I 


ex  LIBRIS 

BERTRAM  C  A  WINOLE    K'  .  K  SG    fR6   F.S.A 


THE  "SUMMA  THEOLOGICA" 


FR.   INNOCENTIUS  APAP,  O.P.,  S.T.M. 
CENSOR  THEOL. 

imprimatur. 

EDUS.  CANONICUS  SURMONT 
VICARICS  GENERALIS. 

WESTMONASTERII. 


APPROBATIO  ORDINIS. 

Jlihtl  ®bstat. 

FR.  VINCENTIUS  McNABB,  O.P.,  S.T.M. 
FR.  FABIANUS  DIX.  O.P.,  B.A. 

Imprimatur. 

FR.  BEDA  JARRETT,  O.P.,  S.T.L.,  M.A.. 
PRIOR  PROVINCIALIS  ANGLIC. 


LONWNI, 

Aug.  4,  1921. 


OF 


ST.  THOMAS  AQUINAS 

THIRD  PART  (SUPPLEMENT) 
LXIX.—  LXXXVI. 


LITERALLY    TRANSLATED    BY 


FATHERS  OF  THE  ENGLISH   DOMINICAN 

PROVINCE 


'.    ft 


LONDON 

BURNS  OATES  &  WASHBOURNE  LTD. 

28  ORCHARD  STREET,  W.  i  8-10  PATERNOSTER  ROW,  E.G.  4 

BENZIGER  BROTHERS:  NEW  YORK,  CINCINNATI,  CHICAGO 
I  Q 2  I  -All  rifkts  rtstrveii 


THE  INSTITUTE  OF  MEDIAEVAL  S 
1C  ELteSLEY  PLAO£ 

Tone  it  TO  i,  CANADA, 


1  UDitS 


CONTENTS 

TREATISE  OF  THE  RESURRECTION 
(a)  BEFORE  THE  RESURRECTION 

QUESTION  PAGE 

LXIX.  OF  THE  PLACE  WHERE  SOULS  ARE  RECEIVED  AFTER 

DEATH  I 
LXX.  OF  THE  QUALITY  OF  THE  SOUL  AFTER  LEAVING  THE 

BODY                                              -  21 

LXXI.  OF  THE  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD    -                           -  38 

LXXII.  OF  PRAYERS  ADDRESSED  TO  THE  SAINTS  IN  HEAVEN  75 

LXXIII.  OF  THE  SIGNS  THAT  WILL  PRECEDE  THE  JUDGMENT-  87 

LXXIV.  OF  THE  FIRE  OF  THE  FINAL  CONFLAGRATION              -  94 

(6)  THE  RESURRECTION  ITSELF 

LXXV.  OF  THE  RESURRECTION  ITSELF                                      -  Il8 
LXXVI.  OF  THE  CAUSE  OF  THE  RESURRECTION                          -  129 
LXXVII.  OF  THE  TIME  AND  MANNER  OF  THE  RESURRECTION  -  137 
LXXVIII.  OF  THE  TERM  WHEREFROM  OF  THE  RESURRECTION  -  148 
LXXIX.  OF  THE  IDENTITY  OF  THOSE  WHO  RISE  AGAIN          -  156 
LXXX.  OF    THE   INTEGRITY   OF  THE  BODIES  IN  THE  RESUR 
RECTION          -                                                                                             -  1 68 

LXXXI.  OF  THE  QUALITY  OF  THOSE  WHO  RISE  AGAIN  -  1 86 

LXXXII.  OF  THE  IMPASSIBILITY  OF  THE  BODIES  OF  THE  BLESSED  195 

LXXXIII.  OF  THE  SUBTLETY  „  „  ,,  „  211 

LXXXIV.  OF  THE  AGILITY  ,,  „  ,,  „  232 

LXXXV.    OF   THE    CLARITY                   ,,                  „                  ,,                  ,,  246 

LXXXVI.    OF    THE     CONDITIONS     OF     THE     DAMNED     AFTER     THE 

RESURRECTION                                                                                      -  253 


TREATISE  ON  THE  LAST  THINGS 


THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA 


THIRD  PART  (SUPPLEMENT). 

QUESTION  LXIX. 

OF    MATTERS    CONCERNING   THE    RESURRECTION,   AND 

FIRST  OF  THE  PLACE  WHERE  SOULS  ARE  AFTER 

DEATH. 

(In  Seven  Articles.) 

IN  sequence  to  the  foregoing  we  must  treat  of  matters  con 
cerning  the  state  of  resurrection:  for  after  speaking  of  the 
sacraments  whereby  man  is  delivered  from  the  death  of  sin, 
we  must  next  speak  of  the  resurrection  whereby  man  is 
delivered  from  the  death  of  punishment.  The  treatise  on 
the  resurrection  offers  a  threefold  consideration,  namely 
the  things  that  precede,  those  that  accompany,  and  those 
that  follow  the  resurrection.  Consequently  we  must  speak 
(i)  of  those  things  which  partly,  though  not  wholly,  precede 
the  resurrection;  (2)  of  the  resurrection  itself  and  its  cir 
cumstances  ;  (3)  of  the  things  which  follow  it. 

Among  the  things  which  precede  the  resurrection  we  must 
consider  (i)  the  places  appointed  for  the  reception  of  bodies 
after  death;  (2)  the  quality  of  separated  souls,  and  the 
punishment  inflicted  on  them  by  fire;  (3)  the  suffrages 
whereby  the  souls  of  the  departed  are  assisted  by  the  living; 
(4)  the  prayers  of  the  saints  in  heaven;  (5)  the  signs  pre 
ceding  the  general  judgment;  (6)  the  fire  of  the  world's  final 
conflagration  which  will  precede  the  appearance  of  the  Judge. 

Under  the  first  head  there  are  seven  points  of  inquiry: 
(i)  Whether  any  places  are  appointed  to  receive  souls  after 

m.  6  £  O  I 


Q.  69.  ART.  i     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  2 

death  ?  (2)  Whether  souls  are  conveyed  thither  immediately 
after  death  ?  (3)  Whether  they  are  able  to  leave  those  places  ? 
(4)  Whether  the  limbo  of  hell  is  the  same  as  Abraham's 
bosom  ?  (5)  Whether  limbo  is  the  same  as  the  hell  of  the 
damned  ?  (6)  Whether  the  limbo  of  the  patriarchs  is  the 
same  as  the  limbo  of  children  ?  (7)  Whether  so  many  places 
should  be  distinguished  ? 

FIRST  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  PLACES  ARE  APPOINTED  TO  RECEIVE  SOULS 
AFTER  DEATH  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  First  A  rticle : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  places  are  not  appointed 
to  receive  souls  after  death.  For  as  Boethius  says  (De 
Hebdom.} :  Wise  men  are  agreed  that  incorporeal  things  are  not 
in  a  place,  and  this  agrees  with  the  words  of  Augustine 
(Gen.  ad  Lit.  xii.) :  We  can  answer  without  hesitation  that  the 
soul  is  not  conveyed  to  corporeal  places,  except  with  a  body,  or 
that  it  is  not  conveyed  locally.  Now  the  soul  separated  from 
the  body  is  without  a  body,  as  Augustine  also  says  (ibid.). 
Therefore  it  is  absurd  to  assign  any  places  for  the  reception 
of  souls. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Whatever  has  a  definite  place  has  more 
in  common  with  that  place  than  with  any  other.  Now 
separated  souls,  like  certain  other  spiritual  substances,  are 
indifferent  to  all  places ;  for  it  cannot  be  said  that  they  agree 
with  certain  bodies,  and  differ  from  others,  since  they  are 
utterly  removed  from  all  corporeal  conditions.  Therefore 
places  should  not  be  assigned  for  their  reception. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  Nothing  is  assigned  to  separated  souls 
after  death,  except  what  conduces  to  their  punishment  or 
to  their  reward.  But  a  corporeal  place  cannot  conduce  to 
their  punishment  or  reward,  since  they  receive  nothing 
from  bodies.  Therefore  definite  places  should  not  be 
assigned  to  receive  them. 

On  the  contrary,  The  empyrean  heaven  is  a  corporeal  place, 
and  yet  as  soon  as  it  was  made  it  was  filled  with  the  holy 


3  SOUL'S  ABODE  AFTER  DEATH     Q.  69.  ART.  i 

angels,  as  Strabus*  says.  Since  then  angels  even  as  separated 
souls  are  incorporeal,  it  would  seem  that  some  place  should 
also  be  assigned  to  receive  separated  souls. 

Further,  this  appears  from  Gregory's  statement  (Dial,  iv.) 
that  souls  after  death  are  conveyed  to  various  corporeal 
places,  as  in  the  case  of  Paschasius  whom  Gcrmanus,  Bishop 
of  Capua,  found  at  the  baths,  and  of  the  soul  of  King  Theo- 
doric,  which  he  asserts  to  have  been  conveyed  to  hell.  There 
fore  after  death  souls  have  certain  places  for  their  reception. 

/  answer  that,  Although  spiritual  substances  do  not  depend 
on  a  body  in  respect  of  their  being,  nevertheless  the  corporeal 
world  is  governed  by  God  by  means  of  the  spiritual  world, 
as  asserted  by  Augustine  (De  Trin.  iii.)  and  Gregory 
(Dial.  iv.).  Hence  it  is  that  there  is  a  certain  fittingness 
by  way  of  congruity  of  spiritual  substances  to  corporeal 
substances,  in  that  the  more  noble  bodies  are  adapted  to 
the  more  noble  substances:  wherefore  also  the  philosophers 
held  that  the  order  of  separate  substances  is  according  to  the 
order  of  movables.  And  though  after  death  souls  have  no 
bodies  assigned  to  them  whereof  they  be  the  forms  or  deter 
minate  motors,  nevertheless  certain  corporeal  places  are 
appointed  to  them  by  way  of  congruity  in  reference  to  their 
degree  of  nobility  (wherein  they  are  as  though  in  a  place, 
after  the  manner  in  which  incorporeal  things  can  be  in  a 
place),  according  as  they  more  or  less  approach  to  the  first 
substance  (to  which  the  highest  place  is  fittingly  assigned), 
namely  God,  whose  throne  the  Scriptures  proclaim  heaven 
to  be  (Ps.  cii.  19,  Isa.  Ixvi.  i).  Wherefore  we  hold  that  those 
souls  that  have  a  perfect  share  of  the  Godhead  are  in  heaven, 
and  that  those  souls  that  are  deprived  of  that  share  are 
assigned  to  a  contrary  place. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Incorporeal  things  are  not  in  place  after 
a  manner  known  and  familiar  to  us,  in  which  way  we  say 
that  bodies  are  properly  in  place ;  but  they  are  in  place  after 
a  manner  befitting  spiritual  substances,  a  manner  that 
cannot  be  fully  manifest  to  us. 

Reply  Obj.  a.  Things  have  something  in  common  with  or 
*  Bede,  Hexam.  i.  ad  Gen.  i.  2. 


Q.69.ART.2     THE  "SUMMA  THEOLOGICA"  4 

a  likeness  to  one  another  in  two  ways.  First,  by  sharing 
a  same  quality:  thus  hot  things  have  something  in  common, 
and  incorporeal  things  can  have  nothing  in  common  with 
corporeal  things  in  this  way.  Secondly,  by  a  kind  of  pro- 
portionateness,  by  reason  of  which  the  Scriptures  apply 
the  corporeal  world  to  the  spiritual  metaphorically.  Thus 
the  Scriptures  speak  of  God  as  the  sun,  because  He  is  the 
principle  of  spiritual  life,  as  the  sun  is  of  corporeal  life.  In 
this  way  certain  souls  have  more  in  common  with  certain 
places:  for  instance,  souls  that  are  spiritually  enlightened, 
with  luminous  bodies,  and  souls  that  are  plunged  in  darkness 
by  sin,  with  dark  places. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  separated  soul  receives  nothing  directly 
from  corporeal  places  in  the  same  way  as  bodies  which  are 
maintained  by  their  respective  places :  yet  these  same  souls, 
through  knowing  themselves  to  be  appointed  to  such  places, 
gather  joy  or  sorrow  therefrom;  and  thus  their  place  conduces 
to  their  punishment  or  reward. 

SECOND  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  SOULS  ARE  CONVEYED  TO  HEAVEN  OR  HELL 
IMMEDIATELY  AFTER  DEATH  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Second  Article  : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  no  souls  are  conveyed 
to  heaven  or  hell  immediately  after  death.  For  a  gloss  on 
Ps.  xxxvi.  10,  Yet  a  little  while  and  the  wicked  shall  not  be, 
says  that  the  saints  are  delivered  at  the  end  of  life;  yet  after  this 
life  they  will  not  yet  be  where  the  saints  will  be  when  it  is  said 
to  them:  Come  ye  blessed  of  My  Father.  Now  those  saints 
will  be  in  heaven.  Therefore  after  this  life  the  saints  do  not 
go  immediately  up  to  heaven. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Augustine  says  (Enchir.  cix.)  that  the 
time  which  lies  between  man's  death  and  the  final  resurrection 
holds  the  souls  in  secret  receptacles  according  as  each  one  is 
worthy  of  rest  or  of  suffering.  Now  these  secret  abodes 
cannot  denote  heaven  and  hell,  since  also  after  the  final 
resurrection  the  souls  will  be  there  together  with  their 


5  SOUL'S  ABODE  AFTER  DEATH     Q.  69.  ART.  2 

bodies :  so  that  he  would  have  no  reason  to  distinguish  be 
tween  the  time  before  and  the  time  after  the  resurrection. 
Therefore  they  will  be  neither  in  hell  nor  in  heaven  until 
the  day  of  judgment. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  the  glory  of  the  soul  is  greater  than  that 
of  bodies.  Now  the  glory  of  the  body  is  awarded  to  all  at 
the  same  time,  so  that  each  one  may  have  the  greater  joy 
in  the  common  rejoicing  of  all,  as  appears  from  a  gloss  on 
Heb.  xi.  40,  God  providing  some  better  thing  for  us — that  the 
common  joy  may  make  each  one  rejoice  the  more.  Much  more, 
therefore,  ought  the  glory  of  souls  to  be  deferred  until  the 
end,  so  as  to  be  awarded  to  all  at  the  same  time. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  Punishment  and  reward,  being  pronounced 
by  the  sentence  of  the  judge,  should  not  precede  the  judg 
ment.  Now  hell  fire  and  the  joys  of  heaven  will  be  awarded 
to  all  by  the  sentence  of  Christ  judging  them,  namely  at 
the  last  judgment,  according  to  Matth.  xxv.  Therefore 
no  one  will  go  up  to  heaven  or  down  to  hell  before  the  day 
of  judgment. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (2  Cor.  v.  i) :  //  our  earthly 
house  of  this  habitation  be  dissolved,  that  we  have  .  .  .  a  house 
not  made  with  hands,  but  reserved  in  heaven*  Therefore, 
after  the  body's  dissolution,  the  soul  has  an  abode,  which 
had  been  reserved  for  it  in  heaven. 

Further,  the  Apostle  says  (Phi lip.  i.  23):  I  desire  (Vulg., — 
Having  a  desire]  to  be  dissolved  and  to  be  with  Christ.  From 
these  words  Gregory  argues  as  follows  (Dial,  iv.) :  //  there 
is  no  doubt  that  Christ  is  in  heaven,  it  cannot  be  denied  that 
Paul's  soul  is  in  heaven  likewise.  Now  it  cannot  be  gainsaid 
that  Christ  is  in  heaven,  since  this  is  an  article  of  faith. 
Therefore  neither  is  it  to  be  denied  that  the  souls  of  the  saints 
are  borne  to  heaven.  That  also  some  souls  go  down  to  hell 
immediately  after  death  is  evident  from  Luke  xvi.  22,  And 
the  rich  man  died,  and  he  was  buried  in  hell. 

I  answer  that,  Even  as  in  bodies  there  is  gravity  or  levity 
whereby  they  are  borne  to  their  own  place  which  is  the  end 
of  their  movement,  so  in  souls  there  is  merit  or  demerit 
*  Vulg., — eternal  in  heaven.  Cf.  i  Pet.  i.  4. 


Q.69.ART.2    THE  "SUMMA  THEOLOGICA"  6 

whereby  they  reach  their  reward  or  punishment,  which  are 
the  ends  of  their  deeds.  Wherefore  just  as  a  body  is  con 
veyed  at  once  to  its  place,  by  its  gravity  or  levity,  unless  there 
be  an  obstacle,  so  too  the  soul,  the  bonds  of  the  flesh  being 
broken,  whereby  it  was  detained  in  the  state  of  the  way, 
receives  at  once  its  reward  or  punishment,  unless  there  be 
an  obstacle.  Thus  sometimes  venial  sin,  though  needing 
first  of  all  to  be  cleansed,  is  an  obstacle  to  the  receiving  of 
the  reward;  the  result  being  that  the  reward  is  delayed. 
And  since  a  place  is  assigned  to  souls  in  keeping  with  their 
reward  or  punishment,  as  soon  as  the  soul  is  set  free  from 
the  body  it  is  either  plunged  into  hell  or  soars  to  heaven, 
unless  it  be  held  back  by  some  debt,  for  which  its  flight  must 
needs  be  delayed  until  the  soul  is  first  of  all  cleansed.  This 
truth  is  attested  by  the  manifest  authority  of  the  canonical 
Scriptures  and  the  doctrine  of  the  holy  Fathers :  wherefore 
the  contrary  must  be  judged  heretical  as  stated  in  Dial.  iv. 
and  in  De  Eccl.  Dogni.  Ixxxviii. 

Reply  Obf.  i.  The  gloss  explains  itself:  for  it  expounds 
the  words,  They  will  not  yet  be  where  the  saints  will  be,  etc., 
by  saying  immediately  afterwards :  That  is  to  say,  they  will 
not  have  the  double  stole  which  the  saints  will  have  at  the 
resurrection. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Among  the  secret  abodes  of  which  Augustine 
speaks,  we  must  also  reckon  hell  and  heaven,  where  some 
souls  are  detained  before  the  resurrection.  The  reason 
why  a  distinction  is  drawn  between  the  time  before  and  the 
time  after  the  resurrection  is  because  before  the  resurrection 
they  are  there  without  the  body  whereas  afterwards  they 
are  with  the  body,  and  because  in  certain  places  there  are 
souls  now  which  will  not  be  there  after  the  resurrection. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  There  is  a  kind  of  continuity  among  men  as  re 
gards  the  body,  because  in  respect  thereof  is  verified  the  saying 
of  Acts  xvii.  24,  26,  God  .  .  .  hath  made  of  one  all  mankind: 
whereas  He  has  fashioned  souls  independently  of  one  another. 
Consequently  it  is  not  so  fitting  that  all  men  should  be 
glorified  together  in  the  soul  as  that  they  should  be  glorified 
together  in  the  body.  Moreover  the  glory  of  the  body  is  not 


7  SOUL'S  ABODE  AFTER  DEATH     Q.  69.  ART.  3 

so  essential  as  the  glory  of  the  soul;  wherefore  it  would  be 
more  derogatory  to  the  saints  if  the  glory  of  the  soul  were 
delayed,  than  that  the  glory  of  the  body  be  deferred:  nor 
could  this  detriment  to  their  glory  be  compensated  on  account 
of  the  joy  of  each  one  being  increased  by  the  common  joy. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  Gregory  proposes  and  solves  this  very 
difficulty  (Dial,  iv.) :  If  then,  he  says,  the  souls  of  the  just  are 
in  heaven  now,  what  will  they  receive  in  reward  for  their  justice 
on  the  judgment  day  ?  And  he  answers :  Surely  it  will  be  a 
gain  to  them  at  the  judgment,  that  whereas  now  they  enjoy 
only  the  happiness  of  the  soul,  afterwards  they  will  enjoy  also 
that  of  the  body,  so  as  to  rejoice  also  in  the  flesh  wherein  they 
bore  sorrow  and  torments  for  the  Lord.  The  same  is  to  be 
said  in  reference  to  the  damned. 


THIRD  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  SOULS  WHO  ARE  IN  HEAVEN  OR  HELL 
ARE  ABLE  TO  GO  FROM  THENCE  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Third  Article: — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  souls  in  heaven  or  hell 
are  unable  to  go  from  thence.  For  Augustine  says  (De  Cum 
pro  Mort.  xiii.) :  //  the  souls  of  the  dead  took  any  part  in  the 
affairs  of  the  living,  to  say  nothing  of  others,  there  is  myself 
whom  not  for  a  single  night  would  my  loving  mother  fail  to 
visit  since  she  followed  me  by  land  and  sea  in  order  to  abide 
with  me :  and  from  this  he  concludes  that  the  souls  of  the 
departed  do  not  mingle  in  the  affairs  of  the  living.  But  they 
would  be  able  to  do  so  if  they  were  to  leave  their  abode. 
Therefore  they  do  not  go  forth  from  their  abode. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  It  is  written  (Ps.  xxvi.  4) :  That  I  may 
dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  all  the  days  of  my  life,  and 
(Job  vii.  9) :  He  that  shall  go  down  to  hell  shall  not  come  up. 
Therefore  neither  the  good  nor  the  wicked  quit  their 
abode. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  As  stated  above  (A.  2),  abodes  are  awarded 
to  souls  after  death  as  a  reward  or  punishment.  Now  after 
death  neither  the  rewards  of  the  saints  nor  the  punishments 


Q.69-ART.3     THE  "SUMMA  THEOLOGICA"  8 

of  the  damned  are  increased.     Therefore  they  do  not  quit 
their  abodes. 

On  the  contrary,  Jerome  writing  against  Vigilantius 
addresses  him  thus:  For  thou  sayest  that  the  souls  of  the 
apostles  and  martyrs  have  taken  up  their  abode  either  in 
Abraham's  bosom  or  in  the  place  of  refreshment,  or  under 
the  altar  of  God,  and  that  they  are  unable  to  visit  their  graves 
when  they  will.  Wouldst  thou  then  lay  down  the  law  for 
God  ?  Wouldst  thou  put  the  apostles  in  chains,  imprison 
them  until  the  day  of  judgment,  and  forbid  them  to  be  with  their 
Lord,  them  of  whom  it  is  written  :  They  follow  the  Lamb 
whithersoever  He  goeth  ?  And  if  the  Lamb  is  everywhere, 
therefore  we  must  believe  that  those  also  who  are  with  Him  are 
everywhere.  Therefore  it  is  absurd  to  say  that  the  souls  of 
the  departed  do  not  leave  their  abode. 

Further,  Jerome  argues  as  follows  (ibid.} :  Since  the  devil 
and  the  demons  wander  throughout  the  whole  world,  and  are 
everywhere  present  with  wondrous  speed,  why  should  the 
martyrs,  after  shedding  their  blood,  be  imprisoned  and  unable 
to  go  forth  ?  Hence  we  may  infer  that  not  only  the  good 
sometimes  leave  their  abode,  but  also  the  wicked,  since  their 
damnation  does  not  exceed  that  of  the  demons  who  wander 
about  everywhere. 

Further,  The  same  conclusion  may  be  gathered  from 
Gregory  (Dial,  iv.),  where  he  relates  many  cases  of  the  dead 
having  appeared  to  the  living. 

I  answer  that,  There  are  two  ways  of  understanding  a 
person  to  leave  hell  or  heaven.  First,  that  he  goes  from 
thence  simply,  so  that  heaven  or  hell  be  no  longer  his  place : 
and  in  this  way  no  one  who  is  finally  consigned  to  hell  or 
heaven  can  go  from  thence,  as  we  shall  state  further  on 
(Q.  LXXL,  A.  5,  ad  5).  Secondly,  they  may  be  understood 
to  go  forth  for  a  time:  and  here  we  must  distinguish  what 
befits  them  according  to  the  order  of  nature,  and  what 
according  to  the  order  of  Divine  providence ;  for  as  Augustine 
says  (De  Cura  pro  Mort.  xvi.) :  Human  affairs  have  their  limits 
other  than  have  the  wonders  of  the  Divine  power,  nature  s  works 
differ  from  those  which  are  done  miraculously.  Consequently, 


9  SOUL'S  ABODE  AFTER  DEATH     Q.  69.  ART.  3 

according  to  the  natural  course,  the  separated  souls  consigned 
to  their  respective  abodes  are  utterly  cut  off  from  communica 
tion  with  the  living.  For  according  to  the  course  of  nature 
men  living  in  mortal  bodies  are  not  immediately  united 
to  separate  substances,  since  their  entire  knowledge  arises 
from  the  senses :  nor  would  it  be  fitting  for  them  to  leave  their 
abode  for  any  purpose  other  than  to  take  part  in  the  affairs 
of  the  living.  Nevertheless,  according  to  the  disposition 
of  Divine  providence  separated  souls  sometimes  come  forth 
from  their  abode  and  appear  to  men,  as  Augustine,  in  the 
book  quoted  above,  relates  of  the  martyr  Felix  who  appeared 
visibly  to  the  people  of  Nola  when  they  were  besieged  by  the 
barbarians.  It  is  also  credible  that  this  may  occur  some 
times  to  the  damned,  and  that  for  man's  instruction  and 
intimidation  they  be  permitted  to  appear  to  the  living; 
or  again  in  order  to  seek  our  suffrages,  as  to  those  who  are 
detained  in  purgatory,  as  evidenced  by  many  instances 
related  in  the  fourth  book  of  the  Dialogues.  There  is, 
however,  this  difference  between  the  saints  and  the  damned, 
that  the  saints  can  appear  when  they  will  to  the  living, 
but  not  the  damned;  for  even  as  the  saints  while  living  in  the 
flesh  are  able  by  the  gifts  of  gratuitous  grace  to  heal  and 
work  wonders,  which  can  only  be  done  miraculously  by  the 
Divine  power,  and  cannot  be  done  by  those  who  lack  this 
gift,  so  it  is  not  unfitting  for  the  souls  of  the  saints  to  be 
endowed  with  a  power  in  virtue  of  their  glory,  so  that  they 
are  able  to  appear  wondrously  to  the  living,  when  they  will : 
while  others  are  unable  to  do  so  unless  they  be  sometimes 
permitted. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Augustine,  as  may  be  gathered  from  what 
he  says  afterwards,  is  speaking  according  to  the  common 
course  of  nature.  And  yet  it  does  not  follow,  although  the 
dead  be  able  to  appear  to  the  living  as  they  will,  that  they 
appear  as  often  as  when  living  in  the  flesh :  because  when  they 
are  separated  from  the  flesh,  they  are  either  wholly  conformed 
to  the  divine  will,  so  that  they  may  do  nothing  but  what 
they  see  to  be  agreeable  with  the  Divine  disposition,  or  else 
they  are  so  overwhelmed  by  their  punishments  that  their 


Q.69.ART.3     THE  "SUMMA  THEOLOGICA "  10 

grief  for  their  unhappiness  surpasses  their  desire  to  appear 
to  others. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  authorities  quoted  speak  in  the  sense 
that  no  one  comes  forth  from  heaven  or  hell  simply,  and  do 
not  imply  that  one  may  not  come  forth  for  a  time. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  As  stated  above  (A.  I,  ad  3)  the  soul's  place 
conduces  to  its  punishment  or  reward  in  so  far  as  the  soul, 
through  being  consigned  to  that  place,  is  affected  either  by 
joy  or  by  grief.  Now  this  joy  or  grief  at  being  consigned 
to  such  a  place  remains  in  the  soul  even  when  it  is  outside 
that  place.  Thus  a  bishop  who  is  given  the  honour  of  sitting 
on  a  throne  in  the  church  incurs  no  dishonour  when  he 
leaves  the  throne,  for  though  he  sits  not  therein  actually, 
the  place  remains  assigned  to  him. 

We  must  also  reply  to  the  arguments  in  the  contrary  sense. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  Jerome  is  speaking  of  the  apostles  and 
martyrs  in  reference  to  that  which  they  gain  from  their 
power  of  glory,  and  not  to  that  which  befits  them  as  due  to 
them  by  nature.  And  when  he  says  that  they  are  every 
where,  he  does  not  mean  that  they  are  in  several  places  or 
everywhere  at  once,  but  that  they  can  be  wherever  they  will. 

Reply  Obj.  5.  There  is  no  parity  between  demons  and 
angels  on  the  one  hand  and  the  souls  of  the  saints  and  of  the 
damned  on  the  other.  For  the  good  or  bad  angels  have 
allotted  to  them  the  office  of  presiding  over  men,  to  watch 
over  them  or  to  try  them ;  but  this  cannot  be  said  of  the  souls 
of  men.  Nevertheless,  according  to  the  power  of  glory,  it  is 
competent  to  the  souls  of  the  saints  that  they  can  be  where 
they  will ;  and  this  is  what  Jerome  means  to  say. 

Reply  Obj.  6.  Although  the  souls  of  the  saints  or  of  the 
damned  are  sometimes  actually  present  where  they  appear, 
we  are  not  to  believe  that  this  is  always  so:  for  sometimes 
these  apparitions  occur  to  persons  whether  asleep  or  awake  by 
the  activity  of  good  or  wicked  angels  in  order  to  instruct  or 
deceive  the  living.  Thus  sometimes  even  the  living  appear 
to  others  and  tell  them  many  things  in  their  sleep ;  and  yet 
it  is  clear  that  they  are  not  present,  as  Augustine  proves 
from  many  instances  (De  Cura  pro  Mori,  xi.,  xii.). 


ii  SOUL'S  ABODE  AFTER  DEATH     Q.  69.  ART.  4 


FOURTH  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  LIMBO  OF  HELL  IS  THE  SAME  AS 
ABRAHAM'S  BOSOM  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Fourth  Article : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  the  limbo  of  hell  is  not 
the  same  as  Abraham's  bosom.  For  according  to  Augustine 
(Gen.  ad  Lit.  xxxiii.) :  /  have  not  yet  found  Scripture  mentioning 
hell  in  a  favourable  sense.  Now  Abraham's  bosom  is  taken 
in  a  favourable  sense,  as  Augustine  goes  on  to  say  (ibid) : 
Surely  no  one  would  be  allowed  to  give  an  unfavourable  signi 
fication  to  Abraham's  bosom  and  the  place  of  rest  whither  the 
godly  poor  man  was  carried  by  the  angels.  Therefore  Abra 
ham's  bosom  is  not  the  same  as  the  limbo  of  hell. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Those  who  are  in  hell  see  not  God.  Yet 
God  is  seen  by  those  who  are  in  Abraham's  bosom,  as  may 
be  gathered  from  Augustine  (Conf.  ix.  3)  who,  speaking  of 
Nebridius,  says :  Whatever  that  be,  which  is  signified  by  that 
bosom,  there  lives  my  Nebridius,  and  further  on:  Now  lays 
he  not  his  ear  to  my  mouth,  but  his  spiritual  mouth  unto  Thy 
fountain,  and  drinketh  as  much  as  he  can  receive  wisdom  in 
proportion  to  his  thirst,  endlessly  happy.  Therefore  Abra 
ham's  bosom  is  not  the  same  as  the  limbo  of  hell. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  Church  prays  not  that  a  man  be 
taken  to  hell :  and  yet  she  prays  that  the  angels  may  carry 
the  departed  soul  to  Abraham's  bosom.  Therefore  it  would 
seem  that  Abraham's  bosom  is  not  the  same  as  limbo. 

On  the  contrary,  The  place  whither  the  beggar  Lazarus 
was  taken  is  called  Abraham's  bosom.  Now  he  was  taken 
to  hell,  for  as  a  gloss*  on  Job  xxx.  23,  Where  a  house  is 
appointed  for  every  one  that  liveth,  says,  hell  was  the  house 
of  all  the  living  until  the  coming  of  Christ.  Therefore  Abra 
ham's  bosom  is  the  same  as  limbo. 

Further,  Jacob  said  to  his  sons  (Gen.  xliv.  38) :  You  will 
bring  down  my  grey  hairs  with  sorrow  to  hell :  wherefore  Jacob 
knew  that  he  would  be  taken  to  hell  after  his  death.  There- 
*  S.  Gregory  (Moral,  xx.). 


Q.C9.ART.4     THE  "SUMMA  THEOLOGICA"  12 

fore  Abraham  likewise  was  taken  to  hell  after  his  death; 
and  consequently  Abraham's  bosom  would  seem  to  be  a  part 
of  hell. 

/  answer  that,  After  death  men's  souls  cannot  find  rest 
save  by  the  merit  of  faith,  because  he  that  cometh  to  God  must 
believe  (Heb.  xi.  6) .  Now  the  first  example  of  faith  was  given 
to  men  in  the  person  of  Abraham,  who  was  the  first  to  sever 
himself  from  the  body  of  unbelievers,  and  to  receive  a  special 
sign  of  faith :  for  which  reason  the  place  of  rest  given  to  men 
after  death  is  called  Abraham's  bosom,  as  Augustine  declares 
(Gen.  ad  Lit.  xii.).  But  the  souls  of  the  saints  have  not  at 
all  times  had  the  same  rest  after  death;  because,  since 
Christ's  coming  they  have  had  complete  rest  through  en 
joying  the  vision  of  God,  whereas  before  Christ's  coming  they 
had  rest  through  being  exempt  from  punishment,  but  their 
desire  was  not  set  at  rest  by  their  attaining  their  end. 
Consequently  the  state  of  the  saints  before  Christ's  coming 
may  be  considered  both  as  regards  the  rest  it  afforded,  and 
thus  it  is  called  Abraham's  bosom,  and  as  regards  its  lack 
of  rest,  and  thus  it  is  called  the  limbo  of  hell.  Accordingly, 
before  Christ's  coming  the  limbo  of  hell  and  Abraham's 
bosom  were  one  place  accidentally  and  not  essentially :  and 
consequently,  nothing  prevents  Abraham's  bosom  from 
being  after  Christ's  coming,  and  from  being  altogether 
distinct  from  limbo,  since  things  that  are  one  accidentally 
may  be  parted  from  one  another. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  The  state  of  the  holy  Fathers  as  regards 
what  was  good  in  it  was  called  Abraham's  bosom,  but  as 
regards  its  deficiencies  it  was  called  hell.  Accordingly, 
neither  is  Abraham's  bosom  taken  in  an  unfavourable 
sense,  nor  hell  in  a  favourable  sense,  although  in  a  way 
they  are  one. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  place  of  rest  of  the  holy  Fathers  was 
called  Abraham's  bosom  before  as  well  as  after  Christ's 
coming,  but  in  different  ways.  For  since  before  Christ's 
coming  the  saints'  rest  had  a  lack  of  rest  attached  to  it,  it 
was  called  both  hell  and  Abraham's  bosom,  wherefore  God 
was  not  seen  there.  But  since  after  the  coming  of  Christ 


13  SOUL'S  ABODE  AFTER  DEATH     Q.  69.  ART.  5 

the  saints'  rest  is  complete  through  their  seeing  God,  this 
rest  is  called  Abraham's  bosom,  but  not  hell  by  any  means. 
It  is  to  this  bosom  of  Abraham  that  the  Church  prays  for 
the  faithful  to  be  brought. 

Hence  the  Reply  to  the  Third  Objection  is  evident :  and 
the  same  meaning  applies  to  a  gloss  on  Luke  xvi.  22,  It 
came  to  pass  that  the  beggar  died,  etc.,  which  says:  Abraham's 
bosom  is  the  rest  of  the  blessed  poor,  whose  is  the  kingdom  of 

heaven. 

FIFTH  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  LIMBO  IS  THE  SAME  AS  THE  HELL  OF  THE 

DAMNED  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Fifth  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  limbo  of  hell  is  the 
same  as  the  hell  of  the  damned.  For  Christ  is  said  to  have 
bitten*  hell,  but  not  to  have  swallowed  it,  because  He  took 
some  from  thence  but  not  all.  Now  He  would  not  be  said 
to  have  bitten  hell  if  those  whom  He  set  free  were  not  part 
of  the  multitude  shut  up  in  hell.  Therefore  since  those 
whom  He  set  free  were  shut  up  in  hell,  the  same  were  shut 
up  in  limbo  and  in  hell.  Therefore  limbo  is  either  the  same 
as  hell,  or  is  a  part  of  hell. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  In  the  Creed  Christ  is  said  to  have 
descended  into  hell.  But  He  did  not  descend  save  to  the 
limbo  of  the  Fathers.  Therefore  the  limbo  of  the  Fathers  is 
the  same  as  hell. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  It  is  written  (Job  xvii.  16) :  All  that  I 
have  shall  go  down  into  the  deepest  hell  (Douay, — pit).  Now 
since  Job  was  a  holy  and  just  man,  he  went  down  to  limbo. 
Therefore  limbo  is  the  same  as  the  deepest  hell. 

On  the  contrary,  In  hell  there  is  no  redemption.^  But  the 
saints  were  redeemed  from  limbo.  Therefore  limbo  is  not 
the  same  as  hell. 

Further,  Augustine  says  (Gen.  ad  Lit.  xii.) :  /  do  not  see 
how  we  can  believe  that  the  rest  which  Lazarus  received  was 
in  hell.  Now  the  soul  of  Lazarus  went  down  into  limbo. 
Therefore  limbo  is  not  the  same  as  hell. 

*  Allusion  to  Osee  xiii.  14.          f  Office  of  the  Dead,  Resp.  vii. 


Q.  69.  ART.  5     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  14 

/  answer  that,  The  abodes  of  souls  after  death  may  be  dis 
tinguished  in  two  ways;  either  as  to  their  situation,  or  as 
to  the  quality  of  the  places,  inasmuch  as  souls  are  punished 
or  rewarded  in  certain  places.  Accordingly  if  we  consider 
the  limbo  of  the  Fathers  and  hell  in  respect  of  the  aforesaid 
quality  of  the  places,  there  is  no  doubt  that  they  are  distinct, 
both  because  in  hell  there  is  sensible  punishment,  which  was 
not  in  the  limbo  of  the  Fathers,  and  because  in  hell  there 
is  eternal  punishment,  whereas  the  saints  were  detained  but 
temporally  in  the  limbo  of  the  Fathers.  On  the  other  hand, 
if  we  consider  them  as  to  the  situation  of  the  place,  it  is 
probable  that  hell  and  limbo  are  the  same  place,  or  that 
they  are  continuous  as  it  were,  yet  so  that  some  higher  part 
of  hell  be  called  the  limbo  of  the  Fathers.  For  those  who 
are  in  hell  receive  diverse  punishments  according  to  the 
diversity  of  their  guilt,  so  that  those  who  are  condemned 
are  consigned  to  darker  and  deeper  parts  of  hell  according 
as  they  have  been  guilty  of  graver  sins,  and  consequently 
the  holy  Fathers  in  whom  there  was  the  least  amount  of 
sin  were  consigned  to  a  higher  and  less  darksome  part  than 
all  those  who  were  condemned  to  punishment. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  When  Christ,  by  His  descent,  delivered  the 
Fathers  from  limbo,  He  is  said  to  have  bitten  hell  and  to 
have  descended  into  hell,  in  so  far  as  hell  and  limbo  are  the 
same  as  to  situation. 

This  suffices  for  the  Reply  to  the  Second  Objection. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Job  descended,  not  to  the  hell  of  the  damned, 
but  to  the  limbo  of  the  Fathers.  The  latter  is  called  the 
deepest  place,  not  in  reference  to  the  places  of  punishment, 
but  in  comparison  with  other  places,  as  including  all  penal 
places  under  one  head. — Again  we  may  reply  with  Augustine 
(Gen.  ad  Lit.  xii.)  who  says  of  Jacob:  When  Jacob  said  to  his 
sons,  "  You  will  bring  down  my  grey  hairs  with  sorrow  to 
hell,"  he  seems  to  have  feared  most,  lest  he  should  be  troubled 
with  so  great  a  sorrow  as  to  obtain,  not  the  rest  of  good  men,  but 
the  hell  of  sinners.  The  saying  of  Job  may  be  expounded  in 
the  same  way,  as  being  the  utterance  of  one  in  fear,  rather 
than  an  assertion. 


15  SOUL'S  ABODE  AFTER  DEATH     Q.  69.  ART.  6 

SIXTH  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  LIMBO  OF  CHILDREN  IS  THE  SAME  AS 
THE  LIMBO  OF  THE  FATHERS  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Sixth  Article : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  the  limbo  of  children  is 
the  same  as  the  limbo  of  the  Fathers.  For  punishment 
should  correspond  to  sin.  Now  the  Fathers  were  detained 
in  limbo  for  the  same  sin  as  children,  namely  for  original  sin. 
Therefore  the  place  of  punishment  should  be  the  same  for 
both. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Augustine  says  (Enchir.  xciii.) :  The  pun 
ishment  of  children  who  die  in  none  but  original  sin  is  most 
lenient.  But  no  punishment  is  more  lenient  than  that  of 
the  holy  Fathers.  Therefore  the  place  of  punishment  is  the 
same  for  both. 

On  the  contrary,  Even  as  temporal  punishment  in  purga 
tory  and  eternal  punishment  in  hell  are  due  to  actual  sin,  so 
temporal  punishment  in  the  limbo  of  the  Fathers  and  eternal 
punishment  in  the  limbo  of  the  children  were  due  to  original 
sin.  If,  therefore,  hell  and  purgatory  be  not  the  same  it 
would  seem  that  neither  are  the  limbo  of  children  and  the 
limbo  of  the  Fathers  the  same. 

/  answer  that,  The  limbo  of  the  Fathers  and  the  limbo 
of  children,  without  any  doubt,  differ  as  to  the  quality  of 
punishment  or  reward.  For  children  have  no  hope  of  the 
blessed  life,  as  the  Fathers  in  limbo  had,  in  whom,  moreover, 
shone  forth  the  light  of  faith  and  grace.  But  as  regards 
their  situation,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  place  of 
both  is  the  same;  except  that  the  limbo  of  the  Fathers  is 
placed  higher  than  the  limbo  of  children,  just  as  we  have 
stated  in  reference  to  limbo  and  hell  (A.  5). 

Reply  Obj.  i.  The  Fathers  did  not  stand  in  the  same 
relation  to  original  sin  as  children.  For  in  the  Fathers 
original  sin  was  expiated  in  so  far  as  it  infected  the 
person,  while  there  remained  an  obstacle  on  the  part  of 
nature,  on  account  of  which  their  satisfaction  was  not  yet 
complete.  On  the  other  hand,  in  children  there  is  an 


Q.69.ART.7    THE  "SUMMA  THEOLOGICA"  16 

obstacle  both  on  the  part  of  the  person  and  on  the  part  of 
nature:  and  for  this  reason  different  abodes  are  appointed 
to  the  Fathers  and  to  children. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Augustine  is  speaking  of  punishments  due 
to  some  one  by  reason  of  his  person.  Of  these  the  most 
lenient  are  due  to  those  who  are  burdened  with  none  but 
original  sin.  But  lighter  still  is  the  punishment  due  to 
those  who  are  debarred  from  the  reception  of  glory  by  no 
personal  defect  but  only  by  a  defect  of  nature,  so  that  this 
very  delay  of  glory  is  called  a  kind  of  punishment. 

SEVENTH  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  SO  MANY  ABODES  SHOULD  BE  DISTINGUISHED  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Seventh  Article : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  we  should  not  distinguish 
so  many  abodes.  For  after  death,  just  as  abodes  are  due  to 
souls  on  account  of  sin,  so  are  they  due  on  account  of  merit. 
Now  there  is  only  one  abode  due  on  account  of  merit, 
namely  paradise.  Therefore  neither  should  there  be  more 
than  one  abode  due  on  account  of  sin,  namely  hell. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Abodes  are  appointed  to  souls  after  death 
on  account  of  merits  or  demerits.  Now  there  is  one  place 
where  they  merit  or  demerit.  Therefore  only  one  abode 
should  be  assigned  to  them  after  death. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  places  of  punishment  should  corre 
spond  to  the  sins.  Now  there  are  only  three  kinds  of  sin, 
namely  original,  venial,  and  mortal.  Therefore  there  should 
only  be  three  penal  abodes. 

Obj.  4.  On  the  other  hand,  it  would  seem  that  there  should 
be  many  more  than  those  assigned.  For  this  darksome  air 
is  the  prison  house  of  the  demons  (2  Pet.  ii.  17),  and  yet  it  is 
not  reckoned  among  the  five  abodes  which  are  mentioned 
by  certain  authors.  Therefore  there  are  more  than  five 
abodes. 

Obj.  5.  Further,  The  earthly  paradise  is  distinct  from  the 
heavenly  paradise.  Now  some  were  borne  away  to  the 
earthly  paradise  after  this  state  of  life,  as  is  related  of  Enoch 


i;      SOUL'S  ABODE  AFTER  DEATH  Q.  69.  ART.  7 

and  Elias.  Since  then  the  earthly  paradise  is  not  counted 
among  the  five  abodes,  it  would  seem  that  there  are  more 
than  five. 

Obj.  6.  Further,  Some  penal  place  should  correspond  to 
each  state  of  sinners.  Now  if  we  suppose  a  person  to  die  in 
original  sin  who  has  committed  only  venial  sins,  none  of  the 
assigned  abodes  will  be  befitting  to  him.  For  it  is  clear 
that  he  would  not  be  in  heaven,  since  he  would  be  without 
grace,  and  for  the  same  reason  neither  would  he  be  in  the 
limbo  of  the  Fathers;  nor  again,  would  he  be  in  the  limbo 
of  children,  since  there  is  no  sensible  punishment  there, 
which  is  due  to  such  a  person  by  reason  of  venial  sin:  nor 
would  he  be  in  purgatory,  where  there  is  none  but  temporal 
punishment,  whereas  everlasting  punishment  is  due  to  him: 
nor  would  he  be  in  the  hell  of  the  damned,  since  he  is  not 
guilty  of  actual  mortal  sin.  Therefore  a  sixth  abode  should 
be  assigned. 

Obj.  7.  Further,  Rewards  and  punishments  vary  in  quan 
tity  according  to  the  differences  of  sins  and  merits.  Now 
the  degrees  of  merit  and  sin  are  infinite.  Therefore  we 
should  distinguish  an  infinite  number  of  abodes,  in  which 
souls  are  punished  or  rewarded  after  death. 

Obj.  8.  Further,  Souls  are  sometimes  punished  in  the 
places  where  they  sinned,  as  Gregory  states  (Dial.  iv.). 
But  they  sinned  in  the  place  which  we  inhabit.  Therefore 
this  place  should  be  reckoned  among  the  abodes,  especially 
since  some  are  punished  for  their  sins  in  this  world,  as  the 
Master  said  above  (iv.  Sent.  D.  21). 

Obj.  9.  Further,  Just  as  some  die  in  a  state  of  grace  and 
have  some  venial  sins  for  which  they  deserve  punishment, 
so  some  die  in  mortal  sin  and  have  some  good  for  which  they 
would  deserve  a  reward.  Now  to  those  who  die  in  grace 
with  venial  sins  an  abode  is  assigned  where  they  are  pun 
ished  ere  they  receive  their  reward,  which  abode  is  purga 
tory.  Therefore,  on  the  other  hand,  there  should  be  equally 
an  abode  for  those  who  die  in  mortal  sin  together  with  some 
good  works. 

Obj.  10.  Further,  Just  as  the  Fathers  were  delayed  from 

III.  6  2 


Q.69.ARX.7    THE  "SUMMA  THEOLOGICA "  18 

obtaining  full  glory  of  the  soul  before  Christ's  coming,  so  are 
they  now  detained  from  receiving  the  glory  of  the  body. 
Therefore  as  we  distinguish  an  abode  of  the  saints  before 
the  coming  of  Christ  from  the  one  where  they  are  received 
now,  so  ought  we  to  distinguish  the  one  in  which  they  are 
received  now  from  the  one  where  they  will  be  received  after 
the  resurrection. 

/  answer  that,  The  abodes  of  souls  are  distinguished 
according  to  the  souls'  various  states.  Now  the  soul  united 
to  a  mortal  body  is  in  the  state  of  meriting,  while  the  soul 
separated  from  the  body  is  in  the  state  of  receiving  good  or 
evil  for  its  merits ;  so  that  after  death  it  is  either  in  the  state 
of  receiving  its  final  reward,  or  in  the  state  of  being  hindered 
from  receiving  it.  If  it  is  in  the  state  of  receiving  its  final 
retribution,  this  happens  in  two  ways :  either  in  the  respect 
of  good,  and  then  it  is  paradise;  or  in  respect  of  evil,  and 
thus  as  regards  actual  sin  it  is  hell,  and  as  regards  original 
sin  it  is  the  limbo  of  children.  On  the  other  hand,  if  it  be 
in  the  state  where  it  is  hindered  from  receiving  its  final 
reward,  this  is  either  on  account  of  a  defect  of  the  person, 
and  thus  we  have  purgatory  where  souls  are  detained  from 
receiving  their  reward  at  once  on  account  of  the  sins  they 
have  committed,  or  else  it  is  on  account  of  a  defect  of  nature, 
and  thus  We  have  the  limbo  of  the  Fathers,  where  the 
Fathers  were  detained  from  obtaining  glory  on  account  of 
the  guilt  of  human  nature  which  could  not  yet  be  expiated. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Good  happens  in  one  way,  but  evil  in 
many  ways,  according  to  Dionysius  (Div.  Nom.  iv.)  and  the 
Philosopher  (Ethic,  ii.  6) :  wherefore  it  is  not  unfitting  if  there 
be  one  place  of  blissful  reward  and  several  places  of  punish 
ment. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  state  of  meriting  and  dementing  is  one 
state,  since  the  same  person  is  able  to  merit  and  demerit : 
wherefore  it  is  fitting  that  one  place  should  be  assigned  to 
all :  whereas  of  those  who  receive  according  to  their  merits 
there  are  various  states,  and  consequently  the  comparison 
fails. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  One  may  be  punished  in  two  ways  for 


19  SOUL'S  ABODE  AFTER  DEATH     Q.  69.  ART.  7 

original  sin,  as  stated  above,  either  in  reference  to  the 
person,  or  in  reference  to  nature  only.  Consequently  there 
is  a  twofold  limbo  corresponding  to  that  sin. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  This  darksome  air  is  assigned  to  the  demons, 
not  as  the  place  where  they  receive  retribution  for  their 
merits,  but  as  a  place  befitting  their  office,  in  so  far  as  they 
are  appointed  to  try  us.  Hence  it  is  not  reckoned  among 
the  abodes  of  which  we  are  treating  now:  since  hell  fire  is 
assigned  to  them  in  the  first  place  (Matth.  xxv.). 

Reply  Obj.  5.  The  earthly  paradise  belongs  to  the  state 
of  the  wayfarer  rather  than  to  the  state  of  those  who  receive 
for  their  merits ;  and  consequently  it  is  not  reckoned  among 
the  abodes  whereof  we  are  treating  now. 

Reply  Obj.  6.  This  supposition  is  impossible.*  If,  how 
ever,  it  were  possible,  such  a  one  would  be  punished  in  hell 
eternally:  for  it  is  accidental  to  venial  sin  that  it  be  pun 
ished  temporally  in  purgatory,  through  its  having  grace 
annexed  to  it :  wherefore  if  it  be  annexed  to  a  mortal  sin, 
which  is  without  grace,  it  will  be  punished  eternally  in  hell. 
And  since  this  one  who  dies  in  original  sin  has  a  venial  sin 
without  grace,  it  is  not  unfitting  to  suppose  that  he  be 
punished  eternally. 

Reply  Obj.  7.  Diversity  of  degrees  in  punishments  or 
rewards  does  not  diversify  the  state,  and  it  is  according  to 
the  diversity  of  state  that  we  distinguish  various  abodes. 
Hence  the  argument  does  not  prove. 

Reply  Obj.  8.  Although  separated  souls  are  sometimes 
punished  in  the  place  where  we  dwell,  it  does  not  follow 
that  this  is  their  proper  place  of  punishment:  but  this  is 
done  for  our  instruction,  that  seeing  their  punishment  we 
may  be  deterred  from  sin.  That  souls  while  yet  in  the  flesh 
are  punished  here  for  their  sins  has  nothing  to  do  with  the 
question,  because  a  punishment  of  this  kind  does  not  place 
a  man  outside  the  state  of  meriting  or  demeriting:  whereas 
we  are  treating  now  of  the  abodes  to  which  souls  are  assigned 
after  the  state  of  merit  or  demerit. 

Reply  Obj.  9.  It  is  impossible  for  evil  to  be  pure  and 
*  Cf.  I.-IL,  Q.  LXXXIX.,  A.  6. 


Q.eo.ART.  7    THE  "SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  20 

without  the  admixture  of  good,  just  as  the  supreme  good  is 
without  any  admixture  of  evil.  Consequently  those  who 
are  to  be  conveyed  to  beatitude  which  is  a  supreme  good 
must  be  cleansed  of  all  evil ;  wherefore  there  must  needs  be 
a  place  where  such  persons  are  cleansed  if  they  go  hence 
without  being  perfectly  clean.  But  those  who  will  be 
thrust  into  hell  will  not  be  free  from  all  good:  and  conse 
quently  the  comparison  fails,  since  those  who  are  in  hell  can 
receive  the  reward  of  their  goods,  in  so  far  as  their  past  goods 
avail  for  the  mitigation  of  their  punishment. 

Reply  Obj.  10.  The  essential  reward  consists  in  the  glory 
of  the  soul,  but  the  body's  glory,  since  it  overflows  from 
the  soul,  is  entirely  founded  as  it  were  on  the  soul :  and  con 
sequently  lack  of  the  soul's  glory  causes  a  difference  of  state, 
whereas  lack  of  the  body's  glory  does  not.  For  this  reason, 
too,  the  same  place,  namely  the  empyrean,  is  assigned  to  the 
holy  souls  separated  from  their  bodies  and  united  to  glorious 
bodies :  whereas  the  same  place  was  not  assigned  to  the  souls 
of  the  Fathers  both  before  and  after  the  glorification  of  souls. 


QUESTION  LXX. 

OF  THE  QUALITY  OF  THE  SOUL  AFTER  LEAVING  THE 

BODY,  AND  OF  THE  PUNISHMENT  INFLICTED 

ON  IT  BY  MATERIAL  FIRE. 

(In  Three  Articles.) 

WE  must  next  consider  the  general  quality  of  the  soul 
after  leaving  the  body,  and  the  punishment  inflicted  on  it 
by  material  fire.  Under  this  head  there  are  three  points  of 
inquiry:  (i)  Whether  the  sensitive  powers  remain  in  the 
separated  soul  ?  (2)  Whether  the  acts  of  the  aforesaid 
powers  remain  in  the  soul  ?  (3)  Whether  the  separated 
soul  can  suffer  from  a  material  fire  ? 


FIRST  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  SENSITIVE  POWERS  REMAIN  IN  THF 
SEPARATED  SOUL  ?* 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  First  Article  : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  the  sensitive  powers 
remain  in  the  sensitive  soul.  For  Augustine  says  (De 
Spir.  et  Anim.  xv.) :  The  soul  withdraws  from  the  body  taking 
all  with  itself,  sense  and  imagination,  reason,  understanding 
and  intelligence,  the  concupiscible  and  irascible  powers.  Now 
sense,  imagination,  concupiscible  and  irascible  are  sensitive 
powers.  Therefore  the  sensitive  powers  remain  in  the 
separated  soul. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Augustine  says  (De  Eccl.  Dogm.  xvi.): 
We  believe  that  man  alone  has  a  substantial  soul,  which  lives 
though  separated  from  the  body,  and  clings  keenly  to  its  senses 
*  Cf.  P.  I.,  Q.  LXXVIL,  A.  8. 

21 


Q.  7o.  ART.  i     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA"  22 

and  wits.  Therefore  the  soul  retains  its  senses  after  being 
separated  from  the  body. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  soul's  powers  are  either  its  essential 
parts  as  some  maintain,  or  at  least  are  its  natural  properties. 
Now  that  which  is  in  a  thing  essentially  cannot  be  separated 
from  it,  nor  is  a  subject  severed  from  its  natural  properties. 
Therefore  it  is  impossible  for  the  soul  to  lose  any  of  its 
powers  after  being  separated  from  the  body. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  A  whole  is  not  entire  if  one  of  its  parts 
be  lacking.  Now  the  soul's  powers  are  called  its  parts. 
Therefore,  if  the  soul  lose  any  of  its  powers  after  death,  it 
will  not  be  entire  after  death:  and  this  is  unfitting. 

Obj.  5.  Further,  The  soul's  powers  co-operate  in  merit 
more  even  than  the  body,  since  the  body  is  a  mere  instru 
ment  of  action,  while  the  powers  are  principles  of  action. 
Now  the  body  must  of  necessity  be  rewarded  together  with 
the  soul,  since  it  co-operated  in  merit.  Much  more,  there 
fore,  is  it  necessary  that  the  powers  of  the  soul  be  rewarded 
together  with  it.  Therefore  the  separated  soul  does  not  lose 
them. 

Obj.  6.  Further,  If  the  soul  after  separation  from  the  body 
loses  its  sensitive  power,  that  must  needs  come  to  naught. 
For  it  cannot  be  said  that  it  is  dissolved  into  some  matter, 
since  it  has  no  matter  as  a  part  of  itself.  Now  that  which 
entirely  comes  to  naught  is  not  restored  in  identity ;  where 
fore  at  the  resurrection  the  soul  will  not  have  the  same 
identical  sensitive  powers.  Now  according  to  the  Phil 
osopher  (De  Anima,  ii.),  as  the  soul  is  to  the  body  so  are  the 
soul's  powers  to  the  parts  of  the  body,  for  instance  the  sight 
to  the  eye.  But  if  it  were  not  identically  the  same  soul  that 
returns  to  the  body,  it  would  not  be  identically  the  same  man. 
Therefore  for  the  same  reason  it  would  not  be  identically  the 
same  eye,  if  the  visual  power  were  not  identically  the  same ; 
and  in  like  manner  no  other  part  would  rise  again  in  identity, 
and  consequently  neither  would  the  whole  man  be  identically 
the  same.  Therefore  it  is  impossible  for  the  separated  soul 
to  lose  its  sensitive  powers. 

Obj.  7.  Further,  If  the  sensitive  powers  were  to  be  cor- 


23    SOUL'S  QUALITY  AFTER  DEATH  Q.  70.  ART.  i 

rupted  when  the  body  is  corrupted,  it  would  follow  that  they 
are  weakened  when  the  body  is  weakened.  Yet  this  is  not 
the  case,  for  according  to  De  Anima,  i.,  if  an  old  man  were 
given  the  eye  of  a  young  man,  he  would,  without  doubt,  see  as 
well  as  a  young  man.  Therefore  neither  are  the  sensitive 
powers  corrupted  when  the  body  is  corrupted. 

On  the  contrary,  Augustine  says  (De  Eccl.  Dogm.  xix.):  Of 
two  substances  alone  does  man  consist,  soul  and  body;  the  soul 
with  its  reason,  and  the  body  with  its  senses.  Therefore  the 
sensitive  powers  belong  to  the  body :  and  consequently  when 
the  body  is  corrupted  the  sensitive  powers  remain  not  in 
the  soul. 

Further,  The  Philosopher,  speaking  of  the  separation  of 
the  soul,  expresses  himself  thus  (Met.  xii.):  //,  however, 
anything  remain  at  last,  we  must  ask  what  this  is :  because 
in  certain  subjects  it  is  not  impossible,  for  instance  if  the  soul 
be  of  such  a  disposition,  not  the  whole  soul  but  the  intellect ; 
for  as  regards  the  whole  soul  this  is  probably  impossible.  Hence 
it  seems  that  the  whole  soul  is  not  separated  from  the  body, 
but  only  the  intellective  powers  of  the  soul,  and  consequently 
not  the  sensitive  or  vegetative  powers. 

Further,  The  Philosopher,  speaking  of  the  intellect,  says 
(De  Anima,  ii.)  :  This  alone  is  ever  separated,  as  the  everlasting 
from  the  corruptible :  for  it  is  hereby  clear  that  the  remaining 
parts  are  not  separable  as  some  maintain.  Therefore  the 
sensitive  powers  do  not  remain  in  the  separated  soul. 

/  answer  that,  There  are  many  opinions  on  this  question. 
For  some,  holding  the  view  that  all  the  powers  are  in  the 
soul  in  the  same  way  as  colour  is  in  a  body,  hold  that  the 
soul  separated  from  the  body  takes  all  its  powers  away  with 
it :  because,  if  it  lacked  -any  one  of  them,  it  would  follow 
that  the  soul  is  changed  in  its  natural  properties,  since  these 
cannot  change  so  long  as  their  subject  remains.  But  the 
aforesaid  view  is  false,  for  since  a  power  is  so  called  because 
it  enables  us  to  do  or  suffer  something,  and  since  to  do  and  to 
be  able  belong  to  the  same  subject,  it  follows  that  the  subject 
of  a  power  is  the  same  as  that  which  is  agent  or  patient. 
Hence  the  Philosopher  says  (De  Somn.  et  Vigil.}  that  where 


Q.  70.  ART.  T     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  24 

we  find  power  there  we  find  action.     Now  it  is  evident  that 
certain  operations,  whereof  the  soul's  powers  are  the  prin 
ciples,  do  not  belong  to  the  soul  properly  speaking  but  to  the 
soul  as  united  to  the  body,  because  they  are  not  performed 
except  through  the  medium  of  the  body,-— such  as  to  see,  to 
hear,  and  so  forth.     Hence  it  follows  that  suchlike  powers 
belong  to  the  united  soul  and  body  as  their  subject,  but  to 
the  soul  as  their  quickening  principle,  just  as  the  form  is  the 
principle  of  the  properties  of  a  composite   being.     Some 
operations,  however,  are  performed  by  the  soul  without  a 
bodily  organ,— for  instance  to  understand,  to  consider,  to 
will :  wherefore,  since  these  actions  are  proper  to  the  soul, 
the  powers  that  are  the  principles  thereof  belong  to  the  soul 
not  only  as  their  principle  but  also  as  their  subject.  There 
fore,   since    so   long   as    the    proper   subject    remains   its 
proper  passions  must  also  remain,  and  when  it  is  corrupted 
they  also  must  be  corrupted,  it  follows  that  these  powers 
which  use  no  bodily  organ  for  their  actions  must  needs 
remain  in  the  separated  body,   while  those  which  use  a 
bodily  organ  must  needs  be  corrupted  when  the  body  is 
corrupted:  and  such  are  all  the  powers  belonging  to  the 
sensitive  and  the  vegetative  soul.     On  this  account  some 
draw  a  distinction  in  the  sensitive  powers  of  the  soul:  for 
they  say  that  they  are  of  two  kinds— some  being  acts  of 
organs  and   emanating  from   the  soul   into  the   body  are 
corrupted  with  the  body;  others,  whence  the  former  origi 
nate,  are  in  the  soul,  because  by  them  the  soul  sensitizes  the 
body  for  seeing,  hearing,  and  so  on;  and  these  primary 
powers  remain  in  the  separated  soul.     But  this  statement 
seems  unreasonable :  because  the  soul,  by  its  essence  and  not 
through  the  medium  of  certain  other  powers,  is  the  origin  of 
those  powers  which  are  the  acts  of  organs,  even  as  any  form, 
from  the  very  fact  that  by  its  essence  it  informs  its  matter! 
is  the  origin  of  the  properties  which  result  naturally  in  the 
composite.     For  were  it  necessary  to  suppose  other  powers 
in  the  soul,  by  means  of  which  the  powers  that  perfect  the 
organs  may  flow  from  the  essence  of  the  soul,  for  the  same 
reason  it  would  be  necessary  to  suppose  other  powers  by 


25          SOUL'S  QUALITY  AFTER  DEATH    Q.  70-  ART.  i 

means  of  which  these  mean  powers  flow  from  the  essence  of 
the  soul,  and  so  on  to  infinity,  and  if  we  have  to  stop  it  is 
better  to  do  so  at  the  first  step. 

Hence  others  say  that  the  sensitive  and  other  like  powers 
do  not  remain  in  the  separated  soul  except  in  a  restricted 
sense,  namely  radically,  in  the  same  way  as  a  result  is  in 
its  principle:  because  there  remains  in  the  separated  soul 
the  ability  to  produce  these  powers  if  it  should  be  reunited 
to  the  body;  nor  is  it  necessary  for  this  ability  to  be  any 
thing  in  addition  to  the  essence  of  the  soul,  as  stated  above. 
This  opinion  appears  to  be  the  more  reasonable. 

Reply  Obj.  I.  This  saying  of  Augustine  is  to  be  under 
stood  as  meaning  that  the  soul  takes  away  with  it  some  of 
those  powers  actually,  namely  understanding  and  intelli 
gence,  and  some  radically,  as  stated  above.* 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  senses  which  the  soul  takes  away  with 
it  are  not  these  external  senses,  but  the  internal,  those, 
namely,  which  pertain  to  the  intellective  part,  for  the  intellect 
is  sometimes  called  sense,  as  Basil  states  in  his  commentary 
on  the  Proverbs,  and  again  the  Philosopher  (Ethic,  vi.  n) .  If, 
however,  he  means  the  external  senses  we  must  reply  as 
above  to  the  first  objection. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  As  stated  above  the  sensitive  powers  are 
related  to  the  soul,  not  as  natural  passions  to  their  subject, 
but  as  compared  to  their  origin:  wherefore  the  conclusion 
does  not  follow. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  The  powers  of  the  soul  are  not  called  its 
integral  but  its  potential  parts.  Now  the  nature  of  suchlike 
wholes  is  that  the  entire  energy  of  the  whole  is  found  perfectly 
in  one  of  the  parts,  but  partially  in  the  others;  thus  in  the 
soul  the  soul's  energy  is  found  perfectly  in  the  intellective 
part,  but  partially  in  the  others.  Wherefore,  as  the  powers 
of  the  intellective  part  remain  in  the  separated  soul,  the 
latter  will  remain  entire  and  undiminished,  although  the 
sensitive  powers  do  not  remain  actually:  as  neither  is  the 
king's  power  decreased  by  the  death  of  a  mayor  who  shared 
his  authority. 

*  Cf.  P.  I.,  Q.  LXXVIL,  A.  8,  ad  i.  and  infra  A.  2,  ad  i. 


Q.  70-  ART.  2     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  26 

Reply  Obj.  5.  The  body  co-operates  in  merit,  as  an  essential 
part  of  the  man  who  merits.  The  sensitive  powers,  however, 
do  not  co-operate  thus,  since  they  are  of  the  genus  of  acci 
dents.  Hence  the  comparison  fails. 

Reply  Obj.  6.  The  powers  of  the  sensitive  soul  are  said 
to  be  acts  of  the  organs,  not  as  though  they  were  the  essen 
tial  forms  of  those  organs,  except  in  reference  to  the  soul 
whose  powers  they  are.  But  they  are  the  acts  of  the  organs, 
by  perfecting  them  for  their  proper  operations,  as  heat  is  the 
act  of  fire  by  perfecting  it  for  the  purpose  of  heating.  Where 
fore,  just  as  a  fire  would  remain  identically  the  same, 
although  another  individual  heat  were  in  it  (even  so  the  cold 
of  water  that  has  been  heated  returns  not  identically  the 
same,  although  the  water  remains  the  same  in  identity),  so 
the  organs  will  be  the  same  identically,  although  the  powers 
be  not  identically  the  same. 

Reply  Obj.  7.  The  Philosopher  is  speaking  there  of  these 
powers  as  being  rooted  in  the  soul.  This  is  clear  from  his 
saying  that  old  age  is  an  affection  not  of  the  soul,  but  of  that 
in  which  the  soul  is,  namely  the  body.  For  in  this  way  the 
powers  of  the  soul  are  neither  weakened  nor  corrupted  on 
account  of  the  body. 

SECOND  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  ACTS  OF  THE  SENSITIVE  POWERS  REMAIN 
IN  THE  SEPARATED  SOUL  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Second  A  rticle  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  acts  of  the  sensitive 
powers  remain  in  the  separated  soul.  For  Augustine  says 
(De  Spiritu  et  Anima,  xv.):  When  the  soul  leaves  the  body  it 
derives  pleasure  or  sorrow  through  being  affected  with  these 
(namely  the  imagination,  and  the  concupiscible  and  irascible 
faculties)  according  to  its  merits.  But  the  imagination,  the 
concupiscible,  and  the  irascible  are  sensitive  powers.  There 
fore  the  separated  soul  will  be  affected  as  regards  the  sensi 
tive  powers,  and  consequently  will  be  in  some  act  by  reason 
of  them. 


27    SOUL'S  QUALITY  AFTER  DEATH  Q.  70.  ART.  2 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Augustine  says  (Gen.  ad  Lit.  xii.)  that  the 
body  feels  not,  but  the  soul  through  the  body,  and  further  on : 
The  soul  feels  certain  things,  not  through  the  body  but  without 
the  body.  Now  that  which  befits  the  soul  without  the  body 
can  be  in  the  soul  separated  from  the  body.  Therefore  the 
soul  will  then  be  able  to  feel  actually. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  To  see  images  of  bodies,  as  occurs  in 
sleep,  belongs  to  imaginary  vision  which  is  in  the  sensitive 
part.  Now  it  happens  that  the  separated  soul  sees  images 
of  bodies  in  the  same  way  as  when  we  sleep.  Thus  Augustine 
says  (Gen.  ad  Lit.  xii.) :  For  I  see  not  why  the  soul  has  an  image 
of  its  own  body  when,  the  body  lying  senseless,  yet  not  quite 
dead,  it  sees  some  things  which  many  have  related  after  returning 
to  life  from  this  suspended  animation  and  yet  has  it  not  when 
it  has  left  the  body  through  death  having  taken  place.  For  it  is 
unintelligible  that  the  soul  should  have  an  image  of  its  body, 
except  in  so  far  as  it  sees  that  image:  wherefore  he  said 
before  of  those  who  lie  senseless  that  they  have  a  certain 
image  of  their  own  body,  by  which  they  are  able  to  be  borne  to 
corporeal  places  and  by  means  of  sensible  images  to  take  cog 
nizance  of  such  things  as  they  see.  Therefore  the  separated 
soul  can  exercise  the  acts  of  the  sensitive  powers. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  The  memory  is  a  power  of  the  sensitive 
part,  as  proved  in  De  Memor.  et  Remin.  i.  Now  separated 
souls  will  actually  remember  the  things  they  did  in  this 
world :  wherefore  it  is  said  to  the  rich  glutton  (Luke  xvi.  25) : 
Remember  that  thou  didst  receive  good  things  in  thy  lifetime. 
Therefore  the  separated  soul  will  exercise  the  act  of  a  sensi 
tive  power. 

Obj.  5.  Further,  According  to  the  Philosopher  (DeAnima, 
iii.)  the  irascible  and  concupiscible  are  in  the  sensitive  part. 
But  joy  and  sorrow,  love  and  hatred,  fear  and  hope,  and 
similar  emotions  which  according  to  our  faith  we  hold  to  be 
in  separated  souls,  are  in  the  irascible  and  concupiscible. 
Therefore  separated  souls  will  not  be  deprived  of  the  acts 
of  the  sensitive  powers. 

On  the  contrary,  That  which  is  common  to  soul  and  body 
cannot  remain  in  the  separated  soul.  Now  all  the  operations 


Q.  7o.  ART.  2     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA"  28 

of  the  sensitive  powers  are  common  to  the  soul  and  body : 
and  this  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  no  sensitive  power 
exercises  an  act  except  through  a  bodily  organ.  Therefore 
the  separated  soul  will  be  deprived  of  the  acts  of  the  sensi 
tive  powers. 

Further,  The  Philosopher  says  (De  Anima,  i.)  that  when 
the  body  is  corrupted,  the  soul  neither  remembers  nor  loves,  and 
the  same  applies  to  all  the  acts  of  the  sensitive  powers. 
Therefore  the  separated  soul  does  not  exercise  the  act  of  any 
sensitive  power. 

/  answer  that,  Some  distinguish  two  kinds  of  acts  in  the 
sensitive  powers:  external  acts  which  the  soul  exercises 
through  the  body ;  and  these  do  not  remain  in  the  separated 
soul:  and  internal  acts  which  the  soul  performs  by  itself; 
and  these  will  be  in  the  separated  soul.  This  statement 
would  seem  to  have  originated  from  the  opinion  of  Plato,  who 
held  that  the  soul  is  united  to  the  body,  as  a  perfect  substance 
nowise  dependant  on  the  body,  and  merely  as  a  mover  is 
united  to  the  thing  moved.  This  is  an  evident  consequence  of 
transmigration  which  he  held.  And  since  according  to  him 
nothing  is  in  motion  except  what  is  moved,  and  lest  he  should 
go  on  indefinitely,  he  said  that  the  first  mover  moves  itself, 
and  he  maintained  that  the  soul  is  the  cause  of  its  own 
movement.  Accordingly  there  would  be  a  twofold  move 
ment  of  the  soul,  one  by  which  it  moves  itself,  and  another 
whereby  the  body  is  moved  by  the  soul:  so  that  this  act  to 
see  is  first  of  all  in  the  soul  itself  as  moving  itself,  and 
secondly  in  the  bodily  organ  in  so  far  as  the  soul  moves 
the  body.  This  opinion  is  refuted  by  the  Philosopher  (De 
Anima,  i.)  who  proves  that  the  soul  does  not  move  itself, 
and  that  it  is  nowise  moved  in  respect  of  such  operations  as 
seeing,  feeling,  and  the  like,  but  that  such  operations  are 
movements  of  the  composite  only.  We  must  therefore 
conclude  that  the  acts  of  the  sensitive  powers  nowise  remain 
in  the  separated  soul,  except  perhaps  as  in  their  remote  origin. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Some  deny  that  this  book  is  Augustine's: 
for  it  is  ascribed  to  a  Cistercian  who  compiled  it  from  Augus 
tine's  works,  and  added  things  of  his  own.  Hence  we  are 


29    SOUL'S  QUALITY  AFTER  DEATH  Q.  70.  ART.  2 

not  to  take  what  is  written  there,  as  having  authority.  If, 
however,  its  authority  should  be  maintained,  it  must  be  said 
that  the  meaning  is  that  the  separated  soul  is  affected  with 
imagination  and  other  like  powers,  not  as  though  such 
affection  were  the  act  of  the  aforesaid  powers,  but  in  the 
sense  that  the  soul  will  be  affected  in  the  future  life  for  good 
or  ill,  according  to  the  things  which  it  committed  in  the 
body  through  the  imagination  and  other  like  powers:  so 
that  the  imagination  and  suchlike  powers  are  not  supposed 
to  elicit  that  affection,  but  to  have  elicited  in  the  body  the 
merit  of  that  affection. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  soul  is  said  to  feel  through  the  body, 
not  as  though  the  act  of  feeling  belonged  to  the  soul  by 
itself,  but  as  belonging  to  the  whole  composite  by  reason  of 
the  soul,  just  as  we  say  that  heat  heats.  That  which  is 
added,  namely  that  the  soul  feels  some  things  without  the 
body,  such  as  fear  and  so  forth,  means  that  it  feels  such 
things  without  the  outward  movement  of  the  body  that 
takes  place  in  the  acts  of  the  proper  senses:  since  fear  and 
like  passions  do  not  occur  without  any  bodily  movement. 

It  may  also  be  replied  that  Augustine  is  speaking  according 
to  the  opinion  of  the  Platonists  who  maintained  this  as 
stated  above. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Augustine  speaks  there  as  nearly  throughout 
that  book,  as  one  inquiring  and  not  deciding.  For  it  is 
clear  that  there  is  no  comparison  between  the  soul  of  a 
sleeper  and  the  separated  soul :  since  the  soul  of  the  sleeper 
uses  the  organ  of  imagination  wherein  corporeal  images  are 
impressed;  which  cannot  be  said  of  the  separated  soul.  Or 
we  may  reply  that  images  of  things  are  in  the  soul,  both  as  to 
the  sensitive  and  imaginative  power  and  as  to  the  intellective 
power,  with  greater  or  lesser  abstraction  from  matter  and 
material  conditions.  Wherefore  Augustine's  comparison 
holds  in  this  respect  that  just  as  the  images  of  corporeal 
things  are  in  the  soul  of  the  dreamer  or  of  one  who  is  carried 
out  of  his  mind,  imaginatively,  so  are  they  in  the  separated 
soul  intellectively :  but  not  that  they  are  in  the  separated 
soul  imaginatively. 


Q.  7o.  ART.  3    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA"  30 

Reply  Obj.  4.  As  stated  in  the  first  book  of  Sentences, 
memory  has  a  twofold  signification.  Sometimes  it  means  a 
power  of  the  sensitive  part,  in  so  far  as  its  gaze  extends  over 
past  time;  and  in  this  way  the  act  of  the  memory  will  not 
be  in  the  separated  soul.  Wherefore  the  Philosopher  says 
(De  Anima,  i.,  text.  66)  that  when  this,  the  body  to  wit,  is 
corrupted,  the  soul  remembers  not.  In  another  way  memory  is 
used  to  designate  that  part  of  the  imagination  which  pertains 
to  the  intellective  faculty,  in  so  far  namely  as  it  abstracts 
from  all  differences  of  time,  since  it  regards  not  only  the  past 
but  also  the  present,  and  the  future  as  Augustine  says  (De 
Trin.  xiv.).  Taking  memory  in  this  sense  the  separated 
soul  will  remember.* 

Reply  Obj.  5.  Love,  joy,  sorrow,  and  the  like,  have  a  two 
fold  signification.  Sometimes  they  denote  passions  of  the 
sensitive  appetite,  and  thus  they  will  not  be  in  the  separated 
soul,  because  in  this  way  they  are  not  exercised  without  a 
definite  movement  of  the  heart.  In  another  way  they  denote 
acts  of  the  will  which  is  in  the  intellective  part :  and  in  this 
way  they  will  be  in  the  separated  soul,  even  as  delight  will 
be  there  without  bodily  movement,  even  as  it  is  in  God, 
namely  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  simple  movement  of  the  will.  In 
this  sense  the  Philosopher  says  (Ethic,  vii.  14)  that  God's  joy 
is  one  simple  delight. 

THIRD  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  SEPARATED  SOUL  CAN  SUFFER  FROM  A 
BODILY  FIRE  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Third  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  separated  soul  cannot 
suffer  from  a  bodily  fire.  For  Augustine  says  (Gen.  ad 
Lit.  xii.) :  The  things  that  affect  the  soul  well  or  ill  after  its 
separation  from  the  body,  are  not  corporeal  but  resemble 
corporeal  things.  Therefore  the  separated  soul  is  not  punished 
with  a  bodily  fire. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Augustine  (ibid.)  says  that  the  agent  is 

*  Cf.  P.  L,  Q.  LXXVIL,  A.  8;  Q.  LXXXIX.,  A.  6. 


3i    SOUL'S  QUALITY  AFTER  DEATH  Q.  70.  ART.  3 

always  more  excellent  than  the  patient.  But  it  is  impossible 
for  any  body  to  be  more  excellent  than  the  separated  soul. 
Therefore  it  cannot  suffer  from  a  body. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  According  to  the  Philosopher  (De  Gener.i.) 
and  Boethius  (De  Duab.  Natur.}  only  those  things  that 
agree  in  matter  are  active  and  passive  in  relation  to  one 
another.  But  the  soul  and  corporeal  fire  do  not  agree  in 
matter,  since  there  is  no  matter  common  to  spiritual  and 
corporeal  things:  wherefore  they  cannot  be  changed  into 
one  another,  as  Boethius  says  (ibid.}.  Therefore  the  sepa 
rated  soul  does  not  suffer  from  a  bodily  fire. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  Whatsoever  is  patient  receives  something 
from  the  agent.  Therefore  if  the  soul  suffer  from  the  bodily 
fire,  it  will  receive  something  therefrom.  Now  whatsoever 
is  received  in  a  thing  is  received  according  to  the  mode  of 
the  recipient.  Therefore  that  which  is  received  in  the  soul 
from  the  fire,  is  in  it  not  materially  but  spiritually.  Now 
the  forms  of  things  existing  spiritually  in  the  soul  are  its 
perfections.  Therefore  though  it  be  granted  that  the  soul 
suffer  from  the  bodily  fire,  this  will  not  conduce  to  its 
punishment,  but  rather  to  its  perfection. 

Obj.  5.  Further,  If  it  be  said  that  the  soul  is  punished 
merely  by  seeing  the  fire,  as  Gregory  would  seem  to  say 
(Dial,  iv.) ;  on  the  contrary, — If  the  soul  sees  the  fire  of  hell, 
it  cannot  see  it  save  by  intellectual  vision,  since  it  has  not 
the  organs  by  which  sensitive  or  imaginative  vision  is 
effected.  But  it  would  seem  impossible  for  intellectual  vision 
to  be  the  cause  of  sorrow,  since  there  is  no  sorrow  contrary 
to  the  pleasure  of  considering,  according  to  the  Philosopher 
(Top.  i.) .  Therefore  the  soul  is  not  punished  by  that  vision. 

Obj.  6.  Further,  If  it  be  said  that  the  soul  suffers  from  the 
corporeal  fire,  through  being  held  thereby,  even  as  now 
it  is  held  by  the  body  while  living  in  the  body;  on  the  con 
trary, — The  soul  while  living  in  the  body  is  held  by  the 
body  in  so  far  as  there  results  one  thing  from  the  soul  and 
the  body,  as  from  form  and  matter.  But  the  soul  will  not 
be  the  form  of  that  corporeal  fire.  Therefore  it  cannot  be 
held  by  the  fire  in  the  manner  aforesaid. 


Q.  7o.  ART.  3     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA"  32 

Obj.  7.  Further,  Every  bodily  agent  acts  by  contact. 
But  a  corporeal  fire  cannot  be  in  contact  with  the  soul,  since 
contact  is  only  between  corporeal  things  whose  bounds  come 
together.  Therefore  the  soul  suffers  not  from  that  fire. 

Obj.  8.  Further,  An  organic  agent  does  not  act  on  a 
remote  object,  except  through  acting  on  the  intermediate 
objects;  wherefore  it  is  able  to  act  at  a  fixed  distance  in 
proportion  to  its  power.  But  souls,  or  at  least  the  demons 
to  whom  this  equally  applies,  are  sometimes  outside  the 
place  of  hell,  since  sometimes  they  appear  to  men  even  in 
this  world :  and  yet  they  are  not  then  free  from  punishment, 
for  just  as  the  glory  of  the  saints  is  never  interrupted,  so 
neither  is  the  punishment  of  the  damned.  And  yet  we  do 
not  find  that  all  the  intermediate  things  surfer  from  the  fire 
of  hell:  nor  again  is  it  credible  that  any  corporeal  thing  of 
an  elemental  nature  has  such  a  power  that  its  action  can 
reach  to  such  a  distance.  Therefore  it  does  not  seem  that 
the  pains  suffered  by  the  souls  of  the  damned  are  inflicted 
by  a  corporeal  fire. 

On  the  contrary,  The  possibility  of  suffering  from  a  cor 
poreal  fire  is  equally  consistent  with  separated  souls  and  with 
demons.  Now  demons  suffer  therefrom  since  they  are 
punished  by  that  fire  into  which  the  bodies  of  the  damned 
will  be  cast  after  the  resurrection,  and  which  must  needs  be 
as  corporeal  fire.  This  is  evident  from  the  words  of  our 
Lord  (Matth.  xxv.  41),  Depart  from  Me,  you  cursed,  into 
everlasting  fire,  which  was  prepared  for  the  devil,  etc.  There 
fore  separated  souls  also  can  suffer  from  that  fire. 

Further,  Punishment  should  correspond  to  sin.  Now 
in  sinning  the  soul  subjected  itself  to  the  body  by  sinful 
concupiscence.  Therefore  it  is  just  that  it  should  be  pun 
ished  by  being  made  subject  to  a  bodily  thing  by  suffering 
therefrom. 

Further,  There  is  greater  union  between  form  and  matter 
than  between  agent  and  patient.  Now  the  diversity  of 
spiritual  and  corporeal  nature  does  not  hinder  the  soul  from 
being  the  form  of  the  body.  Therefore  neither  is  it  an 
obstacle  to  its  suffering  from  a  body. 


33    SOUL'S  QUALITY  AFTER  DEATH  Q.  70.  ART.  3 

/  answer  that,  Given  that  the  fire  of  hell  is  not  so  called 
metaphorically,  nor  an  imaginary  fire,  but  a  real  corporeal 
fire,  we  must  needs  say  that  the  soul  will  suffer  punishment 
from  a  corporeal  fire,  since  our  Lord  said  (Matth.  xxv.  41) 
that  this  fire  was  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels,  who 
are  incorporeal  even  as  the  soul.  But  how  it  is  that  they 
can  thus  suffer  is  explained  in  many  ways.  For  some  have 
said  that  the  mere  fact  that  the  soul  sees  the  fire  makes  the 
soul  suffer  from  the  fire :  wherefore  Gregory  (Dial,  iv.)  says : 
The  soul  suffers  from  the  fire  by  merely  seeing  it.  But  this 
does  not  seem  sufficient,  because  whatever  is  seen,  from  the 
fact  that  it  is  seen,  is  a  perfection  of  the  seer ;  wherefore  it 
cannot  conduce  to  his  punishment,  as  seen.  Sometimes, 
however,  it  is  of  a  penal  or  unpleasant  nature  accidentally, 
in  so  far,  to  wit,  as  it  is  apprehended  as  something  hurtful, 
and  consequently,  besides  the  fact  that  the  soul  sees  the  fire, 
there  must  needs  be  some  relation  of  the  soul  to  the  fire, 
according  to  which  the  fire  is  hurtful  to  the  soul.  Hence 
others  have  said  that  although  a  corporeal  fire  cannot  burn 
the  soul,  the  soul  nevertheless  apprehends  it  as  hurtful  to 
itself,  and  in  consequence  of  this  apprehension  is  seized  with 
fear  and  sorrow,  in  fulfilment  of  Ps.  xiii.  5,  They  have  trem 
bled  for  fear,  where  there  was  no  fear.  Hence  Gregory  says 
(Dial,  iv.)  that  the  soul  burns  through  seeing  itself  aflame.  But 
this,  again,  seems  insufficient,  because  in  this  case  the  soul 
would  suffer  from  the  fire,  not  in  reality  but  only  in  appre 
hension  :  for  although  a  real  passion  of  sorrow  or  pain  may 
result  from  a  false  imagination,  as  Augustine  observes  (Gen. 
ad  Lit.  xii.),  it  cannot  be  said  in  relation  to  that  passion  that 
one  really  suffers  from  the  thing,  but  from  the  image  of  the 
thing  that  is  present  to  one's  fancy.  Moreover,  this  kind 
of  suffering  would  be  more  unlike  real  suffering  than  that 
which  results  from  imaginary  vision,  since  the  latter  is  stated 
to  result  from  real  images  of  things,  which  images  the  soul 
carries  about  with  it,  whereas  the  former  results  from  false 
fancies  which  the  erring  soul  imagines :  and  furthermore,  it 
is  not  probable  that  separated  souls  or  demons,  who  are 
endowed  with  keen  intelligence,  would  think  it  possible  for 

in.  6  3 


Q.  7o.  ART.  3    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  34 

a  corporeal  fire  to  hurt  them,  if  they  Were  nowise  distressed 
thereby.  Hence  others  say  that  it  is  necessary  to  admit 
that  the  soul  suffers  even  really  from  the  corporeal  fire: 
wherefore  Gregory  says  (Dial,  iv.):  We  can  gather  from  the 
words  of  the  Gospel,  that  the  soul  suffers  from  the  fire  not  only 
by  seeing  it,  but  also  by  feeling  it.  They  explain  the  possi 
bility  of  this  as  follows.  They  say  that  this  corporeal  fire 
can  be  considered  in  two  ways.  First,  as  a  corporeal  thing, 
and  thus  it  has  not  the  power  to  act  on  the  soul.  Secondly, 
as  the  instrument  of  the  vengeance  of  Divine  justice.  For 
the  order  of  Divine  justice  demands  that  the  soul  which  by 
sinning  subjected  itself  to  corporeal  things  should  be  sub 
jected  to  them  also  in  punishment.  Now  an  instrument  acts 
not  only  in  virtue  of  its  own  nature,  but  also  in  virtue  of  the 
principal  agent :  wherefore  it  is  not  unreasonable  if  that  fire 
seeing  that  it  acts  in  virtue  of  a  spiritual  agent  should  act 
on  the  spirit  of  a  man  or  demon,  in  the  same  way  as  we  have 
explained  the  sanctification  of  the  soul  by  the  sacraments 
(P.  III.,  Q.  LXIL,  AA.  i,  4).  But,  again,  this  does  not 
seem  to  suffice,  since  every  instrument,  in  acting  on  that  on 
which  it  is  used  instrumentally,  has  its  own  connatural  action 
besides  the  action  whereby  it  acts  in  virtue  of  the  principal 
agent :  in  fact  it  is  by  fulfilling  the  former  that  it  effects  the 
latter  action,  even  as,  in  Baptism,  it  is  by  laving  the  body 
that  water  sanctifies  the  soul,  and  the  saw  by  cutting  wood 
produces  the  shape  of  a  house.  Hence  we  must  allow  the 
fire  to  exercise  on  the  soul  an  action  connatural  to  the  fire, 
in  order  that  it  may  be  the  instrument  of  Divine  justice  in 
the  punishment  of  sin :  and  for  this  reason  we  must  say  that 
a  body  cannot  naturally  act  on  a  spirit,  nor  in  any  way  be 
hurtful  or  distressful  to  it,  except  in  so  far  as  the  latter  is 
in  some  way  united  to  a  body :  for  thus  we  observe  that  the 
corruptible  body  is  a  load  upon  the  soul  (Wis.  ix.  15).  Now 
a  spirit  is  united  to  a  body  in  two  ways.  In  one  way  as 
form  to  matter,  so  that  from  their  union  there  results  one 
thing  simply:  and  the  spirit  that  is  thus  united  to  a  body 
both  quickens  the  body  and  is  somewhat  burdened  by  the 
body :  but  it  is  not  thus  that  the  spirit  of  man  or  demon  is 


35    SOUL'S  QUALITY  AFTER  DEATH  Q.  70.  ART.  3 

united  to  the  corporeal  fire.     In  another  way  as  the  mover  is 
united  to  the  things  moved,  or  as  a  thing  placed  is  united  to 
place,  even  as  incorporeal  things  are  in  a  place.     In  this  way 
created  incorporeal  spirits  are  confined  to  a  place,  being  in 
one  place  in  such  a  way  as  not  to  be  in  another.     Now 
although  of  its  nature  a  corporeal  thing  is  able  to  confine  an 
incorporeal  spirit  to  a  place,  it  is  not  able  of  its  nature  to 
detain  an  incorporeal  spirit  in  the  place  to  which  it  is  con 
fined,  and  so  to  tie  it  to  that  place  that  it  be  unable  to  seek 
another,  since  a  spirit  is  not  by  nature  in  a  place  so  as  to  be 
subject  to  place.     But  the  corporeal  fire  is  enabled  as  the 
instrument  of  the  vengeance  of  Divine  justice  thus  to  detain 
a  spirit;  and  thus  it  has  a  penal  effect  on  it,  by  hindering 
it  from  fulfilling  its  own  will,  that  is  by  hindering  it  from 
acting  where  it  will  and  as  it  will.     This  way  is  asserted 
by  Gregory  (Dial.  iv.).     For  in  explaining  how  the  soul  can 
suffer  from  that  fire  by  feeling  it,  he  expresses  himself  as 
follows:  Since   Truth  declares   the  rich   sinner  to  be   con 
demned  to  fire,  will  any  wise  man  deny  that  the  souls  of  the 
wicked  are  imprisoned  in  flames?     Julian*  says  the  same 
as  quoted  by  the  Master  (iv.  Sent.  D.  44) :  If  the  incorporeal 
spirit  of  a  living  man  is  held  by  the  body,  why  shall  it  not  be 
held  after  death  by  a  corporeal  fire  ?  and  Augustine  says  (De 
Civ.  Dei,  xxi.)  that  just  as,  although  the  soul  is  spiritual  and 
the  body  corporeal,  man  is  so  fashioned  that  the  soul  is  united 
to  the  body  as  giving  it  life,  and  on  account  of  this  union  con 
ceives  a  great  love  for  its  body,  so  it  is  chained  to  the  fire,  as 
receiving  punishment  therefrom,  and  from  this  union  conceives 
a  loathing.     Accordingly  we  must  unite  all  the  aforesaid 
modes  together,  in  order  to  understand  perfectly  how  the 
soul  suffers  from  a  corporeal  fire :  so  as  to  say  that  the  fire 
of  its  nature  is  able  to  have  an  incorporeal  spirit  united  to 
it  as  a  thing  placed  is  united  to  a  place :  that  as  the  instru 
ment  of  Divine  justice  it  is  enabled  to  detain  it  enchained 
as  it  were,  and  in  this  respect  this  fire  is  really  hurtful  to 
the  spirit,  and  thus  the  soul  seeing  the  fire  as  something 
hurtful  to  it  is  tormented  by  the  fire.     Hence   Gregory 
*  Bishop.of  Toledo,  Prognostic  ii. 


Q.  7o.  ART.  3    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  36 

(Dial,  iv.)  mentions  all  these  in  order,  as  may  be  seen  from 
the  above  quotations. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Augustine  speaks  there  as  one  inquiring: 
wherefore  he  expresses  himself  otherwise  when  deciding 
as  quoted  above  (De  Civ.  Dei,  xxi.).  Or  we  may  reply  that 
Augustine  means  to  say  that  the  things  which  are  the 
proximate  occasion  of  the  soul's  pain  or  sorrow  are  spiritual, 
since  it  would  not  be  distressed  unless  it  apprehended  the 
fire  as  hurtful  to  it :  wherefore  the  fire  as  apprehended  is  the 
proximate  cause  of  its  distress,  whereas  the  corporeal  fire 
which  exists  outside  the  soul  is  the  remote  cause  of  its 
distress. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Although  the  soul  is  simply  more  excellent 
than  the  fire,  the  fire  is  relatively  more  excellent  than  the 
soul,  in  so  far,  to  wit,  as  it  is  the  instrument  of  Divine 
justice. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  Philosopher  and  Boethius  are  speaking 
of  the  action  whereby  the  patient  is  changed  into  the  nature 
of  the  agent.  Such  is  not  the  action  of  the  fire  on  the  soul : 
and  consequently  the  argument  is  not  conclusive. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  By  acting  on  the  soul  the  fire  bestows  nothing 
on  it  but  detains  it,  as  stated  above.  Hence  the  argument  is 
not  to  the  point. 

Reply  Obj.  5.  In  intellectual  vision  sorrow  is  not  caused 
by  the  fact  that  something  is  seen,  since  the  thing  seen  as 
such  can  nowise  be  contrary  to  the  intellect.  But  in  the 
sensible  vision  the  thing  seen,  by  its  very  action  on  the  sight 
so  as  to  be  seen,  there  may  be  accidentally  something 
corruptive  of  the  sight,  in  so  far  as  it  destroys  the  harmony 
of  the  organ.  Nevertheless,  intellectual  vision  may  cause 
sorrow,  in  so  far  as  the  thing  seen  is  apprehended  as  hurtful, 
not  that  it  hurts  through  being  seen,  but  in  some  other  way 
no  matter  which.  It  is  thus  that  the  soul  in  seeing  the  fire 
is  distressed. 

Reply  Obj.  6.  The  comparison  does  not  hold  in  every 
respect,  but  it  does  in  some,  as  explained  above. 

Reply  Obj.  7.  Although  there  is  no  bodily  contact  between 
the  soul  and  body,  there  is  a  certain  spiritual  contact  be- 


37    SOUL'S  QUALITY  AFTER  DEATH  Q.  70.  ART.  3 

tween  them  (even  as  the  mover  of  the  heaven,  being  spiritual, 
touches  the  heaven,  when  it  moves  it,  with  a  spiritual 
contact)  in  the  same  way  as  a  painful  object  is  said  to  touch, 
as  stated  in  De  Generat.  i.  This  mode  of  contact  is  sufficient 
for  action. 

Reply  Obj.  8.  The  souls  of  the  damned  are  never  outside 
hell,  except  by  Divine  permission,  either  for  the  instruction 
or  for  the  trial  of  the  elect.  And  wherever  they  are  outside 
hell  they  nevertheless  always  see  the  fire  thereof  as  prepared 
for  their  punishment.  Wherefore,  since  this  vision  is  the 
immediate  cause  of  their  distress,  as  stated  above,  wherever 
they  are,  they  suffer  from  hell-fire.  Even  so  prisoners, 
though  outside  the  prison,  suffer  somewhat  from  the  prison, 
seeing  themselves  condemned  thereto.  Hence  just  as  the 
glory  of  the  elect  is  not  diminished,  neither  as  to  the  essen 
tial,  nor  as  to  the  accidental  reward,  if  they  happen  to  be 
outside  the  empyrean,  in  fact  this  somewhat  conduces  to 
their  glory,  so  the  punishment  of  the  damned  is  nowise 
diminished,  if  by  God's  permission  they  happen  to  be 
outside  hell  for  a  time.  A  gloss  on  James  iii.  6,  inflameth 
the  wheel  of  ow  nativity,  etc.,  is  in  agreement  with  this,  for 
it  is  worded  thus:  The  devil,  wherever  he  is,  whether  in  the 
air  or  under  the  earth,  drags  with  him  the  torments  of  his 
flames.  But  the  objection  argues  as  though  the  corporeal 
fire  tortured  the  spirit  immediately  in  the  same  way  as  it 
torments  bodies. 


QUESTION  LXXL 

OF  THE  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD. 

(In  Fourteen  Articles.) 

WE  must  now  consider  the  suffrages  for  the  dead.  Under 
this  head  there  are  fourteen  points  of  inquiry :  (i)  Whether 
suffrages  performed  by  one  person  can  profit  others  ? 
(2)  Whether  the  dead  can  be  assisted  by  the  works  of  the 
living  ?  (3)  Whether  the  suffrages  of  sinners  profit  the 
dead  ?  (4)  Whether  suffrages  for  the  dead  profit  those 
who  perform  them  ?  (5)  Whether  suffrages  profit  those 
who  are  in  hell  ?  (6)  Whether  they  profit  those  who  are  in 
purgatory  ?  (7)  Whether  they  avail  the  children  in  limbo? 

(8)  Whether  in  any  way  they  profit  those  who  are  in  heaven  ? 

(9)  Whether  the  prayer  of  the  Church,  the  Sacrament  of  the 
altar,  and  almsgiving  profit  the  departed  ?     (10)  Whether 
indulgences     granted     by     the     Church     profit     them  ? 
(n)  Whether    the    burial    service    profits    the    departed  ? 
(12)  Whether   suffrages   for   one   dead  person   profit   that 
person    more    than    others  ?     (13)  Whether    suffrages    for 
many  avail  each  one  as  much  as  if  they  were  offered  for  each 
individual  ?    (14)  Whether  general  suffrages  avail  those  for 
whom  special  suffrages  are  not  offered,  as  much  as  special 
and  general  suffrages  together  avail  those  for  whom  they 
are  offered  ? 

FIRST  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  THE  SUFFRAGES  OF  ONE  PERSON  CAN  PROFIT 

OTHERS  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  First  Article  : — 
Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  the  suffrages  of  one  person 
cannot  profit  others.     For  it  is  written  (Gal.  vi.  8):  What 

38 


39  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD    Q.  71.  ART.  i 

things  a  man  shall  sow,  those  also  shall  he  reap.  Now  if  one 
person  reaped  fruit  from  the  suffrages  of  another,  he  would 
reap  from. another's  sowing.  Therefore  a  person  receives 
no  fruit  from  the  suffrages  of  others. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  It  belongs  to  God's  justice,  that  each  one 
should  receive  according  to  his  merits,  wherefore  the  psalm 
(Ixi.  13)  says:  Thou  wilt  render  to  every  man  according  to  his 
works.  Now  it  is  impossible  for  God's  justice  to  fail.  There 
fore  it  is  impossible  for  one  man  to  be  assisted  by  the  works 
of  another. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  A  work  is  meritorious  on  the  same  count 
as  it  is  praiseworthy,  namely  inasmuch  as  it  is  voluntary. 
Now  one  man  is  not  praised  for  the  work  of  another.  There 
fore  neither  can  the  work  of  one  man  be  meritorious  and 
fruitful  for  another. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  It  belongs  to  Divine  justice  to  repay 
good  for  good  in  the  same  way  as  evil  for  evil.  But  no  man 
is  punished  for  the  evildoings  of  another ;  indeed,  according 
to  Ezech.  xviii.  4,  the  soul  that  sinneth,  the  same  shall  die. 
Therefore  neither  does  one  person  profit  by  another's  good. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (Ps.  cxviii.  63) :  I  am  a  par 
taker  with  all  them  that  fear  Thee,  etc. 

Further,  All  the  faithful  united  together  by  charity  are 
members  of  the  one  body  of  the  Church.  Now  one  member 
is  assisted  by  another.  Therefore  one  man  can  be  assisted 
by  the  merits  of  another. 

I  answer  that,  Our  actions  can  avail  for  two  purposes. 
First,  for  acquiring  a  certain  state;  thus  by  a  meritorious 
work  a  man  obtains  the  state  of  bliss.  Secondly,  for  some 
thing  consequent  upon  a  state;  thus  by  some  work  a  man 
merits  an  accidental  reward,  or  a  rebate  of  punishment. 
And  for  both  these  purposes  our  actions  may  avail  in  two 
ways:  first,  by  way  of  merit;  secondly,  by  way  of  prayer: 
the  difference  being  that  merit  relies  on  justice,  and  prayer 
on  mercy;  since  he  who  prays  obtains  his  petition  from  the 
mere  liberality  of  the  one  he  prays.  Accordingly  we  must 
say  that  the  work  of  one  person  nowise  can  avail  another  for 
acquiring  a  state  by  way  of  merit,  so  that,  to  wit,  a  man  be 


Q.  71.  ART.  i     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  40 

able  to  merit  eternal  life  by  the  works  which  I  do,  because 
the  share  of  glory  is  awarded  according  to  the  measure  of  the 
recipient,  and  each  one  is  disposed  by  his  own  and  not  by 
another's  actions, — disposed,  that  is  to  say,  by  being  worthy 
of  reward.  By  way  of  prayer,  however,  the  work  of  one 
may  profit  another  while  he  is  a  wayfarer,  even  for  acquiring 
a  state ;  for  instance,  one  man  may  obtain  the  first  grace  for 
another:*  and  since  the  impetration  of  prayer  depends  on 
the  liberality  of  God  Whom  we  pray,  it  may  extend  to  what 
ever  is  ordinately  subject  to  the  Divine  power.  On  the  other 
hand,  as  regards  that  which  is  consequent  upon  or  accessory 
to  a  state,  the  work  of  one  may  avail  another,  not  only 
by  way  of  prayer  but  even  by  way  of  merit :  and  this  happens 
in  two  ways.  First,  on  account  of  their  communion  in  the 
root  of  the  work,  which  root  is  charity  in  meritorious  works. 
Wherefore  all  who  are  united  together  by  charity  acquire 
some  benefit  from  one  another's  works,  albeit  according  to 
the  measure  of  each  one's  state,  since  even  in  heaven  each 
one  will  rejoice  in  the  goods  of  others.  Hence  it  is  that  the 
communion  of  saints  is  laid  down  as  an  article  of  faith. 
Secondly,  through  the  intention  of  the  doer  who  does  certain 
works  specially  for  the  purpose  that  they  may  profit  such 
persons :  so  that  those  works  become  somewhat  the  works  of 
those  for  whom  they  are  done,  as  though  they  were  bestowed 
on  them  by  the  doer.  Wherefore  they  can  avail  them  either 
for  the  fulfilment  of  satisfaction  or  for  some  similar  purpose 
that  does  not  change  their  state. 

Reply  Obj.  I.  This  reaping  is  the  receiving  of  eternal  life, 
as  stated  in  Jo.  iv.  36,  And  he  that  reapeth  .  .  .  gather  eth 
fruit  unto  life  everlasting.  Now  a  share  of  eternal  life  is  not 
given  to  a  man  save  for  his  own  works,  for  although  we  may 
impetrate  for  another  that  he  obtain  life,  this  never  happens 
except  by  means  of  his  own  works,  when  namely,  at  the 
prayers  of  one,  another  is  given  the  grace  whereby  he  merits 
eternal  life. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  work  that  is  done  for  another  becomes 
his  for  whom  it  is  done :  and  in  like  manner  the  work  done 
*  Cf.  I.-IL,  Q.  CXIV.,  A.  6. 


4i  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD     Q.  71.  ART.  2 

by  a  man  who  is  one  with  me  is  somewhat  mine.  Hence  it 
is  not  contrary  to  Divine  justice  if  a  man  receives  the  fruit 
of  the  works  done  by  a  man  who  is  one  with  him  in  charity, 
or  of  works  done  for  him.  This  also  happens  according  to 
human  justice,  so  that  the  satisfaction  offered  by  one  is 
accepted  in  lieu  of  another's. 

Reply  Obf.  3.  Praise  is  not  given  to  a  person  save  according 
to  his  relation  to  an  act,  wherefore  praise  is  in  relation  to 
something  (Ethic,  i.  12).  And  since  no  man  is  made  or  shown 
to  be  well  or  ill  disposed  to  something,  by  another's  deed, 
it  follows  that  no  man  is  praised  for  another's  deeds  save 
accidentally,  in  so  far  as  he  is  somewhat  the  cause  of  those 
deeds,  by  giving  counsel,  assistance,  inducement,  or  by  any 
other  means.  On  the  other  hand,  a  work  is  meritorious  to. 
a  person,  not  only  by  reason  of  his  disposition,  but  also  in 
view  of  something  consequent  upon  his  disposition  or  state, 
as  evidenced  by  what  has  been  said. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  It  is  directly  contrary  to  justice  to  take  away 
from  a  person  that  which  is  his  due :  but  to  give  a  person 
what  is  not  his  due  is  not  contrary  to  justice,  but  surpasses 
the  bounds  of  justice,  for  it  is  liberality.  Now  a  person 
cannot  be  hurt  by  the  ills  of  another,  unless  he  be  deprived 
of  something  of  his  own.  Consequently  it  is  not  becoming 
that  one  should  be  punished  for  another's  sins,  as  it  is  that 
one  should  acquire  some  advantage  from  the  good  deeds  of 
another. 

SECOND  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  DEAD  CAN  BE  ASSISTED  BY  THE  WORKS  OF 
THE  LIVING  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Second  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  dead  cannot  be  assisted 
by  the  works  of  the  living.  First,  because  the  Apostle  says 
(2  Cor.  v.  10) :  We  must  all  be  manifested  before  the  judgment 
seat  of  Christ,  that  every  one  may  receive  the  proper  things  of 
the  body,  according  as  he  hath  done.  Therefore  nothing  can 
accrue  to  a  man  from  the  works  of  others,  which  are  done 
after  his  death  and  when  he  is  no  longer  in  the  body. 


Q.  71.  ART.  2     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  42 

Obj.  2.  Further,  This  also  seems  to  follow  from  the  words 
of  Apoc.  xiv.  13,  Blessed  are  the  dead  who  die  in  the  Lord  .  .  . 
for  their  works  follow  them. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  It  belongs  only  to  one  who  is  on  the  way 
to  advance  on  account  of  some  deed.  Now  after  death 
men  are  no  longer  wayfarers,  because  to  them  the  words  of 
Job  xix.  8,  refer :  He  hath  hedged  in  my  path  round  about,  and 
I  cannot  pass.  Therefore  the  dead  cannot  be  assisted  by 
a  person's  suffrages. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  No  one  is  assisted  by  the  deed  of  another, 
unless  there  be  some  community  of  life  between  them.  Now 
there  is  no  community  between  the  dead  and  the  living,  as 
the  Philosopher  says  (Ethic,  i.  n).  Therefore  the  suffrages 
of  the  living  do  not  profit  the  dead. 

On  the  contrary  are  the  words  of  2  Machab.  xii.  46 :  It  is  .  .  . 
a  holy  and  wholesome  thought  to  pray  for  the  dead,  that  they 
may  be  loosed  from  sins.  But  this  would  not  be  profitable 
unless  it  were  a  help  to  them.  Therefore  the  suffrages  of 
the  living  profit  the  dead. 

Further,  Augustine  says  (De  Cura  pro  Mori,  i.) :  Of  no 
small  weight  is  the  authority  of  the  Church  whereby  she  clearly 
approves  of  the  custom  whereby  a  commendation  of  the  dead 
has  a  place  in  the  prayers  which  the  priests  pour  forth  to  the 
Lord  God  at  His  altar.  This  custom  was  established  by  the 
apostles  themselves  according  to  the  Damascene  in  a  sermon 
on  suffrages  for  the  dead,  where  he  expresses  himself  thus: 
Realizing  the  nature  of  the  Mysteries  the  disciples  of  the 
Saviour  and  His  holy  apostles  sanctioned  a  commemoration  of 
those  who  had  died  in  the  faith,  being  made  in  the  awe-inspiring 
and  life-giving  Mysteries.  This  is  also  confirmed  by  the 
authority  of  Dionysius  (flier.  Eccl.},  where  he  mentions 
the  rite  of  the  Early  Church  in  praying  for  the  dead,  and, 
moreover,  asserts  that  the  suffrages  of  the  living  profit  the 
dead.  Therefore  we  must  believe  this  without  any  doubt. 

I  answer  that,  Charity,  which  is  the  bond  uniting  the 
members  of  the  Church,  extends  not  only  to  the  living,  but 
also  to  the  dead  who  die  in  charity.  For  charity  which  is 
the  life  of  the  soul,  even  as  the  soul  is  the  life  of  the  body, 


43  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD     Q.  71.  ART.  2 

has  no  end:  Chanty  never fatteth  away  (i  Cor.  xiii.  8).  More 
over,  the  dead  live  in  the  memory  of  the  living:  wherefore 
the  intention  of  the  living  can  be  directed  to  them.  Hence 
the  suffrages  of  the  living  profit  the  dead  in  two  ways 
even  as  they  profit  the  living,  both  on  account  of  the  bond 
of  charity  and  on  account  of  the  intention  being  directed  to 
them.  Nevertheless,  we  must  not  believe  that  the  suffrages 
of  the  living  profit  them  so  as  to  change  their  state  from 
unhappiness  to  happiness  or  vice  versa  ;  but  they  avail  for 
the  diminution  of  punishment  or  something  of  the  kind  that 
involves  no  change  in  the  state  of  the  dead. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Man  while  living  in  the  body  merited  that 
such  things  should  avail  him  after  death.  Wherefore  if  he 
is  assisted  thereby  after  this  life,  this  is,  nevertheless,  the 
result  of  the  things  he  has  done  in  the  body. 

Or  we  may  reply,  according  to  John  Damascene,  in  the 
sermon  quoted  above,  that  these  words  refer  to  the  retribu 
tion  which  will  be  made  at  the  final  judgment,  of  eternal 
glory  or  eternal  unhappiness :  for  then  each  one  will  receive 
only  according  as  he  himself  has  done  in  the  body.  Mean 
while,  however,  he  can  be  assisted  by  the  suffrages  of  the 
living. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  words  quoted  refer  expressly  to  the 
sequel  of  eternal  retribution  as  is  clear  from  the  opening 
words :  Blessed  are  the  dead,  etc.  Or  we  may  reply  that  deeds 
done  on  their  behalf  are  somewhat  their  own,  as  stated  above. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Although,  strictly  speaking,  after  death 
souls  are  not  in  the  state  of  the  way,  yet  in  a  certain  respect 
they  are  still  on  the  way,  in  so  far  as  they  are  delayed 
awhile  in  their  advance  towards  their  final  award.  Where 
fore,  strictly  speaking,  their  way  is  hedged  in  round  about,  so 
that  they  can  no  more  be  changed  by  any  works  in  respect 
of  the  state  of  happiness  or  unhappiness.  Yet  their  way  is 
not  so  hedged  around  that  they  cannot  be  helped  by  others 
in  the  matter  of  their  being  delayed  from  receiving  their 
final  award,  because  in  this  respect  they  are  still  wayfarers. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  Although  the  communion  of  civic  deeds, 
whereof  the  Philosopher  speaks,  is  impossible  between  the 


Q.  71.  ART.  3     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  44 

dead  and  the  living,  because  the  dead  are  outside  civic  life, 
the  communication  of  the  spiritual  life  is  possible  between 
them,  for  that  life  is  founded  on  charity  towards  God,  to 
Whom  the  spirits  of  the  dead  live. 

THIRD  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  SUFFRAGES  PERFORMED  BY  SINNERS  PROFIT 

THE   DEAD  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Third  Article  : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  suffrages  performed  by 
sinners  do  not  profit  the  dead.  For,  according  to  Jo.  ix.  31, 
God  doth  not  hear  sinners.  Now  if  their  prayers  were  to 
profit  those  for  whom  they  pray,  they  would  be  heard  by 
God.  Therefore  the  suffrages  performed  by  them  do  not 
profit  the  dead. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Gregory  says  (Pastoral,  i.  n)  that  when 
an  offensive  person  is  sent  to  intercede,  the  wrath  of  the  angered 
party  is  provoked  to  harsher  measures.  Now  every  sinner  is 
offensive  to  God.  Therefore  God  is  not  inclined  to  mercy 
by  the  suffrages  of  sinners,  and  consequently  their  suffrages 
are  of  no  avail. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  A  person's  deed  would  seem  to  be  more 
fruitful  to  the  doer  than  to  another.  But  a  sinner  merits 
naught  for  himself  by  his  deeds.  Much  less,  therefore,  can 
he  merit  for  another. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  Every  meritorious  work  must  be  a  living 
work,  that  is  to  say,  informed  by  charity.  Now  works  done 
by  sinners  are  dead.  Therefore  the  dead  for  whom  they  are 
done  cannot  be  assisted  thereby. 

Obj.  5.  On  the  contrary,  No  man  can  know  for  certain 
about  another  man  whether  the  latter  be  in  a  state  of  sin  or 
of  grace.  If,  therefore,  only  those  suffrages  were  profitable 
that  are  done  by  those  who  are  in  a  state  of  grace,  a  man 
could  not  know  of  whom  to  ask  suffrages  for  his  dead,  and 
consequently  many  would  be  deterred  from  obtaining 
suffrages. 

Obj.  6.  Further,  According  to  Augustine  (Enchir.  cix.), 


45  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD    Q.  71.  ART.  3 

as  quoted  in  the  text  (iv.  Sent.  D.  45),  the  dead  are  assisted 
by  suffrages  according  as  while  living  they  merited  to  be 
assisted  after  death.  Therefore  the  worth  of  suffrages  is 
measured  according  to  the  disposition  of  the  person  for  whom 
they  are  performed.  Therefore  it  would  appear  that  it  differs 
not  whether  they  be  performed  by  good  or  by  wicked  persons. 
I  answer  that,  Two  things  may  be  considered  in  the 
suffrages  performed  by  the  wicked.  First,  the  deed  done, 
for  instance  the  sacrifice  of  the  altar.  And  since  our  sacra 
ments  have  their  efficacy  from  themselves  independently  of 
the  deed  of  the  doer,  and  are  equally  efficacious  by  whom 
soever  they  are  performed,  in  this  respect  the  suffrages  of 
the  wicked  profit  the  departed.  Secondly,  we  may  consider 
the  deed  of  the  doer,  and  then  we  must  draw  a  distinction ; 
because  the  deed  of  a  sinner  who  offers  suffrage  may  be 
considered — in  one  way  in  so  far  as  it  is  his  own  deed,  and 
thus  it  can  nowise  be  meritorious  either  to  himself  or  to 
another;  in  another  way  in  so  far  as  it  is  another's  deed,  and 
this  happens  in  two  ways.  First,  when  the  sinner,  offering 
suffrages,  represents  the  whole  Church;  for  instance  a  priest 
when  he  performs  the  burial  service  in  church.  And  since 
one  in  whose  name  or  in  whose  stead  a  -thing  is  done  is  under 
stood  to  do  it  himself  as  Dionysius  asserts  (Coel.  Hier.  xiii.), 
it  follows  that  the  suffrages  of  that  priest,  albeit  a  sinner, 
profit  the  departed.  Secondly,  when  he  acts  as  the 
instrument  of  another:  for  the  work  of  the  instrument 
belongs  more  to  the  principal  agent.  Wherefore,  although 
he  who  acts  as  the  instrument  of  another  be  not  in  a  state 
of  merit,  his  act  may  be  meritorious  on  account  of  the 
principal  agent:  for  instance  if  a  servant  being  in  sin  do 
any  work  of  mercy  at  the  command  of  his  master  who  has 
charity.  Hence,  if  a  person  dying  in  charity  command 
suffrages  to  be  offered  for  him,  or  if  some  other  person 
having  charity  prescribe  them,  those  suffrages  avail  for  the 
departed,  even  though  the  persons  by  whom  they  are  per 
formed  be  in  sin.  Nevertheless  they  would  avail  more  if 
those  persons  were  in  charity,  because  then  those  works 
would  be  meritorious  on  two  counts. 


Q.  71.  ART.  3     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  46 

Reply  Obj.  I.  The  prayer  offered  by  a  sinner  is  sometimes 
not  his  but  another's,  and  consequently  in  this  respect  is 
worthy  to  be  heard  by  God.  Nevertheless,  God  sometimes 
hears  sinners,  when,  to  wit,  they  ask  for  something  accept 
able  to  God.  For  God  dispenses  His  goods  not  only  to  the 
righteous  but  also  to  sinners  (Matth.  v.  45),  not  indeed  on 
account  of  their  merits,  but  of  His  loving  kindness.  Hence 
a  gloss  on  Jo.  ix.  31,  God  doth  not  hear  sinners,  says  that 
he  speaks  as  one  unanointed  and  as  not  seeing  clearly. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Although  the  sinner's  prayer  is  not  accept 
able  in  so  far  as  he  is  offensive,  it  may  be  acceptable  to  God 
on  account  of  another  in  whose  stead  or  at  whose  command 
he  offers  the  prayer. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  reason  why  the  sinner  who  performs 
these  suffrages  gains  nothing  thereby  is  because  he  is  not 
capable  of  profiting  by  reason  of  his  own  indisposition. 
Nevertheless,  as  stated  above,  it  may  in  some  way  profit 
another,  who  is  disposed. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  Although  the  sinner's  deed  is  not  living  in 
so  far  as  it  is  his  own,  it  may  be  living  in  so  far  as  it  is 
another's,  as  stated  above. 

Since,  however,  the  arguments  in  the  contrary  sense 
would  seem  to  show  that  it  matters  not  whether  one 
obtain  suffrages  from  good  or  from  evil  persons,  we  must 
reply  to  them  also. 

Reply  Obj.  5.  Although  one  cannot  know  for  certain 
about  another  whether  he  be  in  the  state  of  salvation,  one 
may  infer  it  with  probability  from  what  one  sees  outwardly 
of  a  man :  for  a  tree  is  known  by  its  fruit  (Matth.  vii.  16). 

Reply  Obj.  6.  In  order  that  suffrage  avail  another,  it  is 
requisite  that  the  one  for  whom  it  is  performed  be  capable 
of  availing  by  it :  and  a  man  has  become  capable  of  this  by 
his  own  works  which  he  did  in  his  life-time.  This  is  what 
Augustine  means  to  say.  Nevertheless,  those  works  must 
be  such  that  they  can  profit  him,  and  this  depends  not  on  the 
person  for  whom  the  suffrage  is  performed,  but  rather  on 
the  one  who  offers  the  suffrages  whether  by  performing 
them  or  by  commanding  them. 


47  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD    Q.7i.ARx.4 


FOURTH  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  SUFFRAGES  OFFERED  BY  THE  LIVING  FOR  THE 
DEAD  PROFIT  THOSE  WHO  OFFER  THEM  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Fourth  Article  : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  suffrages  offered  by  the 
living  for  the  dead  do  not  profit  those  who  offer  them.  For 
according  to  human  justice  a  man  is  not  absolved  from  his 
own  debt  if  he  pay  a  debt  for  another  man.  Therefore  a 
man  is  not  absolved  from  his  own  debt  for  the  reason  that 
by  offering  suffrages  he  has  paid  the  debt  of  the  one  for 
whom  he  offered  them. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Whatever  a  man  does,  he  should  do  it 
as  best  he  can.  Now  it  is  better  to  assist  two  than  one. 
Therefore  if  one  who  by  suffrages  has  paid  the  debt  of  a  dead 
person  is  freed  from  his  own  debt,  it  would  seem  that  one 
ought  never  to  satisfy  for  oneself,  but  always  for  another. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  If  the  satisfaction  of  one  who  satisfies 
for  another  profits  him  equally  with  the  one  for  whom  he 
satisfies,  it  will  likewise  equally  profit  a  third  person  if  he 
satisfy  for  him  at  the  same  time,  and  likewise  a  fourth  and 
so  on.  Therefore  he  might  satisfy  for  all  by  one  work  of 
satisfaction;  which  is  absurd. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (Ps.  xxxiv.  13) :  My  prayer 
shall  be  turned  into  my  bosom.  Therefore,  in  like  manner, 
suffrages  that  are  offered  for  others  profit  those  who  satisfy. 

Further,  The  Damascene  says  in  the  sermon  On  those  who 
fell  asleep  in  the  faith  :  Just  as  when  about  to  anoint  a  sick 
man  with  the  ointment  or  other  holy  oil,  first  of  all  he,  namely 
the  anointer,  shares  in  the  anointing  and  thus  proceeds  to 
anoint  the  patient,  so  whoever  strives  for  his  neighbour's  salva 
tion  first  of  all  profits  himself  and  afterwards  his  neighbour. 
And  thus  the  question  at  issue  is  answered. 

/  answer  that,  The  work  of  suffrage  that  is  done  for  another 
may  be  considered  in  two  ways.  First,  as  expiating  punish 
ment  by  way  of  compensation  which  is  a  condition  of  satis 
faction:  and  in  this  way  the  work  of  suffrage  that  is  counted 


Q.  yi.  ART.  5     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA"  48 

as  belonging  to  the  person  for  whom  it  is  done,  while  absolv 
ing  him  from  the  debt  of  punishment,  does  not  absolve  the 
performer  from  his  own  debt  of  punishment,  because  in  this 
compensation  we  have  to  consider  the  equality  of  justice: 
and  this  work  of  satisfaction  can  be  equal  to  the  one  debt 
without  being  equal  to  the  other,  for  the  debts  of  two  sinners 
require  a  greater  satisfaction  than  the  debt  of  one.  Secondly, 
it  may  be  considered  as  meriting  eternal  life,  and  this  it 
has  as  proceeding  from  its  root,  which  is  charity :  and  in  this 
way  it  profits  not  only  the  person  for  whom  it  is  done,  but 
also  and  still  more  the  doer. 

This  suffices  for  the  Replies  to  the  Objections  :  for  the  first 
considered  the  work  of  suffrage  as  a  work  of  satisfaction, 
while  the  others  consider  it  as  meritorious. 

FIFTH  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  SUFFRAGES  PROFIT  THOSE  WHO  ARE  IN  HELL  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Fifth  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  suffrages  profit  those  who 
are  in  hell.  For  it  is  written  (2  Machab.  xii.  40) :  They  found 
under  the  coats  of  the  slain  some  of  the  donaries  of  the  idols 
.  .  .,  which  the  law  forbiddeth  to  the  Jews,  and  yet  we  read 
further  on  (verse  43)  that  Judas  sent  twelve  thousand  drachms 
of  silver  to  Jerusalem  .  .  .  to  be  offered  for  the  sins  of  the 
dead.  Now  it  is  clear  that  they  sinned  mortally  through 
acting  against  the  Law,  and  consequently  that  they  died 
in  mortal  sin,  and  were  taken  to  hell.  Therefore  suffrages 
profit  those  who  are  in  hell. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  The  text  (iv.  Sent.  D.  45)  quotes  the 
saying  of  Augustine  (Enchir.  ex.)  that  those  whom  suffrages 
profit  gain  either  entire  forgiveness,  or  at  least  an  abatement 
of  their  damnation.  Now  only  those  who  are  in  hell  are 
said  to  be  damned.  Therefore  suffrages  profit  even  those 
who  are  in  hell. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  Dionysius  says  (Eccl.  Hier.  cap  ult.) :  // 
here  the  prayers  of  the  righteous  avail  those  who  are  alive,  how 
much  more  do  they,  after  death,  profit  those  alone  who  are 


49  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD    Q.  71.  ART.  5 

worthy  of  their  holy  prayers  ?  Hence  we  may  gather  that 
suffrages  are  more  profitable  to  the  dead  than  to  the  living. 
Now  they  profit  the  living  even  though  they  be  in  mortal 
sin,  for  the  Church  prays  daily  for  sinners  that  they  be 
converted  to  God.  Therefore  suffrages  avail  also  for  the 
dead  who  are  in  mortal  sin. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  In  the  Lives  of  the  Fathers  (iii.  172:  vi.  16) 
we  read,  and  the  Damascene  relates  in  a  sermon  of  his 
(De  Defunct.},  that  Macarius  discovered  the  skull  of  a  dead 
man  on  the  road,  and  that  after  praying  he  asked  whose 
head  it  was,  and  the  head  replied  that  it  had  belonged  to  a 
pagan  priest  who  was  condemned  to  hell;  and  yet  he  con 
fessed  that  he  and  others  were  assisted  by  the  prayers  of 
Macarius.  Therefore  the  suffrages  of  the  Church  profit 
even  those  who  are  in  hell. 

Obj.  5.  Further,  Tii  Damascene  in  the  same  sermon  relates 
that  Gregory,  while  praying  for  Trajan,  heard  a  voice  from 
heaven  saying  to  him :  /  have  heard  thy  voice,  and  I  pardon 
Trajan :  and  of  this  fact  the  Damascene  adds  in  the  same 
sermon,  the  whole  East  and  West  are  witnesses.  Yet  it  is 
clear  that  Trajan  was  in  hell,  since  he  put  many  martyrs  to  a 
cruel  death  (ibid.}.  Therefore  the  suffrages  of  the  Church 
avail  even  for  those  who  are  in  hell. 

On  the  contrary,  Dionysius  says  (Eccl.  Hier.  vii.)  :  The 
high  priest  prays  not  for  the  unclean,  because  by  so  doing  he 
would  act  counter  to  the  Divine  order,  and  consequently  he 
says  (ibid.}  that  he  prays  not  that  sinners  be  forgiven,  because 
his  prayer  for  them  would  not  be  heard.  Therefore  suffrages 
avail  not  those  who  are  in  hell. 

Further,  Gregory  says  (Moral,  xxxiv.) :  There  is  the  same 
reason  for  not  praying  then  (namely  after  the  judgment  day) 
for  men  condemned  to  the  everlasting  fire,  as  there  is  now  for 
not  praying  for  the  devil  and  his  angels  who  are  sentenced  to 
eternal  punishment,  and  for  this  same  reason  the  saints  pray 
not  for  dead  unbelieving  and  wicked  men,  because,  forsooth, 
knowing  them  to  be  already  condemned  to  eternal  punishmentt 
they  shrink  from  pleading  for  them  by  the  merit  of  their  prayers 
before  they  are  summoned  to  the  presence  of  the  just  Judge. 
in.  6  4 


Q.  71.  ART.  5     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  50 

Further,  The  text  (iv.  Sent.  D.  45)  quotes  the  words  of 
Augustine  (Serm.  xxxii.  de  Verb.  Apost.):  If  a  man  depart 
this  life  without  the  faith  that  worketh  by  charity  and  its  sacra 
ments,  in  vain  do  his  friends  have  recourse  to  suchlike  acts  of 
kindness.  Now  all  the  damned  come  under  that  head. 
Therefore  suffrages  profit  them  not. 

/  answer  that,  There  have  been  three  opinions  about  the 
damned.  For  some  have  said  that  a  twofold  distinction 
must  be  made  in  this  matter.  First,  as  to  time;  for  they 
said  that  after  the  judgment  day  no  one  in  hell  will  be 
assisted  by  any  suffrage,  but  that  before  the  judgment  day 
some  are  assisted  by  the  suffrages  of  the  Church.  Secondly, 
they  made  a  distinction  among  those  who  are  detained  in 
hell.  Some  of  these,  they  said,  are  very  bad,  those  namely 
who  have  died  without  faith  and  the  sacraments,  and 
these,  since  they  were  not  of  the  Church,  neither  by  grace 
nor  by  name,*  the  suffrages  of  the  Church  cannot  avail; 
while  others  are  not  very  bad,  those  namely  who  belonged 
to  the  Church  as  actual  members,  who  had  the  faith,  fre 
quented  the  sacraments  and  performed  works  generically 
good,  and  for  these  the  suffrages  of  the  Church  ought  to 
avail.  Yet  they  were  confronted  with  a  difficulty  which 
troubled  them,  for  it  would  seem  to  follow  from  this  (since 
the  punishment  of  hell  is  finite  in  intensity  although  infinite 
in  duration)  that  a  multiplicity  of  suffrages  would  take  away 
that  punishment  altogether,  which  is  the  error  of  Origen 
(Peri  Archon.  i.;  cf.  Gregory,  Moral,  xxxiv.) :  and  conse 
quently  they  endeavoured  in  various  ways  to  avoid  this 
difficulty.  For  Prsepositivusf  said  that  suffrages  for  the 
damned  can  be  so  multiplied  that  they  are  entirely  freed 
from  punishment,  not  absolutely  as  Origen  maintained,  but 
for  a  time,  namely  till  the  judgment  day :  for  their  souls  will 
be  reunited  to  their  bodies,  and  will  be  cast  back  into  the 
punishments  of  hell  without  hope  of  pardon.  But  this 
opinion  seems  incompatible  with  Divine  providence,  which 
leaves  nothing  inordinate  in  the  world.  For  guilt  cannot  be 

*  Cf.  Oratio  ad  Vesperas,  Per.  ii.  post  Dom.  Pass. 

f  Gilbertus  Praepositivus,  Chancellor  of  the  See  of  Paris,  A.D.  1206. 


5i  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD     Q.  71.  ART.  5 

restored  to  order  save  by  punishment:  wherefore  it  is 
impossible  for  punishment  to  cease,  unless  first  of  all  guilt  be 
expiated:  so  that,  as  guilt  remains  for  ever  in  the  damned, 
their  punishment  will  nowise  be  interrupted.  For  this  reason 
the  followers  of  Gilbert  de  la  Porree  devised  another  ex 
planation.  These  said  that  the  process  in  the  diminution  of 
punishments  by  suffrages  is  as  the  process  in  dividing  a 
line,  which  though  finite,  is  indefinitely  divisible,  and  is 
never  destroyed  by  division,  if  it  be  diminished  not  by  equal 
but  by  proportionate  quantities,  for  instance  if  we  begin 
by  taking  away  a  quarter  of  the  whole  and,  secondly,  a 
quarter  of  that  quarter,  and  then  a  quarter  of  this  second 
quarter,  and  so  on  indefinitely.  In  like  manner,  they  say 
by  the  first  suffrage  a  certain  proportion  of  the  punishment 
is  taken  away,  and  by  the  second  an  equally  proportionate 
part  of  the  remainder.  But  this  explanation  is  in  many 
ways  defective.  First,  because  it  seems  that  indefinite 
division  which  is  applicable  to  continuous  quantity  cannot 
be  transferred  to  spiritual  quantity :  secondly,  because  there 
is  no  reason  why  the  second  suffrage,  if  it  be  of  equal  worth, 
should  diminish  the  punishment  less  than  the  first :  thirdly, 
because  punishment  cannot  be  diminished  unless  guilt  be 
diminished,  even  as  it  cannot  be  done  away  unless  the  guilt 
be  done  away:  fourthly,  because  in  the  division  of  a  line 
we  come  at  length  to  something  which  is  not  sensible,  for  a 
sensible  body  is  not  indefinitely  divisible :  and  thus  it  would 
follow  that  after  many  suffrages  the  remaining  punishment 
would  be  so  little  as  not  to  be  felt,  and  thus  would  no  longer 
be  a  punishment.  Hence  others  found  another  explanation. 
For  Antissiodorensis*  (iv.  Sent.  Tract.  14)  said  that  suffrages 
profit  the  damned  not  by  diminishing  or  interrupting  their 
punishment,  but  by  fortifying  the  person  punished :  even  as 
a  man  who  is  carrying  a  heavy  load  might  bathe  his  face 
in  water,  for  thus  he  would,  be  enabled  to  carry  it  better, 
and  yet  his  load  would  be  none  the  lighter.  But  this  again 
is  impossible,  because  according  to  Gregory  (Moral,  ix.)  a 
man  suffers  more  or  less  from  the  eternal  fire  according  as 
*  William  of  Auxerre,  Archdeacon  of  Beauvais. 


Q.  71.  ART.  5     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA "  52 

his  guilt  deserves ;  and  consequently  some  suffer  more,  some 
less,  from  the  same  fire;  wherefore  since  the  guilt  of  the 
damned  remains  unchanged,  it  cannot  be  that  he  suffers  less 
punishment.     Moreover,  the  aforesaid  opinion  is  presump 
tuous,  as  being  in  opposition  to  the  statements  of  holy  men, 
and  groundless  as  being  based  on  no  authority.     It  is  also 
unreasonable.     First,  because  the  damned  in  hell  are  cut  off 
from  the  bond  of  charity  in  virtue  of  which  the  departed 
are  in  touch  with  the  works  of  the  living.     Secondly,  because 
they  have  entirely  come  to  the  end  of  life,  and  have  received 
the  final  award  for  their  merits,  even  as  the  saints  who  are  in 
heaven.     For  the  remaining  punishment  or  glory  of  the 
body  does  not  make  them  to  be   wayfarers,   since  glory 
essentially  and  radically  resides  in  the  soul.     It  is  the  same 
with  the  unhappiness  of  the  damned,  wherefore  their  punish 
ment  cannot  be  diminished  as  neither  can  the  glory  of  the 
saints  be  increased  as  to  the  essential  reward.     However,  we 
may  admit,  in  a  certain  measure,  the  manner  in  which, 
according  to  some,  suffrages  profit  the  damned,  if  it  be  said 
that  they  profit  neither  by  diminishing  nor  interrupting 
their  punishment,  nor  again  by  diminishing  their  sense  of 
punishment,  but  by  withdrawing  from  the  damned  some 
matter  of  grief,  which  matter  they  might  have  if  they  knew 
themselves  to  be  so  outcast  as  to  be  a  care  to  no  one;  and 
this  matter  of  grief  is  withdrawn  from  them  when  suffrages 
are  offered  for  them.     Yet  even  this  is  impossible  according 
to  the  general  law,  because  as  Augustine  says  (De  Cura  pro 
Mort.  xiii.) — and  this  applies  especially  to  the  damned — the 
spirits  of  the  departed  are  where  they  see  nothing  of  what  men 
do  or  of  what  happens  to  them  in  this  life,  and  consequently 
they  know  not  when  suffrages  are  offered  for  them,  unless 
this  relief  be  granted  from  above  to  some  of  the  damned  in 
despite  of  the  general  law.     This,  however,  is  a  matter  of 
great  uncertainty;  wherefore  it  is  safer  to  say  simply  that 
suffrages  profit  not  the  damned,  nor  does  the  Church  intend 
to  pray  for  them,  as  appears  from  the  authors  quoted  above. 
Reply  Obj.  I.  The  donaries  to  the  idols  were  not  found  on 
those  dead  so  that  they  might  be  taken  as  a  sign  that  they 


53  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD    Q.7i.ARx.5 

were  carried  off.  in  reverence  to  the  idols:  but  they  took 
them  as  conquerors  because  they  were  due  to  them  by  right 
of  war.  They  sinned,  however,  venially  by  covetousness : 
and  consequently  they  were  not  damned  in  hell,  and  thus 
suffrages  could  profit  them.  Or  we  may  say,  according  to 
some,  that  in  the  midst  of  fighting,  seeing  they  were  in 
danger,  they  repented  of  their  sin,  according  to  Ps.  Ixxvii.  34, 
When  He  slew  them,  then  they  sought  Him :  and  this  is  a 
probable  opinion.  Wherefore  the  offering  was  made  for 
them. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  In  these  words  damnation  is  taken  in  a 
broad  sense  for  any  kind  of  punishment,  so  as  to  include 
also  the  punishment  of  purgatory  which  is  sometimes  entirely 
expiated  by  suffrages,  and  sometimes  not  entirely,  but 
diminished. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Suffrage  for  a  dead  person  is  more  accept 
able  than  for  a  living  person,  as  regards  his  being  in  greater 
want,  since  he  cannot  help  himself  as  a  living  person  can. 
But  a  living  person  is  better  off  in  that  he  can  be  taken  from 
the  state  of  mortal  sin  to  the  state  of  grace,  which  cannot  be 
said  of  the  dead.  Hence  there  is  not  the  same  reason  for 
praying  for  the  dead  as  for  the  living. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  This  assistance  did  not  consist  in  a  diminish- 
ment  of  their  punishment,  but  in  this  alone  (as  stated  in  the 
same  place)  that  when  he  prayed  they  were  permitted  to  see 
one  another,  and  in  this  they  had  a  certain  joy,  not  real  but 
imaginary,  in  the  fulfilment  of  their  desire.  Even  so  the 
demons  are  said  to  rejoice  when  they  draw  men  into  sin, 
although  this  nowise  diminishes  their  punishment,  as 
neither  is  the  joy  of  the  angels  diminished  by  the  fact  that 
they  take  pity  on  our  ills. 

Reply  Obj.  5.  Concerning  the  incident  of  Trajan  it  may 
be  supposed  with  probability  that  he  was  recalled  to  life  at 
the  prayers  of  blessed  Gregory,  and  thus  obtained  the  grace 
whereby  he  received  the  pardon  of  his  sins  and  in  conse 
quence  was  freed  from  punishment.  The  same  applies  to  all 
those  who  were  miraculously  raised  from  the  dead,  many  of 
whom  were  evidently  idolaters  and  damned.  For  we  must 


Q.  7i.  ART.  6     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA"  54 

needs  say  likewise  of  all  such  persons  that  they  were  con 
signed  to  hell,  not  finally,  but  as  was  actually  due  to  their 
own  merits  according  to  justice :  and  that  according  to  higher 
causes,  in  view  of  which  it  was  foreseen  that  they  would  be 
recalled  to  life,  they  were  to  be  disposed  of  otherwise. 

Or  we  may  say  with  some  that  Trajan's  soul  was  not 
simply  freed  from  the  debt  of  eternal  punishment,  but  that 
his  punishment  was  suspended  for  a  time,  that  is,  until  the 
judgment  day.  Nor  does  it  follow  that  this  is  the  general 
result  of  suffrages,  because  things  happen  differently  in 
accordance  with  the  general  law  from  that  which  is  per 
mitted  in  particular  cases  and  by  privilege.  Even  so  the 
bounds  of  human  affairs  differ  from  those  of  the  miracles  of 
the  Divine  power  as  Augustine  says  (De  Cura  pro  Mort.  xvi.). 

SIXTH  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  SUFFRAGES  PROFIT  THOSE  WHO  ARE  IN 
PURGATORY  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Sixth  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  suffrages  do  not  profit 
even  those  who  are  in  purgatory.  For  purgatory  is  a  part 
of  hell.  Now  there  is  no  redemption  in  hell,*  and  it  is 
written  (Ps.  vi.  6),  Who  shall  confess  to  Thee  in  hell  ?  There 
fore  suffrages  do  not  profit  those  who  are  in  purgatory. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  The  punishment  of  purgatory  is  finite. 
Therefore  if  some  of  the  punishment  is  abated  by  suffrages, 
it  would  be  possible  to  have  such  a  great  number  of  suffrages, 
that  the  punishment  would  be  entirely  remitted,  and  con 
sequently  the  sin  entirely  unpunished :  and  this  would  seem 
incompatible  with  Divine  justice. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  Souls  are  in  purgatory  in  order  that  they 
may  be  purified  there,  and  being  pure  may  come  to  the 
kingdom.  Now  nothing  can  be  purified,  unless  something 
be  done  to  it.  Therefore  suffrages  offered  by  the  living  do 
not  diminish  the  punishment  of  purgatory. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  If  suffrages  availed  those  who  are  in 
*  Office  of  the  dead,  Resp.  vii. 


55  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD    Q.  71.  ART.  6 

purgatory,  those  especially  would  seem  to  avail  them  which 
are  offered  at  their  behest.  Yet  these  do  not  always  avail: 
for  instance,  if  a  person  before  dying  were  to  provide  for  so 
many  suffrages  to  be  offered  for  him  that  if  they  were  offered 
they  would  suffice  for  the  remission  of  his  entire  punishment. 
Now  supposing  these  suffrages  to  be  delayed  until  he  is 
released  from  punishment,  they  will  profit  him  nothing. 
For  it  cannot  be  said  that  they  profit  him  before  they  are 
discharged;  and  after  they  are  fulfilled,  he  no  longer  needs 
them,  since  he  is  already  released.  Therefore  suffrages  do 
not  avail  those  who  are  in  purgatory. 

On  the  contrary,  As  quoted  in  the  text  (iv.  Sent.  D.  45), 
Augustine  says  (Enchir.  ex.) :  Suffrages  profit  those  who  are 
not  very  good  or  not  very  bad.  Now  such  are  those  who  are 
detained  in  purgatory.  Therefore,  etc. 

Further,  Dionysius  says  (Eccl.  Hier.  vii.)  that  the  godlike 
priest  in  praying  for  the  departed  prays  for  those  who  lived  a 
holy  life,  and  yet  contracted  certain  stains  through  human 
frailty.  Now  such  persons  are  detained  in  purgatory. 
Therefore,  etc. 

I  answer  that,  The  punishment  of  purgatory  is  intended  to 
supplement  the  satisfaction  which  was  not  fully  completed 
in  the  body.  Consequently,  since,  as  stated  above  (AA.  i,  2'. 
Q.  XIII.,  A.  2),  the  works  of  one  person  can  avail  for  another's 
satisfaction,  whether  the  latter  be  living  or  dead,  the  suffrages 
of  the  living,  without  any  doubt,  profit  those  who  are  in 
purgatory. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  The  words  quoted  refer  to  those  who  are  in 
the  hell  of  the  damned,  where  there  is  no  redemption  for 
those  who  are  finally  consigned  to  that  punishment.  We 
may  also  reply  with  Damascene  (Serm.  de  Dormientibus) 
that  such  statements  are  to  be  explained  with  reference  to 
the  lower  causes,  that  is  according  to  the  demands  of  the 
merits  of  those  who  are  consigned  to  those  punishments. 
But  according  to  the  Divine  mercy  which  transcends  human 
merits,  it  happens  otherwise  through  the  prayers  of  the 
righteous,  than  is  implied  by  the  expressions  quoted  in  the 
aforesaid  authorities.  Now  God  changes  His  sentence  but 


Q.  71.  ART.  6    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  56 

not  his  counsel,  as  Gregory  says  (Moral,  xx.) :  wherefore  the 
Damascene  (loc.  cit.)  quotes  as  instances  of  this  the  Nine- 
vites,  Achab  and  Ezechias,  in  whom  it  is  apparent  that  the 
sentence  pronounced  against  them  by  God  was  commuted 
by  the  Divine  mercy.* 

Reply  Obj.  2.  It  is  not  unreasonable  that  the  punishment 
of  those  who  are  in  purgatory  be  entirely  done  away  by  the 
multiplicity  of  suffrages.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  the 
sins  remain  unpunished,  because  the  punishment  of  one 
undertaken  in  lieu  of  another  is  credited  to  that  other. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  purifying  of  the  soul  by  the  punish 
ment  of  purgatory  is  nothing  else  than  the  expiation  of  the 
guilt  that  hinders  it  from  obtaining  glory.  And  since,  as 
stated  above  (Q.  XIII.,  A.  2),  the  guilt  of  one  person  can  be 
expiated  by  the  punishment  which  another  undergoes  in  his 
stead,  it  is  not  unreasonable  that  one  person  be  purified  by 
another  satisfying  for  him. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  Suffrages  avail  on  two  counts,  namely  the 
action  of  the  agentf  and  the  action  done.  By  action  done 
I  mean  not  only  the  sacrament  of  the  Church,  but  the  effect 
incidental  to  that  action, — thus  from  the  giving  of  alms 
there  follow  the  relief  of  the  poor  and  their  prayer  to  God 
for  the  deceased.  In  like  manner  the  action  of  the  agent 
may  be  considered  in  relation  either  to  the  principal  agent 
or  to  the  executor.  I  say,  then,  that  the  dying  person,  as 
soon  as  he  provides  for  certain  suffrages  to  be  offered  for  him, 
receives  the  full  meed  of  those  suffrages,  even  before  they  are 
discharged,  as  regards  the  efficacy  of  the  suffrages  that 
results  from  the  action  as  proceeding  from  the  principal 
agent.  But  as  regards  the  efficacy  of  the  suffrages  arising 
from  the  action  done  or  from  the  action  as  proceeding  from 
the  executor,  he  does  not  receive  the  fruit  before  the  suffrages 
are  discharged.  And  if,  before  this,  he  happens  to  be 
released  from  his  punishment,  he  will  in  this  respect  be 
deprived  of  the  fruit  of  the  suffrages,  and  this  will  fall  back 
upon  those  by  whose  fault  he  was  then  defrauded.  For  it 

*  Cf.  P.  I.,  Q.  XIX.,  A.  7,  ad  2. 

f  Ex  opere  operante  and  ex  opere  operato. 


57  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD    Q.  71.  ART.  7 

is  not  unreasonable  that  a  person  be  defrauded  in  temporal 
matters  by  another's  fault, — and  the  punishment  of  pur 
gatory  is  temporal, — although  as  regards  the  eternal  retri 
bution  none  can  be  defrauded  save  by  his  own  fault. 


SEVENTH  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  SUFFRAGES  AVAIL  THE  CHILDREN  WHO  ARE 

IN   LIMBO  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Seventh  Article : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  suffrages  avail  the  children 
who  are  in  limbo.  For  they  are  not  detained  there  except 
for  another's  sin.  Therefore  it  is  most  becoming  that  they 
should  be  assisted  by  the  suffrages  of  others. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  In  the  text  (iv.  Sent.  D.  45)  the  words  of 
Augustine  (Enchir.  ex.)  are  quoted:  The  suffrages  of  the 
Church  obtain  forgiveness  for  those  who  are  not  very  bad. 
Now  children  are  not  reckoned  among  those  who  are  very 
bad,  since  their  punishment  is  very  light.  Therefore  the 
suffrages  of  the  Church  avail  them. 

On  the  contrary,  The  text  (ibid.)  quotes  Augustine  as 
saying  (Serm.  xxxii.  De  Verb  Ap.)  that  suffrages  avail  not 
those  who  have  departed  hence  without  the  faith  that  works  by 
love.  Now  the  children  departed  thus.  Therefore  suffrages 
avail  them  not. 

I  answer  that,  Unbaptized  children  are  not  detained  in 
limbo  save  because  they  lack  the  state  of  grace.  Hence, 
since  the  state  of  the  dead  cannot  be  changed  by  the  works 
of  the  living,  especially  as  regards  the  merit  of  the  essential 
reward  or  punishment,  the  suffrages  of  the  living  cannot 
profit  the  children  in  limbo. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Although  original  sin  is  such  that  one  person 
can  be  assisted  by  another  on  its  account,  nevertheless  the 
souls  of  the  children  in  limbo  are  in  such  a  state  that  they 
cannot  be  assisted,  because  after  this  life  there  is  no  time 
for  obtaining  grace. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Augustine  is  speaking  of  those  who  are  not 
very  bad,  but  have  been  baptized.  This  is  clear  from  what 


Q.  7i.  ART.  8     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  58 

precedes :  Since  these  sacrifices,  whether  of  the  altar  or  of  any 
alms  whatsoever,  are  offered  for  those  who  have  been  baptized, 
etc. 

EIGHTH  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  SUFFRAGES  PROFIT  THE  SAINTS  IN  HEAVEN  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Eighth  Article  : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  in  some  way  suffrages 
profit  the  saints  in  heaven;  on  account  of  the  words  of  the 
collect  in  the  mass:*  Even  as  they  (i.e.,  the  sacraments) 
avail  thy  saints  unto  glory,  so  may  they  profit  us  unto  healing. 
Now  foremost  among  all  suffrages  is  the  sacrifice  of  the 
altar.  Therefore  suffrages  profit  the  saints  in  heaven. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  The  sacraments  cause  what  they  signify. 
Now  the  third  part  of  the  host,  that  namely  which  is  dropped 
into  the  chalice,  signifies  those  who  lead  a  happy  life  in 
heaven.  Therefore  the  suffrages  of  the  Church  profit  those 
who  are  in  heaven. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  saints  rejoice  in  heaven  not  only  in 
their  own  goods,  but  also  in  the  goods  of  others :  hence  it 
is  written  (Luke  xv.  10) :  There  is  (Vulg., — shall  be)  joy  before 
the  angels  of  God  upon  one  sinner  doing  penance.  Therefore 
the  joy  of  the  saints  in  heaven  increases  on  account  of  the 
good  works  of  the  living:  and  consequently  our  suffrages 
also  profit  them. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  The  Damascene  says  (Serm.  deDormient.} 
quoting  the  words  of  Chrysostom :  For  if  the  heathens,  he  says, 
burn  the  dead  together  with  what  has  belonged  to  them,  how  much 
more  shouldst  thou,  a  believer,  send  forth  a  believer  together 
with  what  has  belonged  to  him,  not  that  they  also  may  be  brought 
to  ashes  like  him,  but  that  thou  mayest  surround  him  with  greater 
glory  by  so  doing  ;  and  if  he  be  a  sinner  who  has  died,  that  thou 
mayest  loose  him  from  his  sins,  and  if  he  be  righteous,  that 
thou  mayest  add  to  his  meed  and  reward  !  And  thus  the  same 
conclusion  follows. 

On  the  contrary,  As  quoted  in  the  text  (iv.  Sent.  D.  15), 
Augustine  says  (De  Verb.  Ap.  Serm.  xvii.):  It  is  insulting 
*  Postcommunion,  Feast  of  S.  Andrew,  Apostle. 


59  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD    Q.  71.  ART.  8 

to  pray  for  a  martyr  in  church,  since  we  ought  to  commend 
ourselves  to  his  prayers. 

Further,  To  be  assisted  belongs  to  one  who  is  in  need. 
But  the  saints  in  heaven  are  without  any  need  whatever. 
Therefore  they  are  not  assisted  by  the  suffrages  of  the  Church. 

I  answer  that,  Suffrage  by  its  very  nature  implies  the 
giving  of  some  assistance,  which  does  not  apply  to  one  who 
suffers  no  default :  since  no  one  is  competent  to  be  assisted 
except  he  who  is  in  need.  Hence,  as  the  saints  in  heaven 
are  free  from  all  need,  being  inebriated  with  the  plenty  of 
God's  house  (Ps.  xxxv.  10),  they  are  not  competent  to  be 
assisted  by  suffrages. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Suchlike  expressions  do  not  mean  that  the 
saints  receive  an  increase  of  glory  in  themselves  through  our 
observing  their  feasts,  but  that  we  profit  thereby  in  cele 
brating  their  glory  with  greater  solemnity.  Thus,  through 
our  knowing  or  praising  God,  and  through  His  glory  thus 
increasing  somewhat  in  us,  there  accrues  something,  not 
to  God,  but  to  us. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Although  the  sacraments  cause  what  they 
signify,  they  do  not  produce  this  effect  in  respect  of  everything 
that  they  signify :  else,  since  they  signify  Christ,  they  would 
produce  something  in  Christ  (which  is  absurd).  But  they 
produce  their  effect  on  the  recipient  of  the  sacrament  in 
virtue  of  that  which  is  signified  by  the  sacrament.  Thus  it 
does  not  follow  that  the  sacrifices  offered  for  the  faithful 
departed  profit  the  saints,  but  that  by  the  merits  of  the 
saints  which  we  commemorate,  or  which  are  signified  in  the 
sacrament,  they  profit  others  for  whom  they  are  offered. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Although  the  saints  in  heaven  rejoice  in  all 
our  goods,  it  does  not  follow,  that  if  our  joys  be  increased 
their  joy  is  also  increased  formally,  but  only  materially, 
because  every  passion  is  increased  formally  in  respect  of  the 
formal  aspect  of  its  object.  Now  the  formal  aspect  of  the 
saints'  joy,  no  matter  what  they  rejoice  in,  is  God  Himself, 
in  Whom  they  cannot  rejoice  more  and  less,  for  otherwise 
their  essential  reward,  consisting  of  their  joy  in  God,  would 
vary.  Hence  from  the  fact  that  the  goods  are  multiplied, 


Q.  7i.  ART.  9     THE  "SUMMA  THEOLOGICA"  60 

wherein  they  rejoice  with  God  as  the  formal  aspect  of  their 
joy,  it  does  not  follow  that  their  joy  is  intensified,  but  that 
they  rejoice  in  more  things.  Consequently  it  does  not  follow 
that  they  are  assisted  by  our  works. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  The  sense  is  not  that  an  increase  of  meed 
or  reward  accrues  to  the  saint  from  the  suffrages  offered  by 
a  person,  but  that  this  accrues  to  the  offerer.  Or  we  may 
reply  that  the  blessed  departed  may  derive  a  reward  from 
suffrages  through  having,  while  living,  provided  for  suffrage 
to  be  offered  for  himself,  and  this  was  meritorious  for  him. 

NINTH  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  PRAYERS  OF  THE  CHURCH,  THE  SACRIFICE 
OF  THE  ALTAR  AND  ALMS  PROFIT  THE  DEPARTED  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Ninth  Article  : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  the  souls  of  the  departed 
are  not  assisted  only  by  the  prayers  of  the  Church,  the 
sacrifice  of  the  altar  and  alms,  or  that  they  are  not  assisted 
by  them  chiefly.  For  punishment  should  compensate  for 
punishment.  Now  fasting  is  more  penal  than  almsgiving 
or  prayer.  Therefore  fasting  profits  more  as  suffrage  than 
any  of  the  above. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Gregory  reckons  fasting  together  with 
these  three,  as  stated  in  the  Decretals  (xiii.,  Q.  ii.,  cap.  22) : 
The  souls  of  the  departed  are  released  in  four  ways,  either  by 
the  offerings  of  priests,  or  the  alms  of  their  friends,  or  the 
prayers  of  the  saints,  or  the  fasting  of  their  kinsfolk.  Therefore 
the  three  mentioned  above  are  insufficiently  reckoned  by 
Augustine  (De  Cura  pro  Mort.  xviii.). 

Obj.  3.  Further,  Baptism  is  the  greatest  of  the  sacraments, 
especially  as  regards  its  effect.  Therefore  Baptism  and 
other  sacraments  ought  to  be  offered  for  the  departed 
equally  with  or  more  than  the  sacrament  of  the  altar. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  This  would  seem  to  follow  from  the  words 
of  i  Cor.  xv.  29,  //  the  dead  rise  not  again  at  all,  why  are 
they  then  baptized  for  them  ?  Therefore  Baptism  avails  as 
suffrage  for  the  dead. 


61  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD    Q.  71.  ART.  9 

Obj.  5.  Further,  In  different  masses  there  is  the  same 
sacrifice  of  the  altar.  If,  therefore,  sacrifice,  and  not  the 
mass,  be  reckoned  among  the  suffrages,  it  would  seem  that 
the  effect  would  be  the  same  whatever  mass  be  said  for  a 
deceased  person,  whether  in  honour  of  the  Blessed  Virgin 
or  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  any  other.  Yet  this  seems  con 
trary  to  the  ordinance  of  the  Church  which  has  appointed 
a  special  mass  for  the  dead. 

Obj.  6.  Further,  The  Damascene  (Serm.  de  Dormient.) 
teaches  that  candles  and  oil  should  be  offered  for  the  dead. 
Therefore  not  only  the  offering  of  the  sacrifice  of  the  altar, 
but  also  other  offerings  should  be  reckoned  among  suffrages 
for  the  dead. 

/  answer  that,  The  suffrages  of  the  living  profit  the  dead 
in  so  far  as  the  latter  are  united  to  the  living  in  charity,  and 
in  so  far  as  the  intention  of  the  living  is  directed  to  the  dead. 
Consequently  those  whose  works  are  by  nature  best  adapted 
to  assist  the  dead,  which  pertain  chiefly  to  the  communica 
tion  of  charity,  or  to  the  directing  of  one's  intention  to 
another  person.  Now  the  sacrament  of  the  Eucharist  belongs 
chiefly  to  charity,  since  it  is  the  sacrament  of  ecclesiastical 
unity,  inasmuch  as  it  contains  Him  in  Whom  the  whole 
Church  is  united  and  incorporated,  namely  Christ:  where 
fore  the  Eucharist  is  as  it  were  the  origin  and  bond  of  charity. 
Again,  chief  among  the  effects  of  charity  is  the  work  of  alms 
giving:  wherefore  on  the  part  of  charity  these  two,  namely 
the  sacrifice  of  the  Church  and  almsgiving  are  the  chief 
suffrages  for  the  dead.  But  on  the  part  of  the  intention 
directed  to  the  dead  the  chief  suffrage  is  prayer,  because 
prayer  by  its  very  nature  implies  relation  not  only  to  the 
person  who  prays,  even  as  other  works  do,  but  more  directly 
still  to  that  which  we  pray  for.  Hence  these  three  are 
reckoned  the  principal  means  of  succouring  the  dead,  although 
we  must  allow  that  any  other  goods  whatsoever  that  are 
done  out  of  charity  for  the  dead  are  profitable  to  them. 

Reply  Obj.  I.  When  one  person  satisfies  for  another,  the 
point  to  consider,  in  order  that  the  effect  of  his  satisfaction 
reach  the  other,  is  the  thing  whereby  the  satisfaction  of  one 


Q.  71-  ART.  9     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  62 

passes  to  another,  rather  than  even  the  punishment  under 
gone  by  way  of  satisfaction;  although  the  punishment  ex 
piates  more  the  guilt  of  the  one  who  satisfies,  in  so  far  as  it 
is  a  kind  of  medicine.  And  consequently  the  three  aforesaid 
are  more  profitable  to  the  departed  than  fasting. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  It  is  true  that  fasting  can  profit  the  departed 
by  reason  of  charity,  and  on  account  of  the  intention  being 
directed  to  the  departed.  Nevertheless,  fasting  does  not  by 
its  nature  contain  anything  pertaining  to  charity  or  to  the 
directing  of  the  intention,  and  these  things  are  extrinsic 
thereto  as  it  were,  and  for  this  reason  Augustine  did  not 
reckon,  while  Gregory  did  reckon,  fasting  among  the  suffrages 
for  the  dead. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Baptism  is  a  spiritual  regeneration,  where 
fore  just  as  by  generation  being  does  not  accrue  save  to  the 
object  generated,  so  Baptism  produces  its  effect  only  in  the 
person  baptized,  as  regards  the  deed  done :  and  yet  as  regards 
the  deed  of  the  doer  whether  of  the  baptizer  or  of  the 
baptized,  it  may  profit  others  even  as  other  meritorious 
works.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Eucharist  is  the  sign  of 
ecclesiastical  unity,  wherefore  by  reason  of  the  deed  done 
its  effect  can  pass  to  another,  which  is  not  the  case  with  the 
other  sacraments. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  According  to  a  gloss  this  passage  may  be 
expounded  in  two  ways.  First,  thus :  //  the  dead  rise  not 
again,  nor  did  Christ  rise  again,  why  are  they  baptized  for 
them?  i.e.  for  sins,  since  they  are  not  pardoned  ij  Christ  rose 
not  again,  because  in  Baptism  not  only  Christ's  passion  but 
also  His  resurrection  operates,  for  the  latter  is  in  a  sense  the 
cause  of  our  spiritual  resurrection.  Secondly,  thus:  There 
have  been  some  misguided  persons  who  were  baptized  for 
those  who  had  departed  this  life  without  baptism,  thinking 
that  this  would  profit  them:  and  according  to  this  explan 
ation  the  Apostle  is  speaking,  in  the  above  words,  merely 
according  to  the  opinion  of  certain  persons. 

Reply  Obj.  5.  In  the  office  of  the  mass  there  is  not  only  a 
sacrifice  but  also  prayers.  Hence  the  suffrage  of  the  mass 
contains  two  of  the  things  mentioned  by  Augustine  (loc.  cit.}, 


63  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD    Q.7i.ARx.io 

namely  prayer  and  sacrifice.  As  regards  the  sacrifice  offered 
the  mass  profits  equally  the  departed,  no  matter  in  whose 
honour  it  be  said :  and  this  is  the  principal  thing  done  in  the 
mass.  But  as  regards  the  prayers,  that  mass  is  most  profit 
able  in  which  the  prayers  are  appointed  for  this  purpose. 
Nevertheless,  this  defect  may  be  supplied  by  the  greater 
devotion,  either  of  the  one  who  says  mass,  or  of  the  one  who 
orders  the  mass  to  be  said,  or  again,  by  the  intercession  of 
the  saint  whose  suffrage  is  besought  in  the  mass. 

Reply  Obj.  6.  This  offering  of  candles  or  oil  may  profit 
the  departed  in  so  far  as  they  are  a  kind  of  alms :  for  they 
are  given  for  the  worship  of  the  Church  or  for  the  use  of  the 
faithful. 

TENTH  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  THE  INDULGENCES  OF  THE  CHURCH  PROFIT 

THE   DEAD  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Tenth  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  indulgences  granted 
by  the  Church  profit  even  the  dead.  First,  on  account  of 
the  custom  of  the  Church,  who  orders  the  preaching  of  a 
crusade  in  order  that  some  one  may  gain  an  indulgence  for 
himself  and  for  two  or  three  and  sometimes  even  ten  souls, 
both  of  the  living  and  of  the  dead.  But  this  would  amount 
to  a  deception  unless  they  profited  the  dead.  Therefore 
indulgences  profit  the  dead. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  The  merit  of  the  whole  Church  is  more 
efficacious  than  that  of  one  person.  Now  personal  merit 
serves  as  a  suffrage  for  the  departed,  for  instance  in  the  case 
of  almsgiving.  Much  more  therefore  does  the  merit  of  the 
Church  whereon  indulgences  are  founded. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  indulgences  of  the  Church  profit 
those  who  are  members  of  the  Church.  Now  those  who  are 
in  purgatory  are  members  of  the  Church,  else  the  suffrages 
of  ,the  Church  would  not  profit  them.  Therefore  it  would 
seem  that  indulgences  profit  the  departed. 

On  the  contrary,  In  order  that  indulgences  may  avail  a 
person,  there  must  be  a  fitting  cause  for  granting  the  indul- 


Q.  71.  ART.  10     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  64 

gence.*  Now  there  can  be  no  such  cause  on  the  part  of  the 
dead,  since  they  can  do  nothing  that  is  of  profit  to  the  Church, 
and  it  is  for  such  a  cause  that  indulgences  are  chiefly  granted. 
Therefore,  seemingly,  indulgences  profit  not  the  dead. 

Further,  Indulgences  are  regulated  according  to  the 
decision  of  the  party  who  grants  them.  If,  therefore,  in 
dulgences  could  avail  the  dead,  it  would  be  in  the  power  of 
the  party  granting  them  to  release  a  deceased  person  entirely 
from  punishment :  which  is  apparently  absurd. 

I  answer  that,  An  indulgence  may  profit  a  person  in  two 
ways:  in  one  way,  principally;  in  another,  secondarily.     It 
profits  principally  the  person  who  avails  himself  of  an  in 
dulgence,  who,  namely,  does  that  for  which  the  indulgence 
is  granted,  for  instance  one  who  visits  the  shrine  of  some 
saint.     Hence  since  the  dead  can  do  none  of  those  things  for 
which  indulgences  are  granted,  indulgences  cannot  avail 
them  directly.     However,  they  profit  secondarily  and  in 
directly  the  person  for  whom  one  does  that  which  is  the  cause 
of  the  indulgence.     This  is  sometimes  feasible  and  sometimes 
not,  according  to  the  different  forms  of  indulgence.     For  if 
the  form  of  indulgence  be  such  as  this :  Whosoever  does  this 
or  that  shall  gain  so  much  indulgence,  he  who  does  this  cannot 
transfer  the  fruit  of  the  indulgence  to  another,  because  it  is 
not  in  his  power  to  apply  to  a  particular  person  the  intention 
of  the  Church  who  dispenses  the  common  suffrages  whence 
indulgences  derive  their  value,  as  stated  above  (Q.  XXVIL, 
A.  3,  ad  2).     If,  however,  the  indulgence  be  granted  in  this 
form :  Whosoever  does  this  or  that,  he,  his  father,  or  any  other 
-person  connected  with  him  and  detained  in  purgatory,  will  gain 
so  much  indulgence,  an  indulgence  of  this  kind  will  avail  not 
only  a  living  but  also  a  deceased  person.     For  there  is  no 
reason  why  the   Church  is  able  to  transfer  the  common 
merits,  whereon  indulgences  are  based,  to  the  living  and  not 
to  the  dead.     Nor  does  it  follow  that  a  prelate  of  the  Church 
can  release  souls  from  purgatory  just  as  he  lists,  since  for 
indulgences  to  avail  there  must  be  a  fitting  cause  for  granting 
them,  as  stated  above  (Q.  XXVI.,  A.  3). 
*  Cf.  Q.  XXV.,  A.  2. 


65  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD 


ELEVENTH  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  THE  BURIAL  SERVICE  PROFITS  THE  DEAD  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Eleventh  Article  :  — 
Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  the  burial  service  profits 
the  dead.  For  Damascene  (Serm.  de  Dormient.}  quotes 
Athanasius  as  saying:  Even  though  he  who  has  departed  in 
godliness  be  taken  up  to  heaven,  do  not  hesitate  to  call  upon  God 
and  to  burn  oil  and  wax  at  his  tomb;  for  stick  things  are 
pleasing  to  God  and  receive  a  great  reward  from  Him.  Now 
the  like  pertain  to  the  burial  service.  Therefore  the  burial 
service  profits  the  dead. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  According  to  Augustine  (De  Cur  a  pro 
Mort.  iii.),  In  olden  times  the  funerals  of  just  men  were  cared 
for  with  dutiful  piety,  their  obsequies  celebrated,  their  graves  pro 
vided,  and  themselves  while  living  charged  their  children  touching 
the  burial  or  even  the  translation  of  their  bodies.  But  they 
would  not  have  done  this  unless  the  tomb  and  things  of  this 
kind  conferred  something  on  the  dead.  Therefore  the  like 
profit  the  dead  somewhat. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  No  one  does  a  work  of  mercy  on  some 
one's  behalf  unless  it  profit  him.  Now  burying  the  dead  is 
reckoned  among  the  works  of  mercy,  therefore  Augustine 
says  (ibid.}  :  Tobias,  as  attested  by  the  angel,  is  declared  to  have 
found  favour  with  God  by  burying  the  dead.  Therefore  such 
like  burial  observances  profit  the  dead. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  It  is  unbecoming  to  assert  that  the 
devotion  of  the  faithful  is  fruitless.  Now  some,  out  of 
devotion,  arrange  for  their  burial  in  some  religious  locality. 
Therefore  the  burial  service  profits  the  dead. 

Obj.  5.  Further,  God  is  more  inclined  to  pity  than  to 
condemn.  Now  burial  in  a  sacred  place  is  hurtful  to  some 
if  they  be  unworthy  :  wherefore  Gregory  says  (Dial,  iv.)  : 
If  those  who  are  burdened  with  grievous  sins  are  buried  in  the 
church  this  will  lead  to  their  more  severe  condemnation  rather 
than  to  their  release.  Much  more,  therefore,  should  we  say 
that  the  burial  service  profits  the  good. 

in.  6  3 


Q.  71.  ART.  it     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA "  66 

On  the  contrary,  Augustine  says  (De  Cum  pro  Mort.  iii.): 
Whatever  service  is  done  the  body  is  no  aid  to  salvation,  but 
an  office  of  humanity. 

Further,  Augustine  says  (ibid.;  De  Civ.  Dei,  i.):  The 
funereal  equipment,  the  disposition  of  the  grave,  the  solemnity 
of  the  obsequies  are  a  comfort  to  the  living  rather  than  a  help 
to  the  dead. 

Further,  Our  Lord  said  (Luke  xii.  4) :  Be  not  afraid  of 
them  who  kill  the  body,  and  after  that  have  no  more  that  they 
can  do.  Now  after  death  the  bodies  of  the  saints  can  be 
hindered  from  being  buried,  as  we  read  of  having  been  done 
to  certain  martyrs  at  Lyons  in  Gaul  (Eusebius,  Eccl.  Hist. 
v.  i).  Therefore  the  dead  take  no  harm  if  their  bodies 
remain  unburied:  and  consequently  the  burial  service  does 
not  profit  them. 

/  answer  that,  We  have  recourse  to  burial  for  the  sake  of 
both  the  living  and  the  dead.  For  the  sake  of  the  living, 
lest  their  eyes  be  revolted  by  the  disfigurement  of  the  corpse, 
and  their  bodies  be  infected  by  the  stench,  and  this  as 
regards  the  body.  But  it  profits  the  living  also  spiritually 
inasmuch  as  our  belief  in  the  resurrection  is  confirmed 
thereby.  It  profits  the  dead  in  so  far  as  one  bears  the  dead 
in  mind  and  prays  for  them  through  looking  on  their  burial 
place,  wherefore  a  monument  takes  its  name  from  remem 
brance,  for  a  monument  is  something  that  recalls  the  mind 
(monens  mentem],  as  Augustine  observes  (De  Civ.  Dei,  i.;  De 
Cum  pro  Mort.  iv.).  It  was,  however,  a  pagan  error  that 
burial  was  profitable  to  the  dead  by  procuring  rest  for  his 
soul:  for  they  believed  that  the  soul  could  not  be  at  rest 
until  the  body  was  buried,  which  is  altogether  ridiculous 
and  absurd. 

That,  moreover,  burial  in  a  sacred  place  profits  the  dead, 
does  not  result  from  the  action  done,  but  rather  from  the  action 
itself  of  the  doer :  when,  to  wit,  the  dead  person  himself,  or 
another,  arranges  for  his  body  to  be  buried  in  a  sacred  place, 
and  commends  him  to  the  patronage  of  some  saint,  by  whose 
prayers  we  must  believe  that  he  is  assisted,  as  well  as  to  the 
suffrages  of  those  who  serve  the  holy  place,  and  pray  more 


67  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD    Q.7i.ARx.n 

frequently  and  more  specially  for  those  who  are  buried  in 
their  midst.  But  such  things  as  are  done  for  the  display  of 
the  obsequies  are  profitable  to  the  living,  as  being  a  con 
solation  to  them ;  and  yet  they  can  also  profit  the  dead,  not 
directly  but  indirectly,  in  so  far  as  men  are  aroused  to  pity 
thereby  and  consequently  to  pray,  or  in  so  far  as  the  outlay 
on  the  burial  brings  either  assistance  to  the  poor  or  adorn 
ment  to  the  church :  for  it  is  in  this  sense  that  the  burial  of 
the  dead  is  reckoned  among  the  works  of  mercy. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  By  bringing  oil  and  candles  to  the  tombs  of 
the  dead  we  profit  them  indirectly,  either  as  offering  them  to 
the  Church  and  as  giving  them  to  the  poor,  or  as  doing  this 
in  reverence  of  God.  Hence,  after  the  words  quoted  we 
read:  For  oil  and  candles  are  a  holocaust. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  fathers  of  old  arranged  for  the  burial 
of  their  bodies,  so  as  to  show  that  the  bodies  of  the  dead  are 
the  object  of  Divine  providence,  not  that  there  is  any  feeling 
in  a  dead  body,  but  in  order  to  confirm  the  belief  in  the 
resurrection,  as  Augustine  says  (De  Civ.  Dei,  i.) .  Hence,  also, 
they  wished  to  be  buried  in  the  land  of  promise,  where  they 
believed  Christ's  birth  and  death  would  take  place,  Whose 
resurrection  is  the  cause  of  our  rising  again. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Since  flesh  is  a  part  of  man's  nature,  man 
has  a  natural  affection  for  his  flesh,  according  to  Eph.  v.  29, 
No  man  ever  hated  his  own  flesh.  Hence  in  accordance  with 
this  natural  affection  a  man  has  during  life  a  certain  solici 
tude  for  what  will  become  of  his  body  after  death:  and  he 
would  grieve  if  he  had  a  presentiment  that  something  un 
toward  would  happen  to  his  body.  Consequently  those 
who  love  a  man,  through  being  conformed  to  the  one  they 
love  in  his  affection  for  himself,  treat  his  body  with  loving 
care.  For  as  Augustine  says  (De  Civ.  Dei,  i.):  If  a  father  s 
garment  and  ring,  and  whatever  such  like  is  the  more  dear  to 
those  whom  they  leave  behind  the  greater  their  affection  is 
towards  their  parents,  in  no  wise  are  the  bodies  themselves  to 
be  spurned  which  truly  we  wear  in  more  familiar  and  close 
conjunction  than  anything  else  we  put  on. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  As  Augustine  says  (De  Cura  proMort.iv.},  the 


Q.  71.  ART.  12     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  68 

devotion  of  the  faithful  is  not  fruitless  when  they  arrange 
for  their  friends  to  be  buried  in  holy  places,  since  by  so 
doing  they  commend  their  dead  to  the  suffrages  of  the 
saints,  as  stated  above. 

Reply  Obj.  5.  The  wicked  man  dead  takes  no  harm  by  being 
buried  in  a  holy  place,  except  in  so  far  as  he  rendered  such  a 
burial  place  unfitting  for  him  by  reason  of  human  glory. 

TWELFTH  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  SUFFRAGES  OFFERED  FOR  ONE  DECEASED  PERSON 
PROFIT  THE  PERSON  FOR  WHOM  THEY  ARE  OFFERED 
MORE  THAN  OTHERS  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Twelfth  Article : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  suffrages  offered  for  one 
deceased  person  are  not  more  profitable  to  the  one  for 
whom  they  are  offered,  than  to  others.  For  spiritual  light 
is  more  communicable  than  a  material  light.  Now  a 
material  light,  for  instance  of  a  candle,  though  kindled  for 
one  person  only,  avails  equally  all  those  who  are  gathered 
together,  though  the  candle  be  not  lit  for  them.  Therefore, 
since  suffrages  are  a  kind  of  spiritual  light,  though  they  be 
offered  for  one  person  in  particular,  do  not  avail  him  any 
more  than  the  others  who  are  in  purgatory. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  As  stated  in  the  text  (iv.  Sent.  D.  45), 
suffrages  avail  the  dead  in  so  far  as  during  this  life  they 
merited  that  they  might  avail  them  afterwards.*  Now  some 
merited  that  suffrages  might  avail  them  more  than  those 
for  whom  they  are  offered.  Therefore  they  profit  more 
by  those  suffrages,  else  their  merits  would  be  rendered 
unavailing. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  poor  have  not  so  many  suffrages 
given  them  as  the  rich.  Therefore  if  the  suffrages  offered 
for  certain  people  profit  them  alone,  or  profit  them  more 
than  others,  the  poor  would  be  worse  off :  yet  this  is  contrary 
to  our  Lord's  saying  (Luke  vi.  20):  Blessed  are  ye  poor,  for 
yours  is  the  kingdom  of  God. 

*  S.  Augustine,  Enchiridion  ex. 


69  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD    Q.  71.  ART.  12 

On  the  contrary,  Human  justice  is  copied  from  Divine 
justice.  But  if  a  person  pay  another's  debt  human  justice 
releases  the  latter  alone.  Therefore  since  he  who  offers 
suffrages  for  another  pays  the  debt,  in  a  sense,  of  the  person 
for  whom  he  offers  them,  they  profit  this  person  alone. 

Further,  just  as  a  man  by  offering  suffrages  satisfies  some 
what  for  a  deceased  person,  so,  too,  sometimes  a  person  can 
satisfy  for  a  living  person.  Now  where  one  satisfies  for  a 
living  person  the  satisfaction  counts  only  for  the  person  for 
whom  it  is  offered.  Therefore  one  also  who  offers  suffrages 
profits  him  alone  for  whom  he  offers  them. 

/  answer  that,  There  have  been  two  opinions  on  this  ques 
tion.  For  some,  like  Fraepositivus,  have  said  that  suffrages 
offered  for  one  particular  person  do  avail  chiefly,  not  the 
person  for  whom  they  are  offered,  but  those  who  are  most 
worthy.  And  they  instanced  a  candle  which  is  lit  for  a  rich 
man  and  profits  those  who  are  with  him  no  less  than  the 
rich  man  himself,  and  perhaps  even  more,  if  they  have 
keener  sight.  They  also  gave  the  instance  of  a  lesson 
which  profits  the  person  to  whom  it  is  given  no  more  than 
others  who  listen  with  him,  but  perhaps  profits  these  others 
more,  if  they  be  more  intelligent.  And  if  it  were  pointed  out 
to  them  that  in  this  case  the  Church's  ordinance  in  appoint 
ing  certain  special  prayers  for  certain  persons  is  futile,  they 
said  that  the  Church  did  this  to  excite  the  devotion  of  the 
faithful,  who  are  more  inclined  to  offer  special  than  common 
suffrages,  and  pray  more  fervently  for  their  kinsfolk  than 
for  strangers.  Others,  on  the  contrary,  said  that  suffrages 
avail  more  those  for  whom  they  are  offered.  Now  both 
opinions  have  a  certain  amount  of  truth:  for  the  value  of 
suffrages  may  be  gauged  from  two  sources.  For  their  value 
is  derived  in  the  first  place  from  the  virtue  of  charity,  which 
makes  all  goods  common,  and  in  this  respect  they  avail 
more  the  person  who  is  more  full  of  charity,  although  they 
are  not  offered  specially  for  him.  In  this  way  the  value  of 
suffrages  regards  more  a  certain  inward  consolation  by 
reason  of  which  one  who  is  in  charity  rejoices  in  the  goods 
of  another  after  death  in  respect  of  the  diminution  of 


Q.  71.  ART.  12     THE  "SUMMA  THEOLOGICA"  70 

punishment ;  for  after  death  there  is  no  possibility  of  obtain 
ing  or  increasing  grace,  whereas  during  life  the  works  of 
others  avail  for  this  purpose  by  the  virtue  of  charity.  In 
the  second  place  suffrages  derive  their  value  from  being 
applied  to  another  person  by  one's  intention.  In  this  way 
the  satisfaction  of  one  person  counts  for  another,  and  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  thus  they  avail  more  the  person  for 
whom  they  are  offered:  in  fact,  they  avail  him  alone  in  this 
way,  because  satisfaction,  properly  speaking,  is  directed 
to  the  remission  of  punishment.  Consequently,  as  regards 
the  remission  of  punishment,  suffrages  avail  chiefly  the 
person  for  whom  they  are  offered,  and  accordingly  there  is 
more  truth  in  the  second  opinion  than  in  the  first. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Suffrages  avail,  after  the  manner  of  a  light, 
in  so  far  as  they  reach  the  dead,  who  thereby  receive  a 
certain  amount  of  consolation:  and  this  is  all  the  greater 
according  as  they  are  endowed  with  a  greater  charity.  But 
in  so  far  as  suffrages  are  a  satisfaction  applied  to  another  by 
the  intention  of  the  offerer,  they  do  not  resemble  a  light, 
but  rather  the  payment  of  a  debt :  and  it  does  not  follow, 
if  one  person's  debt  be  paid,  that  the  debt  of  others  is  paid 
likewise. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Such  a  merit  is  conditional,  for  in  this  way 
they  merited  that  suffrages  would  profit  them  if  offered  for 
them,  and  this  was  merely  to  render  themselves  fit  recipients 
of  those  suffrages.  It  is  therefore  clear  that  they  did  not 
directly  merit  the  assistance  of  those  suffrages,  but  made 
themselves  fit  by  their  preceding  merits  to  receive  the  fruit 
of  suffrages.  Hence  it  does  not  follow  that  their  merit  is 
rendered  unavailing. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Nothing  hinders  the  rich  from  being  in 
some  respects  better  off  than  the  poor,  for  instance  as  regards 
the  expiation  of  their  punishment.  But  this  is  as  nothing 
in  comparison  with  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  where  the  poor 
are  shown  to  be  better  off  by  the  authority  quoted. 


7i  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD    Q.  71.  ART.  13 


THIRTEENTH  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  SUFFRAGES  OFFERED  FOR  SEVERAL  ARE  OF  AS 
MUCH  VALUE  TO  EACH  ONE  AS  IF  THEY  HAD  BEEN 
OFFERED  FOR  EACH  IN  PARTICULAR  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Thirteenth  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  suffrages  offered  for 
several  are  of  as  much  value  to  each  one  as  if  they  had  been 
offered  for  each  in  particular.  For  it  is  clear  that  if  one 
person  receives  a  lesson  he  loses  nothing  if  others  receive 
the  lesson  with  him.  Therefore  in  like  manner  a  person  for 
whom  a  suffrage  is  offered  loses  nothing  if  some  one  else  is 
reckoned  together  with  him:  and  consequently  if  it  be 
offered  for  several,  it  is  of  as  much  value  to  each  one  as  if  it 
were  offered  for  each  in  particular. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  It  is  to  be  observed  that  according  to 
the  common  practice  of  the  Church,  when  Mass  is  said  for 
one  deceased  person,  other  prayers  are  added  for  other 
deceased  persons.  Now  this  would  not  be  done,  if  the 
dead  person  for  whom  the  Mass  is  said  were  to  lose  some 
thing  thereby.  Therefore  the  same  conclusion  follows  as 
above. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  Suffrages,  especially  of  prayers,  rely  on 
the  Divine  power.  But  with  God,  just  as  it  makes  no 
difference  whether  He  helps  by  means  of  many  or  by  means 
of  a  few,  so  it  differs  not  whether  He  assists  many  or  a  few. 
Therefore  if  the  one  same  prayer  be  said  for  many,  each 
one  of  them  will  receive  as  much  assistance  as  one  person 
would  if  that  same  prayer  were  said  for  him  alone. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  better  to  assist  many  than  one.  If 
therefore  a  suffrage  offered  for  several  is  of  as  much  value 
to  each  one  as  if  it  were  offered  for  one  alone,  it  would 
seem  that  the  Church  ought  not  to  have  appointed  a  Mass 
and  prayer  to  be  said  for  one  person  in  particular,  but  that 
Mass  ought  always  to  be  said  for  all  the  faithful  departed: 
and  this  is  evidently  false. 

Further,  A  suffrage  has  a  finite  efficiency.     Therefore  if 


Q.  7i.  ART.  i3     THE  "SUMMA  THEOLOGICA"  72 

it  be  divided  among  many  it  avails  less  for  each  one  than 
if  it  were  offered  for  one  only. 

I  answer  that,  If  the  value  of  suffrages  be  considered 
according  as  it  is  derived  from  the  virtue  of  charity  uniting 
the  members  of  the  Church  together,  suffrages  offered  for 
several  persons  avail  each  one  as  much  as  if  they  were 
offered  for  one  alone,  because  charity  is  not  diminished  if 
its  effect  be  divided  among  many,  in  fact  rather  is  it  in 
creased;  and  in  like  manner  joy  increases  through  being 
shared  by  many,  as  Augustine  says  (Conf.  viii.).  Conse 
quently  many  in  purgatory  rejoice  in  one  good  deed  no 
less  than  one  does.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  consider  the 
value  of  suffrages,  inasmuch  as  they  are  a  kind  of  satisfac 
tion  applied  to  the  dead  by  the  intention  of  the  person 
offering  them,  then  the  suffrage  for  some  person  in  particular 
avails  him  more  than  that  which  is  offered  for  him  in 
common  with  many  others ;  for  in  this  case  the  effect  of  the 
suffrages  is  divided  in  virtue  of  Divine  justice  among  those 
for  whom  the  suffrages  are  offered.  Hence  it  is  evident  that 
this  question  depends  on  the  first ;  and,  moreover,  it  is  made 
clear  why  special  suffrages  are  appointed  to  be  offered  in  the 
Church. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Suffrages  considered  as  works  of  satisfaction 
do  not  profit  after  the  manner  of  an  action  as  teaching  does ; 
for  teaching,  like  any  other  action,  produces  its  effect 
according  to  the  disposition  of  the  recipient.  But  they 
profit  after  the  manner  of  the  payment  of  a  debt,  as  stated 
above  (A.  12,  ad  i) ;  and  so  the  comparison  fails. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Since  suffrages  offered  for  one  person  avail 
others  in  a  certain  way,  as  stated  (A.  i),  it  follows  that 
when  Mass  is  said  for  one  person,  it  is  not  unfitting  for 
prayers  to  be  said  for  others  also.  For  these  prayers  are 
said,  not  that  the  satisfaction  offered  by  one  suffrage  be 
applied  to  those  others  chiefly,  but  that  the  prayer  offered 
for  them  in  particular  may  profit  them  also. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Prayer  may  be  considered  both  on  the  part 
of  the  one  who  prays,  and  on  the  part  of  the  person  prayed : 
and  its  effect  depends  on  both.  Consequently  though  it  is 


73  SUFFRAGES  FOR  THE  DEAD    Q.7i.ART.i4 

no  more  difficult  to  the  Divine  power  to  absolve  many  than 
to  absolve  one,  nevertheless  the  prayer  of  one  who  prays 
thus  is  not  as  satisfactory  for  many  as  for  one. 


FOURTEENTH  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  GENERAL  SUFFRAGES  AVAIL  THOSE  FOR  WHOM 
SPECIAL  SUFFRAGES  ARE  NOT  OFFERED,  AS  MUCH  AS 
SPECIAL  SUFFRAGES  AVAIL  THOSE  FOR  WHOM  THEY  ARE 
OFFERED  IN  ADDITION  TO  GENERAL  SUFFRAGES  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Fourteenth  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  general  suffrages  avail 
those  for  whom  special  suffrages  are  not  offered,  as  much  as 
special  suffrages  avail  those  for  whom  they  are  offered  in 
addition  to  general  suffrages.  For  in  the  life  to  come  each 
one  will  be  rewarded  according  to  his  merits.  Now  a  person 
for  whom  no  suffrages  are  offered  merited  to  be  assisted 
after  death  as  much  as  one  for  whom  special  suffrages  are 
offered.  Therefore  the  former  will  be  assisted  by  general 
suffrages  as  much  as  the  latter  by  special  and  general 
suffrages. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  Eucharist  is  the  chief  of  the  suffrages 
of  the  Church.  Now  the  Eucharist,  since  it  contains  Christ 
whole,  has  infinite  efficacy  so  to  speak.  Therefore  one 
offering  of  the  Eucharist  for  all  in  general  is  of  sufficient 
value  to  release  all  who  are  in  purgatory :  and  consequently 
general  suffrages  alone  afford  as  much  assistance  as  special 
and  general  suffrages  together. 

On  the  contrary,  Two  goods  are  more  eligible  than  one. 
Therefore  special  suffrages,  together  with  general  suffrages, 
are  more  profitable  to  the  person  for  whom  they  are  offered 
than  general  suffrages  alone. 

/  answer  that,  The  reply  to  this  question  depends  on  that 
which  is  given  to  the  twelfth  inquiry  (A.  12) :  for  if  the 
suffrages  offered  for  one  person  in  particular  avail  indif 
ferently  for  all,  then  all  suffrages  are  common;  and  conse 
quently  one  for  whom  the  special  suffrages  are  not  offered 
will  be  assisted  as  much  as  the  one  for  whom  they  are 


Q.  71-  ART.  14     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA "  74 

offered,  if  he  be  equally  worthy.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the 
suffrages  offered  for  a  person  do  not  profit  all  indifferently, 
but  those  chiefly  for  whom  they  are  offered,  then  there  is  no 
doubt  that  general  and  special  suffrages  together  avail  a 
person  more  than  general  suffrages  alone.  Hence  the 
Master,  in  the  text  (iv.  Sent.  D.  45),  mentions  two  opinions: 
one,  when  he  says  that  a  rich  man  derives  from  general, 
together  with  special  suffrages,  an  equal  profit  to  that  which 
a  poor  man  derives  from  special  suffrages  alone ;  for  although 
the  one  receives  assistance  from  more  sources  than  the 
other,  he  does  not  receive  a  greater  assistance:  the  other 
opinion  he  mentions  when  he  says  that  a  person  for  whom 
special  suffrages  are  offered  obtains  a  more  speedy  but  not 
a  more  complete  release,  because  each  will  be  finally  released 
from  all  punishment. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  As  stated  above  (A.  12,  ad  2)  the  assistance 
derived  from  suffrages  is  not  directly  and  simply  an  object 
of  merit,  but  conditionally  as  it  were:  hence  the  argument 
does  not  prove. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Although  the  power  of  Christ  Who  is  con 
tained  in  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist  is  infinite,  yet 
there  is  a  definite  effect  to  which  that  sacrament  is  directed. 
Hence  it  does  not  follow  that  the  whole  punishment  of  those 
who  are  in  purgatory  is  expiated  by  one  sacrifice  of  the  altar : 
even  so,  by  the  one  sacrifice  which  a  man  offers,  he  is  not 
released  from  the  whole  satisfaction  due  for  his  sins,  where 
fore  sometimes  several  Masses  are  enjoined  in  satisfaction 
for  one  sin.  Nevertheless,  if  anything  from  special  suffrages 
be  left  over  for  those  for  whom  they  are  offered  (for  instance 
if  they  need  them  not)  we  may  well  believe  that  by  God's 
mercy  this  is  granted  to  others  for  whom  those  suffrages 
are  not  offered,  if  they  need  them:  as  affirmed  by  Damas 
cene  (Serm.  de  Dormient.)  who  says :  Truly  God,  forasmuch 
as  He  is  just  will  adapt  ability  to  the  disabled,  and  will  arrange 
for  an  exchange  of  deficiencies  :  and  this  exchange  is  effected 
when  what  is  lacking  to  one  is  supplied  by  another. 


QUESTION  LXXII. 

OF  PRAYERS  WITH  REGARD  TO  THE  SAINTS  IN 
HEAVEN. 

(In  Three  Articles.) 

WE  must  now  consider  prayer  with  regard  to  the  saints  in 
heaven.     Under  this  head  there  are  three  points  of  inquiry: 

(1)  Whether  the  saints  have  knowledge  of  our  prayers  ? 

(2)  Whether   we   should   beseech   them   to   pray   for   us  ? 

(3)  Whether  the  prayers  they  pour  forth  for  us  are  always 
granted  ? 

FIRST  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  THE  SAINTS  HAVE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  OUR 

PRAYERS  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  First  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  saints  have  no  know 
ledge  of  our  prayers.  For  a  gloss  on  Isa.lxiii.  16,  Thou  art 
our  father  and  Abraham  hath  not  known  us,  and  Israel  hath 
been  ignorant  of  us,  says  that  the  dead  saints  know  not  what 
the  living,  even  their  own  children,  are  doing.  This  is  taken 
from  Augustine  (De  Cur  a  pro  Mort.  xiii.),  where  he  quotes 
the  aforesaid  authority,  and  the  following  are  his  words :  // 
such  great  men  as  the  patriarchs  knew  not  what  was  happening 
to  the  people  begotten  of  them,  how  can  the  dead  occupy  themselves 
in  watching  and  helping  the  affairs  and  actions  of  the  living  ? 
Therefore  the  saints  cannot  be  cognizant  of  our  prayers. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  the  following  words  are  addressed  to 
King  Joas  (4  Kings  xxii.  20):  Therefore  (i.e.,  because  thou 
hast  wept  before  Me),  /  will  gather  thee  to  thy  fathers  .  .  . 
that  thy  eyes  may  not  see  all  the  evils  which  I  will  bring  upon 

75 


Q.  72.  ART.  i     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  76 

this  place.  But  Joas  would  have  gained  no  such  advantage 
from  his  death  if  he  were  to  know  after  death  what  was 
happening  to  his  people.  Therefore  the  saints  after  death 
know  not  our  actions,  and  thus  they  are  not  cognizant  of 
our  prayers. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  more  perfect  a  man  is  in  charity,  the 
more  he  succours  his  neighbour  when  the  latter  is  in  danger. 
Now  the  saints,  in  this  life,  watch  over  their  neighbour, 
especially  their  kinsfolk,  when  these  are  in  danger,  and 
manifestly  assist  them.  Since  then,  after  death,  their 
charity  is  much  greater,  if  they  were  cognizant  of  our  deeds, 
much  more  would  they  watch  over  their  friends  and  kindred 
and  assist  them  in  their  needs :  and  yet,  seemingly,  they  do 
not.  Therefore  it  would  seem  that  our  deeds  and  prayers 
are  not  known  to  them. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  Even  as  the  saints  after  death  see  the 
Word,  so  do  the  angels  of  whom  it  is  stated  (Matth.  xviii.  10) 
that  their  angels  in  heaven  always  see  the  face  of  My  Father. 
Yet  the  angels  through  seeing  the  Word  do  not  therefore 
know  all  things,  since  the  lower  angels  are  cleansed  from 
their  lack  of  knowledge  by  the  higher  angels,*  as  Dionysius 
declares  (Ccel.  Hier.  vii.).  Therefore  although  the  saints 
see  the  Word,  they  do  not  see  therein  our  prayers  and  other 
things  that  happen  in  our  regard. 

Obj.  5.  Further,  God  alone  is  the  searcher  of  hearts.  Now 
prayer  is  seated  chiefly  in  the  heart.  Therefore  it  belongs 
to  God  alone  to  know  our  prayers.  Therefore  our  prayers 
are  unknown  to  the  saints. 

On  the  contrary,  Gregory,  commenting  on  Job  xiv.  21, 
Whether  his  children  come  to  honour  or  dishonour,  he  shall 
not  understand,  says  (Moral,  xii.):  This  does  not  apply  to 
the  souls  of  the  saints,  for  since  they  have  an  insight  of  Almighty 
God's  glory  we  must  nowise  believe  that  anything  outside  that 
glory  is  unknown  to  them.  Therefore  they  are  cognizant  of 
our  prayers. 

Further,  Gregory  says  (Dial,  ii.) :  All  creatures  are  little  to 
the  soul  that  sees  God :  because  however  little  it  sees  of  the 

*  Cf.  P.  I..  Q.  CVL,  A.  i. 


77         PRAYER  ADDRESSED  TO  SAINTS     Q.  72.  ART.  i 

Creator's  light,  every  created  thing  appears  foreshortened  to  it. 
Now  apparently  the  chief  obstacle  to  the  souls  of  the  saints 
being  cognizant  of  our  prayers  and  other  happenings  in  our 
regard  is  that  they  are  far  removed  from  us.  Since  then 
distance  does  not  prevent  these  things,  as  appears  from  the 
authority  quoted,  it  would  seem  that  the  souls  of  the  saints  are 
cognizant  of  our  prayers  and  of  what  happens  here  below. 

Further,  Unless  they  were  aware  of  what  happens  in  our 
regard  they  would  not  pray  for  us,  since  they  would  be 
ignorant  of  our  needs.  But  this  is  the  error  of  Vigilantius, 
as  Jerome  asserts  in  his  letter  against  him.  Therefore  the 
saints  are  cognizant  of  what  happens  in  our  regard. 

I  answer  that,  The  Divine  essence  is  a  sufficient  medium 
for  knowing  all  things,  and  this  is  evident  from  the  fact  that 
God,  by  seeing  His  essence,  sees  all  things.  But  it  does  not 
follow  that  whoever  sees  God's  essence  knows  all  things, 
but  only  those  who  comprehend  the  essence  of  God:*  even 
as  the  knowledge  of  a  principle  does  not  involve  the  know 
ledge  of  all  that  follows  from  that  principle,  unless  the  whole 
virtue  of  the  principle  be  comprehended.  Wherefore,  since 
the  souls  of  the  saints  do  not  comprehend  the  Divine  essence, 
it  does  not  follow  that  they  know  all  that  can  be  known  by 
the  Divine  essence, — for  which  reason  the  lower  angels  are 
taught  concerning  certain  matters  by  the  higher  angels, 
though  they  all  see  the  essence  of  God;  but  each  of  the 
blessed  must  needs  see  in  the  Divine  essence  as  many  other 
things  as  the  perfection  of  his  happiness  requires.  For  the 
perfection  of  a  man's  happiness  requires  him  to  have 
whatever  he  will,  and  to  will  nothing  amiss :  and  each  one 
wills  with  a  right  will,  to  know  what  concerns  himself. 
Hence  since  no  rectitude  is  lacking  to  the  saints,  they  wish 
to  know  what  concerns  themselves,  and  consequently  it 
follows  that  they  know  it  in  the  Word.  Now  it  pertains  to 
their  glory  that  they  assist  the  needy  for  their  salvation: 
for  thus  they  become  God's  co-operators,  than  which  nothing 
is  more  Godlike,  as  Dionysius  declares  (Cozl.  Hier.  iii.). 
Wherefore  it  is  evident  that  the  saints  are  cognizant  of  such 
*  Cf.  P.  I.,  Q.  XII.,  AA.  7,  8. 


Q.  72.  ART.  i     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  78 

things  as  are  required  for  this  purpose ;  and  so  it  is  manifest 
that  they  know  in  the  Word  the  vows,  devotions,  and  prayers 
of  those  who  have  recourse  to  their  assistance. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  The  saying  of  Augustine  is  to  be  understood 
as  referring  to  the  natural  knowledge  of  separated  souls, 
which  knowledge  is  devoid  of  obscurity  in  holy  men.  But 
he  is  not  speaking  of  their  knowledge  in  the  Word,  for  it  is 
clear  that  when  Isaias  said  this,  Abraham  had  no  such 
knowledge,  since  no  one  had  come  to  the  vision  of  God  before 
Christ's  passion. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Although  the  saints,  after  this  life,  know 
what  happens  here  below,  we  must  not  believe  that  they 
grieve  through  knowing  the  woes  of  those  whom  they  loved 
in  this  world:  for  they  are  so  filled  with  heavenly  joy,  that 
sorrow  finds  no  place  in  them.  Wherefore  if  after  death 
they  know  the  woes  of  their  friends,  their  grief  is  forestalled 
by  their  removal  from  this  world  before  their  woes  occur. 
Perhaps,  however,  the  non-glorified  souls  would  grieve  some 
what,  if  they  were  aware  of  the  distress  of  their  dear  ones: 
and  since  the  soul  of  Josias  was  not  glorified  as  soon  as  it 
went  out  from  his  body,  it  is  in  this  respect  that  Augustine 
uses  this  argument  to  show  that  the  souls  of  the  dead  have 
no  knowledge  of  the  deeds  of  the  living. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  souls  of  the  saints  have  their  will  fully 
conformed  to  the  Divine  will  even  as  regards  the  things 
willed;  and  consequently,  although  they  retain  the  love  of 
charity  towards  their  neighbour,  they  do  not  succour  him 
otherwise  than  they  see  to  be  in  conformity  with  the  dis 
position  of  Divine  justice.  Nevertheless,  it  is  to  be  believed 
that  they  help  their  neighbour  very  much  by  interceding 
for  him  to  God. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  Although  it  does  not  follow  that  those  who  see 
the  Word  see  all  things  in  the  Word,  they  see  those  things  that 
pertain  to  the  perfection  of  their  happiness,  as  stated  above. 

Reply  Obj.  5.  God  alone  of  Himself  knows  the  thoughts  of 
the  heart :  yet  others  know  them,  in  so  far  as  these  are  re 
vealed  to  them,  either  by  their  vision  of  the  Word  or  by 
any  other  means. 


79         PRAYER  ADDRESSED  TO  SAINTS    Q.  72.  ART.  2 


SECOND  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  WE  OUGHT  TO  CALL  UPON  THE  SAINTS  TO 
PRAY  FOR  US  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Second  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  we  ought  not  to  call  upon 
the  saints  to  pray  for  us.  For  no  man  asks  anyone's  friends 
to  pray  for  him,  except  in  so  far  as  he  believes  he  will  more 
easily  find  favour  with  them.  But  God  is  infinitely  more 
merciful  than  any  saint,  and  consequently  His  will  is  more 
easily  inclined  to  give  us  a  gracious  hearing,  than  the  will 
of  a  saint.  Therefore  it  would  seem  unnecessary  to  make  the 
saints  mediators  between  us  and  God,  that  they  may  inter 
cede  for  us. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  If  we  ought  to  beseech  them  to  pray  for 
us,  this  is  only  because  we  know  their  prayer  to  be  acceptable 
to  God.  Now  among  the  saints  the  holier  a  man  is,  the 
more  is  his  prayer  acceptable  to  God.  Therefore  we  ought 
always  to  bespeak  the  greater  saints  to  intercede  for  us  with 
God,  and  never  the  lesser  ones. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  Christ,  even  as  man,  is  called  the  Holy 
of  Holies,  and,  as  man,  it  is  competent  to  Him  to  pray. 
Yet  we  never  call  upon  Christ  to  pray  for  us.  Therefore 
neither  should  we  ask  the  other  saints  to  do  so. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  Whenever  one  person  intercedes  for  an 
other  at  the  latter's  request,  he  presents  his  petition  to  the 
one  with  whom  he  intercedes  for  him.  Now  it  is  unneces 
sary  to  present  anything  to  one  to  whom  all  things  are 
present.  Therefore  it  is  unnecessary  to  make  the  saints 
our  intercessors  with  God. 

Obj.  5.  Further,  It  is  unnecessary  to  do  a  thing  if,  without 
doing  it,  the  purpose  for  which  it  is  done  would  be  achieved 
in  the  same  way,  or  else  not  achieved  at  all.  Now  the  saints 
would  pray  for  us  just  the  same,  or  would  not  pray  for  us 
at  all,  whether  we  pray  to  them  or  not :  for  if  we  be  worthy 
of  their  prayers,  they  would  pray  for  us  even  though  we 
prayed  not  to  them,  while  if  we  be  unworthy  they  pray 


Q.  72.  ART.  2     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  80 

not  for  us  even  though  we  ask  them  to.     Therefore  it  seems 
altogether  unnecessary  to  call  on  them  to  pray  for  us. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (Job  v.  i) :  Call  .  .  .  if  there 
be  any  that  will  answer  thee,  and  turn  to  some  of  the  saints. 
Now,  as  Gregory  says  (Moral,  v.  30)  on  this  passage,  we  call 
upon  God  when  we  beseech  Him  in  humble  prayer.  Therefore 
when  we  wish  to  pray  God,  we  should  turn  to  the  saints,  that 
they  may  pray  God  for  us. 

Further,  The  saints  who  are  in  heaven  are  more  accept 
able  to  God  than  those  who  are  on  the  way.  Now  we 
should  make  the  saints,  who  are  on  the  way,  our  intercessors 
with  God,  after  the  example  of  the  Apostle,  who  said 
(Rom.  xv.  30) :  I  beseech  you  .  .  .  brethren,  through  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  by  the  chanty  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  you 
help  me  in  your  prayers  for  me  to  God.  Much  more,  there 
fore,  should  we  ask  the  saints  who  are  in  heaven  to  help  us 
by  their  prayers  to  God. 

Further,  An  additional  argument  is  provided  by  the 
common  custom  of  the  Church  which  asks  for  the  prayers  of 
the  saints  in  the  Litany. 

/  answer  that,  According  to  Dionysius  (Eccl.  Hier.  v.)  the 
order  established  by  God  among  things  is  that  the  last  should 
be  led  to  God  by  those  that  are  midway  between.  Wherefore, 
since  the  saints  who  are  in  heaven  are  nearest  to  God,  the 
order  of  the  Divine  law  requires  that  we,  who  while  we 
remain  in  the  body  are  pilgrims  from  the  Lord,  should  be 
brought  back  to  God  by  the  saints  who  are  between  us  and 
Him:  and  this  happens  when  the  Divine  goodness  pours 
forth  its  effect  into  us  through  them.  And  since  our  return 
to  God  should  correspond  to  the  outflow  of  His  boons  upon 
us,  just  as  the  Divine  favours  reach  us  by  means  of  the 
saints'  intercession,  so  should  we,  by  their  means,  be  brought 
back  to  God,  that  we  may  receive  His  favours  again.  Hence 
it  is  that  we  make  them  our  intercessors  with  God,  and  our 
mediators  as  it  were,  when  we  ask  them  to  pray  for  us. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  It  is  not  on  account  of  any  defect  in  God's 
power  that  He  works  by  means  of  second  causes,  but  it  is 
for  the  perfection  of  the  order  of  the  universe,  and  the  more 


8i         PRAYER  ADDRESSED  TO  SAINTS    Q.  72.  ART.  2 

manifold  outpouring  of  His  goodness  on  things,  through  His 
bestowing  on  them  not  only  the  goodness  which  is  proper 
to  them,  but  also  the  faculty  of  causing  goodness  in  others. 
Even  so  it  is  not  through  any  defect  in  His  mercy,  that  we 
need  to  bespeak  His  clemency  through  the  prayers  of  the 
saints,  but  to  the  end  that  the  aforesaid  order  in  things  be 
observed. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Although  the  greater  saints  are  more  accept 
able  to  God  than  the  lesser,  it  is  sometimes  profitable  to 
pray  to  the  lesser;  and  this  for  five  reasons.  First,  because 
sometimes  one  has  greater  devotion  for  a  lesser  saint  than 
for  a  greater,  and  the  effect  of  prayer  depends  very  much 
on  one's  devotion.  Secondly,  in  order  to  avoid  tediousness, 
for  continual  attention  to  one  thing  makes  a  person  weary; 
whereas  by  praying  to  different  saints,  the  fervour  of  our 
devotion  is  aroused  anew  as  it  were.  Thirdly,  because  it  is 
granted  to  some  saints  to  exercise  their  patronage  in  certain 
special  cases,  for  instance  to  Saint  Anthony  against  the  fire 
of  hell.  Fourthly,  that  due  honour  be  given  by  us  to  all. 
Fifthly,  because  the  prayers  of  several  sometimes  obtain 
that  which  would  not  have  been  obtained  by  the  prayers 
of  one. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Prayer  is  an  act,  and  acts  belong  to  particular 
persons  (supposita).  Hence,  were  we  to  say:  Christ,  pray 
for  us,  except  we  added  something,  this  would  seem  to  refer 
to  Christ's  person,  and  consequently  to  agree  with  the 
error  either  of  Nestorius,  who  distinguished  in  Christ  the 
person  of  the  son  of  man  from  the  person  of  the  Son  of  God, 
or  of  Arius,  who  asserted  that  the  person  of  the  Son  is  less 
than  the  Father.  Wherefore  to  avoid  these  errors  the  Church 
says  not :  Christ,  pray  for  us,  but  Christ,  hear  us,  or  have 
mercy  on  us. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  As  we  shall  state  further  on  (A.  3)  the  saints 
are  said  to  present  our  prayers  to  God,  not  as  though  they 
notified  things  unknown  to  Him,  but  because  they  ask  God 
to  grant  those  prayers  a  gracious  hearing,  or  because  they 
seek  the  Divine  truth  about  them,  namely  what  ought  to  be 
done  according  to  His  providence. 

III.  6  6 


Q.  72.  ART.  3    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA"  82 

Reply  Obj.  5.  A  person  is  rendered  worthy  of  a  saint's 
prayers  for  him  by  the  very  fact  that  in  his  need  he  has 
recourse  to  him  with  pure  devotion.  Hence  it  is  not  un 
necessary  to  pray  to  the  saints. 

THIRD  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  PRAYERS  WHICH  THE  SAINTS  POUR  FORTH 
TO  GOD  FOR  US  ARE  ALWAYS  GRANTED  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Third  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  prayers  which  the 
saints  pour  forth  to  God  for  us  are  not  always  granted. 
For  if  they  were  always  granted,  the  saints  would  be  heard 
especially  in  regard  to  matters  concerning  themselves.  But 
they  are  not  heard  in  reference  to  these  things ;  wherefore  it 
is  stated  in  the  Apocalypse  (vi.  n)  that  on  the  martyrs 
beseeching  vengeance  on  them  that  dwell  on  earth,  it  was 
said  to  them  that  they  should  rest  for  a  little  while  till  the  number 
of  their  brethren  should  be  filled  up*  Much  less  therefore, 
are  they  heard  in  reference  to  matters  concerning  others. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  It  is  written  (Jer.  xv.  i) :  If  Moses  and 
Samuel  shall  stand  before  Me,  My  soul  is  not  towards  this 
people.  Therefore,  the  saints  are  not  always  heard  when 
they  pray  God  for  us. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  saints  in  heaven  are  stated  to  be 
equal  to  the  angels  of  God  (Matth.  xxii.  30).  But  the  angels 
are  not  always  heard  in  the  prayers  which  they  offer  up  to 
God.  This  is  evident  from  Dan.  x.  12,  13,  where  it  is  written : 
I  am  come  for  thy  words :  but  the  prince  of  the  kingdom  of  the 
Persians  resisted  me  one-and-twenty  days.  But  the  angel 
who  spoke  had  not  come  to  Daniel's  aid  except  by  asking 
of  God  to  be  set  free ;  and  yet  the  fulfilment  of  his  prayer  was 
hindered.  Therefore  neither  are  other  saints  always  heard 
by  God  when  they  pray  for  us. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  Whosoever  obtains  something  by  prayer 
merits  it  in  a  sense.  But  the  saints  in  heaven  are  not  in  the 

*  Vulg., — till  their  fellow- servants  and  their  brethren  .  .  .  should 
be  filled  up. 


83         PRAYER  ADDRESSED  TO  SAINTS    Q.  72.  ART.  3 

state  of  meriting.  Therefore  they  cannot  obtain  anything 
for  us  from  God  by  their  prayers. 

Obj.  5.  Further,  The  saints,  in  all  things,  conform  their 
will  to  the  will  of  God.  Therefore  they  will  nothing  but 
what  they  know  God  to  will.  But  no  one  prays  save  for 
what  he  wills.  Therefore  they  pray  not  save  for  what  they 
know  God  to  will.  Now  that  which  God  wills  would  be 
done  even  without  their  praying  for  it.  Therefore  their 
prayers  are  not  efficacious  for  obtaining  anything. 

Obj.  6.  Further,  The  prayers  of  the  whole  heavenly  court, 
if  they  could  obtain  anything,  would  be  more  efficacious 
than  all  the  petitions  of  the  Church  here  below.  Now  if  the 
suffrages  of  the  Church  here  below  for  some  one  in  purgatory 
were  to  be  multiplied,  he  would  be  wholly  delivered  from 
punishment.  Since  then  the  saints  in  heaven  pray  for 
those  who  are  in  purgatory  on  the  same  account  as  for  us, 
if  they  obtain  anything  for  us,  their  prayers  would  deliver 
entirely  from  punishment  those  who  are  in  purgatory.  But 
this  is  not  true,  because  then  the  Church's  suffrages  for  the 
dead  would  be  unnecessary. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (2  Machab.  xv.  14) :  This  is 
he  that  prayeth  much  for  the  people,  and  for  all  the  holy  city, 
Jeremias  the  prophet  of  God  :  and  that  his  prayer  was  granted 
is  clear  from  what  follows  (verse  15):  Jeremias  stretched  forth 
his  right  hand,  and  gave  to  Judas  a  sword  of  gold,  saying : 
Take  this  holy  sword,  a  gift  from  God,  etc. 

Further,  Jerome  says  (Ep.  contra  Vigilant.} :  Thou  sayest 
in  thy  pamphlets,  that  while  we  live,  we  can  pray  for  one 
another,  but  that  when  we  are  dead  no  ones  prayer  for  another 
will  be  heard  :  and  afterwards  he  refutes  this  in  the  following 
words :  //  the  apostles  and  martyrs  while  yet  in  the  body  can 
pray  for  others,  while  they  are  still  solicitous  for  themselves,  how 
much  more  can  they  do  so  when  the  crown,  the  victory,  the 
triumph  is  already  theirs  ! 

Further,  This  is  confirmed  by  the  custom  of  the  Church, 
which  often  asks  to  be  assisted  by  the  prayers  of  the  saints. 

/  answer  that,  The  saints  are  said  to  pray  for  us  in  two 
ways.  First,  by  express  prayer,  when  by  their  prayers  they 


Q.  72.  ART.  3    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  84 

seek  a  hearing  of  the  Divine  clemency  on  our  behalf: 
secondly,  by  interpretive  prayer,  namely  by  their  merits 
which,  being  known  to  God,  avail  not  only  them  unto  glory, 
but  also  us  as  suffrages  and  prayers,  even  as  the  shedding  of 
Christ's  blood  is  said  to  ask  pardon  for  us.  In  both  ways 
the  saints'  prayers  considered  in  themselves  avail  to  obtain 
what  they  ask,  yet  on  our  part  they  may  fail  so  that  we 
obtain  not  the  fruit  of  their  prayers,  in  so  far  as  they  are  said 
to  pray  for  us  by  reason  of  their  merits  availing  on  our 
behalf.  But  in  so  far  as  they  pray  for  us  by  asking  some 
thing  for  us  in  their  prayers,  their  prayers  are  always 
granted,  since  they  will  only  what  God  wills,  nor  do  they 
ask  save  for  what  they  will  to  be  done ;  and  what  God  wills  is 
always  fulfilled, — unless  we  speak  of  His  antecedent  will, 
whereby  He  wishes  all  men  to  be  saved.  *  For  this  will  is  not 
always  fulfilled;  wherefore  no  wonder  if  that  also  which  the 
saints  will  according  to  this  kind  of  will  be  not  fulfilled 
sometimes. 

Reply  Obj.  I.  This  prayer  of  the  martyrs  is  merely  their 
desire  to  obtain  the  robe  of  the  body  and  the  fellowship  of 
those  who  will  be  saved,  and  their  consent  to  God's  justice  in 
punishing  the  wicked.  Hence  a  gloss  on  Apoc.  vi.  n,  How 
long,  0  Lord,  says:  They  desire  an  increase  of  joy  and  the 
fellowship  of  the  saints,  and  they  consent  to  God's  justice. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  Lord  speaks  there  of  Moses  and  Samuel 
according  to  their  state  in  this  life.  For  we  read  that  they 
withstood  God's  anger  by  praying  for  the  people.  And  yet 
even  if  they  had  been  living  at  the  time  in  question,  they 
would  have  been  unable  to  placate  God  towards  the  people 
by  their  prayers,  on  account  of  the  wickedness  of  this  same 
people :  and  it  is  thus  that  we  are  to  understand  this  passage. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  This  dispute  among  the  good  angels  does 
not  mean  that  they  offered  contradictory  prayers  to  God, 
but  that  they  submitted  contrary  merits  on  various  sides 
to  the  Divine  inquiry,  with  a  view  of  God's  pronouncing 
sentence  thereon.  This,  in  fact,  is  what  Gregory  says 
(Moral,  xvii.)  in  explanation  of  the  aforesaid  words  of 
*  Cf.  P.  I.,  Q.  XIX.,  A.  6,  ad  i. 


85         PRAYER  ADDRESSED  TO  SAINTS    Q.  72-  ART.  3 

Daniel:  The  lofty  spirits  that  are  set  over  the  nations  never 
fight  in  behalf  of  those  that  act  unjustly,  but  they  justly  judge 
and  try  their  deeds.  And  when  the  guilt  or  innocence  of  any 
particular  nation  is  brought  into  the  debate  of  the  court  above, 
the  ruling  spirit  of  that  nation  is  said  to  have  won  or  lost 
in  the  conflict.  Yet  the  supreme  will  of  their  Maker  is 
victorious  over  all,  for  since  they  have  it  ever  before  their 
eyes,  they  will  not  what  they  are  unable  to  obtain,  wherefore 
neither  do  they  seek  for  it.  And  consequently  it  is  clear 
that  their  prayers  are  always  heard. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  Although  the  saints  are  not  in  a  state  to 
merit  for  themselves,  when  once  they  are  in  heaven,  they 
are  in  a  state  to  merit  for  others,  or  rather  to  assist  others 
by  reason  of  their  previous  merit:  for  while  living  they 
merited  that  their  prayers  should  be  heard  after  their 
death. 

Or  we  may  reply  that  prayer  is  meritorious  on  one  count, 
and  impetratory  on  another.  For  merit  consists  in  a  certain 
equation  of  the  act  to  the  end  for  which  it  is  intended,  and 
which  is  given  to  it  as  its  reward;  while  the  impetration  of 
a  prayer  depends  on  the  liberality  of  the  person  supplicated. 
Hence  prayer  sometimes,  through  the  liberality  of  the 
person  supplicated,  obtains  that  which  was  not  merited 
either  by  the  suppliant,  or  by  the  person  supplicated  for : 
and  so,  although  the  saints  are  not  in  the  state  of  meriting, 
it  does  not  follow  that  they  are  not  in  the  state  of 
impetrating. 

Reply  Obj.  5.  As  appears  from  the  authority  of  Gregory 
quoted  above  (ad  3),  the  saints  and  angels  will  nothing  but 
what  they  see  to  be  in  the  Divine  will:  and  so  neither  do 
they  pray  for  aught  else.  Nor  is  their  prayer  fruitless,  since 
as  Augustine  says  (De  Prczd.  Sanct.*):  The  prayers  of  the 
saints  profit  the  predestinate,  because  it  is  perhaps  pre 
ordained  that  they  shall  be  saved  through  the  prayers  of 
those  who  intercede  for  them:  and  consequently  God  also 
wills  that  what  the  saints  see  Him  to  will  shall  be  fulfilled 
through  their  prayers. 

*  De  Dono  Persever.  xxii. 


Q.  72.  ART.  3    THE  "SUMMA  THEOLOGICA"  86 

Reply  Obj.  6.  The  suffrages  of  the  Church  for  the  dead 
are  as  so  many  satisfactions  of  the  living  in  lieu  of  the  dead : 
and  accordingly  they  free  the  dead  from  the  punishment 
which  the  latter  have  not  paid.  But  the  saints  in  heaven 
are  not  in  the  state  of  making  satisfaction ;  and  consequently 
the  parallel  fails  between  their  prayers  and  the  suffrages  of 
the  Church. 


QUESTION  LXXIII. 

OF  THE  SIGNS  THAT  WILL  PRECEDE  THE  JUDGMENT. 
(In  Three  Articles.) 

WE  must  next  consider  the  signs  that  will  precede  the 
judgment:  and  under  this  head  there  are  three  points  of 
inquiry:  (i)  Whether  any  signs  will  precede  the  Lord's 
coming  to  judgment  ?  (2)  Whether  in  very  truth  the  sun 
and  moon  will  be  darkened  ?  (3)  Whether  the  powers  of 
the  heavens  will  be  moved  when  the  Lord  shall  come  ? 

FIRST  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  ANY  SIGNS  WILL  PRECEDE  THE  LORD'S  COMING  TO 

JUDGMENT  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  First  Article : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  Lord's  coming  to 
judgment  will  not  be  preceded  by  any  signs.  Because  it  is 
written  (i  Thess.  v.  3) :  When  they  shall  say :  Peace  and 
security  ;  then  shall  sudden  destruction  come  upon  them.  Now 
there  would  be  no  peace  and  security  if  men  were  terrified  by 
previous  signs.  Therefore  signs  will  not  precede  that  coming. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Signs  are  ordained  for  the  manifestation 
of  something.  But  His  coming  is  to  be  hidden;  wherefore 
it  is  written  (i  Thess.  v.  2) :  The  day  of  the  Lord  shall  come 
as  a  thief  in  the  night.  Therefore  signs  ought  not  to 
precede  it. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  time  of  His  first  coming  was  fore 
known  by  the  prophets,  which  does  not  apply  to  His  second 
coming.  Now  no  such  signs  preceded  the  first  coming  of 
Christ.  Therefore  neither  will  they  precede  the  second. 

87 


Q.  73-  ART.  i     THE  "SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  88 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (Luke  xxi.  25):  There  shall 
be  signs  in  the  sun,  and  in  the  moon,  and  in  the  stars,  etc. 

Further,  Jerome*  mentions  fifteen  signs  preceding  the 
judgment.  He  says  that  on  the  first  day  all  the  seas  will 
rise  fifteen  cubits  above  the  mountains;  in  the  second  day 
all  the  waters  will  be  plunged  into  the  depths,  so  that 
scarcely  will  they  be  visible;  on  the  third  day  they  will  be 
restored  to  their  previous  condition;  on  the  fourth  day  all 
the  great  fishes  and  other  things  that  move  in  the  waters 
will  gather  together  and,  raising  their  heads  above  the  sea, 
roar  at  one  another  contentiously ;  on  the  fifth  day,  all  the 
birds  of  the  air  will  gather  together  in  the  fields,  wailing  to 
one  another,  with  neither  bite  nor  sup;  on  the  sixth  day 
rivers  of  fire  will  arise  towards  the  firmament  rushing  together 
from  the  west  to  the  east;  on  the  seventh  day  all  the  stars, 
both  planets  and  fixed  stars,  will  throw  out  fiery  tails  like 
comets ;  on  the  eighth  day  there  will  be  a  great  earthquake, 
and  all  animals  will  be  laid  low;  on  the  ninth  day  all  the 
plants  will  be  bedewed  as  it  were  with  blood;  on  the  tenth 
day  all  stones,  little  and  great,  will  be  divided  into  four 
parts  dashing  against  one  another;  on  the  eleventh  day  all 
hills  and  mountains  and  buildings  will  be  reduced  to  dust; 
on  the  twelfth  day  all  animals  will  come  from  forest  and 
mountain  to  the  fields,  roaring  and  tasting  of  nothing;  on 
the  thirteenth  day  all  graves  from  east  to  west  will  open  to 
allow  the  bodies  to  rise  again ;  on  the  fourteenth  day  all  men 
will  leave  their  abode,  neither  understanding  nor  speaking, 
but  rushing  hither  and  thither  like  madmen;  on  the  fifteenth 
day  all  will  die  and  will  rise  again  with  those  who  died  long 
before. 

I  answer  that,  When  Christ  shall  come  to  judge  He  will 
appear  in  the  form  of  glory,  on  account  of  the  authority 
becoming  a  judge.  Now  it  pertains  to  the  dignity  of 
judicial  power  to  have  certain  signs  that  induce  people  to 
reverence  and  subjection:  and  consequently  many  signs  will 
precede  the  advent  of  Christ  when  He  shall  come  to  judg- 

*  S.  Peter  Damian,  Opuscul.  xlix.  4.  He  quotes  S.  Jerome,  but 
the  reference  is  not  known. 


89  SIGNS  PRECEDING  JUDGMENT    Q.  73-  ART.  i 

ment,  in  order  that  the  hearts  of  men  be  brought  to  sub 
jection  to  the  coming  judge,  and  be  prepared  for  the  judg 
ment,  being  forewarned  by  those  signs.  But  it  is  not  easy 
to  know  what  these  signs  may  be:  for  the  signs  of  which 
we  read  in  the  gospels,  as  Augustine  says,  writing  to  Hesy- 
chius  about  the  end  of  the  world  (Ep.  Ixxx.),  refer  not  only 
to  Christ's  coming  to  judgment,  but  also  to  the  time  of  the 
sack  of  Jerusalem,  and  to  the  coming  of  Christ  in  ceaselessly 
visiting  His  Church.  So  that,  perhaps,  if  we  consider  them 
carefully,  we  shall  find  that  none  of  them  refers  to  the  coming 
advent,  as  he  remarks:  because  these  signs  that  are  men 
tioned  in  the  gospels,  such  as  wars,  fears,  and  so  forth,  have 
been  from  the  beginning  of  the  human  race :  unless  perhaps 
we  say  that  at  that  time  they  will  be  more  prevalent: 
although  it  is  uncertain  in  what  degree  this  increase  will 
foretell  the  imminence  of  the  advent.  The  signs  mentioned 
by  Jerome  are  not  asserted  by  him;  he  merely  says  that  he 
found  them  written  in  the  annals  of  the  Hebrews:  and, 
indeed,  they  contain  very  little  likelihood. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  According  to  Augustine  (Ad  Hesych.  ;  loc. 
cit.)  towards  the  end  of  the  world  there  will  be  a  general 
persecution  of  the  good  by  the  wicked :  so  that  at  the  same 
time  some  will  fear,  namely  the  good,  and  some  will  be  secure, 
namely  the  wicked.  The  words:  When  they  shall  say: 
Peace  and  security,  refer  to  the  wicked,  who  will  pay  little 
heed  to  the  signs  of  the  coming  judgment :  while  the  words 
of  Luke  xxi.  26,  men  withering  away,  etc.,  should  be  referred 
to  the  good. 

We  may  also  reply  that  all  these  signs  that  will  happen 
about  the  time  of  the  judgment  are  reckoned  to  occur 
within  the  time  occupied  by  the  judgment,  so  that  the 
judgment  day  contains  them  all.  Wherefore  although  men 
be  terrified  by  the  signs  appearing  about  the  judgment  day, 
yet  before  those  signs  begin  to  appear  the  wicked  will  think 
themselves  to  be  in  peace  and  security,  after  the  death  of 
Antichrist  and  before  the  coming  of  Christ,  seeing  that  the 
world  is  not  at  once  destroyed,  as  they  thought  hitherto. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  said  to  come  as  a 


Q.  73- ART.  2    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA"  90 

thief,  because  the  exact  time  is  not  known,  since  it  will  not 
be  possible  to  know  it  from  those  signs:  although,  as  we 
have  already  said,  all  these  most  manifest  signs  which  will 
precede  the  judgment  immediately  may  be  comprised 
under  the  judgment  day. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  At  His  first  advent  Christ  came  secretly, 
although  the  appointed  time  was  known  beforehand  by  the 
prophets.  Hence  there  was  no  need  for  such  signs  to 
appear  at  His  first  coming,  as  will  appear  at  His  second 
advent,  when  He  will  come  openly,  although  the  appointed 
time  is  hidden. 

SECOND  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  TOWARDS  THE  TIME  OF  THE  JUDGMENT  THE  SUN 
AND  MOON  WILL  BE  DARKENED  IN  VERY  TRUTH  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Second  Article  : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  towards  the  time  of  the 
judgment  the  sun  and  moon  will  be  darkened  in  very  truth. 
For,  as  Rabanus  says,  commenting  on  Matth.  xxiv.  29, 
nothing  hinders  us  from  gathering  that  the  sun,  moon,  and 
stars  will  then  be  deprived  of  their  light,  as  we  know  happened 
to  the  sun  at  the  time  of  our  Lord's  passion. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  The  light  of  the  heavenly  bodies  is 
directed  to  the  generation  of  inferior  bodies,  because  by  its 
means  and  not  only  by  their  movement  they  act  upon  this 
lower  world,  as  Averroes  says  (De  Subst.  Orbis.}.  But 
generation  will  cease  then.  Therefore  neither  will  light 
remain  in  the  heavenly  bodies. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  According  to  some  the  inferior  bodies 
will  be  cleansed  of  the  qualities  by  which  they  act.  Now 
heavenly  bodies  act  not  only  by  movement,  but  also  by  light, 
as  stated  above  (Obj.  2).  Therefore  as  the  movement  of 
heaven  will  cease,  so  will  the  light  of  the  heavenly  bodies. 

On  the  contrary,  According  to  astronomers  the  sun  and 
moon  cannot  be  eclipsed  at  the  same  time.  But  this  darken 
ing  of  the  sun  and  moon  is  stated  to  be  simultaneous,  when 
the  Lord  shall  come  to  judgment.  Therefore  the  darkening 
will  not  be  in  very  truth  due  to  a  natural  eclipse. 


9i  SIGNS  PRECEDING  JUDGMENT   Q.  73- ART.  2 

Further,  It  is  not  seemly  for  the  same  to  be  the  cause  of 
a  thing's  failing  and  increasing.  Now  when  our  Lord  shall 
come  the  light  of  the  luminaries  will  increase  according  to 
Isa.  xxx.  26,  The  light  of  the  moon  shall  be  as  the  light  of  the 
sun,  and  the  light  of  the  sun  shall  be  sevenfold.  Therefore  it 
is  unfitting  for  the  light  of  these  bodies  to  cease  when  our 
Lord  comes. 

/  answer  that,  If  we  speak  of  the  sun  and  moon  in  respect 
of  the  very  moment  of  Christ's  coming,  it  is  not  credible 
that  they  will  be  darkened  through  being  bereft  of  their 
light,  since  when  Christ  comes  and  the  saints  rise  again  the 
whole  world  will  be  renewed,  as  we  shall  state  further  on 
(Q.  LXXIV.).  If,  however,  we  speak  of  them  in  respect 
of  the  time  immediately  preceding  the  judgment,  it  is  pos 
sible  that  by  the  Divine  power  the  sun,  moon,  and  other 
luminaries  of  the  heavens  will  be  darkened,  either  at  various 
times  or  all  together,  in  order  to  inspire  men  with  fear. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Rabanus  is  speaking  of  the  time  preceding 
the  judgment:  wherefore  he  adds  that  when  the  judgment 
day  is  over  the  words  of  Isaias  shall  be  fulfilled. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Light  is  in  the  heavenly  bodies  not  only  for 
the  purpose  of  causing  generation  in  these  lower  bodies, 
but  also  for  their  own  perfection  and  beauty.  Hence  it 
does  not  follow  that  where  generation  ceases,  the  light  of  the 
heavenly  bodies  will  cease,  but  rather  that  it  will  increase. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  It  does  not  seem  probable  that  the 
elemental  qualities  will  be  removed  from  the  elements, 
although  some  have  asserted  this.  If,  however,  they  be 
removed,  there  would  still  be  no  parallel  between  them  and 
light,  since  the  elemental  qualities  are  in  opposition  to  one 
another,  so  that  their  action  is  corruptive:  whereas  light  is 
a  principle  of  action  not  by  way  of  opposition,  but  by  way 
of  a  principle  regulating  things  in  opposition  to  one  another 
and  bringing  them  back  to  harmony.  Nor  is  there  a 
parallel  with  the  movement  of  heavenly  bodies,  for  move 
ment  is  the  act  of  that  which  is  imperfect,  wherefore  it  must 
needs  cease  when  the  imperfection  ceases:  whereas  this 
cannot  be  said  of  light. 


Q.  73-  ART.  3    THE  "SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  92 


THIRD  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  VIRTUES  OF  HEAVEN  WILL  BE  MOVED 
WHEN  OUR  LORD  SHALL  COME  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Third  A  rticle  : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  the  virtues  of  heaven 
will  not  be  moved  when  our  Lord  shall  come.  For  the 
virtues  of  heaven  can  denote  only  the  blessed  angels.  Now 
immobility  is  essential  to  blessedness.  Therefore  it  will 
be  impossible  for  them  to  be  moved. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Ignorance  is  the  cause  of  wonder  (Met.i.  2). 
Now  ignorance,  like  fear,  is  far  from  the  angels,  for  as 
Gregory  says  (Dial.  iv. ;  Moral,  xii.),  what  do  they  not  see, 
who  see  Him  Who  sees  all.  Therefore  it  will  be  impossible 
for  them  to  be  moved  with  wonder,  as  stated  in  the  text 
(iv.  Sent.  D.  48). 

Obj.  3.  Further,  All  the  angels  will  be  present  at  the 
Divine  judgment;  wherefore  it  is  stated  (Apoc.  vii.  n): 
All  the  angels  stood  round  about  the  throne.  Now  the  virtues 
denote  one  particular  order  of  angels.  Therefore  it  should 
not  be  said  of  them  rather  than  of  others,  that  they  are 
moved. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (Job  xxvi.  n) :  The  pillars  of 
heaven  tremble,  and  dread  at  His  beck.  Now  the  pillars  of 
heaven  can  denote  only  the  virtues  of  heaven.  Therefore 
the  virtues  of  heaven  will  be  moved. 

Further,  It  is  written  (Matth.  xxiv.  29) :  The  stars  shall 
fall  from  heaven,  and  the  virtues  (Douay, — powers)  of  heaven 
shall  be  moved. 

I  answer  that,  Virtue  is  twofold  as  applied  to  the  angels,* 
as  Dionysius  states  (Ccel.  Hier.  xi.).  For  sometimes  the 
name  of  virtues  is  appropriated  to  one  order,  which  accord 
ing  to  him,  is  the  middle  order  of  the  middle  hierarchy,  but 
according  to  Gregory  (Horn,  in  Ev.  xxxiv.)  is  the  highest 
order  of  the  lowest  hierarchy.  In  another  sense  it  is  em 
ployed  to  denote  all  the  heavenly  spirits  in  general.  In 

*  Cf.  P.  I.,  Q.  CVIIL,  A.  5,  ad  i. 


93  SIGNS  PRECEDING  JUDGMENT    Q.  73-  ART.  3 

the  question  at  issue  it  may  be  taken  either  way.  For  in 
the  text  (loc.  cit.)  it  is  explained  according  to  the  second 
acceptation,  so  as  to  denote  all  the  angels:  and  then  they 
are  said  to  be  moved  through  wonder  at  the  renewing  of 
the  world,  as  stated  in  the  text.  It  can  also  be  explained 
in  reference  to  virtue  as  the  name  of  a  particular  order; 
and  then  that  order  is  said  to  be  moved  more  than  the  others 
by  reason  of  the  effect,  since  according  to  Gregory  (loc. 
cit.)  we  ascribe  to  that  order  the  working  of  miracles  which 
especially  will  be  worked  about  that  time :  or  again,  because 
that  order — since,  according  to  Dionysius  (loc.  cit.),  it  belongs 
to  the  middle  hierarchy — is  not  limited  in  its  power,  where 
fore  its  ministry  must  needs  regard  universal  causes.  Conse 
quently  the  proper  office  of  the  virtues  is  seemingly  to  move 
the  heavenly  bodies  which  are  the  cause  of  what  happens 
in  nature  here  below.  And  again  the  very  name  denotes 
this,  since  they  are  called  the  virtues  of  heaven.  Accordingly 
they  will  be  moved  then,  because  they  will  no  more  produce 
their  effect,  by  ceasing  to  move  the  heavenly  bodies:  even 
as  the  angels  who  are  appointed  to  watch  over  men  will  no 
longer  fulfil  the  office  of  guardians. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  This  movement  changes  nothing  pertaining 
to  their  state;  but  refers  either  to  their  effects  which  may 
vary  without  any  change  on  their  part,  or  to  some  new 
consideration  of  things  which  hitherto  they  were  unable 
to  see  by  means  of  their  concreated  species,  which  change 
of  thought  is  not  taken  from  them  by  their  state  of  blessed 
ness.  Hence  Augustine  says  (De  Trin.  iii.)  that  God  moves 
the  spiritual  creature  through  time. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Wonder  is  wont  to  be  about  things  surpass 
ing  our  knowledge  or  ability :  and  accordingly  the  virtues  of 
heaven  will  wonder  at  the  Divine  power  doing  such  things, 
in  so  far  as  they  fail  to  do  or  comprehend  them.  In  this 
sense  the  blessed  Agnes  said  that  the  sun  and  moon  wonder 
at  His  beauty :  and  ihis  does  not  imply  ignorance  in  the 
angels,  but  removes  the  comprehension  of  God  from  them. 

The  Reply  to  the  Third  Objection  is  clear  from  what  has 
been  said. 


QUESTION  LXXIV. 

OF  THE  FIRE  OF  THE  FINAL  CONFLAGRATION. 

(In  Nine  Articles.) 

WE  must  now  consider  the  fire  of  the  final  conflagration: 
and  under   this   head   there   are   nine   points   of   inquiry: 

(1)  Whether  any  cleansing  of  the  world  is  to  take  place  ? 

(2)  Whether  it  will  be  effected  by  fire  ?     (3)  Whether  that 
fire  is  of  the  same  species  as  elemental  fire  ?     (4)  Whether 
that  fire  will  cleanse  also  the  higher  heavens  ?    (5)  Whether 
that  fire  will  consume  the  other  elements  ?    (6)  Whether  it 
will  cleanse  all  the  elements  ?     (7)  Whether  that  fire  pre 
cedes  or  follows  the  judgment  ?    (8)  Whether  men  are  to 
be  consumed  by  that  fire  ?     (9)  Whether  the  wicked  will 
be  involved  therein  ? 

FIRST  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  THE  WORLD  IS  TO  BE  CLEANSED  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  First  Article : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  there  is  not  to  be  any 
cleansing  of  the  world.  For  only  that  which  is  unclean 
needs  cleansing.  Now  God's  creatures  are  not  unclean, 
wherefore  it  is  written  (Acts  x.  15):  That  which  God  hath 
cleansed,  do  not  thou  call  common,  i.e.  unclean.  Therefore 
the  creatures  of  the  world  shall  not  be  cleansed. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  According  to  Divine  justice  cleansing  is 
directed  to  the  removal  of  the  uncleanness  of  sin,  as  in- 
stanced  in  the  cleansing  after  death.  But  there  can  be  no 
stain  of  sin  in  the  elements  of  this  world.  Therefore,  seem 
ingly,  they  need  not  to  be  cleansed. 

94 


95  THE  FINAL  CONFLAGRATION    Q.  74-  ART.  i 

Obj.  3.  Further,  A  thing  is  said  to  be  cleansed  when  any 
foreign  matter  that  depreciates  it  is  removed  therefrom: 
for  the  removal  of  that  which  ennobles  a  thing  is  not  called 
a  cleansing,  but  rather  a  diminishing.  Now  it  pertains  to 
the  perfection  and  nobility  of  the  elements  that  something 
of  a  foreign  nature  is  mingled  with  them,  since  the  form  of 
a  mixed  body  is  more  noble  than  the  form  of  a  simple  body. 
Therefore  it  would  seem  nowise  fitting  that  the  elements  of 
this  world  can  possibly  be  cleansed. 

On  the  contrary,  All  renewal  is  effected  by  some  kind  of 
cleansing.  But  the  elements  will  be  renewed;  hence  it  is 
written  (Apoc.  xxi.  i) :  I  saw  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  : 
for  the  first  heaven  and  the  first  earth  was  gone.  Therefore  the 
elements  shall  be  cleansed. 

Further,  a  gloss*  on  i  Cor.  vii.  31,  The  fashion  of  this 
earth  passeth  away,  says:  The  beauty  of  this  world  will 
perish  in  the  burning  of  worldly  flames.  Therefore  the  same 
conclusion  follows. 

/  answer  that,  Since  the  world  was,  in  a  way,  made  for 
man's  sake,  it  follows  that,  when  man  shall  be  glorified  in 
the  body,  the  other  bodies  of  the  world  shall  also  be  changed 
to  a  better  state,  so  that  it  is  rendered  a  more  fitting  place 
for  him  and  more  pleasant  to  look  upon.  Now  in  order 
that  man  obtain  the  glory  of  the  body,  it  behoves  first  of  all 
those  things  to  be  removed  which  are  opposed  to  glory. 
There  are  two,  namely  the  corruption  and  stain  of  sin, — 
because  according  to  i  Cor.  xv.  50,  neither  shall  corruption 
possess  incorruption,  and  all  the  unclean  shall  be  without  the 
city  of  glory  (Apoc.  xxii.  15), — and  again,  the  elements 
require  to  be  cleansed  from  the  contrary  dispositions,  ere 
they  be  brought  to  the  newness  of  glory,  proportionately 
to  what  we  have  said  with  regard  to  man.  Now  although, 
properly  speaking,  a  corporeal  thing  cannot  be  the  sub 
ject  of  the  stain  of  sin,  nevertheless,  on  account  of  sin 
corporeal  things  contract  a  certain  unfittingness  for  being 
appointed  to  spiritual  purposes;  and  for  this  reason  we 
find  that  places  where  crimes  have  been  committed  are 
*  S.  Augustine,  De  Civ.  Dei,  xx.  16. 


Q.  74.  ART.  i     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  96 

reckoned  unfit  for  the  performance  of  sacred  actions  therein, 
unless  they  be  cleansed  beforehand.  Accordingly  that  part 
of  the  world  which  is  given  to  our  use  contracts  from  men's 
sins  a  certain  unfitness  for  being  glorified,  wherefore  in  this 
respect  it  needs  to  be  cleansed.  In  like  manner  with  regard 
to  the  intervening  space,  on  account  of  the  contact  of  the 
elements,  there  are  many  corruptions,  generations  and 
alterations  of  the  elements,  which  diminish  their  purity: 
wherefore  the  elements  need  to  be  cleansed  from  these  also, 
so  that  they  be  fit  to  receive  the  newness  of  glory. 

Reply  Obj.  I.  When  it  is  asserted  that  every  creature  of 
God  is  clean  we  are  to  understand  this  as  meaning  that  its 
substance  contains  no  alloy  of  evil,  as  the  Manichees  main 
tained,  saying  that  evil  and  good  are  two  substances  in  some 
places  severed  from  one  another,  in  others  mingled  together. 
But  it  does  not  exclude  a  creature  from  having  an  admixture 
of  a  foreign  nature,  which  in  itself  is  also  good,  but  is  incon 
sistent  with  the  perfection  of  that  creature.  Nor  does  this 
prevent  evil  from  being  accidental  to  a  creature,  although 
not  mingled  with  it  as  part  of  its  substance. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Although  corporeal  elements  cannot  be  the 
subject  of  sin,  nevertheless,  from  the  sin  that  is  committed 
in  them  they  contract  a  certain  unfitness  for  receiving  the 
perfection  of  glory. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  form  of  a  mixed  body  and  the  form  of 
an  element  may  be  considered  in  two  ways:  either  as 
regards  the  perfection  of  the  species,  and  thus  a  mixed  body 
is  more  perfect, — or  as  regards  their  continual  endurance; 
and  thus  the  simple  body  is  more  noble,  because  it  has  not 
in  itself  the  cause  of  corruption,  unless  it  be  corrupted  by 
something  extrinsic :  whereas  a  mixed  body  has  in  itself  the 
cause  of  its  corruption,  namely  the  composition  of  con 
traries.  Wherefore  a  simple  body,  although  it  be  corruptible 
in  part  is  incorruptible  as  a  whole,  which  cannot  be  said  of  a 
mixed  body.  And  since  incorruption  belongs  to  the  per 
fection  of  glory,  it  follows  that  the  perfection  of  a  simple  is 
more  in  keeping  with  the  perfection  of  glory,  than  the  per 
fection  of  a  mixed  body,  unless  the  mixed  body  has  also  in 


97  THE  FINAL  CONFLAGRATION    Q.  74-  ART.  2 

itself  some  principle  of  incorruption,  as  the  human  body  has, 
the  form  of  which  is  incorruptible.  Nevertheless,  although 
a  mixed  body  is  somewhat  more  noble  than  a  simple  body,  a 
simple  body  that  exists  by  itself  has  a  more  noble  being  than 
if  it  exist  in  a  mixed  body,  because  in  a  mixed  body  simple 
bodies  are  somewhat  in  potentiality,  whereas,  existing  by 
themselves,  they  are  in  their  ultimate  perfection. 

SECOND  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  CLEANSING  OF  THE  WORLD  WILL  BE 
EFFECTED  BY  FIRE  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Second  Article  : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  this  cleansing  will  not 
be  effected  by  fire.  For  since  fire  is  a  part  of  the  world,  it 
needs  to  be  cleansed  like  the  other  parts.  Now  the  same 
tiling  should  not  be  both  cleanser  and  cleansed.  Therefore 
it  would  seem  that  the  cleansing  will  not  be  by  fire. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Just  as  fire  has  a  cleansing  virtue  so  has 
water.  Since  then  all  things  are  not  capable  of  being 
cleansed  by  fire,  and  some  need  to  be  cleansed  by  water, — 
which  distinction  is  moreover  observed  by  the  old  law, — it 
would  seem  that  fire  will  not  at  any  rate  cleanse  all 
tilings. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  This  cleansing  would  seem  to  consist  in 
purifying  the  parts  of  the  world  by  separating  them  from 
one  another.  Now  the  separation  of  the  parts  of  the  world 
from  one  another  at  the  world's  beginning  was  effected  by 
God's  power  alone,  for  the  work  of  distinction  was  carried 
out  by  that  power :  wherefore  Anaxagoras  asserted  that  the 
separation  was  effected  by  the  act  of  the  intellect  which 
moves  all  things  (cf.  Arist.  Phys.  viii.,  text.  77).  Therefore 
it  would  seem  that  at  the  end  of  the  world  the  cleansing  will 
be  done  immediately  by  God  and  not  by  fire. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (Ps.  xlix.  3) :  A  fire  shall 
burn  before  Him,  and  a  mighty  tempest  shall  be  around  Him  ; 
and  afterwards  in  reference  to  the  judgment  (verse  4) :  He 
shall  call  heaven  from  above,  and  the  earth  to  judge  His  people. 

III.  6  n 


Q.  74- ART.  2    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGTC A  "  98 

Therefore  it  would  seem  that  the  final  cleansing  of  the  world 
will  be  by  means  of  fire. 

Further,  It  is  written  (2  Pet.  iii.  12) :  The  heavens  being  on 
fire  will  be  dissolved,  and  the  elements  shall  melt  with  the  burn 
ing  heat.  Therefore  this  cleansing  will  be  effected  by  fire. 

/  answer  that,  As  stated  above  (A.  i)  this  cleansing  of  the 
world  will  remove  from  it  the  stain  contracted  from  sin, 
and  the  impurity  resulting  from  mixture,  and  will  be  a  dis 
position  to  the  perfection  of  glory ;  and  consequently  in  this 
threefold  respect  it  will  be  most  fitting  for  it  to  be  effected 
by  fire.  First,  because  since  fire  is  the  most  noble  of  the 
elements,  its  natural  properties  are  more  like  the  properties 
of  glory,  and  this  is  especially  clear  in  regard  to  light. 
Secondly,  because  fire,  on  account  of  the  efficacy  of  its  active 
virtue,  is  not  as  susceptible  as  the  other  elements  to  the 
admixture  of  a  foreign  matter.  Thirdly,  because  the  sphere 
of  fire  is  far  removed  from  our  abode ;  nor  are  we  so  familiar 
with  the  use  of  fire  as  with  that  of  earth,  water,  and  air,  so 
that  it  is  not  so  liable  to  depreciation.  Moreover,  it  is  most 
efficacious  in  cleansing  and  in  separating  by  a  process  of 
rarefaction. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Fire  is  not  employed  by  us  in  its  proper 
matter  (since  thus  it  is  far  removed  from  us),  but  only  in  a 
foreign  matter:  and  in  this  respect  it  will  be  possible  for 
the  world  to  be  cleansed  by  fire  as  existing  in  its  pure  state. 
But  in  so  far  as  it  has  an  admixture  of  some  foreign  matter 
it  will  be  possible  for  it  to  be  cleansed;  and  thus  it  will  be 
cleanser  and  cleansed  under  different  aspects;  and  this  is 
not  unreasonable. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  first  cleansing  of  the  world  by  the  deluge 
regarded  only  the  stain  of  sin.  Now  the  sin  which  was 
most  prevalent  then  was  the  sin  of  concupiscence,  and  con 
sequently  it  was  fitting  that  the  cleansing  should  be  by 
means  of  its  contrary,  namely  water.  But  the  second 
cleansing  regards  both  the  stain  of  sin  and  the  impurity  of 
mixture,  and  in  respect  of  both  it  is  more  fitting  for  it  to 
be  effected  by  fire  than  by  water.  For  the  power  of  water 
tends  to  unite  rather  than  to  separate;  wherefore  the 


99  THE  FINAL  CONFLAGRATION     Q.  74-  ART.  3 

natural  impurity  of  the  elements  could  not  be  removed  by 
water  as  by  fire.  Moreover,  at  the  end  of  the  world  the 
prevalent  sin  will  be  that  of  tepidity,  as  though  the  world 
were  already  growing  old,  because  then,  according  to 
Matth.  xxiv.  12,  the  charity  of  many  shall  grow  cold,  and 
consequently  the  cleansing  will  then  be  fittingly  effected  by 
fire.  Nor  is  there  any  thing  that  cannot  in  some  way  be 
cleansed  by  fire :  some  things,  however,  cannot  be  cleansed 
by  fire  without  being  destroyed  themselves,  such  as  cloths 
and  wooden  vessels,  and  these  the  Law  ordered  to  be 
cleansed  with  water;  yet  all  these  things  will  be  finally 
destroyed  by  fire. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  By  the  work  of  distinction  things  received 
different  forms  whereby  they  are  distinct  from  one  another : 
and  consequently  this  could  only  be  done  by  Him  Who  is 
the  author  of  nature.  But  by  the  final  cleansing  things 
will  be  restored  to  the  purity  wherein  they  were  created, 
wherefore  created  nature  will  be  able  to  minister  to  its 
Creator  to  this  effect;  and  for  this  reason  is  a  creature  em 
ployed  as  a  minister,  that  it  is  ennobled  thereby. 

THIRD  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  FIRE  WHEREBY  THE  WORLD  WILL  BE  CLEANSED 
WILL  BE  OF  THE  SAME  SPECIES  WITH  ELEMENTAL  FIRE  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Third  A  rticle  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  fire  in  question  is  not 
of  the  same  species  as  elemental  fire.  For  nothing  consumes 
itself.  But  that  fire  will  consume  the  four  elements  accord 
ing  to  a  gloss  on  a  Pet.  iii.  12.  Therefore  that  fire  will  not 
be  of  the  same  species  as  elemental  fire. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  As  power  is  made  known  by  operation, 
so  is  nature  made  known  by  power.  Now  that  fire  will 
have  a  different  power  from  the  fire  which  is  an  element: 
because  it  will  cleanse  the  universe,  whereas  this  fire  cannot 
do  that.  Therefore  it  will  not  be  of  the  same  species  as  this. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  In  natural  bodies  those  that  are  of  the 
same  species  have  the  same  movement.  But  that  fire  will 


Q.  74-  ART.  3    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA "  100 

have  a  different  movement  from  the  fire  that  is  an  element, 
because  it  will  move  in  all  directions  so  as  to  cleanse  the 
whole.  Therefore  it  is  not  of  the  same  species. 

On  the  contrary,  Augustine  says  (De  Civ.  Dei,  XX.),  and  his 
words  are  contained  in  a  gloss  on  i  Cor.  vii.  31,  that  the 
fashion  of  this  world  will  perish  in  the  burning  of  worldly 
flames.  Therefore  that  fire  will  be  of  the  same  nature  as 
the  fire  which  is  now  in  the  world. 

Further,  Just  as  the  future  cleansing  is  to  be  by  fire,  so 
was  the  past  cleansing  by  water;  and  they  are  both  com 
pared  to  one  another,  2  Pet.  iii.  5.  Now  in  the  first  cleansing 
the  water  was  of  the  same  species  with  elemental  water. 
Therefore  in  like  manner  the  fire  of  the  second  cleansing  will 
be  of  the  same  species  with  elemental  fire. 

I  answer  that,  We  meet  with  three  opinions  on  this  ques 
tion.  For  some  say  that  the  element  of  fire  which  is  in  its 
own  sphere  will  come  down  to  cleanse  the  world:  and  they 
explain  this  descent  by  way  of  multiplication,  because  the 
fire  will  spread  through  finding  combustible  matter  on  all 
sides.  And  this  will  result  all  the  more  then,  since  the 
virtue  of  the  fire  will  be  raised  over  all  the  elements.  Against 
this,  however,  would  seem  to  be  not  only  the  fact  that  this 
fire  will  come  down,  but  also  the  statement  of  the  saints 
that  it  will  rise  up;  thus  (2  Pet.  iii.  10)  it  is  declared  that 
the  fire  of  the  judgment  will  rise  as  high  as  the  waters  of 
the  deluge;  whence  it  would  seem  to  follow  that  this  fire 
is  situated  towards  the  middle  of  the  place  of  generation. 
Hence  others  say  that  this  fire  will  be  generated  towards 
the  intervening  space  through  the  focussing  together  of  the 
rays  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  just  as  we  see  them  focussed 
together  in  a  burning-glass;  for  at  that  time  in  lieu  of 
glasses  there  will  be  concave  clouds,  on  which  the  rays  will 
strike.  But  this  again  does  not  seem  probable:  for  since 
the  effects  of  heavenly  bodies  depend  on  certain  fixed 
positions  and  aspects,  if  this  fire  resulted  from  the  virtue  of 
the  heavenly  bodies,  the  time  of  this  cleansing  would  be 
known  to  those  who  observe  the  movements  of  the  stars, 
and  this  is  contrary  to  the  authority  of  Scripture.  Conse- 


ioi  THE  FINAL  CONFLAGRATION    Q.  74-  ART.  3 

quently  others,  following  Augustine,  say  that  just  as  the 
deluge  resulted  from  an  outpouring  of  the  waters  of  the  world, 
so  the  fashion  of  this  world  will  perish  by  a  burning  of  worldly 
flames  (De  Civ.  Dei,  xx.).  This  burning  is  nothing  else  but 
the  assembly  of  all  those  lower  and  higher  causes  that  by 
their  nature  have  a  kindling  virtue:  and  this  assembly  will 
take  place  not  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things,  but  by  the 
Divine  power :  and  from  all  these  causes  thus  assembled  the 
fire  that  will  burn  the  surface  of  this  world  will  result.  If 
we  consider  aright  these  opinions,  we  shall  find  that  they 
differ  as  to  the  cause  producing  this  fire  and  not  as  to  its 
species.  For  fire,  whether  produced  by  the  sun  or  by  some 
lower  heating  cause,  is  of  the  same  species  as  fire  in  its  own 
sphere,  except  in  so  far  as  the  former  has  some  admixture 
of  foreign  matter.  And  this  will  of  necessity  be  the  case 
then,  since  fire  cannot  cleanse  a  thing,  unless  this  become 
its  matter  in  some  way.  Hence  we  must  grant  that  the 
fire  in  question  is  simply  of  the  same  species  as  ours. 

Reply  Obj.  I.  The  fire  in  question,  although  of  the  same 
species  as  ours,  is  not  identically  the  same.  Now  we  see 
that  of  two  fires  of  the  same  species  one  destroys  the  other, 
namely  the  greater  destroys  the  lesser,  by  consuming  its 
matter.  In  like  manner  that  fire  will  be  able  to  destroy 
our  fire. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Just  as  an  operation  that  proceeds  from 
the  virtue  of  a  thing  is  an  indication  of  that  virtue,  so  is 
its  virtue  an  indication  of  its  essence  or  nature,  if  it  proceed 
from  the  essential  principles  of  the  thing.  But  an  operation 
that  does  not  proceed  from  the  virtue  of  the  operator  does 
not  indicate  its  virtue.  This  appears  in  instruments:  for 
the  action  of  an  instrument  shows  forth  the  virtue  of  the 
mover  rather  than  that  of  the  instrument,  since  it  shows 
forth  the  virtue  of  the  agent  in  so  far  as  the  latter  is  the 
first  principle  of  the  action,  whereas  it  does  not  show  forth 
the  virtue  of  the  instrument,  except  in  so  far  as  it  is  suscep 
tive  of  the  influence  of  the  principal  agent  as  moving  that 
instrument.  In  like  manner  a  virtue  that  does  not  proceed 
from  the  essential  principles  of  a  thing  does  not  indicate 


Q.  74- ART.  4    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  102 

the  nature  of  that  thing  except  in  the  point  of  susceptibility. 
Thus  the  virtue  whereby  hot  water  can  heat  is  no  indication 
of  the  nature  of  water  except  in  the  point  of  its  being  recep 
tive  of  heat.  Consequently  nothing  prevents  water  that 
has  this  virtue  from  being  of  the  same  species  as  water  that 
has  it  not.  In  like  manner  it  is  not  unreasonable  that  this 
fire,  which  will  have  the  power  to  cleanse  the  surface  of  the 
world,  will  be  of  the  same  species  as  the  fire  to  which  we  are 
used,  since  the  heating  power  therein  arises,  not  from  its 
essential  principles,  but  from  the  divine  power  or  operation : 
whether  we  say  that  this  power  is  an  absolute  quality,  such 
as  heat  in  hot  water,  or  a  kind  of  intention  as  we  have  ascribed 
to  instrumental  virtue  (iv.  Sent.  D.  i,  qu.  i,  A.  4).*  The 
latter  is  more  probable  since  that  fire  will  not  act  save  as  the 
instrument  of  the  Divine  power. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Of  its  own  nature  fire  tends  only  upwards; 
but  in  so  far  as  it  pursues  its  matter,  which  it  requires  when 
it  is  outside  its  own  sphere,  it  follows  the  site  of  combustible 
matter.  Accordingly  it  is  not  unreasonable  for  it  to  take 
a  circular  or  a  downward  course,  especially  in  so  far  as  it 
acts  as  the  instrument  of  the  Divine  power. 

FOURTH  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  THAT  FIRE  WILL  CLEANSE  ALSO  THE  HIGHER 

HEAVENS  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Fourth  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  that  fire  will  cleanse  also 
the  higher  heavens.  For  it  is  written  (Ps.  ci.  26,  27): 
The  heavens  are  the  works  of  Thy  hands  :  they  shall  perish 
but  Thou  remainest.  Now  the  higher  heavens  also  are  the 
work  of  God's  hands.  Therefore  they  also  shall  perish  in 
the  final  burning  of  the  world. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  It  is  written  (2  Pet.  iii.  12) :  The  heavens 
being  on  fire  shall  be  dissolved,  and  the  elements  shall  melt 
with  the  burning  heat  of  fire.  Now  the  heavens  that  are 
distinct  from  the  elements  are  the  higher  heavens,  wherein 

*  Cf.  P.  III.,  Q.  LXIL,  A.  4,  ad  i. 


THE  FINAL  CONFLAGRATION    Q.  74-  ART.  4 

the  stars  are  fixed.  Therefore  it  would  seem  that  they  also 
will  be  cleansed  by  that  fire. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  purpose  of  that  fire  will  be  to  remove 
from  bodies  their  indisposition  to  the  perfection  of  glory. 
Now  in  the  higher  heaven  we  find  this  indisposition  both  as 
regards  guilt,  since  the  devil  sinned  there,  and  as  regards 
natural  deficiency,  since  a  gloss  on  Rom.  viii.  22,  We  know 
that  every  creature groaneth  and  is  in  labour  even  until  now,  says : 
All  the  elements  fulfil  their  duty  with  labour  :  even  as  it  is  not 
without  labour  that  the  sun  and  moon  travel  their  appointed 
course.  Therefore  the  higher  heavens  also  will  be  cleansed 
by  that  fire. 

On  the  contrary,  The  heavenly  bodies  are  not  receptive 
of  impressions  from  without. 

Further,  A  gloss  on  2  Thess.  i.  8,  In  a  flame  of  fire  giving 
vengeance,  says:  There  will  be  in  the  world  a  fire  that  shall 
precede  Him,  and  shall  rise  in  the  air  to  the  same  height  as 
did  the  waters  of  the  deluge.  But  the  waters  of  the  deluge 
did  not  rise  to  the  height  of  the  higher  heavens  but  only  15 
cubits  higher  than  the  mountain  summits  (Gen.  vii.  20). 
Therefore  the  higher  heavens  will  not  be  cleansed  by  that  fire. 

I  answer  that,  The  cleansing  of  the  world  will  be  for  the 
purpose  of  removing  from  bodies  the  disposition  contrary  to 
the  perfection  of  glory,  and  this  perfection  is  the  final  con 
summation  of  the  universe :  and  this  disposition  is  to  be  found 
in  all  bodies,  but  differently  in  different  bodies.  For  in 
some  this  indisposition  regards  something  inherent  to  their 
substance:  as  in  these  lower  bodies  which  by  being  mixed 
together  fall  away  from  their  own  purity.  In  others  this 
indisposition  does  not  regard  something  inherent  to  their 
substance ;  as  in  the  heavenly  bodies,  wherein  nothing  is  to 
be  found  contrary  to  the  final  perfection  of  the  universe, 
except  movement  which  is  the  way  to  perfection,  and  this  not 
any  kind  of  movement,  but  only  local  movement,  which 
changes  nothing  intrinsic  to  a  thing,  such  as  its  substance, 
quantity,  or  quality,  but  only  its  place  which  is  extrinsic  to 
it.  Consequently  there  is  no  need  to  take  anything  away 
from  the  substance  of  the  higher  heavens,  but  only  to  set 


Q.  74-  ART.  5    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  104 

its  movement  at  rest.  Now  local  movement  is  brought  to 
rest  not  by  the  action  of  a  counter  agent,  but  by  the  mover 
ceasing  to  move ;  and  therefore  the  heavenly  bodies  will  not 
be  cleansed,  neither  by  fire  nor  by  the  action  of  any  creature, 
but  in  lieu  of  being  cleansed  they  will  be  set  at  rest  by  God's 
will  alone. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  As  Augustine  says  (De  Civ.  Dei,  xx.):  Those 
words  of  the  psalm  refer  to  the  aerial  heavens  which  will  be 
cleansed  by  the  fire  of  the  final  conflagration.  Or  we  may 
reply  that  if  they  refer  also  to  the  higher  heavens,  these  are 
said  to  perish  as  regards  their  movement  whereby  now  they 
are  moved  without  cessation. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Peter  explains  himself  to  which  heavens  he 
refers.  For  before  the  words  quoted,  he  had  said  (verses 
5-7) :  The  heavens  .  .  .  first,  and  the  earth  .  .  .  through 
water  .  .  .  perished  .  .  .  which  .  .  .  now,  by  the  same  word 
are  kept  in  store,  reserved  unto  fire  unto  the  day  of  judgment* 
Therefore  the  heavens  to  be  cleansed  are  those  which  before 
were  cleansed  by  the  waters  of  the  deluge,  namely  the  aerial 
heavens. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  This  labour  and  service  of  the  creature,  that 
Ambrose  ascribes  to  the  heavenly  bodies,  is  nothing  else  than 
the  successive  movements  whereby  they  are  subject  to  time, 
and  the  lack  of  that  final  consummation  which  they  will  attain 
in  the  end.  Nor  did  the  empyrean  heaven  contract  any 
stain  from  the  sin  of  the  demons,  because  they  were  expelled 
from  that  heaven  as  soon  as  they  sinned. 

FIFTH  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THAT  FIRE  WILL  CONSUME  THE  OTHER  ELEMENTS  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Fifth  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  fire  in  question 
will  consume  the  other  elements.  For  a  gloss  of  Bede  on 
2  Pet.  iii.  12  says:  This  exceeding  great  fire  will  engulf  the  four 
elements  whereof  the  world  consists  :  yet  it  will  not  so  engulf  all 
things  that  they  will  cease  to  be,  but  it  will  consume  two  of 

*  The  entire  text  differs  somewhat  from  S.  Thomas's  quotation  ; 
but  the  sense  is  the  same. 


105  THE  FINAL  CONFLAGRATION     Q.  74-  ART.  5 

them  entirely,  and  will  restore  two  of  them  to  a  better  fashion. 
Therefore  it  would  seem  that  at  least  two  of  the  elements 
are  to  be  entirely  destroyed  by  that  fire. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  It  is  written  (Apoc.  xxi.  i):  The  first 
heaven  and  the  first  earth  have  passed  away  and  the  sea  is  no 
more.  Now  the  heaven  here  denotes  the  air,  as  Augustine 
states  (De  Civ.  Dei,  xx.);  and  the  sea  denotes  the  gathering 
together  of  the  waters.  Therefore  it  would  seem  that  these 
three  elements  will  be  wholly  destroyed. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  Fire  does  not  cleanse  except  in  so  far  as 
other  things  are  made  to  be  its  matter.  If,  then,  fire  cleanses 
the  other  elements,  they  must  needs  become  its  matter. 
Therefore  they  must  pass  into  its  nature,  and  consequently 
be  voided  of  their  own  nature. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  The  form  of  fire  is  the  most  noble  of  the 
forms  to  which  elemental  matter  can  attain.  Now  all 
things  will  be  brought  to  the  most  noble  state  by  this 
cleansing.  Therefore  the  other  elements  will  be  wholly 
transformed  into  fire. 

On  the  contrary,  A  gloss  on  i  Cor.  vii.  31,  The  fashion  of 
this  world  passeth  away,  says :  The  beauty,  not  the  substance, 
passeth.  But  the  very  substance  of  the  elements  belongs  to 
the  perfection  of  the  world.  Therefore  the  elements  will 
not  be  consumed  as  to  their  substance. 

Further,  This  final  cleansing  that  will  be  effected  by  fire 
will  correspond  to  the  first  cleansing  which  was  effected  by 
water.  Now  the  latter  did  not  corrupt  the  substance  of  the 
elements.  Therefore  neither  will  the  former  which  will  be 
the  work  of  fire. 

/  answer  that,  There  are  many  opinions  on  this  question. 
For  some  say  that  all  the  elements  will  remain  as  to  their 
matter,  while  all  will  be  changed  as  regards  their  imperfec 
tion  ;  but  that  two  of  them  will  retain  their  respective  sub 
stantial  form,  namely  air  and  earth,  while  two  of  them, 
namely  fire  and  water,  will  not  retain  their  substantial  form 
but  will  be  changed  to  the  form  of  heaven.  In  this  way 
three  elements,  namely  air,  fire,  and  water,  will  be  called 
heaven;  although  air  will  retain  the  same  substantial  form 


Q.  74-  ART.  5    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  106 

as  it  has  now,  since  even  now  it  is  called  heaven.  Where 
fore  (Apoc.  xxi.  i)  only  heaven  and  earth  are  mentioned: 
/  saw,  says  he,  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth.  But  this 
opinion  is  altogether  absurd :  for  it  is  opposed  both  to  philo 
sophy — which  holds  it  impossible  for  the  lower  bodies  to 
be  in  potentiality  to  the  form  of  heaven,  since  they  have 
neither  a  common  matter,  nor  mutual  contrariety — and  to 
theology,  since  according  to  this  opinion  the  perfection  of  the 
universe  with  the  integrity  of  its  parts  will  not  be  assured 
on  account  of  two  of  the  elements  being  destroyed. 

Consequently  heaven  is  taken  to  denote  the  fifth  body, 
while  all  the  elements  are  designated  by  earth,  as  expressed 
in  Ps.  cxlviii.  7,  8,  Praise  the  Lord  from  the  earth  and  after 
wards,  Fire,  hail,  snow,  ice,  etc. 

Hence  others  say  that  all  the  elements  will  remain  as 
to  their  substance,  but  that  their  active  and  passive  qualities 
will  be  taken  from  them:  even  as  they  say  too,  that  in  a 
mixed  body  the  elements  retain  their  substantial  form  with 
out  having  their  proper  qualities,  since  these  are  reduced  to 
a  mean,  and  a  mean  is  neither  of  the  extremes.  And  seem 
ingly  the  following  words  of  Augustine  (De  Civ.  Dei,  xx.) 
would  seem  in  agreement  with  this:  In  this  conflagration 
of  the  world  the  qualities  of  the  corruptible  elements  that  were 
befitting  our  corruptible  bodies  will  entirely  perish  by  fire  : 
and  the  substance  itself  will  have  those  qualities  that  become 
an  immortal  body. 

However,  this  does  not  seem  probable,  for  since  the  proper 
qualities  of  the  elements  are  the  effects  of  their  substantial 
form,  it  seems  impossible,  as  long  as  the  substantial  forms 
remain,  for  the  aforesaid  qualities  to  be  changed,  except  for  a 
time  by  some  violent  action :  thus  in  hot  water  we  see  that 
by  virtue  of  its  species  it  returns  to  the  cold  temperature  which 
it  had  lost  by  the  action  of  fire,  provided  the  species  of  water 
remain.  Moreover,  these  same  elemental  qualities  belong  to 
the  second  perfection  of  the  elements,  as  being  their  proper 
passions :  nor  is  it  probable  that  in  this  final  consummation 
the  elements  will  lose  anything  of  their  natural  perfection. 

Wherefore  it  would  seem  that  the  reply  to  this  question 


107  THE  FINAL  CONFLAGRATION    Q.  74-  ART.  5 

should  be  that  the  elements  will  remain  as  to  their  substance 
and  proper  qualities,  but  that  they  will  be  cleansed  both  from 
the  stain  which  they  contracted  from  the  sins  of  men,  and 
from  the  impurity  resulting  in  them  through  their  mutual 
action  and  passion :  because  when  once  the  movement  of  the 
first  movable  body  ceases,  mutual  action  and  passion  will  be 
impossible  in  the  lower  elements :  and  this  is  what  Augustine 
calls  the  qualities  of  corruptible  elements,  namely  their  un 
natural  dispositions  by  reason  of  which  they  come  near  to 
corruption. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  That  fire  is  said  to  engulf  the  four  elements 
in  so  far  as  in  some  way  it  will  cleanse  them.  But  when  it  is 
said  further  that  it  will  consume  two  entirely,  this  does  not 
mean  that  two  of  the  elements  are  to  be  destroyed  as  to 
their  substance,  but  that  two  will  be  more  changed  from  the 
property  which  they  have  now.  Some  say  that  these  two  are 
fire  and  water  which  excel  the  others  in  their  active  qualities, 
namely  heat  and  cold,  which  are  the  chief  principles  of  cor 
ruption  in  other  bodies;  and  since  then  there  will  be  no  action 
of  fire  and  water  which  surpass  the  others  in  activity,  they 
would  seem  especially  to  be  changed  from  the  virtue  which 
they  have  now.  Others,  however,  say  that  these  two  are 
air  and  water,  on  account  of  the  various  movements  of 
these  two  elements,  which  movements  they  derive  from  the 
movement  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  And  since  these  move 
ments  will  cease  (such  as  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  sea,  and  the 
disturbances  of  winds  and  so  forth),  therefore  these  elements 
especially  will  be  changed  from  the  property  which  they  have 
now. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  As  Augustine  says  (De  Civ.  Dei,  xx.),  when 
it  is  stated :  And  the  sea  is  no  more,  by  the  sea  we  may  under 
stand  the  present  world  of  which  he  had  said  previously 
(xx.  13) :  The  sea  gave  up  the  dead  that  were  in  it.  If,  however, 
the  sea  be  taken  literally  we  must  reply  that  by  the  sea  two 
things  are  to  be  understood,  namely  the  substance  of  the 
waters,  and  their  disposition,  as  containing  salt  and  as  to  the 
movement  of  the  waves.  The  sea  will  remain,  not  as  to  this 
second,  but  as  to  the  first. 


Q.  74-  ART.  6     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  108 

Reply  Obj.  3.  This  fire  will  not  act  save  as  the  instrument 
of  God's  providence  and  power;  wherefore  it  will  not  act 
on  the  other  elements  so  as  to  consume  them  but  only  so  as 
to  cleanse  them.  Nor  is  it  necessary  for  that  which  becomes 
the  matter  of  fire,  to  be  voided  of  its  proper  species  entirely, 
as  instanced  by  incandescent  iron,  which  by  virtue  of  its 
species  that  remains  returns  to  its  proper  and  former  state 
as  soon  as  it  is  taken  from  the  furnace.  It  will  be  the  same 
with  the  elements  after  they  are  cleansed  by  fire. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  In  the  elemental  parts  we  must  consider 
not  only  what  is  befitting  a  part  considered  in  itself,  but  also 
what  is  befitting  it  in  its  relation  to  the  whole.  I  say,  then, 
that  although  water  would  be  more  noble  if  it  had  the  form 
of  fire,  as  likewise  would  earth  and  air,  yet  the  universe 
would  be  more  imperfect,  if  all  elemental  matter  were  to 
assume  the  form  of  fire. 

SIXTH  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  ALL  THE  ELEMENTS  WILL  BE  CLEANSED  BY  THAT 

FIRE  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Second  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  neither  will  all  the  ele 
ments  be  cleansed  by  that  fire.  Because  that  fire,  as  stated 
already  (A.  3),  will  not  rise  higher  than  the  waters  of  the 
deluge.  But  the  waters  of  the  deluge  did  not  reach  to  the 
sphere  of  fire.  Therefore  neither  will  the  element  of  fire  be 
cleansed  by  the  final  cleansing. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  A  gloss  on  Apoc.  xxi.  i,  I  saw  a  new  heaven, 
etc.,  says:  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  transformation  of  the 
air  and  earth  will  be  caused  by  fire  ;  but  it  is  doubtful  about 
water,  since  it  is  believed  to  have  the  power  of  cleansing  itself. 
Therefore  at  least  it  is  uncertain  that  all  the  elements  will  be 
cleansed. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  A  place  where  there  is  an  everlasting  stain 
is  never  cleansed.  Now  there  will  always  be  a  stain  in  hell. 
Since,  then,  hell  is  situated  among  the  elements,  it  would 
seem  that  the  elements  will  not  be  wholly  cleansed. 


109  THE  FINAL  CONFLAGRATION     Q.  74-  ART.  6 

Obj.  4.  Further,  The  earthly  paradise  is  situated  on  the 
earth.  Yet  it  will  not  be  cleansed  by  fire,  since  not  even  the 
waters  of  the  deluge  reached  it,  as  Bede  says  (Comm.  in 
Exod.  v.},  as  is  stated  in  ii.  Sent.  D.  7.  Therefore  it  would 
seem  that  the  elements  will  not  all  be  wholly  cleansed. 

On  the  contrary,  The  gloss  quoted  above  (A.  5,  Obj.  i)  on 
2  Pet.  iii.  12  declares  that  this  fire  will  engulf  the  four  elements. 

I  answer  that,  Some*  say  that  the  fire  in  question  will 
rise  to  the  summit  of  the  space  containing  the  four  elements : 
so  that  the  elements  would  be  entirely  cleansed  both  from 
the  stain  of  sin  by  which  also  the  higher  parts  of  the  elements 
were  infected  (as  instanced  by  the  smoke  of  idolatry 
which  stained  the  higher  regions),  and  again  from  corrup 
tion,  since  the  elements  are  corruptible  in  all  their  parts. 
But  this  opinion  is  opposed  to  the  authority  of  Scripture, 
because  it  is  written  (2  Pet.  iii.  7)  that  those  heavens  are 
kept  in  store  unto  fire,  which  were  cleansed  by  water;  and 
Augustine  says  (De  Civ.  Dei,  xx.)  that  the  same  world  which 
perished  in  the  deluge  is  reserved  unto  fire.  Now  it  is  clear 
that  the  waters  of  the  deluge  did  not  rise  to  the  summit  of 
the  space  occupied  by  the  elements,  but  only  15  cubits 
above  the  mountain  tops;  and  moreover  it  is  known  that 
vapours  or  any  smoke  whatever  rising  from  the  earth  cannot 
pierce  the  entire  sphere  of  fire  so  as  to  reach  its  summit; 
and  so  the  stain  of  sin  did  not  reach  the  aforesaid  space. 
Nor  can  the  elements  be  cleansed  from  corruptibility  by  the 
removal  of  something  that  might  be  consumed  by  fire: 
whereas  it  will  be  possible  for  the  impurities  of  the  elements 
arising  from  their  mingling  together  to  be  consumed  by 
fire.  And  these  impurities  are  chiefly  round  about  the  earth 
as  far  as  the  middle  of  the  air :  wherefore  the  fire  of  the  final 
conflagration  will  cleanse  up  to  that  point,  since  the  waters 
of  the  deluge  rose  to  a  height  which  can  be  approximately 
calculated  from  the  height  of  the  mountains  which  they  sur 
passed  in  a  fixed  measure. 

We  therefore  grant  the  First  Objection. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  reason  for  doubt  is  expressed  in  the  gloss, 
*  S.  Bonaventure,  iv.  Sent.  D.  47,  A.  2,  Q.  3. 


Q.  74.  ART.  7     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  no 

because,  to  wit,  water  is  believed  to  have  in  itself  the  power 
of  cleansing,  yet  not  such  a  power  as  will  be  competent  to  the 
future  state,  as  stated  above  (A.  5;  A.  2,  ad  2). 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  purpose  of  this  cleansing  will  be  chiefly 
to  remove  all  imperfection  from  the  abode  of  the  saints ;  and 
consequently  in  this  cleansing  all  that  is  foul  will  be  brought 
together  to  the  place  of  the  damned:  so  hell  will  not  be 
cleansed,  and  the  dregs  of  the  whole  earth  will  be  brought 
thither,  according  to  Ps.  Ixxiv.  9,  The  dregs  thereof  are  not 
emptied,  all  the  sinners  of  the  earth  shall  drink. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  Although  the  sin  of  the  first  man  was  com 
mitted  in  the  earthly  paradise,  this  is  not  the  place  of  sinners, 
as  neither  is  the  empyrean  heaven :  since  from  both  places, 
man  and  devil  were  expelled  forthwith  after  their  sin.  Con 
sequently  that  place  needs  no  cleansing. 

SEVENTH  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  FIRE  OF  THE  FINAL  CONFLAGRATION  IS  TO 
FOLLOW  THE  JUDGMENT  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Seventh  Article  : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  the  fire  of  the  final  confla 
gration  is  to  follow  the  judgment.  For  Augustine  (De  Civ. 
Del,  xx.)  gives  the  following  order  of  the  things  to  take 
place  at  the  judgment,  saying:  At  this  judgment  we  have 
learnt  that  the  following  things  will  occur.  Elias  the  Thesbite 
will  appear,  the  Jews  will  believe,  Antichrist  will  persecute, 
Christ  will  judge,  the  dead  shall  rise  again,  the  good  shall  be 
separated  from  the  wicked,  the  world  shall  be  set  on  fire  and 
shall  be  renewed.  Therefore  the  burning  will  follow  the  judg 
ment. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Augustine  says  (ibid.} :  After  the  wicked 
have  been  judged,  and  cast  into  everlasting  fire,  the  figure  of 
this  world  will  perish  in  the  furnace  of  worldly  flames.  There 
fore  the  same  conclusion  follows. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  When  the  Lord  comes  to  judgment  He 
will  find  some  men  living,  as  appears  from  the  words  of 
i  Thess.  iv.  16,  where  the  Apostle  speaking  in  their  person, 


in  THE  FINAL  CONFLAGRATION     Q.  74-  ART.  7 

says :  Then  we  who  are  alive,  who  remain  unto  the  coming  of 
the  Lord*  But  it  would  not  be  so,  if  the  burning  of  the 
world  were  to  come  first,  since  they  would  be  destroyed  by  the 
fire:  Therefore  this  fire  will  follow  the  judgment. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  It  is  said  that  our  Lord  will  come  to 
judge  the  earth  by  fire,  and  consequently  the  final  conflagra 
tion  would  seem  to  be  the  execution  of  the  sentence  of 
Divine  judgment.  Now  execution  follows  judgment.  There 
fore  that  fire  will  follow  the  judgment. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (Ps.  xcvi.  3):  A  fire  shall 
go  before  Him. 

Further,  The  resurrection  will  precede  the  judgment, 
else  every  eye  would  not  see  Christ  judging.  Now  the  burn 
ing  of  the  world  will  precede  the  resurrection,  for  the  saints 
who  will  rise  again  will  have  spiritual  and  impassible  bodies, 
so  that  it  will  be  impossible  for  the  fire  to  cleanse  them,  and 
yet  the  text  (iv.  Sent.  D.  47)  quotes  Augustine  (De  Civ.  Dei, 
xx.)  as  saying  that  whatever  needs  cleansing  in  any  way 
shall  be  cleansed  by  that  fire.  Therefore  that  fire  will 
precede  the  judgment. 

I  answer  that,  The  fire  in  question  will  in  reality,  as  regards 
its  beginning,  precede  the  judgment.  This  can  clearly  be 
gathered  from  the  fact  that  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  will 
precede  the  judgment,  since  according  to  I  Thess.  iv.  13-16, 
those  who  have  slept  shall  be  taken  up  .  .  .  in  the  clouds  .  .  . 
into  the  air  .  .  .  to  meet  Christ  coming  to  judgment.  Now 
the  general  resurrection  and  the  glorification  of  the  bodies 
of  the  saints  will  happen  at  the  same  time ;  for  the  saints  in 
rising  again  will  assume  a  glorified  body,  as  evidenced  by 
i  Cor.  xv.  43,  It  is  sown  in  dishonour,  it  shall  rise  in  glory: 
and  at  the  same  time  as  the  saints'  bodies  shall  be  glorified, 
all  creatures  shall  be  renewed,  each  in  its  own  way,  as  appears 
from  the  statement  (Rom.  viii.  21)  that  the  creature  .  .  .  itself 
shall  be  delivered  from  the  servitude  of  corruption  into  the 
liberty  of  the  glory  of  the  children  of  God.  Since  then  the 
burning  of  the  world  is  a  disposition  to  the  aforesaid  renewal, 

*  Vulg., — who  are  left,  shall  be  taken  .  .  .  to  meet  Christ — the 
words  who  remain,  etc.,  are  from  verse  14. 


Q.  74.  ART  8      THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  112 

as  stated  above  (AA.  I,  4);  it  can  clearly  be  gathered  that 
this  burning,  so  far  as  it  shall  cleanse  the  world,  will  precede 
the  judgment,  but  as  regards  a  certain  action  thereof, 
whereby  it  will  engulf  the  wicked,  it  will  follow  the  judgment. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Augustine  is  speaking  not  as  one  who  decides 
the  point,  but  as  expressing  an  opinion.  This  is  clear  from 
his  continuing  thus:  That  all  these  things  are  to  happen  is  a 
matter  of  faith,  but  how  and  in  what  order  we  shall  learn  more 
then  by  experience  of  the  things  themselves  than  now  by  seeking 
a  definite  conclusion  by  arguing  about  them.  Methinks,  how 
ever,  they  will  occur  in  the  order  I  have  given.  Hence  it 
is  clear  that  he  is  speaking  as  offering  his  opinion.  The  same 
answer  applies  to  the  Second  Objection. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  All  men  shall  die  and  rise  again :  yet  those  are 
said  to  be  found  alive  who  will  live  in  the  body  until  the 
time  of  the  conflagration. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  That  fire  will  not  carry  out  the  sentence  of 
the  judge  except  as  regards  the  engulfing  of  the  wicked :  in 
this  respect  it  will  follow  the  judgment. 

EIGHTH  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THAT  FIRE  WILL  HAVE  SUCH  AN  EFFECT  ON  MEN 
AS  IS  DESCRIBED  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Eighth  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  this  fire  will  not  have 
such  an  effect  on  men  as  is  described  in  the  text  (iv.  Sent. 
D.  47).  For  a  thing  is  said  to  be  consumed  when  it  is  re 
duced  to  naught.  Now  the  bodies  of  the  wicked  will  not 
be  reduced  to  naught,  but  will  be  kept  for  eternity,  that 
they  may  bear  an  eternal  punishment.  Therefore  this  fire 
will  not  consume  the  wicked,  as  stated  in  the  text. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  If  it  be  said  that  it  will  consume  the  bodies 
of  the  wicked  by  reducing  them  to  ashes;  on  the  contrary, 
As  the  bodies  of  the  wicked,  so  will  those  of  the  good  be 
brought  to  ashes :  for  it  is  the  privilege  of  Christ  alone  that 
His  flesh  see  not  corruption.  Therefore  it  will  consume 
also  the  good  who  will  then  be  found. 


H3  THE  FINAL  CONFLAGRATION     Q.  74-  ART.  8 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  stain  of  sin  is  more  abundant  in  the 
elements,  as  combining  together  to  the  formation  of  the 
human  body  wherein  is  the  corruption  of  the  fomes*  even 
in  the  good,  than  in  the  elements  existing  outside  the  human 
body.  Now  the  elements  existing  outside  the  human  body 
will  be  cleansed  on  account  of  the  stain  of  sin.  Much  there 
fore  will  the  elements  in  the  human  body  whether  of  the 
good  or  of  the  wicked  need  to  be  cleansed,  and  consequently 
the  bodies  of  both  will  need  to  be  destroyed. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  As  long  as  the  state  of  the  way  lasts  the 
elements  act  in  like  manner  on  the  good  and  the  wicked. 
Now  the  state  of  the  way  will  still  endure  in  that  conflagra 
tion,  since  after  this  state  of  the  way  death  will  not  be 
natural,  and  yet  it  will  be  caused  by  that  fire.  Therefore 
that  fire  will  act  equally  on  good  and  wicked;  and  conse 
quently  it  does  not  seem  that  any  distinction  is  made  between 
them  as  to  their  being  affected  by  that  fire,  as  stated  in  the 
text. 

Obj.  5.  Further,  This  fire  will  have  done  its  work  in  a 
moment  as  it  were.  Yet  there  will  be  many  among  the 
living  in  whom  there  will  be  many  things  to  be  cleansed. 
Therefore  that  fire  will  not  suffice  for  their  cleansing. 

/  answer  that,  This  fire  of  the  final  conflagration,  in  so  far 
as  it  will  precede  the  judgment,  will  act  as  the  instrument 
of  Divine  justice  as  well  as  by  the  natural  virtue  of  fire. 
Accordingly,  as  regards  its  natural  virtue,  it  will  act  in 
like  manner  on  the  wicked  and  good  who  will  be  alive,  by 
reducing  the  bodies  of  both  to  ashes.  But  in  so  far  as  it 
acts  as  the  instrument  of  Divine  justice,  it  will  act  differently 
on  different  people  as  regards  the  sense  of  pain.  For  the 
wicked  will  be  tortured  by  the  action  of  the  fire;  whereas 
the  good  in  whom  there  will  be  nothing  to  cleanse  will  feel 
no  pain  at  all  from  the  fire,  as  neither  did  the  children  in  the 
fiery  furnace  (Dan.  iii.);  although  their  bodies  will  not  be 
kept  whole,  as  were  the  bodies  of  the  children :  and  it  will  be 
possible  by  God's  power  for  their  bodies  to  be  destroyed 
without  their  suffering  pain.  But  the  good,  in  whom  matter 

*  Cf.  I.-IL,  Q.  LXXXIII.,  A.  3;  Q.  XCL,  A.  6. 
in.  6  8 


Q.  74.  ART.  8    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  114 

for  cleansing  will  be  found,  will  suffer  pain  from  that  fire, 
more  or  less  according  to  their  different  merits. 

On  the  other  hand,  as  regards  the  action  which  this  fire 
will  have  after  the  judgment,  it  will  act  on  the  damned  alone, 
since  the  good  will  all  have  impassible  bodies. 

Reply  Obj.  I.  Consumption  there  signifies  being  brought, 
not  to  nothing,  but  to  ashes. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Although  the  bodies  of  the  good  will  be 
reduced  to  ashes  by  the  fire,  they  will  not  suffer  pain  thereby, 
as  neither  did  the  children  in  the  Babylonian  furnace.  In 
this  respect  a  distinction  is  drawn  between  the  good  and  the 
wicked. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  elements  that  are  in  human  bodies, 
even  in  the  bodies  of  the  elect,  will  be  cleansed  by  fire.  But 
this  will  be  done,  by  God's  power,  without  their  suffering 
pain. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  This  fire  will  act  not  only  according  to  the 
natural  power  of  the  element,  but  also  as  the  instrument 
of  Divine  justice. 

Reply  Obj.  5.  There  are  three  reasons  why  those  who  will 
be  found  living  will  be  able  to  be  cleansed  suddenly.  One 
is  because  there  will  be  few  things  in  them  to  be  cleansed, 
since  they  will  be  already  cleansed  by  the  previous  fears 
and  persecutions.  The  second  is  because  they  will  suffer 
pain  both  while  living  and  of  their  own  will :  and  pain  suffered 
in  this  life  voluntarily  cleanses  much  more  than  pain  inflicted 
after  death,  as  in  the  case  of  the  martyrs,  because  if  anything 
needing  to  be  cleansed  be  found  in  them,  it  is  cut  off  by  the 
sickle  of  suffering,  as  Augustine  says  (De  Unic.  Bap.  xiii.), 
although  the  pain  of  martyrdom  is  of  short  duration  in 
comparison  with  the  pain  endured  in  purgatory.  The  third 
is  because  the  heat  will  gain  in  intensity  what  it  loses  in 
shortness  of  time. 


ii5  THE  FINAL  CONFLAGRATION    Q.  74-  ART.  9 

NINTH  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  THAT  FIRE  WILL  ENGULF  THE  WICKED  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Ninth  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  that  fire  will  not  engulf 
the  wicked.  For  a  gloss  on  Mai.  iii.  3,  He  shall  purify  the 
sons  of  Levi,  says  that  it  is  a  fire  consuming  the  wicked  and 
refimng  the  good  ;  and  a  gloss  on  i  Cor.  iii.  13,  Fire  shall  try 
every  man's  work,  says:  We  read  that  there  will  be  a  twofold 
fire,  one  that  will  cleanse  the  elect  and  will  precede  the  judgment, 
another  that  will  torture  the  wicked.  Now  the  latter  is  the 
fire  of  hell  that  shall  engulf  the  wicked,  while  the  former  is 
the  fire  of  the  final  conflagration.  Therefore  the  fire  of  the 
final  conflagration  will  not  be  that  which  will  engulf  the 
wicked. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  That  fire  will  obey  God  in  the  cleansing  of 
the  world :  therefore  it  should  receive  its  reward  like  the  other 
elements,  especially  since  fire  is  the  most  noble  of  the  ele 
ments.  Therefore  it  would  seem  that  it  ought  not  to  be  cast 
into  hell  for  the  punishment  of  the  damned. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  fire  that  will  engulf  the  wicked 
will  be  the  fire  of  hell :  and  this  fire  was  prepared  from  the 
beginning  of  the  world  for  the  damned;  hence  it  is  written 
(Matth.  xxv.  41):  Depart  .  .  .  you  cursed  .  .  .  into  ever 
lasting  fire  which  was  prepared  for  the  devil,  etc.,  and  (Isa. 
xxx.  33) :  Thopheth  is  prepared  from  yesterday,  prepared  by 
the  king,  etc.,  where  a  gloss  observes:  From  yesterday — i.e., 
from  the  beginning — Thopheth — i.e.,  the  valley  of  hell.  But 
this  fire  of  the  final  conflagration  was  not  prepared  from  the 
beginning,  but  will  result  from  the  meeting  together  of  the 
fires  of  the  world.  Therefore  that  fire  is  not  the  fire  of  hell 
which  will  engulf  the  wicked. 

On  the  contrary  are  the  words  of  Ps.  xcvi.  3,  where  it  is  said 
of  this  fire  that  it  shall  burn  His  enemies  round  about. 

Further,  It  is  written  (Dan.  vii.  10):  A  swift  stream  of  fire 
issued  forth  from  before  Him  ;  and  a  gloss  adds,  to  drag  sinners 
into  hell.  Now  the  passage  quoted  refers  to  that  fire  of  which 
we  are  now  speaking,  as  appears  from  a  gloss  which  observes 


Q.  74- ART.  9    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLO GIGA'"  116 

on  the  same  words :  In  order  to  punish  the  wicked  and  cleanse 
the  good.  Therefore  the  fire  of  the  final  conflagration  will  be 
plunged  into  hell  together  with  the  wicked. 

/  answer  that,  The  entire  cleansing  of  the  world  and  the 
renewal  for  the  purpose  of  cleansing  will  be  directed  to  the 
renewal  of  man :  and  consequently  the  cleansing  and  renewal 
of  the  world  must  needs  correspond  with  the  cleansing  and 
renewal  of  mankind.  Now  mankind  will  be  cleansed  in  one 
way  by  the  separation  of  the  wicked  from  the  good :  where 
fore  it  is  said  (Luke  iii.  17):  Whose  fan  is  in  His  hand,  and 
He  mil  purge  His  floor,  and  will  gather  the  wheat,  i.e.  the 
elect,  into  His  barn,  but  the  chaff,  i.e.  the  wicked,  He  will 
burn  with  unquenchable  fire.  Hence  it  will  be  thus  with  the 
cleansing  of  the  world,  so  that  all  that  is  ugly  and  vile  will  be 
cast  with  the  wicked  into  hell,  and  all  that  is  beautiful  and 
noble  will  be  taken  up  above  for  the  glory  of  the  elect :  and 
so  too  will  it  be  with  the  fire  of  that  conflagration,  as  Basil 
says  in  Ps.  xxviii.  7,  The  voice  of  the  Lord  divideth  the  flame  of 
fire,  because  whatever  fire  contains  of  burning  heat  and  gross 
matter  will  go  down  into  hell  for  the  punishment  of  the  wicked  , 
and  whatever  is  subtle  and  lightsome  will  remain  above  for 
the  glory  of  the  elect. 

Reply  Obj.  I.  The  fire  that  will  cleanse  the  elect  before 
the  judgment  will  be  the  same  as  the  fire  that  will  burn  the 
world,  although  some  say  the  contrary.  For  it  is  fitting  that 
man,  being  a  part  of  the  world,  be  cleansed  with  the  same 
fire  as  the  world.  They  are,  however,  described  as  two  fires, 
that  will  cleanse  the  good,  and  torture  the  wicked,  both  in 
reference  to  their  respective  offices,  and  somewhat  in  refer 
ence  to  their  substance :  since  the  substance  of  the  cleansing 
fire  will  not  all  be  cast  into  hell,  as  stated  above. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  This  fire  will  be  rewarded  because  whatever 
it  contains  of  gross  matter  will  be  separated  from  it,  and 
cast  into  hell. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  punishment  of  the  wicked,  even  as  the 
glory  of  the  elect,  will  be  greater  after  the  judgment  than 
before.  Wherefore,  just  as  charity  will  be  added  to  the 
higher  creature  in  order  to  increase  the  glory  of  the  elect, 


117  THE  FINAL  CONFLAGRATION     Q.  74-  ART.  9 

so  too  whatever  is  vile  in  creatures  will  be  thrust  down  into 
hell  in  order  to  add  to  the  misery  of  the  damned.  Conse 
quently  it  is  not  unbecoming  that  another  fire  be  added  to 
the  fire  of  the  damned  that  was  prepared  from  the  beginning 
of  the  world. 


QUESTION  LXXV. 

OF  THE  RESURRECTION. 
(In  Three  Articles.} 

IN  the  next  place  we  must  consider  things  connected  with 
and  accompanying  the  resurrection.  Of  these  the  first  to  be 
considered  will  be  the  resurrection  itself ;  the  second  will  be 
the  cause  of  the  resurrection;  the  third  its  time  and  manner; 
the  fourth  its  term  wherefrom  ;  the  fifth  the  condition  of 
those  who  rise  again. 

Under  the  first  head  there  will  be  three  points  of  inquiry : 

(1)  Whether  there  is  to  be  a  resurrection  of  the  body  ? 

(2)  Whether  it  is  universally  of  all  bodies  ?     (3)  Whether 
it  is  natural  or  miraculous  ? 

FIRST  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  THERE  IS  TO  BE  A  RESURRECTION  OF  THE  BODY  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  First  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  there  is  not  to  be  a  resur 
rection  of  the  body:  for  it  is  written  (Job  xiv.  12):  Man, 
when  he  is  fallen  asleep,  shall  not  rise  again  till  the  heavens 
be  broken.  But  the  heavens  shall  never  be  broken,  since  the 
earth,  to  which  seemingly  this  is  still  less  applicable,  standeth 
for  ever  (Eccles.  i.  4).  Therefore  the  man  that  is  dead  shall 
never  rise  again. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Our  Lord  proves  the  resurrection  by 
quoting  the  words:  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  and  the  God 
of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob.  He  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead 
but  of  the  living  (Matth.  xxii.  32;  Exod.  iii.  6).  But  it  is  clear 
that  when  those  words  were  uttered,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and 

118 


ii9  THE  RESURRECTION  Q.  75-  ART.  i 

Jacob  lived  not  in  body,  but  only  in  the  soul.     Therefore 
there  will  be  no  resurrection  of  bodies  but  only  of  souls. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  Apostle  (i  Cor.  xv.)  seemingly  proves 
the  resurrection  from  the  reward  for  labours  endured  by 
the  saints  in  this  life.  For  if  they  trusted  in  this  life  alone, 
they  would  be  the  most  unhappy  of  all  men.  Now  there  can 
be  sufficient  reward  for  labour  in  the  soul  alone :  since  it  is  not 
necessary  for  the  instrument  to  be  repaid  together  with  the 
worker,  and  the  body  is  the  soul's  instrument.  Wherefore 
even  in  purgatory,  where  souls  will  be  punished  for  what  they 
did  in  the  body,  the  soul  is  punished  without  the  body. 
Therefore  there  is  no  need  to  hold  a  resurrection  of  the  body, 
but  it  is  enough  to  hold  a  resurrection  of  souls,  which  con 
sists  in  their  being  taken  from  the  death  of  sin  and  unhappi- 
ness  to  the  life  of  grace  and  glory. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  The  last  (state)  of  a  thing  is  the  most 
perfect,  since  thereby  it  attains  its  end.  Now  the  most 
perfect  state  of  the  soul  is  to  be  separated  from  the  body, 
since  in  that  state  it  is  more  conformed  to  God  and  the  angels, 
and  is  more  pure,  as  being  separated  from  any  extraneous 
nature.  Therefore  separation  from  the  body  is  its  final 
state,  and  consequently  it  returns  not  from  this  state  to  the 
body,  as  neither  does  a  man  end  in  becoming  a  boy. 

Obj.  5.  Further,  Bodily  death  is  the  punishment  inflicted 
on  man  for  his  own  transgression,  as  appears  from  Gen.  ii., 
even  as  spiritual  death,  which  is  the  separation  of  the  soul 
from  God,  is  inflicted  on  man  for  mortal  sin.  Now  man 
never  returns  to  life  from  spiritual  death  after  receiving  the 
sentence  of  his  damnation.  Therefore  neither  will  there  be 
any  return  from  bodily  death  to  bodily  life,  and  so  there 
will  be  no  resurrection. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (Job  xix.  25-26) :  /  know  that 
my  Redeemer  liveth,  and  in  the  last  day  I  shall  rise  out  of  the 
earth,  and  I  shall  be  clothed  again  with  my  skin,  etc.  There 
fore  there  will  be  a  resurrection  of  the  body. 

Further,  The  gift  of  Christ  is  greater  than  the  sin  of  Adam, 
as  appears  from  Rom.  v.  15.  Now  death  was  brought  in 
by  sin,  for  if  sin  had  not  been,  there  had  been  no  death. 


Q.  75-  ART.  i      THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  120 

Therefore  by  the  gift  of  Christ  man  will  be  restored  from 
death  to  life. 

Further,  The  members  should  be  conformed  to  the  head. 
Now  our  Head  lives  and  will  live  eternally  in  body  and  soul, 
since  Christ  rising  again  from  the  dead  dieth  now  no  more 
(Rom.  vi.  8).  Therefore  men  who  are  His  members  will  live 
in  body  and  soul;  and  consequently  there  must  needs  be  a 
resurrection  of  the  body. 

I  answer  that,  According  to  the  various  opinions  about 
man's  last  end  there  have  been  various  opinions  holding  or 
denying  the  resurrection.  For  man's  last  end  which  all  men 
desire  naturally  is  happiness.  Some  have  held  that  man 
is  able  to  attain  this  end  in  this  life :  wherefore  they  had  no 
need  to  admit  another  life  after  this,  wherein  man  would  be 
able  to  attain  to  his  perfection :  and  so  they  denied  the  resur 
rection.  But  this  opinion  is  confuted  with  sufficient  proba 
bility  by  the  changeableness  of  fortune,  the  weakness  of  the 
human  body,  the  imperfection  and  instability  of  knowledge 
and  virtue,  all  of  which  are  hindrances  to  the  perfection  of 
happiness,  as  Augustine  argues  at  the  end  of  De  Civ.  Dei 
(xix.  3).  Hence  others  maintained  that  after  this  there  is 
another  life  wherein,  after  death,  man  lives  according  to  the 
soul  only,  and  they  held  that  such  a  life  sufficed  to  satisfy 
the  natural  desire  to  obtain  happiness :  wherefore  Porphyrius 
said  as  Augustine  states  (De  Civ.  Dei,  xxi.):  The  soul,  to  be 
happy,  must  avoid  all  bodies  :  and  consequently  these  did 
not  hold  the  resurrection.  This  opinion  was  based  by 
various  people  on  various  false  foundations.  For  certain 
heretics  asserted  that  all  bodily  things  are  from  the  evil 
principle,  but  that  spiritual  things  are  from  the  good  prin 
ciple  :  and  from  this  it  follows  that  the  soul  cannot  reach  the 
height  of  its  perfection  unless  it  be  separated  from  the  body, 
since  the  latter  withdraws  it  from  its  principle,  the  participa 
tion  of  which  makes  it  happy.  Hence  all  those  heretical 
sects  that  hold  corporeal  things  to  have  been  created  or 
fashioned  by  the  devil  deny  the.  resurrection  of  the  body. 
The  falsehood  of  this  principle  has  been  shown  at  the  begin 
ning  of  the  Second  Book  (ii.  Sent.  D.  4,  qu.  i,  A.  3).* 
*  Cf.  P.  I..  Q.  XLIX.,  A.  3. 


I2i  THE  RESURRECTION  Q.  75-  ART.  i 

Others  said  that  the  entire  nature  of  man  is  seated  in  the 
soul,  so  that  the  soul  makes  use  of  the  body  as  an  instrument, 
or  as  a  sailor  uses  his  ship:  wherefore  according  to  this 
opinion,  it  follows  that  if  happiness  is  attained  by  the  soul 
alone,  man  would  not  be  baulked  in  his  natural  desire  for 
happiness,  and  so  there  is  no  need  to  hold  the  resurrection. 
But  the  Philosopher  sufficiently  destroys  this  foundation  (De 
Anima,  ii.),  where  he  shows  that  the  soul  is  united  to  the  body 
as  form  to  matter.  Hence  it  is  clear  that  if  man  cannot  be 
happy  in  this  life,  we  must  of  necessity  hold  the  resurrection. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  The  heavens  will  never  be  broken  as  to  their 
substance,  but  as  to  the  effect  of  their  power  whereby  their 
movement  is  the  cause  of  generation  and  corruption  of  lower 
things:  for  this  reason  the  Apostle  says  (i  Cor.  vii.  31): 
The  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Abraham's  soul,  properly  speaking,  is  not 
Abraham  himself,  but  a  part  of  him  (and  the  same  as  regards 
the  others).  Hence  life  in  Abraham's  soul  does  not  suffice 
to  make  Abraham  a  living  being,  or  to  make  the  God  of 
Abraham  the  God  of  a  living  man.  But  there  needs  to  be 
life  in  the  whole  composite,  i.e.  the  soul  and  body:  and 
although  this  life  were  not  actually  when  these  words  were 
uttered,  it  was  in  each  part  as  ordained  to  the  resurrection. 
Wherefore  our  Lord  proves  the  resurrection  with  the  greatest 
subtlety  and  efficacy. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  soul  is  compared  to  the  body,  not  only 
as  a  worker  to  the  instrument  with  which  he  works,  but  also 
as  form  to  matter :  wherefore  the  work  belongs  to  the  com 
posite  and  not  to  the  soul  alone,  as  the  Philosopher  shows 
(De  Anima,  i.).  And  since  to  the  worker  is  due  the  reward 
of  the  work,  it  behoves  man  himself,  who  is  composed  of  soul 
and  body,  to  receive  the  reward  of  his  work.  Now  as  venial 
offences  are  called  sins  as  being  dispositions  to  sin,  and  not  as 
having  simply  and  perfectly  the  character  of  sin,  so  the 
punishment  which  is  awarded  to  them  in  purgatory  is  not  a 
retribution  simply,  but  rather  a  cleansing,  which  is  wrought 
separately  in  the  body,  by  death  and  by  its  being  reduced  to 
ashes,  and  in  the  soul  by  the  fire  of  purgatory. 


Q.  75.  ART.  2     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  122 

Reply  Obj.  4.  Other  things  being  equal,  the  state  of  the 
soul  in  the  body  is  more  perfect  than  outside  the  body, 
because  it  is  a  part  of  the  whole  composite;  and  every 
integral  part  is  material  in  comparison  to  the  whole:  and 
though  it  were  conformed  to  God  in  one  respect,  it  is  not 
simply.  Because,  strictly  speaking,  a  thing  is  more  con 
formed  to  God  when  it  has  all  that  the  condition  of  its  nature 
requires,  since  then  most  of  all  it  imitates  the  Divine  per 
fection.  Hence  the  heart  of  an  animal  is  more  conformed 
to  an  immovable  God  when  it  is  in  movement  than  when 
it  is  at  rest,  because  the  perfection  of  the  heart  is  in  its  move 
ment,  and  its  rest  is  its  undoing. 

Reply  Obj.  5.  Bodily  death  was  brought  about  by  Adam's 
sin  which  was  blotted  out  by  Christ's  death:  hence  its 
punishment  lasts  not  for  ever.  But  mortal  sin  which  causes 
everlasting  death  through  impenitence  will  not  be  expiated 
hereafter.  Hence  that  death  will  be  everlasting. 

SECOND  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  RESURRECTION  WILL  BE  FOR  ALL  WITHOUT 
EXCEPTION  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Second  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  resurrection  will  not 
be  for  all  without  exception.  For  it  is  written  (Ps.  i.  5): 
The  wicked  shall  not  rise  again  in  judgment.  Now  men  will 
not  rise  again  except  at  the  time  of  the  general  judgment. 
Therefore  the  wicked  shall  in  no  way  rise  again. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  It  is  written  (Dan.  xii.  2):  Many  of  those 
that  sleep  in  the  dust  of  the  earth  shall  awake.  But  these  words 
imply  a  certain  restriction.  Therefore  all  will  not  rise 
again. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  By  the  resurrection  men  are  conformed  to 
Christ  rising  again ;  wherefore  the  Apostle  argues  (i  Cor.  xv. 
12,  seqq.)  that  if  Christ  rose  again,  we  also  shall  rise  again. 
Now  those  alone  should  be  conformed  to  Christ  rising  again 
who  have  borne  His  image,  and  this  belongs  to  the  good  alone. 
Therefore  they  alone  shall  rise  again. 


123  THE  RESURRECTION  Q.  75.  ART.  2 

Obj.  4.  Further,  Punishment  is  not  remitted  unless  the 
fault  be  condoned.  Now  bodily  death  is  the  punishment 
of  original  sin.  Therefore,  as  original  sin  is  not  forgiven 
to  all,  all  will  not  rise  again. 

Obj.  5.  Further,  As  we  are  born  again  by  the  grace  of 
Christ,  even  so  shall  we  rise  again  by  His  grace.  Now  those 
who  die  in  their  mother's  womb  can  never  be  born  again : 
therefore  neither  can  they  rise  again,  and  consequently 
all  will  not  rise  again. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  said  (Jo.  v.  28,  25):  All  that  are 
in  the  graves  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  .  .  .  and 
they  that  hear  shall  live.  Therefore  the  dead  shall  all  rise 
again. 

Further,  It  is  written  (i  Cor.  xv.  51):  We  shall  all  indeed 
rise  again,  etc. 

Further,  The  resurrection  is  necessary  in  order  that  those 
who  rise  again  may  receive  punishment  or  reward  accord 
ing  to  their  merits.  Now  either  punishment  or  reward  is  due 
to  all,  either  for  their  own  merits,  as  to  adults,  or  for  others' 
merits,  as  to  children.  Therefore  all  will  rise  again. 

I  answer  that,  Those  things,  the  reason  of  which  comes 
from  the  nature  of  a  species,  must  needs  be  found  likewise 
in  all  the  members  of  that  same  species.  Now  such  is  the 
resurrection:  because  the  reason  thereof,  as  stated  above 
(A.  i),  is  that  the  soul  cannot  have  the  final  perfection  of  the 
human  species,  so  long  as  it  is  separated  from  the  body. 
Hence  no  soul  will  remain  for  ever  separated  from  the  body. 
Therefore  it  is  necessary  for  all,  as  well  as  for  one,  to  rise 
again. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  As  a  gloss  expounds  these  words,  they  refer 
to  the  spiritual  resurrection  whereby  the  wicked  shall  not 
rise  again  in  the  particular  judgment.  Or  else  they  refer 
to  the  wicked  who  are  altogether  unbelievers,  who  will 
not  rise  again  to  be  judged,  since  they  are  already  judged.* 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Augustine  (De  Civ.  Dei,  xx.)  explains  many 
as  meaning  all:  in  fact,  this  way  of  speaking  is  often  met 
with  in  Holy  Writ.  Or  else  the  restriction  may  refer  to  the 

*  John  iii.  18. 


Q.  75.  ART.  3     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  124 

children  consigned  to  limbo  who,  although  they  shall  rise 
again,  are  not  properly  said  to  awake,  since  they  will  have  no 
sense  either  of  pain  or  of  glory,  and  waking  is  the  unchaining 
of  the  senses. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  All,  both  good  and  wicked,  are  conformed  to 
Christ,  while  living  in  this  life,  as  regards  things  pertaining 
to  the  nature  of  the  species,  but  not  as  regards  matters  per 
taining  to  grace.  Hence  all  will  be  conformed  to  Him  in  the 
restoration  of  natural  life,  but  not  in  the  likeness  of  glory, 
except  the  good  alone. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  Those  who  have  died  in  original  sin  have,  by 
dying,  discharged  the  obligation  of  death  which  is  the  punish 
ment  of  original  sin.  Hence,  notwithstanding  original  sin, 
they  can  rise  again  from  death :  for  the  punishment  of  original 
sin  is  to  die,  rather  than  to  be  detained  by  death. 

Reply  Obj.  5.  We  are  born  again  by  the  grace  of  Christ 
that  is  given  to  us,  but  we  rise  again  by  the  grace  of  Christ 
whereby  it  came  about  that  He  took  our  nature,  since  it  is 
by  this  that  we  are  conformed  to  Him  in  natural  things. 
Hence  those  who  die  in  their  mother's  womb,  although  they 
are  not  born  again  by  receiving  grace,  will  nevertheless  rise 
again  on  account  of  the  conformity  of  their  nature  with 
Him,  which  conformity  they  acquired  by  attaining  to  the 
perfection  of  the  human  species. 

THIRD  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  THE  RESURRECTION  IS  NATURAL  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Third  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  resurrection  is  natural. 
For,  as  the  Damascene  says  (De  Fide  Orthod.  iii.),  that  which  is 
commonly  observed  in  all,  marks  the  nature  of  the  individuals 
contained  under  it.  Now  resurrection  applies  commonly  to 
all.  Therefore  it  is  natural. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Gregory  says  (Moral,  xiv.):  Those  who  do 
not  hold  the  resurrection  on  the  principle  of  obedience  ought 
certainly  to  hold  it  on  the  principle  of  reason.  For  what  does 
the  world  every  day  but  imitate,  in  its  elements,  our  resurrection  ? 


125  THE  RESURRECTION  Q.  75-  ART.  3 

And  he  offers  as  examples  the  light  which  as  it  were  dies  .  .  . 
and  is  withdrawn  from  our  sight  .  .  .  and  again  rises  anew, 
as  it  were,  and  is  recalled — the  shrubs  which  lose  their  greenery, 
and  again  by  a  kind  of  resurrection  are  renewed — and  the  seeds 
which  rot  and  die  and  then  sprout  and  rise  again  as  it  were  : 
which  same  example  is  adduced  by  the  Apostle  (i  Cor.  xv. 
36).  Now  from  the  works  of  nature  nothing  can  be  known 
save  what  is  natural.  Therefore  the  resurrection  is  natural. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  Things  that  are  against  nature  abide  not 
for  long,  because  they  are  violent,  so  to  speak.  But  the 
life  that  is  restored  by  the  resurrection  will  last  for  ever. 
Therefore  the  resurrection  will  be  natural. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  That  to  which  the  entire  expectation  of 
nature  looks  forward  would  seem  to  be  natural.  Now  such 
a  thing  is  the  resurrection  and  the  glorification  of  the  saints 
according  to  Rom.  viii.  19.  Therefore  the  resurrection  will 
be  natural. 

Obj.  5.  Further,  The  resurrection  is  a  kind  of  movement 
towards  the  everlasting  union  of  soul  and  body.  Now  move 
ment  is  natural  if  it  terminate  in  a  natural  rest  (Phys.  v., 
text.  59) :  and  the  everlasting  union  of  soul  and  body  will  be 
natural,  for  since  the  soul  is  the  body's  proper  mover,  it  has 
a  body  proportionate  to  it :  so  that  the  body  is  likewise  for 
ever  capable  of  being  quickened  by  it,  even  as  the  soul  lives 
for  ever.  Therefore  the  resurrection  will  be  natural. 

On  the  contrary,  There  is  no  natural  return  from  privation 
to  habit.  But  death  is  privation  of  life.  Therefore  the 
resurrection  whereby  one  returns  from  death  to  life  is  not 
natural. 

Further,  Things  of  the  one  species  have  one  fixed  way  of 
origin :  wherefore  animals  begotten  of  putrefaction  are  never 
of  the  same  species  as  those  begotten  of  seed,  as  the  Com 
mentator  says  on  Phys.  viii.  Now  the  natural  way  of  man's 
origin  is  for  him  to  be  begotten  of  a  like  in  species:  and 
such  is  not  the  case  in  the  resurrection.  Therefore  it  will 
not  be  natural. 

I  answer  that,  A  movement  or  an  action  stands  related  to 
nature  in  three  ways.  For  there  is  a  movement  or  action 


Q.  75-  ART.  3     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  126 

whereof  nature  is  neither  the  principle  nor  the  term:  and 
such  a  movement  is  sometimes  from  a  principle  above  nature 
as  in  the  case  of  a  glorified  body ;  and  sometimes  from  any 
other  principle  whatever;  for  instance,  the  violent  upward 
movement  of  a  stone  which  terminates  in  a  violent  rest. 
Again,  there  is  a  movement  whereof  nature  is  both  principle 
and  term:  for  instance,  the  downward  movement  of  a  stone. 
And  there  is  another  movement  whereof  nature  is  the  term, 
but  not  the  principle,  the  latter  being  sometimes  something 
above  nature  (as  in  giving  sight  to  a  blind  man,  for  sight  is 
natural,  but  the  principle  of  the  sight-giving  is  above  nature), 
and  sometimes  something  else,  as  in  the  forcing  of  flowers  or 
fruit  by  artificial  process.    It  is  impossible  for  nature  to  be  the 
principle  and  not  the  term,  because  natural  principles  are  ap 
pointed  to  definite  effects,  beyond  which  they  cannot  extend. 
Therefore  the  action  or  movement  that  is  related  to  nature 
in  the  first  way  can  nowise  be  natural,  but  is  either  miraculous 
if  it  come  from  a  principle  above  nature,  or  violent  if  from 
any  other  principle.     The  action  or  movement  that  is  related 
to  nature  in  the  second  way  is  simply  natural :  but  the  action 
that  is  related  to  nature  in  the  third  way  cannot  be  described 
as  natural  simply,  but  as  natural  in  a  restricted  sense,  in  so 
far,  to  wit,  as  it  leads  to  that  which  is  according  to  nature : 
but  it  is  called  either  miraculous  or  artificial  or  violent. 
For,  properly  speaking,  natural  is  that  which  is  according 
to  nature,  and  a  thing  is  according  to  nature  if  it  has  that 
nature  and  whatever  results  from  that  nature  (Phys.  ii.). 
Consequently,     speaking    simply,    movement    cannot    be 
described  as  natural  unless  its  principle  be  natural.     Now 
nature  cannot  be  the  principle  of  resurrection,  although  resur 
rection  terminates  in  the  life  of  nature.     For  nature  is  the 
principle  of  movement  in  the  thing  wherein  nature  is, — either 
the  active  principle,  as  in  the  movement  of  heavy  and  light 
bodies  and  in  the  natural  alterations  of  animals, — or  the 
passive  principle,  as  in  the  generation  of  simple  bodies.     The 
passive  principle  of  natural  generation  is  the  natural  passive 
potentiality  which  always  has  an  active  principle  correspond 
ing  to  it  in  nature,  according  to  Met.  ix.,  text.  10 :  nor  as  to  this 


127  THE  RESURRECTION  Q.75.ART.3 

does  it  matter  whether  the  active  principle  in  nature  corre 
spond  to  the  passive  principle  in  respect  of  its  ultimate 
perfection,  namely  the  form;  or  in  respect  of  a  disposition 
in  virtue  of  which  it  demands  the  ultimate  form,  as  in  the 
generation  of  a  man  according  to  the  teaching  of  faith,  or 
in  all  other  generations  according  to  the  opinions  of  Plato 
and  Avicenna.  But  in  nature  there  is  no  active  principle 
of  the  resurrection,  neither  as  regards  the  union  of  the  soul 
with  the  body,  nor  as  regards  the  disposition  which  is  the 
demand  for  that  union:  since  such  a  disposition  cannot  be 
produced  by  nature,  except  in  a  definite  way  by  the  process 
of  generation  from  seed.  Wherefore  even  granted  a  passive 
potentiality  on  the  part  of  the  body,  or  any  kind  of  inclina 
tion  to  its  union  with  the  soul,  it  is  not  such  as  to  suffice  for 
the  conditions  of  natural  movement.  Therefore  the  resur 
rection,  strictly  speaking,  is  miraculous  and  not  natural 
except  in  a  restricted  sense,  as  we  have  explained. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  The  Damascene  is  speaking  of  those  things 
that  are  found  in  all  individuals  and  are  caused  by  the 
principles  of  nature.  For  supposing  by  a  divine  operation 
all  men  to  be  made  white,  or  to  be  gathered  together  in  one 
place,  as  happened  at  the  time  of  the  deluge,  it  would  not 
follow  that  whiteness  or  existence  in  some  particular  place  is 
a  natural  property  of  man. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  From  natural  things  one  does  not  come  by 
a  demonstration  of  reason  to  know  non-natural  things,  but 
by  the  induction  of  reason  one  may  know  something 
above  nature,  since  the  natural  bears  a  certain  resemblance 
to  the  supernatural.  Thus  the  union  of  soul  and  body 
resembles  the  union  of  the  soul  with  God  by  the  glory  of 
fruition,  as  the  Master  says  (ii.  Sent.  D.  i) :  and  in  like  manner 
the  examples,  quoted  by  the  Apostle  and  Gregory,  are  con 
firmatory  evidences  of  our  faith  in  the  resurrection. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  This  argument  regards  an  operation  which 
terminates  hi  something  that  is  not  natural  but  contrary  to 
nature.  Such  is  not  the  resurrection,  and  hence  the  argu 
ment  is  not  to  the  point. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  The  entire  operation  of  nature  is  subordinate 


Q.  75.  ART.  3    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  128 

to  the  Divine  operation,  just  as  the  working  of  a  lower  art 
is  subordinate  to  the  working  of  a  higher  art.  Hence  just 
as  all  the  work  of  a  lower  art  has  in  view  an  end  unattainable 
save  by  the  operation  of  the  higher  art  that  produces  the 
form,  or  makes  use  of  what  has  been  made  by  art:  so  the 
last  end  which  the  whole  expectation  of  nature  has  in  view 
is  unattainable  by  the  operation  of  nature,  and  for  which 
reason  the  attaining  thereto  is  not  natural. 

Reply  Obj.  5.  Although  there  can  be  no  natural  move 
ment  terminating  in  a  violent  rest,  there  can  be  a  non- 
natural  movement  terminating  in  a  natural  rest,  as  explained 
above. 


QUESTION  LXXVI. 

OF  THE  CAUSE  OF  THE  RESURRECTION. 

(In  Three  Articles.) 

WE  must  next  consider  the  cause  of  our  resurrection. 
Under  this  head  there  are  three  points  of  inquiry :  (i)  Whether 
Christ's  resurrection  is  the  cause  of  our  resurrection  ? 
(2)  Whether  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  is  ?  (3)  Whether 
the  angels  are  ? 

FIRST  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  RESURRECTION  OF  CHRIST  IS  THE  CAUSE  OF 
OUR  RESURRECTION  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  First  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  resurrection  of  Christ 
is  not  the  cause  of  our  resurrection.  For,  given  the  cause, 
the  effect  follows.  Yet  given  the  resurrection  of  Christ  the 
resurrection  of  the  other  dead  did  not  follow  at  once.  There 
fore  His  resurrection  is  not  the  cause  of  ours. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  An  effect  cannot  be  unless  the  cause  pre 
cede.  But  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  would  be  even  if 
Christ  had  not  risen  again :  for  God  could  have  delivered  man 
in  some  other  way.  Therefore  Christ's  resurrection  is  not 
the  cause  of  ours. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  same  thing  produces  the  one  effect 
throughout  the  one  same  species.  Now  the  resurrection  will 
be  common  to  all  men.  Since  then  Christ's  resurrection  is 
not  its  own  cause,  it  is  not  the  cause  of  the  resurrection  of 
others. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  An  effect  retains  some  likeness  to  its 
cause.  But  the  resurrection,  at  least  of  some,  namely  the 

HI.  6  129  9 


Q.  76.  ART.  i     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  130 

wicked,  bears  no  likeness  to  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  There 
fore  Christ's  resurrection  will  not  be  the  cause  of  theirs. 

On  the  contrary,  In  every  genus  that  which  is  first  is  the 
cause  of  those  that  come  after  it  (Met.  ii.,  text.  4) .  Now  Christ, 
by  reason  of  His  bodily  resurrection,  is  called  the  firstfruits 
of  them  that  sleep  (i  Cor.  xv.  20),  and  the  first-begotten  of 
the  dead  (Apoc.  i.  5).  Therefore  His  resurrection  is  the  cause 
of  the  resurrection  of  others. 

Further,  Christ's  resurrection  has  more  in  common  with 
our  bodily  resurrection  than  with  our  spiritual  resurrection 
which  is  by  justification.  But  Christ's  resurrection  is  the 
cause  of  our  justification,  as  appears  from  Rom.  iv.  25,  where 
it  is  said  that  He  rose  again  for  our  justification.  Therefore 
Christ's  resurrection  is  the  cause  of  our  bodily  resurrection. 

I  answer  that,  Christ  by  reason  of  His  human  nature  is 
called  the  mediator  of  God  and  men :  wherefore  the  Divine 
gifts  are  bestowed  on  men  by  means  of  Christ's  humanity. 
Now  just  as  we  cannot  be  delivered  from  spiritual  death 
save  by  the  gift  of  grace  bestowed  by  God,  so  neither  can 
we  be  delivered  from  bodily  death  except  by  resurrection 
wrought  by  the  Divine  power.  And  therefore  as  Christ, 
in  respect  of  His  human  nature,  received  the  firstfruits  of 
grace  from  above,  and  His  grace  is  the  cause  of  our  grace, 
because  of  His  fulness  we  all  have  received  •  •  •  grace  for 
grace  (John  i.  16),  so  in  Christ  has  our  resurrection  begun, 
and  His  resurrection  is  the  cause  of  ours.  Thus  Christ  as 
God  is,  as  it  were,  the  equivocal  cause  of  our  resurrection, 
but  as  God  and  man  rising  again,  He  is  the  proximate  and, 
so  to  say,  the  univocal  cause  of  our  resurrection.  Now  a 
uni vocal  efficient  cause  produces  its  effect  in  likeness  to  its 
own  form,  so  that  not  only  is  it  an  efficient,  but  also  an 
exemplar  cause  in  relation  to  that  effect.  This  happens  in 
two  ways.  For  sometimes  this  very  form,  whereby  the 
agent  is  likened  to  its  effect,  is  the  direct  principle  of  the  action 
by  which  the  effect  is  produced,  as  heat  in  the  fire  that  heats : 
and  sometimes  it  is  not  the  form  in  respect  of  which  this 
likeness  is  observed,  that  is  primarily  and  directly  the  principle 
of  that  action,  but  the  principles  of  that  form.  For  instance, 


131        CAUSE  OF  THE  RESURRECTION     Q.  76.  ART.  i 

if  a  white  man  beget  a  white  man,  the  whiteness  of  the  be 
getter  is  not  the  principle  of  active  generation,  and  yet  the 
whiteness  of  the  begetter  is  said  to  be  the  cause  of  the  white 
ness  of  the  begotten,  because  the  principles  of  whiteness  in 
the  begetter  are  the  generative  principles  causing  whiteness 
in  the  begotten.  In  this  way  the  resurrection  of  Christ  is 
the  cause  of  our  resurrection,  because  the  same  thing  that 
wrought  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  which  is  the  univocal 
efficient  cause  of  our  resurrection,  is  the  active  cause  of  our 
resurrection,  namely  the  power  of  Christ's  Godhead  which 
is  common  to  Him  and  the  Father.  Hence  it  is  written 
(Rom.  viii.  n) :  He  that  raised  up  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead 
shall  quicken  also  your  mortal  bodies.  And  this  very  resur 
rection  of  Christ  by  virtue  of  His  indwelling  Godhead  is 
the  quasi-instrumental  cause  of  our  resurrection:  since  the 
Divine  operations  were  wrought  by  means  of  Christ's  flesh, 
as  though  it  were  a  kind  of  organ;  thus  the  Damascene 
Instances  as  an  example  (De  Fide  Orthod.  iii.)  the  touch  of 
His  body  whereby  he  healed  the  leper  (Matth.  viii.  3). 

Reply  Obj.  i.  A  sufficient  cause  produces  at  once  its  effect 
to  which  it  is  immediately  directed,  but  not  the  effect  to 
which  it  is  directed  by  means  of  something  else,  no  matter 
how  sufficient  it  may  be:  thus  heat,  however  intense  it  be, 
does  not  cause  heat  at  once  in  the  first  instant,  but  it  begins 
at  once  to  set  up  a  movement  towards  heat,  because  heat  is 
its  effect  by  means  of  movement.  Now  Christ's  resurrection 
is  said  to  be  the  cause  of  ours,  in  that  it  works  our  resurrec 
tion,  not  immediately,  but  by  means  of  its  principle,  namely 
the  Divine  power  which  will  work  our  resurrection  in  like 
ness  to  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  Now  God's  power  works 
by  means  of  His  will  which  is  nearest  to  the  effect ;  hence  it 
is  not  necessary  that  our  resurrection  should  follow  straight 
way  after  He  has  wrought  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  but 
that  it  should  happen  at  the  time  which  God's  will  has 
decreed. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  God's  power  is  not  tied  to  any  particular 
second  causes,  but  that  He  can  produce  their  effects  either 
immediately  or  by  means  of  other  causes:  thus  He  might 


Q.  76.  ART.  2     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  132 

work  the  generation  of  lower  bodies  even  though  there  were 
no  movement  of  the  heaven:  and  yet  according  to  the 
order  which  He  has  established  in  things,  the  movement  of 
the  heaven  is  the  cause  of  the  generation  of  the  lower  bodies. 
In  like  manner  according  to  the  order  appointed  to  human 
things  by  Divine  providence,  Christ's  resurrection  is  the 
cause  of  ours:  and  yet  He  could  have  appointed  another 
order,  and  then  our  resurrection  would  have  had  another 
cause  ordained  by  God. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  This  argument  holds  when  all  the  things  of 
one  species  have  the  same  order  to  the  first  cause  of  the  effect 
to  be  produced  in  the  whole  of  that  species.  But  it  is  not 
so  in  the  case  in  point,  because  Christ's  humanity  is  nearer 
to  His  Godhead,  Whose  power  is  the  first  cause  of  the  resur 
rection,  than  is  the  humanity  of  others.  Hence  Christ's 
Godhead  caused  His  resurrection  immediately,  but  it  causes 
the  resurrection  of  others  by  means  of  Christ-man  rising 
again. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  The  resurrection  of  all  men  will  bear  some 
resemblance  to  Christ's  resurrection,  as  regards  that  which 
pertains  to  the  life  of  nature,  in  respect  of  which  all  were 
conformed  to  Christ.  Hence  all  will  rise  again  to  immortal 
life;  but  in  the  saints  who  were  conformed  to  Christ  by 
grace,  there  will  be  conformity  as  to  things  pertaining  to 
glory. 

SECOND  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  SOUND  OF  THE  TRUMPET  WILL  BE  THE  CAUSE 
OF  OUR  RESURRECTION  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Second  A  rticle  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  sound  of  the  trumpet 
will  not  be  the  cause  of  our  resurrection.  For  the  Damascene 
says  (De  Fide  Orthod.  iv.):  Thou  must  believe  that  the  resur 
rection  will  take  place  by  God's  will,  power,  and  nod.  There 
fore  since  these  are  a  sufficient  cause  of  our  resurrection, 
we  ought  not  to  assign  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  as  a  cause 
thereof. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  It  is  useless  to  make  sounds  to  one  who 


133        CAUSE  OF  THE  RESURRECTION     3-  76.  ART.  2 

cannot  hear.     But  the  dead  will  not  have  hearing.     There 
fore  it  is  unfitting  to  make  a  sound  to  arouse  them. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  If  any  sound  is  the  cause  of  the  resurrec 
tion,  this  will  only  be  by  a  power  given  by  God  to  the  sound : 
wherefore  a  gloss  on  Ps.  Ixvii.  34,  He  will  give  to  His  voice 
the  voice  of  power,  says, — to  arouse  our  bodies.  Now  from  the 
moment  that  a  power  is  given  to  a  thing,  though  it  be  given 
miraculously,  the  act  that  ensues  is  natural,  as  instanced  in 
the  man  born  blind  who,  after  being  restored  to  sight,  saw 
naturally.  Therefore  if  a  sound  be  the  cause  of  resurrection j 
the  resurrection  would  be  natural:  which  is  false. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (i  Thess.  iv.  15) :  The  Lord 
Himself  will  come  down  from  heaven  .  .  .  with  the  trumpet 
of  God  ;  and  the  dead  who  are  in  Christ  shall  rise. 

Further,  It  is  written  (John  v.  28)  that  they  who  are  in  the 
graves  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God  .  .  .  and  (verse  25) 
they  that  hear  shall  live.  Now  this  voice  is  called  the  trumpet, 
as  stated  in  the  text  (iv.  Sent.  D.  43).  Therefore,  etc. 

/  answer  that,  Cause  and  effect  must  needs  in  some  way 
be  united  together,  since  mover  and  moved,  maker  and 
made,  are  simultaneous  (Phys.  viii.).  Now  Christ  rising 
again  is  the  univocal  cause  of  our  resurrection:  wherefore 
at  the  resurrection  of  bodies,  it  behoves  Christ  to  work  the 
resurrection  at  the  giving  of  some  common  bodily  sign. 
According  to  some  this  sign  will  be  literally  Christ's  voice 
commanding  the  resurrection,  even  as  He  commanded  the 
sea  and  the  storm  ceased  (Matth.  viii.  26).  Others  say  that 
this  sign  will  be  nothing  else  than  the  manifest  appearance 
of  the  Son  of  God  in  the  world,  according  to  the  words  of 
Matth.  xxiv.  27:  As  lightning  cometh  out  of  the  east,  and 
appeareth  even  into  the  west,  so  shall  also  the  coming  of  the 
Son  of  man  be.  These  rely  on  the  authority  of  Gregory*  who 
says  that  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  is  nothing  else  but  the 
Son  appearing  to  the  world  as  judge.  According  to  this,  the 
visible  presence  of  the  Son  of  God  is  called  His  voice, 
because  as  soon  as  He  appears  all  nature  will  obey  His 
command  in  restoring  human  bodies :  hence  He  is  described 
*  Moral,  xxxi.  as  quoted  by  Albert  the  Great,  iv.  Sent.  D.  42,  A.  4. 


Q.  76.  ART.  2     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  134 

as  coming  with  commandment  (i  Thess.  iv.  15).  In  this  way 
His  appearing,  in  so  far  as  it  has  the  force  of  a  command, 
is  called  His  voice :  which  voice,  whatever  it  be,  is  sometimes 
called  a  cry,*  as  of  a  crier  summoning  to  judgment;  some 
times  the  sound  of  a  trumpet,  f  either  on  account  of  its  dis 
tinctness,  as  stated  in  the  text  (iv.  Sent.  D.  43),  or  as  being 
in  keeping  with  the  use  of  the  trumpet  in  the  Old  Testament : 
for  by  the  trumpet  they  were  summoned  to  the  council, 
stirred  to  the  battle,  and  called  to  the  feast;  and  those  who 
rise  again  will  be  summoned  to  the  council  of  judgment,  to 
the  battle  in  which  the  world  shall  fight  .  .  .  against  the 
unwise  (Wis.  v.  21),  and  to  the  feast  of  everlasting  solemnity. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  In  those  words  the  Damascene  touches  on 
three  things  respecting  the  material  cause  of  the  resurrection : 
to  wit,  the  Divine  will  which  commands,  the  power  which 
executes,  and  the  ease  of  execution,  when  he  adds  bidding, 
in  resemblance  to  our  own  affairs :  since  it  is  very  easy  for  us 
to  do  what  is  done  at  once  at  our  word.  But  the  ease  is 
much  more  evident,  if  before  we  say  a  word,  our  servants 
execute  our  will  at  once  at  the  first  sign  of  our  will,  which 
sign  is  called  a  nod :  and  this  nod  is  a  kind  of  cause  of  that 
execution,  in  so  far  as  others  are  led  thereby  to  accomplish 
our  will.  And  the  Divine  nod,  at  which  the  resurrection 
will  take  place,  is  nothing  but  the  sign  given  by  God,  which 
all  nature  will  obey  by  concurring  in  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead.  This  sign  is  the  same  as  the  sound  of  the  trumpet, 
as  explained  above. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  As  the  forms  of  the  Sacrament  have  the 
power  to  sanctify,  not  through  being  heard,  but  through 
being  spoken:  so  this  sound,  whatever  it  be,  will  have  an 
instrumental  efficacy  of  resuscitation,  not  through  being 
perceived,  but  through  being  uttered.  Even  so  a  sound  by 
the  pulsation  of  the  air  arouses  the  sleeper,  by  loosing  the 
organ  of  perception,  and  not  because  it  is  known :  since  judg 
ment  about  the  sound  that  reaches  the  ears  is  subsequent 
to  the  awakening  and  is  not  its  cause. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  This  argument  would  avail,  if  the  power 

*  Matth.  xxv.  6.  f  J  C°r-  xv-  52'-  r  Thess.  iv.  15. 


135        CAUSE  OF  THE  RESURRECTION    Q.  76.  ART.  3 

given  to  that  sound  were  a  complete  being  in  nature :  because 
then  that  which  would  proceed  therefrom  would  have  for 
principle  a  power  already  rendered  natural.  But  this  power 
is  not  of  that  kind  but  such  as  we  have  ascribed  above  to  the 
forms  of  the  Sacraments  (iv.  Sent.  D.  i;  P.  iii.,  Q.  LXII., 
AA.  i,  4). 

THIRD  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  ANGELS  WILL  DO  ANYTHING  TOWARDS 
THE  RESURRECTION  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Third  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  angels  will  do  nothing 
at  all  towards  the  resurrection.  For  raising  the  dead  shows 
a  greater  power  than  does  begetting  men.  Now  when  men 
are  begotten,  the  soul  is  not  infused  into  the  body  by  means 
of  the  angels.  Therefore  neither  will  the  resurrection, 
which  is  reunion  of  soul  and  body,  be  wrought  by  the 
ministry  of  the  angels. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  If  this  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  instru 
mentality  of  any  angels  at  all,  it  would  seem  especially 
referable  to  the  virtues,  to  whom  it  belongs  to  work  miracles. 
Yet  it  is  referred,  not  to  them,  but  to  the  archangels,  accord 
ing  to  the  text  (iv.  Sent.  D.  43).  Therefore  the  resurrection 
will  not  be  wrought  by  the  ministry  of  the  angels. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  stated  (i  Thess.  iv.  15)  that  the  Lord 
.  .  .  shall  come  down  from  heaven  .  .  .  with  the  voice  of  an 
archangel  .  .  .  and  the  dead  shall  rise  again.  Therefore 
the  resurrection  of  the  dead  will  be  accomplished  by  the 
angelic  ministry. 

/  answer  that,  According  to  Augustine  (De  Trin.  ii.)  just  as 
the  grosser  and  inferior  bodies  are  ruled  in  a  certain  order  by 
the  more  subtle  and  more  powerful  bodies,  so  are  all  bodies 
ruled  by  God  by  the  rational  spirit  of  life  :  and  Gregory  speaks 
in  the  same  sense  (Dial.  iv.).  Consequently  in  all  God's 
bodily  works,  He  employs  the  ministry  of  the  angels.  Now 
in  the  resurrection  there  is  something  pertaining  to  the  trans 
mutation  of  the  bodies,  to  wit  the  gathering  together  of  the 
mortal  remains  and  the  disposal  thereof  for  the  testoration 


Q.  76.  ART.  3     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  136 

of  the  human  body ;  wherefore  in  this  respect  God  will  employ 
the  ministry  of  the  angels  in  the  resurrection.  But  the 
soul,  even  as  it  is  immediately  created  by  God,  so  will  it 
be  reunited  to  the  body  immediately  by  God  without  any 
operation  of  the  angels :  and  in  like  manner  He  Himself  will 
glorify  the  body  without  the  ministry  of  the  angels,  just  as 
He  immediately  glorifies  man's  soul.  This  ministry  of  the 
angels  is  called  their  voice,  according  to  one  explanation 
given  in  the  text  (iv.  Sent.  D.  43). 

Hence  the  Reply  to  the  First  Objection  is  evident  from 
what  has  been  said. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  This  ministry  will  be  exercised  chiefly  by 
one  Archangel,  namely  Michael,  who  is  the  prince  of  the 
Church  as  he  was  of  the  Synagogue  (Dan.  x.  13,  21).  Yet  he 
will  act  under  the  influence  of  the  Virtues  and  the  other  higher 
orders:  so  that  what  he  shall  do,  the  higher  orders  will, 
in  a  way,  do  also.  In  like  manner  the  lower  angels  will  co 
operate  with  him  as  to  the  resurrection  of  each  individual 
to  whose  guardianship  they  were  appointed:  so  that  this 
voice  can  be  ascribed  either  to  one  or  to  many  angels. 


QUESTION  LXXVIL 

OF  THE  TIME  AND  MANNER  OF  THE  RESURRECTION. 

(In  Four  Articles.} 

WE  must  now  consider  the  time  and  manner  of  the  resur 
rection.  Under  this  head  there  are  four  points  of  inquiry: 
(i)  Whether  the  time  of  the  resurrection  should  be  delayed 
until  the  end  of  the  world  ?  (2)  Whether  that  time  is  hidden  ? 

(3)  Whether   the   resurrection    will   occur   at   night-time  ? 

(4)  Whether  it  will  happen  suddenly  ? 

FIRST  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  TIME  OF  OUR  RESURRECTION  SHOULD  BE 
DELAYED  TILL  THE  END  OF  THE  WORLD  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  First  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  time  of  the  resurrection 
ought  not  to  be  delayed  till  the  end  of  the  world,  so  that  all 
may  rise  together.  For  there  is  more  conformity  between 
head  and  members  than  between  one  member  and  another, 
as  there  is  more  between  cause  and  effect  than  between 
one  effect  and  another.  Now  Christ,  Who  is  our  Head, 
did  not  delay  His  resurrection  until  the  end  of  the  world, 
so  as  to  rise  again  together  with  all  men.  Therefore  there 
is  no  need  for  the  resurrection  of  the  early  saints  to  be  de 
ferred  until  the  end  of  the  world,  so  that  they  may  rise  again 
together  with  the  others. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  The  resurrection  of  the  Head  is  the  cause 
of  the  resurrection  of  the  members.  But  the  resurrection  of 
certain  members  that  desire  nobility  from  their  being  closely 
connected  with  the  Head  was  not  delayed  till  the  end  of  the 


Q.  77-  ART.  i     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  138 

world,  but  followed  immediately  after  Christ's  resurrection, 
as  is  piously  believed  concerning  the  Blessed  Virgin  and 
John  the  Evangelist.*  Therefore  the  resurrection  of  others 
will  be  so  much  nearer  Christ's  resurrection,  according  as 
they  have  been  more  conformed  tc  Him  by  grace  and  merit. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  state  of  the  New  Testament  is  more 
perfect,  and  bears  a  closer  resemblance  to  Christ,  than  the 
state  of  the  Old  Testament.  Yet  some  of  the  fathers  of 
the  Old  Testament  rose  again  when  Christ  rose,  according 
to  Matth.  xxvii.  52:  Many  of  the  bodies  of  the  saints,  that  had 
slept,  arose.  Therefore  it  would  seem  that  the  resurrection 
of  the  Old  Testament  saints  should  not  be  delayed  till  the 
end  of  the  world,  so  that  all  may  rise  together. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  There  will  be  no  numbering  of  years  after 
the  end  of  the  world.  Yet  after  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead,  the  years  are  still  reckoned  until  the  resurrection  of 
others,  as  appears  from  Apoc.  xx.  4,  5.  For  it  is  stated  there 
that  I  saw  .  .  .  the  souls  of  them  that  were  beheaded  for  the 
testimony  of  Jesus,  and  for  the  word  of  God,  and  further  on : 
And  they  lived  and  reigned  with  Christ  a  thousand  years. 
And  the  rest  of  the  dead  lived  not  till  the  thousand  years  were 
finished.  Therefore  the  resurrection  of  all  is  not  delayed 
until  the  end  of  the  world,  that  all  may  rise  together. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (Job  xiv.  12) :  Man  when  he 
is  fallen  asleep  shall  not  rise  again  till  the  heavens  be  broken, 
he  shall  not  wake,  nor  rise  out  of  his  sleep,  and  it  is  a  question 
of  the  sleep  of  death.  Therefore  the  resurrection  of  men 
will  be  delayed  until  the  end  of  the  world  when  the  heavens 
shall  be  broken. 

Further,  It  is  written  (Heb.  xi.  39) :  All  these  being  approved 
by  the  testimony  of  faith  received  not  the  promise,  i.e.  full 
beatitude  of  soul  and  body,  since  God  has  provided  something 
better  for  us,  lest  they  should  be  consummated,  i.e.  perfected, 
without  us, — in  order  that,  as  a  gloss  observes,  through  all  re 
joicing  each  one  might  rejoice  the  more.  But  the  resurrection 
will  not  precede  the  glorification  of  bodies,  because  He  will 
reform  the  body  of  our  lowness  made  like  to  the  body  of  His 
*  Ep.  de  Assump.  B.V.,  cap.  ii.,  among  S.  Jerome's  works. 


139  TIME  OF  RESURRECTION       Q.  77-  ART.  i 

glory  (Phil.  iii.  21),  and  the  children  of  the  resurrection  will 
be  as  the  angels  .  .  .  in  heaven  (Matth.  xxii.  30).  Therefore 
the  resurrection  will  be  delayed  till  the  end  of  the  world, 
when  all  shall  rise  together. 

/  answer  that,  As  Augustine  states  (De  Trin.  iii.)  Divine 
providence  decreed  that  the  grosser  and  lower  bodies  should  be 
ruled  in  a  certain  order  by  the  more  subtle  and  powerful  bodies: 
wherefore  the  entire  matter  of  the  lower  bodies  is  subject  to 
variation  according  to  the  movement  of  the  heavenly  bodies. 
Hence  it  would  be  contrary  to  the  order  established  in 
things  by  Divine  providence  if  the  matter  of  lower  bodies 
were  brought  to  the  state  of  incorruption,  so  long  as  there 
remains  movement  in  the  higher  bodies.  And  since,  accord 
ing  to  the  teaching  of  faith,  the  resurrection  will  bring  men 
to  immortal  life  conformably  to  Christ  Who  rising  again 
from  the  dead  dieth  now  no  more  (Rom.  vi.  9),  the  resurrection 
of  human  bodies  will  be  delayed  until  the  end  of  the  world 
when  the  heavenly  movement  will  cease.  For  this  reason, 
too,  certain  philosophers,  who  held  that  the  movement  of  the 
heavens  will  never  cease,  maintained  that  human  souls  will 
return  to  mortal  bodies  such  as  we  have  now, — whether,  as 
Empedocles,  they  stated  that  the  soul  would  return  to  the 
same  body  at  the  end  of  the  great  year,  or  that  it  would 
return  to  another  body;  thus  Pythagoras  asserted  that  any 
soul  will  enter  any  body,  as  stated  in  De  Anima,  i.,  text.  53. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Although  the  head  is  more  conformed  to  the 
members  by  conformity  of  proportion  (which  is  requisite 
in  order  that  it  have  influence  over  the  members)  than  one 
member  is  to  another,  yet  the  head  has  a  certain  causality 
over  the  members  which  the  members  have  not;  and  in  this 
the  members  differ  from  the  head  and  agree  with  one  another. 
Hence  Christ's  resurrection  is  an  exemplar  of  ours,  and 
through  our  faith  therein  there  arises  in  us  the  hope  of  our 
own  resurrection.  But  the  resurrection  of  one  of  Christ's 
members  is  not  the  cause  of  the  resurrection  of  other 
members,  and  consequently  Christ's  resurrection  had  to  pre 
cede  the  resurrection  of  others  who  have  all  to  rise  again  at 
the  consummation  of  the  world. 


Q.  77-  ART.  i     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  140 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Although  among  the  members  some  rank 
higher  than  others  and  are  more  conformed  to  the  Head,  they 
do  not  attain  to  the  character  of  headship  so  as  to  be  the 
cause  of  others.  Consequently  greater  conformity  to  Christ 
does  not  give  them  a  right  to  rise  again  before  others  as 
though  they  were  exemplar  and  the  others  exemplate,  as  we 
have  said  in  reference  to  Christ's  resurrection :  and  if  it  has 
been  granted  to  others  that  their  resurrection  should  not  be 
delayed  until  the  general  resurrection,  this  has  been  by 
special  privilege  of  grace,  and  not  as  due  on  account  of  con 
formity  to  Christ. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Jerome,  in  a  sermon  on  the  Assumption,* 
seems  to  be  doubtful  of  this  resurrection  of  the  saints  with 
Christ,  namely  as  to  whether,  having  been  witnesses  to  the 
resurrection,  they  died  again,  so  that  theirs  was  a  resuscita 
tion  (as  in  the  case  of  Lazarus  who  died  again)  rather  than  a 
resurrection  such  as  will  be  at  the  end  of  the  world, — or 
really  rose  again  to  immortal  life,  to  live  for  ever  in  the  body, 
and  to  ascend  bodily  into  heaven  with  Christ,  as  a  gloss  says 
on  Matth.  xxvii.  52.  The  latter  seems  more  probable, 
because,  as  Jerome  says  (ibid.},  in  order  that  they  might  bear 
true  witness  to  Christ's  true  resurrection,  it  was  fitting  that 
they  should  truly  rise  again.  Nor  was  their  resurrection 
hastened  for  their  sake,  but  for  the  sake  of  bearing  witness 
to  Christ's  resurrection :  and  that  by  bearing  witness  thereto 
they  might  lay  the  foundation  of  the  faith  of  the  New  Testa 
ment:  wherefore  it  was  more  fitting  that  it  should  be  borne 
by  the  fathers  of  the  Old  Testament,  than  by  those  who  died 
after  the  foundation  of  the  New.  It  must,  however,  be 
observed  that,  although  the  Gospel  mentions  their  resurrec 
tion  before  Christ's,  we  must  take  this  statement  as  made  in 
anticipation,  as  is  often  the  case  with  writers  of  history. 
For  none  rose  again  with  a  true  resurrection  before  Christ, 
since  He  is  the  firstfruits  of  them  that  sleep  (i  Cor.  xv.  20), 
although  some  were  resuscitated  before  Christ's  resurrec 
tion,  as  in  the  case  of  Lazarus. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  On  account  of  these  words,  as  Augustine 
*  Ep.  x.  ad  Paul,  et  Eustoch.,  now  recognized  as  spurious. 


I4i  TIME  OF  RESURRECTION      Q.  77-  ART.  2 

relates  (De  Civ.  Dei,  xx.),  certain  heretics  asserted  that  there 
will  be  a  first  resurrection  of  the  dead  that  they  may  reign 
with  Christ  on  earth  for  a  thousand  years ;  whence  they  were 
called  chiliasts  or  millenarians.  Hence  Augustine  says 
(ibid.)  that  these  words  are  to  be  understood  otherwise, 
namely  of  the  spiritual  resurrection,  whereby  men  shall  rise 
again  from  their  sins  to  the  gift  of  grace:  while  the  second 
resurrection  is  of  bodies.  The  reign  of  Christ  denotes  the 
Church  wherein  not  only  martyrs  but  also  the  other  elect 
reign,  the  part  denoting  the  whole;  or  they  reign  with  Christ 
in  glory  as  regards  all,  special  mention  being  made  of  the 
martyrs,  because  they  especially  reign  after  death  who 
fought  for  the  truth,  even  unto  death.  The  number  of  a 
thousand  years  denotes  not  a  fixed  number,  but  the  whole 
of  the  present  time  wherein  the  saints  now  reign  with 
Christ,  because  the  number  1,000  designates  universality 
more  than  the  number  100,  since  100  is  the  square  of  10, 
whereas  1,000  is  a  cube  resulting  from  the  multiplication  of 
ten  by  its  square,  for  10x10  =  100,  and  100x10  =  1,000. 
Again  in  Ps.  civ.  8,  The  word  which  He  commanded  to  a 
thousand,  i.e.  all,  generations. 

SECOND  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  THE  TIME  OF  OUR  RESURRECTION  IS  HIDDEN  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Second  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  this  time  is  not  hidden. 
Because  when  we  know  exactly  the  beginning  of  a  thing, 
we  can  know  its  end  exactly,  since  all  things  are  measured  by 
a  certain  period  (De  Generat.  ii.).  Now  the  beginning  of  the 
world  is  known  exactly.  Therefore  its  end  can  also  be  known 
exactly.  But  this  will  be  the  time  of  the  resurrection  and 
judgment.  Therefore  that  time  is  not  hidden. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  It  is  stated  (Apoc.  xii.  6)  that  the  woman 
who  represents  the  Church  had  a  place  prepared  by  God,  that 
there  she  might  feed  (Vulg., — they  should  feed  her)  a  thousand 
two  hundred  sixty  days.  Again  (Dan.  xii.  u),  a  certain  fixed 
number  of  days  is  mentioned,  which  apparently  signify  years, 


Q.  77-  ART.  2     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  142 

according  to  Ezech.  iv.  6:  A  day  for  a  year,  yea  a  (Lay  for  a 
year  I  have  appointed  to  thee.  Therefore  the  time  of  the  end 
of  the  world  and  of  the  resurrection  can  be  known  exactly 
from  Holy  Writ. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  state  of  the  New  Testament  was 
foreshadowed  in  the  Old  Testament.  Now  we  know  exactly 
the  time  wherein  the  state  of  the  Old  Testament  endured. 
Therefore  we  can  also  know  exactly  the  time  wherein  the 
state  of  the  New  Testament  will  endure.  But  the  state  of  the 
New  Testament  will  last  to  the  end  of  the  world,  wherefore 
it  is  said  (Matth.  xxviii.  20):  Behold  I  am  with  you  .  .  .  to 
the  consummation  of  the  world.  Therefore  the  time  of  the 
end  of  the  world  and  of  the  resurrection  can  be  known 
exactly. 

On  the  contrary,  That  which  is  unknown  to  the  angels 
will  be  much  more  unknown  to  men :  because  those  things  to 
which  men  attain  by  natural  reason  are  much  more  clearly 
and  certainly  known  to  the  angels  by  their  natural  know 
ledge.  Moreover  revelations  are  not  made  to  men  save  by 
means  of  the  angels  as  Dionysius  asserts  (Cael.  Hier.  iv.). 
Now  the  angels  have  no  exact  knowledge  of  that  time,  as 
appears  from  Matth.  xxiv.  36:  Of  that  day  and  hour  no  one 
knoweth,  no  not  the  angels  of  heaven.  Therefore  that  time 
is  hidden  from  men. 

Further,  The  apostles  were  more  cognizant  of  God's 
secrets  than  others  who  followed  them,  because  they  had 
the  firstfruits  of  the  spirit  (Rom.  viii.  23), — before  others  in 
point  of  time  and  more  abundantly,  as  a  gloss  observes. 
And  yet  when  they  questioned  our  Lord  about  this  very 
matter,  He  answered  them  (Acts  i.  7) :  It  is  not  for  you  to 
know  the  times  or  moments  which  the  Father  hath  put  in  His  own 
power.  Much  more,  therefore,  is  it  hidden  from  others. 

/  answer  that,  As  Augustine  says  (83  Qucest.  qu.  Iviii.) 
as  to  the  last  age  of  the  human  race,  which  begins  from  our 
Lord's  coming  and  lasts  until  the  end  of  the  world,  it  is  uncertain 
of  how  many  generations  it  will  consist :  even  so  old  age,  which 
is  man's  last  age,  has  no  fixed  time  according  to  the  measure 
of  the  other  ages,  since  sometimes  alone  it  lasts  as  long  a  time 


143  TIME  OF  RESURRECTION       Q.  77.  ART.  2 

as  all  the  others.  The  reason  of  this  is  because  the  exact 
length  of  future  time  cannot  be  known  except  either  by 
revelation  or  by  natural  reason :  and  the  time  until  the  resur 
rection  cannot  be  reckoned  by  natural  reason,  because  the 
resurrection  and  the  end  of  the  heavenly  movement  will 
be  simultaneous  as  stated  above  (A.  i).  And  all  things  that 
are  foreseen  by  natural  reason  to  happen  at  a  fixed  time  are 
reckoned  by  movement :  and  it  is  impossible  from  the  move 
ment  of  the  heaven  to  reckon  its  end,  for  since  it  is  circular, 
it  is  for  this  very  reason  able  by  its  nature  to  endure  for 
ever :  and  consequently  the  time  between  this  and  the  resur 
rection  cannot  be  reckoned  by  natural  reason.  Again  it 
cannot  be  known  by  revelation,  so  that  all  may  be  on  the 
watch  and  ready  to  meet  Christ:  and  for  this  reason  when 
the  apostles  asked  Him  about  this  Christ  answered  (Acts  i.  7) : 
//  is  not  for  you  to  know  the  times  or  moments  which  the  Father 
hath  put  in  His  own  power,  whereby,  as  Augustine  says  (De 
Civ.  Dei,  xviii.):  He  scatters  the  fingers  of  all  calculators  and 
bids  them  be  still.  For  what  He  refused  to  tell  the  apostles, 
He  will  not  reveal  to  others :  wherefore  all  those  who  have 
been  misled  to  reckon  the  aforesaid  time  have  so  far  proved 
to  be  untruthful;  for  some,  as  Augustine  says  (ibid.},  stated 
that  from  our  Lord's  Ascension  to  His  last  coming  400 
years  would  elapse,  others  500,  others  1,000.  The  falseness 
of  these  calculators  is  evident,  as  will  likewise  be  the  false 
ness  of  those  who  even  now  cease  not  to  calculate. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  When  we  know  a  thing's  beginning  and  also 
its  end  it  follows  that  its  measure  is  known  to  us:  where 
fore  if  we  know  the  beginning  of  a  thing  the  duration  of 
which  is  measured  by  the  movement  of  the  heaven,  we  are 
able  to  know  its  end,  since  the  movement  of  heaven  is  known 
to  us.  But  the  measure  of  the  duration  of  the  heavenly 
movement  is  God's  ordinance  alone,  which  is  unknown  to  us. 
Wherefore  however  much  we  may  know  its  beginning,  we 
are  unable  to  know  its  end. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  thousand  two  hundred  sixty  days 
mentioned  in  the  Apocalypse  (loc.  cit.)  denote  all  the  time 
during  which  the  Church  endures,  and  not  any  definite 


Q.  77-  ART.  3     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  144 

number  of  years.  The  reason  whereof  is  because  the  preach 
ing  of  Christ  on  which  the  Church  is  built  lasted  three  years 
and  a  half,  which  time  contains  almost  an  equal  number  of 
days  as  the  aforesaid  number.  Again  the  number  of  days 
appointed  by  Daniel  does  not  refer  to  a  number  of  years  to 
elapse  before  the  end  of  the  world  or  until  the  preaching  of 
Antichrist,  but  to  the  time  of  Antichrist's  preaching  and  the 
duration  of  his  persecution. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Although  the  state  of  the  New  Testament 
in  general  is  foreshadowed  by  the  state  of  the  Old  Testa 
ment  it  does  not  follow  that  individuals  correspond  to  indi 
viduals  :  especially  since  all  the  figures  of  the  Old  Testament 
were  fulfilled  in  Christ.  Hence  Augustine  (De  Civ.  Dei,  xviii.) 
answers  certain  persons  who  wished  to  liken  the  number 
of  persecutions  suffered  by  the  Church  to  the  number  of  the 
plagues  of  Egypt,  in  these  words:  /  do  not  think  that  the 
occurrences  in  Egypt  were  in  their  signification  prophetic 
of  these  persecutions,  although  those  who  think  so  have  shown 
nicety  and  ingenuity  in  adapting  them  severally  the  one  to  the 
other,  not  indeed  by  a  prophetic  spirit,  but  by  the  guess-work 
of  the  human  mind,  which  sometimes  reaches  the  truth  and 
sometimes  not.  The  same  remarks  would  seem  applicable  to 
the  statements  of  Abbot  Joachim,  who  by  means  of  such 
conjectures  about  the  future  foretold  some  things  that  were 
true,  and  in  others  was  deceived. 


THIRD  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  RESURRECTION  WILL  TAKE  PLACE  AT 
NIGHT-TIME  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Third  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  resurrection  will  not 
be  at  night-time.  For  the  resurrection  will  not  be  till  the 
heavens  be  broken  (Job  xiv.  12).  Now  when  the  heavenly 
movement  ceases,  which  is  signified  by  its  breaking,  there 
will  be  no  time,  neither  night  nor  day.  Therefore  the  resur 
rection  will  not  be  at  night-time. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  The  end  of  a  thing  ought  to  be  most  per- 


145  TIME  OF  RESURRECTION      Q.77.ART.3 

feet.  Now  the  end  of  time  will  be  then :  wherefore  it  is  said 
(Apoc.  x.  6)  that  time  shall  be  no  longer.  Therefore  time  ought 
to  be  then  in  its  most  perfect  disposition  and  consequently 
it  should  be  the  daytime. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  time  should  be  such  as  to  be  adapted 
to  what  is  done  therein:  wherefore  (John  xiii.  30)  the  night 
is  mentioned  as  being  the  time  when  Judas  went  out  from 
the  fellowship  of  the  light.  Now,  all  things  that  are  hidden 
at  the  present  time  will  then  be  made  most  manifest,  because 
when  the  Lord  shall  come  He  will  bring  to  light  the  hidden 
things  of  darkness,  and  will  make  manifest  the  counsels  of 
the  hearts  (i  Cor.  iv.  5).  Therefore  it  ought  to  be  during 
the  day. 

On  the  contrary,  Christ's  resurrection  is  the  exemplar  of 
ours.  Now  Christ's  resurrection  was  at  night,  as  Gregory 
says  in  a  homily  for  Easter  (xxi.  in  Ev.).  Therefore  our 
resurrection  will  also  be  at  night-time. 

Further,  The  coming  of  our  Lord  is  compared  to  the 
coming  of  a  thief  into  the  house  (Luke  xii.  39,  40).  But 
the  thief  comes  to  the  house  at  night-time.  Therefore  our 
Lord  will  also  come  in  the  night.  Now,  when  He  comes  the 
resurrection  will  take  place,  as  stated  above  (Q.  LXXVI., 
A.  2).  Therefore  the  resurrection  will  be  at  night-time. 

/  answer  that,  The  exact  time  and  hour  at  which  the  resur 
rection  will  be  cannot  be  known  for  certain,  as  stated  in  the 
text  (iv.  Sent.  D.  43).  Nevertheless  some  assert  with  suffi 
cient  probability  that  it  will  be  towards  the  twilight,  the 
moon  being  in  the  east  and  the  sun  in  the  west ;  because  the 
sun  and  moon  are  believed  to  have  been  created  in  these  posi 
tions,  and  thus  their  revolutions  will  be  altogether  completed 
by  their  return  to  the  same  point.  Wherefore  it  is  said  that 
Christ  arose  at  such  an  hour. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  When  the  resurrection  occurs,  it  will  not 
be  time  but  the  end  of  time;  because  at  the  very  instant 
that  the  heavens  will  cease  to  move  the  dead  will  rise  again. 
Nevertheless  the  stars  will  be  in  the  same  position  as  they 
occupy  now  at  any  fixed  hour:  and  accordingly  it  is  said 
that  the  resurrection  will  be  at  this  or  that  hour. 

in.  6  10 


Q.  77.  ART.  4    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  146 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  most  perfect  disposition  of  time  is  said 
to  be  midday,  on  account  of  the  light  given  by  the  sun. 
But  then  the  city  of  God  will  need  neither  sun  nor  moon, 
because  the  glory  of  God  will  enlighten  it  (Apoc.  xxii.  5). 
Wherefore  in  this  respect  it  matters  not  whether  the  resur 
rection  be  in  the  day  or  in  the  night. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  That  time  should  be  adapted  to  manifesta 
tion  as  regards  the  things  that  will  happen  then,  and  to 
secrecy  as  regards  the  fixing  of  the  time.  Hence  either  may 
happen  fittingly,  namely  that  the  resurrection  be  in  the  day 
or  in  the  night. 

FOURTH  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  RESURRECTION  WILL  HAPPEN  SUDDENLY  OR 
BY  DEGREES  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Fourth  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  resurrection  will  not 
happen  suddenly  but  by  degrees.  For  the  resurrection  of 
the  dead  is  foretold  (Ezech.  xxxvii.  7,  8)  where  it  is  written: 
The  bones  came  together  .  .  .  and  I  saw  and  behold  the  sinews 
and  the  flesh  came  up  upon  them,  and  the  skin  was  stretched 
out  over  them,  but  there  was  no  spirit  in  them.  Therefore  the 
restoration  of  the  bodies  will  precede  in  time  their  reunion 
with  the  souls,  and  thus  the  resurrection  will  not  be  sudden. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  A  thing  does  not  happen  suddenly  if  it 
require  several  actions  following  one  another.  Now  the 
resurrection  requires  several  actions  following  one  another, 
namely  the  gathering  of  the  ashes,  the  refashioning  of  the 
body,  the  infusion  of  the  soul.  Therefore  the  resurrection 
will  not  be  sudden. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  All  sound  is  measured  by  time.  Now 
the  sound  of  the  trumpet  will  be  the  cause  of  the  resurrection, 
as  stated  above  (Q.  LXXVI.,  A.  2).  Therefore  the  resurrec 
tion  will  take  time  and  will  not  happen  suddenly. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  No  local  movement  can  be  sudden  as 
stated  in  De  Sensu  et  Sensato,  vii.  Now  the  resurrection 
requires  local  movement  in  the  gathering  of  the  ashes. 
Therefore  it  will  not  happen  suddenly. 


147  TIME  OF  RESURRECTION      Q.77-ART.4 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (i  Cor.  xv.  51,  52):  We  shall 
all  indeed  rise  again  .  .  .  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an 
eye.  Therefore  the  resurrection  will  be  sudden. 

Further,  Infinite  power  works  suddenly.  But  the  Damas 
cene  says  (De  Fide  Orthod.  iv.) :  Thou  shalt  believe  in  the  resur 
rection  to  be  wrought  by  the  power  of  God,  and  it  is  evident  that 
this  is  infinite.  Therefore  the  resurrection  will  be  sudden. 

/  answer  that,  At  the  resurrection  something  will  be  done 
by  the  ministry  of  the  angels,  and  something  immediately 
by  the  power  of  God,  as  stated  above  (Q.  LXXVI.,  A.  3). 
Accordingly  that  which  is  done  by  the  ministry  of  the  angels 
will  not  be  instantaneous,  if  by  instant  we  mean  an  indivisible 
point  of  time,  but  it  will  be  instantaneous  if  by  instant  we 
mean  an  imperceptible  time.  But  that  which  will  be  done 
immediately  by  God's  power  will  happen  suddenly,  namely 
at  the  end  of  the  time  wherein  the  work  of  the  angels  will  be 
done,  because  the  higher  power  brings  the  lower  to  perfection. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Ezechiel  spoke,  like  Moses,  to  a  rough  people, 
and  therefore,  just  as  Moses  divided  the  works  of  the  six 
days  into  days,  in  order  that  the  uncultured  people  might 
be  able  to  understand,  although  all  things  were  made  together 
according  to  Augustine  (Gen.  ad  Lit.  iv.),  so  Ezechiel  expressed 
the  various  things  that  will  happen  in  the  resurrection, 
although  they  will  all  happen  together  in  an  instant. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Although  these  actions  follow  one  another 
in  nature,  they  are  all  together  in  time :  because  either  they 
are  together  in  the  same  instant,  or  one  is  in  the  instant  that 
terminates  the  other. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  same  would  seem  to  apply  to  that 
sound  as  to  the  forms  of  the  sacraments,  namely  that  the 
sound  will  produce  its  effect  in  its  last  instant. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  The  gathering  of  the  ashes  which  cannot  be 
without  local  movement  will  be  done  by  the  ministry  of  the 
angels.  Hence  it  will  be  in  time  though  imperceptible  on 
account  of  the  facility  of  operation  which  is  competent  to 
the  angels. 


QUESTION  LXXVIII. 

OF  THE  TERM   WHEREFROM  OF  THE  RESURRECTION. 
(In  Three  Articles.) 

WE  must  now  consider  the  term  wherefrom  of  the  resurrec 
tion;  and  under  this  head  there  are  three  points  of  inquiry: 
(i)  Whether  death  is  the  term  wherefrom  of  the  resurrection 
in  every  case  ?  (2)  Whether  ashes  are,  or  dust  ?  (3)  Whether 
this  dust  has  a  natural  inclination  towards  the  soul  ? 

FIRST  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  DEATH  WILL  BE  THE  TERM  WHEREFROM  OF  THE 
RESURRECTION  IN  ALL  CASES  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  First  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  death  will  not  be  the  term 
wherefrom  of  the  resurrection  in  all  cases.  Because  some 
shall  not  die  but  shall  be  clothed  with  immortality:  for  it 
is  said  in  the  creed  that  our  Lord  will  come  to  judge  the 
living  and  the  dead.  Now  this  cannot  refer  to  the  time  of 
judgment,  because  then  all  will  be  alive ;  therefore  this  dis 
tinction  must  refer  to  the  previous  time,  and  consequently 
all  will  not  die  before  the  judgment. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  A  natural  and  common  desire  cannot  be 
empty  and  vain,  but  is  fulfilled  in  some  cases.  Now  accord 
ing  to  the  Apostle  (2  Cor.  v.  4)  it  is  a  common  desire  that 
we  would  not  be  unclothed  but  clothed  upon.  Therefore  there 
will  be  some  who  will  never  be  stripped  of  the  body  by  death, 
but  will  be  arrayed  in  the  glory  of  the  resurrection. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  Augustine  says  (Enchir.  cxv.)  that  the 
four  last  petitions  of  the  Lord's  prayer  refer  to  the  present 

148 


149  TERM  OF  RESURRECTION      Q.78.ARx.i 

life :  and  one  of  them  is :  Forgive  us  our  debts  (Douay, — tres 
passes).  Therefore  the  Church  prays  that  all  debts  may 
be  forgiven  her  in  this  life.  Now  the  Church's  prayer  can 
not  be  void  and  not  granted:  If  you  ask  the  Father  anything 
in  My  name,  He  will  give  it  you  (Jo.  xvi.  23).  Therefore 
at  some  time  of  this  life  the  Church  will  receive  the  remission 
of  all  debts:  and  one  of  the  debts  to  which  we  are  bound 
by  the  sin  of  our  first  parent  is  that  we  be  born  in  original 
sin.  Therefore  at  some  time  God  will  grant  to  the  Church 
that  men  be  bom  without  original  sin.  But  death  is  the 
punishment  of  original  sin.  Therefore  at  the  end  of  the 
world  there  will  be  some  men  who  will  not  die :  and  so  the 
same  conclusion  follows. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  The  wise  man  should  always  choose  the 
shortest  way.  Now  the  shortest  way  is  for  the  men  who 
shall  be  found  living  to  be  transferred  to  the  impassibility  of 
the  resurrection,  than  for  them  to  die  first,  and  afterwards 
rise  again  from  death  to  immortality.  Therefore  God  Who 
is  supremely  wise  will  choose  this  way  for  those  who  shall 
be  found  living. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (i  Cor.  xv.  36) :  That  which 
thou  sowest  is  not  quickened  except  it  die  first,  and  he  is  speak 
ing  of  the  resurrection  of  the  body  as  compared  to  the  seed. 

Further,  It  is  written  (ibid.  22):  As  in  Adam  all  die,  so 
also  in  Christ  all  shall  be  made  alive.  Now  all  shall  be  made 
alive  in  Christ.  Therefore  all  shall  die  in  Adam:  and  so  all 
shall  rise  again  from  death. 

I  answer  that,  The  saints  differ  in  speaking  on  this  question, 
as  may  be  seen  in  the  text  (iv.  Sent.  D.  43).  However,  the 
safer  and  more  common  opinion  is  that  all  shall  die  and  rise 
again  from  death :  and  this  for  three  reasons.  First,  because 
it  is  more  in  accord  with  Divine  justice,  which  condemned 
human  nature  for  the  sin  of  its  first  parent,  that  all  who  by 
the  act  of  nature  derive  their  origin  from  him  should  con 
tract  the  stain  of  original  sin,  and  consequently  be  the  debtors 
of  death.  Secondly,  because  it  is  more  in  agreement  with 
Divine  Scripture  which  foretells  the  resurrection  of  all;  and 
resurrection  is  not  predicted  properly  except  of  that  which 


Q.  78.  ART.  i     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  150 

has  fallen  and  perished,  as  the  Damascene  says  (De  Fide 
Orthod.  iv.).  Thirdly,  because  it  is  more  in  harmony  with 
the  order  of  nature  where  we  find  that  what  is  corrupted 
and  decayed  is  not  renewed  except  by  means  of  corruption : 
thus  vinegar  does  not  become  wine  unless  the  vinegar  be 
corrupted  and  pass  into  the  juice  of  the  grape.  Wherefore 
since  human  nature  has  incurred  the  defect  of  the  neces 
sity  of  death,  it  cannot  return  to  immortality  save  by  means 
of  death.  It  is  also  in  keeping  with  the  order  of  nature  for 
another  reason,  because, as  it  is  stated  in  Phys.  viii.,  text,  i,  the 
movement  of  heaven  is  as  a  kind  of  life  to  all  existing  in  nature, 
just  as  the  movement  oi  the  heart  is  a  kind  of  life  of  the  whole 
body :  wherefore  even  as  all  the  members  become  dead  on  the 
heart  ceasing  to  move,  so  when  the  heavenly  movement 
ceases  nothing  can  remain  living  with  that  life  which  was 
sustained  by  the  influence  of  that  movement.  Now  such 
is  the  life  by  which  we  live  now :  and  therefore  it  follows  that 
those  who  shall  live  after  the  movement  of  the  heaven 
comes  to  a  standstill  must  depart  from  this  life. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  This  distinction  of  the  dead  and  the  living 
does  not  apply  to  the  time  itself  of  the  judgment,  nor  to  the 
whole  preceding  time,  since  all  who  are  to  be  judged  were 
living  at  some  time,  and  dead  at  some  time :  but  it  applies 
to  that  particular  time  which  shall  precede  the  judgment 
immediately,  when,  to  wit,  the  signs  of  the  judgment  shall 
begin  to  appear. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  perfect  desire  of  the  saints  cannot  be 
void;  but  nothing  prevents  their  conditional  desire  being 
void.  Such  is  the  desire  whereby  we  would  not  be  unclothed, 
but  clothed  upon,  namely  if  that  be  possible :  and  this  desire 
is  called  by  some  a  velleity. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  It  is  erroneous  to  say  that  any  one  except 
Christ  is  conceived  without  original  sin,  because  those  who 
would  be  conceived  without  original  sin  would  not  need  the 
redemption  which  was  wrought  by  Christ,  and  thus  Christ 
would  not  be  the  Redeemer  of  all  men.*  Nor  can  it  be 
said  that  they  needed  not  this  redemption,  because  it  was 
*  See  Editor's  note  at  the  beginning  of  Part  III.,  Second  Number. 


i5i  TERM  OF  RESURRECTION      Q.  78.  ART.  2 

granted  to  them  that  they  should  be  conceived  without  sin. 
For,  this  grace  was  vouchsafed, — either  to  their  parents,  that 
the  sin  of  nature  might  be  healed  in  them  (because  so  long  as 
that  sin  remained  they  were  unable  to  beget  without  com 
municating  original  sin), — or  to  nature  itself  which  washealed. 
Now  we  must  allow  that  every  one  needs  the  redemption  of 
Christ  personally,  and  not  only  by  reason  of  nature,  and 
one  cannot  be  delivered  from  an  evil  or  absolved  from  a 
debt  unless  one  incur  the  debt  or  incur  the  evil :  and  conse 
quently  all  could  not  reap  in  themselves  the  fruit  of  the 
Lord's  prayer,  unless  all  were  born  debtors  and  subject  to 
evil.  Hence  the  forgiveness  of  debts  or  delivery  from  evil 
cannot  be  applied  to  one  who  is  born  without  a  debt  or  free 
from  evil,  but  only  to  one  who  is  born  with  a  debt  and  is 
afterwards  delivered  by  the  grace  of  Christ.  Nor  does  it 
follow,  if  it  can  be  asserted  without  error  that  some  die  not, 
that  they  are  born  without  original  sin,  although  death  is  a 
punishment  of  original  sm;  because  God  can  of  His  mercy 
remit  the  punishment  which  one  has  incurred  by  a  past 
fault,  as  He  forgave  the  adulterous  woman  without  punish 
ment  (Jo.  viii.) :  and  in  like  manner  He  can  deliver  from 
death  those  who  have  contracted  the  debt  of  death  by  being 
born  in  original  sin.  And  thus  it  does  not  follow  that  if 
they  die  not,  therefore  they  were  born  without  original  sin. 
Reply  Obj.  4.  The  shortest  way  is  not  always  the  one  to  be 
chosen,  but  only  when  it  is  more  or  equally  adapted  for 
attaining  the  end.  It  is  not  so  here,  as  is  clear  from  what 
we  have  said. 

SECOND  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  ALL  WILL  RISE  AGAIN  FROM  ASHES  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Second  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  all  will  not  rise  again 
from  ashes.  For  Christ's  resurrection  is  the  exemplar  of 
ours.  Yet  His  resurrection  was  not  from  ashes,  for  His 
flesh  saw  not  corruption  according  to  Ps.  xv.  10;  Acts  ii.  27, 
31.  Therefore  neither  will  all  rise  again  from  ashes. 

Obj .  2.  Further,  The  human  body  is  not  always  burnt. 


Q.  78.  ART.  2     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  152 

Yet  a  thing  cannot  be  reduced  to  ashes  unless  it  be  burnt. 
Therefore  not  all  will  rise  again  from  ashes. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  body  of  a  dead  man  is  not  reduced  to 
ashes  immediately  after  death.  But  some  will  rise  again 
at  once  after  death,  according  to  the  text  (iv.  Sent.  D.  43), 
namely  those  who  will  be  found  living.  Therefore  all  will 
not  rise  again  from  ashes. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  The  term  wherefrom  corresponds  to  the 
term  whereto.  Now  the  term  whereto  of  the  resurrection  is 
not  the  same  in  the  good  as  in  the  wicked:  We  shall  all 
indeed  rise  again,  but  we  shall  not  all  be  changed  (i  Cor.  xv.  51). 
Therefore  the  term  wherefrom  is  not  the  same.  And  thus, 
if  the  wicked  rise  again  from  ashes,  the  good  will  not  rise 
again  from  ashes. 

On  the  contrary,  Haymo  says  (on  Rom.  v.  10,  For  if  when 
we  were  enemies}:  All  who  are  born  in  original  sin  lie  under  the 
sentence  :  Earth  thou  art  and  into  earth  shall  thou  go.  Now 
all  who  shall  rise  again  at  the  general  resurrection  were 
born  in  original  sin,  either  at  their  birth  within  the  womb 
or  at  least  at  their  birth  from  the  womb.  Therefore  all  will 
rise  again  from  ashes. 

Further,  there  are  many  things  in  the  human  body  that  do 
not  truly  belong  to  human  nature.  But  all  these  will  be  re 
moved.  Therefore  all  bodies  must  needs  be  reduced  to  ashes. 

/  answer  that,  The  same  reasons  by  which  we  have  shown 
(A.  i)  that  ah1  rise  again  from  death  prove  also  that  at  the 
general  resurrection  all  will  rise  again  from  ashes,  unless 
the  contrary,  such  as  the  hastening  of  their  resurrection, 
be  vouchsafed  to  certain  persons  by  a  special  privilege  of 
grace.  For  just  as  holy  writ  foretells  the  resurrection,  so 
does  it  foretell  the  reformation  of  bodies  (Phil.  iii.  21).  And 
thus  it  follows  that  even  as  all  die  that  the  bodies  of  all  may 
be  able  truly  to  rise  again,  so  will  the  bodies  of  all  perish 
that  they  may  be  able  to  be  reformed.  For  just  as  death 
was  inflicted  by  Divine  justice  as  a  punishment  on  man,  so 
was  the  decay  of  the  body,  as  appears  from  Gen.  iii.  19, 
Earth  thou  art  and  into  earth  shall  thou  go.* 

*  Vulg., — Dust  thou  art  and  into  dust  thou  shalt  return. 


153  TERM  OF  RESURRECTION     Q.  78.  ART.  2 

Moreover  the  order  of  nature  requires  the  dissolution  not 
only  of  the  union  of  soul  and  body,  but  also  of  the  mingling 
of  the  elements:  even  as  vinegar  cannot  be  brought  back 
to  the  quality  of  wine  unless  it  first  be  dissolved  into  the 
prejacent^  matter :  for  the  mingling  of  the  elements  is  both 
caused  and  preserved  by  the  movement  of  the  heaven,  and 
when  this  ceases  all  mixed  bodies  will  be  dissolved  into  pure 
elements. 

Reply  Obj.  I.  Christ's  resurrection  is  the  exemplar  of  ours 
as  to  the  term  whereto,  but  not  as  to  the  term  wherefrom. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  By  ashes  we  mean  all  the  remains  that  are 
left  after  the  dissolution  of  the  body, — for  two  reasons. 
First,  because  it  was  the  common  custom  in  olden  times  to 
burn  the  bodies  of  the  dead,  and  to  keep  the  ashes,  whence  it 
became  customary  to  speak  of  the  remains  of  a  human  body 
as  ashes.  Secondly,  on  account  of  the  cause  of  dissolution, 
which  is  the  flame  of  the  fomes*  whereby  the  human  body 
is  radically  infected.  Hence,  in  order  to  be  cleansed  of  this 
infection  the  human  body  must  needs  be  dissolved  into  its 
primary  components:  and  when  a  thing  is  destroyed  by 
fire  it  is  said  to  be  reduced  to  ashes;  wherefore  the  name 
of  ashes  is  given  to  those  things  into  which  the  human  body 
is  dissolved. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  fire  that  will  cleanse  the  face  of  the 
earth  will  be  able  to  reduce  suddenly  to  ashes  the  bodies  of 
those  that  will  be  found  living,  even  as  it  will  dissolve  other 
mixed  bodies  into  their  prejacent  matter. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  Movement  does  not  take  its  species  from 
its  term  wherefrom  but  from  its  term  whereto.  Hence  the 
resurrection  of  the  saints  which  will  be  glorious  must  needs 
differ  from  the  resurrection  of  the  wicked  which  will  not  be 
glorious,  in  respect  of  the  term  whereto,  and  not  in  respect  of 
the  term  wherefrom.  And  it  often  happens  that  the  term 
whereto  is  not  the  same,  whereas  the  term  wherefrom  is  the 
same, — for  instance,  a  thing  may  be  moved  from  blackness 
to  whiteness  and  to  pallor. 

*  Cf.  I.-IL,  Q.  LXXXIL,  A.  3. 


Q.  78.  ART.  3     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  154 

THIRD  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  ASHES  FROM  WHICH  THE  HUMAN  BODY  WILL 
BE  RESTORED  HAVE  ANY  NATURAL  INCLINATION  TOWARDS 
THE  SOUL  WHICH  WILL  BE  UNITED  TO  THEM  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Third  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  ashes  from  which  the 
human  body  will  be  restored  will  have  a  natural  inclination 
towards  the  soul  which  will  be  united  to  them.  For  if 
they  had  no  inclination  towards  the  soul,  they  would  stand 
in  the  same  relation  to  that  soul  as  other  ashes.  Therefore 
it  would  make  no  difference  whether  the  body  that  is  to  be 
united  to  that  soul  were  restored  from  those  ashes  or  from 
others :  and  this  is  false. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  The  body  is  more  dependent  on  the  soul 
than  the  soul  on  the  body.  Now  the  soul  separated  from 
the  body  is  still  somewhat  dependent  on  the  body,  where 
fore  its  movement  towards  God  is  retarded  on  account  of  its 
desire  for  the  body,  as  Augustine  says  (Gen.  ad  Lit.  xii.). 
Much  more,  therefore,  has  the  body  when  separated  from 
the  soul,  a  natural  inclination  towards  that  soul. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  It  is  written  (Job  xx.  n) :  His  bones  shall 
be  filled  with  the  vices  of  his  youth,  and  they  shall  sleep  with 
him  in  the  dust.  But  vices  are  only  in  the  soul.  Therefore 
there  will  still  remain  in  those  ashes  a  natural  inclination 
towards  the  soul. 

On  the  contrary,  The  human  body  can  be  dissolved  into 
the  very  elements,  or  changed  into  the  flesh  of  other  animals. 
But  the  elements  are  homogeneous,  and  so  is  the  flesh  of  a 
lion  or  other  animal.  Since  then  in  the  other  parts  of  the 
elements  or  animals  there  is  no  natural  inclination  to  that 
soul,  neither  will  there  be  an  inclination  towards  the  soul 
in  those  parts  into  which  the  human  body  has  been  changed. 
The  first  proposition  is  made  evident  on  the  authority  of 
Augustine  (Enchir.  Ixxxviii.) :  The  human  body,  although 
changed  into  the  substance  of  other  bodies  or  even  into  the  ele 
ments,  although  it  has  become  the  food  and  flesh  of  any  animals 
whatsoever,  even  of  man,  will  in  an  instant  return  to  that  soul 


155  TERM  OF  RESURRECTION      Q.  78.  ART.  3 

which  erstwhile  animated  it,  making  it  a  living  and  growing 
man. 

Further,  To  every  natural  inclination  there  corresponds  a 
natural  agent:  else  nature  would  fail  in  necessaries.  Now 
the  aforesaid  ashes  cannot  be  reunited  to  the  same  soul 
by  any  natural  agent.  Therefore  there  is  not  in  them  any 
natural  inclination  to  the  aforesaid  reunion. 

/  answer  that,  Opinion  is  threefold  on  this  point.  For 
some  say  that  the  human  body  is  never  dissolved  into  its 
very  elements;  and  so  there  always  remains  in  the  ashes  a 
certain  force  besides  the  elements,  which  gives  a  natural 
inclination  to  the  same  soul.  But  this  assertion  is  in  con 
tradiction  with  the  authority  of  Augustine  quoted  above, 
as  well  as  with  the  senses  and  reason:  since  whatever  is 
composed  of  contraries  can  be  dissolved  into  its  component 
parts.  Wherefore  others  say  that  these  parts  of  the  ele 
ments  into  which  the  human  body  is  dissolved  retain  more 
light,  through  having  been  united  to  the  soul,  and  for  this 
reason  have  a  natural  inclination  to  human  souls.  But 
this  again  is  nonsensical,  since  the  parts  of  the  elements  are 
of  the  same  nature  and  have  an  equal  share  of  light  and 
darkness.  Hence  we  must  say  differently  that  in  those 
ashes  there  is  no  natural  inclination  to  resurrection,  but  only 
by  the  ordering  of  Divine  providence,  which  decreed  that 
those  ashes  should  be  reunited  to  the  soul :  it  is  on  this  account 
that  those  parts  of  the  elements  shall  be  reunited  and  not 
others. 

Hence  the  Reply  to  the  First  Objection  is  clear. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  soul  separated  from  the  body  remains 
in  the  same  nature  that  it  has  when  united  to  the  body.  It 
is  not  so  with  the  body,  and  consequently  the  comparison 
fails. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  These  words  of  Job  do  not  mean  that  the 
vices  actually  remain  in  the  ashes  of  the  dead,  but  that  they 
remain  according  to  the  ordering  of  Divine  justice,  whereby 
those  ashes  are  destined  to  the  restoration  of  the  body  which 
will  suffer  eternally  for  the  sins  committed. 


QUESTION  LXXIX. 

OF  THE  CONDITIONS  OF  THOSE  WHO  RISE  AGAIN, 
AND  FIRST  OF  THEIR  IDENTITY. 

(In  Three  Articles.) 

IN  the  next  place  we  must  consider  the  conditions  of  those 
who  rise  again.  Here  we  shall  consider :  (i)  Those  which  con 
cern  the  good  and  wicked  in  common ;  (2)  those  which  con 
cern  the  good  only;  (3)  those  which  concern  only  the  wicked. 
Three  things  concern  the  good  and  wicked  in  common, 
namely  their  identity,  their  integrity,  and  their  quality :  and 
we  shall  inquire  (i)  about  their  identity:  (2)  about  their 
integrity;  (3)  about  their  quality. 

Under  the  first  head  there  are  three  points  of  inquiry: 

(1)  Whether  the  body  will  rise  again  identically  the  same  ? 

(2)  Whether  it  will  be  the  selfsame  man  ?     (3)  Whether  it 
is  necessary  that  the  same  ashes  should  return  to  the  same 
parts  in  which  they  were  before  ? 

FIRST  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  IN  THE  RESURRECTION  THE  SOUL  WILL  BE  REUNITED 
TO  THE  SAME  IDENTICAL  BODY  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  First  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  soul  will  not  be  re 
united  to  the  same  identical  body  at  the  resurrection,  for 
thou  sowest  not  the  body  that  shall  be,  but  bare  grain  (i  Cor. 
xv.  37).  Now  the  Apostle  is  there  comparing  death  to 
sowing  and  resurrection  to  fructifying.  Therefore  the  same 
body  that  is  laid  aside  in  death  is  not  resumed  at  the  resur 
rection. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  To  every  form  some  matter  is  adapted 

156 


157     IDENTITY  AFTER  RESURRECTION    Q.yg.ARx.i 

according  to  its  condition,  and  likewise  to  every  agent  some 
instrument.  Now  the  body  is  compared  to  the  soul  as  matter 
to  form,  and  as  instrument  to  agent.  Since  then  at  the  resur 
rection  the  soul  will  not  be  of  the  same  condition  as  now  (for 
it  will  be  either  entirely  borne  away  to  the  heavenly  life 
to  which  it  adhered  while  living  in  the  world,  or  will  be  cast 
down  into  the  life  of  the  brutes,  if  it  lived  as  a  brute  in  this 
world)  it  would  seem  that  it  will  not  resume  the  same  body, 
but  either  a  heavenly  or  a  brutish  body. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  After  death,  as  stated  above  (Q.  LXXVIII., 
A.  3),  the  human  body  is  dissolved  into  the  elements.  Now 
these  elemental  parts  into  which  the  human  body  has  been 
dissolved  do  not  agree  with  the  human  body  dissolved 
into  them,  except  in  primary  matter,  even  as  any  other 
elemental  parts  agree  with  that  same  body.  But  if  the  body 
were  to  be  formed  from  those  other  elemental  parts,  it  would 
not  be  described  as  identically  the  same.  Therefore  neither 
will  it  be  the  selfsame  body  if  it  be  restored  from  these  parts. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  There  cannot  be  numerical  identity  where 
there  is  numerical  distinction  of  essential  parts.  Now  the 
form  of  the  mixed  body,  which  form  is  an  essential  part  of 
the  human  body,  as  being  its  form,  cannot  be  resumed  in 
numerical  identity.  Therefore  the  body  will  not  be  identi 
cally  the  same.  The  minor  is  proved  thus:  That  which 
passes  away  into  complete  nonentity  cannot  be  resumed 
in  identity.  This  is  clear  from  the  fact  that  there  cannot  be 
identity  where  there  is  distinction  of  existence :  and  existence, 
which  is  the  act  of  a  being,  is  differentiated  by  being  inter 
rupted,  as  is  any  interrupted  act.  Now  the  form  of  a 
mixed  body  passes  away  into  complete  nonentity  by  death, 
since  it  is  a  bodily  form,  and  so  also  do  the  contrary  qualities 
from  which  the  mixture  results.  Therefore  the  form  of  a 
mixed  body  does  not  return  in  identity. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (Job  xix.  26):  In  my  flesh  I 
shall  see  God  my  Saviour  (Vulg., — my  God],  where  he  is 
speaking  of  the  vision  after  the  resurrection,  as  appears 
from  the  preceding  words :  In  the  last  day  I  shall  rise  out  of 
the  earth.  Therefore  the  selfsame  body  will  rise  again. 


Q.  79-  ART.  i     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  158 

Further,  The  Damascene  says  (De  Fide  Orthod.  iv.) :  Resur 
rection  is  the  second  rising  of  that  which  has  fallen.  But  the 
body  which  we  have  now  fell  by  death.  Therefore  it  will  rise 
again  the  same  identically. 

/  answer  that,  On  this  point  the  philosophers  erred  and 
certain  modern  heretics  err.  For  some  of  the  philosophers 
allowed  that  souls  separated  from  bodies  are  reunited  to 
bodies,  yet  they  erred  in  this  in  two  ways.  First,  as  to  the 
mode  of  reunion,  for  some  held  the  separated  soul  to  be 
naturally  reunited  to  a  body  by  the  way  of  generation. 
Secondly,  as  to  the  body  to  which  it  was  reunited,  for  they  held 
that  this  second  union  was  not  with  the  selfsame  body  that 
was  laid  aside  in  death,  but  with  another,  sometimes  of  the 
same,  sometimes  of  a  different  species.  Of  a  different  species 
when  the  soul  while  existing  in  the  body  had  led  a  life  contrary 
to  the  ordering  of  reason:  wherefore  it  passed  after  death 
from  the  body  of  a  man  into  the  body  of  some  other  animal 
to  whose  manner  of  living  it  had  conformed  in  this  life,  for 
instance  into  the  body  of  a  dog  on  account  of  lust,  into  the 
body  of  a  lion  on  account  of  robbery  and  violence,  and  so 
forth, — and  into  a  body  of  the  same  species  when  the  soul 
has  led  a  good  life  in  the  body,  and  having  after  death  ex 
perienced  some  happiness,  after  some  centuries  began  to 
wish  to  return  to  the  body;  and  thus  it  was  reunited  to  a 
human  body.  But  this  opinion  arises  from  two  false  sources. 
The  first  of  these  is  that  they  said  that  the  soul  is  not  united 
to  the  body  essentially  as  form  to  matter,  but  only  accident 
ally,  as  mover  to  the  thing  moved,*  or  as  a  man  to  his  clothes. 
Hence  it  was  possible  for  them  to  maintain  that  the  soul 
pre-existed  before  being  infused  into  the  body  begotten  of 
natural  generation,  as  also  that  it  is  united  to  various  bodies. 
The  second  is  that  they  held  intellect  not  to  differ  from 
sense  except  accidentally,  so  that  man  would  be  said  to 
surpass  other  animals  in  intelligence,  because  the  sensitive 
power  is  more  acute  in  him  on  account  of  the  excellence  of 
his  bodily  complexion ;  and  hence  it  was  possible  for  them  to 
assert  that  man's  soul  passes  into  the  soul  of  a  brute  animal, 
*  Cf.  P.  I.,  Q.  LXXVL,  A.  i. 


159    IDENTITY  AFTER  RESURRECTION     Q.  79-  ART.  i 

especially  when  the  human  soul  has  been  habituated  to 
brutish  actions.  But  these  two  sources  are  refuted  by  the 
Philosopher  (De  Anima,  ii.),  and  in  consequence  of  these 
being  refuted,  it  is  clear  that  the  above  opinion  is  false. 

In  like  manner  the  errors  of  certain  heretics  are  refuted. 
Some  of  them  fell  into  the  aforesaid  opinions  of  the  philo 
sophers  :  while  others  held  that  souls  are  reunited  to  heavenly 
bodies,  or  again  to  bodies  subtle  as  the  wind,  as  Gregory 
relates  of  a  certain  Bishop  of  Constantinople,  in  his  exposition 
of  Job  xix.  26,  In  my  flesh  I  shall  see  my  God,  etc.  Moreover 
these  same  errors  of  heretics  may  be  refuted  by  the  fact  that 
they  are  prejudicial  to  the  truth  of  resurrection  as  witnessed 
to  by  Holy  Writ.  For  we  cannot  call  it  resurrection  unless 
the  soul  return  to  the  same  body,  since  resurrection  is  a 
second  rising,  and  the  same  thing  rises  that  falls :  wherefore 
resurrection  regards  the  body  which  after  death  falls  rather 
than  the  soul  which  after  death  lives.  And  consequently 
if  it  be  not  the  same  body  which  the  soul  resumes,  it  will  not 
be  a  resurrection,  but  rather  the  assuming  of  a  new  body. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  A  comparison  does  not  apply  to  every  parti 
cular,  but  to  some.  For  in  the  sowing  of  grain,  the  grain 
sown  and  the  grain  that  is  born  thereof  are  neither  identical, 
nor  of  the  same  condition,  since  it  was  first  sown  without  a 
husk,  yet  is  born  with  one :  and  the  body  will  rise  again 
identically  the  same,  but  of  a  different  condition,  since  it 
was  mortal  and  will  rise  in  immortality. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  soul  rising  again  and  the  soul  living  in 
this  world  differ,  not  in  essence  but  in  respect  of  glory  and 
misery,  which  is  an  accidental  difference.  Hence  it  follows 
that  the  body  in  rising  again  differs,  not  in  identity,  but  in 
condition,  so  that  a  difference  of  bodies  corresponds  propor 
tionally  to  the  difference  of  souls. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  That  which  is  understood  as  though  it  were 
in  matter  before  its  form  remains  in  matter  after  corruption, 
because  when  that  which  comes  afterwards  is  removed 
that  which  came  before  may  yet  remain.  Now,  as  the  Com 
mentator  observes  on  the  First  Book  of  Physics  and  in  De 
Substantia  Orbis,  in  the  matter  of  things  subject  to  generation 


Q.  79.  ART.  i     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  160 

and  corruption,  we  must  presuppose  undeterminate  dimen 
sions,  by  reason  of  which  matter  is  divisible,  so  as  to  be  able 
to  receive  various  forms  in  its  various  parts.  Wherefore  after 
the  separation  of  the  substantial  form  from  matter,  these 
dimensions  still  remain  the  same:  and  consequently  the 
matter  existing  under  those  dimensions,  whatever  form  it 
receive,  is  more  identified  with  that  which  was  generated  from 
it,  than  any  other  part  of  matter  existing  under  any  form 
whatever.  Thus  the  matter  that  will  be  brought  back  to 
restore  the  human  body  will  be  the  same  as  that  body's 
previous  matter. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  Even  as  a  simple  quality  is  not  the  substantial 
form  of  an  element,  but  its  proper  accident,  and  the  disposi 
tion  whereby  its  matter  is  rendered  proper  to  such  a  form;  so 
the  form  of  a  mixed  body,  which  form  is  a  quality  resulting 
from  simple  qualities  reduced  to  a  mean,  is  not  the  substan 
tial  form  of  the  mixed  body,  but  its  proper  accident,  and  the 
disposition  whereby  the  matter  is  in  need  of  the  form.  Now 
the  human  body  has  no  substantial  form  besides  this  form 
of  the  mixed  body,  except  the  rational  soul,  for  if  it  had  any 
previous  substantial  form,  this  would  give  it  substantial 
being,  and  would  establish  it  in  the  genus  of  substance: 
so  that  the  soul  would  be  united  to  a  body  already  estab 
lished  in  the  genus  of  substance,  and  thus  the  soul  would  be 
compared  to  the  body  as  artificial  forms  are  to  their  matter, 
in  respect  of  their  being  established  in  the  genus  of  substance 
by  their  matter.  Hence  the  union  of  the  soul  to  the  body 
would  be  accidental,  which  is  the  error  of  the  ancient  philo 
sophers  refuted  by  the  Philosopher  (De  Anima,  ii.,  text.  4 
seq. ;  i.,  text.  52).  It  would  also  follow  that  the  human  body 
and  each  of  its  parts  would  not  retain  their  former  names 
in  the  same  sense,  which  is  contrary  to  the  teaching  of  the 
Philosopher.  Therefore  since  the  rational  soul  remains, 
no  substantial  form  of  the  human  body  falls  away  into 
complete  nonentity.  And  the  variation  of  accidental  forms 
does  not  make  a  difference  of  identity.  Therefore  the  self 
same  body  will  rise  again,  since  the  selfsame  matter  is 
resumed  as  stated  in  a  previous  reply  (ad  2). 


161     IDENTITY  AFTER  RESURRECTION    Q.  79.  ART.  2 


SECOND  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  IT  WILL  BE  IDENTICALLY  THE  SAME  MAN  THAT 
SHALL  RISE  AGAIN  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Second  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  it  will  not  be  identically 
the  same  man  that  shall  rise  again.  For  according  to  the 
Philosopher  (De  Gener.  ii.):  Whatsoever  things  are  changed  in 
their  corruptible  substance  are  not  repeated  identically.  Now 
such  is  man's  substance  in  his  present  state.  Therefore 
after  the  change  wrought  by  death  the  selfsame  man  cannot 
be  repeated. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Where  there  is  a  distinction  of  human 
nature  there  is  not  the  same  identical  man:  wherefore 
Socrates  and  Plato  are  two  men  and  not  one  man,  since  each 
has  his  own  distinct  human  nature.  Now  the  human  nature 
of  one  who  rises  again  is  distinct  from  that  which  he  has 
now.  Therefore  he  is  not  the  same  identical  man.  The 
minor  can  be  proved  in  two  ways.  First,  because  human 
nature  which  is  the  form  of  the  whole  is  not  both  form  and 
substance  as  the  soul  is,  but  is  a  form  only.  Now  suchlike 
forms  pass  away  into  complete  nonentity,  and  consequently 
they  cannot  be  restored.  Secondly,  because  human  nature 
results  from  union  of  parts.  Now  the  same  identical  union 
as  that  which  was  heretofore  cannot  be  resumed,  because 
repetition  is  opposed  to  identity,  since  repetition  implies 
number,  whereas  identity  implies  unity,  and  these  are  in 
compatible  with  one  another.  But  resurrection  is  a  repeated 
union :  therefore  the  union  is  not  the  same,  and  consequently 
there  is  not  the  same  human  nature  nor  the  same  man. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  One  same  man  is  not  several  animals: 
wherefore  if  it  is  not  the  same  animal  it  is  not  the  same 
identical  man.  Now  where  sense  is  not  the  same,  there  is 
not  the  same  animal,  since  animal  is  defined  from  the  primary 
sense,  namely  touch.  But  sense,  as  it  does  not  remain  in 
the  separated  soul  (as  some  maintain),  cannot  be  resumed 
in  identity.  Therefore  the  man  who  rises  again  will  not 

in.  6  ii 


Q.  79.  ARx.2     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  162 

be  the  same  identical  animal,  and  consequently  he  will  not 
be  the  same  man. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  The  matter  of  a  statue  ranks  higher  in  the 
statue  than  the  matter  of  a  man  does  in  man :  because  artifi 
cial  things  belong  to  the  genus  of  substance  by  reason  of 
their  matter,  but  natural  things  by  reason  of  their  form, 
as  appears  from  the  Philosopher  (Phys.  ii.,  text.  8,  seq.),  and 
again  from  the  Commentator  (De  Anima,  ii.).  But  if  a  statue 
is  remade  from  the  same  brass,  it  will  not  be  the  same 
identically.  Therefore  much  less  will  it  be  identically  the 
same  man  if  he  be  reformed  from  the  same  ashes. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (Job  xix.  27) :  Whom  I  myself 
shall  see  .  .  .  and  not  another,  and  he  is  speaking  of  the  vision 
after  the  resurrection.  Therefore  the  same  identical  man 
will  rise  again. 

Further,  Augustine  says  (De  Trin.  viii.)  that  to  rise  again 
is  naught  else  but  to  live  again.  Now  unless  the  same  identical 
man  that  died  return  to  life,  he  would  not  be  said  to  live 
again.  Therefore  he  would  not  rise  again,  which  is  contrary 
to  faith. 

I  answer  that,  The  necessity  of  holding  the  resurrection 
arises  from  this, — that  man  may  obtain  the  last  end  for 
which  he  was  made ;  for  this  cannot  be  accomplished  in  this 
life,  nor  in  the  life  of  the  separated  soul,  as  stated  above 
(Q.  LXXV.,  AA.  i,  2) :  otherwise  man  would  have  been  made 
in  vain,  if  he  were  unable  to  obtain  the  end  for  which  he  was 
made.  And  since  it  behoves  the  end  to  be  obtained  by  the 
selfsame  thing  that  was  made  for  that  end,  lest  it  appear 
to  be  made  without  purpose,  it  is  necessary  for  the  selfsame 
man  to  rise  again;  and  this  is  effected  by  the  selfsame  soul 
being  united  to  the  selfsame  body.  For  otherwise  there 
would  be  no  resurrection  properly  speaking,  if  the  same  man 
were  not  reformed.  Hence  to  maintain  that  he  who  rises 
again  is  not  the  selfsame  man  is  heretical,  since  it  is  contrary 
to  the  truth  of  Scripture  which  proclaims  the  resurrection. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  The  Philosopher  is  speaking  of  repetition  by 
movement  or  natural  change.  For  he  shows  the  difference 
between  the  recurrence  that  occurs  in  generation  and  corrup- 


163    IDENTITY  AFTER  RESURRECTION    Q.  79.  ART.  2 

tion  and  that  which  is  observed  in  the  movement  of  the 
heavens.  Because  the  selfsame  heaven  by  local  movement 
returns  to  the  beginning  of  its  movement,  since  it  has 
a  moved  incorruptible  substance.  On  the  other  hand, 
things  subject  to  generation  and  corruption  return  by  genera 
tion  to  specific  but  not  numerical  identity,  because  from 
man  blood  is  engendered,  from  blood  seed,  and  so  on  until 
a  man  is  begotten,  not  the  selfsame  man,  but  the  same 
specifically.  In  like  manner  from  fire  comes  air,  from  air 
water,  from  water  earth,  whence  fire  is  produced,  not  the  self 
same  fire,  but  the  same  in  species.  Hence  it  is  clear  that  the 
argument,  so  far  as  the  meaning  of  the  Philosopher  is  con 
cerned,  is  not  tc  the  point.  We  may  also  reply  that  the 
form  of  other  things  subject  to  generation  and  corruption 
is  not  subsistent  of  itself,  so  as  to  be  able  to  remain  after  the 
corruption  of  the  composite,  as  it  is  with  the  rational  soul. 
For  the  soul,  even  after  separation  from  the  body,  retains  the 
being  which  accrues  to  it  when  in  the  body,  and  the  body  is 
made  to  share  that  being  by  the  resurrection,  since  the  being 
of  the  body  and  the  being  of  the  soul  in  the  body  are  not  dis 
tinct  from  one  another,  otherwise  the  union  of  soul  and  body 
would  be  accidental.  Consequently  there  has  been  no  inter 
ruption  in  the  substantial  being  of  man,  as  would  make  it 
impossible  for  the  selfsame  man  to  return  on  account  of  an 
interruption  in  his  being,  as  is  the  case  with  other  things 
that  are  corrupted,  the  being  of  which  is  interrupted  alto 
gether,  since  their  form  remains  not,  and  their  matter  remains 
under  another  being.  Nevertheless  neither  does  the  self 
same  man  recur  by  natural  generation,  because  the  body  of 
the  man  begotten  is  not  composed  of  the  whole  body  of  his 
begetter :  hence  his  body  is  numerically  distinct,  and  conse 
quently  his  soul  and  the  whole  man. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  There  are  two  opinions  about  humanity  and 
about  any  form  of  a  whole.  For  some  say  that  the  form  of 
the  whole  and  the  form  of  the  part  are  really  one  and  the 
same:  but  that  it  is  called  the  form  of  the  part  inasmuch 
as  it  perfects  the  matter,  and  the  form  of  the  whole  inasmuch 
as  the  whole  specific  nature  results  therefrom.  According  to 


Q.  79.  ART.  2    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  164 

this  opinion  humanity  is  really  nothing  else  than  the  rational 
soul:  and  so,  since  the  selfsame  rational  soul  is  resumed, 
there  will  be  the  same  identical  humanity,  which  will  remain 
even  after  death,  albeit  not  under  the  aspect  of  humanity, 
because  the  composite  does  not  derive  the  specific  nature 
from  a  separated  humanity.  The  other  opinion,  which 
seems  nearer  the  truth,  is  Avicenna's,  according  to  whom 
the  form  of  the  whole  is  not  the  form  of  a  part  only,  nor  some 
other  form  besides  the  form  of  the  part,  but  is  the  whole 
resulting  from  the  composition  of  form  and  matter,  embracing 
both  within  itself.  This  form  of  the  whole  is  called  the 
essence  or  quiddity.  Since  then  at  the  resurrection  there 
will  be  the  selfsame  body,  and  the  selfsame  rational  soul, 
there  will  be,  of  necessity,  the  same  humanity.  The  first 
argument  proving  that  there  will  be  a  distinction  of  humanity 
was  based  on  the  supposition  that  humanity  is  some  distinct 
form  supervening  form  and  matter;  which  is  false:  and  the 
second  reason  does  not  disprove  the  identity  of  humanity, 
because  union  implies  action  or  passion,  and  though  there 
be  a  different  union,  this  cannot  prevent  the  identity  of 
humanity,  because  the  action  and  passion  from  which 
humanity  resulted  are  not  of  the  essence  of  humanity, 
wherefore  a  distinction  on  their  part  does  not  involve  a 
distinction  of  humanity :  for  it  is  clear  that  generation  and 
resurrection  are  not  the  selfsame  movement.  Yet  the  identity 
of  the  rising  man  with  the  begotten  man  is  not  hindered  for 
this  reason:  and  in  like  manner  neither  is  the  identity  of 
humanity  prevented,  if  we  take  union  for  the  relation  itself : 
because  this  relation  is  not  essential  to  but  concomitant 
with  humanity,  since  humanity  is  not  one  of  those  forms 
that  are  composition  or  order  (Phys.  ii.,  text.  13),  as  are  the 
forms  of  things  produced  by  art,  so  that  if  there  be  another 
distinct  composition  there  is  another  distinct  form  of  a  house. 
Reply  Obj.  3.  This  argument  affords  a  very  good  proof 
against  those  who  held  a  distinction  between  the  sensitive 
and  rational  souls  in  man :  because  in  that  case  the  sensitive 
soul  in  man  would  not  be  incorruptible,  as  neither  is  it  in 
other  animals;  and  consequently  in  the  resurrection  there 


i6s     IDENTITY  AFTER  RESURRECTION    Q.79.ART.2 

would  not  be  the  same  sensitive  soul,  and  consequently  neither 
the  same  animal  nor  the  same  man.  But  if  we  assert  that 
in  man  the  same  soul  is  by  its  substance  both  rational  and 
sensitive,  we  shall  encounter  no  difficulty  in  this  question, 
because  animal  is  defined  from  sense,  i.e.  the  sensitive  soul 
as  from  its  essential  form:  whereas  from  sense,  i.e.  the  sensi 
tive  power,  we  know  its  definition  as  from  an  accidental 
form  that  contributes  more  than  any  other  to  our  know 
ledge  of  the  quiddity  (DeAnima,  i.,  text.  2).  Accordingly  after 
death  there  remains  the  sensitive  soul,  even  as  the  rational 
soul,  according  to  its  substance :  whereas  the  sensitive  powers, 
according  to  some,  do  not  remain.  And  since  these  powers 
are  accidental  properties,  diversity  on  their  part  cannot 
prevent  the  identity  of  the  whole  animal,  not  even  of  the 
animal's  parts :  nor  are  powers  to  be  called  perfections  or  acts 
of  organs  unless  as  principles  of  action,  as  heat  in  fire. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  A  statue  may  be  considered  in  two  ways, 
either  as  a  particular  substance,  or  as  something  artificial. 
And  since  it  is  placed  in  the  genus  of  substance  by  reason  of 
its  matter,  it  follows  that  if  we  consider  it  as  a  particular 
substance,  it  is  the  selfsame  statue  that  is  remade  from  the 
same  matter.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  placed  in  the  genus 
of  artificial  things  inasmuch  as  it  has  an  accidental  form 
which,  if  the  statue  be  destroyed,  passes  away  also.  Conse 
quently  it  does  not  return  identically  the  same,  nor  can  the 
statue  be  identically  the  same.  But  man's  form,  namely  the 
soul,  remains  after  the  body  has  perished :  wherefore  the 
comparison  fails. 

THIRD  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  ASHES  OF  THE  HUMAN  BODY  MUST  NEEDS,  BY 
THE  RESURRECTION,  RETURN  TO  THE  SAME  PARTS  OF  THE 
BODY  THAT  WERE  DISSOLVED  INTO  THEM  ? 

We  proceed  thiis  to  the  Third  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  necessary  for  the  ashes  of  the 
human  body  to  return,  by  the  resurrection,  to  the  same 
parts  that  were  dissolved  into  them.  For,  according  to  the 
Philosopher,  as  the  whole  soul  is  to  the  whole  body,  so  is  a  part 


Q.  79.  ART.  3      THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  166 

of  the  soul  to  a  part  of  the  body,  as  sight  to  the  pupil  (De 
Anima,  ii.,  text.  9) .  Now  it  is  necessary  that  after  the  resur 
rection  the  body  be  resumed  by  the  same  soul.  Therefore 
it  is  also  necessary  for  the  same  parts  of  the  body  to  return 
to  the  same  limbs,  in  which  they  were  perfected  by  the  same 
parts  of  the  soul. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Difference  of  matter  causes  difference  of 
identity.  But  if  the  ashes  return  not  to  the  same  parts, 
each  part  will  not  be  remade  from  the  same  matter  of  which 
it  consisted  before.  Therefore  they  will  not  be  the  same 
identically.  Now  if  the  parts  are  different  the  whole  will 
also  be  different,  since  parts  are  to  the  whole  as  matter  is  to 
form  (Phys.  ii.,  text.  3).  Therefore  it  will  not  be  the  selfsame 
man;  which  is  contrary  to  the  truth  of  the  resurrection. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  resurrection  is  directed  to  the  end 
that  man  may  receive  the  meed  of  his  works.  Now  different 
parts  of  the  body  are  employed  in  different  works,  whether 
of  merit  or  of  demerit.  Therefore  at  the  resurrection  each 
part  must  needs  return  to  its  former  state  that  it  may  be 
rewarded  in  due  measure. 

On  the  contrary,  Artificial  things  are  more  dependent  on 
their  matter  than  natural  things.  Now  in  artificial  things,  in 
order  that  the  same  artificial  thing  be  remade,  from  the  same 
matter,  there  is  no  need  for  the  parts  to  be  brought  back  to 
the  same  position.  Neither  therefore  is  it  necessary  in  man. 

Further,  Change  of  an  accident  does  not  cause  a  change 
of  identity.  Now  the  situation  of  parts  is  an  accident. 
Therefore  its  change  in  a  man  does  not  cause  a  change  of 
identity. 

I  answer  that,  In  this  question  it  makes  a  difference 
whether  we  ask  what  can  be  done  without  prejudice  to 
identity,  and  what  will  be  done  for  the  sake  of  congruity. 
As  regards  the  first  it  must  be  observed  that  in  man  we  may 
speak  of  parts  in  two  ways :  first  as  of  the  various  parts  of  a 
homogeneous  whole,  for  instance  the  various  parts  of  flesh, 
or  the  various  parts  of  bone ;  secondly,  as  of  various  parts  of 
various  species  of  a  heterogeneous  whole,  for  instance  bone 
and  flesh.  Accordingly  if  it  be  said  that  one  part  of  matter 


167   IDENTITY  AFTER  RESURRECTION     Q.  79.  ART.  3 

will  return  to  another  part  of  the  same  species,  this  causes 
no  change  except  in  the  position  of  the  parts :  and  change  of 
position  of  parts  does  not  change  the  species  in  homogeneous 
wholes :  and  so  if  the  matter  of  one  part  return  to  another 
part,  this  is  nowise  prejudicial  to  the  identity  of  the  whole. 
Thus  is  it  in  the  example  given  in  the  text  (iv.  Sent.  D.  44), 
because  a  statue,  after  being  remade,  is  identically  the  same, 
not  as  to  its  form,  but  as  to  its  matter,  in  respect  of  which 
it  is  a  particular  substance,  and  in  this  way  a  statue  is  homo 
geneous,  although  it  is  not  according  to  its  artificial  form. 
But  if  it  be  said  that  the  matter  of  one  part  returns  to  another 
part  of  another  species,  it  follows  of  necessity  that  there  is  a 
change  not  only  in  the  position  of  parts,  but  also  in  their 
identity :  yet  so  that  the  whole  matter,  or  something  belong 
ing  to  the  truth  of  human  nature  in  one  is  transferred  to 
another;  but  not  if  what  was  superfluous  in  one  part  is 
transferred  to  another.  Now  the  identity  of  parts  being 
taken  away,  the  identity  of  the  whole  is  removed,  if  we  speak 
of  essential  parts,  but  not  if  we  speak  of  accidental  parts, 
such  as  hair  and  nails,  to  which  apparently  Augustine  refers 
(De  Civ.  Dei,  xxii.).  It  is  thus  clear  how  the  transference 
of  matter  from  one  part  to  another  destroys  the  identity, 
and  how  it  does  not. 

But  speaking  of  the  congruity,  it  is  more  probable  that 
even  the  parts  will  retain  their  position  at  the  resurrection, 
especially  as  regards  the  essential  and  organic  parts,  although 
perhaps  not  as  regards  the  accidental  parts,  such  as  nails 
and  hair. 

Reply  Obj.  I.  This  argument  considers  organic  or  hetero 
geneous  parts,  but  not  homogeneous  or  like  parts. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  A  change  in  the  position  of  the  parts  of  matter 
does  not  cause  a  change  of  identity,  although  difference  of 
matter  does. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Operation,  properly  speaking,  is  not  ascribed 
to  the  part  but  to  the  whole,  wherefore  the  reward  is  due, 
not  to  the  part  but  to  the  whole. 


QUESTION  LXXX. 

OF  THE  INTEGRITY  OF  THE  BODIES  IN  THE 
RESURRECTION. 

(In  Five  Articles.) 

WE  must  next  consider  the  integrity  of  the  bodies  in  the 
resurrection.  Under  this  head  there  are  five  points  of  in 
quiry:  (i)  Whether  all  the  members  of  the  human  body 
will  rise  again  therein  ?  (2)  Whether  the  hair  and  nails 
will  ?  (3)  Whether  the  humours  wiU  ?  (4)  Whether  what 
ever  the  body  contained  belonging  to  the  truth  of  human 
nature  will  rise  again  ?  (5)  Whether  whatever  it  contained 
materially  will  rise  again  ? 

FIRST  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  ALL  THE  MEMBERS  OF  THE  HUMAN  BODY  WILL 
RISE  AGAIN  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  First  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  not  all  the  members  of  the 
human  body  will  rise  again.  For  if  the  end  be  done  away 
it  is  useless  to  repair  the  means .  Now  the  end  of  each  member 
is  its  act.  Since  then  nothing  useless  is  done  in  the  Divine 
works,  and  since  the  use  of  certain  members  is  not  fitting 
to  man  after  the  resurrection,  especially  the  use  of  the  genital 
members,  for  then  they  shall  neither  marry,  nor  be  married 
(Matth.  xxii.  30),  it  would  seem  that  not  all  the  members 
shall  rise  again. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  The  entrails  are  members:  and  yet  they 
will  not  rise  again.  For  they  can  neither  rise  full,  since 
thus  they  contain  impurities,  nor  empty,  since  nothing  is 

168 


169  INTEGRITY  AFTER  RESURRECTION   Q.  80.  ART.  i 

empty  in  nature.  Therefore  the  members  shall  not  all 
rise  again. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  body  shall  rise  again  that  it  may  be 
rewarded  for  the  works  which  the  soul  did  through  it.  Now 
the  member  of  which  a  thief  has  been  deprived  for  theft,  and 
who  has  afterwards  done  penance  and  is  saved,  cannot  be 
rewarded  at  the  resurrection,  neither  for  any  good  deed, 
since  it  has  not  co-operated  in  any,  nor  for  evil  deeds,  since 
the  punishment  of  the  member  would  redound  to  the  punish 
ment  of  the  man.  Therefore  the  members  will  not  all  rise 
again  with  man. 

On  the  contrary,  The  other  members  belong  more  to  the 
truth  of  human  nature  than  hair  and  nails.  Yet  these  will  be 
restored  to  man  at  the  resurrection  according  to  the  text 
(iv.  Sent.  D.  44).  Much  more  therefore  does  this  apply  to  the 
other  members. 

Further,  The  works  of  God  are  perfect  (Deut.  xxxii.  4). 
But  the  resurrection  will  be  the  work  of  God.  Therefore 
man  will  be  remade  perfect  in  all  his  members. 

/  answer  that,  As  stated  in  De  Anima,  ii.,  the  soul  stands 
in  relation  to  the  body  not  only  as  its  form  and  end,  but  also 
as  efficient  cause.  For  the  soul  is  compared  to  the  body  as 
art  to  the  thing  made  by  art,  as  the  Philosopher  says  (Ethic. 
Magn.  vii.  n),  and  whatever  is  shown  forth  explicitly  in  the 
product  of  art  is  all  contained  implicitly  and  originally  in 
the  art.  In  like  manner  whatever  appears  in  the  parts  of 
the  body  is  all  contained  originally  and,  in  a  way,  implicitly 
in  the  soul.  Thus  just  as  the  work  of  an  art  would  not  be 
perfect,  if  its  product  lacked  any  of  the  things  contained  in 
the  art,  so  neither  could  man  be  perfect,  unless  the  whole 
that  is  contained  enfolded  in  the  soul  be  outwardly  un 
folded  in  the  body,  nor  would  the  body  correspond  in  full 
proportion  to  the  soul.  Since  then  at  the  resurrection  it 
behoves  man's  body  to  correspond  entirely  to  the  soul,  for 
it  will  not  rise  again  except  according  to  the  relation  it  bears 
to  the  rational  soul,  it  follows  that  man  also  must  rise  again 
perfect,  seeing  that  he  is  thereby  repaired  in  order  that  he 
may  obtain  his  ultimate  perfection.  Consequently  all  the 


Q.  80.  ART.  2     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  170 

members  that  are  now  in  man's  body  must  needs  be  restored 
at  the  resurrection. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  The  members  may  be  considered  in  two  ways 
in  relation  to  the  soul:  either  according  to  the  relation  of 
matter  to  form,  or  according  to  the  relation  of  instrument  to 
agent,  since  the  whole  body  is  compared  to  the  whole  soul  in  the 
same  way  as  one  partisto  another  (DeAnima,  ii.,  text.  9).  If  then 
the  members  be  considered  in  the  light  of  the  first  relation 
ship,  their  end  is  not  operation,  but  rather  the  perfect  being 
of  the  species,  and  this  is  also  required  after  the  resurrection : 
but  if  they  be  considered  in  the  light  of  the  second  relation 
ship,  then  their  end  is  operation.  And  yet  it  does  not  follow 
that  when  the  operation  fails  the  instrument  is  useless, 
because  an  instrument  serves  not  only  to  accomplish  the 
operation  of  the  agent,  but  also  to  show  its  virtue.  Hence 
it  will  be  necessary  for  the  virtue  of  the  soul's  powers  to  be 
shown  in  their  bodily  instruments,  even  though  they  never 
proceed  to  action,  so  that  the  wisdom  of  God  be  thereby 
glorified. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  entrails  will  rise  again  in  the  body  even 
as  the  other  members :  and  they  will  be  filled  not  with  vile 
superfluities  but  with  goodly  humours. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  acts  whereby  we  merit  are  not  the  acts, 
properly  speaking,  of  hand  or  foot  but  of  the  whole  man; 
even  as  the  work  of  art  is  ascribed  not  to  the  instrument  but 
to  the  craftsman.  Therefore  though  the  member  which 
was  cut  off  before  a  man's  repentance  did  not  co-operate 
with  him  in  the  state  wherein  he  merits  glory,  yet  man  him 
self  merits  that  the  whole  man  may  be  rewarded,  who  with 
his  whole  being  serves  God. 

SECOND  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  HAIR  AND  NAILS  WILL  RISE  AGAIN  IN  THE 
HUMAN  BODY  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Second  Article  : — 
0  jection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  hair  and  nails  will  not 
rise  again  in  the  human  body.     For  just  as  hair  and  nails 


171  INTEGRITY  AFTER  RESURRECTION  Q.  80.  ART.  2 

result  from  the  surplus  of  food,  so  do  urine,  sweat  and  other 
superfluities  or  dregs.  But  these  will  not  rise  again  with 
the  body.  Neither  therefore  will  hair  and  nails. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Of  all  the  superfluities  that  are  produced 
from  food,  seed  comes  nearest  to  the  truth  of  human  nature, 
since  though  superfluous  it  is  needed.  Yet  seed  will  not  rise 
again  in  the  human  body.  Much  less  therefore  will  hair  and 
nails. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  Nothing  is  perfected  by  a  rational  soul 
that  is  not  perfected  by  a  sensitive  soul.  But  hair  and  nails 
are  not  perfected  by  a  sensitive  soul,  for  we  do  not  feel  with 
them  according  to  DeAnima,  iii.,  text.  66.  Therefore  since  the 
human  body  rises  not  again  except  because  it  is  perfected  by 
a  rational  soul,  it  would  seem  that  the  hair  and  nails  will  not 
rise  again. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (Luke  xxi.  18) :  A  hair  of  your 
head  shall  not  perish. 

Further,  Hair  and  nails  were  given  to  man  as  an  ornament. 
Now  the  bodies  of  men,  especially  of  the  elect,  ought  to  rise 
again  with  all  their  adornment.  Therefore  they  ought  to 
rise  again  with  the  hair. 

I  answer  that,  The  soul  is  to  the  animated  body,  as  art  is 
to  the  work  of  art,  and  is  to  the  parts  of  the  body  as  art  to 
its  instruments:  wherefore  an  animated  body  is  called  an 
organic  body.  Now  art  employs  certain  instruments  for  the 
accomplishment  of  the  work  intended,  and  these  instruments 
belong  to  the  primary  intention  of  art :  and  it  also  uses  other 
instruments  for  the  safe-keeping  of  the  principal  instruments, 
and  these  belong  to  the  secondary  intention  of  art:  thus  the 
art  of  warfare  employs  a  sword  for  fighting,  and  a  sheath 
for  the  safe-keeping  of  the  sword.  And  so  among  the  parts 
of  an  animated  body,  some  are  directed  to  the  accomplish 
ment  of  the  soul's  operations,  for  instance  the  heart,  liver, 
hand,  foot;  while  others  are  directed  to  the  safe-keeping 
of  the  other  parts  as  leaves  to  cover  fruit ;  and  thus  hair  and 
nails  are  in  man  for  the  protection  of  other  parts.  Conse 
quently,  although  they  do  not  belong  to  the  primary  per 
fection  of  the  human  body,  they  belong  to  the  secondary 


Q.  80.  ART.  3     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  172 

perfection :  and  since  man  will  rise  again  with  all  the  perfec 
tions  of  his  nature,  it  follows  that  hair  and  nails  will  rise 
again  in  him. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Those  superfluities  are  voided  by  nature,  as 
being  useful  for  nothing.  Hence  they  do  not  belong  to  the 
perfection  of  the  human  body.  It  is  not  so  with  those  super 
fluities  which  nature  reserves  for  the  production  of  hair  and 
nails  which  she  needs  for  the  protection  of  the  members. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Seed  is  not  required  for  the  perfection  of  the 
individual,  as  hair  and  nails  are,  but  only  for  the  perfection 
of  the  species. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Hair  and  nails  are  nourished  and  grow,  and 
so  it  is  clear  that  they  share  in  some  operation,  which  would 
not  be  possible  unless  they  were  parts  in  some  way  perfected 
by  the  soul.  And  since  in  man  there  is  but  one  soul,  namely 
the  rational  soul,  it  is  clear  that  they  are  perfected  by  the 
rational  soul,  although  not  so  far  as  to  share  in  the  operation 
of  sense,  as  neither  do  bones,  and  yet  it  is  certain  that  these 
will  rise  again  and  that  they  belong  to  the  integrity  of  the 
individual. 

THIRD  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  THE  HUMOURS  WILL  RISE  AGAIN  IN  THE  BODY  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Third-  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  humours  will  not  rise 
again  in  the  body.  For  it  is  written  (i  Cor.  xv.  50) :  Flesh 
and  blood  cannot  possess  the  kingdom  of  God.  Now  blood  is 
the  chief  humour.  Therefore  it  will  not  rise  again  in  the 
blessed,  who  will  possess  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  much 
less  in  others. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Humours  are  intended  to  make  up  for 
waste.  Now  after  the  resurrection  there  will  be  no  waste. 
Therefore  the  body  will  not  rise  again  with  humours. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  That  which  is  in  process  of  generation  in 
the  human  body  is  not  yet  perfected  by  the  rational  soul. 
Now  the  humours  are  still  in  process  of  generation  because 
they  are  potentially  flesh  and  bone.  Therefore  they  are  not 
yet  perfected  by  the  rational  soul.  Now  the  human  body 


173  INTEGRITY  AFTER  RESURRECTION  Q.  80.  ART.  3 

is  not  directed  to  the  resurrection  except  in  so  far  as  it  is 
perfected  by  the  rational  soul.  Therefore  the  humours  will 
not  rise  again. 

On  the  contrary,  Whatever  enters  into  the  constitution  of 
the  human  body  will  rise  again  with  it.  Now  this  applies 
to  the  humours,  as  appears  from  the  statement  of  Augustine 
(De  Spir.  et  Anima,  xv.)  that  the  body  consists  of  functional 
members;  the  functional  members  of  homogeneous  parts ;  and 
the  homogeneous  parts  of  humours.  Therefore  the  humours 
will  rise  again  in  the  body. 

Further,  Our  resurrection  will  be  conformed  to  the  resur 
rection  of  Christ.  Now  in  Christ's  resurrection  His  blood 
rose  again,  else  the  wine  would  not  now  be  changed  into  His 
blood  in  the  Sacrament  of  the  altar.  Therefore  the  blood  will 
rise  again  in  us  also,  and  in  like  manner  the  other  humours. 

/  answer  that,  Whatever  belongs  to  the  integrity  of  human 
nature  in  those  who  take  part  in  the  resurrection  will  rise 
again,  as  stated  above  (AA.  i,  2).  Hence  whatever  humidity 
of  the  body  belongs  to  the  integrity  of  human  nature  must 
needs  rise  again  in  man.  Now  there  is  a  threefold  humidity 
in  man.  There  is  one  which  occurs  as  receding  from  the 
perfection  of  the  individual, — either  because  it  is  on  the  way 
to  corruption,  and  is  voided  by  nature,  for  instance  urine, 
sweat,  matter,  and  so  forth, — or  because  it  is  directed  by 
nature  to  the  preservation  of  the  species  in  some  individual, 
either  by  the  act  of  the  generative  power,  as  seed,  or  by 
the  act  of  the  nutritive  power,  as  milk.  None  of  these 
humidities  will  rise  again,  because  they  do  not  belong  to 
the  perfection  of  the  person  rising  again. 

The  second  kind  of  humidity  is  one  that  has  not  yet 
reached  its  ultimate  perfection,  which  nature  achieves  in  the 
individual,  yet  it  is  directed  thereto  by  nature:  and  this 
is  of  two  kinds.  For  there  is  one  kind  that  has  a  definite 
form  and  is  contained  among  the  parts  of  the  body,  for  in 
stance  the  blood  and  the  other  humours  which  nature  has 
directed  to  the  members  that  are  produced  or  nourished 
therefrom :  and  yet  they  have  certain  definite  forms  like  the 
other  parts  of  the  body,  and  consequently  will  rise  again 


Q.  80.  ART.  3     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  174 

with  the  other  parts  of  the  body:  while  another  kind  of 
humidity  is  in  transition  from  form  to  form,  namely  from 
the  form  of  humour  to  the  form  of  member.  Humidities  of 
this  kind  will  not  rise  again,  because  after  the  resurrection 
each  part  of  the  body  will  be  established  in  its  form,  so  that 
one  will  not  pass  into  another.  Wherefore  this  humidity 
that  is  actually  in  transition  from  one  form  to  another  will 
not  rise  again.  Now  this  humidity  may  be  considered  in  a 
twofold  state, — either  as  being  at  the  beginning  of  its  trans 
formation,  and  thus  it  is  called  ros,  namely  the  humidity 
that  is  found  in  the  cavities  of  the  smaller  veins, — or  as  in 
the  course  of  transformation  and  already  beginning  to  under 
go  alteration,  and  thus  it  is  called  cambium  :  but  in  neither 
state  will  it  rise  again.  The  third  kind  of  humidity  is  that 
which  has  already  reached  its  ultimate  perfection  that 
nature  intends  in  the  body  of  the  individual,  and  has  already 
undergone  transformation  and  become  incorporate  with  the 
members.  This  is  called  gluten,  and  since  it  belongs  to  the 
substance  of  the  members  it  will  rise  again  just  as  the  mem 
bers  will. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  In  these  words  of  the  Apostle  flesh  and  blood 
do  not  denote  the  substance  of  flesh  and  blood  but  deeds  of 
flesh  and  blood,  which  are  either  deeds  of  sin  or  the  operations 
of  the  animal  life.  Or  we  may  say  with  Augustine  in  his 
letter  to  Consentius  (Ep.  cxlvi.)  that  flesh  and  blood  here 
s  gnify  the  corruption  which  is  now  predominant  in  flesh  and 
blood;  wherefore  the  Apostle's  words  continue:  Neither 
shall  corruption  possess  incorruption. 

Reply  Obj. 2.  Just  as  the  members  that  serve  for  generation 
will  be  after  the  resurrection  for  the  integrity  of  human 
nature,  and  not  for  the  operation  accomplished  now  by 
them,  so  will  the  humours  be  in  the  body  not  to  make  up 
for  waste,  but  to  restore  the  integrity  of  human  nature  and 
to  show  forth  its  natural  power. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Just  as  the  elements  are  in  the  course  of 
generation  in  relation  to  mixed  bodies,  because  they  are 
their  matter,  yet  not  so  as  to  be  always  in  transition  when 
in  the  mixed  body,  so  too  are  the  humours  in  relation  to  the 


175   INTEGRITY  AFTER  RESURRECTION  Q.  80.  ART.  4 

members.  And  for  this  reason  as  the  elements  in  the  parts 
of  the  universe  have  definite  forms,  by  reason  of  which  they, 
like  mixed  bodies,  belong  to  the  perfection  of  the  universe, 
so  too  the  humours  belong  to  the  perfection  of  the  human 
body,  just  as  the  other  parts  do,  although  they  do  not  reach 
its  entire  perfection,  as  the  other  parts  do,  and  although 
the  elements  have  not  perfect  forms  as  mixed  bodies  have. 
But  as  all  the  parts  of  the  universe  receive  their  perfection 
from  God,  not  equally,  but  each  one  according  to  its  mode, 
so  too  the  humours  are  in  some  way  perfected  by  the  rational 
soul,  yet  not  in  the  same  measure  as  the  more  perfect  parts. 


FOURTH  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  WHATEVER  IN  THE  BODY  BELONGED  TO  THE  TRUTH 
OF  HUMAN  NATURE  WILL  RISE  AGAIN  IN  IT  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Fourth  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  what  was  in  the  body, 
belonging  to  the  truth  of  human  nature,  will  not  all  rise 
again  in  it.  For  food  is  changed  into  the  truth  of  human 
nature.  Now  sometimes  the  flesh  of  the  ox  or  of  other 
animals  is  taken  as  food.  Therefore  if  whatever  belonged 
to  the  truth  of  human  nature  will  rise  again,  the  flesh  of  the 
ox  or  of  other  animals  will  also  rise  again :  which  is  inad 
missible. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Adam's  rib  belonged  to  the  truth  of  human 
nature  in  him,  as  ours  does  in  us.  But  Adam's  rib  will  rise 
again  not  in  Adam  but  in  Eve,  else  Eve  would  not  rise 
again  at  all  since  she  was  made  from  that  rib.  Therefore 
whatever  belonged  in  man  to  the  truth  of  human  nature 
will  not  all  rise  again  in  him. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  It  is  impossible  for  the  same  thing  from 
different  men  to  rise  again.  Yet  it  is  possible  for  something 
in  different  men  to  belong  to  the  truth  of  human  nature, 
for  instance  if  a  man  were  to  partake  of  human  flesh  which 
would  be  changed  into  his  substance.  Therefore  there  will 
not  rise  again  in  man  whatever  belonged  in  him  to  the  truth 
of  human  nature. 


Q.  80.  ART.  4    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  176 

Obj.  4.  Further,  If  it  be  said  that  not  all  the  flesh  partaken 
of  belongs  to  the  truth  of  human  nature,  and  that  conse 
quently  some  of  it  may  possibly  rise  again  in  the  one  man 
and  some  in  the  other, — on  the  contrary:  That  which  is 
derived  from  one's  parents  would  especially  seem  to  belong 
to  the  truth  of  human  nature.  But  if  one  who  partook  of 
nothing  but  human  flesh  were  to  beget  children,  that  which 
his  child  derives  from  him  must  needs  be  of  the  flesh  of 
other  men  partaken  of  by  his  father,  since  the  seed  is  from 
the  surplus  of  food,  as  the  Philosopher  proves  (De  Gen. 
Animal,  i.).  Therefore  what  belongs  to  the  truth  of  human 
nature  in  that  child  belonged  also  to  the  truth  of  human 
nature  in  other  men  of  whose  flesh  his  father  had  partaken. 

Obj.  5.  Further,  If  it  be  said  that  what  was  changed  into 
seed  was  not  that  which  belonged  to  the  truth  of  human 
nature  in  the  flesh  of  the  men  eaten,  but  something  not  belong 
ing  to  the  truth  of  human  nature, — on  the  contrary:  Let 
us  suppose  that  some  one  is  fed  entirely  on  embryos  in 
which  seemingly  there  is  nothing  but  what  belongs  to  the 
truth  of  human  nature,  since  whatever  is  in  them  is  derived 
from  the  parents.  If  then  the  surplus  food  be  changed  into 
seed,  that  which  belonged  to  the  truth  of  human  nature  in 
the  embryos — and  after  these  have  received  a  rational  soul, 
the  resurrection  applies  to  them — must  needs  belong  to  the 
truth  of  human  nature  in  the  child  begotten  of  that  seed. 
And  thus,  since  the  same  cannot  rise  again  in  two  subjects, 
it  will  be  impossible  for  whatever  belonged  to  the  truth  of 
human  nature  in  both  to  rise  again  in  both  of  them. 

On  the  contrary,  Whatever  belonged  to  the  truth  of  human 
nature  was  perfected  by  the  rational  soul.  Now  it  is  through 
being  perfected  by  the  rational  soul  that  the  human  body 
is  directed  to  the  resurrection.  Therefore  whatever  belonged 
to  the  truth  of  human  nature  will  rise  again  in  each  one. 

Further,  If  anything  belonging  to  the  truth  of  human  nature 
in  a  man  be  taken  from  his  body,  this  will  not  be  the  perfect 
body  of  a  man.  Now  all  imperfection  of  a  man  will  be 
removed  at  the  resurrection,  especially  in  the  elect,  to  whom 
it  was  promised  (Luke  xxi.  18)  that  not  a  hair  of  their  head 


177   INTEGRITY  AFTER  RESURRECTION  Q.8o.ART.4 

should  perish.  Therefore  whatever  belonged  to  the  truth  of 
human  nature  in  a  man  will  rise  again  in  him. 

I  answer  that,  Everything  is  related  to  truth  in  the  same  way 
as  to  being  (Met.  ii.),  because  a  thing  is  true  when  it  is  as  it  ap 
pears  to  him  who  actually  knows  it.  For  this  reason  Avicenna 
(Met.  ii.)  says  that  the  truth  of  anything  is  a  property  of  the  being 
immutably  attached  thereto.  Accordingly  a  thing  is  said  to 
belong  to  the  truth  of  human  nature,  because  it  belongs 
properly  to  the  being  of  human  nature,  and  this  is  what  shares 
the  form  of  human  nature,  just  as  true  gold  is  what  has  the 
true  form  of  gold  whence  gold  derives  its  proper  being. 
In  order  therefore  to  see  what  it  is  that  belongs  to  the  truth 
of  human  nature,  we  must  observe  that  there  have  been  three 
opinions  on  that  question.  For  some  have  maintained  that 
nothing  begins  anew  to  belong  to  the  truth  of  human  nature, 
and  that  whatever  belongs  to  the  truth  of  human  nature, 
all  of  it  belonged  to  the  truth  of  human  nature  when  this  was 
created ;  and  that  this  multiplies  by  itself,  so  that  it  is  possible 
for  the  seed  whereof  the  child  is  begotten  to  be  detached 
therefrom  by  the  begetter,  and  that  again  the  detached  part 
multiplies  in  the  child,  so  that  he  reaches  perfect  quantity  by 
growth,  and  so  on;  and  that  thus  was  the  whole  human  race 
multiplied.  Wherefore  according  to  this  opinion,  whatever 
is  produced  by  nourishment,  although  it  seem  to  have  the 
appearance  of  flesh  and  blood,  does  not  belong  to  the  truth 
of  human  nature. 

Others  held  that  something  new  is  added  to  the  truth  of 
human  nature  by  the  natural  transformation  of  the  food 
into  the  human  body,  if  we  consider  the  truth  of  human 
nature  in  the  species  to  the  preservation  of  which  the  act  of 
the  generative  power  is  directed :  but  that  if  we  consider  the 
truth  of  human  nature  in  the  individual,  to  the  preservation 
and  perfection  of  which  the  act  of  the  nutritive  power  is 
directed,  that  which  is  added  by  food  belongs  to  the  truth 
of  the  human  nature  of  the  individual,  not  primarily  but 
secondarily.  For  they  assert  that  the  truth  of  human  nature, 
first  and  foremost,  consists  in  the  radical  humour,  that 
namely  which  is  begotten  of  the  seed  of  which  the  human 

in.  6  12 


Q.  80.  ART.  4     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  178 

race  was  originally  fashioned :  and  that  what  is  changed  from 
food  into  true  flesh  and  blood  does  not  belong  principally  to 
the  truth  of  human  nature  in  this  particular  individual,  but 
secondarily:  and  that  nevertheless  this  can  belong  principally 
to  the  truth  of  human  nature  in  another  individual  who  is 
begotten  of  the  seed  of  the  former.  For  they  assert  that 
seed  is  the  surplus  from  food,  either  mingled  with  something 
belonging  principally  to  the  truth  of  human  nature  in  the 
begetter,  according  to  some,  or  without  any  such  admixture, 
as  others  maintain.  And  thus  the  nutrimental  humour  in  one 
becomes  the  radical  humour  in  another.  The  third  opinion 
is  that  something  new  begins  to  belong  principally  to  the  truth 
of  human  nature  even  in  this  individual,  because  distinction 
in  the  human  body  does  not  require  that  any  signate  material 
part  must  needs  remain  throughout  the  whole  lifetime;  any 
signate  part  one  may  take  is  indifferent  to  this,  whereas  it 
remains  always  as  regards  what  belongs  to  the  species  in  it, 
albeit  as  regards  what  is  material  therein  it  may  ebb  and  flow. 
And  thus  the  nutrimental  humour  is  not  distinct  from  the 
radical  on  the  part  of  its  principle  (so  that  it  be  called  radical 
when  begotten  of  the  seed,  and  nutrimental  when  produced 
by  the  food),  but  rather  on  the  part  of  the  term,  so  that 
it  be  called  radical  when  it  reaches  the  term  of  generation  by 
the  act  of  the  generative,  or  even  nutritive  power,  but  nutri 
mental,  when  it  has  not  yet  reached  this  term,  but  is  still  on  the 
way  to  give  nourishment.  These  three  opinions  have  been 
more  fully  exposed  and  examined  in  the  Second  Book 
(ii.  Sent.  D.  30);  wherefore  there  is  no  need  for  repetition 
here,  except  in  so  far  as  the  question  at  issue  is  concerned. 
It  must  accordingly  be  observed  that  this  question  requires 
different  answers  according  to  these  opinions.  For  the 
first  opinion  on  account  of  its  explanation  of  the  process  of 
multiplication  is  able  to  admit  perfection  of  the  truth  of 
human  nature,  both  as  regards  the  number  of  individuals 
and  as  regards  the  due  quantity  of  each  individual,  without 
taking  into  account  that  which  is  produced  from  food ;  for 
this  is  not  added  except  for  the  purpose  of  resisting  the 
destruction  that  might  result  from  the  action  of  natural 


179  INTEGRITY  AFTER  RESURRECTION  g.8o.ART.4 

heat,  as  lead  is  added  to  silver  lest  it  be  destroyed  in  melting. 
Wherefore  since  at  the  resurrection  it  behoves  human  nature 
to  be  restored  to  its  perfection,  nor  does  the  natural  heat 
tend  to  destroy  the  natural  humour,  there  will  be  no  need 
for  anything  resulting  from  food  to  rise  again  in  man,  but 
that  alone  will  rise  again  which  belonged  to  the  truth  of  the 
human  nature  of  the  individual,  and  this  reaches  the  aforesaid 
perfection  in  number  and  quantity  by  being  detached  and 
multiplied.  The  second  opinion,  since  it  maintains  that  what 
is  produced  from  food  is  needed  for  the  perfection  of  quan 
tity  in  the  individual  and  for  the  multiplication  that  results 
from  generation,  must  needs  admit  that  something  of  this 
product  from  food  shall  rise  again :  not  all,  however,  but  only  so 
much  as  is  required  for  the  perfect  restoration  of  human  nature 
in  all  its  individuals.  Hence  this  opinion  asserts  that  all 
that  was  in  the  substance  of  the  seed  will  rise  again  in  this 
man  who  was  begotten  of  this  seed;  because  this  belongs 
chiefly  to  the  truth  of  human  nature  in  him :  while  of  that  which 
afterwards  he  derives  from  nourishment,  only  so  much  will 
rise  again  in  him  as  is  needed  for  the  perfection  of  his  quantity ; 
and  not  all,  because  this  does  not  belong  to  the  perfection  of 
human  nature,  except  in  so  far  as  nature  requires  it  for  the  per 
fection  of  quantity.  Since  however  this  nutrimental  humour 
is  subject  to  ebb  and  flow  the  restoration  will  be  effected  in 
this  order,  that  what  first  belonged  to  the  substance  of  a 
man's  body,  will  all  be  restored,  and  of  that  which  was 
added  secondly,  thirdly,  and  so  on,  as  much  as  is  required 
to  restore  quantity.  This  is  proved  by  two  reasons.  First, 
because  that  which  was  added  was  intended  to  restore  what 
was  wasted  at  first,  and  thus  it  does  not  belong  principally  to 
the  truth  of  human  nature  to  the  same  extent  as  that  which 
came  first.  Secondly,  because  the  addition  of  extraneous 
humour  to  the  first  radical  humour  results  in  the  whole  mixture 
not  sharing  the  truth  of  the  specific  nature  as  perfectly  as  the 
first  did:  and  the  Philosopher  instances  as  an  example  (De 
Gener.  i.)  the  mixing  of  water  with  wine,  which  always 
weakens  the  strength  of  the  wine,  so  that  in  the  end  the  wine 
becomes  watery :  so  that  although  the  second  water  be  drawn 


Q.  80.  ART.  4    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  180 

into  the  species  of  wine,  it  does  not  share  the  species  of  wine 
as  perfectly  as  the  first  water  added  to  the  wine.  Even  so 
that  which  is  secondly  changed  from  food  into  flesh  does 
not  so  perfectly  attain  to  the  species  of  flesh  as  that  which 
was  changed  first,  and  consequently  does  not  belong  in  the 
same  degree  to  the  truth  of  human  nature  nor  to  the  resur 
rection.  Accordingly  it  is  clear  that  this  opinion  maintains 
that  the  whole  of  what  belongs  to  the  truth  of  human  nature 
principally  will  rise  again,  but  not  the  whole  of  what  belongs 
to  the  truth  of  human  nature  secondarily. 

The  third  opinion  differs  somewhat  from  the  second  and 
in  some  respects  agrees  with  it.  It  differs  in  that  it  main 
tains  that  whatever  is  under  the  form  of  flesh  and  bone  all 
belongs  to  the  truth  of  human  nature,  because  this  opinion 
does  not  distinguish  as  remaining  in  man  during  his  whole 
lifetime  any  signate  matter  that  belongs  essentially  and 
primarily  to  the  truth  of  human  nature,  besides  something 
ebbing  and  flowing,  that  belongs  to  the  truth  of  human 
nature  merely  on  account  of  the  perfection  of  quantity,  and 
not  on  account  of  the  primary  being  of  the  species,  as  the 
second  opinion  asserted.  But  it  states  that  all  the  parts 
that  are  not  beside  the  intention  of  the  nature  generated 
belong  to  the  truth  of  human  nature,  as  regards  what  they 
have  of  the  species,  since  thus  they  remain ;  but  not  as  regards 
what  they  have  of  matter,  since  thus  they  are  indifferent 
to  ebb  and  flow :  so  that  we  are  to  understand  that  the  same 
thing  happens  in  the  parts  of  one  man  as  in  the  whole  popu 
lation  of  a  city,  for  each  individual  is  cut  off  from  the  popu 
lation  by  death,  while  others  take  their  place:  wherefore 
the  parts  of  the  people  flow  back  and  forth  materially,  but 
remain  formally,  since  these  others  occupy  the  very  same 
offices  and  positions  from  which  the  former  were  withdrawn, 
so  that  the  commonwealth  is  said  to  remain  the  selfsame. 
In  like  manner,  while  certain  parts  are  on  the  ebb  and  others 
are  being  restored  to  the  same  shape  and  position,  all  the 
parts  flow  back  and  forth  as  to  their  matter,  but  remain  as 
to  their  species;  and  nevertheless  the  selfsame  man  remains. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  third  opinion  agrees  with  the 


i8i  INTEGRITY  AFTER  RESURRECTION   Q.  80.  ART.  4 

second,  because  it  holds  that  the  parts  which  come  secondly 
do  not  reach  the  perfection  of  the  species  so  perfectly  as 
those  which  come  first :  and  consequently  the  third  opinion 
asserts  that  the  same  thing  rises  again  in  man  as  the  second 
opinion  maintains,  but  not  for  quite  the  same  reason.  For 
it  holds  that  the  whole  of  what  is  produced  from  the  seed 
will  rise  again,  not  because  it  belongs  to  the  truth  of  human 
nature  otherwise  than  that  which  comes  after,  but  because 
it  shares  the  truth  of  human  nature  more  perfectly :  which 
same  order  the  second  opinion  applied  to  those  things  that 
are  produced  afterwards  from  food,  in  which  point  also 
these  two  opinions  agree. 

Reply  Obf.  I.  A  natural  thing  is  what  it  is,  not  from  its 
matter  but  from  its  form :  wherefore,  although  that  part  of 
matter  which  at  one  time  was  under  the  form  of  bovine  flesh 
rises  again  in  man  under  the  form  of  human  flesh,  it  does  not 
follow  that  the  flesh  of  an  ox  rises  again,  but  the  flesh  of  a 
man:  else  one  might  conclude  that  the  clay  from  which 
Adam's  body  was  fashioned  shall  rise  again.  The  second 
opinion,  however,  grants  this  argument. 

Reply  Ob).  2.  That  rib  did  not  belong  to  the  perfection  of 
the  individual  in  Adam,  but  was  directed  to  the  multiplica 
tion  of  the  species.  Hence  it  will  rise  again  not  in  Adam 
but  in  Eve,  just  as  the  seed  will  rise  again,  not  in  the  be 
getter,  but  in  the  begotten. 

Reply  Obf.  3.  According  to  the  first  opinion  it  is  easy  to 
reply  to  this  argument,  because  the  flesh  that  is  eaten  never 
belonged  to  the  truth  of  human  nature  in  the  eater,  but  it 
did  belong  to  the  truth  of  human  nature  in  him  whose  flesh 
was  eaten :  and  thus  it  will  rise  again  in  the  latter  but  not 
in  the  former.  But  according  to  the  second  and  third 
opinions,  each  one  will  rise  again  in  that  wherein  he  ap 
proached  nearest  to  the  perfect  participation  of  the  virtue 
of  the  species,  and  if  he  approached  equally  in  both,  he  will 
rise  again  in  that  wherein  he  was  first,  because  in  that  he 
first  was  directed  to  the  resurrection  by  union  with  the 
rational  soul  of  that  man.  Hence  if  there  were  any  surplus 
in  the  flesh  eaten,  not  belonging  to  the  truth  of  human 


Q.  80.  ART.  4     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  182 

nature  in  the  first  man,  it  will  be  possible  for  it  to  rise  again 
in  the  second:  otherwise  what  belonged  to  the  resurrection 
in  the  first  will  rise  again  in  him  and  not  in  the  second ;  but 
in  the  second  its  place  is  taken  either  by  something  of  that 
which  was  the  product  from  other  food,  or  if  he  never 
partook  of  any  other  food  than  human  flesh,  the  substitution 
is  made  by  Divine  power  so  far  as  the  perfection  of  quantity 
requires,  as  it  does  in  those  who  die  before  the  perfect  age. 
Nor  does  this  derogate  from  numerical  identity,  as  neither 
does  the  ebb  and  flow  of  parts. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  According  to  the  first  opinion  this  argument 
is  easily  answered.  For  that  opinion  asserts  that  the  seed 
is  not  from  the  surplus  food :  so  that  the  flesh  eaten  is  not 
changed  into  the  seed  whereof  the  child  is  begotten.  But 
according  to  the  other  two  opinions  we  must  reply  that  it  is 
impossible  for  the  whole  of  the  flesh  eaten  to  be  changed 
into  seed,  because  it  is  after  much  separation  that  the  seed 
is  distilled  from  the  food,  since  seed  is  the  ultimate  surplus 
of  food.  That  part  of  the  eaten  flesh  which  is  changed  into 
seed  belongs  to  the  truth  of  human  nature  in  the  one  born  of 
the  seed  more  than  in  the  one  of  whose  flesh  the  seed  was  the 
product.  Hence,  according  to  the  rule  already  laid  down 
(ad  3) ,  whatever  was  changed  into  the  seed  will  rise  again  in 
the  person  born  of  the  seed ;  while  the  remaining  matter  will 
rise  again  in  him  of  whose  flesh  the  seed  was  the  product. 

Reply  Obj.  5.  The  embryo  is  not  concerned  with  the 
resurrection  before  it  is  animated  by  a  rational  soul,  in  which 
state  much  has  been  added  to  the  seminal  substance  from 
the  substance  of  food,  since  the  child  is  nourished  in  the 
mother's  womb.  Consequently  on  the  supposition  that 
a  man  partook  of  such  food,  and  that  some  one  were  be 
gotten  of  the  surplus  thereof,  that  which  was  in  the  seminal 
substance  will  indeed  rise  again  in  the  one  begotten  of  that 
seed ;  unless  it  contain  something  that  would  have  belonged 
to  the  seminal  substance  in  those  from  whose  flesh  being 
eaten  the  seed  was  produced,  for  this  would  rise  again  in  the 
first  but  not  in  the  second.  The  remainder  of  the  eaten 
flesh,  not  being  changed  into  seed,  will  clearly  rise  again 


183  INTEGRITY  AFTER  RESURRECTION   Q.  80.  ART.  5 

in  the  first,  the  Divine  power  supplying  deficiences  in  both. 
The  first  opinion  is  not  troubled  by  this  objection,  since  it 
does  not  hold  the  seed  to  be  from  the  surplus  food :  but  there 
are  many  other  reasons  against  it  as  may  be  seen  in  the 
Second  Book  (ii.  Sent.  D.  30;  P.  I.,  Q.  CXIX.,  A.  2). 


FIFTH  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  WHATEVER  WAS  MATERIALLY  IN  A  MAN'S 
MEMBERS  WILL  ALL  RISE  AGAIN  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Fifth  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  whatever  was  materially 
in  a  man's  members  will  all  rise  again.  For  the  hair, 
seemingly,  is  less  concerned  in  the  resurrection  than  the 
other  members.  Yet  whatever  was  in  the  hair  will  all  rise 
again,  if  not  in  the  hair,  at  least  in  other  parts  of  the  body, 
as  Augustine  says  (De  Civ.  Dei,  xxii.)  quoted  in  the  text 
(iv.  Sent.  D.  44).  Much  more  therefore  whatever  was 
materially  in  the  other  members  will  all  rise  again. 

Obi.  2.  Further,  Just  as  the  parts  of  the  flesh  are  per 
fected  as  to  species  by  the  rational  soul,  so  are  the  parts  as 
to  matter.  But  the  human  body  is  directed  to  the  resurrec 
tion  through  being  perfected  by  a  rational  soul.  Therefore 
not  only  the  parts  of  species  but  also  the  parts  of  matter 
will  all  rise  again. 

Obi.  3.  Further,  The  body  derives  its  totality  from  the 
same  cause  as  it  derives  its  divisibility  into  parts.  But 
division  into  parts  belongs  to  a  body  in  respect  of  matter 
the  disposition  of  which  is  quantity  in  respect  of  which  it  is 
divided.  Therefore  totality  is  ascribed  to  the  body  in 
respect  of  its  parts  of  matter.  If  then  all  the  parts  of 
matter  rise  not  again,  neither  will  the  whole  body  rise  again : 
which  is  inadmissible. 

On  the  contrary,  The  parts  of  matter  are  not  permanent 
in  the  body  but  ebb  and  flow,  as  stated  in  De  Gener.  i.  If, 
therefore,  all  the  parts  of  matter,  which  remain  not  but  ebb 
and  flow,  rise  again,  either  the  body  of  one  who  rises  again 
will  be  very  dense,  or  it  will  be  immoderate  in  quantity. 


Q.  80.  ART.  5     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  184 

Further,  whatever  belongs  to  the  truth  of  human  nature 
in  one  man  can  all  be  a  part  of  matter  in  another  man,  if 
the  latter  were  to  partake  of  his  flesh.  Therefore  if  all  the 
parts  of  matter  in  one  man  were  to  rise  again  it  follows  that 
in  one  man  there  will  rise  again  that  which  belongs  to  the 
truth  of  human  nature  in  another :  which  is  absurd. 

I  answer  that,  What  is  in  man  materially,  is  not  directed 
to  the  resurrection,  except  in  so  far  as  it  belongs  to  the 
truth  of  human  nature,  because  it  is  in  this  respect  that  it 
bears  a  relation  to  the  human  souls.  Now  all  that  is  in 
man  materially  belongs  indeed  to  the  truth  of  human  nature 
in  so  far  as  it  has  something  of  the  species,  but  not  all,  if 
we  consider  the  totality  of  matter;  because  all  the  matter 
that  was  in  a  man  from  the  beginning  of  his  life  to  the  end 
would  surpass  the  quantity  due  to  his  species,  as  the  third 
opinion  states,  which  opinion  seems  to  me  more  probable 
than  the  others.  Wherefore  the  whole  of  what  is  in  man 
will  rise  again,  if  we  speak  of  the  totality  of  the  species 
which  is  dependent  on  quantity,  shape,  position  and  order 
of  parts,  but  the  whole  will  not  rise  again  if  we  speak  of  the 
totality  of  matter.  The  second  and  first  opinions,  however, 
do  not  make  this  distinction,  but  distinguish  between  parts 
both  of  which  have  the  species  and  matter.  But  these  two 
opinions  agree  in  that  they  both  state  that  what  is  produced 
from  the  seed  will  all  rise  again  even  if  we  speak  of  totality 
of  matter:  while  they  differ  in  this  that  the  first  opinion 
maintains  that  nothing  will  rise  again  of  that  which  was 
engendered  from  food,  whereas  the  second  holds  that  some 
thing,  but  not  all,  thereof  will  rise  again,  as  stated  above  (A.  4) . 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Just  as  all  that  is  in  the  other  parts  of  the 
body  will  rise  again,  if  we  speak  of  the  totality  of  the  species, 
but  not  if  we  speak  of  material  totality,  so  is  it  with  the  hair. 
In  the  other  parts  something  accrues  from  nourishment 
which  causes  growth,  and  this  is  reckoned  as  another  part, 
if  we  speak  of  totality  of  species,  since  it  occupies  another 
place  and  position  in  the  body,  and  is  under  other  parts  of 
dimension:  and  there  accrues  something  which  does  not 
cause  growth,  but  serves  to  make  up  for  waste  by  nourishing ; 
and  this  is  not  reckoned  as  another  part  of  the  whole  con- 


i8s  INTEGRITY  AFTER  RESURRECTION  Q.8o.ART.5 

sidered  in  relation  to  the  species,  since  it  does  not  occupy 
another  place  or  position  in  the  body  than  that  which  was 
occupied  by  the  part  that  has  passed  away :  although  it  may 
be  reckoned  another  part  if  we  consider  the  totality  of 
matter.  The  same  applies  to  the  hair.  Augustine,  however, 
is  speaking  of  the  cutting  of  hair  that  was  a  part  causing 
growth  of  the  body;  wherefore  it  must  needs  rise  again,  not 
however  as  regards  the  quantity  of  hair,  lest  it  should  be 
immoderate,  but  it  will  rise  again  in  other  parts  as  deemed 
expedient  by  Divine  providence.  Or  else  he  refers  to  the 
case  when  something  will  be  lacking  to  the  other  parts,  for 
then  it  will  be  possible  for  this  to  be  supplied  from  the  sur 
plus  of  hair. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  According  to  the  third  opinion  parts  of 
species  are  the  same  as  parts  of  matter :  for  the  Philosopher 
does  not  make  this  distinction  (De  Gener.  i.)  in  order  to 
distinguish  different  parts,  but  in  order  to  show  that  the 
same  parts  may  be  considered  both  in  respect  of  species,  as 
to  what  belongs  to  the  form  and  species  in  them,  and  in 
respect  of  matter,  as  to  that  which  is  under  the  form  and 
species.  Now  it  is  clear  that  the  matter  of  the  flesh  has  no 
relation  to  the  rational  soul  except  in  so  far  as  it  is  under 
such  a  form,  and  consequently  by  reason  thereof  it  is  directed 
to  the  resurrection.  But  the  first  and  second  opinions  which 
draw  a  distinction  between  parts  of  species  and  parts  of 
matter  say  that  although  the  rational  soul  perfects  both 
parts,  it  does  not  perfect  parts  of  matter  except  by  means 
of  the  parts  of  species,  wherefore  they  are  not  equally 
directed  to  the  resurrection. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  In  the  matter  of  things  subject  to  generation 
and  corruption  it  is  necessary  to  presuppose  indefinite 
dimensions  before  the  reception  of  the  substantial  form. 
Consequently  division  which  is  made  according  to  these 
dimensions  belongs  properly  to  matter.  But  complete  and 
definite  quantity  comes  to  matter  after  the  substantial  form; 
wherefore  division  that  is  made  in  reference  to  definite 
quantity  regards  the  species  especially  when  definite  position 
of  parts  belongs  to  the  essence  of  the  species,  as  in  the 
human  body. 


QUESTION  LXXXI. 

OF  THE  QUALITY  OF  THOSE  WHO  RISE  AGAIN. 

(In  Four  Articles.} 

WE  must  now  consider  the  quality  of  those  who  rise  again. 
Under  this  head  there  are  four  points  of  inquiry :  (i)  Whether 
all  will  rise  again  in  the  youthful  age  ?  (2)  Whether  they 
will  be  of  equal  stature  ?  (3)  Whether  all  will  be  of  the 
same  sex  ?  (4)  Whether  they  will  rise  again  to  the  animal 
life  ? 

FIRST  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  ALL  WILL  RISE  AGAIN  OF  THE  SAME  AGE  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  First  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  all  will  not  rise  again  of 
the  same,  namely  the  youthful  age.  Because  God  will  take 
nothing  pertaining  to  man's  perfection  from  those  who  rise 
again,  especially  from  the  blessed.  Now  age  pertains  to  the 
perfection  of  man,  since  old  age  is  the  age  that  demands 
reverence.  Therefore  the  old  will  not  rise  again  of  a  youth 
ful  age. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Age  is  reckoned  according  to  the  length 
of  past  time.  Now  it  is  impossible  for  past  time  not  to 
have  passed.  Therefore  it  is  impossible  for  those  who 
were  of  greater  age  to  be  brought  back  to  a  youthful  age. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  That  which  belonged  most  to  the  truth 
of  human  nature  in  each  individual  will  especially  rise 
again  in  him.  Now  the  sooner  a  thing  was  in  man  the 
more  would  it  seem  to  have  belonged  to  the  truth  of  human 
nature,  because  in  the  end,  through  the  strength  of  the 
species  being  weakened  the  human  body  is  likened  to  watery 

186 


187       QUALITY  AFTER  RESURRECTION   Q.SI.ART.  i 

wine  according  to  the  Philosopher  (De  Gencr.  i.).  Therefore 
if  all  are  to  rise  again  of  the  same  age,  it  is  more  fitting  that 
they  should  rise  again  in  the  age  of  childhood. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (Eph.  iv.  13):  Until  we  all 
meet  .  .  .  unto  a  perfect  man,  unto  the  measure  of  the  age  of 
the  fulness  of  Christ.  Now  Christ  rose  again  of  youthful  age, 
which  begins  about  the  age  of  thirty  years,  as  Augustine 
says  (De  Civ.  Dei,  xxii.).  Therefore  others  also  will  rise 
again  of  a  youthful  age. 

Further,  Man  will  rise  again  at  the  most  perfect  stage  of 
nature.  Now  human  nature  is  at  the  most  perfect  stage 
in  the  age  of  youth.  Therefore  all  will  rise  again  of  that 
age. 

/  answer  that,  Man  will  rise  again  without  any  defect  of 
human  nature,  because  as  God  founded  human  nature 
without  a  defect,  even  so  will  He  restore  it  without  defect. 
Now  human  nature  has  a  twofold  defect.  First,  because  it 
has  not  yet  attained  to  its  ultimate  perfection.  Secondly, 
because  it  has  already  gone  back  from  its  ultimate  perfection. 
The  first  defect  is  found  in  children,  the  second  in  the  aged : 
and  consequently  in  each  of  these  human  nature  will  be 
brought  by  the  resurrection  to  the  state  of  its  ultimate 
perfection  which  is  in  the  youthful  age,  at  which  the  move 
ment  of  growth  terminates,  and  from  which  the  movement 
of  decrease  begins. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Old  age  calls  for  reverence,  not  on  account 
of  the  state  of  the  body  which  is  at  fault ;  but  on  account  of 
the  soul's  wisdom  which  is  taken  for  granted  on  account 
of  its  being  advanced  in  years.  Wherefore  in  the  elect 
there  will  remain  the  reverence  due  to  old  age  on  account 
of  the  fulness  of  Divine  wisdom  which  will  be  in  them,  but 
the  defect  of  old  age  will  not  be  in  them. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  We  speak  of  age  not  as  regards  the  number 
of  years,  but  as  regards  the  state  which  the  human  body 
acquires  from  years.  Hence  Adam  is  said  to  have  been 
formed  in  the  youthful  age  on  account  of  the  particular 
condition  of  body  which  he  had  at  the  first  day  of  his  forma 
tion.  Thus  the  argument  is  not  to  the  point. 


Q.  81.  ART.  2     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  188 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  strength  of  the  species  is  said  to  be 
more  perfect  in  a  child  than  in  a  young  man,  as  regards  the 
ability  to  transform  nourishment  in  a  certain  way,  even  as 
it  is  more  perfect  in  the  seed  than  in  the  mature  man.  In 
youth,  however,  it  is  more  perfect  as  regards  the  term  of 
completion.  Wherefore  that  which  belonged  principally  to 
the  truth  of  human  nature  will  be  brought  to  that  perfection 
which  it  has  in  the  age  of  youth,  and  not  to  that  perfection 
which  it  has  in  the  age  of  a  child,  wherein  the  humours  have 
not  yet  reached  their  ultimate  disposition. 

SECOND  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  ALL  WILL  RISE  AGAIN  OF  THE  SAME  STATURE  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Second  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  all  will  rise  again  of  the 
same  stature.  For  just  as  man  is  measured  by  dimensive 
quantity,  so  is  he  by  the  quantity  of  time.  Now  the  quantity 
of  time  will  be  reduced  to  the  same  measure  in  all,  since  all 
will  rise  again  of  the  same  age.  Therefore  the  dimensive 
quantity  will  also  be  reduced  to  the  same  measure  in  all,  so 
that  all  will  rise  again  of  the  same  stature. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  The  Philosopher  says  (De  Anima,  ii.  41) 
that  all  things  of  the  same  nature  have  a  certain  limit  and 
measure  of  size  and  growth.  Now  this  limitation  can  only 
arise  by  virtue  of  the  form,  with  which  the  quantity  as  well 
as  all  the  other  accidents  ought  to  agree.  Therefore  since 
all  men  have  the  same  specific  form,  there  should  be  the 
same  measure  of  quantity  in  respect  of  matter  in  all,  unless 
an  error  should  occur.  But  the  error  of  nature  will  be  set 
right  at  the  resurrection.  Therefore  all  will  rise  again  of 
the  same  stature. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  It  will  be  impossible  for  man  in  rising 
again  to  be  of  a  quantity  proportionate  to  the  natural  power 
which  first  formed  his  body;  for  otherwise  those  who  could 
not  be  brought  to  a  greater  quantity  by  the  power  of  nature 
will  never  rise  again  of  a  greater  quantity,  which  is  false. 
Therefore  that  quantity  must  needs  be  proportionate  to  the 


189      QUALITY  AFTER  RESURRECTION     Q.8i.ARx.2 

power  which  will  restore  the  human  body  by  the  resurrection, 
and  to  the  matter  from  which  it  is  restored.  Now  the  self 
same,  namely  the  Divine,  power  will  restore  all  bodies;  and 
all  the  ashes  from  which  the  human  bodies  will  be  restored 
are  equally  disposed  to  receive  the  action  of  that  power. 
Therefore  the  resurrection  of  all  men  will  bring  them  to  the 
same  quantity :  and  so  the  same  conclusion  follows. 

On  the  contrary,  Natural  quantity  results  from  each  indi 
vidual's  nature.  Now  the  nature  of  the  individual  will  not 
be  altered  at  the  resurrection.  Therefore  neither  will  its 
natural  quantity.  But  all  are  not  of  the  same  natural 
quantity.  Therefore  all  will  not  rise  again  of  the  same  stature . 

Further,  Human  nature  will  be  restored  by  resurrection 
unto  glory  or  unto  punishment.  But  there  will  not  be  the 
same  quantity  of  glory  or  punishment  in  all  those  who  rise 
again.  Neither  therefore  will  there  be  the  same  quantity  of 
stature. 

I  answer  that,  At  the  resurrection  human  nature  will 
be  restored  not  only  in  the  selfsame  species  but  also  in  the 
selfsame  individual:  and  consequently  we  must  observe  in 
the  resurrection  what  is  requisite  not  only  to  the  specific 
but  also  to  the  individual  nature.  Now  the  specific  nature 
has  a  certain  quantity  which  it  neither  exceeds  nor  fails 
without  error,  and  yet  this  quantity  has  certain  degrees  of 
latitude  and  is  not  to  be  attached  to  one  fixed  measure; 
and  each  individual  in  the  human  species  aims  at  some  degree 
of  quantity  befitting  his  individual  nature  within  the  bounds 
of  that  latitude,  and  reaches  it  at  the  end  of  his  growth,  if 
there  has  been  no  error  in  the  working  of  nature,  resulting  in 
the  addition  of  something  to  or  the  subtraction  of  something 
from  the  aforesaid  quantity :  the  measure  whereof  is  gauged 
according  to  the  proportion  of  heat  as  expanding,  and  of 
humidity  as  expansive,  in  point  of  which  all  are  not  of  the 
same  power.  Therefore  all  will  not  rise  again  of  the  same 
quantity,  but  each  one  will  rise  again  of  that  quantity  which 
would  have  been  his  at  the  end  of  his  growth  if  nature  had  not 
erred  or  failed :  and  the  Divine  power  will  subtract  or  supply 
what  was  excessive  or  lacking  in  man. 


Q.  81.  ART.  3     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  190 

Reply  Obj.  I.  It  has  already  been  explained  (A.  i,  ad  2) 
that  all  are  said  to  rise  again  of  the  same  age,  not  as  though 
the  same  length  of  time  were  befitting  to  each  one,  but  because 
the  same  state  of  perfection  will  be  in  all,  which  state  is  in 
different  to  a  great  or  small  quantity. 

Re-ply  Obj.  2.  The  quantity  of  a  particular  individual 
corresponds  not  only  to  the  form  of  the  species,  but  also  to 
the  nature  or  matter  of  the  individual :  wherefore  the  con 
clusion  does  not  follow. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  quantity  of  those  who  will  be  raised 
from  the  dead  is  not  proportionate  to  the  restoring  power, 
because  the  latter  does  not  belong  to  the  power  of  the  body, 
— nor  to  the  ashes,  as  to  the  state  in  which  they  are  before 
the  resurrection, — but  to  nature  which  the  individual  had 
at  first.  Nevertheless  if  the  formative  power  on  account  of 
some  defect  was  unable  to  effect  the  due  quantity  that  is 
befitting  to  the  species,  the  Divine  power  will  supply  the 
defect  at  the  resurrection,  as  in  dwarfs,  and  in  like  manner 
in  those  who  by  immoderate  size  have  exceeded  the  due 
bounds  of  nature. 

THIRD  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  ALL  WILL  RISE  AGAIN  OF  THE  MALE  SEX  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Third  Article  : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  all  will  rise  again  of  the 
male  sex.  For  it  is  written  (Ephes.  iv.  13)  that  we  shall  all 
meet  unto  a  perfect  man,  etc.  Therefore  there  will  be  none 
but  the  male  sex. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  In  the  world  to  come  all  pre-eminence 
will  cease,  as  a  gloss  observes  on  I  Cor.  xv.  24.  Now  woman 
is  subject  to  man  in  the  natural  order.  Therefore  women 
will  rise  again  not  in  the  female  but  in  the  male  sex. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  That  which  is  produced  incidentally  and 
beside  the  intention  of  nature  will  not  rise  again,  since  all 
error  will  be  removed  at  the  resurrection.  Now  the  female 
sex  is  produced  beside  the  intention  of  nature,  through  a 
fault  in  the  formative  power  of  the  seed,  which  is  unable  to 
bring  the  matter  of  the  fetus  to  the  male  form:  wherefore 


QUALITY  AFTER  RESURRECTION     Q.S 

the  Philosopher  says  (De  Animal,  xvi.,  i.e.  De  General. 
Animal,  ii.)  that  the  female  is  a  misbegotten  male.  There 
fore  the  female  sex  will  not  rise  again. 

On  the  contrary,  Augustine  says  (De  Civ.  Dei,  xxii.) :  Those 
are  wiser,  seemingly,  who  doubt  not  that  both  sexes  will  rise 
again. 

Further,  At  the  resurrection  God  will  restore  man  to  what 
He  made  him  at  the  creation.  Now  He  made  woman  from 
the  man's  rib  (Gen.  ii.  22).  Therefore  He  will  also  restore 
the  female  sex  at  the  resurrection. 

I  answer  that,  Just  as,  considering  the  nature  of  the  indi 
vidual,  a  different  quantity  is  due  to  different  men,  so  also, 
considering  the  nature  of  the  individual,  a  different  sex  is 
due  to  different  men.  Moreover,  this  same  diversity  is 
becoming  to  the  perfection  of  the  species,  the  different  degrees 
whereof  are  filled  by  this  very  difference  of  sex  and  quan 
tity.  Wherefore  just  as  men  will  rise  again  of  various  stature, 
so  will  they  rise  again  of  different  sex.  And  though  there 
be  difference  of  sex  there  will  be  no  shame  in  seeing  one 
another,  since  there  will  be  no  lust  to  invite  them  to  shame 
ful  deeds  which  are  the  cause  of  shame. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  When  it  is  said:  We  shall  all  meet  Christ 
unto  a  perfect  man,  this  refers  not  to  the  male  sex  but  to  the 
strength  of  soul  which  will  be  in  all,  both  men  and  women. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Woman  is  subject  to  man  on  account  of 
the  frailty  of  nature,  as  regards  both  vigour  of  soul  and 
strength  of  body.  After  the  resurrection,  however,  the 
difference  in  those  points  will  be  not  on  account  of  the 
difference  of  sex,  but  by  reason  of  the  difference  of  merits. 
Hence  the  conclusion  does  not  follow. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Although  the  begetting  of  a  woman  is  beside 
the  intention  of  a  particular  nature,  it  is  in  the  intention  of 
universal  nature,  which  requires  both  sexes  for  the  perfection 
of  the  human  species.  Nor  will  any  defect  result  from  sex 
as  stated  above  (ad  2). 


Q.  81.  ART.  4     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  192 

FOURTH  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  ALL  WILL  RISE  AGAIN  TO  ANIMAL  LIFE  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Fourth  Article  : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  they  will  rise  again  to 
the  animal  life,  or  in  other  words  that  they  will  make  use 
of  the  acts  of  the  nutritive  and  generative  powers.  For  our 
resurrection  will  be  conformed  to  Christ's.  But  Christ  is 
said  to  have  ate  after  His  resurrection  (John  xxi.,  Luke 
xxiv).  Therefore,  after  the  resurrection  men  will  eat,  and 
in  like  manner  beget. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  The  distinction  of  sexes  is  directed  to 
generation;  and  in  like  manner  the  instruments  which 
serve  the  nutritive  power  are  directed  to  eating.  Now 
man  will  rise  again  with  all  these.  Therefore  he  will  exer 
cise  the  acts  of  the  generative  and  nutritive  powers. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  whole  man  will  be  beatified  both  in 
soul  and  in  body.  Now  beatitude  or  happiness,  according 
to  the  Philosopher  (Ethic,  i.  7),  consists  in  a  perfect  opera 
tion.  Therefore  it  must  needs  be  that  all  the  powers  of  the 
soul  and  all  the  members  should  have  their  respective  acts 
after  the  resurrection.  And  so  the  same  conclusion  follows 
as  above. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  After  the  resurrection  there  will  be  perfect 
joy  in  the  blessed.  Now  such  a  joy  includes  all  pleasures, 
since  happiness  according  to  Boethius  is  a  state  rendered 
perfect  by  the  accumulation  of  all  goods  (De  Consol.  iii.),  and 
the  perfect  is  that  which  lacks  nothing.  Since  then  there  is 
much  pleasure  in  the  act  of  the  generative  and  nutritive 
powers  it  would  seem  that  such  acts  belonging  to  animal 
life  will  be  in  the  blessed,  and  much  more  in  others,  who  will 
have  less  spiritual  bodies. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (Matth.  xxii.  30) :  In  the 
resurrection  they  shall  neither  marry  nor  be  married. 

Further,  Generation  is  directed  to  supply  the  defect 
resulting  from  death,  and  to  the  multiplication  of  the  human 
race :  and  eating  is  directed  to  make  up  for  waste,  and  to 
increase  quantity.  But  in  the  state  of  the  resurrection  the 


193      QUALITY  AFTER  RESURRECTION     Q.8i.ART.4 

human  race  will  already  have  the  number  of  individuals 
preordained  by  God,  since  generation  will  continue  up  to 
that  point.  In  like  manner  each  man  will  rise  again  in  due 
quantity;  neither  will  death  be  any  more,  nor  any  waste 
affect  the  parts  of  man.  Therefore  the  acts  of  the  generative 
and  nutritive  powers  would  be  void  of  purpose. 

/  answer  that,  The  resurrection  will  not  be  necessary  to 
man  on  account  of  his  primary  perfection,  which  consists 
in  the  integrity  of  those  things  that  belong  to  his  nature, 
since  man  can  attain  to  this  in  his  present  state  of  life  by  the 
action  of  natural  causes ;  but  the  necessity  of  the  resurrection 
regards  the  attainment  of  his  ultimate  perfection,  which 
consists  in  his  reaching  his  ultimate  end.  Consequently 
those  natural  operations  which  are  directed  to  cause  or 
preserve  the  primary  perfection  of  human  nature  will  not 
be  in  the  resurrection :  such  are  the  actions  of  the  animal  life 
in  man,  the  action  of  the  elements  on  one  another,  and  the 
movement  of  the  heavens;  wherefore  all  these  will  cease  at 
the  resurrection.  And  since  to  eat,  drink,  sleep,  beget, 
pertain  to  the  animal  life,  being  directed  to  the  primary 
perfection  of  nature,  it  follows  that  they  will  not  be  in  the 
resurrection. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  When  Christ  partook  of  that  meal,  His 
eating  was  an  act,  not  of  necessity  as  though  human  nature 
needed  food  after  the  resurrection,  but  of  power,  so  as  to 
prove  that  He  had  resumed  the  true  human  nature  which  He 
had  in  that  state  wherein  He  ate  and  drank  with  His  dis 
ciples.  There  will  be  no  need  of  such  proof  at  the  general 
resurrection,  since  it  will  be  evident  to  all.  Hence  Christ  is 
said  to  have  ate  by  dispensation  in  the  sense  in  which 
lawyers  say  that  a  dispensation  is  a  relaxation  of  the  general 
law  :  because  Christ  made  an  exception  to  that  which  is 
common  to  those  who  rise  again  (namely  not  to  partake  of 
food)  for  the  aforesaid  motive.  Hence  the  argument  does 
not  prove. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  distinction  of  sexes  and  the  difference 
of  members  will  be  for  the  restoration  of  the  perfection  of 
human  nature  both  in  the  species  and  in  the  individual. 

in.  6  13 


Q.  81.  ART.  4     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  194 

Hence  it  does  not  follow  that  they  are  without  purpose, 
although  they  lack  their  animal  operations. 

Reply  Obf.  3.  The  aforesaid  operations  do  not  belong  to 
man  as  man,  as  also  the  Philosopher  states  (Ethic,  x.  7), 
wherefore  the  happiness  of  the  human  body  does  not  consist 
therein.  But  the  human  body  will  be  glorified  by  an  over 
flow  from  the  reason  whereby  man  is  man,  inasmuch  as  the 
body  will  be  subject  to  reason. 

Reply  Obi.  4.  As  the  Philosopher  says  (Ethic,  vii.  12,  x.  5), 
the  pleasures  of  the  body  are  medicinal,  because  they  are 
applied  to  man  for  the  removal  of  weariness ;  or  again,  they 
are  unhealthy,  in  so  far  as  man  indulges  in  those  pleasures 
inordinately,  as  though  they  were  real  pleasures:  just  as  a 
man  whose  taste  is  vitiated  delights  in  things  which  are  not 
delightful  to  the  healthy.  Consequently  it  does  not  follow 
that  such  pleasures  as  these  belong  to  the  perfection  of 
beatitude,  as  the  Jews  and  Turks  maintain,  and  certain 
heretics  known  as  the  Chiliasts  asserted;  who,  moreover, 
according  to  the  Philosopher's  teaching,  would  seem  to 
have  an  unhealthy  appetite,  since  according  to  him  none 
but  spiritual  pleasures  are  pleasures  simply,  and  to  be  sought 
for  their  own  sake;  wherefore  these  alone  are  requisite  for 
beatitude. 


QUESTION  LXXXII. 

OF  THE  IMPASSIBILITY  OF  THE  BODIES  OF  THE 
BLESSED  AFTER  THEIR  RESURRECTION. 

(In  Four  Articles.} 

WE  must  now  consider  the  conditions  under  which  the 
blessed  rise  again,  and  (i)  the  impassibility  of  their  bodies : 

(2)  their  subtlety :  (3)  their  agility :  (4)  their  clarity.     Under 
the  first  head  there  are  four  points  of  inquiry :  (i)  Whether 
at  the  resurrection  the  saints  will  rise   again  impassible 
in   body  ?     (2)    Whether  all   will  be   equally  impassible  ? 

(3)  Whether  this  impassibility  renders  the  glorious  bodies 
insensible  ?     (4)  Whether  in  them  all  the  senses  are  in  act  ? 

FIRST  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  BODIES  OF  THE  SAINTS  WILL  BE  IMPASSIBLE 
AFTER  THE  RESURRECTION  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  First  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  seems  that  the  bodies  of  the  saints  will 
not  be  impassible  after  the  resurrection.  For  everything 
mortal  is  passible.  But  man,  after  the  resurrection,  will  be 
a  mortal  rational  animal,  for  such  is  the  definition  of  man, 
which  will  never  be  dissociated  from  him.  Therefore  the 
body  will  be  passible. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Whatever  is  in  potentiality  to  have  the 
form  of  another  thing  is  passible  in  relation  to  something 
else;  for  this  is  what  is  meant  by  being  passive  to  another 
thing  (De  Gener.  i.).  Now  the  bodies  of  the  saints  will  be  in 
potentiality  to  the  form  of  another  thing  after  the  resurrec- 

195 


Q.  82.  ART.  i     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  196 

tion;  since  matter,  according  as  it  is  under  one  form,  does 
not  lose  its  potentiality  to  another  form.  But  the  bodies  of 
the  saints  after  the  resurrection  will  have  matter  in  common 
with  the  elements,  because  they  will  be  restored  out  of  the 
same  matter  of  which  they  are  now  composed.  Therefore 
they  will  be  in  potentiality  to  another  form,  and  thus  will 
be  passible. 

Obf.  3.  Further,  According  to  the  Philosopher  (De  Gener. 
i.),  contraries  have  a  natural  inclination  to  be  active  and 
passive  towards  one  another.  Now  the  bodies  of  the  saints 
will  be  composed  of  contraries  after  the  resurrection,  even 
as  now.  Therefore  they  will  be  passible. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  In  the  human  body  the  blood  and  humours 
will  rise  again,  as  stated  above  (Q.  LXXX.,  AA.  3,  4).  Now, 
sickness  and  suchlike  passions  arise  in  the  body  through 
the  antipathy  of  the  humours.  Therefore  the  bodies  of  the 
saints  will  be  passible  after  the  resurrection. 

Obj.  5.  Further,  Actual  defect  is  more  inconsistent  with 
perfection  than  potential  defect.  But  passibility  denotes 
merely  potential  defect.  Since  then  there  will  be  certain 
actual  defects  in  the  bodies  of  the  blessed,  such  as  the  scars 
of  the  wounds  in  the  martyrs,  even  as  they  were  in  Christ, 
it  would  seem  that  their  perfections  will  not  suffer,  if  we 
grant  their  bodies  to  be  passible. 

On  the  contrary,  Everything  passible  is  corruptible,  because 
increase  of  passion  results  in  loss  of  substance.*  Now  the 
bodies  of  the  saints  will  be  incorruptible  after  the  resurrec 
tion,  according  to  i  Cor.  xv.  42,  It  is  sown  in  corruption, 
it  shall  rise  in  incorruption.  Therefore  they  will  be  impas 
sible. 

Further,  The  stronger  is  not  passive  to  the  weaker.  But 
no  body  will  be  stronger  than  the  bodies  of  the  saints,  of 
which  it  is  written  (i  Cor.  xv.  43) :  It  is  sown  in  weakness, 
it  shall  rise  in  power.  Therefore  they  will  be  impassible. 

I  answer  that,  We  speak  of  a  thing  being  passive  in  two 
ways.f  First  in  a  broad  sense,  and  thus  every  reception  is 
called  a  passion,  whether  the  thing  received  be  fitting  to  the 

*  Aristotle,  Topic,  vi.  i.  f  Cf.  I.-IL,  Q.  XXII.,  A.  i. 


197  IMPASSIBILITY  Q.  82.  ART.  i 

receiver  and  perfect  it,  or  contrary  to  it  and  corrupt  it. 
The  glorious  bodies  are  not  said  to  be  impassible  by  the 
removal  of  this  kind  of  passion,  since  nothing  pertaining  to 
perfection  is  to  be  removed  from  them.  In  another  way  we 
use  the  word  passive  properly,  and  thus  the  Damascene  defines 
passion  (De  Fide  Orthod.  ii.  22)  as  being  a  movement  contrary 
to  nature.  Hence  an  immoderate  movement  of  the  heart  is 
called  its  passion,  but  a  moderate  movement  is  called  its 
operation.  The  reason  of  this  is  that  whatever  is  patient 
is  drawn  to  the  bounds  of  the  agent,  since  the  agent  assimi 
lates  the  patient  to  itself,  so  that,  therefore,  the  patient  as 
such  is  drawn  beyond  its  own  bounds  within  which  it  was 
confined.  Accordingly  taking  passion  in  its  proper  sense 
there  will  be  no  potentiality  to  passion  in  the  bodies  of  the 
saints  after  resurrection;  wherefore  they  are  said  to  be  im 
passible. 

The  reason  however  of  this  impassibility  is  assigned  dif 
ferently  by  different  persons.  Some  ascribe  it  to  the  con 
dition  of  the  elements,  which  will  be  different  then  from  what 
it  is  now.  For  they  say  that  the  elements  will  remain  then, 
as  to  substance,  yet  that  they  will  be  deprived  of  their  active 
and  passive  qualities.  But  this  does  not  seem  to  be  true: 
because  the  active  and  passive  qualities  belong  to  the  per 
fection  of  the  elements,  so  that  if  the  elements  were  restored 
without  them  in  the  body  of  the  man  that  rises  again,  they 
would  be  less  perfect  than  now.  Moreover  since  these  quali 
ties  are  the  proper  accidents  of  the  elements,  being  caused 
by  their  form  and  matter,  it  would  seem  most  absurd  for 
the  cause  to  remain  and  the  effect  to  be  removed.  Wherefore 
others  say  that  the  qualities  will  remain,  but  deprived  of 
their  proper  activities,  the  Divine  power  so  doing  for  the 
preservation  of  the  human  body.  This  however  would  seem 
to  be  untenable,  since  the  action  and  passion  of  the  active 
and  passive  qualities  is  necessary  for  the  mixture  (of  the 
elements),  and  according  as  one  or  the  other  preponderates 
the  mixed  (bodies)  differ  in  their  respective  complexions, 
and  this  must  apply  to  the  bodies  of  those  who  rise  again, 
for  they  will  contain  flesh  and  bones  and  like  parts,  all  of 


Q.  82.  ART.  i     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  198 

which  demand  different  complexions.     Moreover,  according 
to  this,  impassibility  could  not  be  one  of  their  gifts,  because 
it  would  not  imply  a  disposition  in  the  impassible  substance, 
but  merely  an  external  preventive  to  passion,  namely  the 
power  of  God,  which  might  produce  the  same  effect  in  a 
human  body  even  in  this  state  of  life.     Consequently  others 
say  that  in  the  body  itself  there  will  be  something  preventing 
the  passion  of  a  glorified  body,  namely  the  nature  of  a  fifth* 
or  heavenly  body,  which  they  maintain  enters  into  the 
composition  of  a  human  body,  to  the  effect  of  blending  the 
elements  together  in  harmony  so  as  to  be  fitting  matter  for 
the  rational  soul ;  but  that  in  this  state  of  life,  on  account  of 
the  preponderance  of  the  elemental  nature,  the  human  body 
is  passible  like  other  elements,  whereas  in  the  resurrection 
the  nature  of  the  fifth  body  will  predominate,  so  that  the 
human  body  will  be  made  impassible  in  likeness  to  the 
heavenly  body.     But  this  cannot  stand,  because  the  fifth  body 
does  not  enter  materially  into  the  composition  of  a  human 
body,  as  was  proved  above  (ii.  Sent.  D.  12,  Q.  I.,  A.  i).     More 
over  it  is  absurd  to  say  that  a  natural  power,  such  as  the  power 
of  a  heavenly  body,  should  endow  the  human  body  with  a  pro 
perty  of  glory,  such  as  the  impassibility  of  a  glorified  body, 
since  the  Apostle  ascribes  to  Christ's  power  the  transformation 
of  the  human  body,  because  such  as  is  the  heavenly,  such  also 
are  they  that  are  heavenly  (i  Cor.  xv.  48) ,  and  He  will  reform 
the  body  of  our  lowness,  made  like  to  the  body  of  His  glory, 
according  to  the  operation  whereby  also  He  is  able  to  subdue 
all  things  unto  Himself  (Phil.  iii.  21).      And  again,  a  heavenly 
nature  cannot  exercise  such  power  over  the  human  body 
as  to  take  from  it  its  elemental  nature  which  is  passible  by 
reason  of  its  essential  constituents.      Consequently  we  must 
say  otherwise  that  all  passion  results  from  the  agent  over 
coming  the  patient,  else  it  would  not  draw  it  to  its  own 
bounds.     Now  it  is  impossible  for  agent  to  overcome  patient 
except  through  the  weakening  of  the  hold  which  the  form 

*  The  other  four  being  the  elements.  This  fifth  element  was 
known  to  the  peripatetic  philosophers  as  the  quintessence,  of  which 
they  held  heavenly  bodies  to  be  formed. 


199  IMPASSIBILITY  Q.  82.  ART.  i 

of  the  patient  has  over  its  matter,  if  we  speak  of  the  passion 
which  is  against  nature,  for  it  is  of  passion  in  this  sense  that 
we  are  speaking  now :  for  matter  is  not  subject  to  one  of  two 
contraries,  except  through  the  cessation  or  at  least  the 
diminution  of  the  hold  which  the  other  contrary  has  on  it 
Now  the  human  body  and  all  that  it  contains  will  be  perfectly 
subject  to  the  rational  soul,  even  as  the  soul  will  be  perfectly 
subject  to  God.  Wherefore  it  will  be  impossible  for  the 
glorified  body  to  be  subject  to  any  change  contrary  to  the 
disposition  whereby  it  is  perfected  by  the  soul ;  and  conse 
quently  those  bodies  will  be  impassible. 

Reply  Obj.  I.  According  to  Anselm  (Cur  Deus  Homo,  ii.  II), 
mortal  is  included  in  the  philosophers'  definition  of  man, 
because  they  did  not  believe  that  the  whole  man  could  be  ever 
immortal,  for  they  had  no  experience  of  man  otherwise 
than  in  this  state  of  mortality.  Or  we  may  say  that  since, 
according  to  the  Philosopher  (Met.  vii.,  viii.),  essential 
differences  are  unknown  to  us,  we  sometimes  employ  acci 
dental  differences  in  order  to  signify  essential  differences 
from  which  the  accidental  differences  result.  Hence 
mortal  is  put  in  the  definition  of  man,  not  as  though  mortal 
ity  were  essential  to  man,  but  because  that  which  causes 
passibility  and  mortality  in  the  present  state  of  life,  namely 
composition  of  contraries,  is  essential  to  man,  but  it  will 
not  cause  it  then,  on  account  of  the  triumph  of  the  soul 
over  the  body. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Potentiality  is  twofold,  tied  and  free:  and 
this  is  true  not  only  of  active  but  also  of  passive  potentiality. 
For  the  form  ties  the  potentiality  of  matter,  by  determining 
it  to  one  thing,  and  it  is  thus  that  it  overcomes  it.  And 
since  in  corruptible  things  form  does  not  perfectly  overcome 
matter,  it  cannot  tie  it  completely  so  as  to  prevent  it  from 
sometimes  receiving  a  disposition  contrary  to  the  form 
through  some  passion.  But  in  the  saints  after  the  resurrec 
tion,  the  soul  will  have  complete  dominion  over  the  body,  and 
it  will  be  altogether  impossible  for  it  to  lose  this  dominion, 
because  it  will  be  immutably  subject  to  God,  which  was 
not  the  case  in  the  state  of  innocence.  Consequently 


Q.  82.  ART.  i     THE  "  SUMMA  1HEOLOGICA  "  200 

those  bodies  will  retain  substantially  the  same  potentiality 
as  they  have  now  to  another  form;  yet  that  potentiality 
will  remain  tied  by  the  triumph  of  the  soul  over  the  body, 
so  that  it  will  never  be  realized  by  actual  passion. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  elemental  qualities  are  the  instruments 
of  the  soul,  as  stated  in  De  Anima,  ii.,  text.  38,  seq.,  for  the 
heat  of  fire  in  an  animal's  body  is  directed  in  the  act  of 
nutrition  by  the  soul's  power.  When,  however,  the  principal 
agent  is  perfect,  and  there  is  no  defect  in  the  instrument, 
no  action  proceeds  from  the  instrument,  except  in  accord 
ance  with  the  disposition  of  the  principal  agent.  Con 
sequently  in  the  bodies  of  the  saints  after  the  resurrection, 
no  action  or  passion  will  result  from  the  elemental  qualities 
that  is  contrary  to  the  disposition  of  the  soul  which  has 
the  preservation  of  the  body  in  view. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  According  to  Augustine  (Ep.  ad  Consent,  cv.) 
the  Divine  power  is  able  to  remove  whatever  qualities  He  will 
from  this  visible  and  tangible  body,  other  qualities  remaining. 
Hence  even  as  in  a  certain  respect  He  deprived  the  flames 
of  the  Chaldees*  furnace  of  the  power  to  burn,  since  the  bodies 
of  the  children  were  preserved  without  hurt,  while  in  another 
respect  that  power  remained,  since  those  flames  consumed  the 
wood,  so  will  He  remove  passibility  from  the  humours  while 
leaving  their  nature  unchanged.  It  has  been  explained  in  the 
Article  how  this  is  brought  about. 

Reply  Obj.  5.  The  scars  of  wounds  will  not  be  in  the  saints, 
nor  were  they  in  Christ,  in  so  far  as  they  imply  a  defect, 
but  as  signs  of  the  most  steadfast  virtue  whereby  the  saints 
suffered  for  the  sake  of  justice  and  faith :  so  that  this  will  in 
crease  their  own  and  others'  joy  (cf.  P.  III.,  Q.  LIV.,  A.  4,  ad  3). 
Hence  Augustine  says  (De  Civ.  Dei,  xxii.  20) :  We  feel  an 
undescribable  love  for  the  blessed  martyrs  so  as  to  desire  to  see 
in  that  kingdom  the  scars  of  the  wounds  in  their  bodies,  which 
they  bore  for  Christ's  name.  Perchance  indeed  we  shall  see 
them,  for  this  will  not  make  them  less  comely  but  more  glorious. 
A  certain  beauty  will  shine  in  them,  a  beauty  though  in  the 
body,  yet  not  of  the  body  but  of  virtue.  Nevertheless  those 
martyrs  who  have  been  maimed  and  deprived  of  their 


201  IMPASSIBILITY  Q.  82.  ART.  2 

limbs  will  not  be  without  those  limbs  in  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead,  for  to  them  it  is  said  (Luke  xxi.  18) :  A  hair  of 
your  head  shall  not  perish. 


SECOND  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  ALL  WILL  BE  EQUALLY  IMPASSIBLE  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Second  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  all  will  be  equally  im 
passible.  For  a  gloss  on  I  Cor.  xv.  42,  It  is  sown  in  corrup 
tion,  says  that  all  have  equal  immunity  from  suffering.  Now 
the  gift  of  impassibility  consists  in  immunity  from  suffering. 
Therefore  all  will  be  equally  impassible. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Negations  are  not  subject  to  be  more 
or  less.  Now  impassibility  is  a  negation  or  privation  of 
passibility.  Therefore  it  cannot  be  greater  in  one  subject 
than  in  another. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  A  thing  is  more  white  if  it  have  less 
admixture  of  black.  But  there  will  be  no  admixture  of 
passibility  in  any  of  the  saints'  bodies.  Therefore  they  will 
all  be  equally  impassible. 

On  the  contrary,  Reward  should  be  proportionate  to  merit. 
Now  some  of  the  saints  were  greater  in  merit  than  others. 
Therefore,  since  impassibility  is  a  reward,  it  would  seem 
to  be  greater  in  some  than  in  others. 

Further,  Impassibility  is  condivided  with  the  gift  of 
clarity.  Now  the  latter  will  not  be  equal  in  all,  according 
to  i  Cor.  xv.  41.  Therefore  neither  will  impassibility  be 
equal  in  all. 

/  answer  that,  Impassibility  may  be  considered  in  two 
ways,  either  in  itself,  or  in  respect  of  its  cause.  If  it  be 
considered  in  itself,  since  it  denotes  a  mere  negation  or 
privation,  it  is  not  subject  to  be  more  or  less,  but  will  be 
equal  in  all  the  blessed.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we  consider 
it  in  relation  to  its  cause,  thus  it  will  be  greater  in  one  person 
than  in  another.  Now  its  cause  is  the  dominion  of  the  soul 
over  the  body,  and  this  dominion  is  caused  by  the  soul's 
unchangeable  enjoyment  of  God.  Consequently  in  one 


Q.  82.  ART.  3    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  202 

who  enjoys  God  more  perfectly,  there  is  a  greater  cause  of 
impassibility. 

Reply  Obj.  I.  This  gloss  is  speaking  of  impassibility  in 
itself  and  not  in  relation  to  its  cause. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Although  negations  and  privations  con 
sidered  in  themselves  are  not  increased  nor  diminished, 
yet  they  are  subject  to  increase  and  diminution  in  relation 
to  their  causes.  Thus  a  place  is  said  to  be  more  darksome 
from  having  more  and  greater  obstacles  to  light. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Some  things  increase  not  only  by  receding 
from  their  contrary,  but  also  by  approach  to  a  term:  thus 
light  increases.  Consequently  impassibility  also  is  greater 
in  one  subject  than  in  another,  although  there  is  no  passi- 
bility  remaining  in  any  one. 

THIRD  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  IMPASSIBILITY  EXCLUDES  ACTUAL  SENSATION 
FROM  GLORIFIED  BODIES  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Third  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  impassibility  excludes 
actual  sensation  from  glorified  bodies.  For  according  to 
the  Philosopher  (De  Anima,  ii.,  text.  118),  sensation  is  a  kind 
of  passion.  But  the  glorified  bodies  will  be  impassible. 
Therefore  they  will  not  have  actual  sensation. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Natural  alteration  precedes  spiritual* 
alteration,  just  as  natural  being  precedes  intentional  being. 
Now  glorified  bodies,  by  reason  of  their  impassibility,  will 
not  be  subject  to  natural  alteration.  Therefore  they  will 
not  be  subject  to  spiritual  alteration  which  is  requisite  for 
sensation. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  Whenever  actual  sensation  is  due  to  a 
new  perception,  there  is  a  new  judgment.  But  in  that 
state  there  will  be  no  new  judgment,  because  our  thoughts 
will  not  then  be  changeable,  as  Augustine  says  (De  Trin.  xv.  16) . 
Therefore  there  will  be  no  actual  sensation. 

*  Animalem,  as  though  it  were  derived  from  animus — the  mind. 
Cf.  P.  I.-II.,  Q.  L.,  A.  i,  3m;  Q.  LIL,  A.  i,  3m- 


203  IMPASSIBILITY  Q.  82.  ART.  3 

Obj.  4.  Further,  When  the  act  of  one  of  the  soul's  powers 
is  intense,  the  acts  of  the  other  powers  are  remiss.  Now 
the  soul  will  be  supremely  intent  on  the  act  of  the  contem 
plative  power  in  contemplating  God.  Therefore  the  soul 
will  have  no  actual  sensation  whatever. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (Apoc.  i.  7) :  Every  eye  shall 
see  Him.  Therefore  there  will  be  actual  sensation. 

Further,  According  to  the  Philosopher  (De  Anima,  i.), 
the  animate  is  distinct  from  the  inanimate  by  sensation  and 
movement.  Now  there  will  be  actual  movement  since  they 
shall  run  to  and  fro  like  sparks  among  the  reeds  (Wis.  iii.  7). 
Therefore  there  will  also  be  actual  sensation. 

/  answer  that,  All  are  agreed  that  there  is  some  sensation 
in  the  bodies  of  the  blessed :  else  the  bodily  life  of  the  saints 
after  the  resurrection  would  be  likened  to  sleep  rather  than 
to  vigilance.  Now  this  is  not  befitting  that  perfection, 
because  in  sleep  a  sensible  body  is  not  in  the  ultimate  act 
of  life,  for  which  reason  sleep  is  described  as  half -life.* 
But  there  is  a  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the  mode  of 
sensation. 

For  some  say  that  the  glorified  bodies  will  be  impassible, 
and  consequently  not  susceptible  to  strange  impressions, 
and  much  less  so  than  the  heavenly  bodies,  because  they 
will  have  actual  sensations,  not  by  receiving  species  from 
sensibles,  but  by  emission  of  species.  But  this  is  impos 
sible,  since  in  the  resurrection  the  specific  nature  will  remain 
the  same  in  man  and  in  all  his  parts.  Now  the  nature  of  sense 
is  to  be  a  passive  power  as  the  Philosopher  proves  (De  Anima, 
ii.,  text.  51.  54)-  Wherefore  if  the  saints,  in  the  resurrection, 
were  to  have  sensations  by  emitting  and  not  by  receiving 
species,  sense  in  them  would  be  not  a  passive  but  an  active 
power,  and  thus  it  would  not  be  the  same  specifically  with 
sense  as  it  is  now,  but  would  be  some  other  power  bestowed 
on  them ;  for  just  as  matter  never  becomes  form,  so  a  passive 
power  never  becomes  active.  Consequently  others  say 

*  This  is  what  Aristotle  says :  The  good  and  the  bad  are  in  sleep 
least  distinguishable :  hence  men  say  that  for  half  their  lives  there  is  no 
difference  between  the  happy  and  the  unhappy  (Ethic,  i.  13). 


Q.  82.  ART.  3    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  204 

that  the  senses  will  be  actualized  by  receiving  species,  not 
indeed  from  external  sensibles,  but  by  an  outflow  from  the 
higher  powers,  so  that  as  now  the  higher  powers  receive  from 
the  lower,  so  on  the  contrary  the  lower  powers  will  then 
receive  from  the  higher.  But  this  mode  of  reception  does 
not  result  in  real  sensation,  because  every  passive  power, 
according  to  its  specific  nature,  is  determined  to  some  special 
active  principle,  since  a  power  as  such  bears  relation  to  that 
with  respect  to  which  it  is  said  to  be  the  power.  Wherefore 
since  the  proper  active  principle  in  external  sensation  is 
a  thing  existing  outside  the  soul  and  not  an  intention 
thereof  existing  in  the  imagination  or  reason,  if  the  organ  of 
sense  be  not  moved  by  external  things,  but  by  the  imagina 
tion  or  other  higher  powers,  there  will  be  no  true  sensation. 
Hence  we  do  not  say  that  madmen  or  other  witless  persons 
(in  whom  there  is  this  kind  of  outflow  of  species  towards 
the  organs  of  sense,  on  account  of  the  powerful  influence  of 
the  imagination)  have  real  sensations,  but  that  it  seems  to 
them  that  they  have  sensations.  Consequently  we  must  say 
with  others  that  sensation  in  glorified  bodies  will  result 
from  the  reception  of  things  outside  the  soul.  It  must, 
however,  be  observed  that  the  organs  of  sense  are  trans 
muted  by  things  outside  the  soul  in  two  ways.  First  by  a 
natural  transmutation,  when  namely  the  organ  is  disposed 
by  the  same  natural  quality  as  the  thing  outside  the  soul 
which  acts  on  that  organ:  for  instance,  when  the  hand  is 
heated  by  touching  a  hot  object,  or  becomes  fragrant  through 
contact  with  a  fragrant  object.  Secondly,  by  a  spiritual 
transmutation,  as  when  a  sensible  quality  is  received  in 
an  instrument,  according  to  a  spiritual  mode  of  being,  when, 
namely,  the  species  or  the  intention  of  a  quality,  and  not 
the  quality  itself  is  received:  thus  the  pupil  receives  the 
species  of  whiteness  and  yet  does  not  itself  become  white. 
Accordingly  the  first  reception  does  not  cause  sensation, 
properly  speaking,  because  the  senses  are  receptive  of  species 
in  matter  but  without  matter;  that  is  to  say  without  the 
material  being  which  the  species  had  outside  the  soul  (De 
Anima,  ii.,  text.  121).  This  reception  transmutes  the  nature  of 


205  IMPASSIBILITY  Q.  82.  ART.  3 

the  recipient,  because  in  this  way  the  quality  is  received 
according  to  its  material  being.  Consequently  this  kind  of 
reception  will  not  be  in  the  glorified  bodies,  but  the  second, 
which  of  itself  causes  actual  sensation,  without  changing  the 
nature  of  the  recipient. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  As  already  explained,  by  this  passion  that 
takes  place  in  actual  sensation  and  is  no  other  than  the  afore 
said  reception  of  species,  the  body  is  not  drawn  away  from 
natural  quality,  but  is  perfected  by  a  spiritual  change. 
Wherefore  the  impassibility  of  glorified  bodies  does  not 
exclude  this  kind  of  passion. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Every  subject  of  passion  receives  the  action 
of  the  agent  according  to  its  mode.  Accordingly  if  there  be 
a  thing  that  is  naturally  adapted  to  be  altered  by  an  active 
principle,  with  a  natural  and  a  spiritual  alteration,  the  natural 
alteration  precedes  the  spiritual  alteration,  just  as  natural 
precedes  intentional  being.  If  however  a  thing  be  naturally 
adapted  to  be  altered  only  with  a  spiritual  alteration  it  does 
not  follow  that  it  is  altered  naturally.  For  instance  the  air 
is  not  receptive  of  colour,  according  to  its  natural  being,  but 
only  according  to  its  spiritual  being,  wherefore  in  this  way 
alone  is  it  altered :  whereas,  on  the  contrary,  inanimate  bodies 
are  altered  by  sensible  qualities  only  naturally  and  not 
spiritually.  But  in  the  glorified  bodies  there  cannot  be 
any  natural  alteration,  and  consequently  there  will  be  only 
spiritual  alteration. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Just  as  there  will  be  new  reception  of  species 
in  the  organs  of  sensation,  so  there  will  be  new  judgment  in 
the  common  sense :  but  there  will  be  no  new  judgment  on  the 
point  in  the  intellect;  such  is  the  case  with  one  who  sees 
what  he  knew  before.  The  saying  of  Augustine,  that  there 
our  thoughts  will  not  be  changeable,  refers  to  the  thoughts  of  the 
intellectual  part :  therefore  it  is  not  to  the  point. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  When  one  of  two  things  is  the  type  of  the 
other,  the  attention  of  the  soul  to  the  one  does  not  hinder 
or  lessen  its  attention  to  the  other :  thus  a  physician  while 
considering  urine  is  not  less  but  more  able  to  bear  in  mind 
the  rules  of  his  art  concerning  the  colours  of  urine.  And 


Q.  82.  ART.  4    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  206 

since  God  is  apprehended  by  the  saints  as  the  type  of  all 
things  that  will  be  done  or  known  by  them,  their  attention 
to  perceiving  sensibles,  or  to  contemplating  or  doing  any 
thing  else  will  nowise  hinder  their  contemplation  of  God, 
nor  conversely.  Or  we  may  say  that  the  reason  why  one 
power  is  hindered  in  its  act  when  another  power  is  intensely 
engaged  is  because  one  power  does  not  alone  suffice  for  such 
an  intense  operation,  unless  it  be  assisted  by  receiving  from 
the  principle  of  life  the  inflow  that  the  other  powers  or  mem 
bers  should  receive.  And  since  in  the  saints  all  the  powers 
will  be  most  perfect,  one  will  be  able  to  operate  intensely 
without  thereby  hindering  the  operation  of  another  power 
even  as  it  was  with  Christ. 


FOURTH  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  IN  THE  BLESSED,  AFTER  THE  RESURRECTION, 
ALL  THE  SENSES  WILL  BE  IN  ACT  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Fourth  Article  : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  all  the  senses  are  not  in 
act  there.  For  touch  is  the  first  of  all  the  senses  (De  Anima, 
ii.).  But  the  glorified  body  will  lack  the  actual  sense  of 
touch,  since  the  sense  of  touch  becomes  actual  by  the  altera 
tion  of  an  animal  body  by  some  external  body  preponderating 
in  some  one  of  the  active  or  passive  qualities  which  touch 
is  capable  of  discerning :  and  such  an  alteration  will  then  be 
impossible.  Therefore  all  the  Senses  will  not  be  in  act  there. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  The  sense  of  taste  assists  the  action  of  the 
nutritive  power.  Now  after  the  resurrection  there  will  be 
no  such  action,  as  stated  above  (Q.  LXXXL,  A.  4).  There 
fore  taste  would  be  useless  there. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  Nothing  will  be  corrupted  after  the  resur 
rection  because  the  whole  creature  will  be  invested  with  a 
certain  virtue  of  incorruption.  Now  the  sense  of  smell 
cannot  have  its  act  without  some  corruption  having  taken 
place,  because  smell  is  not  perceived  without  a  volatile  evap 
oration  consisting  in  a  certain  dissolution.  Therefore  the 
sense  of  smell  is  not  there  in  its  act. 


207  IMPASSIBILITY  Q.  82.  ART.  4 

Obj.  4.  Further,  Hearing  assists  teaching  (De  Sensu  et 
Sensato,  i.).  But  the  blessed,  after  the  resurrection,  will 
require  no  teaching  by  means  of  sensible  objects,  since  they 
will  be  filled  with  Divine  wisdom  by  the  very  vision  of  God. 
Therefore  hearing  will  not  be  there. 

Obj.  5.  Further,  Seeing  results  from  the  pupil  receiving 
the  species  of  the  thing  seen.  But  after  the  resurrection 
this  will  be  impossible  in  the  blessed.  Therefore  there  will 
be  no  actual  seeing  there,  and  yet  this  is  the  most  noble  of 
the  senses.  The  minor  is  proved  thus: — That  which  15 
actually  lightsome  is  not  receptive  of  a  visible  species ;  and 
consequently  a  mirror  placed  under  the  sun's  rays  does  not 
reflect  the  image  of  a  body  opposite  to  it.  Now  the  pupil 
like  the  whole  body  will  be  endowed  with  clarity.  There 
fore  it  will  not  receive  the  image  of  a  coloured  body. 

Obj.  6.  Further,  According  to  the  science  of  perspective, 
whatever  is  seen  is  seen  at  an  angle.  But  this  does  not  apply 
to  the  glorified  bodies.  Therefore  they  will  not  have  actual 
sense  of  sight.  The  minor  is  proved  thus :  Whenever  a  thing 
is  seen  at  an  angle,  the  angle  must  be  proportionate  to  the 
distance  of  the  object  seen :  because  what  is  seen  from  a 
greater  distance  is  less  seen  and  at  a  lesser  angle,  so  that 
the  angle  may  be  so  small  that  nothing  is  seen  of  the  object. 
Therefore  if  the  glorified  eye  sees  at  an  angle,  it  follows  that 
it  sees  things  within  a  certain  distance,  and  that  consequently 
it  does  not  see  a  thing  from  a  greater  distance  than  we  see 
now:  and  this  would  seem  very  absurd.  And  thus  it  would 
seem  that  the  sense  of  sight  will  not  be  actual  in  glorified 
bodies. 

On  the  contrary,  A  power  conjoined  to  its  act  is  more 
perfect  than  one  not  so  conjoined.  Now  human  nature 
in  the  blessed  will  be  in  its  greatest  perfection.  Therefore 
all  the  senses  will  be  actual  there. 

Further,  The  sensitive  powers  are  nearer  to  the  soul  than 
the  body  is.  But  the  body  will  be  rewarded  or  punished  on 
account  of  the  merits  or  demerits  of  the  soul.  Therefore 
all  the  senses  in  the  blessed  will  also  be  rewarded,  and 
in  the  wicked  will  be  punished,  with  regard  to  pleasure 


Q.  82.  ART.  4    THE ."  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  208 

and  pain  or  sorrow  which  consist  in  the  operation  of  the 
senses. 

I  answer  that,  There  are  two  opinions  on  this  question. 
For  some  say  that  in  the  glorified  bodies  there  will  be  all  the 
sensitive  powers,  but  that  only  two  senses  will  be  in  act, 
namely  touch  and  sight ;  nor  will  this  be  owing  to  defective 
senses,  but  from  lack  of  medium  and  object ;  and  that  the 
senses  will  not  be  useless,  because  they  will  conduce  to  the 
integrity  of  human  nature  and  will  show  forth  the  wisdom 
of  their  Creator.  But  this  is  seemingly  untrue,  because  the 
medium  in  these  senses  is  the  same  as  in  the  others.  For 
in  the  sight  the  medium  is  the  air,  and  this  is  also  the 
medium  in  hearing  and  smelling  (De  Anima,  ii.,  text.  76, 
97).  Again,  the  taste,  like  the  touch,  has  the  medium 
in  contact,  since  taste  is  a  kind  of  touch  (ibid.  text.  28, 
94).  Smell  also  which  is  the  object  of  the  sense  of  smell 
will  be  there,  since  the  Church  sings  that  the  bodies  of 
the  saints  will  be  a  most  sweet  smell.  There  will  also 
be  vocal  praise  in  heaven;  hence  a  gloss  says  on  Ps. 
cxlix.  6,  The  high  praises  of  God  shall  be  in  their  mouth, 
that  hearts  and  tongues  shall  not  cease  to  praise  God.  The 
same  is  had  on  the  authority  of  a  gloss  on  2  Esdr.  xii.  27, 
With  singing  and  with  cymbals.  Wherefore,  according  to 
others  we  must  say  that  smelling  and  hearing  will  be  in  act 
there,  but  taste  will  not  be  in  act,  in  the  sense  of  being 
affected  by  the  taking  of  food  or  drink,  as  appears  from 
what  we  have  said  (Q.  LXXXL,  A.  4) :  unless  perchance  we 
say  that  there  will  be  taste  in  act  through  the  tongue  being 
affected  by  some  neighbouring  humour. 

Reply  Obj.  I.  The  qualities  perceived  by  the  touch  are 
those  which  constitute  the  animal  body.  Wherefore  the 
body  of  an  animal  has,  through  its  tangible  qualities  accord 
ing  to  the  present  state  of  life,  a  natural  aptitude  to  be 
affected  with  a  natural  and  spiritual  alteration  by  the  object 
of  touch.  For  this  reason  the  touch  is  said  to  be  the  most 
material  of  the  senses,  since  it  has  a  greater  measure  of 
material  alteration  connected  with  it.  Yet  material  altera 
tion  is  only  accidentally  related  to  the  act  of  sensation  which 


209  IMPASSIBILITY  Q.  82.  ART.  4 

is  effected  by  a  spiritual  alteration.  Consequently  the 
glorified  bodies,  which  by  reason  of  their  impassibility  are 
immune  from  natural  alteration,  will  be  subject  only  to 
spiritual  alteration  by  tangible  qualities.  Thus  it  was  with 
the  body  of  Adam,  which  could  neither  be  burnt  by  fire, 
nor  pierced  by  sword,  although  he  had  the  sense  of  such 
things. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Taste,  in  so  far  as  it  is  the  perception  of 
food,  will  not  be  in  act ;  but  perhaps  it  will  be  possible  in  so 
far  as  it  is  cognizant  of  flavours  in  the  way  mentioned  above. 
Reply  Obj.  3.  Some  have  considered  smell  to  be  merely  a 
volatile  evaporation.  But  this  opinion  cannot  be  true; 
which  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  vultures  hasten  to  a 
corpse  on  perceiving  the  odour  from  a  very  great  distance, 
whereas  it  would  be  impossible  for  an  evaporation  to  travel 
from  the  corpse  to  a  place  so  remote,  even  though  the  whole 
corpse  were  to  be  dissolved  into  vapour.  This  is  confirmed 
by  the  fact  that  sensible  objects  at  an  equal  distance  exercise 
their  influence  in  all  directions:  so  that  smell  affects  the 
medium  sometimes,  and  the  instrument  of  sensation  with  a 
spiritual  alteration,  without  any  evaporation  reaching  the 
organ.  That  some  evaporation  should  be  necessary  is  due 
to  the  fact  that  smell  in  bodies  is  mixed  with  humidity; 
wherefore  it  is  necessary  for  dissolution  to  take  place  in 
order  for  the  smell  to  be  perceived.  But  in  the  glorified 
bodies  odour  will  be  in  its  ultimate  perfection,  being  nowise 
hampered  by  humidity:  wherefore  it  will  affect  the  organ 
with  a  spiritual  alteration,  like  the  odour  of  a  volatile  evap 
oration.  Such  wih1  be  the  sense  of  smeh1  in  the  saints, 
because  it  will  not  be  hindered  by  any  humidity :  and  it  will 
take  cognizance  not  only  of  the  excellences  of  odours,  as 
happens  with  us  now  on  account  of  the  very  great  humidity 
of  the  brain,  but  also  of  the  minutest  differences  of  odours. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  In  heaven  there  will  be  vocal  praise  (though 
indeed  some  think  otherwise),  and  in  the  blessed  it  will 
affect  the  organ  of  hearing  by  a  merely  spiritual  alteration. 
Nor  will  it  be  for  the  sake  of  learning  whereby  they  may 
acquire  knowledge,  but  for  the  sake  of  the  perfection  of  the 

in.  6  14 


Q.  82.  ART.  4     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  210 

sense  and  for  the  sake  of  pleasure.  How  it  is  possible  for 
the  voice  to  give  sound  there,  we  have  already  stated 
(ii.  Sent.  D.  2;  Q.  II.,  A.  2,  ad  5). 

Reply  Obj.  5.  The  intensity  of  light  does  not  hinder  the 
spiritual  reception  of  the  image  of  colour,  so  long  as  the 
pupil  retains  its  diaphanous  nature ;  thus  it  is  evident  that 
however  much  the  air  be  filled  with  light,  it  can  be  the 
medium  of  sight,  and  the  more  it  is  illumined,  the  more 
clearly  are  objects  seen  through  it,  unless  there  be  a  fault 
through  defective  sight.  The  fact  that  the  image  of  an 
object  placed  in  opposition  to  a  mirror  directly  opposite  the 
sun's  rays  does  not  appear  therein,  is  not  due  to  the  reception 
being  hindered,  but  to  the  hindering  of  reflection :  because 
for  an  image  to  appear  in  a  mirror  it  must  needs  be  thrown 
back  by  an  opaque  body,  for  which  reason  lead  is  affixed  to 
the  glass  in  a  mirror.  The  sun's  ray  dispels  this  opacity  so 
that  no  image  can  appear  in  the  mirror.  But  the  clarity  of 
a  glorified  body  does  not  destroy  the  diaphanous  nature  of 
the  pupil,  since  glory  does  not  destroy  nature;  and  conse 
quently  the  greatness  of  clarity  in  the  pupil  renders  the  sight 
keen  rather  than  defective. 

Reply  Obj.  6.  The  more  perfect  the  sense  the  less  does 
it  require  to  be  altered  in  order  to  perceive  its  object.  Now 
the  smaller  the  angle  at  which  the  sight  is  affected  by  the 
visible  object,  the  less  is  the  organ  altered.  Hence  it  is 
that  a  stronger  sight  can  see  from  a  distance  more  than  a 
weaker  sight;  because  the  greater  the  distance  the  smaller 
the  angle  at  which  a  thing  is  seen.  And  since  the  sight  of 
a  glorified  body  will  be  most  perfect  it  will  be  able  to  see  by 
the  very  least  alteration  (of  the  organ) ;  and  consequently 
at  a  very  much  smaller  angle  than  now,  and  therefore  from 
a  much  greater  distance. 


QUESTION  LXXXIII. 

OF  THE  SUBTLETY  OF  THE  BODIES  OF  THE  BLESSED. 

(In  Six  Articles.) 

WE  must  now  consider  the  subtlety  of  the  bodies  of  the 
blessed.     Under  this  head  there  are  six  points  of  inquiry: 

(1)  Whether  subtlety  is  a  property  of  the  glorified  body  ? 

(2)  Whether  by  reason  of  this  subtlety  it  can  be  in  the  same 
place  with  another  not  glorified  body  ?     (3)  Whether  by  a 
miracle  two  bodies  can  be  in  the  same  place  ?    (4)  Whether 
a  glorified  body  can  be  in  the  same  place  with  another 
glorified  body  ?     (5)  Whether  a  glorified  body  necessarily 
requires  a  place  equal  to  itself  ?     (6)  Whether  a  glorified 
body  is  palpable  ? 

FIRST  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  SUBTLETY  IS  A  PROPERTY  OF  THE  GLORIFIED 

BODY  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  First  Article : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  subtlety  is  not  a  property 
of  the  glorified  body.  For  the  properties  of  glory  surpass 
the  properties  of  nature,  even  as  the  clarity  of  glory  sur 
passes  the  clarity  of  the  sun,  which  is  the  greatest  in  nature. 
Accordingly  if  subtlety  be  a  property  of  the  glorified  body, 
it  would  seem  that  the  glorified  body  will  be  more  subtle 
than  anything  which  is  subtle  in  nature,  and  thus  it  will  be 
more  subtle  than  the  wind  and  the  air,  which  was  condemned 
by  Gregory  in  the  city  of  Constantinople,  as  he  relates 
(Moral,  xiv.). 

Obj.  2.  Further,  As  heat  and  cold  are  simple  qualities  of 
bodies,  i.e.  of  the  elements,  so  is  subtlety.  But  heat  and 

211 


Q.  83.  ART.  i     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  212 

other  qualities  of  the  elements  will  not  be  intensified  in  the 
glorified  bodies  any  more  than  they  are  now,  in  fact  they 
will  be  more  reduced  to  the  mean.  Neither,  therefore,  will 
subtlety  be  in  them  more  than  it  is  now. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  Subtlety  is  in  bodies  as  a  result  of  scarcity 
of  matter,  wherefore  bodies  that  have  less  matter  within 
equal  dimensions  are  said  to  be  more  subtle ;  as  fire  in  com 
parison  with  air,  and  air  as  compared  with  water,  and  water 
as  compared  with  earth.  But  there  will  be  as  much  matter 
in  the  glorified  bodies  as  there  is  now,  nor  will  their  dimen 
sions  be  greater.  Therefore  they  will  not  be  more  subtle 
then  than  now. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (i  Cor.  xv.  44) :  It  is  sown  a 
corruptible  body,  it  shall  rise  a  spiritual,  i.e.  a  spirit-like, 
body.  But  the  subtlety  of  a  spirit  surpasses  all  bodily 
subtlety.  Therefore  the  glorified  bodies  will  be  most  subtle. 

Further,  The  more  subtle  a  body  is  the  more  exalted  it  is. 
But  the  glorified  bodies  will  be  most  exalted.  Therefore 
they  will  be  most  subtle. 

I  answer  that,  Subtlety  takes  its  name  from  the  power 
to  penetrate.  Hence  it  is  said  in  De  Gener.  ii.  that  a  subtle 
thing  fills  all  the  parts  and  the  parts  of  parts.  Now  that  a 
body  has  the  power  of  penetrating  may  happen  through 
two  causes.  First,  through  smallness  of  quantity,  especially 
in  respect  of  depth  and  breadth,  but  not  of  length,  because 
penetration  regards  depth,  wherefore  length  is  not  an 
obstacle  to  penetration.  Secondly,  through  paucity  of 
matter,  wherefore  rarity  is  synonymous  with  subtlety: 
and  since  in  rare  bodies  the  form  is  more  predominant  over 
the  matter,  the  term  subtlety  has  been  transferred  to  those 
bodies  which  are  most  perfectly  subject  to  their  form,  and 
are  most  fully  perfected  thereby :  thus  we  speak  of  subtlety 
in  the  sun  and  moon  and  like  bodies,  just  as  gold  and  similar 
things  may  be  caUed  subtle,  when  they  are  most  perfectly 
complete  in  their  specific  being  and  power.  And  since 
incorporeal  things  lack  quantity  and  matter,  the  term 
subtlety  is  applied  to  them,  not  only  by  reason  of  their  sub 
stance,  but  also  on  account  of  their  power.  For  just  as  a 


213  SUBTLETY  Q.  83.  ART.  i 

subtle  thing  is  said  to  be  penetrative,  for  the  reason  that  it 
reaches  to  the  inmost  part  of  a  thing,  so  is  an  intellect  said 
to  be  subtle  because  it  reaches  to  the  insight  of  the  intrinsic 
principles  and  the  hidden  natural  properties  of  a  thing. 
In  like  manner  a  person  is  said  to  have  subtle  sight,  because 
he  is  able  to  perceive  by  sight  things  of  the  smallest  size: 
and  the  same  applies  to  the  other  senses.  Accordingly 
people  have  differed  by  ascribing  subtlety  to  the  glorified 
bodies  in  different  ways. 

For  certain  heretics,  as  Augustine  relates  (De  Civ.  Dei, 
xiii.  12),  ascribed  to  them  the  subtlety  whereby  spiritual 
substances  are  said  to  be  subtle :  and  they  said  that  at  the 
resurrection  the  body  will  be  transformed  into  a  spirit, 
and  that  for  this  reason  the  Apostle  describes  as  being 
spiritual  the  bodies  of  those  who  rise  again  (i  Cor.  xv.  44). 
But  this  cannot  be  maintained.  First,  because  a  body 
cannot  be  changed  into  a  spirit,  since  there  is  no  community 
of  matter  between  them:  and  Boethius  proves  this  (De  duab. 
Nat.).  Secondly,  because,  if  this  were  possible,  and  one's 
body  were  changed  into  a  spirit,  one  would  not  rise  again 
a  man,  for  a  man  naturally  consists  of  a  soul  and  body. 
Thirdly,  because  if  this  were  the  Apostle's  meaning,  just  as 
he  speaks  of  spiritual  bodies,  so  would  he  speak  of  natural 
(animate)  bodies,  as  being  changed  into  souls  (animam) : 
and  this  is  clearly  false. 

Hence  certain  heretics  said  that  the  body  will  remain 
at  the  resurrection,  but  that  it  will  be  endowed  with  subtlety 
by  means  of  rarefaction,  so  that  human  bodies  in  rising 
again  will  be  like  the  air  or  the  wind,  as  Gregory  relates 
(Moral,  xiv.).  But  this  again  cannot  be  maintained,  be 
cause  our  Lord  had  a  palpable  body  after  the  Resurrection, 
as  appears  from  the  last  chapter  of  Luke,  and  we  must 
believe  that  His  body  was  supremely  subtle.  Moreover 
the  human  body  will  rise  again  with  flesh  and  bones,  as  did 
the  body  of  our  Lord,  according  to  Luke  xxiv.  39,  A  spirit 
hath  not  flesh  and  bones  as  you  see  Me  to  have,  and  Job  xix.  26, 
In  my  flesh  I  shall  see  God,  my  Saviour :  and  the  nature  of 
flesh  and  bone  is  incompatible  with  the  aforesaid  rarity. 


Q.  83.  ART.  i     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  214 

Consequently  another  kind  of  subtlety  must  be  assigned 
to  glorified  bodies,  by  saying  that  they  are  subtle  on  account 
of  the  most  complete  perfection  of  the  body.  But  this 
completeness  is  explained  by  some  in  relation  to  the  fifth, 
or  heavenly,  essence,  which  will  be  then  predominant  in 
them.  This,  however,  is  impossible,  since  first  of  all  the 
fifth  essence  can  nowise  enter  into  the  composition  of  a 
body,  as  we  have  shown  above  (ii.  Sent.  D.  12,  qu.  i). 
Secondly,  because  granted  that  it  entered  into  the  composi 
tion  of  the  human  body,  it  would  be  impossible  to  account 
for  its  having  a  greater  predominance  over  the  elemental 
nature  then  than  now,  unless, — either  the  amount  of  the 
heavenly  nature  in  human  bodies  were  increased  (thus 
human  bodies  would  not  be  of  the  same  stature,  unless 
perhaps  elemental  matter  in  man  were  decreased,  which  is 
inconsistent  with  the  integrity  of  those  who  rise  again), — 
or  unless  elemental  nature  were  endowed  with  the  properties 
of  the  heavenly  nature  through  the  latter's  dominion  over 
the  body,  and  in  that  case  a  natural  power  would  be  the 
cause  of  a  property  of  glory,  which  seems  absurd. 

Hence  others  say  that  the  aforesaid  completeness  by 
reason  of  which  human  bodies  are  said  to  be  subtle  will 
result  from  the  dominion  of  the  glorified  soul  (which  is 
the  form  of  the  body)  over  the  body,  by  reason  of  which 
dominion  the  glorified  body  is  said  to  be  spiritual,  as  being 
wholly  subject  to  the  spirit.  The  first  subjection  whereby 
the  body  is  subject  to  the  soul  is  to  the  effect  of  its  partici 
pating  in  its  specific  being,  in  so  far  as  it  is  subject  to  the 
soul  as  matter  to  form;  and  secondly  it  is  subject  to  the  soul 
in  respect  of  the  other  operations  of  the  soul,  in  so  far  as  the 
soul  is  a  principle  of  movement.  Consequently  the  first 
reason  for  spirituality  in  the  body  is  subtlety,  and,  after 
that,  agility  and  the  other  properties  of  a  glorified  body. 
Hence  the  Apostle,  as  the  masters  expound,  in  speaking  of 
spirituality  indicates  subtlety:  wherefore  Gregory  says 
(Moral,  xiv.)  that  the  glorified  body  is  said  to  be  subtle  as  a 
result  of  a  spiritual  power. 

This  suffices  for  the  Replies  to  the  Objections  which  refer 
to  the  subtlety  of  rarefaction . 


215  SUBTLETY  Q.  83.  ART.  2 

SECOND  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  BY  REASON  OF  THIS  SUBTLETY  A  GLORIFIED 
BODY  IS  ABLE  TO  BE  IN  THE  SAME  PLACE  WITH  ANOTHER 
BODY  NOT  GLORIFIED  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Second  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  by  reason  of  this  subtlety 
a  body  is  able  to  be  in  the  same  place  with  another  body 
not  glorified.  For  according  to  Philip,  iii.  21,  He  will 
reform  the  body  of  our  lowness  made  like  to  the  body  of  His 
glory.  Now  the  body  of  Christ  was  able  to  be  in  the  same 
place  with  another  body,  as  appears  from  the  fact  that  after 
His  Resurrection  He  went  in  to  His  disciples,  the  doors 
being  shut  (John  xx.  19,  26).  Therefore  also  the  glorified 
bodies  by  reason  of  their  subtlety  will  be  able  to  be  in  the 
same  place  with  other  bodies  not  glorified. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Glorified  bodies  will  be  superior  to  all 
other  bodies.  Yet  by  reason  of  their  superiority  certain 
bodies,  to  wit  the  solar  rays,  are  able  now  to  occupy  the  same 
place  together  with  other  bodies.  Much  more  therefore 
is  this  befitting  glorified  bodies. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  A  heavenly  body  cannot  be  severed, 
at  least  as  regards  the  substance  of  the  spheres:  hence  it 
is  written  (Job  xxxvii.  18)  that  the  heavens  .  .  .  are  most 
strong,  as  if  they  were  of  molten  brass.  If  then  the  subtlety 
of  a  glorified  body  will  not  enable  it  to  be  in  the  same  place 
together  with  another  body,  it  will  never  be  able  to  ascend 
to  the  empyrean,*  and  this  is  erroneous. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  A  body  which  is  unable  to  be  in  the  same 
place  with  another  body  can  be  hindered  in  its  movement 
or  even  surrounded  by  others  standing  in  its  way.  But  this 
cannot  happen  to  glorified  bodies.  Therefore  they  will  be 
able  to  be  together  in  the  same  place  with  other  bodies. 

Obj.  5.  Further,  As  point  is  to  point,  so  is  line  to  line, 
surface  to  surface,  and  body  to  body.  Now  two  points  can 

*  The  empyrean  was  the  highest  of  the  concentric  spheres  or 
heavens,  and  was  identified  by  Christian  writers  with  the  abode  of 
God.  Cf.  P.  I.,  Q.  LVL,  A.  3. 


Q.  83.  ART.  2     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  216 

be  coincident,  as  in  the  case  of  two  lines  touching  one  another, 
and  two  lines  when  two  surfaces  are  in  contact  with  one 
another,  and  two  surfaces  when  two  bodies  touch  one 
another,  because  contiguous  things  are  those  whose  boundaries 
coincide  (Phys.  vi.).  Therefore  it  is  not  against  the  nature 
of  a  body  to  be  in  the  same  place  together  with  another 
body.  Now  whatever  excellence  is  competent  to  the 
nature  of  a  body  will  all  be  bestowed  on  the  glorified  body. 
Therefore  a  glorified  body,  by  reason  of  its  subtlety,  will 
be  able  to  be  in  the  same  place  together  with  another 
body. 

On  the  contrary,  Boethius  says  (De  Trin.):  Difference  of 
accidents  makes  distinction  in  number.  For  three  men  differ 
not  in  genus,  nor  in  species,  but  in  their  accidents.  If  we  were 
to  remove  absolutely  every  accident  from  them,  still  each  one 
has  a  different  place  ;  and  it  is  quite  inconceivable  that  they 
should  all  occupy  the  same  place.  Therefore  if  we  suppose 
two  bodies  to  occupy  the  same  place,  there  will  be  but  one 
body  numerically. 

7  answer  that,  It  cannot  be  maintained  that  a  glorified 
body,  by  reason  of  its  subtlety,  is  able  to  be  in  the  same  place 
with  another  body,  unless  the  obstacle  to  its  being  now  in  the 
same  place  with  another  body  be  removed  by  that  subtlety. 
Some  say  that  in  the  present  state  this  obstacle  is  its  gross- 
ness  by  virtue  of  which  it  is  able  to  occupy  a  place ;  and  that 
this  grossness  is  removed  by  the  gift  of  subtlety.  But  there 
are  two  reasons  why  this  cannot  be  maintained.  First 
because  the  grossness  which  the  gift  of  subtlety  removes 
is  a  kind  of  defect,  for  instance  an  inordinateness  of  matter 
in  not  being  perfectly  subject  to  its  form.  For  all  that  per 
tains  to  the  integrity  of  the  body  will  rise  again  in  the  body, 
both  as  regards  the  matter  and  as  regards  the  form.  And 
the  fact  that  a  body  is  able  to  fill  a  place  belongs  to  it  by 
reason  of  that  which  pertains  to  its  integrity,  and  not  on 
account  of  any  defect  of  nature .  For  since  fulness  is  opposed 
to  vacancy,  that  alone  does  not  fill  a  place,  which  being  put  in 
a  place,  nevertheless  leaves  a  place  vacant.  Now  a  vacuum 
is  defined  by  the  Philosopher  (Phys.  iv.)  as  being  a  place  not 


217  SUBTLETY  Q.  83.  ART.  2 

filled  by  a  sensible  body.  And  a  body  is  said  to  be  sensible 
by  reason  of  its  matter,  form,  and  natural  accidents,  all 
of  which  pertain  to  the  integrity  of  nature.  It  is  also  plain 
that  the  glorified  body  will  be  sensible  even  to  touch,  as 
evidenced  by  the  body  of  our  Lord  (Luke  xxiv.  39) :  nor  will 
it  lack  matter,  or  form,  or  natural  accidents,  namely  heat, 
cold,  and  so  forth.  Hence  it  is  evident  that  the  glorified 
body,  the  gift  of  subtlety  notwithstanding,  will  fill  a  place : 
for  it  would  seem  madness  to  say  that  the  place  in  which 
there  will  be  a  glorified  body  will  be  empty.  Secondly  their 
aforesaid  argument  does  not  avail,  because  to  hinder  the  co 
existence  of  a  body  in  the  same  place  is  more  than  to  fill  a 
place.  For  if  we  suppose  dimensions  separate  from  matter, 
those  dimensions  do  not  fill  a  place.  Hence  some  who  held 
the  possibility  of  a  vacuum,  said  that  a  vacuum  is  a  place 
wherein  suchlike  dimensions  exist  apart  from  a  sensible  body ; 
and  yet  those  dimensions  hinder  another  body  from  being 
together  with  them  in  the  same  place.  This  is  made  clear 
by  the  Philosopher  (PJiys.  iv. ;  Met.  iii.),  where  he  considers 
it  impossible  for  a  mathematical  body,  which  is  nothing  but 
separate  dimensions,  to  be  together  with  another  natural 
sensible  body.  Consequently,  granted  that  the  subtlety  of  a 
glorified  body  hindered  it  from  filling  a  place,  nevertheless 
it  would  not  follow  that  for  this  reason  it  is  able  to  be  in  the 
same  place  with  another  body,  since  the  removal  of  the  lesser 
does  not  involve  the  removal  of  the  greater. 

Accordingly  we  must  say  that  the  obstacle  to  our  body's 
being  now  in  the  same  place  with  another  body  can  nowise 
be  removed  by  the  gift  of  subtlety.  For  nothing  can  pre 
vent  a  body  from  occupying  the  same  place  together  with 
another  body,  except  something  in  it  that  requires  a  different 
place:  since  nothing  is  an  obstacle  to  identity,  save  that 
which  is  a  cause  of  distinction.  Now  this  distinction  of  place 
is  not  required  by  any  quality  of  the  body,  because  a  body 
demands  a  place,  not  by  reason  of  its  quality:  wherefore  if 
we  remove  from  a  body  the  fact  of  its  being  hot  or  cold, 
heavy  or  light,  it  still  retains  the  necessity  of  the  aforesaid 
distinction,  as  the  Philosopher  proves  (Phys.  iv.),  and  as  is 


Q.  83.  ART.  2     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  218 

self-evident.  In  like  manner  neither  can  matter  cause  the 
necessity  of  the  aforesaid  distinction,  because  matter  does 
not  occupy  a  place  except  through  its  dimensive  quantity. 
Again  neither  does  form  occupy  a  place,  unless  it  have  a 
place  through  its  matter.  It  remains  therefore  that  the 
necessity  for  two  bodies  occupying  each  a  distinct  place 
results  from  the  nature  of  dimensive  quantity,  to  which  a 
place  is  essentially  befitting.  For  this  forms  part  of  its 
definition,  since  dimensive  quantity  is  quantity  occupying 
a  place.  Hence  it  is  that  if  we  remove  all  else  in  a  thing 
from  it,  the  necessity  of  this  distinction  is  found  in  its 
dimensive  quantity  alone.  Thus  take  the  example  of  a 
separate  line,  supposing  there  to  be  two  such  lines,  or  two 
parts  of  one  line,  they  must  needs  occupy  distinct  places, 
else  one  line  added  to  another  would  not  make  something 
greater,  and  this  is  against  common  sense.  The  same  applies 
to  surfaces  and  mathematical  bodies.  And  since  matter 
demands  place,  through  being  the  subject  of  dimension,  the 
aforesaid  necessity  results  in  placed  matter,  so  that  just 
as  it  is  impossible  for  there  to  be  two  lines,  or  two  parts  of 
a  line,  unless  they  occupy  distinct  places,  so  is  it  impossible 
for  there  to  be  two  matters,  or  two  parts  of  matter,  without 
there  be  distinction  of  place.  And  since  distinction  of 
matter  is  the  principle  of  the  distinction  between  individuals, 
it  follows  that,  as  Boethius  says  (De  Trin.),  we  cannot  possibly 
conceive  two  bodies  occupying  one  place,  so  that  this  distinc 
tion  of  individuals  requires  this  difference  of  accidents. 
Now  subtlety  does  not  deprive  the  glorified  body  of  its 
dimension ;  wherefore  it  nowise  removes  from  it  the  aforesaid 
necessity  of  occupying  a  distinct  place  from  another  body. 
Therefore  the  subtlety  of  a  glorified  body  will  not  enable  it 
to  be  in  the  same  place  together  with  another  body,  but  it 
will  be  possible  for  it  to  be  together  with  another  body  by  the 
operation  of  the  Divine  power :  even  as  the  body  of  Peter 
had  the  power  whereby  the  sick  were  healed  at  the  passing 
of  Peter's  shadow  (Acts  v.  15)  not  through  any  inherent 
property,  but  by  the  power  of  God  for  the  upbuilding  of  the 
faith.  Thus  will  the  Divine  power  make  it  possible  for  a 


219  SUBTLETY  Q.  83.  ART.  2 

glorified  body  to  be  in  the  same  place  together  with  another 
body  for  the  perfection  of  glory. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  That  Christ's  body  was  able  to  be  together 
with  another  body  in  the  same  place  was  not  due  to  its 
subtlety,  but  resulted  from  the  power  of  His  Godhead  after 
His  resurrection,  even  as  in  His  birth.*  Hence  Gregory 
says  (Horn.  xxvi.  in  Ev.}:  The  same  body  went  into  His 
disciples  the  doors  being  shut,  which  to  human  eyes  came  from 
the  closed  womb  of  the  Virgin  at  His  birth.  Therefore  there 
is  no  reason  why  this  should  be  befitting  to  glorified  bodies 
on  account  of  their  subtlety. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Light  is  not  a  body  as  we  have  said  above 
(ii.  Sent.  Q.  XIII.,  A.  3;  P.  L,  Q.  LXVIL,  A.  2):  hence  the 
objection  proceeds  on  a  false  supposition. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  glorified  body  will  pass  through  the 
heavenly  spheres  without  severing  them,  not  by  virtue  of 
its  subtlety,  but  by  the  Divine  power,  which  will  assist  them 
in  all  things  at  will. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  From  the  fact  that  God  will  come  to  the 
aid  of  the  blessed  at  will  in  whatever  they  desire,  it  follows 
that  they  cannot  be  surrounded  or  imprisoned. 

Reply  Obj.  5.  As  stated  in  Phys.  iv.,  place  is  not  befitting 
a  point :  hence  if  it  be  said  to  be  in  a  place,  this  is  only 
accidental,  because  the  body  of  which  it  is  a  term  is  in  a 
place.  And  just  as  the  whole  place  corresponds  to  the  whole 
body,  so  the  term  of  the  place  corresponds  to  the  term  of  the 
body.  But  it  happens  that  two  places  have  one  term,  even 
as  two  lines  terminate  in  one  point.  And  consequently 
though  two  bodies  must  needs  be  in  distinct  places,  yet  the 
same  term  of  two  places  corresponds  to  the  two  terms  of  the 
two  bodies.  It  is  in  this  sense  that  the  bounds  of  contiguous 
bodies  are  said  to  coincide. 

*  Cf.  P.  III.,  Q.  XXVIII.,  A.  2,  ad  3. 


Q.  83.  ART.  3    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  220 

THIRD  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  IT  IS  POSSIBLE,  BY  A  MIRACLE,  FOR  TWO  BODIES 
TO  BE  IN  THE  SAME  PLACE  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Third  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  not  even  by  a  miracle  is  it 
possible  for  two  bodies  to  be  in  the  same  place.  For  it  is 
not  possible  that,  by  a  miracle,  two  bodies  be  at  once  two 
and  one,  since  this  would  imply  that  contradictions  are  true 
at  the  same  time.  But  if  we  suppose  two  bodies  to  be  in  the 
same  place,  it  would  follow  that  those  two  bodies  are  one. 
Therefore  this  cannot  be  done  by  a  miracle.  The  minor 
is  proved  thus.  Suppose  two  bodies  A  and  B  to  be  in  the 
same  place.  The  dimensions  of  A  will  either  be  the  same 
as  the  dimensions  of  the  place,  or  they  will  differ  from  them. 
If  they  differ,  then  some  of  the  dimensions  will  be  separate : 
which  is  impossible,  since  the  dimensions  that  are  within  the 
bounds  of  a  place  are  not  in  a  subject  unless  they  be  in  a 
placed  body.  If  they  be  the  same,  then  for  the  same  reason 
the  dimensions  of  B  will  be  the  same  as  the  dimensions  of 
the  place.  Now  things  that  are  the  same  with  one  and  the 
same  thing  are  the  same  with  one  another.  Therefore  the 
dimensions  of  A  and  B  are  the  same.  But  two  bodies  cannot 
have  identical  dimensions  just  as  they  cannot  have  the  same 
whiteness.  Therefore  A  and  B  are  one  body  and  yet  they 
were  two.  Therefore  they  are  at  the  same  time  one  and  two. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  A  thing  cannot  be  done  miraculously  either 
against  the  common  principles, — for  instance  that  the  part 
be  not  less  than  the  whole;  since  what  is  contrary  to 
common  principles  implies  a  direct  contradiction: — or  con 
trary  to  the  conclusions  of  geometry  which  are  infallible 
deductions  from  common  principles, — for  instance  that  the 
three  angles  of  a  triangle  should  not  be  equal  to  two  right 
angles.  In  like  manner  nothing  can  be  done  to  a  line  that 
is  contrary  to  the  definition  of  a  line,  because  to  sever  the 
definition  from  the  defined  is  to  make  two  contradictories 
true  at  the  same  time.  Now  it  is  contrary  to  common  prin 
ciples,  both  to  the  conclusions  of  geometry  and  to  the  defini- 


221  SUBTLETY  Q.  83.  ART  3 

tion  of  a  line,  for  two  bodies  to  be  in  the  same  place.  There 
fore  this  cannot  be  done  by  a  miracle.  The  minor  is  proved 
as  follows:  It  is  a  conclusion  of  geometry  that  two  circles 
touch  one  another  only  at  a  point.  Now  if  two  circular 
bodies  were  in  the  same  place,  the  two  circles  described  in 
them  would  touch  one  another  as  a  whole.  Again  it  is 
contrary  to  the  definition  of  a  line  that  there  be  more  than 
one  straight  line  between  two  points :  yet  this  would  be  the 
case  were  two  bodies  in  the  same  place,  since  between  two 
given  points  in  the  various  surfaces  of  the  place,  there  would 
be  two  straight  lines  corresponding  to  the  two  bodies  in 
that  place. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  It  would  seem  impossible  that  by  a  miracle 
a  body  which  is  enclosed  within  another  should  not  be  in 
a  place,  for  then  it  would  have  a  common  and  not  a  proper 
place,  and  this  is  impossible.  Yet  this  would  follow  if  two 
bodies  were  in  the  same  place.  Therefore  this  cannot  be 
done  by  a  miracle.  The  minor  is  proved  thus.  Supposing 
two  bodies  to  be  in  the  same  place,  the  one  being  greater 
than  the  other  as  to  every  dimension,  the  lesser  body  will  be 
enclosed  in  the  greater,  and  the  place  occupied  by  the  greater 
body  will  be  its  common  place ;  while  it  will  have  no  proper 
place,  because  no  given  surface  of  the  body  will  contain  it, 
and  this  is  essential  to  place.  Therefore  it  will  not  have  a 
proper  place. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  Place  corresponds  in  proportion  to  the 
thing  placed.  Now  it  can  never  happen  by  a  miracle  that 
the  same  body  is  at  the  same  time  in  different  places,  except 
by  some  kind  of  transformation,  as  in  the  Sacrament  of  the 
Altar.  Therefore  it  can  nowise  happen  by  a  miracle  that 
two  bodies  be  together  in  the  same  place. 

On  the  contrary,  The  Blessed  Virgin  gave  birth  to  her  Son 
by  a  miracle.  Now  in  this  hallowed  birth  it  was  necessary 
for  two  bodies  to  be  together  in  the  same  place,  because  the 
body  of  her  child  when  coming  forth  did  not  break  through 
the  enclosure  of  her  virginal  purity.  Therefore  it  is  possible 
for  two  bodies  to  be  miraculously  together  in  the  same  place. 

Further,  This  may  again  be  proved  from  the  fact  that 


Q.  83.  ART.  3    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  222 

our  Lord  went  in  to  His  disciples,  the  doors  being  shut 
(John  xx.  19,  26). 

/  answer  that,  As  shown  above  (A.  2)  the  reason 
why  two  bodies  must  needs  be  in  two  places  is  that  dis 
tinction  in  matter  requires  distinction  in  place.  Wherefore 
we  observe  that  when  two  bodies  merge  into  one,  each 
loses  its  distinct  being,  and  one  indistinct  being  accrues 
to  the  two  combined,  as  in  the  case  of  mixtures.  Hence 
it  is  impossible  for  two  bodies  to  remain  two  and  yet  be 
together  unless  each  retain  its  distinct  being  which  it  had 
hitherto,  in  so  much  as  each  of  them  was  a  being  undivided 
in  itself  and  distinct  from  others.  Now  this  distinct  being 
depends  on  the  essential  principles  of  a  thing  as  on  its  proxi 
mate  causes,  but  on  God  as  on  the  first  cause.  And  since 
the  first  cause  can  preserve  a  thing  in  being,  though  the 
second  causes  be  done  away,  as  appears  from  the  first  pro 
position  of  De  Causis,  therefore  by  God's  power  and  by  that 
alone  it  is  possible  for  an  accident  to  be  without  substance 
as  in  the  Sacrament  of  the  Altar.  Likewise  by  the  power  of 
God,  and  by  that  alone,  it  is  possible  for  a  body  to  retain  its 
distinct  being  from  that  of  another  body,  although  its  matter 
be  not  distinct  as  to  place  from  the  matter  of  the  other 
body:  and  thus  it  is  possible  by  a  miracle  for  two  bodies 
to  be  together  in  the  same  place. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  This  argument  is  sophistical  because  it  is 
based  on  a  false  supposition,  or  begs  the  question.  For  it 
supposes  the  existence,  between  two  opposite  superficies 
of  a  place,  of  a  dimension  proper  to  the  place,  with  which 
dimension  a  dimension  of  the  body  put  in  occupation  of  the 
place  would  have  to  be  identified:  because  it  would  then 
follow  that  the  dimensions  of  two  bodies  occupying  a  place 
would  become  one  dimension,  if  each  of  them  were  identified 
with  the  dimension  of  the  place.  But  this  supposition  is 
false,  because  if  it  were  true  whenever  a  body  acquires  a 
new  place,  it  would  follow  that  a  change  takes  place  in  the 
dimensions  of  the  place  or  of  thing  placed :  since  it  is  impos 
sible  for  two  things  to  become  one  anew,  except  one  of  them 
be  changed.  Whereas  if,  as  is  the  case  in  truth,  no  other 


223  SUBTLETY  Q.  83.  ART.  3 

dimensions  belong  to  a  place  than  those  of  the  thing  occupy 
ing  the  place,  it  is  clear  that  the  argument  proves  nothing, 
but  begs  the  question,  because  according  to  this  nothing  else 
has  been  said,  but  that  the  dimensions  of  a  thing  placed  are 
the  same  as  the  dimensions  of  the  place ;  excepting  that  the 
dimensions  of  the  thing  placed  are  contained  within  the 
bounds  of  the  place,  and  that  the  distance  between  the 
bounds  of  a  place  is  commensurate  with  the  distance  between 
the  bounds  of  the  thing  placed,  just  as  the  former  would  be 
distant  by  their  own  dimensions  if  they  had  them.  Thus 
that  the  dimensions  of  two  bodies  be  the  dimensions  of  one 
place  is  nothing  else  than  that  two  bodies  be  in  the  same 
place,  which  is  the  chief  question  at  issue. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Granted  that  by  a  miracle  two  bodies  be 
together  in  the  same  place,  nothing  follows  either  against 
common  principles,  or  against  the  definition  of  a  line,  or 
against  any  conclusions  of  geometry.  For,  as  stated  above 
(A.  2),  dimensive  quantity  differs  from  all  other  accidents 
in  that  it  has  a  special  reason  of  individuality  and  distinc 
tion,  namely  on  account  of  the  placing  of  the  parts,  besides 
the  reason  of  individuality  and  distinction  which  is  common 
to  it  and  all  other  accidents,  arising  namely  from  the  matter 
which  is  its  subject.  Thus  then  one  line  may  be  understood 
as  being  distinct  from  another,  either  because  it  is  in  another 
subject  (in  which  case  we  are  considering  a  material  line), 
or  because  it  is  placed  at  a  distance  from  another  (in  which 
case  we  are  considering  a  mathematical  line,  which  is  under 
stood  apart  from  matter) .  Accordingly  if  we  remove  matter, 
there  can  be  no  distinction  between  lines  save  in  respect  of 
a  different  placing :  and  in  like  manner  neither  can  there  be 
a  distinction  of  points,  nor  of  superficies,  nor  of  any  dimen 
sions  whatever.  Consequently  geometry  cannot  suppose 
one  line  to  be  added  to  another,  as  being  distinct  therefrom 
unless  it  be  distinct  as  to  place.  But  supposing  by  a  Divine 
miracle  a  distinction  of  subject  without  a  distinction  of 
place,  we  can  understand  a  distinction  of  lines;  and  these 
are  not  distant  from  one  another  in  place,  on  account  of 
the  distinction  of  subjects.  Again  we  can  understand  a 


Q.  83.  ART.  3     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  224 

difference  of  points,  and  thus  different  lines  described  on 
two  bodies  that  are  in  the  same  place  are  drawn  from  different 
points  to  different  points;  for  the  point  that  we  take  is  not 
a  point  fixed  in  the  place,  but  in  the  placed  body,  because  a 
line  is  not  said  to  be  drawn  otherwise  than  from  a  point 
which  is  its  term.  In  like  manner  the  two  circles  described 
in  two  spherical  bodies  that  occupy  the  same  place  are 
two,  not  on  account  of  the  difference  of  place,  else  they  could 
not  touch  one  another  as  a  whole,  but  on  account  of  the  dis 
tinction  of  subjects,  and  thus  while  wholly  touching  one 
another  they  still  remain  two.  Even  so  a  circle  described 
by  a  placed  spherical  body  touches,  as  a  whole,  the  other 
circle  described  by  the  locating  body. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  God  could  make  a  body  not  to  be  in  a  place ; 
and  yet  supposing  this,  it  would  not  follow  that  a  certain 
body  is  not  in  a  place,  because  the  greater  body  is  the  place 
of  the  lesser  body,  by  reason  of  its  superficies  which  is 
described  by  contact  with  the  terms  of  the  lesser  body. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  It  is  impossible  for  one  body  to  be  miracu 
lously  in  two  places  locally  (for  Christ's  body  is  not  locally 
on  the  altar),  although  it  is  possible  by  a  miracle  for  two 
bodies  to  be  in  the  same  place.  Because  to  be  in  several 
places  at  once  is  incompatible  with  the  individual,  by 
reason  of  its  having  being  undivided  in  itself,  for  it  would 
follow  that  it  is  divided  as  to  place.  On  the  other  hand, 
to  be  in  the  same  place  with  another  body  is  incompatible 
with  the  individual  as  distinct  from  aught  else.  Now  the 
nature  of  unity  is  perfected  in  indivision  (Met.  v.),  whereas 
distinction  from  others  is  a  result  of  the  nature  of  unity. 
Wherefore  that  one  same  body  be  locally  in  several  places 
at  once  implies  a  contradiction,  even  as  for  a  man  to  lack 
reason,  while  for  two  bodies  to  be  in  the  same  place  does  not 
imply  a  contradiction,  as  explained  above.  Hence  the  com 
parison  fails. 


225  SUBTLETY  Q.83.ART.4 

FOURTH  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  ONE  GLORIFIED  BODY  CAN  BE  IN  THE  SAME  PLACE 
TOGETHER  WITH  ANOTHER  GLORIFIED  BODY  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Fourth  Article  : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  a  glorified  body  can  be 
in  the  same  place  together  with  another  glorified  body. 
Because  where  there  is  greater  subtlety  there  is  less  resist 
ance.  If  then  a  glorified  body  is  more  subtle  than  a  non- 
glorified  body,  it  will  offer  less  resistance  to  a  glorified  body : 
and  so  if  a  glorified  body  can  be  in  the  same  place  with  a 
non-glorified  body,  much  more  can  it  with  a  glorified  body. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Even  as  a  glorified  body  will  be  more 
subtle  than  a  non-glorified  body,  so  will  one  glorified  body 
be  more  subtle  than  another.  Therefore  if  a  glorified  body 
can  be  in  the  same  place  with  a  non-glorified  body,  a  more 
subtle  glorified  body  can  be  in  the  same  place  with  a  less 
subtle  glorified  body. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  body  of  heaven  is  subtle,  and  will 
then  be  glorified.  Now  the  glorified  body  of  a  saint  will  be 
able  to  be  in  the  same  place  with  the  body  of  heaven,  since 
the  saints  will  be  able  at  will  to  travel  to  and  from  earth. 
Therefore  two  glorified  bodies  will  be  able  to  occupy  the 
same  place. 

On  the  contrary,  The  glorified  bodies  will  be  spiritual,  that 
is  like  spirits  in  a  certain  respect.  Now  two  spirits  cannot 
be  in  the  same  place,  although  a  body  and  a  spirit  can  be 
in  the  same  place,  as  stated  above  (i.  Sent.  D.  37,  Q.  III., 
A.  3;  P.  I.,  Q.  LIL,  A.  3).  Therefore  neither  will  two  glori 
fied  bodies  be  able  to  be  in  the  same  place. 

Further,  If  two  bodies  occupy  the  same  place,  one  is 
penetrated  by  the  other.  But  to  be  penetrated  is  a  mark 
of  imperfection  which  will  be  altogether  absent  from  the 
glorified  bodies.  Therefore  it  will  be  impossible  for  two 
glorified  bodies  to  be  in  the  same  place. 

/  answer  that,  The  property  of  a  glorified  body  does  not 
make  it  able  to  be  in  the  same  place  with  another  glorified 
body,  nor  again  to  be  in  the  same  place  with  a  non-glorified 

in.  6 


Q.  83.  ART.  5     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  226 

body.  But  it  would  be  possible  by  the  Divine  power  for 
two  glorified  bodies  or  two  non-glorified  bodies  to  be  in  the 
same  place,  even  as  a  glorified  body  with  a  non-glorified  body. 
Nevertheless  it  is  not  befitting  for  a  glorified  body  to  be  in 
the  same  place  with  another  glorified  body,  both  because  a 
becoming  order  will  be  observed  in  them,  which  demands 
distinction,  and  because  one  glorified  body  will  not  be  in 
the  way  of  another.  Consequently  two  glorified  bodies  will 
never  be  in  the  same  place. 

Reply  Obj.  I.  This  argument  supposes  that  a  glorified 
body  is  able  by  reason  of  its  subtlety  to  be  in  the  same  place 
with  another  body :  and  this  is  not  true. 

The  same  answer  applies  to  the  Second  Objection. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  body  of  heaven  and  the  other  bodies 
will  be  said  equivocally  to  be  glorified,  in  so  far  as  they  will 
have  a  certain  share  in  glory,  and  not  as  though  it  were 
becoming  for  them  to  have  the  gifts  of  glorified  human 
bodies. 

FIFTH  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  BY  VIRTUE  OF  ITS  SUBTLETY  A  GLORIFIED  BODY 
WILL  NO  LONGER  NEED  TO  BE  IN  AN  EQUAL  PLACE  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Fifth  Article  : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  by  virtue  of  its  subtlety, 
a  glorified  body  will  no  longer  need  to  be  in  an  equal  place. 
For  the  glorified  bodies  will  be  made  like  to  the  body  of 
Christ  according  to  Phil.  iii.  21.  Now  Christ's  body  is  not 
bound  by  this  necessity  of  being  in  an  equal  place :  where 
fore  it  is  contained  whole  under  the  small  or  great  dimensions 
of  a  consecrated  host.  Therefore  the  same  will  be  true  of 
the  glorified  bodies. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  The  Philosopher  proves  (Phys.  iv.,  text. 
53,  76)  that  two  bodies  are  not  in  the  same  place,  because 
it  would  follow  that  the  greatest  body  would  occupy  the 
smallest  place,  since  its  various  parts  could  be  in  the  same 
part  of  the  place:  for  it  makes  no  difference  whether  two 
bodies  or  however  many  be  in  the  same  place.  Now  a 
glorified  body  will  be  in  the  same  place  with  another  body, 


227  SUBTLETY  Q.  83.  ART.  5 

as  is  commonly  admitted.  Therefore  it  will  be  possible  for 
it  to  be  in  any  place  however  small. 

Obi.  3.  Further,  Even  as  a  body  is  seen  by  reason  of  its 
colour,  so  is  it  measured  by  reason  of  its  quantity.  Now 
the  glorified  body  will  be  so  subject  to  the  spirit  that  it  will 
be  able  at  will  to  be  seen,  and  not  seen,  especially  by  a  non- 
glorified  eye,  as  evidenced  in  the  case  of  Christ.  Therefore 
its  quantity  will  be  so  subject  to  the  spirit's  will  that  it 
will  be  able  to  be  in  a  little  or  great  place,  and  to  have  a 
little  or  great  quantity  at  will. 

On  the  contrary,  The  Philosopher  says  (Phys.  iv.,  text.  30) 
that  whatever  is  in  a  place  occupies  a  place  equal  to]  itself. 
Now  the  glorified  body  will  be  in  a  place.  Therefore  it  will 
occupy  a  place  equal  to  itself. 

Further,  The  dimensions  of  a  place  and  of  that  which  is  in 
that  place  are  the  same,  as  shown  in  Phys.  iv.,  text.  30,  76,  77. 
Therefore  if  the  place  were  larger  than  that  which  is  in  the 
place  the  same  thing  would  be  greater  and  smaller  than 
itself,  which  is  absurd. 

/  answer  that,  A  body  is  not  related  to  place  save  through 
the  medium  of  its  proper  dimensions,  in  respect  of  which  a 
located  body  is  confined  through  contact  with  the  locating 
body.  Hence  it  is  not  possible  for  a  body  to  occupy  a  place 
smaller  than  its  quantity,  unless  its  proper  quantity  be 
made  in  some  way  less  than  itself :  and  this  can  only  be  under 
stood  in  two  ways.  First,  by  a  variation  in  quantity  in 
respect  of  the  same  matter,  so  that  in  fact  the  matter  which 
at  first  is  subject  to  a  greater  quantity  is  afterwards  subject 
to  a  lesser.  Some  have  held  this  to  be  the  case  with  the 
glorified  bodies,  saying  that  quantity  is  subject  to  them  at 
will,  so  that  when  they  list,  they  are  able  to  have  a  great 
quantity,  and  when  they  list,  a  small  quantity.  But  this 
is  impossible,  because  no  movement  affecting  that  which  is 
intrinsic  to  a  thing  is  possible  without  passion  to  the  detri 
ment*  of  its  substance.  Hence  in  incorruptible,  i.e.  heavenly, 
bodies,  there  is  only  local  movement,  which  is  not  accord 
ing  to  something  intrinsic.  Thus  it  is  clear  that  change 
*  a.  I.-IL,  Q.  XXII.,  A.  i.;  Q.  XLL,  A.  I. 


Q.  83.  ART.  5    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  228 

of  quantity  in  respect  of  matter  would  be  incompatible 
with  the  impassibility  and  incorruptibility  of  a  glorified 
body.     Moreover,  it   would   follow  that   a   glorified  body 
would  be  sometimes  rarer  and  sometimes  denser,  because 
since  it  cannot  be  deprived  of  any  of  its  matter,  sometimes 
the  same  matter  would  be  under  great  dimensions  and  some 
times  under  small  dimensions,  and  thus  it  would  be  rarefied 
and   densified,    which   is   impossible.     Secondly,    that   the 
quantity  of  a  glorified  body  become  smaller  than  itself  may 
be  understood  by  a  variation  of  place;  so,  to  wit,  that  the 
parts  of  a  glorified  body  insinuate   themselves  into   one 
another,  so  that  it  is  reduced  in  quantity  however  small 
it  may  become.     And  some  have  held  this  to  be  the  case, 
saying  that  by  reason  of  its  subtlety  a  glorified  body  will 
be  able  to  be  in  the  same  place  with  a  non-glorified  body :  and 
that  in  like  manner  its  parts  can  be  one  within  the  other, 
so  much  so  that  a  whole  glorified  body  will  be  able  to  pass 
through  the  minutest  opening  in  another  body:  and  thus 
they  explain  how  Christ's  body  came  out  of  the  Virgin's 
womb ;  and  how  it  went  into  His  disciples,  the  doors  being 
shut.   But  this  is  impossible ;  both  because  the  glorified  body 
will  not  be  able,  by  reason  of  its  subtlety,  to  be  in  the  same 
place  with  another  body,  and  because,  even  if  it  were  able 
to  be  in  the  same  place  with  another  body,  this  would  not 
be  possible  if  the  other  were  a  glorified  body,  as  many  say ; 
and  again  because  this  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  right 
disposition  of  the  human  body,  which  requires  the  parts 
to  be  in  a  certain  fixed  place  and  at  a  certain  fixed  distance 
from    one    another.     Wherefore    this   will   never   happen, 
not  even  by  a  miracle.     Consequently  we  must  say  that 
the    glorified   body   will   always   be  in   a  place   equal   to 
itself. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Christ's  body  is  not  locally  in  the  Sacra 
ment  of  the  Altar,  as  stated  above  (iv.  Sent.  D.  10,  Q.  I., 
A.  i,  ad  5;  P.  III.,  Q.  LXXVII.,  A.  5). 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  Philosopher's  argument  is  that  for  the 
same  reason  one  part  might  permeate  another.  But  this 
permeation  of  the  parts  of  a  glorified  body  into  one  another 


229  SUBTLETY  Q.  83.  ART.  6 

is  impossible,  as  stated  above.     Therefore   the  objection 
does  not  prove. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  A  body  is  seen  because  it  acts  on  the  sight: 
but  that  it  does  or  does  not  act  on  the  sight  causes  no  change 
in  the  body.  Hence  it  is  not  unfitting,  if  it  can  be  seen  when 
it  will,  and  not  seen  when  it  will.*  On  the  other  hand,  being 
in  a  place  is  not  an  action  proceeding  from  a  body  by  reason 
of  its  quantity,  as  being  seen  is  by  reason  of  its  colour. 
Consequently  the  comparison  fails. 

SIXTH  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  GLORIFIED  BODY,  BY  REASON  OF  ITS  SUBTLETY, 
WILL  BE  IMPALPABLE  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Sixth  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  glorified  body,  by 
reason  of  its  subtlety,  is  impalpable.  For  Gregory  says 
(Horn.  xxv.  in  Ev.) :  What  is  palpable  must  needs  be  corruptible. 
But  the  glorified  body  is  incorruptible.  Therefore  it  is 
impalpable. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Whatever  is  palpable  resists  one  who 
handles  it.  But  that  which  can  be  in  the  same  place  with 
another  does  not  resist  it.  Since  then  a  glorified  body  can 
be  in  the  same  place  with  another  body,  it  will  not  be  palpable. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  Every  palpable  body  is  tangible.  Now 
every  tangible  body  has  tangible  qualities  in  excess  of  the 
qualities  of  the  one  touching  it.  Since  then  in  the  glorified 
bodies  the  tangible  qualities  are  not  in  excess  but  are  reduced 
to  a  supreme  degree  of  equality,  it  would  seem  that  they  are 
impalpable. 

On  the  contrary,  Our  Lord  rose  again  with  a  glorified  body ; 
and  yet  His  body  was  palpable,  as  appears  from  Luke  xxiv. 
39 :  Handle,  and  see  ;  for  a  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bones. 
Therefore  the  glorified  bodies  also  will  be  palpable. 

Further,  This  is  the  heresy  of  Eutychius,  Bishop  of  Con 
stantinople,  as  Gregory  states  (Moral,  xxiv.) :  for  he  said  that 
in  the  glory  of  the  resurrection  our  bodies  will  be  impalpable. 
*  Cf.  \\  III.,  Q.  LV.,  A.  4. 


Q.  83.  ART.  6    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  230 

/  answer  that,  Every  palpable  body  is  tangible,  but  not 
conversely.  For  every  body  is  tangible  that  has  qualities 
whereby  the  sense  of  touch  has  a  natural  aptitude  to  be 
affected:  wherefore  air,  fixe,  and  the  like  are  tangible  bodies: 
but  a  palpable  body,  in  addition  to  this,  resists  the  touch; 
wherefore  the  air  which  never  resists  that  which  passes 
through  it,  and  is  most  easily  pierced,  is  tangible  indeed  but 
not  palpable.  Accordingly  it  is  clear  that  a  body  is  said  to  be 
palpable  for  two  reasons,  namely  on  account  of  its  tangible 
qualities,  and  on  account  of  its  resisting  that  which  touches 
it,  so  as  to  hinder  it  from  piercing  it.  And  since  the  tangible 
qualities  are  hot  and  cold  and  so  forth,  which  are  not  found 
save  in  heavy  and  light  bodies,  which  through  being  contrary 
to  one  another  are  therefore  corruptible,  it  follows  that  the 
heavenly  bodies,  which  by  their  nature  are  incorruptible,  are 
sensible  to  the  sight  but  not  tangible,  and  therefore  neither 
are  they  palpable.  This  is  what  Gregory  means  when  he 
says  (loc.  cit.  Obj.  i)  that  whatever  is  palpable  must  needs  be 
corruptible.  Accordingly  the  glorified  body  has  by  its  nature 
those  qualities  which  have  a  natural  aptitude  to  affect  the 
touch,  and  yet  since  the  body  is  altogether  subject  to  the 
spirit,  it  is  in  its  power  thereby  to  affect  or  not  to  affect  the 
touch.  In  like  manner  it  is  competent  by  its  nature  to  resist 
any  other  passing  body,  so  that  the  latter  cannot  be  in  the 
same  place  together  with  it:  although,  according  to  its 
pleasure,  it  may  happen  by  the  Divine  power  that  it  occupy 
the  same  place  with  another  body,  and  thus  offer  no  resist 
ance  to  a  passing  body.  Wherefore  according  to  its  nature 
the  glorified  body  is  palpable,  but  it  is  competent  for  it  to  be 
impalpable  to  a  non-glorified  body  by  a  supernatural  power. 
Hence  Gregory  says  (loc.  cit.)  that  our  Lord  offered  His  flesh 
to  be  handled,  which  He  had  brought  in  through  the  closed 
doors,  so  as  to  afford  a  complete  proof  that  after  His  resurrec 
tion  His  body  was  unchanged  in  nature  though  changed  in 
glory. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  The  incorruptibility  of  a  glorified  body  does 
not  result  from  the  nature  of  its  component  parts;  and  it 
is  on  account  of  that  nature  that  whatever  is  palpable  is 


231  SUBTLETY  Q.  83.  ART.  6 

corruptible,  as  stated  above.  Hence  the  argument  does 
not  prove. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Although  in  a  way  it  is  possible  for  a  glorified 
body  to  be  in  the  same  place  with  another  body :  nevertheless 
the  glorified  body  has  it  in  its  power  to  resist  at  will  any  one 
touching  it,  and  thus  it  is  palpable. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  In  the  glorified  bodies  the  tangible  qualities 
are  not  reduced  to  the  real  mean  that  is  measured  according 
to  equal  distance  from  the  extremes,  but  to  the  proportionate 
mean,  according  as  is  most  becoming  to  the  human  complexion 
in  each  part.  Wherefore  the  touch  of  those  bodies  will  be 
most  delightful,  because  a  power  always  delights  in  a  becom 
ing  object,  and  is  grieved  by  excess. 


QUESTION  LXXXIV. 

OF  THE  AGILITY  OF  THE  BODIES  OF  THE  BLESSED. 
(In  Three  Articles.) 

WE  must  now  consider  the  agility  of  the  bodies  of  the  blessed 
in  the  resurrection.  Under  this  head  there  are  three  points 
of  inquiry:  (i)  Whether  the  glorified  bodies  will  be  agile  ? 
(2)  Whether  they  will  move  ?  (3)  Whether  they  will  move 
instantaneously  ? 

FIRST  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  THE  GLORIFIED  BODIES  WILL  BE  AGILE  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  First  Article  : — 
Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  glorified  bodies  will 
not  be  agile.  For  that  which  is  agile  by  itself  needs  not  to 
be  carried  in  order  to  move.  But  the  glorified  bodies  will, 
after  the  resurrection,  be  taken  up  by  the  angels  (according 
to  a  gloss)  in  the  clouds  to  meet  Christ,  into  the  air  (i  Thess. 
iv.  16).  Therefore  the  glorified  bodies  will  not  be  agile. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  No  body  that  moves  with  labour  and  pain 
can  be  said  to  be  agile.  Yet  the  glorified  bodies  will  move 
thus,  since  the  principle  of  their  movement,  namely  the 
soul,  moves  them  counter  to  their  nature,  else  they  would 
always  move  in  the  same  direction.  Therefore  they  are  not 
agile. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  Of  all  the  animal  operations  sense  sur 
passes  movement  in  nobility  and  priority.  Yet  no  property 
is  ascribed  to  glorified  bodies  as  perfecting  them  in  sensation 
Therefore  neither  should  agility  be  ascribed  to  them  as 
perfecting  them  in  movement. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  Nature  gives  different  animals  instru- 

232 


233  AGILITY  Q.  84.  ART.  i 

ments  of  different  disposition  according  to  their  different 
powers:  hence  she  does  not  give  instruments  of  the  same 
disposition  to  slow  as  to  fleet  animals.  Now  God's  works 
are  much  more  orderly  than  those  of  nature.  Since  then 
the  glorified  body's  members  will  have  the  same  disposition, 
shape  and  quantity  as  they  now  have,  it  would  seem  that 
it  will  have  no  agility  other  than  it  has  now. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (i  Cor.  xv.  43) :  It  is  sown  -in 
weakness,  it  shall  rise  in  power,  that  is,  according  to  a  gloss, 
mobile  and  living.  But  mobility  can  only  signify  agility 
in  movement.  Therefore  the  glorified  bodies  will  be  agile. 

Further,  Slowness  of  movement  would  seem  especially 
inconsistent  with  the  nature  of  a  spirit.  But  the  glorified 
bodies  will  be  most  spiritual  according  to  i  Cor.  xv.  44. 
Therefore  they  will  be  agile. 

I  answer  that,  The  glorified  body  will  be  altogether  subject 
to  the  glorified  soul,  so  that  not  only  will  there  be  nothing 
in  it  to  resist  the  will  of  the  spirit,  for  it  was  even  so 
in  the  case  of  Adam's  body,  but  also  from  the  glorified 
soul  there  will  flow  into  the  body  a  certain  perfection, 
whereby  it  will  become  adapted  to  that  subjection:  and 
this  perfection  is  called  the  gift  of  the  glorified  body.  Now 
the  soul  is  united  to  body  not  only  as  its  form,  but  also 
as  its  mover ;  and  in  both  ways  the  glorified  body  must  needs 
be  most  perfectly  subject  to  the  glorified  soul.  Wherefore 
even  as  by  the  gift  of  subtlety  the  body  is  wholly  subject 
to  the  soul  as  its  form,  whence  it  derives  its  specific  being, 
so  by  the  gift  of  agility  it  is  subject  to  the  soul  as  its  mover, 
so  that  it  is  prompt  and  apt  to  obey  the  spirit  in  all  the 
movements  and  actions  of  the  soul. 

Some,  however,  ascribe  the  cause  of  this  agility  to  the 
fifth,  i.e.  the  heavenly  essence,  which  will  then  be  predomi 
nant  in  the  glorified  bodies.  But  of  this  we  have  frequently 
observed  that  it  does  not  seem  probable  (Q.  LXXXIL,  A.  i; 
Q.  LXXXIII.,  A.  i).  Wherefore  it  is  better  to  ascribe  it 
to  the  soul,  whence  glory  flows  to  the  body. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Glorified  bodies  are  said  to  be  borne  by 
the  angels  and  also  on  the  clouds,  not  as  though  theyjneeded 


Q.  84.  ART.  2     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  234 

them,  but  in  order  to  signify  the  reverence  which  both 
angels  and  all  creatures  will  show  them. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  more  the  power  of  the  moving  soul 
dominates  over  the  body,  the  less  is  the  labour  of  movement, 
even  though  it  be  counter  to  the  body's  nature.  Hence 
those  in  whom  the  motive  power  is  stronger,  and  those  who 
through  exercise  have  the  body  more  adapted  to  obey  the 
moving  spirit,  labour  less  in  being  moved.  And  since, 
after  the  resurrection,  -the  soul  will  perfectly  dominate  the 
body,  both  on  account  of  the  perfection  of  its  own  power, 
and  on  account  of  the  glorified  body's  aptitude  resulting 
from  the  outflow  of  glory  which  it  receives  from  the  soul, 
there  will  be  no  labour  in  the  saints'  movements,  and  thus 
it  may  be  said  that  the  bodies  of  the  saints  will  be  agile. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  By  the  gift  of  agility  the  glorified  body  will 
be  rendered  apt  not  only  for  local  movement  but  also  for 
sensation,  and  for  the  execution  of  all  the  other  operations 
of  the  soul. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  Even  as  nature  gives  to  fleeter  animals 
instruments  of  a  different  disposition  in  shape  and  quantity, 
so  God  will  give  to  the  bodies  of  the  saints  a  disposition  other 
than  that  which  they  have  now,  not  indeed  in  shape  and 
quantity,  but  in  that  property  of  glory  which  is  called 
agility. 

SECOND  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  SAINTS  WILL  NEVER  USE  THEIR  AGILITY 
FOR  THE  PURPOSE  OF  MOVEMENT  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Second  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  saints  will  never  use 
their  agility  for  the  purpose  of  movement.  For,  according  to 
the  Philosopher  (Phys.  iii.,  text.  6,  14),  movement  is  the  act  of 
the  imperfect.  But  there  will  be  no  imperfection  in  glorified 
bodies.  Neither  therefore  will  there  be  any  movement. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  All  movement  is  on  account  of  some 
need,  because  whatever  is  in  motion  is  moved  for  the  sake 
of  obtaining  some  end.  But  glorified  bodies  will  have  no 


235  AGILITY  Q.  84.  ART.  2 

need,  since  as  Augustine  says  (De  Spiritu  et  Anima,  Ixiii.),* 
all  thou  wiliest  will  be  there,  and  nothing  that  thou  wiliest  not. 
Therefore  they  will  not  move. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  According  to  the  Philosopher  (De  Ccelo 
et  Mundo,  ii.),  that  which  shares  the  Divine  goodness  without 
movement  shares  it  more  excellently  than  that  which  shares  it 
with  movement.  Now  the  glorified  body  shares  the  Divine 
goodness  more  excellently  than  any  other  body.  Since 
then  certain  bodies,  like  the  heavenly  bodies,  will  remain 
altogether  without  movement,  it  seems  that  much  more 
will  human  bodies  remain  so. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  Augustine  says  (De  Vera  Relig.  xii.)  that 
the  soul  being  established  in  God  will  in  consequence  estab 
lish  its  body.  Now  the  soul  will  be  so  established  in  God, 
that  in  no  way  will  it  move  away  from  Him.  Therefore 
in  the  body  there  will  be  no  movement  caused  by  the  soul. 

Obj.  5.  Further,  The  more  noble  a  body  is,  the  more  noble 
a  place  is  due  to  it:  wherefore  Christ's  body  which  is  the 
most  exalted  of  all  has  the  highest  place  of  all,  according 
to  Heb.  vii.  26,  Made  higher  than  the  heavens,  where  a  gloss f 
says,  in  place  and  dignity.  And  again  each  glorified  body 
will,  in  like  manner,  have  a  place  befitting  it  according 
to  the  measure  of  its  dignity.  Now  a  fitting  place  is  one 
of  the  conditions  pertaining  to  glory.  Since  then  after  the 
resurrection  the  glory  of  the  saints  will  never  vary,  neither 
by  increase  nor  by  decrease,  because  they  will  then  have 
reached  the  final  term  of  all,  it  would  seem  that  their  bodies 
will  never  leave  the  place  assigned  to  them,  and  consequently 
will  not  be  moved. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (Isa.  xl.  31):  They  shall  run 
and  not  be  weary,  they  shall  walk  and  not  faint;  and  (Wis.  iii.  7) : 
(The  just]  shall  run  to  and  fro  like  sparks  among  the  reeds. 
Therefore  there  will  be  some  movement  in  glorified 
bodies. 

/  answer  that,  It  is  necessary  to  suppose  that  the  glorified 
bodies  are  moved  sometimes,  since  even  Christ's  body  was 

*  Cf.  Q.  LXX.,  A.  2,  ad  i. 

f  Gloss  on  Heb.  i.  3,  On  the  right  hand  of  the  majesty. 


Q.  84.  ART.  2     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  236 

moved  in  His  ascension,  and  likewise  the  bodies  of  the  saints, 
which  will  arise  from  the  earth,  will  ascend  to  the  empyrean.* 
But  even  after  they  have  climbed  the  heavens,  it  is  likely 
that  they  will  sometimes  move  according  as  it  pleases  them; 
so  that  by  actually  putting  into  practice  that  which  is  in 
their  power,  they  may  show  forth  the  excellence  of  Divine 
wisdom,  and  that  furthermore  their  vision  may  be  refreshed 
by  the  beauty  of  the  variety  of  creatures,  in  which  God's 
wisdom  will  shine  forth  with  great  evidence :  for  sense  can 
only  perceive  that  which  is  present,  although  glorified  bodies 
can  perceive  from  a  greater  distance  than  non-glorified 
bodies.  And  yet  movement  will  nowise  diminish  their 
happiness  which  consists  in  seeing  God,  for  He  will  be  every 
where  present  to  them;  thus  Gregory  says  of  the  angels 
(Horn,  xxxiv.  in  Ev.)  that  wherever  they  are  sent  their  course 
lies  in  God. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Local  movement  changes  nothing  that  is 
intrinsic  to  a  thing,  but  only  that  which  is  without,  namely 
place.  Hence  that  which  is  moved  locally  is  perfect  as 
to  those  things  which  are  within  (Phys.  viii.,  text.  59), 
although  it  has  an  imperfection  as  to  place,  because  while  it 
is  in  one  place  it  is  in  potentiality  with  regard  to  another 
place,  since  it  cannot  be  in  several  places  at  the  same  time, 
for  this  belongs  to  God  alone.  But  this  defect  is  not  incon 
sistent  with  the  perfection  of  glory,  as  neither  is  the  defect 
whereby  a  creature  is  formed  from  nothing.  Hence  such 
like  defects  will  remain  in  glorified  bodies. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  A  person  is  said  to  need  a  thing  in  two  ways, 
namely  absolutely  and  lelatively.  One  needs  absolutely 
that  without  which  one  cannot  retain  one's  being  or  one's 
perfection:  and  thus  movement  in  glorified  bodies  will  not 
be  on  account  of  a  need,  because  their  happiness  will  suffice 
them  for  all  such  things.  But  we  need  a  thing  relatively 
when  without  it  some  end  we  have  in  view  cannot  be 
obtained  by  us,  or  not  so  well,  or  not  in  some  particular  way. 
It  is  thus  that  movement  will  be  in  the  blessed  on  account 
of  need,  for  they  will  be  unable  to  show  forth  their  motive 
*  Cf.  footnote  Q.  LXXXIII.,  A.  2. 


237  AGILITY  Q.  84.  ART.  3 

power  practically,  unless  they  be  in  motion,  since  nothing 
prevents  a  need  of  this  kind  being  in  glorified  bodies. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  This  argument  would  prove  if  the  glorified 
body  were  unable  even  without  movement  to  share  the 
Divine  goodness  much  more  perfectly  than  the  heavenly 
bodies,  which  is  untrue.  Hence  glorified  bodies  will  be  moved, 
not  in  order  to  gain  a  perfect  participation  in  the  Divine 
goodness  (since  they  have  this  through  glory),  but  in  order 
to  show  the  soul's  power.  On  the  other  hand,  the  movement 
of  the  heavenly  bodies  could  not  show  their  power,  except 
the  power  they  have  in  moving  lower  bodies  to  generation 
and  corruption,  which  is  not  becoming  to  that  state.  Hence 
the  argument  does  not  prove. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  Local  movement  takes  nothing  away  from 
the  stability  of  the  soul  that  is  established  in  God,  since  it 
does  not  affect  that  which  is  intrinsic  to  a  thing,  as  stated 
above  (ad  i). 

Reply  Obj.  5.  The  fitting  place  assigned  to  each  glorified 
body  according  to  the  degree  of  its  dignity  belongs  to  the 
accidental  reward.  Nor  does  it  follow  that  this  reward 
is  diminished  whenever  the  body  is  outside  its  place ;  because 
that  place  pertains  to  reward,  not  as  actually  containing  the 
body  located  therein  (since  nothing  flows  therefrom  into  the 
glorified  body,  but  rather  does  it  receive  splendour  there 
from),  but  as  being  due  to  merits.  Wherefore,  though  out  of 
that  place,  they  will  still  continue  to  rejoice  in  it. 

THIRD  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  MOVEMENT  OF  THE  SAINTS  WILL  BE 
INSTANTANEOUS  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Third  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  movement  of  the  saints 
will  be  instantaneous.  For  Augustine  says  (De  Civ.  Dei, 
lib.  xxii.,  cap  xxx.)  that  wherever  the  spirit  listeth  there  will 
the  body  be.  Now  the  movement  of  the  will,  whereby  the 
spirit  wishes  to  be  anywhere,  is  instantaneous.  Therefore 
the  body's  movement  will  be  instantaneous. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  The  Philosopher  (Phys.  iv.,  text.  71,  seq.) 


Q.  84.  ART.  3    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  238 

proves  that  there  is  no  movement  through  a  vacuum,  because 
it  would  follow  that  something  moves  instantaneously,  since 
a  vacuum  offers  no  resistance  whatever  to  a  thing  that  is  in 
motion,  whereas  the  plenum  offers  resistance;  and  so  there 
would  be  no  proportion  between  the  velocity  of  movement  in 
a  vacuum  and  that  of  movement  in  a  plenum,  since  the  ratio 
of  movements  in  point  of  velocity  is  as  the  ratio  of  the  resist 
ance  offered  by  the  medium.  Now  the  velocities  of  any  two 
movements  that  take  place  in  time  must  needs  be  propor 
tional,  since  any  one  space  of  time  is  proportional  to  any  other. 
But  in  like  manner  no  full  place  can  resist  a  glorified  body  since 
this  can  be  in  the  same  place  with  another  body,  no  matter 
how  this  may  occur ;  even  as  neither  can  a  vacuum  resist  a 
body.  Therefore  if  it  moves  at  all,  it  moves  instantaneously. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  The  power  of  a  glorified  soul  surpasses 
the  power  of  a  non-glorified  soul,  out  of  all  proportion  so  to 
speak.  Now  the  non-glorified  soul  moves  the  body  in  time. 
Therefore  the  glorified  soul  moves  the  body  instantaneously. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  Whatever  is  moved  equally  soon  to  what 
is  near  and  what  is  distant,  is  moved  instantaneously.  Now 
such  is  the  movement  of  a  glorified  body,  for  however  distant 
the  space  to  which  it  is  moved,  the  time  it  takes  to  be  moved 
is  imperceptible :  wherefore  Augustine  says  (QQ.  De  Resurrec- 
tione,  Ep.  cii.,  Q.  i)  that  the  glorified  body  reaches  equally  soon 
to  any  distance,  like  the  sun's  ray.  Therefore  the  glorified 
body  is  moved  instantaneously. 

Obj.  5.  Further,  Whatever  is  in  motion  is  moved  either  in 
time  or  in  an  instant.  Now  after  the  resurrection  the 
glorified  body  will  not  be  moved  in  time,  since  time  will  not 
be  then  according  to  Apoc.  x.  6.  Therefore  this  movement 
will  be  instantaneous. 

On  the  contrary,  In  local  movement  space,  movement  and 
time  are  equally  divisible,  as  is  demonstrated  in  Phys.  vi., 
text.  37,  seq.  Now  the  space  traversed  by  a  glorified 
body  in  motion  is  divisible.  Therefore  both  the  movement 
and  the  time  are  divisible.  But  an  instant  is  indivisible. 
Therefore  this  movement  will  not  be  instantaneous. 

Further,  A  thing  cannot  be  at  the  same  time  wholly  in 


239  AGILITY  Q.84.ARx.3 

one  place  and  partly  in  another  place,  since  it  would  follow 
that  the  remaining  part  is  in  two  places  at  the  same  time, 
which  is  impossible.  But  whatever  is  in  motion  is  partly 
in  a  term  wherefrom  and  partly  in  a  term  whereto,  as  is  proved 
in  Phys.  vi.,  text.  32:  while  whatever  has  been  in  motion  is 
wholly  in  the  term  whereto  the  movement  is  directed :  and  it  is 
impossible  at  the  same  time  for  it  to  be  moved  and  to  have 
been  moved.  Now  that  which  is  moved  instantaneously 
is  being  moved  and  has  been  moved  at  the  same  time. 
Therefore  the  local  movement  of  a  glorified  body  cannot  be 
instantaneous. 

/  answer  that,  Opinion  is  much  divided  on  this  point. 
For  some  say  that  a  glorified  body  passes  from  one  place  to 
another  without  passing  through  the  interval,  just  as  the 
will  passes  from  one  place  to  another  without  passing  through 
the  interval,  and  that  consequently  it  is  possible  for  the 
movement  of  a  glorified  body  like  that  of  the  will  to  be  in 
stantaneous.  But  this  will  not  hold:  because  the  glorified 
body  will  never  attain  to  the  dignity  of  the  spiritual  nature, 
just  as  it  will  never  cease  to  be  a  body.  : Moreover,  when  the 
will  is  said  to  move  from  one  place  to  another,  it  is  not  essen 
tially  transferred  from  place  to  place,  because  in  neither 
place  is  it  contained  essentially,  but  it  is  directed  to  one  place 
after  being  directed  by  the  intention  to  another:  and  in 
this  sense  it  is  said  to  move  from  one  place  to  another. 
Hence  others  say  that  it  is  a  property  of  the  nature  of  a 
glorified  body,  since  it  is  a  body,  to  pass  through  the  interval 
and  consequently  to  be  moved  in  time,  but  that  by  the  power 
of  glory,  which  raises  it  to  a  certain  infinitude  above  the  power 
of  nature,  it  is  possible  for  it  not  to  pass  through  the  interval, 
and  consequently  to  be  moved  instantaneously.  But  this  is 
impossible,  since  it  implies  a  contradiction :  which  is  proved 
as  follows.  Suppose  a  body  which  we  will  call  Z  to  be  in 
motion  from  A  to  B.  It  is  clear  that  Z,  as  long  as  it  is 
wholly  in  A  is  not  in  motion ;  and  in  like  manner  when  it  is 
wholly  in  B,  because  then  the  movement  is  past.  Therefore 
if  it  is  at  any  time  in  motion  it  must  needs  be  neither  wholly 
in  A  nor  wholly  in  B.  Therefore  while  it  is  in  motion,  it  is 


Q.84.ARx.3    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  240 

either  nowhere,  or  partly  in  A  and  partly  in  B,  or  wholly  in 
some  other  intervening  place,  say  C,  or  partly  in  A  and  C 
and  partly  in  C  and  B.  But  it  is  impossible  for  it  to  be  no 
where,  for  then  there  would  be  a  dimensive  quantity  without 
a  place,  which  is  impossible.  Nor  again  is  it  possible  for  it 
to  be  partly  in  A  and  partly  in  B  without  being  in  some  way 
in  the  intervening  space ;  for  since  B  is  a  place  distant  from 
A,  it  would  follow  that  in  the  intervening  space  the  part  of 
Z  which  is  in  B  is  not  continuous  with  the  part  which  is  in  A. 
Therefore  it  follows  that  it  is  either  wholly  in  C,  or  partly  in 
C,  and  partly  in  some  other  place  that  intervenes  between  C 
and  A,  say  D,  and  so  forth.  Therefore  it  follows  that  Z 
does  not  pass  from  A  to  B  unless  first  of  all  it  be  in  all  the 
intervening  places:  unless  we  suppose  that  it  passes  from 
A  to  B  without  ever  being  moved,  which  implies  a  contra 
diction,  because  the  very  succession  of  places  is  local  move 
ment.  The  same  applies  to  any  change  whatever  having  two 
opposite  terms,  each  of  which  is  a  positive  entity,  but  not  to 
those  changes  which  have  only  one  positive  term,  the  other 
being  a  pure  privation,  since  between  affirmation  and  nega 
tion  or  privation  there  is  no  fixed  distance :  wherefore  that 
which  is  in  the  negation  may  be  nearer  to  or  more  remote 
from  affirmation,  and  conversely,  by  reason  of  something 
that  causes  either  of  them  or  disposes  thereto :  so  that  while 
that  which  is  moved  is  wholly  under  a  negation  it  is  changed 
into  affirmation,  and  vice  versa ;  wherefore  in  such  things 
to  be  changing  precedes  to  be  changed,  as  is  proved  in 
Phys.  vi.,  text.  40,  seq.  Nor  is  there  any  comparison  with 
the  movement  of  an  angel,  because  being  in  a  place  is  pre 
dicated  equivocally  of  a  body  and  an  angel.  Hence  it  is 
clear  that  it  is  altogether  impossible  for  a  body  to  pass  from 
one  place  to  another,  unless  it  pass  through  every  interval. 
Wherefore  others  grant  this,  and  yet  they  maintain  that  the 
glorified  body  is  moved  instantaneously.  But  it  follows  from 
this  that  a  glorified  body  is  at  the  same  instant  in  two  or 
more  places  together,  namely  in  the  ultimate  term,  and  in 
all  the  intervening  places,  which  is  impossible.  To  this, 
however,  they  reply  that,  although  it  is  the  same  instant 


241  AGILITY  Q.  84.  ART.  3 

really,  it  is  not  the  same  logically,  like  a  point  at  which 
different  lines  terminate.  But  this  is  not  enough,  because 
an  instant  measures  the  instantaneous,  according  to  its 
reality  and  not  according  to  our  way  of  considering  it- 
Wherefore  an  instant  through  being  considered  in  a  different 
way  is  not  rendered  capable  of  measuring  things  that  are  not 
simultaneous  in  time,  just  as  a  point  through  being  considered 
in  a  different  wa}'  does  not  make  it  possible  for  one  point  of 
place  to  contain  things  that  are  locally  distant  from  one 
another.  Hence  others  with  greater  probability  hold  that 
a  glorified  body  moves  in  time,  but  that  this  time  is  so  short 
as  to  be  imperceptible;  and  that  nevertheless  one  glorified 
body  can  pass  through  the  same  space  in  less  time  than 
another,  because  there  is  no  limit  to  the  divisibility  of  time, 
no  matter  how  short  a  space  we  may  take. 

Reply  Obj.  I.  Thai  which  is  little  lacking  is  as  it  were  not 
lacking  at  all ;  wherefore  we  say :  I  do  so  and  so  at  once,  when 
it  is  to  be  done  after  a  short  time.  It  is  in  this  sense  that 
Augustine  speaks  when  he  says  that  wheresoever  the  will 
shall  be,  there  shall  the  body  be  forthwith.  Or  we  may  say 
that  in  the  blessed  there  will  never  be  an  inordinate  will :  so 
that  they  never  will  wish  their  body  to  be  instantaneously 
where  it  cannot  be,  and  consequently  whatever  instant  the 
will  shall  choose,  at  that  same  instant  the  body  will  be  in 
whatever  place  the  will  shall  determine. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Some  have  demurred  to  this  proposition  of 
the  Philosopher's,  as  the  Commentator  thereon  observes. 
They  say  that  the  ratio  of  one  whole  movement  to  another 
whole  movement  is  not  necessarily  as  the  ratio  of  one  resist 
ing  medium  to  another  resisting  medium,  but  that  the  ratio 
of  the  intervening  mediums  gives  us  the  ratio  of  retarda 
tions  attending  the  movements  on  account  of  the  resistance 
of  the  medium.  For  every  movement  has  a  certain  fixed 
speed,  either  fast  or  slow,  through  the  mover  overcoming 
the  movable,  although  there  be  no  resistance  on  the  part  of 
the  medium ;  as  evidenced  in  heavenly  bodies,  which  have 
nothing  to  hinder  their  movement;  and  yet  they  do  not 
move  instantaneously,  but  in  a  fixed  time  proportionate  to 

in.  6  16 


Q.  84.  ART.  3    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  242 

the  power  of  the  mover  in  comparison  with  the  movable. 
Consequently  it  is  clear  that  even  if  we  suppose  something 
to  move  in  a  vacuum,  it  does  not  follow  that  it  moves  in 
stantaneously,  but  that  nothing  is  added  to  the  time  which 
that  movement  requires  in  the  aforesaid  proportion  of  the 
mover  to  the  movable,  because  the  movement  is  not  retarded. 

But  this  reply,  as  the  Commentator  observes  (ibid.},  pro 
ceeds  from  an  error  in  the  imagination;  for  it  is  imagined 
that  the  retardation  resulting  from  the  resistance  of  the 
medium  is  a  part  of  movement  added  to  the  natural  move 
ment,  the  quantity  of  which  is  in  proportion  to  the  mover 
in  comparison  with  the  movable,  as  when  one  line  is  added 
to  another :  for  the  proportion  of  one  total  to  the  other  is 
not  the  same  as  the  proportion  of  the  lines  to  which  an 
addition  has  been  made.*  And  so  there  would  not  be  the 
same  proportion  between  one  whole  sensible  movement  and 
another,  as  between  the  retardations  resulting  from  the  re 
sistance  of  the  medium.  This  is  an  error  of  the  imagination, 
because  each  part  of  a  movement  has  as  much  speed  as  the 
whole  movement :  whereas  not  every  part  of  a  line  has 
as  much  of  the  dimensive  quantity  as  the  whole  line  has. 
Hence  any  retardation  or  acceleration  affecting  the  move 
ment  affects  each  of  its  parts,  which  is  not  the  case  with  lines : 
and  consequently  the  retardation  that  comes  to  a  movement 
is  not  another  part  of  the  movement,  whereas  in  the  case  of 
the  lines  that  which  is  added  is  a  part  of  the  total  line. 

Consequently,  in  order  to  understand  the  Philosopher's 
argument,  as  the  Commentator  explains  (ibid.},  we  must 
take  the  whole  as  being  one,  that  is  we  must  take  not  only 
the  resistance  of  the  movable  to  the  moving  power,  but  also 
the  resistance  of  the  medium  through  which  the  movement 
takes  place,  and  again  the  resistance  of  anything  else,  so 
that  we  take  the  amount  of  retardation  in  the  whole  move 
ment  as  being  proportionate  to  the  moving  power  in  com 
parison  with  the  resisting  movable,  no  matter  in  what  way 
it  resist,  whether  by  itself  or  by  reason  of  something  ex- 

*  The  same  applies  to  mathematical  quantities:  for  instance  the 
ratio  of  2  + 1  to  4  -I- 1  is  not  as  2  to  4. 


243  AGILITY  Q.  84.  ART.  3 

trinsic.  For  the  movable  must  needs  always  resist  the 
mover  somewhat,  since  mover  and  moved,  agent  and  patient, 
as  such,  are  opposed  to  one  another.  Now  sometimes  it 
is  to  be  observed  that  the  moved  resists  the  mover  by  itself, 
either  because  it  has  a  force  inclining  it  to  a  contrary  move 
ment,  as  appears  in  violent  movements,  or  at  least  because 
it  has  a  place  contrary  to  the  place  which  is  in  the  intention 
of  the  mover ;  and  suchlike  resistance  even  heavenly  bodies 
offer  their  movers.  Sometimes  the  movable  resists  the 
power  of  the  mover,  by  reason  only  of  something  else  and 
not  by  itself.  This  is  seen  in  the  natural  movement  of 
heavy  and  light  things,  because  by  their  very  form  they 
are  inclined  to  such  a  movement :  for  the  form  is  an  impres 
sion  of  their  generator,  which  is  the  mover  as  regards  heavy 
and  light  bodies.  On  the  part  of  matter  we  find  no  resistance, 
neither  of  a  force  inclining  to  a  contrary  movement  nor  of  a 
contrary  place,  since  place  is  not  due  to  matter  except  in 
so  far  as  the  latter,  being  circumscribed  by  its  dimensions, 
is  perfected  by  its  natural  form.  Hence  there  can  be  no 
resistance  save  on  the  part  of  the  medium,  and  this  resistance 
is  connatural  to  their  movement.  Sometimes  again  the 
resistance  results  from  both,  as  may  be  seen  in  the  move 
ments  of  animals.  Accordingly  when  in  a  movement  there 
is  no  resistance  save  on  the  part  of  the  movable,  as  in  the 
heavenly  bodies,  the  time  of  the  movement  is  measured 
according  to  the  proportion  of  the  mover  to  the  movable, 
and  the  Philosopher's  argument  does  not  apply  to  these, 
since  if  there  be  no  medium  at  all  their  movement  is  still 
a  movement  in  time.  On  the  other  hand,  in  those  move 
ments  where  there  is  resistance  on  the  part  of  the  medium 
only,  the  measure  of  time  is  taken  only  according  to  the 
obstacle  on  the  part  of  the  medium,  so  that  if  the  medium 
be  removed  there  will  be  no  longer  an  obstacle;  and  so 
either  it  will  move  instantaneously,  or  it  will  move  in  an 
equal  time  through  a  vacuum  and  through  a  plenum, 
because  granted  that  it  moves  in  time  through  a  vacuum, 
that  time  will  bear  some  proportion  to  the  time  in  which  it 
moves  through  a  plenum.  Now  it  is  possible  to  imagine 


Q.  84.  ART.  3    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  244 

another  body  more  subtle  in  the  same  proportion  than  the 
body  which  filled  the  space,  and  then  if  this  body  fill  some 
other  equal  space  it  will  move  in  as  little  time  through  that 
plenum  as  it  did  previously  through  a  vacuum,  since  by 
as  much  as  the  subtlety  of  the  medium  is  increased  by  so 
much  is  the  length  of  time  decreased,  and  the  more  subtle 
the  medium  the  less  it  resists.  But  in  those  other  move 
ments  where  resistance  is  offered  by  both  the  movable  and 
the  medium,  the  quantity  of  time  must  be  proportionate  to 
the  power  of  the  mover  as  compared  with  the  resistance  of 
both  movable  and  medium  together.  Hence  granted  that 
the  medium  be  taken  away  altogether,  or  that  it  cease  to 
hinder,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  movement  is  instantaneous, 
but  that  the  time  is  measured  according  only  to  the  resist 
ance  of  the  movable.  Nor  will  there  be  any  inconsistency 
if  it  move  in  an  equal  time  through  a  vacuum,  and  through 
a  space  filled  with  the  most  subtle  body  imaginable,  since 
the  greater  the  subtlety  we  ascribe  to  the  medium  the  less 
is  it  naturally  inclined  to  retard  the  movement.  Where 
fore  it  is  possible  to  imagine  so  great  a  subtlety,  as  will 
naturally  retard  the  movement  less  than  does  the  resist 
ance  of  the  movable,  so  that  the  resistance  of  the  medium 
will  add  no  retardation  to  the  movement. 

It  is  therefore  evident  that  although  the  medium  offer 
no  resistance  to  the  glorified  bodies,  in  so  far  as  it  is  possible 
for  them  to  be  in  the  same  place  with  another  body,  never 
theless  their  movement  will  not  be  instantaneous,  because 
the  movable  body  itself  will  resist  the  motive  power,  from 
the  very  fact  that  it  has  a  determinate  place,  as  we  have 
said  in  reference  to  the  heavenly  bodies. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Although  the  power  of  a  glorified  soul 
surpasses  immeasurably  the  power  of  a  non-glorified  soul, 
it  does  not  surpass  it  infinitely,  because  both  powers  are 
finite :  hence  it  does  not  follow  that  it  causes  instantaneous 
movement.  And  even  if  its  power  were  simply  infinite,  it 
would  not  follow  that  it  causes  an  instantaneous  move 
ment,  unless  the  resistance  of  the  movable  were  overcome 
altogether.  Now  although  the  resistance  of  the  movable 


245  AGILITY  Q.  84.  ART.  3 

to  the  mover,  that  results  from  opposition  to  such  a  move 
ment  by  reason  of  its  being  inclined  to  a  contrary  movement, 
can  be  altogether  overcome  by  a  mover  of  infinite  power, 
nevertheless  the  resistance  it  offers  through  contrariety 
towards  the  place  which  the  mover  intends  by  the  move 
ment  cannot  be  overcome  altogether,  except  by  depriving 
it  of  its  being  in  such  and  such  a  place  or  position.  For 
just  as  white  resists  black  by  reason  of  whiteness,  and  all  the 
more  according  as  whiteness  is  the  more  distant  from  black 
ness,  so  a  body  resists  a  certain  place  through  having  an 
opposite  place,  and  its  resistance  is  all  the  greater,  according 
as  the  distance  is  greater.  Now  it  is  impossible  to  take 
away  from  a  body  its  being  in  some  place  or  position,  except 
one  deprive  it  of  its  corporeity,  by  reason  of  which  it  re 
quires  a  place  or  position :  wherefore  so  long  as  it  retains  the 
nature  of  a  body,  it  can  nowise  be  imoved  instantaneously, 
however  greater  be  the  motive  power.  Now  the  glorified 
body  will  never  lose  its  corporeity,  and  therefore  it  will  never 
be  possible  for  it  to  be  moved  instantaneously. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  In  the  words  of  Augustine,  the  speed  is  said 
to  be  equal  because  the  excess  of  one  over  the  other  is 
imperceptible,  just  as  the  time  taken  by  the  whole  move 
ment  is  imperceptible. 

Reply  Obj.  5.  Although  after  the  resurrection  the  time 
which  is  the  measure  of  the  heaven's  movement  will  be  no 
more,  there  will  nevertheless  be  time  resulting  from  the 
before  and  after  in  any  kind  of  movement. 


QUESTION  LXXXV. 

OF  THE  CLARITY  OF  THE  BEATIFIED  BODIES. 

(In  Three  Articles.} 

WE  must  now  consider  the  clarity  of  the  beatified  bodies 
at  the  resurrection.  Under  this  head  there  are  three  points 
of  inquiry :  (i)  Whether  there  will  be  clarity  in  the  glorified 
bodies  ?  (2)  Whether  this  clarity  will  be  visible  to  the  non- 
glorified  eye  ?  (3)  Whether  a  glorified  body  will  of  necessity 
be  seen  by  a  non-glorified  body  ? 

FIRST  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  CLARITY  IS  BECOMING  TO  THE  GLORIFIED 

BODY  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  First  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  clarity  is  unbecoming 
to  the  glorified  body.  Because  according  to  Avicenna 
(Natural,  vi.  3),  every  luminous  body  consists  of  transparent 
parts.  But  the  parts  of  a  glorified  body  will  not  be  trans 
parent,  since  in  some  of  them,  such  as  flesh  and  bones,  earth 
is  predominant.  Therefore  glorified  bodies  are  not  light 
some. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Every  lightsome  body  hides  one  that 
is  behind  it;  wherefore  one  luminary  behind  another  is 
eclipsed,  and  a  flame  of  fire  prevents  one  seeing  what  is 
behind  it.  But  the  glorified  bodies  will  not  hide  that 
which  is  within  them,  for  as  Gregory  says  on  Job  xxviii.  17, 
Gold  or  crystal  cannot  equal  it  (Moral,  xviii.):  There,  that  is 
in  the  heavenly  country,  the  grossness  of  the  members  will  not 
hide  ones  mind  from  another's  eyes,  and  the  very  harmony 

246 


247  CLARITY  Q.  85.  ART.  i 

of  the  body  will  be  evident  to  the  bodily  sight.     Therefore  those 
bodies  will  not  be  lightsome. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  Light  and  colour  require  a  contrary 
disposition  in  their  subject,  since  light  is  the  extreme  point 
of  visibility  in  an  indeterminate  body;  colour,  in  a  determinate 
body  (De  Sensu  et  Sensato,  in.).  But  glorified  bodies  will  have 
colour,  for  as  Augustine  says  (De  Civ.  Dei,  xxii.),  the  body's 
beauty  is  harmony  of  parts  with  a  certain  charm  of  colour : 
and  it  will  be  impossible  for  the  glorified  bodies  to  lack 
beauty.  Therefore  the  glorified  bodies  will  not  be  light 
some. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  If  there  be  clarity  in  the  glorified 
bodies,  it  will  need  to  be  equal  in  all  the  parts  of  the  body, 
just  as  all  the  parts  will  be  equally  impassible,  subtle  and 
agile.  But  this  is  not  becoming,  since  one  part  has  a  greater 
disposition  to  clarity  than  another,  for  instance  the  eye 
than  the  hand,  the  spirits*  than  the  bones,  the  humours 
than  the  flesh  or  nerves.  Therefore  it  would  seem  unfitting 
for  those  bodies  to  be  lightsome. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (Matth.  xiii.  43) :  The  just 
shall  shine  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father,  and 
(Wis.  iii.  7) :  The  just  shall  shine,  and  shall  run  to  and  fro 
like  sparks  among  the  reeds. 

Further,  It  is  written  (i  Cor.  xv.  43) :  It  is  sown  in  dis 
honour,  it  shall  rise  in  glory,  which  refers  to  clarity,  as 
evidenced  by  the  previous  context  where  the  glory  of  the 
rising  bodies  is  compared  to  the  clarity  of  the  stars.  There 
fore  the  bodies  of  the  saints  will  be  lightsome. 

/  answer  that,  It  is  necessary  to  assert  that  after  the 
resurrection  the  bodies  of  the  saints  will  be  lightsome,  on 
account  of  the  authority  of  Scripture  which  makes  this 
promise.  But  the  cause  of  this  clarity  is  ascribed  by  some 
to  the  fifth  or  heavenly  essence,  which  will  then  predominate 
in  the  human  body.  Since,  however,  this  is  absurd,  as  we 
have  often  remarked  (Q.  LXXXIV.,  A.  i),  it  is  better  to 
say  that  this  clarity  will  result  from  the  overflow  of  the  soul's 
glory  into  the  body.  For  whatever  is  received  into  any- 
*  Cf.  footnote,  Q.  LXXXII...  A.  3. 


Q.  85.  ART.  i     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  248 

thing  is  received  not  according  to  the  mode  of  the  source 
whence  it  flows,  but  according  to  the  mode  of  the  recipient. 
Wherefore  clarity  which  in  the  soul  is  spiritual  is  received 
into  the  body  as  corporeal.  And  consequently  according 
to  the  greater  clarity  of  the  soul  by  reason  of  its  greater 
merit,  so  too  will  the  body  differ  in  clarity,  as  the  Apostle 
affirms  (i  Cor.  xv.  41).  Thus  in  the  glorified  body  the  glory 
of  the  soul  will  be  known,  even  as  through  a  crystal  is  known 
the  colour  of  a  body  contained  in  a  crystal  vessel,  as  Gregory 
says  on  Job.  xxviii.  17,  Gold  or  crystal  cannot  equal  it. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Avicenna  is  speaking  of  a  body  that  has 
clarity  through  the  nature  of  its  component  parts.  It  is 
not  thus  but  rather  by  the  merit  of  virtue  that  the  glorified 
body  will  have  clarity. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Gregory  compares  the  glorified  body  to 
gold  on  account  of  clarity,  and  to  crystal  on  account  ot 
its  transparency.  Wherefore  seemingly  we  should  say 
that  they  will  be  both  transparent  and  lightsome ;  for  that 
a  lightsome  body  be  not  transparent  is  owing  to  the  fact 
that  the  clarity  of  that  body  results  from  the  density  of  the 
lightsome  parts,  and  density  is  opposed  to  transparency. 
Then,  however,  clarity  will  result  from  another  cause,  as 
stated  above :  and  the  density  of  the  glorified  body  will  not 
deprive  it  of  transparency,  as  neither  does  the  density  of 
a  crystal  deprive  crystal. 

Some,  on  the  other  hand,  say  that  they  are  compared  to 
crystal,  not  because  they  are  transparent,  but  on  account 
of  this  likeness,  for  as  much  as  that  which  is  enclosed  in 
crystal  is  visible,  so  the  glory  of  the  soul  enclosed  in  the 
glorified  body  will  not  be  hidden.  But  the  first  explanation 
is  better,  because  it  safeguards  better  the  dignity  of  the 
glorified  body,  and  is  more  consistent  with  the  words  of 
Gregory. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  glory  of  the  body  will  not  destroy 
nature  but  will  perfect  it.  Wherefore  the  body  will  retain 
the  colour  due  to  it  by  reason  of  the  nature  of  its  component 
parts,  but  in  addition  to  this  it  will  have  clarity  resulting 
from  the  soul's  glory.  Thus  we  see  bodies  which  have 


249  CLARITY  Q.  85.  ART.  2 

colour  by  their  nature  aglow  with  the  resplendence  of  the 
sun,  or  from  some  other  cause  extrinsic  or  intrinsic. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  Even  as  the  clarity  of  glory  will  overflow 
from  the  soul  into  the  body  according  to  the  mode  of  the 
body,  and  is  there  otherwise  than  in  the  soul,  so  again  it 
will  overflow  into  each  part  of  the  soul  according  to  the 
mode  of  that  part.  Hence  it  is  not  unreasonable  that  the 
different  parts  should  have  clarity  in  different  ways,  accord 
ing  as  they  are  differently  disposed  thereto  by  their  nature. 
Nor  is  there  any  comparison  with  the  other  gifts  of  the  body, 
for  the  various  parts  of  the  bodjr  are  not  differently  disposed 
in  their  regard. 

SECOND  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  CLARITY  OF  THE  GLORIFIED  BODY  IS 
VISIBLE  TO  THE  NON-GLORIFIED  EYE  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Second  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  clarity  of  the  glorified 
body  is  invisible  to  the  non-glorified  eye.  For  the  visible 
object  should  be  proportionate  to  the  sight.  But  a  non- 
glorified  eye  is  not  proportionate  to  see  the  clarity  of  glory, 
since  this  differs  generically  from  the  clarity  of  nature. 
Therefore  the  clarity  of  the  glorified  body  will  not  be  seen 
by  a  non-glorified  eye. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  The  clarity  of  the  glorified  body  will  be 
greater  than  the  clarity  of  the  sun  is  now,  since  the  clarity 
of  the  sun  also  will  then  be  greater  than  it  is  now,  according 
to  Isa.  xxx.  26,  and  the  clarity  of  the  glorified  body  will  be 
much  greater  still,  for  which  reason  the  sun  and  the  entire 
world  will  receive  greater  clarity.  Now  a  non-glorified  eye 
is  unable  to  gaze  on  the  very  orb  of  the  sun  on  account  of 
the  greatness  of  its  clarity.  Therefore  still  less  will  it  be  able 
to  gaze  on  the  clarity  of  a  glorified  body. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  A  visible  object  that  is  opposite  the  eyes 
of  the  seer  must  needs  be  seen,  unless  there  be  some  lesion 
to  the  eye.  But  the  clarity  of  a  glorified  body  that  is 
opposite  to  non-glorified  eyes  is  not  necessarily  seen  by  them : 
which  is  evident  in  the  case  of  the  disciples  who  saw  our 


Q.  85.  ART.  2    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  250 

Lord's  body  after  the  resurrection,  without  witnessing  its 
clarity.  Therefore  this  clarity  will  be  invisible  to  a  non- 
glorified  eye. 

On  the  contrary,  A  gloss  on  Philip,  iii.  21,  Made  like  to  the 
body  of  His  glory,  says :  It  will  be  like  the  clarity  which  He 
had  in  the  Transfiguration.  Now  this  clarity  was  seen  by 
the  non-glorified  eyes  of  the  disciples.  Therefore  the  clarity 
of  the  glorified  body  will  be  visible  to  non-glorified  eyes  also. 

Further,  The  wicked  will  be  tortured  in  the  judgment  by 
seeing  the  glory  of  the  just,  according  to  Wis.  v.  2.  But 
they  would  not  fully  see  their  glory  unless  they  gazed  on  their 
clarity.  Therefore,  etc. 

/  answer  that,  Some  have  asserted  that  the  clarity  of  the 
glorified  body  will  not  be  visible  to  the  non-glorified  eye, 
except  by  a  miracle.  But  this  is  impossible,  unless  this 
clarity  were  so  named  equivocally,  because  light  by  its 
essence  has  a  natural  tendency  to  move  the  sight,  and  sight 
by  its  essence  has  a  natural  tendency  to  perceive  light,  even 
as  the  true  is  in  relation  to  the  intellect,  and  the  good  to  the 
appetite.  Wherefore  if  there  were  a  sight  altogether  in 
capable  of  perceiving  a  light,  either  this  sight  is  so  named 
equivocally,  or  else  this  light  is.  This  cannot  be  said  in  the 
point  at  issue,  because  then  nothing  would  be  made  known 
to  us  when  we  are  told  that  the  glorified  bodies  will  be 
lightsome :  even  so  a  person  who  says  that  a  dog*  is  in  the 
heavens  conveys  no  knowledge  to  one  who  knows  no  other 
dog  than  the  animal.  Hence  we  must  say  that  the  clarity 
of  a  glorified  body  is  naturally  visible  to  the  non-glorified  eye. 

Reply  Obj.  I.  The  clarity  of  glory  will  differ  generically 
from  the  clarity  of  nature,  as  to  its  cause,  but  not  as  to  its 
species.  Hence  just  as  the  clarity  of  nature  is,  by  reason 
of  its  species,  proportionate  to  the  sight,  so  too  will  the  clarity 
of  glory  be. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  Just  as  a  glorified  body  is  not  passible  to 

a  passion  of  nature  but  only  to  a  passion  of  the  soul,f  so  in 

virtue  of  its  property  of  glory  it  acts  only  by  the  action  of 

the  soul.     Now  intense  clarity  does  not  disturb  the  sight, 

*  The  dog  star.  f  Cf-  Q-  LXXXIL,  A.  i. 


251  CLARITY  Q.  85.  ART.  3 

in  so  far  as  it  acts  by  the  action  of  the  soul,  for  thus  it  rather 
gives  delight,  but  it  disturbs  it  in  so  far  as  it  acts  by  the  action 
of  nature  by  heating  and  destroying  the  organ  of  sight, 
and  by  scattering  the  spirits*  asunder.  Hence,  though 
the  clarity  of  a  glorified  body  surpasses  the  clarity  of  the 
sun,  it  does  not  by  its  nature  disturb  the  sight  but  soothes 
it:  wherefore  this  clarity  is  compared  to  the  jasper-stone 
(Apoc.  xxi.  u). 

Reply  Obj.  3.  The  clarity  of  the  glorified  body  results 
from  the  merit  of  the  will  and  therefore  will  be  subject  to 
the  will,  so  as  to  be  seen  or  not  seen  according  to  its  command. 
Therefore  it  will  be  in  the  power  of  the  glorified  body  to 
show  forth  its  clarity  or  to  hide  it :  and  this  was  the  opinion 
of  Praepositivus. 

THIRD  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  A  GLORIFIED  BODY  WILL  BE  NECESSARILY 
SEEN  BY  A  NON-GLORIFIED  BODY  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Third  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  a  glorified  body  will  be 
necessarily  seen  by  a  non-glorified  body.  For  the  glorified 
bodies  will  be  lightsome.  Now  a  lightsome  body  reveals 
itself  and  other  things.  Therefore  the  glorified  bodies  will 
be  seen  of  necessity. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Every  body  which  hides  other  bodies 
that  are  behind  it  is  necessarily  perceived  by  the  sight, 
from  the  very  fact  that  the  other  things  behind  it  are  hidden. 
Now  the  glorified  body  will  hide  other  bodies  that  are 
behind  it  from  being  seen,  because  it  will  be  a  coloured  body. 
Therefore  it  will  be  seen  of  necessity. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  Just  as  quantity  is  something  in  a  body, 
so  is  the  quality  whereby  a  body  is  seen.  Now  quantity 
will  not  be  subject  to  the  will,  so  that  the  glorified  body 
be  able  to  be  of  greater  or  smaller  quantity.  Therefore 
neither  will  the  quality  of  visibility  be  subject  to  the  will, 
so  that  a  body  be  able  not  to  be  seen. 

On  the  contrary,  Our  body  will  be  glorified  in  being  made 
*  Cf.  footnote,  Q.  XXXII.,  A.  3. 


Q.  85.  ART.  3    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  252 

like  to  the  body  of  Christ  after  the  resurrection.  Now 
after  the  resurrection  Christ's  body  was  not  necessarily 
seen;  in  fact  it  vanished  from  the  sight  of  the  disciples  at 
Emmaus  (Luke  xxiv.  31).  Therefore  neither  will  the  glori 
fied  body  be  necessarily  seen. 

Further,  There  the  body  will  be  in  complete  obedience 
to  the  will.  Therefore  as  the  soul  lists  the  body  will  be 
visible  or  invisible. 

I  answer  that,  A  visible  object  is  seen,  inasmuch  as  it  acts 
on  the  sight.  Now  there  is  no  change  in  a  thing  through 
its  acting  or  not  acting  on  an  external  object.  Wherefore 
a  glorified  body  may  be  seen  or  not  seen  without  any  pro 
perty  pertaining  to  its  perfection  being  changed.  Conse 
quently  it  will  be  in  the  power  of  a  glorified  soul  for  its  body 
to  be  seen  or  not  seen,  even  as  any  other  action  of  the  body 
will  be  in  the  soul's  power ;  else  the  glorified  body  would  not 
be  a  perfectly  obedient  instrument  of  its  principal  agent. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  This  clarity  will  be  obedient  to;  the  glorified 
body  so  that  this  will  be  able  to  show  it  or  hide  it. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  A  body's  colour  does  not  prevent  its  being 
transparent  except  in  so  far  as  it  affects  the  sight,  because 
the  sight  cannot  be  affected  by  two  colours  at  the  same  time, 
so  as  to  perceive  them  both  perfectly.  But  the  colour  of 
the  glorified  body  will  be  completely  in  the  power  of  the 
soul,  so  that  it  can  thereby  act  or  not  act  on  the  sight. 
Hence  it  will  be  in  its  power  to  hide  or  not  to  hide  a  body 
that  is  behind  it. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Quantity  is  inherent  to  the  glorified  body 
itself,  nor  would  it  be  possible  for  the  quantity  to  be  altered 
at  the  soul's  bidding  without  the  glorified  body  suffering 
some  alteration  incompatible  with  its  impassibility.  Hence 
there  is  no  comparison  between  quantity  and  visibility, 
because  even  this  quality  whereby  it  is  visible  cannot  be 
removed  at  the  soul's  bidding,  but  the  action  of  that  quality 
will  be  suspended,  and  thus  the  body  will  be  hidden  at  the 
soul's  command. 


QUESTION  LXXXVI. 

OF  THE  CONDITIONS  UNDER  WHICH  THE  BODIES 
OF  THE  DAMNED  WILL  RISE  AGAIN. 

(In  Three  Articles.) 

WE  must  next  consider  the  conditions  in  which  the  bodies 
of  the  damned  will  rise  again.  Under  this  head  there  are 
three  points  of  inquiry:  (i)  Whether  the  bodies  of  the 
damned  will  rise  again  with  their  deformities  ?  (2)  Whether 
their  bodies  will  be  corruptible  ?  (3)  Whether  they  will  be 
impassible  ? 

FIRST  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  BODIES  OF  THE  DAMNED  WILL  RISE 
AGAIN  WITH  THEIR  DEFORMITIES  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  First  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  bodies  of  the  damned 
will  rise  again  with  their  deformities.  For  that  which  was 
appointed  as  a  punishment  for  sin  should  not  cease  except 
the  sin  be  forgiven.  Now  the  lack  of  limbs  that  results 
from  mutilation,  as  well  as  all  other  bodily  deformities,  are 
appointed  as  punishments  for  sin.  Therefore  these  defor 
mities  will  not  be  taken  away  from  the  damned,  seeing  that 
they  will  not  have  received  the  forgiveness  of  their  sins. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Just  as  the  saints  will  rise  again  to  final 
happiness,  so  the  wicked  will  rise  again  to  final  unhappi- 
ness.  Now  when  the  saints  rise  again  nothing  will  be  taken 
from  them  that  can  pertain  to  their  perfection,  therefore 
nothing  pertaining  to  the  defect  or  unhappiness  of  the 
wicked  will  be  taken  from  them  at  the  resurrection.  But 
such  are  their  deformities.  Therefore,  etc. 

253 


Q.  86.  ART.  i     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  254 

Obj.  3.  Further,  Just  as  deformity  is  a  defect  of  the  pas 
sible  body,  so  is  slowness  of  movement.  Now  slowness  of 
movement  will  not  be  taken  from  the  bodies  of  the  damned 
at  the  resurrection,  since  their  bodies  will  not  be  agile. 
Therefore  for  the  same  reason  neither  will  their  deformity 
be  taken  away. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (i  Cor.  xv.  52) :  The  dead 
shall  rise  again  incorruptible  ;  where  a  gloss  says :  The  dead, 
i.e.  sinners,  or  all  the  dead  in  general  shall  rise  again  incorrupt 
ible,  i.e.  without  the  loss  of  any  limbs.  Therefore  the  wicked 
will  rise  again  without  their  deformities. 

Further,  There  will  be  nothing  in  the  damned  to  lessen 
the  sense  of  pain.  But  sickness  hinders  the  sense  of  pain 
by  weakening  the  organ  of  sense,  and  in  like  manner  the 
lack  of  a  limb  would  prevent  pain  from  affecting  the  whole 
body.  Therefore  the  damned  will  rise  again  without  these 
defects. 

I  answer  that,  Deformity  in  the  human  body  is  of  two 
kinds.  One  arises  from  the  lack  of  a  limb;  thus  we  say  that 
a  mutilated  person  is  deformed,  because  he  lacks  due  pro 
portion  of  the  parts  to  the  whole.  Deformities  of  this  kind, 
without  any  doubt,  will  not  be  in  the  bodies  of  the  damned, 
since  all  bodies  of  both  wicked  and  good  will  rise  again  whole. 
Another  deformity  arises  from  the  undue  disposition  of  the 
parts,  by  reason  of  undue  quantity,  quality,  or  place, — 
which  deformity  is,  moreover,  incompatible  with  due  pro 
portion  of  parts  to  whole.  Concerning  these  deformities  and 
like  defects  such  as  fevers  and  similar  ailments  which  some 
times  result  in  deformity,  Augustine  remained  undecided  and 
doubtful  (Enchir.  xcii.)  as  the  Master  remarks  (iv.  Sent.  D.  44). 
Among  modern  masters,  however,  there  are  two  opinions 
on  this  point.  For  some  say  that  suchlike  deformities  and 
defects  will  remain  in  the  bodies  of  the  damned,  because  they 
consider  that  those  who  are  damned  are  sentenced  to  utmost 
unhappiness  wherefrom  no  affliction  should  be  rebated.  But 
this  would  seem  unreasonable.  For  in  the  restoration  of  the 
rising  body  we  look  to  its  natural  perfection  rather  than  to 
its  previous  condition :  wherefore  those  who  die  under  perfect 


255  CONDITIONS  OF  THE  DAMNED     Q.  36.  ART.  i 

age  will  rise  again  in  the  stature  of  youth,  as  stated  above 
(Q.  LXXXI.,  A.  i).  Consequently  those  who  had  natural 
defects  in  the  body,  or  deformities  resulting  therefrom,  will 
be  restored  without  those  defects  or  deformities  at  the  resur 
rection,  unless  the  demerit  of  sin  prevent ;  and  so  if  a  person 
rise  again  with  such  defects  and  deformities,  this  will  be  for 
his  punishment.  Now  the  mode  of  punishment  is  according 
to  the  measure  of  guilt.  And  a  sinner  who  is  about  to  be 
damned  may  be  burdened  with  less  grievous  sins  and  yet 
have  deformities  and  defects  which  one  who  is  about  to  be 
damned  has  not,  while  burdened  with  more  grievous  sins. 
Wherefore  if  he  who  had  deformities  in  this  life  rise  again 
with  them,  while  the  other  who  had  them  not  in  this  life, 
and  therefore,  as  is  clear,  will  rise  again  without  them,  though 
deserving  of  greater  punishment,  the  mode  of  the  punish 
ment  wrould  not  correspond  to  the  amount  of  guilt;  in  fact 
it  would  seem  that  a  man  is  more  punished  on  account  of 
the  pains  which  he  suffered  in  this  world;  which  is  absurd. 

Hence  others  say  with  more  reason,  that  He  Who  fashioned 
nature  will  wholly  restore  the  body's  nature  at  the  resur 
rection.  Wherefore  whatever  defect  or  deformity  was  in  the 
body  through  corruption,  or  weakness  of  nature  or  of  natural 
principles  (for  instance  fever,  purblindness,  and  so  forth) 
will  be  entirely  done  away  at  the  resurrection:  whereas 
those  defects  in  the  human  body  which  are  the  natural  result 
of  its  natural  principles,  such  as  heaviness,  passibility,  and 
the  like,  will  be  in  the  bodies  of  the  damned,  while  they  will 
be  removed  from  the  bodies  of  the  elect  by  the  glory  of  the 
resurrection. 

Reply  Obj.  i.  Since  in  every  tribunal  punishment  is  in 
flicted  according  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  tribunal,  the 
punishments  which  in  this  temporal  life  are  inflicted  for 
some  particular  sin  are  themselves  temporal,  and  extend 
not  beyond  the  term  of  this  life.  Hence  although  the 
damned  are  not  pardoned  their  sins,  it  does  not  follow  that 
there  they  will  undergo  the  same  punishments  as  they  have 
in  this  world :  but  the  Divine  justice  demands  that  there  they 
shall  suffer  more  severe  punishment  for  eternity. 


Q.  86.  ART.  2     THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  256 

Reply  Obj.  2.  There  is  no  parity  between  the  good  and  the 
wicked,  because  a  thing  can  be  altogether  good,  but  not 
altogether  evil.  Hence  the  final  happiness  of  the  saints 
requires  that  they  should  be  altogether  exempt  from  all 
evil;  whereas  the  final  unhappiness  of  the  wicked  will  not 
exclude  all  good,  because  if  a  thing  be  wholly  evil  it  destroys 
itself,  as  the  Philosopher  says  (Ethic,  iv.  5).  Hence  it  is 
necessary  for  the  good  of  their  nature  to  underlie  the  unhap 
piness  of  the  damned,  which  good  is  the  work  of  their 
perfect  Creator,  Who  will  restore  that  same  nature  to  the 
perfection  of  its  species. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Slowness  of  movement  is  one  of  those  defects 
which  are  the  natural  result  of  the  principles  of  the  human 
body ;  but  deformity  is  not,  and  consequently  the  comparison 
fails. 

SECOND  ARTICLE. 

WHETHER  THE  BODIES  OF  THE  DAMNED  WILL  BE 
INCORRUPTIBLE  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Second  Article  : — 

Objection  i.  It  would  seem  that  the  bodies  of  the  damned 
will  be  corruptible.  For  everything  composed  of  contraries 
must  necessarily  be  corruptible.  Now  the  bodies  of  the 
damned  will  be  composed  of  the  contraries  whereof  they  are 
composed  even  now,  else  they  would  not  be  the  same, 
neither  specifically  nor,  in  consequence,  numerically.  There 
fore  they  will  be  corruptible. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  If  the  bodies  of  the  damned  will  not  be 
corruptible,  this  will  be  due  either  to  nature,  or  to  grace, 
or  to  glory.  But  it  will  not  be  by  nature,  since  they  will 
be  of  the  same  nature  as  now;  nor  will  it  be  by  grace  or  glory, 
since  they  will  lack  these  things  altogether.  Therefore  they 
will  be  corruptible. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  It  would  seem  inconsistent  to  withdraw 
the  greatest  of  punishments  from  those  who  are  in  the 
highest  degree  of  unhappiness.  Now  death  is  the  greatest 
of  punishments,  as  the  Philosopher  declares  (Ethic,  iii.  6). 
Therefore  death  should  not  be  withdrawn  from  the  damned, 


257  CONDITIONS  OF  THE  DAMNED     Q.  86.  ART.  2 

since  they  are  in  the  highest  degree  of  unhappiness.     There 
fore  their  bodies  will  be  corruptible. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (Apoc.  ix.  6) :  In  those  days 
men  shall  seek  death,  and  shall  not  find  it,  and  they  shall  desire 
to  die,  and  death  shall  fly  from  them. 

Further,  The  damned  will  be  punished  with  an  everlasting 
punishment  both  in  soul  and  body  (Matth.  xxv.  46) :  These 
shall  go  into  everlasting  punishment.  But  this  would  not  be 
possible  if  their  bodies  were  corruptible.  Therefore  their 
bodies  will  be  incorruptible. 

/  answer  that,  Since  in  every  movement  there  must  needs 
be  a  principle  of  movement,  movement  or  change  may  be 
withdrawn  from  a  movable  in  two  ways:  first  through 
absence  of  a  principle  of  movement,  secondly  through  an 
obstacle  to  the  principle  of  movement.  Now  corruption  is  a 
kind  of  change :  and  consequently  a  body  which  is  corrupt 
ible  on  account  of  the  nature  of  its  principles  may  be  ren 
dered  incorruptible  in  two  ways.  First  by  the  total  removal 
of  the  principle  which  leads  to  corruption,  and  in  this  way 
the  bodies  of  the  damned  will  be  incorruptible.  For  since 
the  heaven  is  the  first  principle  of  alteration  in  virtue  of  its 
local  movement,  and  all  other  secondary  agents  act  in  virtue 
thereof  and  as  though  moved  thereby,  it  follows  that  at  the 
cessation  of  the  heavenly  movement  there  is  no  longer  any 
agent  that  can  change  the  body  by  altering  it  from  its 
natural  property.  Wherefore  after  the  resurrection,  and  the 
cessation  of  the  heavenly  movement,  there  will  be  no  quality 
capable  of  altering  the  human  body  from  its  natural  quality. 
Now  corruption,  like  generation,  is  the  term  of  alteration. 
Hence  the  bodies  of  the  damned  will  be  incorruptible,  and 
this  will  serve  the  purpose  of  Divine  justice,  since  living  for 
ever  they  will  be  punished  for  ever.  This  is  in  keeping  with 
the  demands  of  Divine  justice,  as  we  shall  state  further  on 
(A.  3),  even  as  now  the  corruptibility  of  bodies  serves  the 
purpose  of  Divine  providence,  by  which  through  the  corrup 
tion  of  one  thing  another  is  generated. 

Secondly,  this  happens  through  the  principle  of  corruption 
being  hindered,  and  in  this  way  the  body  of  Adam  was 

in.  6  17 


Q.  86.  ART.  2    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  258 

incorruptible,  because  the  conflicting  qualities  that  exist  in 
man's  body  were  withheld  by  the  grace  of  innocence  from 
conducing  to  the  body's  dissolution:  and  much  more  will 
they  be  withheld  in  the  glorified  bodies,  which  will  be  wholly 
subject  to  the  spirit.  Thus  after  the  general  resurrection 
the  two  aforesaid  modes  of  incorruptibility  will  be  united 
together  in  the  bodies  of  the  blessed. 

Reply  Obj.  I.  The  contraries  of  which  bodies  are  com 
posed  are  conducive  to  corruption  as  secondary  principles. 
For  the  first  active  principle  thereof  is  the  heavenly  move 
ment  :  wherefore  given  the  movement  of  the  heaven,  it  is 
necessary  for  a  body  composed  of  contraries  to  be  corrupted 
unless  some  more  powerful  cause  prevent  it :  whereas  if  the 
heavenly  movement  be  withdrawn,  the  contraries  of  which 
a  body  is  composed  do  not  suffice  to  cause  corruption,  even 
in  accordance  with  nature,  as  explained  above.  But  the 
philosophers  were  ignorant  of  a  cessation  in  the  heavenly 
movement;  and  consequently  they  held  that  a  body  com 
posed  of  contraries  is  without  fail  corrupted  in  accordance 
with  nature. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  This  incorruptibility  will  result  from  nature, 
not  as  though  there  were  some  principle  of  incorruption  in 
the  bodies  of  the  damned,  but  on  account  of  the  cessation  of 
the  active  principle  of  corruption,  as  shown  above. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  Although  death  is  simply  the  greatest  of 
punishments,  yet  nothing  prevents  death  conducing,  in  a 
certain  respect,  to  a  cessation  of  punishments;  and  conse 
quently  the  removal  of  death  may  contribute  to  the  increase 
of  punishment.  For  as  the  Philosopher  says  (Ethic,  ix.  9), 
Life  is  pleasant  to  all,  for  all  desire  to  be.  .  .  .  But  we  must 
not  apply  this  to  a  wicked  or  corrupt  life,  nor  one  passed 
in  sorrow.  Accordingly  just  as  life  is  simply  pleasant, 
but  not  the  life  that  is  passed  in  sorrows,  so  too  death, 
which  is  the  privation  of  life,  is  painful  simply,  and  the 
greatest  of  punishments,  inasmuch  as  it  deprives  one  of 
the  primary  good,  namely  being,  with  which  other  things 
are  withdrawn.  But  in  so  far  as  it  deprives  one  of  a  wicked 
life,  and  of  such  as  is  passed  in  sorrow,  it  is  a  remedy  for 


259  CONDITIONS  OF  THE  DAMNED     Q.  86.  ART.  3 

pains,  since  it  puts  an  end  to  them;  and  consequently  the 
withdrawal  of  death  leads  to  the  increase  of  punishments  by 
making  them  everlasting.  If  however  we  say  that  death  is 
penal  by  reason  of  the  bodily  pain  which  the  dying  feel, 
without  doubt  the  damned  will  continue  to  feel  a  far  greater 
pain:  wherefore  they  are  said  to  be  in  everlasting  death, 
according  to  the  Psalm  (xlviii.  15) :  Death  shall  feed  upon 
them. 

THIRD  ARTICLE. 
WHETHER  THE  BODIES  OF  THE  DAMNED  WILL  BE  IMPASSIBLE  ? 

We  proceed  thus  to  the  Third  Article  : — 

Objection  I.  It  would  seem  that  the  bodies  of  the  damned 
will  be  impassible.  For,  according  to  the  Philosopher 
(Topic,  vi.),  increase  of  passion  results  in  loss  of  substance. 
Now  if  a  finite  thing  be  continually  lessened,  it  must  needs 
at  length  be  done  away  (Phys.  i.) .  Therefore  if  the  bodies  of 
the  damned  will  be  passible,  and  will  be  ever  suffering,  they 
will  at  length  be  done  away  and  corrupted :  and  this  has  been 
shown  to  be  false  (A.  2).  Therefore  they  will  be  impassible. 

Obj.  2.  Further,  Every  agent  likens  the  patient  to  itself. 
If  then  the  bodies  of  the  damned  are  passive  to  the  fire  the 
fire  will  liken  them  to  itself.  Now  fire  does  not  consume 
bodies  except  in  so  far  as  in  likening  them  to  itself  it  disinte 
grates  them.  Therefore  if  the  bodies  of  the  damned  will  be 
passible  they  will  at  length  be  consumed  by  the  fire,  and 
thus  the  same  conclusion  follows  as  before. 

Obj.  3.  Further,  Those  animals,  for  instance  the  sala 
mander,  which  are  said  to  remain  living  in  fire  without  being 
destroyed,  are  not  distressed  by  the  fire :  because  an  animal 
is  not  distressed  by  bodily  pain,  unless  the  body  in  some  way 
is  hurt  thereby.  If  therefore  the  bodies  of  the  damned  can, 
like  the  aforesaid  animals,  remain  in  the  fire  without  being 
corrupted,  as  Augustine  asserts  (De  Civ.  Dei,  xxi.),  it  would 
seem  that  tney  will  suffer  no  distress  there:  which  would 
not  be  the  case  unless  their  bodies  were  impassible.  There 
fore,  etc. 

Obj.  4.  Further,  If  the  bodies  of  the  damned  be  passible, 


Q.  86.  ART.  3    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  260 

the  pain  resulting  from  their  suffering,  seemingly,  will  sur 
pass  all  present  bodily  pain,  even  as  the  joy  of  the  saints 
will  surpass  all  present  joy.  Now  in  this  life  it  sometimes 
happens  that  the  soul  is  severed  from  the  body  through 
excess  of  pain.  Much  more  therefore  if  those  bodies  will  be 
passible,  the  souls  will  be  separate  from  the  bodies  through 
excess  of  pain,  and  thus  those  bodies  will  be  corrupted :  which 
is  false.  Therefore  those  bodies  will  be  impassible. 

On  the  contrary,  It  is  written  (i  Cor.  xv.  52) :  And  we  shall 
be  changed  :  and  a  gloss  says :  We, — the  good  alone, — will  be 
changed  with  the  unchangeableness  and  impassibility  of  glory. 

Further,  Even  as  the  body  co-operates  with  the  soul  in 
merit,  so  does  it  co-operate  in  sin.  Now  on  account  of  the 
former  co-operation  not  only  the  soul  but  also  the  body  will 
be  rewarded  after  the  resurrection.  Therefore  in  like  manner 
the  bodies  of  the  damned  will  be  punished ;  which  would  not 
be  the  case  were  they  impassible.  Therefore  they  will  be 
passible. 

/  answer  that,  The  principal  cause  of  the  bodies  of  the 
damned  not  being  consumed  by  the  fire  will  be  the  Divine 
justice  by  which  their  bodies  will  be  consigned  to  everlast 
ing  punishment.  Now  the  Divine  justice  is  served  also  by  the 
natural  disposition,  whether  on  the  part  of  the  passive  body 
or  on  the  part  of  the  active  causes ;  for  since  passiveness  is 
a  kind  of  receptiveness,  there  are  two  kinds  of  passion,  corre 
sponding  to  two  ways  in  which  one  thing  is  receptive  of 
another.  For  a  form  may  be  received  into  a  subject  materi 
ally  according  to  its  natural  being,  just  as  the  air  receives 
heat  from  fire  materially;  and  corresponding  to  this 
manner  of  reception  there  is  a  kind  of  passion  which  we  call 
passion  of  nature.  In  another  way  one  thing  is  received 
into  another  spiritually  by  way  of  an  intention,  just  as  the 
likeness  of  whiteness  is  received  into  the  air  and  in  the  pupil : 
this  reception  is  like  that  whereby  the  soul  receives  the  like 
ness  of  things:  wherefore  corresponding  to  this  mode  of 
reception  is  another  mode  of  passion  which  we  call  passion 
of  the  soul.  Since  therefore  after  the  resurrection  and  the 
cessation  of  the  heavenly  movement  it  will  be  impossible 


261  CONDITIONS  OF  THE  DAMNED     Q.  86.  ART.  3 

for  a  body  to  be  altered  by  its  natural  quality,  as  stated 
above  (A.  2),  it  will  not  be  possible  for  any  body  to  be  passive 
with  a  passion  of  nature.  Consequently  as  regards  this  mode 
of  passion  the  bodies  of  the  damned  will  be  impassible  even 
as  they  will  be  incorruptible.  Yet  after  the  heaven  has 
ceased  to  move,  there  will  still  remain  the  passion  which  is 
after  the  manner  of  the  soul,  since  the  air  will  both  receive 
light  from  the  sun,  and  will  convey  the  variety  of  colours  to 
the  sight.  Wherefore  in  respect  of  this  mode  of  passion  the 
bodies  of  the  damned  will  be  passible.  But  the  glorified 
bodies,  albeit  they  receive  something,  and  are  in  a  manner 
patient  to  sensation,  will  nevertheless  not  be  passive,  since 
they  will  receive  nothing  to  distress  or  hurt  them,  as  will 
the  bodies  of  the  damned,  which  for  this  reason  are  said  to 
be  passible. 

Reply  Obf.  I.  The  Philosopher  is  speaking  of  the  passion 
whereby  the  patient  is  changed  from  its  natural  disposition. 
But  this  kind  of  passion  will  not  be  in  the  bodies  of  the 
damned,  as  stated  above. 

Reply  Obj.  2.  The  likeness  of  the  agent  is  in  the  patient  in 
two  ways.  First,  in  the  same  way  as  in  the  agent,  and  thus 
it  is  in  all  univocal  agents,  for  instance  a  thing  that  is  hot 
makes  another  thing  hot,  and  fire  generates  fire.  Secondly, 
otherwise  than  in  the  agent,  and  thus  it  is  in  all  equivocal 
agents.  In  these  it  happens  sometimes  that  a  form  which 
is  in  the  agent  spiritually  is  received  into  the  patient  materi 
ally:  thus  the  form  of  the  house  built  by  the  craftsman  is 
materially  in  itself,  but  spiritually  in  the  mind  of  the  crafts 
man.  On  the  other  hand,  sometimes  it  is  in  the  agent 
materially,  but  is  received  into  the  patient  spiritually :  thus 
whiteness  is  materially  on  the  wall  wherein  it  is  received, 
whereas  it  is  spiritually  in  the  pupil  and  in  the  transferring 
medium .  And  so  it  is  in  the  case  at  issue,  because  the  species 
which  is  in  the  fire  materially  is  received  spiritually  into  the 
bodies  of  the  damned ;  thus  it  is  that  the  fire  will  assimilate 
the  bodies  of  the  damned  to  itself,  without  consuming  them 
withal. 

Reply  Obj.  3.  According  to   the   Philosopher  (De  Prop. 


Q.  86.  ART.  3    THE  "  SUMMA  THEOLOGICA  "  262 

Element.},  no  animal  can  live  in  fire.  Galen  also  (De  simp, 
medic.)  says  that  there  is  no  body  which  at  length  is  not  con 
sumed  by  fire;  although  sometimes  certain  bodies  may 
remain  in  fire  without  hurt,  such  as  ebony.  The  instance 
of  the  salamander  is  not  altogether  apposite,  since  it 
cannot  remain  in  the  fire  without  being  at  last  consumed, 
as  do  the  bodies  of  the  damned  in  hell.  Nor  does  it  follow 
that  because  the  bodies  of  the  damned  suffer  no  corruption 
from  the  fire,  they  therefore  are  not  tormented  by  the  fire, 
because  the  sensible  object  has  a  natural  aptitude  to  please 
or  displease  the  senses,  not  only  as  regards  its  natural 
action  of  stimulating  or  injuring  the  organ,  but  also  as 
regards  its  spiritual  action:  since  when  the  sensible  object 
is  duly  proportionate  to  the  sense,  it  pleases,  whereas  the 
contrary  is  the  result  when  it  is  in  excess  or  delect.  Hence 
subdued  colours  and  harmonious  sounds  are  pleasing, 
whereas  discordant  sounds  displease  the  hearing. 

Reply  Obj.  4.  Pain  does  not  sever  the  soul  from  the  body, 
in  so  far  as  it  is  confined  to  a  power  of  the  soul  which  feels 
the  pain,  but  in  so  far  as  the  passion  of  the  soul  leads  to 
the  body  being  changed  from  its  natural  disposition.  Thus 
it  is  that  we  see  that  through  anger  the  body  becomes 
heated,  and  through  fear,  chilled :  whereas  after  the  resurrec 
tion  it  will  be  impossible  for  the  body  to  be  changed  from 
its  natural  disposition,  as  stated  above  (A.  2).  Conse 
quently,  however  great  the  pain  will  be,  it  will  not  sever  the 
body  from  the  soul. 


Printed  in  England. 


The  "Summa  Theologica"  of 
St.  Thomas  Aquinas,  in  English 

EDITED  BY  THE    DOMINICAN    FATHERS 

Demy  Svo.  Volumes.     Cloth. 
FIRST  PART. 

QQ.  i-  26     OF  GOD  AND  THE  DIVINE  ATTRIBUTES. 

[Revised  Edition  Ready. 
27-  49     THE  BLESSED  TRINITY — THE  CREATION. 

[Revised  Edition  Ready. 
50-  74     THE  ANGELS — THE  WORK  OF  Six  DAYS. 

[Revised  Edition  in  Preparation. 
75-119     ON   MAN — THE  DIVINE  GOVERNMENT.  [Ready. 

SECOND  PART.     (Prima  Secunda.) 

QQ.  I-  48     THE  END  OF  MAN — HUMAN  ACTS — PASSIONS.        [Ready. 
49-  89     HABITS — VIRTUES  AND  VICES.  [Ready. 

90-114     LAW  AND   GRACE.  [Ready. 

SECOND  PART.     (Secunda  Secunda.) 

QQ.  I-  46     FAITH,   HOPE,  AND  CHARITY.  [Ready. 

47-  79      PRUDENCE — JUSTICE.  [Ready. 

80-100     JUSTICE  (continue/} — THE  INTERIOR  AND  EXTKRIOR  ACTS 

OF  RELIGION  [Nearly  Ready. 

101-140     PIETY,  OBSERVANCE,  AND  CONTRARY  VICES — FORTITUDE 

[In  Preparation. 

141-170     TEMPERANCE,   ITS  INTEGRAL,   SUBJECTIVE  AND   POTENTIAL 

PARTS,  AND  CONTRARY  VICES.  [Ready. 

171-189     GRATUITOUS  GRACES — ACTIVE  AND  CONTEMPLATIVE  LIFE 

— STATES  OF  LIFE.  [In  Preparation. 

THIRD  PART  AND  SUPPLEMENT. 

QQ.i-  26     THE  INCARNATION.  [Ready. 

27-  59     THE  CHRISTOLOGY  (including  St.  Thomas's  Mariology). 

[Ready. 

60-  83     THE  SACRAMENTS  IN  GENERAL — BAPTISM — CONFIRMATION 

— HOLY  EUCHARIST.  [Ready. 

84-Supp.  33     PENANCE  (including  last  seven  questions  of  the  Third 

Part) — EXTREME  UNCTION.  [Ready. 

34-  68     HOLY  ORDERS — MATRIMONY.  [In  Preparation. 

69-  86     TREATISE  ON  THE  LAST  THINGS.  [Ready. 

87-  99     PURGATORY.  [In  Preparation. 

Orders  for  the  entire  work  are  received.     Forthcoming  Volumes  will  be  charged  as 

they  appear. 

BURNS    OATES   &    WASHBOURNE    LTD. 

28    ORCHARD    STREET  8-10    PATERNOSTER    ROW 

W.  i  LONDON  B.C.  4 

BENZIGER   BROTHERS      -       -       NEW   YORK,    CINCINNATI,    CHICAGO 


BX  1749  .T5S913  1911 

v.19  SMC 

Thomas,  Aquinas,  Saint, 

12257-1274. 
The  "Summa  theologica" 

of  St.  Thomas  Aquinas  / 
BAI-4800  (awsk) 


