of  JlnrtJia 
ICtbrart^s 


ahr  (Sift  nf 

rirs-   Charles  Morris 


International  Library  of  Psychology- 
Philosophy    and    Scientific    Method 


The  Mind 
and  its  Place  in  Nature 


International  Library  of  Psychology 
Philosophy    and   Scientific    Method 


GENERAL  EDITOR 


Philosophical  Studies 
The  Misuse  of  Mind    . 
Conflict  and  Dream 
Psychology  and  Politics  . 
Medicine,  Magic  and  Religion 
Tractatus  Logico-Philosophicus 
The  INIeasurement  of  Emotion 
Psychological  Types  . 
Scientific  Method 

Scientific  Thought by  C.  T).  Broad,  LittD. 

The  Meaning  of  Meaning.  by  C.  K.  Ogden  and  I.  A.  Richards 
Character  and  the  Unconscious  .  ■  by  ].  H.  van  der  Hoop 
Individual  Psychology       .        .        .        .        .by  Alfred  Adler 


C.   K.  OGDEN,  M.A. 
(Magdalene  College,  Cambridge) 

.    by  G.  E.  Moore,  LittD. 

by  Karin  Stephen 

by  W.  H.  R.  Rivers,  F.R.S. 

by  W.  H.  R.  Rivers,  F.R.S. 

by  W.  H.  R.  Rivers,  F.R.S. 

by  L.  Wittgenstein 

by  W.  Whately  Smith 

by  C.  G.  Jung,  M.D.,  LL.D. 

by  A.  D.  Ritchie 


Chance,  Love  and  Logic    .        .        .        . 

Speculations  (Preface  by  Jacob  Epstein) 

The  Psychology'  of  Reasoning 

The  Philosophy  of  Music 

The  Philosophy  of  '  As  If  ' 

The  Nature  of  Laughter 

The  Nature  of  Intelligence   . 

Telepathy  and  Clairvoyance   . 

The  Growth  of  the  Mind 

The  Mentality  of  Apes     .        .        .        . 

Psychology  of  Religious  Mysticism 

The  Psychology  of  a  Musical  Prodigy 

Principles  of  Literary  Criticism    . 

Metaphysical  Foundations  of  Science 

Colour-Blindness 

Physique  and  Character  . 
Psychology  of  Emotion 
Problems  of  Personality  : 

Psyche     

Psychology'  of  Time    . 


by  C.  S.  Peirce 

by  T.  E.  Hulme 

by  Eugenic  Rignano 

.    by  W.  Pole,  F.R.S. 

by  H.  Vaihinger 

by  ].  C.  Gregory' 

.  by  L.  L.  Thurstone 

by  R.  Tischner 

by  K.  Koffka 

.     by  W.  Kohler 

.  by  ].   H.   Leuba 

by  G.   Revesz 

by  I.  A.  Richards 

by  E.  A.   Burtt,  Ph.D. 

by  M.  Collins,  Ph.D. 

by  Ernst  Kretschmer 

by  J.  T.  MacCurdy,  M.D. 

in  Jionour  of  Morton  Prince 

by  E.  Rohde 

by  M.  Sturt 


.    by  F.  Paulhan 

by  S.  DE  Sanctis 

by  H.  Pii^RON 

.by  F.  A.  Lange 

by  S.  Thalbitzer 


IN   PREPARATION 

The  Laws  of  Feeling         .... 

Conversion 

Thought  and  the  Brain     .... 
The  History  of  Materialism    . 
Emotion  and  Ins.^nity         .... 

Personality by  R.  G.  Gordon,  M. D. 

Repression  in  Savage  Societies  .  .  by  B.  Malinowski,  D.  Sc. 
The  Analysis  of  Matter  .  .  by  Bertrand  Russell,  F.R.S. 
Psychology  and  Ethnology      .        .     by  W.  H.  R.  Rivers,  F.R.S. 

Educational  Psychology by  Charles  Fox 

Statistical  Method  in  Economics  .        by  P.  Sargant  Florence 

The  Primitive  Mind by  P.  Radin,  Ph.D. 

Colour-Harmony  .        . by  James  Wood 

The  Theory  of  Hearing  .  .  .  .  by  H.  Hartridge,  D.Sc. 
Supernormal  Physical  Phenomena         .        .    by  E.  J.  Dingwall 

Theoretical  Biology by  ].  von  UexkOll 

Integrative  Action  of  the  Mind  .  .  .  by  F..  Miller,  M.D. 
Plato's  Theory  of  Knowledge  .  .  .  by  F.  M.  Cornford 
Principles  of  Psychopathology  .  by  Wm.  Brown,  M.D.,  D.Sc. 
Theory  of  Medical  Diagnosis  .    by  F.  G.  Crookshank,  M.D. 

Language  as  Symbol  and  as  Expression       .        .         by  E.  Sapir 


A  History  of  Ethical  Theory. 
The  Philosophy  of  Law     .        .        .         . 
Psychology  of  Musical  Genius 
Modern  Theories  of  Perception 
Scope  and  Value  of  Economic  Theory  . 
Mathematics  for  Philosophers 
The  Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious 
The  Psychology  of  Myths        .        .     by 
The  Psychology  of  Music 
Psychology  of  Primitive  Peoples  . 
Development  of  Chinese  Thought 


by  M.  Ginsberg,  D.Lit. 

.   by  A.   L.  Goodhart 

by  G.  Revesz 

.   by  W.  J.   H.   Sprott 

bv  Barbara  Wootton 

by'c  H.   Hardy,  F.R.S. 

by  E.  von  Hartmann 

G  Elliot  Smith,  F.R.S. 

by  Edward  J.  Dent 

by  B.  Malinowski,  D.Sc. 

by  Liang  Che-Chiao 


The  Mind 
and  its  Place  in  Nature 


By 
C.    D.    BROAD,   M.A.,  Litt.D. 

Fellow  and  Lecturer  in  the  Moral  Sciences,  Trinity  College,  Cambyidge 
Author  of  Peyception,  Physics,  and  Reality,  and  Scientific  Thought 


NEW   YORK 
HARCOURT,   BRACE   &   COMPANY,   INC. 

LONDON:  KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH.  TRUBNER  &  CO.,  LTD. 

1925 


ISO 


Tamer  Lectures  delivered  in  Trinity  College 
Cambridge,  1923 


TRINTED    IN    GREAT   BRITAIN    BY 
THE    EDINBURGH    PRESS,    Q   AND    II   YOUNG   STREET,    EDINBURGH 


To 
J.   A.   CHADWICK 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2010  with  funding  from 

Lyrasis  IVIembers  and  Sloan  Foundation 


http://www.archive.org/details/minditsplaceinnaOObroa 


PREFACE 

My  duties  as  Tarner  Lecturer  and  as  Lecturer  in  the 
Moral  Sciences  at  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  began 
together  and  overlapped  during  the  Michaelmas  term 
of  1923.  It  was  therefore  impossible  for  me  to  devote 
as  much  time  to  the  preparation  of  the  Tarner  Lectures 
as  I  could  have  wished  ;  and  I  was  profoundly  dis- 
satisfied with  them.  So  I  determined  to  spend  the 
whole  of  the  Long  Vacation  of  1924,  and  all  my  spare 
time  in  the  Michaelmas  term  of  that  year,  in  rewriting 
what  I  had  written,  and  in  adding  to  it.  However 
bad  the  book  may  seem  to  the  reader,  I  can  assure 
him  that  the  lectures  were  far  worse  ;  and  however 
long  the  lectures  may  have  seemed  to  the  audience, 
I  can  assure  them  that  the  book  is  far  longer. 

I  had  no  intention  of  inflicting  another  book  on 
the  public  so  soon  after  my  Scientific  Thought;  and 
I  should  certainly  not  have  done  so  had  I  not  been 
asked  to  give  the  Tarner  Lectures.  I  think  I  can 
promise  that  it  will  be  long  before  I  offend  again. 
In  the  meanwhile  I  retire  to  my  well-earned  bath- 
chair,  from  which  I  shall  watch  with  a  fatherly  eye 
the  philosophic  gambols  of  my  younger  friends  as 
they  dance  to  the  highly  syncopated  pipings  of  Herr 
Wittgenstein's  flute. 

I  am,  as  always,  deeply  indebted  to  the  works  of 
Mr  Johnson,  Dr  M'Taggart,  Dr  Moore,  Mr  Bertrand 
Russell,  and  Prof.  Stout.  I  have  to  thank  my  friend, 
Mr  J.  A.  Chadwick  of  Trinity,  for  kindly  reading  the 
proofs.  I  have  also  learned  much  from  him  in  the 
many  conversations  which  we  have  had  together,  and 
I  am  indebted  to  him  especially  for  certain  suggestions 


viii  PREFACE 

which  I  have  tried  to  work  out  in  Chapter  XIII.  Part 
of  Chapter  II.  and  part  of  Chapter  VIII.  are  based  on 
papers  which  have  been  published  in  the  Proceedings 
of  the  Aristotelian  Society.  Part  of  Chapter  III.  is 
based  on  an  article  which  appeared  in  The  Monist ; 
and  part  of  Chapter  XII.  is  based  on  an  article  which 
appeared  in  The  Hibbert  Journal.  I  have  to  thank  the 
editors  of  these  publications  for  kind  permission  to 
make  use  of  the  articles  in  question. 

I  shall  no  doubt  be  blamed  by  certain  scientists,  and, 
I  am  afraid,  by  some  philosophers,  for  having  taken 
serious  account  of  the  alleged  facts  which  are  investi- 
gated by  Psychical  Researchers.  I  am  wholly  impeni- 
tent about  this.  The  scientists  in  question  seem  to  me 
to  confuse  the  Author  of  Nature  with  the  Editor  of 
Nature  ;  or  at  any  rate  to  suppose  that  there  can  be  no 
productions  of  the  former  which  would  not  be  accepted 
for  publication  by  the  latter.  And  I  see  no  reason  to 
believe  this. 

I  am  only  too  well  aware  how  inadequate  the  book 
is  to  its  rather  ambitious  title.  Many  subjects  which 
ought  to  have  been  discussed  are  not  touched  upon  ; 
and  those  subjects  which  are  discussed  are  not  exhausted, 
even  if  the  reader  be  so.  But  it  is  the  best  that  I  can 
do  at  present ;  and  I  hope  that  some  parts  of  it,  at  any 
rate,  may  form  starting-points  for  fruitful  controversies 
among  philosophers,  psychologists,  biologists  and 
psychical  researchers. 

C.    D.    BROAD. 

Trinity  College,  Cambridge, 
January  1925. 


CONTENTS 

PAGE 

Chapter  I.   Introduction  —  General     Remarks     on 

Method — Pluralism  and  Monism  i 


SECTION  A 

Alternative  Theories  of  Life  and  Mind  at  the 
Level  of  Enlightened  Common-sense 

Chapter  II.  Mechanism  and  its  Alternatives    .         .       43 

Chapter  III.  The    Traditional     Problem     of     Body 

AND  Mind    ......       95 

SECTION  B 

The  Mind's  Knowledge  of  Existents 
Chapter  IV.  Sense-Perception  and  Matter        .         .140 
Chapter  V.  Memory       .         .         .         .         .         .         .221 

Chapter  VI.  Introspection  ......     275 

Chapter  VII.  The     Mind's     Knowledge     of     Other 

Minds  .         .         .         .         .         .         -317 

SECTION  C 

The  Unconscious 

Chapter  VIII.  Various  Meanings  of  the  Term  "  Un- 
conscious"   354 

Chapter  IX.  The  Alleged  Evidence  for  Unconscious 

Mental  Events  and  Processes  .     401 

Chapter  X.  The  Nature  of  Traces  and  Dispositions     430 


X  CONTENTS 

SECTION  D 

The  Alleged  Evidence  for  Human  Survival 
of  Bodily  Death 

V.___I,^  Chapter  XI.  Ethical    Arguments    for    Human    Sur- 
vival     487 

Chapter  XII.  Empirical  Arguments  for  Human  Sur- 
vival   .         .         .         .         .         .         .514 

SECTION  E 

The  Unity  of  the  Mind  and  the  Unity  of  Nature 
Chapter  XIIL  The  Unity  of  the  Mind      .         ,         -556 

Chapter  XIV.  The  Status   and   Prospects   of   Mind 

in  Nature  ......     607 

Index        .         .         .         ...         .         .         .         .         .     667 


CHAPTER   I 

"She's    a    rum    'un    is    Natur',"     said     Mr     Squeers.  . 
Natur'  is  more  easier  conceived  than  described." 

(Dickens,  Nicholas  Nickleby) 


CHAPTER   I 

Introduction.    General  Remarks  on  Method. 
Pluralism  and  Monism 

Introduction.  The  aim  of  the  Tarner  Benefaction  is 
to  found  a  course  of  lectures  on  "the  relation  or  lack 
of  relation  between  the  various  sciences."  Dr  White- 
head, who  gave  the  first  course,  dealt  with  applied 
geometry  and  chronometry,  dynamics,  and  the  Theory 
of  Relativity.  He  left  to  his  immediate  successor  a 
delicate  and  invidious  task.  Dr  Whitehead's  Concept  of 
Nature  is  an  epoch-making  book  by  a  man  who  is  a 
complete  master  of  the  technical  part  of  his  subject  and 
an  original  philosophic  thinker  of  the  highest  order. 
Taken  in  conjunction  with  its  predecessor,  The  Principles 
of  Natural  Knowledge,  and  its  sequel.  The  Principle  of 
Relativity,  it  forms  the  most  important  contribution 
which  has  been  made  for  many  years  to  the  philosophy 
of  mathematical  physics.  For  me  to  attempt  to  cover 
the  same  ground  again  in  these  lectures  would  be  to 
expose  myself  to  the  most  unflattering  comparisons. 
Moreover,  I  have  lately  dealt  with  these  matters  to  the 
best  of  my  ability  in  my  Scientific  lliought ;  and,  whilst 
I  am  well  aware  how  much  room  there  is  for  improve- 
ment in  that  book,  my  readers  must  be  as  tired  of  seeing 
my  views  on  this  subject  as  I  am  at  present  of  writing 
them  down.  I  therefore  determined  to  choose  a  problem 
which  should  be  supplementary  to  Dr  Whitehead's 
work  and  should  overlap  it  as  little  as  possible. 

Now  the  limitations  which  the  first  Tarner  Lecturer 
deliberately  imposed  on  himself  at  once  suggest  a 
subject  for  discussion  by  his  immediate  successor.     He 


4  MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE  IN   NATURE 

I  quite  explicitly  confined  himself  to  the  study  of  Nature 
I  as  an  object  of  Mind.  He  refused  to  complicate  his 
■  problem  by  dealing  with  the  stuff  and  structure  of  mind 
as  such,  or  with  its  place  within  the  physical  world 
I  which  it  contemplates  and  acts  upon.  And,  beside  this, 
Dr  Whitehead  confined  himself  to  the  most  general 
\  characteristics  of  the  physical  world,  to  those  which  are 
shared  by  stones,  trees,  and  animal  or  human  bodies. 
He  did  not  consider  in  detail  the  very  great  apparent, 
differences  which  there  are  between  such  objects  as 
these.  In  these  self-imposed  limitations  he  was,  I  think, 
wholly  justified.  The  problem  of  the  external  world  as 
such  is  a  terribly  hard  one,  and  it  has  certainly  been 
made  harder  in  the  past  by  being  mixed  up  to  a 
needless  extent  with  psychological  and  physiological 
questions.  I  found  it  necessary  to  follow  much  the 
same  course,  so  far  as  I  could,  in  my  Scientific  Thought. 
Nevertheless,  it  seems  clear  to  me  (and  I  do  not  suppose 
that  Dr  Whitehead  would  seriously  dissent)  that  all 
sharp  divisions  of  Reality  into  water-tight  compart- 
ments, and  all  confinement  of  our  attention  to  the 
common  characteristics  of  things  which  also  differ  pro- 
foundly, are  practically  necessary  rather  than  theoreti- 
cally satisfactory.  Minds  do  arise,  to  all  appearance, 
A  within  the  physical  world  ;  and  they  do  remain,  to  all 
^^appearance,  tightly  bound  to  certain  special  physical 
objects,  viz.,  living  animal  organisms.  And,  having 
arisen  and  being  connected  with  such  organisms,  they 
do  then  proceed  to  perceive,  think  about,  act  upon,  feel 
emotions  toward,  and  approve  or  disapprove  of  things 
and  events  in  the  physical  world.  Nor  do  they  confine 
their  attention  to  such  objects.  A  mind  may  perform 
all  these  acts  towards  itself  and  towards  other  minds  as 
well  as  towards  physical  things  and  events  ;  and  the 
minds  which  we  know  most  about  are  concerned  almost 
as  much  with  themselves  and  with  other  minds  as  with 
matter.  Nor  does  even  this  exhaust  the  objects  with 
which   minds   are   apparently   concerned   from  time  to 


INTRODUCTION  5 

time.  Some  minds,  and  especially  Dr  Whitehead's, 
seem  to  spend  a  good  deal  of  their  time  in  contem- 
plating, reasoning  about,  and  feeling  approval  or  dis- 
approval towards  objects  which  are,  on  the  face  of 
them,  neither  material  nor  mental,  e.g.^  numbers, 
propositions,  and  the  formal  relations  of  such  objects 
among  themselves.  And  it  is  certainly  arguable  that  a 
mind  could  go  little  if  any  distance  in  cognising  objects 
which  are  physical  or  mental  if  it  did  not  have  the  power 
of  cognising  objects  which  are  neither. 

Now  these  are  vitally  important  facts  which  must 
presumably  shed  some  further  light  on  the  stuff  and 
structure  of  the  world  as  a  whole,  and  even  on  that  part 
of  it  which  consists  of  physical  things  and  processes 
and  is  called  "  Nature."  When  we  treat  any  one  part  of 
Reality  in  isolation  from  the  rest,  or  when  we  con- 
centrate on  the  common  features  of  things  which  also 
differ  profoundly,  it  is  certain  that  our  results  will  not  be 
the  whole  truth  and  probable  that  they  will  not  be  wholly 
true.  The  speculative  philosopher  and  the  scientific 
specialist  are  liable  to  two  opposite  mistakes.  The 
former  tends  to  deliver  frontal  attacks  on  Reality  as  a 
whole,  armed  only  with  a  few  wide  general  principles, 
and  to  neglect  to  isolate  and  master  in  detail  particular 
problems.  The  latter  tends  to  forget  that  he  has 
violently  abstracted  one  part  or  one  aspect  of  Reality  i 
from  the  rest,  and  to  imagine  that  the  success  which  ! 
this  abstraction  has  given  him  within  a  limited  field 
justifies  him  in  taking  the  principles  which  hold  therein  ; 
as  the  whole  truth  about  the  whole  world.  The  one 
cannot  see  the  trees  for  the  wood,  and  the  other  cannot 
see  the  wood  for  the  trees.  The  result  of  both  kinds  of 
mistake  is  the  same,  viz.,  to  produce  philosophical 
theories  which  may  be  self-consistent  but  which  must  be 
described  as  "  silly  ".  By  a  *'  silly  "  theory  I  mean  one  \ 
which  may  be  held  at  theTIme'^wherrone  is  talking  or 
writing  professionally,  but  which  only  an  inmate  of  a 
lunatic  asylum  would  think  of  carrying  into  daily  life. 


r 


4 


6  MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE  IN   NATURE 

I  should  count  Behavipurism,  taken  quite  strictly,  and 
certain  forms  of  Idealism  as  "silly"  in  this  sense.  No 
one  in  his  senses  can  in  practice  regard  himself  or  his 
friends  or  enemies  simply  as  ingenious  machines  pro- 
duced by  other  machines,  or  can  regard  his  arm-chair  or 
his  poker  as  being  literally  societies  of  spirits  or  thoughts 
in  the  mind  of  God.  It  must  not  be  supposed  that  the 
men  who  maintain  these  theories  and  believe  that  they 
believe  them  are  "silly"  people.  Only  very  acute  and 
learned  men  could  have  thought  of  anything  so  odd  or 
defended  anything  so  preposterous  against  the  continual 
protests  of  common-sense. 

General  Remarks  on  Method.  In  view  of  these 
dangers  it  seems  to  me  that  the  best  plan  for  the 
philosopher  is  somewhat  as  follows.  He  must  start  by 
considering  separately  those  departments  of  Reality 
which  seem  prima  facie  to  be  susceptible  of  fairly 
elaborate  treatment  by  themselves  without  detailed 
knowledge  of  their  relations  to  each  other.  He  must 
then  analyse  and  reflect  upon  each  of  these  in  turn  as 
carefully  and  exhaustively  as  he  can  until  he  finds 
himself  nearing  a  point  at  which  no  further  progress 
can  be  made  in  understanding  one  without  a  detailed 
study,  of  its  relations  to  the  others.  In  the  meanwhile 
he  will  always  bear  in  mind  that  the  departments  which 
he  is  treating  separately  are  in  fact  connected  with  each 
other,  and  that  any  results  which  he  has  reached  about 
one  of  them  will  probably  need  some  correction  and 
modification  when  he  takes  into  account  those  relations 
with  the  rest  which  he  has  hitherto  been  ignoring. 
Again,  within  each  department  he  will  begin  by  con- 
sidering those  most  abstract  and  pervasive  features 
which  are  common  to  all  things  that  fall  within  it  and 
so  exhibit  its  general  structure  and  ground-plan.  When 
he  has  done  this  he  will  pass  on  to  consider  the  most 
striking  and  apparently  fundamental  differences  between 
different  objects  which   fall   into  the  same  department. 


INTRODUCTION  7 

Here  again  he  will  do  well  to  remember  that  the  study 
of  the  detailed  differences  may  force  him  to  modify  his 
original  conclusions  about  the  common  structure  of  the 
department  in  question.     Thus  the  general  procedure  is  / 
(i)   gradually   to  work   forward  from   the  parts  to  the^ 
whole  and  from  the  common  features  of  each  part  to  the 
characteristic   differences   within  it ;    and    (2)    at    every 
stage  to  look  back  on  one's  earlier  results  and  see  how 
far  and  in  what  direction  they  need  to  be  modified  in  the\ 
light  of  the  later  ones.  ' 

Now  it  might  be  objected  at  this  stage  that  the 
suggested  method  prejudges  the  question  of  Pluralism 
or  Monism.  I  do  not  think  that  it  does.  The  plain 
fact  is  that  if  the  world  be  too  much  or  too  little  of  a 
unity  there  is  not  the  least  chance  of  our  ever  being  able 
to  understand  it.  If  it  were  as  pluralistic  as  Leibniz 
thought  or  as  monistic  as  Mr  Bradley  seems  to  have 
believed,  I  do  not  see  how  knowledge  would  be  possible. 
What  we  find  is  that  Reality  as  a  whole  does  seem  to 
show  a  mixture  of  unity  and  relative  isolation  ;  and  it 
is  reasonable  to  begin  with  the  departments  which  seem 
relatively  independent  and  work  at  them  in  detail  before 
considering  the  connexions  which  they  undoubtedly 
also  have  with  each  other.  So  long  as  we  know  what 
we  are  doing,  and  clearly  recognise  that  what  seems  at 
first  sight  closely  connected  may  prove  to  be  separable 
and  that  what  seems  at  first  sight  independent  may 
prove  to  be  intimately  connected,  we  shall  not  go  far 
wrong. 

I  have  said  that  at  each  stage  of  our  work  we  must 
look  back  to  see  whether  the  results  of  the  earlier  stages 
need  correction  or  modification.  I  want  now  to  explain 
this  possibility  a  little  further.  In  the  first  place,  the 
results  of  our  earlier  and  more  abstract  investigations 
may  be  seen  to  be  positively  wrong  in  some  respects 
when  we  take  into  account  the  more  special  and  concrete 
aspects  of  Reality  which  we  had  formerly  been  ignoring. 
But  there  is  a  second  alternative  which  may  arise  if  we 


8  MIND  AND   ITS   PLACE  IN   NATURE 

have  been  lucky  in  our  original  division  of  Reality  into 
separate  departments  and  cautious  in  the  statement  of 
our  conclusions  about  these  departments.  We  may 
find,  in  this  case,  that  we  have  not  positively  to  correct 
anything  that  we  have  already  asserted,  but  have  only  to 
choose  between  alternatives  which  we  have  already  recog- 
nised as  possible.  So  long  as  we  confine  ourselves  to 
each  department  in  isolation  from  the  rest,  and  so  long 
as  we  investigate  only  the  general  ground-plan  of  each 
department,  we  may  well  find  that  a  number  of  alterna- 
tive theories  are  open  to  us  and  that  we  have  no  means 
of  deciding  between  them.  As  we  go  on  to  consider 
the  relations  of  one  department  to  the  others  and  the 
detailed  differences  within  each  department,  we  may 
find  that  this  new  knowledge  favours  certain  of  these 
alternatives  and  excludes  others.  In  that  event  we 
shall  not  be  correcting  past  errors,  but  merely  replacing 
true  but  less  determinate  theories  by  true  and  more 
determinate  theories.  This  is  of  course  the  ideal  path 
of  philosophic  progress  ;  but  we  cannot  assume  that  we 
shall  strike  it.  Our  chance  of  doing  so  depends  partly 
on  initial  luck  and  insight  in  our  division  of  the  subject- 
matter,  and  partly  on  the  power  of  recognising  a  number 
of  alternatives  and  not  thinking  at  any  stage  that  our 
knowledge  is  more  determinate  than  it  really  is. 

I  will  now  illustrate  my  meaning  with  an  example. 
In  Dr  Whitehead's  Lectures  and  in  my  Scientific  Thought 
we  are  concerned  with  matter  only  as  known  to  the 
physicist,  and  with  mind  only  as  something  which 
perceives  and  thinks  about  matter.  The  main  problem 
at  that  level  is  to  state  clearly  what  is  meant  by 
"  sensible  appearance  ",  and  to  reconcile  what  we  know 
about  the  sensible  appearances  and  their  qualities  and 
mutual  relations  with  what  physics  asserts  about  the 
matter  which  appears  to  us  in  this  way.  Now  it  seems 
to  me  that,  so  long  as  we  confine  ourselves  to  these 
data,  many  alternative  theories  about  the  nature  of 
matter  and  of  mind  are  possible.    But,  in  the  first  place. 


INTRODUCTION  9 

we  have  to  remember  that  matter  seems  to  have  differ- 
ences of  kind  within  it  beside  the  common  features 
which  are  studied  by  the  mathematical  physicist.  E.g.^ 
there  seem  to  be  a  number  of  different  chemical 
elements  ;  there  seems  to  be  a  fundamental  difference 
between  living  organisms  and  inorganic  matter  ;  and 
so  on.  Again,  within  the  regioji_of  mind  there  are 
apparently  very  profound  differences.  Oysters,  perhaps, 
can  only  feel  ;  cats,  perhaps,  can  only  feel  and  per- 
ceive ;  men  can  feel,  perceive  and  reason  ;  and  so  on. 
Secondly,  we  have  to  notice  that  there  is  in  fact  a  most 
intimate  relation  between  minds  and  living  bodies. 
The  minds  that  we  know  about  are  not  disembodied 
spirits  ;  they  seem  to  be  tied  to  organisms,  to  grow  and 
decay  with  these,  and  to  cease  when  these  die.  More- 
ov^er,  in  our  part  of  the  world  at  any  rate,  there  seems 
to  have  been  a  gradual  historic  development  of  mind 
going  hand  in  hand  with  a  growth  in  the  complexity 
of  living  matter.  Any  theory  of  Reality  which  can 
claim  to  be  even  approximately  adequate  must  take 
such  apparent  facts  into  account,  and  must  contain  a 
doctrine  of  matter  and  mind  which  shall  be  consistent 
with  them.  Now  it  may  well  be  that,  of  the  various 
theories  which  were  possible  when  we  considered  merely 
the  common  properties  of  mind  and  of  matter  and  when 
we  looked  on  mind  merely  as  a  contemplator  of  matter, 
some  will  be  ruled  out  when  we  take  account  of  the 
different  sorts  of  mind  and  of  matter  and  the  apparent 
relation  of  dependence  between  these  two  departments 
of  Reality.  And  it  may  be  that  some  of  the  remaining 
alternatives  will  be  better  adapted  than  others  to  this 
new  and  more  concrete  situation. 

I  propose  therefore  to  consider  in  these  lectures  the 
Mind  and  its  Place  in  Nature.  As  minds  are  specially 
closely  connected  with  those  peculiar  bodies  called 
"animal  organisms"  I  shall  also  have  to  consider  the 
apparent  differences  between  living  and  non-living 
matter.     This  line  of  inquiry  seems  to  fall  quite  natur- 


10        MIND  AND   ITS   PLACE  IN  NATURE 

ally  into  the  scheme  of  the  Tarner  Benefaction  ;  for  it 
^  amounts  to  considering  the  "  relation  or  want  of  re- 
lation "  between  physics,  physiology,  and  psychology. 
I  shall  in  certain  places  assume  that  the  reader  is 
acquainted  with  my  Scientific  Thought ;  but  I  shall  take 
no  special  pains  to  make  the  outcome  of  this  inquiry 
square  with  the  outcome  of  that.  If  they  should  turn 
out  to  be  mutually  consistent,  so  much  the  better.  But 
I  shall  follow  my  argument  whithersoever  it  may  lead  ; 
and,  if  fragments  of  my  works  should  survive  the  down- 
fall which  Western  civilisation  is  so  busily  preparing 
for  itself,  it  will  perhaps  be  the  pleasing  task  of  the 
Negro  commentators  of  the  future  universities  of  central 
Africa  to  excogitate  a  consistent  system  of  thought  from 
my  scattered  remains. 

I  propose  to  attack  the  problem  in  the  following 
order.  (^)  I  shall  begin  by  taking  quite  traditional 
and  commonplace  views  about  matter  and  mind,  and 
shall  discuss  at  that  level  the  old  questions  of  Mechan- 
ism and  Vitalism  and  of  the  Relation  of  Mind  and 
Body.  {E)  Next  I  shall  consider  critically  the  sources 
of  our  alleged  knowledge  of  Matter,  of  our  own  Minds, 
and  of  other  Minds.  In  this  section  I  shall  also  discuss 
Memory,  which  is  involved  in  all  our  knowledge. 
This  should  enable  us  to  decide  how  much  we  are 
probably  justified  in  asserting  about  the  nature  of 
Matter  and  of  Mind,  taken  in  isolation  from  each  other. 
(Q  It  will  then  be  profitable  to  say  something  about 
what  seem  to  be  common  features  of  living  organisms 
and  minds,  or  to  be  on  the  borderline  between  merely 
vital  and  obviously  mental  phenomena.  I  allude  here 
to  Mnemic  Phenomena  and  the  "Unconscious".  At 
the  end  of  this  section  we  shall  see  that  there  are  certain 
alternative  possibilities  between  which  we  cannot  decide 
unless  we  know  whether  minds  ever  survive  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  organisms  which  they  have  animated.  There- 
fore {D)  I  then  proceed  to  discuss  the  arguments  for  and 
against  human  survival  of  bodily  death.     Finally  {E)  1 


INTRODUCTION  ii 

shall  consider   the  internal  unity  of  the  mind,  and  its 
position  and  probable  prospects  in  Nature. 

Dangers  of  the  Genetic  Method.  In  dealing  with  living 
organisms  and  with  minds  there  is  a  complication  which 
does  not  arise  to  the  same  extent  in  considering  non- 
living matter.  This  is  the  fact  of  evolution.  Each 
mind  and  each  organism  that  we  know  of  has  developed 
gradually  from  very  simple  beginnings.  And,  again, 
there  is  some  reason  to  think  that  the  most  complex 
minds  and  organisms  which  have  appeared  up  to  a 
given  date  are  less  and  less  complex  as  that  date  is 
pushed  further  back  in  the  earth's  history,  and  that  the 
more  complex  organisms  of  later  date  are  the  descendants 
of  less  complex  organisms  of  earlier  date.  However 
this  may  be,  it  is  certain  that  at  the  present  time  there 
are  minds  and  organisms  of  very  various  degrees  of 
complexity,  ranging  from  amoebas  through  cats  and 
dogs  to  men.  Now,  in  trying  to  analyse  and  understand 
any  complex  state  of  affairs  which  has  gradually  grown 
up  from  simpler  beginnings,  there  are  two  alternative 
orders  of  treatment.  One  is  to  start  by  considering 
the  most  perfect  and  highly  developed  instances  of  the 
phenomenon  in  question.  Another  is  to  treat  the 
problem  genetically,  devoting  great  attention  to  its 
earliest,  simplest,  and  crudest  forms.  The  latter  is  of 
course  the  more  popular  order  at  the  present  time.  My 
own  view  is  that  neither  line  of  approach  can  be  dis- 
pensed with,  but  that  the  former  is  the  more  funda- 
mental of  the  two.  In  the  first  place,  if  we  want  to. 
study  the  nature  and  structure  of  some  important  item 
in  Reality  it  is  surely  more  sensible  to  begin  by  studying 
it  in  its  most  characteristic  and  developed  forms  than 
in  those  elementary  beginnings  in  which  it  is  barely 
distinguishable  from  other  factors  in  Reality.  Even 
if  one's  main  interest  be  in  the  development  of  some- 
thing it  is  at  least  as  important  to  know  what  it  has 
developed  into  as  what  it  has  developed  out  of. 
Secondly,    if   we    start    from    the    other    end,    we    are 


12         MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

liable  to  fall  into  two  errors.  (a)  We  are  extremely 
likely  to  underestimate  the  complexity  and  ignore  the 
peculiarities  of  the  final  stage,  because  we  cannot  see 
how  they  could  have  developed  out  of  the  earlier  and 
simpler  stages.  It  certainly  seems  to  me  that  evolu- 
tionary accounts  of  Mind  very  often  fail  altogether  to 
take  due  account  of  the  most  characteristic  features  of 
the  most  highly  developed  minds.  Now  it  is  much 
more  disastrous  to  slur  over  differences  which  are 
really  irreducible  than  to  recognise  differences  and 
wrongly  think  them  to  be  irreducible.  If  we  make  the 
latter  error  we  still  have  in  hand  all  the  data  for  the 
solution  of  our  problem,  and  we  or  others  will  solve  it 
when  we  have  pushed  our  analysis  a  little  further.  But, 
if  we  make  the  former  mistake,  our  data  are  incomplete 
and  the  problem  cannot  possibly  be  solved  until  we 
have  recognised  this  fact.  My  first  objection  then  to 
starting  from  the  lower  end  and  working  to  the  higher 
is  that  this  way  of  approach  tends  to  prevent  one 
from  viewing  the  latter  with  an  unprejudiced  eye,  and 
to  make  one  commit  the  greatest  of  all  mistakes  in 
philosophy,  that  of  over-simplifying  the  facts  to  be 
explained. 

(d)  A  second  danger  is  the  following.  When  I  study 
the  evolution  of  anything,  be  it  an  animal  or  an  institu- 
tion or  a  mental  process,  I  am  simply  learning  about 
the  history  of  it  and  its  "  ancestors  "  in  a  wide  sense  of 
that  word.  I  learn  that  A  developed  into  B,  B  into  C, 
and  C  into  the  thing  in  question.  Now  we  are  all 
extremely  liable  to  confuse  a  history  of  the  becoming  of 
a  thing  with  an  analysis  of  the  thing  as  it  has  become. 
Because  C  arose  out  of  B,  and  B  out  of  A,  people  are 
inclined  to  think  that  C  is  7iothing  but  A  in  a  disguised 
form.  Thus,  suppose  we  could  show  that  action  from  a 
sense  of  duty  developed  out  of  action  from  fear  of  public 
opinion,  that  this  developed  out  of  action  from  fear  of 
the  ghosts  of  dead  ancestors,  and  that  this  developed 
out  of  action   from   fear  of  living  chiefs.     All  that  we 


INTRODUCTION  13 

should  really  have  done  would  be  to  give  a  history  of 
the  process  of  becoming  which  ended  in  action  from  a 
sense  of  duty.  But  we  should  be  very  liable  to  think 
that  we  had  analysed  the  sense  of  duty  as  it  now  exists, 
and  proved  that  it  is  just  a  disguised  form  of  fear  of 
punishment  by  tribal  chiefs.  This  would  be  simply  a 
gross  mistake.  To  analyse  anything  you  must  examine 
and  reflect  upon  it ;  and  the  most  elaborate  account  of 
what  preceded  it  in  the  course  of  history  is  no  substitute 
^for  this.  At  the  best  a  study  of  the  history  of  a  thing 
may  make  you  look  for  factors  in  the  thing  which  you 
might  otherwise  have  missed.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
as  I  have  already  pointed  out,  it  is  just  as  likely  to 
make  you  turn  a  blind  eye  to  factors  in  it  which  were 
not  present  in  the  earlier  stages.  And,  in  any  case, 
you  have  no  right  whatever  to  say  that  the  end  is  just 
the  beginning  in  disguise  if,  on  inspecting  the  end  as 
carefully  and  fairly  as  you  can,  you  do  not  detect  the 
characteristics  of  the  beginning  in  it  and  do  detect 
characteristics  which  were  not  present  in  the  beginning. 
There  is  a  certain  kind  of  pretentious  futility  which  is 
closely  connected  with  this  error  and  is  highly  typical 
of  some  of  the  sillier  psycho-analysts.  Suppose  we  are 
told  that  a  taste  for  music  is  due  to  suppressed  sexual 
desire  or  to  Dr  Ernest  Jones's  family  pet,  "infantile  anal- 
erotic  sensations  ".  What  is  the  precise  cash-value  of 
such  a  statement?  It  cannot  mean  that  this  is  a  sufficient 
condition  of  a  taste  for  music,  since  the  psycho-analyst 
would  be  the  first  to  assure  us  that  suppressed  sexual 
desire  can  exist  in  people  who  show  no  taste  for  music 
but  an  excessive  fondness  for  pet  animals.  Thus  other 
factors  must  be  needed  to  account  for  the  taste  for  music 
in  one  person  and  the  mania  for  keeping  cats  in  the 
other.  And  these  other  factors  will  plainly  be  the  more 
characteristic  cause-factors,  since  the  suppressed  sexual 
desire  is  supposed  to  be  the  common  condition  of  botJi^ 
whilst  the  other  factors  determine  which  of  the  tzvo  shall 
result.     So  the  most  that  can   be  said  is  that  the  sup- 


i 


14         MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

pressed  sexual  desire  is  a  necessary  condition  of  a  taste 
for  music.  Now  it  is  obvious  that  the  more  different 
states  the  psycho-analyst  ascribes  to  suppressed  sexual 
desire  the  more  trivial  his  statement  becomes  about  any 
one  of  them.  If  this  desire  be  a  necessary  condition  of 
fifty  different  tastes,  accomplishments,  diseases,  and 
crotchets,  it  is  of  extremely  little  interest  to  say  of  any 
one  of  them  that  it  is  ''due  to  "  suppressed  sexual  desire. 
It  is  about  as  useful  as  to  say  that  committing  a  murder 
is  ''due  to  "  being  born.  This  is  true,  since  you  could 
not  commit  a  murder  without  having  been  born.  But 
it  is  not  very  interesting  or  important,  since  it  is  equally 
true  that  being  born  is  a  necessary  condition  of  saving 
another  man's  life  at  the  risk  of  your  own. 

Thus,  one  characteristic  mistake  of  the  incautious 
user  of  the  genetic  method  is  to  give  a  rather  trivial 
necessary  condition  of  some  highly  developed  state  as 
if  it  were  the  sufficient  condition.  He  then  proceeds  to 
ignore  the  other  conditions,  which  are  equally  necessary 
and  much  more  characteristic.  The  next  move  is  to 
confuse  a  list  of  the  historical  conditions  out  of  which  a 
thing  arose  with  an  analysis  of  the  thing  itself.  And 
so,  from  the  perfectly  trivial,  even  if  true,  proposition 
that  suppressed  sexual  desire  is  a  necessary  condition  of 
a  taste  for  music,  he  jumps  by  these  two  steps  to  the 
interesting  but  extremely  doubtful  assertion  that  a  taste 
for  music  is  just  a  disguised  form  of  sexual  desire.  For 
these  reasons  I  think  I  am  justified  in  the  order  which 
I  propose  to  adopt,  i.e.,  in  discussing  the  apparent 
features  of  highly  developed  minds  at  an  early  stage, 
and  not  considering  the  borderline  of  Instinct  and  the 
Unconscious  until  later.  And  perhaps  it  is  relevant  to 
add  that  I  fancy  I  can  imagine  what  it  feels  like  to  be  a 
highly  developed  mind  much  better  than  I  can  imagine 
what  it  feels  like  to  be  a  flea  or  an  amoeba.  But,  of 
course,  that  may  just  be  my  conceit. 

Value  of  the  Abnormal.      Before  leaving  this  subject  I 
must  make   one  further  remark  about  method,   which 


INTRODUCTION  15 

may  seem  to  be  inconsistent  with  what  I  have  just  been 
saying  but  is  not,  I  think,  really  so.  I  hold  that  it  is  t 
of  the  utmost  value  for  the  philosopher  to  study  the 
abnormal  in  all  subjects.  £■£',  it  is  such  facts  as 
dreams,  hallucination,  mirror-images,  etc.,  which 
prevent  (or  should  prevent)  us  from  taking  too  simple- 
minded  a  view  of  the  external  world  and  our  perception 
of  it.  If  we  start  with  a  theory  made  to  fit  the  normal 
cases  alone,  we  shall  probably  never  be  able  to  square 
the  abnormal  cases  with  it.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we 
take  the  abnormal  cases  into  account  from  the  very  first, 
we  may  be  able  to  devise  a  general  theory  which  covers 
both  them  and  the  normal  cases.  The  normal  cases 
may  then  be  seen  to  arise  from  the  fulfilment  of  certain 
special  conditions  which  do  zn  fact  generally  hold,  but 
which  do  not  hold  of  necessity  and  are  not  in  fact  fulfilled 
in  the  abnormal  cases.  A  simple  example  from  mathe- 
matics will  make  this  clear.  If  we  had  started  by  con- 
fining our  attention  to  circles,  and  had  then  insisted  on 
regarding  all  other  conic-sections  as  circles  which  had 
more  or  less  "  gone  to  the  bad  ",  it  seems  unlikely  that 
we  should  ever  have  had  a  very  satisfactory  theory  of 
conic-sections.  The  alternative  and  much  better  plan 
is  to  start  with  the  general  equation  of  a  conic-section, 
and  to  see  that  circles,  ellipses,  hyperbolas,  etc.,  are 
special  cases  which  arise  through  special  values  of,  or 
special  relations  between,  the  co-efficients  in  this  general 
equation. 

Now  this  general  principle  is  just  as  important  in 
considering  minds  as  it  is  in  considering  the  external 
world  and  our  perception  of  it.  This  fact  may  be 
illustrated  in  three  ways,  (i)  If  we  study  sane  human 
beings  in  their  waking  moments  we  find  a  very  high 
degree  of  unity  in  their  minds.  And,  if  we  confine 
ourselves  to  them,  we  shall  be  tempted  to  think  that 
psychical  events  can  exist  only  as  states  of  selves,  and 
that  each  human  body  can  have  only  one  self  connected 
with  it.     Now  these  conclusions  may  be  true  ;  but  they 


H 


r^ 


i6         MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE  IN  NATURE 

begin  to  look  much  less  plausible  when  we  consider 
abnormal  phenomena,  such  as  automatic  writing, 
multiple  personality,  etc.  Moreover,  a  study  of  such 
phenomena  may  lead  us  to  scrutinise  more  carefully  the 
normal  human  mind,  and  we  may  then  find  that  even 
the  mind  of  a  healthy  young  Scotsman  "on  the  make" 
is  a  good  deal  less  unified  than  it  seemed  to  be.  In 
the  end  we  may  decide  that  the  facts  as  a  whole  are  best 
explained  by  supposing  that  psychical  events  need  not 
be  states  of  selves  and  that  one  human  body  need  not  be 
connected  with  only  one  self.  The  considerable  degree 
of  mental  unity  which  we  find  as  a  rule,  and  the  normal 
assignment  of  one  self  to  one  body,  may  then  be  re- 
garded as  due  to  the  fulfilment  of  certain  special 
conditions  which  generally  hold  but  need  not  and  some- 
times do  not.  It  will  still  be  a  most  important  fact 
that  these  conditions  tend  to  be  approximately  fulfilled 
in  the  vast  majority  of  cases,  so  that  there  will  be  no 
excuse  for  neglecting  the  study  of  normal  minds.  But 
the  study  of  the  abnormal  will  have  had  two  excellent 
effects.  It  will  have  presented  alternative  hypotheses 
to  us  which  we  should  otherwise  not  have  contemplated 
as  possible,  and  it  will  have  made  us  notice  certain  facts 
about  the  normal  mind  which  we  should  otherwise  not 
have  looked  for.  (2)  Under  normal  circumstances  one 
mind  seems  to  be  incapable  of  knowing  what  is  going 
on  in  another  except  by  listening  to  the  speech  or 
watching  the  gestures  of  the  body  with  which  this  other 
mind  is  connected.  Most  theories  of  mind  assume  that 
this  very  roundabout  method  is  the  only  possible  way  in 
which  one  mind  can  communicate  with  another.  Now 
it  seems  to  me  that  the  existence  of  telepathy  between 
specially  sensitive  subjects  and  between  ordinary  minds 
under  special  conditions  has  been  firmly  established  by 
the  work  of  the  S.P.R.,  and  I  consider  that  I  have  met 
with  undoubted  instances  of  it  in  sittings  which  I  have 
had  with  the  medium  Mrs  Osborne  Leonard.  The 
establishment  of  such  facts  opens  up  many  possibilities 


INTRODUCTION  17 

which  would  otherwise  have  had  to  be  rejected,  and  it 
suggests  that  even  in  normal  human  intercourse  a  tele- 
pathic factor  may  play  some  part.  (3)  Lastly,  there  are 
the  more  debatable  cases  in  which  it  looks  as  if  a  human 
mind  were  communicating  after  the  death  of  its  body. 
At  present  it  would  be  very  unwise  to  philosophise 
about  the  mind  with  such  cases  mainly  in  view.  But  it 
seems  to  me  to  be  almost  equally  rash  to  put  forward  a 
theory  of  mind  and  its  relation  to  body  which  totally 
ignores  these  phenomena  and  assumes  that  they  can  all 
be  explained  away. 

Now  I  do  not  think  that  there  is  any  inconsistency 
between  my  present  contention  that  philosophy  must 
attend  most  carefully  to  the  abnormal  and  my  former 
assertion  that  it  must  start  by  considering  the  most 
highly  developed,  and  therefore  the  most  characteristic, 
minds  and  mental  processes.  In  the  first  place,  many 
of  the  phenomena  dealt  with  by  Psychical  Research 
may  be  fairly  regarded  as  supernormal,  i.e.,  as  instances 
in  which  a  mind  shows  powers  which  no  mind  was 
suspected  of  having.  And,  even  in  the  merely  patho- 
logical abnormalities  which  the  psycho-analyst  and  the 
student  of  multiple  personality  treat,  we  are  concerned 
with  derangements  which  can  happen  only  to  a  mind 
of  a  fairly  high  order.  We  should  not  expect  to  find 
multiple  personality  in  a  guinea-pig  or  suppressed  com- 
plexes in  an  amoeba ;  a  mind  must  be  fairly  highly 
developed  before  it  can  go  wrong  in  an  interesting  and 
instructive  way. 

Pluralism  and  Monism.  I  have  now  said  all  that 
I  want  to  say  about  method.  In  doing  so,  however, 
I  have  introduced  the  notion  of  Reality  falling  into 
relatively  isolated,  though  connected,  "departments". 
I  have  also  talked  of  apparently  fundamental  differ- 
ences of  kind  among  things  which  belong  to  the  same 
department.  To  explain  these  notions  further  it  will 
be    necessary   to   say   something  about  the  traditional 

B 


,^^' 


i8         MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

antithesis  of  "Pluralism"  and  "Monism".  These 
words  are  terribly  ambiguous,  and  I  think  it  will  be 
both  useful  and  relevant  to  clear  up  their  ambiguities 
at  this  stage.  In  doing  so  I  shall  be  throwing  some 
light  on  the  principles  which  I  have  been  asserting, 
shall  sketch  out  the  possible  alternatives  which  have  to 
be  considered  in  detail  in  later  chapters,  and  shall  show 
something  of  the  conditions  on  which  the  "connexion 
or  lack  of  connexion  of  the  various  sciences  "  depends. 

Existents  and  Abstracta.  The  first  great  division 
within  Reality  as  a  whole  which  strikes  one  is  the 
distinction  between  the  part  which  exists  and  the  part 
which  is  real  but  not  existent.  The  contents  of  the  latter 
I  call  "Abstracta".  The  names  "Pluralism"  and 
"Monism"  are  usually  confined  to  different  views 
about  the  nature  of  the  Existent ;  but  a  prior  question 
arises,  for  some  philosophers  have  held  that  the 
difference  between  Abstracta  and  Existents  is  not 
ultimate,  since  in  their  view  there  are  no  Abstracta.  A 
Nominalist,  who  holds  that  there  are  no  universals  but 
only  words  used  in  a  certain  way,  would  be  a  Monist, 
in  a  sense  in  which  a  Realist,  who  holds  that  there  are 
real  universals  whether  ante  rem  or  only  in  re,  would 
not.  However,  we  have  the  words  "Realist",  in  the 
mediaeval  sense,  and  "Anti-Realist"  (covering  Nomin- 
alists and  Conceptualists)  to  mark  this  distinction  ; 
and  we  can  therefore  keep  the  words  "Monist"  and 
"Pluralist"  for  differences  of  opinion  about  the  Ex- 
istent. Nevertheless,  I  will  briefly  explain  what  I  under- 
stand by  the  distinction,  which  seems  to  me  to  be  a 
real  and  irreducible  one. 

I  do  not  think  that  "  Existence"  can  be  defined,  but 
I  think  that  it  can  be  unambiguously  described,  ia) 
Whatever  exists  can  occur  in  a  proposition  only  as  a 
logical  subject.  Of  course  the  name  of  an  existent  may 
appear  in  a  setitence  as  a  grammatical  object  and  in  other 
positions  too.  E.g.,  in  the  sentence  "Smith  dislikes 
Jones"   the    only    grammatical    subject    is    the   word 


INTRODUCTION  19* 

"Smith",  and    the  word   "Jones"  counts  as  a  gram- 
matical object.     Nevertheless,  the  men  Smith  and  Jones  / 
are  both  logical  subjects  of  the  proposition  for  which     y-'""^    j 
this  sentence  stands.     This  property,  however,  cannot                   J  •> 
safely  be  taken  by  itself  to  mark  out  existents.     If  there         '-"  ''0 
be  such  entities  as  propositions  they  are  certainly  Ab- 
stracta  and  not  Existents  ;  yet  it  would  seem  that  the 
only  part  which  one  proposition  can    play  in  another 
proposition    is   that   of   logical   subject.      E.g-,    if    the 
sentence  "Edwin  will  marry  Angelina"  stands   for  a 
single  complex  entity,  a  proposition,  then  it  can  only 
appear  in  such  other  propositions  as  :     It  is  probable 
that  Edwin  will  marry  Angelina,  or  :    Smith    believes 
that  Edwin  will  marry  Angelina.     And  in  these  second- 
ary propositions  it  is  plain  that  the  original  proposition 
about    Edwin    and    Angelina   is    present   as   a   logical 
subject.       (d)   A   second   characteristic   which    belongs 
to   all^Existents  and:  to  no  Abstracta  is  that   they  are   ^  .^*,.^\  / 
either  literally   and    directly    in    time ;    cr,    if  time    be 
unreal,  have  those  characteristics,  whatever  they  may 
be,  which  make   them  appear   to  human  minds   to  be 
directly  and  literally  in  time.     I  put  the  matter  in  this 
way  because,  although    I    see  no  reason   to  doubt  the 
reality  of  time,  there  are  philosophers  who  deny  it  and 
yet  believe  that  there  are  existents.     If  then  I  had  said 
that  all  existents   are   literally  and   directly  in   time    I 
should  have  prejudged  this  question.     But  I  think  that 
even  those  philosophers  who  deny  the  reality  of  time 
would  accept  the  second  part  of  the  above  alternative. 

I  do  not  think  that  Abstracta  can  even  be  unambigu- 
ously described  except  by  saying  that  they  are  real  but 
non-existent.  But  they  can  be  indicated  enumeratively. 
This  class  of  realities  includes  qualities,  relations, 
numbers,  and  also  propositions  and  classes  if  there  be 
such  entities.  Abstracta  of  course  do  not  exist,  and 
neither  are  nor  appear  to' be~TiterallyaTTd~tKrectly  in 
time.  But  some  at  least  oTtEem  are  very  closeljTcon- 
nected   with  existents,   and  thereby  become   indirectly 


! 


t 


20         MIND  AND   ITS   PLACE  IN  NATURE 

connected  with  time.     This  happens   in  two  different 

ways,     {a)  Certain  qualities  characterise  certain  things 

or  events  from  time  to  time      Again,  certain  relations 

relate  now  one  set  of  existents  and  now  another.     And 

many  propositions  are  about  things  and  events  which 

exist  in  time,     {b)  Any  Abstractum  may  from  time  to 

time   become   the   object   of  someone's  thought.     The 

proposition  that  Charles  I  was  beheaded  is  not  in  time 

.    ^  -     directly  and  literally,  as  Charles  I  and  the  axe  are  ;  but 

'^^'^  it  is  connected  indirectly  with  time,  both  because  it  is 

about  temporal  things  and  events  and  because  I  began 

to  think  of  it  a  moment  ago  and  shall  cease  to  think 

of  it  a  few  minutes  hence.     All  that  can  happen  to  a 

quality  is  that   it  sometimes   characterises   one,  some- 

/^'  ^        times  another,  and  sometimes  perhaps  no  existent ;  and 

that  it  is  sometimes  thought  of  by  me,  sometimes  by 

you,  and  sometimes  perhaps  by  no  one.     The  realm  of 

i  Abstracta,    as   such,    forms   the   inexhaustible   subject- 

\    matter  of  the  a  priori  sciences  of  Pure  Logic  and  Pure 

Mathematics. 

On  this  matter,  which  it  would  be  irrelevant  to  pursue 
further  here,  I  am  certainly  a  Realist  to  the  extent  of 
accepting  universalia  in  re  as  absolutely  irreducible 
factors  in  Reality.  And  I  am  inclined  to  be  a  Realist 
in  the  stronger  sense  of  believing  that  we  cannot  do 
without  universalia  ante  rem,  i.e.,  simple  and  unanalys- 
able universals  which  will  never  have  instances.  But 
I  think  it  possible  that  we  may  be  able  to  devise  a 
means  of  dispensing  with  such  universals,  though  I  do 
not  at  present  see  how  to  do  the  trick. 

Pluralism  and  Monism  about  the  Existent. — I  will  first 
illustrate  the  ambiguities  of  these  terms  by  taking 
examples,  (i)  Leibniz  is  commonly  counted  as  a  typical 
pluralist.  And  in  one  sense  he  certainly  was.  Descartes 
is  commonly  regarded  as  a  typical  dualist.  But,  in  the 
sense  in  which  Descartes  is  a  dualist,  Leibniz  is  a 
monist.  Leibniz  held  that  all  that  appears  as  matter  is 
really    mind,    whilst    Descartes    held    that    mind    and 


j  M- 


INTRODUCTION  21 

matter  are  equally  real  and  quite  irreducible  to  each 
other.  We  therefore  say  that  Leibniz  was  a  monist 
in  the  sense  in  which  Descartes  was  a  dualist.  But 
Leibniz  was  equally  certain  that  there  is  a  very  large 
number  of  minds,  each  of  which  is  an  independent 
substance  ;  and  in  this  Descartes  agreed  with  him.  In 
this  sense  they  were  both  pluralists.  Let  us  next  con- 
sider the  case  of  Spinoza,  who  is  commonly  regarded  as 
a  typical  monist.  In  the  sense  in  which  Leibniz  was 
a  monist,  and  Descartes  was  a  dualist,  Spinoza  was 
an  extreme  pluralist.  For  he  not  only  held  that  thought 
and  extension  were  both  real  and  mutually  irreducible  ;  he 
held  that  these  were  just  two  out  of  an  infinite  number 
of  equally  real  and  mutually  irreducible  "Attributes". 
On  the  other  hand,  Spinoza  was  a  monist  in  the  sense 
in  which  Leibniz  was  a  pluralist.  He  held  that  minds 
are  not  independent  substances  but  are  simply  "  modes  " 
of  the  "attribute  "  of  thought  ;  and  he  meant  roughly 
by  this  that  there  is  a  single  psychic  continuant  of 
which  all  minds  are  merely  occurrent  states.  Of  course 
he  held  a  similar  view  about  bodies.  In  this  sense 
Descartes  was  a  pluralist  about  mind  and  a  monist 
about  matter,  for  he  agreed  with  Leibniz  that  minds 
are  continuants  and  with  Spinoza  that  bodies  are 
occurrents. 

These  examples  illustrate  some,  but  not  all,  of  the 
ambiguities.  Let  us  imagine  two  materialists  who  both 
believed  that  there  are  many  independent  material 
particles.  So  far  they  would  both  be  monists,  in  the 
sense  in  which  Leibniz  is  and  Spinoza  is  not  a  monist. 
And  they  would  both  be  pluralists,  in  the  sense  in 
which  Leibniz  is  and  Spinoza  is  not  a  pluralist.  Now 
let  us  suppose  that  one  of  these  materialists  holds  that 
there  is  a  plurality  of  irreducibly  different  kinds  of 
material  particle,  e.g.^  Oxygen  atoms.  Hydrogen  atoms, 
and  so  on.  And  let  us  suppose  that  the  other  thinks 
that  there  is  ultimately  only  one  kind  of  material 
particle,    and   that    the    differences    between    Oxygen, 


22         MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE  IN   NATURE 

Hydrogen,  etc.,  are  simply  differences  in  the  structure 
and  movements  of  different  groups  of  these  particles. 
Then  the  second  materialist  would  be  a  monist  in  a 
certain  sense.  And,  in  this  sense,  the  first  materialist 
would  be  a  pluralist.  Leibniz  was  a  pluralist  in  this 
sense  ;  for  he  held  that  there  were  ultimately  different 
orders  of  mind,  e.g.,  "bare  monads",  the  souls  of 
animals,  and  human  minds. 

Let  us  now  try  to  draw  the  necessary  distinctions 
and  to  define  our  terms,  {a)  There  are  certain  attri-  ^ 
butes  which  anything  must  have  if  it  is  to  be  a  substance 
at  all.  I  should  say  that  anything  that  is  a  substance 
must  have  some  duration  and  must  be  capable  of 
standing  in  causal  relations.  Or,  since  some  people 
deny  the  reality  of  time  and  of  causation,  let  us  say 
that  anything  that  is  a  substance  must  have  those 
characteristics,  whatever  they  may  be,  which  appear 
to  human  minds  as  duration  and  causation.  I  will 
call  these  "  Substantial  Attributes  ".  There  are  other 
attributes  which  a  thing  need  not  have  in  order  to  be 
a  substance.  It  need  not  be  extended  and  it  need  not 
even  appear  to  be  so.  Again,  it  need  not  have  the 
power  of  feeling  or  cognising,  and  it  need  not  even 
seem  to  have  this. 

{b)  Now  it  must  be  admitted  that  every  actual 
substance  must  have  sovie  special  attribute  or  other 
beside  the  substantial  attributes  which  are  essential 
to  all  substances.  This  special  attribute  will  make  it 
a  substance  of  such  and  such  a  kind,  e.g.,  a  material 
or  a  mental  substance.  Let  us  call  such  attributes 
"Differentiating  Attributes".  It  will  be  necessary  to 
describe 'the  nature  of  a  differentiating  attribute  a  little 
more  fully,  (i)  It  must  not  be  essential  to  substance 
as  such,  even  if  in  fact  it  be  possessed  by  all  substances. 
E.g.,  if  materialism  be  true,  extension  is  an  attribute 
which  is  in  fact  possessed  by  all  substances.  But  it 
is  a  differentiating  attribute  for  all  that,  since  it  is  not 
essential  for  a  substance  as  such  to  be  extended.     (2) 


INTRODUCTION  23 

It  is  a  determinable  which  is  not  itself  a  determinate 
under  any  higher  determinable.  This  condition  is 
needed  for  the  following  reason.  Suppose  that  the 
properties  of  being  gold,  being  silver,  and  so  on,  are 
ultimate  and  irreducible.  We  do  not  want  to  count 
these  as  differentiating  attributes  ;  but,  if  we  did  not 
add  the  present  condition,  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  we 
should  not  have  to  do  so.  But  'these  properties 
would  be  determinates  under  the  higher  determinable 
''matter",  and  so  they  will  not  have  to  be  counted 
as  differentiating  attributes  if  we  add  the  condition 
that  such  attributes  must  be  determinables  of  the 
highest  order.  (3)  If  it  belongs  to  any  complex  sub- 
stance as  a  whole  it  must  belong  also  to  all  its  parts. 
This  has  to  be  added  in  view  of  the  doctrine  of 
"emergent  qualities",  about  ivhich  more  will  be  said 
in  what  follows.  An^  emergejit  quality  is  roughly  a  U 
quality  which  belongs  to  a  complex  as  a  whole  and  not  7 
to  its  parts.  Some  people  hold  that  life  and  conscious- 
ness are  emergent  qualities  of  material  aggregates  of 
a  certain  kind  and  degree  of  complexity.  If  there  be 
such  qualities  we  do  not  want  to  have  to  count  them  as 
differentiating  attributes.  (4)  It  must  be  a  simple 
attribute,  i.e.j  it  must  not  be  analysable  into  a  con- 
junction or  disjunction  of  other  attributes. 

We  can  now  define  the  first  kind  of  Pluralism  and 
Monism.  This  I  will  call  "Pluralism  and  Monism 
about  Differentiating  Attributes".  A  "  Differentiating- 
Attribute  Monist  "  holds  that  there  is  in  fact  only  one 
differentiating  attribute.  Materialists,  like  Hobbes,  and 
Mentalists,  like  Leibniz,  are  monists  of  this  kind.  A 
"  Differentiating- Attribute  Pluralist"  holds  that  there 
are  two  or  more  differentiating  attributes.  Pluralists 
of  this  kind  can  be  further  subdivided  according  to  two 
different  principles,  (i)  We  may  take  the  trivial  prin- 
ciple of  dividing  them  according  to  the  number  of 
differentiating  attributes  which  they  accept.  E.g., 
Descartes  was  a  dualist  and  accepted  two  only  ;  Spinoza 


24         MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

accepted  an  infinite  number  ;  and  there  seems  no  obvious 
reason  why  there  should  not  be  Trialists  or  Hendekal- 
ists  in  this  sense,  though  I  cannot  call  any  to  mind  at 
the  moment.  (2)  A  much  more  important  principle  of 
division  is  the  following.  Some  people  who  accept  a 
plurality  of  differentiating  attributes  hold  that  one  and 
the  same  substance  can  have  several  or  all  of  these 
attributes.  Thus  Spinoza  held  that  God  has  all  the 
infinite  number  of  differentiating  attributes.  Others 
consider  the  various  differentiating  attributes  to  be  in- 
compatible with  each  other.  This  view  was  held  by 
Descartes  of  the  two  differentiating  attributes  which  he 
accepted.  The  first  kind  of  differentiating-attribute 
pluralist  can  (though  he  need  not)  believe  that  there  is 
only  one  substance,  as  Spinoza  did.  The  second  kind 
of  differentiating-attribute  pluralist  nitist  admit  at  least 
as  many  different  substances  as  there  are  differentiating 
attributes,  and  he  may  of  course  admit  more.  Descartes 
could  not  consistently  have  accepted  less  than  two  sub- 
stances ;  and  in  fact  he  accepted  a  great  many  more, 
since  he  thought  that  each  individual  mind  is  a  distinct 
substance.  On  the  other  hand,  a  man  can  be  a  differ- 
entiating-attribute monist,  like  Leibniz,  and  yet  accept 
an  infinite  plurality  of  substances. 

We  have  now  to  consider  a  second  meaning  of  the 
antithesis  between  Pluralism  and  Monism.  Just  as 
every  actual  substance  has  some  differentiating  attribute 
as  well  as  the  substantial  attributes,  so  too  every  actual 
substance  has  its  differentiating  attribute  in  some  specific 
form.  No  material  substance  \sjust  a  bit  of  matter ;  it 
has  the  Oxygen  properties,  or  the  Hydrogen  properties, 
or  the  Silver  Chloride  properties,  and  so  on.  Similarly, 
no  mind  \sjust  a  thinking  substance  ;  it  has  the  charac- 
teristic properties  of  an  oyster's  mind,  or  of  a  dog's,  or 
of  a  man's,  or  of  an  angel's,  and  so  on.  I  will  call 
these  more  specific  features,  which  distinguish  different 
"  natural  kinds"  of  substances  having  the  same  differ- 
entiating attribute,  "Specific  Properties ".     And  I  will 


INTRODUCTION  25 

call  the  aggregate  of  substances  which  have  a  common 
differentiating  attribute,  taken  together,  a  "  Realm  of 
Being".  E.g.,  we  can  talk  of  the  "  Mental  Realm  "  and 
the  "Material  Realm".  The  question  can  then  be 
raised  :  "  Are  there  several  ultimately  different  kinds  of 
substance  within  a  single  realm  of  being,  or  are  all  the 
apparently  different  specific  properties  within  a  realm 
of  being  really  reducible  to  a  single  one?  E.g.,  must 
the  Oxygen-property  and  the  Hydrogen-property  simply 
be  accepted  as  ultimate  ;  or  can  they  both  be  derived 
from  certain  common  properties  of  all  matter,  such  as  ex- 
tension, spatial  arrangement,  motion  of  particles,  etc.?" 
We  might  call  a  man  who  accepted  the  first  alternative 
a  "Pluralist  about  the  Specific  Properties  of  Matter", 
and  one  who  accepted  the  second  alternative  a  "  Monist 
about  the  Specific  Properties  of  Matter".  It  would  of 
course  be  quite  consistent  to  be  a  differentiating-attribute 
pluralist  and  a  specific-property  monist  about  some  or 
all  of  the  realms  of  being.  And  the  opposite  combina- 
tion of  views  would  also  be  quite  consistent.  E.g., 
Leibniz  was  a  differentiating-attribute  monist ;  but  he 
was  a  specific-property  pluralist,  since  he  believed  in 
ultimately  different  kinds  of  mind.  Descartes,  on  the 
other  hand,  was  a  diff"erentiating-attribute  dualist.  But 
he  was  a  specific-property  monist  about  the  realm  of 
matter,  for  he  thought  that  the  apparently  different 
kinds  of  matter  differ  only  in  the  arrangement  and 
motion  of  the  parts  of  a  single  homogeneous  material 
substance.  He  was  a  specific-property  pluralist  about 
the  realm  of  mind,  for  he  certainly  held  that  God's  mind 
differs  in  kind  from  human  minds.  It  is  evident  that, 
if  a  man  believes  in  a  plurality  of  kinds  of  substance 
within  a  single  realm  of  being,  he  must  accept  at  least 
as  great  a  plurality  o{  substances  ;  and  he  may  of  course 
accept  a  much  greater  plurality  of  substances  than  of 
kinds. 

This  brings  us  to  a  third  sense  of  "Monism"  and 
"  Pluralism  ".     On  the  face  of  it  there  can  be  a  plurality 


26         MIND  AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

of  substances  having  the  same  specific  properties.  E.g., 
it  is  plainly  true,  in  some  sense,  that  there  is  a  large 
number  of  human  minds  and  a  large  number  of  hydrogen 
atoms  in  the  universe.  Now  some  men  hold  that  the 
minds  of  Smith,  Brown,  Jones,  and  Robinson  actually 
are  distinct  and  independent  substances  ;  others  hold 
that  they  are  not  strictly  substances  at  all,  but  only 
states  of  a  single  substance.  Similarly,  some  men  hold 
that  atoms  or  electrons  are  not  strictly  substances  ;  but 
are  merely  different  states  of  vortex-motion  in  a  single 
substance,  the  ether.  We  might  call  the  former  class 
of  people  "Substantival  Pluralists"  and  the  latter  class 
"  Substantival  Monists  ".  Spinoza  and  Mr  Bradley  are 
examples  of  substantival  monists  ;  for  both  of  them 
regard  chairs  and  tables  and  minds,  not  as  substances, 
but  as  "modifications",  "differentiations",  or  "states" 
of  a  single  Substance.  But,  whereas  Spinoza  is  an 
extreme  pluralist  about  differentiating  attributes,  Mr 
Bradley  is  a  differentiating-attribute  monist ;  for  he 
thinks  that  the  Absolute  consists  wholly  of  mental  stuff 
or  "  experience  ",  as  he  calls  it. 

4  Let  us  now    sum  up  the  results  of  this  attempt  at 

clarification.  We  have  distinguished  and  exemplified 
three  different  kinds  of  opposition  under  the  vague 
disjunction  of  Pluralism  and  Monism.  (i)  Differ- 
entiating-attribute Pluralism  and  Monism.  This  kind  of 
pluralism  may  take  two  forms  (apart  altogether  from 
the  question  of  how  many  differentiating  attributes  are 
accepted).  {a)  It  may  allow  that  the  differentiating 
attributes  are  all  compatible  with  each  other ;  in  which 
case  it  is  consistent  with,  though  it  does  not  entail. 
Substantival  Monism,  {b)  It  may  deny  the  compati- 
bility of  some  or  of  all  combinations  of  differentiating 
attributes,  in  which  case  it  entails  some  degree  at  any 
rate  of  Substantival  Pluralism.  (ii)  Specific- Property 
Pluralism  and  Monism.  This  is  the  question  whether 
there  are  or  are  not  irreducibly  different  kinds  of  sub- 
stance within  the  same  realm  of  being,  i.e.,  with  the  same 


INTRODUCTION  27 

differentiating  attributes.  Monism  about  differentiating 
attributes  is  compatible  with  pluralism  about  specific 
properties  (cf.  Leibniz) ;  and  pluralism  about  differ- 
entiating attributes  is  compatible  with  monism  about 
specific  properties  in  some  or  in  all  realms  of  being 
(cf.  Descartes'  view  of  matter).  Specific -property- 
Monism  is  consistent  with,  but  does  not  entail,  Sub- 
stantival Monism.  Specific-property  Pluralism  does 
entail  some  degree  at  any  rate  of  Substantival  Pluralism, 
(iii)  Substantival  Pluralism  and  Monism.  This  is  the 
question  whether  the  apparent  plurality  of  substances 
of  the  same  kind  is  really  a  plurality  of  substances  or  only 
of  the  states  or  occurrents  of  a  single  Substance.  As 
we  have  seen,  Substantival  Monism  is  not  entailed  by 
either  of  the  other  kinds  of  monism,  but  some  degree 
of  Substantival  Pluralism  is  entailed  by  each  of  the 
other  forms  of  pluralism.  And,  just  as  it  is  possible  to 
be  a  Specific-property  Monist  for  one  realm  of  being 
and  a  Specific-property  Pluralist  for  another  realm,  so 
it  is  possible  to  be  a  Substantival  Monist  for  one  realm 
and  a  Substantival  Pluralist  for  another  (cf.  Descartes' 
views  on  Matter  and  Mind  respectively). 

Pluralism  and  Monism  about  Differentiating  Attri- 
butes will  be  discussed  in  Section  E  of  this  book. 
Pluralism  and  Monism  about  Specific  Properties  in 
the  realm  of  matter  will  be  discussed  in  the  next 
chapter.  But  I  may  not  have  another  opportunity 
of  saying  anything  about  Substantival  Monism  and 
Pluralism,  so  I  will  end  this  chapter  with  some  remarks 
about  this  antithesis. 

The  controversy  between  Substantival  Monists  and 
Pluralists  seems  to  me  to  be  partly  verbal,  and  to 
depend  on  taking  the  word  "substance"  in  a  wider 
or  a  narrower  sense.  Suppose  we  define  a  substance 
simply  as  a  particular  existence,  which  is  practically 
what  Dr  M'Taggart  does.  Then  twinges  of  toothache, 
flashes  of  lightning,  and  so  on,  must  be  counted  as 
substances.     For  they  certainly  exist  or  appear  to  exist 


v^ 


28         MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

literally  in  time,  and  they  cannot  occupy  any  position 
in  a  proposition  except  that  of  logical   subject.      But 
A       most  people  would  refuse  to  call  them  *' substances". 
'^  They  would  call  such  objects  "events  in"  or  "states 

of"  substances.  Evidently  these  people  mean  by  a 
"substance"  something  more  specific  than  a  particular 
existent.  They  would  say  that  all  substances  are 
particular  existents,  but  that  the  converse  is  not  true. 
It  is  not  very  easy  to  say  exactly  what  more  is  needed. 
One  feature  that  seems  to  be  assumed  is  that  a  substance 
must  last  for  a  considerable  time.  In  fact,  whatever 
else  it  may  be,  it  would  seem  that  it  is  supposed  to  be 
at  least  a  series  of  events  having  a  certain  kind  of 
internal  unity  and  continuity  both  causal  and  spatio- 
temporal,  and  lasting  at  least  long  enough  for  this 
unity  to  be  fully  manifested.  I  think  that  it  is  also 
assumed  by  most  people  that  all  events  which  do  not 
themselves  last  long  enough  to  count  as  substances  are 
parts  of  some  series  of  interconnected  events  which  is 
a  substance. 

It  will  be  seen  that,  under  these  circumstances,  the 
distinction  between  a  substance  and  a  mere  event  is 
likely  to  be  hard  to  draw  in  practice,  and  that  a  certain 
particular  existent  will  be  asserted  to  be  a  substance  by 
some  and  denied  to  be  a  substance  by  others.  Moreover, 
we  must  notice  that,  when  two  things  are  very  closely 
interconnected,  some  people  would  call  them  "two 
substances"  whilst  others  would  call  the  whole  which 
they  together  form  "one  substance".  B.g-,  we  gener- 
ally think  of  a  man's  body  as  a  single  substance,  though, 
from  another  point  of  view,  his  head  is  one  substance 
and  his  trunk  is  another.  Bearing  these  facts  in  mind, 
let  us  compare  the  ordinary  view  of  the  world  as  con- 
sisting of  a  plurality  of  substances  with  the  view  of  a 
typical  Substantival  Monist,  such  as  Spinoza.  The 
ordinary  man  would  count  the  various  chairs  in  his 
room  as  so  many  distinct  substances  ;  and  he  would 
take  the  same  view  about  his  own  and  his  neighbours' 


INTRODUCTION  29 

minds.  But  he  probably  would  not  count  the  falling 
of  a  chair  or  a  passing  twinge  of  toothache  as  sub- 
stances ;  he  would  say  that  they  are  only  states  or 
modifications  of  substances.  And  he  would  say  this 
partly  because  they  are  so  transitory,  and  partly  because 
he  thinks  that  they  could  not  have  existed  by  themselves  ; 
e.g.^  that  a  fall  can  exist  only  as  part  of  the  history  of 
some  body,  and  that  a  feeling  of  toothache  can  exist 
only  as  part  of  the  history  of  some  mind.  The  plain 
man  thus  takes  long  duration,  and  the  possibility  of 
independent  existence,  as  marks  of  a  substance  ;  and 
he  takes  transitoriness  and  incapacity  for  independent 
exisfen^ce  as  marks  of  ia  mere  state  or  modification  of  a 
substance. 

Now  it  is  very  easy  for  a  Substantival  Monist  to 
attack  this  position.  How  long  must  a  particular  last 
in  order  to  count  as  a  substance?  The  plain  man  says 
that  a  flash  of  lightning  or  a  twinge  of  toothache  is 
too  transitory  to  be  a  substance,  but  holds  that  a  human 
body  lasts  long  enough  to  be  a  substance.  But  this  is 
obviously  rather  arbitrary.  The  duration  of  a  human 
body  is  very  small  as  compared  with  that  of  the 
pyramids  and  almost  negligible  as  compared  with 
that  of  a  mountain.  Thus,  if  the  distinction  is  to  turn 
on  mere  duration,  it  seems  difficult  to  find  any  safe 
resting-place  between  the  two  extreme  views  of  Dr 
M'Taggart  and  of  Spinoza,  viz.,  that  every  particular 
existent,  however  transitory,  is  a  substance,  and  that  no 
existent  can  count  as  a  substance  unless  it  be  eternal. 

The  common-sense  view  does  not  fare  very  much 
better  if  we  take  the  capacity  for  independent  existence 
as  the  characteristic  mark  of  a  substance.  No  doubt  it 
is  extremely  difficult  to  conceive  of  a  perfectly  isolated 
twinge  of  toothache,  forming  no  part  of  a  longer  and 
wider  whole,  called  a  *'mind".  But  is  it  much  easier 
to  conceive  the  existence  of  a  perfectly  isolated  human 
body,  when  you  clearly  understand  what  you  are  trying 
to  do?     Eating,  breathing,  sleeping,  walking,  etc.,  are 


30         MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

all  characteristic  features  of  a  living  human  body ;  and 
it  is  hard  to  see  how  anything  with  these  properties 
could  be  conceived  to  exist  without  air  to  breathe,  ground 
to  walk  on,  and  so  on.  Thus  the  radical  distinction 
which  common-sense  draws  between  the  twinge  of 
toothache,  as  a  mere  state  incapable  of  independent 
existence,  and  the  human  body  as  a  genuine  substance 
capable  of  existing  independently,  seems  rather  arbitrary 
on  reflection.  A  Substantival  Monist,  like  Spinoza, 
would  meet  the  difficulty  by  saying  that  no  finite 
particulars  are  capable  of  independent  existence  and 
that  therefore  none  of  them  deserves  the  name  of 
"substance".  According  to  this  view,  nothing  less 
than  the  whole  material  world  throughout  Space  and 
Time  would  deserve  the  name  of  "substance".  All 
finite  bodies  are  merely  states  or  modifications  of  this, 
which  last  for  longer  or  shorter  times  and  then  break 
up,  giving  place  to  other  modifications. 

Probably  many  people  would  be  ready  to  accept  this 
mode  of  statement  as  on  the  whole  the  best  way  of  ex- 
pressing the  known  facts  about  the  material  realm. 
Perhaps  we  might,  however,  put  the  case  somewhat 
differently.  We  might  hold  that,  whilst  the  difference 
between  a  substantive  and  an  adjective  is  a  difference 
of  kind,  that  between  substances  and  states  is  a  matter 
of  degree.  Anyone  who  held  Substantival  Monism  to 
mean  that  chairs  or  minds  are  literally  adjectives^  i.e.^ 
universals  and  not  particulars,  would  plainly  be  talking 
nonsense.  It  is  plain  that  the  proposition  :  John  Smith 
exists,  does  not  mean  :  The  Universe  has  a  John-Smithy 
character,  for  this  is  either  meaningless  or  false.  It 
must  be  admitted  that  some  Monists  have  talked  as  if 
they  meant  to  assert  some  such  nonsense  as  this  ;  but 
it  is  charitable  to  suppose  that  they  were  merely  ex- 
pressing themselves  badly.  The  difference  between  an 
adjective  and  a  substantive  is  that  between  a  universal 
and  a  particular,  and  it  is  irreducible.  On  the  other 
hand,  what  would  commonly  be  called  a  "substance" 


INTRODUCTION  31 

and  what  would  commonly  be  called  a  "mere  state" 
are  both  particulars.  Now  I  would  suggest  that  it  is 
quite  reasonable  to  talk  of  "  degrees  of  substantiality  ", 
Cceteris  paribus^  an  existent  is  more  of  a  substance  the 
longer  it  lasts  and  the  less  dependent  it  is  on  anything 
else.  I  should  then  agree  with  Spinoza  to  the  following 
extent.  I  should  say  that  the  solar  system  is  much  more 
substantial  than  my  body  ;  and  that  my  body  is  much 
more  substantial  than  a  sneeze  ;  and  that  the  whole 
material  world,  if  it  forms  a  single  self-contained 
physical  system,  is  still  more  of  a  substance  than  the 
solar  system.  So  far  I  should  agree  with  the  more 
reasonable  Substantival  Monists,  though  I  should  state 
the  facts  in  rather  different  language. 

But,  although  the  question  at  issue  is  thus  largely 
verbal,  it  is  not  wholly  so.  There  are  three  closely 
connected  points  to  be  noticed  which  are  not  merely 
verbal,  (r)  Spinoza  took  a  similar  view  about  mind  to 
that  which  I  have  just  been  stating  in  my  own  way 
about  matter.  He  held  that  finite  minds  are  not  genuine 
substances  any  more  than  finite  bodies  ;  they  are  just 
states  or  modifications  of  a  single  mind-substance.  (He 
would  of  course  have  said  ^'^  v(\\ndi-attribute'\  but  for 
the  present  purpose  there  is  no  important  distinction 
between  what  Spinoza  calls  an  "attribute"  and  what  I 
am  calling  a  "substance".)  Now  I  can  accept  the 
negative  part  of  this  statement  tentatively,  but  I  see 
very  little  reason  to  accept  the  positive  part.  I  think  it 
is  perfectly  true  that  finite  minds  have  a  comparatively 
low  degree  of  substantiality,  unless  they  are  very 
different  from  what  they  appear  in  this  life  to  be.  No 
doubt  my  mind  is  more  substantial  than  a  twinge  of 
toothache.  But,  in  the  first  place,  it  apparently  begins 
and  ends  in  time.  Again,  it  is  apparently  not  existing 
during  large  parts  of  the  time  between  my  birth  and  my 
death.  Lastly,  it  seems  to  be  extremely  dependent  on 
my  body.  These  appearances  may  of  course  be  decep- 
tive ;  we  shall  have  to  consider  the  question  in  greater 


32         MIND  AND   ITS   PLACE  IN  NATURE 

detail  in  a  future  chapter.  But  I  think  we  may  fairly 
say  that  a  human  mind,  taken  at  its  face-value,  is  a 
poor  sort  of  substance. 

So  far  I  should  agree  with  Spinoza.  But  I  cannot 
see  much  reason  to  think  that  there  is  anything  mental 
which  is  more  substantial  than  finite  minds,  poor  things 
as  they  are  ;  or  that  finite  minds  are  states  of  some  one 
mental  substance  which  is  more  substantial  than  them- 
selves. The  material  realm  does  seem  to  form  one 
single  system  in  a  fairly  definite  sense.  All  finite 
bodies  have  spatial  relations  to  each  other,  and  all 
physical  events  are  causally  interconnected  by  gravita- 
tion and  other  forces  which  bridge  the  spatio-temporal 
gaps  between  them.  Moreover,  the  whole  seems  to  be 
of  much  the  same  nature  as  the  parts.  The  spatial  and 
causal  relations  within  a  finite  body  and  between  its 
parts  are  of  much  the  same  nature  as  the  spatial  and 
causal  relations  between  two  finite  bodies  and  within 
the  material  realm  as  a  whole.  Now,  so  far  as  one  can 
see,  there  is  very  little  analogy  to  this  within  the 
mental  realm.  No  doubt  some  groups  of  minds  form 
societies  which  last  longer  than  any  of  their  individual 
members  ;  and  probably  all  human  minds  do  belong  to 
such  societies.  I  think  it  would  be  perfectly  correct  to 
call  Trinity  College  or  the  Judicial  Committee  of  the 
Privy  Council  a  "mental  substance".  But  we  must 
remember  {ci)  that  a  society  is  in  many  ways  less 
substantial  than  the  minds  which  compose  it ;  {p)  that 
it  is  not  a  mental  substance,  in  the  sense  that  it  is  a 
mind,  but  only  in  the  sense  that  its  constituents  are 
minds.  A  society  of  minds  is  not  a  big  mind  ;_  but  a 
system  of  bodies  (such  as  the  solar  system)  is  just  a  big 
body  ;  [c]  there  is  no  one  society  which  includes  all 
minds  ;  and  {d)  the  minds  which  are  included  in  any 
one  society  are  also  as  a  rule  included  in  others  which 
are  not  parts  of  the  first.  The  essential  point  is 
that  the  relations  within  a  mind  and  between  its  states 
seem  to  be  different  in  kind  from  the  relations  between 


INTRODUCTION  33 

several  minds  and  within  a  society,  and  that  no  society 
is  at  once  all-inclusive  and  very  highly  unified.  I 
therefore  can  see  no  good  ground  for  believing  in  a 
single  mental  subslance  of  which  all  finite  minds  could 
be  regarded  as  states  or  modifications.  I  think  that 
this  notion  would  become  plausible  only  if  we  had 
reason  to  believe  that  all  minds  are  in  some  kind  of 
intimate  telepathic  union,  analogous  to  gravitation  in 
the  material  realm,  and  that  the  system  thus  formed 
was  itself  of  the  nature  of  a  mind. 

(2)  The  second  qualification  that  must  be  made  to  my 
tentative  acceptance  of  a  form  of  Substantival  Monism  - 
is  tlTis;  Th^ave  granted  that  the  typical  mate^fial  sub- 
stances of  ordinary  life,  viz.,  human  bodies,  chairs, 
trees,  etc.,  are  only  imperfectly  substantial,  since  they 
are  transitory  and  incapable  of  existing  in  isolation. 
And  I  have  granted  that  the  solar  system,  and  still 
more  the  whole  material  realm,  can  claim  a  higher 
degree  of  substantiality.  But  might  we  not  say  that 
some  things  which  are  much  smaller  than  the  material 
substances  of  daily  life,  viz.,  molecules,  atoms,  electrons, 
etc.,  can  claim  a  very  high  degree  of  substantiality? 
If  this  be  so,  we  could  not  agree  with  Spinoza  in  holding 
that  only  the  material  realm  as  a  whole  deserves  to  be 
called  a  material  substance  ;  we  should  have  to  hold 
that  there  are  also  certain  parts  of  the  material  realm 
which  have  just  as  good  claims  to  this  name.  And  I 
think  that  this  must  be  admitted.  We^took  endurance 
and  capacity  for  independent  existence  as  two  tests  for 
substantiality.  Now  a  thing  may  be  enduring  and 
self-subsistent  for  two  different  reasons,  {a)  It  may  be 
so  because  it  is  so  very  inclusive.  The  solar  system  is 
more  enduring  and  self-subsistent  than  my  body  because 
there  is  so  very  little  outside  it  to  upset  it.  {U)  A  thing 
may  not  include  very  much,  but  it  may  be  extremely 
stable.  This  may  happen  in  two  different  ways,  (i)  It 
may  be  that,  although  there  are  many  things  outside  it, 
it  is  indifferent  to  nearly  all  of  them,  so  that  they  have 

C 


./ 


34         MIND  AND   ITS   PLACE  IN  NATURE 

no  hold  on  it.  (ii)  It  may  be  that,  although  it  is 
influenced  by  other  things,  it  has  an  intense  degree  of 
internal  unity  and  can  be  destroyed  by  these  things 
only  under  very  special  circumstances  which  very 
seldom  arise.  Now  it  seems  to  be  a  fact  that,  as  you 
divide  up  the  material  realm  in  Space  and  Time,  there 
are  certain  definite  stages  of  division  below  which  dis- 
integrating forces  which  were  formerly  effective  cease  to 
be  so,  e.g.,  a  chair  can  be  broken  up  by  many  means, 
including  an  axe.  A  molecule  cannot  be  split  up  by 
mechanical  means,  but  it  can  be  by  heat  or  chemical 
reagents.  The  ordinary  atoms  are  so  stable  that  only 
heroic  methods  will  break  them  up.  I  should  say  that, 
at  the  stages  of  molecules,  atoms,  and  electrons,  we 
come  across  genuine  natural  units  each  of  which  may 
fairly  claim  a  high  degree  of  substantiality. 

(3)  There  is  one  other  remark  to  be  made.  We  have 
said  that  the  notion  of  a  substance  involves  the  per- 
sistence of  something  through  a  lapse  of  time,  and  that 
the  longer  this  something  persists  the  more  substantial 
it  is  said  to  be.  But  common -sense  distinguishes 
between  the  mere  persistence  oiform  and  the  persistence 
of  stuff.  We  can  identify  a  certain  ripple  on  a  sheet  of 
water  and  follow  it  as  it  moves  along  just  as  well  as  we 
can  identify  a  certain  speck  of  dust  and  follow  it  as  it 
rests  or  moves  through  the  air.  But  the  persistence  of 
the  ripple  is  known  to  be  just  the  fact  that  a  certain 
kind  of  movement  successively  affects  a  continuous 
series  of  different  particles  of  water ;  whilst  the  per- 
sistence of  the  speck  of  dust  is  the  fact  that  the  same 
bit  of  stzff  occupies  successively  the  same  or  a  continuous 
series  of  successive  places.  Now  it  is  commonly  held 
that  the  two  kinds  of  persistence  are  essentially 
different  ;  and  that  things  which  have  the  latter  kind 
are  substances,  whilst  those  which  have  only  the  former 
are  not.  On  this  view,  if  an  electron  could  be  shown 
to  be  merely  a  persistent  vortex  in  the  ether  it  would  be 
denied  to   be   a   substance,    even   though   it  could    be 


INTRODUCTION  35 

shown  that  such  a  vortex  must  go  on  for  ever.  For,  it 
would  be  said,  an  electron  on  this  theory  fails  to  fulfil 
the  second  condition  of  substantiality.  From  the  nature 
of  the  case  a  vortex  in  the  ether  could  not  exist  without 
the  ether  existing  to  move  in  whirlpools,  but  the  ether 
could  quite  well  have  existed  without  moving  in  this  or 
any  other  way.  Hence  the  ether  is  the  only  genuine 
substance  concerned,  and  the  electrons  would  be  counted 
merely  as  states,  though  endless  and  indestructible 
states,  of  the  ether. 

I  doubt  whether  this  sharp  distinction  between  sub- 
stances and  mere  states,  based  on  the  difference  between 
the  two  kinds  of  persistence,  can  be  upheld,  (i)  We 
must  notice  that  there  are  border-line  cases  in  which 
there  is  persistence  of  form  with  gradual  change  of 
stuff.  Here  common-sense  does  not  hesitate  to  hold 
that  we  have  a  persistent  substance.  A  human  body  is 
a  fairly  obvious  instance.  No  doubt  at  two  moments 
near  together  the  bulk  of  the  stuff  of  which  it  is  com- 
posed is  the  same  ;  but  there  is  always  some  difference, 
and  we  all  know  that  after  a  few  years  scarcely  any  of 
the  same  stuff  remains.  Yet,  if  the  outward  form  and 
the  characteristic  ways  of  behaving  are  kept,  no  one 
hesitates  to  call  it  the  same  body  or  attempts  to  deny 
that  it  is  a  substance,  (ii)  Common-sense  presumably 
regards  a  mind  as  a  persistent  substance  ;  yet  it  may 
fairly  be  doubted  whether  in  this  case  there  is  anything 
corresponding  to  the  notion  of  persistent  stuff,  (iii) 
These,  however,  are  merely  examples  of  the  fact  that 
common-sense  is  not  perfectly  consistent  in  practice, 
which  we  all  knew  before.  The  important  question  is 
whether  there  is  really  any  fundamental  difference 
between  persistence  of  stuff  and  persistence  of  form. 
If  this  distinction  can  be  got  rid  of,  it  must  be  by 
reducing  persistence  of  stuff  to  persistence  of  form,  I 
thinkr  Let  us  consider  the  case  of  what  would  be 
called  "the  same  bit  of  stuff"  resting  for  a  time  in  one 
place   and    then    moving   to   another.       We  must   first 


36         MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

distinguish  between  its  purely  spatial  properties,  ue., 
its  shape  and  size  at  any  moment,  and  what  I  will  call 
its  "  material  qualities,"  i.e.,  its  colour,  weight,  chemical 
and  physical  constants,  and  so  on.  Now,  if  the  per- 
sistence of  this  bit  of  stuff  is  to  be  reduced  to  persistence 
of  form,  in  a  wide  sense,  this  reduction  must  be  made 
somewhat  as  follows.  We  should  have  to  say  that  all 
that  is  meant  by  the  persistence  of  a  certain  bit  of  stuff 
is  that  certain  determinable  characteristics  are  manifested 
throughout  a  period  of  time  in  one  or  in  a  continuous 
series  of  determinate  forms  throughout  one  or  a  con- 
tinuous series  of  places. 

This  attempted  reduction  of  persistence  of  stuff  to 
persistence  of  form  seems  most  plausible  when  we  con- 
fine our  attention  to  solid  bodies  with  sharp  outlines 
which  rest  or  move  about  in  vacuo  or  in  a  fluid  medium 
markedly  different  from  themselves.  It  is  much  less 
plausible  when  we  try  to  apply  it  to  a  homogeneous 
fluid.  Imagine  a  homogeneous  incompressible  fluid 
with  no  solid  bodies  in  it.  Let  us  consider  a  small 
volume  at  any  place  within  this  fluid.  Then,  whether 
the  fluid  were  wholly  at  rest  or  there  were  currents 
steadily  circulating  within  it,  precisely  the  same  pro- 
perties would  continue  to  be  manifested  throughout  the 
small  volume  that  we  have  chosen  for  investigation. 
On  the  principles  suggested  above  we  should  have  to 
say  in  both  cases  that  this  volume  contains  a  single  per- 
sistent bit  of  stuff.  But  actually  we  always  distinguish 
in  theory  the  two  cases  [a)  where  the  constancy  of  the 
properties  manifested  in  any  small  volume  is  due  to  the 
fluid  being  at  rest,  so  that  nothing  is  flowing  into  or 
out  of  this  volume  ;  and  {b)  where  this  constancy  is 
due  to  the  fact  that  the  fluid  is  in  a  steady  state  of 
internal  motion,  and  the  matter  which  flows  into  the 
volume  is  always  exactly  like  the  matter  which  it  dis- 
places therefrom.  Since  we  plainly  do  distinguish 
these  two  cases  in  thought,  even  if  we  cannot  always 
distinguish  them  in  practice,   it  would  seem  that  the 


INTRODUCTION  37 

attempted  reduction  of  persistence  of  stuff  to  persistence 
of  form  has  failed.  (Of  course  it  would  be  quite  easy  to 
distinguish  the  two  cases  in  practice  as  well  as  in  theory 
if  we  put  a  drop  of  highly  coloured  liquid  into  our 
fluid  and  saw  whether  the  colour  merely  diffused  slowly 
and  equally  in  all  directions  or  streamed  out  in  one 
direction.) 

I  am  inclined  to  think  that  there  is  a  more  ultimate 
objection  than  this,  which  applies  as  much  to  the 
attempted  reduction  for  solids  as  to  its  application  to 
homogeneous  fluids.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  theory 
in  question  presupposes  the  existence  of  Absolute  Space, 
in  a  quite  crude  and  literal  sense.  When  it  is  said 
that  certain  properties  continue  to  pervade  "the  same 
place  ",  or  that  they  successively  pervade  "a  continuous 
series  of  different  places  ",  we  presuppose  the  existence 
and  persistence  of  these  places.  We  are  in  fact  think- 
ing of  Space  as  a  kind  of  persistent  homogeneous 
medium,  which  differs  from  the  homogeneous-fluid 
ether  only  in  the  fact  that  it  has  nothing  but  spatial 
properties  and  that  all  its  parts  are  eternally  at  rest. 
And  we  are  thinking  of  the  material  properties  as  being 
manifested  now  in  one  part  and  now  in  another  of  this 
medium.  But  this  just  amounts  to  saying  that  the 
stuff  of  all  material  substances  is  Space.  We  shall 
still  have  to  distinguish  between  a  plurality  of  different 
bits  of  stuff,  for  each  different  volume  in  Space  will  now 
be  a  different  bit  of  stuff.  We  have  thus  not  got  rid  of 
the  notion  of  stuff,  nor  dissolved  persistence  of  stuff 
into  persistence  of  form,  nor  avoided  the  necessity  of 
accepting  a  plurality  of  different  bits  of  stuff.  The 
difference  between  this  viev/  and  the  more  usual  one  is 
not  that  the  former  avoids  the  notion  of  stuff  altogether 
whilst  the  latter  uses  it.  The  real  differences  are  these. 
(a)  On  the  present  view  no  bit  of  stuff"  can  move  about ; 
and  the  motion  of  a  body  becomes  the  successive  in- 
herence of  the  same  or  a  continuous  series  of  determinate 
qualities  in  a  continuous  series  of  different  bits  of  stuff; 


38         MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

whilst,  on  the  more  usual  view,  bits  of  stuff  themselves 
move  about.  And  {b)  on  the  present  view  the  various 
bits  of  stuff  are  just  different  volumes  within  a  single 
continuum  ;  whilst,  on  the  more  usual  view,  the  various 
bits  of  stujff  are  not  all  in  contact  with  each  other  at 
any  time.  The  former  type  of  theory,  as  I  have  said, 
requires  Absolute  Space,  in  the  literal  substantival 
sense  ;  whilst  the  latter  fits  in  with  a  Relational  Theory 
of  Space.  JButL  jLeither  can  do  without  the  notion  of 
stuff  or  without  accepting  a  plurality  of  different  bits  of 
stuff;  since  Absolute  Space  becomes  the  stuff  of  the 
former  theory,  and  the  different  parts  of  Absolute  Space 
become  the  plurality  of  different  bits  of  stuff. 

My  conclusion  then  is  that  in  the  long  run  wecannot 
be  Substantival  Monists  about  the  materlalTealm.  For, 
if  it  be  true  that  Absolute  Space  would  be  one  substance 
and  that  space  is  the  only  kind  of  stuff  in  the  material 
world,  it  is  equally  true  that  every  part  of  Absolute 
Space  is  a  distinct  substance,  so  that  there  will  be  as 
many  bits  of  stuff  as  there  are  different  spaces  within 
Absolute  Space.  The  differences  between  a  hydro- 
dynamic  and  an  atomic  view  of  the  material  world  are 
no  doubt  important;  but  it  is  a  mistake  to  think  that 
they  are  differences  about  Substantival  Monism  or 
Pluralism.  For,  as  I  have  tried  to  show,  both  types  of 
view  presuppose  Substantival  Pluralism,  though  at 
different  places.  Really  the  question  at  issue  between 
them  is  whether  there  is  one  kind  of  material  stuff  or 
many  ;  and  this  is  the  question  of  Specific-Prop.erty 
Monism  or  Pluralism. 


SECTION  A 

Introductory  Remarks 

"  Est  quaedam  ....  etiam  nesciendi  ars  et  scientia  ;  nam,  si 
turpe  est  nescire  quae  possunt  sciri,  non  minus  turpe  est  scire  se 
putare  quae  sciri  nequeunt."  (Lobeck,  Aglaophamus,  Bk.  Ill : 
Procem.) 


SECTION    A 

Alternative  Theories  of  Life   and  Mind  at  the 
Level  of  Enlightened  Common-sense 

Introductory  Remarks 

In  this  section  I  propose  to  consider  the  problem  of 
the  mind's  place  in  Nature,  as  it  presents  itself  to 
educated  persons  who  are  acquainted  in  outline  with 
the  concepts  and  results  of  modern  science.  The 
restriction  that  I  here  impose  on  myself  is  that  I  take 
matter  and  mind  to  be  very  much  as  they  appear  to 
be  to  educated  common-sense,  and  do  not  for  the  present 
consider  in  detail  the  modifications  which  philosophic 
criticism  may  introduce  into  those  concepts.  It  will  of 
course  be  necessary  to  remove  this  restriction  at  a  later 
stage  of  the  book  ;  and  this  may  entail  considerable 
modifications  in  any  tentative  conclusions  that  we  may 
reach  here.  A  discussion  at  the  present  level,  though 
necessarily  imperfect,  would  be  by  no  means  useless, 
even  though  it  were  not  to  be  corrected  by  later  and 
more  accurate  investigations.  For  there  really  is  a 
good  deal  to  be  said,  and  a  good  many  confusions  to 
be  cleared  up,  in  the  ordinary  discussions  about  Mechan- 
ism and  Vitalism  or  Interaction  and  Parallelism. 

The  section  is  divided  into  two  chapters  ;  the  first 
on  Mechanism,  and  its  Alternatives^  and  the  second  on 
The  Traditional  Problem  of  Body  and  Mind.  I  should 
like  to  point  out  that  the  first  of  these  chapters  is 
essentially  a  discussion  of  Specific-Property  Monism 
and  Pluralism  within  the  material  realm  ;  and  that  it 
has  a  most  important   bearing  on   "the   connexion  or 


42        MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN   NATURE 

lack  of  connexion  between  the  various  sciences  ".  If  we 
give  one  kind  of  answer  to  the  questions  which  are 
raised  in  that  chapter  we  can  hold  that  strictly  there 
is  one  and  only  one  science  of  matter,  and  that  all  the 
apparently  different  sciences  which  deal  with  various 
aspects  of  the  material  realm  are  merely  departments 
of  it.  If  we  give  the  other  kind  of  answer  we  shall 
have  to  hold  that,  even  within  the  realm  of  matter, 
there  is  a  plurality  of  sciences  which  are  irreducible 
to  each  other,  though  they  can  be  arranged  in  a  hier- 
archical order. 


CHAPTER    II 

Mechanism  and  its  Alternatives 

In  this  chapter  I  want  to  consider  some  of  the  char- 
acteristic  differences  which  there   seem  to   be   among 
material  objects,  and  to  inquire  how  far  these  differences 
are  ultimate   and   irreducible.     On   the   face  of   it  the 
world  of  material  objects  is  divided  pretty  sharply  into 
those  which  are  alive  and  those  which  are  not.     And 
the  latter  seem  to  be  of  many  different  kinds,  such  as 
Oxygen,   Silver,   etc.     The   question    which    is   of  the 
greatest  importance   for  our  purpose  is   the    nature  of 
living  organisms,  since  the  only  minds  that  we  know 
of  are   bound   up   with   them.     But   the    famous   con-  .- 
troversy  between  Mechanists  and  Vitalists  about  living 
organisms  is  merely  a  particular   case  of  the   general  \ 
question  :  Are  the  apparently  different  kinds  of  material  \ 
objects  irreducibly  different  ? 

It  is  this  general  question  which  I  want  to  discuss 
at  present.  I  do  not  expect  to  be  able  to  give  a  definite 
answer  to  it ;  and  I  am  not  certain  that  the  question 
can  ever  be  settled  conclusively.  But  we  can  at  least 
try  to  analyse  the  various  alternatives,  to  state  them 
clearly,  and  to  see  the  implications  of  each.  Once 
this  has  been  done  it  is  at  least  possible  that  people 
with  an  adequate  knowledge  of  the  relevant  facts  may 
be  able  to  answer  the  question  with  a  definite  Yes  or 
No  ;  and,  until  it  has  been  done,  all  controversy  on 
the  subject  is  very  much  in  the  air.  I  think  one  feels 
that  the  disputes  between  Mechanists  and  Vitalists  are 
unsatisfactory  for  two  reasons,  (i)  One  is  never  quite 
sure  what  is  meant  by  "Mechanism"  and  by  "Vital- 


44        MIND   AND  ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

ism "  ;  and  one  suspects  that  both  names  cover  a 
multitude  of  theories  which  the  protagonists  have  never 
distinguished  and  put  clearly  before  themselves.  And 
(ii)  one  wonders  whether  the  question  ought  not  to  have 
been  raised  long  before  the  level  of  life.  Certainly- 
living  beings  behave  in  a  very  different  way  from  non- 
living ones  ;  but  it  is  also  true  that  substances  which 
interact  chemically  behave  in  a  very  different  way  from 
those  which  merely  hit  each  other,  like  two  billiard- 
balls.  The  question  :  Is  chemical  behaviour  ultimately 
different  from  dynamical  behaviour?  seems  just  as 
reasonable  as  the  question  :  Is  vital  behaviour  ulti- 
mately different  from  non-vital  behaviour?  And  we 
are  much  more  likely  to  answer  the  latter  question 
rightly  if  we  see  it  in  relation  to  similar  questions 
which  might  be  raised  about  other  apparent  differences 
of  kind  in  the  material  realm. 

The  Ideal  of  PureJMe£hanism^  Let  us  first  ask  our- 
selves what  would  be  the  ideal  of  a  mechanical  view  of 
the  material  realm.  I  think,  in  the  first  place,  that  it 
would  suppose  that  there  is  only  one  fundamental  kind 
of  stuff  out  of  which  every  material  object  is  made. 
Next,  it  would  suppose  that  this  stuff  has  only  one 
intrinsic  quality,  over  and  above  its  purely  spatio- 
temporal  and  causal  characteristics.  The  property 
ascribed  to  it  might,  e.g:,  be  inertial  mass  or  electric 
charge.  Thirdly,  it  would  suppose  that  there  is  only 
one  fundamental  kind  of  change,  viz.,  change  in  the 
relative  positions  of  the  particles  of  this  stuff.  Lastly, 
it  would  suppose  that  there  is  one  fundamental  law 
according  to  which  one  particle  of  this  stuff  affects  the 
changes  of  another  particle.  It  would  suppose  that 
this  law  connects  particles  by  pairs,  and  that  the 
action  of  any  two  aggregates  of  particles  as  wholes  on 
each  other  is  compounded  in  a  simple  and  uniform  way 
from  the  actions  which  the  constituent  particles  taken 
by  pairs  would  have  on  each  other.     Thus  the^  essence 


MECHANISM   AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES      45 

of  Pure  Mechanism  is  (a)  a  single  kind  of  stuff,  all  of 
AvTTose~payts  afe~exactly  alike  except  for  differences  of 
position  and  motion  ;  {d)  a  single  fundamental  kind  of 
change,  viz.,  change  of  position.  Imposed  on  this 
there  may  of  course  be  changes  of  a  higher  order,  e.g:, 
changes  of  velocity,  of  acceleration,  and  so  on  ;  (c) 
a  single  elementary  causal  law,  according  to  which 
particles  influence  each  other  by  pairs ;  and  (d)  a  single 
and  simple  principle  of  composition,  according  to  which 
the  behaviour  of  any  aggregate  of  particles,  or  the 
influence  of  any  one  aggregate  on  any  other,  follows 
in  a  uniform  way  from  the  mutual  influences  of  the 
constituent  particles  taken  by  pairs. 

A  set  of  gravitating  particles,  on  the  classical  theory 
of  gravitation,  is  an  almost  perfect  example  of  the  ideal 
of  Pure  Mechanism.  The  single  elementary  law  is  the 
inverse-square  law  for  any  pair  of  particles.  The  single 
and  simple  principle  of  composition  is  the  rule  that  the 
influence  of  any  set  of  particles  on  a  single  particle  is 
the  vector-sum  of  the  influences  that  each  would  exert 
taken  by  itself.  An  electronic  theory  of  matter  departs 
to  some  extent  from  this  ideal.  In  the  first  place,  it 
has  to  assume  at  present  that  there  are  two  ultimately 
different  kinds  of  particle,  viz.,  protons  and  electrons. 
Secondly,  the  laws  of  electro-magnetics  cannot,  so  far 
as  we  know,  be  reduced  to  central  forces.  Thirdly, 
gravitational  phenomena  do  not  at  present  fall  within 
the  scheme  ;  and  so  it  is  necessary  to  ascribe  masses  as 
well  as  charges  to  the  ultimate  particles,  and  to  intro- 
duce other  elementary  forces  beside  those  of  electro- 
magnetics. 

On  a  purely  mechanical  theory  all  the  apparently  \ 
different  kinds  of  matter  would  be  made  of  the  same  > 
stuff.  They  would  differ  only  in  the  number,  arrange- 
ment and  movements  of  their  constituent  particles. 
And  their  apparently  different  kinds  of  behaviour  would 
not  be  ultimately  different.  For  they  would  all  be 
deducible  by  a  single  simple  principle  of  composition 


46         MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

from  the  mutual  influences  of  the  particles  taken  by- 
pairs  ;  and  these  mutual  influences  would  all  obey  a 
single  law  which  is  quite  independent  of  the  configura- 
tions and  surroundings  in  which  the  particles  happen 
to  find  themselves.  The  ideal  which  we  have  been 
describing  and  illustrating  may  be  called  "Pure 
Mechanism  ". 

When  a  biologist  calls  himself  a  "Mechanist"  it 
may  fairly  be  doubted  whether  he  means  to  assert 
anything  so  rigid  as  this.  Probably  all  that  he  wishes 
to  assert  is  that  a  living  body  is  composed  only  of 
constituents  which  do  or  might  occur  in  non-living 
bodies,  and  that  its  characteristic  behaviour  is  wholly 
deducible  from  its  structure  and  components  and  from 
the  chemical,  physical  and  dynamical  laws  which  these 
materials  would  obey  if  they  were  isolated  or  were 
in  non-living  combinations.  Whether  the  apparently 
different  kinds  of  chemical  substance  are  really  just 
so  many  different  configurations  of  a  single  kind  of 
particles,  and  whether  the  chemical  and  physical  laws 
are  just  the  compounded  results  of  the  action  of  a 
number  of  similar  particles  obeying  a  single  elementary 
law  and  a  single  principle  of  composition,  he  is  not 
compelled  as  a  biologist  to  decide.  I  shall  later  on 
discuss  this  milder  form  of  "Mechanism,"  which  is 
all  that  is  presupposed  in  the  controversies  between 
mechanistic  and  vitalistic  biologists.  In  the  meanwhile 
I  want  to  consider  how  far  the  ideal  of  Pure  Mechanism 
could  possibly  be  an  adequate  account  of  the  world  as 
we  know  it. 

Limitations  of  Pure  Mechanism.  No  one  of  course 
pretends  that  a  satisfactory  account  even  of  purely 
physical  processes  in  terms  of  Pure  Mechanism  has 
ever  been  given  ;  but  the  question  for  us  is :  How  far, 
and  in  what  sense,  could  such  a  theory  be  adequate  to 
all  the  known  facts?  On  the  face  of  it  external  objects 
have  plenty  of  other  characteristics  beside  mass  or 
electric  charge,  e.g.^  colour,  temperature,  etc.     And,  on 


-V 


MECHANISM  AND   ITS  ALTERNATIVES      47 

the  face  of  it,  many  changes  take  place  in  the  external 
world  beside  changes  of  position,  velocity,  etc.  Now 
of  course  many  different  views  have  been  held  about 
the  nature  and  status  of  such  characteristics  as  colour  ; 
but  the  one  thing  which  no  adequate  theory  of  the 
external  world  can  do  is  to  ignore  them  altogether.  I 
will  state  here  very  roughly  the  alternative  types  of 
theory,  and  show  that^  norie  of  them  is  compatible  with 
Pure  Mechanism  as  a  complete  account  of  the  facts, 
(i)  There  is  the  naive  view  that  we  are  in  immediate  <7) 
cognitive  contact  with  parts  of  the  surfaces  of  external 
objects,  and  that  the  colours  and  temperatures  which 
we  perceive  quite  literally  inhere  in  those  surfaces  in- 
dependently of  our  minds  and  of  our  bodies.  On  this 
view  Pure  Mechanism  breaks  down  at  the  first  move, 
for  certain  parts  of  the  external  world  would  have 
various  properties  different  from  and  irreducible  to 
the  one  fundamental  property  which  Pure  Mechanism 
assumes.  This  would  not  mean  that  what  scientists 
have  discovered  about  the  connexion  between  heat 
and  molecular  motion,  or  light  and  periodic  motion  of 
electrons  would  be  wrong.  It  might  be  perfectly  true, 
so  far  as  it  went ;  but  it  would  certainly  not  be  the 
whole  truth  about  the  external  world.  We  should  have 
to  begin  by  distinguishing  between  "  macroscopic  "  and 
"microscopic"  properties,  to  use  twp_  very  convenient 
terrris adopted  by  Lorentz.  Colours,  temperatures,  etc., 
would  be  macroscopic  properties,  ?>.,  they  would  need 
a  certain  minimum  area  or  volume  (and  perhaps,  as 
Dr  Whitehead  has  suggested,  a  certain  minimum 
duration)  to  inhere  in.  Other  properties,  such  as  mass 
or  electric  charge,  might  be  able  to  inhere  in  volumes 
smaller  than  these  minima  and  even  in  volumes  and 
durations  of  any  degree  of  smallness.  Molecular  and 
electronic  theories  of  heat  and  light  would  then  assert 
that  a  certain  volume  is  pervaded  by  such  and  such  a 
temperature  or  such  and  such  a  colour  if  and  only  if  it 
contains  certain  arrangements  of  particles  moving  in 


^; 


48        MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

certain  ways.  What  we  should  have  would  be  laws 
connecting  the  macroscopic  qualities  which  inhere  in  a 
volume  with  the  number,  arrangement,  and  motion  of 
the  microscopic  particles  which  are  contained  in  this 
volume. 

On  such  a  view  how  much  would  be  left  of  Pure 
Mechanism?  (i)  It  would  of  course  not  be  true  of 
macroscopic  properties,  (ii)  It  might  still  be  true  of 
the  microscopic  particles  in  their  interactions  with  each 
other.  It  might  be  that  there  is  ultimately  only  one 
kind  of  particle,  that  it  has  only  one  non-spatio-temporal 
quality,  that  these  particles  affect  each  other  by  pairs 
according  to  a  single  law,  and  that  their  effects  are 
compounded  according  to  a  single  law.  (iii)  But, 
even  if  this  were  true  of  the  microscopic  particles  in 
their  relations  with  each  other,  it  plainly  could  not  be 
the  whole  truth  about  them.  For  there  will  also  be  laws 
connecting  the  presence  of  such  and  such  a  configura- 
tion of  particles,  moving  in  such  and  such  ways,  in  a 
certain  region,  with  the  pervasion  of  this  region  by 
such  and  such  a  determinate  value  of  a  certain  macro- 
scopic quality,  e.g.,  a  certain  shade  of  red  or  a  tempera- 
ture of  57°  C.  These  will  be  just  as  much  laws  of  the 
external  world  as  are  the  laws  which  connect  the 
motions  of  one  particle  with  those  of  another.  And  it 
is  perfectly  clear  that  the  one  kind  of  law  cannot 
possibly  be  reduced  to  the  other ;  since  colour  and 
temperature  are  irreducibly  different  characteristics 
from  figure  and  motion,  however  close  may  be  the 
causal  connexion  between  the  occurrence  of  the  one 
kind  of  characteristic  and  that  of  the  other.  Moreover, 
there  will  have  to  be  a  number  of  different  and  irreduc- 
ible laws  connecting  microscopic  with  macroscopic 
characteristics  ;  for  there  are  many  different  and  irre- 
ducible determinable  macroscopic  characteristics,  e.g., 
colour,  temperature,  sound,  etc.  And  each  will  need 
its  own  peculiar  law. 

(2)  A    second   conceivable   view   would    be   that    in 


MECHANISM  AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES      49 

perception  we  are  in  direct  cognitive  contact  with  parts 
of  the  surfaces  of  external  objects,  and  that,  so  long  as 
we  are  looking  at  them  or  feeling  them,  they  do  have 
the  colours  or  temperatures  which  they  then  seem  to  us 
to  have.  But  that  the  inherence  of  colours  and  tempera- 
tures in  external  bodies  is  dependent  upon  the  presence 
of  a  suitable  bodily  organism,  or  a  suitable  mind,  or  of 
both,  in  a  suitable  relation  to  the  external  object. 

On  such  a  view  it  is  plain  that  Pure  Mechanism 
cannot  be  an  adequate  theory  of  the  external  world  of 
matter.  For  colours  and  temperatures  would  belong 
to  external  objects  on  this  view,  though  they  would 
characterise  an  external  object  only  when  very  special 
conditions  are  fulfilled.  And  evidently  the  laws  accord- 
ing to  which,  e.g.,)  a  certain  shade  of  colour  inheres  in 
a  certain  external  region  when  a  suitable  organism  or 
mind  is  in  suitable  relations  to  that  region  cannot  be 
of  the  mechanical  type. 

(3)  A  third  conceivable  view  is  that  physical  objects 
can  seem  to  have  qualities  which  do  not  really  belong 
to  any  physical  object,  e.g.^  that  a  pillar-box  can  seem 
to  have  a  certain  shade  of  red  although  really  no 
physical  object  has  any  colour  at  all.  This  type  of 
theory  divides  into  two  forms,  {a)  It  might  be  held  that, 
when  a  physical  object  seems  to  have  a  certain  shade 
of  red,  there  really  is  something  in  the  world  which  has 
this  shade  of  red,  although  this  something  cannot  be  a 
physical  object  or  literally  a  part  of  one.  Some  would 
say  that  there  is  a  red  mental  state — a  "sensation  " — ; 
others  that  the  red  colour  belongs  to  something  which 
is  neither  mental  nor  physical.*  On  either  of  these 
alternatives  it  would  be  conceivable  that  Pure  Mechan- 
ism was  the  whole  truth  about  matter  considered  in  its 
relations  with  matter.  But  it  would  be  certain  that  it 
is  not  the  whole  truth  about  matter  when  this  limitation 
is  removed.  Granted  that  bits  of  matter  only  seem  to 
be  red  or  to  be  hot,  we  still  claim  to  know  a  good  deal 
about  the  conditions  under  which  one  bit  of  matter  will 

*  {b)  It  might  be  held  that  nothing  in  the  world  really  has  colour,  though 
certain  things  seem  to  have  certain  colours.  The  relation  of  ''seeming  to 
have  "  is  taken  as  ultimate. 

D 


=) 


50         MIND   AND   ITS  PLACE   IN   NATURE 

seem  to  be  red  and  another  to  be  blue  and  about  the 
conditions  under  which  one  bit  of  matter  will  seem  to 
be  hot  and  another  to  be  cold.     This  knowledge  belongs 
partly  to   physics   and    partly   to   the   physiology   and 
anatomy  of  the  brain  and  nervous  system.     We  know 
little  or  nothing  about  the  mental  conditions  which  have 
to  be  fulfilled  if  an  external  object  is  to  seem   red  or 
hot  to  a  percipient ;  but  we  can  say  that  this  depends 
on  an  unknown  mental  factor  x  and  on  certain  physical 
conditions  a,  b,  c,  etc.,   partly  within  and  partly  outside 
the  percipient's  body,   about  which  we  know  a  good 
deal.      It  is  plain  then    that,    on    the    present   theory, 
physical    events   and   objects   do    not   merely    interact 
mechanically    with   each   other ;    they   also   play   their 
part,  along  with  a  mental  factor,  in  causing  such  and 
such  an  external  object  to  seem  to  such  and  such  an 
observer   to    have   a   certain    quality   which    really    no 
physical  object  has.     In  fact,  for  the  present  purpose, 
the  difference  between  theories   (2)  and  (3)   is   simply 
the  following.      On    theory   (2)   certain    events   in    the 
external  object,    in  the  observer's  body,  and  possibly 
in   his   mind,   cause  a  certain  quality  to  inhere  in  the 
external    object   so    long   as    they   are   going   on.     On 
theory  (3)  they  cause  the  same  quality  to  seem  to  inhere 
in   the   same   object,    so   long   as    they   are   going   on, 
though    actually    it    does    not   inhere   in    any   physical 
object.     Theory   (i),    for   the   present   purpose,    differs 
from    theory   (2)   only    in    taking   the    naive   view  that 
the  body  and   mind  of  the  observer  are  irrelevant  to 
the  occurrence  of  the   sensible   quality    in    the   external 
object,    though    of  course    it   would   admit    that   these 
factors   are    relevant    to   the  perception   of    this   quality 
by    the     observer.      This    last    point    is    presumably 
common  to  all  three  theories. 

I    will    now    sum    up    the    argument.      The    plain 

;(CO         I    fact  is   that   the  external    world,    as    perceived    by    us, 

"^^ '^^        I    seems    not   to    have    the    homogeneity    demanded    by 

Pure  Mechanism.     If  it  really  has  the  various  irreduc- 


MECHANISM   AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES       51 

ibly  different  sensible  qualities  which  it  seems  to  have, 
Pure  Mechanism  cannot  be  true  of  the  whole  of  the  l^ 
external  world  and  cannot  be  the  whole  truth  about 
any  part  of  it.  The  best  that  we  can  do  for  Pure 
Mechanism  on  this  theory  is  to  divide  up  the  external 
world  first  on  a  macroscopic  and  then  on  a  microscopic 
scale  ;  to  suppose  that  the  macroscopic  qualities  which 
pervade  any  region  are  causally  determined  by  the 
microscopic  events  and  objects  which  exist  within  it ; 
and  to  hope  that  the  latter,  in  their  interactions  with 
each  other  at  any  rate,  fulfil  the  conditions  of  Pure 
Mechanism.  This  result  may  remind  the  reader  of 
the  carefully  qualified  compliment  which  Mr  Gibbon 
pays  to  the  morality  of  the  Negroes  in  a  foot-note 
which  I  forbear  from  quoting.  We  must  remember, 
moreover,  that  there  is  no  a  priori  reason  why  micro- 
scopic events  and  objects  should  answer  the  demands 
of  Pure  Mechanism  even  in  their  interactions  with 
each  other ;  that,  so  far  as  science  can  tell  us  at 
present,  they  do  not ;  and  that,  in  any  case,  the  laws 
connecting  them  with  the  occurrence  of  macroscopic 
qualities  cannot  be  mechanical  in  the  sense  defined. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  deny  that  physical  objects 
have  the  various  sensible  qualities  which  they  seem  to 
us  to  have,  we  are  still  left  with  the  fact  that  some 
things  seem  to  be  red,  others  to  be  blue,  others  to  be 
hot,  and  so  on.  And  a  complete  account  of  the  world 
must  include  some  explanation  of  such  events  as  ''seem- 
ing red  to  me",  ''seeming  blue  to  you",  etc.  We 
can  admit  that  the  ultimate  physical  objects  may  all 
be  exactly  alike,  may  all  have  only  one  non-spatio- 
temporal  and  non-causal  property,  and  may  interact 
with  each  other  in  the  way  which  Pure  Mechanism 
requires.  But  we  must  admit  that  they  are  also  cause- 
factors  in  determining  the  appearance,  if  not  the  occurrence, 
of  the  various  sensible  qualities  at  such  and  such  places 
and  times.  And,  in  these  transactions,  the  laws  which 
they  obey  cannot  be  mechanical. 


* 


52        MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE  IN   NATURE 

We  may  put  the  whole  matter  in  a  nutshell  by  saying 
that  the  appearance  of  a  plurality  of  irreducible  sensible 
qualities  forces  us,  no  matter  what  theory  we  adopt 
about  their  status,  to  distinguish  two  different  kinds 
of  law.  One  may  be  called  "  intra-physical "  and  the 
other  "trans-physical".  The  intra-physical  laws  may 
be,  though  there  seems  no  positive  reason  to  suppose 
that  they  are,  of  the  kind  required  by  Pure  Mechanism. 
If  so,  there  is  just  one  ultimate  elementary  intra- 
physical  law  and  one  ultimate  principle  of  composition 
for  intra-physical  transactions.  But  the  trans-physical 
laws  cannot  satisfy  the  demands  of  Pure  Mechanism  ; 
and,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  there  must  be  at  least  as  many 
irreducible  trans-physical  laws  as  there  are  irreducible 
determinable  sense-qualities.  The  nature  of  the  trans- 
physical  laws  will  of  course  depend  on  the  view  that 
we  take  about  the  status  of  sensible  qualities.  It  will 
be  somewhat  different  for  each  of  the  three  alternative 
types  of  theory  which  I  have  mentioned,  and  it  will 
differ  according  to  which  form  of  the  third  theory  we 
adopt.  But  it  is  not  necessary  for  our  present  purpose 
to  go  into  further  detail  on  this  point. 

The  Three  Possible  Ways  of  accounting  for  char- 
acteristic Differences  of  Behaviour.  So  far  we  have 
confined  our  attention  to  pure  qualities,  such  as  red, 
hot,  etc.  By  calling  these  "pure  qualities"  I  mean 
that,  when  we  say  "This  is  red",  "This  is  hot",  and 
so  on,  it  is  no  part  of  the  meaning  of  our  predicate 
that  "  this  "  stands  in  such  and  such  a  relation  to  some- 
thing else.  It  is  logically  possible  that  this  should  be 
red  even  though  "this"  were  the  only  thing  in  the 
world  ;  though  it  is  probably  not  physically  possible. 
I  have  argued  so  far  that  the  fact  that  external  objects 
seem  to  have  a  number  of  irreducibly  different  pure 
qualities  makes  it  certain  that  Pure  Mechanism  cannot 
be  an  adequate  account  of  the  external  world.  I  want 
now  to  consider  differences  of  behaviour  amonsr  external 


MECHANISM   AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES       53 

objects.  These  are  not  differences  of  pure  quality. 
When  I  say  "This  combines  with  that",  "This  eats 
and  digests  ",  and  so  on,  I  am  making  statements  which 
would  have  no  meaning  if  "  this  "  were  the  only  thing 
in  the  world.  Now  there  are  apparently  extremely 
different  kinds  of  behaviour  to  be  found  among  external 
objects.  A  bit  of  gold  and  a  bit  of  silver  behave  quite 
differently  when  put  into  nitric  acid.  A  cat  and  an 
oyster  behave  quite  differently  when  put  near  a  mouse. 
Again,  all  bodies  which  would  be  said  to  be  "alive", 
behave  differently  in  many  ways  from  all  bodies  which 
would  be  said  not  to  be  "alive".  And,  among  non- 
living bodies,  what  we  call  their  "chemical  behaviour" 
is  very  different  from  what  we  call  their  "merely  physical 
behaviour".  The  question  that  we  have  now  to  discuss 
is  this  :  "Are  the  differences  between  merely  physical, 
chemical,  and  vital  behaviour  ultimate  and  irreducible 
or  not?  And  are  the  differences  in  chemical  behaviour 
between  Oxygen  and  Hydrogen,  or  the  differences  in 
vital  behaviour  between  trees  and  oysters  and  cats, 
ultimate  and  irreducible  or  not?"  I  do  not  expect  to 
be  able  to  give  a  conclusive  answer  to  this  question,  as 
I  do  claim  to  have  done  to  the  question  about  differences 
of  pure  quality.  But  I  hope  at  least  to  state  the  possible 
alternatives  clearly,  so  that  people  with  an  adequate 
knowledge  of  the  relevant  empirical  facts  may  know 
exactly  what  we  want  them  to  discuss,  and  may  not 
beat  the  air  in  the  regrettable  way  in  which  they  too 
often  have  done. 

We  must  first  notice  a  difference  between  vital  be- 
haviour, on  the  one  hand,  and  chemical  behaviour,  on 
the  other.  On  the  macroscopic  scale,  i.e.^  within  the 
limits  of  what  we  can  perceive  with  our  unaided  senses 
or  by  the  help  of  optical  instruments,  all  matter  seems 
to  behave  chemically  from  time  to  time,  though  there 
may  be  long  stretches  throughout  which  a  given  bit 
of  matter  has  no  chance  to  exhibit  any  marked  chemical 
behaviour.     But  only  a  comparatively  few  bits  of  matter 


/ 


54        MIND  AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

ever  exhibit  vital  behaviour.  These  are  always  very 
complex  chemically  ;  they  are  always  composed  of  the 
same  comparatively  small  selection  of  chemical  elements ; 
and  they  generally  have  a  characteristic  external  form 
and  internal  structure.  All  of  them  after  a  longer  or 
shorter  time  cease  to  show  vital  behaviour,  and  soon 
after  this  they  visibly  lose  their  characteristic  external 
form  and  internal  structure.  We  do  not  know  how  to 
make  a  living  body  out  of  non-living  materials  ;  and 
we  do  not  know  how  to  make  a  once  living  body, 
which  has  ceased  to  behave  vitally,  live  again.  But 
we  know  that  plants,  so  long  as  they  are  alive,  do 
take  up  inorganic  materials  from  their  surroundings 
and  build  them  up  into  their  own  substance  ;  that 
all  living  bodies  maintain  themselves  for  a  time  through 
constant  change  of  material  ;  and  that  they  all  have 
the  power  of  restoring  themselves  when  not  too  severely 
injured,  and  of  producing  new  living  bodies  like  them- 
selves. 

Let  us  now  consider  what  general  types  of  view  are 
possible  about  the  fact  that  certain  things  behave  in 
characteristically  different  ways,  (i)  Certain  character- 
istically different  ways  of  behaving  may  be  regarded  as 
absolutely  unanalysable  facts  which  do  not  depend  in 
any  way  on  differences  of  structure  or  components. 
This  would  be  an  absurd  view  to  take  about  vital 
behaviour,  for  we  know  that  all  living  bodies  have  a 
complex  structure  even  on  the  macroscopic  scale,  and 
that  their  characteristic  behaviour  depends  m  part  at 
least  on  their  structure  and  components.  It  would  also 
be  a  foolish  view  to  take  about  the  chemical  behaviour 
of  non-living  substances  which  are  known  to  be  com- 
pounds and  can  be  split  up  and  re-synthesised  by  us 
from  their  elements.  But  it  was  for  many  years  the 
orthodox  view  about  the  chemical  elements.  It  was 
held  that  the  characteristic  differences  between  the 
behaviour  of  Oxygen  and  Hydrogen  are  due  in  no 
v/ay  to  differences  of  structure  or  components,  but  must 


MECHANISM   AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES       55 

simply  be  accepted  as  ultimate  facts.  This  first  alter- 
native can  hardly  be  counted  as  one  way  of  explain- 
ing differences  of  behaviour,  since  it  consists  in 
holding  that  there  are  certain  differences  which  can- 
not be  explained,  even  in  part,  but  must  simply  be 
swallowed  whole  with  that  philosophic  jam  which 
Professor  Alexander  calls  "natural  piety".  It  is 
worth  while  to  remark  that  we  could  never  be  logic- 
ally compelled  to  hold  this  view,  since  it  is  always 
open  to  us  to  suppose  that  what  is  macroscopically 
homogeneous  has  a  complex  microscopic  structure 
which  wholly  or  partly  determines  its  characteristic 
macroscopic  behaviour.  Nevertheless,  it  is  perfectly 
possible  that  this  hypothesis  is  not  true  in  certain  cases, 
and  that  there  are  certain  ultimate  differences  in  the 
material  world  which  must  just  be  accepted  as  brute 
facts. 

(2)  We  come  now  to  types  of  theory  which  profess 
to  explain,  wholly  or  partly,  differences  of  behaviour 
in  terms  of  structure  or  components  or  both.  These 
of  course  all  presuppose  that  the  objects  that  we  are 
dealing  with  are  at  any  rate  microscopically  complex  : 
an  hypothesis,  as  I  have  said,  which  can  never  be 
conclusively  refuted.  We  may  divide  up  these  theories 
as  follows,  {a)  Those  which  hold  that  the  characteristic 
behaviour  of  a  certain  object  or  class  of  objects  is  in 
part  dependent  on  the  presence  of  a  peculiar  component 
which  does  not  occur  in  anything  that  does  not  behave 
in  this  way.  This  is  of  course  the  usual  view  to  take 
about  the  characteristic  chemical  behaviour  of  com- 
pounds. We  say  that  Silver  Chloride  behaves  differ- 
ently from  Common  Salt  because  one  contains  Silver 
and  the  other  Sodium.  It  is  always  held  that  differ- 
ences of  microscopic  structure  are  also  relevant  to  ex- 
plaining differences  of  macroscopic  chemical  behaviour. 
E.g.,  the  very  marked  differences  between  the  chemical 
behaviour  of  acetone  and  propion  aldehyde,  which  both 
consist  of  Carbon,   Hydrogen,  and  Oxygen  in  exactly 


56        MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

the  same  proportions,  are  ascribed  to  the  fact  that  the 
former  has  the  structure  symbolised  by 
CH3— C— CH3 

O 

and  that  the  latter  has  the  structure  symbolised  by 

CHg  '  Crit,  '  C<^ 

\H 

The  doctrine  which  I  will  call  "Substantial  Vitalism  " 
is  logically  a  theory  of  this  type  about  vital  behaviour. 
It  assumes  that  a  necessary  factor  in  explaining  the 
characteristic  behaviour  of  living  bodies  is  the  presence 
in  them  of  a  peculiar  component,  often  called  an 
"Entelechy",  which  does  not  occur  in  inorganic 
matter  or  in  bodies  which  were  formerly  alive  but 
have  now  died.  I  will  try  to  bring  out  the  analogies 
and  differences  between  this  type  of  theory  as  applied 
to  vital  behaviour  and  as  applied  to  the  behaviour  of 
chemical  compounds,  (i)  It  is  not  supposed  that  the 
presence  of  an  entelechy  is  sufficient  to  explain  vital 
behaviour ;  as  in  chemistry,  the  structure  of  the  com- 
plex is  admitted  to  be  also  an  essential  factor,  (ii)  It 
is  admitted  that  entelechies  cannot  be  isolated,  and 
that  perhaps  they  cannot  exist  apart  from  the  complex 
which  is  a  living  organism.  But  there  is  plenty  of 
analogy  to  this  in  chemistry.  In  the  first  place, 
elements  have  been  recognised,  and  the  characteristic 
behaviour  of  certain  compounds  has  been  ascribed  to 
their  presence,  long  before  they  were  isolated.  Secondly, 
there  are  certain  groups,  like  CH3  and  CgH^  in  organic 
chemistry,  which  cannot  exist  in  isolation,  but  which 
nevertheless  play  an  essential  part  in  determining  the 
characteristic  behaviour  of  certain  compounds,  (iii)  The 
entelechy  is  supposed  to  exert  some  kind  of  directive 
influence  over  matter  which  enters  the  organism  from 
outside.  There  is  a  faint  analogy  to  this  in  certain 
parts  of  organic   chemistry.      The   presence  of  certain 


MECHANISM   AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES       57 

groups  in  certain  positions  in  a  Benzene  nucleus  makes 
it  very  easy  to  put  certain  other  groups  and  very  hard 
to  put  others  into  certain  positions  in  the  nucleus. 
There  are  well-known  empirical  rules  on  this  point. 

Why  then  do  most  of  us  feel  pretty  confident  of 
the  truth  of  the  chemical  explanation  and  very  doubtful 
of  the  formally  analogous  explanation  of  vital  behaviour 
in  terms  of  entelechies?  I  think  that  our  main  reasons 
are  the  following,  and  that  they  are  fairly  sound  ones, 
(i)  It  is  true  that  some  elements  were  recognised  and 
used  for  chemical  explanations  long  before  they  were 
isolated.  But  a  great  many  other  elements  had  been 
isolated,  and  it  was  known  that  the  process  presented 
various  degrees  of  difficulty.  No  entelechy,  or  any- 
thing like  one,  has  ever  been  isolated ;  hence  an 
entelechy  is  a  purely  hypothetical  entity  in  a  sense  in 
which  an  as  yet  unisolated  but  suspected  chemical 
element  is  not.  If  it  be  said  that  an  isolated  entelechy 
is  from  the  nature  of  the  case  something  which  could 
not  be  perceived,  and  that  this  objection  is  therefore 
unreasonable,  I  can  only  answer  (as  I  should  to  the 
similar  assertion  that  the  physical  phenomena  of  medium- 
ship  can  happen  only  in  darkness  and  in  the  presence 
of  sympathetic  spectators)  that  it  may  well  be  true  but 
is  certainly  very  unfortunate,  (ii)  It  is  true  that  some 
groups  which  cannot  exist  in  isolation  play  a  most 
important  part  in  chemical  explanations.  But  they 
Sive.  groups  of  known  composition,  not  mysterious  simple 
entities;  and  their  inability  to  exist  by  themselves  is  not 
an  isolated  fact  but  is  part  of  the  more  general,  though 
imperfectly  understood,  fact  of  valency.  Moreover,  we 
can  at  least  pass  these  groups  from  one  compound  to 
another,  and  can  note  how  the  chemical  properties 
change  as  one  compound  loses  such  a  group  and 
another  gains  it.  There  is  no  known  analogy  to  this 
with  entelechies.  You  cannot  pass  an  entelechy  from  a 
living  man  into  a  corpse  and  note  that  the  former  ceases 
and  the  latter  begins  to  behave  vitally,     (iii)  Entelechies 


58        MIND  AND   ITS   PLACE  IN  NATURE 

are  supposed  to  differ  in  kind  from  material  particles  ; 
and  it  is  doubtful  whether  they  are  literally  in  Space 
at  all.  It  is  thus  hard  to  understand  what  exactly  is 
meant  by  saying  that  a  living  body  is  a  compound  of 
an  entelechy  and  a  material  structure  ;  and  impossible 
to  say  anything  in  detail  about  the  structure  of  the  total 
complex  thus  formed. 

These  objections  seem  to  me  to  make  the  doctrine 
of  Substantial  Vitalism  unsatisfactory,  though  not 
impossible.  I  think  that  those  who  have  accepted  it 
have  done  so  largely  under  a  misapprehension.  They 
have  thought  that  there  was  no  alternative  between 
Biological  Mechanism  (which  I  shall  define  a  little 
later)  and  Substantial  Vitalism.  They  found  the 
former  unsatisfactory,  and  so  they  felt  obliged  to 
accept  the  latter.  We  shall  see  in  a  moment,  how- 
ever, that  there  is  another  alternative  type  of  theory, 
which  I  will  call  "Emergent  Vitalism",  borrowing 
the  adjective  from  Professors  Alexander  and  Lloyd 
Morgan.  Of  course  positive  arguments  have  been 
put  forward  in  favour  of  entelechies,  notably  by  Driesch. 
I  do  not  propose  to  consider  them  in  detail.  I  will 
merely  say  that  Driesch's  arguments  do  not  seem  to 
me  to  be  in  the  least  conclusive,  even  against  Biological 
Mechanism,  because  they  seem  to  forget  that  the  smallest 
fragment  which  we  can  make  of  an  organised  body  by 
cutting  it  up  may  contain  an  enormous  number  of 
similar  microscopic  structures,  each  of  enormous  com- 
plexity. And,  even  if  it  be  held  that  Driesch  has  con- 
clusively dzsproved  Biological  Mechanism,  I  cannot  see 
that  his  arguments  have  the  least  tendency  to  prove 
Substantial  Vitalism  rather  than  the  Emergent  form  of 
Vitalism  which  does  not  assume  entelechies. 

{d)  I  come  now  to  the  second  type  of  theory  which 
professes  to  explain,  wholly  or  partly,  the  differences  of 
behaviour  between  different  things.  This  kind  of  theory 
denies  that  there  need  be  any  peculiar  component  which 
is  present  in  all  things  that  behave  in  a  certain  way  and 


MECHANISM   AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES      59 

is  absent  from  all  things  which  do  not  behave  in  this 
way.  It  says  that  the  components  may  be  exactly  alike 
in  both  cases,  and  it  tries  to  explain  the  difference  of 
behaviour  wholly  in  terms  of  difference  of  structure. 
Now  it  is  most  important  to  notice  that  this  type  of 
theory  can  take  two  radically  different  forms.  They 
differ  according  to  the  view  that  we  take  about  the  laws 
which  connect  the  properties  of  the  components  with 
the  characteristic  behaviour  of  the  complex  wholes 
which  they  make  up.  (i)  On  the  first  form  of  the  theory 
the  characteristic  behaviour  of  the  whole  could  not,  even  j 
in  theory,  be  deduced  from  the  most  complete  know-  / 
ledge  of  the  behaviour  of  its  components,  taken  separ- 
ately or  in  other  combinations,  and  of  their  proportions 
and  arrangements  in  this  whole.  This  alternative,  which  I 
I  have  roughly  outlined  and  shall  soon  discuss  in  detail, 
is  what  I  understand  by  the  "Theory  of  Emergence". 
I  cannot  give  a  conclusive  example  of  it,  since  it  is  a 
matter  of  controversy  whether  it  actually  applies  to 
anything.  But  there  is  no  doubt,  as  I  hope  to  show, 
that  it  is  a  logically  possible  view  with  a  good  deal  in 
its  favour.  I  will  merely  remark  that,  so  far  as  we 
know  at  present,  the  characteristic  behaviour  of  Common 
Salt  cannot  be  deduced  from  the  most  complete  know- 
ledge of  the  properties  of  Sodium  in  isolation  ;  or  of 
Chlorine  in  isolation  ;  or  of  other  compounds  of  Sodium, 
such  as  Sodium  Sulphate,  and  of  other  compounds  of 
Chlorine,  such  as  Silver  Chloride,  (ii)  On  the  second 
form  of  the  theory  the  characteristic  behaviour  of  the 
whole  is  not  only  completely  determined  by  the  nature 
and  arrangement  of  its  components  ;  in  addition  to  this 
it  is  held  that  the  behaviour  of  the  whole  could,  in 
theory  at  least,  be  deduced  from  a  sufficient  knowledge 
of  how  the  components  behave  in  isolation  or  in  other 
wholes  of  a  simpler  kind.  I  will  call  this  kind  of  theory 
"Mechanistic".  A  theory  may  be  "mechanistic"  in 
this  sense  without  being  an  instance  of  Pure  Mechanism, 
in  the  sense  defined  earlier  in  this  chapter.     E.g.^  if  a 


6o        MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE  IN   NATURE 


I 

^1 


biologist  held  that  all  the  characteristic  behaviour  of 
living  beings  could  be  deduced  from  an  adequate  know- 
ledge of  the  physical  and  chemical  laws  which  its 
components  would  obey  in  isolation  or  in  non-living 
complexes,  he  would  be  called  a  "Biological  Mechanist" 
even  though  he  believed  that  the  different  chemical 
elements  are  ultimately  different  kinds  of  stuff  and  that 
the  laws  of  chemical  composition  are  not  of  the  type 
demanded  by  Pure  Mechanism. 

The  most  obvious  examples  of  wholes  to  which  a 
mechanistic  theory  applies  are  artificial  machines.  A 
clock  behaves  in  a  characteristic  way.  But  no  one 
supposes  that  the  peculiar  behaviour  of  clocks  depends 
on  their  containing  as  a  component  a  peculiar  entity 
which  is  not  present  in  anything  but  clocks.  Nor  does 
anyone  suppose  that  the  peculiar  behaviour  of  clocks  is 
simply  an  emergent  quality  of  that  kind  of  structure 
and  cannot  be  learnt  by  studying  anything  but  clocks. 
We  know  perfectly  well  that  the  behaviour  of  a  clock 
can  be  deduced  from  the  particular  arrangement  of 
springs,  wheels,  pendulum,  etc.,  in  it,  and  from  general 
laws  of  mechanics  and  physics  which  apply  just  as 
much  to  material  systems  which  are  not  clocks. 

To  sum  up.  We  have  distinguished  three  possible 
types  of  theory  to  account  wholly  or" partly  for  the 
characteristic  differences  of  behaviour  between  different 
kinds  of  material  object,  viz.,  the  Theory  of  a  Special 
Component,  the  Theory  of  Emergence,  and  the  Mechan- 
istic Theory.  We  have  illustrated  these,  so  far  as 
possible,  with  examples  which  everyone  will  accept. 
In  the  special  problem  of  the  peculiar  behaviour  of 
living  bodies  these  three  types  of  theory  are  represented 
by  Substantial  Vitalism,  Emergent  Vitalismj  and  Bio- 
logical Mechanism.  I  have  argued  that  Substantial 
"Vitalism,  though  logically  possible,  is  a  very  unsatis- 
factory kind  of  theory,  and  that  probably  many  people 
who  have  accepted  it  have  done  so  because  they  did  not 
recognise    the    alternative   of    Emergent   Vitalism.       I 


MECHANISM   AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES      6i 

propose  now  to  consider  in  greater  detail  the  emergent 
and  the  mechanistic  types  of  theory. 

Emergent  Theories.  Put  in  abstract  terms  the  emergent 
theory  asserts  that  there  are  certain  wholes,  composed 
(say)  of  constituents  A,  B,  and  C  in  a  relation  R  to 
each  other  ;  that  all  wholes  composed  of  constituents  of 
the  same  kind  as  A,  B,  and  C  in  relations  of  the  same 
kind  as  R  have  certain  characteristic  properties  ;  that 
A,  B,  and  C  are  capable  of  occurring  in  other  kinds  of 
complex  where  the  relation  is  not  of  the  same  kind  as 
R  ;  and  that  the  characteristic  properties  of  the  whole 
R(A,  B,  C)  cannot,  even  in  theory,  be  deduced  from  the 
most  complete  knowledge  of  the  properties  of  A,  B,  and 
G  in  isolation  or  in  other  wholes  which  are  not  of  the 
form  R(A,  B,  C).  The  mechanistic  theory  rejects  the 
last  clause  of  this  assertion. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  question  in  detail.  If  we 
want  to  explain  the  behaviour  of  any  whole  in  terms  of 
its  structure  and  components  we  always  need  two  inde- 
pendent kinds  of  information,  {a)  We  need  to  know 
how  the  parts  would  behave  separately.  And  ib)  we 
need  to  know  the  law  or  laws  according  to  which  the 
behaviour  of  the  separate  parts  is  compounded  when 
they  are  acting  together  in  any  proportion  and  arrange- 
ment. Now  it  is  extremely  important  to  notice  that 
these  two  bits  of  information  are  quite  independent  of 
each  other  in  every  case.  Let  us  consider,  e.g.^  the 
simplest  possible  case.  We  know  that  a  certain  tap, 
when  running  by  itself,  will  put  so  many  cubic  centi- 
metres of  water  into  a  tank  in  a  minute.  We  know 
that  a  certain  other  tap,  when  running  by  itself,  will 
put  so  many  cubic  centimetres  of  water  into  this  tank  in 
the  same  time.  It  does  not  follow  logically  from  these 
two  bits  of  information  that,  when  the  two  taps  are 
turned  on  together,  the  sum  of  these  two  numbers  of 
cubic  centimetres  will  be  added  to  the  contents  of  the 
tank  every  minute.  This  might  not  happen  for  two 
reasons.     In  the  first  place,  it  is  quite  likely  that,  if  the 


62        MIND  AND   ITS   PLACE  IN  NATURE 

two  taps  came  from  the  same  pipe,  less  would  flow  from 
each  when  both  were  turned  on  together  than  when 
each  was  turned  on  separately  ;  i.e.,  the  separate  factors 
do  not  behave  together  as  they  would  have  behaved  in 
isolation.  Again,  if  one  tap  delivered  hot  water  and 
the  other  cold  water,  the  simple  assumption  about  com- 
position would  break  down  although  the  separate  factors 
continued  to  obey  the  same  laws  as  they  had  followed 
when  acting  in  isolation.  For  there  would  be  a  change 
of  volume  on  mixture  of  the  hot  and  cold  water. 

Next  let  us  consider  the  case  of  two  forces  acting 
on  a  particle  at  an  angle  to  each  other.  We  find  by 
experiment  that  the  actual  motion  of  the  body  is  the 
vector-sum  of  the  motions  which  it  would  have  had  if 
each  had  been  acting  separately.  There  is  not  the  least 
possibility  of  deducing  this  law  of  composition  from  the 
laws  of  each  force  taken  separately.  There  is  one  other 
fact  worth  mentioning  here.  As  Mr  Russell  pointed 
out  long  ago,  a  vector-sum  is  not  a  sum  in  the  ordinary 
sense  of  the  word.  We  cannot  strictly  say  that  each 
force  is  doing  what  it  would  have  done  if  it  had  been 
alone,  and  that  the  result  of  their  joint  action  is  the  sum 
of  the  results  of  their  separate  actions.  A  velocity  of 
5  miles  an  hour  in  a  certain  direction  does  not  literally 
contain  as  parts  a  velocity  of  3  miles  an  hour  in  a  certain 
other  direction  and  a  velocity  of  4  miles  an  hour  in  a 
direction  at  right  angles  to  this.  All  that  we  can  say 
is  that  the  effect  of  several  forces  acting  together  is  a 
fairly  simple  mathematical  function  of  the  purely  hypo- 
thetical effects  which  each  would  have  had  if  it  had 
acted  by  itself,  and  that  this  function  reduces  to  an 
algebraical  sum  in  the  particular  case  where  all  the 
forces  are  in  the  same  line. 

We  will  now  pass  to  the  case  of  chemical  composition. 
Oxygen  has  certain  properties  and  Hydrogen  has 
certain  other  properties.  They  combine  to  form  water, 
and  the  proportions  in  which  they  do  this  are  fixed. 
Nothing  that  we  know  about  Oxygen  by  itself  or  in  its 


MECHANISM   AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES      6^. 


vJ 


combinations  with  anything  but  Hydrogen  would  give 
us  the  least  reason  to  suppose  that  it  would  combine 
with  Hydrogen  at  all.  Nothing  that  we  know  about 
Hydrogen  by  itself  or  in  its  combinations  with  anything 
but  Oxygen  would  give  us  the  least  reason  to  expect 
that  it  would  combine  with  Oxygen  at  all.  And  most 
of  the  chemical  and  physical  properties  of  water  have  no 
known  connexion,  either  quantitative  or  qualitative, 
with  those  of  Oxygen  and  Hydrogen.  Here  we  have  a 
clear  instance  of  a  case  where,  so  far  as  we  can  tell,  the 
properties  of  a  whole  composed  of  two  constituents 
could  not  have  been  predicted  from  a  knowledge  of  the 
properties  of  these  constituents  taken  separately,  or 
from  this  combined  with  a  knowledge  of  the  properties 
of  other  wholes  which  contain  these  constituents. 

Let  us  sum  up  the  conclusions  which  may  be  reached 
from  these  examples  before  going  further.  It  is  clear 
that  in  no  case  could  the  behaviour  of  a  whole  composed 
of  certain  constituents  be  predicted  merely  from  a 
knowledge  of  the  properties  of  these  constituents,  taken 
separately,  and  of  their  proportions  and  arrangements 
in  the  particular  complex  under  consideration.  When- 
ever this  seems  to  be  possible  it  is  because  we  are  using 
a  suppressed  premise  which  is  so  familiar  that  it  has 
escaped  our  notice.  The  suppressed  premise  is  the 
fact  that  we  have  examined  other  complexes  in  the  past 
and  have  noted  their  behaviour ;  that  we  have  found  a 
general  law  connecting  the  behaviour  of  these  wholes 
with  that  which  their  constituents  would  show  in 
isolation  ;  and  that  we  are  assuming  that  this  law  of 
composition  will  hold  also  of  the  particular  complex 
whole  at  present  under  consideration.  For  purely 
dynamical  transactions  this  assumption  is  pretty  well 
justified,  because  we  have  found  a  simple  law  of  com- 
position and  have  verified  it  very  fully  for  wholes  of 
very  different  composition,  complexity,  and  internal 
structure.  It  is  therefore  not  particularly  rash  to  expect 
to   predict   the   dynamical    behaviour   of    any   material 


64        MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE  IN   NATURE 

complex  under  the  action  of  any  set  of  forces,  however 
much  it  may  differ  in  the  details  of  its  structure  and 
parts  from  those  complexes  for  which  the  assumed  law 
of  composition  has  actually  been  verified. 

The  example  of  chemical  compounds  shows  us  that 
we  have  no  right  to  expect  that  the  same  simple  law  of 
composition  will  hold  for  chemical  as  for  dynamical 
transactions.  And  it  shows  us  something  further.  It 
shows  us  that,  if  we  want  to  know  the  chemical  (and 
many  of  the  physical)  properties  of  a  chemical  com- 
pound, such  as  silver-chloride,  it  is  absolutely  necessary 
to  study  samples  of  that  particular  compound.  It  would 
of  course  (on  any  view)  be  useless  merely  to  study  silver 
in  isolation  and  chlorine  in  isolation  ;  for  that  would  tell 
us  nothing  about  the  law  of  their  conjoint  action.  This 
would  be  equally  true  even  if  a  mechanistic  explanation 
of  the  chemical  behaviour  of  compounds  were  possible. 
The  essential  point  is  that  it  would  also  be  useless  to 
study  chemical  compounds  in  general  and  to  compare 
their  properties  with  those  of  their  elements  in  the  hope 
A^  \  of  discovering  a  general  law  of  composition  by  which  the 

properties  of  any  chemical  compound  could  be  foretold 
when  the  properties  of  its  separate  elements  were  known. 
So  far  as  we  know,  there  is  no  general  law  of  this  kind. 
It  is  useless  even  to  study  the  properties  of  other  com- 
pounds of  silver  and  of  other  compounds  of  chlorine  in 
the  hope  of  discovering  one  general  law  by  which  the 
properties  of  silver-compounds  could  be  predicted  from 
those  of  elementary  silver  and  another  general  law  by 
which  the  properties  of  chlorine-compounds  could  be 
predicted  from  those  of  elementary  chlorine.  No  doubt 
the  properties  of  silver-chloride  are  completely  determined 
by  those  of  silver  and  of  chlorine  ;  in  the  sense  that 
whenever  you  have  a  whole  composed  of  these  two 
elements  in  certain  proportions  and  relations  you  have 
something  with  the  characteristic  properties  of  silver- 
chloride,  and  that  nothing  has  these  properties  except  a 
whole  composed  in  this  way.     But  the  law  connecting 


MECHANISM   AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES      65 

the  properties  of  silver-chloride  with  those  of  silver  and 
of  chlorine  and  with  the  structure  of  the  compound  is, 
so  far  as  we  know,  an  unique  and  ultimate  law.  By  this 
I  mean  {a)  that  it  is  not  a  special  case  which  arises 
through  substituting  certain  determinate  values  for 
determinable  variables  in  a  general  law  which  connects 
the  properties  of  any  chemical  compound  with  those  of 
its  separate  elements  and  with  its  structure.  And  {U) 
that  it  is  not  a  special  case  which  arises  by  combining 
two  more  general  laws,  one  of  which  connects  the 
properties  of  any  silver -compound  with  those  of 
elementary  silver,  whilst  the  other  connects  the 
properties  of  any  chlorine- compound  with  those  of 
elementary  chlorine.  So  far  as  we  know  there  are  no 
such  laws.  It  is  ic)  a  law  which  could  have  been  dis- 
covered only  by  studying  samples  of  silver -chloride 
itself,  and  which  can  be  extended  inductively  only  to 
other  samples  of  the  same  substance. 

We  may  contrast  this  state  of  affairs  with  that  which 
exists  where  a  mechanistic  explanation  is  possible.  In 
order  to  predict  the  behaviour  of  a  clock  a  man  need 
never  have  seen  a  clock  in  his  life.  Provided  he  is 
told  how  it  is  constructed,  and  that  he  has  learnt  from 
the  study  of  other  material  systems  the  general  rules 
about  motion  and  about  the  mechanical  properties  of 
springs  and  of  rigid  bodies,  he  can  foretell  exactly  how 
a  system  constructed  like  a  clock  must  behave. 

The  situation  with  which  we  are  faced  in  chemistry, 
which  seems  to  offer  the  most  plausible  example  of 
emergent  behaviour,  may  be  described  in  two  alternative 
ways.  These  may  be  theoretically  different,  but  in 
practice  they  are  equivalent.  (i)  The  first  way  of 
putting  the  case  is  the  following.  What  we  call  the 
"  properties  "  of  the  chemical  elements  are  very  largely 
propositions  about  the  compounds  which  they  form 
with  other  elements  under  suitable  conditions.  E.g.^ 
one  of  the  "properties"  of  silver  is  that  it  combines 
under  certain  conditions  with   chlorine  to  give  a  com- 


66        MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE  IN   NATURE 

pound  with  the  properties  of  silver-chloride.  Likewise 
one  of  the  "properties"  of  chlorine  is  that  under 
certain  conditions  it  combines  with  silver  to  give  a 
compound  with  the  properties  of  silver-chloride.  These 
*' properties  "  cannot  be  deduced  from  any  selection  of 
the  other  properties  of  silver  or  of  chlorine.  Thus  we 
may  say  that  we  do  not  know  all  the  properties  of 
chlorine  and  of  silver  until  they  have  been  put  in  presence 
of  each  other  ;  and  that  no  amount  of  knowledge  about 
the  properties  which  they  manifest  in  other  circum- 
stances will  tell  us  what  property,  if  any,  they  will 
manifest  in  these  circumstances.  Put  in  this  way  the 
position  is  that  we  do  not  know  all  the  properties  of 
any  element,  and  that  there  is  always  the  possibility 
of  their  manifesting  unpredictable  properties  when  put 
into  new  situations.  This  happens  whenever  a  chemical 
compound  is  prepared  or  discovered  for  the  first  time. 
(ii)  The  other  way  to  put  the  matter  is  to  confine  the 
name  "property"  to  those  characteristics  which  the 
elements  manifest  when  they  do  not  act  chemically  on 
each  other,  i.e.^  the  physical  characteristics  of  the 
isolated  elements.  In  this  case  we  may  indeed  say,  if 
we  like,  that  we  know  all  the  properties  of  each  element ; 
but  we  shall  have  to  admit  that  we  do  not  know  the 
laws  according  to  which  elements,  which  have  these 
properties  in  isolation,  together  produce  compounds 
having  such  and  such  other  characteristic  properties. 
]  The  essential  point  is  that  the  behaviour  of  an  as  yet 
■vJ  I  unexamined  compound  cannot  be  predicted  from  a 
K/\^  \  knowledge  of  the  properties  of  its  elements  in  isolation 
or  from  a  knowledge  of  the  properties  of  their  other 
compounds  ;  and  it  matters  little  whether  we  ascribe 
this  to  the  existence  of  innumerable  "  latent"  properties 
in  each  element,  each  of  which  is  manifested  only  in 
the  presence  of  a  certain  other  element ;  or  to  the  lack 
of  any  general  principle  of  composition,  such  as  the 
parallelogram  law  in  dynamics,  by  which  the  behaviour 
of  any  chemical  compound  could  be  deduced  from  its 


MECHANISM  AND   ITS  ALTERNATIVES      67 

structure  and  from  the  behaviour  of  each  of  its  elements 
in  isolation  from  the  rest. 

Let  us  now  apply  the  conceptions,  which  I  have  been 
explaining  and  illustrating  from  chemistry,  to  the  case 
of  vital  behaviour.  We  know  that  the  bits  of  matter 
which  behave  vitally  are  composed  of  various  chemical 
compounds  arranged  in  certain  characteristic  ways. 
We  have  prepared  and  experimented  with  many  of 
these  compounds  apart  from  living  bodies,  and  we  see 
no  obvious  reason  why  some  day  they  might  not  all  be 
synthesised  and  studied  in  the  chepiical  laboratory.  A 
living  body  might  be  regarded  as  a  compound  of  the 
second  order,  i.e.^  a  compound  composed  of  compounds  ; 
just  as  silver-chloride  is  a  compound~of  the~fifsr  order, 
z.^.,  one  composed  of  chemical  elements.  Now  it  is 
obviously  possible  that,  just  as  the  characteristic  be- 
haviour of  a  first-order  compound  could  not  be  pre- 
dicted from  any  amount  of  knowledge  of  the  properties 
of  its  elements  in  isolation  or  of  the  properties  of  other 
first-order  compounds,  so  the  properties  of  a  second- 
order  compound  could  not  be  predicted  from  any  amount 
of  knowledge  about  the  properties  of  its  first-order  con- 
stituents taken  separately  or  in  other  surroundings. 
Just  as  the  only  way  to  find  out  the  properties  of  silver- 
chloride  is  to  study  samples  of  silver-chloride,  and  no 
amount  of  study  of  silver  and  of  chlorine  taken  separately 
or  in  other  combinations  will  help  us  ;  so  the  only  way  , 
to  find  out  the  characteristic  behaviour  of  living  bodies  j 

may  be  to  study  living  bodies  as  such.    And  no  amount  ; 

of  knowledge  about  how  the  constituents  of  a  living  \  J 

body  behave  in   isolation  or  in  other  and    non-living 
wholes  might  suffice  to  enable  us  to  predict  the  char-  ) 

acteristic  behaviour  of  a  living  organism.     This  possi-    \ 
bility   is   perfectly  compatible  with   the  view  that  the    ' 
characteristic  behaviour  of  a  living  body  is  completely 
determined    by   the    nature    and    arrangement   of    the 
chemical   compounds   which   compose    it,  in  the  sense 
that  any  whole  which  is  composed  of  such  compounds 


t^- 


\      i 


68        MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

in  such  an  arrangement  will  show  vital  behaviour  and 
that  nothing  else  will  do  so.  We  should  merely  have 
to  recognise,  as  we  had  to  do  in  considering  a  first- 
order  compound  like  silver-chloride,  that  we  are  dealing 
with  an  ufiique  and  irreducible  law ;  and  not  with  a 
special  case  which  arises  by  the  substitution  of  particular 
values  for  variables  in  a  more  general  law,  nor  with  a 
combination  of  several  more  general  laws. 

We  could  state  this  possibility  about  living  organisms 
in  two  alternative  but  practically  equivalent  ways,  just 
as  we  stated  the  similar  possibility  about  chemical  com- 
pounds, (i)  The  first  way  would  be  this.  Most  of  the 
properties  which  we  ascribe  to  chemical  compounds  are 
statements  about  what  they  do  in  presence  of  various 
chemical  reagents  under  certain  conditions  of  tempera- 
ture, pressure,  etc.  These  various  properties  are  not 
deducible  from  each  other ;  and,  until  we  have  tried  a 
compound  with  every  other  compound  and  under  every 
possible  condition  of  temperature,  pressure,  etc.,  we 
cannot  possibly  know  that  we  have  exhausted  all  its 
properties.  It  is  therefore  perfectly  possible  that,  in 
the  very  special  situation  in  which  a  chemical  compound 
is  placed  in  a  living  body,  it  may  exhibit  properties 
which  remain  "latent"  under  all  other  conditions, 
(ii)  The  other,  and  practically  equivalent,  way  of 
putting  the  case  is  the  following.  If  we  confine  the 
name  "property"  to  the  behaviour  which  a  chemical 
compound  shows  in  isolation,  we  may  perhaps  say  that 
we  know  all  the  "properties"  of  the  chemical  con- 
stituents of  a  living  body.  But  we  shall  not  be  able  to 
predict  the  behaviour  of  the  body  unless  we  also  know 
the  laws  according  to  which  the  behaviour  which  each 
of  these  constituents  would  have  shown  in  isolation  is 
compounded  when  they  are  acting  together  in  certain 
proportions  and  arrangements.  We  can  discover  such 
laws  only  by  studying  complexes  containing  these 
constituents  in  various  proportions  and  arrangements. 
And  we  have  no  right  to  suppose  that  the  laws  which 


MECHANISM   AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES       69 

we  have  discovered  by  studying  non-living  complexes 
can  be  carried  over  without  modification  to  the  very 
different  case  of  living  complexes.  It  may  be  that  the 
only  way  to  discover  the  laws  according  to  which  the 
behaviour  of  the  separate  constituents  combines  to 
produce  the  behaviour  of  the  whole  in  a  living  body  is 
to  study  living  bodies  as  such.  For  practical  purposes 
it  makes  little  difference  whether  we  say  that  the 
chemical  compounds  which  compose  a  living  body 
have  "latent  properties"  which  are  manifested  only 
when  they  are  parts  of  a  whole  of  this  peculiar  structure  ; 
or  whether  we  say  that  the  properties  of  the  constituents 
of  a  living  body  are  the  same  whether  they  are  in  it  or 
out  of  it,  but  that  the  law  according  to  which  these 
separate  effects  are  compounded  with  each  other  is 
different  in  a  living  whole  from  what  it  is  in  any  non- 
living whole. 

This  view  about  living  bodies  and  vital  behaviour  is 
what  I  call  "Emergent  Vitalism";  and  it  is  important 
to  notice  that  it  is  quite  different  from  what  I  call  "Sub- 
stantial Vitalism  ".  So  far  as  I  can  understand  them 
I  should  say  that  Driesch  is  a  Substantial  Vitalist,  and 
that  Dr  J.  S.  Haldane  is  an  Emergent  Vitalist.  But 
I  may  quite  well  be  wrong  in  classifying  these  two 
distinguished  men  in  this  way. 

Mechanistic  Theories.  The  mechanistic  type  of  theory 
is  much  more  familiar  than  the  emergent  type,  and  it 
will  therefore  be  needless  to  consider  it  in  great  detail. 
I  will  just  consider  the  mechanistic  alternative  about 
chemical  and  vital  behaviour,  so  as  to  make  the 
emergent  theory  still  clearer  by  contrast.  Suppose  it 
were  certain,  as  it  is  very  probable,  that  all  the  dif- 
ferent chemical  atoms  are  composed  of  positive  and 
negative  electrified  particles  in  different  numbers  and 
arrangements ;  and  that  these  differences  of  number 
and  arrangement  are  the  only  ultimate  difference  be- 
tween them.  Suppose  that  all  these  particles  obey  the 
same  elementary  laws,  and  that  their  separate  actions 


70        MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

are  compounded  with  each  other  according  to  a  single 
law  which  is  the  same  no  matter  how  complicated  may 
be  the  whole  of  which  they  are  constituents.  Then  it 
would  be  theoretically  possible  to  deduce  the  charac- 
teristic behaviour  of  any  element  from  an  adequate 
knowledge  of  the  number  and  arrangement  of  the 
particles  in  its  atom,  without  needing  to  observe  a 
sample  of  the  substance.  We  could,  in  theory,  deduce 
what  other  elements  it  would  combine  with  and  in  what 
proportions  ;  which  of  these  compounds  would  be  stable 
to  heat,  etc.  ;  and  how  the  various  compounds  would 
react  in  presence  of  each  other  under  given  conditions 
of  temperature,  pressure,  etc.  And  all  this  should  be 
theoretically  possible  without  needing  to  observe  samples 
of  these  compounds. 

I  want  now  to  explain  exactly  what  I  mean  by  the 
qualification  "theoretically",  (i)  In  the  first  place  the 
mathematical  difficulties  might  be  overwhelming  in 
practice,  even  if  we  knew  the  structure  and  the  laws. 
This  is  a  trivial  qualification  for  our  present  purpose, 
which  is  to  bring  out  the  logical  distinction  between 
mechanism  and  emergence.  Let  us  replace  Sir  Ernest 
Rutherford  by  a  mathematical  archangel,  and  pass  on. 
(2)  Secondly,  we  cannot  directly  perceive  the  microscopic 
structure  of  atoms,  but  can  only  infer  it  from  the  macro- 
scopic behaviour  of  matter  in  bulk.  Thus,  in  practice, 
even  if  the  mechanistic  hypothesis  were  true  and  the 
mathematical  difficulties  were  overcome,  we  should  have 
to  start  by  observing  enough  of  the  macroscopic  be- 
haviour of  samples  of  each  element  to  infer  the  probable 
structure  of  its  atom.  But,  once  this  was  done,  it  should 
be  possible  to  deduce  its  behaviour  in  macroscopic  con- 
ditions under  which  it  has  never  yet  been  observed. 
That  is,  if  we  could  infer  its  microscopic  structure  from 
a  selection  of  its  observed  macroscopic  properties,  we 
could  henceforth  deduce  all  its  other  macroscopic  pro- 
perties from  its  microscopic  structure  without  further 
appeal  to  observation.    The  difference  from  the  emergent 


MECHANISM   AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES      71 

theory  is  thus  profound,  even  when  we  allow  for  our 
mathematical  and  perceptual  limitations.  If  the  emer- 
gent theory  of  chemical  compounds  be  true,  a  mathe- 
matical archangel,  gifted  with  the  further  power  of 
perceiving  the  microscopic  structure  of  atoms  as  easily 
as  we  can  perceive  hay-stacks,  could  no  more  predict 
the  behaviour  of  silver  or  of  chlorine  or  the  properties 
of  silver-chloride  without  having  observed  samples  of 
those  substances  than  we  can  at  present.  And  he 
could  no  more  deduce  the  rest  of  the  properties  of  a 
chemical  element  or  compound  from  a  selection  of  its 
properties  than  we  can. 

Would  there  be  any  theoretical  limit  to  the  deduction 
of  the  properties  of  chemical  elements  and  compounds 
if  a  mechanistic  theory  of  chemistry  were  true?  Yes. 
Take  any  ordinary  statement,  such  as  we  find  in 
chemistry  books  ;  e.g.^  "  Nitrogen  and  Hydrogen  com- 
bine when  an  electric  discharge  is  passed  through  a 
mixture  of  the  two.  The  resulting  compound  contains 
three  atoms  of  Hydrogen  to  one  of  Nitrogen  ;  it  is  a 
gas  readily  soluble  in  water,  and  possessed  of  a  pungent 
and  characteristic  smell."  If  the  mechanistic  theory  be 
true  the  archangel  could  deduce  from  his  knowledge  of 
the  microscopic  structure  of  atoms  all  these  facts  but 
the  last.  He  would  know  exactly  what  the  microscopic 
structure  of  ammonia  must  be  ;  but  he  would  be  totally 
unable  to  predict  that  a  substance  with  this  structure 
must  smell  as  ammonia  does  when  it  gets  into  the 
human  nose.  The  utmost  that  he  could  predict  on  this 
subject  would  be  that  certain  changes  would  take  place 
in  the  mucous  membrane,  the  olfactory  nerves  and  so 
on.  But  he  could  not  possibly  know  that  these  changes 
would  be  accompanied  by  the  appearance  of  a  smell  in 
general  or  of  the  peculiar  smell  of  ammonia  in  particular, 
unless  someone  told  him  so  or  he  had  smelled  it  for 
himself.  If  the  existence  of  the  so-called  "secondary 
qualities,"  or  the  fact  of  their  appearance,  depends 
on  the  microscopic   movements   and   arrangements   of 


72        MIND    AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

material  particles  which  do  not  have  these  qualities 
themselves,  then  the  laws  of  this  dependence  are 
certainly  of  the  emergent  type. 

The  mechanistic  theory  about  vital  behaviour  should 

now  need  little  explanation.    A  man  can  hold  it  without 

being   a    mechanist   about   chemistry.     The   minimum 

that   a    Biological    Mechanist  need  believe   is   that,  in 

\     theory^  everything  that  is  characteristic  of  the  behaviour 

\    of  a  living  body  could  be  deduced  from  an  adequate 

/     knowledge    of  its   structure,   the   chemical   compounds 

which  make  it  up,  and  the  properties  which  these  show 

;    in  isolation  or  in  non-living  wholes. 

Logical  Status  of  Emergence  and  Mechanism.  I  have 
now  stated  the  two  alternatives  which  alone  seem 
worthy  of  serious  consideration.  It  is  not  my  business 
as  a  philosopher  to  consider  detailed  empirical  argu- 
ments for  or  against  mechanism  or  emergence  in 
chemistry  or  in  biology.  But  it  is  my  business  to 
consider  the  logical  status  of  the  two  types  of  theory, 
and  it  is  relevant  to  our  present  purpose  to  discuss  how 
far  the  possibility  of  science  is  bound  up  with  the 
acceptance  of  the  mechanistic  alternative. 

(i)  I  do  not  see  any  a  priori  impossibility  in  a 
mechanistic  biology  or  chemistry,  so  long  as  it  con- 
fines itself  to  that  kind  of  behaviour  which  can  be 
completely  described  in  terms  of  changes  of  position, 
size,  shape,  arrangement  of  parts,  etc.  I  have  already 
argued  that  this  type  of  theory  cannot  be  the  whole 
truth  about  all  aspects  of  the  material  world.  For  one 
aspect  of  it  is  that  bits  of  matter  have  or  seem  to  have 
various  colours,  temperatures,  smells,  tastes,  etc.  If 
the  occurrence  or  the  appearance  of  these  ''secondary 
qualities  "  depends  on  microscopic  particles  and  events, 
the  laws  connecting  the  latter  with  the  former  are 
certainly  of  the  emergent  type.  And  no  complete 
account  of  the  external  world  can  ignore  these  laws. 

(2)  On  the  other  hand,  I  cannot  see  the  least  trace 
of  self-evidence  in  theories  of  the  mechanistic  type,  or 


MECHANISM   AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES       73 

in  the  theory  of  Pure  Mechanism  which  is  the  ideal 
towards  which  they  strive.  I  know  no  reason  whatever 
why  new  and  theoretically  unpredictable  modes  of  be- 
haviour should  not  appear  at  certain  levels  of  complexity, 
or  why  they  must  be  explicable  in  terms  of  elementary 
properties  and  laws  of  composition  which  have  mani- 
fested themselves  in  less  complex  wholes. 

(3)  At  the  back  of  the  Mechanist's  mind  there  is 
undoubtedly  a  notion  that  there  is  something  radically 
unscientific  and  superstitious  about  non-mechanistic 
theories.  It  will  be  well  worth  while  to  consider  this 
vague  belief  carefully,  and  to  see  if  there  be  anything 
in  it.  {a)  In  the  first  place,  I  think  that  the  ordinary 
Biological  Mechanist  does  not  clearly  distinguish  be- 
tween the  Substantial  and  the  Emergent  forms  of 
Vitalism  ;  in  fact  he  generally  identifies  Vitalism  with 
Substantial  Vitalism.  Now  there  are  grave  objections 
to  the  first  type  of  theory,  which  I  have  already  pointed 
out.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  they  apply  to  the 
second  type  of  Vitalism. 

{b)  How  far  does  the  Biological  Mechanist's  vaguely 
felt  objection  to  Vitalism  remain  when  we  confine  our- 
selves to  the  emergent  form  of  the  theory  ?  I  think  that 
the  parallel  case  of  chemistry  may  help  us  to  answer 
this  question.  It  is  perfectly  certain  that  chemistry  is 
a  subject  about  which  there  is  a  great  deal  of  scientific 
knowledge,  and  that  this  is  constantly  increasing.  Now 
of  course  it  may  be  true  as  a  matter  of  fact  that  the 
atoms  of  the  various  elements  are  wholes  composed 
of  various  numbers  of  similar  particles  with  various 
arrangements  and  movements.  And  it  may  be  true  as 
a  matter  of  fact  that  the  laws  of  chemical  combination, 
the  properties  of  compounds  and  so  on,  are  mere  con- 
sequences of  the  laws  of  electro-magnetics  and  of  the 
particular  number,  arrangement  and  movements  of  the 
particles  which  compose  each  kind  of  atom.  It  may 
even  be  true  that  all  chemists  now  hold  this  opinion  as 
a  matter  of  scientific  faith.     But  it  is  perfectly  obvious 


74        MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

that  the  progress  of  chemistry  in  the  past  has  not 
depended  either  on  the  trtith  of  this  proposition,  or  on 
the  general  acceptance  of  it  by  chemists.  For  chemistry 
had  become  a  science  of  great  extent  and  certainty  long 
before  the  electron  theory  was  thought  of;  and  great 
advances  were  made  in  it  by  workers  who  utterly 
scouted  the  notion  that  the  various  elements  were  all 
made  of  a  single  kind  of  stuff,  and  that  their  differences 
were  due  simply  to  different  arrangements  of  the 
particles  of  this  stuff.  And  to  this  day  chemists  who 
accept  the  electronic  theory  can  make  scarcely  any  use 
of  it  in  their  chemical  investigations.  If  then  chemistry 
can  be  a  scientific  subject  and  can  make  steady  progress 
without  using  the  assumption  that  a  mechanistic  ex- 
planation of  chemical  phenomena  is  possible,  it  would 
presumably  have  made  precisely  the  same  progress  if 
in  fact  no  such  explanation  had  been  possible.  And, 
if  neither  the  possibility  of  mechanistic  explanation  nor 
the  belief  in  it  is  essential  to  the  progress  of  chemistry, 
it  is  hard  to  see  how  a  parallel  belief  about  vital  pheno- 
mena can  be  essential  to  the  progress  of  physiology. 

{c)  Reflexion  on  chemistry  will  teach  us  another 
important  fact,  which  applies  equally  to  physiology.  I 
have  said  that  to  learn  the  properties  of  silver-chloride 
we  must  at  present  study  samples  oi  that  substance  ;  and 
that  we  cannot  deduce  them  from  a  knowledge  of  the 
properties  of  silver  and  of  chlorine  by  themselves  or  in 
other  combinations,  by  help  of  some  general  law  con- 
necting the  properties  of  any  compound  with  those  of 
its  elements  and  with  its  structure.  It  does  not  follow 
that  there  are  no  general  laws  connecting  some  of  the 
properties  of  compounds  with  those  of  their  constituents 
and  with  their  structure.  There  are  plenty  of  such  laws, 
and  organic  chemists  in  particular  study  them.  For 
instance  the  presence  of  Carbon,  Oxygen,  and  Hydrogen 

in  the  grouping  Q/  is  known  to  give  a  compound 

\OH 


MECHANISM   AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES      75 

with  acidic  properties.  Obviously  the  way  to  find  such 
laws  is  to  keep  the  structure  and  all  but  one  constituent 
fixed,  and  then  to  vary  this  constituent ;  or  to  keep  all 
the  constituents  fixed,  and  to  vary  the  structure  ;  and 
so  on.  There  might,  e.g.^  be  certain  general  properties 
which  are  common  to  all  compounds  of  a  certain 
structure  which  contain  Chlorine,  and  these  might  vary 
in  a  perfectly  characteristic  way  when  the  structure 
is  kept  fixed  and  Bromine  or  Iodine  is  substituted  for 
the  Chlorine.  What  we  have  to  admit  is  that  such 
laws  have  to  be  discovered  independently  by  an  actual 
study  and  comparison  of  the  compounds  ;  they  cannot 
be  deduced  from  a  mere  knowledge  of  the  properties 
which  the  constituents  would  have  in  isolation  or  in 
other  wholes  ;  and  they  cannot  be  reduced  to  so  many 
special  cases  of  a  single  general  law. 

Now  laws  like  this  could  exist  and  could  be  discovered 
in  Physiology  on  the  emergent  form  of  Vitalism,  just 
as  they  can  exist  and  be  discovered  in  Chemistry.  But 
they  will  have  to  be  discovered  by  studying  living 
beings,  as  such,  and  varying  their  constituents  so  far 
as  possible  one  at  a  time  while  keeping  the  structure  as 
constant  as  may  be.  If  emergence  be  true  they  could 
not  have  been  deduced  from  any  amount  of  reflexion  on 
the  properties  of  these  constituents  taken  separately  or 
in  non-living  wholes  ;  nor,  when  they  have  been  dis- 
covered, can  they  be  reduced  to  so  many  special  cases 
of  a  single  general  law  which  applies  equally  to  the 
living  and  the  non-living.  I  do  not  see  that  such 
a  view  conflicts  with  the  actual  procedure  of  any 
physiologist.  No  physiologist  in  practice  professes  to 
deduce  the  laws  of  living  matter  simply  from  what 
he  knows  of  the  properties  which  the  constituents  of 
living  bodies,  or  substances  more  or  less  like  them, 
exhibit  in  non-living  wholes  ;  any  more  than  a  chemist 
in  practice  professes  to  deduce  the  properties  of  a  com- 
pound wholly  from  the  properties 'of  its  elements  when 
free  or  in  other  combinations  and  from  the  supposed 


76        MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

structure  of  its  molecules.  Thus,  whatever  the  ultimate 
truth  of  the  matter  may  be,  both  the  chemist  and  the 
^  physiologist  are  forced  in  practice  to  behave  as  if  the 
\i  complexes  with  which  they  deal  had  emergent  properties. 
(d)  Let  us  now  sum  up  the  theoretical  differences 
which  the  alternatives  of  Mechanism  and  Emergence 
would  make  to  our  view  of  the  external  world  and 
of  the  relations  between  the  various  sciences.  The 
advantage  of  Mechanism  would  be  that  it  introduces 
a  unity  and  tidiness  into  the  world  which  appeals  very 
strongly  to  our  aesthetic  interests.  On  that  view,  when 
pushed  to  its  extreme  limits,  there  is  one  and  only  one 
kind  of  material.  Each  particle  of  this  obeys  one 
elementary  law  of  behaviour,  and  continues  to  do  so  no 
matter  how  complex  may  be  the  collection  of  particles 
of  which  it  is  a  constituent.  There  is  one  uniform  law 
of  composition,  connecting  the  behaviour  of  groups  of 
these  particles  as  wholes  with  the  behaviour  which  each 
would  show  in  isolation  and  with  the  structure  of  the 
group.  All  the  apparently  different  kinds  of  stuif  are 
just  differently  arranged  groups  of  different  numbers 
of  the  one  kind  of  elementary  particle ;  and  all  the 
apparently  peculiar  laws  of  behaviour  are  simply  special 
cases  which  could  be  deduced  in  theory  from  the 
structure  of  the  whole  under  consideration,  the  one 
elementary  law  of  behaviour  for  isolated  particles,  and 
the  one  universal  law  of  composition.  On  such  a  view 
the  external  world  has  the  greatest  amount  of  unity 
/  which  is  conceivable.  There  is  really  only  one  science, 
and  the  various  "special  sciences"  are  just  particular 
cases  of  it.  This  is  a  magnificent  ideal  ;  it  is  certainly 
much  more  nearly  true  than  anyone  could  possibly  have 
suspected  at  first  sight  ;  and  investigations  pursued 
under  its  guidance  have  certainly  enabled  us  to  discover 
many  connexions  within  the  external  world  which 
would  otherwise  have  escaped  our  notice.  But  it  has 
-/  no  trace  of  self-evidence  ;  it  cannot  be  the  w/zo/e  truth 
about  the  external  world,  since  it  cannot  deal  with  the. 


MECHANISM  AND    ITS   ALTERNATIVES       77 


existence  or  the  appearance  of  "secondary  qualities"  ; 
until  it  is  supplemented  by  laws  of  the  emergent  type  . 
which  assert  that  under  such  and  such  conditions  such 
and  such  groups  of  elementary  particles  moving  in 
certain  ways  have,  or  seem  to  human  beings  to  have, 
such  and  such  secondary  qualities  ;  and  it  is  certain 
that  considerable  scientific  progress  can  be  made  without 
assuming  it  to  be  true.  As  a  practical  postulate  it  has 
its  good  and  its  bad  side.  On  the  one  hand,  it  makes 
us  try  our  hardest  to  explain  the  characteristic  behaviour 
of  the  more  complex  in  terms  of  the  laws  which  we  have 
already  recognised  in  the  less  complex.  If  our  efforts 
succeed,  this  is  sheer  gain.  And,  even  if  they  fail,  we 
shall  probably  have  learned  a  great  deal  about  the 
minute  details  of  the  facts  under  investigation  which  we 
might  not  have  troubled  to  look  for  otherwise.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  tends  to  over-simplification.  If  in  fact 
there  are  new  types  of  law  at  certain  levels,  it  is  very  ':-. 
desirable  that  we  should  honestly  recognise  the  fact. 
And,  if  we  take  the  mechanistic  ideal  too  seriously,  we 
shall  be  in  danger  of  ignoring  or  perverting  awkward 
facts  of  this  kind.  This  sort  of  over-simplification  has 
certainly  happened  in  the  past  in  biology  and  physiology 
under  the  guidance  of  the  mechanistic  ideal ;  and  it  of 
course  reaches  its  wildest  absurdities  in  the  attempts 
which  have  been  made  from  time  to  time  to  treat  mental 
phenomena  mechanistically. 

On  the  emergent  theory  we  have  to   reconcile  our-     - 
selves  to  much  less  unity  in  the  external  world  and  a    2      '    ^ 
much  Jess._„ln.timat&   connexion    between    the    various 
sciences.     At   best  the  external  world  and  the  various 
sciences  that  deal  with  it  will  form  a  kind  of  hierarchy. 
We  might,  if  we  liked,  keep  the  view  that  there  is  only 
one  fundamental  kind  of  stuff.     But  we  should  have  to 
recognise   aggregates   of    various   orders.       And   there  \ 
would   be   two   fundamentally   different    types   of  law,  \ 
which    might   be   called    "  intra-ordinal "    and    "trans-    \ 
ordinal  "   respectively.      A  trans-ordinal  law  would  be 


y^        MIND  AND   ITS  PLACE   IN  NATURE 

one  which  connects  the  properties  of  aggregates  of 
adjacent  orders.  A  and  B  would  be  adjacent,  and  in 
ascending  order,  if  every  aggregate  of  order  B  is 
composed  of  aggregates  of  order  A,  and  if  it  has  certain 
properties  which  no  aggregate  of  order  A  possesses 
and  which  cannot  be  deduced  from  the  A-properties 
and  the  structure  of  the  B-complex  by  any  law  of 
composition  which  has  manifested  itself  at  lower  levels. 
An  intra-ordinal  law  would  be  one  which  connects  the 
properties  of  aggregates  of  the  same  order.  A  trans- 
ordinal  law  would  be  a  statement  of  the  irreducible 
fact  that  an  aggregate  composed  of  aggregates  of  the 
next  lower  order  in  such  and  such  proportions  and 
arrangements  has  such  and  such  characteristic  and 
non-deducible  properties.  If  we  consider  the  properties 
of  a  given  aggregate  of  high  order  we  could  then  divide 
them  into  three  classes,  (i)  Those  which  are  character- 
istic of  this  order,  in  the  sense  that  all  aggregates  of  the 
order  possess  them,  that  no  aggregate  of  lower  order 
does  so,  and  that  they  cannot  be  deduced  from  the 
structure  of  the  aggregate  and  the  properties  of  its 
constituents  by  any  law  of  composition  which  has 
manifested  itself  in  lower  orders.  These  might  be 
called  the  "ultimate  characteristics"  of  the  order, 
(ii)  Those  which  are  characteristic  of  this  order ;  but 
which  could  in  theory  be  deduced  from  the  structure 
of  the  aggregate,  the  properties  of  its  constituents,  and 
certain  laws  of  composition  which  have  manifested 
themselves  in  lower  orders.  These  might  be  called 
"reducible  characteristics"  of  the  order.  (iii)  Pro- 
perties which  aggregates  of  this  order  share  with  those 
of  lower  orders.  These  might  be  called  "  ordinally 
neutral  properties ".  I  will  now  illustrate  these 
conceptions. 

Suppose,  e.g.,  that  living  bodies  form  an  order  of 
3-ggregates  in  the  sense  defined.  Then  the  power  of 
reproduction  might  be  an  example  of  an  Ultimate 
Characteristic   of  this   order.      The  law  which  asserts 


MECHANISM   AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES      79 

that  all  aggregates  composed  of  such  and  such  chemical 
substances  in  such  and  such  proportions  and  relations 
have  the  power  of  reproduction  would  be  an  instance 
of  a  Trans-ordinal  Law.  The  laws  connecting  the 
reproduction  of  living  bodies  with  other  ultimate 
characteristics  of  living  bodies  would  be  instances 
of  Intra-ordinal  Laws.  A  great  many,  though  not 
perhaps  all,  of  the  facts  about  the  beating  of  the  heart 
might  be  Reducible  Characteristics  of  this  order.  I.e.^ 
although  they  are  characteristic  of  living  beings,  they 
might  in  theory  be  deduced  from  what  we  know  of  the 
chemical,  physical,  and  mechanical  properties  of  non- 
living aggregates,  and  from  the  special  structure  of  the 
living  body.  Lastly,  the  conservation  of  energy,  the 
property  of  inertial  and  gravitational  mass,  etc.,  would 
be  examples  of  Ordinally  Neutral  Properties,  since  they 
appear  unchanged  in  living  bodies,  chemical  compounds, 
elements,  etc. 

There  is  nothing,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  mysterious  or 
unscientific  about  a  trans-ordinal  law  or  about  the  notion 
of  ultimate  characteristics  of  a  given  order.  A  trans- 
ordinal  law  is  as  good  a  law  as  any  other  ;  and,  once  it 
has  been  discovered,  it  can  be  used  like  any  other  to 
suggest  experiments,  to  make  predictions,  and  to  give 
us  practical  control  over  external  objects.  The  only 
peculiarity  of  it  is  that  we  must  wait  till  we  meet  with 
an  actual  instance  of  an  object  of  the  higher  order  before 
we  can  discover  such  a  law  ;  and  that  we  cannot  possibly 
deduce  it  beforehand  from  any  combination  of  laws 
which  we  have  discovered  by  observing  aggregates  of 
a  lower  order.  There  is  an  obvious  analogy  between 
the  trans-ordinal  laws  which  I  am  now  discussing  and 
the  trans-physical  laws  which  I  mentioned  in  con- 
sidering Pure  Mechanism  and  said  must  be  recognised 
in  any  complete  account  of  the  external  world.  The 
difference  is  this.  Trans-physical  laws,  in  the  sense 
in  which  we  are  using  the  term,  are  necessarily  of  the 
emergent   type.       For  they  connect  the  configurations 


8o        MIND  AND   ITS   PLACE   IN   NATURE 

and  internal  motions  of  groups  of  microscopic  particles, 
on  the  one  hand,  with  the  fact  that  the  volume  v/hich 
contains  the  group  is,  or  appears  to  be,  pervaded  by- 
such  and  such  a  secondary  quality.  Since  there  are 
many  irreducibly  different  kinds  of  secondary  quality,  e.g. 
colour,  smell,  temperature,  etc.,  there  tmist  be  many 
irreducible  laws  of  this  sort.  Again,  suppose  we 
confine  our  attention  to  one  kind  of  secondary  quality, 
say  colour.  The  concepts  of  the  various  colours — red, 
blue,  green,  etc. — are  not  contained  in  the  general 
concept  of  Colour  in  the  sense  in  which  we  might  quite 
fairly  say  that  the  concepts  of  all  possible  motions  are 
contained  in  the  general  concepts  of  Space  and  of 
Motion.  We  have  no  difficulty  in  conceiving  and 
adequately  describing  determinate  possible  motions 
which  we  have  never  witnessed  and  which  we  never 
shall  witness.  We  have  merely  to  assign  a  determinate 
direction  and  a  determinate  velocity.  But  we  could  not 
possibly  have  formed  the  concept  of  such  a  colour  as 
blue  or  such  a  shade  as  sky-blue  unless  we  had  per- 
ceived instances  of  it,  no  matter  how  much  we  had 
reflected  on  the  concept  of  Colour  in  general  or  on  the 
instances  of  other  colours  and  shades  which  we  had 
seen.  It  follows  that,  even  when  we  know  that  a  certain 
kind  of  secondary  quality  [e.g.^  colour)  pervades  or 
seems  to  pervade  a  region  when  and  only  when  such 
and  such  a  kind  of  microscopic  event  {e.g.,  vibrations) 
is  going  on  within  the  region,  we  still  could  not  possibly 
predict  that  such  and  such  a  determinate  event  of  the 
kind  {e.g.,  a  circular  movement  of  a  certain  period) 
would  be  connected  with  such  and  such  a  determinate 
shade  of  colour  {e.g.,  sky-blue).  The  trans-physical 
laws  are  then  necessarily  of  the  emergent  type. 

On  the  other  hand,  emergent  laws  are  not  necessarily 
trans-physical,  and  it  cannot  be  positively  proved  that 
any  intra-physical  law  is  emergent,  (i)  The  process  of 
breathing  is  a  particular  kind  of  movement  which  goes 
on  in  living  bodies.     And  it  can  be  described  without 


MECHANISM   AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES       8i 

any  essential  reference  to  secondary  qualities.  Yet  in 
its  details  it  may  be  such  that  it  could  not  be  deduced 
from  any  amount  of  knowledge  about  non-living  wholes 
and  the  movements  that  take  place  in  them.  If  so,  it  is 
an  "ultimate  characteristic"  of  the  vital  order,  and 
it  is  determined  by  a  trans-ordinal  law.  But  this  law 
is  not  trans-physical,  in  the  sense  defined,  (ii)  On  the 
other  hand,  since  it  is  a  movement  and  since  the 
characteristic  movements  of  some  complex  wholes  {e.g., 
clocks)  can  be  predicted  from  a  knowledge  of  their 
structure  and  of  other  complex  wholes  which  are  not 
clocks,  it  cannot  be  positively  proved  that  breathing  is 
an  "ultimate  characteristic"  or  that  its  causation  is 
emergent  and  not  mechanistic.  Within  the  physical 
realm  it  always  remains  logically  possible  that  the 
appearance  of  emergent  laws  is  due  to  our  imperfect 
knowledge  of  microscopic  structure  or  to  our  mathemati- 
cal incompetence.  But  this  method  of  avoiding  emergent 
laws  is  not  logically  possible  for  trans-physical  processes, 
as  I  have  tried  to  show. 

Teleology,  Mechanism,  and  Design.  I  have  so  far 
discussed  Mechanism  and  its  alternatives  in  a  perfectly 
general  way  ;  and  have  said  nothing  in  detail  concern- 
ing those  peculiar  facts  about  living  organisms  which 
make  it  plausible  to  distinguish  a  "Vital  Order"  with 
"ultimate  characteristics"  of  its  own.  Now  the 
peculiarities  of  living  organisms  are  often  summed 
up  in  the  phrase  that  organisms  are  "  Teleological 
Systems ".  And  there  is  thought  to  be  some  special 
connexion  between  Teleology  and  Design,  and  some 
special  opposition  between  Teleology  and  Mechanism. 
I  shall  end  this  chapter  by  trying  to  clear  up  these 
points. 

Teleology  is  an  observable  characteristic__which 
certainly  belongs  to  some  thingsjn  the  world.  Design 
is  a  particular  cause  which  certainly  produces  teleology 
in  some  cases.     I  want  to  begin  by  defining  "teleology" 

F 


82         MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE  IN   NATURE 

in  such  a  way  that  there  shall  be  no  doubt  of  its  ex- 
istence and  that  the  admission  of  this  fact  shall  not  pre- 
suppose the  acceptance  of  any  special  theory.  Suppose 
that  a  system  is  composed  of  such  parts  arranged  in 
such  ways  as  might  have  been  expected  if  it  had  been 
constructed  by  an  intelligent  being  to  fulfil  a  certain 
purpose  which  he  had  in  mind.  And  suppose  that, 
when  we  investigate  the  system  more  carefully  under 
the  guidance  of  this  hypothesis,  we  discover  hitherto 
unnoticed  parts  or  hitherto  unnoticed  relations  between 
the  parts,  and  that  these  are  still  found  to  accord  with 
the  hypothesis.  Then  I  should  call  this  system 
" teleological".  It  will  be  noticed  that  there  are  two 
clauses  in  the  definition.  The  first  is  that  our  more  or 
less  superficial  knowledge  of  the  system  suggests  that  it 
was  designed  for  a  special  purpose  which  a  rational 
mind  might  be  likely  to  entertain.  The  second  is  that, 
if  we  use  this  hypothesis  as  a  clue  to  more  minute 
investigation,  we  continue  to  find  that  the  system  is 
constructed  as  if  the  hypothesis  were  true.  I  think  that 
probably  both  factors  are  necessary.  Of  any  system 
whatever  we  might  suppose  that  it  was  designed  to  do 
what  we  actually  find  it  doing.  But  in  general  we 
should  not  find  that  this  gave  us  any  clue  to  investi- 
gating its  more  minute  structure  or  predicting  its 
unobserved  behaviour. 

Now  it  seems  to  me  perfectly  certain  that  the  world 
contains  systems  which  are  teleological,  in  this  sense. 
The  most  obvious  examples  of  such  systems  are 
machines,  like  watches,  motor-cars,  etc.  In  this  case 
of  course  we  start  by  knowing  that  they  have  in  fact 
been  designed  by  intelligent  beings  for  a  certain 
purpose,  such  as  telling  the  time  or  conveying  people 
quickly  along  roads.  Knowing  this  we  can  explain,  as 
we  say,  "what  each  part  is  for."  Suppose  now  we 
were  to  meet  with  a  certain  machine  for  the  first  time 
and  to  know  nothing  about  the  purpose  of  its  con- 
structor.    As  we  have  met  with  plenty  of  other  machines 


MECHANISM   AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES       83 

(though  none  exactly  like  this)  ;  as  we  know  that  all  of 
these  have  been  made  by  some  human  being  for  some 
purpose  ;  and  as  we  know  of  no  machines  which  have 
arisen  in  any  other  way  ;  we  may  legitimately  infer 
that  this  one  also  was  constructed  by  a  human  being 
for  some  purpose.  By  studying  the  action  of  the 
machine  we  may  then  be  able  to  guess  what  the  purpose 
probably  was.  We  can  then  predict  how  it  will 
probably  be  constructed  in  detail,  and  how  it  will 
probably  work  under  various  circumstances.  And,  if 
our  predictions  are  found  to  be  true,  it  is  likely  that  we 
have  hit  on  the  true  purpose  of  the  machine.  I  will 
call  the  kind  of  teleology  which  is  shown  by  watches, 
motor-cars,  and  other  artificial  machines,  ''external 
teleology  ".  By  this  I  mean  that  the  purpose  for  which 
such  systems  were  constructed,  and  by  which  their 
minute  structure  can  be  anticipated,  is  not  wholly  or 
mainly  to  keep  themselves  going  or  to  produce  other 
machines  like  themselves.  Their  main  function  is  to  do 
something,  such  as  telling  the  time,  which  is  of  interest 
not  to  themselves  but  to  their  makers  or  other  men. 

Now  it  seems  to  me  equally  clear  that  living 
organisms  are  teleological  systems  in  the  sense  defined. 
The  most  superficial  knowledge  of  organisms  does 
make  it  look  as  if  they  were  very  complex  systems 
designed  to  preserve  themselves  in  face  of  varying  and 
threatening  external  conditions  and  to  reproduce  their 
kind.  And,  on  the  whole,  the  more  fully  we  investigate 
a  living  organism  in  detail  the  more  fully  does  what 
we  discover  fit  in  with  this  hypothesis.  One  might 
mention,  e.g.,  the  various  small  and  apparently  un- 
important glands  in  the  human  body  whose  secretions 
are  found  to  exercise  a  profound  influence  over  its 
growth  and  well-being.  Or  again  we  might  mention 
the  production  in  the  blood  of  antitoxins  when  the  body 
is  attacked  by  organisms  likely  to  injure  it.  I  will  call 
this  kind  of  teleology  "  internal  teleology  ".  Whatever 
be  the  right  explanation  of  it,  it  is  plainly  a  fact. 


84         MIND   AND  ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

We  have  now  to  consider  the  relation  between 
Teleology  and  Design.  (i)  The  definition  of  "tele- 
ology "  involves  a  hypothetical  reference  to  design. 
The  system  is  teleological  provided  it  acts  as  if  it  were 
designed  for  a  purpose.  But  it  does  not  involve  anything 
more  than  this.  It  remains  a  question  of  fact  whether 
the  system  was  actually  the  result  of  a  design  in  some- 
one's mind,  (ii)  So  far  as  we  know,  the  teleology  of 
non-living  machines  is  always  due  to  design.  They 
behave  in  the  characteristic  way  in  which  they  do 
behave  simply  because  their  parts  are  constructed  and 
fitted  together  in  certain  special  ways,  and  we  have  no 
reason  to  suppose  that  this  special  arrangement  could 
arise  spontaneously  without  the  intervention  of  a  mind 
which  deliberately  chose  it.  (iii)  The  real  paradox 
,1  \  about  organisms  is  that  they  are  teleological  systems 
"^^^^ik  '^fe^  which  seem  nevertheless  to  arise  without  design.  It  is 
this  last  fact  which  we  must  now  discuss. 

Many  organisms  have  minds  connected  with  them. 
But  we  know  that,  if  they  were  designed  at  all,  the  mind 
which  designed  them  was  certainly  not  the  mind  which 
animates  them,  unless  this  be  extraordinarily  different 
from  what  it  appears  to  be  both  to  itself  and  to  others. 
The  highest  type  of  mind  which  we  are  acquainted  with 
is  that  which  animates  a  human  body.  If  we  designed 
our  own  organisms  we  are  quite  unaware  of  the  fact. 
And  the  enterprise  seems  altogether  beyond  our  powers. 
The  most  skilled  physiologist  does  not  know  how  to 
make  a  living  body  ;  but,  if  we  say  that  his  mind 
designed  his  own  organism,  we  must  suppose  that  it 
performed  as  an  embryo  a  feat  which  it  is  totally  in- 
capable of  performing  in  its  developed  state.  We  must 
say  then  that,  if  organisms  are  designed  by  minds, 
either  {a)  the  designing  mind  is  altogether  different 
from  and  enormously  wiser  and  more  skilful  than  the 
animating  mind  ;  or  {b)  that  the  animating  mind,  as 
known  to  itself  by  introspection  and  to  others  by  com- 
munication, is  the  merest  fragment  of  the  total  animating 


MECHANISM  AND   ITS  ALTERNATIVES      85 

mind,  and  that  the  part  of  it  which  does  not  appear  to 
itself  or  to  others  is  of  superhuman  wisdom  and  in- 
genuity. Of  course  it  might  be  held  that  the  designing 
mind,  or  the  designing  part  of  the  animating  mind, 
though  extraordinarily  clever  at  its  own  particular  job, 
takes  no  interest  in  anything  else  ;  or  that  it  works 
in  a  wholly  different  way  from  the  minds  which  are 
known  to  us.  But  this  will  not  help  us.  If  the  con- 
ception of  design  is  to  provide  any  explanation  of  the 
peculiarities  of  organisms  we  must  mean  by  *' design"  i 
something  of  the  same  nature  as  the  only  designs  that 
we  know  anything  about,  viz.,  our  own.  Otherwise  we 
are  merely  playing  with  words.  Now  we  have  designs  t 
only  when  we  imagine  a  possible  state  of  affairs,  apply  ; 
Our  knowledge  of  the  properties  and  laws  of  matter  to  ) 
discover  how  it  might  be  brought  about,  and  then  use  ] 
our  technical  skill  to  shape  the  material  and  to  arrange 
it  in  those  ways  which  we  have  seen  to  be  necessary  for  \ 
our  purpose.  If  the  minds  which  design  organisms  act 
in  this  way  they  must  have  a  superhuman  knowledge 
of  the  laws  and  properties  of  matter,  superhuman  mathe- 
matical ability  to  work  out  the  consequences  of  various 
possible  combinations,  and  superhuman  technical  skill ; 
and  all  analogy  makes  it  most  unlikely  that  a  mind 
which  took  no  interest  in  anything  but  the  one  job  of 
manufacturing  organisms  would  have  these  powers.  If, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  minds  which  design  organisms 
act  in  some  quite  different  and  to  us  unknown  way, 
then  we  have  no  right  to  call  them  "  minds  "  or  to  call 
their  mode  of  operation  "design".  We  are  merely 
assuming  a  wholly  mysterious  cause  for  the  teleology 
of  organisms,  and  tricking  ourselves  into  the  belief  that 
it  is  an  explanation  by  using  the  familiar  words  "mind" 
and  "design".  I  conclude  then  that,  if  organisms  be 
the  result  of  design  in  any  intelligible  sense,  their 
designers  may  fairly  be  called  "gods";  and  either  we 
are  gods  in  disguise  or  there  are  superhuman  beings 
who  make  organisms. 


86  MIND   AND   ITS  PLACE   IN   NATURE 

These  considerations  remove  one  positive  argument 
in  favour  of  the  theory  of  entelechies.  I  am  sure  that 
many  people  who  look  with  a  friendly  eye  on  entelechies 
do  so  because  of  the  teleological  nature  of  organisms. 
They  think  of  entelechies  as  little  minds  which  design 
organisms  and  direct  and  control  their  growth  and 
reactions.  But  they  modestly  regard  entelechies  as  very 
inferior  minds  or  as  the  inferior  parts  of  the  minds 
which  animate  organisms.  Now,  if  I  am  right,  this 
modesty  is  wholly  out  of  place.  If  the  hypothesis  of  an 
entelechy  is  to  explain  anything,  we  miist  suppose  that 
an  entelechy  is  a  very  superior  mind  or  the  very  superior 
part  of  the  mind  which  animates  an  organism.  The 
theory  insinuates  itself  into  our  confidence  by  pretend- 
ing that  the  entelechy  is  so  lowly  a  mind  as  scarcely  to 
deserve  the  name  ;  but  it  can  explain  the  facts  only  if  it 
supposes  the  entelechy  to  be  so  exalted  a  mind  as  to 
deserve  the  name  of  a  "  god  ". 

I  pass  now  to  the  relations  between  Teleology  and 
Design,  on  the  one  hand,  and  Biological  Mechanism, 
on  the  other.  It  is  evident  that,  up  to  a  point,  there 
is  no  opposition  between  teleology  and  mechanism. 
Nothing  can  be  more  thoroughly  teleological  than  a 
watch  or  a  motor-car ;  yet  these  are  machines,  and  their 
characteristic  behaviour  is  wholly  deducible  from  the 
special  arrangement  of  their  parts  and  from  the  general 
laws  which  these  parts  would  equally  obey  in  isolation 
or  in  other  and  non-teleological  complexes.  We  may 
say  then  that,  so  long  as  we  take  a  material  system  as  a 
going  concern  and  do  not  raise  questions  about  its 
origin,  there  is  no  reason  whatever  why  its  character- 
istic behaviour  should  not  be  at  once  teleological  and 
capable  of  complete  mechanistic  explanation.  Now  the 
mechanistic  biologist  regards  organisms  as  very  com- 
plex machines  ;  and  indeed  if  we  were  not  very  familiar 
with  artificial  self-acting  and  self-regulating  machinery 
it  would  never  have  entered  our  heads  to  suggest  a 
mechanistic  theory  of  vital  behaviour.     So  long  as  he 


MECHANISM   AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES       87 

confines  his  attention  to  a  developed  organism  there  is 
nothing  preposterous  in  this  theory.  It  is  only  when 
we  consider  the  origin  of  teleological  systems  that  a 
legitimate  doubt  arises  whether  teleology  and  mechan- 
istic explanation  are  ultimately  consistent  with  each 
other. 

(i)  Every  system  which  is  certainly  known  to  be  at 
once  teleological  and  mechanistic  is  an  artificial  machine ; 
and,  if  we  follow  its  history  far  enough  backwards,  we 
always  come  to  one  or  more  organisms^  which  are 
teleological  but  not  certainly  mechanistic  systems.  It 
is  true  that  many  machines  are  themselves  made  by 
machines  ;  but  sooner  or  later  in  this  chain  we  come  to 
human  bodies  which  made  these  machines  and  were  not 
themselves  made  by  machinery.  Thus,  apart  altogether 
from  any  question  of  minds  and  their  designs,  there  is  | 
something  dangerously  like  a  vicious  circle  in  professing 
to  explain  the  teleology  of  organisms  by  analogy  with 
artificial  machines.  For,  the  moment  we  begin  to  con- 
sider the  origin  of  organisms  in  general  or  of  any 
particular  organism,  we  have  to  admit  that  all  artificial 
machines  were  ultimately  made  by  organisms  whilst  no  \ 
organism  is  ever  made  by  an  artificial  machine. 

To  this  objection  I  think  that  the  following  answer 
might  be  made.  It  might  be  said:  "Admittedly  we 
must  distinguish  two  kinds  of  machines,  viz.,  natural 
and  artificial.  We  can  quite  well  admit  the  general 
principle  that  all  machines  are  made  by  other  machines. 
Natural  machines  (z>.,  organisms)  are  always  made  by 
other  natural  machines  ;  artificial  machines  may  be 
made  proximately  by  other  artificial  machines,  but  in 
the  long  run  in  the  history  of  any  artificial  machine  we 
come  to  a  natural  machine.  We  admit  then  that  natural 
machines  are  causally  prior  to  artificial  machines  ;  but 
this  involves  no  logical  circle.  We  first  derive  the 
general  notion  of  machinery  and  of  a  mechanistic  ex- 
planation of  teleological  behaviour  from  the  specially 
simple  and  obvious  case  of  artificial  machines,  at  a  time 


88         MIND  AND   ITS   PLACE  IN  NATURE 

when  we  do  not  suspect  that  our  bodies  are  themselves 
natural  machines.  Eventually  we  apply  the  notion  thus 
derived  to  our  bodies,  and  find  that  it  fits  them  perfectly. 
There  is  no  inconsistency  between  the  facts  {a)  that  the 
recognition  of  artificial  machines  is  psychologically 
prior  to  the  recognition  of  natural  machines,  and  {b) 
that  the  existence  of  natural  machines  is  causally  prior 
to  the  existence  of  artificial  machines  ".  I  think  that 
this  is  a  valid  answer  to  the  particular  logical  objection 
raised  above.  But  it  does  not  exhaust  the  difficulties 
of  Biological  Mechanism  ;  and  this  brings  us  to  our 
next  point. 

(ii)  It  is  true,  but  it  is  not  the  whole  truth,  to  say 
that  in  the  history  of  every  system  which  is  positively 
known  to  be  both  teleological  and  mechanistic  (z>.,  of 
every  artificial  machine)  we  come  at  length  to  an 
organism.  We  also  come  to  the  mind  which  animates 
this  organism  ;  to  a  design  in  this  mind  ;  and  to  the 
deliberate  arrangement  of  matter  in  view  of  an  end. 
And  this  seems  to  be  essential  for  the  production  of  a 
teleological  system  out  of  non-teleological  materials. 
On  a  mechanistic  theory  the  teleological  behaviour  of  a 
system  must  be  due  wholly  to  the  initial  configuration 
of  its  parts  ;  and,  if  matter  has  only  the  properties  which 
physicists  and  chemists  ascribe  to  it,  it  has  no  tendency 
by  itself  to  fall  into  those  extraordinarily  special  arrange- 
ments which  alone  can  give  rise  to  teleological  be- 
haviour. Now,  if  the  analogy  of  organisms  to  artificial 
machines  is  to  be  used  at  all,  it  must  be  used  fairly  ;  we 
must  not  ignore  one  essential  part  of  the  facts  about  the 
origin  of  artificial  machines.  Let  us  then  apply  the 
whole  analogy  to  organisms.  It  is  certain  that,  when 
one  organism  produces  another  by  ordinary  processes 
of  generation,  the  mind  of  the  first  does  not  design  and 
construct  the  second,  as  it  would  if  it  were  producing 
an  artificial  machine  like  a  watch  or  a  type-writer.  This 
in  itself  need  cause  no  trouble  to  the  Mechanist.  When 
one  artificial  machine  produces  another  the  mind  of  the 


MECHANISM  AND   ITS  ALTERNATIVES      89 

first  does  not  design  the  second,  for  artificial  machines 
have  no  minds.  The  Biological  Mechanist  will  there- 
fore simply  say  that  the  generation  of  one  organism  by 
another  is  analogous  to  the  production  of  one  artificial 
machine  by  another.  But,  as  we  have  seen,  the  latter 
series  eventually  brings  us  back  to  a  mind  with  designs. 
Hence,  if  the  Biological  Mechanist  is  to  apply  his 
analogy  fairly,  there  are  only  two  courses  open  to  him. 
The  first  is  to  say  that  there  always  have  been  organisms,  (jy 
and  that  organisms  have  never  arisen  from  inorganic 
matter.  On  this  alternative  he  has  a  series  of  natural 
machines  going  back  to  infinity.  In  that  case  of  course 
every  artificial  machine  will  also  have  an  infinite 
ancestry  of  other  machines,  since  the  production  of  an 
artificial  machine  eventually  brings  one  back  to  a 
natural  machine.  Such  a  theory  would  be  self-con- 
sistent ;  though  it  would  still  leave  the  awkward 
difference  that  design  enters  into  the  history  of  every 
artificial  machine  and  of  no  natural  machine.  It  is  of 
course  an  alternative  that  most  mechanists  would  be 
very  loath  to  take  ;  for  one  of  the  advantages  claimed 
for  Biological  Mechanism  over  Substantial  Vitalism  is 
that  the  former  does  and  the  latter  does  not  render 
the  development  of  living  from  non-living  matter 
conceivable. 

The  other  possible  alternative  is  to  admit  that  organ- 
isms arose  in  the  remote  past  out  of  non-living  matter.  \^ 
This  means,  on  the  mechanistic  view,  that  natural 
machines  arose  from  matter  which  was  not  arranged  in 
the  form  of  a  machine.  And  this  can  be  consistently 
held  only  if  the  Biological  Mechanist  will  postulate  at 
that  point  the  intervention  of  a  mind  which  deliberately 
designed  and  arranged  non-living  matter  in  the  form 
of  a  natural  machine.  For,  as  we  have  seen,  the  only 
systems  which  we  positively  know  to  be  machines  have 
all  arisen  in  this  way  ;  and,  if  matter  has  no  properties 
except  ithose  which  chemists  and  physicists  assign  to 
it,  there  is  not  the  least  reason  to  suppose  that  it  can 


/ 


90        MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE  IN   NATURE 

spontaneously  fall  into  the  extremely  special  configura- 
tion which  is  needed  if  the  resulting  system  is  to  behave 
teleologically.  Thus  the  proper  complement  to  a  com- 
pletely mechanistic  theory  about  organisms  is  some 
form  of  the  doctrine  of  Deism  ;  a  result  which  accords 
very  well  with  that  simple  piety  which  is  so  character- 
istic of  Biological  Mechanists. 

But,  even  if  we  are  willing  to  go  thus  far  with  the 
Biological  Mechanist,  we  cannot  allow  him  to  leave 
the  matter  there.  Every  system  which  is  positively 
known  to  be  a  machine  has  been  ultimately  made,  not 
by  a  pure  spirit,  but  by  a  mind  which  animates  an 
organism  which  it  did  not  design  or  construct.  This  mind 
formed  a  design  ;  in  consequence  of  this  the  organism 
which  it  animates  has  moved  in  various  ways  ;  and  it  is 
thus  and  thus  only  that  the  design  has  been  realised  in 
foreign  matter.  Once  more,  if  we  are  to  use  the  analogy 
of  machines  at  all,  we  must  use  it  fairly  and  not  ignore 
these  parts  of  it  which,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  are 
essential  but  which  are  not  convenient.     The  Biological 

/  Mechanist,  having  been  brought  willingly  or  unwillingly 
to  Deism,  must  now  take  a  further  step  and  ascribe  to 

/  God  an  organism  which  God's  mind  animates.  And  by 
all  analogy  we  must  suppose  that  God  did  not  design 
or  construct  his  own  organism;  since,  so  far  as  our 
experience  goes  no  mind  designs  or  constructs  the 
organism  which  it  animates.  Thus,  in  the  end,  we 
shall  be  brought  to  one  organism  at  least,  viz.,  God's, 
which  presumably  has  not  arisen  out  of  non-living 
matter  either  spontaneously  or  by  design.  This  seems 
to  be  the  final  result  of  seriously  and  fairly  applying 
the  analogy  between  organisms  and  machines,  when 
we  cease  to  confine  our  attention  to  the  organism  as  a 
going  concern  and  try  to  account  also  for  the  origin  of 
organisms,  as  Biological  Mechanism  would  wish  to  do. 

Tentative    Decision    between    the    Three    Theories 
of  Organisms.       When    we    consider    the  ^teleologicai. 


MECHANISM   AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES       91 


characteristics  of  organisms  the  three  possible  theories 
of  Substantial  Vitalism,  Emergent  Vitalism,  and  Bio- 
logical Mechanism  cease  to  be  on  a  level.  In  the  first 
place,  there  seems  to  be  nothing  to  be  said  for  Sub- 
stantial Vitalism,  and  a  great  deal  to  be  said  against  it. 
We  may  therefore  provisionally  reject  it,  and  confine 
our  attention  to  Emergent  Vitalism  and  Biological 
Mechanism.  It  seems  to  me  that,  so  long  as  we  merely 
consider  the  behaviour  of  the  organism  as  a  going 
concern,  there  is  no  strong  argument  for  deciding 
between  the  two  types  of  theory.  For  it  is  quite  certain 
that  a  material  system,  once  it  is  in  being,  can  be  teleo- 
logical  and  at  the  same  time  mechanistic  in  its  behaviour. 
Hence,  even  if  we  did  not  see  our  way  to  explain  certain 
teleological  characteristics  of  developed  organisms 
mechanistically,  the  Biological  Mechanist  could  always 
answer  that  this  is  merely  because  we  do  not  yet  know 
enough  about  the  minute  structure  of  the  machine  or 
about  the  more  obscure  physico-chemical  properties  of 
non-living  matter.  And  this  is  what  he  is  continually 
occupied  in  saying.  But,  when  we  come  to  consider 
the  origin  of  organisms  as  well  as  their  behaviour,  the 
case  is  altered.  We  find  that  Biological  Mechanism 
about  the  developed  organism  cannot  consistently  be 
held  without  an  elaborate  Deistic  theory  about  the  ] 
origin  of  organisms.  This  is  because  Biological  i 
Mechanism  is  admittedly  a  theory  of  the  organism  \ 
based  on  its  analogy  to  self-acting  and  self- regulating  / 
machines.  These,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  neither  do  ; 
arise  nor  could  have  arisen  without  design  and  deliberate 
interference  by  someone  with  matter.  And,  in  applying 
our  analogy,  we  have  no  right  whatever  to  ignore  this 
side  of  it.  I  do  not  of  course  assert  that  this  is  a 
conclusive  objection  to  Biological  Mechanism.  Deism  ' 
has  always  seemed  to  me  a  much  more  sensible  theory 
than  most  of  its  more  pretentious  successors.  But  I  do 
wish  to  make  it  quite  clear  that  Biological  Mechanism 
is   committed   logically   to   a  great  deal   more  than   is 


\ 


\ 


92        MIND  AND  ITS   PLACE   IN   NATURE 

commonly  supposed.  If  Emergent  Vitalism  could  dis- 
pense with  the  need  for  all  this  Deistic  supplementa- 
tion it  would /;'(?  tan^o  score  over  Biological  Mechanism. 
But  can  it? 

It  might  well  be  thought  that  in  this  matter  Emergent 
Vitalism  is  no  better  off  than  Biological  Mechanism. 
On  both  theories  the  peculiar  behaviour  of  an  organism 
is  completely  determined  by  its  structure  and  its  com- 
ponents and  by  nothing  else.  The  only  difference  is 
that  on  the  Emergent  View  the  peculiar  behaviour 
of  such  systems  must  be  "seen  to  be  believed  ",  whilst 
on  the  Mechanistic  View  it  could  in  theory  have  been 
foretold  from  the  structure  and  the  behaviour  of  the 
components  in  isolation  or  in  non-living  wholes.  If  you 
make  it  an  objection  to  the  Mechanistic  Theory  that  the 
characteristic  behaviour  of  the  organism  depends  on 
the  arrangement  of  its  parts,  and  that  this  arrangement 
could  only  have  happened  by  design,  does  not  the  objec- 
tion apply  equally  strongly  to  the  Emergent  Theory  ? 
This  argument  is  plausible,  but  I  do  not  think  that 
it  is  sound.  The  Biological  Mechanist  points  to  the 
analogy  between  organisms  and  artificial  machines,  and 
asks  us  to  believe  on  this  ground  that  organisms  are 
machines.  To  this  we  answered  that  matter  has  no 
natural  tendency  to  arrange  itself  in  the  form  of 
inachi7ies  {i.e.,  of  teleological  systems  whose  character- 
istic behaviour  is  mechanistically  explicable)  ;  and  that 
therefore,  if  organisms  be  of  the  nature  of  machines, 
there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  they  could  have 
arisen  spontaneously  and  without  design.  But  it  is 
perfectly  consistent  for  a  man  to  hold  that  matter  has 
no  tendency  to  fall  spontaneously  into  the  form  of 
machines  and  that  it  has  a  natural  tendency  to  fall  into 
the  form  oi  organisms ;  provided  he  holds,  as  the  Emer- 
gent Vitalist  does,  that  organisms  are  not  machines 
but  are  systems  whose  characteristic  behaviour  is  emer- 
gent and  not  mechanistically  explicable.  Thus  the  real 
difference  is  that  a  possibility  is  open  to  the  Emergent 


MECHANISM   AND   ITS   ALTERNATIVES       93 

Vitalist,  who  recognises  two  fundamentally  different 
kinds  of  teleological  system,  and  that  this  possibility 
is  closed  to  the  Biological  Mechanist,  who  recognises 
only  one  kind. 

Of  course  this  possibility,  which  is  open  to  the 
Emergent  Vitalist  and  not  to  the  Biological  Mechanist, 
is  very  vague  and  needs  to  be  worked  out  in  much 
greater  detail.  This  would  be  the  task  of  the  empirical 
scientist  rather  than  the  critical  philosopher.  I  will 
content  myself  with  saying  that  the  Emergent  Vitalist 
should  not  rest  with  nothing  better  than  the  vague 
statement  that  matter  has  a  natural  tendency  to  fall 
into  that  kind  of  structure  which  has  vital  behaviour 
as  its  emergent  characteristic.  If  Emergence  be  true  ^ 
at  all  there  are  probably  many  Orders  below  the  *^ 
Vital  Order.  What  must  be  assumed  is  not  a  special 
tendency  of  matter  to  fall  into  the  kind  of  arrangement 
which  has  vital  characteristics,  but  a  general  tendency 
for  complexes  of  one  order  to  combine  with  each  other 
under  suitable  conditions  to  form  complexes  of  the 
next  order.  At  each  stage  in  this  process  we  shall 
get  things  with  new  and  irreducibly  characteristic 
properties  and  new  intra-ordinal  laws,  whilst  there 
will  probably  remain  certain  complexes  of  all  the 
lower  orders.  The  universe  would  thus  grow  continu- 
ally more  varied,  so  long  as  the  special  conditions 
necessary  for  this  combination  of  complexes  of  lower 
order  to  give  complexes  of  higher  order  continued  ;  and  at 
every  new  stage  new  possibilities  of  further  development 
would  begin.  It  would  be  the  business  of  the  believer 
in  Emergence  to  determine  the  precise  condition  under 
which  the  passage  from  one  order  to  the  next  can 
take  place  ;  to  state  definitely  what  are  the  irreducibly 
characteristic  features  of  each  order ;  and  to  deduce 
those  characteristic  features  which  can  be  deduced. 

It  seems  to   me  then   that  on   the    whole    Emergent    a_ 
Vitalism    is   distinctly   to    be    preferred    to    Biological 
Mechanism.       It    does    not    necessitate    a    complicated 


94        MIND  AND   ITS  PLACE   IN  NATURE 

Deistic  supplement,  as  Biological  Mechanism  does ; 
and  this  seems  to  me  to  be  an  advantage.  At  the 
same  time  it  is  perfectly  consistent  with  the  view  that 
there  is  a  God  who  created  and  controls  the  material 
world  ;  so  that,  if  there  should  be  any  good  reason  to 
believe  in  such  a  Being,  the  Emergent  Vitalist  could 
meet  the  situation  with  a  quiet  mind. 


CHAPTER    III 

The  Traditional  Problem  of  Body  and  Mind 

In  the  last  Chapter  we  considered  organisms  simply  as 
complicated  material  systems  which  behave  in  certain 
characteristic  ways.  We  did  not  consider  the  fact  that 
some  organisms  are  animated  by  minds,  and  that  all 
the  minds  of  whose  existence  we  are  certain  animate 
organisms.  And  we  did  not  deal  with  those  features 
in  the  behaviour  of  certain  organisms  which  are  com- 
monly supposed  to  be  due  to  the  mind  which  animates 
the  organism.  It  is  such  facts  as  these,  and  certain 
problems  to  which  they  have  given  rise,  which  I  mean 
to  discuss  in  the  present  Chapter.  There  is  a  question 
which  has  been  argued  about  for  some  centuries  now 
under  the  name  of  "Interaction";  this  is  the  question 
whether  minds  really  do  act  on  the  organisms  which 
they  animate,  and  whether  organisms  really  do  act  on 
the  minds  which  animate  them.  (I  must  point  out  at 
once  that  I  imply  no  particular  theory  of  mind  or  body 
by  the  word  "to  animate".  I  use  it  as  a  perfectly 
neutral  name  to  express  the  fact  that  a  certain  mind 
is  connected  in  some  peculiarly  intimate  way  with  a 
certain  body,  and,  under  normal  conditions  with  no 
other  body.  This  is  a  fact  even  on  a  purely  behaviour- 
istic  theory  of  mind  ;  on  such  a  view  to  say  that  the 
mind  M  animates  the  body  B  would  mean  that  the 
body  B,  in  so  far  as  it  behaves  in  certain  ways,  is  the 
mind  M.  A  body  which  did  not  act  in  these  ways 
would  be  said  not  to  be  animated  by  a  mind.  And  a 
different  Body  B',  which  acted  in  the  same  general 
way  as  B,  would  be  said  to  be  animated  by  a  different 
mind  M'.) 

95 


96        MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE  IN   NATURE 

The  problem  of  Interaction  is  generally  discussed  at 
the  level  of  enlightened  common-sense  ;  where  it  is 
assumed  that  we  know  pretty  well  what  we  mean  by 
'*mind",  by  "matter"  and  by  ''causation".  Obvi- 
ously no  solution  which  is  reached  at  that  level  can 
claim  to  be  ultimate.  If  what  we  call  "  matter"  should 
turn  out  to  be  a  collection  of  spirits  of  low  intelligence, 
as  Leibniz  thought,  the  argument  that  mind  and  body 
are  so  unlike  that  their  interaction  is  impossible  would 
become  irrelevant.  Again,  if  causation  be  nothing  but 
regular  sequence  and  concomitance,  as  some  philoso- 
phers have  held,  it  is  ridiculous  to  regard  psycho- 
neural  parallelism  and  interaction  as  mutually  exclusive 
alternatives.  For  interaction  will  mean  no  more  than 
parallelism,  and  parallelism  will  mean  no  less  than 
interaction.  Nevertheless  I  am  going  to  discuss  the 
arguments  here  at  the  common-sense  level,  because 
they  are  so  incredibly  bad  and  yet  have  imposed  upon 
so  many  learned  men. 

We  start  then  by  assuming  a  developed  mind  and  a 
developed  organism  as  two  distinct  things,  and  by 
admitting  that  the  two  are  now  intimately  connected 
in  some  way  or  other  which  I  express  by  saying  that 
"  this  mind  animates  this  organism  ".  We  assume  that 
bodies  are  very  much  as  enlightened  common-sense 
believes  them  to  be  ;  and  that,  even  if  we  cannot  define 
"  causation  ",  we  have  some  means  of  recognising  when 
it  is  present  and  when  it  is  absent.  The  question  then  is  : 
"  Does  a  mind  ever  act  on  the  body  which  it  animates, 
and  does  a  body  ever  act  on  the  mind  which  animates 
it?"  The  answer  which  common-sense  would  give  to 
both  questions  is:  "Yes,  certainly."  On  the  face  of 
it  my  body  acts  on  my  mind  whenever  a  pin  is  stuck 
into  the  former  and  a  painful  sensation  thereupon  arises 
in  the  latter.  And,  on  the  face  of  it,  my  mind  acts  on 
my  body  whenever  a  desire  to  move  my  arm  arises  in 
the  former  and  is  followed  by  this  movement  in  the 
latter.     Let   us   call   this   common-sense   view    "Two- 


BODY   AND  MIND  97 

sided  Interaction".  Although  it  seems  so  obvious  it 
has  been  denied  by  probably  a  majority  of  philosophers 
and  a  majority  of  physiologists.  So  the  question  is  : 
"Why  should  so  many  distinguished  men,  who  have 
studied  the  subject,  have  denied  the  apparently  obvious 
fact  of  Two-sided  Interaction  ?  " 

The  arguments  against  Two-sided  Interaction  fall 
into  two  sets  : — Philosophical  and  Scientific.  We  will 
take  the  philosophical  arguments  first ;  for  we  shall 
find  that  the  professedly  scientific  arguments  come 
back  in  the  end  to  the  principles  or  prejudices  which 
are  made  explicit  in  the  philosophical  arguments. 

Philosophical  Arguments  against  Two-sided.  Inter- 
action. No  one  can  deny  that  there  is  a  close  correla- 
tion between  certain  bodily  events  and  certain  mental 
events,  and  conversely.  Therefore  anyone  who  denies 
that  there  is  action  of  mind  on  body  and  of  body 
on  mind  must  presumably  hold  {a)  that  concomitant 
variation  is  not  an  adequate  criterion  of  causal  con- 
nexion, and  {b)  that  the  other  feature  which  is  essential 
for  causal  connexion  is  absent  in  the  case  of  body  and 
mind.  Now  the  common  philosophical  argument  is 
that  minds  and  mental  states  are  so  extremely  unlike 
bodies  and  bodily  states  that  it  is  inconceivable  that 
the  two  should  be  causally  connected.  It  is  certainly 
fiMie  that,  if  minds  and  mental  events  are  just  what  they 
seem  to  be  to  introspection  and  nothing  more,  and  if 
bodies  and  bodily  events  are  just  what  enlightened 
common-sense  thinks  them  to  be  and  nothing  more, 
the  two  are  extremely  unlike.  And  this  fact  is  supposed 
to  show  that,  however  closely  correlated  certain  pairs 
of  events  in  mind  and  body  respectively  may  be,  they 
cannot  be  causally  connected. 

Evidently  the  assumption  at  the  back  of  this  argument 
is  that  concomitant  variation,  together  with  a  high 
enough  degree  of  likeness,  is  an  adequate  test  for  causa- 
tion ;  but  that  no  amount  of  concomitant  variation  can 


/ 


i  ^ 


4 


98        MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE  IN   NATURE 

establish  causation  in  the  absence  of  a  high  enough 
degree  of  likeness.  Now  I  am  inclined  to  admit  part  of 
this  assumption.  I  think  it  is  practically  certain  that 
causationdoes  not  s'lmiplj  mean  concomitant  variation. 
(And,  if  it  did,  cadz'i  qucEstio.^  Hence  the  existence  of 
the  latter  is  not  ipso  facto  a  proof  of  the  presence  of  the 
former.  Again,  I  think  it  is  almost  certain  that  con- 
comitant variation  between  A  and  B  is  not  in  fact  a 
sufficient  sign  of  the  presence  of  a  direct  causal  relation 
between  the  two.  (I  think  it  may  perhaps  be  a  sufficient 
sigfn  of  either  a  direct  causal  relation  between  A  and  B 
or  of  several  causal  relations  which  indirectly  unite  A 
and  B  through  the  medium  of  other  terms  C,  D,  etc.) 
So  far  I  agree  with  the  assumptions  of  the  argument. 
But  I  cannot  see  the  least  reason  to  think  that  the  other 
characteristic,  which  must  be  added  to  concomitant 
variation  before  we  can  be  sure  that  A  and  B  are 
causally  connected,  is  a  high  degree  of  likeness  between 
the  two.  One  would  like  to  know  just  how  unlike  two 
events  may  be  before  it  becomes  impossible  to  admit 
the  existence  of  a  causal  relation  between  them.  No 
one  hestitates  to  hold  that  draughts  and  colds  in  the 
head  are  causally  connected,  although  the  two  are 
extremely  unlike  each  other.  If  the  unlikeness  of 
draughts  and  colds  in  the  head  does  not  prevent  one 
from  admitting  a  causal  connexion  between  the  two,  why 
should  the  unlikeness  of  volitions  and  voluntary  move- 
ments prevent  one  from  holding  that  they  are  causally 
connected?  To  sum  up.  I  am  willing  to  admit  that 
an  adequate  criterion  of  causal  connexion  needs  some 
other  relation  between  a  pair  of  events  beside  con- 
comitant variation  ;  but  I  do  not  believe  for  a  moment 
that  this  other  relation  is  that  of  qualitative  likeness. 

This  brings  us  to  a  rather  more  refined  form  of  the 
argument  against  Interaction.  It  is  said  that,  whenever 
we  admit  the  existence  of  a  causal  relation  between  two 
events,  these  two  events  (to  put  it  crudely)  must  also 
form    parts   of   a   single   substantial   whole.     E.g.^    all 


BODY   AND   MIND  99 

physical  events  are  spatially  related  and  form  one  great 
extended  whole.  And  the  mental  events  which  would 
commonly  be  admitted  to  be  causally  connected  are 
always  events  in  a  single  mind.  A  mind  is  a  substantial 
whole  of  a  peculiar  kind  too.  Now  it  is  said  that 
between  bodily  events  and  mental  events  there  are  no 
relations  such  as  those  which  unite  physical  events  in 
different  parts  of  the  same  Space  or  mental  events  in 
the  history  of  the  same  mind.  In  the  absence  of  such 
relations,  binding  mind  and  body  into  a  single  sub- 
stantial whole,  we  cannot  admit  that  bodily  and  mental 
events  can  be  causally  connected  with  each  other,  no 
matter  how  closely  correlated  their  variations  may  be. 

This  is  a  much  better  argument  than  the  argument 
about  qualitative  likeness  and  unlikeness.  If  we  accept 
the  premise  that  causal  relations  can  subsist  only  between 
terms  which  form  parts  of  a  single  substantial  whole 
must  we  deny  that  mental  and  bodily  events  can  be 
causally  connected?  I  do  not  think  that  we  need, 
(i)  It  is  of  course  perfectly  true  that  an  organism  and 
the  mind  which  animates  it  do  not  form  a  physical 
whole,  and  that  they  do  not  form  a  mental  whole  ;  and 
these,  no  doubt,  are  the  two  kinds  of  substantial  whole 
with  which  we  are  most  familiar.  But  it  does  not  follow 
that  a  mind  and  its  organism  do  not  form  a  substantial 
whole  oi  some  kind.  There,  plainly,  is  the  extraordinary 
intimate  union  between  the  two  which  I  have  called 
''animation  "  of  the  one  by  the  other.  Even  if  the  mind 
be  just  what  it  seems  to  introspection,  and  the  body  be 
just  what  it  seems  to  perception  aided  by  the  more 
precise  methods  of  science,  this  seems  to  me  to  be 
enough  to  make  a  mind  and  its  body  a  substantial 
whole.  Even  so  extreme  a  dualist  about  Mind  and 
Matter  as  Descartes  occasionally  suggests  that  a  mind 
and  its  body  together  form  a  quasi-substance  ;  and, 
although  we  may  quarrel  with  the  language  of  the  very 
numerous  philosophers  who  have  said  that  the  mind  is 
"the   form"    of  its    body,    we   must    admit   that    such 


100       MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE  IN   NATURE 

language  would  never  have  seemed  plausible  unless  a 
mind  and  its  body  together  had  formed  something  very- 
much  like  a  single  substantial  whole. 

(ii)  We  must,  moreover,  admit  the  possibility  that 
minds  and  mental  events  have  properties  and  relations 
which  do  not  reveal  themselves  to  introspection,  and 
that  bodies  and  bodily  events  may  have  properties  and 
relations  which  do  not  reveal  themselves  to  perception 
or  to  physical  and  chemical  experiment.  In  virtue  of 
these  properties  and  relations  the  two  together  may  well 
form  a  single  substantial  whole  of  the  kind  which  is 
alleged  to  be  needed  for  causal  interaction.  Thus,  if  we 
accept  the  premise  of  the  argument,  we  have  no  right  to 
assert  that  mind  and  body  cannot  interact ;  but  only  the 
much  more  modest  proposition  that  introspection  and 
perception  do  not  suffice  to  assure  us  that  mind  and 
body  are  so  interrelated  that  they  can  interact. 

(iii)  We  must  further  remember  that  the  Two-sided 
Interactionist  is  under  no  obligation  to  hold  that  the 
complete  conditions  of  any  mental  event  are  bodily  or 
that  the  complete  conditions  of  any  bodily  event  are 
mental.  He  needs  only  to  assert  that  some  mental 
events  include  certain  bodily  events  among  their 
necessary  conditions,  and  that  some  bodily  events 
include  certain  mental  events  among  their  necessary 
conditions.  If  I  am  paralysed  my  volition  may  not 
move  my  arm  ;  and,  if  I  am  hypnotised  or  intensely 
interested  or  frightened,  a  wound  may  not  produce  a 
painful  sensation.  Now,  if  the  complete  cause  and  the 
complete  effect  in  all  interaction  include  both  a  bodily 
and  a  mental  factor,  the  two  wholes  will  be  related  by 
the  fact  that  the  mental  constituents  belong  to  a  single 
mind,  that  the  bodily  constituents  belong  to  a  single 
body,  and  that  this  mind  animates  this  body.  This 
amount  of  connexion  should  surely  be  enough  to  allow 
of  causal  interaction. 

This  will  be  the  most  appropriate  place  to  deal  with 
the  contention  that,  in  voluntary  action,  and  there  only, 


BODY   AND   MIND  loi 

we  are  immediately  acquainted  with  an  instance  of 
causal  connexion.  If  this  be  true  the  controversy  is  of 
course  setFle^  at  once  in  favour  of  the  Interactionist.  It 
is  generally  supposed  that  this  view  was  refuted  once 
and  for  all  by  Mr  Hume  in  his  Enquiry  concerning  Human 
Understandifig  {Sect.  VII,  Part  I).  I  should  not  care  to 
assert  that  the  doctrine  in  question  is  true  ;  but  I  do 
think  that  it  is  plausible,  and  I  am  quite  sure  that  Mr 
Hume's  arguments  do  not  refute  it.  Mr  Hume  uses 
three  closely  connected  arguments,  (i)  The  connexion 
between  a  successful  volition  and  the  resulting  bodily 
movement  is  as  mysterious  and  as  little  self-evident  as 
the  connexion  between  any  other  event  and  its  effect. 
(2)  We  have  to  learn  from  experience  which  of  our 
volitions  will  be  effective  and  which  will  not.  E.g.,  we 
do  not  know,  until  we  have  tried,  that  we  can  voluntarily 
move  our  arms  and  cannot  voluntarily  move  our  livers. 
And  again,  if  a  man  were  suddenly  paralysed,  he  would 
still  expect  to  be  able  to  move  his  arm  voluntarily,  and 
would  be  surprised  when  he  found  that  it  kept  still  in 
spite  of  his  volition.  (3)  We  have  discovered  that  the 
immediate  consequence  of  a  volition  is  a  change  in  our 
nerves  and  muscles,  which  most  people  know  nothing 
about ;  and  is  not  the  movement  of  a  limb,  which 
most  people  believe  to  be  its  immediate  and  necessary 
consequence. 

The  second  and  third  arguments  are  valid  only 
against  the  contention  that  we  know  immediately  that  a 
volition  to  make  a  certain  movement  is  the  sufficient 
condition  for  the  happening  of  that  movement.  They 
are  quite  irrelevant  to  the  contention  that  we  know 
immediately  that  the  volition  is  a  necessary  condition  for 
the  happening  of  just  that  movement  at  just  that  time. 
No  doubt  many  other  conditions  are  also  necessary,  e.g., 
that  our  nerves  and  muscles  shall  be  in  the  right  state  ; 
and  these  other  necessary  conditions  can  be  discovered 
only  by  special  investigation.  Since  our  volitions  to 
move  our  limbs  are  in  fact  followed  in  the  vast  majority 


102      MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

of  cases  by  the  willed  movement,  and  since  the  other 
necessary  conditions  are  not  very  obvious,  it  is  natural 
enough  that  we  should  think  that  we  know  immediately 
that  our  volition  is  the  sufficient  condition  of  the  move- 
ment of  our  limbs.  If  we  think  so,  we  are  certainly 
wrong  ;  and  Mr  Hume's  arguments  prove  that  we  are. 
But  they  prove  nothing  else.  It  does  not  follow  that 
we  are  wrong  in  thinking  that  we  know,  without  having 
to  wait  for  the  result,  that  the  volition  is  a  necessary 
condition  of  the  movement. 

It  remains  to  consider  the  first  argument.  Is  the 
connexion  between  cause  and  effect  as  mysterious  and 
as  little  self-evident  in  the  case  of  the  voluntary  pro- 
duction of  bodily  movement  as  in  all  other  cases?  If 
so,  we  must  hold  that  the  first  time  a  baby  wills  to 
move  its  hand  it  is  just  as  much  surprised  to  find  its 
hand  moving  as  it  would  be  to  find  its  leg  moving  or 
its  nurse  bursting  into  flames.  I  do  not  profess  to 
know  anything  about  the  infant  mind  ;  but  it  seems 
to  me  that  this  is  a  wildly  paradoxical  consequence, 
for  which  there  is  no  evidence  or  likelihood.  But  there 
is  no  need  to  leave  the  matter  there.  It  is  perfectly 
plain  that,  in  the  case  of  volition  and  voluntary  move- 
ment, there  is  a  connexion  between  the  cause  and  the 
effect  which  is  not  present  in  other  cases  of  causation, 
and  which  does  make  it  plausible  to  hold  that  in  this 
one  case  the  nature  of  the  effect  can  be  foreseen  by 
merely  reflecting  on  the  nature  of  the  cause.  The 
peculiarity  of  a  volition  as  a  cause-factor  is  that  it  in-  ■ 
volves  as  an  essential  part  of  it  the  idea  of  the  effect. 
To  say  that  a  person  has  a  volition  to  move  his  arm 
involves  saying  that  he  has  an  idea  of  his  arm  (and  not 
of  his  leg  or  his  liver)  and  an  idea  of  the  position  in 
which  he  wants  his  arm  to  be.  It  is  simply  silly  in. 
view  of  this  fact  to  say  that  there  is  no  closer  connexion 
between  the  desire  to  move  my  arm  and  the  movement 
of  my  arm  than  there  is  between  this  desire  and  the 
movement  of   my  leg  or  my  liver.     We  cannot  detect 


BODY   AND   MIND  103 

any  analogous  connexion   between  cause  and  effect  in 
causal  transactions  which  we  view  wholly  from  outside, 
such  as  the  movement  of  a  billiard-ball  by  a  cue.      It  is 
therefore  by  no  means  unreasonable  to  suggest  that,  in   | 
the  one  case  of  our  own  voluntary  movemente,  we  can    j 
see  without  waiting  for  the  result  that  such  and  such  a    | 
volition   is  a  necessary  condition   of  such  and  such  a    • 
bodily  movement. 

It  seems  to  me  then  that  Mr  Hume's  arguments  on 
this  point  are  absolutely  irrelevant,  and  that  it  may 
very  well  be  true  that  in  volition  we  positively  know 
that  our  desire  for  such  and  such  a  bodily  movement  is 
a  necessary  (though  not  a  sufficient)  condition  of  the 
happening  of  just  that  movement  at  just  that  time. 
On  the  whole  then  I  conclude  that  the  philosophical  j' 
argumenFs  certainly  do  not  disprove  Two-sided  Inter-  '.^ 
action,  and  that  they  do  not  even  raise  any  strong  *| 
presumption  against  it.  And,  while  I  am  not  prepared 
definitely  to  commit  myself  to  the  view  that,  in  voluntary 
movement,  we  positively  know  that  the  mind  acts  on 
the  body,  I  do  think  that  this  opinion  is  quite  plausible 
when  properly  stated  and  that  the  arguments  which 
have  been  brought  against  it  are  worthless.  I  pass 
therefore  to  the  scientific  arguments. 

Scientific  Arguments  against  Two-sided  Interaction. 

There  are,  so  far  as  I  know,  two  of  these.  One  is 
supposed  to  be  based  on  the  physical  principle  of  the 
Conservation  of  Energy,  and  on  certain  experiments 
which  have  been  made  on  human  bodies.  The  other 
is  based  on  the  close  analogy  which  is  said  to  exist 
between  the  structures  of  the  physiological  mechanism 
of  reflex  action  and  that  of  voluntary  action.  I  will  take 
them  in  turn. 

(i)   The  Argument  from  Energy.     It  will  first  be  need-   f-\^ 
ful  to  state  clearly  what  is  asserted  by  the  principle  of    "' 
the    Conservation    of  Energy.      It  is  found  that,  if  we 
take  certain  material  systems,  e.g.^  a  gun,  a  cartridge. 


•i 


104      MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

and  a  bullet,  there  is  a  certain  magnitude  which  keeps 
approximately  constant   throughout   all  their  changes. 
This  is  called  "  Energy  ".     When  the  gun  has  not  been 
fired  it  and  the  bullet  have  no  motion,  but  the  explosive 
in  the  cartridge  has  great  chemical  energy.     When  it 
has  been  fired  the  bullet  is  moving  very  fast  and  has 
great   energy   of   movement.       The    gun,    though    not 
moving  fast  in  its  recoil,  has  also  great  energy  of  move- 
ment because  it  is  very  massive.     The  gases  produced 
by  the  explosion  have  some  energy  of  movement  and 
some  heat-energy,  but  much  less  chemical  energy  than 
the  unexploded  charge  had.     These  various  kinds  of 
energy  can  be  measured  in  common  units  according  to 
certain  conventions.     To  an  innocent  mind  there  seems 
to  be  a  good  deal  of  "cooking"  at  this  stage,  i.e.^  the 
conventions  seem  to  be  chosen  and  various  kinds  and 
amounts  of  concealed  energy  seem  to  be  postulated  in 
order  to  make  the  principle  come  out  right  at  the  end. 
I   do   not   propose  to    go    into   this   in    detail,   for  two 
reasons.     In  the  first  place,  I  think  that  the  conventions 
adopted    and   the    postulates    made,    though  somewhat 
suggestive  of  the  fraudulent  company-promoter,  can  be 
justified  by  their  coherence  with  certain   experimental 
facts,  and  that  they  are  not  simply  xm.^&adhoc.    Secondly, 
I    shall    show    that    the    Conservation    of    Energy    is 
absolutely  irrelevant  to  the  question  at  issue,  so  that  it 
would  be  waste  of  time  to  treat  it  too  seriously  in  the 
present   connexion.       Now    it   is    found    that   the   total 
energy    of  all    kinds    in    this   system,    when    measured 
according  to  these   conventions,    is  approximately  the 
same  in  amount  though  very  differently  distributed  after 
the  explosion   and  before  it.      If   we  had  confined  our 
attention    to  a  part  of  this  system  and  zVj-^energy  this 
would  not  have  been  true.     The  bullet,   e.g.^   had  no 
energy  at  all  before  the  explosion  and  a  great  deal  after- 
wards.    A   system    like    the    bullet,   the  gun,   and   the 
charge,  is  called  a  "Conservative  System"  ;  the  bullet 
alone,   or  the   gun   and   the   charge,    would   be   called 


BODY   AND   MIND  105 

"Non-conservative  Systems".     A  conservative  system    ,, 
might  therefore  be  defined  as  one  whose  total  energy  is   fr* 
redistributed,    but  not  altered   in   amount,   by  changes 
that  happen  within  it.     Of  course  a  given  system  might 
be  conservative  for  some  kinds  of  change  and  not  for 
others. 

So  far  we  have  merely  defined  a  *'  Conservative 
System  ",  and  admitted  that  there  are  systems  which, 
for  some  kinds  of  change  at  any  rate,  answer  approxi- 
mately to  our  definition.  We  can  now  state  the 
Principle  of  the  Conservation  of  Energy  in  terms  of 
the  conceptions  just  defined.  The  principle  asserts 
that  every  material  system  is  either  itself  conservative,  ^■: 
or,  if  not,  is  part  of  a  larger  material  system  which  is  jl 
conservative.  We  may  take  it  that  there  is  good 
inductive  evidence  for  this  proposition. 

The  next  thing  to  consider  is  the  experiments  on  the 
human  body.  These  tend  to  prove  that  a  living  body, 
with  the  air  that  it  breathes  and  the  food  that  it  eats, 
forms  a  conservative  system  to  a  high  degree  of  approxi- 
mation. We  can  measure  the  chemical  energy  of  the 
food  given  to  a  man,  and  that  which  enters  his  body 
in  the  form  of  Oxygen  breathed  in.  We  can  also, 
with  suitable  apparatus,  collect,  measure  and  analyse 
the  air  breathed  out,  and  thus  find  its  chemical  energy. 
Similarly,  we  can  find  the  energy  given  out  in  bodily 
movement,  in  heat,  and  in  excretion.  It  is  alleged 
that,  on  the  average,  whatever  the  man  may  do,  the 
energy  of  his  bodily  movements  is  exactly  accounted 
for  by  the  energy  given  to  him  in  the  form  of  food 
and  of  Oxygen.  If  you  take  the  energy  put  in  in  food 
and  Oxygen,  and  subtract  the  energy  given  out  in 
waste-products,  the  balance  is  almost  exactly  equal  to 
the  energy  put  out  in  bodily  movements.  Such  slight 
differences  as  are  found  are  as  often  on  one  side  as  on 
the  other,  and  are  therefore  probably  due  to  unavoid- 
able experimental  errors.  I  do  not  propose  to  criticise 
the  interpretation  of  these   experiments   in  detail,    be- 


t 


it 


io6       MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE  IN  NATURE 

cause,  as  I  shall  show  soon,  they  are  completely 
irrelevant  to  the  problem  of  whether  mind  and  body 
interact.  But  there  is  just  one  point  that  I  will  make 
before  passing  on.  It  is  perfectly  clear  that  such 
experiments  can  tell  us  only  what  happens  on  the 
average  over  a  long  time.  To  know  whether  the 
balance  was  accurately  kept  at  every  moment  we 
should  have  to  kill  the  patient  at  each  moment  and 
analyse  his  body  so  as  to  find  out  the  energy  present 
•then  in  the  form  of  stored-up  products.  Obviously 
we  cannot  keep  on  killing  the  patient  in  order  to 
analyse  him,  and  then  reviving  him  in  order  to  go 
on  with  the  experiment.  Thus  it  would  seem  that  the 
results  of  the  experiment  are  perfectly  compatible  with 
the  presence  of  quite  large  excesses  or  defects  in  the 
total  bodily  energy  at  certain  moments,  provided  that 
these  average  out  over  longer  periods.  However,  I  do 
not  want  to  press  this  criticism  ;  I  am  quite  ready  to 
accept  for  our  present  purpose  the  traditional  inter- 
pretation which  has  been  put  on  the  experiments. 

We  now  understand  the  physical  principle  and  the 
experimental  facts.  The  two  together  are  generally 
supposed  to  prove  that  mind  and  body  cannot  interact. 
What  precisely  is  the  argument,  and  is  it  valid? 
I  imagine  that  the  argument,  when  fully  stated,  would 
run  somewhat  as  follows:  "I  will  to  move  my  arm, 
and  it  moves.  If  the  volition  has  anything  to  do 
with  causing  the  movement  we  might  expect  energy 
to  flow  from  my  mind  to  my  body.  Thus  the  energy 
of  my  body  ought  to  receive  a  measurable  increase, 
not  accounted  for  by  the  food  that  I  eat  and  the 
Oxygen  that  I  breathe.  But  no  such  physically  un- 
accountable increases  of  bodily  energy  are  found. 
Again,  I  tread  on  a  tin-tack,  and  a  painful  sensation 
arises  in  my  mind.  If  treading  on  the  tack  has  any- 
thing to  do  with  causing  the  sensation  we  might  expect 
energy  to  flow  from  my  body  to  my  mind.  Such  energy 
would  cease  to  be  measurable.      Thus  there  ought  to 


BODY   AND   MIND  107 

be  a  noticeable  decrease  in  my  bodily  energy,  not 
balanced  by  increases  anywhere  in  the  physical  system. 
But  such  unbalanced  decreases  of  bodily  energy  are 
not  found."  So  it  is  concluded  that  the  volition  has 
nothing  to  do  with  causing  my  arm  to  move,  and  that 
treading  on  the  tack  has  nothing  to  do  with  causing 
the  painful  sensation. 

Is  this  argument  valid?  In  the  first  place  it  is 
important  to  notice  that  the  conclusion  does  not  follow 
from  the  Conservation  of  Energy  and  the  experimental 
facts  alone.  The  real  premise  is  a  tacitly  assumed 
proposition  about  causation  ;  viz.,  that,  if  a  change  in  A 
has  anything  to  do  with  causing  a  change  in  B,  energy 
must  leave  A  and  flow  into  B.  This  is  neither  asserted 
nor  entailed  by  the  Conservation  of  Energy.  What  it 
says  is  that,  if  energy  leaves  A,  it  must  appear  in 
something  else,  say  B  ;  so  that  A  and  B  together 
form  a  conservative  system.  Since  the  Conservation 
of  Energy  is  not  itself  the  premise  for  the  argument 
against  Interaction,  and  since  it  does  not  entail  that 
premise,  the  evidence  for  the  Conservation  of  Energy 
is  not  evidence  against  Interaction.  Is  there  any  in- 
dependent evidence  for  the  premise?  We  may  admit 
that  it  is  true  of  many,  though  not  of  all,  transactions 
within  the  physical  realm.  But  there  are  cases  where 
it  is  not  true  even  of  purely  physical  transactions  ; 
and,  even  if  it  were  always  true  in  the  physical  realm, 
it  would  not  follow  that  it  must  also  be  true  of  trans- 
physical  causation.  Take  the  case  of  a  weight  swinging 
at  the  end  of  a  string  hung  from  a  fixed  point.  The 
total  energy  of  the  weight  is  the  same  at  all  positions 
in  its  course.  It  is  thus  a  conservative  system.  But 
at  every  moment  the  direction  and  velocity  of  the 
weight's  motion  are  different,  and  the  proportion  be- 
tween its  kinetic  and  its  potential  energy  is  constantly 
changing.  These  changes  are  caused  by  the  pull  of 
the  string,  which  acts  in  a  different  direction  at  each 
different  moment.     The  string  makes   no  difference  to 


i]a^ 


io8       MIND  AND   ITS  PLACE   IN   NATURE 

the  total  energy  of  the  weight  ;  but  it  makes  all  the 
difference  in  the  world  to  the  particular  way  in  which 
the  weight  moves  and  the  particular  way  in  which  the 
energy  is  distributed  between  the  potential  and  the 
kinetic  forms.  This  is  evident  when  we  remember  that 
the  weight  would  begin  to  move  in  an  utterly  different 
course  if  at  any  moment  the  string  were  cut. 

Here,  then,  we  have  a  clear  case  even  in  the  physical 
realm  where  a  system  is  conservative  but  is  continually 
acted  on  by  something  which  affects  its  movement  and 
the  distribution  of  its  total  energy.  Why  should  not 
the  mind  act  on  the  body  in  this  way?  If  you  say  that 
you  can  see  how  a  string  can  affect  the  movement  of 
a  weight,  but  cannot  see  how  a  volition  could  affect  the 
movement  of  a  material  particle,  you  have  deserted  the 
scientific  argument  and  have  gone  back  to  one  of  the 
philosophical  arguments.  Your  real  difficulty  is  either 
that  volitions  are  so  very  unlike  movements,  or  that 
the  volition  is  in  your  mind  whilst  the  movement  be- 
longs to  the  physical  realm.  And  we  have  seen  how 
little  weight  can  be  attached  to  these  objections. 

The  fact  is  that,  even  in  purely  physical  systems,  the 
Conservation  of  Energy  does  not  explain  what  changes 
will  happen  or  when  they  will  happen.  It  merely  im- 
poses a  very  general  limiting  condition  on  the  changes 
that  are  possible.  The  fact  that  the  system  composed 
of  bullet,  charge,  and  gun,  in  our  earlier  example,  is 
conservative  does  not  tell  us  that  the  gun  ever  will  be 
fired,  or  when  it  will  be  fired  if  at  all,  or  what  will  cause 
it  to  go  off,  or  what  forms  of  energy  will  appear  if  and 
when  it  does  go  off.  The  change  in  this  case  is  deter- 
mined by  pulling  the  trigger.  Likewise  the  mere  fact 
that  the  human  body  and  its  neighbourhood  form  a 
conservative  system  does  not  explain  any  particular 
bodily  movement  ;  it  does  not  explain  why  I  ever  move 
at  all,  or  why  I  sometimes  write,  sometimes  walk,  and 
sometimes  swim.  To  explain  the  happening  of  these 
particular   movements  at  certain   times  it  seems  to  be 


BODY   AND   MIND  109 

essential  to  take  into  account  the  volitions  which  happen 
from  time  to  time  in  my  mind  ;  just  as  it  is  essential 
to  take  the  string  into  account  to  explain  the  particular 
behaviour  of  the  weight,  and  to  take  the  trigger  into 
account  to  explain  the  going  off  of  the  gun  at  a  certain 
moment.  The  difference  between  the  gun-system  and 
the  body-system  is  that  a  little  energy  does  flow  into 
the  former  when  the  trigger  is  pulled,  whilst  it  is 
alleged  that  none  does  so  when  a  volition  starts  a 
bodily  movement.  But  there  is  not  even  this  amount 
of  difference  between  the  body-system  and  the  swinging 
weight. 

Thus  the  argument  from  energy  has  no  tendency  \^^ 
to  disprove  Two-sided  Interaction.  It  has  gained  a 
spurious  authority  from  the  august  name  of  the  Con- 
servation of  Energy.  But  this  impressive  principle 
proves  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  case.  And  the 
real  premise  of  the  argument  is  not  self-evident,  and  is 
not  universally  true  even  in  purely  intra-physical  trans- 
actions. In  the  end  this  scientific  argument  has  to  lean 
on  the  old  philosophic  arguments  ;  and  we  have  seen 
that  these  are  but  bruised  reeds.  Nevertheless,  the  facts 
brought  forward  by  the  argument  from  energy  do  throw 
some  lighten  the  nature oi  the  interaction  between  mind  ,< 
and  body,  assuming  this  to  happen.     They  do  suggest  . 

that  all  the  energy  of  our  bodily  actions  comes  out  of  *^|i 

and  goes  back  into  the  physical  world,  and  that  minds      ; 
neither  add-^&nergy  to  nor  abstract  it  from  the  latter.      ' 
What   they  do,    if  they  do  anything,   is  to  determine     \ 
that  at  a  given  moment  so  much  energy  shall  change 
from    the  chemical    form   to  the   form  of  bodily  move- 
ment ;    and  they  determine  this,  so  far  as  we  can  see, 
without   altering    the   total    amount   of  energy    in    the 
physical  jworld, 

(2)   The  Argument  from   the  Structure  of  the  Nervous        (W 
System.     There  are  purely  reflex  actions,  like  sneezing 
and  blinking,   in  which  there  is   no  reason  to  suppose 
that  the  mind  plays  any  essential  part.     Now  we  know 


no      MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE  IN   NATURE 

the  nervous  structure  which  is  used  in  such  acts  as 
these.  A  stimulus  is  given  to  the  outer  end  of  an 
afferent  nerve ;  some  change  or  other  runs  up  this 
nerve,  crosses  a  synapsis  between  this  and  an  afferent 
nerve,  travels  down  the  latter  to  a  muscle,  causes  the 
muscle  to  contract,  and  so  produces  a  bodily  movement. 
There  seems  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  mind  plays 
any  essential  part  in  this  process.  The  process  may  be 
irreducibly  vital,  and  not  merely  physico-chemical  ;  but 
there  seems  no  need  to  assume  anything  more  than 
this.  Now  it  is  said  that  the  whole  nervous  system  is 
simply  an  immense  complication  of  interconnected 
nervous  arcs.  The  result  is  that  a  change  which  travels 
inwards  has  an  immense  number  of  alternative  paths 
by  which  it  may  travel  outwards.  Thus  the  reaction  to 
a  given  stimulus  is  no  longer  one  definite  movement, 
as  in  the  simple  reflex.  Almost  any  movement  may 
follow  any  stimulus  according  to  the  path  which  the 
afferent  disturbance  happens  to  take.  This  path  will 
depend  on  the  relative  resistance  of  the  various  synapses 
at  the  time.  Now  a  variable  response  to  the  same 
stimulus  is  characteristic  of  deliberate  as  opposed  to 
reflex  action. 

These  are  the  facts.  The  argument  based  on  them 
runs  as  follows.  It  is  admitted  that  the  mind  has 
nothing  to  do  with  the  causation  of  purely  reflex 
actions.  But  the  nervous  structure  and  the  nervous 
processes  involved  in  deliberate  action  do  not  differ  in 
kind  from  those  involved  in  reflex  action  ;  they  differ 
only  in  degree  of  complexity.  The  variability  which 
characterises  deliberate  action  is  fully  explained  by  the 
variety  of  alternative  paths  and  the  variable  resistances 
of  the  synapses.  So  it  is  unreasonable  to  suppose  that 
the  mind  has  any  more  to  do  with  causing  deliberate 
actions  than  it  has  to  do  with  causing  reflex  actions. 

I  think  that  this  argument  is  invalid.  In  the  first 
place  I  am  pretty  sure  that  the  persons  who  use  it  have 
before  their  imagination  a  kind  of  picture  of  how  mind  and 


BODY   AND   MIND  iii 

body  must  interact  if  they  interact  at  all.  They  find 
that  the  facts  do  not  answer  to  this  picture,  and  so  they 
conclude  that  there  is  no  interaction.  The  picture  is 
of  the  following  kind.  They  think  of  the  mind  as 
sitting  somewhere  in  a  hole  in  the  brain,  surrounded 
by  telephones.  And  they  think  of  the  afferent  dis- 
turbance as  coming  to  an  end  at  one  of  these  telephones 
and  there  affecting  the  mind.  The  mind  is  then  sup- 
posed to  respond  by  sexiding  an  afferent  impulse  down 
another  of  these  telephones.  As  no  such  hole,  with 
afferent  nerves  stopping  at  its  walls  and  afferent  nerves 
starting  from  them,  can  be  found,  they  conclude  that 
the  mind  can  play  no  part  in  the  transaction.  But 
another  alternative  is  that  this  picture  of  how  the  mind 
must  act  if  it  acts  at  all  is  wrong.  To  put  it  shortly, 
the  mistake  is  to  confuse  a  gap  in  an  explanation  with 
a  spatio-temporal  gap,  and  to  argue  from  the  absence 
of  the  latter  to  the  absence  of  the  former. 

The  Interactionist's  contention  is  simply  that  there 
is  a  gap  in  any  purely  physiological  explanation  of 
deliberate  action  ;  i.e.,  that  all  such  explanations  fail 
to  account  completely  for  the  facts  because  they  leave 
out  one  necessary  condition.  It  does  not  follow  in  the 
least  that  there  must  be  a  spatio-temporal  breach  of 
continuity  in  the  physiological  conditions,  and  that 
the  missing  condition  must  fill  this  gap  in  the  way  in 
which  the  movement  of  a  wire  fills  the  spatio-temporal 
interval  between  the  pulling  of  a  bell-handle  and  the 
ringing  of  a  distant  bell.  To  assume  this  is  to  make 
the  mind  a  kind  of  physical  object,  and  to  make  its 
action  a  kind  of  mechanical  action.  Really,  the  mind  4,  VN-*^^ 
and  its  actions  are  not  literally  in  Space  at  all,  and  the 
time  which  is  occupied  by  the  mental  event  is  no  doubt 
also  occupied  by  some  part  of  the  physiological  process. 
Thus  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  much  of  the  force 
which  this  argument  actually  exercises  on  many  people 
is  simply  due  to  the  presupposition  about  the  modus 
operandi  of  interaction,  and  that  it  is  greatly  weakened 


112       MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE  IN   NATURE 

when  this  presupposition  is  shown  to  be  a  mere  pre- 
judice due  to  our  limited  power  of  envisaging  un- 
familiar alternative  possibilities. 

We  can,  however,  make  more  detailed  objections  to 
the  argument  than  this.  There  is  a  clear  introspective 
difference  between  the  mental  accompaniment  of  volun- 
tary action  and  that  of  reflex  action.  What  goes  on  in 
our  minds  when  we  decide  with  difficulty  to  get  out  of 
a  hot  bath  on  a  cold  morning  is  obviously  extremely 
different  from  what  goes  on  in  our  minds  when  we 
sniff  pepper  and  sneeze.  And  the  difference  is  quali- 
tative ;  it  is  not  a  mere  difference  of  complexity.  This 
difference  has  to  be  explained  somehow  ;  and  the  theory 
under  discussion  gives  no  plausible  explanation  of  it. 
The  ordinary  view  that,  in  the  latter  case,  the  mind  is 
not  acting  on  the  body  at  all ;  whilst,  in  the  former,  it  is 
acting  on  the  body  in  a  specific  way,  does  at  least  make 
the  introspective  difference  between  the  two  intelligible. 

Again,  whilst  it  is  true  that  deliberate  action  differs 
from  reflex  action  in  its  greater  variability  of  response 
to  the  same  stimulus,  this  is  certainly  not  the  whole  or 
the  most  important  part  of  the  difference  between  them. 
The  really  important  difference  is  that,  in  deliberate 
action,  the  response  is  varied  appropriately  to  meet  the 
special  circumstances  which  are  supposed  to  exist  at 
the  time  or  are  expected  to  arise  later  ;  whilst  reflex 
action  is  not  varied  in  this  way,  but  is  blind  and  almost 
mechanical.  The  complexity  of  the  nervous  system 
explains  the  possibility  of  variation  ;  it  does  not  in  the 
least  explain  why  the  alternative  which  actually  takes 
place  should  as  a  rule  be  appropriate  and  not  merely 
haphazard.  And  so  again  it  seems  as  if  some  factor 
were  in  operation  in  deliberate  action  which  is  not 
present  in  reflex  action  ;  and  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose 
that  this  factor  is  the  volition  in  the  mind. 

It  seems  to  me  that  this  second  scientific  argument 
has  no  tendency  to  disprove  interaction  ;  but  that  the 
facts  which  it  brings  forward  do  tend  to  suggest  the 


BODY   AND   MIND  113 

particular  form  which  interaction  probably  takes  if  it 
happens  at  all.  They  suggest  that  what  the  mind  does 
to  the  body  in  voluntary  action,  if  it  does  anything,  is 
to  lower  the  resistance  of  certain  synapses  and  to  raise 
that  of  others.  The  result  is  that  the  nervous  current 
follows  such  a  course  as  to  produce  the  particular 
movement  which  the  mind  judges  to  be  appropriate 
at  the  time.  On  such  a  view  the  difference  between 
reflex,  habitual,  and  deliberate  actions  for  the  present 
purpose  becomes  fairly  plain.  In  pure  reflexes  the 
mind  cannot  voluntarily  affect  the  resistance  of  the 
synapses  concerned,  and  so  the  action  takes  place  in 
spite  of  it.  In  habitual  action  it  deliberately  refrains 
from  interfering  with  the  resistance  of  the  synapses, 
and  so  the  action  goes  on  like  a  complicated  reflex. 
But  it  can  affect  these  resistances  if  it  wishes,  though 
often  only  with  difficulty  ;  and  it  is  ready  to  do  so  if 
it  judges  this  to  be  expedient.  Finally,  it  may  lose 
the  power  altogether.  This  would  be  what  happens 
when  a  person  becomes  a  slave  to  some  habit,  such  as 
drug-taking. 

I  conclude  that,  at  the  level  of  enlightened  common- 
sense  at  which  the  ordinary  discussion  of  Interaction 
moves,  no  good  reason  has  been  produced  for  doubting 
that  the  mind  acts  on  the  body  in  volition,  and  that  the 
body  acts  on  the  mind  in  sensation.  The  philosophic 
arguments  are  quite  inconclusive ;  and  the  scientific 
arguments,  when  properly  understood,  are  quite  com- 
patible with  Two-sided  Interaction.  At  most  they 
suggest  certain  conclusions  as  to  the  form  which 
interaction  probably  takes  if  it  happens  at  all. 

Difficulties  in  the  Denial  of  Interaction.  I  propose 
now  to  consider  some  of  the  difficulties  which  would 
attend  the  denial  of  Interaction,  still  keeping  the  dis- 
cussion at  the  same  common-sense  level.  If  a  man 
denies  the  action  of  body  on  mind  he  is  at  once  in 
trouble  over  the  causation  of  new  sensations.     Suppose 

n 


114      MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN  NATURE 

that  I  suddenly  tread  on  an  unsuspected  tin-tack.  A 
new  sensation  suddenly  comes  into  my  mind.  This  is 
an  event,  and  it  presumably  has  some  cause.  Now, 
however  carefully  I  introspect  and  retrospect,  I  can  find 
no  other  mental  event  which  is  adequate  to  account  for 
the  fact  that  just  that  sensation  has  arisen  at  just  that 
moment.  If  I  reject  the  common-sense  view  that  tread- 
ing on  the  tack  is  an  essential  part  of  the  cause  of  the 
sensation,  I  must  suppose  either  that  it  is  uncaused,  or 
that  it  is  caused  by  other  events  in  my  mind  which  I 
cannot  discover  by  introspection  or  retrospection,  or 
that  it  is  caused  telepathically  by  other  finite  minds  or 
by  God.  Now  enquiry  of  my  neighbours  would  show 
that  it  is  not  caused  telepathically  by  any  event  in  their 
minds  which  they  can  introspect  or  remember.  Thus 
anyone  who  denies  the  action  of  body  on  mind,  and 
admits  that  sensations  have  causes,  must  postulate 
either  {a)  immense  numbers  of  unobservable  states  in 
'his  own  mind;  or  (d)  as  many  unobservable  states  in 
his  neighbours'  minds,  together  with  telepathic  action  ; 
or  {c)  some  non-human  spirit  together  with  telepathic 
action.  I  must  confess  that  the  difficulties  which  have 
been  alleged  against  the  action  of  body  on  mind  seem 
to  be  mild  compared  with  those  of  the  alternative 
hypotheses  which  are  involved  in  the  denial  of  such 
action. 

The  difficulties  which  are  involved  in  the  denial  of 
the  action  of  mind  on  body  are  at  first  sight  equally 
great ;  but  I  do  not  think  that  they  turn  out  to  be  so 
serious  as  those  which  are  involved  in  denying  the 
action  of  body  on  mind.  The  prima  facie  difficulty  is 
this.  The  world  contains  many  obviously  artificial 
objects,  such  as  books,  bridges,  clothes,  etc.  We  know 
that,  if  we  go  far  enough  back  in  the  history  of  their 
production,  we  always  do  in  fact  come  on  the  actions  of 
some  human  body.  And  the  minds  connected  with 
these  bodies  did  design  the  objects  in  question,  did  will 
to  produce  them,  and  did  believe  that  they  were  initiat- 


BODY   AND   MIND  115 

ing  and  guiding  the  physical  process  by  means  of  these 
designs  and  volitions.  If  it  be  true  that  the  mind  does 
not  act  on  the  body,  it  follows  that  the  designs  and 
volitions  in  the  agents'  minds  did  not  in  fact  play  any 
part  in  the  production  of  books,  bridges,  clothes,  etc. 
This  appears  highly  paradoxical.  And  it  is  an  easy 
step  from  it  to  say  that  anyone  who  denies  the  action  of 
mind  on  body  must  admit  that  books,  bridges,  and  other 
such  objects  cou/d  have  been  produced  even  though 
there  had  been  no  minds,  no  thought  of  these  objects 
and  no  desire  for  them.  This  consequence  seems  mani- 
festly absurd  to  common-sense,  and  it  might  be  argued 
that  it  reflects  its  absurdity  back  on  the  theory  which 
entails  it. 

The  man  who  denies  that  mind  can  act  on  body 
might  deal  with  this  difficulty  in  two  ways:  (i)  He 
might  deny  that  the  conclusion  z's  intrinsically  absurd. 
He  might  say  that  human  bodies  are  extraordinarily 
complex  physical  objects,  which  probably  obey  irre- 
ducible laws  of  their  own,  and  that  we  really  do  not 
know  enough  about  them  to  set  limits  to  what  their 
unaided  powers  could  accomplish.  This  is  the  line 
which  Spinoza  took.  The  conclusion,  it  would  be 
argued,  seems  absurd  only  because  the  state  of  affairs 
which  it  contemplates  is  so  very  unfamiliar.  We  find 
it  difficult  to  imagine  a  body  like  ours  without  a  mind 
like  ours  ;  but,  if  we  could  get  over  this  defect  in  our 
powers  of  imagination,  we  might  have  no  difficulty  in 
admitting  that  such  a  body  could  do  all  the  things 
which  our  bodies  do.  I  think  it  must  be  admitted  that 
the  difficulty  is  not  so  great  as  that  which  is  involved  in 
denying  the  action  of  body  on  mind.  There  we  had  to 
postulate  ad  hoc  utterly  unfamiliar  entities  and  modes 
of  action  ;  here  it  is  not  certain  that  we  should  have  to 
do  this. 

(2)  The  other  line  of  argument  would  be  to  say  that 
the  alleged  consequence  does  not  necessarily  follow 
from  denying  the  action  of  mind  on  body.     I  assume 


ii6      MIND  AND   ITS  PLACE  IN   NATURE 

that  both  parties  admit  that  causation  is  something 
more  than  mere  de  facto  regularity  of  sequence  and 
concomitance.  If  they  do  not,  of  course  the  whole 
controversy  between  them  becomes  futile  ;  for  there  will 
certainly  be  causation  between  mind  and  body  and  be- 
tween body  and  mind,  in  the  only  sense  in  which  there 
is  causation  anywhere.  This  being  presupposed,  the 
following  kind  of  answer  is  logically  possible.  When 
I  say  that  B  could  not  have  happened  unless  A  had 
happened,  there  are  two  alternative  possibilities,  {a) 
A  may  itself  be  an  indispensable  link  in  any  chain  of 
causes  which  ends  up  with  B.  {b)  A  may  not  itself  be 
a  link  in  any  chain  of  causation  which  ends  up  with  B. 
But  there  may  be  an  indispensable  link  a  in  any  such 
chain  of  causation,  and  A  may  be  a  necessary  accom- 
paniment or  sequent  of  a.  These  two  possibilities  may 
be  illustrated  by  diagrams,  ia)  is  represented  by  the 
figure  below  : — 

Ao  A  Ai  A^  B 

^ ^ y    . y  . 

The  two  forms  of  {b)  are  represented  by  the  two  figures 
below  : — 


A 


Evidently,  if  B  cannot  happen  unless  a  precedes,  and 
if  a  cannot  happen  without  A  accompanying  or  im- 
mediately following  it,  B  will  not  be  able  to  happen 
unless  A  precedes  it.  And  yet  A  will  have  had  no  part 
in  causing  B.  It  will  be  noticed  that,  on  this  view,  a 
has  a  complex  effect  AA^  of  which  a  certain  part,  viz., 
A^  is  sufficient  by  itself  to  produce  Ag  and  ultimately 
B.     Let  us  apply  this  abstract  possibility  to  our  present 


BODY   AND   MIND  117 

problem.  Suppose  that  B  is  some  artificial  object,  like 
a  book  or  a  bridge.  If  we  admit  that  this  could  no^ 
have  come  into  existence  unless  a  certain  design  and 
volition  had  existed  in  a  certain  mind,  we  could  interpret 
the  facts  in  two  ways.  {a)  We  could  hold  that  the 
design  and  volition  are  themselves  an  indispensable 
link  in  the  chain  of  causation  which  ends  in  the  pro- 
duction of  a  bridge  or  a  book.  This  is  the  common 
view,  and  it  requires  us  to  admit  the  action  of  mind  on 
body,  {d)  We  might  hold  that  the  design  and  the 
volition  are  not  themselves  a  link  in  the  chain  of  causa- 
tion which  ends  in  the  production  of  the  artificial  object  ; 
but  that  they  are  a  necessary  accompaniment  or  sequent 
of  something  which  z's  an  indispensable  link  in  this 
chain  of  causation.  On  this  view  the  chain  consists 
wholly  of  physical  events  ;  but  one  of  these  physical 
events  (viz.,  some  event  in  the  brain)  has  a  complex 
consequent.  One  part  of  this  consequent  is  purely 
physical,  and  leads  by  purely  physical  causation  to  the 
ultimate  production  of  a  bridge  or  a  book.  The  other 
is  purely  mental,  and  consists  of  a  certain  design  and 
volition  in  the  mind  which  animates  the  human  body 
concerned.  If  this  has  any  consequences  they  are 
purely  mental.  Each  part  of  this  complex  consequent 
follows  with  equal  necessity  ;  this  particular  brain-state 
could  no  more  have  existed  without  such  and  such  a 
mental  state  accompanying  or  following  it  than  it  could 
have  existed  without  such  and  such  a  bodily  movement 
following  it.  If  we  are  willing  to  take  some  such  view 
as  this,  we  can  admit  that  certain  objects  could  not  have 
existed  unless  there  had  been  designs  of  them  and 
desires  for  them ;  and  yet  we  could  consistently  deny 
that  these  desires  and  designs  have  any  effect  on  the 
movements  of  our  bodies. 

It  seems  to  me  then  that  the  doctrine  which  I  will  call 
"  One-sided  Action  of  Body  on  Mind"  is  logically 
possible  ;  i.e.,  a  theory  which  accepts  the  action  of  body 
on  mind  but  denies  the  action  of  mind  on  body.     But  I 


ii8      MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE  IN   NATURE 

do  not  see  the  least  reason  to  accept  it,  since  I  see  no 
reason  to  deny  that  mind  acts  on  body  in  volition. 
One-sided  Action  has,  I  think,  generally  been  held  in 
the  special  form  called  "  Epiphenomenalism."  I  take 
this  doctrine  to  consist  of  the  following  four  proposi- 
tions :  (i)  Certain  bodily  events  cause  certain  mental 
events.  (2)  No  mental  event  plays  any  part  in  the 
causation  of  any  bodily  event.  (3)  No  mental  event 
plays  any  part  in  the  causation  of  any  other  mental 
event.  Consequently  (4)  all  mental  events  are  caused 
by  bodily  events  and  by  them  only.  Thus  Epipheno- 
menalism  is  just  One-sided  Action  of  Body  on  Mind, 
together  with  a  special  theory  about  the  nature  and 
structure  of  mind.  This  special  theory  does  not  call  for 
discussion  here,  where  I  am  dealing  only  with  the 
relations  between  minds  and  bodies,  and  am  not  con- 
cerned with  a  detailed  analysis  of  mind.  In  a  later 
chapter  we  shall  have  to  consider  the  special  features  of 
Epiphenomenalism. 

Arguments  in  Favour  of  Interaction.  The  only  argu- 
ments for  One-sided  Action  of  Body  on  Mind  or  for 
Parallelism  are  the  arguments  against  Two-sided  Inter- 
action ;  and  these,  as  we  have  seen,  are  worthless. 
Are  there  any  arguments  in  favour  of  Two-sided  Inter- 
action ?  I  have  incidentally  given  two  which  seem  to 
me  to  have  considerable  weight.  In  favour  of  the  action 
of  mind  on  body  is  the  fact  that  we  seem  to  be  im- 
mediately aware  of  a  causal  relation  when  we  voluntarily 
try  to  produce  a  bodily  movement,  and  that  the  argu- 
ments to  show  that  this  cannot  be  true  are  invalid.  In 
favour  of  the  action  of  body  on  mind  are  the  insuperable 
difficulties  which  I  have  pointed  out  in  accounting  for 
the  happening  of  new  sensations  on  any  other  hypothesis. 
\  There  are,  however,  two  other  arguments  which  have 
^, often  been  thought  to  prove  the  action  of  mind  on  body. 
These  are  (i)  an  evolutionary  argument,  first  used,  I 
believe,  by  William  James;  and  (2)  the  famous  "telegram 


BODY   AND   MIND  119 

argument."  They  both  seem  to  me  to  be  quite  obviously 
invalid. 

(i)  The  evolutionary  argument  runs  as  follows  :  It  is 
a  fact,   which  is  admitted  by  persons  who  deny  Two- 
sided    Interaction,   that  minds    increase    in    complexity 
and  power  with  the  growth  in  complexity  of  the  brain 
and    nervous    system.       Now,    if  the    mind    makes    no 
difference  to  the  actions  of  the  body,  this  development 
on  the  mental  side  is  quite  unintelligible  from  the  point 
of    view   of    natural    selection.       Let    us   imagine   two 
animals  whose  brains  and  nervous  systems  were  of  the 
same  degree  of  complexity  ;    and  suppose,  if  possible, 
that  one  had  a  mind  and  the  other  had  none.      If  the 
mind  makes  no  difference  to  the  behaviour  of  the  body 
the  chance  of  survival  and  of  leaving  descendants  will 
clearly   be  the  same  for  the    two   animals.     Therefore 
natural  selection  will  have   no  tendency  to  favour  the 
evolution   of  mind  which  has  actually  taken  place.      I 
do  not  think  that  there  is  anything  in  this  argument. 
Natural  selection  is  a  purely  negative  process  ;  it  simply 
tends  to  eliminate  individuals  and  species  which  have 
variations  unfavourable  to  survival.    Now,  by  hypothesis, 
the  possession  of  a  mind  is  not  unfavourable  to  survival  ; 
it  simply  makes  no  difference.     Now  it  may  be  that  the 
existence  of  a   mind    of  such  and   such   a  kind    is   an 
inevitable  consequence  of  the  existence  of  a  brain  and 
nervous  system  of  such  and   such   a   degree   of  com- 
plexity.    Indeed  we  have  seen  that  some  such  view  is 
essential  if  the  opponent  of  Two-sided  Interaction  is  to 
answer  the  common-sense  objection  that  artificial  objects 
could   not  have  existed  unless  there  had  been  a  mind 
which  designed  and  desired  them.      On  this  hypothesis 
there  is  no  need  to  invoke  natural  selection  twice  over, 
once  to  explain  the  evolution  of  the  brain  and  nervous 
system,  and  once  to  explain  the  evolution  of  the  mind. 
If  natural  selection  will  account  for  the  evolution  of  the 
brain  and   nervous  system,  the  evolution  of  the  m.ind 
will  follow  inevitably,  even  though  it  adds  nothing  to 


120      MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE  IN   NATURE 

the  survival-value  of  the  organism.  The  plain  fact  is 
that  natural  selection  does  not  account  for  the  origin 
or  for  the  growth  in  complexity  of  anything  whatever  ; 
and  therefore  it  is  no  objection  to  any  particular  theory 
of  the  relations  of  mind  and  body  that,  if  it  were  true, 
natural  selection  would  not  explain  the  origin  and 
development  of  mind. 

(2)  The  "telegram  argument  "  is  as  follows  :  Suppose 
there  were  two  telegrams,  one  saying  "Our  son  has 
been  killed",  and  the  other  saying:  "Your  son  has 
been  killed  ".  And  suppose  that  one  or  other  of  them 
was  delivered  to  a  parent  whose  son  was  away  from 
home.  As  physical  stimuli  they  are  obviously  ex- 
tremely alike,  since  they  differ  only  in  the  fact  that  the 
letter  "  F"  is  present  in  one  and  absent  in  the  other. 
Yet  we  know  that  the  reaction  of  the  person  who  received 
the  telegram  might  be  very  different  according  to  which 
one  he  received.  This  is  supposed  to  show  that  the 
reactions  of  the  body  cannot  be  wholly  accounted  for 
by  bodily  causes,  and  that  the  mind  must  intervene 
causally  in  some  cases.  Now  I  have  very  little  doubt 
that  the  mind  does  play  a  part  in  determining  the  action 
of  the  recipient  of  the  telegram  ;  but  I  do  not  see  why 
this  argument  should  prove  it  to  a  person  who  doubted 
or  denied  it.  If  two  very  similar  stimuli  are  followed 
by  two  very  different  results,  we  are  no  doubt  justified 
in  concluding  that  these  stimuli  are  not  the  complete 
causes  of  the  reactions  which  follow  them.  But  of  course 
it  would  be  admitted  by  every  one  that  the  receipt  of  the 
telegram  is  not  the  complete  cause  of  the  recipient's  re- 
action. We  all  know  that  his  brain  and  nervous  system 
play  an  essential  part  in  any  reaction  that  he  may  make 
to  the  stimulus.  The  question  then  is  whether  the 
minute  structure  of  his  brain  and  nervous  system,  in- 
cluding in  this  the  supposed  traces  left  by  past  stimuli 
and  past  reactions,  is  not  enough  to  account  for  the 
great  difference  in  his  behaviour  on  receiving  two  very 
similar  stimuli.     Two  keys  may  be   very  much  alike, 


BODY   AND   MIND  121 

but  one  may  fit  a  certain  lock  and  the  other  may  not. 
And,  if  the  lock  be  connected  with  the  trigger  of  a 
loaded  gun,  the  results  of  "stimulating"  the  system 
with  one  or  other  of  the  two  keys  will  be  extremely 
different.  We  know  that  the  brain  and  nervous  system 
are  very  complex,  and  we  commonly  suppose  that  they 
contain  more  or  less  permanent  traces  and  linkages  due 
to  past  stimuli  and  reactions.  If  this  be  granted,  it  is 
obvious  that  two  very  similar  stimuli  may  produce  very 
different  results,  simply  because  one  fits  in  with  the 
internal  structure  of  the  brain  and  nervous  system  whilst 
the  other  does  not.  And  I  do  not  see  how  we  can  be 
sure  that  anything  more  is  needed  to  account  for  the 
mere  difference  of  reaction  adduced  by  the  "telegram 
argument." 

The  Positive  Theory  of  Parallelism.  The  doctrine  of 
Psycho-physical  Parallelism,  or,  as  I  prefer  to  call  it, 
"Psycho-neural  Parallelism",  has  two  sides  to  it. 
One  is  negative  ;  it  is  the  denial  that  mind  acts  on 
body  and  the  denial  that  body  acts  on  mind.  With  this 
side  of  it  I  have  now  dealt  to  the  best  of  my  ability, 
and  have  argued  that  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  it 
and  tolerably  good  reason  to  disbelieve  it.  But  Psycho- 
neural  Parallelism  has  also  a  positive  side,  which  might 
be  accepted  by  one  who  rejected  its  negative  side.  The 
positive  assertion  of  Parallelism  is  that  there  is  a  one- 
one  correlation  between  events  in  a  mind  and  events 
in  the  brain  and  nervous  system  of  the  body  which 
it  animates.  Is  there  any  reason  to  believe  this  on 
empirical  grounds? 

I  think  we  must  say  that  it  may  be  true,  but  that  it  is 
a  perfectly  enormous  assumption  unless  there  be  some 
general  metaphysical  ground  for  it ;  and  that  the  em- 
pirical evidence  for  it  is,  and  will  always  remain,  quite 
inadequate.  The  assertion  is  that  to  every  particular 
change  in  the  mind  there  corresponds  a  certain  change 
in  the  brain  which  this  mind  animates,  and  that  to  every 


/ 


122       MIND   AND   ITS  PLACE   IN   NATURE 

change  in  the  brain  there  corresponds  a  certain  change 
in  the  mind  which  animates  this  brain.  What  kind  of 
empirical  evidence  could  there  be  for  such  an  assertion  ? 
At  best  the  evidence  would  be  of  the  following  kind  : 
''I  have  observed  a  number  of  brains  and  the  minds 
which  animate  them  ;  and  I  have  never  found  a  change 
in  either  which  was  not  correlated  with  a  specific  change 
in  the  other.  And  all  other  people  who  have  made 
similar  observations  have  found  the  same  thing."  If^^ 
had  evidence  of  this  sort  the  positive  side  of  Parallelism 
would  be  a  straightforward  inductive  generalisation  of 
it ;  i.e.^  an  argument  from  "  A  has  never  been  observed 
to  happen  without  B  "  to  "  A  never  does  happen  without 
B  ".  But  actually  we  have  no  evidence  whatever  of  this 
kind.  No  one  person  in  the  world  ever  has  observed, 
or  probably  ever  will  observe,  a  brain  and  its  mind. 
The  only  mind  that  he  can  observe  is  his  own  and  the 
only  brains  that  he  can  observe  are  those  of  others. 
Nor  is  this  the  worst.  We  can  very  rarely  observe 
other  men's  brains  at  all,  and  never  when  they  are  alive 
and  in  a  state  of  normal  consciousness.  Thus  the 
actual  empirical  data  for  the  positive  side  of  Parallelism 
consist  of  observations  on  brains  which  are  no  longer 
animated  by  minds  at  all  or  whose  animating  minds 
are  in  abeyance.  And  these  minds  could  not  be 
directly  observed  by  us  even  if  they  were  present  and 
functioning  normally. 

It  will  therefore  be  worth  while  to  consider  carefully 
what  amount  of  parallelism  we  really  are  justified  on 
empirical  grounds  in  assuming,  (i)  We  have  fairly 
good  reasons  for  thinking  that  the  existence  and  general 
integrity  of  a  brain  and  nervous  system  is  a  necessary 
condition  for  the  manifestation  of  a  mind  to  itself  and  to 
other  minds.  We  do  not  positively  know  that  it  is  a 
sufficient  condition  ;  and  the  question  whether  it  be  so 
or  not  will  have  to  be  discussed  later  in  this  book.  Our 
evidence  is  all  of  the  following  kind  :  (i)  In  the  absence 
of  a  brain   and   nervous  system  we  see  none  of  those 


BODY   AND    MIND  123 

external  actions  which  we  know  in  our  own  case  to  be 
accompanied  by  consciousness,  (ii)  The  brain  and 
nervous  system  are  known  to  increase  in  complexity 
up  to  a  certain  age,  and  we  have  observed  in 
ourselves  and  can  infer  from  the  behaviour  of 
others  a  corresponding  growth  in  mental  complexity, 
(iii)  Soon  after  men  have  ceased  to  show  signs  of 
consciousness  by  their  external  behaviour  their  brains 
and  nervous  systems  break  up.  It  must  be  admitted 
that  it  might  be  maintained  with  almost  equal  plausibility 
that  these  last  facts  show  that  the  integrity  of  the 
brain  and  nervous  system  is  dependent  on  the  presence 
of  the  mind.  We  might  just  as  well  argue  .that  the 
brain  begins  to  break  up  because  the  mind  has  ceased 
to  animate  it,  as  that  the  mind  has  ceased  to  manifest 
itself  because  the  brain  has  begun  to  break  up.  In 
fact,  seeing  the  order  in  which  we  actually  get  our 
knowledge  of  the  two  facts,  the  former  is  prima  facie 
the  more  plausible  interpretation,  (iv)  In  many  cases 
where  men's  behaviour  has  been  so  odd  as  to  suggest 
that  their  minds  are  abnormal,  it  is  known  that  their 
brains  have  been  injured  or  it  has  been  found  after 
their  death  that  their  brains  were  in  an  abnormal  state. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  brains 
of  some  lunatics  on  dissection  show  no  systematic 
differences  from  those  of  normal  people.  It  would 
obviously  be  absurd  to  talk  of  "Parallelism"  in 
reference  to  this  very  general  relation  between  the 
integrity  and  complexity  of  the  brain  and  nervous 
system,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  manifestation  of  a 
human  mind,  on  the  other. 

(2)  There  is,  however,  empirical  evidence  which 
goes  rather  further  than  this.  It  is  found  that  wounds 
in  certain  parts  of  the  brain  make  specific  differences 
to  the  mind.  E-g-,  a  wound  in  one  part  may  be 
followed  by  a  loss  of  memory  for  spoken  words,  and 
so  on.  Unfortunately,  similar  results  can  often  be 
produced  by  causes  like  hypnotism  or  like  those  which 


124       MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE  IN    NATURE 

psycho-analysts  discuss.  And  here  there  is  no  positive 
empirical  evidence  that  these  specific  areas  of  the  brain 
are  affected.  Again,  there  seems  to  be  some  evidence 
that,  after  a  time  and  within  certain  limits,  another  part 
of  the  brain  can  take  over  the  functions  of  a  part  that 
has  been  injured.  Thus  the  most  that  we  can  say  is 
that  the  general  integrity  of  certain  parts  of  the  brain 
seems  to  be  at  least  a  temporarily  necessary  condition 
for  the  manifestation  of  certain  specific  kinds  of  mental 
activity.  It  remains  doubtful  how  far  any  given  area  is 
indispensable  for  a  given  kind  of  mental  activity,  and 
whether  there  may  not  be  some  kinds  of  activity  which, 
though  dependent  like  all  others  on  the  general  integrity 
of  the  brain,  are  not  specially  correlated  with  any 
particular  area.  We  might  sum  up  these  facts  by 
saying  that  there  is  good  evidence  for  a  considerable 
amount  of  "Departmental  Parallelism"  between  mind 
and  brain. 

(3)  The  orthodox  Parallelist,  however,  goes  much 
further  than  this,  and  much  beyond  the  most  rigid 
departmental  parallelism.  He  would  hold,  not  merely 
that  there  is  a  strict  correlation  between  each  distin- 
guishable department  of  mental  life  and  some  specific 
area  of  the  brain,  but  also  that  there  is  a  strict  parallelism 
of  events.  E.g.,  he  holds,  not  merely  that  I  could  not 
remember  at  all  unless  a  certain  area  of  my  brain  were 
intact,  but  also  that  if  I  now  remember  eating  my 
breakfast  there  is  a  certain  event  in  this  area  uniquely 
correlated  with  this  particular  mental  event.  And  by 
"unique  correlation"  he  means  that  if  some  other 
mental  state  had  happened  now  instead  of  this  particular 
memory  there  would  necessarily  have  been  a  different 
brain-event,  and  conversely.  So  far  as  I  know  there 
is  not,  and  could  not  possibly  be,  any  empirical  evidence 
for  this  "  Parallelism  of  Events",  as  I  will  call  it.  For 
(i),  while  a  man  is  conscious  and  can  observe  events 
in  his  own  mind,  his  brain  is  not  open  to  inspection  by 
himself  or  by  anyone  else.     And,   when    his    brain   is 


BODY   AND  MIND  125 

open  to  inspection,  he  is  not  likely  to  be  in  a  position 
to  introspect  or  to  tell  others  what  is  going  on  in  his 
mind,  even  if  something  is  happening  there  at  the  time, 
(ii)  In  any  case  the  events  in  the  brain  which  are  sup- 
posed to  correspond  to  particular  events  in  the  mind 
would  be  admitted  to  be  too  minute  to  be  observable 
even  under  the  most  favourable  circumstances.  They 
are  as  purely  hypothetical  as  the  motions  of  electrons, 
without  the  advantage  that  the  assumption  of  them 
enables  us  to  predict  better  than  we  could  otherwise  do 
what  states  of  mind  a  man  will  probably  have  under 
given  circumstances. 

It  seems  to  me  then  that  there  is  no  empirical  evidence 
at  all  for  a  Parallelism  of  Events  between  mind  and 
brain.  If  this  doctrine  is  to  be  held,  the  grounds  for  it 
must  be  general.  E.g.  psycho-neu7'al  parallelism  might 
■be  plausible  if,  on  other  grounds,  we  saw  reason  to 
accept  psycho-/-%F^zV(3:/ parallelism  ;  i.e.,  the  doctrine  that 
everj/  physical  event  is  correlated  with  a  specific  mental 
event,  and  conversely.  And  the  wider  doctrine  might 
be  defended  as  helping  to  explain  the  apparent  origin 
of  life  and  mind  from  apparently  non-living  and  non- 
conscious  matter.  This  is  a  question  which  we  shall 
have  to  discuss  later ;  all  that  I  am  concerned  to  argue 
at  present  is  that,  at  the  level  of  enlightened  common- 
sense  and  apart  from  some  general  metaphysical  theory 
of  the  nature  of  matter  and  mind,  there  is  no  adequate 
evidence  for  a  psycho-neural  parallelism  of  events. 
And,  as  parallelism  has  commonly  been  defended  on 
the  ground  that  it  is  established  by  empirical  scientific 
investigation  of  the  brain  and  nervous  system,  this  fact 
is  worth  pointing  out. 

If  there  is  no  reason  /or  psycho-neural  parallelism  of 
events,  is  there  any  positive  reason  agaijist  it?  Some 
philosophers  have  held  that  there  is.  They  have  held 
that,  while  it  is  possible  and  even  probable  that  some 
mental  events  are  correlated  with  specific  neural  events, 
it  is  impossible  that  this  should  be  true  of  all  mental 


126      MIND  AND   ITS   PLACE  IN    NATURE 

events.  Those  who  take  this  view  generally  hold  that 
there  probably  is  psycho-neural  parallelism  of  events 
for  sensations,  but  that  there  certainly  cannot  be  such 
parallelism  for  comparison,  introspection,  attentive  in- 
spection, and  so  on.  This  view  is  taken  by  Mr  Johnson 
in  his  Logic  (Part  III)  ;  and  it  will  be  worth  while  to 
consider  his  arguments.  They  are  contained  in  Chapter 
VII,  §  6  of  that  work.  Mr  Johnson's  argument,  if  I 
rightly  understand  it,  comes  to  this  :  We  must  dis- 
tinguish, e.g.,  between  the /<2:^/  that  I  am  having  two 
sensations,  one  of  which  is  light  red  and  the  other  dark 
red,  and  my  recognition  that  both  are  red  and  that  one 
is  darker  than  the  other.  We  must  likewise  distinguish, 
e.g. ,  between  the  fact  that  the  dark  one  started  before 
the  light  one,  and  my  recognition  of  this  fact ;  and 
between  the  fact  that  the  dark  one  is  to  the  left  of  the 
light  one  in  my  visual  field  and  my  recognition  of  this 
fact.  Finally,  we  must  notice  that  we  have  to  dis- 
tinguish different  degrees  of  clearness  and  determinate- 
ness  with  which  a  perfectly  determinate  fact  may  be 
recognised.  We  may  merely  judge  that  one  sensum  is 
separate  from  another,  or  we  may  judge  that  one  is 
to  the  left  of  the  other,  or  we  may  judge  that  the  first 
is  as  much  to  the  left  of  the  second  as  the  second  is  to 
the  right  of  a  third,  and  so  on.  Now  Mr  Johnson 
contends  that  the  sensations  themselves  have  neural 
correlates,  and  that  the  determinate  qualities  and 
relations  which  the  sensations  actually  have  are  deter- 
mined by  the  qualities  and  relations  of  these  neural 
correlates.  But  he  holds  that  there  is  then  nothing 
left  on  the  neural  side  for  the  recognition  of  these  qualities 
and  relations  to  be  correlated  with.  Still  less  is  there 
anything  left  on  the  neural  side  to  be  correlated  with 
the  infinitely  numerous  different  degrees  of  determinate- 
ness  with  which  the  qualities  and  relations  of  the  sensa- 
tions may  be  apprehended.  Hence  he  concludes  that 
mental  events  above  the  level  of  sensations  cannot  be 
correlated  one  to  one  with  specific  neural  events.     He 


/»>*-* 


BODY   AND   MIND  127 

does  not  explicitly  draw  the  distinction  which  I  have 
done  between  Departmental  Parallelism  and  Parallelism 
of  Events  ;  but  I  think  it  is  plain  that  his  argument  is 
meant  only  to  deny  the  latter.  He  would  probably 
admit  that,  if  certain  specific  areas  of  our  brains  were 
injured,  we  should  lose  altogether  the  power  of  making 
judgments  of  comparison  and  of  recognising  spatio- 
temporal  relations  ;  but  he  would  hold  that,  given  the 
general  integrity  of  those  areas,  there  is  not  some 
one  specific  event  within  them  corresponding  to  each 
particular  judgment  of  comparison  or  of  spatio-temporal 
relation. 

Before  criticising  this  argument  we  must  notice  that  C-JT^jLt*'- 
Mr  Johnson  does  not  explicitly  distinguish  sensations 
and  sensa.  -  By  a  "  sensation  "  I  think  he  means  what 
I  should  call  a  "  sensed  sensum  ".  And  he  thinks  that, 
from  the  nature  of  the  case,  there  can  be  no  unsensed 
sensa.  Thus  a  sensation  for  him  is  a  sensum,  regarded 
as  existentially  mind-dependent ;  and,  in  virtue  of  its 
supposed  existential  mind-dependence,  it  counts  as  a 
mental  event  belonging  to  the  mind  on  which  its 
existence  depends.  If  we  like  to  distinguish  between 
mental  states  and  mental  acts  we  can  say  that  a  sensa- 
tion, for  Mr  Johnson,  is  apparently  a  mental  state 
having  certain  sensible  qualities,  such  as  colour,  position 
in  the  visual  field,  and  so  on.  To  recognise  that  one  is 
having  a  sensation,  that  it  is  of  such  and  such  a  kind, 
and  that  it  stands  in  such  and  such  spatio-temporal 
relations  to  other  sensations,  would  be  to  perform  a 
cognitive  mental  act.  And  his  contention  is  that,  whilst 
there  is  a  parallelism  of  events  for  mental  states,  there 
cannot  for  this  very  reason  be  also  a  parallelism  of  events 
for  mental  acts.     This  at  least  is  how  I  understand  him. 

Now  I  must  confess  that  Mr  Johnson's  argument 
seems  to  me  to  be  so  extremely  weak  that  (knowing 
Mr  Johnson)  I  hesitate  to  believe  that  I  can  have 
properly  understood  it.  Let  us  suppose  that  the  actual 
relative  position  of  two  sensa  s^  and  jr^  in  a  visual  sense- 


128      MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN   NATURE 

field  is  determined  by  the  relative  position  of  two  excited 
areas  in  the  brain,  b^  and  b.^.  Let  us  suppose  that  the 
actual  relative  date  of  the  two  sensa  in  the  sense-history 
of  the  experient  is  determined  by  the  relative  date  of 
the  excitement  of  these  areas.  And  let  us  suppose 
that  the  determinate  sensible  qualities  of  the  two  sensa 
{e.g.,  the  particular  shade  of  the  particular  colour  pos- 
sessed by  each)  is  determined  by  the  particular  kind  of 
movement  which  is  going  on  in  the  microscopic  particles 
within  these  two  areas.  Mr  Johnson's  contention  seems 
to  be  that,  when  we  have  mentioned  the  positions  of 
the  excited  areas,  the  dates  at  which  they  begin  to  be 
excited,  and  the  particular  kind  of  movement  which  is 
going  on  within  them,  we  have  said  all  that  can  be  said 
about  the  neural  events.  There  is  nothing  left  on  the 
neural  side  to  be  correlated  with  our  acts  of  recognition, 
of  qualitative  comparison,  and  of  spatio-temporal  judg- 
ment ;  and  therefore  these  events  can  have  no  special 
neural  correlate.  To  this  there  are  two  answers  which 
seem  so  obvious  that  I  am  almost  ashamed  to  make 
them. 

(i)  At  the  very  utmost  the  argument  would  show  only 
that  there  is  nothing  left  within  the  two  areas  b^  and  b^ 
to  be  correlated  with  any  judgments  which  we  happen 
to  make  about  the  sensations  s-^  and  s^_^.  But  these  two 
areas  do  not  exhaust  the  whole  of  the  brain  and  nervous 
system.  Why  our  acts  of  judgment  about  these  two 
sensations  should  not  have  neural  correlates  in  some 
other  part  of  the  brain  I  cannot  imagine.  The  situation 
on  the  mental  side  is  that  we  may,  but  need  not,  make 
these  judgments  if  we  do  have  the  sensations  ;  and  that 
we  cannot  make  them  unless  we  have  the  sensations. 
This  is  exactly  what  we  might  expect  if  the  neural 
correlates  of  the  acts  of  judgment  were  in  a  different 
part  of  the  brain  from  the  neural  correlates  of  the  sensa- 
tions themselves  ;  and  if  a  certain  kind  of  disturbance 
in  the  latter  were  a  necessary  but  insufficient  condition 
of  a  certain  kind  of  disturbance  in  the  former. 


BODY   AND   MIND  129 

(2)  But  we  could  answer  the  argument  without  needing 
even  to  assume  that  the  neural  correlates  of  judgments 
about  sensations  are  in  a  different  area  of  the  brain  from 
the  neural  correlates  of  the  sensations  themselves.  We 
have  to  remember  that  the  same  area  may  contain  at 
the  same  time  microscopic  events  of  different  scales 
of  magnitude.  Let  us  take  a  purely  physical  analogy. 
The  same  piece  of  metal  may  be  at  once  hot  and  glow- 
ing. We  have  extremely  good  reasons  to  believe  that 
both  these  apparent  characteristics  are  correlated  with 
microscopic  motions  which  are  going  on  throughout 
the  whole  volume  occupied  by  the  bit  of  metal.  The 
heat  is  supposed  to  be  correlated  with  the  random  move- 
ments of  molecules  and  the  light  with  the  jumps  of 
electrons  from  one  stable  orbit  to  another.  The  large- 
scale  events  can  go  on  without  the  small-scale  events 
(a  body  may  be  hot  without  glowing) ;  but  the  more 
violent  the  large-scale  events  the  more  frequent  will  be 
the  small-scale  events  (a  body  begins  to  glow  if  it  be 
heated  enough).  Now  I  cannot  imagine  why  the  same 
thing  might  not  be  true  of  the  neural  correlates  of 
sensations  and  the  neural  correlates  of  our  judgments 
about  our  sensations.  Suppose  that  the  neural  corre- 
lates of  sensations  were  large-scale  events  in  a  certain 
area  of  the  brain  ;  and  suppose  that  the  neural  correlates 
of  our  judgments  about  these  sensations  were  small- 
scale  events  in  the  same  area.  Then  I  should  expect 
to  find  that  sensations  could  happen  without  our  making 
judgments  about  them  ;  that  we  could  not  make  the 
judgments  unless  we  had  the  sensations  ;  and  that  it 
would  be  more  difficult  not  to  make  the  judgments  as 
the  sensations  became  more  intense,  other  things  being 
equal.  And  this  is  exactly  what  I  do  find.  It  seems 
to  me  then,  either  that  I  have  altogether  misunderstood 
Mr  Johnson's  argument,  or  that  there  is  nothing  what- 
ever in  it. 

There  remains  one  other  point  to  be  discussed  before 
leaving  the  subject.     It  is  true,  as  Mr  Johnson  points 

I 


130      MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN    NATURE 

out,  that  we  make  judgments  of  various  degrees  of 
determinateness  about  the  same  perfectly  determinate 
fact.  Does  this  raise  any  particular  difficulty  against 
the  view  that  every  act  of  judgment  has  a  specific  neural 
correlate?  I  do  not  think  that  it  does,  if  we  avoid 
certain  confusions  into  which  it  is  very  easy  to  fall. 
I  suppose  that  the  difficulty  that  is  felt  is  this  :  "  Every 
neural  event  is  perfectly  determinate  ;  how  can  an  inde- 
terminate judgment  have  a  determinate  neural  correlate  ; 
and  how  can  there  be  different  determinate  neural  corre- 
lates for  all  the  different  degrees  of  determinateness  in 
judgments?"  To  this  I  should  answer  (i)  that  of  course 
the  differences  on  the  neural  side  which  would  correspond 
to  different  degrees  of  determinateness  in  the  judgment 
are  not  themselves  differences  of  determinateness.  But 
why  should  they  be  ?  The  differences  on  the  neural  side 
which  correspond  to  differences  of  shade  in  sensations 
of  colour  are  not  themselves  differences  of  shade.  If, 
e.g-.,  the  area  which  is  correlated  with  judgments  about 
our  sensations  be  different  from  the  area  which  is  corre- 
lated with  the  sensations  themselves,  we  might  suppose 
that  differences  in  the  determinateness  of  the  judgment 
were  correlated  with  differences  in  the  extent  or  the 
intensity  of  the  disturbance  within  this  area.  If,  on 
the  other  hand,  we  supposed  that  our  sensations  were 
correlated  with  large-scale  events,  and  our  judgments 
about  these  sensations  with  small-scale  events  in  the 
same  region  of  the  brain,  we  might  suppose  that 
differences  in  the  determinateness  of  the  judgment  are 
correlated  with  differences  in  the  frequency  of  these 
small-scale  events.  There  is  thus  no  difficulty,  so  far 
as  I  can  see,  in  providing  neural  correlates  to  every 
different  degree  of  determinateness  in  our  judgments, 
(ii)  It  is  perhaps  necessary  to  point  out  that  what  is 
called  an  "indeterminate  judgment"  is  not  an  indeter- 
minate event ;  every  event,  whether  mental  or  physical, 
is  no  doubt  perfectly  determinate  of  its  kind.  £•£'', 
whether  I  merely  judge  that  sojne  one  has  been  in  the 


BODY  AND   MIND  131 

room  or  make  the  more  determinate  judgment  that 
John  Smith  has  been  in  the  room,  either  judgment  as 
a  psychical  event  has  perfectly  determinate  forms  of 
all  the  psychical  determinables  under  which  it  falls. 
The  indefiniteness  is  in  what  is  asserted,  not  in  the 
act  of  asserting  as  such.  Hence  the  problem  is  not, 
as  it  might  seem  to  a  careless  observer,  to  find  a  deter- 
minate neural  correlate  to  an  indeterminate  psychical 
event ;  the  problem  is  merely  to  find  a  determinate 
neural  correlate  to  a  determinate  psychical  event  which 
consists  in  the  asserting  of  a  relatively  indeterminate 
characteristic. 

I  conclude  then  that  no  adequate  reason  has  been 
produced  by  Mr  Johnson  to  prove  that  there  cannot 
be  specific  neural  correlates  to  mental  acts  as  well  as 
to  mental  states.  I  have  also  tried  to  show  that  there 
neither  is  nor  is  likely  to  be  any  empirical  evidence  1^ 
for  the  doctrine  that  all  mental  events  have  specific  ' 
neural  events  as  their  correlates.  Hence  the  positive 
doctrine  of  Psycho-neural  Parallelism  of  Events  seems  * 
to  me  to  be  a  perfectly  open  question.  This  is  not 
perhaps  a  wildly  exciting  result.  But  it  is  not  alto- 
gether to  be  despised,  since  it  leaves  us  with  a  perfectly 
free  hand  when  we  try  to  construct  a  speculative  theory 
of  the  relations  of  matter  and  mind  which  shall  do 
justice  to  all  the  known  facts.  For  the  known  facts 
neither  require  nor  preclude  complete  Psycho-neural 
Parallelism  of  Events. 

Summary  and  Conclusions.  I  wish  to  make  quite 
clear  what  I  do  and  what  I  do  not  claim  to  have  done 
in  this  chapter.  I  have  definitely  assumed  that  the  ' 
body  and  the  mind  are  two  distinct  entities,  which  are  \ 
now  in  a  very  intimate  union,  which  I  express  by  saying 
that  the  former  is  "animated  by"  the  latter.  I  have 
raised  no  question  about  the  exact  nature  or  origin 
of  this  relation  of  "animation";  and  I  have  not  con- 
sidered the  apparent  growth  of  mind  in  the  individual 


132      MIND   AND   ITS   PLACE   IN    NATURE 

or  the  apparent  development  of  consciousness  from  the 
non-conscious  in  the  course  of  the  earth's  history. 
Again,  I  have  taken  the  body  to  be  very  much  as 
common-sense,  enlightened  by  physical  science,  but  not 
by  philosophical  criticism,  takes  it  to  be ;  I  have 
supposed  that  we  know  pretty  well  'what  a  mind  is  ; 
and  I  have  assumed  that  causation  is  not  simply  regular 
sequence  and  concomitant  variation,  though  these  are 
more  or  less  trustworthy  signs  of  the  presence  of  a 
causal  relation.  These  are  the  assumptions  on  which 
the  question  of  Interaction  has  commonly  been  discussed 
by  philosophers  and  by  scientists ;  and  it  would  be 
idle  for  me  to  conceal  my  opinion  that  it  has  been 
discussed  extraordinarily  badly.  The  problem  seems 
to  have  exercised  a  most  unfortunate  effect  on  those 
who  have  treated  it ;  for  I  have  rarely  met  with  a 
collection  of  worse  arguments  on  all  sides.  I  can  only 
hope  that  I  have  not  provided  yet  another  instance  in 
support  of  this  generalisation. 

My  conclusion  is  that,  subject  to  the  assumptions 
just  mentioned,  no  argument  has  been  produced  which 
should  make  any  reasonable  person  doubt  that  mind 
acts  on  body  in  volition  and  that  body  acts  on  mind 
in  sensation.  I  have  tried  to  show  the  extreme  diffi- 
culties which  are  involved  in  attempting  to  deny  that 
body  acts  on  mind.  And  I  have  tried  to  show  that 
the  apparently  equal  difficulties  which  seem  to  be  in- 
volved in  attempting  to  deny  that  mind  acts  on  body 
could  be  evaded  with  a  little  ingenuity.  Thus  One- 
sided Action  of  Body  on  Mind  is  a  possible  theory. 
But  there  seems  to  me  to  be  no  positive  reason  for 
accepting  it,  and  at  least  one  reason  for  doubting  it, 
viz.,  the  conviction  which  many  men  have  (and  which 
Mr  Hume's  arguments  fail  altogether  to  refute)  that 
we  know  directly  that  our  volitions  are  necessary  con- 
ditions for  the  occurrence  of  our  voluntary  movements. 

If   these    conclusions    be    sound.     Parallelism,    con- 
sidered as   an    alternative   which    excludes    Interaction, 


BODY   AND   MIND  133 

has  no  leg  left  to  stand  upon.  But  Parallelism  has  a 
positive  side  to  it  which  is  perfectly  compatible  with 
Interaction,  and  is  therefore  worth  discussing  for  its 
own  sake.  I  distinguished  between  the  metaphysical  .. 
doctrine  of  Vsycho-p hysical  Parallelism  and  the  more  f 
restricted  doctrine  of  Psycho-neural  Parallelism.  And 
I  divided  the  latter  into  Departmental  Parallelism  and 
Parallelism  of  Events.  It  seemed  to  me  that  there  was 
good  empirical  evidence  for  a  considerable  amount  of 
Departmental  Parallelism,  but  that  there  was  not  and 
is  not  likely  to  be  adequate  empirical  evidence  for 
Parallelism  of  Events.  On  the  other  hand,  I  came  to 
the  conclusion  that  Mr  Johnson's  arguments  to  prove 
that  complete  parallelism  between  mental  and  neural 
events  is  iinpossible  were  quite  unsound. 

This,    I    think,    is   as   far   as  the  discussion    can    be 
carried  at  this  level.     One  thing  seems  to  me  to  emerge 
clearly   even   at   this   point.     If  interaction   has   to    be  1 
denied   at   a   later   stage   it   can    only   be   because    the  | 
relation   between   mind  and   body  turns   out   to    be  so/ 
intimate  that  "  interaction  "  is  an  unsuitable  expression  ) 
for  the  connection  between  a   particular  mental  event;' 
and  its  correlated  bodily  event.     This  would  be  so  if,  \ 
e.g.^  Materialism  were  true,  so  that  the  mind  was  just 
some  part  of  the  body.     It  might  be  so  on  a  Double- 
aspect   Theory,    or   on    a   theory   of  Neutral    Monism. 
But  we  cannot  decide  between   such  general    theories 
until  we   know  more  about   the    true    nature   of  Mind 
and    of    Matter,    and    have    taken    into    consideration 
questions    about    origin    and    development    of    minds 
which  we  have  hitherto  explicitly  left  out  of  account. 
Thus   the   final   discussion    of  the   question   can   come 
only  near  the  end  of  the  book. 


SECTION  B 

Introductory  Remarks 

"  If  there's  a  screw  loose  in  a  heavenly  body,  that's  philosophy  ; 
and  if  there's  a  screw  loose  in  a  earthly  body,  that's  philosophy 
too ;  or  it  may  be  that  there's  sometimes  a  little  metaphysics  in 
it,  but  that's  not  often.  Philosophy's  the  chap  for  me.  If  a 
parent  asks  a  question  in  the  classical,  commercial,  or  mathe- 
matical line,  says  I  gravely,  '  Why,  sir,  in  the  first  place,  are 
you  a  philosopher  ? '  '  No,  Mr  Squeers,'  he  says,  '  I  ain't.' 
'Then,  sir,'  says  I,  '  I  am  sorry  for  you,  for  I  shan't  be  able  to 
explain  it.'  Naturally  the  parent  goes  away  and  wishes  he  was 
a  philosopher,  and,  equally  naturally,  thinks  I'm  one." 

(Dickens,  Nicholas  Nicklehy) 


SECTION    B 

The  Mind's  Knowledge  of  Existents 

Introductory  Remarks 

In  this  Section  I  am  going  to  consider  the  knowledge 
which  a  human  mind  has  of  matter,  of  itself,  and  of 
other  minds.  Knowledge  is  a  transaction  with  two 
sides  to  it,  the  mind  which  knows  and  the  objects 
known.  A  critical  discussion  of  the  mind's  alleged 
knowledge  of  anything  should  therefore  help  to  clear 
our  ideas  both  of  the  nature  of  the  mind  and  its  activities 
and  of  the  nature  of  the  objects  which  it  knows.  Thus,  ,, 
in  discussing  the  mind's  knowledge  of  matter  through  jL, 
perception,  we  ought  to  learn  something  both  of  the  ** 
nature  of  the  mind  as  a  percipient  and  of  the  nature 
and  reality  of  matter.  And,  when  we  consider  the 
mind's  knowledge  of  itself  and  of  other  minds,  we  ought 
to  learn  something  of  the  nature  of  the  mind  from  two 
sides.  Common-sense  believes  itself  to  know  pretty 
well  what  mind  is  and  what  matter  is,  though  it  might 
have  great  difficulties  in  putting  its  beliefs  into  clear 
and  consistent  language.  So  far  we  have  accepted 
these  claims  without  question,  and  have  discussed 
certain  problems  subject  to  this  condition.  We  have 
now  to  pass  from  the  level  of  enlightened  common- 
sense  to  that  of  Critical  Philosophy.  By  this  I  mean 
that  we  have  to  consider  carefully  the  sources  of  our 
alleged  knowledge  of  matter  and  of  mind,  and  to  see 
how  far  we  can  still  accept  the  common-sense  view  of 
these  two  entities  in  the  light  of  this  additional  informa- 
tion.     Even  if  the  common-sense  view  should  not  need 

137 


4-1 


138     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

correction^  it  will  certainly  need  careful  and  explicit 
statement;  and,  when  stated,  it  may  seem  unfamiliar 
and  even  shocking  to  common-sense. 

It  would,  I  think,  be  admitted  by  every  one  that  such 
knowledge  as  we  have  of  matter  is  based  on  sense- 
perception  and  memory.  Each  man's  sense-perception 
and  memory  are  supplemented  by  communication  with 
other  minds  which  claim  to  tell  him  what  they  have 
perceived  and  remembered.  Thus  the  problem  of  our 
knowledge  of  matter  inevitably  involves  the  problem  of 
our  knowledge  of  other  minds.  There  is  less  agreement 
about  the  sources  of  our  knowledge  of  other  minds. 
But  I  suppose  that  every  one  would  admit  that  a 
necessary,  if  not  a  sufficient,  condition  of  such 
knowledge  is  that  we  should  listen  to  the  sounds  and 
note  the  gestures  of  other  human  bodies.  So  the 
problem  of  our  knowledge  of  other  minds  is  in  turn 
bound  up  with  the  problem  of  our  knowledge  of  matter. 
The  exact  connexion  between  these  two  problems  will 
have  to  be  considered  in  some  detail.  There  is,  again, 
a  lack  of  agreement  about  the  sources  of  a  mind's 
knowledge  of  itself.  I  suppose  that  every  one  would 
admit  that  memory  is  involved  here  as  much  as  in  our 
knowledge  of  matter.  But,  on  the  one  hand,  some 
people  deny  the  existence  of  a  mental  activity,  called 
*'  introspection,"  by  which  a  mind  observes  itself  or  the 
events  belonging  to  it.  And  those  who  admit  the 
existence  of  this  activity  differ  a  good  deal  about  its 
limitations  ;  for  some  think  that  we  can  introspect  both 
acts  and  states,  whilst  others  seem  to  hold  that  we  can 
introspect  states  but  not  acts.  On  the  other  hand,  some 
people  who  admit  the  existence  of  introspection  and 
give  it  extensive  powers  would  hold  that  it  is  not  the 
only  or  the  main  source  of  our  knowledge  of  our  own 
minds. 

In  any  case  we  can  see  at  once  that  the^ three  problems 
are  most  intimately  linked,  and  that  no  treatment  of 
one  can  be  satisfactory  without  a  treatment  of  the  rest. 


INTRODUCTORY   REMARKS  139 

I  have  already  tried  to  show  this  linkage  between  the 
problem  of  our  knowledge  of  matter  and  the  problem  of 
our  knowledge  of  other  minds.  There  seems  to  be  an 
equally  close  connexion  between  the  problem  of  our 
knowledge  of  our  own  minds  and  that  of  our  knowledge 
of  other  minds.  For,  even  if  it  be  not  the  whole  truth,  it 
certainly  seems  an  important  part  of  the  truth  to  say 
that  our  beliefs  about  other  minds  are  based  on  analogies 
with  what  we  know  of  our  own.  The  other  point  which 
is  already  clear  is  that  memory  is  involved  in  all  three 
kinds  of  knowledge.  Hence  the  divisions  of  this  Section 
will  be  the  following  :  First  I  shall  treat  Sense-perception, 
then  Memory,  then  Our  Knowledge  of  our  own  Minds,  and 
then  Our  Knowledge  of  other  Minds.  The  reader  will 
remember  that  this  division  is  necessary,  because  we 
cannot  say  everything  at  once,  but  that  none  of  these 
four  chapters  is  likely  to  be  satisfactory  when  taken  by 
itself. 


CHAPTER    IV 

Sense-perception  and  Matter 

In  this  chapter  I  propose  to  give  a  sketch  of  the  problem 
of  the  mind's  knowledge  of  matter  through  the  senses. 
I  shall  necessarily  be  covering  again  ground  which  I 
have  already  been  over  in  my  Scie?itific  Thought,  and  I 
must  refer  the  reader  to  the  Second  Part  of  that  book 
for  a  detailed  statement  and  defence  of  my  views  on  the 
subject.  Here  I  shall  be  as  brief  as  possible,  and  in 
consequence  somewhat  dogmatic.  I  shall,  however,  be 
approaching  the  problem  from  a  slightly  different  angle, 
so  that  I  hope  that  this  chapter  will  not  be  mere  vain 
repetition. 

Perceptual  Situations.  Let  us  begin  with  something 
that  every  one,  whatever  his  philosophical  views  may  be, 
would  admit  to  be  a  fact.  Some  people  would  raise 
doubts  about  the  existence  of  physical  objects,  such  as 
chairs,  tables,  bells,  etc.  Some  people  would  raise 
doubts  about  the  existence  of  selves  or  minds  which 
perceive  such  objects.  But  no  one  doubts  that  such 
phrases  as  "  I  see  a  bell  ",  "I  feel  a  bell ",  "I  hear  a 
bell ",  indicate  states  of  affairs  which  actually  exist  from 
time  to  time.  People  do  not  begin  to  quarrel  till  they 
try  to  analyse  such  situations,  and  to  ask  what  must  be 
meant  by  "  I  ",  by  the  *'  bell  ",  and  by  "  hearing  ",  if  it 
is  to  be  true  that  "  I  hear  a  bell".  When  they  do  this 
they  are  liable  to  find  that  the  only  senses  of  "  I  ", 
"bell",  and  "hear",  which  will  make  the  statement 
true  are  very  different  from  those  which  we  are  wont  to 
attach  to  those  words.     If  this  should  happen,  it  still 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER 


141 


1 


remains  true,  of  course,  that  the  phrases  *'  I  hear  a 
bell"  and  *' I  see  a  chair"  stand  for  real  states  of 
affairs  which  differ  in  certain  specific  ways  from  each 
other ;  but  these  states  of  affairs  may  be  extremely 
different  in  their  structure  and  their  components  from 
what  the  form  of  words  which  is  used  to  indicate  them 
would  naturally  suggest  to  us. 

I  will  call  such  situations  as  are  naturally  indicated 
by  phrases  like  "  I  am  seeing  a  chair"  or  "  I  am  hearing 
a  bell"  by  the  name  of  **  Perceptual  Situations".  I 
take  it  then  that  every  one  agrees  that  there  are  such 
things  as  Perceptual  Situations.  Can  we  all  agree  to 
go  any  further  together  before  parting  company  ?  I 
think  we  obviously  can.  (i)  There  are  certain  situa- 
tions, which  undoubtedly  arise  from  time  to  time,  which 
are  indicated  by  such  phrases  as  "I  feel  tired "  or 
"I  feel  cross".  I  think  that  every  one  would  admit 
that  perceptual  situations  differ  radically  from  these. 
Suppose  we  compare  the  situations  indicated  by  the 
two  phrases  "  I  feel  cross  "  and  "  I  hear  a  bell  ".  When 
we  feel  cross  we  are  not  feeling  someZ/^Z/z^but  are  feeling 
some/iow.  When  we  hear  a  bell  we  no  doubt  are  feeling 
some/low,  but  the  important  point  about  the  perceptual 
situation  is  that  we  claim  to  be  in  cognitive  contact  with 
something  other  than  ourselves  and  our  states.  This 
claim  is  just  as  obvious  in  those  perceptual  situations 
which  are  commonly  believed  to  be  delusive  as  in  those 
which  are  commonly  believed  to  be  veridical.  The  two 
situations  "I  am  hearing  a  bell"  and  "I  am  seeing 
pink  rats "  agree  completely  in  this  respect,  and  both 
differ  in  this  respect  from  the  situation  "I  feel  cross".  ' 
L  will  express  the  difference  between  the  two  kinds  of  i 
situatioTL  hy-^ayiiigL_that  the  one  does  and  the  other 
does  not  have  an  "  epistemological  object".  The  bell- 
situation  and  the  pink-rat-situation  both  have  epistemo- 
logical  objects  ;  the  situation  indicated  by  "  I  feel  cross  " 
has  no  epistemological  object.  My  motive  in  adding 
the  qualifying  word    "epistemological"  is  that  other- 


:^~, 

.-r^- 


t-^' 


^■h 


142     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

wise  some  bright  spirit  will  at  once  complain  that  the 
pink-rat  situation  has  no  object.  What  he  really  means 
is  of  course  that  there  is  no  ontological  object,  corre- 
sponding to  the  epistemo logical  object  which  the  situation 
certainly  has  ;  i.e.,  that  the  situation  involves  a  certain 
claim  which  the  physical  world  refuses  to  meet.  I  had 
better  take  this  opportunity  to  anticipate  another  purely 
verbal  objection  which  someone  is  sure  to  make.  Some- 
one is  certain  to  say:  "We  don't  really  see  pink  rats, 
for  there  are  none  ;  we  only  think  that  we  see  them." 
To  this  I  answer  by  admitting  that  words  like  "seeing  ", 
"hearing",  etc.,  do,  most  unfortunately,  introduce  the 
"  fallacy  of  many  questions  "  like  the  barrister's  query  : 
"When  did  you  leave  off  beating  your  wife?"  The 
phrase  "I  see  so-and-so"  is  taken  in  ordinary  life  to 
mean:  "There  is  a  perceptual  situation  of  the  visual 
kind  of  which  I  am  subject.  This  has  such  and  such 
an  epistemological  object.  And  there  is  a  physical 
object  corresponding  to  this  epistemological  object". 
If  a  second  person  has  reason  to  believe  that  the  third 
of  these  propositions  is  false,  he  will  be  inclined  to  say: 
"You  are  not  really  seeing  so-and-so  ;  you  only  think 
that  you  are  seeing  it".  Now  words  like  "seeing"  and 
"hearing"  are  hopeless  for  our  present  purpose  if  they 
are  to  be  interpreted  in  this  way.  I  therefore  wish  it  to 
be  clearly  understood  that  I  shall  depart  so  far  from 
/  common  usage  as  to  say  that  a  man  sees  a  pink  rat, 
provided  he  is  subject  of  a  perceptual  situation  which 
has  a  pink  rat  as  an  epistemological  object  and  is  of 
the  visual  kind,  regardless  of  whether  there  is  a 
physical  pink  rat  corresponding  to  this  epistemological 
object.  With  these  verbal  explanations  I  think  that 
every  one  would  admit  that  there  are  perceptual  situa- 
^-  tions  and  that  all  perceptual  situations  necessarily  have 
epistemological  objects.  Common  language,  though 
far  from  consistent,  expresses  the  difference  between 
the  two  kinds  of  situation  in  the  following  way :  It 
tends  to  express  a  situation  which   has   no   epistemo- 


4: 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        143  ^ 

logical  object  by  the  verb   "to  feel"  followed  by  an     •  v»  . 

adjective   or   adverb,  such   as    "cross"    or  "crossly",     '^r*^  2' 
It  tends  to  express  a  situation  which  has  an  epistemo-      4^^ 
logical  object  by  some  special  transitive  verb,  such  as       t  a^  ^ 
"see"  or  "hear",  and  by  a  substantive-name  which,     "-'  y^ ^  ' 
in  an  inflected  language,  would  be  put  in  the  accusa- 
tive case.     In  order  to  know  what  is  the  epistemological 
object  of  any  situation  it  is  only  necessary  to  know  the 
meaning  of  this  substantive-word  in  the  phrase  which 
expresses   the   situation.       In    order   to    know   whether 
the  situation  has  an  ontological  as  well  as  an  epistemo- 
logical object  it  is  plainly  not  enough  to  consider  the 
meanings  of  words;   the  question  can  be  settled  only, 
if   at  all,    by   a   careful    enquiry    into    the    nature   and 
connexions  of  things. 

(ii)  It  would  further  be  admitted  by  every  one  that 
not  all  situations  which  have  an  epistemological  object 
are  perceptual,  {a)  In  the  first  place  there  are  situations 
whose  epistemological  objects  are  such  that  no  physical 
object  could  correspond  to  them,  though  ontological 
objects  of  a  different  kind  might  correspond  to  them. 
E.g.,  the  situation  expressed  by  the  phrase  "I  notice 
that  I  am  acting  spitefully"  has  an  epistemological  object. 
But,  if  there  be  an  ontological  object  which  corresponds 
to  this  epistemological  object,  it  certainly  cannot  be 
any  purely  physical  thing  or  event.  It  must  be  some 
process  which  is  going  on  [n  my  mind.  I  will  say 
that  the  epistemological  object  of  a  situation  which  has 
such  an  object  may  be  "of  the  physical  kind",  or  "  of  /  ^ 

the  psychical  kind",  or  possibly  of  many  other  kinds.  -  v 
It  would  be  agreed,  I  think,  that  the  epistemological 
object  of  any  perceptual  situation  must  be  of  the 
physical  kind  ;  and  this  simply  means  that,  if  there  be 
an  ontological  object  corresponding  to  it,  it  must  be  a 
physical  object  or  event. 

{b)  It  would  further  be  admitted  that  a  situation  may 
have  an  epistemological  object  of  the  physical  kind  and 
yet  not  be  a  perceptual  situation.     Compare   the  two 


144    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

phrases  '*  I  am  hearing  a  bell  "  and  ''  I  am  thinking  of 
a  bell".  The  epistemological  objects  of  the  two  situa- 
tions which  are  expressed  by  these  two  phrases  are  both 
of  the  physical  kind  ;  they  might,  so  far  as  one  can  see, 
even  be  identical.  But  every  one  recognises  that  there  is 
a  deep  difference  between  the  situations.  We  should 
vaguely  express  one  part  of  this  difference  by  saying  that 
in  the  perceptual  situation  we  are  "  in  more  immediate 
touch  with"  the  bell  than  in  the  thought -situation. 
This  difference  is  indicated  in  speech  by  the  fact  that  the 
phrase  which  expresses  the  thought-situation  contains  a 
preposition  like  "  of  "  or  "  about"  before  the  substantive- 
word  which  expresses  the  epistemological  object  of  the 
situation,  whilst  there  is  in  general  no  such  word  in  the 
phrase  which  stands  for  the  perceptual  situation.  I  will 
express  this  difference  by  saying  that  a  perceptual 
;  situation  is  "  intuitive  ",  whilst  a  thought-situation  with 
•)  the  same  kind  of  epistemological  object  is  "discursive  ". 
^^  ^  Here  again  I  suppose  that  every  one  would  admit  the 
distinction  which  I  am  drawing,  though  different 
philosophers  would  differ  violently  about  the  proper 
analysis  of  it.  I  do  not  wish  to  deny  that  there  may  be 
:,  something  intuitive  in  every  thought -situation  and 
something  discursive  in  every  perceptual  situation.  But 
I  think  that  it  is  plainly  true  that  what  strikes  us  about 
the  situation  called  "hearing  a  bell"  is  its  intuitive 
character,  and  that  what  strikes  us  about  the  situation 
;  called  "thinking  about  a  bell"  is  its  discursive 
character. 

(c)  We  must  next  notice  that  there  are  situations 
'  which  have  an  epistemological  object  of  the  physical 
kind,  and  are  intuitive  and  not  discursive,  and  yet  would 
not  be  called  perceptual.  The  most  obvious  examples 
are  memory-situations.  I  may  have  a  genuine  memory 
of  the  tie  which  my  friend  was  wearing  yesterday. 
This  situation  has  an  epistemological  object  of  the 
physical  kind.  And  it  is  intuitive,  in  the  sense  in  which 
seeing  his  tie  would  be  intuitive  and  merely  thinking  of 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        145 

his  tie  would  not  be.  But  it  is  quite  different  from  a 
perceptual  situation.  And  one  important  difference,  at 
any  rate,  is  this.  It  is  of  the  essence  of  a  perceptual 
situation  that  it  claims  to  reveal  an  object  as  it  is  at  the 
time  when  the  situation  is  going  on  ;  and  it  is  of  the 
essence  of  a  memory-situation  that  it  claims  to  reveal  an 
object  as  it  was  some  time  before  the  memory-situation 
began.  It  is  perfectly  true  that,  when  I  see  a  distant 
star,  this  is  an  instance  of  a  perceptual  situation  ;  and  it 
is  true  that  there  is  strong  reason  to  believe  that,  if  the 
situation  reveals  a  physical  object  at  all,  it  reveals  it  as  it 
was  long  before  the  situation  began.  But  this  does  not 
affect  the  t^uth   of  my  statement.     For  it  is  certainly  ^ 

true  that,  so  long  as  we  remain  at  the  level  of  perception     ^  J,„x^ 
and  do  not  introduce  inferences,  the  situation  does  claim  ^ 

to  reveal  the  star  as  it  now  is  ;  and,  if  it  did  not,  it 
would  not  be  a  perceptual  situation. 

(iii)  There  is  one  other  point  which  I  suppose  that 
every  one  would  admit  to  be  common  and  peculiar  to 
perceptual  situations.  This  is  the  fact  that  sensation 
plays  an  unique  and  indispensable  part  in  them.  I  do 
not  think  it  is  possible  to  define  "sensation".  But  if 
is  possible  to  give  illustrations  which  every  one  will 
recognise.  Such  statements  as  "  I  am  aware  of  a  red 
flash",  "I  am  aware  of  a  squeaky  noise",  and  so  on, 
are  certainly  sometimes  true  ;  and  they  express  a  kind 
of  situation  which  is  perfectly  familiar  to  every  one. 
Whenever  such  a  statement  is  true,  there  exists  a 
sensation.  And  it  would  be  admitted  that  there^cannpt 
be  perceptual  situations  without  sensations.  I  think 
that  it  would  also  be  admitted  that  sensations  play  a  part 
in  perceptual  situations  which  they  do  not  play  in  any 
other  kind  of  situation.  I  will  express  this  fact  by 
saying  that  perceptual  situations  are  "sensuous". 

We  may  now  sum  up  the  points  on  which  every  one 
is  really  agreed,  however  much  they  may  differ  in  their 
language,  as  follows :  There  certainly  are  perceptual 
situations  ;    they  are  intuitive  and  sensuous  and   they 


tp, 


^^^ 


146     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

have  epistemological  objects  of  the  physical  kind, 
which  are  given  as  simultaneous  with  the  situation 
itself.  This  is  of  course  neither  a  definition  of  the 
perceptual  situation  nor  an  analysis  of  it ;  it  is  simply  a 
set  of  propositions  which  are  admittedly  all  true  of 
perceptual  situations  and  not  all  true  of  anything  else. 
Does  the  agreement  stretch  any  further  than  this?  I 
think  that  it  can  be  carried  one  step  further.  I  think 
that  every  one  is  really  agreed  about  the  irreducible 
minimum  of  characteristics  that  a  thing  would  have  to 
possess  in  order  to  count  as  a  physical  object.  Now  it 
is  agreed  that  all  perceptual  situations  claim  to  reveal 
objects  of  this  kind,  for  that  is  what  we  mean  when  we 
say  that  they  all  have  epistemological  objects  of  the 
physical  kind.     Let  us  then  raise  the  question  : 

What  do  we  understand  by  a  "  Physical  Object "  ?  The 
following  marks  seem  to  characterise  anything  that  we 
should  be  willing  to  call  a  "  physical  object",  (i)  It  is 
conceived  to  be  a  strand  of  history  of  reasonably  long 
duration,  as  compared  with  that  of  our  specious  present, 
and  possessed  of  a  certain  characteristic  unity  and 
continuity  throughout  the  period  during  which  it  is 
said  to  last.  A  mere  flash  would  hardly  be  counted  as 
a  physical  object ;  a  penny,  if  it  has  the  characteristics 
which  it  is  commonly  believed  to  have,  would  count  as 
one.  (ii)  It  is  conceived  to  be  quite  literally  extended 
in  space.  It  has  some  size  and  some  shape,  an  inside 
as  well  as  an  outside,  and  it  stands  in  spatial  relations 
to  other  physical  objects.  Strictly  speaking,  we  ought 
rather  to  say  that  each  momentary  cross-section  of  the 
history  of  the  object  has  these  characteristics,  and  that 
the  nearer  together  two  such  cross-sections  are  in  time 
the  more  nearly  alike  they  will  be  in  their  spatial 
properties.  It  may  happen,  as  a  particular  case,  that 
all  the  momentary  cross-sections  of  a  certain  physical 
object  within  a  certain  stretch  of  time  are  exactly  alike 
in  all  their  spatial  characteristics.  In  this  case  we 
should  say  that,  for  this  stretch  of  time,  the  object  had 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        147 

kept  its  shape  and  position  unchanged,  (iii)  It  is  con- 
ceived to  persist  and  interact  with  other  physical  objects 
when  no  one  perceives  it.  "Being  perceived"  is  re- 
garded as  something  which  happens  from  time  to  time 
to  physical  objects,   but  which  is  not  essential  to  their  ^  ,w^-*-' 

existence,  and  makes  no  further  difference  to  their  '^  J^^^^  , 
qualities  either  at  the  time  or  afterwards,  (iv)  It  is 
conceived  to  be  perceptible  by  a  number  of  different 
observers^at  Ihe  same  time,  as  well  as  by  one  observer 
at  various  times.  (v)  It  is  supposed  to  combine  a 
number  of  other  qualities  beside  the  spatio-temporal 
characteristics  already  mentioned.  Some  of  these  quali- 
ties reveal  themselves  in  one  way,  others  in  another 
way  ;  thus  colour  reveals  itself  to  sight,  hardness  and 
temperature  to  touch,  and  so  on.  In  order  that  a  certain 
kind  of  quality  may  reveal  itself  to  a  certain  mind  it 
seems  necessary  that  the  body  which  this  mind  animates 
shall  be  gifted  with  appropriate  sense-organs.  Thus  it 
is  held  to  be  quite  possible  that  physical  objects  may 
have  many  qualities  which  are  never  revealed  to  us, 
simply  because  we  lack  the  necessary  sense-organs.  If 
there  be  no  things  which  have  all  these  characteristics, 
there  are,  strictly  speaking,  no  physical  objects  ;  and 
all  perceptual  situations  are  delusive.  But  of  course 
there  might  still  be  things  which  literally  possessed 
some  of  these  characteristics  and  to  which  the  rest  could 
be  ascribed  in  various  more  or  less  Pickwickian  senses. 
In  that  case  it  would  be  a  matter  of  taste  whether  we 
still  said  that  we  believed  in  physical  objects  ;  but  it 
would  be  a  matter  of  fact  that  all  perceptual  situations 
are  delusive  in  certain  respects.  E.g:,  if  the  ordinary 
scientific  view,  as  commonly  interpreted,  were  right,  all 
perceptual  situations  would  be  delusive  in  so  far  as  they 
claim  to  reveal  objects  which  literally  have  colour,  taste, 
smell,  etc.  But  they  would  be  veridical  in  so  far  as 
they  claim  to  reveal  objects  which  literally  have  shape, 
size,  position,  and  motion.  If  Berkeley  be  right,  all 
perceptual  situations  are  delusive  in  every  respect  except 


148     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

in  their  claim  to  reveal  something  independent  of  and 
common  to  percipients.  This  "something"  will  be  the 
permanent  habits  of  volition  according  to  which  God 
sends  us  such  and  such  sensations  on  such  and  such 
occasions. 

Analysis  of  Perceptual  Situations.  The  typical  lin- 
guistic expression  for  a  perceptual  situation  is  a  sentence 
like  '*!  see  the  chair"  or  "I  hear  the  bell".  This 
mode  of  expression  inevitably  suggests  a  certain  mode 
of  analysis  for  the  perceptual  situation.  It  suggests 
that  it  consists  of  me  and  the  physical  object  whose 
name  appears  in  the  phrase,  related  directly  by  an 
asymmetrical  two-term  relation  which  is  indicated  by  the 
verb.  And  this  suggests  that  the  admitted  existence  of 
the  situation  guarantees  the  existence  of  me  and  of  the 
physical  object.  How  far  can  this  simple-minded  view 
be  maintained? 

In  philosophy  it  is  equally  silly  to  be  a  slave  to 
common  speech  or  to  neglect  it.  When  we  remember 
that  it  represents  the  analyses  made  unconsciously  for 
practical  ends  by  our  prehistoric  ancestors  we  shall  not 
be  inclined  to  treat  it  as  an  oracle.  When  we  remember 
that  they  were  probably  no  greater  fools  than  we  are,  we 
shall  recognise  that  it  is  likely  to  accord  at  any  rate 
with  the  more  obvious  facts,  and  that  it  will  be  wise  to 
take  it  as  our  starting-point  and  to  work  from  it.  It  is 
plausible  to  suppose  that  the  perceptual  situation  which 
language  describes  by  the  phrase  "  I  see  a  chair"  does 
contain  two  outstanding  constituents  related  by  an 
asymmetrical  two-term  relation.  But  it  is  quite  another 
question  whether  these  two  constituents  can  possibly 
be  what  is  commonly  understood  by  "me"  and  by 
"chair".  Let  us  now  consider  this  question,  first  as 
regards  the  object  and  then  as  regards  the  subject. 

The  Objective  Constituent.  Even  if  we  had  never  had 
any  reason  to  believe  that  some  perceptual  situations 
are    delusive,    this    extremely   simple-minded    analysis 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        149 

would  need  to  be  modified  considerably,  {a)  It  would 
be  admitted  that  in  any  one  perceptual  situation  I  am  fe^ 
never  aware  of  the  whole  of  the  surface  of  a  physical 
object,  in  the  sense  in  which  I  do  seem  to  be  aware  of 
a  part  of  it.  Nobody  who  was  looking  at  a  bell  would 
seriously  maintain  that,  at  a  given  moment,  he  is  aware 
of  the  far  side  and  the  inside  of  the  bell,  in  the  same 
sense  in  which  he  would  claim  to  be  aware  of  a  certain 
part  of  the  outside  which  is  facing  him  at  the  time. 
And  by  a  "  bell "  we  certainly  mean  something  which 
has  a  closed  surface  with  an  inside  as  well  as  an  out- 
side, and  not  merely  a  patch  with  indefinite  boundaries. 
Thus  the  most  we  could  say  is;  *'The  perceptual 
situation  contains  as  a  constituent  something  which  is 
in  fact  part  of  the  surface  of  a  bell  ".  {b)  A  similar 
limitation  with  regard  to  time  must  be  put  on  the  naive 
analysis  of  the  perceptual  situation.  By  a  "bell"  we 
mean  something  of  considerable  duration  ;  something 
which  certainly  may,  and  almost  certainly  does,  stretch 
out  in  time  beyond  the  limits  of  the  perceptual  situation 
in  which  I  am  aware  of  it.  Now  no  one  would  maintain 
that  the  parts  of  the  history  of  the  bell  which  come 
before  the  beginning  and  after  the  end  of  a  certain 
perceptual  situation  are  "given"  to  him  in  that  per- 
ceptual situation  in  the  same  sense  in  which  the  con- 
temporary slice  of  the  bell's  history  is  "  given  ".  Thus 
we  have  no  right  to  say  that  the  situation,  described  by 
the  phrase  "  I  am  seeing  the  bell  "  contains  the  bell  as  a 
constituent ;  at  most  we  can  say  that  it  contains  as  a 
constituent  a  short  event  which  is  in  fact  a  slice  of  a 
longer  strand  of  history,  and  that  this  longer  strand  is 
the  history  of  a  certain  bell,  {c)  It  would  be  admitted 
by  every  one  that  a  bell  is  something  more  than  a 
coloured  surface,  more  than  a  cold  hard  surface,  and  so 
on.  Now,  so  long  as  I  merely  look  at  a  bell,  its  colour 
only  is  revealed  to  me  ;  its  temperature  or  hardness  are 
certainly  not  revealed  in  the  same  sense  at  that  time. 
Similarly,    when    I    merely    touch    the    bell,    only   its 


150     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

temperature  and  hardness  are  revealed  to  me;  its  colour 
is  certainly  not  revealed  to  me  in  the  same  sense  at  that 
time.  Once  again  then  I  have  no  right  to  say  that  the 
hell  is  a  constituent  of  either  of  these  perceptual  situa- 
tions. At  most  I  may  say  there  is  a  constituent  which 
displays  certain  qualities,  and  that  this  same  con- 
stituent has  in  fact  other  qualities  which  would  be 
displayed  under  other  conditions. 

Thus  we  are  forced  to  modify  the  first  naive  analysis 
of  "  I  see  a  bell"  at  least  in  the  following  respects: 
We  cannot  hold  that  this  situation  literally  contains  the 
bell  itself  as  a  constituent.  The  most  we  can  say  is 
that  the  situation  contains  me  and  something  related  by 
an  asymmetrical  two-term  relation  ;  that  this  something 
is  in  fact  a  part  of  a  larger  surface,  and  is  also  a  short 
slice  of  a  longer  strand  of  history  ;  that  it  has  in  fact 
other  qualities  beside  those  which  are  sensuously  re- 
vealed to  me  in  this  situation  ;  and  that  this  spatially 
larger  and  temporally  longer  whole,  with  the  qualities 
which  are  not  revealed  sensuously  in  this  situation,  is  a 
certain  bell.  This  whole  is  the  epistemological  object 
of  the  situation  expressed  by  the  phrase  "  I  am  seeing 
the  bell ".  And,  even  if  it  be  granted  that  there  is  an 
ontological  object  which  corresponds  accurately  to  the 
epistemological  object,  we  cannot  admit  that  it  is  bodily 
a  constituent  of  the  situation.  The  most  that  we  can 
grant  is  that  a  small  spatio-temporal  fragment  of  the 
ontological  object  is  literally  a  constituent  of  the  situa- 
tion, and  that  a  small  selection  of  the  qualities  of  this 
fragment  is  sensuously  revealed  in  the  situation. 

Now  of  course  the  existence  of  any  complex  whole 
entails  the  existence  of  anything  that  really  is  a  con- 
stituent of  it.  There  is  no  doubt  that  such  situations 
as  are  described  by  the  phrase  "I  see  a  bell"  exist. 
And  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  epistemological  object 
of  such  a  situation  is  something  having  all  the  character- 
istics which  are  connoted  by  the  word  "bell".  If  then 
the  perceptual   situation    did    contain   as  a  constituent 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER         151 

something  which  accurately  corresponds  to  its  episte- 
mological  object,  the  existence  of  the  former  would 
guarantee  that  of  the  latter.  But  it  is  now  clear  that 
the  situation  does  not  and  could  not  contain  as  a  con- 
stituent anything  that  could  properly  be  denoted  by 
the  word  "  bell  ".  Hence  the  existence  of  the  situation 
denoted  by  the  phrase  "  Isee  the  bell  "  does  not  suffice 
to  guarantee  the  existence  of  a  certain  thing  denoted  oA' 

by  the  phrase  ''the  bell".  It  is  plain  then  that  there 
is  involved  in  every  perceptual  situation  another  factor 
beside  me  and  a  certain  spatio-temporally  extended 
particular.  This  is  the  conviction  that  this  particular 
something  is  not  isolated  and  self-subsistent,  and  is  not 
completely  revealed  in  all  its  qualities  ;  but  that  it  is 
spatio-temporally  a  part  of  a  larger  whole  of  a  certain 
characteristic  kind,  viz.,  a  certain  physical  object,  and 
that  this  whole  has  other  qualities  beside  those  which 
are  sensuously  manifested  in  the  perceptual  situation. 

Let  us  call  the  constituent  about  which  we  believe 
these  propositions  *'  thg^  objective  cojoatituent  of  the  per- 
ceptual situation ".  And  let  us  call  this  conviction 
wETch  we  have  about  the  objective  constituent  ''the 
external  reference  of  the  situation ".  I  give  it  this 
name  because  it  clearly  points  spatially,  temporally, 
and  qualitatively,  beyond  the  situation  and  what  is 
contained  in  and  sensuously  manifested  in  it.  I  will 
now  say  something  more  about  the  external  reference 
of  a  perceptual  situation. 

The  External  Reference,  {a)  It  would  be  false  psycho- 
logically to  say  that  we  infer  from  the  nature  of  the 
objective  constituent  and  from  any  other  knowledge  that 
we  may  have  that  it  is  part  of  a  larger  spatio-temporal 
whole  of  a  certain  specific  kind.  It  is  perfectly  evident 
that  we  do  nothing  of  the  sort.  Of  course  we  can  talk 
of  "unconscious  inferences",  if  we  like;  but  at  most 
this  means  that  we  in  fact  reach  without  inference  the 
kind  of  conclusion  which  could  be  defended  by  inference 
if  it  were  challenged,     {b)   It  would   be  false  logically 


152    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE    OF   EXISTENTS 

to  say  that  the  beliefs  which  are  an  essential  factor  in 
a  perceptual  situation,  though  not  reached  by  inference, 
could  be  justified  by  inference.     I  can  see  no  way  of 
validly  inferring  from  the  mere  presence  of  an  objective 
constituent,  which  sensuously  manifests  such  and  such 
qualities,  that  this  constituent  is  part  of  a  larger  spatio- 
temporal  whole  which  is  not  a  constituent  of  the  situation 
and  has  other  qualities.     It  might  perhaps  be  argued 
that,  although   this   cannot    be  inferred  with  certainty 
from  anyone  or  from  any  number  of  perceptual  situations 
taken  separately,  it  might  be  inferred  with  probability 
from  a  number  of  such   situations  taken  together  and 
considered  in  their  mutual  relations.     I  shall  go  further 
into  this  question  a  little  later  in  the  chapter.     But  it 
is  evident  that,   even    if   the   general    validity  of  such 
inferences  be  admitted,  their  conclusion  would  be  some- 
thing much  less  definite  than  the  belief  that  the  objective 
constituent  of  a  perceptual  situation  is  a  spatio-temporal 
part  of  a  larger  whole  which  corresponds  accurately  to 
the   epistemological   object   of  the   situation.      Strictly 
speaking,  the  most  that  could  be  directly  inferred  from  a 
study  of  perceptual  situations  and  their  mutual  relations 
is  that  probably  such  and  such  a  perceptual  situation 
will  be  accompanied  by  such  and  such  others,  belong- 
ing to  different  observers  ;  or  that  it  will  probably  be 
succeeded  by  such  and  such  other  perceptual  situations, 
provided  I  make  such  and  such  movements.     The  notion 
of  persistent  physical  objects  is  logically  merely  a  hypo- 
thesis to  explain  such  correlations   between  perceptual 
situations ;  and  the  common-sense  belief  that  the  objective 
constituents  of  perceptual  situations  are  literally  spatio- 
temporal  parts  of  persistent  physical  objects  is  logically 
one  very  special  form  of  this  hypothesis.     It  is  tolerably 
obvious  that  the  actual  strength  of  our  conviction  that 
in  perception   we   are  in  direct  cognitive  contact  with 
literal  spatio-temporal  parts  of  a  physical  object,  which 
corresponds  to  the  epistemological  object  of  the  situa- 
tion, could  not  be  justified  by  inference.     (<:)  Lastly,  we 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER         153 

express  the  position  far  too  intellectually,  when  we  say 
that  in  a  perceptual  situation  we  are  acquainted  with  an 
objective  constituent  which  sensuously  manifests  certain 
qualities,  and  that  this  acquaintance  gives  rise  to  and 
is  accompanied  by  a  belief  that  the  constituent  is  part 
of  a  larger  spatio-temporal  whole  of  a  specific  kind. 
We  must  remember  that  ignorant  men,  and  presumably 
animals,  perceive  as  well  as  philosophers  ;  and  we  must 
beware  of  mixing  up  our  analysis  of  the  perceptual 
situation  with  the  situation  as  it  actually  exists.  It 
would  be  nearer  the  truth  to  say  that,  at  the  purely 
perceptual  level,  people  do  not  have  the  special  experi- 
ence called  "belief"  or  "judgment".  To  believe  so 
and  so  at  this  level  really  means  to  act  as  it  would  be 
reasonable  to  act  if  one  believed  so  and  so,  and  to  be 
surprised  if  the  action  turns  out  to  be  a  failure.  We 
automatically  adjust  our  sense-organs  in  a  certain  way  ; 
we  make  incipient  movements ;  and  so  on.  These  are 
of  course  accompanied  by  characteristic  bodily  feelings. 
Again,  traces  left  by  former  experiences  will  be  excited, 
and  this  may  give  rise  to  images.     More  often  it  gives  I 

rise  only  to  vague  feelings  of  familiarity  and  to  vague  j^  ^  ^ '\ 
expectations.  An  example  of  what  I  mean  is  provided  (^  ^y/-^ 
if  we  see  what  looks  like  a  heavy  weight,  but  is  really 
a  hollow  object  made  of  skilfully  painted  cardboard. 
We  generally  do  not  have  any  distinct  images  of  what 
it  would  feel  like  to  lift  such  a  weight ;  still  less  do 
we  make  explicit  judgments  about  its  heaviness.  But, 
if  we  start  to  lift  it,  we  shall  find  that  we  have  auto- 
matically adjusted  our  bodies  as  it  would  be  reasonable 
to  do  if  we  had  judged  it  to  be  heavy.  And  the  feelings 
connected  with  this  adjustment  will  be  part  of  the  total 
experience  of  external  reference.  When  we  start  to 
lift  it  we  almost  overbalance,  and  we  feel  our  expecta- 
tions frustrated,  though  these  expectations  were  not 
really  present  at  the  time  as  distinct  beliefs  about  the 
future. 

I    shall    have   to   carry  this   analysis  a  little   further 


154    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

when  I  come  to  consider  the  subjective  side  of  the 
perceptual  situation,  to  which  it  more  properly  belongs. 
But  it  was  necessary  to  ward  off  certain  probable  mis- 
understandings at  once.  To  sum  up  :  In  all  perceptual 
situations  there  is  an  external  reference  beyond  the 
objective  constituent ;  and,  if  you  asked  the  ordinary 
man  to  make  this  reference  explicit,  he  would  say  that 
the  objective  constituent  is  literally  part  of  a  certain 
physical  object  of  larger  size  and  longer  duration,  which 
possesses  many  qualities  beside  those  which  are  sensu- 
ously manifested  to  him  in  the  perceptual  situation. 
It  is  in  virtue  of  this  external  reference  that  the  per- 
ceptual situation  has  the  epistemological  object  which 
it  does  have ;  for  the  epistemological  object  just  is  this 
whole  of  which  the  objective  constituent  is  believed 
to  be  a  part.  But  it  would  be  false  psychologically  to 
say  that  this  belief  is  reached  by  a  process  of  inference. 
For  in  fact  we  cannot  detect  any  such  process,  and 
we  ascribe  perception  to  beings  who  would  be  quite 
incapable  of  making  inferences  of  the  kind  required. 
It  would  also  be  false  psychologically  to  say  that  this 
belief  exists  at  the  purely  perceptual  level  in  the  form 
of  an  explicit  judgment ;  we  must  rather  say  that  the 
percipient  adjusts  himself  automatically  in  ways  that 
would  be  reasonable  if  he  held  this  belief,  and  that 
the  belief  is  represented  at  this  stage  by  the  bodily 
feelings  which  accompany  these  adjustments  and  by 
the  feelings  of  satisfaction  or  frustration  which  arise 
according  to  the  results  of  acting  as  if  one  held  the 
belief.  Lastly,  it  would  be  false  as  a  matter  of  logic 
to  maintain  that  this  belief,  in  the  precise  form  and  in 
the  actual  strength  in  which  it  is  held,  could  be  justified 
by  any  known  process  of  reasoning  from  any  available 
premises. 

So  far  we  have  used  no  argument  which  would  not 

9r    be  equally  valid  if  no  perceptual  situations  were  in  the 

least  delusive.     But  of  course  it  is  held  that  there  are 

delusive  perceptual  situations,  and  that  in  some  cases 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER         155 

the  epistemological  object  is  wildly  different  from  the 
ontological  object.  The  drunkard  'says  that  he  sees 
pink  rats,  just  as  the  sober  man  says  that  he  sees  a 
penny.  And  the  former  means  by  "pink  rats"  some- 
thing which  lasts  beyond  the  duration  of  the  perceptual 
situation,  which  could  be  felt  as  well  as  seen,  which 
could  be  seen  and  felt  by  other  men,  which  would  eat 
corn  and  excite  fox-terriers,  and  so  on.  We  call  this 
perceptual  situation  "delusive,"  because  none  of  these 
expectations,  which  form  an  essential  factor  in  the 
situation,  are  verified  by  the  contemporary  perceptions 
of  other  observers  or  by  the  subsequent  perceptions 
of  the  drunkard  himself.  We  must  remember  that, 
although  no  amount  of  perceptual  verification  can 
prove  that  the  objective  constituent  of  a  perceptual 
situation  is  a  part  of  a  physical  object  of  a  certain 
specified  kind,  complete  failure  of  such  verification  may 
make  the  contradictory  of  this  almost  certain.  It  may 
be  doubtful  whether  there  are  such  things  as  pennies, 
in  the  sense  in  which  the  unphilosophical  teetotaller 
asserts  that  there  are  ;  and  it  may  be  doubtful  whether 
the  objective  constituent  of  the  situation  which  we  call 
"the  teetotaller's  perception  of  a  penny"  is  literally 
part  of  a  penny,  as  he  believes  it  to  be.  But  it  is 
practically  certain  that  there  are  no  such  things  as  pink 
rats,  in  the  sense  in  which  the  unphilosophical  drunkard 
asserts  that  there  are,  when  he  is  in  the  situation  called 
"seeing  pink  rats." 

Now  the  existence  of  wildly  delusive  perceptual 
situations,  such  as  we  have  been  describing,  is  im- 
portant for  our  present  analysis  in  several  ways  :  [a) 
It  supports  the  conclusion,  which  we  have  already 
reached  independently,  that  language  is  a  partly  mis- 
leading guide  to  the  analysis  of  perceptual  situations. 
The  perceptual  situation,  described  as  "  I  am  seeing  a 
penny,"  does  seem  likely  to  contain  the  penny  as  a 
constituent  if  we  follow  the  guidance  of  the  phrase. 
We   have   already   seen    that    this   cannot   be   literally 


156     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

true,  without  needing  to  take  into  account  the  existence 
of  delusive  perceptual  situations.  But  this  is  more 
glaringly  obvious  in  the  case  of  delusive  perceptual 
situations.  The  drunkard  says  "I  see  a  pink  rat", 
just  as  the  sober  man  says  *'  I  see  a  brown  penny  "  ; 
and,  mutatis  mutandis,  they  mean  exactly  the  same  kind 
of  thing  by  their  two  statements.  So  long  as  we  follow 
the  suggestions  of  language,  there  is  just  as  much 
reason  for  holding  that  a  pink  rat  is  a  constituent  of 
the  drunkard's  perceptual  situation  as  for  holding  that 
a  brown  penny  is  a  constituent  of  the  sober  man's 
perceptual  situation.  But  this  analysis  must  be  wrong 
in  the  former  case,  since  there  is  almost  certainly  no 
pink  rat  to  be  a  constituent  of  anything.  And,  since 
there  is  no  relevant  internal  difference  between  the 
veridical  and  the  delusive  perceptual  situation,  it  is 
reasonable  to  suppose  that  in  no  case  does  a  perceptual 
situation  contain  as  a  constituent  the  physical  object 
which  corresponds  to  its  epistemological  object,  even 
when  there  is  such  a  physical  object. 

{b)  No  doubt  each  perceptual  situation  does  contain 
an  objective  constituent  of  a  characteristic  kind.  And 
in  each  case  this  is  bound  up  with  the  practical  belief 
that  this  constituent  is  part  of  a  larger  and  more  endur- 
ing whole  which  possesses  certain  other  qualities  beside 
those  which  are  sensuously  manifested  in  the  situation. 
The  difference  is  that  this  practical  belief,  which  goes 
beyond  the  present  situation  and  its  contents,  is  certainly 
wrong  in  the  one  case,  whilst  (so  far  as  we  have  yet 
seen)  it  might  possibly  be  right  in  the  other.  And 
there  is  absolutely  nothing  in  the  two  situations  as  such 
to  distinguish  the  case  where  the  belief  is  certainly  false 
from  the  case  where  it  is  possibly  true.  Now  this  cuts 
out  an  alternative  which  we  have  not  yet  refuted.  We 
have  indeed  seen  that  the  external  reference  of  a  per- 
ceptual situation  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  valid  logical 
inference  from  the  existence  of  the  situation  and  the 
nature  of  its  objective  constituent.     But,  if  there  had 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER         157 

been    no   delusive   perceptual  situations,  the  following 
alternative    might    have    been    maintained.      It   might 
have  been  held   that   every   perceptual    situation  is  as 
such  accompanied  by  an   infallible    revelation  that  its 
objective    constituent    is    part   of    a    larger    and    more 
enduring  whole   of  a   certain   specific  kind.     All  such 
situations   certainly  involve  this  claim  ;    and,    if  there 
had   been    no   reason    to   think  that   any  of  them    are 
delusive,   it  might  have  been  held  that   this  is  not  a 
mere  claim  but  an  infallible  revelation.     So  far  as  I  can 
see,  such  a  position  cannot  be  maintained  in  face  of 
perceptions  of  pink  rats.     The  claim  made  here  is  of 
precisely  the  same  kind  as  is   made  when  teetotallers 
perceive   pennies.     And    it    is  made  just   as   strongly. 
Here  the  claim  proves  to  be  false.     And,  if  it  be  false 
in  some  cases,  it  cannot  be  accepted  as  true  merely  at 
its  face-value  in  any  case.     Of  course,  if  we  water  down 
the  claim  enough,   it  may  at  last  be  put   in  such  an 
attenuated  form  as  to  be  invulnerable  to  all  refutation. 
If  we  claim  merely  that  the  objective  constituents  in  all 
perceptual  situations  are  correlated   in  some  way  with 
something  larger  and  more  enduring  than  themselves, 
and  that  every  variation  in   the  former  is  a  sign  of  a 
change  oi  some  kind  somewhere  or  other  in  the  latter,  we 
can  hardly  be  refuted.     There  is,  no  doubt,  some  such 
correlation    between  the   objective    constituent    of    the 
drunkard's  perceptual  situation  and  the  alcohol  in  his 
stomach  or  something  that  is  happening  in  his  brain. 
But    I     think    it    is    perfectly    clear    that    perceptual 
situations  do  involve  a  more  specific  claim  than  this  ; 
and  that,  since  this  specific  claim  is  certainly  wrong  in 
some  cases  and  since  there  is  no  internal   distinction 
between  these  cases  and  others,  it  may  be  wrong  in  all. 
The  Alternative  Theories.     So  far  I  have  granted  that, 
in  some  cases  at  least,   the  objective  constituent  of  a 
perceptual  situation  may  in  fact  be  literally  a  part  of  a 
larger  external  object  of  a  certain  specific  kind,  having 
other  qualities  beside  those  which  are  sensuously  mani- 


158    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

fested  in  the  situation.  I  have  shown  only  {a)  that  this 
object,  as  such,  is  never  a  constituent  of  the  situation  ; 
{b)  that  this  claim  can  never  be  accepted  at  its  face- 
value,  because  it  is  certainly  sometimes  false  in  situations 
which  differ  in  no  relevant  internal  respect  from  those 
in  which  it  might  be  true  ;  and  {c)  that  the  claim  cannot 
be  proved  to  be  true,  as  it  stands,  by  logical  inference 
from  any  premises  which  are  available  to  us.  It  now 
remains  to  see  whether  we  can  hold  that  it  is  ever  true. 
Let  us  confine  ourselves  for  the  present  to  visual 
situations.  I  think  we  can  prove  that  in  this  case  we 
are  tied  down  to  two  alternatives,  neither  of  which 
accords  very  well  with  common-sense.  Either  {a)  the 
objective  constituent  of  a  visual  situation  does  not  have 
some  of  the  properties  which  it  seems  on  careful  in- 
spection to  have,  and  does  have  properties  inconsistent 
with  these  ;  or  {b)  the  larger  external  whole  of  which  it 
is  a  part  is  so  different  from  what  it  is  commonly 
supposed  to  be  that  it  hardly  deserves  the  name  of 
"  physical  object ".  Of  course  it  is  possible  that  both 
alternatives  might  have  to  be  combined.  Let  us  now 
try  to  prove  this. 

A  penny  is  believed  by  common-sense  to  be  a  round 
flat  object  whose  size  and  shape  are  independent  of  the 
observer,  his  position,  and  his  movements.  A  certain 
observer  may  move  about,  and  may  hold  that  in  all  the 
perceptual  situations  in  which  he  is  placed  he  sees  the 
whole  of  the  top  of  a  certain  penny.  If  he  carefully 
inspects  the  objective  constituents  of  these  perceptual 
situations  he  will  certainly  find  that  they  seem  to  be  of 
different  shapes  and  sizes.  Most  of  them  will  seem 
elliptical  and  not  round,  and  the  direction  of  their 
major-axes  and  their  eccentricity  will  seem  to  vary  as  he 
moves.  Now,  if  these  objective  constituents  are  to  be 
identified  with  different  short  slices  of  the  history  of  the 
top  of  the  penny,  one  of  two  views  must  be  taken,  {a) 
One  alternative  is  to  suppose  that  these  objective  con- 
stituents 7'eall}'  are  all  round  and  all  of  one  size,  although 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        159 

they  seem^  on  careful  inspection,  to  be  elliptical  and  of 
various  sizes  and  eccentricities,  ib)  The  other  alternative 
is  to  suppose  that  the  penny  is  not  of  constant  size  and 
shape,  as  is  commonly  believed,  but  that  it  varies  in 
these  respects  as  the  observer  walks  about. 

Now  the  latter  alternative  might  be  the  reasonable 
one  to  take  if  only  one  observer  had  to  be  considered, 
and  only  his  successive  visual  situations.  But  in  fact 
there  may  be  a  number  of  observers  who  can  compare 
notes.  They  may  agree  that  they  are  all  seeing  the 
whole  of  the  top  of  the  same  penny.  And,  as  we  have 
said,  it  is  certainly  part  of  the  notion  of  a  physical 
object  that  it  is  capable  of  being  perceived  by  several 
observers  at  once.  Now  suppose  that  one  of  these 
observers  stands  still,  whilst  another  moves  about. 
The  objective  constituent  of  the  stationary  observer's  per- 
ceptual situation  will  seem  constant  in  size  and  shape  ; 
the  objective  constituents  of  the  moving  observer's 
successive  perceptual  situations  will  seem  to  differ  in 
size  and  shape.  Evidently,  if  we  suppose  that  these 
objective  constituents  really  do  have  the  characteristics 
which  they  seem  to  have  ;  that  the  observers  really  are 
seeing  the  whole  of  the  top  of  the  same  penny  ;  and 
that  the  objective  constituents  of  their  respective  per- 
ceptual situations  really  are  identical  with  slices  of  the 
history  of  the  top  of  the  penny,  we  shall  have  to 
suppose  that  the  penny  both  changes  and  keeps  constant 
in  shape  and  size  during  the  same  stretch  of  time.  And 
this  seems  at  first  sight  impossible.  If  you  give  up  the 
view  that  two  different  observers  can  both  literally  see 
the  same  part  of  the  same  physical  object  at  the  same 
time,  you  have  given  up  the  neutrality  and  publicity 
which  are  part  of  the  notion  of  a  physical  object.  If 
you  accept  this  publicity  and  neutrality,  and  identify 
the  objective  constituents  of  the  various  visual  situations 
with  the  neutral  and  public  top  of  the  penny,  you  imist 
hold  either  id)  that  the  objective  constituents  have 
certain  qualities  which  differ  from  and  are  inconsistent 


t6o     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 


^ 
K 


with  those  which  they  seem  on  careful  inspection  to 
have  ;  or  {b)  that  the  top  of  the  penny  both  varies  and 
keeps  constant  in  shape  and  size  within  the  same  stretch 
of  time.  The  second  alternative  may  seem  impossible  ; 
but  let  us  not  rashly  reject  it,  since  the  first  is  not  very 
much  more  attractive. 

A  like  result  is  reached  if  we  consider  a  single 
observer  in  two  different  kinds  of  perceptual  situation. 
A  man  may  feel  a  penny,  and  at  the  same  time  move 
his  head  about  whilst  he  continues  to  look  at  it.  The 
objective  constituent  of  the  tactual  situation  seems  on 
inspection  to  be  constant  in  shape  and  size.  Those 
of  the  successive  visual  situation  seem  on  inspection 
to  differ  in  shape  and  size.  Now  common-sense  holds 
that  it  is  the  same  surface  which  we  see  and  which 
we  touch  ;  though  certain  non-spatial  qualities,  such 
as  colour,  are  sensuously  manifested  only  in  one  kind 
of  situation,  whilst  other  non-spatial  qualities,  such  as 
temperature,  are  sensuously  manifested  only  in  another 
kind  of  situation.  If  we  wish  to  keep  the  common- 
sense  notion  of  physical  objects,  we  must  hold  either 
{a)  that  the  objective  constituents  of  some  perceptual 
situations  have  certain  qualities  which  differ  from  and 
are  inconsistent  with  those  which  they  seem  on  careful 
inspection  to  have  ;  or  [b)  that  one  and  the  same  surface 
can  vary  and  keep  constant  in  shape  and  size  within 
the  same  stretch  of  time. 

I  think  that  I  have  now  proved  that  we  are  tied 
down  to  three  alternatives,  each  almost  as  distasteful  to 
common-sense  as  the  others,  {a)  We  may  try  to  keep 
the  common-sense  view  that  the  objective  constituents 
of  some  visual  situations  are  literally  spatio-temporal 
parts  of  a  certain  physical  object,  which  we  are  said  to 
be  "seeing".  But,  if  we  do  this,  we  must  hold  either 
(a)  that  this  physical  object  can  be  both  constant  and 
variable  in  its  spatial  characteristics  within  the  same 
stretch  of  time  ;  or  (^)  that  the  objective  constituents 
of  the  visual   situations  can    have  qualities  which  are 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        161 

different  from  and  inconsistent  with  those  which  they 
seem  on  careful  inspection  to  have.  Or  (b)  we  may 
drop  the  common-sense  view  that  the  objective  con- 
stituent of  a  visual  situation  may  be,  and  in  some  cases 
actually  is,  literally  a  spatio-temporal  part  of  a  certain 
physical  object  which  we  are  said  to  be  "seeing". 
I  will  now  take  these  alternatives  in  turn. 

{a,  a)  Theory  of  Multiple  Inherence.  It  might  be  held 
that  this  alternative  is  so  absurd  that  it  is  not  worth 
discussing.  Is  it  not  a  plain  contradiction  that  the 
same  part  of  the  same  thing  should  be  at  once  variable 
and  constant  in  size,  round  and  elliptical,  and  so  on? 
It  seems  to  me  that  this  is  possible,  if  and  only  if  what 
we  commonly  regard  as  pure  qualities  are  really  relational 
properties.  We  all  know  that  the  same  man  can  be  at 
the  same  time  generous  (to  his  family)  and  stingy  (to 
his  workmen).  The  only  question  is  whether  we  could 
possibly  deal  with  such  propositions  as  "  This  is  round  ", 
"This  is  elliptical",  etc.,  where  "This"  is  an  objective 
constituent  in  a  visual  situation,  in  a  similar  way.  Let 
us  first  state  what  characteristics  the  objective  con- 
stituent of  a  visual  situation  seems  on  careful  inspection 
to  have.  I  think  we  may  fairly  say  that  it  seems  to  be 
a  spatially  extended  patch,  having  a  certain  determinate 
size  and  shape,  situated  in  a  certain  determinate  position 
out  from  the  body,  and  now  occupied  and  marked  out 
by  a  certain  determinate  shade  of  a  certain  colour.  Of 
course,  the  colour  need  not  be  uniform  throughout  the 
region  ;  but  this  raises  no  question  of  principle,  so  I 
will  assume  for  simplicity  that  it  is  uniform.  We  have 
then  four  things  to  consider  :  the  apparent  colour,  the 
apparent  shape  and  size,  the  apparent  position,  and  the 
apparent  date  at  which  the  colour  inheres  in  the  place. 

Now  it  has  been  suggested  that  the  objective  con- 
stituent of  a  visual  situation  can  be  regarded  as  a 
certain  region  of  physical  space  which  is  pervaded  by 
a  certain  determinate  shade  of  colour  at  a  certain  time, 
provided  that  we  recognise   that  the  relation  of  "  per- 

L 


l62      MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

Ivasion  "  is  of  a  peculiar  kind.  It  must  not  be  a  two- 
term  relation,  involving  only  the  pervading  colour  and 
.  the  pervaded  region,  as  we  commonly  suppose.  It 
must  be  at  least  a  three-term  relation,  involving  the 
pervading  colour,  the  pervaded  region,  and  another 
region  which  we  might  call  the  "  region  of  projection  ". 
Theories  of  this  kind  have  been  suggested  lately  by 
Dr  Whitehead  and  by  Professor  Kemp  Smith  ;  and  it 
seems  to  me  that  such  a  theory  in  a  very  crude  form 
may  be  detected  by  a  very  charitable  interpreter  in  the 
writings  of  Malebranche.  I  propose  now  to  discuss  it 
in  my  own  way  without  further  reference  to  the  eminent 
men  who  have  suggested  it.  I  will  call  this  type  of 
theory  "The  Theory  of  Multiple  Inherence". 

The  impression  which  it  makes  on  me  at  the  outset 
is  that  it  can  be  made  to  work  very  well  for  secondary 
qualities,  like  colour,  provided  we  raise  no  questions 
about  shape,  size,  position,  and  date ;  but  that  it  is 
more  difficult  to  deal  with  these  apparent  characteristics 
of  the  objective  constituents  of  perceptual  situations 
in  terms  of  the  theory.  Let  us  begin  with  colour. 
According  to  the  theory  the  proposition  "This  is 
sensibly  of  such  and  such  a  shade  of  red "  (where 
"this"  is  an  objective  constituent  of  a  visual  situation) 
could  not  be  true  if  "this"  were  the  only  thing  in  the 
world,  any  more  than  "This  is  a  shareholder"  could 
be  true  if  "this"  were  the  only  thing  in  the  world. 
And  by  "could  not"  here  I  mean,  not  merely  that  it 
is  causally  impossible,  but  also  that  it  is  logically  im- 
possible. Red,  on  the  present  view,  is  a  characteristic 
j(  of  such  a  kind  that  it  cannot  inhere  in  a  place  simply  ; 
^  it  can  only  "  inhere-in-a-place-from-a-place  ",  and  this 
relation,  which  needs  such  a  complex  phrase  to  express 
it,  is  simple  and  unanalysable.  Now,  supposing  that 
this  were  true,  it  would  be  perfectly  possible  that  one 
and  the  same  region  of  physical  Space  should  be  per- 
vaded at  one  and  the  same  time  by  different  determinate 
shades  of  red.     For  the  minimum  complete  statement 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        163 

about  pervasion  by  a  colour  would  be  of  the  form  : 
''The  determinate  shade  r-^  inheres  in  the  place  j-  from 
the  place  s^  at  the  time  /".  And  this  is  perfectly- 
compatible  with:  "The  determinate  shade  r^  inheres 
in  the  place  s  from  the  place  ^2  ^^  the  time  /".  What 
would  be  inconsistent  with  the  first  proposition  is  the 
proposition  :  "The  determinate  shade  rg  inheres  in  the 
place  s  from  the  place  s^  at  the  time  /".  But  there  is 
no  reason  to  suppose  that  this  complication  ever  arises, 
so  it  need  not  trouble  us. 

It  would  now  be  perfectly  easy  to  define  a  meaning 
for  the  phrase  "  j-  is  red  "  without  reference  to  any  other 
particular  place.  We  might,  ^.^.,  define  "i-  is  red" 
to  mean  "From  every  place  some  shade  of  red  inheres 
in  s  ".  This  is  no  doubt  only  a  first  approximation  to 
a  satisfactory  definition.  For  "  every  place  "  we  should 
certainly  have  to  substitute  "every  place  that  fulfils 
such  and  such  conditions".  But  the  general  principle 
of  the  definition  is  obvious  enough,  and  I  do  not  think 
that  there  would  be  much  difficulty  in  mentioning  the 
conditions.  The  full  statement  would  not,  I  think, 
differ  very  much  from  the  following  : — "i-  is  physically 
red"  means  "From  every  place  which  is  physically 
occupied  by  a  normal  human  brain  and  nervous  system 
in  a  normal  condition  and  is  near  enough  to  s  some 
shade  of  red  sensibly  inheres  in  j-."  The  first  condition 
is  put  in  to  deal  with  colour-blind  men  and  men  drugged 
with  santonin  ;  the  second  is  put  in  to  cut  out  complica- 
tions about  coloured  spectacles,  and  so  on. 

The  essence  of  the  theory,  so  far  as  we  have  gone, 
is  this:  We  must  distinguish  between  the  "sensible" 
and  the  "physical"  inherence  of  a  colour  in  a  place. 
The  former  is  the  fundamental  and  indefinable  relation  ; 
and  it  is  irreducibly  triadic,  involving  an  essential 
reference  to  the  pervading  shade  of  colour,  the  pervaded 
region,  and  the  region  of  projection.  The  latter  is  a 
two-term  relation  ;  but  it  is  not  ultimate,  for  it  is  defin- 
able in  terms  of  the  former.     And  the  definition  is  of  the 


i64    MIND'S  KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

following  kind:  "R  inheres  physically  in  j- "  means 
"From  every  place  Sn,  which  fulfils  certain  conditions 
C,  some  determinate  form  r„  of  the  determinable  R 
sensibly  inheres  in  s".  With  these  definitions  we 
could  perfectly  well  maintain  the  common-sense  view 
that  a  physical  object  cannot  have  two  different  colours 
at  once,  and  yet  admit  that  it  does  have  different  colours 
at  once.  We  should  simply  need  to  clear  up  the 
ambiguities  of  our  statements.  The  truth  will  be  (i) 
that  two  different  colours  cannot  sensibly  inhere  in  the 
\  same  place  from  the  same  place  at  once  ;  (2)  that  two 
different  colours  cannot  physically  inhere  in  the  same 
place  at  once  ;  but  (3)  that  different  colours  or  different 
shades  of  the  same  colour  can  sensibly  inhere  in  the  same 
place  from  different  places  at  once.  Perhaps  I  ought  to 
say  a  word  or  two  in  further  explanation  of  the  second 
of  these  propositions.  To  say  that  the  same  place  was 
at  once  physically  red  and  physically  green  would  be  to 
say  that  from  every  one  of  a  certain  set  of  places  this 
place  was  sensibly  pervaded  by  some  shade  of  red,  and 
that  from  every  one  of  the  same  set  of  places  it  is  at  the 
same  time  sensibly  pervaded  by  some  shade  of  green. 
This,  I  suppose,  would  be  admitted  to  be  impossible. 
But  it  does  not  cover  all  that  we  mean  when  we  say 
that  the  same  place  could  not  at  once  be  physically 
pervaded  by  two  different  colours.  Under  this  head  we 
should  also  include,  e.g.^  two  different  shades  of  red  as 
well  as  two  different  colours,  such  as  red  and  green. 
This,  however,  raises  no  insuperable  difiiculty.  We 
have  defined  the  physical  colour  of  a  place  in  terms  of 
the  colour  under  which  all  the  determinate  shades  which 
sensibly  inhere  in  it  from  a  certain  set  of  places  fall. 
It  would  be  quite  easy  to  define  its  physical  shade  in  a 
similar  way.  We  should  say  that  a  certain  place  was 
physically  pervaded  by  purple  if  and  only  if  all  the 
shades  which  sensibly  inhere  in  it  from  places  which 
fulfil  the  required  conditions  fell  within  certain  limits. 
If  we  were  prepared  to  say  that  this  place  is  physically 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        165 

pervaded  by  scarlet  it  is  certain  that  it  would  have  to  be 
sensibly  pervaded  from  the  same  places  by  different 
shades  of  red.  Since  it  could  not  be  sensibly  pervaded 
at  the  same  time  and  from  the  same  place  by  different 
shades  of  the  same  colour  any  more  than  by  shades  of 
different  colours,  it  would  be  impossible  for  it  to  be  at 
once  physically  pervaded  by  scarlet  and  by  purple  on 
our  definitions. 

So  far  we  have  been  discussing  a  question  which  may 
be  called  ''logical",  in  a  wide  sense,  and  certainly  not 
"causal".  By  this  I  mean  that  we  have  simply  been 
considering  the  question  :  "What  formal  characteristics 
must  the  relation  of  inherence  possess  if  it  is  to  be 
logically  possible  to  hold  that  a  number  of  different 
colours  or  shades  of  colour  inhere  at  the  same  time  in 
the  whole  of  the  same  region  of  Physical  Space?  "  The 
causal  question  is:  "Under  what  conditions  will  such 
and  such  a  colour  inhere  in  such  and  such  a  place  from 
such  and  such  a  place?"     To  this  question  I  now  turn. 

In  view  of  what  we  know  of  geometrical  and  physical 
optics  and  of  the  physiology  of  vision,  I  think  that  the 
following  answer  is  almost  certain.  The  independently 
necessary  and  sufficient  material  conditions  for  a  certain 
shade  of  colour  to  pervade  a  certain  external  region 
from  a  certain  region  of  projection  are  all  contained  in 
or  are  close  to  the  region  of  projection.  (I  will  explain 
in  a  moment  why  I  introduce  the  qualifications  which  I 
have  italicised.)  The  direction  of  the  pervaded  region 
is  the  direction  in  which  a  normal  human  being,  whose 
body  is  in  the  projecting  region,  has  to  look,  in  order  to 
get  the  objective  constituent  under  consideration  into 
the  middle  of  his  visual  field  ;  and  this  is  known  to 
depend  simply  on  what  is  going  on  in  the  immediate 
neighbourhood  of  his  eyes.  When  a  number  of  people 
are  said  to  be  "seeing  the  same  object  directly  under 
normal  conditions",  i.e.^  without  complications  due  to 
mirrors,  non-homogeneous  transparent  media,  and  so 
on,   their   respective   lines   of  sight   intersect   within   a 


i66      MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

fairly   small   determinate   region.      This   is   where   the 
object  is  then  said  to  be.     But  of  course  there  often  are 
mirrors    and    other    complications,    and    we    must    be 
prepared  to   deal  with   the   general   case.      When   the 
medium  is  in  fact  non-homogeneous,  or  the  vision   is 
indirect,  the  place  which  is  pervaded  by  a  given  shade 
of  colour  from  a  given  region  of  projection  is  that  place 
in  which  a  suitable  object  would  have  to  be  put  in  order 
to  present  the  same  appearance  if  viewed  directly  and 
through    a    homogeneous    medium.       In    actual     fact 
nothing  physically  relevant  may   be  going  on  in  this 
region  ;  this  is  the  case  with  mirror  images.      If  I  look 
at  the  reflection  of  a  luminous  point  in  a  plane  mirror 
the  region  which  is  pervaded  from  where  I  am  standing 
is  somewhere  behind  the  mirror  ;  it  is  the  place  where  a 
luminous  point  would  have  to  be  put  in  order  to  present 
the  actual  appearance,  if  viewed  directly  and  without  a 
mirror,    from    where    I    am    standing.     And   of  course 
nothing  physically  relevant  is  happening  at  this  place 
behind   the    mirror.       The   direction    of    the    place    is 
determined  by  the  direction  in  which  the  light  enters 
my   eye,    i.e.,    by    physical    events   in    the    immediate 
neighbourhood  of  the  region  of  projection.     Its  distance 
along  this  direction  is  presumably  determined  by  traces 
left  in  my  brain  by  past  visual  situations  and  correlated 
bodily  movements  in  cases  where  the  vision  really  was 
direct  and  through  a  homogeneous  medium.     Thus  I 
am  justified  in  saying  that  the  position  of  the  pervaded 
region  is  immediately  determined  by  events  in  or  close 
to  the  region  of  projection. 

Next,  the  facts  which  make  us  ascribe  a  velocity  to 
light,  and  particularly  the  fact  of  aberration,  make  it 
almost  certain  that  the  date  at  which  a  certain  place  is 
pervaded  by  a  certain  shade  of  colour  from  a  certain 
region  of  projection  is  the  date  at  which  certain  events 
are  happening  within  the  region  of  projection.  When 
I  look  at  a  distant  star  a  certain  shade  of  colour  sensibly 
inheres  in  a  certain  distant  region  of  Physical  Space 


SENSE-PERCEPTION    AND   MATTER        167 

from  the  place  which  is  physically  occupied  by  my 
body,  if  the  present  theory  be  true.  But  we  know 
quite  well  that  the  star  may  no  longer  be  physically 
occupying  this  distant  region  ;  and  that,  whether  it 
does  so  or  not,  the  relevant  physical  events  may  have 
happened  there  hundreds  of  years  ago. 

Lastly,  and  in  close  connexion  with  this,  we  must 
notice  that  the  particular  colour  and  the  particular 
shade  of  it  which  sensibly  pervade  an  external  place 
from  a  region  of  projection  are  almost  certainly  deter- 
mined by  specific  events  in  the  eyes,  optic  nerves,  and 
brain  which  now  physically  occupy  this  region  of 
projection.  Facts  about  colour-blindness,  about  the 
effects  of  drugs  like  santonin,  and  of  morbid  bodily 
states  like  jaundice,  make  this  practically  certain. 

I  have  now  defended  the  statement  that  the  hide- 1 
pendently  necessary  and  sufficient  material  conditions 
which  determine  that  such  and  such  an  external  place 
shall  be  pervaded  by  such  and  such  a  shade  of  colour 
from  a  certain  region  of  projection  are  physically 
present  within  or  close  to  that  region.  I  will  now 
explain  what  I  mean  by  the  italicised  qualifications  in 
this  statement.  (i)  The  physical  events  within  the 
region  of  projection  of  course  have  physical  causes. 
Now  a  necessary  condition  of  a  necessary  condition  of 
an  event  may  be  called  a  "  dependently "  necessary 
condition  of  that  event.  There  is  every  reason  to 
believe  that  the  pervasion  of  a  certain  region  from  a 
certain  region  by  a  certain  shade  of  colour  has  generally 
dependently  necessary  conditions  which  are  quite  remote 
from  the  region  of  projection.  When  a  certain  place 
is  pervaded  byivery  sirnilar  shades  of  the  same  colour 
from  all  directions  it  is  generally  found  that,  on  walking 
up  to  this  place,  tactual  situations  arise.  And  the 
objective  constituents  of  these  tactual  situations  are 
generally  found  to  be  closely  correlated  with  the 
objective  constituents  of  the  successive  visual  situa- 
tions which  occur  as  we  walk  up  to  this  place.     We 


i68    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

say  then  that  this  place  is  "tactually  occupied".  And 
we  have  very  good  reason  to  believe  that  such  a  region 
is  physically  occupied  by  certain  microscopic  events 
which  are  remote  and  dependently  necessary  conditions 
of  the  pervasion  of  this  region  by  such  and  such  a  shade 
of  colour  from  places  round  it.  These  events  determine 
by  physical  causation  certain  events  in  our  eyes,  optic 
nerves,  and  brains  ;  and  the  latter  events  are  the  im- 
mediately necessary  and  sufficient  material  conditions 
of  the  pervasion  of  the  external  region  by  such  and 
such  a  shade  of  colour  from  the  region  of  projection 
which  contains  our  bodies.  This  may  be  regarded  as 
the  normal  case ;  and  it  is  expressed  in  common 
language  by  saying  that  we  are  then  ''looking  directly 
at  a  certain  physical  object  through  a  colourless  homo- 
geneous medium  ".  But  of  course  this  sweet  simplicity, 
though  normal,  is  not  universal.  Suppose  that  a 
number  of  people  "  see  the  same  mirror  image  ".  Then 
there  is  a  certain  set  of  microscopic  physical  events  in 
a  certain  region  of  Space  ;  and  these  do  constitute  the 
common  dependently  necessary  condition  of  the  per- 
vasion of  a  place  behind  the  mirror  by  similar  shades 
of  the  same  colour  from  a  number  of  different  regions 
of  projection.  But  the  region  which  contains  these 
physical  microscopic  events  is  remote  from  the  region 
in  which  these  shades  of  colour  sensibly  inhere  ;  it  is 
in  fact  as  far  in  front  of  the  mirror  as  the  pervaded 
region  is  behind  it. 

Let  us  call  the  region  which  contains  the  comjiion 
dependently  necessary  conditions  "  the  emitting  region  ". 
Then  the  position  may  be  put  as  follows  :  In  visual 
perception  we  have  to  consider  an  emitting  region,  a 
region  of  projection,  a  pervaded  region,  and  a  per- 
vading shade  of  colour.  The  pervaded  region  is  im- 
mediately determined  by  events  in  and  near  the  region 
of  projection.  These  events  also  determine  immediately 
the  pervading  shade  and  colour.  And  they  are  them- 
selves determined  by  microscopic  events  in  the  emitting 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        169 

region.  In  the  cases  that  arise  most  often  in  everyday 
practical  life  the  pervaded  region  and  the  emitting 
region  roughly  coincide.  But,  in  the  case  of  mirror- 
images  and  the  visual  situations  which  arise  when  we 
are  surrounded  by  non-homogeneous  media,  the  per- 
vaded region  and  the  emitting  region  cease  to  coincide 
and  may  be  very  distant  from  each  other.  The  pervaded 
region  may  then  contain  no  physical  events  at  all  ;  and, 
if  it  does,  they  will  be  quite  irrelevant.  In  such  cases 
there  will  always  be  a  purely  optical  peculiarity  too, 
viz.,  that  the  pervaded  region  will  never  be  pervaded 
from  «// directions  by  similar  shades  of  the  same  colour. 
(Cf.  the  sudden  change  which  happens  in  the  visual 
situation  when  we  go  to  the  back  of  a  mirror  in  which 
we  have  been  viewing  the  image  of  a  certain  object.) 

Just  as  we  have  contrasted  the  pervaded  region  and 
the  emitting  region,  so  we  must  contrast  the  "date  of 
pervasion  "  and  the  *'  date  of  emission  ".  Owing  to  the 
very  great  velocity  of  light  these  generally  coincide 
almost  exactly  in  the  visual  situations  of  ordinary  life. 
But,  when  we  are  concerned  with  very  remote  objects, 
such  as  stars,  the  date  of  emission  (which  is  always 
earlier  than  the  date  of  pervasion)  may  precede  the 
latter  by  thousands  of  years.  In  the  phenomenon  of 
aberration  we  have  a  most  interesting  case  in  which 
the  motion  of  the  observer  of  a  very  distant  object,  and 
the  difference  between  the  date  of  emission  and  the  date 
of  pervasion,  cause  a  difference  between  the  place  of 
emission  and  \h^  place  of  pervasion. 

(2)  I  have  now  explained  why  I  used  the  phrase 
^^independently  necessary  and  sufficient  conditions".  It 
remains  to  explain  why  I  introduced  the  word  '■'' niateriaV 
before  "conditions"  in  my  original  statement.  This 
was  simply  a  precaution.  I  cannot  be  completely 
certain  that  the  sensible  inherence  of  such  and  such  a 
shade  of  colour  in  such  and  such  a  place  from  a  given 
region  of  projection  may  not  have  psychical  as  well  as 
physical  conditions.     Since  we  cannot  get  a  brain  and 


170     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 


/\\y 


S9 


i 


nervous  system  like  ours  working  properly  without  a 
mind  like  ours,  it  is  obviously  impossible  to  be  sure 
that  the  latter  is  irrelevant  for  the  present  purpose  and 
that  the  former  is  sufficient  by  itself.  And,  beside  this 
general  consideration,  there  is  a  more  specific  ground 
for  caution.  I  do  not  think  that  the  determination  of 
the  position  of  the  pervaded  region  can  be  completely 
explained  without  reference  to  the  persistent  effect  of 
past  visual  and  tactual  situations  and  bodily  movements, 
and  the  associations  between  them.  Now  of  course 
these  factors  may  now  be  represented  simply  by  per- 
sistent and  suitably  linked  material  modifications  in  the 
brain  and  nervous  system.  But,  on  the  one  hand,  these 
material  "traces"  are  purely  hypothetical  effects  of 
certain  causes  and  causes  of  certain  effects.  And,  on 
the  other  hand,  even  if  they  be  now  purely  material,  it 
may  be  that  they  could  not  have  been  formed  originally 
without  the  action  of  the  mind,  at  least  in  the  form  of 
selective  attention.  If  this  be  so,  we  might  still  say  that 
the  independently  necessary  conditions  for  a  certain  colour 
to  pervade  a  certain  place  from  a  given  region  of  pro- 
jection are  all  material  ;  but  we  should  have  to  recognise 
that  the  past  action  of  the  mind  is  a  dependently  necessary 
condition,  just  as  much  as  the  past  vibrations  of  distant 
electrons. 

So  far  the  Theory  of  Multiple  Inherence  seems  to 
have  worked  fairly  well.  But  we  have  left  to  the  end 
the  hardest  question  with  which  it  is  faced.  This  is  the 
question  of  "  physical  "  and  "  sensible  "  shape  and  size. 
We  know  that  different  observers,  who  say  that  they 
are  all  seeing  the  whole  of  the  top  of  the  same  penny, 
find  on  careful  inspection  that  the  shapes  and  sizes  of 
the  objective  constituents  of  their  respective  visual 
situations  seem  to  be  different.  We  know  that  the 
same  complication  arises  if  a  single  observer  moves 
about  whilst  he  claims  all  the  time  to  be  seeing  the 
whole  of  the  top  of  the  same  penny.  And  we  know 
that  it  also  arises  when  the  same  observer  claims  to  be 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        171 

at  once  seeing  and  touching  the  whole  of  the  top  of  the 
same  penny.     We  have  dealt  with  similar   difficulties 
about  shades  of  colour  by  suggesting  that  the  relation 
of  inherence  between  a  colour  and  the  place  which  it 
pervades  is  irreducibly  triadic,  and  not  dyadic,  as  has 
commonly  been   thought.     But   can   we    possibly   deal     ] 
with  the  difficulties  about  shape  and  size  in  the  same     / 
way?     Curiously  enough,  Dr  Whitehead  does  not,  so     | 
far  as  I  know,  discuss  this  point.     Yet  no  theory  can 
claim    to    be    satisfactory  which    does    not    make  some 
answer  to  the  question. 

At  first  sight  it  seems  evident  that  we  cannot  deal 
with  variations  in  the  apparent  shape  of  the  same  sur- 
face in  the  way  in  which  we  have  been  dealing  with 
variations  in  its  apparent  colour.  It  seems  obvious  that 
the  proposition  "This  is  round"  cou/d  have  been  true, 
even  if  there  had  been  nothing  in  the  world  but  this 
area.  In  fact  the  shape  of  a  region  seems  to  be  an 
intrinsic  quality  of  it ;  and  it  seems  nonsense  to  talk  of 
various  shapes  inhering  in  a  certain  region  from  various 
places.  Plausible  as  this  argument  sounds,  I  believe 
that  it  is  mistaken.  I  think  that  it  overlooks  a  very 
important  distinction,  viz.,  the  distinction  between  a 
"sensible  form"  and  a  "geometrical  property".  I 
shall  first  try  to  explain  the  difference  between  the  two, 
and  to  show  that  they  must  be  distinguished  quite  apart 
from  the  present  problem.  And  I  shall  then  try  to  ; 
show  that  the  distinction  enables  us  to  apply  the  j 
Multiple  Inherence  Theory  to  the  question  of  variations  \ 
of  apparent  shape  and  size. 

Let  us  consider  circularity,  for  example.  I  find  it 
necessary  to  distinguish  a  certain  geometrical  property 
called  "circularity"  and  a  certain  sensible  form  called 
by  the  same  name,  for  the  following  reasons.  The 
geometrical  property  can  be  defined.  To  say  that  a 
certain  area  is  geometrically  circular  means  that  all  the 
points  on  its  boundary  are  equidistant  from  a  fixed 
point.     But,  if  I  wanted  to  make  someone  understand 


172     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

what  I  was  referring  to  by  the  phrase  "sensibly 
circular  ",  it  would  be  of  no  use  whatever  to  offer  this 
definition  or  any  other  definition.  All  that  I  could  do 
would  be  to  proceed  by  exemplification^  just  as  I  should 
have  to  do  if  I  wanted  to  make  him  understand  what  I 
am  referring  to  when  I  use  the  word  "red".  I  should 
in  fact  have  to  proceed  as  follows  :  I  might  start  by 
getting  the  man  to  look  straight  down  on  to  a  penny. 
I  should  then  cut  out  geometrically  circular  bits  of 
paper  of  various  colours  and  sizes  and  get  him  to  look 
straight  down  on  them.  I  should  also  cut  out  bits  of 
paper  of  the  same  colours  and  different  geometrical 
shapes,  and  get  him  to  look  straight  down  on  them. 
I  should  then  say  to  him  :  "You  notice  that  there  was 
a  certain  resemblance  between  all  the  objective  con- 
stituents of  the  first  series  of  visual  situations  in  which 
I  placed  you,  in  spite  of  the  differences  of  colour,  etc. 
And  you  notice  that  there  was  a  certain  unlikeness 
between  every  objective  constituent  of  the  first  series 
of  visual  situations  and  every  objective  constituent  of 
the  second  series.  Very  well  ;  what  I  am  referring  to 
by  the  phrase  "circular  sensible  form  "  is  that  feature 
which  was  present  in  all  members  of  the  first  series  and 
absent  in  all  members  of  the  second."  In  my  view  it  is 
just  as  impossible  to  know  a  priori  that  a  geometrically 
circular  area,  when  pervaded  by  a  colour  and  viewed 
normally,  would  have  the  sensible  form  called  "cir- 
cularity" as  it  is  to  know  a  priori  that  an  area  contain- 
ing electrons  moving  in  a  certain  way  would  be  pervaded 
by  a  certain  shade  of  red  from  a  place  occupied  by  a 
normal  human  body.  Of  course  some  geometrical  pro- 
"3|  perties  are  themselves  indefinable,  e.g.^  geometrical 
straightness.  But  it  remains  a  fact  that  all  sensible 
forms  are  indefinable,  whilst  many  of  the  geometrical 
properties  which  are  called  by  the  same  name  are 
definable.  It  is  therefore  certain  that  geometrical  pro- 
perties and  the  sensible  forms  which  are  called  by  the 
same  names  must  be  distinguished. 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        173 

Let  us  now  apply  this  conclusion  to  our  present 
problem.  When  it  is  said  that  the  shape  of  a  region 
is  an  intrinsic  property,  and  that  it  is  nonsense  to  talk 
of  it  having  such  and  such  a  shape /r<?;«  such  and  such 
another  region,  this  is  true  only  of  geometrical  shape. 
If  an  area  is  geometrically  circular  it  is  so  intrinsically, 
and  there  is  an  end  of  the  matter.  But,  since  geo- 
metrical shape  and  sensible  form  must  always  be 
distinguished,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  sensible  form 
of  an  area  is  an  intrinsic  property  of  it.  It  may  be  that 
one  and  the  same  area  is  "informed"  by  one  sensible 
form  from  one  place  and  by  a  different  sensible  form 
from  another  place.  The  relation  of  "  informing  "  may 
be  irreducibly  triadic,  as  we  have  suggested  that  the 
relation  of  "pervading"  is.  If  this  be  so,  it  may  be 
that  it  is  only  from  one  place  or  one  series  of  places 
that  an  area  with  a  certain  geometrical  shape  is  informed 
by  that  sensible  form  which  has  the  same  name  as  the 
geometrical  shape.  A  like  distinction  will  have  to  be 
drawn  between  geometrical  and  physical  size.  The  geo- 
metrical size  of  a  region  will  be  an  intrinsic  property 
of  it ;  but  the  sensible  size  may  be  a  property  which  it 
only  has  from  another  region.  It  will  of  course  be  just 
as  necessary  to  distinguish  tactual  form  from  geometrical 
shape  as  to  distinguish  visual  form  from  geometrical 
shape.  But  there  may  be  good  reasons  for  holding 
that  tactual  form  is  a  safer  indication  of  geometrical 
shape  than  is  visual  form. 

There  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  visual  form 
which  informs  a  certain  external  region  from  a  certain 
region  of  projection  is  causally  determined  by  events 
which  are  physically  contained  within  the  region  of 
projection.  The  determining  factors  would  seem  to  be 
the  geometrical  shape  and  size  of  the  part  of  the  retina 
affected  by  light,  and  traces  in  the  brain  and  nervous 
system  left  by  past  visual  and  tactual  situations.  Here 
again  it  seems  to  me  that  we  cannot  be  sure  that  the 
mind  does  not  play  an  essential  part,  if  not  as  an  inde- 


174    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

pendently  necessary  condition,  yet  perhaps  as  a  remote 
and  dependently  necessary  condition  for  the  original 
formation  and  association  of  the  traces. 

I  have  now  sketched  and  defended  to  the  best  of  my 
ability  the  Multiple  Inherence  Theory.  It  is  time  to  ask 
ourselves:  "How  much  of  that  primitive  belief  which 
is  an  essential  part  of  every  perceptual  situation  would 
be  left  standing  if  we  accepted  this  theory?"  Under 
favourable  circumstances,  i.e.,  when  we  should  commonly 
be  held  to  be  seeing  a  not  too  distant  object  by  direct 
vision  through  a  colourless  homogeneous  medium,  we 
could  go  thus  far  with  common-sense.  We  could  hold 
(i)  that  the  visual  situations  of  a  number  of  observers 
who  say  that  they  are  seeing  the  same  object  really  do 
contain  a  common  objective  constituent,  viz.,  a  certain 
region  of  Space  outside  their  bodies.  (2)  That  this  same 
region  of  Space  is  the  common  objective  constituent  of  the 
visual  and  tactual  situations  of  an  observer  who  would 
be  said  to  be  seeing  and  touching  the  same  object.  (3) 
That  this  region  really  is  pervaded  now  by  those  sensible 
qualities  and  informed  by  those  sensible  forms  which 
each  observer  can  detect  by  careful  inspection  in  the 
objective  constituent  of  his  perceptual  situations.  (4) 
That  this  region  really  does  physically  contain  a  set 
of  microscopic  physical  events  (movements  of  molecules, 
vibrations  of  electrons,  etc.)  which  are  the  dependently 
necessary  conditions  for  the  pervasion  of  this  region  by 
these  sensible  qualities  from  the  places  now  occupied  by 
the  observers'  bodies.  This  is  as  far  as  we  could  go  in 
agreement  with  common-sense.  We  should  have  to 
differ  from  common-sense,  even  in  the  cases  which  are 
most  favourable  to  its  beliefs,  in  the  following  points  : 
(i)  It  believes  that  the  colours  which  it  sees  are  quite 
literally  spread  out  over  the  surfaces  of  the  physical  objects 
which  it  sees  and  touches.  In  view  of  the  facts  about 
mirror-images,  etc.,  we  can  admit  only  that  colours  per- 
vade certain  regions  of  Space.  The  latter  may  or  may 
not  contain  those  microscopic  physical  things  and  events 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        175 

which  are  the  dependently  necessary  conditions  of  the 
pervasion  of  this   region   by  this  colour.     Even   when 
this  is  so,  i.e.,  when  there  is  an  emitting  as  well  as  a 
pervaded  region  and  the  two  coincide,   we  cannot  say 
that  the  microscopic  events  and  objects  have  the  colour  ; 
we  caiTsay^nly  that  the  region  which  contains  them  is 
pervaded  by   the   colour.     (2)  Common-sense   believes 
that  the   pervasion   of  anything  by  a  colour  is  a  two- 
term  relation  between  this  thing  and  this  colour.      In 
view  of  the  fact  that  the  whole  of  the  top  of  the  same 
penny  may  appear  brown  to  me  and  yellow  to  you,  who 
have  taken  santonin,  we  cannot  admit  this.     If  we  wish 
to   hold   that   this   one   surface    really   is  the   common 
objective   constituent   of  your   visual    situation   and    of 
mine,  and  that  it  really  has  the  colours  which  it  seems 
to  you  and  me  on  careful  inspection  to  have,  we  must 
hold  that  the  sensible  pervasion  of  a  region  by  a  colour 
is  at  least  a  three-term   relation.     It  must  involve  an 
essential    reference   to   a   region   of  projection    as   well 
as  to  the  pervaded  region   and  the  pervading  colour. 
(3)    Common -sense   believes   that    the    independently 
necessary   and    sufficient   conditions  for  the  pervasion 
of  a  certain  region   by  a  certain  colour  are  contained 
in    that   region    at   the   time   when    it    is    pervaded  by 
this  colour.     It  therefore  holds  that  this  region  would 
be  pervaded  by  this  colour  at  this   moment  no  matter 
what  might  be  ^oing  on   elsewhere.     This  cannot  be 
accepted.      The    independently   necessary   and   sufficient 
conditions   for   the   pervasion    of  a   certain    region    by 
a  certain   colour  are  never  contained   in   the  pervaded 
region  and  are  always  contained  in  or  near  the  region 
of  projection.       It   is   true   that,    in    favourable   cases, 
the  dependently  necessary  conditions  for  this  pervasion 
may  have  been  contained  in  the  pervaded  region  ;  viz., 
when  there  is  an  emitting  region  and  it  coincides  with 
the  pervaded  region.     But,  in  the  first  place,  there  may 
be  no  emitting  region  at  all.     (Cf.  the  visual  situations 
of  dreams,   or  the  case  of  the  drunkard  and  his  pink 


176    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE  OF  EXISTENTS 

rats.)  Secondly,  there  may  be  an  emitting  region,  but 
it  may  be  quite  remote  from  the  pervaded  region.  (Cf. 
mirror-images  and  aberration.)  And  lastly,  even  when 
there  is  an  emitting  region  and  it  coincides  with  the 
pervaded  region,  common-sense  is  always  wrong  about 
the  date  of  the  relevant  physical  events  in  this  region. 
It  always  assumes  that  they  are  contemporary  with  the 
pervasion,  whereas  they  are  always  earlier  and  may  be 
earlier  by  thousands  of  years.  The  net  result  of  all 
this  is  that  there  is  the  strongest  reason  to  believe  that 
no  region  would  be  pervaded  by  any  colour  unless 
some  other  region  contained  a  living  body  with  a  suit- 
able brain  and  nervous  system  functioning  properly. 
To  the  question:  '*Are  things  really  coloured?"  we 
can  make  the  following  answers  on  the  present  theory- 
(i)  Colour  is  not  logically  an  intrinsic  quality  of  any- 
thing. Its  nature  is  such  that  it  can  pervade  one  place 
only  from  another  place.  We  may  express  this  by 
saying  that  it  is  a  genuine  characteristic,  but  that  it 
is  a  "multiply-inherent"  one.  "To  be  coloured"  is 
a  characteristic  which  is  logically  of  the  same  kind  as 
"to  be  envied."  (ii)  Things  are  not  coloured,  in  the 
sense  that  their  colour  is  a  primitive  and  causally  inde- 
pendent characteristic  of  them  ;  or  in  the  sense  that  it 
is  directly  determined  by  their  intrinsic  characteristics. 
The  colour  which  pervades  a  region  is  directly  deter- 
mined, not  by  the  physical  contents  ofrthat  region,  but 
by  the  physical  contents  of  a  different  region.  A  certain 
region  really  is  pervaded  by  a  certain  colour  from  a 
certain  other  region  if  and  only  if  the  latter  contains 
a  suitable  brain  and  nervous  system,  functioning  pro- 
perly. I  express  this  fact  by  saying  that  the  colour  of 
a  region  from  a  place  genuinely  pervades  it,  but  is 
"causally  adventitious  "  to  it.  (iii)  A  region  may  con- 
tain such  microscopic  physical  events  and  objects  that 
a  certain  shade  of  a  certain  colour  would  pervade  it 
from  any  region  which  is  near  enough,  z/"the  latter  were 
occupied   by   a   normal    brain   and   nervous   system   in 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER         177 

normal  working  order.  I  express  this  by  saying  that 
this  region  has  such  and  such  a  ''potential  colour." 
(iv)  If  it  be  asked  whether  my  previous  statements  imply 
that  colours  are  ''mind-dependent",  I  answer  as  follows. 
The  pervasion  of  a  certain  place  by  a  certain  colour  from 
a  certain  region  of  projection  is  not  dependent  on  this 
colour  being  perceived  by  the  mind  which  animates 
the  organism  that  occupies  the  region  of  projection. 
Nothing  depends  for  its  existence  on  being  perceived. 
But  it  is  conceivable  that  the  same  events  in  the  brain 
and  nervous  system  have  two  effects,  viz.,  that  they 
cause  a  certain  distant  place  to  be  pervaded  from  the 
region  of  projection  by  a  certain  colour,  and  that  they 
cause  the  mind  which  animates  the  organism  in  the 
region  of  projection  to  perceive  this  colour.  If  this 
were  so,  the  colour  could  not  pervade  the  external 
place  from  the  region  of  projection  without  being  per- 
ceived by  the  mind  which  animates  the  organism  in 
the  region  of  projection.  But  it  seems  to  me  most 
unlikely  that  the  bodily  conditions  which  cause  the 
colour  to  inhere  are  identical  with  the  bodily  conditions 
which  cause  the  mind  to  perceive  ;  and  there  is  certainly 
no  evidence  for  such  a  view.  If  the  two  sets  of  con- 
ditions be  not  identical,  it  is  logically  possible  that  a 
colour  should  pervade  a  place  from  a  region  of  pro- 
jection without  being  perceived  by  the  mind  which 
animates  the  organism  in  this  region  of  projection. 
Whether  this  in  fact  ever  happens  is  a  question  to  be 
decided  by  empirical  considerations.  We  must  re- 
member, however,  that  a  colour  might  be  in  part  mind- 
dependent  without  being  dependent  on  the  particular 
mental  event  of  being  perceived.  As  I  have  said,  it 
seems_tQ_me_likely  that  some  of  the  remotejconditions 
of  the  characteristics  of  the  objective  constituents  _of 
visual  situations  are  mental  ;  and  it  is  quite  possible 
that  some  of  their  immediate  conditions  are  also  mental. 
It  is,  e.g.^  quite  arguable  that  the  sensible  form  and 
size  and   distance  of  objective   constituents  is  in    part 

M 


178     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

determined    by  our   predominant  interests  and   beliefs 
at  the  moment. 

It  is  evident,  then,  that  the  Theory  of  Multiple  In- 
herence, though  it  allows  us  to  keep  some  parts  of  the 
primitive  belief  which  is  part  of  every  perceptual 
situation,  requires  us  to  modify  other  parts  very  pro- 
foundly in  the  case  of  visual  situations.  We  shall 
find  that  the  other  alternatives  are  equally  upsetting 
to  common-sense.     To  them  I  now  turn. 

{a,  /3)  Multiple  Relation  Theory  of  Appearing.  I  shall 
be  able  to  deal  much  more  briefly  with  this  and  the 
third  alternative,  because  I  have  brought  out  in  the 
last  section  most  of  the  important  facts  which  must  be 
recognised  by  any  satisfactory  theory.  On  any  theory 
we  must  recognise  that  the  independently  necessary 
and  sufficient  conditions  of  the  apparent  characteristics 

(     of  the  objective  constituents  of  perceptual  situations  are 

■  contained  in  or  near  the  place  occupied  by  the  per- 
cipient's body  ;  that  there  may  be  no  external  emitting 
region  ;  that,  if  there  is  one,  it  may  be  remote  from  the 

("     region  which  these  characteristics  apparently  pervade  ; 

i  and  that,  even  if  the  two  regions  coincide,  the  date  of 
]  apparent  pervasion  is  later  than  the  date  of  emission. 
There  is  a  close  formal  analogy  between  the  present 
theory  and  the  one  discussed  in  the  last  section.  Both 
of  them  have  to  assume  a  fundamental  relation  which  is 
at  least  triadic.  The  Multiple  Inherence  Theory  sup- 
poses that  colours  inhere  triadically  in  places  from 
places ;  and  that  sensible  forms  triadically  inf6rm 
regions  from  regions.  The  Multiple  Relation  Theory 
of  Appearing  assumes  that,  if  a  colour  really  did  inhere 
in  anything,  it  would  inhere  dyadically,  as  common- 
sense  supposes.  But  it  assumes  a  fundamental  relation 
of  "appearing",  which  must  be  at  least  triadic.  Thus 
it  assumes,  as  logically  possible,  two  diff"erent  kinds  of 
proposition  about  characteristics  like  colour,  shape,  etc. 
One  is  of  the  form  "This  is  red"  ;  the  other  is  of  the 
form  "This  looks  red    from   here".     And,  in  order  to 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER         179 

deal  with    the  known  facts,   it  has  to  assume  that  the 
objective  constituent  of  a  visual  situation  can  seem  from         flyCT? 
a   place   to   have  characteristics  which  are  other  than    '       -t 
and  incompatible  with  the  characteristics  which  it  does_i 
have.     If  the   top   of  a   penny   literally  has  a  certain 
colour  dyadically,    it  can  have  only  one  shade  of  one 
colour.     But   it   certainly  seems  to  have  a  number  of 
different  shades  of  the  same  colour,  and  may  even  seem 
to    have  a  number  of  different  colours,  from  different 
places   occupied    by   different   observers.     Hence,    if  a  , 
penny  literally  and  dyadically  possesses  a  colour,  the   ! 
colour  which  it  has  must  differ  from  all  but  one  of  the   ; 
colours  or  shades  which  it  seems  to  have  ;  and,  it  may  ( 
differ  from  all  of  them.      Whilst,  if  it  does  not  literally    1 
and  dyadically  possess  any  colour,  it  is  still  plainer  that    ( 
it   seems   to  have  characteristics  which   it  does  not  in 
fact  have.     The  same  remarks  apply  to  shape,  size,  and 
position.     On  this  theory  then  we  may  be  acquainted 
in    a   perceptual    situation  with  a  spatio-temporal  part 
of  a  certain   physical  object  which  we  are  said  to  be 
perceiving.     But  we  learn  only  about  the  characteristics 
which  it  seems  to  have  ;   and  the  more  carefully  we  in- 
spect the  objective  constituent  the  more  we  learn  of  its 
apparent  properties  only.     And  it  is  certain  that  it  either 
does  not  actually  have  properties  of  this  kind  at  all  ; 
or  that,  if  it  does,  the  apparent  and  the  real  properties 
can    be   identical   only  in    one   specially  favoured  per- 
ceptual   situation.     And  there  is  of  course  nothing  in 
any  particular  perceptual  situation,  taken  by  itself,  to 
tell  us  that  in  it  and  it  alone  the  apparent  and  the  real 
characteristics  of  the  objective  constituent  are  identical. 
Let  us  now  consider  the  points  of  difference  between 
this   theory  and   the   one   which  we   discussed    before. 
Both  theories  allow  that,  under  suitable  conditions,  it 
may  be  true  that  there  is  a  common  objective  constituent 
to  the  visual  situations  of  a  number  of  observers  who 
say  that   they  are    '*  seeing   the   same   object".     Both 
allow  that  there  is,  under  suitable  conditions,  a  common 


i8o    MIND'S  KNOWLEDGE  OF  EXISTENTS 

objective  constituent  to  the  visual  and  the  tactual  situa- 
tions of  an  observer  who  says  that  he  is  "seeing  and 
feeling  the  same  object".  And  both  allow,  that,  under 
suitable  conditions,  this  common  objective  constituent 
may  be  literally  a  spatio-temporal  part  of  the  object 
which  the  various  observers  say  that  they  are  ''seeing 
and  feeling  ".  But,  at  this  point,  each  has  to  diverge 
from  common  -  sense  in  a  different  direction.  The 
Multiple  Inherence  Theory  allows  that  the  objective 
constituent  really  does  have  those  characteristics  which 
it  seems  on  careful  inspection  by  each  observer  to  have. 
^^^  But   it  can    allow  this   only  by   supposing   that  these 

-'-*/  characteristics  inhere  in  the  objective  constituent  in  a 

way  never  contemplated  by  common-sense,  viz.,  triadi- 
cally.  The  Multiple  Relation  Theory  of  Appearing 
allows  that,  z/  the  objective  constituent  did  have  such 
characteristics  as  it  seems  to  have,  they  would  inhere 
in  it  in  the  ordinary  dyadic  way  which  common-sense 
recognises.  But  it  can  allow  this  only  by  supposing 
that  most,  if  not  all,  of  the  determinate  characteristics 
which  the  objective  constituent  seems  on  careful  in- 
spection to  have  do  not  in  fact  inhere  in  it.  And  both 
theories,  as  I  have  said,  have  to  depart  altogether  from 
common-sense  when  they  pass  from  purely  logical  to 
causal  considerations.  The  conditions  which  immedi- 
ately determine  what  colour,  sensible  form,  etc.,  the 
objective  constituent  shall  have  (triadically)  on  the  first 
theory,  or  shall  seem  to  have  on  the  second,  are  con- 
tained in  or  near  the  place  where  the  observer  is,  and 
not  in  or  near  the  place  where  the  objective  constituent 
is  on  the  first  theory  or  seems  to  be  on  the  second. 
And  the  remote  and  dependently  necessary  conditions, 
in  many  cases,  are  neither  in  nor  near  the  latter  place. 

{b)  The  Sensum  Theory.  Poor  dear  Common-sense 
has  not  done  very  well  out  of  the  two  types  of  theory 
which  were  constructed  for  its  special  benefit.  Let 
us  now  consider  the  third  possible  alternative.  This 
theory  allows   that  the   objective   constituents   of  per- 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER         i8i 

ceptual  situations  really  do  have  all  those  positive  a,  ^A^^ 
characteristics  which  they  seem  on  careful  inspection  ^ 
to  have.  And  it  allows  that  these  characteristics  inhere 
in  these  objective  constituents  in  the  straightforward 
dyadic  way  in  which  common-sense  supposes  them  to 
do.  But,  in  admitting  this  much,  it  is  then  forced 
to  depart  from  common-sense.  It  cannot  admit  that 
the  visual  situations  of  a  number  of  observers,  who 
say  that  they  are  ''seeing  the  same  object",  contain  a 
common  objective  constituent.  It  cannot  admit  that, 
when  a  man  says  that  he  is  "seeing  and  feeling  the 
same  object",  there  is  in  general  a  common  objective 
constituent  to  his  visual  and  his  tactual  situations. 
And  it  cannot  admit  that,  when  we  say  that  we  are 
"seeing  a  certain  physical  object",  the  objective  con- 
stituent of  our  visual  situation  is  in  general  a  spatio- 
temporal  part  of  the  physical  object  which  we  say  that 
we  are  "seeing".  On  this  theory,  then,  the  objective  I 
constituents  of  most,  if  not  all,  perceptual  situations  \ 
cannot  be  spatio  -  temporal  parts  of  physical  objects,  i 
No  doubt  they  are  really  extended  ;  they  really  last  ) 
for  so  long  ;  they  really  have  certain  shapes,  sizes, 
colours,  etc.;  and  some  at  least  of  them  stand  in  spatial 
and  temporal  relations  to  each  other.  But  they  are 
not,  in  any  plain  straightforward  sense,  in  the  one 
Physical  Space  in  which  physical  objects  are  supposed 
to  be;  and  between  pairs  of  them  which  are  connected 
with  different  observers  there  are  no  simple  and  straight- 
forward spatial  or  temporal  relations.  The  objective 
constituents  of  perceptual  situations  are,  on  this  view, 
particular  existents  of  a  peculiar  kind  ;  they  are  not 
physical,  as  we  have  seen  ;  and  there  is  no  reason  to 
suppose  that  they  are  either  states  of  mind  or  existenti- 
ally  mind-dependent.  In  having  spatial  characteristics, 
colours,  etc.,  they  resemble  physical  objects,  as  ordinarily 
conceived  ;  but  in  their  privacy  and  their  dependence 
on  the  body,  if  not  the  mind,  of  the  observer  they  are 
more  like  mental  states.     I  give  the  name  of  "sensa" 


i82    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE  OF  EXISTENTS 

to  the  objective  constituents  of  perceptual  situations,  on 
the  supposition  that  they  are  not  literally  parts  of  the 
physical  object  which  we  are  said  to  be  "  perceiving", 
and  that  they  are  transitory  particulars  of  the  peculiar 
kind  which  I  have  just  been  describing.  And  I  call  the 
theory  which  assumes  the  existence  of  such  particulars 
"  The  Sensum  Theory  ". 

The  Sensum  Theory  is  at  once  faced  with  the  question  : 
"  What  is  the  relation  between  the  objective  constituent 
of  a  perceptual  situation  and  the  physical  object  which 
we  are  said  to  perceive  in  this  situation?"  On  the  two 
previous  theories  it  was  possible  to  admit  that,  in  favour- 
able cases,  the  objective  constituent  of  the  perceptual 
situation  was  quite  literally  a  spatio-temporal  part  of 
the  perceived  object.  This  cannot  be  admitted  on  the 
Sensum  Theory  ;  the  relation  must  be  less  direct  and 
more  complicated  than  common-sense  believes.  On 
the  Sensum  Theory  the  proposition:  '*The  physical 
object  which  I  am  now  perceiving  appears  to  have  the 
determinate  characteristic  ^"  can  be  analysed  up  to  a 
certain  point.  The  analysis  would  run  as  follows. 
This  proposition  means:  "There  is  a  certain  sensum 
s  which  is  the  objective  constituent  of  this  perceptual 
situation.  This  actually  has  the  characteristic  c  which 
I  can  detect  in  it  by  inspection,  and  it  has  this  char- 
acteristic in  a  straightforward  dyadic  way.  And  there 
is  a  certain  physical  object  ^,  to  which  this  sensum  has 
a  certain  relation  R  which  it  has  to  no  other  physical 
object.  In  virtue  of  this  relation  the  sensum  s  is  said  to 
be  *'an  appearance  of"  the  physical  object  o.  When 
we  say  that  several  people  perceive  the  same  physical 
object  0  and  the  same  part  of  it,  we  must  mean,  on  this 
theory,  that  their  several  perceptual  situations  contain 
as  objective  constituents  the  sensa  s,^  s^^  .  .  .  etc.,  and 
that  all  of  them  are  appearances  of  the  same  physical 
object  0.  It  is  plain  that  these  analyses  contain  an 
unanalysed  factor,  viz.,  the  relation  R  of  ''being  an 
appearance  of".     About   this  relation  we  can  say  the 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER         183 

following-  things,  (i)  It  is  not  the  relation  of  spatio- 
temporal  part  to  spatio-temporal  whole,  (ii)  It  is  a 
many-one  relation,  i.e.,  many  different  sensa  can  be 
appearances  of  one  physical  object,  and  even  of  pre- 
cisely the  same  part  of  this  object ;  but  one  sensum  . 
cannot,  in  this  sense,  be  an  appearance  of  several 
physical  objects.  There  is  a  certain  physical  object 
and  a  certain  part  of  it  which  can  be  called  ^'^  the  part 
of  the  physical  object  which  has  this  sensum  as  an 
appearance ".  At  this  point  the  Sensum  Theory  can 
take  one  of  two  courses.  It  may  profoundly  modify 
the  common-sense  notion  of  physical  objects;  e.g.,  it 
may  hold  with  Berkeley  that  what  are  manifested  by 
sensa  are  volitions  in  God's  mind  ;  or  with  Leibniz  that 
what  are  manifested  by  sensa  are  collections  of  minds  ; 
or  with  Russell  that  the  sensa  which  are  objective 
constituents  of  perceptual  situations  are  a  small  selection 
out  of  certain  larger  groups  of  interrelated  sensa,  and 
that  these  groups  are  the  only  physical  objects  that 
there  are.  Or,  on  the  other  hand,  it  may  try  to  keep 
as  near  to  the  common-sense  notion  of  physical  objects 
as  possible.  The  latter  course  leads  to  what  I  call  the 
'*  Critical  Scientific  Theory  ",  which  is  the  tacit  assump- 
tion of  natural  scientists,  purged  of  its  inconsistencies, 
and  stated  in  terms  of  the  Sensum  Theory.  According 
to  which  of  these  alternative  views  of  the  nature  of 
physical  objects  we  choose  we  shall  take  a  different 
view  of  the  relation  R  between  a  sensum  and  the 
physical  object  of  which  it  is  an  appearance.  E.g.,  on 
such  a  theory  as  Russell's  the  relation  R  is  that  of 
class-membership.  To  say  that  s  is  an  appearance  of  \ 
0  will  mean  that  c*  is  a  certain  group  of  suitably  inter-  ) 
related  sensa,  and  that  s  is  one  of  this  group.  On  such  I 
a  theory  as  Berkeley's  the  relation  R  is  that  of  one  part 
of  a  total  effect  to  the  cause  of  this  total  effect.  The  total 
effect  is  all  the  sensa  which  would  be  said  to  be  appear- 
ances of  a  certain  thing  at  a  certain  time.  The  cause 
is  a  certain  volition  in  God's  mind. 


i84    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE  OF  EXISTENTS 


J 


2 


Co7mnon-sense  and  the  Three  Types  of  Theory.  We 
have  seen  in  what  respects  the  j5rst  two  theories  agree 
with  the  primitive  beliefs  of  common-sense,  and  in  what 
respects  they  differ  from  these.  Let  us  now  raise  the 
same  question  about  the  Sensum  Theory.  It  agrees 
with  common-sense  in  the  belief  that  the  objective 
constituents  of  perceptual  situations  really  do  have,  in 
a  straightforward  dyadic  way,  all  those  characteristics 
which  they  seem  on  careful  inspection  to  have.  But 
it  has  to  assume  that  these  objective  constituents  are 
particular  existents  of  a  peculiar  kind,  being  neither 
mental  nor  physical.  And,  although  it  is  possible  for 
it  to  hold  that  there  may  be  physical  objects  in  the 
ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  it  cannot  admit  that  the 
objective  constituents  of  most  perceptual  situations  are 
in  fact  spatio-temporal  parts  of  them.  It  is  thus  faced 
with  a  problem  which  does  not  arise  for  the  other 
theories ;  viz.,  to  give  some  account  of  the  relation 
between  sensa,  which  are  objective  constituents  of 
perceptual  situations,  and  the  physical  objects  which 
are  supposed  to  be  manifested  by  these  sensa.  In  order 
to  give  a  plausible  account  of  this  relation  the  theory 
may  be  forced  to  depart  very  far  indeed  from  the 
common-sense  notion  of  a  physical  object,  as  has 
happened  in  Russell's  theory. 

I  think  that  it  is  now  abundantly  evident  that  very 
little  can  be  done  for  common-sense.  One  theory 
requires  a  kind  of  inherence  which  shocks  it ;  the 
second  theory  asks  it  to  believe  that  the  objective 
constituents  of  most,  and  perhaps  of  all,  perceptual 
situations  seem  on  careful  inspection  to  have  character- 
istics other  than  and  incompatible  with  those  which 
they  actually  do  have  ;  and  the  third  theory  insists  that 
the  objective  constituents  of  perceptual  situations  are 
seldom  if  ever  spatio-temporal  parts  of  the  physical 
objects  which  it  claims  to  be  perceiving,  and  presents 
it  with  a  peculiar  kind  of  existent  which  is  neither 
physical  nor  mental  but  seems  to  have  one  leg  in  each 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        185 

realm.  And  these  results  are  not  due  to  the  wilful 
perversity  of  philosophers  debauched  with  learning. 
They  are  conclusions  to  which  we  are  forced  most  un- 
willingly by  a  careful  consideration  of  those  facts  which 
common-sense  ignores.  I  think  we  may  say  with 
perfect  confidence  that,  whilst  none  of  the  philosophic 
theories  may  be  true,  the  primitive  belief  which  accom- 
panies all  perceptual  situations  is  certainly  to  a  very 
large  extent  false  ;  and  that  there  is  not  the  faintest 
chance  of  rehabilitating  it.  If  we  reflect  on  the  history 
and  the  probable  prehistory  of  human  perception,  I 
think  we  can  see  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  least 
surprising  in  this  fact.  Perception  must  have  grown 
up  in  close  connexion  with  action  ;  and  the  primitive 
belief  which  forms  part  of  the  perceptual  situation  is,^ 
on  the  whole,  perfectly  satisfactory  for  practical  purposes. 
It  is  exactly  the  belief  that  a  being  would  naturally 
reach  if  he  ignored  abnormal  cases  like  mirror-images  ; 
neglected  minor  differences,  such  as  we  find  on  careful 
inspection,  between  the  objective  constituents  of  the 
perceptual  situations  of  different  observers  who  are  said 
to  be  perceiving  the  same  object  by  the  same  or  by 
different  senses  ;  and  knew  nothing  about  the  velocity 
of  light  or  the  part  played  in  perception  by  his  own 
brain  and  nervous  system.  Now,  a  being  devoted  to 
practical  ends  naturally  would  ignore  comparatively 
rare  cases,  such  as  mirror-images  and  other  optical 
illusions.  He  naturally  would  neglect  the  minor 
differences  between  the  characteristics  of  various  ob- 
jective constituents,  so  long  as  they  all  guided  him  to 
the  right  place  and  enabled  him  to  co-operate  satis- 
factorily with  his  fellows,  to  avoid  danger,  and  to  get 
what  he  wanted.  From  the  nature  of  the  case  he  could 
not  suspect  the  velocity  of  light,  which  needs  the  most 
delicate  experiments  to  detect  it  and  a  stroke  of  genius 
even  to  think  of  it.  And,  as  he  always  carries  his  brain 
and  nervous  system  about  with  him  wherever  he  goes, 
he   would   naturally  tend  to  ignore  the   part  which   it 


/ 


( 


i86     MIND'S  KNOWLEDGE  OF  EXISTENTS 

plays  in  perception  ;  just  as  a  person  who  always  wears 
glasses  forgets  that  he  has  them  on  and  that  he  could 
not  see  properly  without  them.  These  causes,  which 
must  certainly  have  operated  in  the  development  of 
perception,  have  produced  precisely  the  kind  of  primitive 
belief  which  we  might  have  expected  them  to  produce. 
And,  when  we  take  into  account  all  the  factors  which 
were  ignored  in  the  development  of  this  belief,  but  which 
are  none  the  less  real,  we  naturally  find  that  the  belief 
is  far  too  simple-minded  to  deal  with  the  extremely 
.  complex  situation.  It  is,  therefore^inniy  opinion,  simply 
^yL  T^    waste  of  time  to  try  to  rehabilitate  naive  realism  ;  or  to 

regard  it  as  any  serious  objection  to  a  theory  of  the 
external  world  and  our  perception  of  it  that  it  is 
''shocking  to  common-sense".  Any  theory  that  can 
possibly  fit  the  facts  is  certain  to  shock  common-sense 
somewhere  ;  and  in  face  of  the  facts  we  can  only  advise 
1  common-sense  to  follow  the  example  of  Judas  Iscariot, 
and  "  go  out  and  hang  itself". 

We  may  now  ask  ourselves  whether  there  is  anything 
to  choose  between  the  three  kinds  of  theory,  (i)  It 
seems  to  me  that  the  Theory  of  Multiple  Inherence,  as 
stated,  presupposes  a  doctrine  of  Absolute  Space-Time, 
as  a  kind  of  fundamental  stuff  or  matrix.  It  is  quite 
certain  that  the  objective  constituents  of  perceptual 
situations  are  particular  existents,  and  not  mere  universal 
qualities.  And  it  is  quite  certain  that,  if  objective  con- 
stituents of  visual  situations  are  really  situated  where 
they  appear  to  be,  as  the  theory  assumes,  they  are  often 
situated  in  places  which  are  not  occupied  by  matter  in 
any  ordinary  sense  of  the  word.  This  is  often  true, 
e.g.,  of  mirror-images.  Now,  a  mirror-image  is  as  good 
a  particular  as  the  objective  constituent  of  a  more  normal 
visual  situation.  Whence  does  it  get  its  particularity? 
On  the  present  theory  we  must  say  that  it  is  a  particular 
because  it  is  a  certain  region  of  Space,  pervaded  from 
a  certain  other  region  of  Space  at  a  certain  date  and 
for  a  certain  time  by  a  certain  shade  of  colour.     Now 


y< 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        187 

this  surely  presupposes  Space-Time  as  a  kind  of  omni- 
present and  eternal  substance,  every  region  of  which 
is  ready  to  be  pervaded  by  some  sensible  quality  from 
some  other  region.  I  do  not  of  course  suggest  that  this 
theory  must  suppose  that  Absolute  Space-Time  is  the 
only  substance  in  the  material  realm.  The  regions  from 
which  colours  pervade  other  regions  are  occupied  in  a 
non-triadic  sense  by  certain  physical  and  physiological 
events  and  objects.  And  the  emitting  regions  are  also 
occupied  in  a  non-triadic  sense  by  electrons,  atoms, 
molecules,  etc.,  and  their  movements.  It  is  not  necessary 
for  the  theory  to  hold,  e.g.^  that  an  electron  is  just  a 
certain  region  of  Space-Time  dyadically  pervaded  by 
some  physical  quality.  But,  whilst  it  is  not  necessary 
for  the  theory  to  hold  that  Absolute  Space-Time  is  the 
only  substance  in  the  material  realm,  it  is  necessary  for 
it  to  hold  that  Absolute  Space-Time  is  a  substance  and 
that  the  particularity  of  the  objective  constituents  of 
some,  if  not  all,  perceptual  situations  is  the  particularity 
of  some  particular  region  of  Space-Time.  This  region 
is  marked  out  by  being  pervaded  by  such  and  such  a 
sensible  quality  from  such  and  such  a  region  of  pro- 
jection ;  and  a  region  thus  pervaded  and  marked  out 
is,  on  the  present  theory,  that  kind  of  particular  which 
we  call  ''an  objective  constituent  of  a  perceptual 
situation  ". 

Now,  I  do  not  for  a  moment  suggest  that  a  theory  is 
necessarily  wrong  because  it  presupposes  the  doctrine 
of  Absolute  Space-Time  as  the  common  matrix  of  all 
objective  constituents  of  perceptual  situations.  But  I 
do  think  that  such  a  theory  starts  with  rather  heavy 
liabilities,  and  I  do  suspect  that  it  has  not  carried  its 
analysis  far  enough. 

(2)  It  seems  to  me  that  the  Theory  of  a  Multiple 
Relation  of  Appearing  is  liable  to  a  similar  objection. 
Suppose  I  hold  up  a  finger  in  front  of  a  plain  mirror, 
so  that  I  can  see  both  the  finger  and  the  mirror-image 
of  it  at  the  same  time.     Then  it  is  quite  certain  that  the 


i88    MIND*S   KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

characteristic  colour  of  my  finger  seems  to  pervade  the 
surfaces  of  two  distinct  physical  objects,  one  in  front  of 
the  mirror  and  the  other  at  the  back  of  it.  It  is  also 
quite  certain  that  the  characteristic  sensible  form  of  my 
finger  seems  to  inform  two  distinct  physical  objects. 
Now  we  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  only  one 
physical  object  is  appearing  in  this  situation.  It  is 
therefore  not  enough  for  the  theory  to  hold  that  some 
part  of  a  physical  object  which  is  an  objective  con- 
stituent of  a  visual  situation  may  seem  to  have  a 
characteristic  which  it  does  not  in  fact  have.  It  must 
also  assert  that  what  is  in  fact  one  physical  object  in 
one  place  may  seem  to  be  two  physical  objects  in  two 
places  at  some  distance  apart.  Now  one  may  admit 
that  a  certain  particular  might  seem  to  have  a 
characteristic  which  differs  from  and  is  incompatible 
with  the  characteristics  which  it  does  have.  But  I  find 
it  almost  incredible  that  one  particular  extended  patch 
should  seem  to  be  two  particular  extended  patches  at  a 
distance  apart  from  each  other.  There  is  of  course  no 
difficulty  in  holding  that  the  same  shade  of  colour  and 
the  same  sensible  form  may  appear  to  inhere  in  two 
places  at  once,  and  that  one  of  these  places  is  physically 
filled  whilst  the  other  is  physically  empty  ;  provided 
you  hold  that  colours  and  sensible  forms  seem  to  inhere, 
not  in  physical  objects,  but  in  regions  of  Space.  The 
appearance  of  two  particulars  is  then  accounted  for  by 
the  fact  that  there  really  are  two  particulars,  viz.,  the 
two  distinct  regions  of  Space  in  which  the  same  colour 
and  sensible  form  seem  to  inhere  at  the  same  time. 
But  this  presupposes  Absolute  Space-Time  as  a  sub- 
stantial matrix  whose  regions  are  ready  to  appear  to 
have  such  and  such  characteristics  from  other  regions 
which  are  suitably  filled.  And  this  was  the  objection 
to  the  Theory  of  Multiple  Inherence. 

I  think  we  must  say  then  that,  in  view  of  mirror- 
images,  aberration,  etc.,  the  Multiple  Relation  Theory 
of  Appearing  must    hold  either  that  what  is  in  fact  a 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER         189 

single  extended  particular  can  seem  to  be  two  distinct 
extended  particulars  at  a  distance  apart  from  each 
other;  or  that  sensible  qualities  and  forms  have  the 
relation  of  "appearing  to  inhere  in"  to  regions  of 
Absolute  Space -Time,  and  not  to  the  surfaces  of 
physical  objects.  The  first  alternative  is  difficult  to 
believe  ;  the  second  presupposes  Absolute  Space-Time, 
which  is  probably  a  sign  of  inadequate  analysis. 

(3)  It  is  commonly  objected  to  the  Sensum  Theory 
that  it  leaves  the  existence  of  physical  objects  merely 
hypothetical  ;  that  it  introduces  entities  of  a  peculiar 
kind,  whose  status  in  the  world  and  relations  to  physical 
objects,  if  such  there  be,  are  very  difficult  to  under- 
stand ;  and  that  it  involves  a  very  odd  kind  of  causation, 
which  is  almost  creation  out  of  nothing.  In  this  section 
I  shall  content  myself  with  showing  that  the  Sensum 
Theory  is  in  these  respects  very  little  worse  off  than  the 
other  two  alternatives.  It  is  no  doubt  true  that  sensa 
cannot  be  parts,  in  the  literal  and  straightforward  sense, 
of  physical  objects  ;  and  that,  on  most  forms  of  the 
theory,  the  relation  between  the  two  is  very  indirect. 
As  against  this  it  must  be  said  that  the  other  theories 
have  been  found  to  involve  Absolute  Space-Time.  Now 
I  think  that  the  Sensum  Theory  can  dispense  with  this. 
The  other  theories  need  this  because  they  require  some 
kind  of  substance  for  sensible  qualities  to  inhere  in  or 
to  seem  to  inhere  in.     And,  since  in  the  case  of  mirror-  1 

images,  etc.,  this  substance  can  hardly  be  the  surfaces  ^ 

of  physical  objects,  there  seems  nothing  left  for  it  to  be  ; 
except  various  regions  of  Absolute  Space-Time.  Now 
the  Sensum  Theory  starts  with  particulars,  for  each 
sensum  is  a  particular  having  those  sensible  qualities 
and  that  sensible  form  which  it  seems  on  careful 
inspection  to  have.  It  therefore  does  not  need  to 
assume  Absolute  Space-Time,  in  the  sense  of  a  kind  of 
substantial  matrix  whose  various  regions  stand  ready 
to  be  pervaded  by  various  sensible  qualities  and  in- 
formed  by   various   sensible    forms.     It   can   accept   a 


igo    MIND'S  KNOWLEDGE  OF  EXISTENTS 

relational  theory  of  Physical  Space-Time ;  and  this 
certainly  seems  to  me  to  be  a  point  in  its  favour.  It  can 
start  with  the  sensible  spatio-temporal  relations  of  sensa 
in  the  same  sense-field  or  the  same  sense-history,  and 
thus  exemplify  the  general  notion  of  a  Space  or  a  Space- 
Time  of  interrelated  particulars.  Then,  by  considering 
the  correlations  between  sensa  in  different  sense-fields 
and  different  sense-histories,  and  by  taking  account  of 
the  connexion  of  these  with  the  movements  of  the 
observer's  body,  it  can  coM^izuct  in  thought  the  concept 
of  a  single  Physical  Space -Time.  This  Physical 
Space-Time  will  be  the  system  of  all  physical  events 
interrelated  in  the  same  kind  of  way  as  are  sensa  in  a 
single  sense-history.  The  relations  in  the  two  kinds  of 
whole  differ  in  detail,  but  there  is  enough  analogy 
between  them  to  justify  us  in  regarding  the  world  of 
physical  events  as  a  single  spatio-temporal  system 
having  a  certain  kind  of  "  geo-chronometry  ".  This  is 
the  justification  of  the  notion  of  Absolute  Space-Time  ; 
but  it  is  no  justification  for  treating  it  as  a  substantial 
matrix,  as  the  other  theories  have  to  do.  I  have  dealt 
with  the  details  of  this  synthesis  to  the  best  of  my 
ability  in  my  Scientific  Thought^  and  I  must  refer  the 
reader  to  the  Second  Part  of  that  book  for  such  justifica- 
tion as  I  can  give  for  the  above  dogmatic  statements. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  objection  that  the  Sensum 
Theory  makes  physical  objects  entirely  hypothetical, 
mere  Dinge-an-Sich.  I  shall  deal  directly  with  this 
question  in  the  next  section.  Here  I  shall  merely 
consider  whether  the  other  theories  are  much  less 
liable  to  the  same  objection.  I  cannot  see  that  they 
are.  I  profess  to  have  proved  earlier  in  this  chapter  [a) 
that,  even  if  there  had  been  no  delusive  perceptual 
situations,  it  is  certain  from  the  nature  of  the  case  that 
no  perceptual  situation  could  contain  literally  as  its 
objective  constituent  the  physical  object  which  we  are 
said  to  be  perceiving  in  that  situation,  (b)  That  the 
existence  of  totally  delusive  situations  shows  that  the 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER         191 

objective  constituent  cannot  always  be  even  a  spatio- 
temporal  part  of  the  physical  object  which  we  are  said 
to  be  perceiving.  Hence  even  this  modified  claim  can 
never  be  accepted  at  its  face-value,  since  it  is  made  as 
strongly  in  the  perceptual  situations  which  are  certainly 
delusive  as  in  those  which  are  not  known  to  be  so. 
{c)  That,  in  view  of  the  discrepancies  which  careful 
inspection  discovers  between  the  objective  constituents 
of  perceptual  situations  when  one  observer  is  said  to  be 
seeing  and  touching  the  same  object  or  when  several 
observers  are  said  to  be  seeing  the  same  object,  even 
this  modified  claim  cannot  be  true  except  on  the  very 
special  assumptions  of  the  Theory  of  Multiple  Inherence 
or  the  Theory  of  a  Multiple  Relation  of  Appearing. 
On  any  view,  then,  the  claims  of  the  individual  per- 
ce^ual  situation  to  reveal  a  certain  physical  object 
and  to  guarantee  its  existence  must  be  attenuated  to  a 
mere  shadow.  And,  when  we  come  to  consider  in  detail 
the  two  theories  which  are  able  to  admit  this  attenuated 
claim  at  all,  we  find  that  the  claim  must  be  pared  down 
still  more  ;  as  I  will  now  show. 

If  the  Theory  of  Multiple  Inherence  be  true,  all  that 
I  can  learn  from  a  single  perceptual  situation  is  that 
a  certain  external  region  of  Space,  which  may  or  may 
not  now  contain  relevant  physical  events  and  objects, 
is  at  present  pervaded  by  a  certain  sensible  quality 
and  informed  by  a  certain  sensible  form  from  the  place 
where  my  body  now  is.  If  I  want  to  get  any  further 
than  this;  to  know  whether  I  am  perceiving  a  "real 
object"  or  only  an  image;  to  know  what  spatial  and 
other  qualities  I  may  ascribe  to  it  in  itself  and  apart 
from  its  relation  to  my  organism  ;  I  must  do  this,  if 
at  all,  by  considering  the  objective  constituents  of  a 
number  of  different  perceptual  situations  belonging  to 
myself  and  to  others,  and  noting  the  relations  between 
them.  And  the  physical  object  which  I  then  "know", 
and  to  which  I  ascribe  these  intrinsic  characteristics, 
is  logically  (though  not  psychologically)  just  a  hypo- 


192    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

thetical  entity  postulated  to  explain  and  systematise 
these  correlations.  The  position  is  precisely  similar 
if  we  adopt  the  Theory  of  a  Multiple  Relation  of 
Appearing.  All  that  I  can  learn  from  a  single  per- 
ceptual situation  is  that  a  certain  surface,  which  seems 
to  be  a  spatio-temporal  part  of  a  physical  object,  seems 
to  have  such  and  such  a  shape,  position  and  sensible 
quality.  If  I  want  to  know  whether  it  is  part  of  a 
physical  object ;  or  what  kind  of  physical  object  this 
is  ;  or  what  shape,  position  and  intrinsic  qualities  it 
actually  has ;  I  must  do  this,  if  at  all,  by  the  same 
method  of  comparison  and  correlation  as  on  the 
Multiple  Inherence  Theory.  The  physical  object  which 
I  am  said  to  "perceive",  and  the  properties  which  I 
ascribe  to  it,  are  again  logically  (though  not  psycho- 
logically) in  the  position  of  hypothetically  postulated 
entities. 

It  is  of  course  open  to  the  supporter  of  the  Multiple 
Inherence  Theory  to  assert  that  there  may  be  one 
specially  favourable  position  {e.g.^  when  one  is  ''  look- 
ing straight  down  on  a  penny  from  the  distance  of 
most  distinct  vision  ")  in  which  the  geometrical  shape 
and  the  intrinsic  colour  of  the  penny  are  directly 
revealed,  instead  of  the  colour  which  it  has  from  a 
place  and  the  sensible  form  which  inheres  in  it  from 
a  place.  And  it  is  open  to  the  supporter  of  the  Theory 
of  a  Multiple  Relation  of  Appearing  to  assert  that  there 
may  be  one  specially  favourable  position  in  which  the 
qualities  which  a  physical  object  has^  and  not  merely 
those  which  it  seems  to  have,  are  revealed  directly  to 
the  percipient.  On  such  assertions  I  have  the  follow- 
ing comments  to  make,  (i)  They  are  in  the  highest 
degree  unlikely.  We  are  asked  to  believe  that  in 
one  special  position  the  physical,  physiological,  and 
psychical  mechanism  produces  an  utterly  different  result 
from  that  which  it  produces  in  all  other  positions,  no 
matter  how  close  to  this  specially  favoured  one.  (ii) 
There  is  nothing  in  the  nature  of  any  perceptual  situa- 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        193 

tion,  taken  by  itself,  to  reveal  to  us  that  it  differs  in 
this  remarkable  way  from  all  the  rest.  The  unique 
perceptual  situation,  if  such  there  be,  does  not  come 
visibly  "  trailing  clouds  of  glory  behind  it".  It  would 
have  to  be  discovered  to  have  this  property  by  com- 
paring it  and  its  objective  constituent  with  other  per- 
ceptual situations  and  theirs,  (iii)  It  is  just  as  possible, 
logically,  for  the  Sensum  Theory  to  make  this  pre- 
posterous claim  as  for  the  other  two  theories.  It  might 
assert  that,  from  one  specially  favourable  position,  the 
objective  constituent  is  literally  a  part  of  the  physical 
object,  and  that  the  qualities  which  we  detect  in  it  are 
literally  those  of  the  physical  object ;  whilst,  in  all  other 
situations,  the  objective  constituent  is  a  mere  sensum. 
I  think  I  may  fairly  conclude  that  the  objection  that 
on  the  Sensum  Theory  the  perceived  physical  object 
becomes  a  mere  Ding-an-Sich  applies  with  almost  equal 
force,  if  it  applies  at  all,  to  the  other  theories. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  objection  that  the  Sensum 
Theory  involves  a  very  odd  kind  of  causation,  which 
is  almost  creation  of  particulars  out  of  nothing.  I  will 
first  show  that  the  other  theories  also  involve  very  odd 
kinds  of  causation.  The  Theory  of  Multiple  Inherence 
involves  instantaneous  action  at  a  distance.  When  a 
certain  process  goes  on  in  my  brain  and  nervous  system 
a  certain  remote  region  of  Space  becomes  pervaded  by 
a  certain  colour  from  where  I  am.  So  far  as  we  know 
this  is  an  instantaneous  process.  The  date  of  pervasion 
is  identical  with  the  date  of  the  events  in  my  brain  and 
nervous  system,  though  the  pervaded  place  may  be 
millions  of  miles  from  the  region  of  projection.  And 
nothing  that  may  be  physically  occupying  the  inter- 
vening space  is  relevant  to  this  process  of  pervasion  ; 
so  that  we  cannot  compare  this  action  at  a  distance 
with  pushing  a  distant  body  and  making  it  move  in- 
stantaneously by  means  of  a  rigid  rod.  There  is  in 
fact,  so  far  as  I  know,  no  analogy  elsewhere  to  the  kind 
of  causation  which  the  Theory  of  Multiple  Inherence 


194    MIND'S  KNOWLEDGE  OF  EXISTENTS 

has  to  postulate.  I  do  not  make  this  an  objection  to 
the  theory  ;  but  I  do  say  that  it  is  in  no  position  to  cast 
stones  at  the  Sensum  Theory  for  having  to  postulate 
an  odd  kind  of  causation.  Exactly  the  same  remarks 
apply,  mutatis  mutandis^  to  the  Theory  of  a  Multiple 
Relation  of  Appearing.  Here  processes  in  the  brain 
and  nervous  system  instantaneously  cause  certain 
qualities  to  seem  to  inhere  in  places  where  they  do 
not  in  fact  inhere ;  or  else  they  make  one  distant 
particular  seem  to  be  two  distant  particulars. 

I  will  now  consider  more  directly  the  special  objection 
to  the  Sensum  Theory  on  the  grounds  of  the  peculiar 
kind  of  causation  which  it  involves.  The  objection  is 
that,  if  the  Sensum  Theory  be  true,  physical  and  physio- 
logical processes  cveate  certain  particular  existents,  viz., 
sensa,  which  do  not  form  parts  of  the  history  of  any 
physical  object.  Now  it  is  said  that  we  can  understand 
that  a  process  in  one  substance  may  cause  a  certain 
quality  to  characterise  the  next  phase  in  the  history 
of  an  already  existing  substance  ;  but  we  cannot  under- 
stand the  kind  of  creation  of  particulars  which  the 
Sensum  Theory  requires.  To  this  I  answer  (i)  that 
there  are  certain  forms  of  the  Sensum  Theory  which 
do  not  involve  this  creative  kind  of  causation  but  only 
a  selective  kind.  According  to  some  theories  physical 
objects  consist  of  groups  of  sensa,  and  a  physical  object 
is  perceived  when  a  certain  sensum  of  a  certain  group 
becomes  the  objective  constituent  of  a  perceptual  situa- 
tion. On  this  type  of  theory  the  function  of  the 
physical,  physiological,  and  psychical  mechanism  of 
perception  is  not  to  create  sensa,  but  merely  to  select 
from  a  group  of  pre-existing  sensa  a  certain  one  and 
to  make  it  the  objective  constituent  of  a  certain  per- 
ceptual situation.  I  cannot,  however,  lay  much  stress 
on  this  answer,  because  I  do  not  think  that  a  purely 
selective  form  of  the  Sensum  Theory  is  plausible  in 
view  of  all  the  facts.  I  have  explained  my  reasons 
for  this  in  my  Scientific   Thought^   and  will    not  repeat 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        195 

them  here,  (ii)  The  more  direct  answer  to  the  present 
objection  is  the  following.  A  sensum  is  not  something 
that  exists  in  isolation  ;  it  is  a  differentiated  part  of  a 
bigger  and  more  enduring  whole,  viz.,  of  a  sense-field 
which  is  itself  a  mere  cross-section  of  a  sense-history. 
Suppose,  e.g.,  that  I  am  aware  of  a  red  flash.  This  is 
a  differentiation  of  my  total  visual  field  at  the  moment ; 
and  my  total  visual  field  at  the  moment  joins  up  with 
and  continues  my  earlier  visual  fields,  forming  together 
with  them  my  visual  sense-history.  The  sense-history 
is  a  continuant ;  a  kind  of  substance,  though  not  a 
physical  substance.  And  the  new  sensum  is  not  an 
isolated  particular,  but  an  occurrent  in  this  peculiar 
kind  of  continuant.  Thus  the  causation  involved  in  the 
Sensum  Theory,  though  very  different  from  physical 
causation,  is  not  the  sudden  creation  of  a  perfectly 
isolated  and  loose  particular  out  of  nothing.  It  is,  to 
say  the  least  of  it,  no  odder  than  the  causation  involved 
in  the  other  two  theories. 

The  upshot  of  this  discussion  seems  to  me  to  be  that, 
on  the  whole,  there  are  no  greater  objections  tothT 
Sensum  Theory  than  to  the  other  theories,  and  that 
the  offieF^theories  have  no  positive  advantages  over 
the  Sensum  Theory  when  carefully  considered.  And,  | 
as  the  Sensum  Theory  does  not  require  to  assume  ■ 
Absolute  Space-Time  as  a  pre-existing  matrix,  whilst 
the  other  theories  apparently  do,  the  balance  of  advant- 
age seems  to  be  slightly  on  the  side  of  the  Sensum 
Theory.  It  remains  now  to  ask:  "How  much  of  the 
common-sense  notion  of  a  physical  object  can  we  keep  ; 
and  with  what  degree  of  confidence  can  we  believe  that 
there  are  things  which  answer  to  the  various  parts  of 
the  common-sense  notion  of  a  physical  object?" 

In  what  Sense  can  we  accept  Physical  Objects  ?     If  we  .»  -j^ 

consider  the  common-sense  notion  of  a  physical  object  '1*^ 

we  can  divide  it  into  four  logically  independent  parts, 
(i)  It  is  supposed  to  be  more  permanent  than  the  per- 
ceptual situation.     The  latter  is  held  to  be  transitory 


196     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

as  compared  with  the  former,  (ii)  It  is  supposed  to  be 
public  to  a  number  of  observers,  and  to  be  capable  of 
exhibiting  different  aspects  of  itself  to  different  senses 
of  the  same  observer,  (iii)  It  is  supposed  to  be  literally 
extended  in  Space,  having  a  bounding  surface  of  a 
certain  geometrical  size  and  shape,  and  standing  in 
straightforward  spatial  relations  to  other  physical  objects, 
(iv)  The  objective  constituents  of  the  tactual  and  visual 
situations  in  which  it  is  said  to  be  perceived  are  held 
to  be  literally  parts  of  its  surface.  We  have  seen  reason 
to  reject  (iv).  The  first  two  are  accepted  by  nearly 
every  one.  The  average  scientist  who  thinks  about  the 
matter  accepts  the  first  three  and  is  in  an  inextricable 
muddle  about  the  fourth.  Berkeley,  Leibniz,  and  Russell 
accept  the  first  two  and  reject  the  rest.  It  is  therefore 
reasonable  to  think  that  there  is  better  evidence  for  (i) 
and  (ii)  than  for  (iii)  and  (iv)  ;  or  at  any  rate  that  there 
is  less  to  be  said  against  the  first  pair  than  against  the 
last  pair. 

The  evidence  for  (i)  is  of  the  following  kind.  For 
long  periods  of  time  whenever  I  look  in  a  certain 
direction  I  am  aware  of  very  much  the  same  kind  of 
objective  constituent,  e.g.^  a  visual  appearance  of  my 
table.  Now  merely  looking  in  this  direction  from  this 
place  is  not  a  sufficient  condition  for  this  kind  of  objective 
constituent  to  appear.  For  sometimes  {e.g.^  when  my 
room  is  being  spring-cleaned)  I  may  look  in  this 
direction  with  quite  different  results.  On  the  other 
hand,  looking  in  this  direction  from  this  place  is  a 
necessary  condition,  over  long  periods  of  time,  for 
this  objective  constituent  to  appear  to  me.  Now  the 
point  to  notice  is  that  I  can  fulfil  this  condition  at  quite 
arbitrary  intervals,  and  that  whenever  I  do  so  during  a 
long  stretch  of  time  I  am  aware  of  the  same  kind  of 
objective  constituent.  The  natural  interpretation  of 
such  facts  is  that  there  is  another  and  relatively  per- 
manent necessary  condition  on  which  all  these  arbitrarily 
initiated   perceptual   situations    depend,    and   that  this 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        197 

determines  the  likeness  between  their  objective  con- 
stituents. This  conclusion  is  supported  by  three  other 
sets  of  facts. 

(a)  When  I  am  not  in  my  room  other  people  may  be. 
And  they  tell  me  that  they  have  had  visual  experiences 
very  much  like  those  which  I  have  when  I  am  in  the 
room  and  looking  in  the  right  direction.  This  supports 
the  view  that  there  is  a  relatively  permanent  necessary 
condition,  which  is  independent  of  my  presence. 

(i?)  I  have  continually  certain  kinds  of  experiences 
which  I  ascribe  to  my  own  body.  Now  other  people 
tell  me  that  my  body  appears  to  them  in  exactly  the 
same  way  as  any  other  physical  object.  And  I  have  no 
reason  to  doubt  this,  because  I  know  that  their  bodies 
appear  to  me  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  other  physical 
objects.  I  know  from  internal  sensation  that  my  body 
continues  to  exist  when  other  people  are  not  seeing  or 
touching  it ;  and  I  am  told  by  other  people  that  they 
have  the  same  kind  of  evidence  for  the  continued  exist- 
ence of  t/iei'r  bodies  when  /  am  not  seeing  or  touching 
them.  I  have  not  this  kind  'of  direct  evidence  about 
chairs  and  tables  ;  but  the  analogies  in  other  respects 
between  them  and  human  bodies  make  it  reasonable 
for  me  to  treat  them  in  the  same  way.  That  is,  they  \ 
support  the  view  that  something  which  is  capable  of 
producing  a  perceptual  situation  with  a  characteristic 
kind  of  objective  constituent  persists,  even  when  no  ^ 
such  situation  is  actually  being  produced,  because  the 
other  necessary  conditions  are  not  being  fulfilled. 

(<r)  If  I  look  for  some  time  in  a  certain  direction,  e.g.^ 
"  at  my  fire  ",  as  we  say,  I  often  find  a  slow  and  steady 
change  in  the  objective  constituents  of  the  successive 
visual  situations.  If  I  go  out  of  the  room,  and,  on 
returning  after  some  time,  look  again  in  the  same 
direction  from  the  same  place,  I  shall  again  be  aware 
of  an  objective  constituent  which  in  the  main  resembles 
those  of  which  I  was  aware  before.  But  there  will  be 
certain  differences  ;   and  in  general  the  differences  are 


198     MIND'S  KNOWLEDGE  OF  EXISTENTS 

such  as  would  have  been  produced  by  a  steady  con- 
tinuation of  that  process  of  change  which  I  observed 
while  I  was  formerly  in  the  room.  Nothing  that  I  can 
detect  in  myself  during  the  interval  accounts  for  the 
difference  between  the  last  objective  constituent  before 
I  went  out  and  the  first  objective  constituent  after  I 
again  came  in.  So  the  natural  interpretation  is  that 
the  original  series  of  objective  constituents  depended  in 
part  on  a  process  outside  my  body,  and  that  this  process 
has  gone  on  further  during  my  absence. 

I  do  not  say  that  any  or  all  of  these  arguments 
amount  to  a  knock-down  proof  of  the  view  that  the 
objective  constituents  of  perceptual  situations  are,  in 
many  cases,  partly  dependent  on  something  outside 
the  percipient's  body  and  more  permanent  than  them- 
selves. But  I  do  think  that,  if  it  be  granted  that  this 
hypothesis  has  any  finite  initial  probability,  such  facts 
and  arguments  do  give  it  a  very  high  final  probability. 
And  practically  all  philosophers  have  accepted  this 
much  of  the  common-sense  view. 

(ii)  The  second  part  of  the  common-sense  view  is 
that  these  relatively  permanent  and  necessary,  but  not 
sufficient,  conditions  of  perceptual  situations  are  neutral 
as  between  different  percipients.  If  this  merely  means 
that  one  and  the  same  set  of  permanent  conditions 
may  co-operate  with  other  conditions  which  vary  from 
observer  to  observer,  and  may  produce  perceptual 
situations  with  correlated  objective  constituents,  this  is 
also  highly  likely.  There  are  groups  of  contemporary 
perceptual  situations  whose  objective  constituents  are 
so  related  to  each  other  that  they  are  all  said  to  refer  to 
the  same  external  object.  If  we  take  the  case  of  a 
number  of  observers  who  are  said  to  be  seeing  the  top 
of  the  same  penny,  we  find  the  following  correlations. 
All  the  observers  are  looking  in  such  directions  that, 
if  they  moved  along  them,  they  would  run  into  each 
other  at  the  same  place.  In  the  middle  of  each  of  their 
visual  fields  there  is  an  outstanding  patch.     All  these 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER         199 

patches  appear  to  have  some  shade  of  brown  ;  they 
appear  to  be  of  different  sizes  and  to  have  different 
sensible  depths  in  their  respective  fields.  They  appear 
to  have  various  shapes,  but  all  these  shapes  are  pro- 
jections of  a  circle.  All  the  observers  will  be  able  to 
become  aware  of  correlated  tactual  objective  constituents, 
if  they  walk  up  to  the  place  at  which  their  lines  of  sight 
intersect.  And,  as  they  walk  in  these  directions,  each 
will  pass  through  a  series  of  visual  situations  ;  the  total 
objective  constituent  of  each  situation  will  be  a  coloured 
field  with  a  brown  patch  in  the  middle  of  it ;  the  shapes 
of  these  patches  will  all  be  projections  of  a  circle  ;  and 
the  successive  patches  of  each  series  will  be  of  diminish- 
ing sensible  depth  in  their  respective  visual  fields,  and 
of  increasing  sensible  size  and  clearness. 

It  is  hard  to  resist  the  conviction  that  such  groups  of 
correlated  perceptual  situations  depend  on  two  factors. 
One  is  a  relatively  permanent  condition,  independent 
of  the  observers  and  their  bodies.  The  other  is  a 
condition  which  varies  from  observer  to  observer  and 
appears  as  the  position  and  orientation  of  the  per- 
cipient's body.  Moreover,  the  factor  in  these  perceptual 
situations  which  seems  to  be  specially  closely  correlated 
with  this  common  independent  condition  is  the  out- 
standing patch  which  is  at  the  middle  of  each  visual 
field.  Suppose  that  all  the  observers  stand  and  face  as 
before,  and  that  "the  penny  is  replaced  by  a  tennis- 
ball  ",  as  we  say.  Then  there  will  be  a  simultaneous 
change  in  the  outstanding  central  objective  constituent 
of  all  these  visual  situations.  Thus  it  seems  reasonable 
to  accept  the  second  part  of  the  common-sense  view. 
It  is  reasonable  to  hold  that  the  objective  constituent  in 
a  perceptual  situation  is  in  many  cases  determined  by 
two  sets  of  conditions.  One  is  specially  bound  up  with 
the  percipient  and  his  body  ;  the  other  is  independent 
of  percipients  and  their  bodies.  Either  can  vary  without 
the  other.  Variations  of  the  latter  involve  correlated 
variations  in  a  certain  part  of  the  objective  constituents 


200     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

of  a  whole  group  of  perceptual  situations  belonging  to 
different  observers.  Variations  in  the  former  affect  only 
the  objective  constituents  of  the  perceptual  situations  of 
a  single  observer.  When  many  people  are  said  to 
"perceive  the  same  object"  we  have  a  group  of  per- 
ceptual situations  determined  jointly  by  a  common 
independent  condition  and  by  other  conditions  which 
vary  from  one  observer  to  another.  If  this  hypothesis 
starts  with  a  finite  initial  probability,  the  facts  surely 
give  it  a  high  final  probability. 

(iii)  It  remains  to  consider  how  far  the  facts  make  for 
or  against  the  third  part  of  the  common-sense  view  ; 
viz.,  that  these  relatively  permanent  and  neutral  con- 
ditions of  groups  of  correlated  perceptual  situations  are 
literally  extended,  having  geometrical  shapes  and  sizes, 
and  having  spatial  relations  to  other  things  of  the  same 
kind.  Up  to  the  present  all  that  has  been  established 
is  equally  compatible  with  the  primitive  beliefs  of 
common-sense,  with  the  theories  of  Descartes  and  the 
natural  scientists,  and  with  the  speculations  of  Berkeley, 
of  Leibniz,  or  of  Mr  Russell.  For  each  of  these  parties 
admits  that  such  groups  of  perceptual  situations  are 
jointly  dependent  on  a  condition,  which  is  relatively 
permanent  and  neutral  between  the  percipients,  and  a 
variable  condition  which  is  specially  connected  with 
each  percipient.  For  common-sense  this  neutral  and 
relatively  permanent  condition  is  an  extended  physical 
object,  of  which  the  objective  constituents  are  literally 
spatio-temporal  parts  ;  the  variable  conditions  simply 
determine  which  part  shall  be  the  objective  constituent 
of  a  particular  perceptual  situation.  For  Mr  Russell 
the  neutral  and  relatively  permanent  condition  is  a 
whole  group  of  correlated  sensa  ;  and  the  variable  con- 
ditions simply  determine  which  member  of  a  certain 
group  shall  be  the  objective  constituent  of  a  certain 
perceptual  situation.  These  two  views  thus  agree  in 
making  the  variable  conditions  purely  selective;  every- 
thing that  could  become  an  objective  constituent  of  a 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        201 

perceptual  situation  exists  already,  and  the  variable 
conditions  simply  select  a  certain  part  or  a  certain 
member  from  this  pre-existing  whole  and  make  it  the 
objective  constituent  of  a  certain  perceptual  situation. 

The  Cartesian,  the  Leibnitian,  and  the  Berkeleian 
theories  may  be  called  creative ;  for,  as  usually  stated, 
they  assume  that  the  objective  constituents  do  not  exist 
out  of  the  perceptual  situations.  They  assume  that, 
when  both  sets  of  conditions  are  fulfilled,  a  sensum  of 
a  certain  kind  arises  in  a  certain  place  in  a  certain 
sense-field ;  but  that,  when  the  variable  conditions 
specially  connected  with  the  observer  are  not  fulfilled, 
no  sensum  of  this  kind  exists.  And  of  course,  on  every 
theory  except  that  of  Descartes  and  the  scientists,  the 
relatively  permanent  neutral  conditions  of  groups  of 
interconnected  perceptual  situations  are  extremely  un- 
like physical  objects,  as  conceived  by  common-sense. 
One  cannot  say,  in  any  literal  sense,  that  God's  habits 
of  volition,  or  a  colony  of  unintelligent  monads,  or  a 
group  of  interrelated  sensa,  have  geometrical  shape, 
size,  or  position. 

Now  I  have  argued  that  we  can  never  be  sure  that  the 
objective  constituents  of  perceptual  situations  are  liter- 
ally parts  of  physical  objects,  as  conceived  by  common- 
sense  ;  and  that  we  can  be  practically  certain  that  they 
are  not  in  most  cases.  The  question  then  is:  ''Does 
there  remain  any  reason  for  accepting  the  third  proposi- 
tion of  the  common-sense  view  of  physical  objects  when 
we  have  rejected  the  fourth  proposition  of  this  view?" 
Descartes,  Locke,  and  the  scientists  do  reject  the  fourth 
and  accept  the  third.  The  question  is  whether  this 
is  reasonable.  Certain  general  arguments  have  been 
brought  against  the  reality  of  spatial  qualities  and 
relations.  If  these  were  valid  nothing  could  literally 
have  shape,  size,  or  position.  It  would  follow  that 
nothing  like  the  common-sense  view  of  physical  objects 
could  possibly  be  true.  But,  in  the  first  place,  all  these 
arguments  seem  to  me  to  be  plainly  fallacious.  Secondly, 


^ 


202     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

if  they  be  valid  at  all,  they  must  apply,  not  only  to  the 
supposed  persistent  and  neutral  conditions  of  perceptual 
situations,  but  also  to  the  objective  constituents  of  these 
situations  themselves.  If  there  be  some  internal  contra- 
diction in  the  very  notion  of  spatial  qualities  and  rela- 
tions it  will  be  as  impossible  for  the  objective  constituents 
of  perceptual  situations  to  have  these  qualities  or  to 
stand  in  these  relations  as  for  anything  else  to  do  so. 
Now  the  objective  constituents  of  visual  and  tactual 
situations  certainly  seem  on  careful  inspection  to  have 
shapes  and  sizes,  and  to  stand  in  spatial  relations  to 
other  contents  of  the  same  sense-field.  Thus  anyone 
who  accepts  these  general  arguments  against  the  reality 
of  spatial  qualities  and  relations  must  be  prepared  to 
hold  that  we  are  mistaken,  and  enormously  mistaken, 
about  the  objective  constituents  of  our  perceptual  situa- 
tions as  well  as  about  their  neutral  and  persistent  co7idi- 
tions.  It  is  not  merely  a  mistake  about  details,  as  it 
would  be  if  something  which  was  really  round  seemed 
to  be  elliptical ;  it  would  be  a  mistake  about  a  funda- 
mental determinable  characteristic  which  seems  to 
belong  to  the  objective  constituents  of  all  visual  and 
tactual  situations.  As  I  have  said,  the  arguments 
against  the  reality  of  spatial  characteristics  seem  to 
me  plainly  fallacious  ;  but,  if  I  could  see  nothing 
wrong  with  them,  I  should  still  venture  to  think  it 
much  more  likely  that  an  argument  is  invalid,  though 
it  seems  to  me  sound,  than  that  the  objective  con- 
stituents of  visual  and  tactual  situations  are  unextended, 
though  they  seem  to  have  shapes,  sizes  and  positions. 
For  I  know  from  sad  experience  that  I  can  be  taken 
in  by  plausible  but  fallacious  arguments,  whilst  I  have 
no  reason  to  think  that  the  objective  constituents  of  my 
tactual  and  visual  situations  could  seem  to  have  shapes, 
sizes,  and  positions  if  they  were  really  unextended.  It 
seems  to  me  then  to  be  practically  certain  that  the. 
objective  constituents  of  certain  perceptual  situations 
do  have  spatial  characteristics.     It  is  therefore  possible 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        203 

that  their  persistent  and   neutral  conditions   may  also 
have    these    characteristics..     The    only    question     is    '*^ 
whether   there   is   any   positive   ground    for    believing      ; 
that  they  do  in  fact  have  them. 

The  only  way  to  answer  such  a  question  is  to  study 
carefully  and  in  detail  the  nature  of  objective  con- 
stituents and  their  correlations.  In  the  notion  of 
Physical  Space  we  must  distinguish  two  factors : — 
(a)  the  general  conception  of  a  Spatial  whole  having 
contents  of  various  shapes  and  sizes  at  various  places  in 
it ;  and  {d)  the  special  character  and  contents  which  are  V'YV  'y'-> 
ascribed  to  Physical  Space.     I  have  no  doubt  that  the     \  /*' 

general  conception  of  a  spatial  whole  springs  from  our 
acquaintance  with  visual  fields.  Here  we  do  have  an 
extended  whole  of  simultaneous  parts ;  these  parts, 
viz.,  variously  coloured  outstanding  patches,  do  visibly 
have  various  shapes  and  sizes,  and  do  visibly  occupy 
various  positions  within  the  whole  field.  The  visual  field 
then  is  a  spatial  whole  with  which  we  are  acquainted  in 
sense-perception,  and  it  is  the  on/y  spatial  whole  of 
any  importance  with  which  we  are  acquainted.  The  j  / 
physical  world,  as  a  spatial  whole,  is  conceived  on  the  ! 
analogy  of  the  visual  field.  Bodies  are  analogous  to 
outstanding  coloured  patches.  They  are  conceived  to 
have  shapes  and  sizes,  as  these  patches  visibly  do  have 
them  ;  to  occupy  various  positions  in  Physical  Space, 
as  these  patches  visibly  occupy  various  positions  in  the 
visual  field  ;  and  to  be  capable  of  moving  about  within 
Physical  Space,  as  some  of  these  patches  visibly  do  move 
about  within  the  visual  field. 

Given  the  general  conception  of  a  spatial  whole,  v 
many  alternative  theories  about  its  detailed  structure 
and  contents  are  possible.  Our  beliefs  about  the  de- 
tailed structure  and  contents  of  Physical  Space  are 
based  on  experiences  of  sight,  touch,  and  movement, 
and  on  the  very  complicated  correlations  which  these 
are  found  to  have  with  each  other.  Experiences  of 
movement  are  interpreted  spatially  by  analogy  with  the 


r 


^ 


204     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

visual  field  and  the  visible  movements  of  coloured 
patches  within  it,  and  by  means  of  the  correlations 
between  the  former  and  the  latter.  Conversely,  the 
general  conception  of  Physical  Space,  which  is  based 
on  our  acquaintance  with  visual  fields,  is  filled  out  and 
specified  in  detail  by  our  experiences  of  movement. 
The  hypothesis  that  what  appears  to  us  as  external 
objects  and  what  appears  to  us  as  our  own  bodies  are 
extended  and  stand  in  spatial  relations,  in  the  sense 
explained  above,  accounts  for  the  correlations  between 
objective  constituents  of  perceptual  situations  and  for 
their  variations  as  we  move  about.  And  it  is  difficult 
to  see  that  any  alternative  hypothesis  which  does  not 
logically  reduce  to  this  one  will  account  for  such  facts. 
About  the  minuter  details  of  the  physical  spatio-temporal 
order  there  is  room  for  much  diversity  of  opinion  and 
for  much  future  modification  and  refinement,  as  the 
facts  adduced  by  the  Theory  of  Relativity  show.  But 
this  much  seems  to  me  to  be  practically  certain,  viz., 
that  the  nature  and  relations  of  the  persistent  and  neutral 
conditions  of  sensa  must  be  interpreted  by  analogy  with 
visual  sensa  and  their  relations  in  the  visual  sense-field  ; 
and  that  they  cannot  be  interpreted  by  analogy  with 
thoughts  or  volitions  and  their  relations  within  a  mind 
(as  Berkeley  held),  or  with  the  relations  of  minds  within 
a  society  (which,  to  put  it  very  crudely,  was  Leibniz's 
view). 

Thus,  with  suitable  interpretations,  I  accept  the  first 
three  clauses  of  the  common-sense  belief  about  physical 
objects.  The  fourth  clause  I  have  to  reject,  for  reasons 
which  I  have  tried  to  make  plain  in  the  earlier  part  of 
this  Chapter. 

The  Status  of  so-called  ^^  Secondary  Qualities  ^\  It  is 
of  course  part  of  the  common-sense  view  that  physical 
objects  literally  have  colours,  temperatures,  etc.  This 
is  a  logical  consequence  of  the  view  that  the  objective 
constituents  of  perceptual  situations  literally  have  the 
sensible   qualities   which   they   seem    on    inspection   to 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        205 

have,  and  that  these  objective  constituents  are  literally 
parts  of  the  surfaces  of  those  physical  objects  which 
we  are  said  to  be  perceiving.  If  we  drop  the  fourth 
clause  of  the  common-sense  belief  it  still  remains  possid/e 
that  the  neutral  and  persistent  conditions  of  perceptual 
situations  literally  have  some  colour  and  so7ne  tempera- 
ture. And  the  colour  and  temperature  might  be  identical 
with  those  of  the  objective  constituent  of  one  specially 
favoured  perceptual  situation.  Is  there  any  positive 
reason  to  believe  that  this  is  in  fact  true?  I  do  not 
think  that  there  is.  It  does  not  seem  to  be  possible 
to  account  for  the  correlated  variations  in  the  shapes 
and  sizes  of  visual  sensa  without  assigning  quasi-spatial 
qualities  and  relations  to  the  permanent  conditions  of 
these  variable  appearances  and  to  the  things  which 
manifest  themselves  to  us  by  bodily  feelings.  But, 
so  far  as  I  can  see,  it  is  neither  necessary  nor  useful 
to  ascribe  to  these  permanent  conditions  anything 
analogous  to  the  colour  and  the  temperature  which 
we  find  in  sensa.  It  has  been  found  more  expedient 
to  correlate  the  colours  and  temperatures  of  sensa  with 
certain  kinds  of  motion  of  certain  kinds  of  microscopic 
parts  of  their  permanent  conditions.  It  is  practically 
certain  that  the  independently  necessary  and  sufficient 
conditions  of  the  colour  and  temperature  of  the  objective 
constituent  of  a  given  perceptual  situation  are  events 
within  the  observer's  own  body  ;  i.e.^  within  that  rela- 
tively permanent  object  which  is  manifested  to  himself 
by  a  mass  of  bodily  feeling,  and  to  others  through 
certain  characteristic  visual  and  tactual  sensa.  But,  in 
non-delusive  perceptual  situations,  these  bodily  events 
are  physically  determined  by  certain  motions  of  certain 
particles  in  an  emitting  region  ;  so  that  these  external 
physical  events  are  the  dependently  necessary  and  common 
conditions  of  the  colours  and  temperatures  of  the  corre- 
lated sensa  of  a  whole  group  of  observers  who  are  said 
to  be  ''  perceiving  the  same  external  object".  Provided 
we  are  dealing  with  non-delusive  perceptual  situations 


/ 


0-.-    -         > 


206    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

and  with  normal  human  observers  whose  bodies  are  in 
a  healthy  state,  we  can  drop  the  independently  necessary 
conditions  out  of  account,  and  confine  our  attention  to 
these  dependently  necessary  and  common  external  con- 
ditions. This  of  course  is  what  the  physical  theories 
of  colour  and  temperature  do.  Naturally  such  theories 
are  incomplete,  since  they  presuppose  the  fulfilment  of 
conditions  which  are  not  always  fulfilled.  But,  when 
we  try  to  complete  them  we  have  to  do  so,  not  by 
ascribing  a  physical  colour  or  temperature  in  a  literal 
sense  to  the  external  conditions,  but  by  considering 
the  structure  and  processes  of  the  observer's  body. 
Thus,  whilst  it  is  not  impossible  that  physical  objects 
may  literally  have  colours  and  temperatures,  there  is 
not  the  slightest  reason  to  believe  that  they  do.  It  is 
of  course  quite  easy  to  define  a  Pickwickian  sense  in 
which  a  certain  physical  object  may  be  said  to  have  a 
certain  physical  colour.  I  have  already  done  this  in 
treating  the  Multiple  Inherence  Theory,  and  it  is  per- 
fectly easy  to  give  a  similar  definition,  mutatis  mutajidis, 
on  the  other  two  theories.  But  this  is  quite  a  different 
thing  from  saying  that  a  physical  object  literally  has 
a  certain  colour,  in  the  sense  in  which  the  objective 
constituents  of  visual  situations  have  colours. 

I  do  not  know  that  I  have  ever  seen  a  satisfactory 
definition  of  the  terms  ^'Primary"  and  "Secondary" 
Quality.  It  will  therefore  be  of  interest  to  try  to  give 
one.  I  suggest  the  following  definitions.  "A_Primary 
Quality  is  a  determinable  characteristic  which,  we  Have 
reason  to  believe,  inheres  literally  and  dyadically  in 
some  physical  object  in  some  determinate  form  or  other." 
''A  Secondary  Quality  is  a  determinable  characteristic 
which  certainly  inheres  or  seems  to  inhere  literally  and 
dyadically  in  the  objective  constituents  of  some  per- 
ceptual situations  in  some  determinate  form  or  other, 
but  which  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  inheres  literally 
and  dyadically  in  any  physical  object."  A  primary 
quality  may,  but  need  not,  inhere  literally  and  dyadic- 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        207 

ally  in  some  objective  constituent.  On  these  definitions, 
colour  and  temperature  are  secondary  qualities,  if  I  am 
right  about  their  status.  Shape,  size  and  position  are 
primary  qualities  which  inhere  literally  and  dyadically 
both  in  the  objective  constituents  of  perceptual  situations 
and  in  their  relatively  permanent  conditions.  Electric 
charge,  magnetic  properties,  and  so  on,  are  primary 
qualities  which  inhere  literally  and  dyadically  in  physical 
objects,  but  do  not  (so  far  as  we  know)  inhere  in  the 
objective  constituent  of  any  perceptual  situation. 

Before  ending  this  section  it  will  be  interesting  to  see 
just  where  Locke  and  Berkeley  were  respectively  right 
and  wrong,  on  our  view,  about  primary  and  secondary 
qualities.  Berkeley  was  right  against  Locke  when  he 
said  that  nothing  could  possibly  be  -merely  extended  and 
movable.  (Though  Locke,  to  do  him  justice,  never 
maintained  anything  so  silly  as  the  proposition  which 
Berkeley  refutes.)  This  may  be  expressed  by  saying 
that,  if  spatio-temporal  characteristics  be  primary,  they 
cannot  be  the  only  primary  characteristics.  Whatever  is 
extended  must  have  some  other  characteristic,  which  is 
capable  of  covering  an  area  or  filling  a  volume  as  colour 
and  temperature  do  in  sensa.  But  Berkeley  was  wrong 
in  thinking  that  this  ''extensible  characteristic",  as  I 
will  call  it,  must  be  colour  or  temperature  or  some  other 
quality  which  literally  and  dyadically  inheres  in  sensa. 
It  might  be  mass  or  electric  charge.  Again,  Berkeley 
was  right  in  so  far  as  he  held  that  there  is  just  as  good 
reason  to  deny  that  the  determinate  shapes  and  sizes 
of  sensa  inhere  literally  in  some  permanent  object, 
which  we  are  said  to  be  "seeing",  as  to  deny  that  the 
determinate  colours  or  temperatures  of  sensa  literally 
inhere  in  such  objects.  But  Locke  was  right  in  so  far 
as  he  held  that  there  is  positive  reason  to  hold  that  the 
determinable  characteristic  of  extension  inheres  literally 
and  dyadically  in  physical  objects  as  well  as  in  sensa, 
whilst  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  determin- 
able characteristics   of  colour  and   temperature   inhere 


2o8    MIND'S  KNOWLEDGE  OF  EXISTENTS 

literally  and  dyadically  in  anything  but  sensa.  And 
so  Locke  was  right  in  thinking  that  we  can  and  must 
distinguish  between  primary  and  secondary  qualities, 
and  he  was  right  in  assigning  extension  and  motion  to 
the  former  class,  and  colour  and  temperature  to  the 
latter.  Both  these  great  men  were  thus  expressing  im- 
portant truths ;  but  they  both  expressed  them  imperfectly, 
because  they  failed  to  notice  certain  important  distinc- 
tions which  we,  who  have  the  advantage  of  standing  on 
their  shoulders,  are  able  to  see. 

The  Subjective  Factors  in  Perceptual  Situations.  I 
have  been  considering  the  belief,  which  forms  an 
essential  factor  in  every  perceptual  situation  and  con- 
stitutes its  external  reference,  from  a  logical  and  episte- 
mological  and  not  from  a  psychological  point  of  view. 
By  this  I  mean  that  I  have  been  concerned  with  the 
propositions  believed  and  not  with  the  act  of  believing 
them.  I  have  tried  to  state  clearly  what  these  pro- 
positions are  ;  to  consider  which  of  them  are  certainly 
false  and  which  of  them  are  possibly  true  ;  and  to  ad- 
duce and  appraise  the  evidence  which  can  be  submitted 
in  favour  of  the  latter.  I  propose  to  end  this  chapter 
by  an  attempt  at  further  psychological  analysis  of  the 
perceptual  situation.  The  remarks  which  I  shall  now 
make  are  to  be  regarded  as  a  continuation  of  the  analysis 
which  was  begun  and  carried  a  certain  length  in  the 
sub-section  on  External  Reference.  I  there  warned  the 
reader  of  the  following  points,  (i)  That  the  belief 
which  constitutes  the  external  reference  of  a  perceptual 
situation  is  not  in  fact  reached  by  inference,  even  if  it 
can  be  defended  by  inference  on  later  reflection,  (ii) 
That,  psychologically,  it  can  only  be  called  a  ''belief" 
by  courtesy.  We  can  only  say  that  a  man  in  a  per- 
ceptual situation  acts,  adjusts  his  body,  and  feels  certain 
emotions ;  and  that  these  actions,  adjustments,  and 
emotions  are  such  as  would  be  reasonable  if  he  were 
explicitly  making  such  and  such  judgments,  which  he 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        209 

does  not  in  fact  make  as  a  rule  at  the  time.  The  bodily 
adjustment  itself  is  of  course  no  part  of  the  subjective 
factor  in  the  perceptual  situation  ;  but  it  is  impossible 
to  make  these  adjustments  or  to  start  to  perform  these 
actions  without  producing  certain  characteristic  modifi- 
cations of  bodily  feeling.  These  modifications  of  bodily 
feeling  and  these  emotions  are  an  essential  part  of  the 
subjective  side  of  every  perceptual  situation.  We  have 
now  to  see  whether  we  can  carry  the  analysis  any 
further. 

A  reflective  observer,  considering  one  of  his  own 
perceptual  situations  after  it  has  ceased,  or  considering 
a  contemporary  perceptual  situation  in  which  he  is 
not  personally  concerned,  would  probably  propose  the 
following  analysis  for  it.  (i)  An  objective  constituent, 
having  certain  sensible  qualities  and  forming  a  differ- 
entiated part  of  a  wider  sense-field,  (ii)  A  subjective 
constituent,  consisting  of  a  mass  of  bodily  feeling, 
emotion,  etc.  (iii)  The  fact  that  this  objective  con- 
stituent is  intuitively  apprehended  by  the  percipient, 
(iv)  The  fact  that  the  percipient,  who  intuitively  ap- 
prehends the  objective  constituent  and  who  feels  the 
emotions  and  bodily  feelings,  has  certain  non-inferential 
beliefs  about  the  objective  constituent  which  go  beyond 
anything  that  is  intuitively  apprehended  in  the  situation. 
I  believe  this  analysis  to  be  substantially  correct,  though 
the  fourth  factor  in  it  is  expressed  in  terms  which  do 
not  strictly  apply  to  anything  so  primitive  as  the  per- 
ceptual situation  but  are  borrowed  from  higher  cognitive 
levels.  I  have  already  discussed  the  first  factor  ad 
nauseam^  and  I  have  already  given  my  reasons  for 
wishing  to  modify  the  statement  of  the  fourth.  What 
I  want  to  do  now  is  to  explain  what  I  suppose  to  be 
involved  in  the  intuitive  apprehension  of  the  objective 
constituent  and  in  the  quasi-belief  about  it.  I  think 
that  the  two  are  probably  very  closely  connected. 

The    Intuitive  Apprehension    of   Sensa.       It    is    quite 
certain    that    there    is   a    difference    between    the    two 

O 


210     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

propositions:  "This  is  a  red  round  patch  in  a  visual 
field"  and  "This  red  round  patch  in  a  visual  field  is 
intuitively  apprehended  by  so-and-so".  Even  if  as  a 
matter  of  fact  there  are  no  such  objects  which  are  not 
intuitively  apprehended  by  someone,  it  seems  to  me  to 
be  perfectly  certain  that  it  is  logically  possible  that  there 
might  have  been.  {I  have  argued  earlier  in  the  chapter 
that  it  is  also  causally  possible,  but  it  is  not  necessary 
for  our  present  purpose  that  this  should  be  so.)  Since 
it  is  logically  possible  that  the  same  sensum  should 
sometimes  be  intuitively  apprehended  and  sometimes 
not,  or  that  it  should  sometimes  be  intuitively  ap- 
prehended by  A  and  not  by  B  and  at  other  times  by  B 
and  not  by  A,  it  seems  plain  that  the  characteristic 
of  being  '"intuitively  apprehended"  is  a  relational 
characteristic  ;  i.e.^  that  it  consists  in  the  establishment 
of  a  certain  asymmetrical  relation  R  between  the  sensum 
and  somethihg  else.  The  question  is:  "What  is  this 
relation,  and  what  is  this  something  else  ?  "  A  theory 
has  been  put  forward  by  the  persons  who  call  themselves 
"New  Realists",  which  would  provide  a  simple 
answer  to  this  question  if  it  could  be  accepted.  It  has 
also  been  suggested  by  Mr  Russell,  and  is  therefore 
worth  a  degree  of  attention  which  it  might  not  otherwise 
have  deserved. 

So  far  as  I  can  understand  the  theory  it  comes 
roughly  to  this.  All  the  visual  sensa  of  which  it  would 
be  true  to  say  that  A  intuitively  apprehends  them 
belong  to  a  certain  visual  field.  And  of  all  sensa 
which  belong  to  this  visual  field  it  would  be  true  to  say 
that  A  intuitively  apprehends  them.  Hence  the  two 
properties  of  "being  intuitively  apprehended  by  A" 
and  "belonging  to  a  certain  visual  field"  are  logically 
equivalent.  Moreover,  the  relation  of  a  sensum  to  a 
sense-field  is  asymmetrical.  It  is  then  suggested  that 
really  we  have  not  two  different  though  logically 
equivalent  properties,  but  a  single  property  with  two 
different  names.     To  say  that  "  The  visual  sensum  s  is 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        211 

intuitively  apprehended  by  A  "  means  the  same  as  to 
say  that  "The  visual  sensum  s  belongs  to  a  certain 
visual  field  /a."  If  this  were  true,  the  ''something 
else"  to  which  a  sensum  is  related  when  it  is  intuitively 
apprehended  would  be  a  certain  sense-field  ;  and  the 
asymmetrical  relation  of  being  intuitively  apprehended 
would  be  that  of  a  part  of  a  sense-field  to  the  sense-field 
as  a  whole. 

It  seems  to  me  perfectly  certain  that  this  theory  is 
false,  {a)  No  one  would  admit  that  a  sensum  which 
was  part  of  a  sense  -  field  which  is  not  intuitively 
apprehended  would  itself  be  intuitively  apprehended. 
Hence  we  can  hold  that  "to  be  intuitively  apprehended  " 
and  "to  belong  to  a  sense-field"  mean  the  same  only  if 
we  admit  that  it  is  logically  impossible  for  there  to  be  a 
sense-field  which  is  not  intuitively  apprehended.  Now 
it  is  quite  plain  that  there  is  no  more  logical  impossi- 
bility in  the  existence  of  an  unapprehended  sense-field 
than  in  the  existence  of  a  single  sensum  which  is  not 
intuitively  apprehended.  Hence  "to  be  intuitively 
apprehended"  and  "to  belong  to  a  sense-field  "  ^ti^wzc^ 
mean  the  same,  {b)  A  visual  sensum,  a  tactual  sensum, 
and  an  auditory  sensum  may  all  be  intuitively  ap- 
prehended by  the  same  person  at  the  same  time.  They 
certainly  do  not  all  form  parts  of  any  one  sense-field. 
Hence,  to  be  intuitively  apprehended  by  a  certain 
person  cannot  be  the  same  as  to  form  part  of  a  certain 
sense-field.  Still,  it  is  no  doubt  true  that  there  is  some 
relation  between  those  sensa  which  would  be  said  to  be 
intuitively  apprehended  by  the  same  person,  which  does 
not  hold  between  sensa  which  would  not  be  said  to  be 
intuitively  apprehended  by  the  same  person.  Might  it 
not  be  suggested  then  that  the  theory  is  right  in  outline, 
though  incorrect  as  originally  stated?  We  may  admit 
that  "to  be  intuitively  apprehended"  is  fiot  the  same  as 
"to  be  united  with  certain  other  sensa  so  as  to  form 
with  them  a  certain  sense-field "  ;  but  might  we  not 
suggest  that  it  is  the  same  as  "to  be  united  with  certain 


212     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

other  sensa  by  a  certain  relation  R"?  R  might  be  a 
quite  unique  relation,  incapable  of  further  analysis  or 
definition  ;  but  it  would  have  to  have  the  following 
properties,  (i)  It  must  be  logically  possible  for  a  set 
of  sensa  which  are  not  all  parts  of  a  single  sense-field  to 
be  related  to  each  other  by  the  relation  R.  (2)  R  must 
be  such  that  two  sensa,  each  of  which  is  related  by  R  to 
some  other  sensa,  need  not  be  related  by  R  to  each  other. 
For  there  are  sensa  which  are  intuitively  apprehended 
by  A  and  not  by  B,  and  there  are  sensa  which  are 
intuitively  apprehended  by  B  and  not  by  A.  The 
modified  theory  then  comes  to  this.  There  is  a  certain 
relation  R  which  binds  certain  sensa  together  into 
mutually  exclusive  groups.  To  be  intuitively  appre- 
hended means  to  be  a  member  of  some  group  of  sensa 
bound  together  by  the  relation  R.  Let  us  consider 
this  theory  in  its  modified  form. 

So  long  as  the  theory  is  content  to  regard  the  relation 
R  as  absolutely  unique  and  peculiar  I  do  not  think 
that  it  can  be  positively  refuted.  The  moment  it 
attempts  to  identify  R  with  some  familiar  relation,  such 
as  compresence  in  a  sense-field  or  a  direct  relation  of 
simultaneity,  it  is  plainly  false.  It  is  obviously  logically 
possible,  e.g.^  that  a*  set  of  sensa  should  be  directly 
simultaneous  with  each  other  and  yet  that  none  of  them 
should  be  intuitively  apprehended.  But,  although  I 
cannot  refute  the  theory  so  long  as  it  is  willing  to  take 
R  as  absolutely  unique  and  peculiar,  I  think  I  can 
prove  that  it  fails  to  account  for  a  certain  obvious  fact  so 
well  as  alternative  theories,  and  that  the  motives  which 
led  to  it  are  connected  with  an  erroneous  belief.  This  I 
will  now  try  to  show. 

{a)  If  the  theory  be  a  complete  account  of  the  facts, 
the  unity  of  a  set  of  sensa  which  are  all  intuitively 
apprehended  by  a  certain  person  is  wholly  a  "  unity  of 
system  "  and  not  a"  unity  of  centre  ".  I  shall  have  to 
consider  these  two  types  of  unity  in  greater  detail  when 
I    consider  the   unity  of  the   Self.     At  present  I  will 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        213 

content  myself  with  saying  that  a  family  of  brothers 
and  sisters  is  an  example  of  a  unity^  of  centre.  The 
relations  which  they  have  to  each  other  ^e  due  to  the 
fact  that  they  all  stand  in  a  common  relation  to  some- 
thing (viz.,  their  parents)  which  is  not  itself  a  member 
of  the  set.  The  points  on  a  straight  line  constitute  a 
pure  unity  of  system  ;  they  are  just  directly  related  to 
each  other  by  the  relation  of  "between",  and  this 
relation  does  not  depend  in  any  way  on  their  all  being 
related  by  some  common  relation  to  something  which  is 
not  a  member  of  the  set.  Now  it  is  perfectly  certain 
that  we  all  believe,  to  start  with,  that  the  unity  of  a  set 
of  sensa  which  are  all  intuitively  apprehended  by  the 
same  person  is  a  unity  of  centre  and  not  a  pure  unity 
of  system.  That  this  is  so  is  proved  conclusively  by 
language,  and  by  the  extreme  air  of  paradox  which  the 
opposite  view  continues  to  present  even  when  we  admit 
that  it  is  logically  possible.  It  is  certainly  a  fact  then 
that,  z/"the  unity  of  a  set  of  sensa  intuitively  apprehended 
by  the  same  person  be  in  fact  a  pure  unity  of  system,  it 
nevertheless  appears,  and  goes  on  appearing,  to  be  a 
unity  of  centre.  This  fact  must  be  recognised  and 
accounted  for  on  any  adequate  theory  of  the  subject. 
Now  my  objection  to  the  theory  under  discussion  is  that 
it  utterly  fails  to  account  for  this  appearance.  We  must 
remember  that  every  unity  of  centre  is  also  a  unity  of 
system.  If  ;r,  y,  and  s  all  stand  in  a  certain  unique 
relation  S  to  a  certain  term  t  there  will  be  an  unique, 
though  derivative,  relation  between  x,  j/,  and  z.  For 
X  will  have  to  j/  the  relation  R  of  "  being  both  of  them 
terms  which  stand  in  the  relation  S  to  ^ ".  And, 
since  S  is  unique,  R  will  be  unique.  Thus  it  is  quite 
possible  that  what  is  in  fact  a  unity  of  centre  might 
appear  to  be  a  pure  unity  of  system,  especially  if  the 
"  centre  "  t  were  such  that  it  is  hard  to  detect  and  easy 
to  overlook.  But  there  is  no  reason  whatever  why  what 
is  in  fact  a  pure  unity  of  system  should  appear  to  be  a 
unity  of  centre.     Hence  it  seems  to  me  that  the  theory 


214    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

under  discussion  is  quite  incompetent  to  explain  a  most 
striking  and  perfectly  indubitable  fact.  I  should  there- 
fore consider  it  absurd  to  accept  such  a  theory  unless 
there  were  insuperable  objections  to  the  alternatives  or 
great  advantages  in  itself.  These  claims  would  be 
made  for  the  present  theory  ;  but  I  believe  that  they 
have  no  justification,  as  I  will  now  try  to  show. 

{&)  The  objection  which  supporters  of  this  theory 
make  to  the  opposite  view  is  that  the  latter  involves  a 
"Pure  Ego"  to  be  the  "  centre  "  which  generates  the 
unity.  And  it  is  supposed  that  a  "Pure  Ego"  is  so 
disreputable  that  no  decent  philosopher  would  allow 
such  a  thing  in  his  mind  if  he  could  possibly  help  it. 
I  shall  have  to  deal  with  the  alleged  indecency  of  the 
Pure  Ego  in  a  later  chapter  ;  here  I  will  merely  say 
that  the  objection  is  quite  irrelevant  because  there  is  no 
need  whatever  for  the  unifying  centre  to  be  a  Pure  Ego. 
It  might  be,  and  I  believe  is,  a  mass  of  bodily  feeling. 
Of  course,  later  on,  questions  must  be  raised  about  the 
"ownership"  of  this  mass  of  feeling;  and  then  we 
might  find  that  the  Pure  Ego  Theory  explained  the 
facts  better  than  any  other.  But,  so  long  as  we  are 
merely  concerned  with  the  intuitive  apprehension  of 
sensa,  it  is  perfectly  ridiculous  to  try  to  frighten  us  into 
the  theory  under  discussion  by  threatening  us  with  the 
Pure  Ego  as  a  kind  of  bogey  which  can  be  exorcised 
only  by  a  course  of  "  New  Realism  ". 

(c)  I  think  that  the  advantage  which  is  claimed  for 
the  theory  is  that  it  is  "naturalistic".  This,  I  think, 
means  roughly  that  it  claims  to  be  able  to  deal  with 
mind  without  introducing  any  new  and  unique  entities 
or  relations.  I  have  already  shown  that  the  opposite 
theory  has  no  immediate  need  of  any  very  mysterious 
special  entity,  such  as  a  Pure  Ego.  There  should  be 
nothing  very  trying,  even  to  the  most  sensitively  natural- 
istic mind,  in  a  mass  of  bodily  feeling.  And  I  claim 
also  to  have  shown  that  the  theory  cannot  dispense 
with  an  unique  kind  of  relation.      If  you  identify  the 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        215 

relation  R  with  any  familiar  relation  it  is  perfectly 
obvious  that  "to  be  intuitively  apprehended  "  does  not 
mean  "  to  be  a  member  of  a  group  of  sensa  interrelated 
by  R  ".  On  the  whole,  then,  it  seems  to  me  that  there 
are  grave  objections  to  the  theory  under  discussion  and 
no  advantages  to  outweigh  them.  I  therefore  reject  it, 
and  accept  the  common-sense  view  that  when  a  visual, 
tactual,  or  auditory  sensum  is  intuitively  apprehended 
it  stands  in_an  unique  kind  of  relation  to  something 
wKiclTlsnot  an  auditory,  tactual,  or  visual  sensum.  / 
And  I  believe  this  "something"  to  be  the  mass  ! 
of  general  bodily  feeling  of  the  percipient  at  the 
time. 

The  quasi-Belief  about  the  Sensum.  I  am  inclined  to 
think  that  the  quasi-belief  about  the  objective  con- 
stituent, which  is  the  fourth  distinguishable  feature  in 
a  perceptual  situation,  consists  in  the  fact  that  certain 
specific  bodily  feelings  (connected  with  the  automatic 
adjustment  of  the  body),  certain  emotions,  and  certain 
feelings  of  expectation,  are  related  in  an  unique  way  to 
the  apprehended  sensum.  These  are  causally  dependent 
on  the  traces  left  by  past  experience.  When  a  sensum 
of  a  specific  kind  is  intuitively  apprehended  certain 
traces  are  excited  ;  these  arouse  certain  emotions  and 
induce  certain  bodily  adjustments  which  are  accom- 
panied by  specific  bodily  feelings.  They  may  in 
addition  call  up  certain  images  ;  and,  even  if  they  do 
not  do  this,  they  may  evoke  a  more  or  less  vague  feeling 
of  "familiarity".  These  "  mnemic  consequences"  of 
the  apprehension  of  the  sensum  do  not  just  coexist 
with  it ;  they  immediately  enter  into  a  specific  kind  of 
relation  to  it,  which  I  do  not  know  how  to  analyse 
further.  And  these  "mnemic  consequences"  in  this  |+ 
specific  relation  to  this  intuitively  apprehended  sensum  44^ 
constitute  the  quasi-belief  about  the  sensum,  which  gives  Y 
the  situation  its  specific  External  Reference.  Any 
situation  constructed  of  such  materials  in  such  relations, 
ipso  facto,  has  such  and  such  an  External  Reference.    This 


^^ 


2i6    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

is  the  best  analysis  that  I  can  offer  at  present  of  the 
typical  perceptual  situation. 

It  raises  one  interesting  question.  Can  there  be  pure 
sensation  without  perception  ?  Let  us  see  exactly  what 
this  means  on  our  theory.  A  pure  sensation  would  be 
a  situation  in  which  a  certain  sensum,  e.g.^  a  noise  or 
a  coloured  patch,  was  intuitively  apprehended,  but  in 
which  there  was  no  external  reference.  Now,  on  our 
theory,  we  should  expect  perception  to  melt  into  pure 
sensation  by  insensible  degrees  ;  we  should  expect  the 
latter  to  be  an  ideal  limit  rather  than  an  observable 
fact ;  and  we  should  expect  it  to  be  unstable  and 
transitory,  if  it  happens  at  all.  If  the  mass  of  feeling 
be  highly  differentiated  and  certain  specific  parts  of  it 
be  specifically  related  to  a  certain  sensum,  we  shall  have 
a  clear  case  of  a  perceptual  situation  with  a  definite 
external  reference.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  mass  of 
feeling  be  little  differentiated,  and  the  apprehension  of 
the  sensum  fails  to  excite  traces  which  cause  specific 
modifications  in  the  mass,  we  shall  have  a  situation 
which  approximates  to  pure  sensation,  since  its  external 
reference  will  be  very  vague.  And  the  same  result 
would  happen,  even  if  the  mass  of  feeling  were  differ- 
entiated in  the  way  suggested,  provided  that  for  some 
reason  the  differentiated  parts  failed  to  enter  into  the 
proper  relation  to  the  apprehended  sensum.  It  seems 
to  me  that  when  we  are  looking  at  something  with 
interest  our  awareness  of  the  sensa  towards  the  edge  of 
the  visual  field  approximates  to  pure  sensation  for  the 
first  reason.  And,  perhaps,  when  we  are  looking  for 
something  and  discover  afterwards  that  it  was  staring 
us  in  the  face  all  the  time,  our  awareness  of  the  sensa 
connected  with  it  approximates  to  pure  sensation  from 
the  second  cause. 

The  Categorial  Factor  in  Sense-Perception.  One  more 
point  remains  to  be  raised.  I  have  said  that,  when  the 
quasi-belief  which  is  an  essential  factor  in  all  perceptual 
situations  is  formulated   in   abstract  terms,    it  may   be 


SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER        217 


summed  up  in  certain  propositions  which  I  have  stated 
and  criticised.  I  rejected  the  fourth  of  these,  and 
defended  the  first  three  by  an  inverse-probability 
argument.  But,  as  a  matter  of  psychology,  I  asserted 
that  the  belief  in  them  was  not  in  fact  reached  in  this 
way.  And,  as  a  matter  of  logic,  I  asserted  that  the 
argument  gives  them  a  high  final  probability  only 
if  they  start  with  a  finite  initial  probability.  Here  then 
are  certain  propositions  such  that  every  one  acts  as  if 
he  believed  them,  and  inevitably  goes  on  acting  as  if 
he  believed  them,  no  matter  what  theoretical  doubts  he 
may  feel  about  them  while  he  is  reflecting  on  them.  It 
is  certain  that  they  do  not  appear  self-evident  on  re- 
flexion ;  that  they  cannot  be  deduced  by  self-evident 
steps  from  premises  which  are  self-evident ;  and  that 
they  cannot  be  defended  by  probable  reasoning  except 
on  the  assumption  that  they  have  a  finite  initial  prob- 
ability. I  call  such  a  set  of  propositions  a  set  of 
"Postulates".  Between  them  they  **  define  "  a  certain 
general  concept,  viz.  the  notion  of  a  Physical  Object. 
For  a  physical  object  just  is  something  that  answers  to 
these  postulates.  A  general  concept  which  is  defined 
in  this  way  by  a  set  of  postulates  such  as  I  have  been 
describing,  I  call  a  ''Category".  From  the  very 
nature  of  the  case  the  notion  of  "Physical  Object" 
cannot  have  been  derived  by  abstraction  from  observed 
instances  of  it,  as  the  notion  of  "red"  no  doubt  has 
been.  For  the  objective  constituents  of  perceptual 
situations  are  not  instances  of  this  concept ;  and  it  is 
only  in  virtue  of  these  postulates  that  we  can  hold  that 
they  are  "parts  of"  or  "manifestations  of"  instances 
of  this  concept.  The  concept  is  not  "got  out  of" 
experience  until  it  has  been  "  put  into  "  experience.  It 
is  best  described  as  an  innate  principle  of  interpretation 
which  we  apply  to  the  data  of  sense-perception.  At 
the  purely  perceptual  level  "to  apply  the  principle" 
simply  means  to  act  and  to  feel  as  it  would  be  reason- 
able to  act  and  feel  if  we  explicitly  recognised  it  and 


2i8     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

interpreted  the  data  of  sense  in  accordance  with  it.  It 
is  only  at  the  reflective  level  that  we  can  state  in  abstract 
terms  the  implications  of  what  we  have  all  been  doing 
all  our  lives. 

^  Summary  and  Conclusions.      In  this  chapter  I  have 

'yi/^  been    concerned    with    two    very    difficult    questions : 

"What  may  we  believe  about  our  own  bodies  and 
about  the  external  world?"  and  "  What  is  the  mind 
really  doing  when  it  is  said  to  be  perceiving  a  material 
object?"  On  the  first  point  I  have  reached  the  following 
tentative  conclusions,  (i)  We  may  believe  that  there  are 
relatively  permanent  objects  which  literally  have  shape, 
size,  and  position  ;  which  stand  in  literal  spatial  and 
temporal  relations  to  each  other  ;  and  which  literally 
move  about  in  Space.  (2)  We  may  believe  that  some 
of  them  are  animated  by  minds  ;  and  that  any  one  of 
them  which  is  animated  by  a  mind  manifests  itself  to 
that  mind  in  a  peculiar  way,  viz.,  by  organic  sensations. 
Nothing  manifests  itself  in  this  way  except  to  the 
mind,  if  there  be  one,  which  animates  it.  (3)  We  may 
believe  that  physical  objects,  whether  animated  or  not, 
manifest  themselves  in  a  variety  of  ways  to  minds  which 
do  not  animate  them.  And  we  may  believe  that  a 
-7  single  physical  object  may  manifest  Jtself  at  the  same 

time  in  the  same  or  in  different  ways  to  a  number  of 
minds  animating  bodies  in  various  places.  (4)  We  may 
believe  that,  by  comparison  of  the  objective  constituents 
of  various  perceptual  situations  and  by  reflexion  on 
their  correlations,  we  can  determine  with  high  proba- 
bility the  shape,  size,  and  position  of  the  physical 
\y^  object  which   manifests  itself  in  this   situation.      And 

with  somewhat  less  certainty  we  can  determine  im- 
portant facts  about  its  microscopic  structure  and  the 
movements  of  its  microscopic  parts.  (5)  We  must 
believe  that  a  physical  object  has  other  properties  beside 
its  purely  spatio-temporal  ones.  It  must  have  at  least 
one  quality  which  is  capable  of  literally  covering  an 


^       SENSE-PERCEPTION   AND   MATTER         219 

area  or  filling  a  volume  ;  and  it  may  have  many  such. 
(6)  We  may  not  believe  that  the  objective  constituents 
of  perceptual  situations  are  literally  spatio-temporal 
parts  of  the  physical  objects  which  we  are  said  to  be 
perceiving  in  those  situations  ;  or  that  in  general  they 
have  the  same  determinate  spatial  characteristics  as  the 
sensa  by  which  they  manifest  themselves.  (7)  We  have 
no  reason  to  believe  that  physical  objects  have  the  same 
determ'inad/e  sensible  qualities  as  the  sensa  by  which 
they  manifest  themselves.  (8)  We  may  not  believe  that 
the  shape,  size,  spatial  position,  date,  or  sensible 
qualities  of  a  sensum  by  which  a  certain  physical 
object  manifests  itself  are  directly  determined  by  this 
physical  object  or  by  processes  in  it.  On  the  contrary 
the  independently  necessary  and  sufficient  conditions  of 
all  these  characteristics  of  the  sensum  are  within  the 
region  occupied  by  the  percipient's  body.  At  best  the 
external  physical  object  and  the  processes  in  it  are 
remote  and  dependently  necessary  conditions  of  the 
sensum  and  its  characteristics.  (9)  We  have,  therefore, 
to  recognise  a  peculiar  kind  of  Jrans-pjiysical  causation, 
according  to  which  the  occurrence  of  certain  events  in  a 
certain  brain  and  nervous  system  determines  the  occur- 
rence of  a  sensum  with  such  and  such  a  shape,  size, 
position,  and  sensible  quality,  in  a  certain  sense-field 
of  a  certain  sense-history.  (10)  We  have  to  admit 
that  certain  characteristics  of  certain  sensa  are  probably  / 

not  completely   determined    by   physical   and    physio-  >-. 

logical  events  in  the  body  of  the  percipient ;  but  are  in      J^Ja  T--" 
part  determined,  either  directly  or  indirectly  by  events 
in  the  mind  which  animates  this  body. 

On  the  second  point  I  have  reached  the  following 
tentative  conclusions.  (i)  The  perceptual  situation 
contains  two  constituents,  one  objective  and  the  other 
subjective.  (2)  The  objective  constituent  is  a  sense- 
field  with  a  certain  outstanding  sensum.  (3)  The 
subjective  constituent  is  a  mass  of  bodily  feeling, 
together     with     certain     specific     emotions,     muscular 


220    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

sensations,  feelings  of  familiarity,  images,  etc.  (4)  The 
latter  are  produced  through  the  excitement  of  certain 
traces  by  the  apprehension  of  the  sensum.  (5)  The 
sensum  is  apprehended  by  entering  into  a  certain 
specific  relation  with  the  general  mass  of  bodily  feeling. 
(6)  The  situation  has  a  certain  specific  external  reference 
in  virtue  of  a  certain  specific  relation  between  the 
apprehended  sensum  and  its  "mnemic  consequences" 
in  the  way  of  feeling,  etc.  (7)  It  seems  likely  that  pure 
sensation  is  an  ideal  limit,  which  is  approached  as  the 
external  reference  grows  vaguer  and  vaguer,  rather  than 
an  observable  fact.  (8)  The  notion  of  Physical  Object 
cv^  cannot  have  been  abstracted  from  the  data  of  sense.     It 

is  a  Category,  and  is  defined  by  Postulates. 


CHAPTER    V 

Memory 

The  word  "  memory  "  is  highly  ambiguous,  even  when 
it  is  not  being  used  in  admittedly  paradoxical  and  un- 
common senses,  as  when  people  talk  of  ''racial"  or 
"ancestral"  memory.  I  call  such  uses  of  the  word 
paradoxical  because  even  those  persons  who  hold  that 
in  performing  an  instinctive  action  we  are  "remember- 
ing "  similar  actions  which  were  performed  deliberately 
by  our  remote  ancestors  would  have  to  admit  that,  in 
the  ordinary  sense  of  "remembering",  we  certainly  do 
not  remember  the  actions  or  thoughts  of  our  ancestors. 
Even  apart  from  these  odd  senses  of  "  memory"  it  is 
quite  certain  that  the  word  covers  a  number  of  very 
different  acts.  We  talk  of  remembering  a  set  of 
nonsense-syllables ;  of  remembering  a  poem  ;  of  re- 
membering a  proposition  in  Euclid,  though  we  have 
forgotten  the  words  in  which  it  was  expressed  when 
we  originally  learnt  it ;  of  remembering  past  events  ; 
and  of  remembering  people,  places,  and  things.  To 
remember  a  set  of  nonsense-syllables  is  merely  to  have 
acquired  the  power  of  repeating  them  at  will  ;  and 
remembering,  in  this  sense,  seems  to  be  no  more  an 
act  of  cognition  than  is  the  act  of  riding  a  bicycle  or  of 
swimming.  To  remember  a  proposition  of  Euclid  is 
no  doubt  to  perform  a  genuine  act  of  cognition  ;  and 
the  same  is  true  of  remembering  events,  persons,  and 
places.  But  the  first  kind  of  act  has  an  abstract  and 
timeless  object ;  whilst  the  second  has  a  concrete  par- 
ticular object  which  exists  in  time.  Presumably  then 
the  memory  of  propositions  is  something  quite  different 
from  the  memory  of  mere  sentences,  on  the  one  hand, 

221 


222     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

and  from  the  memory  of  events,  persons,  and  places, 
on  the  other.  This  of  course  is  quite  compatible  with 
the  view  that  there  may  be  intimate  relations  of  causal 
dependence  between  the  various  kinds  of  memory,  and 
that  there  may  be  something  common  and  peculiar  to 
them  all  in  virtue  of  which  they  are  all  called  "  memory  ". 
It  seems  plain  that  there  is  one  and  only  one  kind  of 
memory  which  can  plausibly  be  regarded  as  closely 
analogous  to  perception  ;  and  this  is  the  memory  of 
particular  events,  places,  persons,  or  things.  Let  us 
call  this  "Perceptual  Memory".  My  main  object  in 
this  chapter  is  to  discuss  perceptual  memory,  to  compare 
it  with  perception,  and  to  consider  some  of  the  epistemo- 
logical  problems  to  which  it  gives  rise.  At  the  end  of 
the  chapter  I  shall  say  something  about  the  other  senses 
in  which  the  word  "memory"  is  used,  and  shall  con- 
sider the  mutual  relations  and  the  common  features  (if 
any)  of  all  kinds  of  memory. 

Memory-Powers  and  Memory-Acts.  I  must  begin  by 
pointing  out  an  ambiguity  which  applies  equally  to  all 
kinds  of  memory  and  does  not  apply  to  perception.  If 
a  man  said  to  me:  "Do  you  see  Jones?"  and  I 
answered:  "Yes",  I  should  be  lying  unless  I  were 
actually  at  the  time  subject  of  a  visual  situation  whose 
objective  constituent  I  took  to  be  an  appearance  of 
Jones.  But,  if  he  said  to  me:  "Do  you  remember 
Jones?"  or  "  Do  you  remember  Euclid  i.  47?"  or  "  Do 
you  remember  the  first  line  of  the  ^neid'i^^  I  might 
quite  truly  answer  "Yes"  even  though  I  were  not  at 
the  time  performing  any  memory-act  at  all.  So  long  as 
I  believe  that  I  could  remember  these  things  if  I  tried  I 
should  be  justified  in  saying  that  I  do  remember  them. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  he  had  said  to  me:  "Are  you 
remembering  Jones?"  I  should  not  be  justified  in 
saying:  "Yes"  unless  I  were  at  the  time  actually  the 
subject  of  a  memory-situation  with  Jones  as  its  epistemo- 
logical  object. 


MEMORY  223 

The  point  may  be  put  shortly  as  follows.  "To 
remember"  is  an  ambiguous  word,  which  covers  both 
an  act  and  a  power.  When  I  say  that  I  remember  so- 
and-so  I  may  be  referring  either  to  the  power  or  to  a 
particular  present  exercise  of  the  power.  When  I  say 
that  I  am  remembering  so-and-so  I  am  understood  to 
be  referring  to  a  particular  present  exercise  of  the  power, 
and  not  merely  to  the  power  itself.  We  do  not  use  words 
like  "seeing"  and  "hearing"  in  this  ambiguous  way. 
Whether  I  say  that  I  see  so-and-so  or  that  I  am  seeing 
so-and-so  I  am  understood  to  be  referring  to  a  present 
act  of  perception,  and  not  to  a  mere  power  of  perceiv- 
ing. Thus,  in  discussing  memory  and  trying  to  com- 
pare it  with  perception,  I  must  be  understood  to  be 
talking  about  particular  acts  of  remembering  so-and-so, 
and  not  (unless  I  specially  say  so)  about  the  general 
power  of  remembering  so-and-so  at  will.  We  must 
distinguish  then  between  "  Memory-acts  "  and  "  Memory- 
powers  ",  and  we  shall  be  talking  about  the  former 
unless  we  explicitly  say  that  we  are  talking  about  the 
latter. 

Perceptual  Memory.  It  will  be  admitted  by  every- 
one that  such  phrases  as  "  I  remember  having  my  hair 
cut  last  week",  "I  remember  the  tie  which  my  friend 
wore  yesterday",  "  I  remember  the  feeling  which  I  had 
when  I  last  went  to  the  dentist",  and  "I  remember 
hearing  Mr  Russell  lecture",  all  stand  for  familiar 
cognitive  situations  which  do  arise  from  time  to  time. 
We  will  call  them  "Perceptual  Memory-Situations", 
or  in  the  present  section  simply  "  Memory-Situations". 
It  will  be  noticed  that  the  four  examples  which  I  have 
given  differ  from  each  other  in  the  nature  of  the  object 
which  we  profess  to  be  remembering.  In  the  first  we 
profess  to  be  remembering  an  event  of  the pkj/sz'cal  kind. 
In  the  second  we  profess  to  be  remembering  a  certain 
physical  thing.  In  the  third  we  profess  to  be  remember- 
ing a  past  feeling.     And  in  the  fourth  we  profess  to  be 


/( 


224     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

remembering  a  past  perceptual  situation.  Let  us  first 
consider  the  relation  between  memories  of  events  and 
memories  of  things. 

Memories  of  Events  and  of  Things.  We  have  a  like 
distinction  in  the  case  of  perception.  We  talk  of  seeing 
a  flash  of  lightning  and  of  hearing  a  clap  of  thunder  ; 
and  we  also  talk  of  seeing  a  cloud  and  hearing  a  bell. 
In  the  one  case  we  claim  to  be  perceiving  a  physical 
event,  in  the  other  a  physical  thing.  If  we  reflect  we 
see  that  the  two  kinds  of  perceptual  situation  are  very 
closely  connected.  When  we  say  that  we  are  perceiving 
a  certain  physical  event,  as  distinct  from  merely  having 
an  auditory  or  visual  sensation,  we  mean  that  we 
regard  the  sensum  which  we  are  sensing  as  either  a 
part  or  an  appearance  of  a  part  of  the  history  of  a 
certain  physical  thing.  On  the  other  hand,  when  we 
say  that  we  are  perceiving  a  certain  physical  thing,  we 
are  really  perceiving  a  physical  event  or  a  series  of 
them  and  regarding  them  as  parts  of  the  history  of  this 
physical  thing.  All  perceptual  situations  refer  beyond 
themselves  to  physical  things  ;  if  we  confine  ourselves 
to  saying  that  we  perceive  a  certain  physical  event  we 
simply  leave  the  further  reference  rather  more  vague 
than  when  we  say  that  we  perceive  a  certain  physical 
thing.  Now  the  same  is  true  of  perceptual  memory. 
I  say  that  I  remember  the  late  Master  of  Trinity,  and  I 
say  that  I  remember  dining  with  him.  But,  on  the  one 
hand,  I  remember  him  only  in  so  far  as  I  remember 
events  in  which  he  was  concerned.  And,  on  the  other 
hand,  when  I  remember  any  physical  event  I,  ipso  facto, 
remember  to  some  extent  the  thing  in  which  I  believe 
this  event  to  have  happened.  Thus  I  think  we  may 
say  that  to  remember  a  thing  or  person  simply  means 
to  remember  certain  past  events  and  to  regard  them  as 
incidents  in  the  history  of  that  thing  or  person.  We 
can,  and  very  often  do,  remember  things  which  still 
exist  and  which  we  are  now  perceiving.  I  both  perceive 
and   remember  the  chairs  in  my  room,   in   so  far  as  I 


\    |p?^<>jfc^        X— y. 


^,^  ^'-^ 


MEMORY  .  225 

perceive  certain  present  events  and   remember  certain 
past   events  and   regard    them    as  so    many  successive 
phases  in   the  history  of  my  chairs.     So  I  think  that 
the  fundamental  point  to  be  considered  in  dealing  with 
perceptual  memory  is  the  memory  of  events.     Memory 
of  things  depends  on  this,  and  no  principles  are  involved 
in  passing  from  the  memory  of  events  to  the  memory  of 
things  which   are   not  equally  involved  in  the  passage 
from    the    perception    of    events   to   the    perception    of 
things.     We  may  add  that  the  perception  of  things,  in 
so  far  as  it  involves  the  belief  that  the  event  which  I  am 
now  perceiving  is  the  present  phase  of  the  history  of  a 
certain  enduring  thing,   is  inextricably  bound  up  with 
memory  of  things  and  therefore  with  memory  of  events. 
Repetition  and  Perceptual  Memory.     It  has  sometimes 
been  held  that  a  criterion  by  which  we  can  distinguish 
Perceptual  Memory  from  mere  Habit  Memory,  such  as 
is   involved    in    repeating   a     poem    by    heart,    is    that 
Habit  Memory  depends  on  repetition  whilst  Perceptual 
Memory  from  the  nature  of  the  case  cannot  do  so.     This 
of  course  would  at  best  be  only  a  distinction  between 
the  conditions  under  which  the  two  kinds  of  memory- 
power    are    acquired  ;    it    would    not    be   a    distinction 
between  the  two  kinds  of  memory-^^/.     But  it  seems  to 
me  to  be  a  rather  inaccurate  statement ;    and   I   think 
that  those  who  have  made  it  have  failed  to  distinguish 
between   perceptual   memory  of  events  and  pierceptual 
memory  of  things.     It  will  be  worth  while  to  clear  up 
this   point   before    going  further.       In    the   first    place, 
repetition  is  not  essential,  though  it  is  helpful,  for  the 
establishment  of  a  habit-memory-power.     A  man,  like 
Lord  Macaulay,  with  a  very  quick  and  retentive  verbal 
memory,    may   be  able   to    repeat  sentences  or  sets  of 
nonsense-syllables  which   he  has   met  with  only   once. 
Secondly,  it  is  obvious  that  our  power  of  remembering 
a  person,  place,  or  thing  is  in  some  ways  improved  by 
repeatedly  perceiving  the  object  in  question.      It  will, 
therefore,  be  well  to  clear  up  this  question  of  the  relation 

p 


226     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

between  repetition  and  the  acquirement  of  memory- 
powers,  (i)  It  is  of  course  perfectly  true  that  the  power 
of  remembering  a  certain  definite  event  cannot  be  due 
to  repetition,  and  cannot  be  improved  by  repetition. 
For  a  definite  event  with  a  definite  date  cannot  be 
repeatedly  perceived,  although  other  events  very  much 
like  it  may  be  perceived  at  various  times.  (2)  But 
perceptual  memory-power  which  is  concerned  with 
people  or  things  is  improved  by  repetition  in  two  ways. 
(a)  It  is  improved  in  content  by  repetition  with  varia- 
tion. I  have  said  that  my  memory  of  a  thing  consists 
^l^Ct  ,'  of  my  memories  of  various  events  all  of  which  I  regard 
as  so  many  slices  of  the  history  of  this  thing.  Now  a 
thing  shows  different  sides  of  its  nature  by  being  placed 
in  different  kinds  of  situation.  I  can  remember  a  thing 
or  person  better  (in  the  sense  that  I  can  know  more 
facts  about  it  by  memory)  in  proportion  to  the  number 
of  events  of  different  kinds  in  which  I  have  perceived  it 
to  be  concerned.  And  the  same  thing  can  be  concerned 
in  a  large  number  of  events  of  very  different  kinds 
only  on  a  number  of  successive  occasions.  Hence  the 
power  of  adequately  remembering  a  thing  or  person 
does  need  repetition  for  its  establishment.  But  the 
repetition  which  is  needful  for  this  purpose  is  quite 
different  in  kind  from  that  which  is  helpful  in  establish- 
ing a  power  of  habit-memory.  In  the  former  case 
repetition  is  important  only  as  a  necessary  condition  for 
variation.  In  the  latter  case  what  is  wanted  is  pure 
repetition  with  as  little  variation  as  possible,  {b)  I 
think  that  it  is  also  true  that  pure  repetition  without 
variation  plays  a  part  in  the  establishment  and  improve- 
ment of  the  power  of  remembering  persons  and  things  ; 
for  I  think  that  an  element  of  habit-memory  is  involved 
in  perceptual  memory.  To  have  an  accurate  memory  of 
a  person  or  thing  it  is  useful,  if  not  essential,  to  be  able 
to  call  up  an  accurate  image.  Now  the  power  to  call  up 
an  image  is  just  a  habit,  like  the  acquired  power  to 
repeat  a  sentence  which  one  has  learnt  by  heart.     And 


MEMORY  227 

to  establish  this  power  repetition  with  as  little  variation 
as  possible  is  helpful.  The  perceptual  memory -act 
does  not  indeed  consist  in  calling  up  the  image  ;  but  the 
power  to  do  so  is  an  important  condition  of  an  accurate 
perceptual  memory.  As  this  power  is  established  and 
improved  by  bare  repetition,  such  repetition  is  so  far 
helpful  in  establishing  a  perceptual  memory-power. 

Nahire  of  Memory-Objects  and  of  Perception  Objects. 
If  the  reader  will  refer  back  to  the  examples  which  I 
gave  of  perceptual  memory-situations  he  will  see  that 
we  claim  to  remember,  not  only  physical  things  and 
events,  -but  also  feelings  and  perceptual  situations. 
We  claim  to  remember,  not  only  our  friend's  tie  and 
Mr  Russell's  lecture,  but  also  seeing  the  tie,  hearing 
the  lecture,  and  feeling  toothache.  Now  we  do  not 
claim  to  perceive  anything  but  physical  events  and 
objects.  I  do  not  think  that  we  ought  to  exaggerate 
this  difference  between  the  possible  objects  of  memory 
and  the  possible  objects  of  perception.  If  we  confine 
the  name  "perception"  to  j-^^^j^-perception,  it  is  true 
that  the  objects  of  memory  are  less  restricted  than  those 
of  perception.  But  perhaps  this  restriction  is  un- 
warranted. We  certainly  seem  to  have  some  kind  of 
intuitive  knowledge  of  contemporary  feelings  and  per- 
ceptual situations,  and  it  is  possible  that  we  ought  to 
regard  this  as  a  form  of  perception.  I  shall  deal  with 
this  question  in  the  next  chapter.  In  the  meanwhile 
we  must  recognise  that,  whilst  the  objects  of  memory 
are  certainly  less  restricted  than  those  of  sense-per- 
ception, they  may  coincide  with  those  of  perception  in 
the  wider  sense. 

It  is  one  of  the  characteristics  of  sense-perception 
that  the  objects  which  we  claim  to  perceive  are  public 
and  neutral.  When  we  remember  physical  things  and 
events  memory  claims  to  reveal  public  and  neutral 
objects  to  us.  A  number  of  people  can  remember  the 
same  man  or  the  same  flash  of  lightning.  When  we 
remember    feelings    or    perceptual    situations    memory 


^ 


7 


228     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

claims  only  to  reveal  private  and  personal  objects  to 
us.  It  might  be  argued  that  there  is  something  more 
private  and  personal  about  the  object  of  a  memory  even 
of  a  physical  thing  or  event  than  there  is  about  the 
object  of  a  perceptual  situation.  We  can  remember 
only  the  things  and  events  which  we  have  perceived, 
and  only  those  phases  of  the  past  history  of  things 
which  fell  under  our  notice.  I  think  that  this  does 
impose  a  restriction  on  the  range  of  memory  as  com- 
pared with  that  of  perception  ;  but  I  do  notthink  that 
it  introduces  any  special  privacy  into  the  objects  of 
memory.  I  can  remember  only  those  things  and  events 
which  I  have  perceived,  and  it  happens  to  be  true  that 
I  perceive  many  things  and  events  which  I  cannot 
remember.  But  it  is  also  true  that  I  can  perceive  only 
those  things  and  events  which  produce  sensations  in 
me,  and  that  many  things  do  in  fact  produce  sensations 
in  me  without  giving  rise  to  perceptions.  Xhis^re- 
striction  in  the  range  of  perception  does  not  make 
the  perceived  objects  essentially  private  in  character  ; 
similarly,  the  further  restriction  in  the  range  of  memory 
does  not  make  the  remembered  objects  essentially  private 
in  character.  In  each  case  the  class  of  objects  perceived 
or  remembered  is  determined  by  factors  which  are 
personal  to  the  experient ;  but  each  of  the  individual 
members  of  the  class  may  still  be  of  such  a  nature  that 
a  number  of  experients  could  perceive  or  remember  it. 

It  is  only  on  one  very  special  theory  about  memory 
that  it  could  be  maintained  that  there  is  something 
essentially  private  about  the  objects  even  of  memories 
of  physical  events  and  things.  It  might  be  suggested 
that,  when  we  say  that  we  remember  a  certain  physical 
thing  or  event,  what  we  primarily  remember  is  a  past 
perceptual  situation  of  which  we  were  the  subject  and 
the  event  was  the  epistemological  object.  E.g.^  it 
might  be  held  that,  when  I  say  that  I  remember  a 
certain  lecture  being  given  by  Mr  Russell,  I  primarily 
remember   the    perceptual  situation  of  myself  hearing 


MEMORY  229 

Mr  Russell  speaking  ;  and  that  my  belief  that  Mr 
Russell  did  speak  is  inferred  from  my  memory  of 
hearing  him  speak.  On  this  view  that  what  we 
primarily  remember  is  perceptual  situations  with  our- 
selves as  subjects,  and  that  our  memory-beliefs  about 
physical  events  and  objects  are  secondary  and  derivative, 
it  would  be  true  to  say  that  the  primary  epistemological 
objects  of  all  perceptual  memories  are  private  and 
personal  in  a  way  in  which  the  epistemological  objects 
of  perceptual  situations  are  not.  A  milder  view  would 
be  that,  although  my  memory-judgments  about  physical 
events  and  things  are  not  derived  ivova  a  more  primitive 
memory  of  myself  perceiving  these  objects,  yet,  in  fact, 
the  former  kind  of  memory-situation  does  not  and 
cannot  exist  without  the  latter.  On  this  milder  view 
the  total  epistemological  object  of  any  memory  situation 
would  be  complex  ;  and,  since  one  part  of  it  would 
always  be  a  past  perceptual  situation  with  myself  as 
subject,  it  would  be  true  that  there  is  something  private 
and  personal  in  the  epistemological  object  of  every 
memory-situation  even  when  there  is  also  something 
public  and  neutral.  I  shall  have  to  discuss  these  two 
views  a  little  later,  when  I  try  to  analyse  the  typical 
perceptual  memory-situation. 

In   the  meanwhile  there  is  one  other  remark  to  be 
made  before  leaving  this  part  of  the  subject.     \Ye  shall 
find    that   it   is    necessary  to   distinguish    between    the        %| 
objective    constituent    of   a    memory-situation    and    its  .^       ^ 
epistemological  object,  just  as  we  have  had  to  do  in  the    Iv 
case  of  perceptual  situations.      Now  it  is  arguable  that 
the    objective    constituents    of    memory-situations    are 
private  and  existentially  dependent  on  the  body,  if  not 
on  the  mind,  of  the  experient.     For  the  objective  con- 
stituents  of  memory-situations  are    generally  believed 
to  be  images,  and  images  are  generally  believed  to  be 
private  in  this  sense.     This,  however,  would  not  make 
any  sharp  distinction    between    memory-situations  and 
perceptual  situations.     For,  on  the  sensum  theory,  the 


/ 


230     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

objective  constituents  of  perceptual  situations  are  sensa  ; 
and  there  are  reasons  for  thinking  that  sensa  are,  in 
some  degree,  dependent  on  the  body  and  perhaps  on 
the  mind  of  the  percipient. 

We  may  sum  up  the  discussion  as  follows  :  (i)  The 
objective  constituents  of  all  memory-situations  may  very 
well  be  private,  in  the  sense  that  they  are  existentially 
or  qualitatively  dependent  on  the  body  or  the  mind  of 
the  subject.  But  much  the  same  may  be  said  of  the 
objective  constituents  of  perceptual  situations.  (2)  The 
epistemological  objects  of  some  memory-situations  (viz., 
of  those  in  which  we  claim  to  remember  a  feeling  or 
a  perceptual  situation)  are  undoubtedly  private  and 
personal.  (3)  The  epistemological  objects  of  other 
memory-situations  (viz.,  of  those  in  which  we  claim  to 
remember  a  physical  thing  or  event),  are,  on  the  face 
of  them,  as  public  and  neutral  as  those  of  perceptual 
situations.  It  is  true  that  the  range  of  physical  events 
and  things  which  anyone  can  remember  is  limited  by 
his  past  perceptions  ;  but  it  is  equally  true  that  the 
range  of  things  and  events  which  he  can  perceive  is 
limited  by  his  sensations.  And  in  neither  case  does 
this  render  the  objects  themselves  private  or  personal 
in  their  essence.  (4)  There  is  a  certain  theory  about 
memory  according  to  which  all  that  is  primarily  and 
strictly  remembered  is  past  perceptual  situations  of 
which  the  experiment  was  subject.  On  this  theory  it 
would  be  true  that  the  prima?-}'  epistemological  objects 
of  all  memory-situations  are  private  and  personal  to  the 
experient.  (5)  Even  if  this  extreme  view  be  not  taken 
it  remains  possible  that  all  memory-situations  have  a 
complex  epistemological  object,  one  part  of  which  is  a 
past  perceptual  situation.  If  this  be  so  there  will  be 
something  personal  and  private  in  the  complete  episte- 
mological object  of  every  memory-situation,  although 
there  will  also  be  something  which  is  public  and  neutral 
in  the  epistemological  objects  of  memories  of  physical 
things  and  events. 


MEMORY  231 

General  Analysis   of  a  Memory -Situation.     I   propose    1 
now  to  analyse  a  typical  perceptual  memory-situation, '%    M. 9^*^ 
having  a  physical  thing  or  event  for  its  epistemological  "tST 

object.  I  shall  begin  with  a  rough  general  analysis,  in 
which  I  shall  try  to  bring  out  the  apparent  analogies 
between  such  a  situation  and  a  typical  perceptual 
situation.  I  shall  then  go  into  greater  detail  about 
certain  special  points  where  the  two  kinds  of  situation 
seem  to  differ  fundamentally  from  each  other.  Let  us 
compare  the  two  situations  which  are  expressed  re- 
spectively by  the  two  phrases  :  "I  am  remembering  the 
tie  which  my  friend  wore  yesterday  "  and  "  I  am  seeing 
a  certain  penny." 

(i)  Both  are  plainly  situations  with  epistemological 
objects,  and  in  both  cases  the  epistemological  object  is 
known  as  soon  as  we  understand  the  phrase  which 
expresses  the  situation.  In  both  cases  the  fact  that  the 
situation  has  such  and  such  an  epistemological  object  is 
wholly  independent  of  the  question  whether  there  is  an 
ontological  object  which  accurately  corresponds  with 
the  former.  Here  I  must  make  much  the  same  warning 
about  the  use  of  words  as  I  did  when  discussing  per- 
ception. There  are  memory-situations  which  we  have 
good  reason  to  think  delusive  ;  e.g.^  George  IV  used  to 
say  that  he  remembered  leading  a  charge  at  the  Battle 
of  Waterloo,  and  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that 
he  was  never  within  a  hundred  miles  of  the  battle. 
Now  in  common  speech  we  should  be  inclined  to  say 
that  he  did  not  "really  remember"  the  event  in  question, 
just  as  we  are  inclined  to  say  that  the  drunkard  does 
not  "really  see"  pink  rats.  But  in  both  cases  this  is 
to  mix  up  psychological,  epistemological,  and  onto- 
logical considerations  in  a  way  which  is  most  detri- 
mental to  philosophical  discussion.  Assuming  that  the 
First  Gentleman  in  Europe  was  correctly  describing  his 
state  of  mind,  he  was  subject  of  a  situation  which  has 
just  as  good  a  right  to  be  called  a  memory-situation  as 
a  veridical  memory  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington  on  the 


4 


232    MIND'S  KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

same  subject-matter.  It  was  a  situation  with  a  certain 
epistemological  object,  a  certain  kind  of  objective  con- 
stituent, a  certain  kind  of  subjective  constituent,  and  a 
certain  characteristic  kind  of  reference.  There  is  noth- 
ing to  distinguish  it  from  what  we  should  unhesitatingly 
call  a  memory-situation  in  the  case  of  the  Duke  of 
Wellington,  except  that  there  probably  is  an  onto- 
logical  object  accurately  corresponding  to  the  Duke's 
situation  and  that  there  almost  certainly  is  not  an 
ontological  object  corresponding  to  the  King's.  I 
therefore  propose  to  call  all  such  situations  "memory- 
situations  ",  regardless  of  whether  there  is  or  is  not 
reason  to  think  them  delusive. 

(2)  In  both  cases,  and  for  similar  reasons,  it  is  im- 
possible to  hold  that  the  ontological  object,  even  if 
there  be  one  which  accurately  corresponds  to  the  episte- 
mological object,  is  literally  and  bodily  a  constituent  of 
the  situation.  The  most  that  we  could  plausibly  hold 
in  either  case  is  that  each  situation  contains  an  objective 
constituent  which  is  literally  a  slice  of  the  history  of  an 
ontological  object  that  corresponds  accurately  to  the 
epistemological  object  of  the  situation.  The  objective 
constituent  of  the  perceptual  situation  in  our  example 
is  a  certain  patch  which  looks  brown  and  elliptical. 
To  make  the  analogy  as  close  as  possible  we  will 
suppose  that,  when  I  am  remembering  my  friend's  tie, 
a  visual  image  of  it  is  before  my  mind.  And  we  will 
take  this  visual  image  to  be  the  objective  constituent 
of  the  memory  situation.  Now  the  strongest  claim  that 
the  perceptual  situation  can  or  does  make  is  that  this 
patch  which  looks  brown  and  elliptical  is  literally  a 
contemporary  slice  of  the  history  of  a  certain  enduring 
physical  object,  viz.,  the  penny.  And  the  strongest 
claim  that  the  memory-situation  could  make  with  any 
plausibility  is  that  the  visual  image  is  literally  a  past 
slice  of  the  history  of  a  certain  enduring  physical  object, 
viz.,  my  friend's  tie.  Whether  it  is  any  part  of  the 
memory-situation  to  make  even  this  claim  we  shall  have 


MEMORY  233 

to  discuss  later.     But  it  certainly  does  not  and  cannot 
claim  more  than  this. 

(3)  An  essential  feature  in  both  kinds  of  situation  is 
a  belief  which  refers  beyond  the  situation  and  its  con- 
stituents. This  belief  may  not  be  explicitly  formulated  ; 
but  we  are  ready  to  act  in  accordance  with  it  if  occasion 
arises,  and  we  are  surprised  if  the  results  are  such  as 
would  conflict  with  this  belief.  It  is  an  essential  factor 
in  the  perceptual  situation  that  we  believe  that  the 
penny  now  exists  and  that  it  is  now  manifesting  certain 
aspects  of  itself  to  us.  It  is  an  essential  factor  in  the 
memory-situation  that  we  believe  that  the  tie  has  existed 
and  that  a  certain  past  phase  of  its  history  is  now  being- 
manifested  to  us  again.  I  leave  the  precise  content  of 
the  memory-belief  for  more  detailed  discussion  later. 

(4)  In  both  cases  we  may  say  that  the  belief  is  (a) 
based  upon  the  existence  and  character  of  the  objective 
constituent ;  {/?)  refers  beyond  it  to  something  which  is 
not  a  constituent ;  but  (c)  is  not  reached  by  a  process 
of  deductive  or  inductive  inference  from  the  existence 
and  nature  of  the  objective  constituent.  Memory-beliefs, 
like  perceptual  beliefs,  not  only  are  not  reached  by 
inference  from  the  objective  constituent  of  the  situation 
but  cannot  be  supported  by  such  inference  without 
logical  circularity.  When  I  remember  the  tie  which 
my  friend  wore  yesterday  I  do  not  first  notice  an  image 
of  a  certain  characteristic  shape,  colour,  etc.  ;  then 
recollect  the  general  principle  that  the  power  to  have 
an  image  always  originates  in  a  past  perceptual  experi- 
ence whose  objective  constituent  resembles  the  image  ; 
and  then  infer  from  these  two  premises  that  there  must 
have  existed  a  certain  tie  and  that  I  must  have  seen  it. 
And,  if  1  did  profess  to  reach  my  memory-judgments 
by  an  inference  of  this  kind,  the  validity  of  my  argu- 
ment would  be  open  to  the  following  attack.  How  do 
I  come  to  know  the  general  principle  that  all  images 
are  copies  of  past  sensa,  which  is  an  essential  premise 
of  the  supposed  inference?     If  we  say  that  the  general 


\ 


234     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

principle  is  established  inductively,  we  must  suppose 
that  there  are  so/ue  cases  in  which  we  can  remember 
a  past  sensum,  compare  it  with  a  present  image,  and 
notice  that  the  latter  resembles  the  former.  Now  these 
instances  will  be  useless  for  establishing  the  general 
principle  unless,  in  tkese  cases  at  any  rate,  we  can 
remember  the  past  sensum  without  using  the  general 
principle  and  making  an  inference  from  it.  It  would 
therefore  be  impossible  to  establish  the  general  principle 
inductively  unless  there  be  some  non-inferential  memory- 
judgments  about  past  sensa.  The  only  way  of  avoiding 
this  objection  would  be  to  take  the  desperate  step  of 
saying  that  we  know  a  priori  that  every  image  must  be 
a  copy  of  a  past  sensum,  and  that  the  power  to  call 
up  an  image  must  have  originated  through  the  sensing 
of  this  sensum.  It  seems  to  me  quite  plain  that  this 
principle  is  not  a  priori ;  and  I  do  not  know  that  anyone 
has  ever  asserted  that  it  is  so.  Even  Mr  Hume,  who 
had  a  conviction  on  the  subject  which  seems  to  me  to 
be  quite  unintelligible  on  his  own  principles,  cannot 
have  regarded  the  proposition  as  a  priori ;  since  he 
recognises  and  discusses  the  possibility  of  exceptions 
to  it  in  the  case  of  images  of  certain  shades  of  colour. 

Of  course  I  am  not  maintaining  that  particular  memory- 
judgments,  like  particular  perceptual  judgments,  may 
not  be  supported  or  refuted  by  argument.  They  cer- 
tainly can  be.  But  the  arguments  always  presuppose 
other  memory-judginehTs"  which"  must  simply  beacaepted 
on  their  own  merits.  If  I  claim  to  remember  that  my 
friend  was  wearing  a  tie  of  such  and  such  a  kind  yester- 
day, and  I  find  that  he  and  other  people  who  saw  him 
agree  with  me,  my  memory-judgment  will  be  supported. 
If  I  find  that  they  disagree  with  me  and  agree  with 
each  other,  my  memory -judgment  will  be  rendered 
improbable.  But,  in  using  this  test,  I  presuppose  the 
validity  of  their  memory-judgments.  Again,  when  I 
claim  to  remember  a  certain  event,  I  may  test  my  judg- 
ment by  inferring  what  events  would  be  likely  to  follow 


MEMORY 


235 


such  an  event  as  I  claim  to  be  remembering.  If  I  find 
that  I  can  remember  and  perceive  these  consequences, 
my  memory-judgment  will  be  supported  by  inference. 
If  I  find  that  I  remember  and  perceive  events  which 
are  incompatible  with  these,  my  memory-judgment  will 
be  made  improbable.  But,  even  when  I  test  the 
memory-judgment  by  present  perception  and  not  by 
memory,  I  presuppose  the  general  validity  of  my 
memory-judgments.  For  I  start  by  inferring  that  I 
shall  be  likely  to  perceive  so-and-so  if  the  event  which 
I  claim  to  remember  really  happened.  And,  if  the 
chain  of  inference  be  of  any  length,  my  guarantee  for 
the  conclusion  is  my  memory  that  the  earlier  stages  of 
the  argument  satisfied  me.  In  exactly  the  same  way 
we  may  support  or  refute  particular  perceptual  judg- 
ments by  argument ;  but  these  arguments  always  pre- 
suppose the  general  validity  of  perceptual  judgments  and 
the  validity  of  certain  particular  perceptual  judgments 
made  by  myself  or  others. 

(5)  We  see  then  that  memory-judgments,  like  per- 
ceptual judgments,  are  "direct"  or  "immediate",  in 
the  sense  that  they  are  not  in  fact  reached  by  inference 
from  the  nature  and  existence  of  the  objective  con- 
stituent of  the  situation,  and  that  any  such  inference 
would  be  logically  circular.  But  there  was  another 
sense  in  which  we  said  that  perceptual  situations  were 
direct  and  immediate.  We  contrasted  the  two  state- 
ments :  "I  am  hearing  the  bell  "  and  "I  am  thinking 
about  the  bell  "  ;  and  we  said  that  the  perceptual  situa- 
tion claimed  to  bring  us  into  more  direct  cognitive 
contact  with  objects  than  the  thought-situation.  This 
we  expressed  by  calling  perceptual  situations  "  intuitive  " 
and  thought-situations  "discursive".  Of  course  per- 
ceptual judgments  (like  all  judgments,  whether  reached 
by  inference  or  not)  are  "about"  their  subjects.  But, 
in  the  perceptual  situation,  we  claim  to  be  also  in 
peculiarly  direct  contact  with  the  subject  which  the 
perceptual    judgment    is    about.       Now,    very    closely 


)  T 


236    MIND'S  KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

connected  with  this  is  the  fact  that  the  perceptual 
judgment  is  "sensuous".  I  think  that  the  intuitive 
character  of  the  perceptual  situation  lies  in  the  fact 
that  we  are  directly  acquainted  with  the  objective 
constituent,  and  that  this  constituent  is  regarded  as 
being  literally  a  part  of  the  physical  object  which  we 
are  said  to  be  perceiving.  Can  we  say  that  the  typical 
perceptual  memory-situation  is  intuitive  and  sensuous? 
(i)  Ordinary  language  suggests  that  the  memory- 
situation  is  intuitive  and  not  discursive.  We  say  "  I 
remember  my  friend's  tie",  just  as  we  say  "I  see  my 
friend's  tie".  In  neither  case  does  the  verbal  expres- 
sion for  the  situation  contain  a  preposition  like  "  about  " 
before  the  phrase  which  stands  for  the  epistemological 
object,  (ii)  The  memory-situation  often  does  contain 
as  its  objective  constituent  a  visual  or  auditory  image  ; 
and  an  image  is  obviously  very  much  like  a  sensum. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  not  clear  to  me  that  the  memory- 
situation  is  so  obviously  intuitive  and  sensuous  as  the 
perceptual  situation.  The  connexion  between  the 
image  and  the  remembered  object  seems  much  looser 
than  the  connexion  between  the  sensum  and  the  per- 
ceived object.  In  some  cases  the  objective-constituent 
'^*>4^  \  seems  to  be  merely  images  of  words  ;  and  in  that  case 
we  cannot  claim  to  be  in  direct  contact  with  a  past  slice 
I  of  the  history  of  an  object.  And,  even  when  the  image 
is  visual  and  is  held  to  resemble  a  past  phase  of  the 
remembered  object,  it  is  not  clear  to  me  that  we  claim 
that  it  is  literally  a  part  of  the  past  history  of  the  object. 
Thus  we  come  here  to  a  point  at  which  the  analogy 
between  perceptual  situations  and  perceptual  memory- 
situations  begins  to  fail.  In  the  next  section  I  propose 
to  consider  in  more  detail  certain  points,  such  as  this, 
in  which  there  seem  to  be  essential  differences  between 
the  two. 

More  detailed  Discussion  of  certain  Points.  Under  this 
heading  I  shall  consider  two  closely  connected  points, 
viz.,  (i)  the  precise  content  of  the  memory-belief;  and 


MEMORY  237 

(ii)  the  nature  of  the  objective  constituent  and  its  con- 
nexion with  the  epistemological  object.  When  I  speak 
of  the  "content"  of  a  memory-belief  or  a  perceptual 
belief  I  mean  the  propositions  which  are  believed  in  the 
typical  memory-  or  perceptual  situation.  Now,  in  com- 
paring the  content  of  a  memory-belief  with  that  of  a 
perceptual  belief,  there  are  two  points  to  be  considered. 
(a)  Does  the  total  content  of  one  include  some  pro- 
position to  which  nothing  corresponds  in  the  total 
content  of  the  other?  and  {b)  How  far  are  the  parts 
which  may  fairly  be  said  to  correspond  analogous  to 
each  other?  The  latter  question  forms  a  transition  to 
the  question  of  the  nature  of  the  objective  constituent 
of  a  memory-situation  and  its  connexion  with  the 
epistemological  object. 

(i,  a)  When  I  am  the  subject  of  a  perceptual  situation 
I  believe  that  such  and  such  an  event  is  happening  and 
that  it  is  part  of  the  history  of  a  certain  physical  object 
which  still  exists.  But,  so  long  as  I  merely  perceive 
and  do  not  begin  to  reflect  on  my  perception,  I  do  not 
believe  anything  about  myself  and  my  cognitive  situa- 
tions. When  I  am  the  subject  of  a  perceptual  memory- 
situation  I  believe  that  such  and  such  an  event  has 
happened,  and  that  it  was  part  of  the  history  of  a  certain 
physical  object  which  may  or  may  not  still  exist.  This 
part  of  the  content  of  the  memory-belief  is  evidently 
analogous  to  the  content  of  the  perceptual  belief.  But 
is  it  the  whole  of  the  content  of  the  memory-belief? 
When  I  remember  an  event  do  I  not  also  always  believe 
that  I  have  perceived  it  as  well  as  that  it  has  happened? 
If  so,  there  is  an  essential  part  of  the  content  of  every 
memory-belief  which  refers  to  myself  and  my  past 
perceptual  situations  ;  and  there  is  nothing  analogous 
to  this  in  the  content  of  the  perceptual  belief. 

There  is,  I  think,  no  doubt  that  in  most  memory- 
situations  1  judge,  not  merely  that  "This  happened 
before",  but  also  that  "  I  have  perceived  this  before"  ; 
and  that  neither  of  these  judgments  is  inferred   from 


Ii 


-f' 


238     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

the  other  or  from  anything  else.  And  I  suppose  that 
I  could  hardly  judge  that  *'  I  have  perceived  this  before  " 
without,  ipso  facto,  judging  that  "This  has  happened 
before."  The  only  question  then  is  this:  Are  there 
any  memory-situations  in  which  I  judge  that  "This 
%  happened  before"  and  do  not  judge,  in  the  same  in- 
tuitive and  non-inferential  way,  that  "  I  have  perceived 
this  before"?  I  find  this  question  very  difficult  to 
decide,  for  the  following  reasons. 

In  the  first  place,  every  one  believes  that,  under 
normal  circumstances,  we  cannot  have  direct  and  non- 
inferential  knowledge  of  a  past  event  unless  we  have 
in  fact  at  some  time  perceived  it.  If  we  ask  what  can 
be  the  evidence  for  this  universal  belief,  I  think  we 
shall  find  that  it  has  two  sources.  (i)  It  is  quite 
certain  that,  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases  in  which  I 
remember  an  event,  I  do  also  remember  perceiving  it. 
We  might  induce  from  this  that,  in  all  cases  in  which 
I  remember  an  event,  I  must  have  perceived  it ;  though, 
in  a  small  minority,  there  are  special  circumstances 
which  prevent  me  from  remembering  my  perception  of 
it.  (2)  We  have  a  great  difficulty  in  conceiving  the 
causal  mechanism  by  which  we  could  have  direct  and 
non-inferential  knowledge  of  a  past  event  which  we  had 
never  perceived.  When  we  perceive  anything  we  have 
a  sensation,  and  this  involves  a  characteristic  change 
in  our  bodies.  We  think  of  this  change  as  leaving  a 
persistent  "trace"  in  our  bodies  or  minds  or  both,  and 
we  think  of  this  trace  as  carrying  with  it  the  permanent 
possibility  of  intuitively  apprehending  the  past  event. 
But,  if  the  event  did  not  affect  our  bodies  or  our  minds 
when  it  happened,  we  find  it  hard  to  conceive  that  it 
should  be  causally  possible  to  have  subsequent  direct 
knowledge  of  the  event.  For  my  own  part  I  think  that 
there  is  decent  evidence  that,  in  certain  abnormal  cases, 
people  do  have  direct  knowledge  of  certain  past  events 
which  they  never  perceived  in  their  present  bodily  life. 
But   the  evidence  is   not  known   to  most  people  ;    the 


MEMORY  239 

phenomenon,  if  genuine  at  all,  is  very  rare  ;  and  those 
who  are  acquainted  with  the  alleged  facts  would  admit 
that  it  is  dangerous  to  put  too  much  weight  on  them. 
I  think  then  that  we  may  start  by  accepting  the  follow- 
ing propositions,  one  about  a  matter  of  fact  and  the 
other  about  the  usage  of  words,  (i)  It  is  almost  univers- 
ally held  that  we  cannot  have  direct  knowledge  of  a 
past  event  unless  we  have  in  fact  perceived  it,  whether 
we  remember  doing  so  or  not.  And  (2)  if  cases  could  be 
produced  in  which  there  was  direct  knowledge  of  unper- 
ceived  past  events,  we  should  refuse  to  call  such  know- 
ledge "memory".  It  is  part  of  the  meaning  of  the 
word  "memory"  that  a  perceptual  memory-situation 
shall  in  fact  be  due  to  a  past  perceptual  situation  of 
the  same  subject.  The  question  that  remains  is  :  Do 
situations  ever  arise  in  which  a  past  event,  which  has 
in  fact  been  perceived  by  us,  is  remembered  whilst  our 
perception  of  it  is  not  remembered?  And  would  such 
a  situation  be  called  a  "  memory-situation  "? 

I  think  it  is  certain  that  situations  sometimes  arise 
which  it  would  be  natural  to  describe  as  follows:  "I 
remember  that  man's  face,  though  I  do  not  remember 
seeing  it  before."  No  doubt  we  should  immediately 
add:  "I  must  have  seen  it  before."  But  this  word 
"must"  is  the  mark  of  an  inferential  belief,  not  of  a 
direct  intuitive  one  ;  and  no  doubt  the  inference  is  made 
from  the  generally  accepted  premise  that  I  cannot  re- 
member anything  unless  I  have  at  some  time  perceived 
it.  Now,  if  this  phraseology  is  to  be  taken  at  its  face 
value,  such  situations  are  called  "memory-situations", 
and  the  content  of  the  memory-belief  does  not  include 
the  proposition:  "I  have  seen  this  before."  But  I 
am  not  at  all  sure  that  this  is  the  right  interpretation. 
Memory-beliefs  may  be  of  various  degrees  of  determin- 
ateness  in  at  least  three  respects.  In  the  first  place,  we 
may  have  a  more  or  less  determinate  memory-belief 
about  the  qualities  of  the  remembered  object.  We  may, 
e.g.^  remember  that  it  was  brick-red,  or  only  that  it  had 


^ 


240     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

some  shade  or  other  of  red,  or  only  that  it  was  either 
red  or  green.  Secondly,  we  may  have  a  more  or  less 
determinate  memory-belief  about  the  spatial  relations 
and  contemporary  context  of  the  remembered  object. 
E.g.,  we  may  remember  that  it  was  to  the  right  of  the 
fireplace  in  a  certain  room,  or  only  that  it  was  some- 
where in  this  room,  or  only  that  it  was  somewhere  in 
some  room  of  a  certain  house,  and  so  on.  Lastly,  we 
may  have  a  more  or  less  determinate  memory  of  the 
temporal  relations  and  the  earlier  and  later  context  of 
the  remembered  object.  We  may  remember  that  it 
happened  just  before  dinner  on  Monday  last,  or  that 
it  happened  some  time  last  Monday,  or  only  that  it 
happened  some  time  last  week.  Now  it  seems  to  me 
quite  likely  that,  when  we  say  that  we  remember  a 
certain  physical  event  or  thing  and  that  we  do  not  re- 
member perceiving  it,  we  really  mean  only  that  our 
memory  of  our  past  perceptual  situation  is  extremely 
indeterminate  in  these  three  respects  whilst  our  memory 
of  the  event  or  thing  is  relatively  determinate. 

On  this  view  the  total  belief  which  accompanies 
J'  a  memory-situation  may  always  include  a_  .genuine 
•^  memory-belief  about  our  own  past  perception  ;  but  in 
certain  cases  the  latter  may  be  so  extremely  indeter- 
minate that  we  say  that  we  remember  only  the  physical 
event  and  not  the  past  perception  of  it.  We  must,  how- 
ever, recognise  the  following  argument  which  favours 
the  opposite  view.  Since  we  all  believe  strongly  that 
nothing  can  be  remembered  unless  it  has  been  perceived 
by  us,  we  shall  almost  inevitably  infer  when  we  remem- 
ber an  event  that  we  must  have  perceived  it.  And  we 
may  very  well  confuse  this  natural  and  immediate  in- 
ference with  a  genuine  memory-belief;  and  thus  think 
that  the  proposition  :  "I  have  perceived  this  "  was  part 
of  the  content  of  the  original  memory-belief,  when  really 
it  is  a  reflective  and  inferential  addition.  In  view  of 
these  two  considerations  which  point  in  opposite  direc- 
tions I  do  not  feel  able  to  make  up  my  mind  on  the 


MEMORY  241 

question  ;  and  I  must  content  myself  with  saying  that 
the  majority  of  memory-situations  do  include  a  non- 
inferential  belief  that  the  remembered  object  has  been 
perceived  by  us  ;  and  that  this  belief  may  be  of  any 
degree  of  indeterminateness.  I  think,  however,  that 
the  discussion  is  enough  to  refute  a  view  which  was 
mentioned  as  possible  earlier  in  the  chapter  ;  viz.,  that 
what  we  primarily  remember  is  always  our  own  past 
perceptual  situations,  and  that  our  knowledge  of  the 
past  physical  events  which  we  are  said  to  *'  remember" 
is  derived  from  our  memory  of  the  perceptual  situations 
of  which  these  events  were  the  epistemological  objects. 
It  is  difficult  to  see  how  highly  determinate  beliefs 
about  a  past  physical  event  could  be  derived  from  a 
knowledge  of  the  situation  in  which  it  was  perceived 
which  is  so  indeterminate  that  many  people  deny  its 
existence. 

(i,  b  and  ii)  We  have  now  to  consider  how  far  the 
memory-belief  that  "  This  physical  event  happened  and 
formed  part  of  the  history  of  a  certain  physical  object " 
is  analogous  to  the  perceptual  belief  that  "  This  physical 
event  is  happening  and  is  a  contemporary  part  of  the 
history  of  a  certain  physical  object."  It  is  hardly 
possible  to  discuss  this  question  apart  from  that  of  the 
nature  of  the  objective  constituent  and  its  relation  to  the 
epistemological  object.  I  shall  therefore  take  (i,  b)  and 
(ii)  together.  There  are,  as  usual,  two  questions,  one 
purely  psychological  and  the  other  epistemological. 
The  purely  psychological  question  is:  "What  does 
the  memory-situation  claim  to  be  the  connexion  between 
its  objective  constituent  and  its  epistemological  object  ?  " 
The  epistemological  question  is:  "What  view  about 
the  connexion  between  the  two  can  be  justified  in  face 
of  all  the  known  facts?"  I  shall  defer  the  second 
question  to  the  next  section. 

I  will  begin  by  taking  a  case  where  the  memory 
involves  an  imitative  image.  I  will  suppose  that  I  am 
remembering  my  friend's  tie,  in  his  absence  ;  and  that 

G 


242    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

I  have  an  imitative  visual  image  of  a  tie.  This  makes 
the  analogy  to  sense-perception  as  close  as  possible  ; 
so  that  any  differences  that  we  may  discover  will  be 
fundamental.  Let  us  then  contrast  this  situation  with 
that  of  seeing  a  penny,  and  judging  that  it  is  brown 
and  round.  I  will  suppose  that  I  judge  that  my  friend's 
tie  was  red.  Now  I  think  that  the  most  notable  differ- 
ence between  the  two  cases  is  the  following.  When  I 
am  simply  seeing  a  penny  and  making  perceptual 
judgments  about  it,  and  am  not  philosophising,  I  draw 
no  distinction  between  the  objective  constituent  of  the 
situation  and  the  surface  of  the  penny.  I  am  acquainted 
with  a  certain  particular  (the  objective  constituent)  ;  I 
regard  it  as  part  of  the  surface  of  the  penny,  and  I 
regard  the  qualities  which  seem  to  be  sensuously  mani- 
fested by  it  to  me  as,  ipso  facto^  qualities  of  the  penny. 
It  is  true  that  I  find  on  careful  inspection  and  reflection 
that  the  qualities  which  I  have  been  ascribing  to  the 
penny  are  not  exactly  those  that  are  sensuously  mani- 
fested to  me  in  this  situation,  and  that  there  are  strong 
reasons  for  refusing  to  identify  the  objective  constituent 
with  the  surface  of  the  penny.  But  these  views  are 
reached  only  by  careful  and  critical  reflection,  and  they 
exist  only  while  we  are  reflecting.  They  vanish  at  once 
when  we  again  begin  to  perceive,  and  the  naively 
realistic  view  is  reinstated  as  if  it  had  never  been 
questioned.  Now  it  seems  to  me  that,  when  I  remember 
my  friend's  tie  by  means  of  an  imitative  image,  I  do  not 
regard  the  image  as  literally  a  part  of  the  surface  of  the 
tie  which  existed  yesterday,  and  I  do  not  regard  the 
qualities  which  seem  to  be  sensuously  manifested  to  me 
in  the  image  as,  ipso  facto,  qualities  formerly  possessed 
by  the  tie.  So  far  as  I  can  judge,  the  perceptual 
situation  definitely  identifies  its  objective  constituent 
with  a  contemporary  part  of  the  perceived  object,  whilst 
the  memory-situation  ?ieither  identifies  the  image  with  a 
past  part  of  the  object  nor  definitely  distinguishes  the 
two.      The    memory-judgment   most   certainly    is    not : 


MEMORY  243 

"This,  which  I  am  now  acquainted  with,  is  a  part  of 
the  tie  as  it  was."  But  it  also  is  not :  ''This,  which  I 
am  now  acquainted  with,  is  numerically  different  from 
but  qualitatively  similar  to  a  part  of  the  tie  as  it  was." 
It  seems  to  me  that  both  these  suggested  judgments  are 
reflective  theories  about  the  memory-situation,  and  not 
judgments  which  form  an  essential  factor  in  the  memory- 
situation  itself.  While  we  are  actually  living  through 
the  memory-situation,  and  not  philosophising  about  it, 
the  belief  that  we  have  is  vaguer  than  either  of  these 
suggested  beliefs.  If  we  want  to  put  into  words  we 
must  use  some  such  formula  as  follows  :  "There  is  some 
peculiarly  intimate  relation  between  this,  which  I  am 
now  acquainted  with,  and  a  certain  part  of  the  tie  as  it 
was."  And  this  statement  must  be  taken  neither  to 
assert  nor  to  deny  that  the  two  may  be  numerically 
identical. 

The  difference  which   I  have  been  trying  to  indicate 
between  the  memory-situation  and  the  perceptual  situa- 
tion may  be  expressed  as  follows.     Naive  Realism  is 
not  merely  a  theory  about  perception  ;  it  is  the  explicit 
formulation  of  the  belief  which  forms  an  essential  part  of 
the  perceptual  situation  as  such.     But  Naive  Realism 
is  merely  a  theory  about  memory,  just  as  the  Sensum 
Theory  is   a   theory   about   perception.      All   that   the  , 
memory-situation  itself  claims  is  that  somehow  X\\q^  image  / 
enables  us  to  have  an  intuitive  non-inferential  knowledge  ■ 
of  the  occurrence  of  a  certain  past  event  and  of  some  of 
its  qualities  and  relations.     That  it  enables  us   to  do  , 
this  because  it  is  numerically  identical  with  the   past  '^ 
event  is  neither  asserted   nor   denied   in  the  memory-   \ 
situation  itself.     It  is  perhaps  worth  while  to  make  the 
following  remark  at  this  stage.     The  facts  which  make 
it   difficult   or   impossible   to    accept    on    reflexion   the 
naively  realistic  claims  of  perception  are  by  no  means 
obvious.    In  order  to  recognise  them  we  have  to  inspect 
our   sensa   with   special   care ;    to   compare   notes  with 
others  ;    to  know  something  of  the  physiology  of  the 


^^K 


244     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

nervous  system,  and  of  physical  optics  ;  and  so  on.  It 
is  therefore  plausible  to  suppose  that,  if  we  start  with 
an  innate  tendency  towards  naively  realistic  perceptual 
beliefs,  the  tendency  will  be  so  strengthened  by  habit 
in  childhood  that  no  arguments  will  eradicate  it  in 
practice  later  on.  But  the  difficulties  about  a  naively 
realistic  view  of  memory  are  glaring,  and  need  no 
special  knowledge  or  careful  inspection  to  reveal  them  ; 
as  we  shall  see  in  the  next  section.  Hence,  even  if  we 
started  with  a  tendency  to  identify  the  memory-image 
with  the  remembered  event  (which  there  is  no  reason  to 
think  that  we  do),  it  seems  doubtful  whether  it  would 
survive  the  continual  assaults  of  the  objections  which 
would  arise  almost  automatically  even  in  the  least 
reflective  mind. 

I  have  so  far  taken  a  case  in  which  the  objective 
constituent  of  the  memory-situation  is  an  imitative 
image,  and  have  argued  that  even  here  it  is  no  part  of 
the  memory-belief  to  claim  that  the  image  is  numeric- 
ally identical  with  a  certain  slice  of  the  past  history  of 
the  remembered  object.  I  wish  now  to  consider  cases 
in  which  the  memory-situation  does  not  contain  an 
imitative  image  as  a  constituent.  It  seems  certain  that 
there  are  such  cases  ;  and  I  think  that  a  discussion  of 
them  will  throw  light  on  the  part  played  by  the  imitative 
image  in  those  cases  where  it  is  present.  Even  if  it  be 
granted  that  all  perceptual  memory-situations  contain 
images  of  some  kind  as  objective  constituents  and  that 
these  images  play  an  analogous  part  to  that  which  is 
played  by  sensa  in  perceptual  situations,  it  must  be 
granted  that  the  connexion  between  the  objective  con- 
stituent and  the  epistemological  object  is  much  looser 
in  the  memory-situation  than  in  the  perceptual  situation. 
I  will  now  try  to  illustrate  this  point. 

Suppose  that  someone  says  to  me:  "Was  the  tie 
that  your  friend  wore  yesterday,  red?"  I  may  answer 
at  once:  "I  remember  quite  distinctly  that  it  was  not 
red,  but  I   cannot  remember  what  its  colour  was."     I 


MEMORY  245 

will  call  this  a  "negative  memory-situation".  Now 
there  is  nothing  in  perception  which  is  strictly  analogous 
to  this.  Of  course,  if  my  friend  is  wearing  a  green  tie 
and  I  am  looking  at  it  and  am  not  colour-blind,  I  can 
say:  "I  see  plainly  that  his  tie  is  not  red."  But  I 
say  that  it  is  not  red,  and  that  I  see  that  it  is  not, 
because  I  do  see  that  it  is  green.  I  should  never  say 
that  I  see  that  it  is  not  red  unless  I  also  saw  that  it 
had  such  and  such  another  colour.  The  perceptual 
denial  of  a  certain  determinate  colour  depends  upon 
the  perceptual  recognition  of  the  presence  of  another 
determinate  colour.  But  the  memory-denial  of  a  certain 
colour,  so  far  from  depending  on  the  memory-recognition 
of  another  determinate  colour,  may  precede  the  latter 
and  may  exist  though  the  latter  never  supervenes  on  it. 
Now,  in  the  negative  memory-situation  at  least,  the 
presence  of  an  imitative  image  seems  quite  unnecessary. 
It  may  happen  of  course  that,  when  the  word  "red" 
is  mentioned  by  the  questioner  to  me,  I  have  a  red 
image  ;  but,  so  long  as  I  understand  the  meaning  of  1 
the  word  "red"  in  mty  way,  the  negative  memory- 
situation  may  arise  even  though  there  is  no  red  image. 
And  in  rnany  cases  I  am  quite  sure  that  I  understand 
the  meaning  of  the  word  and  that  the  memory-situation 
does  arise  in  the  absence  of  a  red  image.  Again,  it 
may  of  course  happen  that  I  have  an  image  which  does 
in  fact  resemble  my  friend's  tie  in  colour  ;  though  it 
is  evident  that  I  do  not  recognise  the  fact  at  the  time. 
But  it  is  quite  certain  that  the  presence  of  such  an 
image  is  not  essential  to  the  negative  memory-situation, 
and  that  the  latter  does  in  fact  quite  often  arise  in  the 
absence  of  the  former. 

When  I  try  to  analyse  a  negative  memory-situation 
as  carefully  as  I  can  the  essential  point  about  it  seems 
to  be  the  following.  In  some  way  or  other  a  certain 
determinate  characteristic  is  presented  to  me  for  con- 
sideration. It  may  be  presented  by  an  imitative  image, 
or   by  actually   hearing   and    understanding   the   word 


246     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

which  stands  for  it  without  using  an  imitative  image, 
or  by  calling  up  for  myself  an  image  of  the  sound  or 
the  appearance  of  this  word.  The  method  of  presenta- 
tion seems  to  be  absolutely  unimportant  so  long  as  it 
succeeds  in  making  me  think  of  the  characteristic  in 
question.  The  other  factor  is  that  I  then  have  a  peculiar 
feeling  which  can  only  be  described  by  the  phrase  : 
"This  doesn't  fit  the  object".  Of  course  the  feeling 
is  one  thing  and  the  judgment  is  another ;  but  this  is 
the  kind  of  judgment  which  we  consider  to  express 
and  to  be  justified  by  this  kind  of  feeling.  Lastly, 
the  belief  that  the  characteristic  does  not  fit  the  object 
is  not  based  on  a  comparison  with  the  object  and  its 
remembered  characteristics.  For,  if  it  were,  the  negative 
memory-situation,  like  the  negative  perceptual  judg- 
ment, could  not  exist  apart  from  the  corresponding 
positive  situation  ;  whereas  the  former  certainly  can 
and  does  exist  apart  from  the  latter.  The  nearest 
analogy  that  I  can  give  is  that  of  trying  a  lock  in  the 
dark  with  a  number  of  keys  that  do  not  fit  it. 

Let  us  now  consider  a  positive  memory-situation. 
Suppose  that  I  go  on  trying  various  suggested  colours, 
red,  blue,  yellow,  etc.,  and  that  they  all  fail  to  fit. 
At  last,  perhaps,  I  try  green  and  I  have  a  new  and 
unique  kind  of  feeling  which  I  should  express  by  the 
statement:  "This  fits  the  object".  I  then  say  that 
I  remember  that  the  tie  was  green.  This  feeling,  which 
^  is  naturally  expressed  by  the  judgment:  "It  fits  the 
object",  and  is  regarded  as  justifying  that  judgment, 
is  the  characteristic  mark  of  a  positive  memory-situation. 
And  up  to  this  point  no  imitative  image  has  been 
needed.  There  is  no  more  need  for  the  alternative 
which  does  fit  to  be  presented  for  consideration  by  an 
imitative  image  than  for  the  various  alternatives  which 
did  not  fit  to  be  presented  in  this  way.  But  at  this 
point  an  imitative  image  very  often  does  supervene  ; 
and  then  I  think  we  are  said,  not  merely  to  remember 
things  about  the  object,  but  in  the  strictest  sense  to 


«f 


MEMORY  247 

remember  the  object.  (Of  course,  in  a  looser  sense, 
we  are  said  to  remember  an  object  provided  we  remember 
anything  about  it.) 

In  the  examples  which  I  have  just  been  giving  we 
are  supposed  to  be  trying  to  remember  something,  and 
to  succeed  after  failures.  In  other  cases  it  seems  to 
me  that  the  imitative  image  comes  first.  It  floats  up  ; 
we  notice  certain  characteristics  in  it  which  are  felt  to 
fit  a  certain  past  object,  and  others  which  are  felt  not  to 
fit  it.  And  the  two  processes  may  happen  alternately. 
I  may  begin  by  merely  remembering  things  about  an 
object ;  then  I  may  have  an  imitative  image  of  it ;  and 
finally  I  may  read  off  from  the  image  further  char- 
acteristics which  are  felt  to  fit  the  object,  and  so  may 
remember  further  things  about  it.  The  essential  point 
is  the  felt  fitting  or  non-fitting  of  suggested  character- 
istics ;  the  wayTh  which  these  characteristics  are  pre- 
sented for  our  consideration  is  of  minor  importance. 

I  think  that  I  can  now  state  more  clearly  what  seem  A 

to  me  to  be  the  essential  points  of  difference  between  \ 
perceptual  situations  and  even  perceptual  memory-situa- 
tions, (i)  All  perceptual  denials  are  based  upon  per- 
ceptual affirmations  of  determinate  characteristics  which 
are  incompatible  with  the  characteristic  which  is  denied. 
But  there  are  independent  memory-denials,  which  are 
not  based  in  this  way  on  corresponding  memory- 
affirmations.  This  fact  should  lead  us  to  suspect  that 
there  may  be  important  differences  between  positive 
memory  -  situations  and  positive  perceptual  situations 
even  where  they  seem  most  alike.  (2)  It  is  true 
that  we  say  both  that  we  perceive  objects  and  that 
we  perceive  propositions  about  objects.  I  see  a  tie, 
and  I  see  that  the  tie  is  green.  But  the  latter  is  re- 
garded as  dependent  on  the  former.  When  I  say  that 
I  perceive  a  tie  I  do  not  seem  to  mean  merely  that 
I  know  various  propositions  by  perception,  such  as 
''This  is  green",  "This  is  long  and  thin"  ;  that  all 
these  propositions  have  a  common   subject  ;  and    that 


J 


248    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

the  tie  is  known  only  as  the  common  subject  of  all 
these  perceptually  known  propositions.  On  the  con- 
trary I  claim  to  be  directly  acquainted  with  a  part  of 
the  tie  ;  and  the  propositions  which  I  claim  to  perceive 
about  it  seem  to  be  "read  off"  from  the  object  itself. 
The  object  (or,  at  any  rate,  a  literal  part  of  it)  seems  to 
be  "given"  bodily;  and  the  perceptual  judgments 
profess  to  "  analyse  "  it.  Now,  in  spite  of  some  appear- 
ances to  the  contrary  I  believe  that  the  opposite  is  true 
of  perceptual  memory.  I  believe  that  what  is  primarily 
known  by  memory  is  propositions  like  "This  was 
green  ",  "  This  was  long  and  thin  ",  etc.  ;  and  that  this  is 
true  both  in  positive  and  in  negative  memory-situations. 
Certain  groups  of  such  propositions  are  recognised  to 
have  a  common  subject;  and  the  object  is  "remem- 
bered "  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  known  as  the  common 
subject  of  such  a  group  of  remembered  propositions. 
(3)  In  many  cases  an  imitative  image  of  the  remembered 
object  supervenes  at  this  stage  ;  and  in  some  cases 
such  an  image  comes  first,  and  the  characteristics  which 
are  asserted  or  denied  in  the  memory-judgments  are 
presented  to  our  attention  by  it.  It  is  in  this  last  case 
that  perceptual  memory  is  most  like  perception  ;  but 
even  here  it  does  not  seem  to  me  that  we  claim  to  be 
in  direct  cognitive  contact  with  an  actual  fragment  of 
the  past  history  of  the  object  and  to  be  "reading  off" 
the  memory  -  propositions  from  this  fragment.  (4) 
The  essential  factor  in  the  memory  -  situation  is  that 
peculiar  feeling  which  seems  to  justify  the  judgment 
that  a  certain  characteristic  fits  or  fails  to  fit  a  certain 
past  object.  The  characteristic  need  not  be,  and 
generally  is  not,  presented  to  our  attention  by  means  of 
imitative  images.  And  the  object  which  the  character- 
istic is  felt  to  fit  or  fail  to  fit  is  not  cognised  by  direct  and 
sensuous  acquaintance,  as  it  seems  to  be  in  sense-per- 
ception, but  is  presented  only  to  thought  as  the  subject 
of  such  and  such  propositions. 

Thus,    although    perceptual    memory    agrees    with 


MEMORY  249 

sense-perception  in  the  fact  that  the  memory -judg- 
ment, like  the  perceptual  judgment,  is  not  infer- 
ential, I  believe  that  it  differs  from  sense-perception 
in  that  it  is  not  strictly  intuitive  or  sensuous.  Some 
perceptual  memory  -  situations  certainly  seem  at  first 
sight  to  have  these  latter  characteristics  ;  but  it  seems 
to  me  that  careful  inspection  and  comparison  show  that 
none  of  them  really  do  so.  And  I  think  _that_  the 
function  of  imitative  images  in  perceptual  memory 
has  been  greatly  exaggjsr9.ted.  It  is  perhaps  relevant 
to  add  that  I  am  myself  a  strong  visualiser,  and  that 
memory  with  me  does  in  fact  generally  involve  imitative 
imagery  ;  so,  if  I  am  wrong  on  this  point,  my  mistake 
is  certainly  not  due  identifying  a  personal  defect  with 
a  law  of  nature,  as  the  Behaviourists  do  when  they  deny 
the  existence  of  images. 

Episteviological  Questions  about  Perceptual  Memory.  So 
far  I  have  attempted  nothing  but  a  descriptive  analysis 
of  perceptual  memory-situations,  and  a  careful  statement 
of  what  they  really  do  claim.  I  must  now  consider 
what  claims  would  \i^  justified  ovi  the  part  of  the  memory- 
situation.  If  I  am  right,  the  perceptual  situation  makes 
a  stVohg"er  claim  than  we  can  admit  to  be  justified. 
For  every  perceptual  situation  claims  that  its  objective 
constituent  is  literally  a  part  of  the  perceived  physical 
object;  and  this  claim  is  certainly  false  in  some  cases 
and  extremely  hard  to  maintain  in  any.  Now  it  is  of 
course  possible  that  the  memory-situation  goes  to  the 
other  extreme  and  is  too  modest  in  its  claims.  If  I  am 
right,  it  does  not  claim  that  its  objective  constituent 
is  literally  a  part  of  the  past  event  which  it  remembers  ; 
nevertheless  this  claim  might  be  justified,  and  the  New 
Realists  may  only  be  asking  on  behalf  of  the  memory- 
situation  what  it  is  too  modest  to  ask  for  itself.  There 
are  two  reasons  for  wanting  to  be  as  realistic  as  possible 
about  perception.  One  is  that  we  are  then  running 
with  the  stream  and  defending  what  we  all  in  fact 
believe  except  when  we  are  philosophising.     The  other 


I 


250     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

is  that  the  rejection  of  the  claim  of  the  objective  con- 
stituent of  a  perceptual  situation  to  be  literally  a  part 
of  the  perceived  physical  object  makes  it  hard  to  explain 
how  we  can  possibly  know  that  there  are  physical 
objects  and  that  perception  gives  us  trustworthy  informa- 
tion about  them.  Now  there  is  not  the  first  motive  for 
a  naively  realistic  view  of  memory  ;  but  there  is  no 
doubt  the  second  motive.  Unless  the  objective  con- 
stituents of  some  memory-situations  be  literally  identical 
with  the  events  remembered,  how,  it  might  be  asked, 
can  we  possibly  know  that  there  are  past  events  and  that 
memory  gives  us  trustworthy  information  about  them? 
What  we  have  now  to  consider  is  whether  any  such 
claim  could  be  admitted  even  if  it  were  made. 

I  will  first  try  to  show,  as  I  did  in  the  case  of  percep- 
tion, that,  even  if  the  naively  realistic _YLew_cquld  be 
accepted,  it  would  by  itself  go  biLt_a.  sery_small  way  in 
meeting  the  attacks  of  a  sceptic.  To  be  sure  that  there 
are  past  events  or  that  there  are  physical  objects  it  is 
not  enough  to  be  acquainted  directly  with  what  is  in 
fact  a  past  event  or  a  literal  part  of  a  physical  object ; 
we  need  in  some  way  to  know  that  this  is  what  we 
are  acquainted  with.  Now,  if  there  were  no  delusive 
memory-situations,  or  if  it  were  found  on  careful  in- 
spection that  those  which  are  delusive  differ  internally 
from  those  which  are  not,  it  might  be  suggested  that 
every  memory-situation  is  accompanied  by  a  kind  of 
infallible  revelation  that  its  objective  constituent  is 
literally  identical  with  some  past  event.  But  it  is 
certain  that  there  are  totally  delusive  memory-situations, 
such  as  that  of  which  George  IV  was  subject.  And  it 
is  certain  that  there  is  no  inner  difference  which  dis- 
tinguishes them  from  memory-situations  which  are 
commonly  believed  to  be  veridical.  Hence  we  must 
■  deny  that  there  is  an  infallible  revelation  that  we  are  in 
direct  contact  with  the  past  in  any  case.  And,  in  the 
absence  of  this,  the  mere  fact  (if  it  be  a  fact)  that  the 
objective   constituents   of  some   memory-situations  are 


MEMORY  251 

actually  past  events  does  not  explain  how  we  know  that 
there  are  past  events  or  how  we  know  that  we  have 
trustworthy  information  through  memory  about  some 
of  them.  We  shall  still  have  to  rely  entirely  on  the 
external  tests  of  agreement  or  disagreement  of  one 
memory-judgment  with  others,  and  of  agreement  or  dis- 
agreement between  inferences  from  memory-judgments 
and  present  perceptions. 

The  most  that  we  can  say  then  is  that  the  claim  which 
the  extreme  realists  make  for  the  memory-situation  may 
sometimes  be  true,  though  it  is  certainly  sometimes 
false.  Can  we  go  so  far  even  as  this?  (i)  I  will  first 
mention  the  only  point,  so  far  as  I  am  aware,  on  which 
the  memory-situation  is  in  a  stronger  position  than  the 
perceptual  situation  in  making  such  a  claim.  There  is 
nothing  in  memory  corresponding  to  the  systematic 
difference  in  the  apparent  shapes  and  sizes  of  perceived 
objects  when  viewed  by  observers  from  different  positions. 
Now  it  was  this  which  made  it  so  very  hard  to  believe 
that  the  objective  constituent  of  a  visual  situation  can 
be  literally  a  part  of  the  surface  of  the  perceived 
physical  object.  Nevertheless  there  often  are  positive 
discrepancies  between  different  people  who  profess  to  be 
remembering  the  same  event,  and  between  successive 
memories  of  the  same  event  by  the  same  person.  The 
mere  fading  of  details  as  the  event  retreats  further  into 
the  past  presents  no  particular  difficulty  for  a  naively 
realistic  view  of  memory  ;  but  the  memory  of  details 
which  are  positively  inconsistent  with  each  other  on 
different  occasions  when  we  profess  to  be  remembering 
the  same  event  does  present  a  very  serious  difficulty. 

(2)  I  will  now  consider  the  special  objections  which 
might  be  made  against  a  naively  realistic  theory  of 
memory.  (c^)  The  first  is  a  general  metaphysical 
objection,  which  I  believe  to  be  baseless.  It  might  be 
said  that,  when  an  event  is  past,  it  ceases  to  exist. 
Now,  when  I  am  remembering  a  past  event,  the  memory- 
situation  certainly  exists  and  so  does  its  objective  con- 


/ 


tjh'r^^* 


5:^^^- 


252     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

stituent.  Hence,  it  is  said,  the  objective  constituent  of 
a  memory-situation  cannot  be  identical  with  the  past 
event  which  is  being  remembered.  This  objection 
seems  to  me  to  be  mistaken.  It  depends  on  a  view 
of  time  and  change  which  I  am  forced  to  reject.  It 
appears  to  me  that,  once  an  event  has  happened,  it 
exists  eternally ;  all  fhat  happens  henceforth  to  it  is 
that,  as  more  and  more  events  occur  and  take  their 
permanent  place  in  the  ever-lengthening  temporal  order 
of  the  universe,  it  retreats  into  the  more  and  more 
distant  past.  If  an  event  ceased  to  exist  as  soon  as  it 
ceased  to  be  present  it  plainly  could  no  longer  stand  in 
any  relations  to  anything.  But,  when  we  say  that  it 
is  past,  we  imply  that  it  does  stand  in  the  relation  of 
temporal  precedence  to  the  present ;  moreover,  we  say 
that  one  past  event  precedes  a  second  past  event  and 
follows  a  third.  All  such  statements  would  be  non- 
sensical if  events  ceased  to  exist  when  they  ceased  to  be 
present.  It  is  perfectly  true  that  certain  objects  which 
have  existed  {e.g:,  the  town  of  Old  Sarum)  have  ceased 
to  /^rsist.  But  this  means  only  that  after  a  certain 
time  none  of  the  events  which  happened  were  such  as 
to  continue  the  history  of  these  particular  objects  ;  the 
earlier  series  of  events  which  constitute  the  history  of 
such  objects  are  nevertheless  a  permanent  part  of  the 
universe,  considered  as  an  existent  which  is  extended 
in  time.  There  is  then  no  general  metaphysical  ob- 
jection to  a  naively  realistic  view  of  memory.  East 
events  are  always  "  there  "  waiting  to  be  remembered, 
and  there  is  no  a  priori  reason  why  they  should  not 
from  time  to  time  enter  into  such  a  relation  with  certain 
present  events  that  they  become  objects  of  direct  ac- 
quaintance. There  is  no  a  priori  reason  why  a  cognitive 
relation  should  not  bridge  a  temporal  gap,  and  connect 
a  present  mental  event  with  a  past  event  of  any  kind 
whatever. 

{b)    The    second    difficulty    is    much    more   serious. 
Suppose  that  I  remember  the  same  event  on  several 


MEMORY  253 

occasions,  and  that  the  objective  constituent  of  each  of 
these  memory-situations  is  an  imitative  image.  If  the 
naively  realistic  theory  of  memory  be  right,  this  image 
is  literally  and  numerically  the  same  in  all  cases  ;  it  is 
the  past  event  or  a  part  of  it ;  and  so  its  date  is  that  of 
the  past  event.  On  the  other  hand,  the  image  certainly 
seems  to  be  present  on  each  occasion  ;  and  we  should 
certainly  judge  that  we  were  concerned  with  as  many 
different  and  successive  images  as  there  are  different 
and  successive  memory-situations,  even  though  all  these 
images  were  exactly  alike  in  their  qualities.  Again, 
suppose  that  when  I  perceived  the  event  I  had  a  twinge 
of  toothache  ;  and  that  when  I  first  remembered  it  I 
had  no  toothache,  but  a  tickling  sensation  in  my  throat. 
I  should  certainly  judge  that  the  original  event  was 
contemporary  with  this  twinge  of  toothache  and  pre- 
ceded the  tickling  sensation.  And  I  should  certainly 
judge  that  the  image  was  contemporary  with  the  tickling 
sensation  and  not  with  the  twinge  of  toothache.  If  the 
naively  realistic  view  of  memory  be  true  it  would  seem 
that  the  same  event  can  be  both  contemporary  with  a 
certain  other  event  and  can  also  succeed  this  event  by  a 
long  interval. 

The  present  difficulty  is  evidently  analogous  to  that 
which  arises  on  the  naively  realistic  theory  of  perception 
over  mirror-images  and  "seeing  double".  There  we 
seem  to  see  an  object  in  a  place  which  is  remote  from 
its  real  position,  or  we  seem  to  see  several  distinct 
though  qualitatively  similar  objects  in  different  places, 
whilst  the  theory  requires  that  there  shall  be  only  one. 
Here  we  seem  to  be  aware  of  a  series  of  distinct  images 
which  are  separated  in  time,  whilst  the  theory  requires 
that  the  objective  constituents  of  all  the  memory- 
situations  shall  be  numerically  identical  and  shall  have 
a  certain  one  date  in  the  past.  In  face  of  this  situation 
the  naively  realistic  theory  of  memory  might  take  one 
of  three  courses,  (i)  It  might  suggest  that  the  image 
only  seems  to  be  present,  whereas  it  is  really  past ;  and 


254    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE  OF  EXISTENTS 

that  it  only  seems  contemporary  with  the  tickling 
sensation,  whereas  it  really  precedes  it  and  is  con- 
temporary with  the  twinge  of  toothache.  Or  (ii)  it 
might  suggest  that  we  are  using  words  in  an  ambiguous 
way.  Perhaps  when  we  say  that  the  image  is  present 
and  the  original  event  is  past  we  are  using  "present" 
in  one  sense  and  ''past"  in  another.  The  statements 
may  then  be  compatible  with  each  other.  And  the 
same  explanation  may  apply  to  the  statements  that  the 
image  is  contemporary  with  a  tickling  sensation,  whilst 
the  original  event  is  contemporary  with  a  twinge  of 
toothache  and  precedes  the  tickling  sensation.  E.g.^ 
the  two  statements:  "Napoleon  was  greater  than  Og, 
King  of  Bashan  "  and  :  "Napoleon  was  less  than  Og, 
King  of  Bashan  "  may  both  be  true  if  one  refers  to 
their  relative  heights  and  the  other  to  their  respective 
achievements.  Or  (iii)  it  might  suggest  that  we  are 
not  using  words  ambiguously,  but  that  temporal 
relations  are  not  dyadic,  so  that  the  minimum  complete 
statement  about  the  temporal  relations  of  two  events  is 
of  the  form  :  ";f  is  contemporary  with  jj^  (or  precedes,  or 
follows  7')  with  respect  to  r."  In  that  case,  when  we  say 
that  the  image  is  contemporary  with  the  tickling  sensa- 
tion whilst  the  original  event  precedes  the  tickling 
sensation,  both  statements  may  be  true  even  though  the 
image  is  identical  with  the  original  event.  For  we  may 
be  using  a  different  third  term  of  reference  in  the  two 
cases. 

I  think  it  is  possible  that  when  we  say  that  an  image 
is  obviously  present  each  time  we  remember  a  certain 
event  we  may  only  be  justified  in  saying  that  it  is 
presented  ea.ch.  time,  i.e.,  that  it  is  an  objective  constituent 
of  each  situation  and  an  object  of  acquaintance.  Now 
"  being  present^*^"  is  certainly  one  of  the  tests  that  we 
use  for  "  being  pres^^^""  ;  but  it  may  not  be  an  infallible 
test.  Now  of  course,  on  the  usual  view  of  time,  the  same 
event  cannot  be  present  more  than  once ;  but  there  is  no 
a  priori   reason   why  it  might  not  be  presented  to  ac- 


MEMORY  255 

quaintance  dozens  of  times,  and  it  is  of  the  essence  of 
the  naively  realistic  theory  of  memory  to  hold  that  this 
actually  happens.     Suppose    then    that,   when    we    say 
that  the  image  is  present,  we  are  justified  only  in  saying 
that  it  is  presented.     If  we  think  that  it  is  present  we 
shall  infer  that   we  must  be  dealing   with   a   different 
image   on    each,  occurrence   of  the   memory -situation. 
And  yet  really  we  may  be  dealing  with  a  single  entity 
which    is   presented    many    times    but    is    present    only 
once.     I   think  it  must  be  admitted  that  we  have  not 
the  same  direct  and  overpowering  evidence  that  we  are 
acquainted  with  a  number  of  different  images  in  a  series 
of    memory-situations    with    the    same    epistemological 
object,   as  we  have  for  saying  that  we  are  acquainted 
with  two  distinct  sensa  when  we  "see  double".     In  the 
latter  case  it  is  certain  that  no  inference  is  involved  ; 
nothing  is  needed  but  inspection.     In  the  former  case  I 
am  not  at  all  certain  that  the  statement  is  guaranteed  by 
inspection  ;  I  think  that  it  may  well  rest  on  inference. 
And,   as    I   have  just  pointed  out,   the  premise  of  the 
inference  might  be  derived  from  an  uncritical  jump  from 
*' presentedness  "   to   "  presentness."      Similarly,   when 
we  say  that  the  image  is  contemporary  with  the  tickling 
sensation,  we  may  only  be  justified  in  saying  that  both 
are    presented    together.       And    it    may    be    that    co- 
presentedness,  though  a  test  for  co-presence,  is  not  an 
infallible  test.     The  original  event  might  be  presented 
(in   perception)  along  with  a  twinge  of  toothache  and 
apart  from  a  tickling  sensation,  and   it  may  be  again 
presented  (in  memory)  along  with  a  tickling  sensation 
and  apart  from  a  twinge  of  toothache.     If  we  think  that 
co-presentation  is  an  infallible  sign  of  co- presence  we 
shall  be  forced  to  distinguish  between  the  original  event 
and    the    memory  -  image   of   it,    or   else   to   hold   that 
simultaneity  is  a  triadic  relation.      But,  if  we  admit  that 
the  two  relations  are  different,  and  that  the  former  is  not 
an  infallible  sign  of  the  latter,  we  could  hold  that  one 
and   the   same   event    is    objective    constituent   of    the 


256    MIND'S  KNOWLEDGE  OF  EXISTENTS 

original  perceptual  situation  and  of  the  subsequent 
memory-situation.  This  event  is  both  co-present  and 
co-presented  with  the  twinge  of  toothache,  whilst  it  is 
co-presented  but  not  co- present  with  the  tickling 
sensation.  Thus  I  think  that  the  naively  realistic 
theory  of  memory  could  answer  the  present  objection  ; 
provided  it  is  allowed  to  distinguish  bet^yeen  presentness 
and  presentedness  and  between  co-presence  and  co- 
presentedness,  to  hold  that  the  latter  can  occur  without 
the  former,  and  to  hold  that  one  and  the  same  event 
can  be  presented  at  various  times  to  the  same  mind. 
This  last  point  leads  us  to  the  third  possible  objection. 

(c)  It  is  commonly  held  that  the  past  cannot  change. 
Would  the  naively  realistic  theory  of  memory  be  con- 
sistent with  this  doctrine?  And,  if  it  is  not,  ought  we 
unhesitatingly  to  reject  it?  We  must  begin  by  dis- 
tinguishing between  pure  qualities  and  relations.  I 
think  that  every  one  would  admit  that  an  event  cannot 
change  in  respect  of  any  pure  quality  which  it  had  when 
it  happened.  If  it  was,  e.g.,  a  red  flash,  it  cannot  cease 
to  be  red  and  become  green.  Again,  I  think  it  would 
be  admitted  that  an  event  cannot  change  its  relations, 
in  the  sense  of  ceasing  to  be  related  in  a  certain  way 
to  contemporary  or  earlier  events  and  becoming  related 
in  different  ways  to  them.  But  it  seems  to  me  that 
events  can  and  do  change,  in  the  sense  that  they  acquire 
additional  relations  through  the  occurrence  of  later 
events.  This  seems  to  me  quite  clear  about  temporal 
and  causal  relations.  Queen  Anne's  death  now  precedes 
Queen  Victoria's  by  so  many  years,  and  will  do  so  for 
ever  ;  but  there  was  a  time  when  Queen  Anne's  death 
preceded  nothing.  And,  until  Queen  Victoria  had 
died.  Queen  Anne's  death  stood  in  no  relation  whatever 
to  the  event  which  we  now  call  "Queen  Victoria's 
death".  For  there  was  then  no  such  event;  and  an 
event  cannot  stand  in  any  relation  to  a  mere  nonentity. 
Again,  Queen  Anne's  death  caused  a  feeling  of  annoy- 
ance in  the  Duke  of  Berwick  when  he  heard  of  it ;  but 


MEMORY  257 

it  certainly  did  not  stand  in  the  causal  relation  to  the 
Duke's  feeling  of  annoyance  until   the  Duke  began   to 
feel  annoyed,   which  he  did  not  until   he  heard   of  the 
death.     There  is  then,  in  my  opinion,  no  objection  to 
holding  that  past  events  change,    in   the  sense  of  ac- 
quiring relations  to  events  which   follow  them.      And 
this  is  the  only  kind  of  change  in  past  events  which  the 
naively  realistic  theory  of  memory  absolutely  requires. 
It  requires  that  the  same  event  shall  from  time  to  time 
become  a  constituent  of  successive  memory-situations. 
But    the    memory  -  situations    are   simply   fresh    events 
which  happen  after  the  remembered  event  is  past ;  and 
whenever   a   past   event  is  remembered    it  has   simply 
acquired  a  relation  to   a  certain  later  event,   which  it 
naturally    could    not    do    until    that    later    event    had 
happened.      It    is   worth    while    to    remark  that    even 
universals  and_othe£_timeless  entities  can  change  in  an 
analogous  way  to  past  events.     The  quality  of  redness 
is  timeless  ;  nevertheless  it  sometimes  characterises  one 
thing,     sometimes    another,     and    sometimes    perhaps 
nothing  at  all.     Again,  it  is  sometimes  thought  of  by 
me,  sometimes  by  you,  and  sometimes  perhaps  by  no 
one  at  all.     Thus  even  the  timeless  may  acquire  certain 
additional  relational  properties  through  the  happening 
of  new  events  ;    and  precisely  the  same  is  true  of  the 
past.     It  must  be  admitted  then  that  the  naively  realistic 
theory  of  memory  necessarily  involves  the  proposition 
that  past  events  change  in  certain  respects  ;  but  it  must 
also  be  admitted  that  there  is  no  objection  to  the  kind 
of  change  which  it  involves  in  past  events.     This  brings 
us  to  the  last  objection  which  I  propose  to  consider. 

{d)  If  the  objective  constituent  of  a  memory-situation 
were  found  to  differ  in  some  of  its  pure  qualities  from 
the  remembered  event,  it  would  seem  to  be  impossible 
to  identify  the  two.  For  the  attempt  to  do  so  would 
involve  the  proposition  that  a  past  event  had  changed 
in  respect  to  some  of  its  pure  qualities.  And  this  is 
plainly  impossible.     I   want  to  make  quite  clear  what 

R 


4 


258     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

kind  of  qualitative  difference  between  memory-image 
and  remembered  event  would  be  fatal  to  the  naively 
realistic  theory  of  memory,  and  what  kind  would  not, 
before  I  consider  whether  such  differences  are  actually 
found,  (i)  A  visual  sensum  must  in  fact  have  some 
perfectly  determinate  shade  of  colour  ;  and  so  n3ust_a^ 
visual  image.  If  the  memory-image  is  to  be  incidental  J 
with  the  remembered  sensum  it  is  impossible  "flTanKe' 
determinate  shade  of  the  one  should  differ  from  that  of 
the  other.  But  it  is  one  thing  for  a  sensum  or  image 
to  have  such  and  such  a  determinate  shade,  and  another 
thing  for  us  to  be  able  to  judge  that  it  has  it.  Our 
judgments  about  the  determinate  characteristics  of  an 
object  may  be  of  various  degrees  of  determinateness, 
and  they  are  no  doubt  never  completely  determinate. 
Now  it  might  be  that,  when  an  event  is  presented  in 
sensation,  we  are  able  to  make  more  determinate  judg- 
ments about  its  colour,  for  instance,  than  we  can  do 
when  precisely  the  same  event  with  precisely  the  same 
determinate  shade  of  colour  is  presented  in  a  memory- 
situation.  If  the  only  difference  between  the  memory- 
situation  and  the  corresponding  perceptual  situation  is 
that  the  former  permits  of  less  determinate  judgments 
about  the  same  determinable  characteristic  than  the 
latter,  the  memory-image  and  the  remembered  sensum 
may  in  fact  be  identical.  But,  if  we  can  see  that  the 
image  has  a  different  determinate  characteristic  from 
the  original  sensum,  the  two  cannot  be  identical ;  and 
the  naively  realistic  theory  of  memory  falls  to  the  ground, 
(ii)  Much  the  same  remarks  apply  to  differences  of 
internal  detail  or  external  relation  between  the  original 
sensum  and  the  memory-image.  Both  must,  in  fact, 
be  perfectly  determinate  in  these  respects.  If  the 
difference  merely  is  that  we  can  detect  more  detail  in 
the  perceptual  situation  than  we  can  in  the  memory- 
situation,  the  image  and  the  sensum  may  be  identical, 
and  the  naively  realistic  theory  of  memory  may  be  true. 
But,  if  we  can  detect  details  in  the  images  which  differ 


MEMORY  259 

from  and  are  inconsistent  with  those  of  the  sensum, 
the  two  cannot  be  identical  ;  and  the  theory  falls  to 
the  ground.     What  are  the  actual  facts? 

In  the  first  place,  there  is  a  systematic  and  directly 
noticeable  difference  between  the  corresponding  char- 
acteristics of  sensa  and  of  images.  An  auditory  image 
never  sounds  exactly  like  an  auditory  sensum,  and  a 
visual  image  never  looks  exactly  like  a  visual  sensum. 
No  doubt  there  are  marginal  cases  where  this  systematic 
difference  is  hard  to  detect.  A  very  faint  sensum  may 
be  hard  to  distinguish  by  its  intrinsic  qualities  from  an 
image,  and  a  very  vivid  image  may  be  hard  to  dis- 
tinguish by  its  intrinsic  qualities  from  a  sensum.  But 
in  general  there  is  not  the  slightest  difficulty  in  recog- 
nising that  an  image  looks  and  sounds  different  from 
the  sensum  of  which  it  is  said  to  be  a  copy.  Secondly, 
when  I  remember  a  thing  or  event  by  means  of  an 
imitative  image,  I  can  often  say  quite  definitely  that 
there  are  certain  details  in  the  image  which  are  different 
from  and  inconsistent  with  corresponding  details  in  the 
original.  I  may,  e.g.^  call  up  an  imitative  image  of  my 
friend's  head  ;  and  I  may  be  able  to  say  with  complete 
conviction:  '*His  hair  is  like  that,  but  his  nose  is 
not  of  that  shape."  And,  if  I  can  often  detect  these 
positive  differences  of  detail  between  the  memory-image 
and  the  original,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  they 
still  more  often  exist  when  I  cannot  be  sure  that  they 
do.  Now  it  is  impossible  to  believe  that  a  past  event 
actually  undergoes  a  systematic  change  of  intrinsic 
quality  through  lapse  of  time.  And  it  is  impossible  to 
hold  that  a  past  event  can  undergo  positive  changes 
of  internal  detail  through  lapse  of  time.  Hence  we 
must  either  refuse  to  identify  the  memory-image  with 
the  remembered  event ;  or  we  must  hold  that  the  image 
can  seem  to  have  characteristics  which  differ  from  and 
are  inconsistent  with  those  which  it  really  does  have  ; 
or  that  the  characteristics  which  we  detect  when  we  are 
subjects  of  a  memory-situation  inhere  in  some  different 


26o    MIND'S  KNOWLEDGE  OF   EXISTENTS 

way  from  those  which  we  detected  when  we  were  subjects 
of  a  perceptual  situation.  These  three  alternatives  are 
analogous  to  the  three  which  presented  themselves  when 
we  tried  to  be  naively  realistic  about  perception. 

I  do  not  think  that  the  theory  of  two  kinds  of  inher- 
%,  ence  will  help  us  in  defending  a  naively  realistic  view 
of  memory.  It  seems  quite  clear  that,  if  the  character- 
istics which  we  seem  to  detect  in  images  really  inhere 
in  them  at  all,  they  inhere  in  them  in  precisely  the  same 
way  in  which  the  characteristics  which  we  seem  to 
detect  in  sensa  inhere  in  the  latter.  There  does  not 
seem  to  be  the  least  reason  to  believe  that  the  "  is  "  in 
the  two  propositions  :  "  This  sensum  is  red  "  and  '*  This 
image  is  green  "  stands  for  two  different  modes  of  inher- 
ence, such  that  the  two  statements  would  be  compatible 
even  though  "  This  sensum"  and  "This  image"  were 
identical.  A  theory  of  triadic  inherence  for  colours  has 
a  certain  plausibility  in  dealing  with  perception,  when 
we  remember  that  the  apparent  colour  of  what  we  call 
"the  same  surface"  varies  according  to  the  position 
and  internal  state  of  the  percipient's  body.  But  what 
is  needed  for  the  present  purpose  is  that  the  colours,  etc., 
which  we  detect  when  we  are  in  a  memory-situation 
shall  inhere  in  some  different  way  from  the  colours,  etc., 
which  we  detect  when  we  are  in  a  perceptual  situation. 
And  we  know  of  nothing  that  makes  this  suggestion 
plausible.  I  think  then  that  we  may  rule  out  this  line 
of  defence  for  naive  realism  about  memory.  We  are, 
therefore,  reduced  to  saying  that  naive  realism  about 
memory  is  possible  only  on  the  supposition  that  memory- 
images  can  seem  to  have  characteristics  and  details 
which  are  other  than  and  inconsistent  with  those  which 
they  really  do  have. 

We  must  note  that  this  last  statement  needs  a  little 
further  refinement.  The  essential  point  is  that,  when  I 
remember  something  which  I  have  perceived,  the  objec- 
tive constituent  of  the  memory-situation  often  seems  to 
have   characteristics   and    details    which    are,    and    are 


MEMORY  261 

recognised  at  the  time  to  be,  other  than  and  incon- 
sistent with  certain  characteristics  and  details  which 
the  objective  constituent  of  the  perceptual  situation 
seemed  to  have.  I  make  this  modification  in  case  any- 
one accepts  the  theory  that  the  objective  constituent 
of  a  perceptual  situation  does  not  have  the  character- 
istics which  it  seems  to  have.  Thus  we  may  restate 
the  position  as  follows.  We  can  identify  the  memory- 
image  with  the  original  sensum  only  on  the  supposition 
that  one  and  the  same  event  can  seem  to  have  one  set 
of  details  and  characteristics  when  it  is  the  objective 
constituent  of  a  perceptual  situation  and  can  seem  to 
have  another  set  of  details  and  characteristics,  partly 
inconsistent  with  the  former,  when  it  is  the  objective 
constituent  of  a  memory-situation.  Moreover,  I  must 
be  able  to  know,  with  regard  to  certain  determinate 
characteristics  which  the  object  now  seems  to  have, 
that  it  did  not  seem  to  have  these  and  did  seem  to  have 
others  when  I  perceived  it.  E.g.,  I  may  remember  my 
friend's  face,  and  I  may  remember  that  when  I  saw 
him  his  hair  appeared  to  be  bright  yellow  and  his  nose 
straight.  Yet  the  image  (which,  on  the  present  theory, 
is  identical  with  the  past  sensum)  may  seem  to  have 
hair  of  a  washy  straw-colour  and  a  crooked  nose. 

Now  it  is  no  doubt  theoretically  possible  to  hold  that 
the   sensum    and    the    memory-image   are    numerically 
identical    in    spite    of  the    inconsistency   between    their 
apparent    determinate  characteristics  in  the  perceptual 
situation    and  in    the  memory-situation.     But  I    fail  to 
see  what   advantage  accrues  to    the  theory  of  memory 
from  this  supposed   numerical  identity.     On  any  view  . 
I  manage  somehow  to  remember  the  original  apparent/ 
characteristics  by  means  of  the  different  and  incompat-F 
ible  apparent  characteristics  which  are  manifested  in  the^" 
memory-situation.     If  there  is  any  mystery  in   this,   I 
cannot  see  that  it  is  in  any  way  lessened  by  the  sup- 
position of  a  de  facto  numerical  identity  of  image  and 
sensum  which  is  plainly  contrary  to  all  the  appearances. 


262     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

|\  I  may  now  sum  up  what    I  _,bLaye  to  say  about  the 

jf'  naively  realistic  theory  of  memory.  (i)  That  the 
memory-image  and  the  objective  constituent  of  the 
original  perceptual  situation  are  numerically  identical 
is  a  claim  made,  not  by  the  memory-situation,  but  for 
it  by  certain  philosophers.  Hence  this  proposition  has 
not  the  same  strong  antecedent  claim  on  our  belief 
which  Naive  Realism  about  perception  undoubtedly 
does  have.  (ii)  The  motive  for  a  naively  realistic 
theory  of  memory  is  undoubtedly  the  belief  that,  unless 
we  are  in  direct  cognitive  contact  with  past  events  in 
memory,  it  is  impossible  to  explain  how  we  come  to 
have  the  very  notion  of  "  pastness "  or  how  we  have 
trustworthy  non  -  inferential  beliefs  about  particular 
past  events.  Now  this  presupposes  that  the  objective 
constituent  of  a  memory-situation  literally  is  past ;  and 
that  we  recognise  its  pastness  in  the  memory-situation 
just  as  we  recognise  the  redness  of  a  sensum,  which 
is  in  fact  red,  in  a  perceptual  situation.  Such  a  view 
cannot  be  maintained  in  face  of  totally  delusive  memory- 
situations.  For  in  them  the  objective  constituent 
manifests  the  very  same  characteristic  which  we  took 
to  be  "pastness"  in  other  situations.  And  here  the 
objective  constituent  is  not  identical  with  a  certain  past 
event  which  we  claim  to  be  remembering,  for  there  is 
no  such  event.  Thus,  even  if  the  objective  constituents 
'■y  of  some  memory-situations  be  in  fact  past  events,  it 
--''  cannot  be  admitted  that  there  is  any  infallible  revela- 
tion of  their  pastness  in  the  memory-situation.  The 
objective  constituent  of  a  memory-situation  does  no 
doubt  manifest  a  certain  peculiar  characteristic  which 
we  take  as  a  sign  of  pastness.  But  the  existence  of 
totally  delusive  memory-situations,  and  their  internal 
likeness  to  veridical  ones,  show  that  this  manifested 
characteristic  is  not  pastness  and  is  not  even  an  infallible 
sign  of  pastness.  Thus  naive  realism  about  memory, 
J  even  if  it  be  sometimes  true,  fails  altogether  to  solve 
the   epistemological    problem    which    gave    rise   to   it. 


MEMORY  263 

(iii)   The  a  priori  objections  to  a  naively  realistic  theory 
of  memory,  based  on  the  nature  of  time  and  change, 
are    invalid.     Past   events    exist   henceforth    eternally  ; 
there  is  therefore  no  a  priori  objection  to  their   being 
objective   constituents   of  existent    memory -situations. 
And,    although   the   theory    requires    that   past   events 
shall  be  liable  to  a  certain   kind  of  change,  this  is  not 
an  objection.      For  it  is  a  kind  of  change  to  which  past 
events  and  even  timeless  entities  may  be  subject  with- 
out contradiction,     (iv)  It  is  not  a  conclusive  objection 
to    the   theory    that    the    memory-image   seems    to    be 
present  each  time   the  same  event  is  remembered  and 
that  the  memory-image  seems  to  be  contemporary  with 
events  which    the  remembered  event  precedes.     There 
are  various  ways  round  this  difficulty  ;  and  perhaps  the 
simplest  and  most   plausible  is    to   draw  a  distinction 
between    "  presentness "    (which    cannot    be    repeated) 
and    "  presentedness  ■'    (which    can),  and    to    hold    that 
the  latter  is  a  sign   but   not  an   infallible  sign   of  the 
former,     (v)  The  most  serious  difficulty  is  that  we  can 
recognise  a  general  qualitative  difference  between  any  t  , 
ifhage  and  any  sensum,  and  specific  differences  in  detail  i; 
and  in  determinate  characteristics  between  a  memory-  i 
image   and    the    remembered    sensum.       This    can    be 
reconciled  with  the  naively  realistic  theory  of  memory 
only  on  the  assumption  that  the  same  event  can  appear 
to  have  different  and  incompatible  details  and  determin- 
ate characteristics  according  to  whether  it  is  the  objective 
constituent  of  a  perceptual    situation  or  of  a  memory- 
situation.     Such  an  hypothesis  is  not  impossible  ;  but 
it   entails   the   conclusion    that   either  in    the  memory- 
situation  or  in    the  perceptual  situation  (and    possibly 
in  both)  an  event  appears  to  have  determinate  character- 
istics which  are  other  than  and  incompatible  with  those 
which  it  really  does  have.     The  conclusion  seems  to  be, 
that,  if  the  naively  realistic  theory  ^f  memory  had  aiiy-i 
thing  to  recommend  it,  it  would  be  possible  to  hold  it  \ 
provided  we  made  odd  enough  supplementary  assump-   ' 


/ 


264     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

tions.     But  there  are,  so  far  as  I  can  see,   no  reasons 
direct  or  indirect  for  holding  the  theory. 

I  must  now  raise  the  question  which  was  raised  by 
the  naively  realistic  theory  of  memory,  and  which  the 
latter  failed  to  answer.  If  past  events  be  never  con- 
stituents of  memory-situations,  or  if  at  any  rate  they 
never  manifest  the  characteristic  of  pastness  as  sensa 
manifest  colours,  etc.,  how  do  we  come  to  have  the 
notion  of  "pastness"  at  all?  It  will  be  remembered 
that  a  similar  question  arose  over  the  origin  of  the 
notion  of  a  "physical  object".  Underlying  such 
questions  there  is  a  particular  theory  about  the  origin 
of  our  knowledge  of  universal  characteristics  which  is 
explicitly  stated  by  Mr  Hume  and  tacitly  assumed  by 
nearly  every  one  else.  The  theory  may  be  roughly 
stated  as  follows.  If  a  universal  characteristic  be 
simple  and  unanalysable  we  can  form  a  concept  of  it 
only  by  being  acquainted  with  some  particular  which 
has  or  seems  to  have  this  characteristic.  If  the  char- 
acteristic be  complex  and  analysable,  we  may  be  able 
to  form  a  concept  of  it  without  being  acquainted  with 
any  particular  which  has  or  seems  to  have  it ;  but  we 
must  have  been  acquainted  with  particulars  which 
between  them  had  or  seemed  to  have  all  its  simple 
constituents.  E.g.,  red  is  a  simple  characteristic  ;  and  it 
seems  obvious  that  we  could  not  have  had  the  notion  of 
redness  unless  we  had  been  subjects  of  certain  cognitive 
situations  whose  objective  constituents  were  or  seemed  to 
be  red.  The  really  important  point  is  that  the  particulars 
in  question  should  seem  to  have  the  characteristic.  For 
it  certainly  would  not  suffice  that  they  should  have 
it  without  seeming  to  have  it ;  whilst,  so  far  as  we  can 
tell,  it  would  suffice  if  they  seemed  to  have  it  even 
though  they  really  did  not  have  it,  if  this  be  possible. 
Now  the  trouble  is  that  pastness  is  certainly  a  simple 
characteristic,  and  tHat  the  peculiar  characteristic  which 
memory-images  seem  to  have  cannot  be  identified  with 
pastness,  for   the  reasons  given    above.     At  most  this 


MEMORY  265 

characteristic  can  be  taken  as  a  sign  of  pastness  ;  but 
how  can  I  know  this  unless  in  some  cases  I  have  found 
pastness  and  this  other  characteristic  together?  And 
how  can  I  have  done  so  if  no  instance  of  apparent 
pastness  is  ever  presented  to  my  acquaintance? 

If  we  accept  Hume's  principle  the  question  seems 
insoluble.  It  is  even  more  intractable  than  the  similar 
question  about  the  origin  of  the  concept  of  "physical 
object ".  For  it  might  be  argued  (though  not,  I  think, 
successfully)  that  the  concept  of  "physical  object"  is 
complex,  and  is  constructed  by  us  from  simpler  concepts 
which  are  abstracted  from  sense-experience.  But  I  do 
not  think  that  anyone  could  maintain  this  view  about 
pastness.  One  solution  would  be  to  give  up  Hume's 
principle  ;  which  is  what  I  have  done  over  the  notion 
of  "physical  object".  I  should  then  draw  a  distinction 
between  "empirical"  and  "  categofiaT "  characteristics. 
I  shouTd~can~"red  ",  "hard",  etc.,  "empirical  character- 
istics", and  I  should  be  inclined  to  maintain  Hume's 
principle  about  the  origin  of  our  concepts  of  these. 
I  should  count  "physical  object"  "pastness"  "causa-  v  / 
tion  ",  etc.,  as  "  categorial  characteristics  ",  and  I  should 
be  inclined  to  deny  Hurne's  principle  about  the  origin 
of  our  concepts  of  the  latter.  I  see  nothing  self-evident 
or  sacrosanct  about  Hume's  principle  ;  it  seems  to  work 
well  for  empirical  characteristics,  like  colour,  and  to 
cause  nothing  but  trouble  over  categorial  characteristics, 
like  cause  or  substance.  The  two  kinds  of  characteristic 
are  obviously  extremely  different,  and  there  would  be 
nothing  in  the  least  surprising  in  the  fact  (if  it  were 
a  fact)  that  our  concepts  of  the  one  arose  in  a  quite 
different  way  from  our  concepts  of  the  other.  I  am 
not  assuming  of  course  that  categorial  concepts  are 
"innate",  in  the  sense  that  we  are  born  thinking  of 
cause,  substance,  etc.  So  far  as  I  can  see  each  such 
concept  arises  only  on  the  occasion  of  certain  specific 
kinds  of  experience,  which  can  be  analysed  and  de- 
scribed with  fair  accuracy.     There  are  three  stages  in 


w  ^ 


266     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

the  development  of  these  categorial  concepts.  At  the 
first  stage  they  exist  only  in  the  sense  that,  on  the 
occasion  of  certain  kinds  of  experience,  we  act  as  z/we 
were  recognising  the  presence  of  causation,  of  substance, 
etc.  This  stage  is  reached  by  all  men  and  probably  by 
the  higher  animals.  A  dog,  in  the  situation  described 
as  "seeing  a  bone",  treats  his  visual  sensa  as  appear- 
ances of  a  permanent  and  present  physical  object ;  and, 
in  the  situation  called  "  hearing  the  dinner-bell,"  he 
acts  as  if  he  believed  there  to  be  a  causal  connexion 
between  dinner-bells  and  food.  At  the  second  stage 
we  make  explicit  judgments  involving  the  categories 
in  question;  e.g.,  "Quinine  tastes  bitter  and  gives  me 
a  headache."  This  stage  is  probably  reached  by  all 
sane  men,  and  probably  not  by  any  animals.  Then 
there  is  a  third  stage  at  which  we  do  not  merely  act 
as  if  we  recognised  the  categories,  and  do  not  merely 
make  particular  judgments  which  involve  the  categories, 
but  contemplate  the  categories  as  such  and  make  reflec- 
tive judgments  about  them.  This  stage  is  reached  only 
by  philosophers  while  philosophising. 

Let  us  now  apply  these  general  remarks  to  the  par- 
ticular problem  under  discussion.  I  suggest  that  the 
objective  constituents  of  memory-situations  aTe~~iTOt  in 
fact  past  and  that  they  do  not  even  seem  to  be  past. 
But  they  do  seem  to  have  (and  there  is  no  reason  to 
doubt  that  they  actually  do  have)  a  certain  peculiar 
characteristic  which  is  not  manifested  by  most  images 
or  most  sensa.  Let  us  call  this  "familiarity".  Now 
we  are  so  constituted  that,  when  we  are  subjects  of  a 
cognitive  situation  whose  objective  constituent  manifests 
the  characteristic  of  familiarity,  we  inevitably  apply 
the  concept  of  pastness  ;  and,  if  we  make  an  explicit 
judgment,  it  takes  the  form  :  "  There  ivas  an  event 
which  had  such  and  such  empirical  characteristics." 
Familiarity  is  an  empirical  characteristic  and  pastness 
is  a  categorial  characteristic;  but  the  former  "means" 
the  latter  to  such  beings  as  we  are;  and  this  "mean- 


-'^ 


yL,-Y^^ 


•V^*- 


\ 


MEMORY 


267 


ing"  is  primitive  and  unacquired,  in  the  sense  that  it 
is  not,  like  most  meaning,  due  to  the  repeated  mani- 
festation of  the  two  characteristics  together.  This  is 
the  only  account  that  I  can  recommend  of  "how  we 
come  to  have  the  notion  of  pastness  at  all  ".  I  owe 
the  notion  of  "unacquired  meaning"  to  Professor  Stout; 
though  I  do  not  know  in  the  least  whether  he  would 
accept  my  exposition  of  it  or  the  particular  applications 
which  I  have  made  of  the  notion. 

If  the  reader  cannot  accept  the  above  suggestion  I 
have  only  one  other  to  make,  and  I  am  not  prepared  to 
lay  much  stress  on  it.  The  suggestion  is  this.  The 
specious  present  has  a  certain  small  temporal  extension. 
Now  it  might  be  said  that  the  earlier  objective  con-  i 
stituents  of  the  specious  present  are  actually  past  and 
that  they  manifest  the  characteristic  of  pastness.  On 
this  view  pastness  is  an  empirical  characteristic  which 
is  manifested  by  part  of  the  total  objective  constituent 
of  a  specious  present,  and  we  form  the  concept  of 
"pastness"  by  abstraction  in  the  same  way  in  which 
we  form  the  concept  of  "redness".  We  then  apply 
this  concept  beyond  the  contents  of  the  specious  present, 
just  as  we  apply  the  concept  of  redness  to  things  that 
we  have  never  seen.  We  might  then  suppose  that  the 
earlier  parts  of  the  total  content  of  the  specious  present 
manifest  both  pastness  and  familiarity,  so  that  familiarity 
has  acquired  for  us  the  meaning  of  pastness.  The 
objective  constituent  of  the  memory-situation  manifests 
familiarity  but  not  pastness  ;  but  we  read  pastness  into 
it  through  the  association  which  has  been  formed  be- 
tween these  two  characteristics  in  the  case  of  the  contents 
of  the  specious  present.  I  do  not  think  myself  that  this 
suggestion  will  work.  Apart  from  any  other  difficulties 
the  following  strikes  me  as  serious.  If  familiarity  has 
come  to  represent  pastness  to  us  because  the  two  are 
manifested  together  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  content  of 
the  specious  present,  I  should  expect  the  result  of  the 
association   to    be   that,   finding  the  memory-image  to 


268     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

seem  familiar,  we  should  ascribe  pastness  to  it.  For 
in  the  specious  present,  on  the  theory  under  discussion, 
what  seemed  familiar  itself  seemed  past.  But  we  do 
not  in  fact  regard  the  memory-image  itself  as  past. 
The  familiarity  of  the  image  makes  us  think  of  some 
event,  other  than  the  image,  as  past ;  and  makes  us  say 
that  this  event  had  or  had  not  such  and  such  character- 
istics which  are  suggested  to  us  by  the  image.  I  do 
not  see  that  the  present  theory  will  account  for  this  fact. 
The  question  :  "  How  do  we  come  to  have  the  concept 
of  pastness?"  is  one  question,  and  I  have  tried  to 
answer  it  to  the  best  of  my  ability.  The  question  : 
"What  right  have  we  to  believe  that  we  have  rightly 
applied  the  concept  of  pastness  in  any  particular  case?  " 
is  a  different  one.  I  have  already  said  that  we  have  no 
\  infallible  revelation  on  the  subject ;  that  we  can  indeed 
^  test  our  memory-judgments  by  comparison  and  infer- 
ence, but  only  on  the  assumption  of  the  general  trust- 
worthiness of  memory.  I  have  only  one  thing  to  add. 
There  are  "  secondary  signs  "  of  pastness  ;  just  as  there 
are  "secondary  signs"  of  distance,  such  as  the  size, 
clearness,  etc.,  of  the  visual  sensum.  By  this  I  mean 
simply  that  there  are  certain  empirical  characteristics 
which  are  more  often  found  in  an  image  which  seems 
familiar  than  in  one  which  does  not.  These  become 
empirically  associated  with  familiarity  ;  whilst  familiarity 
is,  in  our  view,  non-empirically  associated  with  the 
notion  of  pastness.  Hence,  by  the  ordinary  process  of 
"telescoping",  these  other  empirical  characteristics  of 
images  may  come  to  stand  for  pastness. 

Non-Perceptual  Memory.  I  shall  end  this  chapter 
by  considering  very  briefly  some  of  the  other  senses  in 
which  the  word  "  memory  "  is  used. 

(i)  It  is  a  fundamental  fact  about  living  organisms 
that,  when  they  have  performed  a  certain  set  of  move- 
ments several  times,  they  tend  to  acquire  a  more  or  less 
permanent  power  of   repeating  these  movements  with 


MEMORY  269 

greater  or  less  accuracy  from  time  to  time  when  suitably 
stimulated.  This  general  capacity  of  living  matter  is 
sometimes  called  ''memory";  and  it  is  in  this  sense 
and  in  it  alone  that  heredity  can  plausibly  be  regarded 
as  an  extension  of  memory.  It  would  be  better  to  call  w 
this  general  capacity  "  retentiveness  "  or  "  perseverance  ".  '^^ 

(2)  We  may  acquire  by  practice  the  power  of  per- 
forming at  will  certain  characteristic  sets  of  bodily 
movements,  such  as  those  which  are  used  in  swimming. 
If  we  find  that  we  can  still  swim  when  we  get  into  the 
water  after  an  interval,  we  should  commonly  say  that 
we  "  remember  how  to  swim  "  or  "  remember  the  move- 
ments of  swimming".  There  is  nothing  cognitive  about 
"memory",  in  this  sense.  To  say  that  we  remember 
how  to  swim  is  merely  to  state  (a)  that  we  can  perform 
the  proper  movements  after  an  interval,  and  (d)  that  we 
believe,  or  that  the  speaker  who  observes  us  believes, 
this  to  be  due  to  our  having  performed  them  in  the 
past.  It  would  be  better  to  call  memory,  in  this  sense,  iL-^ 
"  retentioii  "of' an  acquired  motor-capacity". 

(3)  In  precisely  the  same  way  we  may  acquire  by 
practice  the  power  of  uttering  or  writing  at  will  a 
certain  set  of  noises  or  marks,  as  a  parrot  or  a  monkey 
might  do.  There  is  no  essential  difference  between  this 
and  the  last  case,  if  the  noises  or  marks  are  meaningless 
to  us.  What  has  really  been  acquired  and  retained  is 
a  certain  motor-capacity  in  the  throat  and  tongue  or  in 
the  fingers.  It  is  true  that,  in  this  case,  an  external 
observer  would  probably  say,  not  only  that  we  remember 
how  to  make  certain  movements  in  tongue,  throat,  or 
fingers,  but  also  that  we  remember  the  original  words. 
But  this  means  no  more  than  that  the  movements  in 
question  reproduce  noises  or  marks  which  in  fact 
resemble  those  which  we  had  to  imitate  in  acquiring 
the  motor-capacity.  I  will  call  "  memory  ",  in  this  . 
sense,  "retention  of  an  acquired  speech  -  capacity ",  f^" 
using  "  speech  "  ifi  a  wide  sense  to  include  the  utter- 
ances of  a  parrot  or  the  imitative  scrawlings  which  a 


270    MIND'S  KNOWLEDGE  OF  EXISTENTS 

monkey  might  make.  Here  too  "memory"  is  not  a 
form  of  cognition  ;  it  is  simply  a  kind  of  bodily  action 
such  as  we  perform  when  we  find  ourselves  still  able  to 
swim  after  an  interval. 

(4)  One  peculiar  capacity  which  we  may  acquire  by 
practice  and  retain  is  the  power  to  call  up  an  image 
which  in  fact  resembles  something  that  we  have  re- 
peatedly seen  or  heard  in  the  past.  If  we  can  do  this, 
an  external  observer  who  knew  of  the  fact  would  be 
inclined  to  say  that  we  are  remembering  the  thing 
which  we  have  seen  or  heard  in  the  past  which  the 
image  in  fact  resembles.  But  this  would  not  be  an 
accurate  use  of  the  word  "memory"  unless  the  image 

^^-  seems  familiar  to  us  and  leads  us  to  make  memory- 
judgments.  Apart  from  this  we  have  merely  acquired 
and  retained  a  peculiar  kind  of  capacity;  and  "to 
remember",  in  this  sense,  is  no  more  to  perform  a 
special  kind  of  cognitive  act  than  to  swim  is.  The 
peculiarity  of  the  present  case  is  simply  in  the  nature 
of  the  capacity  which  we  have  acquired.  An  image  is 
not  a  series  of  movements,  and  to  call  up  an  image  is 
not  to  move  in  a  certain  way.  It  is  of  course  possible 
that  the  calling  up  of  a  certain  kind  of  image  is  causally 
dependent  on  the  occurrence  of  certain  microscopic 
movements  in  the  brain  and  nervous  system,  and  that 
what  we  have  primarily  acquired  is  the  capacity  to 
initiate  such  microscopic  movements  at  will.  But  this 
is  purely  hypothetical,  and  therefore  it  would  be  para- 
doxical and  rash  to  count  this  capacity  as  a  peculiar 
kind  of  motor-capacity.  I  will  call  "  mjernory  "  injthis 
sense  "retention  of  an  acquired  capacity  Jfor  imitative 
^magery ".  "" 

(5)  The  four  kinds  of  "  memory  "  which  I  have  so  far 
mentioned  do  not  really  deserve  the  name.  In  them- 
selves they  are  modes  of  behaviour^  and  not  modes  of 
cognition.  To  call  them  "  memory  "  is  merely  to  state 
our  belief  that  the  capacity  for  behaving  in  these  ways 
arose   through    our   performing   similar  actions  in  the 


MEMORY  271 

past,  or  through  our  having  perceived  something  which 
resembled  the  image  which  we  can  now  call  up.  Such 
acquired  and  retained  modes  of  behaviour  may  be 
necessary  conditions  of  genuine  memory,  but  they  are 
nothing  more.  But  it  is  of  course  a  fact  that  when  I 
perform  such  actions  as  these  a  genuine  memory- 
situation  often  does  arise.  The  movements  of  swimming 
may  seem  familiar;  so  may  the  sounds  which  I  utter, 
or  the  marks  which  I  make,  or  the  images  which  I  call 
up.  I  see  no  reason  why  this  should  not  happen  even 
with  parrots  and  monkeys.  A  further  stage  is  that  I 
may  then  make  memory-judgments  of  various  degrees 
of  determinateness.  I  may  judge  that  this  has  happened 
before,  or  I  may  definitely  remember  a  certain  occasion 
on  which  I  have  formerly  swum.  I  see  no  reason  to 
suppose  that  this  stage  is  ever  reached  by  animals.  The 
first  stage  cannot  properly  be  called  "  memory  ",  though 
it  approaches  nearer  to  it  than  the  four  cases  which 
we  considered  before.  The  second  stage  is  definitely 
memory,  i.e.^  a  peculiar  kind  of  cognition  in  which  we 
seem  to  be  in  contact  with  a  part  of  our  own  past  history 
and  with  events  which  we  then  experienced.  I  think 
that  the  name  "memory"  is  often  applied  by  external 
observers  to  the  first  four  cases  because  they  unwittingly 
assume  that  what  is  in  fact  a  repetition  of  a  past  mode 
of  behaviour  and  is  in  fact  causally  dependent  on  past 
behaviour  or  past  perception  must  be  accompanied  by  a 
feeling  of  familiarity  and  a  more  or  less  determinate 
memory -judgment  about  the  past.  A  very  little  careful 
introspection  will  suffice  to  show  that  this  is  a  mistake. 

(6)  There  is  one  other  important  sense  of  "  memory  " 
to  be  considered.  In  dealing  with  perceptual  memory 
we  had  occasion  to  consider  a  certain  sense  in  which  w^e 
"remember  propositions".  But  there  is  another  sense 
in  which  we  are  said  to  "remember  propositions", 
and  it  is  this  which  I  want  now  to  discuss.  We  often 
say  that  we  remember  propositions  about  historical 
characters,  such  as  Julius  Ccesar,  which  we  were  taught 


272     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

at  school.  Again,  I  might  well  say  that  I  remember 
Euclid's  proposition  I,  47,  and  Euclid's  proof  of  it. 
Memory  of  propositions,  in  this  sense,  must  be  sharply 
distinguished  from  the  memory  of  propositions  which 
forms  a  part  of  perceptual  memory.  It  must  also  be 
sharply  distinguished  from  mere  memory  of  sentences. 
We  will  take  these  two  points  in  turn. 

(i)  The  propositions  which  I  remember  because  I 
have  once  upon  a  time  learned  them  may  be  about  past 
events,  but  they  need  not  be.  Euclid  I,  47  is  about  the 
timeless  relations  of  certain  abstract  and  timeless  objects. 
Moreover,  when  the  proposition  which  I  remember  in 
this  way  happens  to  be  about  a  past  event,  I  do  not  say 
that  I  remember  the  event  because  I  remember  the 
proposition  about  it.  I  certainly  do  remember  that 
Ccesar  crossed  the  Rubicon,  and  I  certainly  do  not 
remember  the  event  which  is  described  as  ''Caesar 
crossing  the  Rubicon ".  In  perceptual  memory  the 
propositions  remembered  are  always  about  past  events  ; 
and,  when  we  remember  a  proposition  in  this  sense,  we, 
ipso  facto,  remember  perceptually  the  event  which  it  is 
about. 

(ii)  On  the  other  hand,  memory  of  propositions  which 
we  have  been  taught  or  have  learnt  for  ourselves  cannot 
be  identified  with  a  mere  power  to  repeat  the  sentences 
in  which  these  propositions  were  expressed  when  we 
learnt  them,  nor  with  such  repetition  accompanied  by  a 
feeling  of  familiarity  in  the  words  and  by  a  perceptual 
memory-judgment.  I  remember  Euclid  I,  47  and  his 
proof  of  it  through  having  learnt  it.  But  I  certainly 
could  not  reproduce  the  words  in  my  Euclid  book  ;  and 
I  should  recognise  the  proposition  equally  well  if  I  now 
saw  it  stated  for  the  first  time  in  any  foreign  tongue 
that  is  known  to  me.  Again,  I  might  accurately  re- 
produce a  sentence  without  remembering  a  proposition. 
This  might  happen  if  I  did  not  understand  the  sentence; 
e.g.,  if  it  were  in  Hebrew,  a  tongue  which  I  do  not 
understand  though  I  can  write  the  letters.     Or  it  might 


MEMORY  273 

happen  even  though  1  did  understand  the  sentence 
when  I  learnt  it,  if  I  have  now  forgotten  its  meaning. 
Lastly,  it  might  happen  if  I  understood  the  sentence 
and  could  again  understand  it  by  giving  enough  at- 
tention to  it,  but  I  am  now  repeating  it  parrot-wise 
whilst  thinking  of  other  things.  It  is,  therefore,  im- 
possible to  identify  memory  of  propositions  with  memory 
of  the  sentences  in  which  they  were  originally  expressed, 
for  there  is  not  even  an  invariable  and  reciprocal  con- 
nexion between  the  two  kinds  of  memory. 

I  am  said  to  remember  a  proposition  which  I  have 
learnt  provided  I  have  acquired  the  power  of  contem- 
plating it  at  will,  and  provided  that,  when  I  do  con- 
template it,  it  seems  familiar  to  me.  The  first  part  of 
this  definition  might  conceivably  be  fulfilled  without 
the  second.  If  it  were,  I  do  not  think  that  the  experient 
would  himself  say  that  he  remembers  the  proposition  ; 
though  an  external  observer  would  be  very  likely  to 
say  this  of  the  experient.  Now  I  think  it  likely  that 
we  cannot  contemplate  a  proposition  without  some  kind 
of  concrete  symbolism,  though  this  may  be  to  the  last 
degree  sketchy  and  vague  without  apparently  inter- 
fering with  our  contemplation  of  the  proposition.  But, 
for  the  purpose  of  remembering  the  proposition,  it  is  a 
matter  of  complete  indifference  what  particular  form 
the  symbolism  takes,  and  it  is  quite  unnecessary  for 
the  present  form  of  symbolism  to  resemble  that  which 
was  used  for  expressing  the  proposition  when  we  first 
met  with  it.  No  doubt  the  power  to  reproduce  the 
original  sentence  at  will  is  helpful  as  a  means  to 
enabling  us  to  think  of  the  proposition  at  will  ;  but  it 
is  not  essential,  and  it  is  sometimes  positively  harmful. 
Sometimes  we  have  accepted  a  proposition  in  the  past 
on  authority  or  because  of  a  process  of  reasoning  which 
then  satisfied  us.  Perhaps,  if  we  were  now  to  inspect 
and  criticise  the  proposition,  we  should  no  longer  accept 
it ;  the  reasoning  might  not  satisfy  us  now,  and  we 
might   have   lost  our  respect   for   the  authority.     But, 

S 


274     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

unfortunately,  we  have  acquired  the  power  of  repro- 
ducing the  original  sentence,  in  which  the  proposition 
was  expressed  when  we  first  met  it,  at  will.  When  we 
exercise  this  power  we  think  that  we  are  thinking  of  the 
proposition,  and  we  remember  that  we  have  accepted 
it  and  that  we  had  what  seemed  adequate  grounds  for 
doing  so.  But  really  we  are  not  contemplating  the 
proposition  at  all  ;  we  are  just  behaving  like  parrots  or 
monkeys.  Thus  it  comes  about  that  intelligent  grown 
men  can  honestly  believe  that  they  believe  the  most 
preposterous  propositions  in  theology  and  politics,  pro- 
vided that  these  continue  to  be  expressed  in  language 
that  has  been  familiar  to  them  since  their  childhood. 

I  hope  that  I  have  succeeded  in  this  chapter  at  least 
in  showing  how  ridiculous  it  is  to  attempt  to  reduce 
memory  to  "language-habits".  Such  an  attempt  does 
not  even  seem  to  account  for  perceptual  memory  ;  and 
it  fails  to  recognise  the  elementary  distinction  between 
remembering  a  sentence  and  remembering  a  proposition 
which  one  has  learnt  in  the  past.  It  is  odd  enough 
that  the  attempt  should  have  been  made  ;  but  it  is  far 
more  odd  that  it  should  have  been  hailed  as  a  wonderful 
step  in  psychology  and  as  the  last  word  in  "advanced 
thinking". 


CHAPTER    VI 

Introspection 

Under  the  general  heading  of  "  Introspection"  I  shall 
discuss  the  intuitive  and  non-inferential  knowledge 
which  a  mind  is  supposed  by  many  people  to  have 
of  itself  and  its  states.  Here  we  enter  on  even  more 
controversial  ground  than  before.  No  one  doubts  that 
there  are  perceptual  situations,  and  that  in  them  we 
seem  to  have  intuitive  and  non-inferential  knowledge 
of  physical  things  and  events.  But  many  people  deny 
that  we  can  in  any  sense  "perceive"  our  own  minds  or 
their  states.  Some  hold  that  we  can  "perceive"  con- 
temporary mental  states  of  all  kinds,  but  not  our  selves. 
Others  hold  that  we  can  "perceive"  mental  states  of 
one  kind,  viz.,  "  presentations",  but  that  we  have  only 
discursive  and  inferential  knowledge  of  mental  states  of 
another  kind,  viz.,  "acts".  Yet  others  hold  that  we 
can  "remember"  certain  mental  states,  but  that  we 
cannot  "perceive"  any  kind  of  mental  state  while  it  is 
happening.  I  think  that  the  treatment  of  introspection 
by  philosophers  has  been  much  less  careful  than  their 
treatment  of  perception,  and  that  many  necessary 
distinctions  have  been  ignored.  A  great  part  of  the 
disagreement  about  introspection  seems  to  me  to  be  due 
to  the  ambiguities  of  the  word  which  arise  through  the 
failure  to  recognise  these  necessary  distinctions.  I  hope 
that  in  this  chapter  I  may  at  least  clear  up  some  of  these 
ambiguities. 

General   Characteristics   of   Introspection.      I    think 
that  it  would   generally  be  agreed  that,    if  there  is   a 

275 


276     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

process  which  deserves  to  be  called  "introspection"  at 
all,  the  following  characteristics  must  belong  to  it. 
(i)  It  must  be  intuitive,  like  perception,  and  not  merely 
discursive.  That  is,  it  must  not  consist  simply  of 
judgments  about  minds  and  their  states  ;  and  minds 
and  their  states  must  not  be  known  simply  as  the 
subjects  of  such  and  such  propositions.  No  doubt,  if 
there  is  introspection,  there  will  be  introspective  judg- 
ments ;  and  these,  like  perceptual  judgments  will  be 
about  their  subjects.  But,  if  there  is  introspection, 
our  minds  or  certain  states  of  them  must  be  or  seem 
to  be  objective  constituents  of  introspective  situations, 
just  as  physical  events  or  things  are  or  seem  to  be 
objective  constituents  of  perceptual  situations.  These 
objective  constituents  of  introspective  situations  must 
manifest  certain  apparent  characteristics,  as  the  objective 
constituents  of  perceptual  situations  manifest  redness, 
hardness,  etc.  And  introspective  judgments  must  state 
explicitly  the  characteristics  which  the  objective  con- 
stituents of  introspective  situations  manifest.  (2)  Intro- 
spective judgments  must  not  be  reached  by  inference. 
Even  if  they  pass  beyond  the  objective  constituent  of 
the  introspective  situation  and  its  manifested  character- 
istics, and  are  in  some  sense  based  on  the  latter,  they 
must  not  be  inferred  from  the  latter.  (3)  If  there  are 
introspective  situations,  their  objects  are  the  mind  of 
the  subject  of  the  situation  or  some  mental  event  which 
is  a  state  of  that  mind.  It  is  commonly  held  that  no 
one  could  have  this  kind  of  intuitive  and  non-inferential 
knowledge  of  any  mind  but  himself  or  of  any  mental 
events  but  his  own  mental  states.  Thus  the  objects  of 
introspection  are  supposed  to  be  essentially  private  to 
the  introspecting  mind. 

The  Objects  of  Introspection.  We  are  alleged  by 
certain  people  to  have  introspective  knowledge  of 
ourselves  and  of  some  of  our  mental  states.  And  our 
mental  states  themselves  are  divided  into  two  classes. 


•^    ^^  INTROSPECTION  277 

viz.,  acts  and  presentations.  Some  people  hold  that 
we  have  introspective  knowledge  of  both  ;  others  that 
we  have  such  knowledge  only  of  the  latter.  I  will  first 
consider  our  alleged  introspective  knowledge  of  our- 
selves, as  contrasted  with  our  alleged  introspective 
knowledge  of  our  states;  and  I  will  then  consider  the 
two  different  kinds  of  mental  states,  and  our  alleged 
introspective  knowledge  or  lack  of  knowledge  of  them. 

Introspective  Knowledge  of  the  Self.  The  distinction 
between  a  self  and  particular  states  of  it,  such  as  a 
certain  feeling  of  toothache  or  a  certain  act  of  thinking, 
is  obviously  analogous  to  the  distinction  between  a 
physical  object,  such  as  a  chair,  and  a  physical  event, 
such  as  a  flash  of  lightning  or  a  certain  short  phase  in 
the  total  history  of  the  chair.  Just  as  a  short  slice  of 
the  history  of  a  physical  object  may  consist  of  a  number 
of  different  but  temporally  overlapping  physical  events, 
so  a  short  slice  of  the  history  of  a  mind  may  consist  of  a 
number  of  different  but  temporally  overlapping  mental 
events.  The  characteristic  unity  of  the  successive 
slices  of  the  history  of  a  mind  is  no  doubt  different  from 
the  characteristic  unity  of  the  successive  slices  of  the 
history  of  a  physical  object.  And  the  characteristic 
unity  of  the  temporally  overlapping  events  which 
together  make  up  a  slice  of  the  history  of  a  mind  is  no 
doubt  different  from  the  characteristic  unity  of  the 
temporally  overlapping  events  which  together  make  up 
a  slice  of  the  history  of  a  physical  object.  But,  apart 
from  these  characteristic  differences,  there  is  a  general 
resemblance  which  enables  us  to  regard  each  as  a  per- 
sistent substance  which  passes  through  successive  total 
phases,  each  of  which  in  turn  consists  of  distinguishable 
but  temporally  overlapping  events.  So  far  then  we  may 
compare  the  distinction  between  a  state  of  mind  and  the 
mind  which  owns  it  with  the  distinction  between  a 
physical  object  and  a  certain  part  of  a  certain  slice  of  its 
history.  And  we  may  compare  our  alleged  intro- 
spective   knowledge    of    ourselves    and    certain    of    our 


278     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

states    with    our   alleged    perceptual    knowledge   of   a 
physical  object  and  of  certain  events  in  its  history. 

But  we  must  now  mention  a  difference  between  the 
two  cases,  which  complicates  the  present  problem.  It 
is  very  commonly  believed  that  the  characteristic  unity 
of  the  various  events  in  one  slice  of  the  history  of  a  self, 
and  the  characteristic  unity  of  the  successive  slices  of 
the  total  history  of  a  self,  depend  on  the  presence  of  a 
'  peculiar  constituent  in  every  self.  This  peculiar  con- 
■  stituent  is  called  the  '*  Pure  Ego".  I  do  not  think  that 
anyone  seriously  holds  a  similar  view  about  the  charac- 
teristic unity  of  a  physical  object.  Now  a  result  of  the 
wide  prevalence  of  the  Pure  Ego  Theory  is  this.  When 
I  people  talk  of  the  "Self"  they  sometimes  mean  the 
supposed  Pure  Ego,  and  not  the  states  which  it  is  sup- 
I  posed  to  own.  Sometimes  they  mean  the  complex  whole 
composed,  as  they  believe,  of  all  the  states  of  the  self 
in  their  interrelations  and  of  the  Pure  Ego  in  its  rela- 
tions to  these  states.  And  sometimes  they  simply  mean 
the  whole  composed  of  the  states  in  their  interrelations, 
leaving  the  question  of  a  Pure  Ego  perfectly  open  or 
denying  its  existence.  If,  then,  people  mean  three 
different  things  by  the  "Self",  it  is  evident  that  the 
question  whether  we  have  introspective  knowledge  of 
our  selves  is  ambiguous  ;  we  might  have  to  answer 
"Yes"  to  one  form  of  it,  "  No"  to  another,  and  "  It  is 
uncertain  "  to  a  third.  Let  us  first  consider  the  self  as 
Pure  Ego. 

I  do  not  mean  to  discuss  in  this  chapter  whether  the 
Pure  Ego  theory  of  the  self  is  true.  Here  I  merely 
wish  to  ask  the  hypothetical  question  :  "If  there  were 
:  a  Pure  Ego  would  there  be  any  objection  to  the  sup- 
!  position  that  we  can  have  introspective  knowledge  of 
it?"  Now  the  Pure  Ego  might,  I  take  it,  be  conceived 
in  at  least  two  different  ways,  (i)  We  might  suppose 
that  the  Pure  Ego  is  a  single  long  strand  of  history 
of  which  every  slice  is  exactly  like  every  other  slice  in 
all  its  qualities.     On  this  view  the  Pure  Ego  could  not 


INTROSPECTION  279 

possibly  be  the  objective  constituent  of  any  introspective 
situation,  since  the  duration  of  the  Pure  Ego  stretches 
from  the  cradle  to  the  grave,  whilst  that  of  any  intro- 
spective situation  is  only  a  few  seconds  or  at  most 
minutes.  This,  however,  would  not  put  the  Pure  Ego 
in  any  less  favourable  position  than  the  physical  object. 
Various  slices  of  the  history  of  a  Pure  Ego  might  be 
literally  objective  constituents  of  introspective  situations, 
just  as  various  slices  of  the  history  of  a  physical  object 
might  be  literally  objective  constituents  of  perceptual 
situations.  We  should  have  to  admit  that  the  intro- 
spective judgment:  "There  is  a  single  Pure  Ego 
which  lasts  without  qualitative  change  throughout  my 
life  and  owns  all  my  successive  states "  goes  beyond 
what  is  manifested  in  any  introspective  situation  ;  but 
we  have  had  to  make  a  similar  admission  about  the 
perceptual  judgment:  "There  is  a  penny  which  is 
hard  and  cold  as  well  as  brown,  and  which  existed 
before  and  will  exist  after  the  present  perceptual  situa- 
tion." It  would  not  follow  that  our  beliefs  about  the 
Pure  Ego  must  be  reached  by  inference.  It  might  be 
an  essential  feature  of  every  introspective  situation  that 
its  objective  constituent  is  believed  to  be  a  slice  of  a 
longer  strand  which  is  qualitatively  uniform. 

(2)  A  second  possible  view  is  that  the  Pure  Ego  is  a 
timeless  particular  and  not  a  long  uniform  strand  of 
history.  On  that  hypothesis  there  is  no  a  priori  reason 
why  it  should  not  be  literally  an  objective  constituent 
of  each  one  of  a  whole  series  of  introspective  situations. 

But,  even  if  we  accept  a  Pure  Ego  and  admit  that  it 
might  conceivably  be  an  objective  constituent  of  an 
introspective  situation,  I  think  that  our  actual  experi- 
ence would  force  us  to  admit  the  following  two  proposi- 
tions, (i)  It  is  never  the  (rf?;;///^?/^  objective  constituent 
of  any  introspective  situation.  If  it  be  there  at  all  it  is 
always  accompanied  by  some  particular  mental  event 
which  it  owns.  (2)  It  does  not  manifest  empirical 
qualities  in  the  introspective  situation   in   the   way  in 


28o     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

which  the  particular  mental  event  does  so.  Suppose, 
^.^.,  that  the  total  objective  constituent  of  a  certain 
introspective  situation  is  a  feeling  of  toothache,  to- 
gether with  the  Pure  Ego  (or  a  slice  of  the  history  of 
the  Pure  Ego)  which  owns  this  feeling.  Then  it  must 
be  admitted  that  the  toothache  manifests  in  the  situation 
{i.e.,  "seems  to  have")  certain  empirical  qualities,  such 
as  throbbingness,  stabbingness,  and  so  on.  And  it 
must  be  admitted  that  the  Pure  Ego,  or  the  slice  of  its 
history,  does  not  in  this  sense  manifest  any  empirical 
qualities.  One  can  think  of  at  least  two  possible  ex- 
planations of  this,  (i)  Perhaps  the  Pure  Ego  fails  to 
manifest  any  empirical  qualities  because  it  has  none 
to  manifest.  It  may  simply  have  categorial  char- 
acteristics, such  as  "being  a  substance",  "being 
a  particular",  "being  timeless",  etc.;  and  empirical 
relational  properties,  such  as  "  owning  this  toothache", 
"owning  that  thought",  and  so  on.  (ii)  Perhaps  the 
Pure  Ego  has  empirical  qualities,  but  is  incapable  of 
manifesting  them  in  introspective  situations  to  the 
mind  of  which  it  is  a  constituent.  There  are  analogies 
to  this  in  the  case  of  sense-perception.  If  we  take  a 
naively  realistic  view  of  sense-perception,  a  slice  of  the 
history  of  the  top  of  a  penny  is  an  objective  constituent 
of  my  visual  situation  when  I  look  at  the  top  of  this 
penny.  And  it  has  the  empirical  quality  of  coldness. 
But  it  certainly  does  not  manifest  this  quality  in  the 
visual  situation  as  it  manifests  the  empirical  quality  of 
brownness.  Moreover,  we  should  admit  that  it  may 
have  empirical  qualities,  e.g.,  magnetic  ones,  which  it 
fails  to  manifest  in  this  way  in  any  perceptual  situation 
of  which  we  are  capable  of  being  subject.  We  only 
extend  this  a  little  further  when  we  suggest  that  the 
Pure  Ego  may  be  incapable  of  manifesting  any  of  its 
empirical  qualities  in  any  introspective  situation.  It  is 
no  doubt  unfortunate  that,  if  it  exists  at  all,  it  should 
be  so  extremely  retiring;  but  its  modesty  is  certainly 
not  .a  proof  that  it  does  not  exist  or  that  it  cannot  be 


INTROSPECTION  281 

part  of  the  total  objective  constituent  of  an  introspective 
situation. 

In  this  connexion  I  may  just  mention  Mr  Hume's 
famous  statement  that,  vv^henever  he  tried  to  introspect 
his  Self,  he  always  "stumbled  upon"  some  particular 
mental  event  instead.  I  take  it  that  Mr  Hume  did  here 
mean  by  his  ''Self"  a  supposed  Pure  Ego  v^^hich  was 
alleged  to  own  all  his  mental  states.  And  I  think  that 
the  conclusion  which  has  generally  been  drawn  from 
Mr  Hume's  statement  is  either  that  the  Pure  Ego  is  a 
pure  myth  ;  or  at  any  rate  that,  if  it  exists,  our  know- 
ledge of  it  is  discursive  and  inferential.  I  think  that 
we  may  accept  Mr  Hume's  statement  if  we  understand 
it  to  mean  (i)  that  the  Pure  Ego  is  never  the  whole  of 
the  objective  constituent  of  any  introspective  situation, 
even  if  the  whole  Pure  Ego  be  part  of  the  objective  con- 
stituent of  every  introspective  situation  ;  and  (ii)  that, 
even  if  the  whole  Pure  Ego  be  part  of  the  objective 
constituent  of  every  introspective  situation,  it  never 
manifests  any  of  its  empirical  qualities,  as  the  other  part 
of  the  total  objective  constituent  does.  Now  I  think 
that  this  does  entail  the  conclusion  that,  if  we  know  the 
Pure  Ego  at  all,  we  know  it  discursively  {i.e.,  simply 
as  the  subject  of  certain  propositions)  and  not  intuitively. 
But  it  does  not  follow  that  our  knowledge  of  it  is  in- 
ferential ;  it  does  not  follow  that  there  is  no  Pure 
Ego  ;  and  it  does  not  follow  that  the  Pure  Ego  has  no 
empirical  qualities. 

If  we  are  to  hold  that  we  have  non-intuitive  but  non- 
inferential  knowledge  of  the  Pure  Ego,  I  think  we  shall 
have  to  suppose  that  it  arises  somewhat  as  follows. 
We  shall  have  to  suppose  that  each  particular  mental 
event  which  we  become  acquainted  with  in  an  intro- 
spective situation  manifests  in  that  situation  the  re- 
lational property  of  "being  owned  by  something"; 
that,  on  comparison  and  reflexion,  we  can  see  that  this 
"something"  is  the  same  for  all  the  mental  events 
which  we  can  introspect,  whether  they  be  successive  or 


282     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

simultaneous,  and  that  it  is  not  itself  a  mental  event  or 
a  group  of  interrelated  mental  events.  The  Pure  Ego 
would  then  be  known  discursively,  but  not  of  necessity 
inferentially,  as  the  common  owner  of  such  and  such 
particular  contemporary  and  successive  mental  events. 
Now,  since  the  Pure  Ego  can  be  known  only  in  this 
way  even  if  it  be  a  constituent  of  all  introspective 
situations,  there  seems  no  very  good  reason  for  holding 
that  it  is  in  fact  part  of  the  objective  constituent  of 
any  such  situation.  For,  on  the  one  hand,  since  it 
manifests  no  empirical  qualities  in  any  introspective 
situation,  there  seems  to  be  no  direct  reason  for  regard- 
ing it  as  part  of  the  objective  constituent.  And,  on  the 
other  hand,  if  we  can  have  such  non-inferential  know- 
ledge about  it  in  spite  of  its  manifesting  no  empirical 
qualities  in  introspective  situations,  there  seems  no 
reason  why  we  should  not  be  able  to  have  the  same 
kind  of  knowledge  about  it  even  though  it  were  not 
part  of  the  objective  constituent  of  any  such  situation. 
Thus  the  conclusion  seems  to  be  that,  although  the 
Y     Pure  Ego  might  be  part  of  the  objective  constituent  of 

Q     introspective    situations,    there    is    no   good    reason    to 
•^    suppose  that  it  in  fact  w,  even  if  we  admit  its  existence 
i    and  admit  that  we  have  non-inferential  knowledge  of  it. 
I    have    now    considered    our    alleged    introspective 
knowledge  of  the  Self,  in  the  sense  of  the  Pure  Ego. 
Let   us    next  consider   our  alleged  introspective  know- 
ledge of  the  Self,  in  the  sense  of  the  whole  complex  of 
contemporary  and  successive  interrelated  mental  events 
which   together   constitute   our  mental  history.     If  we 
reject   the   Pure   Ego  theory  this  complex  will   be  the 
Total    Self.      If  we   accept   the    Pure    Ego   theory    the 
Total  Self  will  be  this  complex  together  with  the  Pure 
Ego    in    its   relation   of  ownership  to  all  the  events  in 
the  complex.     Let  us  call  the  complex  of  interrelated 
I     mental  events  the  "  Empirical  Self".     No  one  seriously 

-»,  doubts   the   existence  of  Empirical  Selves,  whether  he 
accepts   or   rejects    the    Pure    Ego   theory.      If  a   man 


INTROSPECTION  28^, 


J 


rejects  the  Pure  Ego  theory,  the  Total  Self  and  the 
Empirical  Self  are,  on  his  view,  identical.  If  he  accepts 
the  Pure  Ego  theory,  the  Empirical  Self  must  still  be 
admitted  to  exist ;  but  the  Total  Self  will  not  be  identical 
with  it.  The  Total  Self  will  then  be  the  larger  complex 
which  consists  of  the  Empirical  Self  and  of  the  Pure 
Ego  standing  in  the  relation  of  ownership  to  the  mental 
events  which  are  constituents  of  the  Empirical  Self. 
The  present  question  is  whether,  and  in  what  sense,  we 
can  have  introspective  knowledge  of  the  Empirical  or 
the  Total  Self. 

The  Empirical  Self  is,  for  the  present  purpose,  pre- 
cisely analogous  to  a  physical  thing  ;  i.e.,  each  is  along 
strand  of  history  whose  successive  slices  have  a  certain 
continuity  with  each  other  and  are  themselves  composed 
of  various  temporally  overlapping  events  united  in  a 
characteristic  way.  Now  I  have  argued  that  physical 
things  cannot,  as  such,  be  constituents  of  perceptual 
situations,  quite  apart  from  all  questions  of  delusive 
perception.  For  the  thing  which  we  are  said  to  per- 
ceive is  admitted  to  last  longer  than  the  perceptual 
situation  ;  it  is  admitted  that  only  a  certain  part  of  a 
certain  slice  of  its  history  could  literally  be  a  constituent 
of  any  one  perceptual  situation  ;  and  it  is  admitted  that 
even  this  part  of  this  slice  does  not  manifest  in  the 
perceptual  situation  all  the  empirical  qualities  which  it 
in  fact  has.  Precisely  similar  considerations  apply  to 
the  Empirical  Self  and  to  our  alleged  knowledge  of  it 
by  introspection.  The  Empirical  Self  is  something 
which  lasts  from  birth  till  death  at  least ;  its  successive 
slices  differ  from  each  other  qualitatively  ;  and  each 
slice  is  differentiated  into  a  number  of  distinct  but 
temporally  overlapping  mental  events.  A  particular 
introspective  situation  probably  lasts  for  a  minute  or 
so  ;  and  it  cannot  contain  as  objective  constituent  more 
than  a  certain  short  slice  of  the  Empirical  Self.  More- 
over, it  is  doubtful  whether  it  would  ever  contain  the 
whole  of  such  a  slice  ;  it  might,  e.g.,  contain  a  twinge 


284    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

of  toothache  and  a  little  more  besides,  but  miss  out  the 
rest  of  my  contemporary  mental  states.  Lastly,  there 
is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  a  mental  event  which  is  an 
objective  constituent  of  an  introspective  situation  must, 
ipso  facto ^  manifest  all  the  empirical  properties  which 
it  in  fact  possesses.  When  I  introspect  my  present 
feeling  of  toothache  it  may  manifest  the  quality  of 
throbbingness  ;  but,  even  if  it  be  literally  an  objective 
constituent  of  my  present  introspective  situation,  there 
is  no  reason  why  it  should  not  have  dozens  of  other 
characteristics  which  it  does  not  manifest  in  this 
situation. 

It  is  necessary  to  insist  on  this  last  point  because  of 
the  wide  prevalence  o^a  curious  superstition.  This  i^ 
the  belief  that,  if  there  be  introspection  at  all,  it  must 
give  exhaustive  and  infallible  information.  It  seems 
to  be  thought  that,  because  the  objects  of  my  intro- 
spection are  my  self  and  my  states,  therefore  they  can 
have  no  qualities  which  they  do  not  reveal  to  intro- 
spection by  me.  And  it  seems  to  be  thought  that,  for 
the  same  reason,  my  states  cannot  appear  to  me  to  have 
qualities  which  are  other  than  and  inconsistent  with 
those  which  they  do  have.  Now  the  first  part  of  this 
is  simply  superstition,  and  there  is  nothing  more  to  be 
said  about  it.  I  will  not  dismiss  the  second  part  at 
present  so  cavalierly  ;  it  is  always  difficult  to  under- 
stand how  anything  can  seem  to  have  characteristics 
which  are  other  than  and  inconsistent  with  those  which 
it  really  does  have  ;  and  it  may  be  that  there  are  special 
difficulties  on  the  assumption  that  mental  events  are 
literally  objective  constituents  of  introspective  situations. 
But  these  difficulties  are  certainly  not  due  to  the  fact 
that  the  states  which  /  introspect  are  i)iy  states  ;  if  any- 
thing can  seem  to  have  characteristics  which  are  incon- 
sistent with  those  which  it  does  have,  in  spite  of  its 
being  intuitively  known,  there  is  no  special  reason  why 
m,y  states  should  not  seem  to  me  to  have  such  char- 
acteristics.    It   is  very  easy  to   deny  the   existence   of 


INTROSPECTION 


285 


introspection,  if  you  start  out  with  the  principle  that 
introspection  must  give  exhaustive  and  infallible  know- 
ledge of  its  objects  ;  and  it  is  therefore  important  to 
say  firmly  that  there  is  no  reason  to  accept  the  principle. 
To  return,  after  this  digression,  to  the  Empirical  Self. 
The  upshot  of  the  discussion  is  this.  On  the  most 
favourable  view  possible  we  cannot  hold  that  the 
Empirical  Self  as  such  is  the  objective  constituent  of 
any  introspective  situation.  The  most  we  could  say  is 
that  the  objective  constituents  of  all  my  introspective 
situations  are  mental  events  which  are  in  fact  parts  of 
slices  of  the  history  of  my  Empirical  Self,  and  that  the 
characteristics  which  they  manifest  in  these  introspective 
situations  are  some  of  the  characteristics  which  they  do 
in  fact  possess.  It  does  not  of  course  follow  from  this 
that  our  knowledge  of  the  Empirical  Self  must  be  dis- 
cursive and  inferential  ;  any  more  than  it  follows  from 
the  similar  considerations  which  we  brought  forward  in 
the  case  of  perception  that  our  knowledge  of  physical 
things  must  be  discursive  and  inferential.  It  might  be 
an  essential  factor  in  every  introspective  situation  that 
its  objective  constituent  is  believed  to  be  a  fragment  of 
a  short  slice  of  a  long  strand  of  history  whose  structure 
is  such  that  we  call  it  an  "  Empirical  Self".  I  am  in- 
clined to  think  that  this  is  in  fact  the  case.  And,  for 
anything  that  we  have  seen  at  present,  this  belief,  which 
always  forms  part  of  the  total  introspective  situation, 
might  always  be  true.  In  that  case  I  should  say  that 
our  introspective  knowledge  of  the  Empirical  Self  was 
intuitive  and  non-inferential  in  precisely  the  same  sense 
in  which  our  perceptual  knowledge  of  a  chair  or  a  penny 
is  so.  It  will  be  remembered  that,  in  the  analogous 
case  of  perception,  we  had  to  conclude  that  our  in- 
stinctive belief  that  the  objective  constituent  of  the 
perceptual  situation  is  literally  a  spatio-temporal  part 
of  the  physical  object  which  we  are  said  to  be  perceiving 
is  certainly  sometimes  false.  This  was  because  of  totally 
delusive  perceptual  situations,  such  as  the  drunkard's 


\ 


286     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

,  seeing  pink  rats.  Now,  so  far  as  I  know,  there  are  no 
introspective  situations  which  we  have  reason  to  believe 
to  be  totally  delusive  in  this  sense.  Let  us  consider 
what  would  be  the  introspective  analogon  of  a  totally 
delusive  perceptual  situation.  Suppose  I  were  subject 
of  an  introspective  situation  whose  objective  constituent 
manifested  certain  characteristics  ;  and  suppose  that  I 
had  a  non-inferential  belief  that  this  event  which  mani- 
fests these  characteristics  is  a  state  of  my  mind,  in  the 
sense  that  it  is  a  fragment  of  that  total  strand  of  history 
which  is  my  Empirical  Self.  This  introspective  situation 
would  be  totally  delusive,  in  the  sense  in  which  the 
drunkard's  perception  of  pink  rats  is  so,  if  and  only  if 
there  were  nothing  which  corresponds  in  the  least  to 
my  notion  of  my  Empirical  Self  or  to  my  belief  that 
this  event  is  part  of  the  history  of  my  Empirical  Self. 
We  call  the  drunkard's  perceptual  situation  "totally 
delusive "  because  we  believe  that  there  are  no  such 
things  in  the  world  as  pink  rats  ;  or  because  we  believe 
that,  even  if  there  be  pink  rats  somewhere  in  the  universe, 
the  objective  constituent  of  the  drunkard's  perceptual 
situation  does  not  stand  in  any  specially  intimate  relation 
to  a  certain  pink  rat,  which  the  drunkard  asserts  to  be 
occupying  a  certain  position  on  his  bed  at  the  moment. 
X  Now  I  say  that  there  are  no  introspective  situations 
T  which  are  known  to  be  delusive,  in  this  sense.  We 
have  no  good  reason  to  doubt  that  there  are  such 
strands  of  history  as  we  call  "Empirical  Selves";  we 
have  no  good  reason  to  doubt  that  all  the  introspective 
situations  of  whose  existence  we  know  are  in  fact  events 
in  the  history  of  some  Empirical  Self;  and  we  have  no 
good  reason  to  doubt  that  the  objective  constituent  of 
every  introspective  situation  does  stand  in  a  certain 
peculiarly  intimate  relation  to  that  particular  Empirical 
Self  which  owns  this  introspective  situation.  There  is 
therefore  no  ground  for  thinking  that  the  belief  which 
forms  an  essential  factor  in  all  introspective  situations 
is  ever  false  in  its  main  outlines. 


INTROSPECTION  287 

I  must,  however,  warn  the  reader  at  this  point  against 
three  misunderstandings,     (i)  I  am  not  saying  that  there 
is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  every  mental  event  stands  in 
this  peculiary  intimate   relation  to  a  certain  Empirical 
Self;  I  am  saying  this  only  of  every  mental  event  which 
is   an   object   of  introspection.     There    may    be    excellent 
reasons  for  accepting  the  reality  of  mental  events  which 
we  cannot  introspect  and  which  are  not  connected  in 
this  way  with    any  Empirical   Self,     (ii)   I  am    talking 
of  the  Empirical  Self  and  not  of  the  Pure  Ego.     I  do 
not  think  that  it  is  any  part  of  the  claim  made  by  the 
introspective  situation   that  its  objective  constituent  is 
owned  by  a  Pure  Ego.     And,  if  it  were,  I  might  think 
that  there  was  good  reason  for  doubting  the  claim.     As 
I  have  said,  I  think  that,  even  if  there  be  a  Pure  Ego 
and   it  be  in   fact  a  constituent  of  every  introspective 
situation,  it  is  not  revealed  to  us  in  any  introspective 
situation,  but  is  known  only  by  a  process  of  comparison 
and  reflection,     (iii)  I  am  not  saying  that  there  is  no 
good  reason  to  doubt  the  claim  made  by  the  introspective 
situation    in  the   precise  form  in  which  it  is  made.     I 
think   that  the  introspective   situation  does  claim  that 
its  objective  constituent  is  literally  a  part  of  a  slice  of 
the  history  of  a  certain   Empirical  Self ;  and  that  the 
characteristics  which   it   manifests    in   the   situation  do 
really  belong  to  it,  though  they  need   not  be  all  that 
belong  to  it.     It  may  very  well  be  that  the  claim    in 
this  extreme  form  cannot  be  upheld  in  view  of  all  the 
facts.     It   may  be  that  we  shall  find  it  impossible  to 
hold   that   the    objective   constituents   of    introspective 
situations  are  literally  parts  of  the  Empirical  Self;  or 
that  we  can  hold  this  only  on  the  hypothesis  that  they 
can  seem  to  have  characteristics  which  are  other  than 
and  inconsistent  with  those  which  they  really  do  have. 
Nevertheless,  the  claim  that  the  objective  constituents 
of  introspective  situations  stand  in  a  certain  peculiarly 
intimate  relation  to  the  Empirical  Self  might  be  upheld  ; 
as  we  have  upheld  the  corresponding  claim  of  the  per- 


\^ 


J 


288     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

ceptual  situation,  in  spite  of  our  inability  to  accept  it 
in  the  precise  form  in  which  it  is  made.  We  must  there- 
fore consider  next  our  alleged  introspective  knowledge 
of  particular  mental  events. 

Introspective  Knowledge  of  Mental  Events.  We  must 
begin  by  noticing  that,  under  the  head  of  "  mental 
events  ",  a  number  of  existents  of  very  different  kinds 
are  included.  Various  people  between  them  claim  to 
have  introspective  knowledge  of  events  of  all  these 
different  kinds.  Consequently  we  have  some  reason 
to  suppose  that,  under  the  head  of  "  introspection  "  a 
number  of  extremely  different  kinds  of  cognition  may 
be  included. 

(i)  Many  people  regard  the  objective  constituents  of 
visual,  tactual,  and  auditory  perceptual  situations  as 
states  of  the  percipient's  mind.  Now  there  are  situations 
in  which  we  specially  attend  to  them  and  try  to  describe 
the  characteristics  which  they  seem  to  have,  as  distinct 
from  describing  the  characteristics  which  the  perceived 
physical  object  is  believed  to  have.  Such  people  would 
describe  such  situations  as  "  introspective  ". 

(2)  Some  people  would  hesitate  to  call  the  objective 
constituents  of  such  perceptual  situations  as  these 
"mental  events",  and  would  hesitate  to  call  the  act 
of  attending  to  them  and  their  apparent  characteristics 
"introspection".  But  they  would  count  bodily  feelings, 
like  headache  and  toothache,  as  mental  states.  They 
would  hold  that,  when  we  try  to  describe  accurately 
to  a  dentist  "what  our  toothache  feels  like",  we  are 
introspecting  it.  Now,  for  our  purpose,  these  two  cases 
are  so  much  alike  that  they  may  be  treated  together, 
(i)  It  might  reasonably  be  held  that,  when  we  have  a 
certain  bodily  feeling,  we  are  perceiving  a  certain  pro- 
cess in  our  bodies  in  precisely  the  same  sense  in  which 
we  perceive  a  process  in  a  certain  external  object  when 
we  sense  a  noise  or  a  coloured  patch.  No  doubt  some 
bodily  feelings  are  accompanied  by  such  vague  per- 
ceptual   judgments    about    our    own    bodies    that    the 


INTROSPECTION  289 

situation  approximates  to  one  of  pure  feeling.  But 
it  is  also  true  that  there  are  visual  and  auditory  situa- 
tions which  approximate  to  pure  sensation,  (ii)  The_' 
privacy  of  bodily  feelings  is  no  ground  for  drawing  a 
fundamental  distinction  between  them  and  the  objective 
'constituents  of  visual  or  auditory  situations.  As  we 
have  seen,  the  objective  constituents  of  several  visual 
situations  with  the  same  epistemological  object  always 
seem  on  careful  inspection  to  differ  in  their  determinate 
characteristics,  and  are  probably  always  numerically 
different.  At  most  we  can  say  that  there  is  a  correla- 
tion of  their  apparent  characteristics  with  each  other 
and  with  the  positions  of  the  observers.  The  additional 
privacy  of  bodily  feelings  consists  only  in  the  fact  that 
there  are  not  groups  of  correlated  bodily  feelings,  in 
the  sense  in  which  there  are  groups  of  correlated  visual 
or  auditory  sensa.  (iii)  When  we  attend  to  a  tooth- 
ache it  manifests,  not  only  such  "sensible"  qualities 
as  "  throbbingness "  etc.  (which  may  be  compared 
to  redness  or  "  squeakiness "),  but  also  the  peculiar 
characteristic  of  painfulness.  Most  noises  or  coloured 
patches  which  we  sense  do  not  manifest  painfulness 
or  pleasantness  when  we  attend  to  them.  But,  after 
all,  some  bodily  feelings  are  practically  neutral  ;  and 
some  very  squeaky  noises  or  very  dazzling  flashes  are 
distinctly  painful.  So  this  introduces  no  essential  dis- 
tinction, (iv)  There  is  one  important  feature  which 
is  common  to  the  two  cases  which  we  have  so  far 
considered  and  is  absent  in  those  which  we  have  to 
consider  next.  I  express  this  by  saying  that  a  tooth- 
ache, a  noise,  a  flash,  and  a  coloured  patch  all  seem 
to  be  homogeneous  events.  No  doubt  they  all  have  or 
seem  to  have  temporal  parts,  and  some  of  them  have 
or  seem  to  have  spatial  parts.  No  doubt  the  different 
parts  may  manifest  different  determinate  qualities;  e.g.^ 
one  bit  of  a  coloured  patch  may  seem  red  and  another 
may  seem  blue,  or  the  earlier  part  of  a  twinge  of  tooth- 
ache may  seem  "dull"  and  the  later  part  "throbbing", 

T 


290     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 


and  so  on.  But  all  the  parts  which  we  can  distinguish 
seem  to  be  of  the  same  kind  as  each  other  and  as  the 
whole  which  they  compose.  Moreover,  the  parts  of 
the  whole  are  united  to  form  the  whole  by  the  unique 
relation  of  spatial,  temporal,  or  spatio-temporal  ad- 
junction. This  is  what  I  mean  by  calling  toothaches, 
noises,  coloured  patches,  flashes,  etc.,  "homogeneous 
events ".  Now  there  are  other  events,  which  some 
people  say  that  we  can  introspect,  that  are  certainly 
not  homogeneous  in  this  sense.  E.g.,  a  perceptual 
situation  {i.e.,  the  kind  of  situation  which  we  denote  by 
such  a  phrase  as  "So-and-so  seeing  such-and-such") 
is  not  a  homogeneous  event  in  the  sense  defined.  For 
it  is  a  complex  in  which  we  can  distinguish  an  objective 
constituent,  a  subjective  constituent,  and  a  characteristic 
relation  between  them  which  is  not  that  of  adjunction. 
We  may  call  it  a  "heterogeneous  event".  Now  some 
people  hold  that  perceptual  sTFuations,  and  other  mental 
situations  which  are  heterogeneous  in  the  sense  defined, 
can  be  introspected. 

For  the  reasons  which  I  have  just  given  it  seems  to 
me  likely  that  there  is  no  essential  difiference  between 
what  is  called  "introspecting"  a  bodily  feeling  and 
what  some  people  would  refuse  to  call  "introspecting" 
the  objective  constituent  of  a  visual,  tactual,  or  auditory 
perceptual  situation.  And  it  seems  to  me  likely  that 
there  is  a  difference  between  this  and  what  is  called 
"introspecting"  a  heterogeneous  mental  event,  such 
as  a  perceptual  situation  or  a  memory-situation.  Now 
the  word  "introspection"  is  generally  taken  to  imply 
that  its  object  is  a  state  of  the  introspector's  mind.  I 
certainly  do  not  want  to  use  language  which  would 
suggest  that  noises,  flashes,  toothaches,  etc.,  are  states 
of  the  mind  which  senses  or  feels  them  ;  for  this  is  a 
matter  of  controversy,  and  my  own  view  is  that  they 
are  probably  not  states  of  mind.  Nevertheless  there 
are  situations  in  which  we  specially  attend  to  such 
events  and  to  their  apparent  characteristics,  and  it  is 


A  INTROSPECTION  291 

^      necessary  to  have  some  neutral  name  for  such  situations. 

I  propose  to  call  such  situations  "  inspective  ",  and  not  '-'^^-^A*^ 
"introspective".  Anyone  who  holdstharToothaches, 
noises,  etc.,  are  states  of  the  mind  which  feels  or  senses 
them  will  simply  regard  inspection  as  a  species  of 
introspection.  Anyone  who  rejects  this  view  will  deny 
that  inspection  is  a  species  of  introspection.  But  both 
parties  can  agree  to  use  the  name  "  inspection  "  for  the 
situations  which  I  have  been  describing,  without  com- 
mitting themselves  to  any  special  view  on  this  further 
question. 

(3)  The  third  case  then  that  we  have  to  distinguish 
is  our  alleged  introspective  knowledge  of  heterogeneous 
mental  events  such  as  perceptual  and  memory-situations. 
It  is  necessary  to  introduce  a  further  distinction  under 
this  head,  which  has  often  been  overlooked.  All  the 
situations  which  we  are  at  present  considering  have 
internal  complexity  ;  there  is  an  objective  constituent, 
a  subjective  constituent ;  and  a  characteristic  relation 
between  the  two.  But,  in  addition  to  this  internal 
complexity,  some,  if  not  all,  of  these  situations  refer 
to  an  epistemological  object  which  is  not  a  constituent 
of  the  situation.  It  is  one  thing  to  recognise  that  a 
certain  perceptual  situation,  e.o-.^  contains  a  mass  of 
bodily  feeling  and  a  brown  elliptical  patch  related  in  a 
certain  specific  way  ;  and  it  is  another  thing  to  recognise 
that  it  refers  to  a  certain  epistemological  object,  £■.£-., 
"this  penny".  Now  some  people  would  say  that,  if 
we  are  asked:  "  What  are  you  seeing;  what  are  you 
remembering  ;  what  are  you  desiring?  "  and  we  answer  : 
"  I  am  seeing  a  penny  ;  I  am  remembering  the  tie  which 
my  friend  wore  yesterday  ;  and  I  am  wanting  my  tea  ", 
we  are  introspecting  in  order  to  answer  these  questions. 
Plainly  we  must  distinguish  between  analysing  a  situa- 
tion, describing  its  various  constituents,  and  noting  the 
relations  which  subsist  between  them  in  the  situation, 
on  the  one  hand  ;  and  recognising,  on  the  other  hand, 
that  it  refers  to  such  and  such  an  epistemological  object 


292     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 


\ 


which  is  not  a  constituent  of  it.  If  both  these  processes 
are  to  be  called  "introspection",  they  ought  to  be 
distinguished  by  suitable  adjectives.  We  might  call 
the  first  "psychological  introspection  "  and  the  second 
"  epistemological  introspection".  I  want  now  to  see 
whether  "  epistemological  introspection"  deserves  the 
name  of  "  introspection  "  at  all. 

I  think  that  there  are  two  cases  to  be  considered, 
(i)  The  situation  may  contain  as  an  essential  constituent 
a  judgment  or  some  other  psychological  attitude,  such 
as  supposition,  whose  "objective  "  (to  use  Meinong's  ex- 
pression) is  a  certain  proposition  or  set  of  propositions. 
The  epistemological  object  of  the  situation  is  deter- 
mined by  these  propositions.  On  this  alternative  the 
recognition  that  the  situation  has  such  and  such  an 
epistemological  object  is  not  an  additional  cognitive 
process  which  may  or  may  not  be  superinduced  on  the 
original  situation  ;  it  is  an  essential  part  of  the  original 
situation  itself.  In  judging  or  supposing  certain  pro- 
positions I,  ipso  facto,  know  what  are  the  propositions 
which  I  am  judging  or  supposing ;  and  therefore  in 
being  the  subject  of  such  a  situation  I,  ipso  facto,  know 
what  is  its  epistemological  object.  The  most  that  we 
can  do  is  to  put  this  judgment  or  supposition  explicitly 
into  words  ;  and  I  do  not  see  any  reason  to  call  this 
process  "  introspection  ".  Now  it  is  important  to  notice 
that  this  process  is  not  infallible,  and  that  in  fact  it  is 
liable  to  a  certain  systematic  error  which  might  be 
called  "The  Epistemologist's  Fallacy".  Although  we 
cannot  help  knowing  what  we  are  judging,  we  may  find 
it  very  difficult  to  say  accurately  either  to  ourselves  or 
others  what  we  are  judging  ;  because  the  subtlety  of 
language  is  not  equal  to  the  subtlety  of  fact.  The 
systematic  error,  which  I  call  the  Epistemologist's 
Fallacy,  is  to  substitute  a  more  determinate  judgment 
or  supposition  for  the  vaguer  and  less  determinate 
judgment  or  supposition  which  really  formed  part  of  the 
original    situation.     In  addition    to   the  process  which 


INTROSPECTION  293 

I  have  been  describing  we  may  (a)  recognise  what  kind 
of  attitude  we  are  taking  towards  the  propositions  in 
question  ;  e.£:,  we  may  recognise  that  it  is  judgment 
or  that  it  is  supposition,  or  that  it  is  doubt,  and  so  on. 
And  {d)  we  may  recognise  the  precise  relation  which 
this  factor  in  the  situation  bears  to  the  other  factors  in 
it,  i.e.,  to  the  objective  constituent,  to  the  subjective 
constituent,  and  so  on.  These  two  processes  are  of 
course  particular  cases  of  psychological  introspection. 
It  seems  then  that,  in  this  case,  the  so-called  process 
of  "  epistemological  introspection  "  splits  into  two  parts. 
One  is  not  introspection  at  all,  but  is  merely  the  state- 
ment in  words  of  certain  propositions  which  are  judged 
or  supposed  in  the  original  situation.  The  other  is  a 
particular  instance  of  psychological  introspection,  viz., 
the  recognition  of  the  particular  attitude  which  we  take 
towards  these  propositions  and  of  the  relation  of  this 
attitude  to  the  other  factors  in  the  situation. 

(ii)  The  second  case  is  this.  There  are  certain 
situations,  notably  perceptual  ones,  which  have  epis- 
temological  objects,  but  probably  do  not  contain  as 
constituents  judgments  or  other  attitudes  towards  pro- 
positions. I  have  described  them  as  best  I  could  by 
saying  that  we  adjust  our  bodies  as  if  we  had  made 
certain  judgments  about  what  is  coming  next,  and 
are  surprised  and  disappointed  if  something  different 
happens.  Instead  of  containing  judgments,  the  situa- 
tions contain  the  feelings  due  to  these  bodily  adjust- 
ments related  in  a  characteristic  way  to  the  other 
constituents  of  the  situation.  In  such  cases,  when  we 
try  to  state  what  is  the  epistemological  object  of  the 
situation,  we  are  really  trying  to  state  explicitly  those 
propositions  in  accordance  with  which  we  have  acted  and 
adjusted  ourselves.  Here  we  are  quite  definitely  going 
beyond  anything  that  was  contained  in  the  original 
situation  ;  otherwise  this  case  is  identical  with  the  last 
which  we  considered. 

The  upshot  of  the  matter  is  that   "epistemological 


294    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

introspection  "  is  not  introspection  at  all,  and  need  not 
be  further  considered.      I    cannot,   however,   resist  the 
temptation  to  remark  that  the  extraordinary  confusions 
which  I  seem  to  find  in  Mr  Russell's  argument  about 
Desire  in  the  first  chapter  of  his  Analysis  of  Mind  ^.te 
due  to  a  failure  to  distinguish  between   psychological 
and    epistemological    introspection    coupled    with    the 
superstition  that,  if  there  were  introspective  knowledge 
at  all,    it  would  have  to  be  infallible.      Mr  Russell  is 
anxious  to  prove  that  we  do  not  know  our  own  mental 
states  by  introspection.     Having  discussed  this  question 
about  other  kinds  of  mental  state,  he  here  raises  it  about 
Desire.     And   he  thinks   it   relevant  to  his  purpose  to 
point   out    (what   he    need   scarcely   have    gone   to  the 
Behaviourists  and  the   Psycho-Analysts  to  learn)  that 
we  are  often  mistaken  in  our  beliefs  about  what  would 
in    fact   satisfy    us.      This    seems    to    me    to    be   triply 
irrelevant  to  his  contention   that  we  do   not  know  the 
mental    situation    called    "Desire"    by    introspection, 
(i)   It  assumes  that  introspective  knowledge,  if  it  existed 
at  all,  must  be  infallible.     No  reason  is  given  for  this 
assumption,     (ii)  It  would  prove  only  that  we  do   not 
know  "what  we  desire  "  {i.e.,  the  epistemological  object 
of  the  conative  situation)  by  epistemological  introspection. 
It  would  not  have   the  faintest  tendency  to  show  that 
we  do  not  know  the   mental  situation  of  desiring,  and 
do  not  recognise  its  constituents  and  its  characteristic 
internal  structure,  hy psychological  miros^ectxon.    (iii)  But 
the  facts  adduced  by  Mr  Russell  are  irrelevant  even  to 
epistemological  introspection,  and  even  on  the  assump- 
tion   that   introspection    must   be    infallible    if  it  exists 
at  all.       For  he  has  failed  to  distinguish  between   the 
epistemological  object  and  the  ontological  object  of  a 
conative  situation.     The  ontological   object  of   such    a 
situation    is    that   state   of  affairs   which    would  in  fact 
satisfy  us  ;    its  epistemological   object  is  that  state  of 
affairs  which  we  believe,  while  the  situation  is  occurring, 
would  satisfy  us.      Who  in  the  world  ever  supposed 


INTROSPECTION  295 

that  introspection  could  give  us  infallible  information 
about  the  former,  even  if  he  supposed  that  it  c(nild  do 
so  about  the  latter?  Mr  Russell's  argument  is  thus 
absolutely  irrelevant  to  his  conclusion,  even  if  his  con- 
clusion be  true  ;  and  he  has  failed  to  see  this  because 
he  has  for  the  moment  overlooked  the  distinctions  which 
I  have  been  drawing.  An  exact  parallel  to  his  argument 
about  desire  would  be  the  following  imaginary  argu- 
ment about  perception  :  "It  is  evident  that  we  do  not 
know  of  the  existence  and  the  constituents  and  the 
structure  of  perceptual  situations  by  introspection  ;  for 
it  is  notorious  that  we  may  think  we  are  perceiving  an 
Archdeacon  when  we  are  really  perceiving  a  scarecrow." 
The  utter  irrelevance  of  this  argument  is  obvious  ;  but 
it  is  irrelevant  in  precisely  the  same  way  and  for  pre- 
cisely the  same  reasons  as  Mr  Russell's  argument  to 
prove  that  we  have  no  introspective  knowledge  of 
desire. 

The  outcome  of  this  sub-section  is  that  we  have  to 
recognise  two  and  only  two  apparently  distinct  kinds 
of  knowledge  which  would  commonly  be  counted  as 
introspection  of  mental  events.  One  is  the  inspection 
of  sensa,  images,  bodily  feelings,  and  other  homo- 
geneous events.  The  other  is  the  introspection  of 
heterogeneous  mental  situations.  The  so-called  "  epis- 
temological  introspection  ",  which  turns  up  in  connexion 
with  situations  that  have  epistemological  objects,  resolves 
itself  into  something  which  is  not  introspection,  and 
into  something  else  which  is  a  particular  instance  of 
psychological  introspection.  I  propose  now  to  consider 
inspection  and  psychological  introspection  in  turn. 

Inspection.  We  must  begin  by  distinguishing  a 
number  of  different  but  connected  relations  in  which 
such  an  event  as  a  noise,  or  a  patch  that  appears 
coloured,  may  stand  to  a  percipient.  Let  us  suppose 
that  I  am  looking  attentively  at  a  penny.  There  is  a 
certain  objective  constituent  which,  on  inspection,  will 
seem    to   have   a   certain  determinate   ellipticity  and  a 


296     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

certain  non-uniform  distribution  of  various  shades  of 
brown.  This  patch  will  itself  be  a  spatial  part  of  a 
bigger  visual  field.  Now  (i)  this  visual  field  as  a  whole 
stands  in  a  certain  peculiar  relation  to  me  which  I 
express  by  saying  that  it  "is  being  sensed  by  me". 
If  another  person  be  looking  at  the  penny  at  the  same 
time,  this  visual  field  will  not  stand  in  this  relation  to 
him  ;  though  there  will  be  another  visual  field  which 
does  stand  in  this  relation  to  him  and  does  not  stand  in 
it  to  me.  Moreover,  if  I  turn  my  back,  this  visual  field 
(even  if  it  continues  to  exist)  will  cease  to  stand  in  this 
relation  to  me.  These  statements  will,  I  hope,  indicate 
what  I  mean  by  saying  that  a  visual  field  is  sensed, 
(ii)  It  seems  to  me  that  when  a  field  is  sensed  there  is 
always  one^  and  there  may  well  be  many,  "sets  of 
adjoined  parts"  such  that  each  member  of  this  set  is 
also  sensed  by  me.  By  a  "set  of  adjoined  parts"  I 
mean  a  set  of  spatially  or  temporally  or  spatio-tem- 
porally  extended  parts  which  fit  together  without  over- 
lapping to  make  up  an  extended  whole.  It  is  evident 
that  the  same  extended  whole  has  an  enormous  number 
of  different  sets  of  adjoined  parts  ;  for  this  merely  means 
that  it  can  be  exhaustively  divided  up  in  an  enormous 
number  of  different  ways.  (I  owe  the  conception  of  a 
set  of  adjoined  parts  to  Dr  M'Taggart.)  (iii)  On  the 
other  hand,  it  seems  to  me  that  when  a  whole  is  sensed 
it  may  quite  well  have  parts  which  are  not  sensed 
because  they  are  too  small  or  of  too  short  duration. 
Thus  it  is  possible  that  a  visual  field  which  is  sensed 
may  have  many  sets  of  adjoined  parts  such  that  no 
member  of  any  of  these  sets  is  sensed.  And  of  course 
there  may  be  sets  of  adjoined  parts  of  a  sensed  whole 
such  that  some  members  of  any  such  set  are  sensed 
and  other  members  of  that  set  are  not  sensed,  (iv)  In 
our  example  the  visual  appearance  of  the  penny  and 
the  remainder  of  the  visual  field  form  a  set  of  adjoined 
parts  of  the  visual  field.  And  both  members  of  this  set 
are  sensed,     (v)  Now,  although  the  visual  appearance 


INTROSPECTION  297 

of  the  penny  and  the  rest  of  the  visual  field  agree  in  the 
fact   that   they  are   both  sensed   by   me,   they   differ  in 
another  respect.     I   express   this   difference  by  saying 
that  the  former  is  and  the  latter  is  not  "selected  by 
me".        Whatever    part   of  a   field    is   selected    by  me  ', 
must  also  be  sensed  by  me  ;  but  there  may  be  parts  of  , 
the  field  which  are  sensed  by  me  without  being  selected 
by  me.     (vi)  At  this  point  we  come  to  a  parting  of  the    ' 
ways.     A  part  of  the  field  which  is  selected  by  me  may   r  ^    \ 

{a)  be  used  for  perceiving  a  certain  physical  object  and    '        ^S*^/ 
for  learning  about  its  physical  characteristics,  or  [b)  it  /  / 

may  become  an  object  of  inspection  by  me  with  a  view     j 
to  learning  accurately  its  own  apparent  characteristics. 
We  can  inspect  only  what  we  have  selected,  and  we  can 
perceive  only  with  what  we  have  selected.     And  we  can 
select  only  those  parts  of  a  sensed  field  which  we  sense. 
■  But  we  can  either  ms^^ct  or  perceive  with  -a  part  of  a  > . 
field  which_we  sense  ajid  select;  and  I  am  inclined  to  '^^^ 
think  that  we  must  do  one  or  the  other.     I  think  that  it 
is~"vital   for   the    present   purpose  to   distinguish   these 
relations   of  being    sensed,    being   selected,    being   in- 
spected,   and   being    used    for   perceiving  ;  and    to    get 
clear  about  their  mutual  connexions. 

Inspective  situations  undoubtedly  do  arise,  though 
they  are  of  course  far  less  common  than  perceptual  and 
sensational  situations.  In  ordinary  life  the  most  im- 
portant inspective  situations  are  those  in  which  we 
select  and  inspect  a  certain  bodily  feeling  in  order  to 
describe  its  apparent  characteristics  as  accurately  as  we 
can  to  our  doctor  or  our  dentist.  Inspective  situations 
which  are  not  concerned  with  bodily  feelings  are  almost 
confined  to  philosophers,  psychologists,  and  those 
physiologists  who  study  the  psycho -physiology  of 
sense-perception.  And  even  these  specialists  are 
subjects  of  such  situations  only  at  certain  rare  intervals 
when  inspection  becomes  necessary  for  their  investiga- 
tions. Anyone  who  has  ever  put  himself  in  an  in- 
spective   situation    and    tried    to  discover  the  apparent 


I 


298     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

qualities  of  his  visual  or  auditory  sensa,  as  distinct  from 
trying  to  discover  the  physical  qualities  of  external 
objects,  will  recognise  how  utterly  different  it  is  to 
inspect  a  sensum  and  to  perceive  with  it. 

There  are  several  questions  to  be  raised  about  in- 
spection, (i)  I  have  said  that,  when  we  select  a  certain 
part  of  a  sense-field  in  addition  to  merely  sensing  it,  we 
must  either  inspect  it  or  perceive  with  it.  Can  we  do 
both?  Can  we  perceive  with  and  inspect  precisely  and 
numerically  the  same  noise  or  apparently  coloured 
patch?  I  think  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  we  can.  At 
any  rate  I  find  that,  when  I  am  tempted  to  think  that  I 
do  so,  I  have  really  been  alternating  quickly  to  and  fro 
between  "perceiving  with"  and  "inspecting".  Now 
this  raises  a  problem.  My  main  motive  as  a  philosopher 
for  inspecting  a  certain  noise  or  apparently  coloured 
patch  is  to  describe  accurately  the  apparent  qualities  of 
the  objective  constituent  of  some  auditory  or  visual 
perceptual  situation.  But,  if  what  I  inspect  be  probably 
never  numerically  the  same  as  what  I  have  perceived 
with,  what  right  have  I  to  believe  that  the  objective 
constituent  of  the  past  perceptual  situation  had  (or  would 
have  seemed  to  have)  those  characteristics  which  the 
objective  constituent  of  the  present  inspective  situation 
does  now  seem  to  have?  To  this  question  I  can  only 
make  the  following  answers.  No  conclusive  reason  can 
be  given  for  this  belief;  it  is  a  memory-judgment,  and 
the  correctness  of  memory  in  general  cannot  be  proved 
by  argument.  It  may  be  that  the  characteristics  which 
the  objective  constituent  of  an  inspective  situation  seems 
to  have  are  always  different  from  those  which  the 
objective  constituent  of  the  immediately  previous 
perceptual  situation  had  or  seemed  to  have.  If  it 
amuses  anyone  to  assert  this  I  cannot  possibly  refute 
him.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  not  the  least 
reason  to  believe  him.  If  any  memory-judgment  be 
true,  this  one  would  seem  to  have  the  strongest  possible 
claims.     The   numerical  diversity  of  the  two  objective 


INTROSPECTION  299 

constituents  is  of  course  no  bar  to  complete  identity  of 
their  actual  or  their  apparent  qualities.  And  the  two 
situations,  and  their  respective  objective  constituents, 
are  contiguous  in  time;  so  that  there  is  the  minimum 
possible  opportunity  for  forgetting. 

(2)  We  can  now  state  our  position  about  the  relation 
between  inspection  and  memory.  Inspection  itself  is 
not  memory.  The  purely  inspective  situation  does  not 
refer  to 'the  past;  it  merely  professes  to  describe  the 
apparent  characteristics  of  its  own  objective  constituent,  j 
But  the  objective  constituent  of  an  inspective  situation 
is  very  often  the  objective  constituent  of  a  co-existing 
memory-situation.  And  the  epistemological  object  of 
this  memory-situation  is  such  that,  if  anything  corre- 
sponds to  it,  this  corresponding  object  is  the  objective 
constituent  of  an  immediately  previous  perceptual  situa- 
tion or  of  some  other  immediately  previous  situation 
such  as  a  memory-situation.  In  so  far  as  we  profess 
to  be  learning  by  inspection  about  the  apparent  char- 
acteristics of  the  objective  constituent  of  a  perceptual 
or  memory-situation,  we  are  relying,  not  on  inspection 
alone,  but  on  inspection  and  memory.  But  the  condi- 
tions are  such  that,  if  any  memory-situation  be  veridical, 
this  one  may  reasonably  be  expected  to  be  so. 

(3)  What  is  the  precise  difference  between  trying  to 
learn  more  accurately  about  the  determinate  qualities 
and  the  details  of  a  perceived  physical  object  by  careful 
attention,  and  trying  to  learn  more  accurately  about 
the  determinate  qualities  and  details  of  the  objective 
constituent  of  a  perceptual  situation  by  inspection  ?  It 
seems  to  me  that  one  very  important  difference  is  the 
following,  (a)  In  the  former  case  I  do  not  try  to  keep 
the  perceptual  situation  constant.  I  try  to  replace  it 
by  a  certain  series  of  perceptual  situations  with  different 
objective  constituents.  And,  in  particular,  I  choose 
certain  special  situations  whose  objective  constituents 
are  believed  to  reveal  certain  details  or  qualities  of  the 
perceived  object  more  fully  or  determinately  than  others. 


300     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

An  elementary  example  of  what  I  mean  is  looking  at 
the  thing  from  various  points  of  view  and  approaching 
it  until  it  is  at  the  distance  of  most  distinct  vision. 
An  exaggerated  example  is  looking  at  the  thing  through 
some  optical  instrument,  such  as  a  microscope  or  a 
telescope.  {b)  In  the  latter  case  I  try  to  keep  the 
perceptual  situation  as  nearly  constant  as  I  can,  and 
to  inspect  the  objective  constituent  of  that  situation  or 
of  others  as  like  it  as  possible.  To  look  through  a 
microscope  does  not  tell  me  more  about  the  objective 
constituent  of  my  previous  visual  situation  ;  it  replaces 
it  by  another  visual  situation  with  the  same  episte- 
mological  object  and  a  different  objective  constituent. 
And  the  new  objective  constituent  is  supposed  to  justify 
certain  more  determinate  judgments  about  the  details 
of  the  perceived  object  than  the  old  one  could  do. 

(4)  There  is  one  other  question  which  I  wish  to 
discuss  in  this  subsection.  Is  inspection  infallible ; 
and,  if  so,  in  what  sense?  We  must  begin  by  drawing 
certain  distinctions,  (i)  We  must  not  confuse  the  pure 
inspective  judgment  with  the  memory-judgment  which 
so  often  accompanies  it  and  is  based  on  the  same 
objective  constituent.  Of  the  latter  we  can  only  say 
that  it  has  as  good  a  chance  of  being  true  as  any 
memory -judgment  can  possibly  have,  and  a  much  better 
chance  than  most  memory-judgments  have,  (ii)  We 
must  not  confuse  the  inspective  judgment  itself  with  the 
sentences  in  which  we  may  try  to  express  it  to  ourselves 
or  to  others.  There  are  many  more  degrees  of  deter- 
minateness  in  our  judgments  than  variations  in  language 
to  express  them.  Owing  to  this  inevitable  limitation 
of  language  the  most  careful  formulation  of  an  inspective 
judgment  in  words  may  convey  a  wrong  impression 
even  though  the  judgment  be  itself  true,  (iii)  There 
is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  inspective  judgments  are 
infallible  in  the  sense  of  being  exhaustive.  Suppose 
I  sense,  select  and  inspect  a  certain  noise  or  a  certain 
apparently  red  patch.     Such  an  object  is  exhaustively 


INTROSPECTION  301 

divisible  in  innumerable  different  ways  into  different 
sets  of  adjoined  parts.  Now  some  of  these  sets  of 
adjoined  parts  may  consist  of  members  all  of  which  are 
too  small  or  of  too  short  duration  to  be  sensed  or  selected 
or  inspected  ;  yet  together  the  members  of  any  one  of 
these  sets  make  up  a  whole  which  is  sensed,  selected 
and  inspected.  We  must  not  suppose  then  that,  because 
we  inspect  a  certain  spatio-temporally  extended  whole, 
we  therefore,  ipso  facto,  have  inspective  knowledge  of 
all  or  of  most  of  its  parts,  (iv)  So  far  as  I  can  see,  a 
certain  whole  might  have  a  certain  characteristic  and 
there  might  be  a  certain  set  of  adjoined  parts  which 
make  up  this  whole  and  do  not  have  this  characteristic. 
There  might  be  another  set  of  adjoined  parts  of  the 
same  whole  all  of  which  do  have  the  same  characteristic 
as  the  whole.  E.g.,  a  certain  patch  may  appear  red  as 
a  whole.  There  is  one  set  of  adjoined  parts  consisting 
of  two  halves  of  this  patch  ;  each  member  of  this  set 
may  also  appear  red.  But  there  may  also  be  a  set  of 
adjoined  parts  of  the  patch  each  member  of  which  is  too 
small  to  appear  red  or  to  appear  to  have  any  colour  at 
all.  Thus  the  characteristic  of  "  appearing  to  be  red  " 
may  belong  to  a  whole  and  to  some  of  its  parts,  but  this 
whole  may  also  be  composed  of  a  set  of  adjoined  parts 
none  of  which  has  this  characteristic  of  "appearing  to 
be  red  ".  Nor  do  I  see  any  reason  why  the  whole  and 
some  of  its  parts  should  not  be  red,  whilst  none  of  the 
members  of  a  certain  set  of  adjoined  parts  of  this  whole 
are  red.  And,  just  as  a  whole  may  have  certain  char- 
acteristics which  do  not  belong  to  afiy  member  of  a 
certain  set  of  adjoined  parts  of  it,  so  all  the  members  of 
a  certain  set  of  adjoined  parts  of  a  certain  whole  might 
have  some  positive  characteristic  which  does  not  belong 
to  the  whole  or  to  some  of  its  parts.  A  red  whole  may 
have  a  set  of  adjoined  parts  none  of  which  is  red  ;  and 
every  one  of  these  parts  might,  e.g.,  be  a  mind,  whilst 
the  whole  is  not  a  mind.  We  must  not  therefore 
suppose  that,  because  we  have  inspective  knowledge  of 


4- 


302    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

certain  characteristics  of  a  certain  whole,  we  shall  there- 
fore, ipso  facto,  have  inspective  knowledge  of  all  the 
characteristics  of  all  its  parts,  (v)  I  have  now  pointed 
out  certain  common  confusions  which  we  must  avoid  in 
discussing  our  present  question,  and  have  shown  that 
there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  inspection  will  give  us 
exhaustive  information  about  its  objects.  The  question 
that  remains  is  this  :  "  Is  there  any  ground  for  doubting 
that  the  events  which  we  inspect  do  have  precisely  those 
qualities  which  they  seem  to  have  and  those  parts  which 
we  seem  to  find  on  inspecting  them  as  carefully  as  we 
can?" 

I  think  that  the  answer  to  this  last  question  is  that 
there  is  no  ground  for  doubt  in  any  case  except  when 
the  apparent  characteristics  of  the  inspected  event  are 
ascribed  by  a  memory-judgment  to  the  objective  con- 
stituent of  an  immediately  past  perceptual  situation.  I 
inspect  a  certain  selected  patch  in  my  visual  field,  and  I 
find  that  it  looks  elliptical.  I  make  a  memory-judgment 
ascribing  this  apparent  shape  to  the  objective  constituent 
of  an  immediately  past  perceptual  situation  in  which  I 
claimed  to  be  seeing  the  roiind  top  of  a  certain  penny. 
Now,  if  I  insist  on  identifying  the  objective  constituent 
of  this  recent  perceptual  situation  with  the  actual  top  of 
the  penny,  I  have  two  alternatives,  (i)  I  may  reject  the 
memory-judgment.  I  may  say:  "The  objective  con- 
stituent of  my  present  inspective  situation  certainly 
appears  elliptical  ;  but  my  memory-judgment  that  the 
objective  constituent  of  my  past  perceptual  situation 
appeared  elliptical  must  be  mistaken.  The  latter  objec- 
tive constituent  must  have  appeared  round."  On  this 
alternative  there  is  no  need  for  me  to  suppose  that 
either  objective  constituent  seems  to  have  a  different 
characteristic  from  that  which  it  does  have.  One  was 
round  and  appeared  so ;  the  other  is  elliptical  and 
appears  so  ;  my  memory  simply  deceives  me  when  I 
ascribe  the  characteristic  of  the  second  to  the  first,  (ii) 
I  may  accept  the  memory-judgment.    I  may  say  :   "  The 


INTROSPECTION  303 

objective  constituent  of  my  present  inspective  situation 
certainly  appears  elliptical  ;  and  my  memory-judgment 
that  the  objective  constituent  of  my  past  perceptual 
situation  appeared  elliptical  is  correct.  So  this  latter 
objective  constituent  must  have  been  round,  although 
it  appeared  elliptical."  On  this  alternative  it  is  not 
indeed  positively  necessary  to  hold  that  the  objective 
constituent  of  the  present  inspective  situation  has  a 
different  characteristic  from  that  which  it  appears  to 
have.  But  it  is  necessary  to  hold  this  about  the  objective 
constituent  of  the  past  perceptual  situation.  And  this 
would  make  it  very  rash  to  be  sure  that  the  objective 
constituent  of  the  present  inspective  situation  does  have 
the  characteristic  which  it  seems  to  have.  For,  if  there 
is  certainly  this  divergence  between  apparent  and  actual 
characteristics  in  the  objective  constituent  of  the  per- 
ceptual situation,  we  can  hardly  feel  confident  that  a 
like  divergence  may  not  exist  in  the  case  of  the  inspective 
situation. 

It  will  be  noticed,  however,  that  both  these  unpleasant 
alternatives  depend  on  the  assumption  that  the  objective 
constituent  of  a  perceptual  situation  must  be  literally  a 
spatio-temporal  part  of  the  perceived  physical  object. 
If  we  reject  this  assumption,  there  is  no  reason  why  we 
should  not  accept  both  the  view  that  the  objective 
constituent  of  the  inspective  situation  has  the  character- 
istics which  it  seems  to  have,  and  also  the  memory- 
judgment  that  the  objective  constituent  of  the  previous 
perceptual  situation  seemed  to  have  these  same  char- 
acteristics. For  there  is  now  no  reason  to  suppose 
that  the  latter  did  not  have  the  characteristics  which 
the  memory -judgment  asserts  that  it  seemed  to 
have.  We  can  therefore  accept  the  memory -judgment 
without  casting  doubt  on  the  proposition  that  the 
objective' constituent  of  the  inspective  situation  has  the 
characteristics  which  it  seems  to  have.  For,  if  there 
be  now  no  reason  to  doubt  that  the  objective  constituent 
of  the  recent  perceptual  situation  had  the  characteristics 


V 

i 


304    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

which  we  remember  that  it  seemed  to  have,  there  is  no 
reason  to  doubt  that  the  objective  constituent  of  the 
present  inspective  situation  has  the  characteristics  which 
it  seems  to  have. 

The  upshot  of  the  matter  is  that  there  is  no  reason  to 
doubt  that  inspection  gives  us  information  which  is 
accurate,  so  far  as  it  goes,  about  certain  characteristics 
which  actually  belong  to  the  inspected  object ;  and 
there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  these  characteristics 
did  actually  belong  to  the  objective  constituent  of  the 
immediately  past  perceptual  situation.  For  the  only 
ground  for  doubting  either  of  these  propositions  is  the 
assumption  that  the  objective  constituent  of  a  perceptual 
situation  must  be  literally  identical  with  a  certain  part 
of  the  perceived  physical  object.  And  we  saw,  in 
discussing  Perception,  that  there  are  almost  conclusive 
objections  to  this  assumption. 

Introspection  Proper.  It  will  be  remembered  that  I 
refused  to  call  the  kind  of  cognition  which  I  have  just 
been  discussing  "Introspection"  because  I  think  it 
doubtful  whether  its  objects,  viz.,  sensa,  images,  bodily 
feelings,  etc.,  can  properly  be  regarded  as  "states  of 
mind ".  I  am  doubtful  whether  they  are  even  exist- 
entially  inznd-depe?ide?it,  though  I  think  it  likely  that 
they  are  to  some  extent  qualitatively  mind-dependent. 
Even  if  they  be  existentially  mind-dependent  it  would 
not  follow  that  they  can  be  counted  as  states  of  our 
minds,  i.e.^  as  literally  parts  of  that  strand  of  history 
which  is  our  Empirical  Self.  When  we  reflect  I  think 
we  find  that  we  do  not  really  regard  noises,  visual  and 
auditory  images,  and  so  on,  as  literally  parts  of  our- 
selves or  items  in  our  mental  history,  in  the  sense  in 
which  we  do  regard  "being  aware  of"  a  noise  or  an 
image  as  part  of  our  mental  history.  About  bodily 
feelings  I  think  we  are  more  doubtful.  This  is  because 
we  find  more  difficulty  in  distinguishing  between  a 
toothache  and  the  awareness  of  a  toothache  than  in 
distinguishing  between  a  noise  and  the  awareness  of  a 


INTROSPECTION  305 

noise.  However  this  may  be  I  think  that  every  one 
would  admit  that  what  is  indubitably  mental  and  in- 
dubitably part  of  our  mental  history  is  such  events  as 
*' being  aware  of  a  noise  ",  "  contemplating  an  image", 
''remembering  a  past  event",  "seeing  a  penny",  and 
so  on.  If  there  are  situations  in  which  we  have  intuitive 
and  non-inferential  knowledge  of  such  heterogeneous 
mental  events  as  these  there  is  no  doubt  that  they  would 
be  called  "introspective  shua.tlons''  par  exce//ence. 

We  must  begin  by  distinguishing  these  heterogeneous 
mental  events  into  two  classes,  viz.  (i)  those  which  do, 
and  (ii)  those  which  do  not  have  an  external  reference 
to  an  epistemological  object.  As  we  have  seen,  per- 
ceptual and  memory-situations  belong  to  the  former 
class.  So  far  as  I  can  see,  purely  inspective  situations 
would  belong  to  the  latter  class.  So  would  pure  sen- 
sation, the  mere  awareness  of  an  image,  etc.  Whether 
situations  of  the  second  kind  ever  exist  in  isolation  is 
a  doubtful  point  ;  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  pure 
sensations,  etc.,  are  ideal  limits  rather  than  actual  facts. 
But  all  situations  of  the  first  kind  involve  situations  of 
the  second  kind  ;  we  cannot  perceive  without  sensing, 
or  remember  without  being  aware  of  a  sensum  or  an 
image  of  some  kind.  Let  us  call  situations  of  the  first 
kind  "referential"  and  those  of  the  second  kind 
"  non-referential  ". 

As  we  have  said,  all  referential  situations  (^.^.,  per 
ceptual  situations)  have  both  an  epistemological  objec 
(e.g.  the  top  of  a  certain  penny)  and  an  objective  con 
stituent  (e.g.,  a  patch  which  appears  brown  and  elliptical). 
They  also  involve  a  situation  which  is  non-referential 
but  has  an  objective  constituent  [e.g.,  the  sensing  of  this 
sensum).  When  I  say  that  they  "involve"  this,  I 
think  I  mean  something  of  the  following  kind.  I  mean 
that  the  perceptual  situation  could  not  exist  unless  I 
sensed  this  sensum,  whilst  it  seems  logically  possible 
that  I  should  sense  a  precisely  similar  sensum  without 
perceiving  anything.     Whether  this  is  causally  possible 

U 


:4 


3o6     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

is  another  question  ;  and  whether,  even  if  it  be  causally- 
possible,  it  ever  in  fact  happens  is  yet  another 
question.  I  shall  say  that  a  perceptual  situation  is 
both  ''objective"  and  "referential".  I  shall  say  that 
a  pure  sensation  of  a  noise  or  a  patch  would  be 
"objective"  and  "non-referential";  meaning  that  it 
would  have  an  objective  constituent,  but  no  epistemo- 
logical  object.  Now,  in  theory  there  might  be  mental 
events  which  were  referential  and  non-objective  ;  and 
mental  events  which  were  non-referential  and  non-objec- 
tive. I  do  not  think  that  there  are  or  could  be  instances 
of  the  former  class.  1  am  inclined  to  think  that  a  refer- 
ential   situation    must   also    be  an    objective    situation. 

^  B-utJ_am  not  at  all  sure  that  there  are  not  mental  events 

»•  which  are  both  non  -  objective  and  non  -  referential. 
Suppose,  e.g.^  that  noises,  apparently  coloured  patches, 
and  so  on,  were  literally  mental  events,  as  many  excellent 
people  have  held.  Then  it  seems  quite  clear  that  they 
would  be  both  non-objective  and  non-referential  ;  for  a 
noise  certainly  does  not  contain  something  else  as  an 
objective  constituent,  as  a  perceptual  situation  may 
contain  a  noise  as  an  objective  constituent.  Even  if 
we  deny  that  noises,  coloured  patches,  and  so  on,  are 
mental  events,  we  might  be  inclined  to  hold  that  tooth- 
aches and  other  more  obscure  bodily  feelings  are  so. 

\    If  we  do,   we  must  count  them  as  non-objective  and 

I    non-referential  mental  events. 

We  must  of  course  carefully  distinguish  between 
being  "objective"  in  the  present  sense,  and  being 
"  objectifiable."  And  we  must  further  distinguish 
between  being  "  epistemologically  objectifiable"  and 
being  "  psychologically  objectifiable  ".  To  be  "objec- 
tive "  means  to  be  a  situation  which  has  an  objective 
constituent.  To  be  "epistemologically  objectifiable" 
means  to  be  capable  of  corresponding  to  the  epistemo- 
logical  object  of  some  referential  situation.  Now  every- 
thing is  in  principle  epistemologically  objectifiable,  for 
everything  can  at  least  be  thought  about,  and  is  thus 


INTROSPECTION  307 

capable  of  corresponding  to  the  epistemological  object 
of  some  thought-situation.  To  be  "psychologically 
objectifiable  "  means  to  be  capable  of  being  an  objec- 
tive constituent  of  some  objective  mental  situation.  If 
a  toothache  be  a  non-objective  mental  event,  it  neverthe- 
less becomes  an  objective  constituent  of  a  mental 
situation  whenever  it  is  inspected.  If  a  noise  be  a 
non-objective  mental  event,  it  nevertheless  becomes  an 
objective  constituent  of  a  mental  situation  whenever  it 
is  sensed,  or  selected,  or  inspected,  or  used  for  per- 
ceiving. Thus,  such  events  as  these  are  certainly 
psychologically  objectifiable  even  if  they  be  themselves 
non-objective  mental  events.  On  the  other  hand,  there 
is  no  reason  whatever  why  all  mental  events  should  be 
psychologically  objectifiable.  It  is  in  fact  just  those 
events  which  are  certainly  objective,  in  the  present 
sense,  about  which  we  may  most  plausibly  doubt 
whether  they  are  psychologically  objectifiable. 

All  mental  events  which  we  need  consider  at  present  ^ 
are^^ertainly  "owned"  by  some  Empirical  Self;  i.e.^  f-~ 
they  are  literally  parts  of  its  history.  Now  owning  is 
ffot  itself  a  mode  of  cognition.  What  is  owned  may  be 
"felt"  or  "sensed"  ;  and  this  is  a  mode  of  cognition. 
But,  even  if  everything  that  is  owned  be  felt  or  sensed, 
and  everything  that  is  felt  or  sensed  be  owned,  the 
relation  of  owning  differs  from  that  of  feeling  or  sensing. 
What  is  felt  or  sensed  may  be  selected  ;  and  what  is 
selected  may  be  inspected  or  used  as  the  objective  con- 
stituent of  some  referential  situation,  such  as  perception 
or  memory. 

We  must  then   distinguish  three  kinds  of  event,   of 
which    the   following   are  examples,     (i)  A  noise  or   a   / 
toothache.     This  is  studied  by  inspection  ;  and,  if  it  be   ) 
a  mental  event  at  all,  it  will  be  non-objective  and  non-  i 
referential.     Such  mental  events,  if  such  there  be,  may    ' 
be   called    "purely  subjective",     (ii)  The  feeling   of  a 
toothache  or  the  sensing  of  a  noise.     This  is  an  objective 
and  non-referential  mental  event,     (iii)  The  perception 


3o8     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

of  a  process  in  one's  tooth  by  means  of  the  felt  tooth- 
ache ;  or  the  perception  of  a  process  in  a  bell  by  means 
of  the  sensed  noise.  This  is  an  objective  and  referential 
mental  event.  If  there  be  introspection  proper,  as 
distinct  from  inspection,  it  is  concerned  with  events  of 
the  second  and  third  kind.  Let  us  begin  by  consider- 
ing our  knowledge  of  objective  but  non-referential 
situations,  such  as  sensing  a  noise  or  feeling  a  pang  of 
toothache. 

People  who  deny  that  we  can  introspect  such  situa- 
tions rest  their  case  on  the  fact  that,  when  I  try  to 
introspect  the  situation  of  sensing  a  noise  or  feeling  a 
toothache,  I  seem  to  find  myself  merely  /;^specting  the 
noise  or  the  toothache  itself.  I  imagine  that  this  is  what 
people  are  referring  to  when  they  talk  of  the»  "dia- 
phanous "  character  of  "consciousness  ".  Others  admit 
that  they  seem  to  find  something  beside  the  noise  or 
the  toothache,  but  tell  us  that  this  "something  more" 
is  merely  certain  feelings  connected  with  the  adjust- 
ment of  their  sense-organs  or  with  the  reactions  of  other 
parts  of  their  bodies.  These  men  are  also  inclined  to 
deny  that  we  can  introspect  the  situation  of  sensing  a 
noise  or  feeling  a  toothache.  Now  it  seems  to  me  that 
the  latter  set  of  psychologists  are  very  nearly  right  in 
what  they  assert,  and  quite  wrong  in  what  they  deny. 
If  there  be  such  a  thing  as  an  objective  situation  it 
must  presumably  consist  of  at  least  two  constituents, 
related  in  a  certain  specific  way  by  an  asymmetrical 
relation  so  that  one  of  these  constituents  occupies  a 
special  position  (viz.f  that  of  objective  constituent)  and 
the  other  occupies  a  characteristically  different  position 
(viz.,  that  of  subjective  constituent).  Now  suppose  that 
there  were  complexes  of  this  kind,  and  that  I  were 
acquainted  with  them  introspectively,  we  ought  not  to 
expect  the  relating  relation,  which  makes  this  a  complex 
of  such  and  such  a  structure,  to  be  presented  to  us  in 
the  same  way  as  the  substantival  constituents.  The 
relating  relation  of  a  complex  never  is  a  constituent  of 


INTROSPECTION  309 

it  in  the  same  sense  in  which  the  terms  are.  When  I 
look  at  a  pattern  composed  of  three  dots,  A,  B,  and  C, 
arranged  in  that  order  on  a  line,  I  know  intuitively  that 
B  is  between  A  and  C.  But  I  do  not  *'  see  "  the  relation 
of  "  between  "  in  the  sense  in  which  I  "  see  "  the  dots  ; 
though  it  would  be  quite  in  accordance  with  usage  to 
say  that  ''  I  see  that  B  is  between  A  and  C  ".  Now  no 
one  in  his  senses  supposes  that  the  fact  that  I  "see" 
nothing  but  the  dots  proves,  either  that  the  dots  are  not 
in  fact  related  in  a  certain  order  by  the  relation  of 
"between",  or  that  I  do  not  know  this  relation  in  a 
perfectly  direct  and  non-inferential  way.  People  who 
make  such  facts  as  we  have  been  mentioning  an  argu- 
ment against  the  possibility  of  introspective  knowledge 
of  objective  mental  situations  are  demanding  of  intro- 
spection something  which  no  one  thinks  of  demanding 
of  inspection,  and  something  which  is  from  the  nature 
of  the  case  incapable  of  fulfilment.  If  they  contented 
themselves  with  saying  :  "  When  I  try  to  introspect  the 
sensing  of  a  noise  or  the  feeling  of  a  pang  of  toothache 
the  only  particular  existents  which  are  intuitively  presented 
to  me  are  the  noise  or  the  toothache  and  certain  bodily 
feelings,"  they  might  be  approximately  or  exactly  right. 
But  it  seems  to  me  perfectly  clear  that  these  particular 
existents  are  presented  to  me  as  terms,  each  of  which 
occupies  a  characteristic  position  in  a  complex  of  a  certain 
specific  kind.  This  complex  is  the  objective  mental 
situation  of  sensing  the  noise  or  feeling  the  toothache  ; 
and  we  have  direct  non-inferential  knowledge  of  its 
relating  relation,  as  we  have  of  the  relating  relation  of 
"between"  when  a  pattern  of  three  dots  in  a  line  is 
presented  to  our  inspection.  Naturally,  further  know- 
ledge of  the  situation  will  consist  largely  in  learning 
more  about  the  characteristics  of  its  constituents  by  in- 
specting  them  ;  just  as  we  should  learn  more  about  a 
pattern  of  dots  of  various  colours  by  seeing  exactly  what 
colour  belongs  to  each  dot  in  each  position  in  the 
pattern.     But,  if  we  were  confined  to  inspecting  each 


^' 


310    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE  OF  EXISTENTS 


^ 


'S^^ 


constituent,  we  should  never  know  that  they  were  con- 
stituents of  a  whole  of  a  certain  specific  structure.  And 
it  seems  to  me  that  we  do  know  this  about  the  noise  or 
the  toothache  and  the  bodily  feelings  which  we  find 
when  we  try  to  introspect  the  situation  of  sensing  a 
noise  or  feeling  a  toothache. 

There  is  one  other  remark  to  be  made  before  leaving 
this  subject.  Suppose,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that, 
when  I  try  to  introspect  the  situation  of  sensing  a  noise 
or  feeling  a  toothache,  no  particular  existent  except  the 
noise  or  the  toothache  itself  were  presented  to  my  mind 
as  an  object.  It  would  still  be  most  rash  to  conclude 
that  the  situation  does  not  contain  anything  but  the 
noise  or  the  toothache,  or  to  conclude  that  I  cannot 
know  directly  and  non-inferentially  that  it  contains 
more  than  this.  Suppose,  e.g.,  that  the  situation  con- 
tained two  constituents,  one  of  which  is  sensed  and  can 
be  selected,  whilst  the  other  is  only  sensed  or  felt  and 
cannot  be  selected  or  inspected.  Then,  if  we  tried  to 
introspect  the  situation,  nothing  would  be  presented 
to  us  except  the  former  constituent.  But,  since  the 
other  constituent  is  sensed  or  felt  by  us,  though  it 
cannot  be  selected  or  inspected  by  us,  we  might  quite 
well  know  with  complete  certainty  that  what  we  are 
inspecting  is  not  the  whole  of  the  situation.  We  must 
therefore  always  be  prepared  for  the  possibility  that  the 
constituents  of  a  mental  situation  which  we  can  actually 
inspect  are  not  the  whole  of  its  constituents  ;  and  we 
must  be  prepared  to  recognise  that  we  may  be  able  to 
k^tow  this  directly  and  non-inferentially  because  the 
remaining  constituents  are  felt  or  sensed  by  us  though 
not  selected  or  inspected. 

To  sum  up.  I  cannot  of  course  prove  that  we  have 
introspective  knowledge  of  such  situations  as  sensing 
a  noise  or  feeling  a  toothache,  beside  inspective  know- 
ledge of  the  noise  or  toothache  itself.  I  can  only  say 
that  it  seems  to  me  that  I  do  have  it,  though  it  may  be 
very  inadequate  ;    and  that    I    do  not  understand    how 


INTROSPECTION  311 

otherwise  I  could  distinguish  between  the  existence  of 
noises  and  toothaches  and  the  senshig  or  feeling  of  them. 
But  I  do  think  that  I  have  shown  that  the  reasons 
which  have  been  brought  forward  for  believing  that  I 
do  not  have  such  knowledge  are  utterly  inadequate  to 
prove  this  conclusion  or  even  to  make  it  probable. 

I  now  pass  to  the  case  of  mental  situations  which  are 
referential  as  well  as  objective;  e.g.^  perceptual  situa- 
tions, memory-situations,  and  so  on.  There  is  a  diffi- 
culty here  which  does  not  apply  to  non-referential 
objective  situations,  such  as  we  have  just  been  con- 
sidering. It  seems  very  doubtful  whether  I  can  at 
the  same  time  refer  to  an  epistemological  object  and 
also  make  the  mental  situation  which  has  this  external 
reference  into  an  objective  constituent  of  an  intro- 
spective situation.  For  this  would  require  a  division 
of  attention  between  two  very  different  objects,  and  it 
is  doubtful  whether  we  can  accomplish  anything  more 
than  a  quick  alternation  of  attention  backwards  and 
forwards  between  the  two.  Here  I  think  we  must  draw 
a  distinction  between  two  different  cases ;  viz.,  (i) 
attending  simultaneously  to  two  objects  of  the  same 
order,  and  (ii)  attending  to  a  situation  which  itself 
involves  attending  to  something  else.  It  is  the  latter 
of  these  which  I  doubt  to  be  possible  ;  and  this  would 
be  involved  by  the  claim  to  introspect  perceptual  and 
memory-situations.  The  former  seems  to  me  to  be 
difficult,  but  not  impossible.  Attention  has  various 
degrees  ;  and,  although  it  may  be  impossible  to  attend 
equally  to  two  different  objects  of  the  same  order  at  the 
same  time,  it  does  seem  to  be  possible  to  distribute 
one's  attention  so  that  each  of  them  gets  some  of  it, 
though  one  gets  more  than  the  other.  In  particular 
it  seems  to  me  to  be  possible  to  attend  to  a  situation 
which  does  not  itself  involve  attention  to  something 
else,  and  at  the  same  time  to  use  this  situation  as  the 
objective  constituent  of  a  memory-situation  which  refers 
to  a  certain  epistemological  object.     I  therefore  suggest 


312     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OE  EXISTENTS 

that  what  is  called  "introspecting"  a  perceptual  or 
memory-situation  should  be  analysed  as  follows,  (a) 
We  really  do  introspect  something  else,  which  is  now 
present;  and  (^)  we  make  this  "something  else"  the 
objective  constituent  of  a  memory  -  situation  whose 
epistemological  object  is  such  that,  if  anything  corre- 
sponds to  it,  what  does  so  is  the  immediately  past 
perceptual  or  memory-situation  which  we  are  commonly 
said  to  be  "  introspecting." 

The  next  question  is:  "  What  is  it  that  we  really  do 
introspect  in  such  cases,  and  make  the  objective  con- 
stituent of  a  memory-situation?"  Let  us  suppose  that 
we  are  concerned  with  a  perceptual  situation.  This 
contains  ia)  a  sensed  and  selected  sensum  ;  {b)  certain 
bodily  feelings  connected  with  the  adjustment  and  ex- 
citement of  the  relevant  sense-organs  ;  (c)  certain  bodily 
feelings  connected  with  the  adjustment  of  our  muscles, 
etc.,  in  order  to  respond  to  the  situation  ;  {d)  possibly 
certain  images,  and  certainly  vague  but  characteristic 
feelings,  due  to  the  excitement  of  traces.  The  whole  of 
these  are  bound  together  into  a  complex  of  an  unique 
kind,  in  consequence  of  which  the  whole  situation  has 
such  and  such  an  external  reference.  Suppose  now 
that  we  pass  immediately  from  the  perceptive  to  the 
introspective  attitude,  ia)  There  will  still  be  a  sensed 
and  selected  sensum,  continuous  with  and  qualitatively 
similar  to  that  which  was  the  objective  constituent  of 
the  immediately  past  perceptual  situation,  {b)  Since 
the  relevant  sense-organs  will  still  be  adjusted  and 
excited  as  before,  the  bodily  feelings  connected  with 
these  will  be  continuous  with  and  qualitatively  like 
those  which  were  constituents  of  the  perceptual  situa- 
tion, {c)  On  the  other  hand,  we  shall  no  longer  be 
adjusting  our  muscles,  etc.,  so  as  to  react  to  the  situa- 
tion practically.  Hence  the  feelings  connected  with 
such  adjustments  in  the  past  perceptual  situation  will 
not  be  continued  in  the  present  situation.  It  is  not 
unlikely,    however,    that   they  will    be    represented    by 


INTROSPECTION  313 

images  which  resemble  them  in  quality  and    bear  the 
mark  of  "familiarity",     {d)  The  traces  excited  in  the 
perceptual    situation   will    still    be  excited,  so  that  the 
present  situation  will  contain  images  and  feelings  which 
are   continuous  with  and    similar  to  those  which  were 
due  to  the  excitement  of  these  traces  in  the  perceptual 
situation.     So   far   then   there   is  probably  a  great  re-  '^ 
semblance  between  the  constituents  of  the  present  situa-'X- 
tion,    which   we    introspect,  and    the    immediately  past  I' 
situation,  which  we  remember  by  means  of  it.     There 
is   probably  no  constituent  of  the  present  introspected 
situation  which  does    not    resenfble   or   continue  some 
constituent  of  the  immediately  past  perceptual  situation. 
And    the  constituents  of  the  introspected   situation  are 
probably  so  related  that  its  structure  is  at  least  analogous 
to  that  of  the  perceptual   situation.      But  there  is  this 
difference.      The    images,    feelings,    etc.,    were   purely 
subjective  constituents  of  the  original  perceptual  situa- 
tion.    The  feelings,  images,  etc.,  which  continue  and 
resemble   them    in   the  introspects*^  situation,  are  now 
psychologically  objectified;    i.e.,  they  have  become  ob- 
jective constituents  of  the  introspectzw  situation.     The 
latter  contains  a  new  subjective  constituent,  which  con- 
sists of  (or,  at  any  rate,  includes)  those  bodily  feelings 
which  are  characteristic  of  the  purely  theoretic  and  con- 
templative situation  of  introspecting  as  distinct  from  the 
active  and  practical  situation  of  perceiving.  And  this  new 
subjective  constituent  is  related  in  a  characteristic  way  to 
the  introspected  situation  and  its  constituents,  so  that  the 
whole  thus  formed  contains  the  latter  as  its  objective  con- 
stituent.     In   contemplating   the  constituents    and  the  » 
structureof  the  presentintrospectedsituationwe  remember 
the  similar  constituents  and  the  analogous,  but  not  identi- 
cal, structure  of  the  immediately  past  perceptualsituation.    | 

Thismemory-judgmenthas  no  moreclaimtoinfallibility 
than  any  other  memory-judgment  about  equally  recent 
events.  Like  all  such  judgments,  it  cannot  be  defended 
by  argument  against  a  sceptic  who  chooses  to  doubt  the 


314    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

trustworthiness  of  memory  in  general.  But  there  is  no 
special  reason  for  doubting  the  substantial  correctness  of 
this  particular  kind  of  memory-judgment ;  and  therefore 
no  special  reason  to  doubt  that  perceptual  and  other 
referential  situations  have  substantially  the  structure 
and  the  constituents  which  we  assign  to  them  on  the 
ground  of  introspection  and  memory. 

Summary  of  Conclusions.  {A),  (i)  If  there  were  a 
Pure  Ego,  and  it  were  timeless,  it  might  literally  be 
part  of  the  total  objective  constituent  of  every  introspec- 
tive situation.  But  (2)  even  if  it  were  so,  it  certainly 
does  not  manifest  any  of  its  empirical  qualities  (if  it  has 
any)  in  any  introspective  situation.  And  (3)  it  is  cer- 
tainly never  the  whole  of  the  objective  constituent  of  any 
introspective  situation.  (4)  There  is  therefore  no  direct 
reason  to  believe  that  it  is  a  part  of  the  objective  constitu- 
ent of  any  introspective  situation.  (5)  If  it  exists,  and  is 
known  at  all,  it  is  known  discursively  by  comparison  of 
contemporary  and  successive  mental  events  which  we 
introspect.  It  does  not  follow  from  this  that  its  existence 
and  properties  are  known,  if  at  all,  only  by  inference. 

{E)  (i)  The  Empirical  Self  cannot,  from  its  nature, 
be  literally  an  objective  constituent  of  any  introspective 
situation.  But  (2)  it  is  possible  that  every  introspective 
situation  might  claim  that  its  objective  constituent  is 
literally  a  part  of  the  Empirical  Self;  and  it  is  possible 
that  this  claim  might  be  true.  (3)  If  we  distinguish 
Introspection  Proper  from  Inspection,  I  think  we  must 
admit  that  this  claim  is  made  by  all  genuinely  intro- 
spective situations.  And  (4)  there  seems  to  be  no 
positive  reason  for  rejecting  it,  as  there  is  in  the  case 
of  the  analogous  claim  which  the  perceptual  situation 
makes  for  its  objective  constituent.  (5)  This  does  not 
imply  that  there  may  not  be  mental  events  which  are 
not  parts  of  the  history  of  any  Empirical  Self.  It  im- 
plies only  that,  if  there  be  such  events,  they  are  not 
possible  objects  of  introspection. 


INTROSPECTION  315 

(C).  (i)  The  so-called  "  Epistemological  Introspec- 
tion", by  which  we  know  "what  we  are  believing", 
"what  we  are  desiring",  and  so  on,  is  not  a  special 
kind  of  introspection.  It  can  be  analysed  into  a  process 
which  is  not  introspection  at  all,  and  into  another  which 
is  ordinary  Psychological  Introspection.  (2)  There 
are  situations  in  which  an  event,  such  as  an  image,  a 
twinge  of  toothache,  a  noise,  etc.,  are  examined  with 
a  view  to  discovering  accurately  their  own  apparent 
qualities  instead  of  learning  about  the  physical  qualities 
of  our  own  or  external  bodies.  Such  situations  are 
called  by  us  "  Inspective ",  because  it  is  doubtful 
whether  the  events  which  are  their  objective  constituents 
are  states  of  mind  at  all.  (3)  If  such  events  be  states  of 
mind,  they  are  "non-objective",  in  the  sense  that  they 
do  not  contain  objective  constituents,  though  they  may 
de  and  often  are  objective  constituents  of  other  mental 
events.  And,  on  this  supposition,  inspection  will  be 
the  kind  of  introspection  which  is  concerned  with  non- 
objective  mental  events.  (4)  Introspection  proper  is 
concerned  with  objective  situations,  such  as  perceptual 
and  memory-situations,  the  sensing  of  sensa,  the  feeling 
of  toothaches,  and  so  on.  These  are  undoubtedly  mental 
events  ;  and  it  is  an  essential  factor  of  the  introspective 
situation  to  claim  that  they  are  parts  of  the  history  of 
the  Empirical  Self. 

(D)  (i)  There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  that  inspection  is 
correct,  so  far  as  it  goes,  in  the  information  which  it 
supplies  about  the  apparent  characteristics  of  its  objective 
constituents.  And  (2)  there  is  no  good  reason  to  doubt 
that  the  latter  have  the  characteristics  which  they  seem 
on  careful  inspection  to  have.  But  (3)  there  is  no 
ground  for  supposing  that  inspective  knowledge  is 
exhaustive.  An  inspected  whole  may  have  sets  of 
adjoined  parts,  such  that  no  member  of  one  of  these 
sets  is  revealed  to  inspection.  And  members  of  such 
sets  may  have  characteristics  which  are  not  manifested 
to    inspection,  which    differ  from  those  that  are  mani- 


3i6    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

fested  as  belonging  to  the  whole,  and  which  differ  from 
those  that  are  manifested  as  belonging  to  members  of 
other  sets  of  adjoined  parts  of  the  same  inspected  whole. 
(4)  When  we  profess  to  be  inspecting  the  objective 
constituent  of  a  perceptual  situation  we  are  probably 
inspecting  a  later  event,  which  is  continuous  with  and 
qualitatively  similar  to  the  former ;  and  are  using  it  as 
the  basis  for  a  memory-judgment  about  the  former. 
This  memory-judgment  is  not  infallible  ;  but  it  has  as 
good  a  chance  of  being  true  as  any  memory-judgment, 
and  a  better  chance  than  most. 

{E).  (i)  The  existence  of  introspection  proper  has 
been  denied  on  the  ground  that,  when  we  try  to  intro- 
spect an  objective  situation,  we  find  ourselves  merely 
inspecting  its  objective  constituent ;  or,  at  best,  this 
together  with  certain  bodily  feelings.  (2)  This  con- 
tention has  no  weight,  because  it  rests  on  the  assump- 
tion that,  if  we  have  non-inferential  knowledge  of  the 
structure  of  a  whole,  this  structure  must  be  presented 
in  the  same  way  as  the  constituents.  And  this  demand 
is  absurd.  Moreover  (3)  it  is  perfectly  possible  that  an 
objective  situation  may  have  constituents  which  cannot 
be  made  into  objects  of  inspection.  And  it  is  possible 
that  we  may-  know  this  ;  because  these  constituents, 
though  not  capable  of  being  selected  or  inspected,  are 
nevertheless  sensed  or  felt.  (4)  It  seems  likely  that  we 
cannot  strictly  introspect  situations  which,  beside  being 
objective,  have  also  an  external  reference  to  an  epistemo- 
logical  object.  This  is  not  so  much  because  it  is  difficult 
to  attend  to  two  different  objects  at  once  as  because  it  is 
difficult  to  attend  to  a  situation  which  itself  involves 
attention  to  something  else.  (5)  Here  again  we  have 
probably  to  be  content  with  introspecting  a  present  non- 
referential  situation  and  usingthis  as  thebasis  formemory- 
judgments  about  the  structure  and  constituents  of  the 
immediately  past  referential  situation.  Such  memory- 
judgments  are  not  infallible  ;  but  there  is  no  specm/ reason 
I  for  thinking  that  they  are  peculiarly  likely  to  be  incorrect. 


CHAPTER  VII 

The  Mind's  Knowledge  of  Other  Minds 

The  proper  analysis  of  our  belief  in  the  existence  of 
other  minds,  and  the  question  of  how  it  can  be  justified, 
have  been  far  less  thoroughly  discussed  by  philosophers 
than  the  corresponding  questions  about  matter  and 
our  alleged  knowledge  of  it.  Many  philosophers  have 
wanted  to  deny  the  reality  of  material  objects,  and  have 
felt  that  it  was  a  feather  in  their  caps  when  they  suc- 
ceeded in  doing  so  to  the  satisfaction  of  themselves  and 
their  followers.  But,  seemingly,  no  one  wants  to  be  a 
Solipsist ;  and  scarcely  anyone  has  admitted  himself  to 
be  one.  It  has  been  left  to  rival  philosophers  to  tell 
him  that,  on  his  principles,  he  ought  to  be  one  ;  and 
this  has  generally  been  regarded  as  a  charge  to  be 
repelled  and  not  as  a  compliment  to  be  thankfully 
acknowledged.  We  should  be  doing  too  much  credit 
to  human  consistency  if  we  ascribed  this  to  the  fact  that 
all  convinced  Solipsists  have  kept  silence  and  refused 
to  waste  their  words  on  the  empty  air.  It  would  seem 
then  that  we  have  a  stronger  belief  in  the  existence  of 
other  minds  than  in  the  existence  of  material  things. 
No  one  in  his  senses  doubts  either  proposition  in 
practice  ;  but  the  philosopher  can  and  does  doubt  the 
latter  in  his  study,  whilst,  even  in  that  chaste  seclusion, 
he  seems  to  be  unable  or  unwilling  to  doubt  the  former. 
I  do  not  think  that  this  difference  can  be  ascribed  either 
to  the  fact  that  the  evidence  for  the  existence  of  other 
minds  is  more  cogent  than  fhe  evidence  for  the  existence 
of  matter,  or  to  the  fact  that  we  have  a  stronger  in- 
stinctive belief  in  the  former  than  in  the  latter.     I  think 

317 


3i8     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

that  the  real  explanation  is  that  certain  strong  emotions 
are  bound  up  with  the  belief  in  other  minds,  and  that 
no  very  strong  emotions  are  bound  up  with  the  belief 
in  matter.  The  position  of  a  philosopher  with  no  one 
but  himself  to  lecture  to,  and  no  hope  of  an  audience, 
would  be  so  tragic  that  the  human  mind  naturally 
shrinks  from  contemplating  such  a  possibility.  It  is 
our  business,  however,  to  stifle  our  emotions  for  the 
present,  and  to  follow  the  argument  whithersoever  it 
may  lead. 

Analysis  of  the  Belief  in  Other  Minds.  I  wish  to 
begin,  as  usual,  with  propositions  about  which  every 
one  will  agree.  Now,  I  think  it  would  be  admitted  by 
every  one  that  the  perception  of  a  foreign  body  of  a 
certain  kind,  which  moves,  alters  its  expression,  makes 
noises,  and  so  on,  in  certain  characteristic  ways,  is  a 
necessary  part  of  the  basis  of  our  belief  in  the  existence 
and  activity  of  another  mind.  ■  The  only  exception  to 
this  statement  that  I  can  think  of  is  that  some  few  people 
have  claimed  under  exceptional  circumstances  to  be  in 
direct  communion  with  God  or  with  other  spirits  without 
perceiving  a  characteristic  kind  of  body  moving  in 
characteristic  ways  or  making  characteristic  sounds. 
But  such  claims  are  rare  and  hard  to  test.  Setting 
aside  such  exceptional  cases  for  the  present,  I  think  we 
may  say  that  the  above  proposition  would  generally  be 
admitted. 

I  want  at  once  to  remove  two  possible  misunderstand- 
ings, (i)  I  say  only  that  the  perception  of  such  physical 
objects  and  events  is  a  necessary  part  of  the  basis  of  our 
belief  in  other  minds.  I  do  not  say  that  it  is  sufficient. 
There  may  be  other  ingredients  which  are  equally 
necessary.  (2)  I  say  only  that  the  perception  of  such 
physical  objects  and  events  is  a  necessary  part  of  the 
basis  of  the  belief  in  other  minds.  I  express  no  opinion 
at  present  about  the  nature  of  the  connexion  between 
this  perception  and  this  belief.     In   particular  I   must 


<^ 


MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   OTHER   MINDS    319 

not  be  understood  to  be  asserting  that  the  perceptual 
judgment  forms  2i premise  from  which  the  belief  in  other 
minds  is  infen-ed.  The  sensing  and  selecting  of  a 
certain  sensum  is  a  necessary  part  of  the  basis  of  our 
perceptual  belief  in  the  existence  of  a  certain  physical 
object  or  the  happening  of  a  certain  physical  event. 
But  the  two  are  not  connected  as  premise  and  conclusion 
of  an  argument. 

We  must  next  distinguish  between  our  belief  that  a 
certain  external  body  is  animated  by  a  mind  other  than 
our  own,  and  the  belief  that  at  a  certain  moment  a 
certain  mental  event  which  does  not  belong  to  my 
mental  history  is  happening  in  intimate  connexion  with 
a  certain  external  body.  A  mind,  in  the  sense  of  an  ,  t 
Empirical  Self,  consists  of  a  number  of  simultaneous  ]^ 
and  successive  mental  events  united  into  a  whole  of  a 
certain  characteristic  structure.  Hence,  whenever  we 
believe  that  a  certain  external  body  is  animated  by  a 
certain  mind,  we  are  no  doubt  equally  justified  in 
believing  that  there  is  a  series  of  mental  events  of  some 
kind  intimately  connected  with  this  body.  But  it  might 
well  happen  that  we  believed  much  more  strongly  that 
this  body  is  animated  by  a  mind  than  that  a  particular 
mental  event  of  a  certain  specific  kind  was  going  on  in 
this  mind  at  a  certain  time  and  expressing  itself  by  a 
certain  particular  perceptible  bodily  change.  I  may  be 
practically  certain  that  the  body  of  my  friend  is  animated 
by  a  mind  ;  and  yet  very  doubtful,  on  a  certain  occasion 
when  I  see  him  frowning,  whether  he  is  angry,  or 
thinking  deeply,  or  in  pain.  Again,  it  is  very  far  from 
certain  that  all  mental  events  must  occur  as  members  of 
those  sets  of  interrelated  mental  events  which  we  call 
"  Empirical  Selves".  We  might  then  strongly  believe 
that  a  certain  movement  of  an  external  body  is  the 
outward  expression  of  a  certain  mental  event  which 
does  not  belong  to  our  mind  ;  and  yet  we  might  be  very 
doubtful  whether  this  external  body  is  animated  by  a 
mind  at  all.     E.g.^  I  might  feel  tolerably  certain  that. 


320     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

when  an  insect  is  injured  and  writhes  about,  there  is  a 
feeling  of  pain  which  is  no  part  of  my  mind  and  is 
intimately  connected  with  these  writhing  movements  of 
the  insect's  body.  And  yet  I  might  be  very  doubtful 
whether  the  insect's  body  is  animated  by  anything  that 
could  reasonably  be  called  a  "mind".  This  feeling 
might  be  quite  isolated.  Or,  if  it  be  in  fact  a  member 
of  a  group  of  interrelated  simultaneous  and  successive 
mental  events,  this  group  might  be  so  poor  in  content 
and  so  loose  in  structure  as  not  to  deserve  the  name  of 
"mind".  When  we  contemplate  other  human  bodies 
and  their  behaviour  (including  in  this  their  speech  and 
writing)  we  do  believe  both  that  they  are  animated  by 
minds  and  that  certain  specific  mental  events  are  going 
on  in  those  minds  when  the  bodies  behave  in  certain 
specific  ways.  Most  men  believe  that  the  bodies  of  cats 
and  dogs  are  animated  by  minds,  and  also  that  certain 
specific  events  are  going  on  in  these  minds  when  cats 
and  dogs  behave  in  certain  ways.  Even  if  we  doubt 
this  on  philosophic  reflexion,  we  find  it  very  difficult  not 
to  act  as  if  we  believed  it.  But  even  here  I  think  we 
are  slightly  more  certain  that  there  are  specific  experi- 
ences connected  with  certain  specific  bodily  behaviour 
than  that  the  body  of  the  animal  is  animated  by  a  mind. 
If  one  sees  and  hears  an  animal,  such  as  a  dog  or  a 
rabbit,  with  its  leg  caught  in  a  trap,  it  is  practically 
impossible  at  the  time  to  doubt  that  there  is  a  painful 
feeling  which  is  being  expressed  by  its  struggles  and 
cries.  But  one  would  feel  a  little  less  certain  that  the 
body  of  a  dog  or  a  rabbit  is  animated  by  anything  that 
could  fairly  be  called  a  "mind",  unless  one  were 
already  convinced  that  all  mental  events  must  belong 
to  some  mind.  When  we  come  to  living  beings  which 
are  very  different  from  ourselves,  such  as  insects,  we 
feel  rather  doubtful  about  postulating  mental  events  at 
all  ;  more  doubtful  about  the  precise  character  of  the 
mental  event  which  accompanies  a  given  movement ; 
and    extremely    doubtful    about    the    supposition    that 


MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   OTHER   MINDS    321 

« 
there    is   a    mind    which    animates    the    body    of    the 

insect. 

Let  us  henceforth  confine  ourselves  to  the  case  of 
human  bodies  and  their  perceptible  behaviour.  I  think 
it  will  be  agreed  that,  when  we  see  anything  which  has 
the  characteristic  shape,  size,  appearance,  and  move- 
ments of  a  human  body,  we  treat  it  as  if  it  were  animated 
by  a  mind  like  our  own.  And,  if  it  responds  to  this 
treatment  in  the  way  in  which  we  expect  it  to  do,  we 
have  no  doubt  whatever  on  this  point.  If  it  does  not, 
we  have  much  the  same  feeling  of  shock  and  surprise 
as  we  have  when  we  lift  something  which  looks  like  a 
heavy  weight  but  is  really  made  of  painted  cardboard. 
Our  presumption  that  this  body  is  animated  by  a  mind 
is,  as  I  have  said,  based  on  its  general  appearance  in 
the  first  instance  ;  but  it  is  supported  or  refuted  by  the 
order  and  connexion  (or  the  lack  of  these)  which  we 
afterwards  find  in  its  behaviour.  A  particular,  and 
vitally  important,  case  of  this  general  principle  is  that 
of  connected  rational  speech.  If  something  which  looks 
like  a  human  being  talks  in  a  connected  way,  and  makes 
appropriate  answers  to  questions,   it  is  not  practically  f 

possible  to  doubt  that  it  is  animated  by  a  mind.  Since  if-.  '>7u^^( 
a  mind  is  a  whole_oLsuitably  interrelated  mental  events, 
it  is  natural  enough  that  the  basis  for  our  belief  in  other 
minds  should  be  suitably  connected  series  of  physical 
events  rather  than  any  particular  isolated  physical 
event. 

Besides  this  general  belief  that  things  which  look  like 
human  bodies  and  perform  certain  chains  of  behaviour 
are  animated  by  minds,  we  have  more  specific  beliefs 
about  what  is  going  on  in  those  minds  on  certain 
occasions.  On  observing  certain  facial  expressions, 
such  as  frowning,  we  have  a  tendency  to  believe  that 
there  is  a  certain  emotion,  such  as  anger,  in  the  mind 
which  animates  the  body  which  we  are  observing.  On 
hearing  a  human  body  emit  certain  sounds  we  have  a 
tendency  to  believe  that  the    mind  which  animates  it 

X 


322     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

is  suffering  a  painful  sensation,  and  so  on.      Here  we 
must  draw  a   sharp   distinction    between    two  different 
ways  in  which  we  may  come  to  believe  that  a  certain 
mind   is  having   a   certain    experience.      (i)    The   body 
which  we  are  perceiving  may  make  a  series  of  noises 
or   conventional  gestures  which   form    a  coherent   and 
intelligible  "sentence".     This  sentence  we  understand, 
and  we  then  tend  to  believe  that  the  mind  which  animates 
this  body  is  having  the  experience  which  we  understand 
that  it  is  describing  to  us.     In  that  case  we  assign  to 
the  mind,  not  only  the  particular  experience  which  it 
is  describing,  but  also  a  certain   kind  of  cognitive  ex- 
perience.    When  a  body  emits  the  series  of  noises  :   "I 
have  toothache  ",   we  commonly  believe  that  the  mind 
which  animates  it  has  this  peculiar  feeling,  unless  we 
have  some  special  reason  to  think  that  it  is  lying.     But, 
in  addition  to  this,  we  always  believe  that  it  is  making 
a  judgment  of  some  sort.     If  it    is  trying   to   tell  the 
truth,  it  is  making  a  judgment  about  its  present  experi- 
ence.    And,  if  it  is  lying,  it  is  still  making  a  judgment 
about  something.     We  may  call  this  way  of  arousing 
belief  in    the    existence   of    a    certain    mental    event   a 
"conventional  expression",     (ii)  We  ascribe  on  certain 
occasions  certain  experiences  to  a   foreign   mind  even 
when   it  does   not  and  cannot  tell   us  of  them.      And, 
conversely,   beings  who  cannot   understand  spoken   or 
written  words  probably  ascribe  certain   experiences  to 
other  minds   on    certain    occasions.      If   I    see   a   baby 
smiling  or  hear  a  dog  snarling   I   ascribe   a   pleasant 
feeling  to  the  baby  and  a  feeling  of  anger  to  the  dog, 
although  they  cannot  describe  their  experiences  to  me 
by  any  conventional    expression.     And,   on    the   other 
hand,  it  seems  most  likely  that  babies  and  dogs  often 
know  when    those   who   surround    them    are   angry  or 
pleased,  although  such  creatures  could  not  understand 
what  we  were  saying  if  we  tried  to  describe  our  mental 
states  to  them.     I  will  call  this  way  of  arousing  belief 
in   the  existence   of  a  certain    experience  in   a  foreign 


MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   OTHER   MINDS     323 

mind  "natural  expression".  The  experiences  which 
most  obviously  have  characteristic  natural  expressions 
are  certain  emotions,  such  as  anger,  and  pleasant  or 
painful  bodily  feelings.  But  I  think  that  there  are 
other  experiences  which  have  characteristic  natural  ex- 
pressions. If  I  am  doing  something  and  another  human 
body  starts  to  struggle  with  me  and  try  to  hinder  me  I 
can  hardly  help  believing  that  the  mind  which  animates 
this  body  has  a  volition  which  is  opposed  to  what  I  am 
doing.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  other  human  body 
starts  to  co-operate  with  me  I  can  hardly  help  believing 
that  the  mind  which  animates  it  has  a  volition  which 
is  in  accord  with  what  I  am  doing.  Again,  if  I  see 
another  human  body  performing  a  chain  of  actions 
which  seem  well  adapted  to  lead  up  to  a  certain  end  ; 
if  I  see  it  avoiding  obstacles  or  trying  to  modify  them  ; 
I  can  hardly  help  believing  that  this  body  is  animated 
by  a  mind  which  is  not  only  desiring  a  certain  end  but 
is  also  thinking  about  the  proper  means  to  gain  it. 
Lastly,  whenever  a  body  emits  coherent  and  intelligible 
sentences  it  is  always  naturally  expressing  the  kind  of 
experience  called  "judgment"  or  "supposition"  or 
"questioning",  no  matter  what  else  it  may  be  <:(9;^- 
ventionally  Q^^^x^tss\ng.  If  it  says  "I  have  toothache", 
and  I  believe  what  the  words  mean,  this  set  of  sounds 
conventionally  expresses  to  me  the  presence  of  a  feeling 
of  toothache  ;  but  the  mere  fact  that  the  words  form 
an  intelligible  sentence  naturally  expresses  to  me  the 
presence  of  an  act  of  judgment.  When  I  say  that  I 
have  a  certain  state  of  mind  I  deliberately  and  con- 
ventionally express  only  that  state  of  mind  ;  but  I 
involuntarily  and  naturally  express  in  addition  the  state 
of  mind  called  "judging".  It  seems  clear  that  natural 
expression  is  more  primitive  and  fundamental  than  con-  ) 
ventional  expression,  so  we  will  begin  with  it. 

Natural  Expression.  The  question  to  be  considered  in 
this  subsection  is:  "What  is  the  nature  of  the  con- 
nexion  between  perceiving  a  certain  facial  expression 


324    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

or  natural  gesture  in  a  foreign  body  and  believing  that 
there  is  a  certain  mental  event  going  on  at  the  time 
and  expressing  itself  through  this  bodily  event?" 

In  the  first  place,  I  must  point  out  that  we  are  probably 
intellectualising  the  situation  when  we  talk  of  a  "  belief 
in"  or  "judgment  about"  the  mental  event.  As  in  the 
case  of  perception,  it  would  be  truer  to  say  that  we  act 
as  if  we  believed  that  such  and  such  an  event  was 
happening,  and  are  surprised  if  the  results  of  our 
action  give  us  the  lie.  So  we  had  better  talk  of  a 
"  quasi-belief ".  A  dog  acts  as  it  would  be  reasonable 
for  him  to  act  if  he  believed  his  master  to  be  angry 
when  his  master  shows  the  external  signs  of  anger ; 
but  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  the  dog  has  the  peculiar 
experience  of  judging  or  believing  a  proposition.  And, 
in  most  of  our  intercourse  with  other  human  beings, 
we  are  in  the  same'  position  as  the  dog  in  the  example. 
The  only  difference  is  that  we  can  reflect  and  afterwards 
make  the  judgment  "in  accordance  with  which"  we 
have  been  acting  ;  whilst  a  dog  or  a  baby  presumably 
cannot. 

I  can  now  clear  the  ground  by  making  certain 
negative  statements.  (i)  It  seems  to  me  to  be  abso- 
lutely certain  that  the  belief  in  other  human  minds, 
and  the  belief  that  a  certain  human  mind  is  having 
a  certain  experience  on  a  certain  occasion,  are  not 
reached  by  inference,  even  if  they  can  be  afterwards 
justified  up  to  the  hilt  by  inference.  It  is  perfectly 
certain  that  I  do  not  now  make  an  inference  when 
I  I  see  my  friend  frowning  and  believe  that  he  is  angry. 
And  the  notion  that,  as  a  baby,  I  began  by  looking 
in  a  mirror  when  I  felt  cross,  noting  my  facial  expres- 
sion at  the  time,  observing  a  similar  expression  from 
time  to  time  on  the  face  of  my  mother  or  nurse,  and 
then  arguing  by  analogy  that  these  external  bodies  are 
probably  animated  by  minds  like  my  own,  which  are 
feeling  cross,  is  too  silly  to  need  refutation.  If  the  belief 
in  other  minds  and  other  mental  events  were  reached  in 


MIND'S  KNOWLEDGE   OF   OTHER   MINDS    325 

this  way,  it  might  perhaps  be  entertained  as  a  bfjld 
speculative  opinion  by  a  few  exceptionally  ingenious 
and  observant  persons  at  the  ripe  age  of  thirty-five. 
Its  actual  strength  and  its  universal  distribution  would 
be  utterly  inexplicable  on  this  hypothesis. 

(2)  Next,  I  think  it  is  equally  clear  that  our  ascription 
of  minds  to  other  human  bodies,  and  our  ascription  of 
certain  states  to  these  minds  on  certain  occasions,/ 
cannot  be  due  to  direct  associations  acquired  in  the 
course  of  our  lives.  A  direct  association  between  a 
certain  facial  expression  and  a  certain  emotion  could 
arise  only  in  the  following  way.  We  should  need  to 
have  often  seen  a  certain  expression  ie.g.^  a  frown)  on  ■ 
our  own  faces  when  we  felt  a  certain  emotion  ie.g.^ 
anger).  If  this  could  happen  often  enough,  the  visual 
appearance  of  this  facial  change  might  be  associated 
with  this  emotion.  When  we  saw  a  similar  expression 
on  another  face  we  might  automatically  believe  in  the 
existence  of  a  similar  emotion,  and  we  might  locate  it 
in  the  mind  which  animates  this  other  body.  But 
(i)  the  conditions  which  would  be  needed  for  the  estab- 
lishment of  such  an  association  are  not  and  cannot 
in  fact  be  fulfilled.  We  cannot  see  our  own  facial 
expressions  at  all  except  by  looking  in  mirrors  ;  and 
most  of  us  pass  through  life  with  very  little  direct 
perceptual  knowledge  of  what  we  "look  like"  when 
we  feel  angry,  or  pleased,  or  in  pain.  Of  course,  the 
same  remarks  do  not  apply  to  the  natural  expression 
of  states  of  mind  by  interjectional  noises.  A  baby 
who  is  in  pain  and  howls  can  hear  itself  howling. 
An  association  might  therefore  be  formed  in  its  mind 
between  the  feeling  of  pain  and  the  sound  of  howling. 
If  it  now  heard  a  similar  howl  from  another  baby,  it 
might  automatically  ascribe  a  painful  feeling  to  it. 
Still,  it  is  plain  that  this  will  not  carry  us  very  far  ; 
for  many  states  of  mind  which  have  a  natural  expres- 
sion are  not  naturally  expressed  by  characteristic  sounds, 
but  by  characteristic  facial  modifications,     (ii)  Even   if 


326    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

an  association  were  somehow  established  between  the 

visual   appearance   of  a   certain   facial    expression   and 

the  occurrence  of  a  certain  state  of  mind  in  ourselves, 

it  is  not  obvious  that  this  would  suffice  to  explain  our 

belief  that  this  state  is  now  happening  in  another  mind 

when   we  see  this  expression    on    another   face.      The 

sight  of  this  expression  on  another  face  might  simply 

evoke   a    mild   occurrence   of    the   feeling   in    my   own 

mind.     But,  even  if  it  evokes  in   me  the  idea  of  that 

feeling,     I     might    make    various    uses    of    this    idea. 

I   might  just  as   well   think  of  the  past  occurrence  of 

this  feeling  in  myself  ^.s  believe  in  the /r^i'^?;/^' occurrence 

of  this  feeling  in  another.     We  may  conclude  then  that 

"^     V     the  supposed  association   could  not  in   fact  be  formed 

V  in  the  course  of  our  lives  ;    and   that,  even  if  it  were, 

!     it  would  not  suffice  by  itself  to  account  for  our  belief 

\   that  a  certain  kind  of  event  is   happening  in   another 

I   mind   when    we   see   a   certain    kind    of  expression   on 

another  face. 

There  are  two  kinds  of  direct  association  which  may 
be  formed  in  the  course  of  our  lives,  and  must  be  care- 
fully distinguished  from  the  kind  of  association  which  I 
have   just  rejected,     (i)  When    I    frown,   or   have  any 
\     other   characteristic    bodily    modification,    there    is    no 
(      doubt   a   characteristic  bodily  feeling.'    It  is  therefore 
,     very  likely  indeed  that  an  association  is  quickly  formed 
\     between   certain   of  my  mental   states  and   the   bodily 
feelings  which  are  connected  with  their  natural  expres- 
;      sion.     But  this  kind  of  association  evidently  does  not 
carry  me  beyond  my  owm  mind  and  its  states,     (ii)  It 
may  be  that  a  certain  facial  expression  in  another  body 
which  I  can  perceive  has  often  been  followed  by  overt 
action  on  the  part  of  that  body,  and  that  this  has  often 
ended  by  producing  some  characteristic  sensation  and 
emotion  in  my  mind.     E.g.^  it  might  be  that,  as  a  rule, 
when  I  have  seen  people  frowning,  they  have  followed 
up  their  frowns  by  blows  ;  and  these  may  have  caused 
pain  and  fear  in  my  mind.     An  association  may  thus  be 


(^ 


-'^IND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   OTHER   MINDS     327  {,  ^^ . 

V 

formed  between  the  perception  of  another's  frown  and 
the  expectation  of  pain  and  fear  in  myself.  But  exactly 
the  same  kind  of  association  may  be  formed  in  connexion 
with  objects  to  which  we  do  not  ascribe  minds  or  mental 
states,  as  when  a  "burnt  child"  learns  to  "dread  the 
fire."  Flence  this  kind  of  association  cannot  suffice  to 
account  for  our  belief  in  the  existence  of  other  minds,  or  / 

of  certain  mental  states  which  do  not  belong  to  our  own 
minds. 

(3)  It^  is  now  clear  that  we  do  not  come  to  believe 
by  a  process  of  inference  that  other  human  bodies  are 
animated  by  minds,  and  that  we  do  not  come  to  believe 
this  through  associations  which  have  been  formed  in 
the  course  of  our  lives.  And  it  is  not  in  consequence 
of  inference  or  of  acquired  associations  that  we  ascribe 
certain  states  to  other  minds  on  seeing  certain  facial  ex- 
pressions on  other  bodies.  Hence  only  two  alternatives 
seem  to  be  left.  Either  (i)  there  are  certain  cognitive 
situations  which  actually  contain  other  minds  or  certain 
of  their  states  as  objective  constituents  ;  or  (ii)  the  visual  1 
appearance  of  certain  bodily  forms,  movements,  gestures,  ' 
and  modifications,  has  for  us  an  unacquired  meaning  ;  so 
that,  from  the  first,  we  pass  from  perceiving  such  things 
to  believing  that  the  perceived  body  is  animated  by  a 
mind,  and  that  this  mind  is  owning  such  and  such  anj 
experience.  I  will  now  say  something  about  these  twd 
alternatives. 

For  reasons  which  have  been  repeated  ad  nauseam  in  ]) 
the  case  of  perception  and  introspection  it  is  not  possible 
that  a  mind,  in  the  sense  of  an  Empirical  Self  which 
may  endure  for  years,  can  literally  be  a  constituent  of 
a  cognitive  situation  which  may  last  only  for  a  few 
minutes.  So  at  most  we  can  suppose  that  the  objective 
constituents  of  certain  of  our  cognitive  situations  are 
mental  events  which  in  fact  form  parts  of  the  history  of 
other  Empirical  Selves.  There  is  unfortunately  no 
name,  corresponding  to  "perception"  and  "introspec- 
tion ",  for  those  situations  in  which  we  seem  to  be  in 


328     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

direct  cognitive  contact  with  other  minds  and  their 
states.  But,  as  we  shall  often  have  to  refer  to  them, 
we  had  better  invent  a  name  for  them.  For  want  of  a 
better  word,  let  us  call  them  "  extraspective  situations". 
This  name  is  not  to  imply  any  special  theory  about  the 
right  analysis  of  such  situations. 

We  must  next  notice  that,  even  if  mental  events 
which  are  not  owned  by  our  minds  be  parts  of  the 
objective  constituent  of  an  extraspective  situation,  they 
are  never  the  whole  of  its  objective  constituent.  The 
perception  of  another  body  and  of  certain  movements  or 
modifications  of  it  is  essential  to  extraspection  ;  and  so 
one  part  of  the  objective  constituent  of  any  extraspective 
situation  is  the  visual  and  other  sensa  by  which  the 
foreign  body  appears  to  us  in  perception.  If  there  be 
cognitive  situations  in  which  a  mental  event  belonging 
to  another  mind  is  the  sole  objective  constituent,  they 
must  be  classed  separately.  They  might  be  called 
"telepathic"  or  "  telegnostic  ",  as  distinct  from  "extra- 
spective" situations.  It  will  be  remembered  that  we  said 
that  a  perceptual  situation  always  involves  a  sensational 
situation,  and  that  it  is  perhaps  doubtful  whether  purely 
sensational  situations  actually  exist  or  are  causally 
possible.  On  the  alternative  which  we  are  at  present 
considering,  some  if  not  all  extraspective  situations 
would  involve  a  telegnostic  situation  ;  whilst  all  would 
involve  a  perceptual  situation.  It  is  of  course  certain 
that  perceptual  situations  can  and  do  exist  apart  from 
extraspective  situations  ;  but  a  person  who  accepted  the 
present  alternative  about  extraspective  situations  might 
quite  legitimately  doubt  whether  purely  telegnostic 
situations  exist  or  are  causally  possible. 

The  next  point  to  notice  is  this.  It  would  not  be 
necessary  for  an  upholder  of  the  present  theory  to  assert 
that  (^//extraspective  situations  contain  a  foreign  mental 
event  as  part  of  their  objective  constituent.  Suppose 
that  a  considerable  number  of  extraspective  situations 
involve    telegnostic   situations  ;    that    they   all    involve 


MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   OTHER   MINDS     329 

perceptual  situations  with  characteristic  objective  con- 
stituents ;  and  that  purely  telegnostic  situations  rarely, 
if  ever,  arise.  Then  an  association  would  be  formed 
between  such  and  such  visual  and  auditory  appearances 
and  such  and  such  foreign  mental  events.  Suppose 
now  that  a  purely  perceptual  situation  were  to  arise, 
having  for  its  objective  constituents  these  characteristic 
visual  and  auditory  sensa.  Then  this  association  would 
probably  be  excited,  and  we  should  automatically 
believe  in  the  existence  of  such  and  such  a  foreign 
mental  event,  though  it  is  not  part  of  the  objective 
constituent  of  the  present  cognitive  situation.  Beliefs 
reached  in  this  way  might  often  be  true  ;  but  they  might 
often  be  false.  Thus  the  present  theory  is  quite  com- 
patible with  the  existence  of  delusive  extraspective 
situations. 

Now  the  kind  of  association  which  would  certainly  be 
formed  if  the  present  theory  be  true  would  presumably 
work  both  ways.  Suppose  then  that  a  purely  teleg- 
nostic situation  were  to  arise.  The  association  would 
now  tend  to  call  up  images  of  a  human  being  with  the 
facial  expression  which  corresponds  to  the  mental  event 
which  is  being  telegnostically  cognised,  and  it  might 
lead  to  a  perceptual  belief  that  his  body  is  now  present 
to  our  senses.  The  result  would  be  to  produce  an  ex- 
traspective situation  which  is  delusive  on  its  perceptual 
side.  If  the  reader  will  do  what  most  philosophers  are 
too  proud  and  most  scientists  too  prejudiced  to  do,  and 
will  study  the  evidence  for  "telepathy  "  in  Phantasms  of 
the  Living,  and  the  evidence  which  has  accumulated 
since  1886  as  marshalled  by  Mrs  Sidgwick  in  the 
S.P.R.  Proceediftgs  for  October  1922,  he  will  see  that  a 
large  proportion  of  the  cases  are  of  the  kind  just  sug- 
gested. There  is  little  evidence  for  pure  telegnosis  ;  ) 
but  there  is  a  great  deal  of  excellent  evidence  for  the 
existence  of  extraspective  situations  which  are  delusive  , 
on  their  perceptual  side  and  veridical  on  their  telegnostic  \ 
side.       By  this   I   mean  that  the  mental    event   which 


330     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

the  experient  claims  to  be  apprehending  really  has 
happened  at  much  the  same  time  in  a  mind  whose  body 
is  far  away  ;  but  that  the  apprehension  of  this  event  has 
generally  been  accompanied  by  and  bound  up  with  an 
hallucinatory  perceptual  experience  in  which  this  body 
seems  to  be  present  to  the  experient. 

On  the  other  alternative  which  we  have  to  consider 
the  extraspective  situation  never  contains  a  foreign 
mental  state  as  part  of  its  objective  constituent;  i.e.^  it 
never  involves  a  telegnostic  situation.  We  must 
suppose  that  the  innate  constitution  of  human  beings 
(and  probably  of  other  gregarious  animals)  is  such  that, 
when  one  sees  any  body  which  in  fact  resembles  his  own 
closely  enough,  he  instinctively  believes  it  to  be 
animated  by  a  mind  like  his  own.  And  we  must 
suppose  that,  whenever  one  sees  in  another  a  facial 
expression  or  hears  a  noise  which  in  fact  resembles 
closely  enough  the  facial  expression  or  noise  which  in 
him  is  the  natural  expression  of  a  certain  kind  of 
experience,  he  instinctively  ascribes  a  similar  experience 
to  the  mind  which  he  believes  to  animate  the  body  of 
the  other.  If  there  be  other  creatures  like  ourselves, 
and  if  we  be  largely  dependent  on  them,  we  could  not 
have  survived  unless  we  either  had  instinctive  beliefs  of 
this  kind,  which  are  in  the  main  true,  or  had  telegnostic 
knowledge  of  some  of  their  mental  states. 

The  next  question  is  whether  we  can  decide  between 
these  two  alternatives.  In  the  first  place,  we  might 
accept  the  positive  part  of  the  second  alternative,  and 
deny  or  doubt  the  negative  part.  We  might  admit 
that  there  are  such  instinctive  beliefs  as  the  second 
theory  assumes,  and  that  there  is  also  in  certain  cases 
genuine  telegnosis.  And  it  might  be  that  those 
particular  perceptual  situations  which  call  forth  the 
instinctive  beliefs  are  also  those  which  are  most  favour- 
able to  the  occurrence  of  a  telegnostic  situation.  I 
think  we  may  say  at  once  that  an  analysis  of  extra- 
spective situations  which  accepted  telegnosis  and  denied 


MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   OTHER   MINDS     331 

the  existence  of  these  instinctive  beliefs  would  be  far  less 
plausible  than  one  which  denied  telegnosis  and  accepted 
the  existence  of  these  instinctive  beliefs.  For  it  is  by- 
no  means  certain  that  such  instinctive  beliefs,  eked  out 
by  subsequent  inference  and  association  interpreted  in 
terms  of  these  beliefs,  would  not  suffice  to  account  for 
all  the  known  facts  about  extraspection.  After  all,  such 
a  theory  would  leave  our  extraspective  beliefs  in  foreign 
minds  and  mental  events  in  no  worse  position  than  our 
perceptual  beliefs  in  external  physical  events  and  things, 
if  my  analysis  of  sense-perception  be  admitted.  In  fact 
it  would  be  in  a  slightly  stronger  position.  For  I  have 
argued  that  we  probably  do  have  direct  inspective 
knowledge  of  some  mental  events,  whilst  we  probably 
do  not  have  this  kind  of  knowledge  of  a7iy  physical 
events.  Thus  we  do  not  need  any  special  postulate  or 
category  to  provide  us  with  the  notion  of  a  mental  event, 
or  to  assure  us  that  there  are  instances  of  such  things  ; 
whilst,  if  I  am  right,  we  probably  do  need  something  of 
the  kind  in  the  case  of  physical  events  and  things. 

If  then  we  had  nothing  but  ordinary  extraspective 
situations  to  consider,  I  should  be  inclined  to  say  that 
the  assumption  of  a  telegnostic  factor  is  unnecessary 
and  ungrounded,  though  it  might  still  be  true.  But 
the  actual  position  is  somewhat  different.  From  the 
study  of  abnormal  phenomena  it  seems  to  me  to  be 
practically  certain  that  there  is  such  a  mental  power  as 
telegnosis.  It  is  therefore  not  a  groundless  assumption 
that  it  may  be  operative  in  some  normal  extraspective 
situations.  And  it  is  evident  that,  if  it  were  present 
there  mixed  up  with  a  perceptual  situation  and  with 
instinctive  beliefs  about  foreign  mental  events,  it  would 
be  almost  impossible  to  detect  it.  It  therefore  seems 
to  me  quite  likely  that  there  may  be  a  telegnostic  factor 
in  many  normal  extraspective  situations,  i.e.^  that  their 
objective  constituents  may  include  foreign  mental  events. 
I  do  not  see  that  I  can  prove  this,  or  that  anyone  else 
can  disprove   it ;  -I   merely  say  that  I   think  there  is  a 


i 


332     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

faint  balance  of  probability  in  its  favour  in  view  of  all 
the  known  facts. 

Conventional  Expression.  A  complete  treatment  of 
this  subject  would  occupy  volumes,  and  would  be  far 
beyond  the  powers  of  the  present  writer.  I  will  there- 
fore confine  myself  to  a  few  remarks  which  seem 
specially  relevant  to  our  present  purpose. 

As  I  have  said,  all  intelligible  sentences  are  natural 
expressions,  on  the  occasion  of  which  we  believe  that 
we  are  in  presence  of  a  foreign  mind  which  is  owning 
a  process  of  thinking,  judging,  and  so  on.  The  vast 
majority  of  intelligible  sentences  are  not  about  the 
mental  states  of  the  person  who  utters  them,  and  are 
therefore  not  conventional  expressions  of  his  state  of 
mind.  A  sentence  is  a  conventional  expression  of  a 
state  of  mind  only  in  so  far  as  it  asserts  that  the  person 
who  utters  it  is  having  this  state.  Even  those  sentences 
which  do  conventionally  express  a  state  of  mind  are 
very  likely  to  be  misleading.  A  man  who  says  that  he 
is  having  a  certain  emotion  or  volition  may  be  inten- 
tionally trying  to  deceive  us  ;  or  he  may  have  intro- 
spected inaccurately,  and  be  honestly  mistaken  ;  or  he 
may  be  unable  to  find  words. which  adequately  express 
the  results  of  a  perfectly  correct  process  of  introspection  ; 
or  we  may  be  stupid  and  misunderstand  the  words 
which  he  uses.  For  all  these  reasons  it  is  rash  to  believe 
that  a  certain  man  is  having  a  certain  experience  at  a 
certain  time  merely  because  he  says  that  he  is  doing  so. 
A  prudent  person  checks  such  statements  by  noting  the 
natural  expressions  of  the  speaker  at  the  time  and  his 
subsequent  actions  and  statements. 

In  fact,  for  our  present  purpose,  the  natural  and 
unintentional  expression,  which  belongs  to  all  intel- 
ligible sentences  as  such,  is  far  more  important  than 
the  conventional  and  deliberate  expression,  which 
belongs  to  a  small  minority  of  them.  The  hearing  or 
reading  of  intelligent  and  intelligible  discourse  (whether 
we  accept  or  reject  what  it  asserts)  is  the  occasion  par 


MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   OTHER   MINDS     333 

excellence   on    which    we    feel    perfectly    certain    of    the 
presence  of  a  foreign  mind  3iS  distinct  from  the  presence 
of  mere  me?ital  events.     To  avoid  an  obvious  criticism  I 
must  here  make  one  important  qualification.     I  say  that 
intelligible  discourse  is  the  natural  sign  of  the  presence 
of  a  mind  and  of  the  presence  of  "  thought ",  in  a  wide 
sense.     But  I  am  quite  well  aware  that  a  great  deal  of 
intelligible    and    intelligent    speaking    and    writing    is 
accompanied  by  very  little  thought  about  its  ostensible 
subject-matter.       It  would   not  be   unfair   to   say  that, 
while    we    are    speaking    and    writing    most,    we    are 
thinking  least ;  and  that,  while  we  are  thinking  most, 
we    are    speaking    and    writing    least.       Anyone    who 
prepares   lectures   knows   that   he  was   thinking  about 
the  subject,  and  not  speaking,  during  his  preparation  ; 
whilst  he  can  largely  let  his  mind  "go  on  holiday"  (to 
use  an  excellent  phrase  of  Descartes)  during  the  actual 
delivery  of  the  lecture.     We  must  not  therefore  say  that 
the  utterance  of  an  intelligible  discourse  is  a  sign  that 
the  mind  is  now  thinking  about  what  the  body  is  talking 
about.      But  we  do  feel   perfectly  sure  that  an  intelli- 
gible discourse  can  be  uttered  only  by  a  body  which  is 
animated  by  a  mind  that  has  thought  and  is  capable  of 
thinking  again.      Even  here  we  must  make  a  further 
qualification.      There  are  many  intelligible   sentences, 
uttered  in  ordinary  conversation,  which  are  neither  the 
expression    of  a   present   thought  about  their   subject- 
matter  nor  the  result  of  past  thought  about  this  subject- 
matter  in  the  mind  of  the  person  who  utters  them.    Many 
"expressions"    of  political   and    religious    "opinion", 
which  occur  in  the  conversation  of  quite  intelligent  men, 
are  of  this  nature.     Nevertheless,  these  sentences  would 
not  have  been  spoken  if  someone  else  at  some  time  in 
the  past  had  not  exercised  his  mind  on  these  subjects. 

This  brings  us  to  a  point  where,  as  it  seems  to  me, 
both  Behaviourists  and  Bergsonians  have  gone  wrong 
through  failure  to  recognise  an  important  distinction. 
Seeing  how  much  of  our  alleged  "thinking"   is  just 


334    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

the  automatic  reeling  off  of  sentences  or  the  mechanical 
manipulation  of  symbols,  Behaviourists  have  tended 
to  hold  that  all  "thinking"  reduces  without  residue  to 
this.  And  Bergsonians  have  tended  to  contrast  the 
merely  mechanical  processes  of  the  "intellect"  with 
a  mysterious  and  superior  faculty  of  "  intuition  ",  which 
is  apparently  supposed  to  be  manifested  in  its  purest 
form  in  the  instinctive  behaviour  of  animals.  Now  it 
seems  to  me  that  we  must  distinguish  between  what  I 
call  "  fluid "  and  "crystallised"  thinking.  We  must 
recognise  that,  whilst  the  greater  part~or  any  so-called 
process  of  "thinking"  is  of  the  latter  kind,  it  must 
also  contain  short  spells  of  the  former.  And  we  must 
recognise  that  the  latter  presupposes  the  previous  oc- 
currence of  the  former  in  the  same  mind  or  in  some 
other  mind.  Anyone  who  considers  what  happens 
when  he  solves  some  problem  for  himself  will  recognise 
the  difference.  He  would  commonly  be  said  to  be 
"  thinking  "  about  the  problem  during  the  whole  course 
of  his  work.  Now,  during  the  greater  part  of  this 
period,  he  is  certainly  only  manipulating  symbols 
almost  mechanically  according  to  rules.  But  (i)  at 
the  beginning  of  the  work,  and  at  isolated  intervals 
during  the  course  of  it,  he  must  cease  to  do  this  and 
must  contemplate  face  to  face  the  actual  abstract  objects 
with  which  he  is  concerned  and  their  actual  relations 
to  each  other.  When  he  does  this  he  is  performing 
acts  of  "  fluid"  thinking;  and  no  facility  in  manipula- 
ting symbols  is  any  substitute  for  this.  The  power  to 
perform  acts  of  fluid  thinking  constitutes  that  difference 
between  a  man  and  a  well-trained  parrot  which  the 
Behaviourists  (doubtless  from  excess  of  modesty)  are  so 
loath  to  admit,  (ii)  I  can  now  manipulate  symbols 
blindly  according  to  rules,  and  can  feel  confident  that 
the  result  will  accord  with  the  real  relations  of  things, 
only  because  I  or  my  predecessors  directly  contemplated 
the  things  and  their  relations  and  made  up  a  symbolism 
whose  rules  of  operation  were  seen  to  accord  with  the 


MIND'S  KNOWLEDGE   OF   OTHER   MINDS     335 

relations  of  the  things  symbolised.  Thus  the  symbolism 
is  just  the  "crystallisation"  of  the  past  fluid  thinking 
of  myself  or  others  ;  and,  if  it  were  not,  there  would  not 
be  the  faintest  reason  to  treat  these  operations  with 
symbols  according  to  rules  as  anything  more  than 
solemn  trifling.  It  is  simply  unintelligible  to  me  how 
this  fact  can  escape  the  notice  of  any  competent  person, 
or  why  the  tacit  denial  of  it  should  be  supposed  to  mark 
a  wonderful  advance  in  psychology. 

The  position  of  the  Bergsonians  is  less  silly  than  that 
of  the  Behaviourists  ;  for  the  former  do  at  least  recognise 
that  mere  crystallised  thinking  will  not  account  for  the 
facts.  But  why  they  should  identify  intellectual  pro- 
cesses with  that  mechanical  manipulation  of  words  and 
symbols  which  I  call  "  crystallised  thinking",  I  cannot 
imagine.  And  I  am  equally  at  a  loss  to  understand 
why  they  should  suppose  that  the  missing  factor,  which 
I  call  *•  fluid  thinking",  is  specially  manifested  in  in- 
stinctive actions.  For  these  seem  to  be  extremely  like 
that  mechanical  reeling  off  of  sentences  which  is  sup- 
posed by  them  to  be  the  special  province  of  intellect,  as 
opposed  to  intuition. 

To  sum  up.  When  we  hear  intelligible  and  intelli-  ) 
gent  discourse  uttered  we  cannot  help  believing,  either 
{a)  that  we  are  in  the  presence  of  a  foreign  mind  which  is 
thinking  about  the  subject-matter  of  the  discourse  now, 
or  has  done  so  in  the  past  ;  or  {b)  that  at  any  rate  there 
has  been  a  foreign  mind  which  did  think  about  this 
subject-matter  and  is  an  essential  condition  of  the 
possibility  of  the  present  utterance.  Which  of  these 
alternative  beliefs  we  arrive  at  depends  on  the  special 
circumstances  in  which  the  words  are  uttered. 

The  Logical  Status  of  the  Belief  in  Other  Minds.  So 
far  I  have  confined  myself  to  a  purely  descriptive  dis- 
cussion of  extraspective  situations.  I  have  tried  to 
show  that  they  certainly  do  not  involve  inference  ;  that 
our  extraspective  beliefs  cannot  be  explained  by  direct 


336    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF  EXISTENTS 

associations  which    have   arisen    in    the   course  of  our 
lives;   that  they  almost  certainly  depend  on  an  innate 
/\     I     and  instinctive  meaning  which  attaches  from   the  first 
I     to  certain  perceived  objects  and  events  ;   and  that  it  is 
not  unlikely  that  some  at  least  of  them  actually  contain 
foreign    mental    events  as    part  of  their  objective  con- 
stituents.    The   purely    logical   question    that   remains 
j!     is:    ''Granted  that  such  beliefs  are  not  in  fact  reached 
^    by  inference,  can  they  be  supported  by  inference?" 

The  Logical  Connexion  between  Belief  in  Matter  and 
Belief  in  Other  Minds.  I  shall  begin  by  considering  a 
question  which  seems  to  be  of  very  great  interest  and 
to  have  failed  to  receive  the  attention  which  it  deserves. 
This  is:  "What  logical  connexion,  if  any,  is  there 
«*  between  the  belief  in  Matter  and  the  belief  in  other 
Minds?"  This  question  first  forced  itself  on  my  at- 
tention when  reading  the  philosophy  of  Berkeley.  It 
will  be  remembered  that  Berkeley  denies  the  existence 
of  matter,  but  is  perfectly  certain  of  the  existence  of 
himself  and  of  God.  He  says  very  little  about  the 
existence  of  other  finite  spirits  ;  but  I  think  it  is  certain 
that  he  felt  no  doubt  about  the  existence  of  other  human 
minds.  Now  one  can  see  that  a  Berkeleian  has  a  right 
to  be  certain  of  the  existence  either  of  God  or  of  other 
finite  spirits.  For  he  has  certain  sensations  which  are 
not  due  to  his  own  volitions,  and  he  holds  that  the 
only  possible  cause  of  anything  is  a  volition  of  some 
mind.  Hence  he  has  a  right  to  be  sure  of  the  existence 
of  some  mind  other  than  his  own,  which  has  volitions, 
i  What  seems  more  doubtful  is  whether  he  has  a  right  to 
'  believe  both  in  the  existence  of  God  and  in  that  of  other 
finite  spirits.  And  this  raises  the  general  question 
whether  a  person  who  doubted  or  denied  the  existence 
of  matter  would  have  as  good  right  to  believe  in  the 
existence  of  other  finite  spirits  as  a  person  who  accepted 
the  existence  of  matter  and  hejd  that  we  are  in  cognitive 
contact  with  it  in  perception.  Corresponding  to  this 
would  be  the  question  whether  a  person  who  doubted 


MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   OTHER   MINDS    337 

the  existence  of  other  finite  spirits  would  have  as  good 
a  right  to  believe  in  the  existence  of  matter  as  one  who 
believed  that  there  are  other  finite  spirits  and  that  we 
are  in  cognitive  contact  with  them  in  extraspective 
situations.  The  second  question  is  the  easier  of  the 
two,  and  I  will  dismiss  it  before  dealing  with  the  first. 

If  a  man  doubted  or  denied  the  existence  of  other 
spirits,  it  seems  plain  that  he  would  be  deprived  of 
some  of  the  grounds  which  ordinary  men  have  for 
believing  in  matter.  One  ground  which  might  be 
alleged  for  the  view  that  my  table  is  not  a  mere  bundle 
of  sensa,  existentially  dependent  on  myself,  is  that  other 
people  tell  me  that,  when  they  are  in  my  room  and  I 
am  out  of  it,  they  are  subject  to  perceptual  situations 
with  a  very  similar  objective  constituent  to  that  of  my 
perceptual  situation  when  I  am  in  the  room.  Another 
ground  which  might  be  alleged  for  believing  in  the 
independent  existence  of  matter  is  that  other  people  tell 
me  that  they  know  by  bodily  feeling  that  their  bodies 
continue  to  exist  when  I  cease  to  perceive  them.  Now 
suppose  that  I  doubted  or  denied  the  existence  of  other 
minds.  I  should  of  course  still  hear  and  understand 
these  utterances  which  apparently  come  out  of  the 
mouths  of  other  human  bodies.  But,  in  so  far  as  they 
asserted  that  a  mind  which  animates  these  bodies  has 
perceived  or  is  perceiving  something,  I  should  have  to 
doubt  or  deny  the  statement.  If  my  gramophone  said 
to  me  :  '*  I  saw  your  table  all  the  time  you  were  out 
of  the  room,"  I  should  not  hold  that  this  added  any 
weight  to  the  belief  that  my  table  existed  in  my  absence 
except  in  so  far  as  I  believed  that  another  human  being 
who  had  been  in  the  room  had  recorded  this  observation. 
Now,  on  the  hypothesis  under  consideration,  all  state- 
ments uttered  apparently  by  other  human  bodies  will  be 
in  the  position  of  statements  uttered  by  gramophones, 
with  the  important  difference  that  the  "records"  will 
not  have  been  made  by  bodies  which  are  animated  by 
minds.     And  there  would  be  no  reason  to  attach  any 


338     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

weight  to  these  utterances.  Of  course  the  belief  in 
matter  is  not  reached  by  inference.  It  is,  therefore, 
psychologically  possible  that  a  man  might  cease  to 
believe  in  the  existence  of  other  minds  and  yet  continue 
to  believe  just  as  strongly  as  before  in  the  existence  of 
matter.  But,  if  he  tried  to  defend  his  belief  to  himself 
^^  by   arguments,    he    would    certainly    be    in    a    weaker 

T*'^^  "X         position    than  a  man  who  believed  jnthe  existence  of 
''■(        '  other  human  minds. 

We  now  come  to  the  other  and  harder  question  : 
''Would  a  man  who  doubted  .or  disbelieved  the 
existence  of  matter  have  as  good  a  right  to  believe  in 
the  existence  of  other  minds  as  one  who  accepted  the 
existence  of  matter  and  believed  that  he  was  in  cognitive 
contact  with  it  in  perception?"  In  order  to  answer  this 
question  let  us  consider  the  sensa  that  we  sense  and  the 
feelings  that  we  feel,  without  regard  to  the  question 
whether  they  are  really  appearances  of  our  own  and  of 
other  bodies.  We  can  start  by  dividing  them  up  into 
two  great  groups  ;  viz.  (A)  those  which  we  naturally 
\  regard  as  appearances  of  our  own  body  ;  and  (B)  those 
/  which  we  naturally  regard  as  appearances  of  foreign 
'  bodies.  The  group  (B)  divides  into  two  sub-groups  ; 
viz.  [a)  those  which  v/e  naturally  regard  as  appearances 
of  other  human  bodies,  and  {b)  those  which  we  naturally 
regard  as  appearances  of  non-human  bodies.  We  will 
consider  first  the  resemblances  and  differences  between 
the  contents  of  these  groups. 

Group  (A)  consists  mainly  of  bodily  feelings  ;  but  it 
also  contains  certain  characteristic  visual,  tactual,  and 
auditory  sensa.  For  I  can  "  see  "  and  "touch"  parts 
of  "  my  own  body  ",  and  can  "  hear"  "  my  own  voice  ". 
Group  (B)  contains  no  bodily  feelings  in  either  of  its 
sub-groups  ;  but  consists  wholly  of  visual,  tactual,  and 
auditory  sensa.  The  contents  of  sub-group  {a')  resemble 
that  part  of  the  contents  of  (A)  which  does  not  consist  of 
bodily  feelings.  But  it  is  much  richer  in  content  than 
the  corresponding  part  of  group  (A) ;  for  1  can  "see" 


MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   OTHER   MINDS     339 

and  "feel"  much  more  of  "other  human  bodies"  than 
of  "  my  own  ".  The  contents  of  sub-group  {b)  bear  no 
special  resemblance  in  detail  to  those  of  sub-group 
{a)  or  of  group  (A)  ;  for  "human  bodies"  have  a  char- 
acteristic appearance,  and  "human  voices"  have  a 
characteristic  sound. 

Let  us  next  consider  the  relations  of  my  will  to  these 
various  groups  of  sensa  which  I  sense  and  of  feelings 
which  I  feel.  The  great  mass  of  feelings  in  group  (A) 
is  quite  independent  of  my  will.  But,  when  I  "will  to 
move  my  body  ",  I  initiate  certain  changes  in  this  mass  of 
bodily  feeling  (viz.,  certain  muscle-  and  joint-sensations, 
etc.).  These  changes  are  followed  as  a  rule  by  certain 
characteristic  changes  in  the  visual,  tactual,  or  auditory 
sensa  of  group  (A);  e.g.^  I  may  "hear  myself  speak- 
ing", "  see  my  arm  moving",  and  so  on.  These  may 
be  followed  by  characteristic  changes  in  the  sensa  of 
group  (B) ;  e.g.,  I  may  "see  a  chair  being  moved  by 
my  hand"  or  may  "see  myself  kicking  another  human 
body,  and  hear  it  cry  out".  The  only  way  in  which  I 
can  voluntarily  affect  the  sensa  in  group  (A)  or  in  group 
(B)  is  by  first  initiating  certain  characteristic  changes 
in  the  bodily  feelings  of  group  (A). 

These  are  the  facts  which  are  available  for  an 
argument  by  analogy  when  we  confine  ourselves  strictly 
to  what  we  can  discover  by  inspection  and  introspection. 
The  question  which  we  have  now  to  ask  is  whether  the 
argument  would  be  weaker  or  stronger  according  to 
whether  we  do  or  do  not  believe  that  these  feelings  and 
sensa  are  appearances  of  material  things.  The  only 
way  to  test  this  is  to  consider  in  detail  how  the  argument 
would  run  on  each  alternative  assumption.  I  will  begin 
by  considering  the  argument  on  the  common -sense 
assumption  that  these  sensa  and  feelings  are  appearances 
of  material  things. 

The  Argument  for  other  Minds  on  the  Assumption  of 
Matter.  On  this  view  the  sensa  of  group  (A)  will  be 
appearances  to  me  of  that  material  thing  which  is  my 


340     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

own  body  ;  those  of  sub-group  (a)  of  group  (B)  will  be 
appearances  to  me  of  that  material  object  which  is 
another  human  body.  Now,  on  this  supposition,  the 
effect  of  my  volitions  is  not  directly  to  modify  the 
feelings  which  I  feel  or  the  sensa  which  I  sense.  The 
direct  result  of  my  volitions  is  to  produce  internal 
changes  in  my  body  ;  and  the  changes  which  I  observe 
in  the  feelings  of  group  (A)  are  collateral  results  of  these 
internal  bodily  changes.  The  physical  consequence  of 
these  internal  bodily  changes  is  certain  overt  bodily 
movements  of  my  limbs,  tongue,  etc.  And  the  changes 
which  I  observe  in  the  sensa  of  group  (A)  are  merely 
collateral  results  of  these  overt  bodily  movements. 
Finally,  the  physical  consequence  of  these  overt  bodily 
movements  is,  or  may  be,  certain  changes  in  external 
physical  things  ;  and  the  changes  which  I  observe  in 
the  sensa  of  group  (B)  are  merely  collateral  results  of 
these  external  physical  changes. 

On  this  view,  another  mind  like  mine  would  be  one 
which  animates  a  body  like  mine  ;  which  can  directly 
produce  changes  within  this  body  by  willing  ;  and  can 
thus  indirectly  produce  overt  movements  in  its  own 
body  and  changes  in  external  bodies.  If  the  other 
mind  is  like  mine,  its  body  appears  to  it  as  a  group  (A') 
of  feelings  which  it  feels  and  of  certain  characteristic 
sensa  which  it  senses  ;  and  other  bodies  appear  to  it  as 
a  group  (B')  of  sensa  which  it  senses.  This  group  (B') 
will  divide  into  a  sub-group  {a)  which  is  the  appear- 
ance to  it  of  other  human  bodies,  and  a  sub-group  {d') 
which  is  the  appearance  to  it  of  external  non-human 
bodies. 

On  the  present  assumption,  the  argument  by  analogy 
for  the  existence  of  other  human  minds  would  run  some- 
what as  follows.  The  resemblance  of  the  sensa  of 
sub-group  (a)  to  the  sensa  of  group  (A),  which  are 
appearances  to  me  of  the  outside  of  my  own  body, 
suggests  that  the  sensa  of  sub-group  (a)  are  appearances 
of  an  external  body  which  outwardly  resembles  mine. 


MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   OTHER   MINDS    341 

Since  it  outwardly  resembles  mine,  it  is  likely  that  it 
also  resembles  mine  inwardly.  Now  the  changes  which 
I  observe  from  time  to  time  in  the  sensa  of  sub-group 
(a)  resemble  those  which  I  observe  from  time  to  time  in 
the  sensa  of  group  (A).  The  latter  are  appearances  to 
me  of  overt  movements  of  my  own  body,  and  the  former 
are  appearances  to  me  of  overt  movements  of  an  external 
body  which  outwardly  resembles  mine.  So  this  ex- 
ternal body  resembles  mine,  not  only  in  its  outward 
form,  but  also  in  its  overt  movements.  It  is,  therefore, 
likely  that  the  internal  changes  which  determine  the 
overt  movements  of  this  external  body  resemble  the 
internal  changes  which  determine  the  overt  movements 
of  my  own  body.  Now  these  internal  changes  in  my 
own  body  are  determined  by  my  volitions,  and  appear 
to  me  as  changes  in  the  bodily  feelings  which  I  feel. 
It  is,  therefore,  likely  that  the  similar  internal  changes, 
which  I  assume  on  grounds  of  analogy  to  be  taking 
place  in  the  foreign  body,  are  due  to  volitions.  Now 
they  are  certainly  not  determined  by  any  volition  which 
I  can  introspect  ;  and  they  are  often  contrary  to  volitions 
of  mine  which  I  can  introspect.  Hence  it  is  probable 
that  they  are  determined  by  volitions  which  do  not 
belong  to  my  mind.  Now  the  order  and  connexion 
which  I  find  among  the  changes  of  sensa  in  sub-group 
{a)  resembles  the  order  and  connexion  which  I  find 
among  the  sensa  in  group  (A).  So  probably  the  overt 
movements  of  the  external  body  have  a  similar  order 
and  connexion  to  that  of  the  overt  movements  of  my 
own  body.  But  I  know  that  this  order  and  connexion 
in  my  own  case  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  successive 
volitions  which  determine  the  movements  are  not  isolated 
mental  events  but  are  states  of  a  more  or  less  coherent 
and  rational  mind.  I  therefore  infer  that  the  postulated 
volitions  are  probably  not  merely  isolated  mental  events, 
but  belong  to  some  mind  other  than  my  own,  which  is 
connected  with  the  foreign  body  as  mine  is  connected 
with  my  body.     Now  I  know  that  my  body  appears  to 


342     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

me  through  a  mass  of  feelings  which  I  feel  and  of  sensa 
which  I  sense  ;  I  know  that  other  bodies  appear  to  me 
through  sensa  which  I  sense  ;  and  I  know  that,  when  I 
voluntarily  produce  internal  changes  in  my  body,  these 
appear  to  me  as  changes  in  my  bodily  feelings.  As  I 
have  postulated  a  mind  with  volitions  like  mine,  con- 
nected with  a  body  like  mine  in  the  same  way  in  which 
my  mind  is  connected  with  my  body,  I  argue  by  analogy 
that  probably  this  other  body  appears  to  this  other 
mind  by  feelings  which  it  feels  and  certain  sensa  which 
it  senses ;  that  probably  other  bodies  appear  to  it 
through  sensa  which  it  senses ;  and  that  probably, 
when  it  produces  internal  changes  voluntarily  in  its 
own  body,  these  changes  appear  to  it  as  changes  in  its 
bodily  feelings. 

It  is  evident  that  such  an  argument  as  I  have  been 
/  describing  has  some  weight,  if  we  grant  the  fundamental 
\  assumption  that  it  makes  about  the  connexion  of  sensa 
with  material  objects.  And  it  is  evident  that  this 
assumption  forms  an  integral  part  of  the  basis  of  the 
argument.  I  argue  to  the  existence  of  another  mind 
like  mine  by  way  of  the  existence  of  another  body  which 
looks  like  mine  and  moves  like  it.  And  I  believe  in 
the  existence  of  this  other  body  because  I  believe  that 
the  sensa  of  my  (rt:)-sub-group  are  appearances  of  it, 
whilst  the  similar  sensa  of  my  (A)-group  are  appear- 
ances of  my  own  body.  The  next  question  is  whether 
I  could  legitimately  argue  to  the  existence  of  another 
mind  like  mine  from  the  same  facts  without  the 
assumption  that  the  sensa  which  I  sense  and  the  feel- 
ings which  I  feel  are  appearances  of  material  objects. 

The  Argument  for  Other  Minds  without  the  Assumption 
of  the  Existence  of  Matter.  It  is  plain  that,  on  the 
present  alternative,  the  argument,  if  it  be  possible  at 
all,  must  be  very  different  in  detail.  We  can  no  longer 
say  that  the  immediate  effect  of  my  volition  is  to  pro- 
duce internal  changes  in  my  body,  and  that  the  changes 
in  the  feelings  of  group  (A)  are  merely  collateral  effects 


MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   OTHER   MINDS     343 

of  these  internal  bodily  changes.  We  shall  have  to 
suppose  that  the  iniviediate  effect  of  my  volitions  is 
simply  to  produce  changes  in  the  feelings  of  group  (A). 
Again,  we  can  no  longer  say  that  the  internal  bodily 
changes  produce  directly  overt  bodily  movements,  and 
that  the  changes  in  the  sensa  of  group  (A)  are  simply 
collateral  effects  of  these  overt  bodily  movements. 
Instead  we  shall  have  to  suppose  that  the  voluntarily 
initiated  changes  in  the  feelings  of  group  (A)  directly 
produce  changes  in  the  sensa  of  group  (A).  Finally, 
we  can  no  longer  suppose  that  the  overt  bodily  move- 
ments cause  changes  in  external  physical  objects,  and 
that  the  changes  in  the  sensa  of  group  (B)  are  merely 
collateral  results  of  these  external  physical  changes. 
We  shall  have  to  suppose  that  the  changes  in  the  sensa 
of  group  (A)  in  certain  cases  directly  produce  changes 
in  the  sensa  of  group  (B). 

On  this  view  another  mind  like  mine  would  not  be 
one  which  animates  another  body  like  mine.  And  it 
would  not  manifest  itself  to  my  mind  by  first  directly 
affecting  its  own  body  and  then  indirectly  affecting 
mine.  For  neither  of  us  will  have  bodies.  Another 
mind  like  mine  will  simply  be  one  that  feels  a  certain 
set  of  feelings  and  senses  certain  characteristic  sensa, 
which  together  constitute  an  (A')-group.  It  will  more- 
over sense  another  group  of  sensa  (B'),  and  this  will 
divide  into  sub-sets  («')  and  {b').  And  it  will  be  able 
directly  to  affect  by  its  will  some  of  the  feelings  in  its 
(A')-group,  and  thence  indirectly  some  of  the  sensa  in 
its  (A')-group,  and  thence  at  the  second  remove  some  of 
the  sensa  in  its  (B')-group.  But  none  of  these  feelings 
and  sensa  will  be  the  appearances  to  it  of  material 
objects.  Can  any  argument  from  analogy  be  founded 
on  such  a  basis  ? 

So  far  as  I  can  see  it  could  only  take  the  following 
form.  The  sensa  of  the  (<7)-sub-group  of  my  (B)-group 
resemble  the  sensa  of  my  (A)-group.  And  certain 
changfes  which  I  observe  in  the  former  resemble  certain 


344    MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

changes  which  I  observe  in  the  latter.  Now  these 
changes  in  the  sensa  of  my  (A)-group  are  immediately 
caused  by  changes  in  the  feelings  of  my  (A)-group. 
And  these  in  turn  are  initiated  by  my  volitions.  The 
(rt)-sub-group  contains  no  feelings  which  I  feel,  and  its 
changes  are  not  correlated  with  any  volition  that  I  can 
introspect.  Indeed  they  are  often  contrary  to  volitions 
which  I  can  introspect.  Now  I  might  argue  from  the 
similarity  of  the  («)-sensa  and  their  changes  to  the 
(A)-sensa  and  their  changes  that  there  is  probably  a  set 
of  feelings  which  I  do  not  feel,  which  are  related  to  the 
(rt)-sensa  as  I  know  the  (A)-feelings  to  be  related  to  the 
(A)-sensa.  That  is,  I  might  argue  that  probably  the 
(«)-sub-group  is  really  part  of  a  foreign  (A')-group  as 
well  as  being  a  part  of  my  (B)-group.  And  I  might 
argue  that  probably  there  are  volitions  that  I  cannot 
introspect,  and  that  sometimes  conflict  with  those  which 
I  can  introspect,  which  directly  produce  changes  in 
these  hypothetical  feelings  and  thus  indirectly  produce 
the  changes  which  I  from  time  to  time  observe  in  the 
sensa  of  my  ((7)-sub-group.  Having  reached  this  point, 
I  might  carry  the  analogy  further.  I  sense  and  feel  the 
contents  of  the  (A)-group,  and  I  own  the  volitions 
which  directly  affect  the  feelings,  and  thus  indirectly 
affect  the  sensa,  of  this  group.  It  is  therefore  probable 
that  there  is  another  mind  which  senses  and  feels  the 
contents  of  this  hypothetical  (A')-group  of  which  my 
(^)-sub-group  is  a  part  ;  and  that  this  other  mind  owns 
the  supposed  volitions  which  directly  affect  the  hypo- 
thetical feelings  of  this  (A')-group  and  thus  indirectly 
affect  the  sensa  of  this  group.  The  analogy  might  then 
be  concluded  as  follows.  My  mind  senses  a  (B)-group 
beside  sensing  and  feeling  an  (A)-group.  And  this 
(B)-group  splits  into  an  (a)-  and  a  (/?)-sub-group.  It  is 
therefore  probable  that  the  supposed  foreign  mind 
senses  a  (B')-group  beside  sensing  and  feeling  an  (A')- 
group,  and  that  this  (B')-group  splits  into  an  (a')-  and 
a  ((5'')-sub-group. 


MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   OTHER   MINDS     345 

I  do  not  know  whether  this  argument  from  analogy 
will  appear  convincing  to  the  reader.  At  any  rate  it 
seems  to  me  to  be  the  only  one  that  could  be  used  on 
the  present  supposition.  It  of  course  leads  to  a  very 
different  view  of  the  interconnexion  of  minds  from  that 
which  is  held  by  common-sense.  But  this  is  natural 
enough,  since  common-sense  believes  that  sensa  and 
bodily  feelings  are  appearances  of  material  objects, 
whilst  we  have  been  explicitly  rejecting  this  assumption 
in  the  present  subsection.  On  the  present  supposition 
the  group  of  sensa  which  I  naturally  take  to  be  appear- 
ances to  me  of  your  body  and  the  group  of  sensa  which 
you  naturally  take  to  be  appearances  to  you  of  your 
body  partially  overlap,  so  that  some  of  them  are  sensed 
by  both  of  us.  You  voluntarily  produce  certain  changes 
in  your  feelings,  which  in  turn  produce  certain  charac- 
teristic changres  in  these  common  sensa.  I  notice  these 
changes  ;  remark  their  likeness  to  certain  changes  which 
I  voluntarily  produce  in  those  sensa  which  I  naturally 
take  to  be  the  appearance  to  me  of  my  own  body  ;  find 
that  they  are  not  connected  with  changes  in  my  feelings 
which  I  have  voluntarily  initiated,  and  that  they  often 
conflict  with  my  volitions  ;  and  so  I  conclude  that  they 
are  probably  due  to  a  foreign  mind,  which  produces 
them  by  first  voluntarily  affecting  certain  bodily  feelings 
which  it  feels  and  I  do  not. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  this  argument  from  analogy 
presupposes  that  certain  sensa  which  are  sensed  by  me 
are  also  capable  of  being  sensed  by  another  mind.  Is 
this  essential  to  the  argument  on  the  present  supposi- 
tion? I  think  that  it  is.  So  long  as  I  confine  myself 
to  sensa  and  feelings,  and  make  no  assumption  about 
their  being  appearances  of  material  objects,  the  only 
sensa  which  I  know  that  /  can  affect  voluntarily  are 
sensa  that  /  sense.  That  is,  the  only  voluntary  action 
on  sensa  with  which  I  am  acquainted  will  be  iuiuianent 
voluntary  action.  If  I  were  to  postulate  another  mind, 
which  can  voluntarily  aff"ect  sensa  which  /  sense  and 


346     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

it  does  not,  I  should  be  postulating  a  mode  of  action 
for  which  I  have  no  positive  ground  of  analogy.  For 
this  would  be  transeunt  voluntary  action.  I  cannot  be 
sure  that  the  property  of  "being  sensed  by  M  "  is  not 
a  necessary  condition  of  the  property  of  "  being  affected 
by  M's  volitions".  It  is  of  course  perfectly  possible 
that  this  is  not  so  ;  it  is  perfectly  possible  that  I  do 
indirectly  affect  by  my  volitions  sensa  which  I  do  not 
sense.  I  do  not  know  that  I  cannot  do  this.  But  we 
cannot  take  a  bare  possibility  as  a  ground  for  an  argu- 
ment from  analogy.  We  must  argue  from  what  we 
know  to  be  true,  not  from  what  we  do  not  know  to  be 
false.  Thus,  although  it  is  perfectly  possible  that  there 
might  be  a  plurality  of  minds,  and  that  one  might 
communicate  with  another  by  voluntarily  affecting  sensa 
which  are  sensed  by  the  latter  and  not  by  the  former, 
yet  this  would  remain  a  bare  possibility.  I  should  have 
no  positive  ground  of  analogy  for  believing  anything 
of  the  kind,  if  my  only  starting  point  is  that  /  can 
voluntarily  affect  some  of  the  sensa  which  /  sense. 

Now  it  has  been  held  by  most  philosophers  that  all 
sensa  are  essentially  private,  i.e.,  that  if  a  sensum  s  be 
sensed  by  a  mind  M  it  cannot  be  sensed  by  any  other 
mind.  I  now  claim  to  have  proved  that,  if  we  hold 
that  sensa  are  private  and  also  deny  that  they  are 
appearances  of  material  objects,  it  is  impossible  to 
produce  a  valid  argument  from  analogy  to  the  existence 
of  other  minds.  If,  however,  we  keep  either  of  these 
assumptions  and  reject  the  other,  it  is  possible  to  pro- 
duce a  valid  argument  for  the  existence  of  other  minds 
from  analogy.  A  fortiori^  if  we  reject  both  of  these 
assumptions,  it  is  possible.  The  advantage  for  the 
present  purpose  of  a  belief  in  matter  is  this.  If  we 
believe  that  sensa  are  appearances  of  material  objects; 
then,  even  if  sensa  themselves  be  essentially  private, 
they  are  signs  of  the  existence  of  something  which  is 
not  private.  The  voluntary  action  which  we  observe 
in  our  own  case  is  now  transeunt  from  the  beginning, 


MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   OTHER   MINDS     347 

for  it  immediately  affects  our  bodies  (which  are  public 
objects)  and  not  the  sensa  which  we  sense  (which  may 
be  private  objects).  So  the  arguments  for  the  existence 
of  other  minds  really  are  strengthened  by  the  belief 
that  sensa  are  appearances  of  material  objects.  For  the 
analogy  is  valid,  on  this  view,  whether  sensa  be  private 
or  not ;  whilst,  on  the  opposite  view,  it  is  valid  only  if 
some  sensa  at  least  be  public. 

A  final  question  remains  to  be  raised.  It  might  be 
said  that  it  is  sufficient  for  the  present  purpose  that 
sensa  should  be  assumed  to  be  appearances  of  something 
public  and  neutral  ;  it  is  not  necessary  that  this  some- 
thing should  be  matter.  This  is  of  course  perfectly  true, 
so  far  as  it  goes.  But,  if  we  assume  that  sensa  are 
appearances  of  something  public  and  neutral,  and  that 
this  something  is  not  matter,  what  can  it  be?  The 
only  other  plausible  alternative  is  that  the  sensa  which 
I  sense  are  directly  appearances  of  minds.  Now,  if  we 
start  with  this  assumption  there  is  no  need  to  use  an 
argument  from  analogy  to  prove  the  existence  of  other 
minds.  All  sensa  will  be  known  from  the  outset  to  be 
appearances  of  some  mind,  and  we  shall  merely  have 
to  seek  for  reasons  for  believing  that  some  of  the  sensa 
which  we  sense  are  not  appearances  of  our  own  minds. 
How  we  should  set  about  doing  this  I  do  not  know  ; 
but  I  do  not  see  that  any  argument  from  analogy  would 
be  either  necessary  or  useful. 

Summary  of  Conclusions.  Our  belief  in  the  existence 
of  other  minds  is  not  reached  by  inference  ;  and  our 
belief  in  the  existence  of  material  objects  is  not  reached 
by  inference.  Nevertheless,  each  of  these  beliefs  can 
be  rendered  probable  by  certain  inverse  or  analogical 
arguments,  provided  we  admit  that  they  have  a  finite 
antecedent  probability.  But  the  two  beliefs  are  not 
logically  independent  of  each  other.  For  some,  at  any 
rate,  of  the  arguments  which  support  the  belief  in 
matter  depend  on  our  accepting  the  statements  of  other 
people  about  their  perceptions  ;  and  the  acceptance  of 


348     MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   EXISTENTS 

such  statements  presupposes  our  belief  in  other  minds. 
Again,  arguments  by  analogy  to  support  our  belief  in 
other  minds  presuppose  either  (a)  that  the  feelings 
which  we  feel  and  the  sensa  which  we  sense  are  appear- 
ances to  us  of  material  objects,  or  (d)  that  some  sensa 
are  capable  of  being  sensed  by  more  than  one  mind. 
Since  the  second  condition  is  doubtful,  whilst  the  first 
is  sufficient  even  if  the  second  be  false,  it  follows  that 
arguments  by  analogy  in  support  of  our  belief  in  other 
minds  are  stronger  if  we  believe  that  sensa  are  appear- 
ances of  matter  than  if  we  do  not. 

Do  we  "perceive"  Other  Minds?  I  will  end  this 
chapter  by  trying  to  clear  up  a  question  which  seems  to 
me  to  be  largely  verbal.  Some  people  are  concerned 
to  maintain  that  we  "perceive"  other  minds;  some 
people  are  concerned  to  deny  it.  And  much  heat  is 
often  engendered  by  this  controversy.  What  we  have 
to  notice  is  that  the  question  has  three  possible  mean- 
ings. There  are  two  senses  of  it  in  which  the  answer 
is  certainly  affirmative,  and  a  third  sense  in  which  it  is 
a  fair  matter  of  controversy,  (i)  If  the  question  means  : 
"  Are  there  situations  in  which  we  believe  in  the  present 
existence  of  certain  mental  states  which  do  not  belong 
to  ourselves,  and  ascribe  them  to  other  minds  without 
any  process  of  inference?"  the  answer  is  "Yes".  (2) 
If  the  question  means  :  "  Do  the  objective  constituents 
of  such  situations  have  certain  peculiar  characteristics 
which  distinguish  them  from  the  objective  constituents 
of  other  situations?"  the  answer  is  again  "  Yes  ".  For 
the  sensa  which  are  contained  in  the  objective  con- 
stituent of  an  extraspective  situation  always  have  those 
peculiar  characteristics  which  lead  us  to  take  them 
as  appearances  of  a  human  body  or  a  human  voice. 
And  they  change  and  succeed  each  other  in  perfectly 
characteristic  ways.  If  (i)  and  (2)  be  all  that  is  meant 
by  the  question  :  "  Do  we  perceive  other  minds?"  the 
answer  is   that   we   certainly   do    perceive    them.     But 


MIND'S   KNOWLEDGE   OF   OTHER   MINDS     349 

(3)  the  question  may  mean:  "Do  extraspective  situa- 
tions contain  a  peculiar  kind  of  objective  constituent, 
which  is  not  contained  in  other  situations  ?  "  In  that  case 
the  answer  is  doubtful.  As  I  have  said,  I  think  that  it 
is  slightly  more  probable  than  not  that  some  extra- 
spective situations  involve  telegnostic  situations,  and 
therefore  contain  in  their  objective  constituent  the 
foreign  mental  event  which  we  are  said  to  be  extra- 
specting.  If  this  were  certain,  it  would  be  certain  that 
we  "perceive"  other  mental  events  and  other  minds, 
even  in  this  third  sense.  But  it  is  not  certain  ;  and, 
therefore,  if  "perception"  be  taken  in  this  very  rigid 
sense,  I  can  only  say  that  it  seems  to  me  slightly  more 
likely  than  not  that  we  sometimes  "perceive"  other 
minds. 


(r^ 


'M^ 


^ 


SECTION    C 

Introductory  Remarks 

Satyr  and  Faun  their  late  repose 

Now  burst  like  anything  ; 

Fresh  Maenads,  turning  sprightlier  toes. 

Enjoy  a  jauntier  fling  ; 

With  lustier  lips  old  Pan  shall  play 

Drainpipes  along  the  sewer's  way. 

Priapus,  long  since  left  for  dead, 

Is  dead  no  more  than  Pan ; 

Silenus  rises  from  his  bed 

And  hiccoughs  like  a  man. 

(There's  something  rather  chaste,  between  us. 

About  Priapus  and  Silenus.)" 

(Owen  Seaman,  The  Battle  of  the  Bays) 


SECTION    C 

The    Unconscious 

Introductory  Remarks 

It  is  admitted  by  almost  every  one  that  the  contents  of  a 
mind  are  not  all  open  to  introspection,  and  that  the 
occurrence  of  those  mental  events  which  we  can  in- 
trospect cannot  be  completely  accounted  for  in  terms 
of  other  mental  events  which  we  can  introspect  or 
remember.  In  admitting  this  people  are  admitting 
facts  to  which  the  general  name  of  "  The  Unconscious  " 
is  applied. 

But  here  agreement  ceases.  People  quarrel  violently 
about  the  general  nature  of  "The  Unconscious",  and 
about  the  reality  of  particular  "unconscious"  events 
which  are  alleged  to  happen.  It  is  certain  that  much  of 
this  controversy  is  due  to  the  scandalous  ambiguity 
with  which  the  term  "unconscious"  is  used.  I  think 
it  is  not  unfair  to  say  that  "  the  Unconscious  "  has  been 
the  occasion  for  a  greater  flood  of  more  abject  nonsense 
than  any  other  psychological  concept,  with  the  possible 
exception  of  "  Instinct". 

In  this  section  I  shall  first  try  to  distinguish  the 
various  senses  in  which  people  have  used  the  terms 
"unconscious  mental  states"  and  "The  Unconscious". 
I  shall  show  that,  in  most  of  these  senses,  an  "un- 
conscious mental  state  "  is  either  not  unconscious  or  not 
mental  ;  and  I  shall  try  to  define  a  literal  meaning  of 
the  phrase  "unconscious  mental  states".  I  shall  then 
consider  the  arguments  which  have  been  alleged  to 
prove  the  existence  of  "  unconscious .  mental  states". 
This  will  lead  up  to  a  discussion  of  the  nature  of 
"traces"  and  "dispositions",  which  will  bring  this 
Section  to  an  end. 

853  2 


CHAPTER   VIII 

Various  Meanings  of  the  Term  "Unconscious" 

I  WILL  first  clear  out  of  the  way  two  not  very  important 
senses  in  which  we  use  the  words  "conscious"  and 
"unconscious",  (i)  In  the  first  place,  we  often  apply 
them  to  distinguish  one  kind  of  persistent  substance 
from  another  kind.  We  call  a  stone  an  unconscious 
being,  and  a  man  or  a  dog  or  an  oyster  a  conscious 
being.  By  calling  a  stone  an  unconscious  being  I 
mean  that  it  is  incapable  of  being  aware  of  anything. 
By  calling  a  man  a  conscious  being  I  mean  that  he  is 
capable  of  being  aware  of  something,  even  if  it  should 
happen  that  at  the  present  moment  he  is  not  aware 
of  anything.  So  "conscious"  and  "unconscious",  in 
this  sense,  mean  "  capable  (or  incapable)  of  being  aware 
of  something  at  some  time  ".  I  think  it  would  be  wise 
to  substitute  the  words  "animate"  and  "inanimate" 
for  the  words  "conscious"  and  "unconscious"  when 
the  latter  are  used  in  this  meaning  and  with  this 
application. 

(2)  We  must  next  notice  that  the  words  "  conscious" 
and  "unconscious"  are  often  used  to  distinguish  two 
possible  conditions  in  which  an  animate  being  may  be 
at  different  times.  A  being  which  is  conscious,  in  the 
sense  of  animate,  may  from  time  to  time  be  unconscious 
in  the  present  sense.  A  man  awake  and  a  man  in  a 
deep  sleep  are  both  "conscious  beings",  in  the  sense 
of  animate  beings.  But  we  should  say  that  the  former 
is  now  "  in  a  conscious  condition  "  and  that  the  latter 
is  now  "in  an  unconscious  condition  ". 

"Conscious"  and  "unconscious"  in  this  sense,  apply 

354 


THE   TERM   "UNCONSCIOUS"  355 

to  the  temporary  conditions  of  animate  beings  and  to 
nothing  else.  We  might  be  tempted  to  say  that  an 
animate  being  is  in  a  conscious  condition  provided  that 
it  is  actually  aware  of  something,  and  that  it  is  in  an 
unconscious  condition  provided  that  it  is  not  actually 
aware  of  anything.  A  little  reflection  will  show  that 
this  definition  would  not  be  satisfactory  as  it  stands. 
Many  people  hold  that  there  is  something  which  is 
called  "  unconscious  awareness ",  and  that  an  animate 
being  can  be  "  unconsciously  aware"  of  certain  things. 
Now  they  would  count  a  man  as  being  in  an  un- 
conscious condition,  even  though  he  were  aware  of 
many  things,  if  his  awareness  of  all  these  things  was 
"unconscious  awareness".  To  meet  the  possibility  of 
*'  unconscious  awareness  "  we  must  say  that  an  animate 
being  is  in  a  conscious  condition  when  it  is  ^^consciously 
aware  "  of  something  ;  and  that  it  is  in  an  unconscious 
condition  when  it  is  either  not  aware  of  anything,  or, 
if  aware  of  something,  only  ^^  tmconsciousiy  aware"  of  it. 
The  amended  definitions  are  now  verbally  circular. 
They  are  not  really  circular,  because  a  new  sense  of 
"  conscious  "  and  "unconscious"  has  turned  up.  We 
are  in  fact  defining  "conscious"  and  "unconscious", 
as  applied  to  the  temporary  condition  of  animate  beings, 
in  terms  of  "conscious  "  and  "  unconscious  ",  as  applied 
to  the  process  of  awareness.  But,  although  the  de- 
finitions are  thus  non-circular,  they  do  not  tell  us  much 
until  we  know  what  is  meant  by  "conscious"  and 
"unconscious"  as  applied  to  mental  events.  This  is 
the  really  important  question  to  which  we  must  now 
turn. 

"Conscious"  and  "Unconscious"  as  applied  to 
Mental  Events.  When  a  man  talks  of  "unconscious 
mental  events"  or  "  unconscious  experiences"  he  gener- 
ally assumes  that  everyone  understands  what  is  denoted 
by  the  phrase  "conscious  mental  events  or  experiences". 
I  do  not  of  course  mean  that  he  assumes  that  every  one 


356  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

would  agree  about  the  right  definition  or  analysis  of 
either  the  adjective  ''conscious"  or  the  substantive 
"mental  event"  or  "experience".  We  all  know  that 
people  differ  violently  on  these  subjects.  What  I  do 
mean  is  that  we  assume  at  the  outset  that  it  is  easy  to 
give  examples  to  which  every  one  admits  that  the  name 
"  conscious  mental  events  "or  "  conscious  experiences  " 
can  be  appropriately  and  quite  literally  applied.  To 
feel  a  toothache  which  is  so  acute  as  to  make  one 
seriously  contemplate  going  to  the  dentist  is  an  event 
which  every  one  would  agree  could  be  literally  called 
"an  experience"  and  could  be  literally  called  "con- 
scious". Although  there  are  border-line  cases  which 
some  people  would  call  "conscious  experiences"  and 
other  people  would  refuse  to  call  by  that  name,  there 
seems  little  doubt  that  there  are  thousands  of  events 
which  every  one  would  agree  to  deserve  the  name  of 
"conscious  experiences"  in  a  perfectly  literal  sense. 

Now  a  literally  unconscious  experience  would  be  one 
which  differs  in  a  certain  respect  from  these  literally 
conscious  experiences  and  agrees  with  them  in  a  certain 
other  respect.  But,  as  I  have  said,  the  phrase  "  un- 
conscious experience"  is  constantly  used  in  a  number 
of  senses  which  are  not  literal  but  are  highly  figurative. 
By  this  I  mean  that  a  great  many  events,  commonly 
called  "unconscious  experiences",  are  probably  not 
experiences  at  all  in  the  sense  in  which  every  one  admits 
that  the  feeling  of  an  acute  pang  of  toothache  is  an 
experience.  And  I  also  mean  that  a  great  many  events, 
commonly  called  "unconscious  experiences",  are  cer- 
tainly conscious  in  precisely  the  sense  in  which  it  is 
admitted  that  feeling  the  acute  pang  of  toothache  is 
conscious.  My  ultimate  object  is  to  try  to  define,  or 
sufficiently  describe,  literally  unconscious  mental  events. 
But,  before  doing  this,  I  want  to  enumerate  and  dismiss 
the  various  non-literal  senses  in  which  the  word  "  un- 
conscious "  and  the  phrase  "  unconscious  experiences  " 
are  used.     At  present  the  only  criterion  which  we  shall 


THE  TERM   "UNCONSCIOUS"  357 

be  able  to  employ  when  we  are  presented  with  an  alleged 
case  of  an  unconscious  experience  is  the  following  :  "Is 
there  any  reason  to  think  that  it  resembles  admittedly 
conscious  experiences  so  far  as  to  deserve  the  name  of 
'experience'?  And  is  there  any  reason  to  suppose 
that  it  differs  from  admittedly  conscious  experiences  so 
far  as  not  to  deserve  the  name  of  '  conscious  '  ?  " 

(i)  Traces  and  Dispositions.  Far  the  commonest  use 
of  the  phrase  "  unconscious  states"  in  psychology  is  in 
reference  to  traces  and  dispositions.  It  is  found  that, 
in  order  to  account  for  many  everyday  facts  about  our 
ordinary  conscious  experiences,  it  is  necessary  to  refer 
to  certain  conscious  experiences  which  we  had  in  the 
remote  past.  Memory  is  the  most  obvious  example  of 
such  a  fact.  I  remember  now  something  which  I  saw 
or  heard  last  year  and  of  which  I  have  not  consciously 
thought  in  the  interval.  And  of  course  there  are  number- 
less other  facts  about  our  present  experiences  which  can 
be  explained  only  by  reference  to  experiences  which  we 
had  long  ago.  We  may  sum  up  this  whole  mass  of 
facts  under  the  name  of  "  Mnemic  Phenomena  ",  borrow- 
ing this  phrase  primarily  from  Mr  Russell's  Analysis 
of  Mind  and  ultimately  from  Semon.  Now,  either  we 
must  assume  a  wholly  new  kind  of  causation,  in  which 
one  part  of  the  total  cause  is  separated  from  the  rest 
and  from  the  effect  by  a  considerable  gap  which  contains 
no  relevant  events  ;  or  we  must  fill  in  this  temporal 
gap  with  some  hypothetical  persistent  entity  which  we 
call  "traces".  I  propose  to  discuss  the  alternative  of 
"Mnemic  Causation",  suggested  tentatively  by  Mr 
Russell,  in  a  later  chapter  of  this  section.  For  the 
present  we  will  assume  the  trace  theory,  as  practically 
all  psychologists  have  done.  It  is  supposed  that  ex- 
periences leave  these  traces  ;  that  the  latter  persist ;  and 
that,  when  suitable  stimuli  excite  them,  they  either  give 
rise  to  new  states  of  mind,  such  as  memories,  or  else 
modify  states  of  mind  which  are  in  the  main  due  to 
other  causes. 


358  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

Along  with  these  traces  we  must  include  innate  "dis- 
positions ".  These  are  assumed  in  order  to  explain 
those  differences  between  the  experiences  and  the 
behaviour  of  individuals  which  cannot  be  accounted 
for  by  differences  in  their  past  experiences  and  present 
external  circumstances.  They  differ  from  traces  in 
their  origin  ;  for  they  are  supposed  to  be  innate,  whilst 
traces  are  due  to  experiences  which  happened  to  the 
individual  during  his  present  life.  They  also  differ, 
in  one  respect  at  least,  from  traces  in  their  conse- 
quences. Traces  may  lead,  among  other  consequences, 
to  memories  of  the  experiences  which  left  the  traces. 
Dispositions  cannot  do  this  ;  for,  even  if  they  be 
ultimately  due  to  experiences,  these  experiences  took 
place  in  the  minds  of  our  remote  ancestors.  Apart 
from  these  differences,  traces  and  dispositions  would 
seem  to  be  very  much  alike  ;  and,  as  both  are  purely 
hypothetical  and  are  known  only  by  their  effects,  there 
seems  to  be  no  harm  in  lumping  them  together. 

Now  it  is  common  to  call  traces  and  dispositions 
"unconscious  states".  Many  people  go  further  and 
call  them  "unconscious  menial  states''  or  even  "un- 
conscious experiences".  They  are  certainly  not  con- 
scious, in  the  sense  in  which  feeling  an  acute  pang  of 
toothache  is  conscious.  And  they  are  no  doubt  states 
of  something  or  other.  But  we  have  no  right  whatever 
to  assume  that  they  are  "mental  states"  or  "experi- 
ences", in  the  sense  in  which  feeling  this  pang  of 
toothache  is  a  mental  state  or  an  experience.  The 
fact  is  that  we  know  nothing  whatever  about  the 
intrinsic  nature  of  traces  and  dispositions ;  they  are 
simply  the  hypothetical  causes  of  certain  observable 
effects,  and  the  hypothetical  effects  of  certain  observable 
causes.  True,  these  observable  causes  and  effects  are 
experiences  ;  but  this  is  no  ground  for  supposing  that 
the  traces  themselves  are  of  the  nature  of  experiences. 
This  is  disguised  by  the  silly  metaphor  that  past 
experiences   are    "stored    up   in    the  unconscious".      I 


THE  TERM   "UNCONSCIOUS"  359 

may  have   had    a   certain    conscious   experience  which 
lasted   for   five  minutes  and  ceased   twenty  years  ago. 
If  we  say  that  this  is  "stored  up  in  the  unconscious", 
and  mean  this  statement  to  be  taken  literally,  we  must 
be  understood  to  assert  that  this  same  experience  has 
been    going   on    steadily   for    the    last    twenty    years. 
Perhaps  the  original   experience  was  seeing  a  certain 
dog  for  five  minutes  twenty  years  ago  ;  if  this  experi- 
ence   be    literally  ''stored    up  in    the    unconscious",   I 
have  been  literally  seeing   the  same  dog  in    the  same 
situation  ever  since,  though  ''unconsciously",  in  spite 
of  the  fact  that  the  dog  has  been  dead  and  buried  for 
the  last  fifteen   years.     Of  course  it  will   be  said  that 
no  one  does  mean  to  assert  anything  of  this  kind  when 
he  talks  of  experiences  "  persisting  in  the  unconscious  ". 
It  is  quite  true  that  most  people  hasten  to  disclaim  such 
preposterous  consequences  when  once  they  are  pointed 
out.     But  I  think  there  is  no  doubt  that  many  people 
do  hold  views  which,  if  they  could  be  induced  to  state 
them  clearly,  would  be  found  to  lead  to  these  conse- 
quences.     For  instance,   Rivers  in   his  Instinct  mid  the 
Unconscious  asserts  that  the  content  of  the  Unconscious 
is    "suppressed    experiences",    and    he    gives   as    an 
example  of  such  an  experience  a  fright  which  one  of 
his  patients  had  had  many  years  before  with  a  dog  in 
a    passage.     Of  course,   if  anything   literally  persists, 
it  is  not  the  experience  itself  but  the  trace  of  the  ex- 
perience.    And    there    is    no    more    positive    reason    to 
suppose  that   the  trace   of  an    experience  resembles    it 
or  any  other  experience  than  to  suppose  that  persistent 
deafness    resembles   the    attack   of   scarlet-fever   which 
left  it  in  the  patient. 

The  plain  fact  is  that  we  know  nothing  with  certainty 
about  the  intrinsic  nature  of  traces,  and  we  ought  there- 
fore studiously  to  avoid  all  phrases  which  suggest  some 
particular  view  of  their  intrinsic  nature.  I  propose  to 
call  traces  and  dispositions  by  the  innocent  name  of 
"  mnemic   persistents".     The  reason    for  calling  them 


36o  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

"  mnemic "  is  obvious.  Our  ordinary  states  of  mind 
may  be  called  "transients";  for  they  happen  from 
time  to  time,  last  for  a  little  while,  and  then  cease. 
In  contrast  with  these  we  can  call  traces  and  dispositions 
*' persistents  "  ;  because  they  are  supposed  to  last  for  a 
long  time,  and  to  fill  the  gaps  between  our  transient 
states  of  mind.  (I  avoid  Mr  Johnson's  terms  "  occur- 
rents"  and  "continuants",  because  they  have  certain 
implications  which  I  do  not  at  present  wish  to  assert 
or  deny  of  traces  ;  and  it  is  a  pity  to  spoil  two  valuable 
technical  terms  by  using  them  loosely  in  senses  which 
their  inventor  might  not  admit.)  The  phrase  "  mnemic 
persistents"  has  the  twin  advantage  that  it  does  express 
all  that  we  know  about  traces  and  dispositions,  and 
that  it  does  not  tacitly  imply  anything  that  we  do. not 
know  about  them. 

(2)  hiaccessible  Experieitces.  There  is  another  import- 
ant non-literal  sense  in  which  the  phrase  "unconscious 
experiences  "  has  been  used.  To  explain  it  I  will  take 
an  example  from  that  excellent  book  Instinct  and  the 
Uncojiscious  by  the  late  Dr  Rivers. 

Rivers  quotes  the  case  of  a  patient  who  had  suffered 
from  claustrophobia  for  many  years.  By  analysing 
the  patient's  dreams  Rivers  was  able  to  show  that  the 
claustrophobia  had  been  started  by  a  terrifying  ex- 
perience which  the  man  had  had  as  a  small  boy  in  a 
narrow  passage  with  a  fierce  dog.  This  experience  the 
patient  was  quite  unable  to  remember  by  normal  means. 
Now  Rivers  gives  this  as  a  typical  example  of  an  un- 
conscious experience;  and  practically  defines  "The 
Unconscious",  for  his  own  purposes,  as  consisting  of 
such  experiences.  It  is  clear  that  this  is  an  entirely 
new  meaning  of  the  phrase  "unconscious  experience". 
When  the  experience  originally  happened  it  was  in  all 
probability  an  ordinary  conscious  experience  owned  by 
the  patient.  There  is  no  reason  whatever  to  suppose 
that,  at  the  time,  the  boy  was  unaware  of  seeing  the 
dog  or  of  feeling  frightened,   or   at  any   rate  that   he 


THE  TERM   "UNCONSCIOUS"  361 

could  not  have  been  aware  of  them  if  he  had  chosen  to 
introspect  at  the  time.  In  this  the  experience  contrasts 
strongly  with  the  case  of  Livingstone  and  the  lion, 
which  is  also  quoted  by  Rivers.  Livingstone  noticed 
at  the  time  that  he  was  not  aware  of  any  pain  or  fear 
while  in  the  jaws  of  the  lion  ;  and  the  circumstances 
were  such  that,  if  he  had  been  feeling  pain  or  fear,  he 
could  hardly  have  failed  to  notice  the  fact.  Here  we 
may  conclude,  either  that  there  was  no  experience  of 
pain  or  fear  connected  with  this  situation  ;  or  that,  if 
there  were,  it  was  not  a  conscious  experience  of  the 
mind  known  as  '*  Livingstone". 

The  case  of  Rivers'  patient  is  quite  different.  To  say 
that  his  experience  is  unconscious  means  only  that  he 
cannot  now  remember  it  by  normal  means  ;  and  it  does 
not  mean  that  it  was  not  an  ordinary  conscious  ex- 
perience which  belonged  to  the  boy  at  the  time  when  it 
happened.  It  seems  to  me  to  be  misleading  in  the 
highest  degree  to  use  the  phrase  "unconscious  ex- 
perience" in  these  two  utterly  different  senses.  Rivers 
would  no  doubt  say  that  the  experience  "was  conscious" 
when  it  happened,  and  that  it  "became  unconscious" 
afterwards.  This,  however,  does  not  alter  the  fact 
that  the  words  "conscious"  and  "unconscious"  are 
being  used  in  two  senses  which  are  quite  disconnected 
with  each  other.  In  the  first  sense  an  experience  either 
is  conscious  or  it  is  not ;  and,  if  it  is  one,  it  can  never 
become  the  other.  In  the  second  sense  one  and  the 
same  experience  may  sometimes  be  conscious  and  at 
other  times  unconscious.  For  there  might  be  times 
when  a  person  could  remember  it  normally,  and  other 
times  when  he  could  be  got  to  remember  it  only  by 
technical  methods,  if  at  all. 

The  situation  which  Rivers  is  describing  is  a  real  and 
an  important  one  ;  but  the  terminology  which  he  uses 
to  describe  it  is  hopeless.  I  shall  substitute  for  the 
words  "conscious"  and  "  unconscious  ",  when  used  in 
this  sense,  the  words  "accessible"  and  "inaccessible" 


362  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

respectively.  An  experience  is  accessible  when  it  can 
be  remembered  by  normal  means.  It  is  inaccessible 
when  it  can  be  remembered  only,  if  at  all,  by  special 
technical  methods.  One  and  the  same  experience  may 
be  accessible  at  some  times  and  inaccessible  at  others. 
Also  there  will  probably  be  degrees  of  accessibility. 
Even  when  an  experience  can  eventually  be  remembered 
by  normal  means  it  is  sometimes  harder  and  sometimes 
easier  to  do  this.  And  I  suppose  that,  when  technical 
methods  have  to  be  applied,  they  sometimes  succeed 
easily  and  sometimes  only  with  difficulty. 

Corresponding  to  this  distinction  between  accessible 
and  inaccessible  experiences  there  will  be  a  distinction 
between  mnemic  persistents.  Some  of  these  can  never 
by  any  means  be  made  to  give  rise  to  memories  of  the 
experiences  which  originated  them.  If  innate  dispositions 
originated,  as  some  think,  in  the  experiences  of  our 
remote  ancestors,  they  fall  into  this  class.  And  probably 
some  traces  fall  into  it  too.  Other  mnemic  persistents 
will  give  rise  to  memories  if  special  technical  methods 
be  applied,  but  not  otherwise.  And  a  third  class  give 
rise  to  memories  without  needing  the  application  of 
special  technical  methods.  Probably  there  is  no  sharp 
line  between  the  second  and  third  classes. 

The  work  of  the  psycho-analysts  enables  us  to  state 
one  at  least  of  the  causes  which  tend  to  make  certain 
experiences  inaccessible.  If  the  memory  of  a  past 
experience  would  be  specially  painful  or  shocking  to 
the  present  self  there  is  a  tendency  for  this  experience 
to  become  inaccessible.  It  is  sometimes  said  that  the 
painfulness  or  shockingness  of  the  original  experience 
is  the  operative  factor ;  but  I  think  that  this  is  true 
only  in  a  derivative  way.  The  essential  factor  is  the 
emotional  effect  which  the  memory  of  the  experience 
would  have  if  it  arose  now.  The  memory  of  many 
experiences  which  were  quite  enjoyable  when  they 
happened  might  be  shocking  or  painful  to  the  present 
self.      Such  experiences  will  tend  to  become  inaccessible 


THE   TERM   "UNCONSCIOUS"  363 

in  spite  of  their  originally  pleasant  character.  Again, 
the  memories  of  some  experiences  which  were  painful 
or  shocking  when  they  happened  might  be  neutral,  or 
even  pleasant  and  amusing,  to  my  present  self.  I  see 
no  reason  to  think  that  such  experiences  would  be 
specially  likely  to  become  inaccessible.  All  that  we 
can  say  is  that,  in  a  good  many  cases,  the  memory  of 
an  experience  which  was  painful  or  shocking  when  it 
happened  is  likely  to  be  itself  painful  or  shocking  now. 
So  far,  and  only  so  far,  as  this  is  true  painful  or 
shocking  experiences  will  tend  to  become  inaccessible. 

(3)  Ignored^  Misdescribed,  or  Dislocated  Desires  and 
Emotions.  There  is  another  non-literal  sense  of  "un- 
conscious experiences",  which  applies  specially  to 
desires  and  emotions.  It  is  rather  closely  connected 
with  the  sense  which  we  have  just  been  discussing,  but 
it  must  be  distinguished  from  this.  There  is  no  doubt 
that  we  have  a  general  undiscriminating  awareness  of 
many  of  our  experiences  without  introspectively  analys- 
ing and  discriminating  them.  Introspective  analysis 
and  discrimination  involve  a  special  act  of  attention 
which  we  can  make  or  not  as  we  like.  And,  if  we  choose 
to  make  it  at  all,  we  may  take  more  or  less  trouble 
over  it  and  can  perform  it  more  or  less  thoroughly. 
Even  if  we  choose  to  make  the  attempt,  and  periform 
the  discrimination  and  analysis  to  the  best  of  our  ability, 
we  can  make  mistakes  about  the  right  analysis  of  our 
experiences,  just  as  we  can  make  mistakes  in  trying  to 
analyse  and  describe  external  objects  which  are  presented 
together  in  a  confused  jumble  in  our  field  of  view.  In- 
trospective discrimination  is  a  difficult,  tiresome  and 
unwonted  process  ;  and  no  one  who  is  not  used  to  it  is 
likely  to  avoid  mistakes. 

Now  there  are  two  classes  of  experience  about 
which  we  are  specially  and  systematically  liable  to 
make  mistakes  ;  and  these  mistakes  may  have  several 
different  forms.  The  two  classes  in  question  are 
desires  and  emotions.      Desires  and  emotions  are  the 


364  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

experiences  par  excellence  about  which  we  pass  judg- 
ments of  praise  or  blame  on  ourselves  and  others. 
If  we  find  that  we  have  certain  desires  and  emotions 
we  are  obliged  to  think  badly  of  ourselves  ;  and,  if  we 
confess  such  desires  and  emotion  to  others,  they  will 
think  badly  of  us.  We  thus  have  a  strong  tendency 
not  to  discriminate  these  desires  and  emotions  ;  or,  if 
we  do  discriminate  them,  to  misdescribe  them  to  our- 
selves ;  or  if  we  discriminate  them  and  describe  them 
rightly  to  ourselves,  to  refuse  to  acknowledge  them 
to  others. 

Now,  in  the  case  of  emotions,  we  can  go  wrong 
either  about  the  mental  attitude  itself  or  about  its 
epistemological  object.  There  is  perhaps  hardly  any 
emotional  attitude  which  is  regarded  as  intrinsically 
bad  ;  i.e.^  as  bad,  no  matter  what  kind  of  epistemo- 
logical object  it  may  be  directed  to.  The  rule  seems 
to  be  that  the  same  emotional  attitude  is  good  when 
directed  on  to  one  kind  of  epistemological  object  and 
bad  when  directed  on  to  an  object  of  another  kind. 
Conversely,  of  two  emotional  attitudes  which  may  be 
directed  on  to  the  same  epistemological  object,  one 
may  be  good  and  the  other  bad.  In  fact  we  apply 
ethical  predicates  to  the  whole  situation  composed  of 
such  and  such  an  attitude  directed  to  such  and  such 
an  epistemological  object,  and  not  to  the  attitude  taken 
in  abstraction.  It  is,  e.g.^  considered  virtuous  to  hate 
sin,  but  wicked  to  hate  even  sinful  people.  And  it  is 
considered  virtuous  to  feel  emulation  towards  one's 
rivals,  but  wicked  to  feel  oivy  towards  them.  There 
are  thus  three  methods  of  saving  one's  self-respect 
when  one  feels  a  certain  emotion  towards  a  certain 
object  and  believes  that  this  kind  of  emotion  ought 
not  to  be  felt  towards  this  kind  of  object.  One  method 
is  to  ignore  the  existence  of  the  emotion  altogether  ; 
i.e.,  to  refuse  to  turn  our  introspective  attention  in  this 
dangerous  direction.  A  second  method  is  to  discriminate 
the  emotional  attitude   properly,    but  to  substitute  for 


THE   TERM   "UNCONSCIOUS"  365 

its  actual  object  another  pretended  object  of  such  a 
kind  that  it  would  be  respectable  to  take  up  this 
emotional  attitude  towards  this  object.  E.g.^  I  may 
really  hate  Germans  or  capitalists,  and  may  recognise 
that  I  am  feeling  the  emotion  of  hatred.  But  I  may 
persuade  myself,  and  try  to  persuade  others,  that  what 
I  hate  is  not  Germans  or  capitalists  as  such  but  is  the 
supposed  special  wickedness  of  these  classes.  In  order 
to  do  this  I  shall  very  often  have  to  make  up  a  myth 
about  them,  and  refuse  to  contemplate  any  of  the 
perfectly  obvious  facts  which  show  that  Germans  or 
capitalists  are  neither  much  better  nor  much  worse 
than  Englishmen  or  trades  unionists.  A  third  method 
is  to  make  no  mistake  about  the  object  of  my  emotion, 
and  to  recognise  that  I  am  feeling  an  emotion  towards 
this  object ;  but  to  substitute  for  the  emotion  which  I 
actually  feel,  and  which  I  believe  that  it  is  not  respect- 
able to  feel  towards  that  kind  of  object,  another  pre- 
tended emotional  attitude  which  I  believe  it  would  be 
respectable  to  feel  towards  this  object.  I  may  recognise, 
e.g.,  that  I  feel  a  certain  emotion  towards  the  success 
of  a  fellow  philosopher's  book ;  and  I  may  pretend  to 
myself  and  others  that  this  is  the  respectable  emotion 
of  healthy  rivalry  when  it  is  really  the  disreputable 
emotion  of  disappointed  envy.  This  third  method  is 
easiest  when  the  real  and  the  pretended  emotion  do 
resemble  each  other  or  contain  certain  common  con- 
stituents, as  envy  and  rivalry  do.  Of  course  the  second 
and  third  methods  may  be,  and  often  are,  combined, 
with  the  happiest  results.  The  two  emotions  of  malice 
and  of  righteous  indignation  are  different ;  but  they 
certainly  contain  common  factors,  for  both  involve 
satisfaction  at  the  thought  of  another's  pain.  And  their 
appropriate  objects  are  different,  but  have  something 
in  common.  If  now  I  actually  feel  malice  towards 
Smith,  I  can  easily  keep  my  self-respect  and  the  respect 
of  others  by  persuading  myself  and  them  that  I  am 
feeling  an  exalted  kind  of  satisfaction  at  the  thought 


366  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

of  Smith's  moral  purification  through  suffering.  One 
of  the  reasons  for  the  extreme  popularity  of  war  with 
childless  women  and  others  who  are  in  no  immediate 
personal  or  family  danger  is  that  it  renders  such  sub- 
stitutions easy,  and  enables  quite  ordinary  people  to 
go  about  swelling  with  pretensions  to  moral  superiority 
which  would  be  exploded  at  once  in  a  more  normal 
atmosphere. 

The  case  of  desires  is,  in  one  way,  simpler  than  that 
of  emotions.  There  do  not  seem  to  be  intrinsically 
different  kinds  of  conative  attitude,  as  there  are  in- 
trinsically different  kinds  of  emotional  attitude,  such  as 
fearing  and  hating.  So  far  as  I  can  see,  desires  differ 
from  each  other  only  in  their  intensity  and  in  their 
epistemological  objects  ;  and  the  goodness  or  badness 
of  a  desire  depends  almost  wholly  on  the  nature  of  its 
object.  (It  no  doubt  depends  partly  also  on  the  in- 
tensity of  the  desire.  It  would  be  considered  that  a 
very  intense  desire  for  knowledge  is  good,  and  that 
a  moderate  desire  for  bodily  pleasure  is  good  ;  but  a 
very  intense  desire  for  bodily  pleasure  would  be  re- 
garded as  bad  by  many  people.)  If  I  entertain  a  desire 
for  some  object  which  it  is  considered  wrong  to  desire, 
there  are  two  courses  open  to  me  in  order  to  keep  my 
present  high  opinion  of  my  moral  character  and  to 
confirm  other  people  in  their  high  opinion  of  it.  One 
is  to  ignore  the  existence  of  the  desire  altogether. 
Another  is  to  recognise  the  existence  of  the  desire,  but 
to  pretend  to  myself  and  to  others  that  it  is  for  some 
object  which  it  is  considered  respectable  to  desire.  As 
our  motives  are  nearly  always  mixed,  this  process  is 
childishly  simple.  It  is  only  necessary  to  emphasise 
that  part  of  the  desired  object  which  it  is  considered 
respectable  to  want,  and  to  slur  over  that  part  of  it 
which  it  is  considered  disreputable  to  want.  It  is  need- 
less to  give  examples  of  a  process  which  we  are  all 
doing  continually. 

Such   emotions   and   desires   as   we  have  been   con- 


THE  TERM   "UNCONSCIOUS",  367 

sidering  are  often  given  as  examples  of  unconscious 
experiences.  It  seems  to  me  that  they  are  quite  literally- 
conscious.  They  are  in  fact  quite  ordinary  desires  and 
emotions  about  whose  existence,  nature,  and  objects  we 
need  make  no  mistake  if  we  introspect  honestly  and 
carefully  enough.  But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  we  do  not 
do  this.  We  ignore  them  altogether;  or  we  "dis- 
locate" them,  i.e.^  ascribe  to  them  a  different  object 
from  that  which  they  really  have  ;  or  we  misdescribe 
them,  i.e.,  put  them  into  a  certain  class  of  mental 
attitudes  when  we  ought  to  put  them  into  a  certain 
other  class.  If  there  be  anything  literally  unconscious 
in  the  whole  business,  it  is  not  the  desire  or  the  emotion 
itself,  but  the  process  of  ignoring,  dislocating,  or  mis- 
describing  it.  We  must  therefore  consider  this  process 
in  rather  more  detail. 

If  I  am  going  to  ignore,  misdescribe,  or  dislocate  a 
certain  desire  or  emotion  which  I  own,  I  must  in  some 
sense  know  that  it  is  there  and  that  there  is  a  reason  for 
treating  it  in  this  way.  Now  we  have  simultaneous 
undiscriminating  awareness  of  many  experiences  which 
we  do  not  attentively  and  deliberately  introspect.  I 
suggest  that  this  kind  of  knowledge  suffices  to  warn  us 
that  the  ice  is  thin  in  certain  places,  and  that  we  had 
better  not  turn  our  introspective  attention  in  these 
particular  directions.  The  question  might  then  be 
raised:  "How  far  is  this  aversion  of  discriminating 
introspection  from  certain  desires  and  emotions  a 
deliberate  and  conscious  process?"  In  answer  to  this 
I  think  that  the  following  considerations  are  important. 
[a)  If  we  have  a  conscious  desire  to  ignore  certain  ex- 
periences, because  we  think  that  they  would  turn  out 
to  be  unflattering  to  our  self-respect,  this  desire  is  itself 
an  experience  which  we  shall  tend  to  ignore.  For  it  is 
not  flattering  to  our  self-respect  to  have  to  acknowledge 
that  we  can  keep  it  only  by  averting  our  attention  from 
certain  of  our  desires  and  emotions.  It  follows  that, 
even  if  we  deliberately  and  consciously  ignore  certain 


368  .  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

desires  and  emotions,  we  shall  almost  certainly  refuse 
to  acknowledge  this  fact  to  ourselves,  and  still  more  so 
to  others.  Thus  I  think  that  the  aversion  of  our  dis- 
criminative introspection  from  certain  of  our  experiences 
is  much  oftener  a  deliberate  and  literally  conscious 
process  than  is  commonly  admitted.  I  believe  that  we 
generally  know  when  we  are  doing  this,  and  that  the 
extreme  "touchiness"  which  we  are  liable  to  display 
when  taxed  with  it  is  a  sign  that  we  do. 

(d)  An  aversion  of  introspective  attention,  which  be- 
gins by  being  deliberate,  will  quickly  become  habitual. 
An  analogy  will  make  this  plain.  If  I  have  a  tender 
tooth  I  shall  at  first  deliberately  try  to  avoid  biting 
on  it,  and  shall  sometimes  make  mistakes  and  hurt 
myself.  But  very  soon  I  shall  automatically  avoid 
biting  on  it.  Now  emotions  and  desires  tend  to  recur  ; 
and,  if  I  at  first  deliberately  avert  my  attention  from 
some  of  them,  I  shall  very  soon  come  to  do  so  habitu- 
ally. This  habit,  like  any  other,  may  eventually  become 
so  strong  that  it  cannot  be  overcome  by  deliberate 
volition. 

(c)  A  method  which  we  very  commonly  use  is  to  put 
a  ring-fence  round  a  certain  region,  to  label  it  as 
dangerous,  and  to  avert  our  attention  from  the  whole 
of  it.  All  patriots  do  this  with  the  whole  subject  of  the 
virtues  of  their  enemies  and  the  faults  of  their  fellow- 
countrymen  ;  many  scientists  put  such  a  fence  round 
all  the  subjects  which  are  investigated  by  Psychical 
Researchers  ;  and  the  minds  of  most  clergymen  appear 
to  be  full  of  regions  guarded  with  barbed  wire  and  a 
notice  that  "Trespassers  will  be  Prosecuted".  Once 
this  has  been  done  it  becomes  perfectly  easy  to  assert 
with  complete  good  faith  that  we  are  not  deliberately 
turning  our  attention  away  from  any  assigned  desire  or 
emotion  which  falls  within  such  a  region.  We  can 
truthfully  say  that  we  never  thought  for  a  moment  of 
this  particular  experience,  and  therefore  cannot  have 
deliberately  ignored  it ;  just  as  a  thief  might  truly  say 


THE  TERM   "UNCONSCIOUS"  369 

that  he  had  never  touched  a  certain  necklace  if  he  had 
merely  pocketed  the  case  which  in  fact  contains  it. 

Now  I  think  it  is  certain  that  what  are  called  "un- 
conscious "  desires  and  emotions  are  often  simply  desires 
and  emotions  which  we  habitually  ignore,  misdescribe, 
or  dislocate.  An  experience  which  is  "unconscious" 
only  in  this  sense  is  not  literally  an  unconscious  ex- 
perience. And  the  process  of  ignoring,  misdescribing, 
or  dislocating  it  is  not  literally  an  unconscious  mental 
process.  Sometimes  it  is  a  conscious  and  deliberate 
process  which  is  itself  ignored  or  misdescribed.  Some- 
times it  is  habitual.  In  the  first  case  it  is  not  literally 
unconscious ;  and  in  the  second  there  is  no  positive 
reason  for  thinking  that  it  is  literally  an  experience  or 
series  of  experiences. 

Ignored  experiences  cannot  be  identified  with  in- 
accessible experiences.  Many  experiences  which  have 
become  inaccessible  were  not  ignored  when  they 
happened  ;  and  many  which  were  ignored  when  they 
happened  have  not  become  inaccessible.  Nevertheless, 
there  probably  is  a  close  connexion  between  ignored  and 
inaccessible  experiences.  Experiences  which  it  would  be 
painful  or  shocking  to  discriminate  are  generally  those 
which  it  would  be  painful  or  shocking  to  remember  ; 
and  these,  as  we  know,  tend  to  become  inaccessible. 
Moreover,  the  mere  fact  that  an  experience  is  habitually 
ignored  probably  tends  to  make  its  trace  less  definite 
and  more  isolated,  and  therefore  to  increase  the  difficulty 
of  remembering  it  by  normal  means. 

I  have  discussed  this  subject  mainly  in  connexion 
with  the  ignoring  of  experiences.  But  exactly  the 
same  remarks  apply  to  misdescribed  and  dislocated 
experiences.  In  themselves  these  experiences,  though 
often  called  "unconscious",  are  literally  conscious. 
And  the  process  of  misdescribing  them  or  dislocating 
them  is  either  a  deliberate  process  which  we  choose  to 
ignore  or  misdescribe,  or  it  is  an  habitual  process  which 
is  not  literally  an  experience  at  all. 

2  A 


370  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

(4)  Unrecognised  Needs.  There  is  another  sense  iii 
which  the  phrase  "  unconscious  desires  "  has  been  used, 
in  which  it  does  not  denote  a  literally  unconscious  ex- 
perience. This  has  been  brought  out  very  clearly  by 
Mr  Russell  in  his  Analysis  of  Mind ;  though  I  do  not 
agree  with  his  apparent  opinion  that  it  covers  all  that 
is  meant  by  the  phrase  "unconscious  desire",  and  I 
agree  still  less  with  the  arguments  and  the  conclusions 
which  he  bases  on  it.  When  we  have  the  experience 
of  desiring  something  we  present  to  ourselves  in 
imagination  some  possible  future  state  of  affairs  to  which 
we  take  up  the  conative  attitude.  And  it  is  an  essential 
part  of  this  attitude  that  we  believe  that  this  state  of 
affairs,  if  realised,  will  satisfy  us  and  bring  the  conative 
situation  to  an  end.  Now,  of  course,  what  I  now  believe 
would  satisfy  me  may  be  extremely  different  both  in 
outline  and  in  detail  from  what  would  really  satisfy  me, 
I  have  no  infallible  revelation  about  what  state  of  affairs 
will  brinor  a  certain  kind  of  uneasiness  to  rest.  I  cannot 
learn  about  this  by  introspection,  however  careful  and 
thorough  ;  for  this  will  tell  me  only  about  the  elements 
and  the  structure  of  my  present  conative  situation. 
The  recorded  experiences  of  others  may  provide  me 
with  the  basis  for  a  more  or  less  probable  inference  on 
the  subject ;  but,  in  the  main,  the  only  available  policy 
is  to  "  wait  and  see." 

Now  sometimes  it  is  said  that  what  I  "  really  desire  " 
is  what  would  in  fact  satisfy  my  present  conation. 
With  this  terminology  it  is  certain  that  I  am  often  not 
conscious  of  what  I  really  desire.  And  this  fact  is 
expressed  by  saying  that  I  have  an  "unconscious 
desire  "  for  what  would  in  fact  satisfy  me.  I  think  that 
this  is  a  most  unfortunate  and  misleading  terminology. 
It  is  much  better  to  begin  by  distinguishing  between 
what  I  "desire"  or  "want"  and  what  I  "need".  I 
may  set  before  myself  the  idea  of  a  large  fortune,  and 
spend  most  of  my  life  trying  to  gain  it.  If  so,  it  is  pre- 
posterous to  say  that  I  only  think  that  I  desire  money  ; 


THE  TERM   "UNCONSCIOUS"  371 

I  really  do  desire  it.  I  have  a  conative  attitude,  and  the 
epistemological  object  to  which  it  is  directed  is  my 
future  wealth.  It  is  true  to  say  that  I  desire  money  in 
precisely  the  same  sense  in  which  it  is  true  to  say  that 
the  drunkard  sees  pink  rats  ;  and  to  deny  this  is  to 
confuse  an  epistemological  object  with  an  ontological 
object.  Now  I  may  find  that,  when  I  have  made  a 
great  deal  of  money,  the  same  kind  of  dissatisfaction 
still  persists.  And  it  may  be  true  that  this  dissatis- 
faction would  in  fact  have  been  removed  if  I  had  acquired 
fame  instead  of  money.  If  so,  I  needed  fame.  But  it  is 
preposterous  to  say  that  I  desired  fame,  if  I  never  put 
the  idea  of  fame  before  myself,  or  felt  any  attraction  for 
it,  or  strove  after  it.  To  say  that  I  "unconsciously 
desired"  fame,  is  like  saying  that  the  drunkard  "un- 
consciously saw  "  the  alcohol  in  his  stomach. 

What  is  true  then  is  that  needs  often  give  rise  to 
desires,  and  that  the  desire  which  is  caused  by  a  certain 
need  may  have  an  epistemological  object  which  fails  to 
agree  with  the  ontological  object  which  would  satisfy 
that  need.  But  needs  are  not  desires,  nor  are  they 
experiences  at  all  ;  hence  a  need  of  which  I  am  unaware 
cannot  properly  be  called  an  uncimsGiettS^esire,  or  aiu 
unconscious  ,exj>e;;zence  of  any  kmd^.  Still,  there  is  no 
doubt  that  one  of  the  meanings  which  is  given  to  the 
phrase  "unconscious  desires"  is  "needs  of  which  a 
person  is  unaware  ".  I  shall  call  "  unconscious  desires  ", 
in  this  sense,  by  the  much  less  misleading  name  of 
"unrecognised  needs". 

I  have  now  pointed  out  four  non-literal  senses  in 
which  psychologists  use  the  phrase  "unconscious  ex- 
periences "  or  at  any  rate  "  unconscious  mental  states  ". 
(i)  In  the  sense  of  traces  and  dispositions,  they  seem 
to  have  no  claim  to  be  called  "experiences",  and  no 
obvious  claim  to  be  called  "  mental"  unless  it  can  be 
shown  that  they  cannot  be  simply  modifications  of  the 
brain  and  nervous  system.  (2)  In  the  sense  of  inaccessible 
experiences,  "unconscious  mental  states"  w^ere  literally 


11^: 


372  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

experiences  when  they  happened.  But  they  were  also 
literally  conscious;  and  no  subsequent  facts  about  memory 
or  the  lack  of  it  can  make  them  literally  unconscious. 
(3)  "  Unconscious  desires  and  emotions",  in  the  sense 
of  desires  and  emotions  which  we  ignore,  misdescribe, 
or  dislocate,  are  certainly  experiences.  But  they  are 
literally  conscious.  (4)  '' Unconscious  desires  ",  in  the 
sense  of  unrecognised  needs,  are,  so  far  as  one  can  see, 
not  experiences  at  all.  And  the  desires  for  objects 
which  will  not  in  fact  satisfy  us,  which  are  often 
caused  by  unrecognised  needs,  are  ordinary  conscious 
experiences. 

It  now  remains  to  try  to  see  what  is  meant  by 
literally  conscious  and  literally  unconscious  experiences 
or  mental  states.  The  existence  of  *'  unconscious  mental 
states",  in  the  four  non-literal  senses  which  we  have 
enumerated,  is  so  obvious  that  people  would  not  have 
thought  of  quarrelling  about  unconscious  mental  states 
unless  they  had  had  some  other  and  more  literal  meaning 
of  this  phrase  at  the  back  of  their  minds. 

Literally  Unconscious  Mental  Events.  I  will  first  try  to 
point  out  what  seem  to  me  to  be  the  characteristic 
marks  of  a  conscious  mental  state,  and  I  will  then 
describe  a  literally  unconscious  mental  state  as  one 
which  lacks  some  of  these  marks. 

In  order  that  a  mental  state  of  mine  may  be  conscious 
it  is  certainly  not  necessary  that  I  should  be  "  conscious 
of  it "  when  it  happens,  in  the  sense  of  making  it  the 
object  of  an  act  of  introspective  attention.  I  have  no 
doubt  that  I  have  been  seeing  the  words  of  this  page  as 
I  wrote  them  down  ;  and  1  am  sure  that  my  perceptions 
of  the  words  have  been  instances  of  what  every  one 
would  call  "conscious  experiences".  But  I  most 
certainly  did  not  make  these  perceptual  states  into 
objects  of  introspective  attention  while  they  were 
happening.  My  attention  was  taken  up  with  my  argu- 
ment and  with  the  words  themselves,  and  I  was  not 
attending  at  all  to  the  process  of  seeing  the  words.     No 


THE   TERM   "UNCONSCIOUS"  373 

doubt  all  processes  which  I  introspectively  discriminate 

are  conscious,  but  the  converse  of  this  is  certainly  not 

true.     A  conscious  experience  of  mine  cannot  therefore     1 

be  defined  as  an   experience  of  mine  of  which  1   was     /    TW^p> 

conscious  at  the  time  when  it  happened,  if  by  "being     )       *^ 

conscious  of"  you  mean   "making  an  object  of  intro-     ' 

spective  attention  ". 

Nevertheless,  it  might  be  possible  to  mark  off  con- 
scious experiences  from  all  other  mental  events  by 
means  of  some  more  hypothetical  references  to  intro- 
spective discrimination.  Might  we  not  say  that  every 
conscious  experience  of  mine  is  one  that  I  should  have  /  <  -t — 
succeeded  in  discriminating  if  I  had  introspected  care-  \  ^^^^ 
fully  enough  while  it  was  happening  or  immediately 
afterwards?  I  think  that  we  are  inclined  to  believe 
this  about  all  mental  events  which  we  should  be 
prepared  to  count  as  "conscious  experiences"  of  ours, 
and  that  we  are  not  inclined  to  believe  it  about  any- 
thing else.  It  is  therefore  plausible  to  take  it  as  a 
sufficient  description,  if  not  as  a  definition,  of  a  "con- 
scious experience  "  of  mine. 

But,  even  as  a  description,  it  needs  some  further 
elaboration.  There  are  certain  experiences  which 
probably  could  have  been  introspectively  discriminated 
while  they  were  happening,  and  which  would  yet  be 
called  "unconscious",  in  a  sense  which  does  not  fall 
under  any  of  the  four  non-literal  headings  already  men- 
tioned. Take  dreams,  for  instance.  From  one  point 
of  view  all  dreams  would  be  called  "  unconscious 
experience  ".  Yet,  from  another  point  of  view,  to  see 
my  friend  in  a  dream  is  as  much  a  "conscious  experi- 
ence" as  to  see  him  in  waking  life.  It  is  certain  that 
many  dream-experiences  could  have  been  introspected 
by  the  dreamer  while  they  were  happening  ;  for  I  have 
quite  often  introspected  my  dream-exp,eriencesr~Whiie 
dreaming,  and  I  do  not  suppose  that  this  is  at  all 
exceptional  in  people' wild  are  given  to  introspection. 
Another    example'   is    provided    by    alleged    cases    of 


374  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

co-consciousness.  Sally  Beauchamp,  in  Dr  Morton 
Prince's  Dissociation  of  a  Personality^  claimed  to  be 
aware  of  most  of  the  things  of  which  B^  was  aware 
when  the  latter  was  in  control  of  the  body  and  the 
former  was  not.  From  Sally's  point  of  view  these 
states  of  awareness  were  just  as  "conscious"  as  the 
contemporary  states  of  awareness  in  B^^ ;  in  fact  this  is 
precisely  what  the  claim  to  rc-consciousness,  as  dis- 
tinct from  alternating  consciousness,  amounts  to.  It 
seems  to  me  that  the  only  way  to  deal  with  such  cases 
as  these  is  to  introduce  a  distinction  between  "rela- 
tively" and  "absolutely"  unconscious  mental  events. 
We  shall  then  have  to  distinguish  relatively  unconscious 
experiences  from  strictly  conscious  experiences  by  con- 
sidering who  precisely  could  have  introspected  them 
when  they  were  happening.  We  call  the  vivid  dream 
of  a  normal  man  and  the  alleged  co-conscious  experi- 
ences of  Sally  "conscious",  because  there  was  some 
mind,  viz.,  my  sleeping  self  in  the  one  case  and  Sally 
in  the  other,  which  could  have  introspectively  dis- 
criminated them  if  it  had  tried  at  the  time  when  they 
were  happening.  We  call  the  same  experiences  "un- 
conscious "  simply  because  the  only  mind  which  could 
have  introspectively  discriminated  them  at  the  time 
when  they  were  happening  was  a  mind  which  was  not 
then  in  control  of  the  body  concerned  in  the  experience. 
Such  experiences  as  these  I  shall  call  "relatively 
unconscious".  An  "absolutely  unconscious"  mental 
event  would  be  one  that  could  not  have  been  intro- 
spectively discriminated  at  the  time  of  its  occurrence 
by  any  mind,  whether  in  control  at  the  time  of  a  body 
or  not. 

I  am  well  aware  that  even  these  amended  descriptions 
are  open  to  serious  objections.  What  do  we  mean  by 
"  controlling  a  body  "  ?  And  when  is  a  certain  mind  in 
control  of  a  certain  body,  and  when  is  it  not?  If  you 
press  me  with  these  questions,  I  doubt  whether  I  can 
give  a  perfectly  satisfactory  answer  to  them.     Still,  it 


THE   TERM   "UNCONSCIOUS"  375 

seems  to  me  that  the  kind  of  fact  which  I  refer  to  under 
the  name  of  "control  "  is  pretty  obvious.  There  is  an 
important  sense  in  which  the  mind  which  is  known  as 
"C.D.B."  is  at  present  in  control  of  my  body,  and  in 
which  it  will  not  be  in  control  of  my  body  later  in  the 
evening  when  I  am  in  bed  and  asleep.  At  that  time 
no  mind  will,  in  this  sense,  be  "in  control  of"  it; 
though  it  will,  no  doubt,  still  be  behaving  in  a  some- 
what different  way  from  that  in  which  it  would  behave 
if  it  were  no  longer  animated  by  a  mind  at  all.  In  the 
case  of  alternating  personality  a  recognisably  different 
mind  is  at  different  times  "in  control  of"  the  same 
body,  even  if  there  be  reason  to  suppose  that  all  these 
minds  are  in  a  sense  parts  of  a  single  "mind"  which 
continues  to  animate  this  body  throughout  life. 

There  is  unfortunately  one  other  highly  debatable 
conception  which  I  must  introduce  before  giving  a 
description  of  literally  unconscious  mental  events  which 
can  make  any  claim  to  be  satisfactory.  This  is  the 
notion  of  the  ' '  ownership  "  of  a  mental  event  by  a  mind. 
To  own  an  experience  is  evidently  not  the  same  as  to 
discriminate  it  introspectively.  It  is  commonly  believed 
that  only  mental  events  which  are  owned  by  some  mind 
can  be  introspectively  discriminated,  and  that  the  only 
mind  which  can  introspectively  discriminate  an  experi- 
ence is  the  mind  which  owns  it.  If  this  be  true,  both 
absolutely  conscious  and  relatively  unconscious  mental 
events  must  be  owned  by  minds.  But  theoretically  there 
would  be  two  quite  different  kinds  of  absolutely  uncon- 
scious mental  events.  The  first  would  be  owned  by  a 
mind  which,  for  some  reason,  could  not  have  intro- 
spectively discriminated  them  when  they  happened  even 
if  it  had  tried.  The  second  would  have  been  incapable 
of  being  introspectively  discriminated  by  any  mind 
simply  because  they  were  not  owned  by  any  mind.  I 
have  so  far  drawn  no  distinction  between  "  experiences^^ 
and  ^'mental  events  ".  This  seems  to  be  a  convenient 
place  to  do  so.     All  experiences  are  mental  events  4  but 


376  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

I  think  it  would  be  in  accordance  with  usage  to  say  that, 
if  there  be  unowned  mental  events,  they  should  not  be 
called  "  experiences  ".  So  I  will  define  an  "  experience  " 
as  a  mental  event  which  is  owned  by  some  mind. 
Thus  absolutely  unconscious  mental  events  will  divide 
in  theory  into  {a)  absolutely  unconscious  experiences  ; 
i.e.y  mental  events  which  are  owned,  but  could  not  have 
been  introspectively  discriminated  when  they  happened  ; 
and  {b)  unowned  mental  events. 

Of  course  many  people  would  deny  off-hand  the 
possibility  of  unowned  mental  events.  They  may  be 
right.  On  the  other  hand,  they  may  be  defining  "  mental 
event''  in  some  way  which  includes  ownership  by  a 
mind  as  part  of  the  definition.  In  that  case  their  denial 
is  merely  an  analytic  proposition.  Again,  anyone  who 
holds  that  a  mind  does  not  require  a  Pure  Ego,  but 
consists  simply  of  a  mass  of  suitably  interconnected 
mental  events,  can  hardly  deny  the  possibility  of  masses 
of  mental  events  so  poor  in  content  and  so  loosely  inter- 
connected as  not  to  deserve  the  name  of  "minds".  If 
so,  he  can  hardly  deny  the  possibility  that  some  mental 
events  are  not  owned  by  minds,  even  if  he  denies  the 
possibility  of  completely  isolated  mental  events.  For 
these  reasons  it  is  wise  to  introduce  the  class  of  ' '  unowned 
mental  events  ",  even  though  it  may  turn  out  to  be  a 
mere  blank  window. 

I  must  now  state  more  clearly  what  I  mean  by 
"ownership".  I  do  not  think  that  it  is  definable,  in 
the  sense  in  which  I  am  using  it.  But  it  is  a  highly 
ambiguous  word  ;  and,  by  pointing  out  the  senses  in 
which  I  am  not  using  it,  I  may  be  able  to  indicate  co  the 
reader  what  I  want  him  to  think  about,  (i)  In  the  very 
widest  sense  we  call  a  mental  event  "an  experience  of 
Smith's  "  if  it  is  specially  connected  with  the  stimulation 
of  Smith's  body.  And  by  "Smith's  body"  we  mean 
the  body  which  is  normally  controlled  by  a  certain 
recognisable  mind  known  as  "  Smith  ".  In  this  sense  a 
mental  event  might  be  called  "an  experience  of  Smith's  " 


THE   TERM    "UNCONSCIOUS"  377 

even  if  it  were  not  owned  by  his  mind  or  by  any  other 
mind.  (2)  In  a  slightly  narrower  sense  a  mind  M  might 
be  said  to  be  still  owning  a  mental  event  if  this  has  left 
some  trace  which  still  affects  M's  conscious  experiences 
from  time  to  time.  In  this  sense  Rivers'  claustrophobic 
patient  was  still  "  owning"  the  experience  with  the  dog 
in  the  passage,  both  before  and  after  Rivers  had  cured 
him  by  enabling  him  to  remember  the  incident.  (3)  In 
a  still  narrower  sense  of  "ownership"  we  should  say 
that  a  mind  still  owns  those  and  only  those  experiences 
which  it  can  remember  at  will.  In  this  sense  Rivers' 
patient  had  ceased  to  "own"  the  dog-experience  for 
many  years,  and  began  to  "own"  it  again  only  after 
Rivers  had  cured  him.  We  have  two  senses  of  "  owner- 
ship" in  connexion  with  personal  property,  which  corres- 
pond to  the  last  two  senses  mentioned  above.  In  the 
wider  sense  of  "ownership"  I  am  still  the  owner  of  a 
certain  umbrella  even  after  it  has  been  lost  or  stolen.  It 
remains  my  umbrella,  though  it  now  rests  permanently 
\n  your  hat-stand.  In  the  narrower  sense  I  own  it  only 
so  long  as  I  can  lay  hands  on  it  at  will.  Experiences 
which  are  owned  in  senses  (2)  or  (3)  may  be  said  to  be 
"  mnemically  owned  "  ;  because,  strictly  speaking,  their 
continued  ownership  by  me  means  only  that  they  con- 
tinue to  affect  my  conscious  experiences.  The  two 
senses  may  be  distinguished  from  each  other  by  calling 
the  former  "  mnemic  ownership  de  jure'"'  and  the  latter 
"  mnemic  ownership  de facto  et  dejiire". 

Now  I  am  7iot  using  "ownership"  in  any  of  these 
three  senses  in  my  attempts  to  give  sufficient  descrip- 
tions of  literally  conscious  and  unconscious  mental 
events.  It  is  in  fact  evident  that  there  is  another-sense 
of  "  ownership  ",  which  is  not  mnemic.  When  I  look 
out  of  the  window  and  see  a  man  passing,  or  when  I 
feel  a  twinge  of  toothache,  these  experiences  are  owned 
by  me  in  a  fundamental  and  probably  indefinable  sense. 
This  is  a  sense  in  which  the  visual  experience  ceases 
to  be  owned  by  me  as  soon  as  the  man  passes  out  of 


378  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

sight,  and  the  other  experience  ceases  as  soon  as  I  cease 
to  feel  my  tooth  aching.  They  may  still  continue  to  be 
owned  by  me  both  de  jure  and  de  facto.  I  may  from 
time  to  time  remember  seeing  the  man  or  feeling  the 
pain.  And,  even  if  I  cannot  do  this,  these  experiences 
may  continue  to  modify  my  later  experiences  from  time 
to  time  in  some  way  or  other.  Let  us  call  this  third, 
non-mnemic,  sense  of  "ownership"  by  the  name  of 
"  literal  ownership  ".  In  my  attempts  to  give  sufficient 
descriptions  of  literally  conscious  and  unconscious 
mental  events  it  must  be  understood  that,  wherever  I 
use  the  word  "ownership",  I  mean  "literal  owner- 
ship ".  It  is  probable  that  many  mental  events  which 
have  been  literally  owned  are  not  mnemically  owned 
de  facto  for  more  than  a  negligibly  short  time  ;  and  it  is 
probable  that  many  of  them  are  not  mnemically  owned 
de  jure  for  long.  And  it  is  quite  possible  that  mental 
events  which  have  never  been  literally  owned  by  me 
may  be  mnemically  owned  by  me  de  jure  if  not  de  facto. 

I  will  now  repeat  the  descriptions  which  we  have 
reached.  These  must  be  interpreted  in  the  light  of  the 
remarks  which  I  have  just  been  making,  (i)  Mental 
events  are  either  owned  or  unowned.  All  unowned 
events  are  incapable  of  being  introspectively  discrimin- 
ated by  any  mind,  and  are  therefore  absolutely  unconscious. 
(2)  Events  which  are  mental  and  are  owned  by  some 
mind  are  called  "experiences".  Mental  events  which 
are  unowned  are  not  to  be  called  "experiences",  and 
therefore  not  "unconscious  experiences ''\  (3)  Mental 
events  which  are  owned  may  be  such  that  the  mind 
which  owns  them  could,  or  such  that  it  could  not,  have 
introspectively  discriminated  them  at  the  time  of  their 
occurrence  if  it  had  tried.  In  the  latter  case  they  are 
absolutely  unconscious  experiences  of  that  mind.  (4)  Mental 
events  which  are  owned  and  could  have  been  intro- 
spected may  be  owned  by  a  mind  which  is  at  the  time 
of  their  occurrence  in  control  of  a  body,  or  by  a  mind 
which  is  not  in  control  of  a  body  at  that  time.     In  the 


THE   TERM   "UNCONSCIOUS"  379 

former  case  they  are  absohitely  conscious  experiences.  \  n 
the  latter  case  they  are  relatively  unconscious  experiences, 
i.e.,  they  are  conscious  experiences  of  what  would 
commonly  be  called  an  "unconscious  mind".  These 
results  are  exhibited  synoptically  in  the  table  which 
follows  : 

/  By  controlling  mind  {Absolutely  Conscious]  \ 

■  Introspectible^  ' 


I  IntrospectiblcA 

I  I  By  non-controlling  mind  [Relaii7'cly  Unconscious] 

\  No)L-introspectu 

^'^^^^^  1  'r  Absolutely  Unconscious 


r  Owned    j 
Mental  |  ^  Non-introspectiblc  ^ 


\_  Unoivned  L- 

The  next  point  to  notice  is  that  I  do  not  pretend  to 
have  given  either  definitions  of  literally  conscious  or 
unconscious  mental  events,  or  tests  for  them.  At  most 
I  claim  to  have  given  descriptions  which  suffice  to  dis- 
tinguish the  two  in  theory.  I  will  now  say  something 
more  about  this  first  point.  I  think  that  almost  every- 
one would  be  inclined  to  say  :  "  It  may  be  that  all  my 
conscious  experiences  are  mental  events  which  I  owned 
and  which  I  could  have  introspectively  discriminated 
at  the  time  ;  and  it  may  be  that  there  is  nothing  else  of 
which  this  is  true.  But  this  purely  hypothetical  pro- 
position about  what  would  have  happened  if  I  had 
introspected  cannot  be  ultimate.  There  must  be  some 
intrinsic  difference  between  those  experiences  of  mine 
which  I  could  have  introspected  and  those  which  I 
could  not  have  introspectively  discriminated  even  if  I 
had  tried  my  hardest.  And  this  intrinsic  difference, 
whatever  it  may  be,  is  what  we  nieaji  by  the  difference 
between  a  conscious  and  an  unconscious  experience." 

This  may  very  well  be  true.  One  can  think  of  at 
least  three  circumstances  which  might  tend  to  make  it 
impossible  to  discriminate  an  experience  introspectively. 
(i)  The  difficulty  might  arise  through  the  experience 
being  an  event  all  of  whose  characteristics  have  an 
extremely  weak  intensive  magnitude.  (2)  The  char- 
acteristics of  the  experience  might  be  reasonably  intense, 
but  it  might  be  part  of  a  larger  mass  of  experiences 


38o  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

which  were  extremely  like  it  both  qualitatively  and 
quantitatively.  (3)  The  experience  might  have  consider- 
able intensity,  and  might  differ  from  other  co-existing 
experiences  both  qualitatively  and  quantitatively  to  a 
marked  extent ;  but  it  might  stand  in  certain  special 
relations  to  other  contents  of  the  mind  which  prevent 
it  from  being  introspectively  discriminated.  This  third 
possibility  would  seem  to  split  into  two.  {a)  It  might 
take  a  merely  negative  form.  It  might  be  that  this 
experience  is  relatively  isolated,  and  stands  in  but  few 
relations  to  the  other  contents  of  the  mind.  The  limiting 
case  of  this  arises  when  a  mental  event  is  not  owned  by 
a  mind  at  all,  in  the  literal  sense  of  "  ownership  ".  (d)  It 
might  take  a  positive  form.  There  might  be  some  positive 
relation  between  this  experience  and  the  rest  of  the  mind 
which  positively  averts  introspective  attention  from  the 
former.  And  this  peculiar  relation  might  depend  on 
some  intrinsic  quality  in  the  experience.  B.£:,  the 
experience  may  be  such  that,  whenever  it  begins  to  be 
introspected,  an  intolerably  painful  feeling  begins  to 
arise  in  the  mind  which  owns  it.  It  seems  likely  that 
all  these  various  possibilities  are  realised  in  practice  in 
various  cases  of  literally  unconscious  experiences. 

" Simultaneous  Undiscriniinating Awareness'^ and''''  Owner- 
ship ".  I  will  end  this  section  by  raising  a  rather  difficult 
question  which  is  very  closely  connected  with  what  we 
have  just  been  discussing.  In  our  descriptions  of  liter- 
ally conscious  and  unconscious  mental  events  we  have 
used  two  obviously  different  relations  which  may  hold 
between  a  mind  and  a  mental  event,  viz.,  literal  owner- 
ship and  introspective  discrimination.  The  latter  seems 
to  imply  the  former,  but  the  former  can  evidently  hold 
without  the  latter.  Now  there  seems  to  be  a  third 
possible  relation  between  a  mind  and  a  mental  event, 
which  might  be  called  "  Simultaneous  Undiscriminating 
Awareness".  I  want  to  say  something  about  this,  and 
to  consider  how  it  is  related  to  literal  ownership. 

Let  us  consider  the  case  of  looking  for  one's  spectacles 


THE  TERM   "UNCONSCIOUS"  381 

in  a  certain  drawer,  and  failing  to  find  them  though  they 
were  staring  one  in  the  face  all  the  time.  If  I  were  asked 
whether  I  was  at  the  time  aware  of  seeing  the  drawer 
and  most  of  its  contents,  I  should  answer  *'Yes",  in 
one  sense,  and  "No",  in  another.  Certainly  I  was 
aware  of  seeing  the  drawer  and  most  of  its  contents  in 
a  sense  in  which  I  was  not  aware  of  seeing  the  spectacles. 
On  the  other  hand,  I  was  almost  certainly  not  introspec- 
tively  discriminating  the  process  of  seeing  the  drawer  ; 
for  my  whole  attention  was  devoted  at  the  time  to  the 
drawer  itself  and  its  contents,  and  not  to  my  own  mental 
states.  It  is  evident  that,  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases 
of  conscious  perception,  I  am  not  aware  of  my  perception, 
in  the  sense  of  introspectively  discriminating  it.  Never- 
theless, I  should  certainly  refuse  to  entertain  the  sugges- 
tion that  I  am  not  aware,  in  any  sense,  of  my  conscious 
perceptions  while  they  are  taking  place.  I  shall  say 
then  that  the  person  in  our  example  was  aware  of  his 
act  of  seeing  the  drawer  and  most  of  its  contents,  in 
the  sense  that  he  had  "simultaneous  undiscriminating 
awareness  "  of  this  mental  event.  It  is  also  true  that  he 
"  literally  owned  "  this  mental  event;  it  was  literally  a 
part  of  his  mental  history. 

It  would  seem  then  that  literally  conscious  experiences 
are  always  literally  owned  by  a  rnirici,  and  that  the  mind 
which  owns  them  has  always  simultaneous  undiscrimin- 
ating awareness  of  them.  But,  in  ninety-nine  cases  out 
of  a  hundred,  it  does  not  also  introspectively  discriminate 
them.  The  question  now  arises  :  "  Do  we  ever  literally 
own  mental  events  of  which  we  do  not  have  at  least 
simultaneous  undiscriminating  awareness?" 

It  will  first  be  necessary  to  modify  the  question  in 
order  to  remove  the  danger  of  an  infinite  regress.  If 
"literal  ownership"  and  "simultaneous  undiscrimin- 
ating awareness"  be  just  two  different  names  for  a 
single  relation,  it  will  of  course  follow  that  I  must  have 
simultaneous  undiscriminating  awareness  of  any  mental 
event   which    I    own.      And   there   will    be    no    infinite 


382  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

regress  in  this  assertion.  But,  suppose  that  the  two 
names  stand  for  different  relations.  Suppose  I  own  a 
certain  state  s,  and  that  I  have  simultaneous  undis- 
criminating  awareness  of  s.  This  awareness  of  s  will 
also  be  a  state  which  is  owned  by  me.  And,  if  I  must 
have  simultaneous  undiscriminating  awareness  of  evety 
mental  event  that  I  own,  I  must  have  it  of  this  state 
too.  We  should  thus  be  launched  on  an  infinite  regress 
of  awarenesses  of  awarenesses  of  awarenesses  of  ...  . 
So,  unless  we  take  "literal  ownership"  and  "simul- 
taneous undiscriminating  awareness  "  to  be  simply  two 
names  for  the  same  relation,  or  else  modify  the  proposi- 
tion which  we  are  investigating,  we  can  be  sure  that 
this  proposition  involves  an  infinite  multiplication  of 
states  of  mind.  I  do  not  maintain  that  such  an  infinite 
series  of  mental  states  belonging  to  a  single  mind 
involves  any  contradiction.  But  there  is  not  the  faintest 
reason  to  believe  that  it  is  a  fact  ;  and  it  certainly  would 
be  undesirable  to  accept  a  proposition  which  has  this 
implication,  unless  there  were  the  strongest  grounds 
for  doing  so. 

It  is  of  course  quite  easy  to  modify  the  proposition 
which  we  are  considering,  so  that  it  shall  not  entail 
the  existence  of  an  infinite  series  of  contemporary  mental 
states  belonging  to  the  same  mind.  We  can  begin  by 
distinguishing  "  orders  "  of  mental  events.  We  might 
call  my  awareness  of  the  drawer  a  state  of  the  first  order  ; 
my  simultaneous  undiscriminating  awareness  of  my 
awareness  of  the  drawer  a  state  of  the  second  order ; 
and  so  on.  And  we  might  put  the  proposition  into  the 
milder  form  that  I  have  simultaneous  undiscriminating 
awareness  of  every  mental  event  which  I  own,  provided 
that  its  order  does  not  exceed  some  finite  number  n. 
The  state  of  n+  \th  order,  which  is  my  awareness  of  a 
state  of  nth  order,  would  then  be  owned  by  me  but 
would  not  be  an  object  of  simultaneous  undiscrimin- 
ating awareness  to  me.  In  particular  it  might  be  that 
I  necessarily  have  simultaneous  undiscriminating  aware- 


THE  TERM   "UNCONSCIOUS"  383 

ness  of  all  mental  events  of  the  first  order  which  I  own  ; 
but  that  I  do  not  necessarily  have  simultaneous  undis- 
criminating  awareness  of  any  of  my  experiences  whose 
order  is  greater  than  one.  Stated  in  this  form  the 
proposition  is  intrinsically  unobjectionable,  whether  it 
be  in  fact  true  or  not. 

We  have  now  to  consider  whether  there  is  any 
reason  to  believe  it.  For  this  purpose  we  had  better 
return  to  our  example  about  the  spectacles.  It  is 
plausible  to  hold  that  I  have  simultaneous  undis- 
criminating  awareness  of  all  my  conscious  experiences 
of  the  first  order.  The  question  is  whether  there  may 
not  be  unconscious  experiences  of  the  first  order  which 
I  own  but  of  which  I  do  not  have  simultaneous  undis- 
criminating  awareness.  We  must  notice  that  I  should 
not  normally  use  the  words  "conscious"  and  "uncon- 
scious" at  all  in  describing  my  experience  with  the 
drawer  and  the  spectacles.  I  should  simply  say:  "I 
saw  the  drawer  and  most  of  its  contents,  but  I  did  not 
see  the  spectacles."  The  adjectives  "conscious"  and 
"  unconscious  "  are  added  later,  as  a  result  of  reflection 
and  inference.  I  find  that  the  spectacles  must  have 
been  physically  affecting  my  retina  just  as  much  as 
the  drawer  and  the  rest  of  its  contents  did.  I  then 
perhaps  persuade  myself  that  I  vmst  have  seen  the 
spectacles.  And  I  express  the  obvious  difference 
between  the  way  in  which  I  must  have  seen  the 
spectacles,  if  I  saw  them  at  all,  and  the  way  in  which 
I  certainly  did  see  the  drawer  and  the  rest  of  its  con- 
tents, by  saying  that  I  saw  the  drawer  "consciously" 
and  that  I  must  have  seen  the  spectacles  "uncon- 
sciously ",  if  at  all.  Now  this  phraseology  does  suggest 
the  possibility  of  first-order  experiences  which  are  owned 
by  me,  but  of  which  I  am  not  aware  even  in  the  sense 
of  simultaneous  undiscriminating  awareness.  When  I 
say:  "/  saw  the  spectacles  unconsciously"  or  "  J/j' 
seeing  of  them  was  unconscious",  I  imply  that  this 
experience  was  owned  by  me.     And,  when  I  say  that 


384  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

it  was  unconscious,  I  do  imply  that  I  was  not  aware 
of  it  even  in  the  sense  in  which  I  was  aware  of  seeing 
the  drawer  and  the  rest  of  its  contents.  That  is,  I  do 
imply  that  I  did  not  have  even  simultaneous  undis- 
criminating  awareness  of  seeing  the  spectacles. 

But  it  seems  to  me  very  doubtful  whether  we  have 
any  right  to  accept  the  verbal  implications  of  this 
phraseology.  The  natural  thing  for  me  to  say  is 
simply:  "I  did  not  see  the  spectacles".  And  the 
plain,  straightforward  meaning  of  this  is  that  either 
there  was  no  mental  event  at  all  called  "seeing  the 
spectacles  ",  or  that,  if  there  were,  it  was  not  literally 
owned  by  me.  Now  it  does  not  seem  to  me  that  the 
facts  which  are  taken  into  consideration  on  later  re- 
flection give  us  any  ground  for  reversing  this  view, 
even  if  they  do  give  us  some  ground  for  accepting  the 
view  that  a  mental  event  called  "seeing  the  spectacles  " 
did  exist  at  the  time.  The  facts  which  are  adduced  in 
favour  of  the  view  that  a  mental  event,  called  "seeing 
the  spectacles",  must  have  existed  at  the  time  fall  into 
two  main  groups,  (i)  It  is  argued  that  the  spectacles 
and  my  retina  were  in  such  relative  positions  that  light 
from  the  former  must  have  affected  the  latter  in  a  way 
which  might  reasonably  have  been  expected  to  produce 
such  a  mental  event,  (ii)  It  may  be  that  in  dreams, 
or  by  hypnosis  or  psycho-analysis  or  some  other 
technical  method,  I  come  to  have  experiences  or  to  do 
or  say  things  which  are  hard  to  explain  except  on  the 
assumption  that  a  certain  mental  event  existed  in  the 
past  and  that  it  is  affecting  my  present  experiences 
or  actions.  Even  if  we  admit  that  such  arguments 
make  it  probable  that  a  mental  event  of  "seeing  the 
spectacles  "  existed  while  I  was  searching  in  the  drawer, 
there  seems  no  reason  to  believe  that  they  make  it 
probable  that  this  mental  event  was  literally  owned  by 
me.  No  doubt,  if  it  existed  at  all,  its  occurrence  de- 
pended on  the  stimulation  of  my  body.  It  is  also  true 
that  it  is  a  mental  event  which  afterwards  affects  experi- 


THE  TERM   "UNCONSCIOUS"  385 

ences  in  my  mind.  But  this  does  not  suffice  to  prove 
that,  when  it  happened,  it  was  my  experience,  in  the 
plain  straightforward  sense  in  which  the  experience  of 
seeing  the  drawer  and  the  rest  of  its  contents  was  an 
experience  of  mine. 

Now,  if  this  be  granted,  there  would  seem  to  be  no 
very  good  ground  for  distinguishing  between  the  first- 
order  mental  states  which  I  own  and  the  first-order 
mental  states  of  which  I  have  simultaneous  undis- 
criminating  awareness.  The  only  ground  for  dis- 
tinguishing between  the  two  was  that  certain  common 
phrases  do  seem  to  suggest  that  there  are  mental  events 
which  I  literally  own  but  of  which  I  do  not  have  even 
simultaneous  undiscriminating  awareness.  But  we  have 
now  seen  that,  even  if  there  be  mental  events  which 
arise  through  the  stimulation  of  my  body  and  sub- 
sequently affect  my  experiences,  and  of  which  I  have  not 
simultaneous  undiscriminating  awareness,  there  is  no 
good  reason  to  think  that  they  are  literally  owned  by 
me.  Hence  I  think  that  it  is  quite  likely  that  all  first- 
order  experiences  which  I  literally  own  are  also 
experiences  of  which  1  have  at  least  simultaneous  un- 
discriminating awareness  ;  and  that  all  mental  events 
of  which  I  have  simultaneous  undiscriminating  aware- 
ness are  literally  owned  by  me.  This  of  course  leaves 
it  quite  possible  that  literal  ownership  and  simultaneous 
undiscriminating  awareness  are  different  relations  ;  just 
as  size  and  shape  are  different  qualities,  though  any- 
thing which  has  either  must  have  both.  And  I  think 
it  is  pretty  certain  that  they  are  different  relations,  for 
the  following  reason.  If  they  were  just  two  names  for 
a  single  relation  it  would  be  quite  certain  that  every 
mental  event  which  I  own,  no  matter  what  its  order 
might  be,  would  be  an  object  of  simultaneous  un- 
discriminating awareness  to  me.  This  would  be  an 
identical  proposition.  Now  it  does  not  seem  to  be  in 
the  least  certain  that  there  could  not  be  mental  events 
which  I  own  but  of  which  I  do  not  have  even  simultane- 

2  B 


386  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

ous  undiscriminating  awareness.  I  think  that  a  person 
who  felt  quite  certain  that  he  had  simultaneous  un- 
discriminating awareness  of  all  the  first-order  events 
which  he  owns  might  feel  very  doubtful  indeed  whether 
he  had  simultaneous  undiscriminating  awareness  of  his 
simultaneous  undiscriminating  awareness  of  his  first- 
order  experiences.  And,  if  we  press  the  question  on 
him  for  experiences  of  higher  orders,  I  think  there  will 
certainly  come  a  stage  at  which  he  will  feel  pretty  certain 
that  he  could  own  a  mental  event  without  having  even 
this  kind  of  awareness  of  it.  If  this  be  so,  "literal 
ownership"  and  "simultaneous  undiscriminating  aware- 
ness "  can  hardly  be  two  names  for  a  single  relation. 
Thus,  on  the  whole,  I  think  the  most  probable  conclu- 
sion is  that  we  are  concerned  with  two  different  relations 
which,  in  the  case  of  first-order  experiences,  always  go 
together.  In  the  case  of  experiences  of  a  sufficiently 
high  order  literal  ownership  holds  without  simultaneous 
undiscriminating  awareness. 

The  Notion  of  "The  Unconscious."  We  are  now  in  a 
position  to  deal  with  the  substantive  "  The  Unconscious", 
after  clearing  up  the  meanings  of  the  adjective  "un- 
conscious ".  Here  again  we  find  that  there  are  great 
ambiguities.  We  must  first  notice  a  systematic 
ambiguity  in  all  such  phrases  as  this.  When  we  talk  of 
'■'■the  State  "  or  "  ^"//^  Internal  Combustion  Engine"  we 
generally  mean  a  typical  idealised  state  or  internal 
combustion  engine.  We  use  such  phrases  in  this  way 
when  we  are  pretty  certain  that  we  are  dealing  with  a 
class,  such  as  states  and  internal  combustion  engines, 
having  several  quite  distinct  members  which  do  not 
combine  to  form  a  single  complex  whole  which  is  itself 
a  state  or  an  internal  combustion  engine.  Each  of 
these  members  is  supposed  to  be  a  more  or  less  im- 
perfect approximation  to  that  ideal  limit  which  we  call 
"the  State"  or  "the  Internal  Combustion  Engine", 
and    which    Plato   would    consider  to   be   "laid    up    in 


THE  TERM   "UNCONSCIOUS"  387 

Heaven".  On  the  other  hand,  when  we  talk  of  "the 
Sea",  we  do  not  as  a  rule  mean  a  typical  ideal  sea,  but 
just  the  whole  mass  of  salt  water  on  earth  of  which 
the  various  seas  are  so  many  different  parts.  This 
ambiguity  is  inconvenient  even  when  we  are  talking 
about  "the  State"  (except  to  Idealistic  Metaphysicians 
whose  more  exciting  results  all  depend  on  juggling  with 
the  defects  of  language  instead  of  trying  to  correct 
them).  It  would  be  still  more  so  if  there  were  a  single 
international  world-state,  as  there  ought  to  be.  For,  in 
that  case  "the  State"  might  mean  an  ideal  typical 
state,  or  it  might  mean  the  actual  Super-State  of  which 
all  other  states  would  be  constituents. 

Now  this  kind  of  ambiguity  is  specially  dangerous 
when  we  are  dealing  with  something  about  which  we 
know  so  little  as  we  do  about  the  Unconscious.  It  may 
be  that  there  is  only  this  and  that  Unconscious,  just  as 
there  is  this  and  that  internal  combustion  engine  ;  and 
that  the  totality  of  all  unconscious  mental  events  has 
as  little  unity  and  individuality  as  the  totality  of  all 
internal  combustion  engines.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
is  possible  that  the  total  Unconscious  is  not  divisible 
into  Smith's  Unconscious,  Brown's  Unconscious,  and 
so  on  ;  so  that  it  is  only  the  Unconscious  taken  as  a 
whole,  and  without  reference  to  the  various  origins  of 
various  parts  of  it,  which  can  be  treated  as  an  individual 
unit.  Lastly,  there  is  the  much  more  likely  alternative 
that  the  total  contents  of  the  Unconscious  do  form  an 
important  unity,  and  that  they  also  fall  into  various 
sub-groups,  each  of  which  has  a  greater  internal  unity 
than  the  Unconscious  as  a  whole.  The  Unconscious  as 
a  whole  might  be  like  the  United  States  ;  and  Smith's 
Unconscious  and  Brown's  Unconscious  might  be  like 
the  State  of  New  York  and  the  State  of  Nebraska.  It  is 
most  undesirable  that  we  should  use  phrases  which 
tacitly  prejudge  these  questions,  and  tie  us  down  to 
one  or  other  of  the  extreme  alternatives.  It  wull  be 
wise   to    introduce   at   once   certain    technical  terms  to 


388  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

avoid  these  dangers.  I  will  call  the  whole  contents 
of  the  Unconscious,  taken  collectively  as  a  single 
mass  and  without  regard  to  the  various  origins  of  its 
various  parts,  the  "Total  Unconscious  ".  It  is  then  open 
to  anyone  to  raise  the  questions :  {a)  "  What  are 
the  contents  of  the  Total  Unconscious?";  and  {d) 
"Does  the  Total  Unconscious  possess  anything  worth 
calling  a  '  structure  ' ;  and,  if  so,  what  kind  of  structure 
does  it  possess?"  If  the  Total  Unconscious  should 
contain  organised  sub-groups,  each  having  an  im- 
portant degree  of  unity  and  individuality,  these  may 
be  called  "Unconscious  Sub-groups".  If,  and  only 
if,  the  Total  Unconscious  proved  to  have  that  kind 
of  structure  which  characterises  minds  like  our  own, 
we  could  talk  of  the  "Total  Unconscious  Mind".  If 
any  of  the  unconscious  sub-groups  proved  to  have  this 
kind  of  structure,  it  could  be  called  a  "Special  Un- 
conscious Mind  ". 

T/ie  Total  Unconscious.  One  part  of  the  contents  of 
the  Total  Unconscious  will  be  all  mnemic  persistents, 
i.e.^  all  traces  and  dispositions,  no  matter  whose  experi- 
ences left  the  traces  or  Avhose  experiences  these  traces 
and  dispositions  may  subsequently  modify.  This  will 
be  divisible  into  an  accessible  and  an  inaccessible  part, 
in  the  sense  defined  earlier  in  this  Chapter.  I  will  call 
this  part  of  the  Total  Unconscious  the  "  Total  Mnemic 
Mass".  I  see  no  reason  to  suppose  that  there  is  any 
fundamental  intrinsic  difference  between  the  accessible 
and  the  inaccessible  parts  of  the  Total  Mnemic  Mass. 
The  inaccessible  part  is  mainly  dealt  with  by  abnormal 
psychologists  and  by  psycho-analysts  ;  the  accessible 
part  has  long  been  recognised  in  normal  psychology. 
The  importance  of  the  work  of  the  psycho-analysts  is 
not  that  they  have  revealed  anything  absolutely  new 
and  unheard  of.  It  is  only  the  extreme  ignorance  of 
most  of  them  about  all  subjects  except  their  own  which 
causes  them  to  make  such  claims.  The  real  importance 
of  their  work  is  in  the  following  points,      {a)  They  have 


THE   TERM    "UNCONSCIOUS"  389 

shown  that  many  inaccessible  traces  or  groups  of  traces 
do  not  rest  idly.  In  so  far  as  these  fail  to  produce  their 
normal  effects,  e.g.,  memories,  they  are  liable  to  produce 
various  bodily  and  mental  disorders,  {b)  They  have 
devised  several  new  technical  methods  for  making 
inaccessible  traces  accessible.  {c)  They  have  shown 
that,  when  this  has  been  done,  the  mental  and  bodily 
disorders  are  often  (for  a  time,  at  least)  alleviated. 
{d)  They  have  stated  some  of  the  probable  causes  which 
tend  to  make  certain  experiences  become  inaccessible. 
These  are  great  achievements  ;  and  it  is  a  pity  to  create 
prejudice  against  them  by  ignorant  pontifications  about 
'*  the  New  Psychology  ".  The  psychologists  of  instinct 
(such  as  M'Dougall)  also  deal  with  the  inaccessible 
part  of  the  Total  Mnemic  Mass  ;  but  I  cannot  pretend 
to  believe  that  they  have  accomplished  anything  except 
to  revive  the  faculty-psychology  in  an  extreme  form 
and  with  an  amusingly  pretentious  parade  of  '*  science." 

Now,  if  the  whole  content  of  the  Total  Unconscious 
be  mnemic  persistents,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose 
that  it  contains  mental  events  at  all.  For  there  is  no 
known  reason  to  believe  that  traces  and  dispositions 
are  sufficiently  like  the  only  mental  events  which  we 
know  directly  (viz.,  our  own  conscious  experiences)  to 
be  called  "mental  events".  And,  if  the  Total  Un- 
conscious does  not  contain  mental  events,  it  cannot 
possibly  be  a  mind  or  comprise  sub-groups  which  are 
minds,  no  matter  how  complex  its  structure  may  be  or 
how  definitely  it  is  divided  into  sub-groups  having 
their  own  unity  and  individuality.  Thus,  on  this  hypo- 
thesis, there  would  be  no  Total  Unconscious  Mind,  and 
there  would  be  no  Special  Unconscious  Minds. 

If,  however,  there  be  literally  unconscious  mental 
events,  viz.  {a)  unowned  mental  events,  or  {b)  mental 
events  which  were  literally  owned  by  a  mind  but  which 
could  not  have  been  introspected  by  it,  or  {c)  mental 
events  which  were  owned  and  could  be  introspected 
only   by  a    mind  which  was    not   then  in  control  of  a 


390  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

body,  these  ought  to  be  counted  as  part  of  the  contents 
of  the  Total  Unconscious.  I  propose  to  call  the  whole 
mass  of  such  mental  events,  supposing  that  they  exist, 
the  "Total  Subconscious  Mass".  In  theory  then  the 
Total  Unconscious  will  consist  of  the  Total  Mnemic 
Mass  and  the  Total  Subconscious  Mass.  The  former 
consists  of  traces  and  dispositions  ;  the  latter,  if  it  exists 
at  all,  will  consist  of  literally  unconscious  mental  events. 
If  the  Total  Subconscious  Mass  exists,  and  if  the  mental 
events  which  belong  to  it  leave  traces,  these  will  pre- 
sumably belong  to  the  inaccessible  part  of  the  Total 
Mnemic  Mass. 

Now  if,  and  only  if,  the  Total   Subconscious   Mass 
exists,    there    is  a   possibility  of  a  Total   Unconscious 
Mind    and  of  Special    Unconscious    Minds.     I_do  not 
^     know  how  to  define  a  "  mind  ",  but  I  think  it  is  evident 
\1    that  a  thing  could   not  be  called  a  "mind"  unless  it 
-I    had  a  peculiar  kind  of  content  and  a  peculiar  kind  of 
'    structure.      Its  content  must  be  the  kind  of  events  which 
we   call    "mental"   and    observe   when   we    choose    to 
introspect.     And    these   mental    events    must   be   inter- 
connected in  a  very  peculiar  way.     It  is  possible  that 
I     mental  events  can  exist  only  as  factors  in  those  peculiar 
S    complex  wholes  which  we  call  "minds",  but  I  do  not 
I    see   any  very  good  reason  to  believe   this.      It  is  also 
possible,  and  much  more  likely,  that  nothing  but  mental 
events  can  be  interconnected  in  the  peculiar  way  which 
is    characteristic   of   the    structure   of  a   mind.       Now, 
among    the    relations   which    are   characteristic   of   the 
structure   of  minds,    a    most   important   place  must  be 
given  to  mnemic  relations.     It  seems  essential  to  the 
notion  of  a  mind  that  its  contents  at  one  moment  shall 
be  largely  dependent  on  its  contents  at  other  moments 
in    the    remote   past,   and    shall    not    be  completely  ex- 
plicable   by    reference   to   events   within    or  without   it 
which  have  happened  in  the  iminediate  past.     I  do  not 
suggest  for  an  instant  that  it  is  a  sufficient  description 
of  a   mind   to   say   that   it   consists   of   mental    events 


THE   TERM   "UNCONSCIOUS"  391 

mnemically  interconnected  ;  but  there  is  little  doubt 
that  this  is  an  essential  part  of  what  we  understand  by 
a  "mind".  Now,  unless  we  assume  a  quite  new  kind 
of  causation,  the  mnemic  relations  between  transient 
mental  events  depend  on  the  existence  of  mnemic  per- 
sistents.  Thus  a  mind  requires  a  Mnemic  Mass.  On 
the  other  hand,  a  Mnemic  Mass  by  itself  does  not 
suffice  to  constitute  a  mind  ;  for  a  mind  must  contain 
experiences,  whilst  a  Mnemic  Mass  consists  solely  of 
traces  and  dispositions. 

In  order  to  prove  the  existence  of  anything  that  could 
reasonably  be  called  the  "Total  Unconscious  Mind" 
it  would  therefore  be  necessary  to  establish  the  follow- 
ing points,  (i)  That  there  are  literally  unconscious 
experiences,  in  the  sense  defined  above.  If  so,  there  is 
a  Total  Subconscious  Mass.  (2)  That  these  literally 
unconscious  experiences  leave  traces  ;  i.e.^  that  there 
is  a  part  of  the  Total  Mnemic  Mass  which  consists  of 
the  traces  of  the  Total  Subconscious  Mass.  (3)  That, 
given  these  two  indispensable  prerequisites,  the  mental 
events  which  make  up  the  Total  Subconscious  Mass 
do  in  fact  have  to  each  other  such  relations  as  to  form 
a  single  individual  whole  analogous  to  the  minds  which 
we  know  by  introspection.  It  seems  to  me  most  im- 1" 
portant  that  people  should  recognise  that  the  Total 
Unconscious  may  contain  mental  events,  and  may  form  , 
a  very  important  unity  taken  as  a  whole  ;  and  yet  that  | 
it  may  be  absolutely  misleading  to  call  it  a  "mind". 
At  present  anyone  who  thinks  that  there  is  reason  to 
hold  that  the  Total  Unconscious  has  a  unity  which 
stretches  beyond  and  between  recognised  individual 
human  beings,  is  at  once  liable  to  be  accused  of  be- 
lieving in  a  Total  Unconscious  Mind.  It  is  therefore 
important  to  point  out  how  much  more  than  this  is 
needed  to  constitute  a  belief  in  the  Total  Unconscious 
Mind. 

Unconscious  Sub-groups.      It  is  commonly  assumed  that 
the    Total   Unconscious   falls  quite  definitely  into  well 


392  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

marked  sub-groups,  one  specially  associated  with  one 
human  being  and  another  with  another.  People  con- 
stantly talk  of  "My  Unconscious"  and  ''Your  Un- 
conscious "  ;  and  such  phraseology  would  seem  to 
imply  the  belief  just  mentioned.  So  we  must  now 
consider  the  alleged  subdivision  of  the  Total  Un- 
conscious into  one  part  which  is  Smith's,  another 
which  is  Brown's,  and  a  third  which  is  Robinson's. 

We  will  begin  by  considering  the  subdivisions  of  the 
Total  Mnemic  Mass.  All  that  we  know  about  traces 
is  that  certain  experiences  leave  them,  and  that  they 
produce  or  modify  certain  later  experiences.  We  might 
therefore  classify  the  contents  of  the  Total  Mnemic 
Mass  on  either  of  two  principles,  viz.,  by  their  place  of 
origin  or  by  the  place  where  they  produce  their  effects. 
Each  of  these  principles  can  be  used  in  two  different 
ways,  thus  giving  four  different  methods  of  subdivision. 
We  might  class  together  (a)  all  traces  left  by  experiences 
of  Smith's  mind;  or  (d)  all  traces  left  by  events  which 
happened  to  Smith's  body,  or  (c)  all  traces  and  dis- 
positions which  produce  or  modify  experiences  in 
Smith's  mind  ;  or  (d)  all  traces  and  dispositions  which 
cause  or  modify  behaviour  of  Smith's  body.  Now  it  is 
quite  certain  that  these  four  equally  sensible  ways  of  sub- 
dividing the  Total  Mnemic  Mass  will  lead  to  different 
results  as  soon  as  we  leave  completely  normal  and 
commonplace  phenomena.     I  will  now  show  this  in  detail. 

(i)  If  innate  dispositions  be  classified  by  origin  they 
must  be  assigned  to  that  part  of  the  Total  Mnemic  Mass 
which  belonged  to  our  remote  ancestors.  For,  if  such 
dispositions  originated  in  experiences  or  in  bodily  pro- 
cesses, it  was  in  those  of  our  remote  ancestors  and  not 
of  ourselves  that  they  must  have  originated.  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  we  classify  innate  dispositions  by  the  minds 
whose  experiences  they  modify  or  the  bodies  whose 
activities  they  determine,  we  must  assign  them  to  the 
Mnemic  Masses  of  contemporary  men.  Let  us  then, 
for  the  future,  confine  the  discussion  to  traces. 


THE  TERM   "UNCONSCIOUS"  393 

(ii)  If  there  be  literally  unconscious  mental  events, 
and  we  classify  traces  by  origin,  we  shall  often  reach  a 
different  result  according  as  we  classify  by  the  mind  or 
the  body  in  which  they  originated.  By  "Smith's 
body  "  we  mean  that  body  which  is  most  usually  con- 
trolled by  a  mind  with  certain  marked  characteristics, 
whom  we  know  as  "Smith".  Now,  even  if  Smith  be 
the  most  normal  person  in  the  world,  he  is  often  asleep 
and  sometimes  in  a  swoon.  At  such  times  the  mind 
known  as  "Smith"  is  not  in  control  of  the  organism 
known  as  "Smith's  body",  even  though  it  be  still 
animating  the  latter.  If  stimuli  act  on  the  body  at  such 
times  and  leave  traces,  these  traces  cannot  be  counted 
as  belonging  to  vSmith's  Mnemic  Mass,  if  we  mean 
by  this  the  set  of  traces  left  by  experiences  owned  by 
Smith's  mind.  For  these  stimuli,  if  they  produced 
mental  events  at  all,  did  not  produce  experiences  which 
were  literally  owned  by  Smith's  mind.  On  the  other 
hand,  if  by  "Smith's  Mnemic  Mass"  we  mean  traces 
left  by  events  that  happened  to  Smith's  body,  these 
traces  will  belong  to  Smith's  Mnemic  Mass. 

(iii)  Generally,  when  a  body  is  not  controlled  by  the 
mind  which  normally  controls  it,  it  is  not  controlled  by 
any  mind  at  all.  But  in  cases  of  multiple  personality 
the  same  body  may  be  controlled  successively  by  several 
recognisably  different  minds.  The  phrase  "Smith's 
body  "  then  means  the  body  of  which  the  mind  called 
"Smith"  is  one  of  the  controlling  minds.  The  fact 
that  it  is  called  "  Smith'' s  body  "  is  then  largely  a  matter 
of  chance  ;  it  will  depend  on  which  of  these  minds  is 
most  often  in  control  or  was  earliest  in  control.  If  we 
classify  traces  by  the  bodies  in  which  they  originate 
there  will  be  one  group  connected  with  Smith's  body. 
If  we  classify  traces  by  the  minds  from  whose  experiences 
they  originate,  this  Mnemic  Mass  will  split  up  into 
S/s  Mnemic  Mass,  Sg's  Mnemic  Mass,  and  so  on. 
This  subdivision  may  very  well  not  be  exhaustive  ; 
there  may  be  traces,  due  to  events  which  happened  in 


394  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

Smith's  body,  which  were  not  originated  by  experiences 
in  any  of  the  minds  which  successively  control  Smith's 
body. 

(iv)  I  have  so  far  confined  myself  to  the  classification 
of  traces  by  their  place  of  origin  ;  and  have  shown  that 
those  which  originate  from  experiences  belonging  to  a 
certain  mind  will  be  contained  in,  but  will  not  exhaust, 
the  group  originated  by  events  which  happen  to  the 
body  which  is  said  to  be  controlled  by  this  mind.  I 
will  now  point  out  that  classification  by  place  of  origin 
and  classification  by  results  will  lead  to  different  group- 
ings. Suppose  that  a  certain  body  B  is  controlled 
alternately  by  minds  B^  and  B.,.  An  experience  which 
is  owned  by  Bj^  may  leave  a  trace  which  afterwards 
modifies  experiences  which  are  owned  by  B^.  If  we 
classify  by  origin,  this  trace  will  belong  to  B^'s  Mnemic 
Mass  ;  if  we  classify  by  results,  it  will  belong  to  Bg's 
Mnemic  Mass.  It  is  of  course  quite  possible  that  a 
trace  left  by  one  of  B/s  experiences  may  modify  the 
later  experiences  of  both  B^  and  B2.  If  we  classify  by 
origin,  this  trace  will  belong  to  the  Mnemic  Mass  of 
B^  and  not  to  that  of  B2 ;  if  we  classify  by  results,  it 
will  be  common  to  the  Mnemic  Masses  of  Bi  and  B2. 
There  are  examples  of  such  facts  as  these  in  Dr  Prince's 
account  of  the  Beauchamp  case. 

(v)  So  far  it  has  appeared  that,  even  in  abnormal 
cases,  all  the  traces  which  produce  effects  in  any  of  the 
minds  which  control  a  certain  body  were  started  by 
events  which  happened  to  tJint  body.  This  breaks 
down  in  the  phenomena  of  telepathy.  So  far  as  I  can 
judge  from  my  own  experiences  with  Mrs  Leonard  and 
from  what  I  have  read  of  the  experiences  of  others, 
telepathy  from  a  sitter  to  an  entranced  medium  most 
often  concerns  past  experiences  of  the  sitter  which  he  is 
not  at  the  moment  thinking  about.  We  must  therefore 
suppose  that  traces  of  some  of  the  sitter's  past  experi- 
ences now  affect  the  mind  of  the  medium.  From  the 
point   of  view   of    origin    such    traces    belong   to    the 


THE   TERM    "UNCONSCIOUS"  395 

Mnemic  Mass  of  the  sitter  and  not  to  that  of  the 
medium.  From  the  point  of  view  of  effects  these  traces 
are  common  to  the  Mnemic  Masses  of  sitter  and 
medium  ;  for  the  sitter  can  remember  the  experience, 
and  the  medium  can  have  telepathic  knowledge  of  it. 

(vi)  Lastly,  we  have  the  rare,  but  reasonably  well 
attested  phenomenon  of  "possession";  where  the 
normal  control  of  an  entranced  medium  ceases  to  con- 
trol her  body,  and  the  medium  begins  to  speak  with 
a  quite  different  voice,  gestures,  and  mannerisms,  which 
are  said  to  be  recognisably  characteristic  of  a  certain 
dead  person  whom  the  medium  has  never  met.  I  have 
witnessed  and  taken  dictaphone  records  of  one  alleged 
case  of  this  kind.  There  is  no  doubt  at  all  of  the 
striking  and  sudden  change  which  takes  place  in  voice, 
manner,  and  subject-matter  communicated  ;  but  I  can- 
not personally  vouch  for  the  resemblance  of  these 
characteristics  in  the  so-called  "personal  control"  to 
those  of  a  certain  dead  person  whom  the  medium  has 
never  met.  In  the  experiments  in  which  I  took  part 
the  alleged  communicator  had  been  known  intimately 
by  the  other  sitter,  and  not  at  all  by  myself;  so  that  I 
had  to  take  his  word  for  the  resemblances  between  the 
"personal  control"  and  the  alleged  communicator.  I 
see,  however,  no  special  reason  to  doubt  that  the 
phenomenon  in  question  sometimes  does  happen.  Let 
us  take  it  as  a  hypothesis  that  it  does.  The  most 
plausible  way  to  explain  such  phenomena  would  be  to 
suppose  that  a  set  of  traces,  which  originated  in  the 
mind  or  body  of  a  dead  person,  can  persist  for  a  while 
after  the  destruction  of  all  that  is  recognisable  of  the 
body  ;  and  that  this  set  of  traces  is  capable  of  affecting 
in  a  marked  way  the  speech  and  bodily  behaviour  of  an 
entranced  medium  under  specially  favourable  condi- 
tions. Such  traces  would  have  to  be  counted  as 
belonging  to  the  Mnemic  Mass  of  the  dead  person,  if 
we  count  by  origin  ;  and  as  belonging  to  the  Mnemic 
Mass  of  the  medium,  if  we  count  by  effects. 


396  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

The  upshot  of  this  discussion  is  that  the  Total  Mnemic 
Mass  almost  certainly  does  contain  important  sub- 
groups specially  correlated  with  various  recognisably 
different  human  minds  and  bodies.  But  we  must 
recognise  that,  since  there  are  several  equally  reason- 
able ways  of  grouping  which  lead  to  different  results, 
any  such  phrase  as  "Smith's  Unconscious"  is  highly 
ambiguous  until  the  precise  method  of  selection  adopted 
has  been  clearly  stated.  And  we  must  beware  of 
assuming  either  (a)  that  a/l  the  contents  of  the  Total 
Mnemic  Mass  fall  into  one  or  other  of  such  groups  ;  or 
(d)  that  every  pair  of  such  groups  are  mutually  exclusive, 
so  as  to  have  no  traces  in  common  ;  or  (c)  that  there 
may  not  be  important  bigger  groups  which  include 
several  of  those  smaller  masses  which  are  specially 
correlated  with  each  individual  human  mind  or  body. 
For  there  are  abnormal  phenomena,  which  cannot  safely 
be  ignored,  which,  between  them,  cast  doubt  on  all  these 
assumptions. 

Co-consciousness. — We  know  that  certain  personalities 
claim,  not  merely  to  alternate  with  others  in  controlling 
a  single  human  organism,  but  also  to  be  co-conscious 
with  the  rest.  It  is  no  part  of  my  present  business  to 
discuss  the  alleged  evidence  for  co-consciousness  ;  but, 
for  the  sake  of  completeness,  I  must  try  to  define  what 
"co-consciousness"  would  mean.  Let  us  suppose  that 
a  certain  body  B  is  controlled  in  turn  by  two  personali- 
ties Bj  and  Bg ;  and  that  B^  claims  to  be  co-conscious 
with  Bo-  (So  far  as  I  know,  a  claim  to  reciprocal  co- 
consciousness  is  never  made.)  This  involves  making 
one  or  more  of  the  three  following  demands  on  our 
belief,  (i)  That  certain  stimuli  which  act  on  the  body 
B  when  the  mind  Eg  is  in  control  of  it  produce  mental 
events  which  are  not  literally  owned  by  Bg  and  are 
literally  owned  by  B^.  Of  such  events  Bg  will  not  have 
even  simultaneous  undiscriminating  awareness,  and  B^ 
will  have  at  least  this  kind  of  awareness,  (ii)  That 
certain  stimuli  which  act  on  the  common  body  when  Bg 


THE   TERM    "UNCONSCIOUS"  397 

is  in  control  produce  either  (a)  two  very  similar  experi- 
ences, one  of  which  is  owned  by  Bj  and  the  other  by  B.,  ; 
or  (d)  produce  a  single  experience  which  is  owned  by 
both  of  them.  If  we  call  these  "  common  experiences  ", 
it  may  be  that  Bj  introspectively  discriminates  some  of 
the  common  experiences  which  Bg  does  not,  and  con- 
versely, (iii)  That  B^  has  some  kind  of  discrhninating 
awareness  of  certain  mental  events  which  are  owned  by 
Bg  and  not  by  B^  itself.  Sally  Beauchamp  seems  to 
have  made  all  these  claims. 

I  do  not  think  that  there  is  anything  wildly  paradoxical 
in  the  notion  of  co-consciousness  as  such.  No  doubt  it 
is  extremely  hard  to  prove  that  it  is  a  fact ;  but  it  does 
not  seem  to  me  to  be  antecedently  improbable,  as  many 
people  think.  We  commonly  identify  the  mind  which 
sleeps  and  dreams  with  the  waking  mind.  In  so  far 
as  this  is  legitimate  it  is  certain  that  what  I  call  "  my 
mind  "  exists  and  has  experiences  at  times  when  it  is 
not  controlling  my  body.  Hence  there  is  nothing  ex- 
travagantly unfamiliar  in  the  notion  of  a  mind,  which 
sometimes  controls  a  body,  literally  existing  and  having 
experiences  at  times  when  it  is  not  doing  this.  Of 
course  one  important  difference  between  a  co-conscious 
personality,  like  Sally,  and  our  minds  when  asleep  and 
dreaming  is  that,  when  Sally  is  not  controlling  the 
body,  another  mind  is  doing  so  ;  whilst,  when  we  are 
asleep  and  dreaming,  no  mind  is  controlling  our  body. 
But,  if  this  were  the  only  difference,  it  would  not  be 
very  important.  For  it  is  admitted  that  there  are  several 
distinct  personalities  which  control  the  Beauchamp  body 
alternately  ;  and  the  only  question  is  whether  one  of 
these  persists  and  goes  on  having  experiences  when  the 
control  of  the  body  has  been  taken  over  by  one  of  the 
other  personalities.  Granted  the  plurality  of  person- 
alities, the  analogy  to  the  normal  dreaming  self  is 
enough  to  make  this  possibility  quite  intelligible. 

The  real  difficulties  are  over  the  second  and  third 
claims.     We  have  very  little  analogy  in   ordinary  life 


398  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

to  the  alleged  common  ownership  of  certain  experiences 
by  two    minds.     And    we    have   very  little  analogy  in 
normal  life  to  the  alleged  direct  knowledge  by  one  mind 
of  experiences  which  belong  to  another  mind  and  not 
to  itself.      Let  us  first  consider  the  claim  to   common 
ownership  of  certain  experiences.     I  do  not  think  that 
there  is  any  insuperable  a  priori  objection  to  this,  for  it 
can  easily  be  reconciled  with  either  of  the  three  standard 
theories  of  the  structure  of  minds.     These  are  the  Pure 
j    Ego  theory  ;  the  view  that  a  mind  is  a  peculiar  com- 
\s,^      I   plex  of  interrelated  simultaneous  and  successive  mental 
J- X,  >,  ^        j  events;  and  the  view  that  the  mind  is  a  peculiar  com- 
0^     \         (plex  of  interrelated  non-mental  objects.     On  the  Pure 
^^  \Ego  theory  an  experience  would  be  a  complex  consisting 

of  a  Pure  Ego  and  an  object  related  in  some  character- 
istic way.  Now,  if  there  be  Pure  Egos  at  all,  I  know 
of  no  reason  why  there  should  be  one  and  only  one 
of  them  connected  with  each  human  body  at  a  time. 
Suppose  that  there  were  two  connected  with  the  Beau- 
champ  body.  To  say  that  Sally  and  Miss  Beauchamp 
had  certain  experiences  in  common  would  simply  mean 
that  there  are  certain  objects  to  which  the  Sally  ego  and 
the  Miss  Beauchamp  ego  stood  at  the  same  time  in  the 
same  kind  of  relation.  If  the  Pure  Ego  theory  be  true, 
it  must  sometimes  happen  that  two  Pure  Egos,  con- 
nected with  different  bodies,  stand  at  once  in  the  same 
kind  of  relation  to  the  same  object.  And,  if  this  be  so, 
there  is  no  antecedent  improbability  that  the  same  thing 
should  happen  when  the  two  Egos  are  connected  with 
the  same  body. 

It  is  still  easier  to  reconcile  the  claim  to  common 
experiences  with  the  view  that  a  mind  is  a  complex  of 
suitably  interrelated  mental  events.  A  simple  geo- 
metrical analogy  will  make  this  perfectly  clear.  Let  us 
represent  mental  events  by  points.  And  let  us  represent 
the  relations  which  bind  a  number  of  mental  events  into 
a  single  mind  by  putting  a  number  of  points  on  the 
same  ellipse.     A  pair  of  ellipses  can  cut  each  other  at 


THE  TERM   "UNCONSCIOUS"  399 

four  points.  If  one  of  these  ellipses  represents  Sally's 
mind  and  the  other  represents  Miss  Beauchamp's  mind, 
the  four  points  in  which  the  two  ellipses  cut  each  other 
will  represent  four  experiences  which  are  owned  in 
common  by  Sally  and  Miss  Beauchamp.  It  is  evident 
that  the  claim  to  common  experiences  can  be  reconciled 
by  the  same  method  with  the  view  that  the  mind  is  a 
complex  of  characteristically  interrelated  objects.  We 
have  merely  to  let  the  points  stand  for  objects,  instead 
of  letting  them  stand  for  experiences  ;  and  the  same 
diagram  will  represent  the  alleged  facts  on  this  theory 
about  the  structure  of  the  mind.  (Of  course  it  is  also 
possible  that  the  "  common  experiences  "  are  really  two 
different  experiences,  one  belonging  to  one  mind  and 
one  to  the  other,  and  that  their  "community"  merely 
consists  in  the  fact  that  they  are  very  much  alike  and 
are  produced  simultaneously  in  the  two  minds  by  a 
common  external  cause.  On  that  hypothesis  there  is 
even  less  difficulty  in  admitting  the  possibility  of 
"common  experiences".) 

It  remains  to  consider  Sally's  claim  to  some  kind  of 
direct  knowledge  of  experiences  which  were  owned  by 
other  personalities  and  not  by  herself.  Really,  she  pro- 
fessed to  have  two  very  different  kinds  of  knowledge  of 
such  experiences,  both  of  which  fall  under  the  present 
heading,  {a)  She  alleged  that  she  could  get  to  know 
isolated  experiences  of  the  personality  B^  by  a  special 
method  which  resembled  crystal-gazing.  Of  the  rest  of 
B^'s  experiences  she  was  wholly  ignorant,  {b)  On  the 
other  hand,  Sally  claimed  to  be  aware,  without  any 
special  effort  except  that  of  attention,  of  whole  masses 
of  experience  which  belonged  to  Miss  Beauchamp  and 
not  to  herself.  Thus,  when  Miss  Beauchamp  was 
ill  and  somewhat  light-headed,  Sally  claims  to  have 
been  aware  of  illusory  perceptions  in  Miss  Beauchamp's 
mind  and  of  the  fear  which  these  engendered  in  Miss 
Beauchamp.  Sally  herself  did  not  share  the  illusions  or 
the  fear,    though  she  was  aware  of  the  objects  in  the 


400  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

room,  which  Miss  Beauchamp  was  misperceiving  and 
consequently  fearing. 

Now  I  feel  no  kind  of  a  priori  difficulty  about  the 
first  kind  of  knowledge.  It  is  closely  analogous  to 
ordinary  telepathy  ;  and,  on  her  own  showing,  Sally 
was  throwing  herself  into  a  state  which  is  known  to  be 
favourable  to  telepathy  when  she  got  this  kind  of  know- 
ledge of  isolated  events  in  B/s  mental  history.  There 
is  no  doubt  of  the  reality  of  telepathy  between  minds 
which  animate  differe?it  bodies  ;  and  it  is  easier  rather 
than  harder  to  conceive  of  telepathy  taking  place  between 
two  minds  which  animate  the  same  body.  The  real 
difficulty  is  over  the  second  kind  of  alleged  knowledge. 
With  us  introspective  discrimination  can  be  applied 
only  to  mental  events  which  we  own  and  of  which  we 
have  simultaneous  undiscriminating  awareness.  Sally's 
claim  practically  amounts  to  asserting  that  she  could 
introspect  experiences  which  she  did  not  own  and  which 
Miss  Beauchamp  did  own,  just  as  we  can  introspect  our 
own  experiences.  As  we  have  no  analogy  to  this  power 
anywhere  in  normal  mental  life,  it  must  be  regarded  as 
antecedently  improbable  that  it  exists  ;  though  this  does 
not  of  course  prove  that  it  cannot  exist. 

The  upshot  of  the  matter  is  that,  whether  there  be 
enough  empirical  evidence  for  co-consciousness  or  not, 
it  ought  not  to  be  dismissed  a  priori  as  antecedently 
too  improbable  to  be  worth  consideration.  Three  out 
of  four  of  Sally's  claims  have  enough  analogy  to 
admitted  facts,  and  are  easy  enough  to  reconcile  with 
current  theories,  to  give  them  a  reasonable  antecedent 
probability. 


CHAPTER   IX 

The  Alleged  Evidence  for  Unconscious  Mental 
Events  and  Processes 

In  the  last  chapter  I  pointed  out  a  number  of  non-literal 
senses  of  the  phrase  "  unconscious  mental  events",  and 
I  tried  to  give  a  sufficient  description  of  literally  un- 
conscious mental  events.  Now  there  are  a  number  of 
well-known  facts,  and  of  familiar  arguments  based  on 
these  facts,  which  profess  to  prove  the  existence  of 
''unconscious  mental  events".  Owing  to  the  ambiguities 
of  this  phrase  it  is  uncertain  in  what  sense,  if  any,  these 
arguments  do  prove  the  existence  of  "unconscious 
mental  events".  In  particular  it  is  uncertain  whether 
they  have  any  tendency  to  prove  the  existence  of 
Tiferally  unconscious  mental  events,  as  described  by  us 
in  the  last  Chapter.  In  the  present  Chapter  I  propose 
"to  consider  some  of  the  most  familiar  of  these  arguments, 
and  to  discuss  what  precisely,  if  anything,  they  prove. 

Before  I  begin  I  want  to  point  out  the  difference 
between  a  sufficient  description  of  an  entity  and  a  test 
for  the  existence  of  such  an  entity.  We  give  a  sufficient 
description  of  anything  when  we  state  a  set  of  properties 
which  together  characterise  it  and  do  not  all  char- 
acterise anything  else.  But  it  may  be  that  some  of 
the  properties  mentioned  in  a  sufficient  description 
are  such  that  it  is  difficult  or  impossible  to  tell  by 
direct  inspection  whether  they  be  or  be  not  present 
in  a  particular  case.  Now  it  may  be  that  there  are 
other  properties  whose  presence  or  absence  can  be 
readily  detected  by  direct  inspection.  And  it  may  be 
that  their  presence  or  absence  involves  the  presence  or 

^01  2   C 


402  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

absence  respectively  of  those  features  in  the  sufficient 
description  which  cannot  be  directly  inspected.  If  so, 
these  properties  constitute  a  test  for  the  entity  to  which 
the  description  applies.  Now  it  is  evidently  difficult  or 
impossible  to  know  by  direct  inspection  or  memory 
whether  we  formerly  had  an  experience  which  we  could 
not  at  the  time  have  introspectively  discriminated.  The 
only  test  that  we  can  well  apply  is  certain  facts  about 
our  present  experiences,  which  are  supposed  to  involve 
the  past  existence  of  an  experience  which  we  could  not 
at  the  time  have  introspectively  discriminated.  Such 
tests  always  assume  the  truth  of  some  proposition  con- 
necting the  diagnostic  properties  with  those  mentioned 
in  the  description  ;  and  any  doubt  about  these  proposi- 
tions throws  doubt  on  the  test. 

Arguments  for  "  Unconscious  Sensations."  There  are 
certain  facts,  and  certain  arguments  from  them,  which 
have  been  used  since  Leibniz's  time  to  prove  the 
existence  of  "unconscious  sensations".  Arguments 
about  the  roaring  of  the  sea,  the  stopping  of  clocks,  and 
so  on,  are  what  I  have  in  mind  ;  and  they  will  be 
familiar  to  every  one.  Now,  there  are  certain  general 
remarks  which  apply  to  all  such  arguments,  and  throw 
grave  doubt  on  their  relevance  to  prove  the  existence  of 
unconscious  mental  events. 

It  will  be  admitted,  I  think,  that  the  people  who  have 
used  these  arguments  have  not  as  a  rule  drawn  any 
clear  distinction  between  sensations  and  sensa.  If  they 
have  done  this,  they  have,  nevertheless,  generally 
assumed  that  sensa  are  themselves  mental  events  and 
experiences  of  the  person  who  senses  them.  And,  even 
if  they  have  distinguished  between  sensations  and 
sensa,  and  have  denied  that  sensa  are  mental  events 
owned  by  the  person  who  senses  them,  they  have 
generally  held  that  sensa  are  existentially  dependent  on 
being  sensed  by  a  mind.  I  will  remind  the  reader  that 
by  a  "  sensum  "  I   mean   such  an   event  as  a  coloured 


UNCONSCIOUS   MENTAL   EVENTS 


40; 


patch  or  flash  in  a  visual  field,  or  a  noise.  And  by  a 
''^'  sensation"  I  mean  sucH  a  situation"  as  would  be  ex- 
pressed by  saying:  "This  noise  is  being  sensed". 
~Now"sensa  are  nearly  always  outstanding  parts  or 
differentiations  of  spatially  larger  wholes,  which  I  call 
"sense-fields".  These  in  turn  are  generally  temporal 
parts  of  longer  strands  of  history  which  I  call  "special 
sense-histories".  E.g.,  the  sensum  which  is  a  certain 
coloured  flash  is  generally  an  outstanding  feature  of  a 
visual  sense-field  which  is  a  sensibly  coloured  con- 
tinuum of  coexisting  visual  sensa.  And  this  visual 
sense-field  is  generally  a  short  slice  of  a  longer  whole 
which  is  a  visual  sense-history.  The  reader  will  find  a 
more  elaborate  discussion  of  these  conceptions  in  Part  II 
of  my  Scientific  Thought.  Now,  what  the  arguments 
under  discussion  prove,  if  they  prove  anything,  is  the 
existence  of  undiscriminated  or  undiscriminable  sensa 
in  a  sense-field.  For  instance,  the  argument  about 
the  roaring  of  the  sea  tries  to  show  that  some  auditory 
fields  which  seem  quite  homogeneous  must  yet  be 
highly  differentiated  into  distinct  but  undiscriminable 
noises.  Now  the  relevance  of  such  a  conclusion  to  the 
existence  of  unconscious  mental  events  depends  very 
much  on  the  view  that  we  take  about  the  nature  of 
sensa. 

(i)  If  we  hold  that  sensa  are  themselves  mental  events, 
an  undiscriminable  sensum  will  be,  ipso  facto,  an  undis- 
criminable mental  event,  i.e.,  an  unconscious  mental 
event  as  described  above.  But,  personally,  I  see  no 
ground  whatever  for  thinking  that  a  noise  or  a  coloured 
patch  in  a  visual  field  is  itself  a  mental  event,  though 
of  course  the  total  situation  which  contains  such  an 
object  as  its  objective  constituent  is  a  mental  event. 

(2)  It  might  be  held  that  noises  and  coloured  patches, 
though  not  themselves  mental  events,  can  exist  only  as 
objective  constituents  of  mental  situations.  This  is  a 
more  plausible  view,  though  I  do  not  think  that  there 
are  any  conclusive   arguments   for   it.      Now   it  might 


¥ 


404  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

seem  that,  if  this  were  true,  the  existence  of  undis- 
criminable  sensa  would  involve  the  existence  of  un- 
discriminable,  and  therefore  unconscious,  mental  events. 
This,  however,  need  be  true  only  in  a  very  trivial 
sense.  Even  if  no  sensum  can  exist  except  as  objective 
constituent  of  a  situation  which  also  contains  a  non- 
objective  constituent  suitably  related  to  the  sensum,  it 
does  not  follow  that  each  different  sensum  needs  a 
different  non-objective  factor  and  a  different  particular 
instance  of  this  relation.  Sensa  are  simply  differ- 
entiated parts  of  a  larger  whole  of  the  same  kind  as 
themselves,  viz.,  a  sense-field.  If  this  exists,  all  its 
differentiations  exist  ipso  facto.  If  this  whole  be  sensed, 
all  its  differentiations  are  thereby  sensed  ;  just  as  the 
fact  that  Cambridge  is  north  of  London  involves  the 
fact  that  Trinity  College  is  north  of  London.  Thus, 
even  if  all  sensa  have  to  be  sensed  in  order  to  exist, 
and  even  if  there  be  undiscriminable  sensa,  there  is  no 
need  to  assume  any  independent  mental  event  beside 
the  sensation  of  the  whole  field.  And  this  is  a  literally 
conscious  experience,  since  it  would  be  perfectly  easy 
to  discriminate  it  introspectively  if  we  wanted  to. 

(3)  Lastly,  if,  as  I  think  most  likely,  sensa  be  neither 
themselves  mental  events  nor  dependent  for  their  exist- 
ence on  being  objective  constituents  of  mental  events, 
it  is  plain  that  the  existence  of  undiscriminable  sensa 
would  have  no  tendency  to  prove  the  existence  of  un- 
discriminable experiences.  We  can  say  at  once  then  that 
the  arguments  under  consideration  are  wholly  irrelevant 
to  the  existence  of  literally  unconscious  experiences, 
unless  we  accept  the  extreme  view  that  noises,  coloured 
patches,  etc.,  are  themselves  mental  events.  It  may, 
however,  be  of  interest  to  glance  at  the  arguments  in 
order  to  see  whether  they  prove  the  existence  even  of 
undiscriminable  sensa. 

Arguments  for  Undiscriminable  Sensa.  (i)  Let  us 
begin  with  the  familiar  argument  about  the  stopping 
clock.      It  is  a  fact  that  we  may  be  sitting  in  a  room  in 


UNCONSCIOUS  MENTAL   EVENTS  405 

which  a  clock  is  ticking  ;  and  that,  if  we  be  suddenly 
asked  by  ourselves  or  by  another  whether  the  clock  has 
been  going,  we  cannot  at  once  answer.  But,  if  the 
clock  should  stop,  we  are  liable  to  look  up  and  say  : 
"Why,  the  clock  has  stopped!"  This  is  alleged  to 
prove  that  we  must  have  been  "sub-consciously  hear- 
ing" the  ticking  of  the  clock.  What  do  such  facts 
really  suggest? 

(i)  The  negative  part,  the  fact  that  we  could  not  say 
off-hand  whether  the  clock  has  been  going  or  not, 
suggests  that  we  did  not  in  fact  discriminate  the  ticking 
noise  if  it  did  in  fact  form  part  of  our  earlier  auditory 
fields.  If  we  had  been  discriminating  it,  we  should 
almost  certainly  be  able  to  remember  it.  (ii)  The 
positive  part,  the  fact  that,  when  the  clock  does  stop, 
our  attention  is  arrested,  does  suggest  that  there  is 
some  difference  or  other  between  our  total  sense-field 
just  before  and  just  after  the  stoppage.  Now,  what  the 
argument  would  need  to  prove  is  the  following  two 
propositions,  (i)  That  our  earlier  fields  did  contain 
ticking  noises  ;  and  (ii)  that  these  ticking  noises  were 
not  merely  undiscriminated  but  were  undiscriminable. 
Now  it  seems  to  me  that  the  argument  fails  on  both 
counts.  If  there  were  ticking  noises  in  our  earlier  fields, 
there  seems  to  be  no  reason  to  suppose  that  we  could  not 
have  discriminated  them  if  we  had  tried.  All  that  we 
can  say  is  that  we  did  not  in  fact  discriminate  them, 
because  we  were  attending  to  other  things  such  as  an 
interesting  book.  But  it  does  not  seem  to  me  that  the 
argument  proves  that  there  were  ticking  noises  at  all 
in  our  earlier  auditory  fields.  The  fact  that  we  notice 
a  difference  when  the  clock  stops  needs  for  its  explana- 
tion no  other  assumption  except  that,  while  the  clock 
is  going,  it  produces  some  modification  somewhere  in 
our  total  sense-object,  which  ceases  when  the  clock 
stops.  This  modification  might  not  be  auditory  at  all  ;  \ 
it  might  be  simply  a  vague  toning  of  our  general  bodily  J 
feeling.     And,  even  if  it  be  auditory,  it  need  not  take 


4o6  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

the  form  of  a  ticking  noise.  It  might  be  simply  a 
vague  toning  of  our  auditory  field  as  a  whole. 

It  might  be  objected  that,  if  this  be  all,  why  do  we 
at  once  associate  the  change  with  the  clock  and  say  that 
it  has  stopped?  To  this  I  answer  in  the  first  place  that 
it  is  doubtful  whether  we  do  this  as  a  rule.  It  seems 
more  accurate  to  say  that  we  notice  a  difference,  wonder 
what  it  is,  look  about,  and  finally  fix  the  responsibility 
on  the  clock.  But,  even  if  we  do  sometimes  immedi- 
ately attribute  the  change  to  the  stopping  of  the  clock, 
this  can  be  explained  easily  without  assuming  that  there 
have  been  undiscriminated  ticking  noises  in  our  earlier 
auditory  fields.  Suppose  (to  take  the  least  favourable 
case)  that  the  ticking  of  the  clock  simply  produced  a  vague 
modification  of  our  general  bodil}^  feeling.  This  modi- 
fication must  often  in  the  past  have  been  accompanied 
by  auditory  fields  in  which  ticking  existed  and  was  dis- 
criminated and  ascribed  to  the  clock.  Hence  this  kind 
of  modification  will  have  come  to  suggest  by  association 
ticking  and  clocks.  Its  cessation  would  therefore  tend 
to  make  us  look  at  the  clock  and  ascribe  the  change 
to  it.  Thus,  while  I  have  no  a  priori  objection  to  the 
possibility  of  undiscriminable  sensa  in  sense-fields  which 
we  sense  as  wholes,  I  do  not  think  that  this  argument 
has  any  strong  tendency  to  prove  that  they  exist. 

(2)  I  will  now  consider  the  argument  about  the  waves 
of  the  sea.  I  will  put  it  in  a  perfectly  general  form. 
When  a  number  of  similar  physical  stimuli  are  acting 
together  we  may  be  aware  of  a  perfectly  noticeable 
and  characteristic  sensum.  When  one  of  them  acts 
separately,  or  only  a  few  of  them  together,  we  may 
be  unable  to  notice  any  sensum  of  the  kind.  It  is 
argued  that  each  of  them  must  produce  its  own  special 
sensum,  and  that  each  of  these  sensa  must  be  undis- 
criminable. 

This  is  an  atrocious  argument.  It  assumes  that  the 
effect  of  a  complex  cause  must  be  the  sum  of  the  effects 
which  each  of  its  parts  would  produce  if  acting  separ- 


UNCONSCIOUS   MENTAL  EVENTS  407 

ately.  As  a  general  proposition  about  causation  there 
is  nothing  to  be  said  for  this.  A  very  simple  illustration 
of  its  folly  is  the  following.  The  hearing  of  a  certain 
note  is  physically  conditioned  by  a  series  of  compres- 
sions and  rarefactions  in  the  air  which  follow  each  other 
with  a  certain  frequency.  Now  each  separate  compres- 
sion or  rarefaction  is  physically  a  part  of  this  total  cause. 
Will  it  be  said  that  the  note  heard  is  the  sum  of  the 
undiscriminable  "  notes  "  due  to  each  separate  compres- 
sion and  rarefaction?  And,  if  so,  how  will  you  account 
for  the  fact  that  differences  of  note  depend  on  the 
characteristic  intervals  between  successive  compressions 
or  rarefactions? 

Even  if  we  accepted  this  general  principle  about 
causation,  it  would  be  difficult  to  appl}^  it  to  the  case 
of  sounds.  Sounds  have  intensive  magnitude,  and  it  is 
not  easy  to  attach  a  meaning  to  the  statement  that  loud 
sounds  are  the  sum  of  a  number  of  coexisting  soft 
sounds.  It  might  be  said,  however,  that  a  meaning 
can  be  given  to  this  statement  by  considering  the  case 
of  an  orchestra ;  and  that  this  example  favours  the 
original  argument.  Let  us  consider  this  point.  It  is 
true  that,  in  listening  to  an  orchestra,  I  do  not  as  a  rule 
discriminate  the  sounds  due  to  the  various  instruments. 
But  I  can  do  so,  if  I  choose  to  attend.  Here  of  course 
each  of  the  instruments  would  produce  a  noticeable  and 
characteristic  sound  if  played  by  itself.  Now  it  might 
be  said:  "The  sound  of  the  orchestra  is  the  sum  of 
the  sounds  of  the  separate  instruments ;  and  these 
separate  sounds  can  be  discriminated,  although  as  a 
rule  they  are  not.  When  we  say  that  the  noise  pro- 
duced by  a  sufficient  number  of  separately  inaudible 
stimuli  is  the  sum  of  the  undiscriminable  noises  due  to 
each  of  them,  we  mean  that  the  total  noise  is  related  to 
these  undiscriminable  noises  as  the  sound  of  an  orchestra 
is  related  to  the  discriminable  sounds  made  by  the 
separate  instruments.  And  this  is  intelligible  ;  because, 
in  the  case  of  the  orchestra,  you  can  both  hear  the  whole 


4o8  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

and  discriminate  the  parts."     I  think  that  it  would  be 
better  to  drop  the  word  "sum"  and  to  substitute  the 
word  "pattern".      The  sound  of  the  orchestra  might 
be  called  a  "pattern  woven  from"  the  sounds  of  the 
separate  instruments  ;  and,  in  this  case,  we  can  attend 
either  to  the  pattern  as  a  whole  or  to  the  elements  out 
of  which  it  is  woven.     The  argument  would  then  ask 
us  to  believe  that  a  loud  discriminable  noise,  like  the 
roaring  of  the  sea,  is  a  pattern  woven  out  of  the  many 
soft   and    separately  indiscriminable   noises  due  to  the 
separate  waves.     In  this  case,  it  would  be  said,  you  can 
attend  to  the  pattern  as  a  whole  but  not  to  the  elements 
out  of  which  it  is  woven.     Put  in  this  way  the  argument 
is  at  least  intelligible.     An  intermediate  case  between 
that  contemplated  by  the  argument  and  the  example  of 
the  orchestra  would  be  the  following.     We  might  have 
a  number  of  precisely  similar  stimuli,  e.g.,  fog-horns, 
each  of  which  separately  would  give  rise  to  a  noticeable 
sound.     If  they  were  to  blow  together  we  should  be 
aware  of  a  louder  but  qualitatively  similar  sound.     Now, 
can  we  regard  the  noise  which  we  hear  when  all  these 
fog-horns  are  blowing  together  as  a  pattern  woven  out 
of  the  sounds  which  each  of  the  fog-horns  would  make 
if  it  were  blowing  separately,  just  as  we  regard  a  sym- 
phony as  a  pattern  woven  out  of  the  qualitatively  dis- 
similar sounds  of  the  separate  instruments?     If  so,  we 
might  fairly  argue    by  analogy  that  the  sound  of  the 
sea  is  a  pattern  woven  from  a  number  of  qualitatively 
similar  but  separately  inaudible  sounds  due  to  each  wave. 
The   difficulty   in   the   way  of  this   argument   is  the 
following.     It  seems  to  me  very  doubtful  whether  the 
noises  due  to  the  separate  fog-horns  do  exist  within  the 
noise  made  by  all  the  fog-horns   together.     I    do    not 
think  that  we  could  discriminate  these  supposed  separate 
noises,  as  we  can  discriminate  the  noises  of  the  various 
instruments  in   the  symphony.     And  this    is  certainly 
not  because  of  their  intrinsic  faintness,  since  any  one 
of  them  could  be  heard  with  perfect  ease  if  it  happened 


UNCONSCIOUS   MENTAL  EVENTS  409 

alone  or  against  a  qualitatively  different  background  of 
sound.  Thus  it  seems  uncertain  whether  we  have  here 
an  instance  of  a  loud  noise  being  a  pattern  woven  out 
of  a  number  of  softer  noises  ;  for  it  is  doubtful  whether 
the  softer  noises  which  would  be  made  by  each  fog- 
horn if  it  were  blowing  separately  exist  literally  within 
the  louder  noise  made  by  all  the  fog-horns  blowing 
together.  It  seems  just  as  reasonable  to  hold  that 
we  have  here  a  homogeneous  auditory  field,  within 
which  no  sensa  are  discriminable  because  there  are 
none  to  be  discriminated.  If  this  be  so,  the  argument 
by  analogy  to  prove  that  the  noise  of  the  sea  is  a 
pattern  woven  out  of  the  faint  undiscriminable  sounds 
due  to  each  wave,  breaks  down.  Once  again  I  have 
no  a  priori  objection  to  the  conclusion  ;  I  maintain  only 
that  the  argument  fails  to  prove  it. 

(3)  Before  ending  the  present  subsection  I  wish  to 
point  out  the  complete  irrelevance  of  Stumpfs  Argu- 
ment for  the  present  purpose.  Stumpfs  argument  is 
perfectly  valid  ;  and  it  is  quite  true  that  it  does  not,  as 
some  of  its  critics  have  alleged,  depend  upon  doubtful 
assumptions  about  the  connexion  between  sensations 
and  physiological  stimuli.  Stumpf  might  (and,  for  all 
I  know,  does)  use  his  argument  to  the  angels  in 
Heaven,  who  have  no  bodies.  It  proves  with  almost 
complete  certainty  that  some  pairs  of  sensa,  which 
seem  to  us  to  be  exactly  alike  in  quality  or  intensity, 
must  really  differ  in  these  respects.  But,  even  if 
sensa  be  experiences,  no  one  has  ever  supposed  that 
the  qualities  or  intensities  of  sensa  or  the  relations 
of  identity  or  difference  between  their  qualities  or 
intensities  are  experiences.  The  unlikeness  of  two 
auditory  sensa  is  not  a  third  auditory  sensum  or  any 
kind  of  sensum  ;  it  is  a  relation.  Stumpfs  argument 
merely  establishes  the  fact  that  we  can  make  mistakes 
about  the  relations  of  qualitative  or  intensive  likeness 
between  sensa  which  we  sense  ;  just  as  we  may  make 
mistakes  about  the  likeness  or  unlikeness  of  anything 


410  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

else.  This  has  no  tendency  to  prove  the  existence  of 
unconscious  mental  events  in  any  sense  whatever ;  ex- 
cept on  two  assumptions,  one  of  which  is  probably 
false  and  the  other  of  which  is  absurd.  The  first  of 
these  is  that  sensa  are  experiences  owned  by  the  mind 
which  senses  them.  The  second  is  that,  in  some  sense, 
we  must,  ipso  facto,  know  all  the  qualities  and  relations 
of  our  experiences  merely  because  they  are  ours. 
Stumpf  shows  that  I  often  judge  sensum  A  to  be 
exactly  like  sensum  B,  when  in  fact  they  cannot  be 
exactly  alike.  On  the  two  assumptions  just  stated  I 
must  in  some  sense  know  that  A  and  B  are  not  exactly 
alike  if  they  be  not  so  in  fact.  Thus,  with  these  two 
assumptions,  Stumpf's  argument  would  prove  the  exist- 
ence of  unconscious  knowledge  about  the  relations  of 
sensa,  which  conflicts  with  my  co7iscious  beliefs  about  the 
same  subject.  It  would  not  prove  the  existence  of  un- 
conscious sensations  or  of  undiscriminated  sensa,  even  on 
these  assumptions.  And,  whatever  one  may  think  of 
the  first  assumption,  the  second  is  too  silly  to  merit  a 
moment's  consideration. 

Arguments  for  "  Unconscious  Perceptions  ".  We  can 
sometimes  be  pretty  sure,  on  reflexion  that,  z/"we  perceived 
a  certain  object  on  a  certain  occasion,  this  perception 
must  have  been  unconscious,  at  least  relatively  to  us. 
Now  the  circumstances  may  have  been  such  that  it  would 
be  surprising  if  no  preception  had  existed  at  the  time. 
Finally,  we  may  afterwards  have  dreams,  or  say  and  do 
things  in  ordinary  life  or  under  hypnosis  or  psycho- 
analysis, which  would  be  most  naturally  explained  by 
the  supposition  that  a  perception  did  exist  at  the  time. 
It  will  be  noticed  that,  in  order  to  establish  the  existence 
of  an  unconscious,  perception  of  a  certain  thing  at  a 
certain  time,  we  must  prove  two  propositions,  one 
positive  and  the  other  negative  :  (i)  We  must  prove 
that  a  perception  of  this  thing  did  exist  at  this  time  ;  and 
(ii)  we  must  prove  that  the  person  who  might  have  been 


UNCONSCIOUS   MENTAL   EVENTS  411 

expected  to  own  this  perception  could  not  have  detected 
it  by  introspection  at  the  time,  even  if  he  had  tried.  To 
prove  the  first  point  there  are  two  main  lines  of  argu- 
ment. The  first  is  that  the  general  situation  at  the  time 
was  such  that  a  perception  of  this  thing  might  reason- 
ably have  been  expected  to  happen  then.  The  second 
is  that  some  of  the  later  experiences  and  acts  of  the 
person  are  such  as  would  be  likely  to  follow  if  he  had 
perceived  this  thing,  and  not  otherwise.  To  prove  the 
second  point  we  have  again  two  main  lines  of  argument. 
The  first  is  that  the  person,  not  only  does  not  remember 
^erceivi'nor  the  thing,  but  also  remembers  not perceivmg  \t. 
(I  need  scarcely  say  that  these  are  two  very  different 
experiences.)  The  second  is  that  some  of  the  later  ex- 
periences and  acts  of  the  person  are  such  as  would  be 
likely  to  follow  if  he  had  not  perceived  the  thing,  and 
would  be  unlikely  to  follow  if  he  had  perceived  it. 

A  simple  example  would  be  one  that  we  have  already 
used,  viz.,  looking  for  something,  failing  to  find  it,  and 
yet  discovering  afterwards  that  it  had  been  staring  one 
in  the  face  in  the  very  drawer  in  which  we  have  been 
looking.  The  argument  would  then  run  as  follows  : 
"  If  I  had  recognised  at  the  time  that  I  was  perceiving 
the  object,  I  should  certainly  have  found  it.  As  I  did 
not  find  it,  it  seems  reasonable  to  suppose  either  that  I 
was  not  perceiving  it  at  all  or  that,  if  I  was,  this  per- 
ception was  not  noticed  by  me.  Now,  if  it  existed,  it  is 
hardly  likely  to  have  escaped  my  notice  by  mere  in- 
advertence ;  for  this  was  the  very  experience  which  I 
was  wanting  and  expecting  at  the  time.  Hence  it  seems 
probable  that,  if  there  was  a  perception  of  this  object, 
and  if  it  was  owned  by  me,  it  was  for  some  reason  incap- 
able of  being  introspectively  discriminated  by  me  at  the 
time.  Therefore,  we  must  say  either  that  there  was  no 
perception  of  the  object  at  all  ;  or  that  it  was  not  owned 
by  me  ;  or  that  it  was  owned  by  me  but  could  not  have 
been  introspectively  discriminated  by  me  at  the  time. 
If  it  was  an  experience  of  mine  at  all  it  must,  therefore, 


412  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

have  been  a  literally  unconscious  experience."  The 
argument  might  then  continue  as  follows  :  "  The  object 
was  in  such  a  position  that  light  from  it  must  have 
affected  the  central  part  of  my  retina  ;  and,  therefore,  it 
is  very  unlikely  that  it  did  not  produce  a  perceptual 
experience  at  alL"  Lastly,  it  might  be  that  in  some 
cases  we  could  add  to  this  presumption  something  further 
of  the  following  kind  :  "  Last  night  I  dreamed  of  the 
object  in  a  certain  place  in  the  drawer ;  and  when  I 
went  this  morning  and  looked  again  there  it  was."  Or 
again:  "I  was  hypnotised  afterwards  and  told  the 
hypnotist  where  this  object  was,  and  he  found  it  there." 
We  should  then  have  a  pretty  strong  case,  superficially 
at  any  rate,  for  the  view  that  I  had  had  a  literally  un- 
conscious perception  of  this  object  when  I  was  looking 
for  it  in  the  drawer. 

Let  us  now  consider  whether  this  case  be  really  so 
strong  as  it  seems  at  first  sight.  I  think  we  may  admit 
that  such  arguments  make  it  highly  probable  that,  if  a 
perception  existed  at  the  time,  it  was  literally  unconscious 
relatively  to  the  mind  which  was  then  controlling  the 
body  at  any  rate.  So  we  may  confine  ourselves  to  the 
question  :  "Is  there  any  reason  to  believe  that  a  per- 
ception of  this  object  existed  at  all  ? "  The  evidence 
which  is  given  for  an  affirmative  answer  to  this  question 
is  derived,  as  I  have  said,  from  the  later  experiences  or 
actions  of  the  observer  and  from  the  general  nature  of 
the  situation  in  which  he  was  placed  at  the  time.  That  is, 
we  know  that  most  people  in  the  situation  in  which  this 
man  was  placed  would  have  had  a  certain  kind  of  experi- 
ence, and  so  we  think  it  likely  that  he  too  must  have  had 
experience  of  this  kind.  And,  again,  we  know  that  people 
can  generally  remember  and  be  affected  only  by  what 
they  have  already  perceived.  So  when  the  man  re- 
members a  certain  past  event  under  hypnotism,  or  when 
he  acts  in  ordinary  life  as  if  he  had  perceived  this  event, 
we  assume  that  he  must  have  perceived  it.  Now  these 
are   of  course   simply   arguments  from  analogy  ;   and. 


UNCONSCIOUS   MENTAL   EVENTS  413 

if  the  facts  can  be  explained  equally  well  in  other  ways, 
they  do  not  carry  much  weight.  Can  the  facts  be 
explained  equally  well  in  other  ways? 

In  the  first  place,  we  must  notice  that  the  occurrence  of 
an  experience  in  the  past  is  never  a  sufficient,  even  if  it 
be  a  necessary,  condition  for  the  occurrence  of  a  memory 
in  the  present.  No  memory  will  arise  unless  a  trace, 
whatever  that  may  be,  has  been  left.  Now,  if  a  trace 
exists,  it  seems  reasonable  to  suppose  that  it  could  give 
rise  to  mnemic  phenomena  even  if  no  experience  had 
accompanied  its  formation.  Whether  you  choose  to  call 
any  of  these  mnemic  phenomena  "memories"  or  not 
will  be  simply  a  matter  of  definition.  I,  therefore,  suggest 
the  following  hypothesis  as  a  possible  explanation  of  the 
facts  with  which  we  are  at  present  dealing.  When  stimuli 
act  on  our  nerves  they  usually  give  rise  to  two  results, 
viz.,  an  experience  E  and  a  trace  T.  But,  under  certain 
circumstances,  only  one  of  these  results  may  happen  ; 
e.g.,  a  trace  may  be  formed,  but  no  mental  event  may 
accompany  its  formation.  If  this  trace  be  afterwards 
excited,  the  resulting  experience  will  be  exactly  or  very 
much  like  a  memory  of  the  experience  E  which  normally 
accompanies  the  formation  of  the  trace  T.  And,  again, 
the  resulting  behaviour  will  be  very  much  like  that 
which  normally  follows  from  an  experience  such  as  E. 
Since  the  stimulus  may  thus  have  two  alternative  effects, 
it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  total  cause  is  of  the 
form  Sxy,  where  S  is  the  stimulus.  Here  S.r  produces 
an  experience,  and  Sjf  produces  a  trace.  We  must 
suppose  that  the  two  factors  x  and  j'  generally  co-operate 
with  each  other,  but  that  under  certain  circumstances 
X  is  inhibited.  We  then  get  a  trace  formed,  but  no 
mental  event  accompanies  it.  It  is  of  course  theo- 
retically possible  that,  under  other  circumstances,  y 
is  inhibited.  We  should  then  get  a  mental  event,  but 
no  trace  would  be  left.  Such  mental  events,  if  they 
exist,  could  never  be  remembered  by  any  means,  and 
could  produce  no  mnemic  effects.     It  seems  to  me  that 


414  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

this  simple  and  quite  plausible  hypothesis  accounts  for 
the  facts  perfectly  well  without  the  assumption  of  un- 
conscious perceptions. 

I  will  now  go  a  little  more  into  detail.  We  must 
remember  that  the  perception  of  a  certain  physical 
object  involves  sensation  together  with  at  least  two 
other  factors.  In  addition  to  sensing  a  certain  field  and 
its  contents  we  must  select  a  certain  sensum  from  the 
rest  of  its  sense-field  ;  and  in  addition  to  this  we  must 
recognise  this  sensum  as  an  appearance  of  a  certain 
physical  object.  We  might,  therefore,  fail  to  find  a 
certain  object  which  we  were  looking  for,  and  which 
was  staring  us  in  the  face,  for  one  of  three  reasons. 
(a)  Because  it  was  producing  no  sensible  appearance  in 
our  sense-field  ;  or  {d)  because  the  sensible  appearance 
which  it  was  producing  was  not  selected  and  dis- 
criminated from  the  rest  of  the  field  ;  or  (<:)  because 
this  particular  sensum  was  not  recognised  by  us  at  the 
time  as  an  appearance  of  the  physical  object  for  which 
we  were  looking.  I  think  it  likely  that  the  second  and 
third  possibilities  are  so  closely  connected  as  to  form  in 
practice  only  a  single  alternative.  What  I  mean  is 
this.  I  think  that  we  select  and  discriminate  certain 
sensa  from  the  rest  of  the  field  largely  because  they 
represent  certain  physical  objects  to  us.  If  a  stimulus 
does  excite  certain  traces  of  past  experiences  we  both 
discriminate  the  sensum  which  it  produces  and  take 
this  sensum  as  an  appearance  of  a  certain  physical 
object.  If  it  fails  to  excite  these  traces  we  do  not  as  a 
rule  select  and  discriminate  this  sensum  from  the  rest 
of  the  field  ;  and  a  fortiori  ^o  not  take  it  as  an  appear- 
ance of  any  particular  physical  object. 

It  seems  to  me  most  likely  that  in  the  cases  under 
discussion  there  really  was  a  sensum  in  the  visual  field, 
which  was  in  fact  an  appearance  of  the  object  that  we 
were  seeking  ;  but  that  for  some  reason  the  traces  which 
would  usually  be  excited  under  such  conditions  were 
not   excited,   or,    if  they  were,   failed  to  produce  their 


UNCONSCIOUS   MENTAL   EVENTS  415 

normal  effect.  This  sensum  was  therefore  not  selected 
and  discriminated  from  the  rest  of  the  field,  and  was 
not  recognised  as  an  appearance  of  the  object  for  which 
we  were  looking.  If  this  be  so,  there  was  no  7cnconscious 
perception,  for  there  was  no  perception  at  all.  But  there 
was  an  undiscriminated,  and  at  the  time  probably  un- 
discriminable,  sensum  in  my  visual  field.  This  leaves 
a  trace  ;  and  afterwards  in  dreams  or  under  hypnosis 
the  excitement  of  this  trace  excites  those  which  failed  to 
operate  on  the  former  occasion.  We  may  then  get 
what  is,  for  all  practical  purposes,  a  memory  of  the 
physical  object  which  we  failed  to  perceive  when  we 
were  searching  for  it.  Or  other  mnemic  results  may 
follow  which  usually  follow  from  actual  perception. 
The  psycho-analysts  have  many  things  of  great  interest 
to  tell  us  about  the  emotional  and  conative  factors 
which  sometimes  prevent  sensations  from  developing 
into  perceptions  by  preventing  the  usual  traces  from 
being  excited  or  by  inhibiting  the  usual  results  of  such 
excitement. 

The  conclusion  of  the  matter  is  that,  while  I  have  no 
a  priori  objection  to  the  existence  of  literally  unconscious 
perceptions,  I  do  not  think  that  the  facts  which  have 
been  brought  forward  to  prove  their  existence  are 
adequate  for  the  purpose.  These  facts  can  be  explained 
quite  as  well  by  another  hypothesis  which  is  at  least 
as  plausible  as  the  hypothesis  of  literally  unconscious 
perceptions. 

Arguments  for  "Unconscious  Emotions."  As  an 
example  of  the  facts  which  have  been  brought  forward 
to  prove  the  existence  of  literally  unconscious  emotions 
I  will  take  the  case  of  Livingstone  and  the  lion. 
Livingstone  tells  us  that  he  remembers  that  he  felt 
neither  fear  nor  pain  while  he  was  in  the  jaws  of  a  lion 
and  had  given  himself  up  for  lost.  There  are  other 
cases  where  men  have  been  in  extremely  dangerous 
situations,  and  remember  that  they  felt  no  fear  at  the 


4i6  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

time.  Yet  afterwards  they  dream  of  the  incident,  and 
the  dream  is  accompanied  by  fear  amounting  to  terror. 
It  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  in  such  cases,  if  the 
emotion  of  fear  existed  at  all  while  the  incident  was 
taking  place,  it  must  have  been  literally  unconscious 
relatively  to  the  agent  at  any  rate.  If  Livingstone's 
memory  be  correct  he  looked  at  the  time  for  the  feeling 
of  fear,  which  he  expected  to  find,  and  was  surprised  to 
notice  that  it  was  absent.  It  is,  therefore,  reasonable  to 
suppose  that,  if  this  emotion  existed  at  all  at  the  time 
it  was  not  merely  unnoticed  by  Livingstone  but  was 
unnoticeable  by  him  at  the  time.  This  argument  would 
not  apply  so  strongly  to  men  who  have  saved  them- 
selves in  dangerous  situations  by  their  own  efforts  and 
resource.  They  must  have  been  attending  intently  to 
external  situations  with  which  they  had  to  deal  promptly 
and  effectively.  They  can,  therefore,  hardly  have  been 
attending  at  the  time  to  their  own  emotions.  When 
they  say  afterwards  that  they  "remember  not  feeling 
fear  "  it  would  probably  be  much  more  accurate  to  say 
that  they  '*do  not  remember  feeling  fear",  which  is  a 
very  different  matter.  In  such  cases  the  emotion,  if  it 
existed  at  all,  was  no  doubt  undiscriminated  ;  but  there 
seems  no  good  reason  to  think  that  it  was  undiscrimin- 
able.  But  this  explanation  will  not  cover  a  case  like 
Livingstone's  ;  for  he  had  ceased  to  struggle  and  had 
given  himself  up  for  lost. 

The  evidence  for  supposing  that  an  emotion  of  fear 
existed  is  twofold.  In  the  first  place,  the  situation  was 
such  that  a  man  might  be  expected  to  feel  fear  in  it. 
Secondly,  the  dreams  and  other  later  experiences  of  the 
agent  are  such  as  might  be  expected  to  be  consequent 
on  a  past  feeling  of  fear.  Now  this  argument  can  be 
dealt  with  in  precisely  the  same  way  as  the  argument 
for  unconscious  perceptions.  I  do  not  think  that  there 
is  the  least  need  to  suppose  that  there  was  an  emo- 
tional experience  at  all  in  Livingstone's  case,  or  even 
that    a    trace    was    produced    of    the    kind    which    an 


UNCONSCIOUS   MENTAL   EVENTS  417 

emotional  experience  generally  leaves.  All  that  we 
need  to  suppose  is  that  the  perception  of  the  situation 
left  an  ordinary  cognitive  trace,  and  that  the  emotional 
experience  which  would  normally  accompany  such  a 
perception  was  inhibited.  I  take  it  that,  although  the 
external  situation  was  such  as  normally  produces  pain 
and  fear,  the  internal  state  of  Livingstone's  body  at  the 
time  was  abnormal.  The  result  was  that  a  perception 
arose  as  usual,  but  the  emotion  which  would  have 
accompanied  it  if  the  body  had  been  in  a  normal  state 
did  not  arise.  This  perception  left  a  trace,  as  we  know 
from  the  fact  that  Livingstone  was  able  to  remember 
perceiving  the  situation.  When  the  patient,  at  some 
later  date,  goes  to  sleep  and  dreams  this  trace  is  excited 
and  produces  a  dream  of  the  original  situation.  The 
abnormal  bodily  state  which  inhibited  pain  and  fear  on 
the  first  occasion  has  now  ceased.  Hence  the  dream  is 
accompanied  by  the  sort  of  emotion  which  would 
normally  have  accompanied  the  original  perception. 
There  is  therefore  not  the  least  need  to  suppose  either 
that  there  was  an  emotion  when  the  dangerous  situation 
was  being  lived  through,  or  that  an  "  emotional  trace" 
was  left  though  no  emotion  existed.  The  cogiiitive 
trace,  which  was  certainly  left,  is  quite  adequate  to 
explain  all  the  subsequent  phenomena,  both  cognitive 
and  emotional. 

Arguments  for  "Unconscious  Mental  Processes."     We 

have  so  far  considered  the  evidence  which  has  been 
brought  forward  to  prove  directly  the  existence  of 
literally  unconscious  mental  events,  such  as  sensations, 
perceptions,  and  emotions.  We  have  found  this 
evidence  to  be  quite  inconclusive.  But  we  must  now 
introduce  a  distinction  between  mental  events  a.nd  mental 
processes.  I  do  not  pretend  that  this  is  an  absolutely 
sharp  distinction  ;  but  I  think  that  a  few  examples  will 
make  clear  what  I  have  in  mind  by  it.  When  I 
deliberately  consider   a  number  of  possible  alternative 

2  D 


4i8  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

courses  of  action,  weigh  up  the  pros  and  cons  of  each, 
and  finally  decide  on  one  of  them  to  the  exclusion  of 
the  rest,  the  whole  long  event  may  be  called  a  conscious 
"mental  process".  Similarly,  when  I  follow,  or  make 
up  for  myself,  a  long  chain  of  reasoning  the  whole  long 
event  may  be  called  a  conscious  "mental  process,"  On 
the  other  hand,  seeing  a  dog  and  feeling  frightened  of 
it  would  hardly  be  called  a  mental  "process",  though 
it  is  a  mental  "event".  And  feeling  a  twinge  of 
toothache  would  hardly  be  called  a  "  mental  process  ", 
though  it  is  a  mental  "event".  We  might  roughly 
define  a  "mental  process"  as  a  long  mental  event 
which  has  a  set  of  successive  parts  each  of  which  is  a 
mental  event  of  a  different  kind  from  the  whole.  And 
the  mental  process  is  characterised  by  the  nature  of 
these  parts  and  by  the  characteristic  relations  between 
them  within  the  whole  long  event.  For  instance,  a 
process  of  reasoning  is  a  mental  event  which  is  divisible 
into  three  successive  parts,  none  of  which  is  itself  a 
process  of  reasoning ;  viz.  {a)  contemplating  and 
accepting  the  premises,  [b)  noticing  that  they  logically 
entail  a  certain  conclusion,  and  [c)  passing  from  the 
state  of  merely  contemplating  this  conclusion  to 
believing  it  with  a  feeling  of  being  justified  in  doing 
so.  (Very  likely  the  analysis  could  be  carried  further, 
but  this  is  enough  to  illustrate  my  meaning.)  Now  it 
might  be  that  there  is  good  direct  evidence  for  the 
existence  of  unconscious  mental  processes^  though  there 
is  no  good  direct  evidence  for  the  existence  of  un- 
conscious mental  events  which  are  not,  in  this  sense, 
processes.  If  this  were  so,  there  would  be  good 
indirect  evidence  for  the  existence  of  certain  unconscious 
mental  events  which  are  not  processes.  For  a  mental 
process  is  a  mental  event  having  a  set  of  successive 
parts  which  are  mental  events  and  not  mental  processes. 
We  must  therefore  consider  the  alleged  evidence  for  the 
existence  of  unconscious  mental  processes.  We  shall 
find   that    this    is   a    somewhat    complicated  business, 


UNCONSCIOUS   MENTAL   EVENTS  419 

which  cannot  be  completed  in  this  Chapter.  It  will 
lead  us  up  to  the  question  of  the  real  nature  of  traces 
and  dispositions,  which  I  reserve  for  the  next  Chapter. 

The  "  Unconscious^^  Factor  in  Conscious  Mental  Processes. 
I  think  that  it  is  best  not  to  attack  the  question  of  the 
evidence  for  unconscious  mental  processes  directly,  but 
to  make  a  ditour  by  way  of  the  unconscious  factors  in 
admittedly  conscious  mental  processes.  Suppose  we 
consider  an  ordinary  process  of  conscious  desire  which  a 
man  follows  up  to  a  successful  result.  When  we  analyse 
this  we  profess  to  find  a  process  in  which  the  man  sets 
a  certain  end  before  himself,  feels  attracted  by  the 
prospect  of  it,  chooses  such  and  such  means  in  order 
to  get  it,  and  so  on.  But  how  little  of  this  actually  is 
introspected  or  is  introspectible !  While  the  man  is 
busy  carrying  out  his  purpose  it  is  doubtful  whether  he 
has  any  literally  conscious  idea  of  the  end  or  any 
literally  conscious  feeling  of  attraction  towards  it  except 
for  short  spells  separated  by  long  intervals.  Most  of 
the  time  he  is  thinking  of  some  minute  detail  in  the 
means  which  he  is  using,  and  is  not  thinking  about  the 
end  at  all.  Yet  we  say  that  idea  of  the  end  is  constantly 
present,  guiding  his  choice  of  means ;  and  we  say 
that  the  attraction  which  he  feels  for  this  end  is  a 
factor  which  is  constantly  present,  making  the  agent 
persevere  and  surmount  the  obstacles  which  from  time  to 
time  arise.  Moreover,  a  conative  process  is  often  laid 
aside  for  a  time,  and  then  taken  up  again  at  the  point 
where  it  was  left ;  and  this  may  go  on  for  years.  The 
writing  of  this  book  has  been  a  conscious  conative  pro- 
cess which  has,  in  a  sense  been  going  on  for  the  last 
two  years.  But  in  every  day  of  this  period  there  have 
been  long  intervals  during  which  introspection  would  dis- 
cover nothing  relevant  to  this  conative  process.  Now 
here  we  are  dealing  with  nothing  odd  or  abnormal.  I 
think  that  such  examples  show  that  we  cannot  identify 
the  most  normal  conscious  conation  with  those  scrappy 
and  separated  bits  of  experience  of  which  we  have  simul- 


420  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

taneous  undiscriminating  awareness,  and  which  we  could 
no  doubt  introspectively  discriminate  if  we  tried.  The 
fullest  list  of  all  these  fragments  with  their  observable 
interrelations  is  no  more  what  we  mean  by  a  "conscious 
conation  "  than  the  set  of  interrelated  sensa  by  which 
my  table  from  time  to  time  appears  to  me  is  what  I 
mean  by  "my  table".  We  may  say  that,  just  as  the 
most  ordinary  statement  about  a  physical  object  which 
I  perceive  goes  beyond  the  sensa  which  I  sense,  so  the' 
most  ordinary  statement  about  a  conscious  "  mental  pro- 
cess "  of  mine  goes  beyond  the  scrappy  and  jumbled  bits 
of  experience  which  I  could  introspectively  discriminate. 
It  seems  to  me  then  that  there  is  much  more  analogy 
between  my  perceptual  knowledge  of  external  physical 
things  and  processes  and  my  introspective  knowledge 
of  my  own  mind  and  my  conscious  mental  processes 
than  is  commonly  admitted.  Poor  Locke  and  Kant 
have  been  abused  like  pickpockets  for  talking  about 
"internal  perception"  and  comparing  it  to  "external 
perception ".  I  believe  that  they  were  substantially 
correct ;  and  that  their  main  mistake  was  that  they 
failed  to  draw  certain  very  necessary  distinctions  which 
really  make  the  analogy  stronger  than  they  thought. 
In  ordinary  sense-perception  we  have  to  distinguish 
between  perception  itself  and  sensation  on  which  it  is 
based.  My  perception  of  a  chair  is  based  on  my  sensa- 
tions of  certain  interrelated  sensa  which  are  appearances 
of  it ;  and  I  should  not  say  that  I  perceived  the  chair 
unless  I  did  from  time  to  time  sense  such  sensa.  But 
I  mean  something  more  by  the  "chair"  than  all  these 
sensa  ;  and  I  mean  something  more  by  "  perceiving  the 
chair  "  than  just  sensing  these  sensa.  The  notion  of  the 
chair  contains  as  an  essential  factor  the  notion  of  a  per- 
sistent something  which  joins  up  the  various  isolated 
"  chair-sensa"  which  I  sense,  and  which  shows  itself 
to  me  partially  and  imperfectly  through  them.  Now  it 
seems  to  me  that  we  must  draw  a  similar  distinction  in 
dealing  with   our  introspective  knowledge  of  our  own 


UNCONSCIOUS   MENTAL   EVENTS  421 

conscious  mental  processes.  In  sense-perception  we 
distinguished  between  {a)  sensing  {d)  selecting  and 
(c)  using  a  sensed  and  selected  sensum  for  perceiving. 
I  think  that  we  must  draw  a  similar  set  of  distinctions 
in  the  case  of  our  knowledge  of  our  own  mental 
processes.  We  must  distinguish  (a)  undiscriminating 
simultaneous  awareness  of  mental  events  (d)  introspec- 
tive discrimination  of  certain  particular  mental  events, 
and  (c)  what  I  will  call  "introspective  perception"  of 
a  conscious  mental  process  by  means  of  certain  mental 
events  which  I  have  introspectively  discriminated.  My 
introspective  perception  of  an  ordinary  conscious  mental 
process,  such  as  a  conation,  is  based  on  certain  inter- 
connected experiences  of  which  I  do  have  simultaneous 
undiscriminating  awareness  and  some  of  which  I  may 
introspectively  discriminate.  I  should  not  say  that  I 
"  introspectively  perceived  "  this  conation  of  mine  unless 
I  were  introspectively  aware  of  these  interconnected  bits 
of  experience.  Nevertheless,  I  mean  something  more 
by  my  conation  than  these  bits  of  experience  ;  and  I 
mean  something  more  by  "  introspectively  perceiving  " 
it  than  just  having  simultaneous  undiscriminating 
awareness  of  these  bits  of  experience  or  just  introspec- 
tively discriminating  them.  The  notion  of  a  conation 
involves  as  an  essential  factor  the  notion  of  a  persistent 
something  which  joins  up  these  relatively  isolated  bits 
of  experience  and  reveals  itself  partially  and  imperfectly 
to  me  through  them. 

I  prefer  not  to  call  my  "perception"  of  my  own 
mental  processes  "internal  perception",  because  this 
name  seems  to  me  to  apply  better  to  the  perceptual 
knowledge  which  I  have  of  certain  physiological  pro- 
cesses in  my  own  body  by  means  of  bodily  sensations, 
such  as  headache  or  toothache.  I  prefeji_tQ-di3dd£_ 
Perception  into_  ^^/Jl ,..Ijltrqs£ectij[ej__aJid_4<^)_5.eB.suojJS  ; 
and  then  to  divide  Sensuous  Perception  into  (i)  External 
and  (ii)  Internal.  I  shall  say  that  the  introspectible 
experiences  on  which  I  base  my  introspective  perception 


422  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

of  a  conscious  mental  process  are  "appearances"  of  the 
latter  to  me.  This  word  is  to  have  no  implication  of 
delusiveness.  At  present  I  do  not  wish  to  deny  the 
possibility  that  the  introspectible  appearances  of  a  con- 
scious mental  process  may  be  literally  slices  of  it ;  that 
is  a  question  for  subsequent  discussion. 

If  the  view  which  I  have  been  suggesting  be  accepted 
it  will  be  seen  that  there  is  a  close  analogy  between  the 
problem  of  the  nature  of   traces  and  dispositions  and 
their  relation  to  introspectible  experiences,  on  the  one 
hand  ;  and  the  problem  of  the  nature  of  physical  objects 
and  processes  and  their  relation  to  sensa,  on  the  other. 
Now  about  the  latter  problem  there  are,   I   think,  five 
possible  types  of  theory  ;  and  corresponding  to  each  of 
these  will  be  a  possible  type  of  theory  about  the  nature 
of  traces  and  dispositions,     (i)  Phenomenalis77i.    This  is 
the  theory  that,  strictly  speaking,  there  are  no  physical 
objects  or  processes.     There  are  just  the  sensa  which 
we   sense   and  the  observable  relations   between  them 
which  put  certain  of  them  into  certain  groups.     Corre- 
sponding   to    this    would    be    Mr    Russell's    tentative 
suggestion    of    a   special    kind    of    Mnemic    Causation 
which  directly  connects  introspectible  experiences  and 
does    away    with    the    need    for    assuming   traces    and 
dispositions.      (2)  Naive   Realism.      This   is  the  theory 
that  the  sensa  which  are  appearances  of  a  physical  object 
are  literally  spatio-temporal   parts  of  that  object,   and 
that  the  spatio-temporal  parts  of  it  which  are  not  mani- 
fested in  sensation  are  of  precisely  the  same  nature  as 
those  which  are  so  manifested.     Corresponding  to  this 
would  be  the  theory  that  the  introspectible  appearances 
of  a   conscious    mental    process   are   literally   temporal 
slices   of  the    whole    process,   and    that   the  non-intro- 
spectible    slices   are   of   precisely   the   same   nature   as 
those  which    we   can    introspect.     (3)  Critical  Realism. 
This  is  the   theory  that  sensa  are  not  literally  spatio- 
temporal  parts  of  the  physical  objects  of  which  they  are 
appearances  ;  that  there  are  certain  characteristics  which 


UNCONSCIOUS   MENTAL   EVENTS  423 

belong-  only  to  sensa  and  not  to  physical  objects  ;  and 
that  there  are  other  characteristics  which  belong  to  both, 
though  not  necessarily  in  the  same  determinate  form. 
In  the  next  Chapter  I  will  try  to  explain  the  theory 
about  traces  and  dispositions  which  would  correspond 
to  this.  (4)  Agnosticism.  This  is  the  theory  that  we 
have  no  means  of  telling  what  are  the  characteristics 
of  those  relatively  permanent  things  and  processes 
which  manifest  themselves  partially  to  us  by  the 
interrelated  sensa  which  we  from  time  to  time  sense. 
Corresponding  to  this  would  be  the  view  that  we 
cannot  tell  whether  what  manifests  itself  partially  to 
us  by  interrelated  experiences  is  mental  or  physical  or 
both  or  neither.  (5)  Mentalisvi.  This  is  the  theory 
that  the  relatively  permanent  conditions  of  interrelated 
sets  of  sensa  are  minds  or  states  of  mind,  e.g.,  colonies 
of  spirits  of  a  low  order  of  intelligence  (Leibniz)  or 
standing  volitions  in  the  mind  of  God  (Berkeley). 
Corresponding  to  this  would  be  the  view  that  the  bits 
of  experience  which  we  can  introspect  are  appearances 
of  purely  physical  or  physiological  processes,  and  that 
the  intervals  between  these  introspectible  experiences 
are  filled  in  with  something  which  is  physical  or  physio- 
logical and  not  in  any  sense  mental.  I  leave  the  dis- 
cussion of  these  alternatives  to  the  next  Chapter. 

Wholly  "  Unconscious  Mental  Processes''\  We  are  now 
in  a  position  to  consider  the  arguments  for  "  unconscious 
mental  processes "  which  are  not  merely  factors  in 
"conscious  mental  processes."  A  completely  un- 
conscious mental  process  would  be  a  process  of  the 
same  kind  as  those  which  appear  to  us  or  to  others  as 
a  series  of  characteristically  interrelated  experiences, 
but  which  does  not  in  fact  appear  to  anyone  in  that 
way.  It  may  be  compared  with  a  completely  un- 
perceived  physical  object  or  process,  such  as  an  un- 
perceived  fire.  This  is  a  process  of  the  same  kind  as 
those  which  appear  to  ourselves  or  to  others  as  a  series 
of  characteristically  interrelated  i^ensa,  but  which  does 


424  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

not  in  fact  manifest  itself  to  anyone  in  this  way. 
Naturally,  a  belief  in  a  completely  unconscious  mental 
process,  like  a  belief  in  a  completely  unperceived 
physical  object  or  process,  must  rest  on  inference  ; 
and  this  inference  will  take  the  form  of  an  argument 
from  causation  and  analogy.  To  illustrate  this  I  will 
consider  the  arguments  which  have  led  psycho-analysts 
and  others  to  postulate  wholly  unconscious  conations. 

These  arguments  are  logically  of  the  same  type  as 
those  which  led  Adams  and  Leverrier  to  postulate  the 
existence  of  the  hitherto  unperceived    planet   Neptune. 
In  both  cases  they  are  arguments  by  analogy  to  explain 
certain  observed  perturbations  and  irregularities.     We 
are  quite  familiar  with  the  conflict  between  two  conscious 
wishes.     Each  wish,  in  the  absence  of  the  other,  would 
appear  as  a  certain  typical  series  of  conscious  experi- 
ences, though  it  would  be  more  than  the  sum-total  of 
these.     When  both  coexist  we  can  observe  that  the  two 
series  of  conscious  experiences  do  not  go  on  side  by 
side,   but  they  are  as  a  rule  replaced    by   a   modified 
series  which   is  in   some  sense  a  compromise  between 
the  two.     This  modified  series  may  resemble  either  of 
the  unmodified  series  in  various  degrees,  thus  showing 
the  relative  strength  of  the  two  conscious  wishes.     And 
the  conflict  is  accompanied  by  a  characteristic  conscious 
experience  of  strain  and   uneasiness.      All    these  facts 
are  of  course  quite  familiar  and  open  to  introspective 
observation.     Now   we    may   sometimes    find   one   and 
only  one  conscious  wish  ;  and  it  may  manifest  itself  to 
superficial  observation  as  a  certain  series  of  conscious 
experiences  which  would  be  the  normal  manifestation 
of  a  single  wish.     And  yet,  if  we  look  more  closely  into 
our  minds  or  study  our  actions  more  carefully,  we  may 
find    isolated    bits   of  conscious  experience  or  isolated 
actions  which  are  not  normal  appearances  of  this  con- 
scious wish  but  are  more  like  the  normal  appearances 
of  a  certain  conflicting  wish.     Or  we  may  find,  instead 
of  these  isolated  and  anomalous  conscious  experiences 


UNCONSCIOUS   MENTAL   EVENTS  425 

and  actions,   another   peculiarity.     We  may    find  that 
our  actual  series  of  conscious  experiences  is  more  like 
the  compromise  series  which  occurs  when  we  have  two 
conflicting  conscious  wishes   than    like  the  pure  series 
which  occurs  when  we  have  a  single  conscious  wish. 
Lastly,  there  will  sometimes  be  a  feeling  of  strain  and 
uneasiness  which    resembles   the   feeling  that  we  have 
when  two  conscious  wishes  conflict,  although  here  we 
can    introspectively    perceive   only   one   wish.       Under 
these  circumstances  it    is    reasonable   to    suppose    that 
there  really  are  two  processes  going  on,  and  that  they 
are  both  such  that  we  should    call   them    "conscious 
wishes "    if  they   manifested   themselves    as    series    of 
conscious  experiences.     And  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose 
that  they  have  to  each  other  that  kind  of  relation  which 
often  manifests  itself  as  a  conflict  between  two  conscious 
wishes.     But  in  this  case,  for  some  reason,  one  of  these 
processes  cannot  manifest  itself  in  a  series  of  conscious 
experiences  characteristic  of  a  wish.     It   can    manifest 
itself  only  by  a  few  isolated  and  anomalous  conscious 
experiences  and   actions,   or  by   perturbing   and    com- 
promising  the  series   of  conscious   experiences   which 
is   the    manifestation    of    one   of  these   wishes.      This 
hypothesis  will  of  course  be  strengthened  if  we  do  have 
a  vague  feeling  of  strain  and  uneasiness  which  cannot 
be  explained  by  any  observable  conflict  between  our 
conscious  wishes.     So  far  the  argument  of  the  psycho- 
analysts is  exactly  like  the  arguments  by  which  Adams 
and  Leverrier  were  led  to  suspect  the  existence  of  the 
planet  Neptwie,  and  to  predict  certain  facts  about  it. 

The  next  stage  was  for  astronomers  to  look  for  the 
hypothetical  planet ;  and,  as  we  know,  they  were  eventu- 
ally able  to  perceive  it.  The  psycho-analysts  would 
say  that  they  had  followed  a  similar  course  with  similar 
results.  The  astronomers  by  their  special  technical 
methods  succeeded  in  making  the  planet  Neptune  mani- 
fest itself  by  certain  sensa  characteristic  of  a  planet  such 
as  Adams  and  Leverrier  had  suspected  to  exist.     The 


426  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

psycho-analysts  profess  that,  by  using  certain  technical 
methods,  they  have  in  many  cases  made  the  previously 
unconscious  wish  manifest  itself  as  a  series  of  conscious 
experiences  characteristic  of  such  a  wish  as  they  had 
suspected  to  exist.  If  we  accept  this  statement  (and  I 
see  no  reason  why  we  should  not)  the  analogy  is 
complete. 

When  we  are  considering  the  arguments  for  un- 
conscious mental  processes  used  by  psycho-analysts 
and  others,  I  think  we  must  distinguish  three  questions, 
(i)  Are  the  arguments  logically  of  the  same  form  as 
arguments  which  we  should  admit  to  be  valid  in  other 
spheres  ?  Here  the  answer  is  certainly  in  the  affirmative. 
As  I  have  just  shown,  they  are  of  precisely  the  same 
form  as  those  used  by  Adams  and  Leverrier  in  astronomy. 
True,  they  deal  with  a  subject-matter  which  is  much 
more  complex  and  about  which  we  know  much  less. 
And  they  cannot  be  put  into  mathematical  form  or 
tested  by  making  exact  measurements.  This  no  doubt 
reduces  the  probability  of  their  conclusions,  but  of  their 
general  formal  validity  there  can  be  no  doubt.  (2)  Do 
they  make  it  probable  that  there  are  certain  processes 
which  do  not  give  rise  to  characteristic  sets  of  inter- 
related conscious  experiences,  but  which  are  neverthe- 
less of  the  same  nature  and  capable  of  the  same  mutual 
relations  as  processes  which  do  manifest  themselves  by 
such  sets  of  conscious  experiences?  Here  again  I  think 
there  is  little  doubt  that  the  answer  is  in  the  affirmative. 
(3)  Have  we  a  right  to  call  such  processes  "mental"? 
This  question  is  ambiguous.  If  it  merely  means : 
"  Are  they  of  the  same  nature  as  those  processes  which 
do  manifest  themselves  as  conscious  experiences?",  the 
answer  is  that  they  most  probably  are.  If  it  means  : 
"  Are  they  composed  of  mental  events  which  are  of  the 
same  nature  as  the  conscious  experiences  by  which  other 
processes  of  a  similar  kind  manifest  themselves?",  the 
answer,  if  one  can  be  given  at  all,  must  be  left  to  the 
next  Chapter.     And  the  answer  to  it  will  depend  largely 


UNCONSCIOUS   MENTAL   EVENTS  427 

on  what  view  we  take  about  the  nature  of  the  "un- 
conscious parts"  of  "conscious  mental  processes". 
If  we  have  to  regard  the  "unconscious  parts"  of  a 
"conscious  mental  process"  as  non-introspectible  mental 
events,  and  the  "conscious  parts"  as  differing  from 
them  only  in  being  introspectible,  we  shall  have  to 
answer  the  question  affirmatively.  Otherwise,  we  shall 
have  to  answer  it  with  a  definite  negative  ;  or  with  a 
confession  of  ignorance  ;  or  by  analysing  it  into  several 
questions,  some  of  which  can  be  answered  affirmatively, 
others  negatively,  and  others  perhaps  not  at  all. 

I  have  so  far  confined  my  attention  to  "unconscious 
wishes  "  and  to  the  arguments  which  have  been  brought 
forward  by  psycho-analysts  in  favour  of  their  existence. 
There  is  another  set  of  facts  which  seem  strongly  to 
favour  the  hypothesis  of  "unconscious  mental  pro- 
cesses ".  These  are  the  cases  in  which  a  patient  under 
hypnosis  is  told  to  perform  a  certain  act  at  a  certain 
number  of  minutes  (which  may  run  into  hundreds  or 
thousands)  after  he  has  been  awakened.  It  is  found 
that  certain  patients  perform  the  suggested  action 
automatically  at  or  very  near  to  the  suggested  time. 
This  seems  to  imply  that  the  time  which  was  given  in 
minutes  has  been  reduced  to  days  and  hours  by  some 
process  of  mental  arithmetic,  and  that  a  watch  has  been 
kept  for  the  arrival  of  the  calculated  moment.  Yet  the 
patient  cannot  discover  this  process  of  calculation  and 
of  watching  by  introspection.  Here  it  certainly  seems 
reasonable  to  suppose  that  a  process  has  been  going  on 
similar  to  the  processes  which  manifest  themselves  as  a 
rule  by  the  series  of  conscious  experiences  which  we  call 
"making  a  calculation".  This  process,  for  some 
reason,  does  not  manifest  itself  in  this  way  to  the  mind 
which  normally  controls  this  body.  Whether  the 
process  can  strictly  be  called  "mental"  depends  upon 
considerations  which  must  be  discussed  in  the  next 
Chapter. 

There  is,  however,  one  remark  which  must  be  made 


428  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

before  ending  this  Chapter.  Suppose  that,  on  again 
hypnotising  the  patient,  he  says  that  he  remembers 
making  the  calculation  and  watching  for  the  calculated 
moment.  If  we  accept  this  statement  we  shall  have  to 
suppose  that  a  genuinely  mental  process  has  been  going 
on,  that  it  is  literally  unconscious  relatively  to  the  mind 
which  normally  controls  this  patient's  body,  but  that  it 
is  literally  conscious  relatively  to  the  mind  which  con- 
trols this  body  when  it  is  hypnotised.  And  of  course 
there  may  be  good  grounds  for  regarding  these  two 
"minds"  as  parts  of  a  single  mind  which  animates  the 
body  at  both  times.  Now,  supposing  that  such  state- 
ments are  made  under  hypnosis,  I  think  that  it  is 
certain  that  some  weight  must  be  attached  to  them. 
We  must  remember,  however,  that  a  person  under 
hypnosis  is  in  an  extremely  suggestible  state,  and  is 
very  liable  to  answer  questions  in  the  way  in  which  he 
supposes  the  questioner  to  want  them  answered.  Thus 
I  do  not  think  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to  attach  as 
much  weight  to  the  statements  of  a  hypnotised  person 
about  his  own  experiences  as  to  the  statements  of  a 
normal  waking  person.  We  should  at  least  need  to  be 
very  certain  that  the  questions  were  not  put  in  such  a 
way  as  to  suggest  even  faintly  to  the  patient  that  the 
questioner  was  wanting  a  certain  kind  of  answer.  I 
have  not  enough  first-hand  knowledge  of  the  facts  to 
feel  sure  whether  these  conditions  have  been  fulfilled 
by  the  experimenters  on  this  subject. 

Somewhat  similar  remarks  apply  to  the  statements 
made  by  alternating  personalities,  who  claim  to  be  co- 
conscious,  like  Sally  Beauchamp.  Such  a  personality, 
when  in  control,  may  tell  us  that  it  owned  a  certain 
continuous  series  of  conscious  experiences  while  another 
personality  was  in  control.  And  this  series  may  be 
such  as  to  fill  the  gaps  between  certain  fragmentary 
and  isolated  bits  of  conscious  experience  belonging  to 
the  latter  personality.  Here  we  have  evidence  which, 
taken  at  its  face-value,  would  suggest  that  the  "  uncon- 


UNCONSCIOUS   MENTAL   EVENTS  429 

scious  parts"  of  a  conscious  mental  process  in  one 
personality  are  literally  conscious  experiences  in  another 
co-conscious  personality.  And,  if  we  accepted  this, 
we  might  be  inclined  to  generalise  this  to  normal  cases, 
and  to  suggest  that  the  difference  here  is  that  the  co- 
conscious  personality  never  gets  control  of  the  body 
and  therefore  never  has  a  chance  of  telling  us  about  its 
experiences.  Now  I  think  that  some  weight  must  be 
given  to  the  statements  of  personalities  like  Sally  about 
their  own  experiences.  Moreover,  it  cannot  be  said 
that  Sally  was  particularly  suggestible  ;  she  seemed  to 
have  a  strong  will  of  her  own  and  to  be  quite  capable 
of  resisting  unpalatable  suggestions.  But  was  the 
suggestion  that  she  was  co-conscious  an  unpalatable 
one?  One  gets  the  impression  that  she  was  very 
anxious  to  make  herself  out  to  be  as  important  and 
mysterious  as  possible.  (It  will  be  remembered  that  at 
certain  stages  of  the  proceedings  she  claimed  to  be  a 
"spirit".)  There  is  obviously  a  fairly  close  connection 
between  multiple  personality  and  ordinary  hysteria. 
Now  hysterical  persons  can  be  extremely  obstinate  in 
many  respects,  as  Sally  was.  But  they  show  an  em- 
barrassing readiness  to  provide  evidence  for  any  theory 
about  hysteria  which  they  believe  to  be  held  by  the 
doctor  who  is  treating  them.  And  probably  they  would 
specially  welcome  any  theory  which  enables  them  to 
feel  themselves  to  be  mysterious  beings  who  are  creating 
a  revolution  in  current  medical  and  psychological  con- 
cepts. Thus,  although  we  cannot  afford  to  neglect 
their  statements  about  themselves  and  their  experiences, 
we  ought  to  view  them  with  very  great  suspicion. 


CHAPTER   X 

The  Nature  of  Traces  and  Dispositions 

In  the  last  Chapter  we  saw  that  the  question  whether 
there  are  unconscious  processes  which  are  literally 
mental  involves  the  question  :  "  What  is  the  nature 
of  those  processes  which  manifest  themselves  partially- 
through  more  or  less  discontinuous  series  of  interrelated 
conscious  experiences,  and  which  presumably  fill  the 
temporal  gaps  between  the  conscious  experiences  of  such 
series  ?  "  We  have  already  suggested  several  alterna- 
tive possible  theories  on  this  point ;  and  it  is  now 
time  to  consider  them  in  greater  detail  with  a  view 
to  deciding,  if  possible,  between  them. 

Analogous  Facts  about  Material  Substances. — It  will 
be  wise  to  begin  by  considering  the  analogies  and 
differences  between  the  mental  facts  under  discussion 
and  certain  facts  about  material  substances.  Let  us  take 
any  material  substance,  e.g.^  a  circular  ring  of  elastic 
steel  wire.  We  notice  that  there  are  certain  character- 
istics which,  strictly  speaking,  belong  to  its  states 
rather  than  to  it ;  and  that  there  are  other  characteristics, 
which,  strictly  speaking,  belong  to  it  rather  than  to  any 
of  its  states.  The  wire  ring  throughout  its  history 
always  has  some  shape  or  other,  and  it  may  have  the 
same  shape  for  long  periods  of  its  history.  If  we 
squeeze  it  between  our  fingers  it  assumes  various  ellip- 
tical shapes  ;  and,  when  we  let  go  of  it,  it  goes  back  to 
what  we  call  its  ''natural  shape",  which  is  circular. 
We  should  commonly  express  these  facts  by  saying 
that  "  the  shape  of  the  ring  is  sometimes  circular,  some- 


TRACES  AND   DISPOSITIONS  431 

times  elliptical  and  of  eccentricity  e,  sometimes  ellip- 
tical and  of  eccentricity  e ,  and  so  on  ".  If  we  divide 
up  the  history  of  this  ring  into  successive  adjoined 
slices  there  is  a  certain  determinable  characteristic 
which  belongs  to  all  these  slices,  viz.,  the  characteristic 
of  "having  some  shape"  or  even  the  more  determinate 
characteristic  of  "having  a  shape  which  is  some  conic 
section".  This  can  be  said  to  belong  to  the  thing;  in 
the  sense  that  it  belongs  to  all  the  successive  states  of 
the  thing,  and  that,  if  an  event  did  not  have  this  deter- 
minable characteristic,  it  would  not  be  counted  as  a 
state  of  this  thing.  But  the  completely  determinate 
forms  of  this  determinable  characteristic,  e.g.,  circularity, 
ellipticity  of  eccentricity  e,  etc.,  belong  strictly  to  the 
states  of  the  thing  and  not  to  the  thing.  In  the  first 
place,  one  state  may  have  one  of  these  determinate 
characteristics,  and  another  state  of  the  same  thing  may 
have  another  of  them.  And,  secondly,  even  if  it  should 
happen  that  all  the  states  of  the  thing  have  precisely 
the  same  determinate  shape,  this  is  regarded  as  con- 
tingent. An  event  which  had  a  different  determinate 
shape  would  not  eo  ipso  be  denied  to  be  a  state  of  this 
thing. 

We  have  so  far  distinguished  {a)  certain  determinable 
characteristics  which  may  be  said  to  belong  to  a  thing, 
in  so  far  as  they  belong  to  every  state  of  the  thing  and 
in  so  far  as  any  event  to  which  they  did  not  belong 
would  not  be  counted  as  a  state  of  this  thing.  And  {b) 
completely  determinate  forms  of  these  determinable 
characteristics.  Every  state  of  the  thing  has  one  or 
other  of  these,  and  it  is  possible  that  all  its  states  may 
have  the  same  determinate  form  of  a  certain  deter- 
minable characteristic.  But  this  is  not  necessary  ;  an 
event  may  have  a  different  determinate  form  of  this 
determinable  characteristic  without  thereby  failing  to  be 
a  state  of  this  thing. 

We  have  now  to  notice  a  quite  different  kind  of 
characteristic,  which  can  be  said  to  belong  to  the  thing 


432  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

but  not  to  any  of  its  states.  The  ring  in  our  example 
has  an  inherent  tendency  to  assume  an  elliptical  state  of 
such  and  such  eccentricity  when  squeezed  in  such  and 
such  a  way  ;  and  it  has  an  inherent  tendency  to  assume 
the  circular  form  when  left  alone.  This  might  be  called 
a  "causal  characteristic"  of  the  ring.  The  character- 
istic of  having  some  shape  or  of  having  a  sliape  which 
is  some  conic  section  is  not  a  causal  characteristic. 
And  the  determinate  forms  which  this  determinable 
characteristic  assumes  in  various  states  of  the  thing  are 
not  causal^  though  they  are  causedhy  the  causal  character- 
istic and  the  external  circumstances.  Now  causal  char- 
acteristics of  a  thing  may  change  without  the  thing 
being  thereby  destroyed.  If  I  heated  the  ring  to  a 
certain  temperature  and  then  cooled  it  in  a  certain  way, 
it  would  lose  its  elasticity.  After  this  it  would  stay  in 
any  shape  that  I  squeezed  it  into,  and  w^ould  have  no 
tendency  to  pass  into  the  circular  shape  when  I  ceased 
to  squeeze  it.  Such  facts  as  these  show  that  we  must 
distinguish  causal  properties  of  various  orders  in  a 
material  thing.  We  may  say  that  it  is  a  "first 
order"  causal  characteristic  of  the  ring  to  pass  into 
a  certain  elliptical  shape  when  squeezed  and  to  pass 
back  into  the  circular  shape  when  released.  And  we 
may  say  that,  after  being  heated,  it  has  lost  this  first- 
order  causal  characteristic  and  has  acquired  the  first- 
order  causal  characteristic  of  staying  in  any  shape  into 
which  I  may  squeeze  it.  But  it  is  also  a  causal 
characteristic  of  the  ring  that,  when  it  is  heated  and 
cooled  in  a  certain  way,  it  loses  the  former  first-order 
causal  characteristic  and  gains  the  latter.  This  may  be 
called  a  "second-order"  causal  characteristic  of  the 
ring.  If  we  denote  the  two  first-order  characteristics 
by  p-^  and  p.^  respectively,  we  might  denote  by  p.^^  the 
second -order  causal  characteristic  that  the  substance 
loses /^  and  gains/.,  under  such  and  such  conditions. 

Now  sometimes  such  changes  as  these  can  be  reversed 
either  by   reversing  the   original   process   or    by  some 


TRACES   AND   DISPOSITIONS  433 

other  means.  E.g.^  by  heating  up  the  ring  again, 
hammering  it,  and  cooling  it  suitably  I  could  make  it 
lose /a  ancl  acquire /i.  If  this  be  so  we  may  say  that  it 
has  a  second-order  causal  characteristic  p^i  as  well  as 
/j2-  Iri  other  cases  a  change  of  first-order  causal 
characteristics  is  not,  so  far  as  we  know,  reversible.  It 
is  a  second-order  causal  characteristic  of  an  organism 
that,  if  you  give  it  a  good  dose  of  arsenic,  it  loses  the 
first-order  causal  characteristic  of  "vital  response". 
And  we  do  not  know  of  any  way  in  which  this  first- 
order  characteristic  can  be  restored.  We  must  of  course 
recognise  the  possibility  of  causal  characteristics  of  the 
third  and  higher  orders  ;  but  there  is  no  need  to  go 
into  detail  about  them.  All  that  we  need  say  is  that 
the  lower  the  order  of  a  causal  characteristic  the  more 
is  it  possible  for  this  characteristic  to  change  without 
our  saying  that  the  original  substance  has  ceased  to 
exist.  Provided  that  the  causal  characteristics  of  higher 
order  remain  unaltered,  and  especially  if  the  changes  in 
first-order  causal  characteristics  be  reversible,  we  tend 
to  hold  that  the  same  substance  is  still  existing. 

We  must  next  notice  the  connexion  between  causal 
characteristics  and  internal  structure.  So  long  as  a 
material  substance  has  a  certain  causal  characteristic 
we  are  inclined  to  believe  that  it  must  have  a  certain 
characteristic  internal  structure.  The  word  "  structure  " 
must  here  be  taken  in  a  wide  sense  to  include  both 
purely  spatial  and  spatio-temporal  structure.  It  is  a 
first-order  causal  characteristic  of  a  pillar-box  to  look 
red  when  illuminated  by  white  light  and  viewed  by  a 
normal  eye.  We  ascribe  this  to  a  certain  persistent 
spatial  structure  of  the  minute  particles  of  the  pigment, 
in  virtue  of  which  the  surface  selectively  reflects  the  red 
constituent  of  the  white  light.  If  the  pillar-box  be 
heated  to  a  high  enough  temperature  it  will  henceforth 
appear  brown  or  black  under  similar  conditions  of 
illumination  to  a  normal  eye.  Thus  this  first-order 
causal  characteristic  will  have  changed  into  a  different 

2  E 


434  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

one.  We  ascribe  this  change  to  a  change  in  the 
minute  spatial  structure  of  the  pigment  on  the  surface 
of  the  pillar-box.  Other  causal  characteristics  are 
ascribed,  not  to  the  mere  persistence  of  a  certain  spatial 
structure,  but  to  the  fact  that  the  minute  particles  of  the 
body  are  continuing  to  move  in  certain  orbits  with 
certain  characteristic  velocities.  Magnetic  properties 
are  an  example  in  point.  Here  the  persistence  of  the 
causal  characteristic  is  correlated  with  the  persistence  of 
a  certain  spatio-temporal  structure.  It  is  characteristic 
of  modern  science  as  contrasted  with  mediceval  science 
to  correlate  causal  properties  with  minute  spatial  or 
spatio  -  temporal  structure,  and  not  to  take  them  as 
ultimate  facts.  And  there  is  no  doubt  that,  in  the  case 
of  material  substances,  this  hypothesis  has  led  to  great 
advances  in  knowledge  and  has  been  "verified"  as 
completely  as  any  such  hypothesis  well  could  be. 

Let  us  consider  the  essential  meaning  of  this  pro- 
cedure. It  comes  to  this.  We  correlate  a  causal 
characteristic  of  a  substance  with  a  certain  non-causal 
characteristic  of  its  successive  states.  Let  us  suppose 
that  the  substance  has  the  first-order  causal  charac- 
teristic/^  up  to  and  including  the  moment  t,  and  that  it 
then  loses  p-^  and  gains  p^^  instead.  We  assume  that 
there  is  a  certain  determinable  non-casual  characteristic 
X  which  belongs  to  all  the  states  of  the  substance  both 
before  and  after  /.  And  we  assume  that  all  the  states  of 
the  substance  up  to  and  including  the  moment  t  have 
this  determinable  characteristic  in  the  determinate  form 
TTi,  whilst  all  the  states  of  the  substance  after  the  moment 
t  have  this  determinable  characteristic  in  the  different 
determinate  form  tt^.  In  the  case  of  material  substances 
the  non-causal  determinable  tt  is  always  supposed  to  be 
some  general  type  of  internal  spatio-temporal  or  purely 
spatial  structure  ;  and  the  determinates  tt^  and  7r2  are 
supposed  to  be  different  specific  forms  of  this  determin- 
able spatial  or  spatio-temporal  structure.  Thus  there 
are  really  two   independent   assumptions,  viz.   {a)  that 


TRACES   AND   DISPOSITIONS  435 

each  causal  property  of  a  substance  depends  upon  a 
certain  non-causal  characteristic  of  its  successive  states, 
that  so  long  as  a  causal  property  of  a  substance  remains 
unchanged  its  successive  states  have  the  same  de- 
terminate form  of  this  non-causal  characteristic,  and 
that  when  the  causal  property  changes  the  later  states 
of  the  substance  have  this  non-causal  characteristic  in  a 
different  determinate  form  ;  and  {b)  that  the  non-causal 
characteristics  on  'which  the  causal  characteristics  of 
substances  depend  are  always  certain  types  of  internal 
spatial  or  spatio-temporal  structure. 

There  are  two  important  points  to  notice  before  leav- 
ing this  subject,  (i)  If  the  non-causal  characteristics 
on  which  the  causal  characteristics  of  a  material  sub- 
stance depend  be  forms  of  internal  spatial  or  spatio- 
temporal  structure,  they  are  of  the  same  general  nature 
as  non-causal  characteristics  which  we  can  actually 
observe,  For  we  can  observe  that  material  substances 
have  shapes  and  sizes,  that  several  such  substances  can 
be  arranged  in  various  spatial  patterns,  and  that  they 
can  move  about  in  various  ways  as  wholes.  We  are 
thus  merely  ascribing  to  the  inside  of  a  material  sub- 
stance and  to  its  minute  parts  characteristics  which  are 
analogous  to  those  which  we  can  perceive  in  its  outside 
and  on  a  large  scale.  And  we  assume  that  the  minute 
structure  and  the  minute  movements  which  we  cannot 
observe  are  subject  to  the  same  laws  of  geometry  and 
mechanics  as  the  gross  structure  and  the  gross  move- 
ments which  we  can  observe.  (If  the  Quantum  Theory 
be  correct  we  are  probably  witnessing  a  partial  break- 
down of  the  latter  assumption.) 

(2)  The  second  point  to  notice  is  that  we  cannot 
wholly  reduce  causal  characteristics  to  non-causal  char- 
acteristics by  correlating  the  former  with  the  persistence 
of  a  certain  type  of  internal  structure.  When  we  say 
that  the  movements  of  the  minute  internal  parts  obey 
the  laws  of  mechanics  we  are  ascribing  a  certain  causal 
characteristic   to  them.     And  when,  e.g.^  we   say  that 


436  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

a  certain  minute  spatial  structure  of  a  body  causes  it 
to  select  and  reflect  the  red  component  of  white  light  we 
are  ascribing  a  causal  characteristic  to  this  structure. 
The  most  that  we  can  do  by  this  means  is  to  reduce 
a  number  of  causal  characteristics  which  seem  at  first 
sight  to  be  independent  and  disconnected  to  a  com- 
paratively few  fundamental  causal  characteristics  which 
are  familiar  on  the  large  scale  and  are  very  general  and 
pervasive. 

I  think  that  I  have  now  said  enough  about  the  char- 
acteristics of  material  substances,  though  it  would  be 
necessary  to  go  into  many  more  details  and  to  draw 
many  more  subtle  distinctions  if  I  were  professing  to 
give  a  complete  account  of  this  subject.  I  propose  now 
to  consider  the  analogies  and  differences  between  minds 
and  material  substances  in  these  respects.  In  the  first 
place,  it  is  evident  that  we  ascribe  causal  characteristics 
to  minds  as  well  as  to  material  substances.  First  of  all 
there  are  certain  general  "mental  powers",  which  we 
regard  as  characteristic  of  all  minds.  For  instance  there 
is  the  power  of  cognising,  the  power  of  being  affected 
by  past  experiences,  the  power  of  association,  and  so 
on.  These  may  be  compared  to  the  most  fundamental 
causal  characteristics  of  matter,  such  as  inertia,  gravita- 
tional attraction,  etc.  Secondly,  there  are  "mental 
dispositions "  which  differ  from  one  mind  to  another 
and  are  fairly  general  in  their  effects.  One  man,  e.g,, 
is  "born  good-tempered"  and  another  man  is  "born 
irritable  ".  This  means  that  the  mind  of  the  former  has 
a  causal  characteristic  such  that  very  few  conditions  will 
put  it  into  an  angry  state,  whilst  the  mind  of  the  latter 
has  a  causal  characteristic  such  that  very  many  con- 
ditions will  put  it  into  an  angry  state.  Now  under 
certain  conditions  a  mind  will  lose  the  characteristic  of 
being  good-tempered  and  will  acquire  the  characteristic 
of  being  bad-tempered.  This  may  happen  suddenly 
through  a  wound  in  the  head  or  gradually  through 
disease    or   continually  irritating   surroundings.     Here 


TRACES  AND   DISPOSITIONS  437 

we  have  an  instance  of  a  causal  characteristic  of  higher 
order  belonging  to  a  mind.  Some  of  these  changes  in 
the  causal  characteristics  of  minds  are  reversible.  A 
man  who  has  become  irritable  may  be  restored  to  a 
good-tempered  disposition  by  regulating  his  liver  or  by 
treating  him  psycho-analytically.  "Being  irritable" 
may  be  compared  to  "looking  red  to  most  people  in 
most  lights",  and  "being  good-tempered"  may  be 
compared  to  "looking  brown  to  most  people  in  most 
lights  "  ;  and  the  characteristic  of  losing  the  former  and 
gaining  the  latter  when  wounded  in  the  head  may  be 
compared  to  the  characteristic  of  losing  one  colour  and 
permanently  acquiring  the  other  on  being  heated  to  a 
high  enough  temperature.  So  far  there  is  obviously  a 
great  deal  of  analogy  between  the  cjiaractg r i sjics- -X)f 
mental  and  of  material  substances.  Let  us  now  consider 
some  of  the  differences. 

(i)  Mental  substances  seem  to  start  mainly  with 
powers  to  acquire  other  and  more  determinate  powers. 
A  baby  does  not  at  first  have  the  power  to  talk  or  to 
reason,  but  it  has  the  power  to  acquire  these  powers 
if  proper  stimuli  are  applied.  And  in  most  cases  these 
stimuli  are  applied  if  the  baby  lives,  so  that  these  more 
determinate  powers  generally  are  in  fact  acquired.  I 
do  not  think  that  there  is  much  analogy  to  this  in  the 
case  of  material  substances.  And  this  is  not  surprising. 
For  a  power  to  acquire  some  specific  power,  such  as 
that  of  talking  rationally,  could  hardly  come  into  action 
if  it  were  not  for  the  general  powers  of  association  and 
"  memory"  in  its  widest  sense  ;  and  these  are  common 
and  peculiar  to  minds.  (2)  Although  some  changes  in 
which  a  mind  loses  one  causal  characteristic  and  gains 
another  are  reversible,  most  of  them,  so  far  as  we  know, 
are  not.  On  the  other  hand,  most  changes  in  the 
causal  characteristics  of  material  substances  are  revers- 
ible. Of  course  this  difference  may  simply  be  due  to 
the  fact  that  we  know  much  more  about  matter  than 
about  mind,  and  have  much  greater  practical  control 


438  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

of  the  former  than  of  the  latter  in  consequence.  (3)  A 
mind  in  the  course  of  its  history  is  continually  acquiring 
new  and  extremely  determinate  powers.  E.g.,  it  is 
continually  acquiring  the  power  to  remember  a  certain 
definite  event,  which  it  did  not  have  before  this  event 
happened.  Although  it  also  loses  many  of  these  de- 
terminate memory-powers  with  efflux  of  time,  yet,  on 
the  whole,  through  many  years  of  its  life  the  number 
of  determinate  memory-powers  which  it  possesses  is 
probably  steadily  increasing.  I  do  not  think  that 
there  is  anything  analogous  to  this  in  the  case  of 
matter.  It  must  of  course  be  pointed  out  that  these 
contrasts  which  I  have  been  indicating  are  at  their 
sharpest  when  we  compare  a  highly  developed  mind 
with  a  bit  of  inorganic  matter.  Organised  bodies 
certainly  form  a  half-way  house  between  mind  and 
matter  in  these  respects. 

So  far  I  have  been  considering  differences  between 
the  causal  characteristics  of  mental  and  material  sub- 
stances which  are  immediately  obvious  and  involve  no 
special  theories  about  these  characteristics.  I  have 
said  that,  in  the  case  of  material  substances,  we  make 
two  hypotheses  which  have  been  amply  verified.  The 
first  is  that,  so  long  as  a  material  substance  has  a 
certain  causal  characteristic,  there  is  a  certain  correlated 
non-causal  characteristic  which  belongs  to  each  of  its 
successive  states  and  determines  this  causal  character- 
istic. The  second  is  that  this  non-causal  characteristic 
is  always  a  certain  type  of  internal  spatial  or  spatio- 
temporal  structure.  Now  we  do,  no  doubt,  generally 
assume  something  analogous  to  the  first  proposition 
in  dealing  with  the  causal  characteristics  of  minds. 
We  do  assume  that,  so  long  as  a  mind  has  a  certain 
causal  characteristic,  there  is  a  certain  non-causal  char- 
acteristic of  something  which  determines  this  causal 
characteristic  of  the  mind.  But  it  is  very  difficult  to 
maintain  anything  like  the  second  proposition.  In  the 
first  place,  a  mind,  as  such,  does  not  seem  to  be  a  spatio- 


TRACES  AND   DISPOSITIONS  439 

temporal  whole  ;  we  can,  therefore,  hardly  talk  of  its 
spatio-temporal  structure.  If  we  want  to  talk  of  spatio- 
temporal  structure  in  this  connexion  we  have  to  desert 
the  mind  and  start  talking  about  the  brain  and  nervous 
system.  Again,  the  spatio-temporal  parts  of  a  material 
substance  are  themselves  material  substances  ;  e.g.^  the 
molecules  of  a  gas  are  as  good  material  substances  as 
the  gas  itself.  And  the  relations  of  the  parts  of  a 
material  substance  within  it  are  analogous  to  the  rela- 
tions of  this  material  substance  to  another  which  is 
outside  it.  E.g.^  the  relations  of  the  molecules  of  a  bit 
of  dust  to  each  other  are  geometrically  and  mechanically 
analogous  to  the  relations  of  a  number  of  bits  of  dust 
dancing  about  in  the  air.  Now  a  theory  of  mental 
structure  analogous  to  this  would  have  to  be  of  the 
following  kind.  We  should  have  to  suppose  that  the 
observable  minds  of  ourselves  and  our  friends  are 
composed  of  unobservable  minds.  And  we  should 
have  to  suppose  that  the  unobservable  minds  which 
compose  my  mind  are  related  to  each  other  within  it 
in  the  same  kind  of  way  as  my  mind  is  related  to  other 
observable  minds  to  form  a  society.  Now,  of  course, 
this  might  have  been  true,  but  it  seems  pretty  evident 
that  it  is  not  in  fact  true.  So  far  as  one  can  judge  the 
unity  of  an  individual  mind  is  not  in  the  least  like  the 
unity  of  a  society  of  minds. 

The  difficulty  then  is  this.  If  we  try  to  correlate 
the  causal  characteristics  of  minds  with  minute  spatio- 
temporal  structure  we  are  forced  to  ascribe  this  structure 
to  the  brain  and  nervous  system  and  not  to  the  mind 
itself.  In  that  case  I  think  we  shall  have  to  admit  that 
we  can  hardly  talk  of  a  purely  mental  substance.  The 
mind,  in  abstraction  from  the  brain  and  nervous  system, 
will  be  a  mere  set  of  mental  events  with  many  gaps  and 
a  very  imperfect  internal  unity.  It  might  be  called  an 
"incomplete  substance."  The  only  complete  mental 
substance  will  be  not  merely  mental  but  also  material  ; 
it  will  be  the  "mind-brain",  if  I  may  use  that  expres- 


440  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

sion.     This,  of  course,  is  by  no  means  a  revolutionary- 
view.     St  Thomas,  though  he  did  not  mean  exactly  what 
I    mean    and  did   not  use  the  arguments  which    I  am 
using,  held    that  a  human  soul  is  in  an   "unnatural" 
state  when   separated  from  its  body,  and  used  this  as 
an  argument  for  the  resurrection  of  the  body.     If,  on 
the    other    hand,    we    try    to    assign    a    purely   mental 
structure   to   our   minds    but   otherwise    to   follow   the 
analogy  of  material  substances  as  closely  as  possible, 
we  land  in  a  different  kind  of  trouble.     We  then  have 
to    regard   each   observable  mind   as   a   society  of  un- 
observable  minds  ;  and  this  hypothesis  seems  not  to  fit 
the  facts.     The  result  of  this  is  that  we  cannot  get  away 
from    the    much    decried    "faculty-psychology".      We 
must  remember  that  before  Descartes'  time  there  was  a 
"  faculty-physics  ",  and  that  Descartes'  greatest  achieve- 
ment was  to  show  that  the  various  causal  characteristics 
of  physical  things  can  be  connected  with  each  other  by 
correlating  them  all  with  characteristic  forms  of  spatio- 
temporal  structure  and  a  few  very  general  and  pervasive 
causal  characteristics.     No  one    has  succeeded  in  con- 
necting the  various  mental  "powers"  in  any  analogous 
way,   and    that   is   why    psychology  at    present   hardly 
deserves  the  name  of  a  "science".     It  is,  I  think,  quite 
certain    that   psychology   will    remain    in    this    unsatis- 
factory state  unless  and  until  someone  succeeds  in  doing 
for   it   what    Galileo,    Descartes,    and    Newton    did    for 
physics.     And  the  difficulty  of  doing  anything  of  the 
kind  is  obvious  when  we  remember  how  difficult  it  is  to 
conceive  of  purely  mental    "structure"  or  to  imagine 
what  can  be  the  few  fundamental  causal  characteristics 
which,  together  with  diff"erences  of  "  mental  structure", 
will  explain  and  connect  the  various  observable  mental 
powers. 

The  Theory  of  Mnemic  Causation.  This  is  a  theory 
which  abandons  all  attempts  to  correlate  the  causal 
characteristics  of  minds  with  anv  non-causal  character- 


TRACES  AND   DISPOSITIONS  441 

istic.  A  fortiori  [t  refuses  to  correlate  them  with  purely 
mental  "structure"  or  with  the  spatio-temporal  structure 
of  the  brain  and  nervous  system.  This  theory  has 
been  tentatively  suggested  by  Mr  Russell  in  Lectures 
IV  and  V  of  his  Analysis  of  Mind,  He  rather  un- 
happily associates  it  with  the  name  of  Semon,  who,  so 
far  as  I  can  see,  never  thought  of  anything  of  the  kind. 
Semon  was  anxious  to  show  that  vanemic phenomena  are 
much  commoner  and  more  important  than  has  generally 
been  thought.  But  his  theory  of  their  causation  seems 
to  be  quite  commonplace  ;  it  is  just  a  theory  of  traces 
thinly  disguised  under  the  name  of  "engrams". 

I  shall  have  to  draw  certain  distinctions  and  go  into 
certain  details  which  will  not  be  found  in  Mr  Russell's 
book.  I  will  begin  by  trying  to  give  definitions  of 
"mnemic"and  "  non-mnemic  "  events,  such  that  there 
shall  be  no  doubt  that  there  are  mnemic  events. 

Definition  of  ^^  Mnemic  Events  ^\  I  shall  begin  with 
rough  definitions,  and  shall  gradually  polish  them 
under  the  friction  of  criticism.  A  gas-explosion  might 
be  taken  as  a  typical  example  of  a  non-mnemic  event, 
and  a  memory  of  a  past  visit  to  a  certain  town  as  a 
typical  example  of  a  mnemic  event.  What  is  the 
relevant  difference  between  them  ?  The  gas-explosion 
could  be  fully  accounted  for  by  reference  to  the  state  of 
affairs  which  immediately  preceded  it.  In  this  we 
should  find  a  certain  mixture  of  gas  and  oxygen  and  the 
striking  of  a  light ;  and  these  together  are  enough  to 
account  for  the  happening  of  the  explosion  there  and 
then.  No  doubt,  if  we  like,  we  can  go  further  back. 
We  could  predict  the  presence  of  this  particular  mixture 
by  knowing  that  a  gas-tap  had  been  turned  on  for  so 
long;  and  we  could  predict  the  striking  of  the  light 
from  the  fact  that  a  man  had  filled  his  pipe  and  had  just 
taken  out  his  match-box  to  light  it.  But  there  is  no 
need  for  us  to  go  back  to  these  earlier  events.  The 
explosion  is  directly  determined  by  what  immediately 
precedes  it ;  and  it  is  determined  by  earlier  events  only 


442  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

in  so  far  as  these  determine  its  immediate  antecedents. 
We  will  define  a  "non-mnemic  event "  as  one  whose 
independently  necessary  conditions  are  all  contained  in 
the  state  of  affairs  which  immediately  precedes  it.  No 
one  questions  that  many  events  are  non-mnemic,  in  this 
sense. 

Now  contrast  this  with  the  memory  which  I  now  have 
of  a  visit  which  I  paid  to  a  certain  town  last  year.  In 
order  to  account  for  the  occurrence  of  this  memory  it  is 
not,  on  the  face  of  it,  enough  to  refer  to  what  im- 
mediately preceded  it.  We  should  no  doubt  find 
there  the  stimulus  which  called  forth  the  memory  just 
then.  But  it  is  obvious  that  precisely  the  same  stimulus 
might  have  acted  and  would  have  called  forth  no  such 
memory  if  I  had  not  visited  the  town  at  all.  Thus,  in 
order  to  account  completely  for  the  occurrence  of  the 
memory  now,  it  seems  necessary  to  go  back  to  the  event 
of  last  year,  viz.,  my  visit  to  the  town.  It  might, 
therefore,  seem  plausible  to  define  a  "  mnemic  event"  as 
one  whose  independently  necessary  conditions  are  not 
all  contained  in  the  state  of  aftairs  which  immediately 
precedes  it. 

This  definition,  however,  would  be  unsatisfactory  for 
the  following  reason.  It  would  leave  it  uncertain 
whether  there  are  any  mnemic  events,  and  the  decision 
would  depend  on  whether  we  did  or  did  not  accept 
mnemic  causation.  This  is  just  what  we  do  not  want. 
On  the  usual  form  of  the  trace  -  theory  all  the  in- 
dependently necessary  conditions  of  the  memory  do 
immediately  precede  its  occurrence.  For  this  event  is 
supposed  to  be  completely  determined  by  the  present 
stimulus  and  the  present  trace  which  this  stimulus 
excites.  On  this  view  the  actual  visit  to  the  town  last 
year  is  at  most  a  dependently  necessary  condition  ;  i.e.^ 
the  most  that  we  can  say  is  that  the  trace  would  not 
have  existed  unless  the  visit  had  taken  place.  So  that, 
if  the  trace-theory  be  true,  the  memory  is  not  really  a 
mnemic  event  in  the  sense  defined  above.     In  order  to 


TRACES   AND   DISPOSITIONS  443 

avoid  this  complication  I  shall  have  to  introduce  the 
words  "macroscopic"  and  "microscopic"  into  my 
definitions.  Macroscopic  events  are  those  which  can  be 
directly  observed,  measured,  etc.  Microscopic  events 
are  those  which  are  supposed  to  take  place  in  the 
minute  structure  of  nature,  and  to  be  from  their  nature 
unobservable  by  us.  These  terms  were  introduced 
into  physics  by  Lorentz  in  his  Theory  of  Electrons ;  and 
r  propose  to  borrow  them. 

I  will  now  define  a  "  macroscopically  mnemic  event  ". 
This  will  be  an  event  whose  independently  necessary 
macroscopic  conditions  are  not  all  contained  in  the  state 
of  affairs  which  immediately  precedes  its  occurrence. 
There  is  no  doubt  of  the  existence  of  macroscopically 
mnemic  events,  in  the  sense  defined.  If  we  make  no 
hypotheses  about  traces,  unconscious  mental  processes, 
etc.,  i.e.^  about  microscopic  events,  and  confine  ourselves 
wholly  to  what  we  can  perceive  and  introspect,  it  is 
quite  certain  that  events  in  the  remote  past  are  inde- 
pendently necessary  conditions  of  memory-experiences. 
The  question  at  issue  between  those  who  accept  and 
those  who  reject  Mnemic  Causation  can  now  be  stated 
clearly.  "Are  those  events  which  are  macroscopically 
mnemic  microscopically  non-mnemic,  or  are  they  not?" 
The  trace-theory  says  "  Yes  ",  and  the  theory  of  Mnemic 
Causation  says  "No". 

Causal  and  Epistemological  Conditions.  We  must  now 
notice  a  distinction  which  Mr  Russell  does  not  explicitly 
draw.  On  the  ordinary  form  of  the  trace-theory,  if  a 
similar  trace  could  have  existed  without  the  visit  to  the 
town  having  taken  place,  and  if  the  same  stimulus  had 
acted,  I  should  have  had  a  similar  experience  though  I 
had  never  visited  the  town.  And  the  case  of  hallucina- 
tory memory-experiences  might  be  quoted  in  support 
of  this  view.  But  it  would  be  possible  to  hold  a 
trace-theory,  and  yet  to  hold  that  the  existence  of 
the  trace  and  the  occurrence  of  the  stimulus  are  not 
sufficient  conditions  for  the  occurrence  of  the  memory- 


444 


THE  UNCONSCIOUS 


experience.  A  person  who  holds  the  realistic  view  that, 
in  all  memory-situations,  there  is  direct  acquaintance 
with  the  actual  past  event  remembered  would  have  to 
regard  the  existence  of  the  past  event  as  an  indepen- 
dently necessary  condition  of  the  occurrence  of  the 
memory-experience.  In  order  to  deal  with  these  possi- 
bilities it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between  the 
"causal"  and  the  "  epistemological "  conditions  of  a 
macroscopically  mnemic  event.  The  causal  conditions 
of  a  memory-experience  are  those  which  would  make  this 
kind  of  situation  arise  at  a  certain  Y(\om^xiX.  provided  ^dX 
a  suitable  object  exists  to  be  its  objective  constituent. 
The  existence  of  such  an  object,  ready  to  be  the  objective 
constituent  of  the  situation  if  it  arises,  is  what  I  mean 
by  the  "  epistemological  condition  "  of  the  event.  We 
can  now  consider  the  attitude  which  various  possible 
theories  would  take  up  towards  a  macroscopically 
mnemic  event,  such  as  a  memory-experience. 

(i)  The  ordinary  form  of  the  trace-theory  would  hold 
that  both  the  causal  and  the  epistemological  conditions 
of  a  memory-situation  are  non-mnemic  when  we  consider 
microscopic  events  and  objects.  Let  us  illustrate  this, 
and  the  alternative  theories,  by  diagrams.  Let  us  re- 
present momentary  events  by  dots,  memory-images  by 
circles,  persistent  traces  by  crosses,  the  causal  relation 
by  a  full  arrow,  and  the  cognitive  relation  by  a  dotted 
arrow.  Then  the  ordinary  trace-theory  of  memory  is 
represented  by  the  diagram  below. 


e  <' 


m 


^xxxxxxxx:>c 


/ 


A 


Here  ^,  a  past  event,  produces  a  trace  /?  which  persists. 
In  course  of  time  a  stimulus  s  excites  this  trace  and 


TRACES   AND   DISPOSITIONS 


445 


produces  the  awareness  of  a  memory-image  i  which 
resembles  e.  The  whole  situation  "  being  aware  of  the 
image  z  which  resembles  the  past  event  e  "  is  the  memory 
of  this  past  event.  Here  the  causal  and  the  epistemo- 
logical  conditions  are  both  ultimately  non-mnemic. 

(ii)  Let  us  next  consider  the  trace-theory  combined 
with  a  realistic  view  of  memory.  The  diagram  is  given 
below. 

e  ^— <- —  z'^ 


xxxxxxxxx  K 


A 
is 


Here,  as  before,  the  past  event  e  produces  the  trace 
t  which  persists  and  is  eventually  excited  by  the  stimulus 
s.  But  here  the  result  is  not  to  make  me  aware  of  a 
present  image  resembling  the  past  event.  The  result 
is  to  make  me  cognise  directly  the  past  event  e  which 
left  the  trace.  The  cognitive  relation  jumps  over  the 
time-gap  between  stimulus  and  past  event,  though  the 
causal  relation  does  not.  Thus  the  causal  conditions 
are  here  ultimately  non-mnemic,  but  the  epistemological 
conditions  are  mnemic. 

(iii)  We  will  next  consider  Mr  Russell's  form  of  the 
Mnemic  Causation  Theory.     The  diagram  is  as  follows  : 


->- 


J 


i^ 


Here  the  past  event  e  and  the  present  stimulus  jt  to- 
gether produce  by  mnemic  causation  the  awareness  of 
a  memory-image  /  which  in  fact  resembles  e  and  is 
accompanied  by  a  "  feeling  of  familiarity".  This  con- 
stitutes  the    memory    m   of  the   event   c.     The   causal 


446  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

conditions    are    here    irreducibly    mnemic,    whilst    the 
epistemological  conditions  are  non-mnemic. 

(iv)  It  would  obviously  be  possible  to  imagine  a  still 
more  radically  mnemic  theory,  by  combining  the  theory 
of  Mnemic  Causation  with  the  realistic  view  of  memory. 
This  is  illustrated  in  the  appended  diagram. 

/n 


e^ ^ 


J 

Here  the  causal  conditions  are  as  in  (iii)  ;  but  the 
result  is  not  to  produce  the  awareness  of  a  present 
image  which  feels  familiar  and  in  fact  resembles  the 
past  event.  The  result  is  to  produce  a  direct  awareness 
of  the  past  event  e  itself,  i.e.,  a  cognitive  situation  of 
which  e  itself  is  the  objective  constituent.  Here  then 
both  the  causal  and  the  epistemological  conditions 
would  be  irreducibly  mnemic. 

Of  course  there  are  plenty  of  macroscopically  mnemic 
events  where  there  is  no  need  to  introduce  the  distinction 
between  causal  and  epistemological  conditions.  For 
many  such  events  are  not  cognitions  at  all  ;  and  many 
which  are  cognitions  do  not  have  past  events  as  their 
epistemological  objects.  Still,  memories  are  the  most 
striking  example  of  macroscopically  mnemic  events, 
and  with  them  it  is  necessary  to  introduce  the  distinc- 
tion. Perhaps  the  distinction  can  be  made  clear  to 
anyone  who  finds  it  obscure,  by  means  of  the  following 
analogy.  Suppose  we  take  the  second  possible  theory, 
viz.,  the  trace-theory  combined  with  the  realistic  view 
of  memory.  We  might  compare  the  past  event,  on  this 
view,  to  a  lock ;  the  trace  to  a  key  made  to  fit  the  lock  ; 
and  remembering  the  past  event  to  undoing  the  lock 
with  the  key.      The   existence  of  the  lock  plays  two 


TRACES   AND   DISPOSITIONS  447 

different  parts  in  determining  the  event  of  unfastening 
the    lock.       {a)    The  lock   was   originally    made ;    then 
someone  took  a   wax    model  of  it ;    and  then  someone 
cut  a  key  from  this  model  to  fit  the  lock,  and  this  key 
is  used  from  time  to  time  to  unfasten  the  lock.     (Those 
of  my  readers  who  are  either  professional  burglars  or 
fellows  of  colleges  with  aweakness  for  losingtheir  fellow's- 
keys  will  be  familiar  with  the  causal  sequence  which  I 
have  been  describing.)    This  corresponds  to  the  original 
event  as  an  immediate  causal  condition  of  the  trace  and 
a  remote  causal  condition  of  the  memory,     (d)  The  act 
of  undoing  the  lock  with  the  key  cannot  occur  unless 
the  lock  exists  in  its  original  form  to  put  the  key  into. 
This  corresponds  to  the  original  event  as  an  independ- 
ently necessary  epistemological  condition  of  the  memory. 
"  Temporal  Separation''''  and  ^^  Immediate  Precedence'". 
There  is  one  other  notion   which   is    involved    in    our 
definitions  of  mnemic  and  non-mnemic  events,  which 
needs  to  be  cleared  up.     Real  events  are  not  momentary, 
but  have  a  finite  duration  ;  i.e.  they  are  like  lines  and 
not  like  points.    This  implies  that  *'  momentary  events  " 
are   not  literally  constituents  of  finite  events,  as  short 
events  are  of  longer  ones  that  overlap  them.     They  are 
complicated  functions  of  finite  events,  and  have  to  be 
defined    by  Extensive   Abstraction    in    the   way  which 
Whitehead    has   shown  us.     Again,  the  time-series  is 
supposed  to  be  continuous  ;  and  this  implies  that,  when 
we  "  analyse"  finite  events  into  "  momentary  events", 
no  two  of  these  momentary  events  will  be  next  to  each 
other,  as  two  successive  railings  of  a  fence  are.     When 
we  say  that  all  the  independently  necessary  conditions 
of  an  event  are  contained  in  the  state  of  affairs  which 
immediately  precedes  it,  we  seem  to  imply  {a)  that  all 
these    conditions  are    '*  momentary  ",  {b)    that  they  all 
belong  to  the  same  moment,  and  {c)  that  this  moment 
"  immediately  precedes  "  the  moment  at  which  the  event 
begins.     These  statements  are  all  Pickwickian,  and  we 
must  now  interpret  them. 


448  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

Let  us  represent  the  event  e,  which  is  to  be  the  effect, 
by  a  short  line  be.  Let  the  various  conditions  which 
are  severally  necessary  and  jointly  sufficient  to  produce 
e  be  contained  in  various  earlier  slices  of  the  world's 
history.  These  may  be  represented  by  a  number  of 
lines  ab^  a'b,  a"b,  which  all  end  at  b  the  beginning  of  e. 
Thus — 


Now  take  short  slices  along  ba,  ba,  and  ba"  ;  e.g.,  bx, 
bx,  and  bx".  Suppose  we  find  that,  no  matter  how 
short  we  make  these  stretches,  they  still  contain  all 
the  independently  necessary  conditions  of  e.  Then  we 
can  sum  this  up  by  saying  that  all  the  conditions  of  e 
are  "momentary"  and  that  they  all  "immediately 
precede  ^." 

If  we  did  not  find  this  to  be  true,  several  alternatives 
would  be  possible,  (i)  We  might  find  that  all  the 
independently  necessary  conditions  of  e  were  momentary, 
but  that  they  did  not  all  immediately  precede  e.  For 
instance,  we  might  find  that  the  stretch  bx  fails  to 
contain  a  certain  necessary  condition  of  e,  but  that  the 
stretch  x^  contains  this  missing  condition,  no  matter 
how  near  ^  be  to  x.  Then  we  could  say  that  e  has  a 
momentary  condition  which  is  separated  from  it  by  the 
time-gap  bx.  (ii)  We  might  find  that  some  of  e's 
conditions  are  neither  momentary  nor  immediately 
precedent  to  e.  For  instance,  it  may  be  that  if  x^  be 
made  too  short  it  will  fail  to  contain  a  certain  necessary 
condition  of  e.  There  may  in  fact  be  certain  character- 
istics which  determine  by  their  occurrence  the  occurrence 
of  ^,  and  need  a  certain  minimum  stretch  of  duration  to 
inhere  in.  E.g.,  if  e  were  partly  determined  by  a  certain 
characteristic  rate  of  vibration,  it  would  seem  that  this 
could  not  inhere  in  a  smaller  duration  than  that  taken 


TRACES  AND   DISPOSITIONS  449 

by  one  complete  period  of  the  vibration,  (iii)  It  might 
happen  that,  whilst  some  of  es  conditions  are  not 
momentary,  yet  the  non-momentary  conditions  are  con- 
.tinuous  in  time  with  e.  This  would  mean,  e.g.,  that 
one  of  the  necessary  conditions  of  e  is  the  pervasion  of 
a  certain  finite  stretch  such  as  bx  by  a  certain  non- 
uniform characteristic,  but  that  this  stretch  ends  at  the 
same  moment  as  e  begins. 

We  can  now  give  a  more  accurate  definition  of  non- 
mnemic  and  of  mnemic  events.  A  non-mnemic  event 
would  be  one  whose  "  momentary  "  conditions  (if  it  has 
any)  all  "immediately  precede"  it,  and  whose  non- 
momentary  conditions  (if  it  has  any)  are  all  continuous 
with  it.  A  mnemic  event  would  be  one  which  has  at 
least  one  independently  necessary  condition  which  is 
separated  from  it  by  a  finite  gap  in  time.  It  does  not 
follow  that  this  gap  may  not  also  contain  conditions 
which  are  necessary  for  e's  occurrence  ;  the  point  is  that 
they  are  not  sufficient  without  the  condition  which  pre- 
cedes the  gap.  We  must  also  recognise  the  theoretical 
possibility  that  a  remote  condition  of  an  event  might  be 
both  an  independently  and  a  dependently  necessary 
condition  of  it.  Suppose,  e.g.,  that  a  "momentary" 
event  at  A'  determines  the  filling  ol  the  stretch  xb,  and 
that  ^  is  a  function  both  of  this  event  and  of  the  filling 
oixb.  Then  this  remote  event  will  be  an  independently 
necessary  condition  of  e  ;  but  it  will  also  be  a  de- 
pendently necessary  condition  of  e,  in  so  far  as  it 
determines  the  filling  of  xb  which  in  turn  partially 
determines  e. 

The  important  point  for  us  to  notice  is  that  what  is  ^ 
characteristic  of  mnemic  causation  is  the  time-gap  between  ^ 
an  event  and  some  of  its  independently  necessary  condi- 
tions. The  question  whether  the  conditions  are  or  are 
not  ^^  momentary''  is  not  the  distinguishing  mark.  And 
the  question  whether  this  time-gap  does  or  does  not 
contain  other  necessary  conditions  is  not  relevant,  so 
long  as  it  does  not  contain  all  the  independently  neces- 

2  F 


^ 


450  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

sary  conditions.  It  is  important  to  see  this.  For  it 
is  almost  certain  that  there  is  causation  in  which  the 
conditions  are  not  "momentary",  in  the  sense  defined 
above.  Therefore,  if  we  confuse  mnemic  causation  with 
causation  in  which  some  of  the  conditions  are  non- 
momentary,  we  shall  be  liable  to  accept  the  former  on 
grounds  which  are  relevant  only  to  the  latter. 

Criticism  of  Mnemic  Causation.  We  may  sum  up  the 
differences  between  the  trace-theory  and  the  theory  of 
mnemic  causation  as  follows.  Whenever  we  have  a 
macroscopically  mnemic  event  there  is  a  time  -  gap 
between  the  event  and  some  of  its  independently 
necessary  macroscopic  conditions.  The  trace-theory 
holds  that  such  a  gap  cannot  be  an  ultimate  fact ;  all 
the  independently  necessary  conditions  of  an  event 
must  be  continuous  with  it,  if  they  be  non-momentary, 
and  must  "immediately  precede"  it,  if  they  be 
"momentary".  We  have  explained  the  Pickwickian 
phrases  in  inverted  commas.  Hence  the  trace-theory 
holds  that  the  past  experience  is  not  an  independently 
necessary  causal  condition  of  the  memory  of  it  ;  and  it 
has  to  fill  the  gap  by  postulating  hypothetical  microscopic 
entities,  viz.,  traces,  which  are  produced  by  the  past 
*J,  \        experience  and  persist  into  the  present.     The  mnemic 

theory,  on  the  other  hand,  is  prepared  to  accept  as  an 
ultimate  fact  that  some  of  the  independently  necessary 
conditions  of  an  event  are  neither  continuous  with  it 
nor  "  immediately  precede  "  it.  It  is  prepared  to  bridge 
the  temporal  gap  by  postulating  a  special  kind  of  causal 
relation. 

On  a  first  inspection  each  theory  is  seen  to  have  its 
characteristic  merits  and  defects.  One  keeps  to  the 
familiar  kind  of  causal  relation,  but  has  to  postulate 
purely  hypothetical  persistent  entities  ;  the  other  keeps 
to  events  which  can  actually  be  observed  by  intro- 
spection, but  has  to  postulate  an  unfamiliar  kind  of 
causal  relation.  In  dealing  with  matter  I  do  not  think 
that  we  should  hesitate  for  a  moment  between   the  two. 


TRACES   AND   DISPOSITIONS  451 

The  notion  of  a  hidden  minute  structure  in  matter  is 
perfectly  famiUar  to  us  ;  we  know  that  our  unaided 
senses  cannot  distinguish  the  finer  divisions  of  matter, 
and  that  microscopes  often  reveal  a  highly  differentiated 
structure  in  what  seems  quite  homogeneous  to  the  naked 
eye.  Moreover,  we  know  that  the  details  thus  dis- 
covered very  often  explain  the  behaviour  of  the  bodies 
in  which  we  discover  them.  Hence  the  idea  of  material 
structure  and  states  too  minute  for  us  to  perceive  even 
with  the  microscope  is  almost  forced  upon  us  ;  and  it  is 
reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  not  very  numerous  macro- 
scopically  mnemic  phenomena  which  are  observed  in 
the  inorganic  realm  are  microscopically  non- mnemic. 
It  is  much  harder  to  conceive  of  a  microscopic  mental 
structure,  and  this  is  the  only  reason  why  we  are  tempted 
to  introduce  the  theory  of  mnemic  causation  into  mental 
phenomena.  Since  the  mind  and  its  states  are  not  in 
any  obvious  sense  extended,  the  idea  of  a  structure 
which  cannot  be  observed  because  of  its  spatial  minute- 
ness fails  us  here.  The  notion  of  non-introspectible 
and  perhaps  unowned  series  of  mental  events,  which 
otherwise  resemble  our  conscious  experiences,  is  not 
easy  for  us  to  grasp  ;  and  it  is  hard  for  us  to  give  a 
meaning  to  mental  events  which  do  not  resemble  our 
conscious  experiences.  Hence  the  main  motive  for 
considering  favourably  a  mnemic-causation-theory  for 
mental  phenomena  is  simply  the  difficulty  which  we 
have  in  conceiving  the  intrinsic  nature  of  traces  and 
dispositions  unless  we  are  prepared  to  regard  them  as 
purely  material  modifications  of  the  brain  and  nervous 
system.  Against  this  we  might  put  two  considerations, 
(i)  Although  the  mental  events  which  we  can  intro- 
spect do  not  seem  to  be  extended  they  do  seem  to  have 
different  degrees  of  intensity,  and  it  does  seem  to  be 
harder  to  discriminate  them  introspectively  as  their 
intensity  decreases.  Thus  it  might  be  possible  to 
substitute  low  intensity  for  small  extension,  and  to 
conceive    of  traces   and    dispositions   as   being   of    the 


452  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

nature  of  ordinary  conscious  mental  events  but  of 
very  low  intensity.  (2)  Some  people  would  certainly 
hold  that  there  are  a  priori  objections  to  the  whole 
notion  of  mnemic  causation,  and  that  we  must  therefore 
adopt  a  trace-theory,  no  matter  what  difficulties  we  may 
have  in  picturing  to  ourselves  the  intrinsic  nature  of 
traces  and  dispositions. 

I  propose  now  to  say  something  about  this  last  point. 
In  order  to  discuss  it  adequately  it  would  be  necessary 
to  enter  in  great  detail  into  the  nature  of  causation  in 
general.  This  would  be  out  of  place  in  the  present 
connexion.  I  shall,  therefore,  confine  myself  to  a  few 
remarks  which  seem  relevant  and  do  not  carry  us  too 
far  afield. 

(i)  In  answering  objections  against  the  possibility  of 
mnemic  causation  Mr  Russell  assumes  that  causal  laws 
are  merely  assertions  of  regular jaeque^n^jej-^^^  t^at  any 
true  assertion  of  regular  S£.q.u£jLce  is  a  cau&aJ-Iaw:  He 
supposes  an  objector  to  say  that,  in  mnemic  causation, 
some  of  the  independently  necessary  conditions  of  an 
event  have  ceased  to  exist  long  before  the  event  begins 
to  happen.  And  then  the  objector  is  supposed  to  raise 
the  difficulty:  "How  can  anything  act  after  it  has 
ceased  to  exist  for  a  finite  time?"  To  put  the  objection 
in  a  concrete  form: — "According  to  the  theory  of 
mnemic  causation  my  perception  of  a  town  which  I 
visited  last  year  literally  produces  a  memory  of  this 
event  whenever  a  suitable  stimulus  acts  on  me.  But 
the  perception  is  long  past  and  is  in  no  sense  continued 
into  the  present.  It  has  ceased  to  exist  itself,  and 
nothing  now  exists  which  can  be  regarded  as  a  con- 
tinuation of  it.  How  then  can  it  do  anything  now?" 
Mr  Russell  answers  that  this  objection  presupposes  the 
activity  theory  of  causation,  which  is  now  rejected  by 
most  philosophers.  And  he  goes  on  to  say  that  causa- 
tion simply  means  regular -sequence  ;  and  that,  with 
this  interpretation,  there  is  no  a  priori  objection  to 
mnemic  causation.      By  saying  that  C  causes  E,  on  this 


TRACES   AND   DISPOSITIONS  453 

view,  we  simply  mean  that  C  is  a  set  of  conditions  r^,  r^, 
.  .  .  r„,  such  that  (a)  whenever  they  are  all  fulfilled  E 
happens,  and  {d)  whenever  E  happens  they  have  all 
been  fulfilled.  This  says  nothing  about  c^  .  .  .  c„ 
being  all  of  the  same  date  and  all  ''immediately  pre- 
ceding" E.  Hence,  if  this  be  all  that  we  ever  mean  by 
saying  that  C  causes  E,  mnemic  causation  is  ante- 
cedently quite  as  possible  as  non -mnemic  causation  ; 
and  it  becomes  a  mere  question  of  fact  (which  could 
never  be  conclusively  settled)  whether  there  is  mnemic 
causation. 

For  a  complete  discussion  it  would-be  necessary,  first, 
to  consider  whether  causation  does  mean  nothing  but 
regular  sequence.  If  we  found  that  it  did  involve  some- 
thing more,  the  next  question  would  be  whether  this 
extra  factor  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  possibility 
of  mnemic  causal  laws.  And^  lastly,  we  might  ask 
whether,  even  if  causation  is  simply  regular 
it  is  true  to  say  that  past  experience  and  preset 
are  sufficient  by  themselves  to  cause  a  memory  of  the 
past  event. 

{a)  It  is,  of  course,  impossible  for  me  to  give  an 
adequate  discussion  of  the  meaning  of  Causation  here. 
I  will  simply  say  that,  even  if  all  causation  involves 
regular  sequence,  I  very  much  doubt  whether  all  regular 
sequence  would  be  counted  as  a  causal  law.  I  should 
say  that  there  are  many  cases  where  we  should  admit 
regular  sequence  and  unhesitaiingly  deny  causation  ; 
though  there  are  perhaps  no  cases  where  we  can  im- 
hesitatmgly  assert  causation  in  addition  to  regular 
sequence.  I  do  not  propose  to  do  more  here  than  to 
show  that  the  line  of  argument  by  which  the  doctrine 
that  causation  is  simply  regular  sequence  is~cqimmonly 
supported  is  a  very  weak  one.  The  argument  generally 
takes  the  following  form.  The  plain  man  starts  by 
believing  that  there  is  something  in  causation  beside 
regular  sequence.  His  opponent  then  asks  him  to  state 
clearly  what  this  extra  factor  is.     The  plain  man  is  then 


I 


might   ask      t 
r  sequence,    ..  i, 
?nt  stimulus    '\ 


454 


THE  UNCONSCIOUS 


V 
V"^ 


>^" 


inclined  to  say  that  causation  involves  "activity"  or 
"necessity"  or  both,  in  addition  to  regular  sequence. 
His  opponent  then  tries  to  show  that  the  notion  of 
"  activity"  is  just  an  illegitimate  extension  to  all  cases 
of  causation  of  certain  characteristics  which  accompany 
the  very  special  experience  of  voluntarily  initiating  an 
action.  He  also  argues,  on  the  lines  of  Mr  Hume,  that 
no  causal  law  is  found  to  be  necessary  on  careful  re- 
flection. Thus  the  plain  man  finds  that  the  two  marks 
by  which  he  proposed  to  distinguish  causation  from 
mere  de  facto  regularity  of  sequence  vanish  under  his 
opponent's  criticisms  ;  and  he  has  to  admit  that  he 
cannot  state  any  factor  which  differentiates  a  causal 
law  from  a  mere  statement  of  regular  sequence.  His 
opponent  then  argues  that  this  failure  to  state  the  dif- 
ference is  due  to  there  being  no  difference  to  state  ;  and 
the  plain  man  is  reduced  to  silence,  though  not  alto- 
gether to  conviction. 

If  we  reflect  we  shall  see  that  this  is  a  very  poor 
argument  for  the  purpose.  Suppose  that  causation  did 
involve  an  unique  and  not  further  analysable  relation. 
It  might  be  that  regular  sequence  was  not  even  paj-t  of 
what  we  mean  by  causation,  but  was  merely  a  sign 
(though  by  no  means  an  infallible  one)  by  which  the 
presence  of  this  other  relation  is  indicated.  If  this 
relation  be  unique  and  unanalysable,  like  the  relation 
of  inside  and  outside  in  space,  for  instance,  it  will  be 
impossible  to  define  it  in  any  but  tautologous  terms. 
Thus  the  failure  to  define  anything  in  causation  except 
regular  sequence  may  be  due,  not  to  the  absence  of  an 
extra  factor,  but  to  its  being  ultimate  and  unanalysable. 
Our  extreme  unwillingness  to  admit  that  causation  is 
nothing  but  regular  sequence,  and  the  extreme  paradoxes 
to  which  any  such  views  lead  (cf.  Mr  Russell's  examples 
about  the  hooters  at  two  distant  factories  which  both 
sound  at  the  same  time  and  therefore  are  both  equally 
causes  of  eit/ie)-  set  of  workmen  going  to  their  work) 
suggest  strongly  that  there  is  something  in  causation 


TRACES  AND   DISPOSITIONS  455 

beside  merely  regularity  of  sequence.  On  the  other 
hand,  I  think  we  must  admit  that,  if  there  be  a  peculiar 
relation  involved  in  causation,  we  are  seldom  if  ever 
directly  acquainted  with  it  as  we  often  are  directly 
acquainted  with  certain  spatial  and  temporal  relations. 
I  cannot  perceive  the  causal  relation  by  any  of  my 
senses,  as  I  can  perceive  that  one  thing  in  my  field  of 
view  is  to  the  right  of  another  thing  in  my  field  of  view. 
And  I  cannot,  I  think,  ever  be  perfectly  certain  on 
reflection  that  A  causes  B  in  addition  to  regularly  preced- 
ing\\..  (If  there  beany  exception  to  this,  I  think  it  is 
in  my  voluntary  initiation  of  certain  changes.)  But  I 
think  that  I  can  be  absolutely  certain  that  I  do  not 
mean  the  same  thing  by  "A  causes  B"  and  "A  is 
regularly  followed  by  B  ".  And  I  think  that  I  can  often 
be  quite  certain  that  A  does  not  cause  B  in  spite  of  com- 
plete regularity  of  sequence  between  the  two.  E.g.^  I 
am  quite  sure  that  the  hooter  of  a  factory  in  Manchester 
does  not  cause  the  workmen  of  a  factory  in  London  to 
go  to  their  work,  even  though  the  Manchester  hooter 
does  always  blow  just  before  the  London  workmen  start 
to  wend  their  way  to  the  London  factory. 

{b)  So  far  I  have  suggested  that  regular  sequence 
may  be  no  part  of  what  we  mean  by  causation,  but  that 
it  is  one  of  the  signs  by  which  we  judge  with  more  or 
less  conviction  that  the  causal  relation  is  present.  It 
may  be,  however,  that  regular  sequence  by  itself  is  not 
an  adequate  sign  of  the  presence  of  the  causal  relation. 
It  may  be  that  only  certain  kinds  of  regular  sequence 
are  trustworthy  as  signs  of  the  causal  relation.  And, 
again,  even  if  it  be  held  that  all  causation  is  regular 
sequence  and  that  there  is  no  specific  and  unanalysable 
factor  in  causation,  it  might  still  be  held  that  only 
certain  kinds  of  regular  sequence  are  cases  of  causation. 
I  think  that  this  must  be  admitted  in  view  of  our  refusal 
to  regard  the  sequence  of  the  blowing  of  the  Manchester 
hooter  and  the  movement  of  the  London  workmen  as  an 
instance  of  causation.      Now  the  missing  factor  seems 


456  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

to  be  a  certain  spatio-temporal  continuity  between  the 
sequent  events.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  it  is  the 
absence  of  such  continuity  between  the  blowing  of  the 
Manchester  hooter  and  the  movements  of  the  London 
workmen  which  makes  me  so  certain  that  the  former  is 
not  a  cause  of  the  latter.  I  think  that  it  is  the  absence 
of  the  required  temporal  continuity  between  "cause" 
and  "effect"  which  is  the  real  basis  of  the  objection  to 
mnemic  causation  which  Mr  Russell  has  dismissed  as 
due  to  the  ghost  of  the  activity  theory  of  causation.  If 
such  continuity  be  essential  to  the  notion  of  causation 
then  "  mnemic  causation"  can  be  dismissed,  even  if  we 
admit  that  there  is  no  specific  and  unanalysable  causal 
relation.  For  only  certain  kinds  of  regular  sequences 
will  count  as  "causal";  and  the  sequence  of  past 
experience  and  present  memory  is  not  of  the  required 
kind.  My  own  view  is  that  I  do  not  mean  by  "causa- 
tion "  any  kind  of  regular  sequence  ;  but  that  certain 
kinds  of  regular  sequence  are  fairly  trustworthy  signs 
of  the  presence  of  the  causal  relation.  But  the  final 
result  is  the  same.  For  the  sequence  of  past  experience 
and  present  memory  is  not  of  the  kind  which  I  regard 
as  a  trustworthy  sign  of  the  presence  of  a  direct  causal 
relation  between  the  two. 

[c)  Let  us  now  ask  ourselves  the  question  :  "  Suppose 
that  causation  were  simply  regular  sequence,  and  that 
any  and  every  kind  of  regular  sequence  were  causation, 
should  we  be  justified  in  holding  that  a  past  experience 
and  a  present  stimulus  are  the  complete  cause  of  a 
present  memory  ? "  Suppose  that  I  visited  a  certain 
town  two  years  ago,  and  that  last  year  someone 
mentioned  its  name  to  me  and  I  thereupon  remembered 
my  visit  to  it.  Suppose  that  some  time  after  this  I  had 
a  bad  illness  or  an  accident  ;  it  might  well  happen  that, 
if  the  name  were  now  mentioned  to  me,  I  should  not 
remember  my  visit  to  the  town.  Such  cases  are  of 
course  very  common.  It  follows  at  once  that  the  two 
conditions,    past  experience  and  present  stimulus,   are 


TRACES   AND   DISPOSITIONS  457 

not  jointly  sufficient,  though  they  may  be  severally 
necessary,  to  cause  a  memory  even  on  the  most  extreme 
form  of  the  regularity-theory  of  causation.  For  the 
memory  does  not  regularly  follow  on  the  fulfilment  of 
these  conditions  and  of  these  alone.  In  fact,  we  have 
made  the  common  mistake  of  ignoring  a  condition 
which  is  just  as  necessary  as  the  rest,  but  is  unexciting 
and  is  much  more  often  fulfilled  than  not.  We  talk 
carelessly  of  a  gas-escape  and  a  spark  as  the  cause  of  an 
explosion.  But  the  presence  of  Oxygen  is  equally 
necessary  and  much  more  likely  to  be  forgotten,  because 
this  condition  is  nearly  always  fulfilled,  whilst  it  is  much 
less  common  for  gas  to  be  escaping  or  for  sparks  to  be 
flying  about.  In  the  same  way  something  which  may 
vaguely  be  called  "the  general  integrity  of  the  brain 
and  nervous  system  "  is  at  least  as  necessary  as  the 
past  experience  and  the  present  stimulus  if  the  memory 
is  to  arise.  We  forget  this  condition  because  it  is 
generally  fulfilled  while  we  are  alive.  Now  this  condi- 
tion cannot  be  given  a  definite  date.  If  it  breaks  down 
anywhere  between  the  original  experience  and  the  sub- 
sequent stimulus,  the  memory  is  liable  not  to  arise. 
It  seems  to  me  extremely  unlikely  that  there  is  any  such 
thing  as  mnemic  causation,  even  on  the  extreme 
regularity-theory  which  Mr  Russell  assumes,  if  by  this  '  ^. 
you  mean  that  a  number  of  conditions  separated  in  time 
from  each  other  and  from  the  event  which  they  are 
supposed  to  cause  are  jointly  sufficient  to  cause  this  \ 
event.  And  it  is  perfectly  certain  that  memories  are 
not  completely  determined  by  past  experience  and 
present  stimulus  in  the  sense  that  they  regularly  follow 
on  the  fulfilment  of  these  two  conditions  alone.  To  put 
the  matter  generally,  I  should  say  that  even  on  the 
regularity-theory  of  causation  the  complete  cause  of 
any  event  involves  persistent  as  well  as  transient  con- 
ditions. Even  if  the  transient  conditions  be  separated 
from  each  other  by  temporal  gaps  these  gaps  must  be- 
filled  with  persistent  conditions  which  stretch  right  up 


458  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

to  the  beginning  of  the  effect.  Mr  Russell  in  his 
account  of  mnemic  causation  seems  to  have  made  the 
common  mistake  of  mentioning  the  transient  and 
forgetting  the  persistent  conditions. 

It  is,  however,  quite  easy  to  rectify  this  oversight, 
and  then  we  can  see  precisely  where  the  difference 
between  mnemic  causation  and  ordinary  causation 
would  lie.  The  difference  remains  considerable.  On 
Mr  Russell's  theory,  as  modified  to  meet  the  above 
criticism,  there  is  a  persistent  condition  involved  in 
memory,  but  it  is  general  and  not  special.  This  per- 
sistent condition  is  just  the  general  integrity  of  the 
brain  and  nervous  system,  which  existed  before  as  well 
as  after  the  past  experience  and  was  in  no  way  modified 
by  it.  On  the  trace-theory  there  is  a  special  persistent 
condition,  which  was  started  by  the  past  experience 
and  would  not  have  existed  without  it.  The  two  inde- 
pendently necessary  conditions  of  the  memory  are  this 
special  persistent  and  the  stimulus.  The  difference  can 
be  seen  most  clearly  as  follows.  On  the  trace-theory, 
if  you  were  to  take  a  cross-section  of  the  history  of  the 
experient's  body  and  mind  anywhere  between  the  past 
experience  and  the  stimulus  you  would  find  something, 
viz.,  the  trace,  which  corresponds  to  and  may  be  re- 
garded as  the  representative  of  the  past  experience. 
On  Mr  Russell's  theory,  even  when  modified  to  meet 
the  above  criticisms,  these  intermediate  slices,  though 
relevant  and  necessary,  would  contain  nothing  which 
corresponds  to  and  represents  the  past  experience.  In 
mnemic  causation  we  should  have  the  following  situa- 
tion. Although  there  is  continuity  between  the  total 
cause  and  the  effect  (since  one  essential  part  of  the  cause 
is  a  general  persistent  condition  which  fills  the  gap 
between  its  earlier  and  later  transient  parts),  yet  there 
is  not  continuity  between  the  effect  and  each  inde- 
pendently necessary  factor  in  the  cause.  The  original 
experience  is  not  joined  on  to  the  memory  either 
directly  ;  or  by  transmission  of  a  disturbance  through  a 


TRACES   AND   DISPOSITIONS  459 

medium,  as  in  the  case  of  light  or  sound  ;  or  by  some 
special  persistent  which  represents  it,  as  on  the  trace- 
theory.  If  the  possibility  of  mnemic  causation  is  to  be 
denied,  it  must  be  on  the  ground  that  one  or  other  of 
these  special  kinds  of  continuity  is  needed  in  addition  to 
the  merely  general  continuity  which  the  integrity  of  the 
brain  and  nervous  system  provides.  I  am  not  prepared 
to  assert  that  this  additional  dose  of  continuity  is 
needed  ;  and,  therefore,  I  am  not  prepared  to  deny  the 
possibility  of  mnemic  causation,  as  modified  by  us  in 
the  course  of  the  discussion. 

(2)  The  second  remark  which  I  wish  to  make  about 
mnemic  causation  is  the  following.  Suppose  that  ^j 
.  .  .  r,i  are  independently  necessary  and  jointly  sufficient 
transient  conditions  for  the  happening  of  an  event  e. 
We  will  not  now  insist  that  they  must  all  be  contem- 
porary with  each  other,  or  that  they  shall  "  immediately 
precede"  e  or  be  continuous  with  it.  But  I  do  think 
that  we  should  expect  there  to  be  some  characteristic 
time-relation  between  them.  Surely  we  should  expect 
the  law  to  be  at  least  of  somewhat  the  following  form  : 
''Whenever  c^  is  followed  by  ^^  after  the  interval  /^^, 
and  by  c,^  after  the  interval  /^g,  .  .  .  and  by  Cn  after  the 
interval  t^ni  ^  follows  ;  and  e  does  not  happen  except 
when  c^  .  .  .  c^  have  all  happened  with  these  character- 
istic intervals  between  them."  No  doubt  in  any  causal 
law  the  absolute  dates  of  the  various  factors  are  variable  ; 
but  one  would  expect  the  relative  dates  to  be  constant 
and  characteristic  of  the  law.  Now  let  us  apply  this  to 
the  case  of  past  experience,  present  stimulus  and  memory. 
Assuming  the  general  persistent  condition  to  be  fulfilled, 
we  find  that  the  memory  arises  whenever  the  stimulus  is 
given,  so  long  as  it  is  after  the  original  experience  ;  i.e.^ 
there  is  no  characteristic  interval  between  the  two 
transient  conditions  in  the  supposed  mnemic  causal  law. 
Now  I  should  be  inclined  to  suppose  that,  whenever 
this  is  so,  we  have  not  got  an  ultimate  causal  law  but 
only  an  empirical  generalisation  of  the  very  crudest  kind. 


46o  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

(3)  There  is  one  other  point  rather  closely  connected 
with  the  above.  Suppose  we  ask  ourselves:  "What 
is  our  usual  test  for  the  persistence  of  anything  which 
is  not  under  continuous  observation?"  I  think  that  we 
should  have  to  answer  somewhat  as  follows.  Suppose 
we  find  that  throughout  a  long  period  of  time  whenever 
a  certain  condition  C  is  fulfilled  a  certain  result  E  im- 
mediately follows.  And  suppose  we  know  that  C  by 
itself  is  not  sufficient  to  produce  E.  Then  we  always 
assume  that  there  is  another  persistent  factor  P  with 
which  the  variable  factor  C  co-operates  to  give  the  result 
E.  E.g.,  one  of  my  main  reasons  for  believing  that 
there  is  a  persistent  something,  called  "my  table",  in 
my  room  is  that  throughout  a  long  period  of  time  when- 
ever I  look  in  a  certain  direction  I  become  aware  of  an 
appearance  of  the  table.  I  know  that  the  mere  fact  of 
looking  in  this  direction  is  not  a  sufficient  condition 
of  sensing  this  particular  kind  of  appearance  ;  and  I 
assume  that  the  other  necessary  condition  is  the  per- 
sistent something  which  I  call  "my  table".  But  this 
is  almost  exactly  parallel  to  remembering  my  past  visit 
to  a  certain  town  whenever  the  proper  stimulus  is  applied. 
I  know  that  neither  the  stimulus  nor  the  mere  general 
integrity  of  brain  and  nervous  system  is  enough  to 
account  for  the  occurrence  of  this  particular  memory  at 
this  particular  time  ;  and  I  assume  that  there  must  be 
some  other  condition  which  is  persistent.  The  plain 
fact  is  then  that  we  have  precisely  the  sanie^  kind  of 
reason  for  believing  in  persistent  traces  as  we  have  for 
believing  in  the  persistence  of  tables^  when  they  are  not 
under  direct  observation.  If  this  test  for  persistence  be 
a  valid^one,  we  ought  to  apply  it  to  memory  as  well  as 
to  perception  ;  and  in  that  case  we  shall  have  to  accept 
something  like  the  trace-theory.  If  we  refuse  to  apply 
the  argument  to  traces  we  ought  not  to  apply  it  to 
tables.  We  ought  presumably  to  hold  that  later  table- 
sensations  are  mnemically  caused  by  the  first  table- 
sensation  and  the  subsequent  acts  of  looking  in  a  certairi 


TRACES  AND   DISPOSITIONS  461 

direction  ;  and  we  ought  to  reject  the  noti(jn  of  a  per- 
sistent physical  object  as  a  superstition  unworthy  of 
the  "Free  Man".  No  one  (not  even  Mr  Russell  in 
any  of  his  published  works)  does  in  fact  take  this  alterna- 
tive about  the  table  ;  and  it  seems  scarcely  consistent  to 
take  it  about  memory  and  then  to  refuse  to  extend  it  to 
the  precisely  parallel  case  of  successive  perceptions  of 
what  we  call  "  the  same  thing  ". 

Summary.  I  will  now  sum  up  the  results  of  this 
discussion  about  mnemic  causation.  I  have  tried  to 
explain  clearly  the  difference  between  a  mnemic  and 
a  non-mnemic  event,  and  between  mnemic  and  non- 
mnemic  causation.  In  so  doing  I  have  stated  the  literal 
meaning  of  certain  Pickwickian  phrases  which  are  used 
in  the  definitions.  I  have  distinguished  between  the 
causal  and  the  epistemological  conditions  of  memory, 
and  have  explained  and  illustrated  the  four  possible 
types  of  theory  which  arise  when  we  allow  the  two 
kinds  of  condition  to  be  either  mnemic  or  non-mnemic. 
I  then  considered  the  arguments  for  and  against  mnemic 
causation  in  psychology.  The  only  argument  that  I 
could  find  for  it  was  the  difficulty  of  conceiving  the 
intrinsic  nature  of  traces  unless  we  take  them  to  be 
purely  material  and  thus  pass  outside  the  sphere  of 
pure  psychology.  On  the  other  side  I  argued  that  it 
is  very  doubtful  whether  causation  can  be  reduced  to 
mere  regular  sequence,  and  quite  certain  that  not  all 
kinds  of  regular  sequence  would  be  counted  as  instances 
of  causation.  If,  then,  the  objections  to  mnemic  causa- 
tion can  be  answered  only  on  an  extreme  form  of  the 
regularity-theory  of  causation,  it  is  doubtful  whether 
they  can  be  answered  at  all.  I  then  showed  that,  even 
on  a  pure  regularity-theory  of  causation,  it  is  certain 
that  the  past  experience  and  the  present  stimulus  are 
not  jointly  sufficient  to  cause  a  memory.  At  the  very 
least  a  general  persistent  condition,  which  fills  the  gap 
between  the  two,  is  needed  also.  If  this  be  granted, 
the  difference  between  the  trace-theory  and  the  theory 


462  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

of  mnemic  causation  depends  on  whether  a  general  per- 
sistent condition  is  enough  or  whether  a  jr/^a(2/ persistent 
condition,  which  depends  on  and  "  represents  "  the  past 
experience,  is  also  needed.  I  did  not  profess  to  be  able 
to  give  a  conclusive  answer  to  this  last  question.  But 
I  pointed  out  that  we  might  fairly  expect  a  genuine 
mnemic  law  to  involve  characteristic  time  -  intervals 
between  the  various  independently  necessary  and  non- 
contemporary  transient  conditions  of  an  event.  And 
we  do  not  find  this  to  be  so  in  the  case  of  memory. 
On  the  contrary  we  have  here  exactly  the  kind  of  situa- 
tion which  anywhere  else  would  make  us  postulate  a 
special  persistent  condition. 

I  do  not  pretend  to  have  absolutely  refuted  the  possi- 
bility of  mnemic  causation  as  an  ultimate  fact  in  mental 
life.  But  I  do  think  that  I  have  shown  that  we  have 
very  little  ground  for  accepting  it,  and  that  we  have 
exactly  the  same  kind  of  evidence  for  the  existence  of 
traces  and  dispositions  as  we  have  for  the  persistence  of 
physical  objects  when  they  are  not  under  continuous 
observation.  Under  these  circumstances  I  think  we 
shall  do  well  to  accept  some  form  of  the  trace-theory 
until  some  philosopher  has  successfully  applied  the 
theory  of  mnemic  causation,  not  only  to  the  special 
case  of  mental  phenomena,  but  also  to  all  cases  where 
we  assume  the  existence  of  special  persistents  in  spite 
of  their  not  being  under  continuous  observation.  Hence- 
forth, then,  I  shall  assume  that  there  really  are  such 
things  as  traces  and  dispositions,  i.e.,  special  "  mnemic 
persistents,"  to  revert  to  a  name  which  we  have  already 
introduced.  We  must  now  consider  the  question  : 
'*  What  is  the  intrinsic  nature  of  mnemic  persistents?" 

The  Nature  of  Mnemic  Persistents. — Let  us  begin  by 
considering  once  more  the  case  of  material  substances. 
We  have  agreed  that  here  the  causal  characteristics  are 
correlated  with  and  dependent  upon  certain  persistent 
non-causal    characteristics.       But,    if  we    inquire   more 


TRACES   AND   DISPOSITIONS  463 

closely  into  the  nature  of  the  latter,  we  find  that  two 
different  cases  arise,  (i)  We  may  have  both  identity 
of  stuff  and  persistence  of  structure.  Take,  e.g.^  the 
pillar-box  which  looks  red  whenever  it  is  viewed  in 
white  light  by  a  normal  eye.  Here  we  have  the  same 
particles  persisting,  and  at  each  moment  they  have  the 
same  spatial  structure.  (2)  Contrast  this  with  the  case 
of  an  organism.  Here  we  have  persistence  of  structure 
with  continual  change  of  stuff.  Matter  is  continually 
passing  into  and  out  of  the  organism  ;  and  the  causal 
characteristics  of  the  organism  depend  on  the  fact  that, 
as  new  matter  comes  in,  it  is  continually  organised  and 
arranged  in  the  same  characteristic  way  and  thus  replaces 
the  matter  which  is  continually  going  out. 

A  purely  Mental  Theory  of  Traces.  Now  we  might 
have  a  theory  of  purely  mental  traces  analogous  to  the 
first  of  these  possibilities  if  we  adopted  the  Pure  Ego 
theory  of  the  self.  The  Pure  Ego  itself  would  be  the 
persistent  identical  "stuff".  And  the  causal  charac- 
teristics of  the  mind  might  be  correlated  with  various 
persistent  states  of  the  Pure  Ego,  On  this  view  the 
existence  of  a  trace  would  be  the  fact  that  the  Pure  Ego 
has  a  certain  determinate  non-causal  characteristic  at 
every  moment  within  a  certain  period  of  time.  Of 
course  the  analogy  to  the  first  possibility  about  material 
substances  is  only  partial.  There  we  had  persistence 
of  stuff  and  persistence  of  structure.  Here,  so  far  as 
we  know,  there  would  be  no  question  of  structure. 
There  is  persistence  of  stuff  and  an  identical  deter- 
minate quality  possessed  by  this  stuff  for  a  certain 
period  of  time.  But  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose 
this  determinate  quality  in  the  possession  of  a  certain 
internal  structure ;  for  the  whole  notion  of  internal 
structure  may  be  nonsense  as  applied  to  the  Pure  Ego. 

Could  we  conceive  of  a  theory  of  purely  mental  traces 
without  assuming  the  Pure  Ego  theory  of  the  self?  I 
think  that  we  could,  and  that  it  would  be  partially, 
though  not  exactly,  analogous  to  the  second  possibility 


464  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

about  material  substances.  I  will  begin  by  pointing 
out  that  even  a  purely  physiological  theory  of  traces  is 
incompatible  with  persistence  of  stuff.  Suppose  we 
compare  a  scar,  due  to  a  burn,  with  a  dent  in  a  leaden 
ball,  due  to  a  blow.  The  dent  is  simply  a  persistent 
spatial  rearrangement  of  the  same  particles  of  matter  as 
were  present  in  the  leaden  ball  before  the  blow  dented 
it.  The  scar,  on  the  other  hand,  may  persist  years  after 
every  particle  of  matter  which  was  in  the  body  when  it 
was  burnt  has  left  it  and  been  replaced  by  other  matter. 
What  happens  is  that  the  new  matter  as  it  comes  in  is 
continually  arranged  so  that  we  still  have  the  scar. 
Even  if  traces  be  purely  physiological  they  must  be  of 
the  same  nature  as  the  scar  and  not  of  the  same  nature 
as  the  dent;  i.e.,  they  persist  through  the  same  form 
being  continually  imposed  on  fresh  matter,  and  not 
through  the  same  matter  retaining  a  certain  form  which 
has  once  been  imposed  on  it. 

Now  I  have  already  said  that,  in  many  respects,  an 
organism  is  a  kind  of  half-way  house  between  an  in- 
organic material  substance  and  a  mind.  It  is,  therefore, 
tempting  to  see  whether  we  could  not  conceive  of  purely 
mental  traces  as  analogous  to  scars  in  organic  bodies. 
I  will  first  point  out  where  it  seems  to  me  that  the 
analogy  does  not  hold.  Matter  enters  organisms  from 
outside,  is  elaborated  and  arranged  within  them,  remains 
there  for  some  time,  then  gradually  breaks  down  and  is 
ejected.  If  we  regard  a  mind  as  a  complex  whole  of 
interrelated  mental  states,  we  can  hardly  suppose  that 
new  mental  states  come  into  the  mind  from  elsewhere 
and  pass  from  it  after  a  while.  If  we  take  the  "parts" 
of  a  mind  to  be  its  states,  we  must  admit  that  the 
"parts"  seem  to  be  so  dependent  on  the  whole  that  it 
is  doubtful  whether  they  could  have  existed  before  they 
became  parts  of  this  whole  or  could  exist  after  they  have 
ceased  to  be  parts  of  this  whole.  Another  difference 
between  a  mind  and  an  organism  is  the  following.  An 
organism  exists  continuously  from  birth  to  death,  and 


TRACES   AND   DISPOSITIONS  465 

at  any  two  moments  which  are  reasonably  near  together 
a  great  deal  of  the  matter  which  composes  it  is  the  same. 
A  mind,  on  the  other  hand,  seems  to  cease  to  exist  for 
considerable  spells  during  dreamless  sleep  or  fainting- 
fits, and  then  to  take  up  its  existence  again  at  the  point 
at  which  it  left  it. 

If  we  want  to  have  a  purely  mental  theory  of  traces 
we  must  first  fill  these  gaps  with  something  other  than 
the  persistence  of  a  certain  structure  and  the  continuance 
of  certain   processes  in  the  brain  and  nervous  system. 
On    the    Pure  Ego  theory  such  gaps  are  filled  by  the 
continued  existence  of  the  Pure  Ego  and  by  the  fact 
that  the   Pure    Ego    has   certain    determinate    qualities 
throughout  the  whole  period.      But  we  are  now  trying 
to  do  without  the  Pure  Ego  theory.     The  only  possible 
expedient  is   to   suppose    that   the   gaps   are   filled    by 
literally   unconscious    and    literally    mental    states   and 
processes,   which  have  to   each    other    relations   of  the 
same  kind  as  the  conscious  mental  states  and  processes 
of  waking  life  have  to  each  other.     These  unconscious 
mental    states    and    processes    will    not   themselves   be 
traces  ;  but,  if  we  are  prepared  to  grant  their  existence, 
we  can  give  a  theory  of  purely  mental  traces  without 
assuming  the  Pure  Ego  theory.     This  can  be  done  as 
follows.     The  relations  between  our  ordinary  conscious 
experiences,    and    the   qualities    of    our   ordinary    con- 
scious experiences,  may  justly  be  called  "  mental  relations 
and  qualities  ".     But  they  are  not  themselves  experiences, 
either  conscious  or  unconscious.     Now  I  would  suggest 
the   following  as  a  possible  theory  about  traces.     Just 
before  a  certain  moment  my  total  state  of  mind  consists 
of  a  set  of  mental  events  having  certain  qualities  and 
standing  in  a  certain  characteristic  relation  to  each  other. 
Let  us  call  these  events  ^j,  e^j^  .   .   .  ^„,  and  let  us  denote 
the  relation  which  binds  them  all  together  into  a  single 
state  of  my  mind  by  R.     Then  the  total  state  of  my 
mind  just  before  /  may  be  symbolised  by  R  (r^,  e.,_.  .  .  e,'). 
Let  us  suppose  that  at  ^  a  "  new  "  mental  event  happens 

2  G 


466  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

and   forms    part  of  my    total  state  of  mind  at   t.     We 
will  call  this  event  E.     By  calling  it  "new"   I   mean 
that  it  is  not  a  *' continuation  "  of  any  of  the  events  e^ 
.   .   .  ^„  ;  it  might,  e.g,^  be  a  sensation  due  to  someone 
suddenly  sticking  a  pin  into  me.     Most  of  the  mental 
events  which  compose  my  total  state  of  mind  at  t  will  be 
continuations  of  events  which  composed  my  total  state 
of  mind  just  before  /,  but  probably  some  of  these  will 
not  be  continued.     Let  us  suppose  that  e^  .  .  .  e^  are 
continued    as   e\  .   .   .  e\n,    whilst   ^,„+i  .   .   .   e^   are    not 
continued.     My  total  state  of  mind  at  /  may  then    be 
symbolised  by  R  {e\  .  .  .  /™,  E).     Now  I  suggest  that 
the  presence  of  E  modifies  the  qualities  of  e\  .   .  .  e'^, 
or  of  some  of  them,  in  a  characteristic  way,  so  that  those 
of  them  which  are  continued  into  my  total  state  of  mind 
just  after  t  are  continued  in  the  specially  modified  forms 
e"Ei  .  .  .  e'j;^,.     It  is  also  possible  that  there  is  a  character- 
istic   modification    in    the    relation    which    binds   them 
together,  so  that  it  is  now  R-j.  instead  of  R.     On  this 
hypothesis  my  total  state  of  mind  just  after  t  is  of  the 
form    Rg   (/'j5i    .    .    .    e"E,n),    assuming   for   the   sake    of 
simplicity  that  no  further  "new"  experience  has  taken 
place.     We   have  now  got  our  "trace"  formed.     We 
must    next    assume    that    this     "  E-quality "    or     this 
"  E-relation  "  is  henceforth  imposed  on  the  contents  or 
the  structure  of  each  successive  total  state  by  the  state 
that  precedes  it,  very  much  as  the  scar  is  imposed  on 
the    new  matter  which  comes  into  an  organism  from 
outside.     On  some  such  lines  as  these  we  can  conceive 
of  purely  mental    traces  without  needing  to  assume  a 
Pure  Ego  ;  provided  we  are  willing  to  admit  that  there 
are  no  real  gaps  in  mental  life  and  that  the  apparent 
gaps  are  filled  up  by  non-introspectible  mental  events, 
which  are  of  the  same  general  nature  and  have  the  same 
kind  of  mutual  relations  as  those  which  we  can  intro- 
spect.    The  trace  is  not  itself  a  mental  event,  but  is  a 
characteristic    modification    in    the   qualities  of  mental 
events  or   in    the    relation    which    binds   contemporary 


TRACES   AND    DISPOSITIONS  467 

mental  events  into  a  single  total  state  of  mind.  And 
this  characteristic  modification  of  quality  or  structure 
is  imposed  on  each  total  state  by  the  total  state  which 
immediately  precedes  it. 

I  do  not  think  that  it  would  be  necessary  to  suppose 
that  all  the  events  in  any  total  state  have  this  characteristic 
qualitative  modification  imposed  on  them.  So  long  as 
some  events  in  every  total  state  after  the  occurrence  of 
the  "new"  experience  are  modified  in  this  way,  we 
have  as  much  as  we  need.  Again,  I  do  not  think  that 
it  would  be  necessary  to  assume  that  the  relation  which 
is  modified  in  a  characteristic  way  is  the  relation  which 
binds  together  all  the  events  of  a  single  mental  state. 
It  would  suffice  if  some  relation  which  binds  together  a 
sub-group  of  contemporary  mental  events  were  modified 
in  this  characteristic  way  and  if  this  modified  relation 
were  handed  on  from  this  sub-group  in  any  total  state 
to  the  corresponding  sub  -  group  in  its  immediate 
successor. 

It  is  then  possible  to  conceive  of  a  purely  '*  mental  "  '^ 
theory  of  mind  without  assuming  the  Pure  Ego  theory. 
A  mind  will,  on  this  view,  be  composed  entirely  of 
mental  events.  Some  of  these  are  introspectible  and 
others  are  not.  Again,  certain  of  these  mental  events 
will  be  related  to  each  other  so  as  to  form  series  of  a 
characteristic  kind.  Such  series  will  be  mental  processes. 
Some  mental  processes  will  be  wholly  imperceptible,  i.e.^ 
none  of  the  successive  mental  events  which  compose 
them  will  be  introspectible.  Others  will  be  perceptible, 
i.e.,  some  of  the  mental  events  which  compose  them  will 
be  introspectible  and  will  be  objects  of  simultaneous 
undiscriminating  awareness.  But  there  will  be  imper- 
ceptible parts  of  perceptible  mental  processes.  On  the 
present  view,  the  imperceptible  parts  of  perceptible 
mental  processes,  and  the  wholly  imperceptible  mental 
processes,  will  be  in  all  other  respects  of  precisely  the 
same  nature  as  the  introspectible  parts  of  perceptible 
mental  processes.     All  mental  processes  will  depend  on 


/ 


468 


THE   UNCONSCIOUS 


y 


traces  and  dispositions.  But  these  traces  and  dis- 
positions, though  not  themselves  mental  events  or 
processes^  will  be  purely  mental  ;  for  they  are  just 
certain  qualities  of  the  mental  events  of  one  total  state 
of  mind,  which  are  handed  down  to  the  mental  events 
of  the  next  total  state  of  mind,  and  so  on  indefinitely. 
Or  they  are  just  certain  relations  between  the  mental 
events  composing  one  total  state  of  mind,  which  are 
impressed  upon  the  mental  events  composing  the  next 
total  state  of  mind,  and  so  on  indefinitely. 

A  pm'ely  Physiological  Theory  of  Traces.  Let  us  now 
consider  the  alternative  which  lies  at  the  opposite 
extreme  to  that  which  we  have  been  treating  above.  On 
this  view  traces  are  simply  modifications  in  the  minute 
spatial  or  spatio-temporal  structure  of  our  brains  and 
nervous  systems,  which  are  propagated  from  one  state  of 
the  brain  and  nervous  system  to  the  next  state  in  the 
way  in  which  a  scar  on  one's  arm  due  to  a  burn  is 
propagated  for  the  rest  of  one's  life.  I  think  that  the 
natural  complement  of  such  a  theory  of  traces  would  be 
to  hold  that  the  non-introspectible  "  parts  "  of  percep- 
tible mental  processes  are  not  strictly  mental  at  all,  but 
are  purely  physiological  events.  And,  in  that  case,  of 
course  they  are  not,  strictly  speaking,  "  parts  "  at  all. 
The  position  will  be  that  there  are  certain  physiological 
processes,  some  parts  of  which  are  accompanied  by 
mental  events  which  depend  on  them,  and  other  parts 
of  which  are  not  accompanied  by  mental  events  at  all. 
And  there  will  be  other  physiological  processes  which 
are  exactly  like  those  which  are  accompanied  by  mental 
events  except  in  the  fact  that  they  are  not  accompanied 
by  any  mental  events.  Thus  "unconscious  mental 
processes "  will  not  really  be  mental  at  all  j  and  the 
natural  accompaniment  of  a  purely  physiological i.heory 
of  traces  is  an  epiphenomenalist  theory  of  the  nature  of 
mind.  The  mind  ceases  to  be  a  genuine  substance 
theoretically  capable  of  existing  in  its  own  right. 

I  say  that  this  would  be  the  "  natural  "  complement  of 


TRACES   AND    DISPOSITIONS  469 

a  purely  physiological  theory  of  traces  and  dispositions. 
I  do  not  say  that  it  would  be  an  absolutely  necessary 
consequence  of  such  a  theory.  It  is  possible  that  those 
parts  of  a  certain  physiological  process  which  are  not 
accompanied  by  introspectible  mental  events  are  accom- 
panied by  non-introspectible  mental  events  of  a  similar 
kind  to  the  introspectible  mental  events  which  accom- 
pany other  parts  of  the  same  physiological  process. 
And  it  is  possible  that  those  physiological  processes,  no 
part  of  which  is  accompanied  by  introspectible  mental 
events,  are  nevertheless  accompanied  by  non-intro- 
spectible mental  events.  But,  although  this  hypothesis 
would  be  possible  on  a  purely  physiological  theory 
of  traces  and  dispositions,  it  would  seem  to  be  quite 
unmotived.  At  most  it  could  be  supported  only  by 
arguments  from  analogy.  Since  some  parts  of  a  certain 
physiological  process  are  accompanied  by  introspectible 
mental  events,  and  since  the  later  of  these  events  seems 
to  be  an  obvious  development  of  the  earlier,  it  might  be 
argued  that  the  part  of  the  physiological  process  which 
fills  the  gap  between  two  such  introspectible  mental 
events  must  be  very  much  like  those  parts  of  the  process 
which  are  accompanied  by  introspectible  mental  events. 
By  analogy  it  might  be  argued  that  probably  this  part 
too  is  accompanied  by  mental  events  which  fill  the  gap 
between  those  which  we  can  introspect,  but  which,  for 
some  reason,  are  not  introspectible  by  us.  I  do  not  see 
that  this  extra  hypothesis  would  help  us  to  explain  any- 
thing that  could  not  be  explained  without  it ;  we  must 
content  ourselves  with  saying  that  it  would  be  neither 
necessary  nor  impossible.  The  situation  is,  I  think, 
quite  different  in  the  case  of  a  purely  mental  theory  of 
traces.  Here  we  must  postulate  either  a  Pure  Ego  or  a 
continuous  series  of  total  mental  states  ;  for,  if  we  do 
not  do  this,  we  have  nothing  mental  to  carry  the  traces. 
And,  since  there  are  certainly  gaps  in  our  introspectible 
experiences,  we  must  fill  them  with  non-introspectible 
mental  events    if  we  want  to  keep  to  a  purely  mental 


470  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

theory   of  traces,   and   at   the   same  time  to  avoid  the 
hypothesis  of  a  Pure  Ego. 

Is  there  any  conclusive  objection  to  a  purely  physio- 
logical theory  of  traces  and  dispositions,  and  to  the 
purely  epiphenomenal  theory  of  mind  which  seems  to 
me  to  be  its  natural  complement?  At  first  sight  there 
seem  to  be  several  objections,  and  the  question  is 
whether  they  are  really  conclusive.  (i)  We  have 
certain  experiences  in  which  it  seems  to  us  that  our 
minds  are  acting  on  our  bodies,  and  we  have  other 
experiences  in  which  it  seems  to  us  that  our  bodies  are 
acting  on  our  minds.  The  voluntary  initiation  and 
control  of  bodily  movements  is  an  example  of  the  first 
kind  of  experience,  and  the  occurrence  of  a  new  sensation 
is  an  example  of  the  second  kind.  Now,  it  might  be 
said  that  this  distinction  between  "active"  and  "passive" 
experiences  could  not  exist,  if  epiphenomenalism  were 
true  ;  for  in  all  cases  our  experiences  would  be  merely 
idle  accompaniments  of  certain  physiological  processes, 
and  the  latter  would  be  the  only  real  "agents".  I  do 
not  think  that  this  is  the  right  way  of  putting  the  case. 
It  is  true  that  the  interpretation  which  we  put  on  this 
distinction  would  be  mistaken,  but  it  seems  to  me  that 
the  existence  of  the  distinction  could  be  explained  per- 
fectly well  on  the  epiphenomenalist  theory.  Let  us 
consider  the  observable  differences  between  a  volition 
which  is  followed  by  the  desired  bodily  movement,  and 
a  sensation  which  arises  when  someone  sticks  a  pin 
into  me.  The  volition  forms  the  end-point  of  a  certain 
conscious  mental  process,  viz.,  a  process  of  deliberation, 
which  has  a  characteristic  kind  of  internal  unity.  It  is 
no  doubt  succeeded  by  other  mental  events,  but  they  do 
not  form  a  continuation  of  the  process  of  deliberation. 
The  subsequent  events  which  are  specially  closely  con- 
nected with  the  volition  are  simply  the  sensations  due 
to  the  bodily  movement.  Now  contrast  this  with  the 
new  sensation.  This  is  not  a  continuation  of  any  con- 
scious   mental    process  which  was   going  on    before  it 


TRACES  AND   DISPOSITIONS  471 

happened,  though  it  may  form  the  starting-  point  of  a 
characteristic  conscious  mental  process  which  succeeds 
it.  The  previous  events  with  which  it  is  most  closely 
connected  are  events  in  my  body  which  are  unaccom- 
panied by  conscious  mental  events.  We  feel  "passive" 
par  excellence  at  those  critical  points  where  a  physio- 
logical process  which  is  not  accompanied  by  conscious- 
ness passes  into  a  physiological  process  which  is 
accompanied  by  consciousness  of  a  characteristic  kind. 
We  feel  "active"  par  excellence  at  those  critical  points 
where  a  physiological  process  which  has  been  accom- 
panied by  a  series  of  mental  events  so  related  as  to 
form  a  single  conscious  process  passes  into  a  physio- 
logical process  which  is  either  not  accompanied  by 
consciousness  at  all  or  is  accompanied  by  mental  events 
which  are  not  continuations  of  the  previous  conscious 
mental  process.  Thus  epiphenomenalism  would  seem 
to  be  quite  capable  of  accounting  for  the  existence  of 
the  distinction  in  question. 

(2)  A  rather  similar  difficulty  could  be  raised  over  the 
distinction  between   mere  passive  association    of  ideas 
and  active  deliberate  thinking,  in  which  we  select  ideas 
and  control  the  processes  of  association.     It  might  be 
said  that  the  former  is  compatible  with  epiphenomenalism 
and  that  the  latter  is  not.      I  think  that  we  can  make  a 
very    similar   answer   to   that   which   we    made   to   the 
previous  objection.      If  epiphenomenalism  be  true,  the 
process  of  deliberate  thinking  is   no  doubt  correlated 
with  a  peculiar  physiological  process,  and  the  associa- 
tion of  ideas  is  correlated  with  a  different  physiological 
process.     And,   doubtless,  the   two    physiological  pro- 
cesses are  so  connected  that   [a)   the  latter   can   go    in 
the  absence  of  the  former,  {b)  the  former  depends  for  its 
possibility   on    the    traces   and  dispositions   which   are 
involved  in  the  latter,  and  {c)  when  the  former  is  going 
on  it  greatly  and  characteristically  modifies  the  latter. 
A  process  of  the  former  kind  may  supervene  at  a  certain 
stage  in  the  course  of  a  process  of  the  latter  kind,  and 


472  THE   UNCONSCIOUS 

at  that  stage  we  shall  pass  from  mere  day-dreaming 
to  active  and  deliberate  thinking.  Thus  the  observable 
distinction  seems  to  be  quite  capable  of  explanation  by 
epiphenomenalism,  though  the  interpretation  which  we 
commonly  put  upon  it  will  not  be  strictly  accurate  if 
epiphenomenalism  be  true. 

(3)  A  third  objection  which  might  be  made  is  the 
following.  "Does  not  epiphenomenalism  amount  to 
saying  that  conscious  mental  events  and  conscious 
mental  processes  are  '  appearances  of  certain  physio- 
logical events  and  processes,  just  as  colour  and  tempera- 
ture are  supposed  to  be  'appearances  of  certain  move- 
ments of  molecules  and  electrons?  And  must  not  an 
appearance  of  something  be  an  appearance  to  someone 
who  is  not  an  appearance?  Does  not  the  epipheno- 
menalist  theory  thus  tacitly  assume  the  existence  of  a 
mind  in  a  sense  in  which  it  explicitly  denies  that  minds 
exist?  And  is  it  not  therefore  radically  inconsistent?" 
This  objection  sounds  plausible,  but  I  do  not  think 
that  there  is  anything  in  it.  Epiphenomenalism  may 
be  taken  to  assert  one  of  two  things,  {a)  That  certain 
events  which  have  physiological  characteristics  have 
also  mental  characteristics,  and  that  no  events  which 
lack  physiological  characteristics  have  mentalcharacter- 
istics.  That  many  events  which  have  physiological 
characteristics  are  not  known  to  have  mental  character- 
istics. And  that  an  event  which  has  mental  character- 
istics never  causes  another  event  in  virtue  of  its  mental 
characteristics,  but  only  in  virtue  of  its  physiological 
characteristics.  Or  {b)  that  no  event  has  both  mental 
and  physiological  characteristics  ;  but  that  the  complete 
cause  of  any  event  which  has  mental  characteristics  is 
an  event  or  set  of  events  which  has  physiological 
characteristics.  And  that  no  event  which  has  mental 
characteristics  is  a  cause-factor  in  the  causation  of  any 
other  event  whatever,  whether  mental  or  physiological. 

It  seems  plain  that  neither  of  these  alternative  state- 
ments of  epiphenomenalism  involves  any  tacit  reference 


TRACES   AND   DISPOSITIONS  473 

to  the  existence  of  a  ''mind"  in  some  sense  which  is 
inconsistent  with  epiphenomenalism.  "  But,"  it  might 
be  said,  "this  is  not  the  whole  truth  about  the  matter. 
Some  events  which  have  mental  characteristics  are 
states  of  knowing  other  things.  And,  again,  some  events 
which  have  mental  characteristics  do  not  merely  exist 
but  are  themselves  known  by  the  mind  which  owns 
them.  Does  not  this  involve  the  existence  of  a  '  mind  ' 
in  some  sense  which  epiphenomenalism  cannot  accept?  " 
It  seems  to  me  that  this  is  not  an  objection  which 
applies  specially  and  directly  to  epiphenomenalism. 
Epiphenomenalism  asserts  nothing  positive  about  the 
qualities  and  relations  of  mental  events,  and  it  denies 
only  one  thing  about  them.  It  simply  says  that  mental 
events  either  {a)  do  not  function  at  all  as  cause-factors  ; 
or  {b)  that,  if  they  do,  they  do  so  in  virtue  of  their 
physiological  characteristics  and  not  in  virtue  of  their 
mental  characteristics.  It  has  no  need  to  deny  that 
certain  mental  events  stand  in  the  cognitive  relation  to 
other  things  ;  for  the  relation  of  cognising  is  not,  and 
does  not  involve,  the  relation  of  causation  between  the 
terms  which  it  connects.  And  it  has  no  need  to  deny 
that  two  mental  events  may  be  so  related  that  one  is 
cognised  by  the  other.  Of  course  epiphenomenalism 
does  tacitly  deny  the  Pure  Ego  theory,  and  it  does 
explicitly  deny  that  the  unity  of  a  mind  is  a  direct 
causal  unity.  But  it  denies  nothing  else.  In  particular 
it  has  no  need  to  deny  that  certain  contemporary  mental 
events  are  bound  together  by  unique  and  very  intim.ate 
relations,  so  that  they  together  compose  a  single  total 
mental  state.  And  it  has  no  need  to  deny  that  certain 
successive  total  mental  states  are  bound  together  by 
unique  and  very  intimate  relations,  so  that  they  together 
form  a  single  mind.  The  objection  under  discussion 
therefore  applies,  not  directly  and  specially  to  epipheno- 
menalism, but  to  the  view  that  knowledge  (and,  in 
particular,  self-knowledge)  can  be  explained  without  a 
Pure   Ego  or  without  direct  causal   relations   between 


474  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

mental  events.     And  this  is   a  question  which  we  are 
not  at  present  in  a  position  to  discuss. 

(4)  The  last  objection  which  I  propose  to  consider  is 
the  following.  It  might  be  said  that  the  hypothesis 
that  there  are  literally  unconscious  desires,  emotions, 
etc.,  and  that  they  literally  interact  with  each  other  in 
the  way  in  which  conscious  desires  and  emotions 
appear  to  interact,  is  found  to  be  practically  useful  by 
psycho-analysts  and  others.  This  kind  of  hypothesis 
does  enable  them  to  suggest  methods  of  treatment,  and 
often  to  effect  cures.  The  hypothesis  of  purely  physio- 
logical traces,  dispositions,  and  processes  is  not  found  to 
be  practically  effective.  Therefore,  probably  the  former 
hypothesis  is  approximately  correct,  and  the  latter  is 
probably  wrong. 

I  think  that  there  is  little  or  nothing  in  this  argument. 
Two  conscious  desires  appear  to  interact  in  certain 
characteristic  ways.  If  the  epiphenomenalist  be  right, 
they  do  not  really  interact.  But  each  is  correlated 
with  a  characteristic  physiological  process,  and  these 
physiological  processes  really  do  interact  with  each 
other,  thus  producing  characteristic  modifications  in 
the  series  of  observable  mental  events.  Now  the 
patient  observes  a  certain  series  of  mental  events  which 
is  modified  in  this  characteristic  way,  and  he  fails  to 
find  any  other  series  of  conscious  mental  events  which 
seems  to  account  for  this  modification  in  the  former. 
Let  us  suppose  that  his  psycho-analyst  is  an  epi- 
phenomenalist. Then  he  would  simply  postulate  the 
existence  of  a  physiological  process  which  (1^)  is  not 
accompanied  by  any  mental  events  which  the  patient 
can  introspect,  but  [b)  is  otherwise  of  the  same  general 
nature  as  the  physiological  processes  which  are  accom- 
panied by  a  conscious  mental  process  of  conation.  If 
he  chooses  to  assume  that  this  is  accompanied  by  a 
conative  mental  process  which  the  patient  cannot  intro- 
spect, he  is  simply  using  an  argument  from  analogy 
which  may  be  good  or  bad  but  is  quite  irrelevant  to  any 


TRACES   AND   DISPOSITIONS  475 

predictions  that  he  may  make  or  to  any  course  of 
treatment  that  he  may  devise.  It  is  no  doubt  also  true 
that  he  is  not  helped  in  any  way  by  assuming  that  this 
process  is  physiological  ;  but  he  is  also  not  hindered  by 
this  assumption.  The  point  is  that,  even  if  the  process 
be  physiological,  he  does  not  know  anything  about  its 
physiological  details  ;  he  knows  it  only  as  "the  sort  of 
process  which  would  generally  be  accompanied  by  a 
conscious  conation  or  emotion  of  a  certain  kind  ".  So 
long  as  it  acts  as  such  a  process  might  be  expected  to 
act  it  makes  no  difference  to  his  predictions  whether  its 
intrinsic  nature  be  physiological  or  mental  or  both  or 
neither.  Thus  the  success  of  psycho-analytic  treatment 
which  assumes  literally  unconscious  conations  and 
emotions,  and  the  ill-success  of  methods  of  treatment 
which  assume  a  certain  hypothetical  structure  and 
processes  in  the  brain  and  nervous  system,  seems  to  me 
to  have  no  bearing  one  way  or  the  other  on  the  truth  of 
epiphenomenalism. 

The  Choice  between  the  Two  Theories.  I  have  argued 
that  it  is  perfectly  possible  to  hold  a  purely  mental 
theory  of  traces  and  dispositions,  with  or  without  the 
Pure  Ego  theory  of  the  self.  And  I  have  argued  that 
it  is  perfectly  possible  to  hold  a  purely  physiological 
theory  of  traces  and  dispositions.  A  purely  mental 
theory  of  mnemic  persistents,  which  does  not  accept  the 
Pure  Ego,  requires  the  assumption  of  literally  un- 
conscious mental  processes  ;  but  there  seems  to  be  no 
conclusive  objection  to  this.  A  purely  physiological 
theory  of  mnemic  persistents  permits  the  assumption  of 
literally  unconscious  mental  processes,  but  renders  this 
assumption  superfluous.  There  is  nothing  to  choose 
between  the  two  types  of  theory  so  far  as  concerns  our 
ability  to  predict  and  control  mental  events.  Whether 
traces  and  dispositions  be  purely  mental,  or  purely 
physiological,  or  both,  or  neither,  we  know  absolutely 
nothing  about  them  in  detail,  and  can  predict  nothing 
from  one  hypothesis  about  their  intrinsic  nature  which 


476  THE  UNCONSCIOUS 

we  could  not  predict  equally  well  from  any  other 
hypothesis.  The  fact  is  that  we  know  what  they  are 
only  from  what  they  do^  and  our  knowledge  of  what 
they  do  is  equally  compatible  with  either  of  the  four 
possible  theories  about  what  they  are.  Is  there  then 
the  slightest  possibility  of  deciding  even  tentatively  in 
favour  of  one  rather  than  of  another? 

If  there  be  no  phenomena  which  give  us  any  reason 
to  believe  that  minds  can  exist  and  operate  after  the 
destruction  of  the  bodies  which  they  have  animated,  I 
V  think  that  there  will  be  some  reason  to  prefer  the  epiphe- 
/  nomenalist  theory  on  the  ground  that  it  involves  fewer 
assumptions  than  the  others.  We  know  that  our  brains 
and  nervous  systems  exist  throughout  our  lives,  and 
that  they  are  very  closely  connected  with  our  minds. 
We  know  that  our  conscious  mental  life  is  subject  to 
great  interruptions,  and  we  do  not  know  that  these  gaps 
are  filled  by  literally  mental  processes  which  we  cannot 
introspect  or  remember.  Since  the  brain  and  nervous 
system  are  capable  of  carrying  the  necessary  traces 
and  dispositions,  and  since  processes  in  the  brain  and 
nervous  system  are  capable  of  filling  the  temporal  gaps 
between  our  introspectible  mental  events,  it  would  seem 
superfluous  to  postulate  mental  traces  and  dispositions 
or  literally  unconscious  mental  events  and  processes  in 
addition.  Thus,  unless  there  be  reason  to  believe  that 
minds  can  survive  the  death  of  their  bodies,  I  should 
consider  that  some  form  of  epiphenomenalism  was  the 
most  reasonable  view  to  take  of  the  nature  of  mind  and 
its  relation  to  the  body.  I  have  said,  and  I  repeat,  that 
all  the  arguments  against  interaction  are  invalid.  I 
have  said,  and  I  repeat,  that  a  purely  mental  theory 
of  traces  and  dispositions  is  perfectly  possible  with  or 
without  the  assumption  of  a  Pure  Ego.  All  that  I  assert 
here  is  that  epiphenomenalism  is  also  a  possible  theory  ; 
and  that,  if  there  be  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  mind 
ever  exists  apart  from  the  body,  this  theory  is  to  be 
preferred  as  involving  the  minimum  of  assumptions. 


TRACES   AND   DISPOSITIONS  477 

It   is  plain   that  we  can   get  no  further  till  we  have 
considered  the   alleged    evidence  for  the   doctrine  that 
minds   can    and    do   exist   apart   from    bodies.      If  this 
evidence  produces  even  a  faint  probability,   it  will  be 
rash  to  accept  epiphenomenalism.     For  epiphenomen-    a 
alism  would  seem  to  be  quite  inconsistent  with  the  very   * 
possibility  of  the  independent  existence  of  a  mind.    The   / 
very  essence  of  this  doctrine  is  that  the  mind  by  itself  ( 
is  not  a  genuine  substance  capable  of  independent  exist-  ) 
ence,  but  either  consists  of  events  which  are  also  bodily  K 
or  is   absolutely  dependent  for   its  existence    on    such  i 
events.     Now  we  have  no  strong  positive   ground  for    [ 
accepting  epiphenomenalism  ;    the  alternative  theories 
are  equally  possible,  and  much  more  in  accordance  with 
common-sense.     We  have  given  a  tentative  preference 
to  epiphenomenalism  only  on  grounds  of  ''  economy  "  ; 
a  theory  supported  only  in  this  way  could  be  overthrown 
by  a  very  light  blow.     In  the  next  section  of  this  book 
I  propose  to  consider  the  alleged  evidence  for  the  exist- 
ence of  minds  apart  from  bodies. 


i 

I 


SECTION  D 

Introductory  Remarks 

"  By  the  mere  light  of  reason  it  seems  difficult  to  prove  the 
Immortality  of  the  Soul.  The  arguments  for  it  are  commonly 
derived  either  from  metaphysical  topics,  or  moral,  or  physical. 
But,  in  reality,  it  is  the  Gospel,  and  the  Gospel  alone,  that  has 
brought  life  and  immortality  to  light.  .  .  .  Nothing  could  set 
in  a  fuller  light  the  infinite  obligations  which  mankind  have  to 
Divine  revelation ;  since  we  find  that  no  other  medium  could 
ascertain  this  great  and  important  truth." 

(Hume,  Essay  on  the  Immortality  of  the  Soul) 


SECTION   D 

Alleged  Evidence  for  Human  vSurvival  of 
Bodily  Death 

Introductory  Remarks 

In  this  section  I  am  going  to  consider  certain  causes 
which  have  led  people  to  believe  that  the  human  mind 
can  and  does  sometimes  exist  apart  from  the  human 
body.  And  I  am  going  to  consider  how  far  these 
causes  are  also  adequate  reasons.  It  is  worth  while  to 
remark  that,  for  our  purpose,  arguments  which  led  to 
the  view  that  the  human  mind  existed  before  it  became 
connected  with  its  present  body  would  be  just  as  im- 
portant as  arguments  which  led  to  the  view  that  it  exists 
after  the  destruction  of  its  body.  And  arguments  which 
led  to  the  conclusion  that  a  human  mind  can  become 
temporarily  disconnected  with  its  body  during  life, 
can  function  during  this  interval,  and  can  then  again 
animate  the  body  would  be  equally  important  for  our 
purposes.  For,  if  there  be  reason  to  believe  that  a 
human  mind  can  ever  exist  and  function  apart  from  a 
human  body,  it  will  be  almost  impossible  to  accept  the 
epiphenomenalist  theory  of  the  mind  and  its  relations  to 
the  body.  I  propose,  however,  to  deal  only  with  argu- 
ments which  claim  to  prove  that  human  minds  survive 
the  destruction  of  the  bodies  which  they  have  animated  ; 
the  other  possibilities  will  be  considered  only  in  so  far 
as  they  are  involved  in  certain  arguments  for  survival. 

I  think  that  men  have  believed  in  human  survival  for 
five  reasolTs."'(T)" Some  have  thought  that  it  was  im- 
mediately obvious  or  that  they  had  received  a  divine 

481  2    H 


482        EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

revelation  which  assured  them  of  it.  (2)  Others  have 
believed  it  on  authority.  (3)  Some  have  thought  that 
it  could  be  proved  by  general  metaphysical  arguments. 
(4)  Some  have  thought  that  it  follows  from  certain 
ethical  premises.  And  (5)  some  have  thought  that  there 
is  special  empirical  evidence  in  favour  of  it.  I  shall  say 
what  I  have  to  say  about  the  first  three  causes  of  the 
belief  in  these  Introductory  Remarks,  and  I  shall  devote 
one  chapter  to  ethical  arguments  and  one  to  empirical 
arguments. 

(i)  Most  of  us  do  not  find  the  proposition  that  our 
minds  will  survive  the  destruction  of  our  present  bodies 
in  the  least  self-evident.  And  most  of  us  do  not  claim 
to  have  received  personally  a  divine  revelation  on  this 
or  on  any  other  subject.  And,  if  I  believe  in  survival 
because  I  believe  that  it  is  immediately  certain  to  some- 
one else  or  that  it  has  been  divinely  revealed  to  someone 
else,  I  am  believing  it  on  authority.  So  that  it  is  certain 
that  the  vast  majority  of  people  who  believe  in  human 
survival  must  do  so  either  on  authority  or  because  of 
some  kind  of  argument  which  seems  to  them  to  make  it 
certain  or  probable. 

(2)  We  all  of  us  believe  a  great  many  propositions 
on  the  authority  of  others,  and  we  should  be  behaving 
very  unreasonably  if  we  did  not.  We  must,  therefore, 
try  to  distinguish  the  cases  where  it  is  reasonable  to 
believe  something  on  authority  from  those  where  it  is 
not  reasonable  to  do  so.  And  we  must  then  consider 
whether  the  proposition  that  human  minds  survive  the 
death  of  their  bodies  is  or  is  not  one  which  it  is  reason- 
able to  believe  on  authority,  {a)  My  authority  may 
himself  believe  the  proposition  as  the  result  of  an 
argument,  which  is  too  difficult  or  unfamiliar  for  me  to 
follow  for  myself.  I  am  then  justified  in  attaching  con- 
siderable probability  to  his  conclusion,  provided  (i)  that 
r  accept  his  premises  ;  (ii)  that  I  can  follow  and  accept 
simpler  arguments  of  the  same  kind  as  he  has  used  to 
prove   this    proposition  ;    (iii)    that    I   know  that  men's 


INTRODUCTORY   REMARKS  483 

capacities  for  following  arguments  of  this  kind  vary, 
and  (iv)  that  other  experts  who  have  looked  into  the 
matter  for  themselves  all  come  to  the  same  conclusion. 
I  am,  e.g.,  justified  in  attaching  considerable  weight 
to  any  proposition  in  the  Theory  of  Numbers  which 
Professor  Hardy  and  Mr  Littlewood  tell  me  that  they 
have  proved.  Now  a  great  many  much  better  philoso- 
phers than  I  {e.g.,  Plato  and  St  Thomas)  have  persuaded 
themselves  by  argument  of  the  truth  of  human  survival. 
Ought  I  then  to  attach  a  high  probability  to  this  pro- 
position on  their  authority?  It  does  not  seem  to  me 
that  I  ought.  For  (i)  I  am  quite  competent  to  follow 
their  arguments,  and  they  seem  to  me  not  to  be  valid, 
(ii)  They  use  premises  which  seem  to  me  very  doubt- 
ful. And  (iii)  there  is  no  consensus  among  experts 
either  about  the  validity  of  these  arguments  or  the  truth 
of  the  premises.  Kant  was  a  greater  philosopher  than 
I,  and  he  thought  such  arguments  involve  logical 
fallacies.  Spinoza  was  a  greater  philosopher  than  I, 
and  he  rejected  the  premises  of  such  arguments. 

{b)  My  authority  may  believe  a  certain  proposition 
because  he  has  access  to  facts  which  I  cannot  perceive 
for  myself.  These  facts  may  be  imperceptible  to  me 
simply  because  I  am  not  placed  in  a  suitable  position 
in  space  and  time  for  perceiving  them  ;  or  because  1 
lack  the  necessary  instruments  of  precision  and  the 
necessary  training  in  using  such  instruments  ;  or  because 
my  mind  or  body  or  both  lack  certain  powers  which 
are  possessed  by  the  mind  and  body  of  my  authority. 
On  the  first  two  alternatives  my  authority  claims  only 
to  be  perceiving  something  of  the  same  ki?id  as  Lean 
perceive  ;  and  there  is  no  reason  why  I  should  not  be 
able  to  perceive  it  too,  if  I  went  to  the  right  place  and 
did  the  right  things.  If  I  have  reason  to  believe  that 
my  authority  is  a  skilled  experimenter  and  observer, 
and  if  he  is  believed  to  be  so  by  other  experts,  it  is 
rational  to  attach  considerable  weight  to  what  he  asserts. 
This  weight  will,  of  course,  be  increased  if  other  experts 


484       EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

perform  the  same  experiments  and  observations  and 
reach  similar  results.  It  is  on  such  grounds  as  this 
that  it  is  rational  for  me  to  attach  considerable  proba- 
bility to  statements  made  by  Professor  Rutherford  or 
Dr  Aston  about  the  experimental  splitting  of  atoms. 
But,  when  people  are  said  to  believe  in  survival  on  the 
authority  of  some  religious  teacher,  the  situation  is  not 
at  all  closely  analogous  to  this.  They  suppose  that 
the  religious  teacher  is  either  himself  a  divine  being 
or  that  he  has  received  his  information  directly  from 
some  divine  being.  The  Christian  who  believes  in 
survival  on  the  authority  of  Christ  is  an  example  of 
the  former  case,  and  the  Mohammedan  who  believes 
it  on  the  authority  of  Mohammed  is  an  example  of  the 
latter.  Let  us  consider  this  kind  of  authority  a  little 
more  closely. 

The  ultimate  authority  in  either  case  is  the  supposed 
divine  being.  Before  accepting  such  statements  on 
authority  we  must  therefore  satisfy  ourselves  (i)  that  our 
religious  teacher  was  a  divine  being  or  was  inspired  by 
one  ;  (ii)  that  he  has  been  properly  reported  ;  (iii)  that 
the  divine  being  knows  the  truth  about  the  question 
under  consideration  ;  and  (iv)  that  the  divine  being  is 
not  intentionally  deceiving  us,  or  accommodating  his 
statements  to  the  current  beliefs  of  the  time  and  place, 
or  speaking  metaphorically.  Lastly  (v)  if  our  authority 
is  not  supposed  to  be  himself  divine,  but  only  to  be 
divinely  inspired,  we  must  be  sure  that  he  has  not 
deliberately  or  unwittingly  falsified  the  message  with 
which  he  has  been  entrusted.  I  can  only  say  that  I 
know  of  no  historical  case  in  which  there  seems  to  me  to 
be  any  strong  reason  to  believe  that  all  these  conditions 
have  been  fulfilled.  The  question  has  been  discussed  by 
Mr  Hobbes  with  his  usual  acuteness  in  Chapter  XXXII 
of  the  Leviathan,  where  he  writes  as  follows.  ''  If  a 
man  pretend  to  me  that  God  hath  spoken  to  him 
immediately  and  supernaturally,  and  I  make  doubt 
of  it,    I  cannot  easily  perceive  what  argument  he  can 


INTRODUCTORY    REMARKS  485 

produce  to  oblige  me  to  believe  it.  It  is  true  that,  if 
he  be  my  Sovereign,  he  may  oblige  me  to  obedience  so 
as  not  by  act  or  word  to  dedm-e  I  believe  him  not ;  but 
not  to  think  any  otherwise  than  my  reason  persuades 
me.  But,  if  one  that  hath  not  such  authority  over  me 
shall  pretend  the  same,  there  is  nothing  that  exacteth 
either  belief  or  obedience."  (My  italics.)  I  find  nothing 
to  add  to  Mr  Hobbes's  statement  or  to  alter  in  it. 

(3)  I  pass  now  to  the  case  of  general  metaphysical 
arguments  in  favour  of  human  survival.  These  are 
at  present  somewhat  out  of  fashion  ;  and  I  think  it 
would  be  generally  admitted  that  the  older  kind  of 
argument  which  Kant  dealt  with  in  the  Paralogisms  of 
Pure  Reaso7t  really  was  refuted  by  Kant.  The  only 
modern  philosopher  of  importance,  so  far  as  I  know, 
who  claims  to  prove  the  immortality  of  the  soul  by  ^ 
general  metaphysical  arguments  is  Dr  M'Taggart.  He 
points  out  quite  rightly  that  all  such  arguments  have  an 
a  priori  and  an  empirical  part.  The  a  priori  part 
consists  in  proving  that  anything  which  had  certain 
characteristics  would  necessarily  be  permanent.  The 
empirical  part  consists  in  showing  that  the  human  mind 
has  such  characteristics.  How  then  do  such  argu- 
ments differ  from  those  which  I  call  "empirical"? 
The  difference  is  this.  An  empirical  argument  for 
survival  takes  certain  special  phenomena,  viz.,  those 
which  are  dealt  with  by  Psychical  Research.  And  it 
argues  that  the  hypothesis  of  human  survival  explains 
these  phenomena  better  than  any  other  hypothesis  that 
we  can  think  of.  Such  an  argument  of  course  uses 
a  priori  principles  of  logic  and  probability,  as  every 
argument  does.  But  it  has  no  a  priori  premise.  In 
this  respect  it  differs  fundamentally  from  such  an 
argument  as  M'Taggart's,  and  is  of  exactly  the  same 
kind  as  the  arguments  for  the  wave-theory  of  light  or 
the  constitution  of  the  benzene  molecule. 

Now   I   cannot  prove  that  all   general    metaphysical 
arguments   for   human    survival    must    necessarily   be 


486       EVIDENCE   FOR' HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

invalid.  I  can  only  say  that  all  that  I  am  acquainted 
with  seem  to  be  extremely  doubtful  either  in  their 
a  priori  part  or  in  their  empirical  part  or  in  both. 
And  they  are  so  much  bound  up  with  elaborate  meta- 
physical systems,  and  have  persuaded  so  few  men  beside 
their  authors,  that  I  propose  to  ignore  them  here.  We 
are  thus  left  with  Ethical  Arguments  and  Special 
Empirical  Arguments.  I  shall  deal  with  the  former 
in  the  next  chapter,  and  with  the  latter  in  the  chapter 
which  follows  it.  I  may  say  at  once  that  my  own  view 
is  that,  if  human  survival  can  be  rendered  probable  at 
all,  this  can  be  done  only  by  empirical  arguments  based 
on  the  phenomena  which  are  treated  by  Psychical 
Research. 


CHAPTER    XI 

Ethical  Arguments  for  Human  Survival 

It  has  been  held  by  many  philosophers  that  all 
arguments  from  *' value"  to  "  fact "  or  from  "ought" 
to  "is"  are  necessarily  invalid.  I  have  certainly 
expressed  this  view  myself  from  time  to  time.  I 
believe  now  that  this  is  not  true  without  qualification  ; 
and  that,  if  certain  conditions  be  fulfilled,  such  argu- 
ments are  not  necessarily  fallacious.  Whether  any  of 
them  in  fact  succeed  in  proving  their  conclusions  is  of 
course  another  matter.  I  will,  therefore,  begin  by 
discussing  in  general  terms  the  question  whether  such 
arguments  can  ever  be  valid,  and,  if  so,  what  conditions 
an  argument  of  this  kind  must  fulfil  in  order  not  to  be 
logically  fallacious. 

The  Logical  Status  of  Ethical  Arguments  with  Factual 
Conclusions.  An  ethical  argument  is  one  that  uses  at 
least  one  ethical  premise  ;  we  must,  therefore,  begin  by 
explaining  what  is  meant  by  an  "ethical  premise". 
I  assume  at  the  outset  that  there  are  certain  purely 
ethical  characteristics,  i.e.^  characteristics  which  cannot 
be  identified  with  or  defined  in  terms  of  non-ethical  or 
"natural"  characteristics.  I  should  consider  that  the 
characteristics  of  being  "  intrinsically  good  "  or  "right" 
or  "a  duty"  are  examples  of  purely  ethical  charac- 
teristics. Now  presumably  some  ethical  characteristics 
are  simple  and  indefinable,  whilst  others  can  be  analysed 
and  defined  in  terms  of  other  ethical  characteristics. 
E.g.^  some  people  have  held  that  a  "  right  action  "  may 
be    defined    as    "an    action    which    has    as   good   con- 

4b7 


488       EVIDENCE   FOR  HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

sequences  as  any  action  which  is  possible  to  the  agent". 
Again,  even  when  an  ethical  characteristic  is  not  defin- 
able, there  may  be  synthetic  propositions  about  its 
properties  or  about  its  connexions  with  other  ethical 
characteristics.  E.g.^  we  may  say  that  the  goodness  of 
a  whole  is  not  necessarily  the  sum  of  the  goodness 
which  each  of  its  parts  would  have  in  isolation.  Again, 
we  might  hold  that  both  "good"  and  "right"  are 
indefinable,  and  yet  accept  the  synthetic  proposition 
that  no  action  is  right  which  does  not  have  at  least  as 
good  consequences  as  any  action  which  is  possible  for 
the  agent.  I  think  that  1  can  now  define  what  I  mean 
by  a  "  purely  ethical  proposition  ".  It  will  be  a  proposi- 
tion which  either  {a)  states  that  a  certain  ethical  charac- 
teristic {e.g.^  "good")  is  indefinable;  or  {b)  analyses  it 
in  terms  of  other  ethical  characteristics  ;  or  (^)  states 
some  intrinsic  property  of  an  ethical  characteristic  {e.g.^ 
that  it  is  quantitative,  that  it  is  not  simply  additive,  etc.); 
or  {d)  states  some  synthetic  connexion  between  two  or 
more  ethical  characteristics. 

Now  I  think  that  it  is  certain  that  no  argument  all  of 
whose  premises  are  purely  ethical  propositions  can  lead 
to  a  factual  conclusion.  But  I  am  very  doubtful  whether 
anyone  has  ever  used  such  an  argument.  Now  there 
are  other  propositions  which  involve  ethical  charac- 
teristics, which  I  will  call  "  mixed  ethical  propositions". 
These  assert  a  synthetic  connexion  between  an  ethical 
characteristic  and  one  or  more  non-ethical  characteristics. 
I  will  give  some  examples.  "  No  action  can  be  a  duty 
unless  it  be  physically  possible  for  the  agent  to  perform 
it."  "  No  state  of  affairs  can  be  good  or  bad  unless  it 
is  or  contains  as  a  constituent  some  conscious  mental 
state."  "The  goodness  of  any  state  of  affairs  depends 
on  nothing  but  the  balance  of  pleasure  which  it  contains, 
and  is  directly  proportional  to  this  balance."  All  these 
are  mixed  ethical  propositions  ;  the  first  being  true,  the 
second  highly  probable,  and  the  third  certainly  false. 
Mixed  ethical  propositions  can  always  be  put  into  one 


ETHICAL   ARGUMENTS    FOR   SURVIVAL     489 

of  the  two  forms  :  "  If  anything  had  the  ethical  charac- 
teristic E  it  would  have  the  non- ethical  characteristic 
N,"  or  *' If  anything  had  the  non-ethical  characteristic 
N  it  would  have  the  ethical  characteristic  E."  Any 
ethical  argument  with  a  factual  conclusion  must  contain 
a  mixed  ethical  premise  of  the  first  kind  in  order  to  be 
logically  valid. 

We  can  now  go  a  step  further.  The  mixed  ethical 
premise  is  essentially  hypothetical.  The  conclusion  is 
categorical.  It  follows  that  one  premise  must  be 
categorical,  if  the  argument  is  to  be  logically  valid. 
And  it  is  plain  that  the  categorical  premise  must  be  of 
the  form:  "Something  does  have  the  ethical  charac- 
teristic E ".  We  can  then  conclude  that  something 
does  have  the  non-ethical  characteristic  N.  I  have  now 
stated  what  Mr  Johnson  would  call  the  "constitutive 
conditions "  for  the  validity  of  such  arguments.  We 
must  now  consider  what  he  would  call  the  "epistemic 
conditions  ".  If  the  argument  is  not  to  be  circular  we 
must  be  able  to  know  (a)  that  if  anything  had  E  it  would 
have  N,  and  {b)  that  something  has  E,  without  having 
to  know  beforehand  that  something  has  N. 

We  may  divide  up  ethical  arguments  on  two  different 
principles,  thus  getting  four  different  kinds  of  ethical 
argument  which  might  possibly  be  valid.  (i)  The 
ethical  characteristic  under  consideration  might  be 
"good",  or  it  might  be  "right"  or  "duty",  (ii)  The 
factual  premise  might  take  the  form  "Something  has 
E"  or  the  more  determinate  form  "This  has  E  ".  E.g., 
it  might  take  the  form  "Some  actions  are  right"  or 
"This  action  is  right".  Of  course  the  latter  entails  the 
former.  But  it  is  plain  that  the  argument  is  stronger  if 
it  only  has  to  use  the  milder  premise.  We  might  be 
pretty  certain  that  some  actions  which  have  been  per- 
formed have  been  right,  but  doubtful  whether  any 
particular  action  which  was  brought  to  our  notice  was 
right. 

This  seems  to  me  to  be  about  as  much  as  we  can  say 


490       EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

about  the  general  question  of  whether  ethical  arguments 
with  factual  conclusions  can  ever  be  logically  valid. 
We  have  seen  that  they  can  be  if  they  fulfil  certain 
conditions,  and  we  have  stated  exactly  what  those  con- 
ditions are.  I  propose  now  to  give  an  example  of  an 
ethical  argument  which  seems  to  me  to  fulfil  the  con- 
ditions and  to  prove  its  conclusion.  I  think  that  Kant's 
argument  from  duty  to  freedom  is  a  case  in  point.  It 
may  be  put  as  follows.  "If  it  can  ever  be  truly  said 
that  it  is  a  duty  to  perform  (or  to  avoid)  an  act,  it  must 
have  been  possible  for  the  agent  to  perform  it  and 
possible  for  him  not  to  perform  it.  Now  there  are  some 
acts  of  which  it  is  true  to  say  that  they  ought  to  have 
been  done  (or  avoided).  Hence  there  are  some  acts 
which  their  agent  could  have  performed  and  could  have 
avoided."  It  is  plain  that  this  argument  fulfils  the 
constitutive  conditions.  It  seems  to  me  clear  that  the 
ethical  premise  can  be  known  to  be  true  by  merely 
reflecting  on  the  conceptions  of  "  duty  "  and  of  "  possi- 
bility ",  and  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  know  beforehand 
that  some  acts  which  have  been  done  could  have  been 
avoided  or  that  some  acts  which  have  been  avoided 
could  have  been  done.  So  that  the  first  epistemic  con- 
dition is  fulfilled.  I  am  also  inclined  to  believe  that  we 
can  know  that  the  characteristics  ''ought"  and  "ought 
not"  have  application  without  having  to  know  before- 
hand that  some  actions  which  are  done  could  have 
been  avoided,  and  that  some  actions  which  have  been 
avoided  could  have  been  done.  It  is  diflicult  to  be  sure 
of  this  because  every  one  does  in  practice  believe  the 
conclusion  of  Kant's  argument.  Assuming  that  the 
above  statement  is  true,  Kant's  argument  fulfils  the 
second  epistemic  condition,  and  proves  its  conclusion. 
Unfortunately  the  only  conclusion  which  it  certainly 
proves  is  not  of  much  interest.  It  no  doubt  makes  it 
almost  certain  that  we  are  in  some  sense  "free"  in  some 
of  our  voluntary  actions.  But  it  is  not  in  the  least 
certain  that  the  "  freedom  "  required  is  inconsistent  with 


ETHICAL  ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL    491 

determinism.  And  we  could  have  reached  the  con- 
clusion that  we  are  "free"  in  several  very  important 
senses  without  appealing  to  ethical  arguments  at  all.  It 
seems  to  me  doubtful  whether  Kant's  ethical  argument 
proves  that  we  are  "free"  in  any  sense  of  "freedom" 
which  could  not  have  been  established  by  direct  in- 
spection ;  and  all  these  senses  seem  to  me  to  be  probably 
consistent  with  complete  determinism. 

I  will  now  give  an  example  of  an  ethical  argument 
which  seems  to  me  obviously  to  fail  to  fulfil  the  con- 
ditions and  to  be  invalid.  We  might  argue  as  follows. 
"Unless  God  existed  it  would  not  be  our  duty  to 
address  private  prayers  to  him.  It  is  our  duty  to 
address  private  prayers  to  God.  Therefore  God  must 
exist."  (I  put  in  the  qualification  "private",  because 
it  might  be  my  duty  to  address  public  prayers  to  God, 
even  if  he  does  not  exist  and  I  do  not  believe  that  he 
exists,  if  the  State  of  which  I  am  a  member  orders  its 
citizens  to  do  so  by  an  act  which  has  been  properly 
introduced,  discussed,  and  passed  into  law.)  Now  the 
above  argument  seems  to  me  to  break  the  second  epis- 
temic  condition.  I  do  not  think  that  it  could  possibly 
be  maintained  that  I  can  know  that  it  is  my  duty  to 
address  private  prayers  to  God  unless  I  already  know 
that  God  exists.  Hence  this  ethical  argument  for  the 
existence  of  God  would  be  circular. 

Professor  Taylor's  Arguments  for  Immortality.     Now 

that  we  understand  the  logic  of  ethical  arguments  for 
factual  conclusions  we  can  consider  the  special  ethical 
arguments  for  human  survival.  These  arguments  have 
been  stated  in  many  forms.  Fortunately  the  essence 
of  them  has  been  put  with  admirable  persuasiveness, 
brevity,  and  clearness  by  Professor  A.  E.  Taylor  in  an 
article  called  "The  Moral  Argument  for  Immortality" 
in  the  Holborn  Review.  As  I  have  no  expectation  of 
seeing  the  case  put  better  than  Professor  Taylor  puts 
it  there,  I  will  take  this  article  as  the  text  for  my  dis- 


492       EVIDENCE  FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

cussion.  I  think  that  the  article  contains  two  distinct 
arguments,  though  Professor  Taylor  passes  from  the 
first  to  the  second  without  definitely  saying  that  he  is 
making  a  transition. 

The  Argument  from  Duty.  Crudely  stated,  the  first 
argument  comes  to  this.  If  we  and  all  the  human  race 
will  eventually  die,  certain  acts  which  it  would  be  our 
duty  to  do  on  the  opposite  alternative  will  not  be  duties. 
And  certain  other  acts,  which  it  would  be  wrong  to  do 
if  we  were  immortal,  would  be  harmless  and  reasonable 
enougfh  if  the  lives  of  ourselves  and  our  fellows  are 
limited  to  the  three-score  years  and  ten  which  we  spend 
in  this  mortal  body.  The  duties  of  a  Christian  are  the 
right  and  reasonable  behaviour  of  a  man  who  is  going 
to  survive  the  death  of  his  body  ;  they  are  not  right  or 
reasonable  if  we  die  with  our  bodies.  The  reasonable 
course  of  life  on  the  latter  alternative  would  be  that 
which  is  sketched  for  us  in  Horace's  Odes.  Now  we 
know  that  it  is  right  for  us  to  live  in  accordance  with 
the  Christian  ethics,  and  that  it  is  wrong  to  live  in 
accordance  with  the  Horatian  ethics.  Since  the  latter 
mode  of  life  would  not  be  wrong  if  we  were  mortal,  we 
can  conclude  that  we  are  not  mortal.  I  will  deal  with 
this  argument  first. 

It  is  not  in  the  least  necessary  for  the  argument  to 
assume  that  the  Christian  ethics  are  wholly  right  or  the 
Horatian  ethics  wholly  wrong.  I  must  confess  that  it 
seems  to  me  that  Professor  Taylor  allows  much  too 
much  to  the  Horatian  ethics,  even  on  the  assumption  of 
human  mortality.  He  seems  to  suggest  that,  if  we  all 
die  with  our  bodies,  the  only  reasonable  course  of  action 
is  to  enjoy  the  passing  hour.  I  should  have  supposed 
that,  even  if  the  belief  that  I  and  the  race  will  perish 
makes  it  unreasonable  for  me  to  trouble  about  anything 
but  my  own  pleasure,  the  reasonable  course  of  life  for 
me  might  be  very  different  from  that  which  Horace 
recommends.  If  champagne  gives  me  a  headache  I 
shall  be  foolish  to  take  too  much  of  it  merely  because  I 


ETHICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL    493 

am  mortal.  And  my  mortality  will  surely  not  make  it 
my  duty  to  "  sport  with  Amaryllis  in  the  shade"  if  I 
find  the  society  of  Amaryllis  and  all  her  kindred  an  in- 
tolerable bore.  .  If  I  happen  to  prefer  philosophy,  or 
scientific  research,  or  charity-organisation,  to  dinner- 
parties, race-meetings,  and  night-clubs,  there  seems  to 
be  no  reason  why  I  should  not  indulge  these  tastes  as 
much  as  any  immortal  spirit.  Professor  Taylor  admits 
that  Horace's  Odes  do  not  make  very  cheerful  reading  ; 
surely  this  may  be  due,  not  simply  to  the  fact  that 
Horace  believed  himself  to  be  mortal,  but  also  to  the 
fact  that  he  acted  unreasonably  even  for  a  mortal  being 
whose  sole  aim  is  to  maximise  his  own  happiness.  In  a 
good  many  people  the  passion  for  scientific  research,  for 
artistic  production,  or  for  the  construction  of  engineering 
works  and  the  organisation  of  businesses,  is  extremely 
strong  and  largely  disinterested.  The  Horatian  scheme 
forgets  these  facts.  If  a  man  wishes  to  provide  himself 
with  sources  of  pleasure  that  will  ensure  a  quiet  but 
strong  happiness  over  the  greater  part  of  his  life,  rather 
than  a  few  spasms  of  enjoyment  in  the  earlier  part  of  it 
followed  by  years  of  boredom,  he  will  be  most  unwise 
to  adopt  the  '*  fleeting-hour  "  plan  even  if  he  believes 
himself  to  be  mortal.  His  wisest  course  will  be,  not 
indeed  to  neglect  bodily  pleasures  in  the  earlier  years  of 
his  life,  but  at  any  rate  to  indulge  in  them  only  to  such 
an  extent  as  will  not  interfere  with  the  acquirement  of 
sources  of  quieter  but  more  permanent  happiness  which 
can  be  enjoyed  when  gout  has  forbidden  port  and  a 
failing  digestion  has  vetoed  oysters. 

Thus,  even  if  we  die  with  our  bodies,  and  if  this 
implies  that  it  is  only  reasonable  to  do  what  will  give 
us  pleasure,  this  will  not  necessarily  make  the  right  and 
reasonable  line  of  conduct  for  most  of  us  very  different 
(though  it  will  be  somewhat  different)  from  that  of  a 
convinced  Christian.  But  of  course  the  mere  fact,  if  it  \ 
be  a  fact,  that  we  are  mortal  has  no  tendency  to  make  it  w 
right  to  consider  only  our  own  pleasure.     Suppose  that 


494       EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

I  and  all  other  men  are  mortal,  this  will  not  alter  the 
fact  that,  so  long  as  they  and  I  are  alive,  some  states  of 
mind,  such  as  the  appreciative  hearing  of  good  music, 
are  better  than  others,  such  as  enjoyment  of  another's 
pain.  Nor  will  it  alter  the  fact  that  it  largely  depends 
on  our  present  actions  whether  I,  my  contemporaries, 
and  a  long  series  of  successors  shall  experience  the  one 
kind  of  state  or  the  other.  Whether  we  are  mortal  or 
not  it  will  still  be  our  duty,  I  suppose,  not  to  produce 
a  worse  state  when  we  can  produce  a  better ;  not  to  treat 
our  own  pleasure,  simply  because  it  is  ours^  as  more 
important  than  the  pleasure  of  others  ;  and  not  to  show 
favouritism  in  the  distribution  of  those  materials  for  a 
good  life  which  are  at  our  disposal.  Thus  the  duties  of 
Justice,  Rational  Benevolence,  and  Prudence  remain 
duties  on  either  hypothesis. 

Professor  Taylor  says  that  he  assumes  that  "the 
highest  goods  are  roughly  the  discovery  and  knowledge 
of  truth,  the  attainment  and  exercise  of  virtue,  and  the 
creation  and  fruition  of  beauty  ".  To  these  he  later  on 
adds  the  relation  of  love  between  persons.  "All  other 
goods,"  he  says,  "are  secondary  and  insignificant  as 
compared  with  these."  I  have  no  quarrel  with  these 
statements.  The  question  is  whether  it  would  cease  to 
be  rational  to  strive  for  these  goods  if  we  believed  that 
all  human  beings  are  mortal  and  that  the  race  will 
eventually  die  out.  So  far  as  I  can  see,  the  only  argu- 
ment which  Professor  Taylor  uses  to  support  this  view 
is  that,  on  this  hypothesis,  it  will  make  no  permanent 
difference  whether  we  pursue  these  goods  or  not.  Now 
I  agree  that  this  consequence  follows  from  the  assump- 
tion that  the  race  will  eventually  die  out.  And  I  agree 
that  it  is  practically  certain  that  the  race  will  die  out 
unless  some  individual  members  of  it  are  immortal. 
Finally,  I  agree  (subject  to  certain  qualifications  which 
I  will  mention  in  a  moment)  that,  if  no  goods  that  we 
can  produce  are  permanent,  the  world  is  a  poor  thing. 
The  qualifications   which   I    have   to   make  are   these. 


ETHICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL    495 

(i)  Although  every  species  of  intelligent  beings  may 
last  only  for  a  finite  time,  yet  there  might  always  be 
some  species  of  intelligent  beings  existing.  And  the 
scientific  discoveries  and  artistic  treasures  of  the  human 
race  might  be  capable  of  being  known  and  appreciated 
by  the  race  of  intelligent  beings  whose  sun  is  rising 
while  the  sun  of  the  human  race  is  setting.  On  this 
hypothesis  all  values  which  consist  in  relations  between 
human  beings,  or  which  are  stored  up  in  the  characters 
of  human  beings,  would  indeed  be  lost ;  but  a  good 
deal  would  be  saved  out  of  the  wreck.  The  hypothesis 
which  I  am  suggesting  is  analogous  to  what  has 
happened  many  times  in  the  history  of  the  earth,  when 
one  race  {e.g.,  the  Greeks)  has  flowered  and  decayed, 
and  eventually  another  race  has  found  inspiration  in 
their  artistic,  literary,  and  scientific  productions.  (2) 
Professor  Taylor  holds  that,  if  all  the  values  which  the 
human  race  has  created  die  with  it  and  are  not  continued 
by  some  other  race,  the  world  is  ve7y  evil.  This  seems 
to  me  to  be  too  harsh  a  judgment ;  all  that  is  justified 
is  that  the  world  is  not  veiy  good.  Suppose  that  there 
have  not  been  and  never  will  be  any  intelligent  beings 
except  men,  and  that  the  human  race  lasts  for  ten 
million  years,  reaching  a  maximum  of  virtue,  happiness, 
and  knowledge,  at  some  intermediate  date  and  then 
degenerating.  On  this  hypothesis  no  part  of  the  history 
of  the  world  before  the  beginning  of  this  period,  and  no 
part  of  its  history  after  this  period,  has  any  intrinsic 
value.  All  intrinsic  value,  positive  and  negative,  is 
crowded  into  this  ten  million  years  ;  and  this  period  is 
no  doubt  but  a  moment  in  the  total  life  of  the  universe. 
We  must  remember,  however,  that  if  there  is  no  intrinsic 
goodness  outside  these  limits  of  time,  there  is  also  no 
intrinsic  evil.  Ethically,  all  but  the  ten  million  years 
may  be  wiped  out ;  and  the  moral  character  of  the 
universe  will  stand  or  fall  simply  by  the  balance  of 
good  or  evil  within  this  ten  million  years.  If  there  be 
a  balance  of  good  in  that  period,  the  universe  may  be 


496       EVIDENCE  FOR  HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

called  slightly  good  ;  if  there  be  a  balance  of  evil,  it 
may  be  called  slightly  bad.  But,  however  great  the 
balance  one  way  or  the  other  within  this  period,  we 
cannot  call  the  universe  as  a  whole  very  good  or  very 
bad,  because  the  period  during  which  any  moral 
predicate  can  be  applied  is  such  a  vanishingly  small 
part  of  the  total  history  of  the  universe. 

After  this  explanatory  digression  I  return  to  the 
main  question.  Supposing  that  there  will  come  a  time 
when  all  our  scientific  knowledge  will  be  lost,  when  all 
our  artistic  productions  will  have  ceased  to  exist  or 
will  have  ceased  to  be  contemplated  and  admired  by 
any  conscious  being,  and  when  all  the  values  which  are 
stored  up  in  personal  character  and  in  human  relation- 
ships will  have  vanished  with  the  human  beings  who 
owned  them,  does  it  follow  that  it  is  irrational  for  us 
here  and  now  to  pursue  those  goods  and  to  sacrifice 
other  kinds  of  pleasure  in  order  to  attain  them?  I 
cannot  see  that  it  does.  Let  us  begin  by  taking  an 
analogy  within  a  single  three-score  years  and  ten.  It  is 
certain  that  no  doctor  can  prevent  me  from  eventually 
dying.  Does  this  render  it  irrational  for  me  to  go  to  a 
doctor  if  I  have  an  illness  in  the  prime  of  life,  in  the 
hope  that  he  will  cure  me  and  enable  me  to  live  for  many 
more  years  in  comfort  to  myself  and  in  useful  activities 
and  valuable  personal  relations  to  others?  Surely  it 
does  not.  Now,  if  it  is  rational  to  seek  to  be  cured  of 
an  illness,  though  eventually  some  illness  is  certain  to 
be  fatal  to  me,  why  is  it  irrational  for  me  to  seek  to 
enlarge  scientific  knowledge  and  to  produce  beautiful 
objects,  though  eventually  a  time  will  come  when  this 
knowledge  will  be  lost  and  these  objects  will  no  longer 
be  contemplated?  The  human  race  has  probably  a  very 
long  course  before  it,  and  I  can  certainly  affect  for  better 
or  worse  the  lives  of  countless  generations  of  future 
men.  I  cannot  see  the  least  reason  to  think  that, 
because  the  course  of  human  history  is  not  eftdless,  it 
ceases  to  be  my  duty  to  do  what  I  can  to  assure  to  these 


ETHICAL   ARGUMENTS  FOR   SURVIVAL     497 

future  generations  decent  social  conditions,  clear  scientific 
knowledge  which  they  can  build  upon  and  extend,  and 
beautiful  objects  which  they  can  admire  and  use  as  an 
inspiration  for  the  production  of  yet  more  beautiful 
objects.  That  it  will  all  come  to  an  end  eventually  is  a 
tragedy  ;  but  this  tragedy  seems  to  make  no  difference 
to  my  duty  here  and  now.  If  you  like,  it  lowers  the 
worth  of  every  kind  of  activity  ;  but  it  does  not,  as  far  as 
I  can  see,  alter  the  relative  values  of  various  alternative 
kinds  of  activity. 

No  doubt,  if  one's  duties  are  affected  at  all  by  matters 
of  fact,  one  very  important  fact  which  will  influence 
them  is  the  particular  place  and  time  within  the  cosmic 
process  in  which  one's  lot  happens  to  be  cast.  It  would 
be  irrational  to  start  an  elaborate  scheme  of  social  reform) 
or  a  three-volume  novel,  or  a  treatise  on  the  theory  of 
functions,  if  there  were  reason  to  expect  that  the  world 
was  coming  to  an  end  next  week.  At  least  it  would  be 
foolish  on  any  other  motive  than  the  enjoyment  of  the 
activity  itself.  But  it  is  not  obviously  foolish,  if  there 
be  a  prospect  of  a  long  series  of  human  generations 
between  oneself  and  the  twilight  of  the  earth,  so  to  act 
that  they  may  have  fine  works  of  art,  profound  scientific 
speculations,  and  the  opportunity  to  live  in  a  reasonably 
ordered  community.  Even  if  men  were  immortal  and 
the  human  race  destined  to  last  for  ever,  it  is  certain  that 
my  scientific  speculations  will  become  obsolete  and  my 
artistic  productions  unintelligible.  If  they  will  be  ap- 
preciated by  myself  and  my  contemporaries  and  will 
form  a  basis  from  which  my  successors  will  be  able  to 
build  something  better,  it  is  rational  for  me  to  occupy 
myself  in  these  activities.  I  am  quite  prepared  to  admit 
that,  if  the  race  is  going  to  die  out,  the  duties  of  a  man 
who  is  born  some  millions  of  years  hence  may  be  very 
different  from  my  duties,  and  very  different  from  the 
duties  which  would  be  incumbent  on  him  if  he  believed 
in  immortality.  If  it  were  certain  that  the  race  had 
passed  its  prime,  and  that  nothing  now  awaited  it  but 

2  I 


498       EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

a  hopeless  struggle  with  an  increasingly  unfavourable 
environment,  the  main  duty  of  a  good  man  might  be 
to  preach  and  to  practise  contraception  and  infanticide. 
But  I  do  deny  that  the  question  of  mortality  or  immor- 
tality makes  any  appreciable  difference  to  the  duties  of 
a  man  here   and  now  ;    and  the  fact   that  it  will  make 
a  great  difference  to  the  duties  of  a  man   born  some 
millions  of  years  hence  seems  to  me  to  be  irrelevant. 
It  seems  to  me,  then,  that  the  difference  between  the 
\     duties  of  a  Christian  and  the  duties  of  a  man  of  the 
j    present  time  who  believes  that  he  and  his  fellows  are 
/    mortal  are  not  nearly  so  great  as  has  been  represented. 
No  doubt  there  are  considerable  differences  ;  but  these 
depend  on  the  fact  that  certain  details  of  the  Christian 
ethics  are  accepted  by  Christians  on    the  authority  of 
a  supposed  divine  revelation.     Differences  of  this  kind 
are  irrelevant  to  the  present  argument,  for  the  following 
reasons,     {a)  It  is  needless  to  prove  to  Christians  that 
they  are    immortal  from    the    special  features   of  their 
ethical  system,  for  they  already  believe   that   they  are 
immortal  on  the  same  authority  on  which  they  accept 
these  special  duties.     On    the  other  hand,   in  arguing 
wath  non-Christians  it  is  useless  to  take  as  the  basis  for 
your  argument  special  duties  which,  since  they  are  be- 
lieved to  be  duties  only  on  the  authority  of  the  Christian 
revelation,  will  not  be   regarded  by  non-Christians  as 
duties  at  all.     {b)  In  any  case  differences  of  this  kind 
will  not  be  relevant  to  the  argument  for  immortality. 
We    must   find    some   difference   in    our    duties   which 
depends  simply  and  solely  on  the  question  whether  we 
are  or  are  not  mortal,  if  we  are  to  base  an  argument  for 
immortality  on  our  supposed  knowledge  of  what  it  is  our 
duty  to  do.     What  I  have  tried  to  do  so  far  is  to  show 
that  it  is  by  no  means  clear  that  there  are  any  duties 
which   fulfil  the  two  conditions  of  being  regarded  as 
binding  by  virtuous  disbelievers  in  immortality,  and  of 
not  really  being  binding  unless  we  are  immortal 

It  would  be  enough,  however,  for  Professor  Taylor's 


ETHICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL    499 

purpose  if  a  single  act  can  be  found  which  is  admitted 
to  be  a  duty  by  all  competent  judges,  and  would  not 
be  a  duty  if  we  were  mortal.  Now,  although  I  do  not 
know  of  any  act  which  fulfils  these  conditions  here  and 
now,  it  would  be  rash  to  assert  that  there  may  not  be 
at  least  one.  Let  us  assume  then,  as  a  hypothesis, 
that  a  clear  case  of  such  a  duty  can  be  produced  ;  and 
let  us  then  ask  whether  we  should  be  justified  in  con- 
cluding that  we  are  immortal. 

It  is  plain  that  the  argument  fulfils  the  necessary 
constitutive  conditions.  It  would  run  as  follows.  "  I 
know  it  is  my  duty  to  perform  actions  of  a  certain  kind. 
I  can  show  that  it  would  not  be  my  duty  to  perform 
such  actions  unless  I  were  immortal.  Therefore  I  can 
conclude  that  I  am  immortal."  The  question  is  whether 
the  argument  could  fulfil  the  necessary  epistemic  con- 
ditions. If  the  argument  is  to  be  epistemically  valid 
I  must  be  able  to  know  that  so-and-so  is  my  duty 
without  having  to  know  beforehand  w^hether  I  am  mortal 
or  immortal.  Now  I  am  extremely  doubtful  whether 
the  epistemic  condition  can  be  fulfilled.  Either  my 
duty  depends  on  circumstances  or  it  does  not.  If  it 
does,  how  can  I  know  what  it  is  until  I  know  the 
circumstances  in  which  I  am  placed?  And  a  very 
important  circumstance  will  be  whether  I  am  mortal 
or  immortal.  Thus,  if  my  duty  does  depend  on  circum- 
stances, it  seems  to  me  almost  incredible  that  I  can  know 
what  it  is  while  I  am  ignorant  of  the  relevant  circum- 
stances. Now,  by  hypothesis,  the  question  whether  I 
am  or  am  not  mortal,  is  highly  relevant  in  connexion 
with  the  duty  on  which  the  argument  is  based.  If, 
then,  my  duty  does  depend  upon  circumstances,  and 
the  question  of  my  mortality  or  immortality  is  highly 
relevant  to  the  question  whether  so-and-so  is  my  duty 
or  not,  I  find  it  hard  to  believe  that  I  could  be  certain 
that  so-and-so  is  my  duty  at  times  when  I  am  uncertain 
whether  I  am  mortal  or  immortal.  I  fully  admit  that 
there  is  no  logical  impossibility  here  ;  but  I  have  the 


500       EVIDENCE  FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

gravest  doubts  whether  any  actual  instance  could  be 
produced.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  my  duty  be  inde- 
pendent of  circumstances,  then  there  is  of  course  no 
difficulty  in  supposing  that  I  can  know  that  so-and-so 
is  my  duty  at  times  when  I  do  not  know  whether  I  am 
or  am  not  mortal.  But  then  the  other  half  of  the 
argument  will  break  down.  If  it  be  my  duty  to  do 
so-and-so  regardless  of  circumstances,  it  will  be  my  duty 
to  do  it  whether  I  be  mortal  or  not ;  and,  therefore,  the 
fact  that  it  is  my  duty  to  do  it  will  not  enable  me  to 
decide  between  these  two  alternatives. 

I  will  now  try  to  state  as  shortly  as  possible  what  I 
do  and  what  I  do  not  think  that  I  have  proved,  (i)  I 
have  not  proved  that  there  is  any  logical  incoherence 
in  Professor  Taylor's  argument.  It  is  theoretically 
possible,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  that  an  instance  might 
be  produced  fulfilling  all  the  conditions  which  the 
argument  requires.  (2)  I  have  tried  to  make  these 
conditions  explicit,  and  I  will  now  sum  them  up.  In 
trying  to  prove  to  a  man  M  by  this  argument  that  he 
is  immortal  it  is  necessary  to  find  some  action  which 
fulfils  the  following  conditions,  {a)  M  recognises  it  to 
be  his  duty,  {b)  It  would  not  be  M's  duty  unless  M 
were  in  fact  immortal,  (c)  M  can  know  that  it  is  his 
duty  without  having  to  know  beforehand  whether  he 
is  immortal  or  not,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  it  can  be  his 
duty  only  if  he  is  in  fact  immortal.  (3)  I  have  tried 
to  show  that  it  is  uncertain  whether  any  action  can  be 
suggested  at  the  present  time  which  fulfils  conditions 
{a)  and  {b).  And  I  have  tried  further  to  show  that, 
even  if  an  action  could  be  produced  that  fulfils  {a)  and 
(<^),  it  is  most  unlikely  that  it  would  fulfil  {c)  also. 

The  Argument  that  the  World  would  be  very  evil  tmless 
Men  are  immortal.  This  is  plainly  a  different  argument 
from  that  which  we  have  just  been  considering.  The 
first  argument  took  as  its  premise  that  we  have  certain 
duties  and  that  these  would  not  be  obligatory  on  us  if 
we  were  mortal.     The  present  argument  is  of  the  follow- 


ETHICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL    501 

ing  form.  ''  If  we  and  all  men  die  with  our  bodies  the 
world  is  very  evil.  The  world  is  not  so  evil  as  this. 
Therefore  some  men,  at  any  rate,  are  immortal." 
Professor  Taylor  does  not  directly  discuss  this  argu- 
ment. But  he  has  a  good  deal  of  importance  to  say 
about  it.  In  the  first  place,  he  incidentally  uses  an 
argument,  which  seems  to  me  to  be  invalid  in  the 
present  connexion,  to  suggest  that  the  world  is  not  so 
evil  as  it  seems.  Secondly,  he  argues  in  considerable 
detail,  not  that  it  is  false  that  the  world  is  very  evil, 
but  that  it  is  inconsistent  for  a  scientist  to  hold  that  it  is 
so.  I  will  first  consider  the  argument  for  myself,  and 
will  then  consider  Professor  Taylor's  remarks  about  it. 

I  think  that  the  argument  under  discussion  could  take 
two  forms,  one  of  which  applies  more  directly  to  the 
individual  than  the  other.  The  first  form  is  this. 
"  Men  often  die  quite  suddenly  at  the  height  of  their 
powers,  and  other  men  die  when  their  full  powers  are 
not  developed.  If  such  men  do  not  survive  the  death 
of  their  bodies  they  are  treated  with  gross  injustice. 
If  there  were  such  injustice  the  universe  would  be  very 
evil.  Now  the  universe  is  not  so  evil  as  this.  Hence  such 
men  do  not  really  die  with  the  death  of  their  bodies."  If 
such  an  argument  were  valid  at  all,  it  would  not  directly 
prove  that  all  men  survive  the  death  of  their  bodies  or 
that  any  man  is  immortal.  Some  men  seem  to  be  pro- 
vided in  this  life  with  ample  opportunities  to  display 
the  best  that  is  in  them,  and  to  display  nothing  that  is 
worth  preserving.  And  it  is  not  obvious  that  any  man 
needs  unending  time  to  display  all  his  powers  to  the 
utmost.  If  you  answer  that  every  man  viay  have 
valuable  characteristics  which  need  only  favourable 
conditions  to  develop,  and  that  we  cannot  be  sure  that 
any  man  could  develop  his  full  powers  in  a  finite  time, 
the  answer  is  true  but  irrelevant.  We  can  argue  only 
from  what  we  know  to  be  true,  not  from  what  we  do 
know  to  be  false. 

I  have  already  stated  the  other  form  of  the  argument. 


4 


502        EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

I  will  begin  by  making  some  comments  on  the  first 
premise  and  the  conclusion.  For  reasons  already- 
given  the  first  premise  needs  to  be  stated  in  a  more 
guarded  form.  We  must  not  suppose  merely  that  all 
human  beings  are  mortal  and  that  the  race  will  eventu- 
ally die  out.  We  must  also  suppose  that  there  will 
not  be  other  races  of  intelligent  beings  who  will  be  able 
to  take  over,  appreciate,  and  develop  the  science  and 
art  of  the  hurnan  race,  as  one  nation  of  human  beings 
has  often  done  with  the  science  and  art  of  another 
nation  which  has  died  out.  If  there  always  will  be 
such  -intelligent  beings,  though  none  of  them  are 
immortal,  the  world  need  not  be  very  evil  ;  though  I 
think  it  would  be  less  good  than  it  would  be  if  some 
individuals,  human  or  non  -  human,  were  immortal. 
Secondly,  I  am  not  prepared  to  say  that  the  world 
would  be  very  evil  even  on  the  more  detailed  hypothesis 
that  there  will  be  no  other  races  of  intelligent  beings 
related  to  the  human  race  in  the  way  suggested.  I  am 
prepared  to  say  only  that  the  world  would  not  be  very 
good  on  this  hypothesis.  It  is  worth  while  to  remark 
that  the  world  might  be  very  much  worse  on  the 
hypothesis  of  immortality  than  on  the  hypothesis 
of  mortality.  If  all  human  beings  be  immortal,  and 
most  human  beings  spend  eternity  in  Hell,  it  seems 
to  me  that  the  world  will  be  very  evil  ;  much  more 
evil  than  it  would  be  on  the  hypothesis  of  universal 
mortality.  In  fact  immortality  is  a  necessary  condition 
(on  the  present  restricted  hypothesis)  for  very  great 
good  or  very  great  evil.  But  it  is  quite  neutral  between 
the  two.  So  much  for  the  first  premise  of  the  present 
argument. 

About  the  conclusion  I  have  to  make  the  same  remark 
as  I  made  about  the  conclusion  of  the  first  form  of  the 
argument.  So  far  as  I  can  see,  the  argument  would 
not  prove  that  every  one  is  immortal  ;  it  would  prove 
only  that  some  men  must  be  so.  It  would  be  quite 
consistent  with  the  view  that  no  one  who  has  existed 


ETHICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL    503 

up  to  the  present  date  is  immortal,  or  that  only  a 
small  proportion  of  the  men  who  are  alive  at  any 
date  are  immortal. 

It  now  remains  to  consider  the  second  premise,  which 
is  common  to  the  two  forms  of  this  argument.  Two 
conditions  must  be  fulfilled  if  the  argument  is  to  be 
valid,  (i)  It  must  be  true  that  the  world  is  better  than 
it  would  be  if  all  human  beings  were  mortal.  And  (ii) 
we  must  be  able  to  know  this  without  having  to  know 
beforehand  whether  all  men  are  mortal  or  not.  It  is 
this  second  and  epistemic  condition  which  renders  a 
perfectly  true  observation  of  Professor  Taylor's  com- 
pletely irrelevant  to  the  present  purpose.  He  supposes 
an  objector  to  say  that,  on  the  face  of  it,  there  is  a  great 
deal  of  evil  in  the  world  ;  and,  since  the  world  contains 
so  much  evil  anyhow,  we  can  feel  no  confidence  that  it 
may  not  be  evil  enough  to  be  consistent  with  universal 
mortality.  To  this  he  answers  that  a  great  deal  in  the 
world  which  seems  to  be  very  evil  would  be  trivial  if 
we  are  immortal.  This  is  no  doubt  true  ;  but  it  is 
surely  quite  irrelevant.  If  we  knew  independently 
that  we  were  immortal  this  would  be  a  perfectly  good 
argument  against  the  pessimist.  But,  when  we  are 
trying  to  prove  that  we  are  immortal,  we  must  surely 
take  the  world  at  its  face-value  and  not  import  con- 
siderations which  depend  on  the  hypothesis  that  we  are 
immortal.  Whether  we  are  immortal  or  not  it  is 
certain  that  pain  and  cruelty  exist,  and  it  is  certain  that 
they  are  intrinsically  evil.  If  we  are  immortal,  they  may 
have  a  great  instrumental  value  which  they  will  not 
have  if  we  are  mortal.  But  we  have  no  right  to  assume 
either  that  they  do  or  that  they  do  not  have  this  instru- 
mental value  when  we  are  trying  to  prove  that  we  are 
immortal;  the  question  of  their  possible  instrumental 
value  must  here  be  dismissed  as  simply  irrelevant.  It 
is  perhaps  worth  while  to  add  that,  if  we  are  to  play  fast 
and  loose  with  our  data  in  this  way  at  all,  we  may  as 
well  do  it  in  one  direction  as  in  another.     Whether  we 


504       EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

are  immortal  or  not  it  is  certain  that  love  and  pity- 
exist,  and  it  is  certain  that  they  are  intrinsically  good. 
But  intrinsically  good  states  sometimes  have  bad  con- 
sequences ;  and,  if  we  are  immortal,  they  may  have  a 
great  instrumental  disvalue  which  they  will  not  have  if 
we  are  mortal. 

For  my  own  part  I  believe  the  objection  which 
Professor  Taylor  is  here  trying  to  answer  is  a  perfectly 
valid  one.  There  certainly  is  some  evil,  and  I  do  not 
know  of  any  general  principle  by  which  we  could  decide, 
e.g.^  that  toothache  is  not  too  bad  to  be  true  whilst 
universal  mortality  is  too  bad  to  be  true.  Perhaps  there 
may  be  some  general  principle  which  would  enable  us 
to  draw  a  line  somewhere,  if  only  we  knew  it.  But,  so 
far  as  I  can  see,  we  are  not  acquainted  with  any  such 
principle  and  have  not  the  least  idea  where  this  line  is 
to  be  drawn. 

The  alleged  Inconsistency  between  holding  that  the  World 
is  '  *  rationaV  and  denying  that  it  is  ' '  righteous  ".  Professor 
Taylor  imagines  the  case  of  a  scientist  who  should  argue 
as  follows.  "  I  see  that  it  is  my  duty  to  act  in  such  and 
such  a  way.  I  also  know  from  my  study  of  natural 
science  that  the  efforts  of  the  human  race  will  all  come 
to  naught  in  the  end,  whether  we  do  what  is  right  or 
what  is  wrong.  So  much  the  worse  for  Nature.  It  is  a 
fact  that  it  has  at  a  certain  stage  produced  beings  who 
can  distinguish  between  right  and  wrong  and  be  guided 
in  their  actions  by  this  distinction.  Such  beings  can 
judge  the  cosmic  process  and  condemn  it  as  indifferent 
to,  and  in  the  end  destructive  of,  all  that  is  valuable.  It 
is  a  fact  that,  if  men  survived  the  death  of  their  bodies, 
there  would  be  at  least  a  chance  that  their  efforts  and 
experiences  might  be  of  some  permanent  value.  But 
we  have  no  right  to  think  that  this  provides  any  reason 
for  holding  that  men  will  survive  bodily  death  ;  what 
ought  to  be  and  what  is  fall  into  two  utterly  different 
spheres,  and  we  cannot  argue  from  the  former  to  the 
latter.     Their  sole  connexion  is  that  the  world  of  what  is 


ETHICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL    505 

has,  under  temporary  and  exceptional  circumstances, 
tlirown  up  for  a  moment  beings  who  can  contemplate 
the  world  of  what  ought  to  be,  and  can  criticise  from  its 
standards  the  material  world  which  has  made  and  will 
soon  break  its  critics." 

Now  I  understand  Professor  Taylor's  position  to  be 
that  there  is  a  positive  inconsistency  in  a  scientist  who 
combines  the  view  that  the  world  is  "rational",  in  the 
sense  of  being  coherent  enough  to  be  a  possible 
object  of  scientific  knowledge,  with  the  view  that  it  is 
"irrational",  in  the  sense  of  being  indifferent  or  hostile 
to  what  we  know  to  be  ethically  valuable.  Now  we 
must  at  the  outset  distinguish  two  very  different  cases. 
{a)  That  the  two  propositions  :  "The  world  is  logically 
coherent"  and:  "The  world  is  ethically  incoherent" 
are  mutually  inconsistent.  And  [b]  that  /  should  be 
inconsistent  if  I  believed  both  of  them.  The  distinction 
may  be  illustrated  as  follows.  There  is  no  inconsistency 
between  the  two  propositions  :  "  Smith  is  in  the  dining- 
room  "  and  :  "Jones  is  not  in  the  dining-room  ".  But, 
if  my  sole  ground  for  any  determinate  belief  about  the 
position  of  either  is  that  the  housemaid  has  told  me  that 
both  are  in  the  dining-room,  /  shall  be  inconsistent  if  I 
assert  that  Smith  is  there  and  deny  that  Jones  is  there. 
I  think  it  is  certain  that  Professor  Taylor  claims  to  prove 
only  the  second  kind  of  inconsistency.  I  will,  however, 
deal  with  the  first  before  I  consider  Professor  Taylor's 
arguments  for  the  second. 

[a)  It  seems  to  me  quite  plain  that  there  is  no  in- 
consistency between  the  two  statements  that  the  world 
obeys  the  laws  of  logic  and  that  it  breaks  the  laws  of 
ethics.  There  appears  to  be  an  inconsistency  only 
because  of  a  confusion  between  two  senses  of  "law" 
and  two  senses  of  "breaking".  Murders  are  committed 
from  time  to  time  ;  and  this,  in  a  sense,  conflicts  with 
the  moral  law:  "Thou  shalt  do  no  murder".  But  it 
conflicts  simply  in  the  sense  that  something  happens 
which  the  law  asserts  to  be  wrong.     It  does  not  conflict 


5o6       EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

with  the  law  in  the  sense  that  it  is  inconsistent  with  its 
truth.  If  every  one  always  and  everywhere  committed 
murders,  this  would  not  have  the  least  bearing  on  the 
fact  that  murder  is  wrong,  if  it  be  a  fact.  At  most  it 
might  make  it  harder  for  us  to  recognise  this  law.  To 
say  then  that  the  world  breaks  the  laws  of  ethics  means 
only  that  it  contains  a  great  deal  of  evil  ;  and,  since  the 
laws  of  ethics  make  no  assertion  whatever  about  the 
amount  of  evil  which  may  exist,  there  is  not  the  slightest 
intellectual  incoherence  between  this  fact  and  the  laws 
of  ethics.  There  is  therefore  no  difficulty  whatever  that 
I  can  see  in  believing  both  that  these  laws  are  true  and 
that  they  are  very  often  or  even  always  broken. 

Let  us  now  see  what  would  be  meant  by  saying  that 
the  world  never  breaks  the  laws  of  logic.  This  means 
that  neither  the  world  as  a  whole  nor  any  part  of  it 
can  be  the  subject  of  two  true  propositions  of  the  kind 
which  logic  asserts  to  be  inconsistent  with  each  other. 
Is  there  any  incoherence  between  this  statement  and 
the  statement  that  the  world  or  parts  of  it  break  the 
laws  of  ethics?  There  would  be  an  incoherence  if  and 
only  if  a  breach  of  the  laws  of  ethics  by  anything  im- 
plied that  this  thing  was  the  subject  of  two  logically 
inconsistent  propositions  both  of  which  were  true.  But 
we  have  seen  that  a  breach  of  the  laws  of  ethics  entails 
no  such  consequences.  If  I  commit  a  murder  I  break  a 
law  of  ethics,  but  I  do  not  thereby  become  the  subject 
of  two  true  propositions  which  are  logically  inconsistent 
with  each  other.  The  two  true  propositions  :  "I  commit 
a  murder"  and  :  "  I  do  wrong  to  commit  a  murder"  are 
perfectly  consistent  in  logic  with  each  other. 

{b)  We  may  therefore  pass  to  the  second  question. 
Granted  that  there  is  no  inconsistency  between  the 
propositions:  "The  world  is  logically  coherent"  and 
"  The  world  is  ethically  incoherent";  is  it  inconsistent 
of  me  to  combine  the  two?  I  understand  Professor 
Taylor's  position  to  be  that  I  have  no  positive  ground 
for  believing  the  world  to  be  logically  coherent  which 


ETHICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL    507 

is  not  also  a  positive  ground  for  believing  it  to  be 
ethically  coherent,  and  that  it  is  therefore  inconsistent 
in  me  to  assert  the  former  and  doubt  the  latter.  Let 
us  now  examine  this  contention  a  little  more  closely. 
When  we  say  that  a  man  has  no  ground  for  asserting 
/  which  is  not  equally  a  ground  for  asserting  q  we 
may  mean  one  of  two  things.  (i)  We  may  mean 
that  he  has  no  ground  at  all  for  either  assertion. 
Or  (ii)  we  may  mean  that  he  has  a  positive  ground  for 
asserting/,  and  that  this  is  just  as  good  a  ground  for 
asserting  q. 

The  former  alternative  would  mean  that  the  belief 
that  the  world  is  rational  is  an  act  of  pure  faith,  and 
that  the  belief  that  the  world  is  righteous  is  another  act 
of  pure  faith.  Supposing  this  to  be  true,  all  that  follows 
is  that  A,  who  believes  on  no  grounds  that  the  world  is 
intelligible,  cannot  cast  stones  at  B,  who  believes  on 
no  grounds  that  the  world  is  righteous.  Equally,  of 
course,  B  will  not  be  able  to  cast  stones  at  A.  But,  so 
far  as  I  can  see,  though  A  and  B  could  not  refute  each 
other,  they  also  could  not  convince  each  other.  Because 
I  believe  one  proposition  on  faith,  and  another  man 
believes  another  proposition  on  faith,  it  does  not  follow 
that  I  ought  to  add  his  belief  to  mine  or  that  he  ought 
to  add  my  belief  to  his.  Thus,  on  this  alternative,  the 
argument  may  produce  mutual  charity  but  it  has  no 
tendency  to  produce  mutual  conviction. 

The  second  alternative  is  that  the  two  beliefs  that  the 
world  is  intelligible  and  that  it  is  righteous  have  a 
common  positive  ground.  If  so,  it  will  be  inconsistent 
of  me  to  assert  one  proposition  on  this  ground  and  to 
deny  the  other.  In  order  to  deal  with  this  case  it  will 
be  necessary  to  state  more  clearly  what  is  meant  by  the 
proposition  that  the  world  is  "intelligible"  or  "in- 
tellectually coherent".  I  think  that  this  involves  two 
points  ;  (i)  that  the  world  obeys  the  laws  of  logic,  and 
(ii)  something  more.  The  first  is  all  that  the  pure 
mathematician  requires  ;    the  second  is  required  in  ad- 


5o8       EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

dition  to  the  first  by  the  natural  scientist.     I  will  deal 
with  these  two  points  in  turn. 

(i)  It  seems  to  me  that  my  ground  for  believing  that 
the  world  obeys  the  laws  of  logic  can  be  stated,  and  that 
it  is  obviously  quite  different  from  my  ground  (if  any) 
for  believing  that  it  obeys  the  laws  of  ethics.     Why  do 
):y^  I  believe  that  the  world  obeys  the  laws  of  logic?    Because 

I  seem  to  be  able  to  see  quite  clearly  that  no  term  of 
^  any  kind  could  be  the  subject  of  two  true  and  logically 

inconsistent  propositions.  It  is  true  that  this  belief 
''  has  no  grounds  ",  in  the  sense  that  no  reasons  can  be 
given  for  it  which  do  not  presuppose  it.  But  it  also 
needs  no  grounds  in  this  sense  ;  for  it  is  self-evident. 
It  is  merely  an  abuse  of  language  to  call  it  an  "  act  of 
faith  "  in  the  sense  in  which  my  belief  that  my  friend 
loves  me  in  spite  of  his  being  sometimes  cold  and  some- 
times peevish  to  me  may  be  called  an  "act  of  faith". 
I  have  this  self-evident  knowledge  of  some  of  the  more 
abstract  principles  of  ethics  as  well  as  of  the  laws  of 
logic.  But  I  have  no  such  knowledge  of  the  proposition 
that  the  world  conforms  to  the  laws  of  ethics.  So  far 
from  its  being  self-evident  that  the  world  conforms  to 
the  laws  of  ethics  it  is  perfectly  certain  that  some  parts 
of  it  do  not.  At  least  it  is  as  certain  that  the  world 
does  not  wholly  conform  to  the  laws  of  ethics  as  it  is 
that  there  is  moral  evil  in  it.  It  is  no  answer  to  this  to 
say  that  we  often  meet  with  apparent  contradictions, 
and  that  we  always  feel  quite  sure  that  they  are  on/y 
apparent  and  that  fuller  knowledge  would  show  that  the 
laws  of  logic  have  not  been  broken  ;  so  why  should  not 
the  same  thing  be  true  of  apparent  breaches  of  the  laws 
of  ethics?  The  two  cases  are  quite  different.  We  know 
beforehand  that  nothing  real  can  break  the  laws  of  logic  ; 
we  do  not  know  that  nothing  real  can  break  the  laws  of 
ethics.  Moreover,  additional  knowledge  will  not  show 
that  something  which  I  took  to  be  intrinsically  evil  is 
not  intrinsically  evil  ;  at  the  most  it  will  only  show  that 
something  which  is  intrinsically  evil  is  a  causal  condi- 


ETHICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL    509 

tion  of  something  else  which  is  intrinsically  good,  or 
that  it  is  a  constituent  of  a  whole  which  is  intrinsically 
good  in  spite  of  the  intrinsic  badness  of  this  part  of  it. 
There  is  thus  no  parallel  at  all  between  the  two  cases, 
so  far  as  I  can  see. 

(ii)  There  is  then  not  the  slightest  inconsistency  in 
the  position  of  a  pure  mathematician,  e.g.,  who  believes 
that  all  apparent  contradictions  in  mathematics  can  be 
resolved  and  also  believes  that  the  world  is  very  bad 
or  not  very  good.  But  Professor  Taylor  was  not  really 
considering  the  case  of  a  pure  mathematician.  He  was 
considering  the  ordinary  natural  scientist  ;  and  here 
his  argument  has  much  more  plausibility.  The  intelli- 
gibility of  the  existent  world  does  imply  that  it  and 
every  part  of  it  obeys  the  laws  of  logic  ;  but  it  requires 
more  than  this.  Nature  might  obey  the  laws  of  logic  ; 
but,  unless  at  least  two  further  conditions  were  fulfilled, 
it  would  still  be  an  unintelligible  chaos  to  the  scientific 
investigator.  The  first  condition  is  that  changes  shall 
be  subject  to  general  laws,  such  as  the  laws  of  motion, 
gravitation,  etc.  This  is  in  no  way  implied  by  the  fact 
that  nature  obeys  the  laws  of  logic.  But  this  is  not 
enough.  Nature  might  obey  the  laws  of  logic,  and 
every  change  in  the  existent  might  be  subject  to  general 
laws,  and  yet  nature  might  be  utterly  unintelligible. 
The  laws  might  be  too  numerous  or  too  complex  for  us 
to  unravel  ;  they  might  be  such  that  it  was  practically 
impossible  for  us  to  isolate  any  one  phenomenon  from 
all  the  rest  even  to  a  first  degree  of  approximation  ;  or 
again,  our  situation  in  nature  might  be  so  unfortunate 
that  our  sensations  came  to  us  in  such  an  order  that 
they  failed  to  reveal  the  laws  which  really  are  present  in 
nature.  The  scientist  who  assumes  that  nature  is  and 
will  always  remain  intelligible  must  therefore  assume 
that  nature  obeys  other  laws  in  addition  to  those  of 
logic  ;  that  these  are  of  such  a  kind  that  we  shall  be 
able  to  disentangle  them  if  we  try  patiently  ;  and  that 
we  are  not  fixed  in  such  an  exceptional  corner  of  nature 


510       EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

or  so  badly  provided  with  sense-organs  that  all  our 
efforts  will  be  vain.  These  assumptions  are  not  self- 
evident,  like  the  laws  of  logic  ;  and  they  cannot  be 
proved  by  any  known  process  of  reasoning  from  any 
known  set  of  premises  which  are  self-evident.  Let  us 
call  them  "postulates",  as  contrasted  with  the  laws  of 
logic,  which  are  "  axioms". 

Of  these  scientific  postulates  we  may  say  (a)  that  they 
cannot  be  disproved,  any  more  than  they  can  be  proved  ; 
and  (d)  that  it  is  practically  more  advantageous  to  act 
as  if  we  believed  them  than  to  act  as  if  we  disbelieved 
them.  There  is  no  logical  reason  for  believing  them, 
but  there  is  2l practical  motive  for  acting  as  if  we  believed 
them.  The  practical  motive  of  course  is  that,  if  we  act 
on  these  postulates,  we  shall  go  on  investigating  ;  and 
that  if,  and  only  if,  we  go  on  investigating,  we  may  dis- 
cover explanations  of  what  is  at  present  unintelligible. 
Now  I  suppose  that  the  corresponding  ethical  postulate 
would  be  that  our  efforts  to  do  what  is  right,  to  discover 
truth,  and  to  create  beautiful  objects,  have  an  effect 
which  \s  permanently  valuable.  I  think  it  is  true  to  say 
that  this  {a)  cannot  be  disproved,  and  {b)  that  most 
men  are  more  likely  to  exercise  themselves  in  valuable 
activities  if  they  act  as  if  they  believed  it  than  if  they 
act  as  if  they  disbelieved  it.  There  is  (apart  from  the 
special  empirical  arguments  which  I  reserve  for  the 
next  chapter)  no  logical  reason  to  believe  this  ethical 
postulate,  but  there  is  2.  practical  motive  for  acting  as  if 
we  believed  it.  It  is  thus  in  precisely  the  same  logical 
position  and  in  precisely  the  same  practical  position  as 
the  scientific  postulate.  So  much  I  think  we  may  grant 
to  Professor  Taylor. 

What  is  the  bearing  of  this  admission  on  the  question 
of  human  immortality  ?  It  seems  to  me  to  have  no 
direct  bearing  at  all.  It  is  desirable  that  men  should 
act  as  if  they  believed  that  their  efforts  will  have  per- 
manently valuable  results.  If  Professor  Taylor  be 
right,  the  proposition:   "Human  efforts  will  have  per- 


ETHICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL    511 

manently  valuable  results  "  entails  the  pr(jp(xsiti(jn  : 
*'  Some  human  beings  are  immortal  ".  All  that  follows 
from  this  is  that  it  is  desirable  that  men  should  act  as  if 
they  believed  a  certain  proposition  which  entails  the 
proposition  that  some  men  are  immortal.  It  is  plain 
that  this  does  not  give  us  any  reason  to  assert  that  some 
men  are  immortal.  It  does  not  even  justify  us  in  saying 
that  it  is  desirable  to  act  as  if  we  believed  that  some 
men  are  immortal.  It  may  be  desirable  to  act  as  if  we 
believed/,  and/  may  in  fact  entail  q  ;  but  it  might  be 
highly  desirable  that  men  should  ignore  this  implication. 
It  is  one  thing  to  say  that  it  is  desirable  to  act  as  if  we 
believed  /  ;  and  it  is  another  thing  to  say  that  it  is 
desirable  to  act  as  if  we  believed  both  **/"  and  "/ 
entails  q  ".  And  the  second  does  not  follow  from  the 
first,  even  \{ p  does  in  fact  entail  q. 

All  that  Professor  Taylor's  argument  justifies  us  in 
asserting  is  a  certain  proposition  about  practical  politics. 
If  people  do  not  believe  that  their  efforts  will  produce 
permanently  valuable  results,  or  if  they  do  believe  some- 
thing which  is  inconsistent  with  this,  there  is  a  danger 
that  they  will  cease  to  act  as  if  they  believed  that  their 
efforts  will  produce  permanently  valuable  results.  And 
this  will  be  very  unfortunate.  Now,  if  Professor  Taylor 
be  right,  those  who  believe  that  all  men  are  mortal  are 
believing  something  which  is  inconsistent  with  the  pro- 
position that  their  efforts  will  have  permanently  valuable 
results.  And  of  course  there  is  a  danger  that  they  may 
come  to  see  this  ;  and  may  thus  cease  to  believe  that 
their  efforts  will  have  permanently  valuable  results,  and 
finally  cease  to  act  as  if  they  believed  this.  It  follows 
from  this  that  it  would  probably  be  wise  for  the  State  to 
adopt  the  immortality  of  the  soul  as  a  fundamental 
"  myth  ",  and  not  to  allow  it  to  be  publicly  questioned. 
I    wholly    agree   with    Plato   in    thinking   that   human  ^ 

society  requires  to  be  founded  on  certain  "myths", 
which  are  not  self-evident  and  cannot  be  proved  ;  and 
that  the  State  is  within  its  rights  in  forbidding  all  public 


512       EVIDENCE  FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

discussion  of  the  truth  of  these  "  myths".  And  I  think 
it  is  quite  possible  that  the  doctrine  of  human  im- 
mortality (whether  it  be  in  fact  true  or  false)  is  one  of 
these  socially  valuable  "myths"  which  the  State  ought 
to  remove  from  the  arena  of  public  discussion.  This  of 
course  has  no  bearing  whatever  on  the  question  whether 
the  philosopher  in  his  study  ought  to  believe  the  doctrine 
of  human  immortality.  He  Ought  only  to  believe  what 
is  either  self-evident,  or  capable  of  certain  or  probable 
proof,  or  verifiable  by  sensible  or  introspective  perception. 

I  have  suggested  that  the  view  that  nature  is  "in- 
telligible", in  the  sense  in  which  the  natural  scientist 
believes  this,  is  in  precisely  the  same  logical  and 
practical  position  as  the  view  that  our  efforts  can  pro- 
duce results  of  permanent  value.  And  I  have  suggested 
that  it  is  arguable  that  the  State  ought  to  propagate  and 
defend  such  "myths"  as  are  needed  to  support  the 
latter  belief.  Ought  I  in  consistency  to  suggest  that 
the  State  should  propagate  and  defend  the  scientist's 
"myth"  also?  I  do  not  think  so.  In  the  first  place, 
no  one  of  any  influence  attacks  the  scientist's  "myth". 
Secondly,  the  practical  success  of  the  scientific  postulate 
up  to  the  present  is  much  more  obvious  to  the  general 
public  than  the  practical  success  of  the  ethical  postulate. 
This  of  course  is  not  really  any  logical  ground  for  be- 
lieving the  scientist's  postulate.  But  it  is  commonly 
thought  to  be  so.  Hence  most  people  believe  that  the 
scientist's  postulate  is  continually  strengthened  by 
experience.  So  long  as  this  logical  fallacy  is  commonly 
accepted  as  a  truth  there  is  no  danger  that  people  will 
cease  to  believe  the  scientist's  postulate,  and  therefore 
there  is  no  danger  that  they  will  cease  to  act  on  it. 
Hence  there  is  no  need  for  the  State  to  take  any  special 
precautions  in  favour  of  this  particular  "  myth  ". 

Conclusion.  The  upshot  of  the  matter  is  that  I  feel  no 
confidence  that  Professor  Taylor  has  produced  any 
ground  whatever  for  believing  in  human  immortality. 
It  does  not  of  course  follow  that  there  could  not  be  a 


ETHICAL   ARGUMENTS   EOR   SURVIVAL    513 

valid  ethical  argument  to  prove  that  some  men  at  least 
are  not  mortal.  But  if,  as  I  think,  Professor  Taylor 
has  failed  to  produce  one,  I  should  be  very  much 
surprised  if  anyone  else  were  more  successful.  And, 
until  someone  does  it  to  my  satisfaction,  I  shall  venture 
to  doubt  whether  it  can  be  done. 


2  K 


i 


CHAPTER    XII 

Empirical  Arguments  for  Human  Survival 

I  MUST  begin  by  saying  exactly  what  I  do  and  what  I 
do  not  propose  to  discuss  in  this  Chapter.  I  do  not 
propose  to  discuss  in  any  detail  the  special  alleged 
facts  (such  as  the  Cross-correspondences  in  automatic 
writings)  on  which  empirical  arguments  for  human  sur- 
vival have  been  based.  This  is  an  extremely  technical 
question  which  must  be  left  to  experts  and  would  be  out 
of  place  "in  a  philosophical  book.  I  do  presuppose  that 
the  careful  work  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research 
has  elicited  a  mass  of  facts  which  may  fairly  be  called 
"  supernormal  ",  in  the  sense  that  they  cannot,  if  genuine, 
be  explained  on  the  usual  assumptions  of  science  and 
common-sense  about  the  nature  and  powers  of  the 
human  mind.  And  I  do  assume  that  a  great  many  of 
the  facts  that  come  up  to  the  extremely  high  standard  of 
evidence  required  by  the  Society  are  ''genuine",  in  the 
sense  that  they  have  been  correctly  reported  and  that 
they  are  not  simply  due  to  fraud  or  self-deception.  I 
assume  this  on  the  basis  of  a  fairly  careful  study  of  the 
literature  ;  of  a  knowledge  of  the  kind  of  persons  who 
have  controlled  the  policy  of  the  Society  and  taken  part 
in  its  investigations  ;  and  of  some  investigations  of  my 
own,  I  have,  in  fact,  exactly  the  same  kind  of  grounds 
for  assuming  the  existence  of  genuinely  supernormal 
phenomena  as  I  have  for  assuming  the  existence  of 
certain  rare  physical  phenomena  which  are  difficult  to 
reproduce  to  order,  and  of  certain  rare  diseases  which 
competent  doctors  have  described.  I  accept  them  on  a 
mixed  basis  of  authority  and  personal  experience  ;  and 


EMPIRICAL   ARGUMENTS    FOR   SURVIVAL   515 

my  authority  is  of  the  same  kind  and  carries  the  same 
weight  as  the  authority  on  which  I  accept  the  rarer  and 
obscurer  kinds  of  physical  and  medical  phenomena  as 
genuine.  I  do  not  think  it  is  necessary  to  argue  this 
point,  because  I  have  always  found  that  those  who  deny 
it  have  not  carefully  read  the  relevant  literature,  have 
conducted  very  few  careful  investigations  for  themselves, 
and  are  ignorant  of  the  intellectual  calibre  and  the 
scrupulous  accuracy  of  such  men  as  Sidgwick,  Gurney, 
and  Podmore  (to  mention  only  the  names  'of  those  who 
are  no  longer  with  us).  Whenever  we  are  told  that 
^ '  Science  proves  so-and-so  to  be  impossible"  we  must 
remember  that  this  is  merely  a  rhetorical  form  of 
'*  Professor  X  and  most  of  his  colleagues  assert  so-and- 
so  to  be  impossible ".  Those  of  us  who  have  the 
privilege  of  meeting  Professor  X  and  his  colleagues 
daily,  and  know  from  experience  what  kind  of  assertions 
they  are  capable  of  making  when  they  leave  their  own 
subject,  will,  I  am  afraid,  remain  completely  unmoved. 

I  take  human  survival  then  to  be  one  hypothesis 
among  others  to  account  for  certain  reasonably  well- 
established  supernormal  phenomena.  The  argument 
will  be  of  the  usual  inverse-inductive  type.  Now,  in 
such  arguments  we  always  have  to  consider  the  follow- 
ing points,  (i)  The  antecedent  probabilities  of  the 
various  alternative  hypotheses.  And  (ii)  the  complete- 
ness with  which  the  various  alternative  hypotheses 
explain  the  special  facts  under  consideration.  If  the 
antecedent  probability  of  /i^  be  very  much  less  than  that 
of  /i.^,  then,  even  though  /?j  explains  the  special  facts 
better  than  /i.>,  it  may  be  more  prudent  to  try  to  make 
some  modification  of  /12  rather  than  to  put  much  faith  in 
/ly  I  shall,  therefore,  begin  by  considering  the  ante- 
cedent probability  of  the  hypothesis  of  human  survival. 

The    Antecedent    Probability    of    Human    SurvivaL 

When  we  are  considering  the  antecedent  probability 
of  a  hypothesis  put  forward   to  explain  certain  special 


5i6       EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

facts  there  are  two  points  to  be  considered,  (i)  There  is 
what  may  be  called  its  "intrinsic  probability".  This 
depends  on  the  structure  of  the  proposition  itself,  and 
very  little  can  be  said  about  it  here,  (ii)  There  is  the 
probability  which  the  proposition  has  with  respect  to  all 
known  facts  other  than  the  special  set  of  facts  which  it  is 
put  forward  to  explain.  If  p  and  q  be  two  logically 
independent  propositions,  the  proposition  pq  is  in- 
trinsically less  probable  than  the  proposition  p.  This  is 
an  instance  of  the  first  point.  If  a  bishop  falls  down  in 
the  street  it  is  antecedently  more  probable  that  this  is 
due  to  a  piece  of  orange-peel  than  to  direct  diabolic 
agency.  For,  although  both  hypotheses  explain  the 
observed  fact  equally  well,  the  former  fits  in  much  better 
with  the  other  facts  which  we  know  about  the  world 
than  the  latter  does.  This  is  an  example  of  the  latter 
point.  I  find  myself  quite  unable  to  say  much  of 
importance  about  the  intrinsic  probabilities  of  human 
survival  and  its  rival  hypotheses.  But  there  are  a  few 
logical  points  which  are  perhaps  worth  making,  (i) 
Among  alternative  hypotheses  to  human  survival  which 
have  been  suggested  we  may  mention  (a)  a  very  ex- 
tended telepathy  among  living  men,  and  {b)  the  action 
of  non-human  spirits  who  personate  certain  dead  men. 
The  second  of  these  would  seem  to  have  the  least 
intrinsic  probability  of  the  three  hypotheses.  For  we 
have  to  postulate  minds,  for  whose  existence  we  have 
no  other  evidence,  and  to  ascribe  telepathic  powers  to 
them.  The  first  hypothesis  postulates  no  minds  for 
whose  existence  we  have  not  already  independent 
evidence  ;  but  it  has  to  ascribe  to  them  telepathic  powers 
of  such  great  extent  that  we  have  little  or  no  independent 
evidence  for  their  existence.  The  hypothesis  of  human 
survival  perhaps  rnakes  the  minimum  assumption  of 
the  three  ;  since  it  merely  postulates  the  continuance  of 
something  which  we  know  independently  to  have 
existed,  and  it  ascribes  to  this  only  such  telepathic 
powers  as  we  have  reason  to  believe  exist  in  embodied 


EMPIRICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL   517 

minds.     (2)  There    is   one  very  great  logical    difficulty 
which  is  inherent  in    the    subject.     We    have    not   the 
least  reason  to    believe  that   the  hypotheses  that  have 
been  put  forward  are  exhaustive  or  even  approximately 
so.     Hence  we  have  no  ground  for  ascribing  any  very 
high  antecedent  probability  to  any  one  of  them.     We 
believe  ourselves  to  know  enough  of  the  general  structure 
of  the  material  world   to  enable  us  to  rule  out  all  but 
a   few   hypotheses   about   the   causation    of  a   physical 
phenomenon.     In  such  an  unfamiliar  region  as  we  enter 
in  doing  Psychical  Research  we  have  not  this  advantage. 
There  is  just  one  other  remark  that  I  will  make  before 
leaving  this  part  of  the  subject.      It  is  well  known  that 
many  Roman  Catholics  and  High  Anglicans,  not  con- 
tent with  ascribing  the  phenomena  to  non-human  spirits, 
ascribe   them    to    "devils".       Now    I    suppose    that    a 
"devil"    means   a    non-human    spirit   who    is    morally 
much  worse   than    the   worst  man.     There   appears    to 
me    to    be   absolutely    nothing   in    the    phenomena    to 
warrant  this  hypothesis,     (a)  There  is  a  certain  amount 
of  indecency  in  some   automatic  scripts.     So   there  is 
in    the  writings  of  Petronius   and  in    the  conversation 
of  many    undergraduates  ;    whilst    Mr  Gibbon   informs 
us  that  "a  learned  prelate,  now  deceased,  was  fond  of 
quoting  ...  in  conversation  "  a  passage  from  Procopius 
about  the  Empress  Theodora  which  the  historian  prud- 
ently "veils  in  the  obscurity  of  a  learned  language". 
{d)   Most  spiritualistic   communications  which    are    not 
merely   trivial    consist   of    elevated,    but    to    my    mind 
"twaddling",    ethico-religious    "uplift".       If  they    be 
the  communications  of  devils  it  must  be  admitted  that 
most  devils  who  communicate  are  decorous  to  the  verge 
of  dulness ;    and  that   the   aphorism    "Heaven   for  the 
climate,  but  Hell  for  the  company  "  stands  in   need  of 
considerable  modification,      (c)  It  may  be  admitted  that  to 
personate  a  dead  man  and  raise  false  hopes  in  his  friends 
and  relations  would  not    be  the  mark  of   a    very  high 
morality.     It  would  be  a  somewhat  heartless   practical 


5i8       EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

joke.      But  it  is  not  necessary  to  be  a  devil  in  order  to 
play  heartless  practical  jokes  ;   such  things  have  been 
done  before  now  by  quite  kindly  but  somewhat  thought- 
less  undergraduates,     {d)    It  may   be   admitted   that  a 
certain    number    of  weak-minded    people   go    mentally 
and  morally  to   the  bad  through    excessive  indulgence 
in    spiritualistic   seances.     The   same   may   be   said   of 
excessive    indulgence   in   alcohol    or    religion.     And   a 
devil  who   chooses   this   particular   method   of  leading 
men  to  damnation  when  there  are  so  many  more  pro- 
fitable  alternatives   open    to    him    must    be   extremely 
incompetent  at  his  own  business,     [e]  There  is  a  certain 
amount  of  "  roughness  "  and  horse-play  at  some  seances 
for   physical    phenomena ;    there    is  a  great   deal  more 
after   a    bump-supper    or   at   many   political    meetings. 
In   fact,  if  we  can  judge  of  Hell  from  those  denizens 
of  it  whom  we   meet,  on    this   theory,  at   spiritualistic 
seances,  we    must   suppose   that   it   is   very  much   like 
what  I  believe  is  called  a  "  Pleasant  Sunday  Afternoon  " 
at   a    Nonconformist    chapel,    enlivened    by   occasional 
bump -suppers.       Its    nearest    earthly    analogy   would 
probably  be  a  Welsh  University  ;  and  I  should  suppose 
that  those  who  pass  directly  from  the  one  institution  to 
the  other  must  often   fail  to  notice  the  transition.     To 
sum  up,  from  a  fairly  extensive  reading  of  spiritualistic 
literature,  and  from  a  certain  amount  of  personal  experi- 
ence of  seances,  I  should  say  that  the  average  ''spirit" 
is  morally  no  worse  than  the  average  Fellow  of  Trinity, 
though  there  is  a  very  marked  difference  in  the  intel- 
ligence of  the  two. 

The  motives  which  make  the  "  devil -theory "  so 
popular  in  ecclesiastical  circles  are  tolerably  obvious. 
In  the  first  place,  there  is  the  perfectly  legitimate  desire 
to  frighten  one's  congregation  away  from  dabbling  in 
practices  which  are  very  unlikely  to  do  good  to  any 
of  them  and  very  likely  to  do  positive  harm  to  many 
of  them.  The  second  motive  is  probably  just  as  strong, 
but   is   generally   unrecognised    or   unadmitted.      This 


EMPIRICAL  ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL   519 

is  the  objection  which  the  members,  and  especially 
the  officials,  of  all  close  corporations  have  to  non- 
members  who  claim  to  perform  the  same  functions. 
The  objection  of  the  orthodox  churchman,  and  particu- 
larly the  orthodox  clergyman,  to  the  spiritualistic 
medium  is  the  same  kind  of  objection  which  doctors 
feel  towards  "bone-setters"  and  trade-unionists  feel 
towards  blacklegs.  It  is  necessary  to  disguise  this  to 
oneself  and  to  others  ;  and  for  this  purpose  the  "  devil- 
theory  "  is  very  handy,  just  as  doctors  find  it  highly 
convenient  to  remind  us  of  the  deaths  of  patients  under 
quacks  and  to  forget  that  patients  sometimes  die  under 
doctors. 

I  propose  now  to  consider  whether  there  are  any 
facts  other  than  the  special  phenomena  dealt  with  by 
Psychical  Research  which  make  the  hypothesis  of  human 
survival  antecedently  probable.  Although,  as  I  have 
said,  I  do  not  think  that  such  special  propositions  as  the 
survival  of  man  fall  within  the  range  of  proof  or  dis- 
proof by  metaphysical  arguments,  I  can  see  of  course 
that  the  antecedent  probability  of  human  survival  will  be 
greatly  affected  by  one's  general  metaphysical  position. 
If  materialism  or  epiphenomenalism  were  strict  meta- 
physical truth,  survival,  though  perhaps  still  abstractly 
possible,  would  be  in  the  last  degree  unlikely.  If 
mentalism,  in  one  of  its  forms,  were  strictly  true, 
survival  would  not  indeed  necessarily  follow.  Lotze 
and  Mr  Bradley  were  mentalists  ;  but  they  held  quite 
consistently  that  their  systems  did  not  necessitate 
human  survival  and  that  it  is  on  the  whole  improbable. 
Still,  mentalism  is  decidedly  more  favourable  to  human 
survival  than  is  the  view  of  the  world  which  is  taken 
by  common-sense,  or  by  non-philosophical  scientists, 
or  by  dualistic  philosophers.  Idealism  (which  I  dis- 
tinguish from  mentalism,  though  most  idealists  have  in 
fact  been  mentalists)  is  still  more  favourable  to  survival. 
For  I  take  it  that  the  essence  of  idealism  is  to  hold  that 
what  we  regard  as  the  "higher"  characteristics,  such 


520       EVIDENCE  FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

as  life  and  consciousness,  are  fundamental  categories 
which  apply  to  Reality  as  such  and  are  not  just  special 
and  probably  transitory  features  of  certain  specially 
complicated  and  probably  unstable  parts  of  Reality.  It 
is  possible  to  be  an  Idealist  and  yet  to  regard  human 
survival  as  false  or  highly  improbable.  This  position 
was  taken  by  Professor  Bosanquet.  But  it  must  be 
admitted  that  idealism  would  favour  the  antecedent 
probability  of  survival. 

It  might  seem  then  that,  in  order  to  determine  the 
antecedent  probability  of  survival,  it  would  be  necessary 
to  make  up  one's  mind  between  various  rival  systems  of 
metaphysics.  I  am  certainly  not  prepared  to  do  this. 
But  I  think  I  have  a  fairly  good  excuse.  On  my  view 
no  general  metaphysical  system  can  be  proved  deduct- 
ively by  reasoning  from  a  priori  premises.  Idealism 
and  materialism  are  just  attempts  to  synthesise  all  the 
known  facts  ;  and  their  respective  probabilities  can  be 
decided  only  by  their  respective  success  in  doing  this. 
There  is  then,  in  my  view,  no  possibility  of  first 
deciding  between  alternative  metaphysical  systems  on 
general  grounds  and  then  taking  the  system  which  we 
have  accepted  as  a  fixed  datum  from  which  to  estimate 
the  antecedent  probability  of  survival.  The  question 
whether  we  probably  do  or  probably  do  not  survive  the 
death  of  our  bodies  is  just  the  kind  of  question  that  has 
to  be  answered  before  we  can  decide  (say)  between 
idealism  and  materialism  or  epiphenomenalism.  What 
we  must  do  then  is  to  discuss  the  antecedent  probability 
of  survival  on  data  which  are  common  to  all  men,  in- 
cluding the  upholders  of  rival  systems  of  metaphysics. 
And  this  means  that  we  must  consider  the  areruments 
for  or  against  human  survival  which  may  be  drawn  from 
the  constitution  of  the  world  as  it  presents  itself  to 
enlightened  common-sense ;  for  this  is  the  common 
basis  from  which  all  the  rival  systems  start.  If  we  do 
this  we  may  consistently  use  our  result  as  one  means  of 
deciding  tentatively  between  the  various  rival  systems. 


EMPIRICAL  ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL   521 

Now,  on  the  face  of  it,  the  most  striking  feature  of 
the  world  as  we  know  it  in  daily  life  is,  for  our  purpose, 
that  it  does  not  present  the  faintest  trace  of  evidence  for 
survival.  Continued  action  is  a  criterion  of  the  con- 
tinued existence  of  any  substance  ;  and  this  is  conspicu- 
ously lacking  after  death.  The  body  ceases  to  give  the 
characteristic  responses,  and  very  soon  it  decays  and 
loses  even  its  characteristic  shape  and  appearance. 
Hence  the  only  evidence  that  we  ever  had  for  the 
existence  of  a  man's  mind  has  ceased  abruptly  ;  and, 
apart  from  the  alleged  facts  investigated  by  Psychical 
Research,  it  has  ceased  for  ever  so  far  as  our  experience 
goes.  We  do  indeed  often  believe  in  the  continued 
existence  of  substances  in  spite  of  long  periods  during 
which  neither  we  nor  anyone  else  are  aware  of  them  by 
any  of  their  usual  signs.  E.g.^  we  believe  that  silver 
continues  to  exist  though  it  be  dissolved  in  nitric  acid 
and  kept  for  years  as  silver-nitrate.  But  in  such  cases 
we  have  reason  to  believe  that  at  any  moment  we  could 
restore  a  substance  having  the  properties  of  the  silver 
which  we  dissolved,  and  connected  with  it  by  identity 
of  mass  and  continuity  of  spatial  positions.  Every  such 
factor  making  for  belief  in  the  continued  existence  of 
dead  men  is  lacking  in  our  ordinary  experience  ;  and 
thus  such  a  belief  seems  to  have  nothing  whatever  in 
its  favour,  and  to  be  from  a  logical  point  of  view  a  bare 
unmotived  possibility. 

Yet  of  course,  as  a  matter  of  history,  this  has  seldom 
seriously  militated  against  the  belief  in  survival.  Such 
a  belief  has  been  all  but  universal.  Now,  on  the  one 
hand,  the  mere  universality  of  a  belief  is  no  proof  of  its 
truth.  On  the  other  hand,  the  fact  that  a  belief  has 
been  widely  held  by  ignorant  and  primitive  men  is  no 
proof  of  its  falsehood.  Confronted  then  by  a  strong 
belief  which  seems  to  have  arisen  and  persisted  in  spite 
of  complete  lack  of  evidence  in  its  favour,  we  must  con- 
sider what  factors  may  have  caused  the  belief,  and 
whether  any  of  them  are  reasons  as  well  as  causes. 


i 


522       EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

A  primitive  man  would  certainly  not  accept  the  state- 
ment that  there  is  no  evidence  in  ordinary  experience 
for  survival.  He  would  claim  to  know  of  dozens  of 
cases  of  men  seen  and  heard  after  death  ;  and  he  might 
even  think  that  he  had  met  with  such  cases  in  his  own 
experience.  Now,  without  prejudice  to  the  genuineness 
of  abnormal  phenomena  in  general  or  to  the  possibility 
that  they  occasionally  happen  among  savages,  we  may 
be  quite  certain  that  in  most  cases  the  primitive  man  is 
mistaken  in  thinking  that  there  is  any  need  to  assume 
the  continued  existence  of  the  dead  to  explain  the  pheno- 
mena which  he  would  regard  as  evidence  for  survival. 
We  may  divide  such  phenomena  into  two  classes.  The 
first  consists  of  those  which  are  capable  of  a  perfectly 
normal  explanation  ;  the  second  of  those  which  would 
now  be  dealt  with  by  Psychical  Research.  There  is  no 
reason  to  suppose  that  the  latter  will  be  more  numerous 
or  striking  among  savages  than  among  civilised  men. 
The  first  group  provides  no  evidence  at  all  for  survival, 
since  the  facts  have  simply  been  misinterpreted.  The 
second,  supposing  it  to  exist,  contains  no  evidence 
antecedent  to  Psychical  Research  ;  since,  by  hypothesis, 
it  consists  of  precisely  those  phenomena  which  would 
now  be  treated  by  that  science.  Hence  the  primitive 
man  had  simply  more  causes^  but  no  better  reasons^  for  a 
belief  in  survival  than  we  have  ;  but  a  belief  irrationally 
caused  in  him  may  have  been  handed  on  to  us. 

No  doubt  experiences  of  fainting  and  sleeping  helped 
the  belief  in  survival.  In  these  conditions  the  mind 
gives  no  external  manifestations  of  its  existence,  and  the 
body  in  many  ways  resembles  a  corpse.  Yet  conscious- 
ness returns ;  and,  if  we  remember  our  dreams,  we 
remember  that  it  was  not  really  absent  when  our  bodies 
were  giving  no  external  signs  of  its  existence.  What 
more  natural  then  than  to  suppose  that  at  these  times 
the  mind  leaves  the  body  for  a  while  and  follows  its 
own  adventures,  and  that  at  death  it  leaves  the  body 
for  good?     But  the  differences  between  sleep  and  death 


EMPIRICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL   523 

make  it  impossible  to  accept  this  undoubted  cause  of  a 
belief  in  survival  as  a  valid  reason  in  its  favour.  If, 
after  dissolving  a  bit  of  silver  several  times  in  nitric 
acid  and  getting  it  back  again,  we  one  day  dissolved  it 
in  something  else  and  found  that  no  efforts  of  ours 
could  restore  anything  with  the  properties  of  silver,  the 
inference  would  be  obvious.  It  was  reasonable  to  think 
that  the  silver  survived  the  nitric  acid  treatment,  because 
it  could  be  restored  ;  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to  con- 
clude from  this  that  it  also  survived  the  treatment  after 
which  nothing  like  it  can  be  again  obtained.  If  we 
choose  to  assume  that  it  still  exists,  our  assumption  is 
an  unmotived  one.  So  once  more  we  have  a  cause  of 
belief  which  is  not  a  reason  for  belief. 

Probably  neither  of  the  above-mentioned  causes  would 
have  sufficed  to  produce  an  almost  universal  belief  in 
survival.  Both  are  to  be  regarded  as  interpretations  of 
real  or  supposed  facts  in  terms  of  this  belief  rather  than 
as  the  original  causes  of  it.  The  truth  is  that  we  have  1/ 
the  greatest  difficulty  in  actually  envisaging  the  cessation  7\ 
61"  our  own  conscious  life.  ""TfTs'easy'enough  to  think  of 
anyone  "else "  as"~liavrng  Teally  ceased  to  exist ;  but  it  is 
almost  impossible  to  give  more  than  a  cold  intellectual 
assent  to  the  same  proposition  about  oneself.  In  making 
a  will,  e.g.,  containing  elaborate  provisions  for  the  dis- 
posal of  one's  property  after  death,  it  is  almost  impossible 
(unless  my  experience  be  quite  exceptional)  not  to  think 
of  oneself  as  going  to  be  conscious  and  able  to  oversee 
the  working  of  one's  own  bequests.  I  at  least  can 
continually  catch  myself  in  this  attitude,  and  I  should 
imagine  it  to  be  quite  common  even  among  people  who 
are  intellectually  persuaded  of  their  future  extinction. 

Ought  we  to  attach  any  weight  to  this  primitive  belief 
which  nearly  every  one  has  in  his  own  survival?  The 
mere  fact  that  it  is  held  without  reasons  is  no  conclusive 
objection  to  it ;  for,  unless  some  propositions  can  be 
known  to  be  true  without  reasons,  no  proposition  can 
be  known  to  be  true  for  reasons.     We  must,  therefore. 


^i 


524       EVIDENCE  FOR  HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

consider  the  belief  on  its  merits  without  prejudice. 
Now  it  seems  perfectly  clear  that  it  is  not  a  self-evident 
proposition  like  an  axiom,  which  becomes  more  certain 
the  more  carefully  we  inspect  it.  Nor  can  it  be  regarded 
as  a  postulate  ;  /.^.,  as  a  proposition  which,  though  not 
self-evident  and  incapable  of  either  proof  or  disproof 
by  experience,  has  to  be  assumed  in  order  to  organise 
experience  and  to  furnish  a  motive  for  research.  Certain 
propositions  which  we  use  in  induction  seem  to  me  to 
be  postulates  in  this  sense  ;  the  proposition  that  John 
Jones  will  survive  the  death  of  his  body  seems  to  me  to 
be  quite  plainly  nothing  of  the  kind.  In  fact  I  think 
that  the  belief  represents  nothing  more  profound  than 
y  an  easily  explicable  limit  of  our  powers  of  imagination. 
J  Naturally  all  my  experience  of  myself  has  been  of  myself 
as  conscious  and  active.  There  have  indeed  been  gaps 
during  dreamless  sleep  or  fainting  fits,  but  conscious- 
ness has  revived  and  the  gaps  have  been  bridged  by 
memory.  Again,  at  every  moment  I  have  been  obliged 
for  practical  purposes  to  think  of  myself  as  going  to 
exist  at  later  moments  ;  it  is  therefore  a  breach  with  the 
mental  habits  of  a  lifetime  to  envisage  a  moment  after 
which  the  series  of  my  conscious  states  shall  have  finally 
ended.  This  practical  difficulty,  due  to  habit,  seems 
,|  the  sole  and  sufficient  explanation  of  our  primitive  belief 
2|.  in  our  own  indefinite  continuance ;  and  it  obviously 
"*  ^provides  no  evidence  for  the  truth  of  that  belief. 

I  think  then  that  we  must  conclude  that  a  mere  con- 
templation of  the  world  as  it  appears  in  ordinary  experi- 
ence furnishes  no  trace  of  support  for  the  belief  in 
survival.  Ought  we  to  hold  that  the  absence  of  all 
evidence  for  constitutes  evidence  against  ?  This  is  a 
somewhat  delicate  question.  Sometimes  the  absence  of 
evidence  for  a  proposition  makes  strongly  against  it, 
and  sometimes  it  does  not.  If  I  look  carefully  round  a 
room  and,  seeing  no  one,  say  :  "  There  is  no  one  in  the 
room  ",  my  evidence  is  purely  negative  ;  but  it  is  almost 
conclusive  against  the  proposition  :   "There  is  someone 


EMPIRICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL    525 

in  the  room  ".  But  the  fact  that  I  did  not  see  a  tubercu- 
losis bacillus  in  the  room  would  be  quite  irrelevant  to 
the  question  whether  there  was  one  there.  Finding  no 
evidence  for  a  proposition  is  evidence  against  it  only  if 
the  proposition  be  such  that,  if  it  were  true,  there  ought 
to  be  some  observable  evidence  for  it. 

Now  the  proposition  :  "  Some  men  survive  the  death 
of  their  bodies"  is  not  precisely  in  the  position  of  either 
of  the  two  quoted  above.  I  know  enough  about  human 
bodies  and  about  tuberculosis  bacilli  to  be  sure  that  one 
of  the  former  could  hardly  be  present  in  a  room  without 
my  finding  it,  but  that  one  of  the  latter  could  not  be  seen 
by  the  naked  eye  even  if  it  were  present.  I  know  very 
much  less  about  the  conditions  under  which  one  human 
spirit  can  make  its  presence  known  to  another ;  but  I  do 
know  something  about  it.  I  am  a  human  spirit  con- 
nected with_a_body,  and  all  other  spirits  of  whose  exist- 
ence I  am  certain  are  in  the  same  position.  Setting 
aside  the  phenomena  treated  by  Psychical  Research,  I 
know  that  one  such  spirit  can  make  its  presence  known 
to  another  only  by  moving  its  own  body,  thence  agitating 
the  air  or  the  ether,  and  thence  affecting  another  human 
body.  My  friend  dies  ;  I  remain  alive  and  connected 
with  my  body.  Communication  with  me,  therefore, 
presumably  requires  the  same  complex  and  roundabout 
series  of  material  changes  as  before.  Its  very  complexity 
and  indirectness  make  it  not  unlikely  that,  even  if  my 
friend  has  survived,  some  necessary  link  in  this  mechan- 
ism will  have  broken  down.  Hence  the  absence  of 
evidence  for  his  survival  cannot  be  regarded  logically 
as  very  strong  evidence  against  it. 

The  present  position,  therefore,  is  that  at  the  level  of 
ordinary  experience  there  is  not  the  faintest  trace  of 
evidence  tor  survival,  though  there  is  a  pretfy  general 
belief  in  it.  The  causes  of  this  belief  have  been  enumer- 
ated and  seen  not  to  be  reasons.  But  the  absence  of 
evidence  for  the  belief  cannot  be  taken  as  strong  evidence 
against  it,  in  view  of  what  we  know  about  the  means 


526       EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

by  which  embodied  human  spirits  have  to  communicate 
with  each  other. 

Is  there  at  this  level  any  positive  evidence  against 
survival?  I  think  that  there  are  two  sets  of  facts  which 
impress  common-sense  and  are  interpreted  in  this  direc- 
tion. One  is  the  apparently  haphazard  way  in  which 
men  are  born  and  die.  Human  beings  are  constantly 
brought  into  the  world  thoughtlessly  and  by  mistake  ; 
many  children  live  for  a  few  minutes  or  hours  and  then 
die ;  many  are  born  idiotic.  The  general  impression 
produced  is  that  the  claim  to  permanence  for  creatures 
whose  earthly  lives  begin  and  end  in  these  trivial  ways 
is  somewhat  ridiculous.  An  unwanted  child  is  produced, 
let  us  say,  in  a  drunken  orgy  ;  and  in  six  weeks  dies  of 
neglect  or  is  killed  by  its  mother.  Does  it  seem  likely 
that  a  being  whose  earthly  career  is  started  and  stopped 
by  such  causes  is  a  permanent  and  indestructible  part 
of  the  universe,  or  indeed  that  it  survives  the  death  of 
its  body  at  all  ? 

The  second  fact  which  is  felt  to  bear  in  the  same 
direction  is  the  continuity  between  men  and  animals. 
The  bodies  of  each  begin  and  cease  to  be  animated  by 
minds  through  precisely  similar  physical  and  physio- 
logical causes.  No  doubt  the  mind  of  any  living  man 
differs,  not  merely  quantitatively,  but  also  qualitatively 
from  that  of  any  living  animal  ;  still  the  most  primitive 
men  can  hardly  have  differed  appreciably  from  the 
highest  animals  in  their  mental  endowments.  Did  Pithe- 
canthropus erectus  and  does  every  Australian  aborigine 
survive  the  death  of  his  body?  If  they  do,  have  not  the 
higher  animals  almost  an  equal  claim?  And,  if  you 
grant  this  for  cats  and  monkeys,  will  you  not  be  forced 
in  the  end  to  grant  it  for  lice  and  earwigs?  If,  on  the 
I  other  hand,  you  deny  that  any  animal  survives,  on  the 
\  ground  that  their  minds  are  not  complex  or  important 
enough  to  be  permanent  factors  in  the  universe,  how  can 
you  be  sure  that  any  man  yet  born  has  possessed  a  mind 
complex  and  important  enough  for  survival?     The  two 


EMPIRICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL   527 

facts  quoted  above  do,  I  am  sure,  exert  a  considerable 
influence  against  the  view  that  men  survive  the  death  of 
their  bodies.  I  am  conscious  that  they  affect  me  person- 
ally more  than  any  others.  But  the  question  remains  : 
"  Have  they  any  logical  right  to  exert  this  influence?" 

I  am  inclined  to  think  on  reflection  that  the  first 
argument  is  wholly  fallacious.  It  really  involves  the 
illegitimate  introduction  of  a  judgment  of  value  into  a 
question  of  fact.  And  the  judgment  of  value  is  itself  a 
rather  superficial  one.  It  is  thought  that,  because  the 
occasioning  causes  of  birth  and  death  are  often  trivial, 
therefore  what  seems  to  begin  with  birth  and  to  end 
with  death  cannot  be  important  enough  to  survive. 
But  (a)  you  cannot  argue  from  the  triviality  of  a  cause 
to  the  impermanence  of  its  effect,  {d)  The  cause  is 
trivial  only  in  the  irrelevant  ethical  sense  that  it  does 
not  involve  a  considered  and  deliberate  choice  by  a 
virtuous  human  being.  There  is  really  no  logical 
transition  from:  "This  is  caused  by  the  careless  or 
criminal  action  or  a  human  being"  to:  "This  is  the 
kind  of  thing  whose  existence  is  transitory  ".  (c)  When 
we  say  that  the  cause  is  trivial  we  make  the  common 
mistake  of  taking  for  t/ie  cause  some  necessary  cause- 
factor  which  happens  to  be  specially  noticeable  or  of 
special  practical  interest.  The  complete  cause  of  the 
birth  of  a  child  or  the  death  of  a  man  must  be  of  almost 
unthinkable  complexity,  whether  the  child  be  begotten 
or  the  man  be  killed  carelessly  or  with  deliberate  fore- 
thought. This  is  true  even  if  we  confine  ourselves  to 
the  material  conditions  ;  and  we  are  not  really  in  a 
position  to  say  that  the  complete  conditions  of  so  singular 
an  event  as  the  jnanifestation  of  a  new  mind  through 
a  new  body  are  contained  in  the  material  world. 

The  second  argument  is  of  course  of  a  well-known 
general  type.  It  tries  to  show  by  continuity  of  cases 
that,  if  a  man  asserts  one  proposition,  he  ought  in 
consistency  not  to  deny  a  certain  other  proposition 
which  he  would  like  to  deny.     Arguments  of  this  kind 


528        EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

can  be  met  in  one  of  two  ways,  (i)  We  may  point  out 
that  an  argument  from  continuity  is  reversible,  and 
that  the  direction  in  which  one  turns  it  is  arbitrary. 
We  might  just  as  well  argue  by  continuity  from 
the  supposed  immortality  of  men  to  the  immor- 
tality of  earwigs  as  from  the  supposed  mortality 
of  earwigs  to  the  mortality  of  men.  The  actual 
direction  in  which  the  argument  is  used  presup- 
poses that  we  are  already  pretty  certain  that  earwigs 
are  mortal,  and  much  more  doubtful  whether  men  are 
immortal.  This  no  doubt  is  true.  But  it  immediately 
raises  the  question:  "Why  are  we  practically  certain 
that  earwigs  are  mortal?"  This  question  cannot  be 
answered  by  considerations  of  continuity,  but  only 
by  reflecting  on  the  special  peculiarities  of  earwigs. 
(2)  When  we  raise  this  question  two  answers  are 
possible,  {a)  We  may  find  on  reflection  that  we  have 
no  good  reason  for  thinking  that  earwigs  are  unlikely 
to  be  immortal.  In  that  case  the  argument  from  con- 
tinuity to  the  case  of  men  will  prove  nothing.  Or 
{b)  we  may  find  that  those  characteristics  of  earwigs 
which  make  it  very  unlikely  that  they  are  immortal  are 
obviously  not  present  in  men.  In  that  case  the  argu- 
ment from  continuity  will  also  prove  nothing  about 
men.  At  most  it  will  show  that  it  is  difficult  for  us 
to  say  with  confidence  about  certain  intermediate  forms 
of  living  being  whether  they  are  likely  to  be  mortal 
or  not.  Let  us  then  consider  the  question  why  we 
think  it  very  unlikely  that  earwigs  should  be  immortal  ; 
and  let  us  also  consider  whether  the  reasons,  whatever 
they  may  be,  apply  to  men  also. 

In  the  first  place  it  might  be  said  that  an  earwig's 
mind  has  very  little  value,  and  therefore  it  is  unworthy 
to  be  a  permanent  factor  in  the  universe.  And  it  might 
be  argued  that  it  is  therefore  unlikely  to  survive.  But 
{a)  this  would  be  an  ethical  argument  of  a  kind  which 
we  have  already  dismissed.  And  (^),  even  if  it  were 
valid,   it  is  obvious  that  most  human  minds  are  enor- 


EMPIRICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL   529 

mously  more  valuable  than  the  mind  of  any  earwig  ; 
so  that  it  would  not  be  inconsistent  to  think  it  likely 
that  human  minds  are  immortal  and  unlikely  that  the 
minds  of  earwigs  are  so.  All  that  we  should  be  entitled 
to  say  is  {a)  that  it  is  not  certain  even  that  any  human 
mind  is  valuable  enough  to  be  immortal  ;  and  (d)  that, 
if  it  were  certain,  there  would  be  intermediate  cases, 
e.g.,  cats,  about  which  the  probabilities  are  about  equally 
balanced. 

But  the  differences  between  the  minds  of  men  and 
those  of  the  lower  animals  are  never  mere  differences 
of  value.  Presumably  an  earwig's  mind  has  very  little 
unity,  complexity,  or  comprehensiveness.  Now  it  is 
arguable  that  such  a  very  simple  mind  is  not  very 
likely  to  survive  bodily  death.  But  (a)  I  do  not  think 
that  what  we  know  of  nature  suggests  any  straight- 
forward connexion  between  unity  and  complexity  on 
the  one  hand  and  stability  on  the  other.  Both  the  very 
simple  and  the  highly  comprehensive  seem  to  be  fairly 
stable,  though  for  different  reasons.  The  very  simple, 
like  the  electron,  is  stable  because  of  its  comparative 
indifference  to  changes  in  external  conditions.  The 
highly  unified  and  comprehensive  complex,  like  the 
solar  system,  tends  to  be  stable  because  it  contains  so 
much  within  itself  that  there  is  little  left  over  to  disturb 
it.  It  is  therefore  quite  in  accordance  with  what  we 
know  of  the  order  of  nature  to  suppose  that  the  simplicity 
of  the  earwig's  mind  gives  it  a  particularly  good  chance 
of  survival,  (d)  Suppose,  on  the  other  hand,  that  we 
do  hold  that  the  simplicity  of  the  earwig's  mind  makes 
it  very  unlikely  to  survive.  Then  we  must  admit  that 
the  human  mind  is  enormously  less  simple  and  more 
comprehensive  and  highly  unified.  Hence  it  would  be 
perfectly  consistent  to  hold  that  the  human  mind  is  likely 
to  survive  because  of  its  unity  and  comprehensiveness 
and  that  the  earwig's  mind  is  unlikely  to  survive  because 
of  its  simplicity  and  poverty  of  content.  Thus  on  neither 
alternative   does    the   argument   from    continuity    make 

2   L 


530       EVIDENCE  FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

it  unreasonable  to  hold  that  the  human  mind  is  likely 
to  survive.  As  before,  all  that  we  can  legitimately 
conclude  from  the  argument  from  continuity  is  (a)  that 
it  is  uncertain  whether  any  human  mind  even  is  complex 
and  comprehensive  enough  to  survive  ;  and  {d)  that,  if 
it  were  certain,  there  would  be  cases  of  intermediate 
complexity,  e.g:,  cats,  about  which  the  probabilities 
would  be  nearly  equally  balanced. 

Again,  some  people  no  doubt  shrink  from  admitting 
the  possibility  of  survival  to  the  lower  animals  out  of 
horror  at  the  immense  number  of  minds  which  there 
would  be  if  none,  even  of  the  lowest  kind,  died  with 
the  death  of  their  bodies.  This  shrinking  from  mere 
numerical  vastness  seems  to  me  to  be  childish.  We 
have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  universe  is  conducted 
in  accordance  with  the  Law  of  Parsimony  ;  and  it  may 
well  be  that  the  world  exhibits  a  profusion  in  the 
item  of  minds  which  would  horrify  the  inhabitants  of 
Aberdeen.  Thus  I  do  not  think  that  this  consideration 
makes  it  specially  improbable  that  earwigs  should  be 
immortal. 

Lastly,  the  following  argument  might  be  used  to 
suggest  that  the  minds  of  the  lower  animals  are  very 
unlikely  to  survive  the  death  of  their  bodies.  The  char- 
acteristic activities  and  experiences  of  animals  seem  to 
be  specially  and  exclusively  directed  to  preserving  their 
own  lives  and  those  of  their  offspring.  If  we  judge 
living  things  teleologically  (and,  in  practice,  it  is  hard 
to  avoid  doing  this)  it  does  seem  that  an  animal  accom- 
plishes "all  that  is  in  it"  when  it  succeeds  in  keeping 
itself  alive  long  enough  to  produce  young  and  to  start 
them  in  the  world.  It  is  hard  to  see  what  ''purpose" 
would  be  served  by  the  individual  survival  of  an  earwig 
which  dies  at  a  reasonable  age  after  bringing  up  a  family 
of  little  earwigs.  I  do  not  know  what  weight  to  attach 
to  such  an  argument  as  this.  The  principle  of  judging 
living  beings  and  their  parts  in  terms  of  a  supposed 
"purpose  for  which  they  were  made"   is  undoubtedly 


EMPIRICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL   531 

valuable  as  an  heuristic  method  ;  and  it  is  difficult  to 
suppose  that  it  does  not  in  some  way  accord  with  the 
facts.  But  fortunately  it  is  not  necessary  for  our 
purpose  to  decide  on  the  legitimacy  of  such  considera- 
tions. For  the  position  is  this,  (a)  If  it  be  n(jt  valid, 
the  argument  to  show  that  earwigs  are  very  unlikely 
to  survive  falls  to  the  ground  ;  and  with  it  goes  the 
argument  from  continuity  to  the  probable  mortality  of 
human  beings,  (d)  If,  on  the  other  hand,  it  be  valid, 
the  argument  from  continuity  equally  breaks  down  in 
another  way.  For  it  does  seem  as  if  human  minds  had 
many  powers  and  faculties  which  are  not  merely  directed 
to  preserving  the  life  of  the  individual  and  the  species  ; 
and  that  the  continued  existence  of  certain  human  minds 
after  the  death  of  their  bodies  would  "answer  the 
purpose  for  which  they  seem  to  be  made"  in  a  way 
in  which  the  continued  existence  of  an  individual  earwig 
would  not.  Hence  it  would  be  perfectly  consistent  to 
hold,  on  the  basis  of  this  argument,  that  earwigs  are 
most  unlikely  to  be  immortal  and  that  men  are  quite 
likely  to  be  immortal.  As  usual,  the  argument  from 
continuity  would  raise  a  doubt  only  about  certain  inter- 
mediate cases,  such  as  cats  and  dogs,  where  the  prob- 
abilities might  be  about  equally  balanced. 

To  sum  up.  The  argument  from  continuity  makes 
against  the  probability  of  human  survival  only  on  two 
conditions,  (i)  There  must  be  some  reason  (and  not 
a  mere  prejudice)  for  thinking  that  the  survival  of  the 
lower  animals  is  very  improbable.  And  (2)  this  reason 
must  not  be  the  presence  of  some  characteristic  in  the 
lower  animals  which  differentiates  them  sharply  from 
human  beings.  For,  if  our  only  reason  for  thinking 
it  very  unlikely  that  earwigs  will  survive  be  some  char- 
acteristic in  which  earwigs  differ  profoundly  from  men, 
it  will  be  perfectly  consistent  to  think  it  likely  that  men 
will  survive  and  that  earwigs  will  not.  The  existence 
of  a  continuous  series  of  intermediate  forms  between 
earwigs  and  men  will  prove  nothing  except  that  there 


532        EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

are  certain  intermediate  cases  in  which  the  probabiHties 
for  and  against  survival  are  about  equally  balanced. 
^    And  there  would  not  be  the  least  trace  of  inconsistency 
]  in    the   position    of  a   man  who   should  be  practically 
certain  that  earwigs  are  mortal  and  human  beings  im- 
mortal but  should  be  quite  unable  to  make  up  his  mind 
about  cats  or  kangaroos.      Now,    so  far  as  I  can    see, 
these   two   conditions    are    never   both   fulfilled.      The 
alleged  reasons  for  thinking  it  very  unlikely  that  earwigs 
are  immortal  either  are  no  reasons  at  all  or  they  obviously 
depend  on  characteristics  in  which  human  beings  and 
earwigs  differ  profoundly.     Hence  I  doubt  whether  the 
■t    argument  against  the  probability   of  human    survival, 
1  drawfi  from  the  continuous  series  of  living  forms  be- 
\  tween    men   and   the  lowest  animals,   has   any  .logical 
I  validity.      The   world    then,    as    it    presents   itself    to 
common-sense  and  everyday  experience,  offers  no  posi- 
tive reasons  for  and  no  positive  reasons  against  Iiuman 
survival.      The    only    reason   against    it    is    the    utter 
i  absence  of  all  reasons  for  it ;    and  we  have  seen  that 
j  this  is  not  a  strong  argument  in  the  present  case.     Let 
us  now  enquire  whether  the  more  detailed  investigations 
of  science  provide  us  with  any  grounds  for  deciding  one 
way  or  the  other. 

Science  on  the  whole  does  not  reverse,  but  merely 
amplifies  and  elaborates,  the  views  of  common-sense  on 
the  connexion  of  body  and  mind.  We  already  knew 
that  body  and  mind  were  intimately  connected,  and  that 
injury  to  the  former  may  gravely  modify  or  to  all  appear- 
ance destroy  the  latter.  The  additional  information 
gained  from  science  may  be  summed  up  as  follows, 
(i)  More  detailed  knowledge  has  been  got  of  the  correla- 
tion between  injuries  to  particular  regions  of  the  brain 
and  defects  in  certain  departments  of  mental  life.  Con- 
nected with  this  is  the  knowledge  that  many  mental 
processes,  which  seem  to  common-sense  to  be  almost 
independent  of  the  body,  have  bodily  correlates,  (ii) 
We  have  gained   the   surprising   information    that,    in 


EMPIRICAL  ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL  533 

spite  of  the  apparent  interaction  of  body  and  mind, 
the  body  and  its  material  surroundings  form  a  closed 
energetic  system  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  Conserva- 
tion of  Energy,  (iii)  We  know  more  about  the  detailed 
structure  and  general  plan  of  the  brain  and  nervous 
system.  What  bearing  has  all  this  on  the  probability 
of  survival?  We  find  bodies  without  minds  ;  we  never 
find  minds  without  bodies.  When  we  do  find  minds 
we  always  find  a  close  correlation  between  their  pro- 
cesses and  those  of  their  bodies.  This,  it  is  argued, 
strongly  suggests  that  minds  depend  for  their  existence 
on  bodies  ;  in  which  case,  though  survival  may  still  be 
abstractly  possible,  it  is  to  the  last  degree  unlikely.  At 
death  there  takes  place  completely  and  permanently  a 
process  of  bodily  destruction  which,  when  it  occurs 
partially  and  temporarily,  carries  with  it  the  destruction 
of  part  of  our  mental  life.  The  inference  seems  only 
too  obvious.  I  think  it  is  fairjo.  j§ay  that  our  ordinary 
scientific  knowledge  of  the  relation  of  body  'to  mind 
most  strongly  suggests  epiphenomenalism,  though  it 
does  not  necessitate  it ;  and  that  epiphenomenalism  is 
most  unfavourable  to  the  hypothesis  of  human  survival. 

It  is,  however,  possible  to  put  forward  other  theories 
about  the  mind  and  its  relation  to  the  body,  which  are 
consistent  with  ordinary  experience  and  with  scientific 
knowledge  and  are  less  unfavourable  to  survival  than 
epiphenomenalism.  I  will  call  the  first  of  these  the 
"  Instrumental  Theory." 

The  Instrumental  Theory. — We  must  begin  by  drawing 
a  distinction  between  the  existence  of  a  mind  and  its 
manifestation  to  other  minds.  On_  the  Instrumental 
Theory  the  mind  is  a  substance  which  is  existentially 
independent  of  the  body.  It  may  have  existed  before 
the  body  began,  and  it  may  exist  after  the  body  is 
destroyed.  For  a  time  it  is  intimately  connected  with  a 
certain  body  ;  and  at  such  times  it  can  get  information 
about  other  things  only  by  means  of  its  body  and  can 
act  on  other  things  only  by  first  moving  its  body.     If 


\ 


534       EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

the  body   be   injured    the    mind    may  be  cut   off  from 
certain  sources  of  information  about  other  things,  and 
it  may  be  prevented  from  expressing  itself  in  certain 
ways  ;  but  otherwise  it  may  be  uninjured.      It  is  certain 
that  such  a  theory  as   this  is    consistent   with  a  good 
many  of  the  facts  which  are  commonly  held  to  prove 
the  existential  dependence  of  mind  on  body.     Neverthe- 
less,   I    think   that,   in    this   crude    form,   it   cannot   be 
maintained.     Let   us   take  the  case  of  a  man  who   is 
injured  in  a  certain  part  of  his  brain,  and  for  the  time 
loses  his  power  to  remember   certain  events.     It   can 
hardly  be  maintained  that,  in  any  literal  sense,  he  still 
remembers    the    events ;    and    that   all    that   has    been 
damaged  is  his  power  of  manifesting  this    knowledge 
to  others  by  speech  or  writing.     The  latter  case  does 
sometimes    arise,    and    it    seems    introspectively   quite 
different  from  the  former  to  the  patient  himself.     Again, 
if  the  patient  recovers  these  lost  memories  after  a  while, 
it  seems  to  him  that   a  change  has  taken  place  in  the 
contents  of  his  mind,  and  not  merely  a  change  in  his 
ability  to  express  to  others  what  was  going  on  in  his 
mind  before.     We  must  suppose  then  that  in  such  cases 
something    more    than    the   power    to    manifest    one's 
knowledge  to  others  has  been  injured.     The  only  other 
alternative  is  to  suppose  that  all  such  patients  are  lying 
and  asserting  that  they  cannot  remember  certain  things 
which  they  actually  are  remembering.     If  we  reject  this 
very  violent  alternative  we  must  hold  that  in  some  cases 
an  injury  to  the  brain  does  actually  deprive  the  mind  of 
the  power  to  remember  certain  events  which  it  formerly 
could  remember.     Could  a  supporter  of  the  Instrumental 
Theory  square  the  facts  with  his  view?     He  might  say 
that  the  general  power  of  remembering  is  unchanged  ; 
and  assert  that  all  that  has  happened  is  that  the  injury 
to  the  body  has  prevented  certain  past  events  from  being 
objects  of  memory,  as  blindfolding  a  man  would  prevent 
certain  present   objects  from  being  perceived.     But  in 
that  case  the  mind  is  reduced  to  something  which  has 


EMPIRICAL  ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL   535 

merely  certain  very  general  capacities,  and  any  par- 
ticular exercise  of  these  powers  seems  to  depend  on 
the  body. 

Let  us  now  take  another  example.  We  will  suppose 
that  a  man  is  injured  in  the  head  ;  that  before  the  injury 
he  was  of  a  cheerful  and  benevolent  disposition  ;  and 
that  after  the  injury  he  is  morose  and  liable  to  attacks 
of  homicidal  mania.  Are  we  to  say  that  the  injury  has. 
made  no  difference  to  his  mind  ;  that  this  remains 
cheerful  and  benevolent ;  but  that  the  change  in  his 
brain  compels  him  to  express  his  cheerfulness  by 
scowling  and  his  benevolence  by  attacking  other  people 
with  carving-knives?  This  is  scarcely  plausible.  And, 
if  we  accept  it,  we  shall  not  be  able  to  stop  at  this  point. 
We  shall  have  to  conclude  that  it  is  impossible  to  tell 
what  the  character  of  anyone's  mind  really  is.  Lifelong 
philanthropists  may  be  inwardly  boiling  with  malice 
which  some  peculiar  kink  in  their  brains  and  nervous 
systems  compels  them  to  express  by  pensioning  their 
poor  relations  and  giving  pennies  to  crossing-sweepers. 
Once  more,  the  mind  will  be  reduced  to  something 
with  no  definite  traits  of  its  own,  such  as  benevolence 
or  peevishness,  but  merely  with  certain  very  general 
powers  to  express  itself  in  various  ways  according  to 
the  body  with  which  it  is  provided.  It  seems  to  me 
that  what  is  left  of  the  mind  when  we  try  to  square  the 
Instrumental  Theory  with  the  known  facts  is  so  abstract 
and  indefinite  that  it  does  not  deserve  to  be  called 
a  "mind". 

The  Compound  Theory. — This  suggests  a  modification 
of  the  Instrumental — Tiieory,  which  1  will  call  the 
"Compound  Theory".  M.ight  not  what  we  know  as 
a  "mind"  be  a  compound  of  two  Factors,  "^neither  of 
which  separately  has  the  characteristic  properties  of  a 
mind,  just  as  salt  is  a  compound  of  two  substances, 
neither  of  which  by  itself  has  the  characteristic  pro- 
perties of  salt?  Let  us  call  one  of  these  constituents  the 
"psychic   factor"   and  the  other  the  "bodily  factor". 


vd 


536       EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

The  psychic  factor  would  be  like  some  chemical  ele- 
ment which  has  never  been  isolated  ;  and  the  character- 
istics of  a  mind  would  depend  jointly  on  those  of  the 
psychic  factor  and  on  those  of  the  material  organism 
with  which  it  is  united.  This  would  allow  of  all  the 
correlation  between  mind  and  body  which  could  ever 
be  discovered,  and  at  the  same  time  it  is  not  open  to 
the  objections  which  I  have  pointed  out  in  the  ordinary 
form  of  the  Instrumental  Theory.  Moreover,  it  is  in 
accord  with  many  facts  which  we  know  about  other 
departments  of  nature.  We  know  that  chemical  com- 
pounds have  properties  which  cannot  be  deduced  from 
those  which  their  elements  display  in  isolation  or  in 
other  compounds.  And  yet  the  properties  of  these 
compounds  are  wholly  dependent  on  those  of  their 
eleftients,  in  the  sense  that,  given  such  elements  in 
such  relations,  a  compound  necessarily  arises  with  such 
and  such  properties.  These  properties  do  not  belong 
to  either  of  the  elements,  but  only  to  the  compound  as  a 
whole.  Now  this  does  seem  to  accord  fairly  well  with 
what  we  know  about  minds  when  we  reflect  upon  them. 
On  the  one  hand,  it  seems  a  mistake  to  ascribe  per- 
ception, reasoning,  anger,  love,  etc.,  to  a  mere  body. 
On  the  other  hand,  as  we  have  seen,  it  is  almost 
equally  difficult  to  ascribe  them  to  what  is  left  when 
the  bodily  factor  is  ignored.  Thus  the  mind,  as  com- 
monly conceived,  does  look  as  if  it  were  a  compound  of 
two  factors  neither  of  which  separately  is  a  mind.  And 
it  does  look  as  if  specifically  mental  characteristics  be- 
longed only  to  this  compound  substance. 

It  would  be  unwise  to  press  the  analogy  to  chemical 
compounds  too  far.  So  far  as  we  know,  when  two 
chemical  elements  are  united  to  form  a  chemical  com- 
pound no  permanent  change  is  produced  in  the  pro- 
perties of  either.  It  would  be  rash  to  assume  that  this 
is  also  true  when  a  psychic  factor  is  united  with  a 
bodily  organism  so  as  to  give  a  mind.  Both  factors 
may  be  permanently  affected  by  this  union  ;  so  that,  if 


EMPIRICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL   537 

they  become  separated  again  and  continue  to  exist, 
their  properties  are  characteristically  different  from  what 
they  were  when  the  two  first  became  connected  with 
each  other.  Of  course  many  different  views  would  be 
antecedently  possible  about  the  supposed  psychic  factor. 
At  one  extreme  would  be  the  view  that  there  is  only  one 
psychic  factor  for  all  minds.  Different  minds  would 
then  be  compounds  of  this  one  psychic  factor  with  dif- 
ferent brains  and  nervous  systems.  Such  a  view  would 
bear  some  analogy  to  Green's  theory  of  the  one  Eternal 
Consciousness  and  the  many  animal  organisms.  But 
the  psychic  factor  on  our  view  would  have  no  claim  to 
be  called  a  "Consciousness";  it  would  not  perform 
those  feats  of  relating  and  unifying  sense-data  which 
Green  ascribed  to  it  ;  and  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose 
that  it  would  deserve  honorific  titles  like  "eternal",  or 
be  an  appropriate  object  for  those  religious  emotions 
which  Green  felt  towards  it.  At  the  opposite  extreme 
would  be  the  view  that  there  is  a  different  psychic  factor 
fof^-each  different  mind.  Then  the  question  could  be 
raised  whether  some  or  all  of  them  can  exist  out  of 
combination  with  organisms;  whether  some  one  psychic 
factor  can  combine  successively  with  a  series  of  dif- 
ferent organisms  to  give  a  series  of  different  minds;  and 
so  on.  (It  may  be  remarked  that  the  view  that  the 
psychic  factor  cannot  exist  out  of  combination  with 
organisms,  and  yet  that  the  same  psychic  factor  can  be 
combined  with  a  series  of  successive  organisms,  has  a 
pretty  close  analogy  to  certain  chemical  facts.  There 
are  groups,  such  as  NH^,  CH3,  etc.,  which  are  in- 
capable of  more  than  the  most  transitory  independent 
existence.  Yet  one  such  group  may  pass  successively 
from  one  combination  to  another,  and  may  impart 
certain  characteristic  properties  to  each  of  these  com- 
pounds.) Finally,  there  is  an  intermediate  possibility 
for  which  there  might  be  a  good  deal  to  be  said.  It 
might  be  suggested  that  the  marked  individuality  of 
human  minds  indicates  that  there  is  a  different  psychic 


538       EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 


\ 


factor  as  well  as  a  different  bodily  organism  to  each  co- 
existing human  mind.  On  the  other  hand,  it  might  be 
held  that  there  is  only  one  psychic  factor  for  the  whole 
species  of  earwigs  ;  and  that  the  very  trivial  differences 
between  the  mind  of  one  earwig  and  another  are  due 
simply  to  differences  in  their  bodily  organisms.  It  is 
obvious  that  only  empirical  evidence  of  a  very  special 
kind  could  help  us  to  decide  between  these  alternatives, 
even  if  we  accepted  the  Compound  Theory  in  its  main 
outlines. 

Granted  that  the  Compound  Theory  is  consistent  with 
all  the  facts  which  are  commonly  held  to  prove  the 
existential  dependence  of  mind  on  body,  and  granted 
that  it  is  in  better  accord  with  the  facts  than  the  Instru- 
mental Theory,  is  there  any  positive  evidence  for  it? 
We  have  a  set  of  facts  which  point  to  the  dependence  of 
mind  on  body.  One  explanation  is  that  mind  depends 
on  nothing  but  body,  i.e.^  that  mental  events  either  are 
also  bodily  events,  or  that  at  any  rate  they  are  all 
caused  wholly  by  bodily  events  and  do  not  in  turn  affect 
either  each  other  or  the  body.  The  present  explanation 
is  that  the  mind  is  a  compound  of  the  body  and  some- 
thing else,  and  that  mental  events  and  mental  character- 
istics belong  to  this  compound  substance  and  not  to 
its  separate  constituents.  Both  explanations  fit  all  the 
normal  facts  equally  well.  But  the  Compound  Theory 
is  more  complex  than  the  Epiphenomenal  Theory,  and 
it  would  be  foolish  to  accept  it  unless  there  were  some 
facts  which  it  explains  and  which  the  Epiphenomenalist 
Theory  does  not.  Now  I  do  not  think  that  there  is 
anything  in  the  normal  phenomena  which  requires  us 
to  suppose  that  a  mind  depends  for  its  existence  and 
functioning  on  anything  but  the  body  and  its  processes. 
We  must  therefore  turn  to  the  abnormal  phenomena. 


Abnormal  and  Supernormal  Phenomena.  I  think 
that  it  is  very  important  to  begin  by  drawing  a  dis- 
tinction   which    is    too   commonly    neglected,    viz.,  the 


EMPIRICAL  ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL    539 


distinction  between  Survival  and  mer e_Pjzsi£i£nce.  It 
seems  to  me  that  a  great  many  of  the  phenomena  which 
are  held  to  point  to  the  survival  of  particular  human 
minds  point  only  to  the  persistence  of  some  factor 
which  was  a  constituent  of  a  human  mind.  We  are 
not  justified  in  saying  that  the  mind  of  John  Jones  has 
survived  the  death  of  his  body  unless  we  have  reason 
to  believe  that  there  is  still  a  continuous  stream  of 
conscious  mental  states  which  may  be  said  to  be  "  further 
experiences  of  John  Jones  ".  We  must  suppose  that 
this  contains  conations  as  well  as  cognitions,  that  it 
puts  ends  before  itself  and  tries  to  realise  them,  and 
that  it  feels  elation  or  disappointment  according  to  its 
success  or  failure  in  doing  so.  No  doubt  such  a  stream 
of  consciousness  would  be  impossible  unless  past  ex- 
periences modified  later  experiences  ;  and  no  doubt  we 
should  not  say  that  John  Jones  had  survived  unless  he 
were  able  to  remember  some  events  in  his  life  in  the 
body.  But  these  mnemic  phenomena,  though  necessary 
to  survival,  are  certainly  not  by  themselves  sufficient  to 
constitute  survival.  If  they  occur  alone,  without  the 
continuous  stream  of  conscious  cognitions,  conations, 
and  feelings,  all  that  we  have  a  right  to  say  is  that 
"some  constituent  of  the  mind  of  John  Jones  has  per- 
sisted "  and  not  that  "  John  Jones  has  survived  ". 

Now  it  seems  to  me  that  the  vast  majority  of  medium- 
istic  phenomena  which  are  taken  to  suggest  survival 
really  suggest  only  persistence.  The  additional  notion 
of  survival  is  read  into  them  because  in  our  ordinary 
experience  we  do  not  find  memories  without  a  pretty 
continuous  stream  of  consciousness  filling  the  gaps 
between  the  memory  and  the  event  remembered.  The 
cases  that  I  have  in  mind  are  these.  A  medium  goes 
into  a  trance.  He  is  then  supposed  either  to  be  in 
contact  with  the  spirit  of  some  dead  man,  or  in  rarer 
cases  to  be  directly  possessed  by  such  a  spirit.  In 
either  case  he  sometimes  mentions  incidents  in  the 
past   life   of    the    supposed    communicator   which    are 


4 


540       EVIDENCE  FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

unknown  to  the  sitter  and  can  afterwards  be  verified. 
And  in  the  latter  case  he  sometimes  exhibits  in  a  very 
remarkable  way  some  of  the  mannerisms  and  even  the 
verbal  intonations  of  the  supposed  communicator.  The 
evidence  for  such  phenomena  is,  in  my  opinion,  good 
enough  to  make  them  worth  serious  consideration  by 
philosophers.  Now  the  ordinary  spiritualist  interprets 
such  phenomena  in  terms  of  the  Instrumental  Theory  ; 
he  supposes  that  a  human  mind  is  existentially  inde- 
pendent of  its  body  and  just  uses  it  as  an  instrument ; 
that  it  leaves  its  body  at  death,  goes  on  living  its  own 
life,  and  from  time  to  time  uses  a  medium's  body  for 
purposes  of  communication. 

But  it  seems  to  me  that,  apart  from  the  intrinsic 
difficulties  of  the  Instrumental  Theory,  the  Compound 
Theory  fits  these  supernormal  phenomena  on  the  whole 
much  better.  One  thing  which  is  highly  characteristic 
of  the  communications  of  alleged  dead  men  is  their 
singular  reticence  about  their  present  life,  occupations, 
and  surroundings.  Such  observations  as  are  made  by 
entranced  mediums  on  these  subjects  seem  to  me  to  be 
extraordinarily  silly,  and  to  have  every  appearance  of 
being  merely  the  crude  beliefs  about  the  spiritual  world 
which  are  current  in  mediumistic  circles.  Yet  this 
nonsense  is  at  times  mixed  up  with  traits  which  are 
highly  characteristic  of  the  supposed  communicator, 
and  with  bits  of  detailed  information  about  his  past 
life  which  can  afterwards  be  verified.  Now,  on  the 
Compound  Theory,  we  can  suppose  that  the  psychic 
factor  may  persist  for  a  time  at  least  after  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  organism  with  which  it  was  united  to  form 
the  compound  called  "John  Jones's  mind".  This 
psychic  factor  is  not  itself  a  mind,  but  it  may  carry 
modifications  due  to  experiences  which  happened  to 
John  Jones  while  he  was  alive.  And  it  may  become 
temporarily  united  with  the  organism  of  an  entranced 
medium.  If  so,  a  little  temporary  "mind"  (a  "  mind- 
kin  ",  if  I    may  use   that  expression)  will    be   formed. 


EMPIRICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL   541 

Since  this  mindkin  will  contain  the  same  psychic  factor 
as  the  mind  of  John  Jones  it  will  not  be  surprising  it 
it  displays  some  traits  characteristic  of  John  Jones,  and 
some  memories  of  events  in  his  earthly  life.  Since  the 
bodily  factor  of  this  mindkin  is  the  medium's  organism, 
which  is  adapted  to  the  medium's  psychic  factor  and 
not  to  John  Jones's,  it  will  not  be  surprising  if  it  shows 
many  traits  which  are  characteristic  of  the  medium. 
And  the  reason  why  we  can  get  no  information  about 
the  present  life  and  experiences  of  John  Jones  is  that 
no  such  mind  is  existing  at  all.  When  the  medium 
is  entranced  the  psychic  factor  which  was  a  constituent 
of  John  Jones's  mind  forms  with  the  medium's  body  a 
mindkin  which  lasts  just  as  long  as  the  medium  re- 
mains in  trance.  At  intermediate  times,  on  this  view, 
all  that  exists  is  this  psychic  factor  ;  and  this  by  itself 
is  no  more  a  mind  than  John  Jones's  corpse  is  a  mind. 
To  explain  the  positive  part  of  the  phenomena  it  is 
plausible  to  suppose  that  something  has  persisted,  and 
that  this  something  was  an  integral  part  of  John  Jones's 
mind.  But  it  is  an  enormous  jump  from  this  to  the 
conclusion  that  John  Jones's  mind  has  survived  the 
death  of  his  body.  And  the  negative  part  of  the 
phenomena  strongly  suggests  that  what  has  persisted 
is  not  a  mind,  but  is  at  most  something  which  in 
combination  with  a  suitable  organism  is  capable  of 
producing  a  mind. 

Some  of  the  facts  of  multiple  personality  would  also 
be  neatly  explained  by  the  Compound  Theory,  Of 
course  mediumistic  phenomena  are,  in  the  first  instance, 
cases  of  multiple  personality.  The  peculiarity  of  them 
is  that  one  of  the  personalities  professes  either  to  be 
a  certain  deceased  human  being,  or  more  usually  only 
to  be  in  communication  with  one  ;  and  that,  in  some 
cases,  there  appear  certain  characteristic  traits  of  this 
dead  man,  or  knowledge  is  shown  of  some  minute 
details  in  his  past  life.  But  ordinary  multiple  person- 
ality, such  as  that  of  the  Beauchamp  case,  might  be 


542       EVIDENCE  FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

explained  by  supposing  that  the  same  organism  can 
have  two  different  psychic  factors  connected  with  it. 
We  should  then  expect  to  find  two  minds  having  certain 
characteristic  differences,  and  yet  having  a  good  deal 
more  in  common  than  two  minds  which  differ  in  their 
organisms  as  well  as  in  their  psychic  factors.  Two 
personalities  might  be  compared  to  two  chemical 
compounds  with  one  element  in  common,  such  as 
silver  chloride  and  silver  bromide  ;  whilst  two  ordinary 
minds  might  be  compared  (say)  to  silver  chloride  and 
lead  nitrate.  I  do  not  think,  however,  that  ordinary 
multiple  personality  positively  requires  the  Compound 
Theory  for  its  explanation.  We  can  never  be  sure  that 
the  organism  is  in  precisely  the  same  state  when  one 
personality  is  in  control  as  it  is  when  the  other  is  in 
control.  Hence  it  is  possible  that  the  facts  could  be 
explained  on  a  purely  epiphenomenalist  theory.  It  is 
the  apparent  persistence  of  certain  traces  and  dis- 
positions after  the  destruction  of  the  organism  which 
seems  to  demand  for  its  explanation  something  more 
than  epiphenomenalism,  and  seems  to  suggest  at  least 
something  like  the  Compound  Theory. 

We  must  now  consider  ia)  whether  there  are  any 
facts  which  require  something  more  than  the  Compound 
Theory  to  explain  them  ;  and  {b)  whether  the  facts  that 
I  have  already  mentioned  could  be  explained  with 
something  less  than  the  Compound  Theory.  It  seems 
to  me  that  we  should  have  grounds  for  postulating  the 
survival  of  a  mind,  and  not  the  mere  persistence  of  a 
psychic  factor,  if  and  only  if  the  communications  showed 
traces  of  an  intention  which  persisted  between  the 
experiments  and  deliberately  modified  and  controlled 
each  in  the  light  of  those  which  had  preceded  it. 
Now  it  is  alleged  that  there  are  signs  of  this  deliberate 
intention  in  the  Cross-Correspondences  which  the 
Society  for  Psychical  Research  has  been  investigating 
'  for  many  years.  If  all  or  most  of  these  came  up  to  the 
ideal  type  of  a  Cross-Correspondence,  I  think  we  should 


EMPIRICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL   543 

have  to  admit  that  it  looks  as  if  a  single  intelligent  being 
were  deliberately  trying  in  an  extremely  ingenious  way 
to  produce  evidence  of  its  continuous  existence.  The 
ideal  Cross-Correspondence  would  be  of  the  following 
form.  Suppose  three  automatic  writers  in  different 
places  produce  automatic  scripts  over  a  series  of  years. 
Suppose  that  they  do  not  communicate  with  each  other, 
but  send  their  scripts  from  time  to  time  to  an  impartial 
authority  for  comparison.  Suppose  that  A,  B,  and  C 
in  their  scripts  get  statements  which,  taken  separately, 
are  fragmentary  and  unintelligible  to  them  ;  and  suppose 
further  that  after  such  an  unintelligible  and  fragmentary 
statement  in  A's  script  there  comes  an  injunction  to 
refer  to  what  B  and  C  are  now  writing  or  will  shortly 
write  or  have  written  at  some  definite  time  in  the  past. 
Suppose  that  similar  injunctions  are  found  in  B's  and 
C's  scripts  after  fragmentary  and  unintelligible  passages 
in  them.  Suppose  finally  that  when  the  impartial 
authority  compares  the  scripts  and  follows  the  directions 
contained  in  them  he  finds  that  these  separately  unin- 
telligible sentences  combine  to  convey  something  which 
is  highly  characteristic  of  a  certain  deceased  person  who 
is  alleged  to  be  communicating.  Then  we  should  have 
a  perfect  instance  of  a  Cross-Correspondence  ;  and  it 
would  be  difficult  to  resist  the  conviction  that  the 
phenomena  are  controlled  intentionally  by  a  single 
mind,  which  cannot  be  identified  with  the  conscious 
part  of  the  mind  of  any  of  the  automatic  writers. 

Unfortunately  it  is  not  clear  to  me  that  most  of  the    II 
alleged  Cross-Correspondences  accurately  exemplify  this    ^ 
ideal  type.     I  also  cannot  help  feeling  suspicious  of  the     \ 
enormous  amount  of  learning  and  ingenuity  which  the     i 
impartial  authority  has  to  exercise  in  order  to  find  the      \ 
key  to   the    riddle   which    the  scripts  set.     Would  not 
the  same  amount  of  patience,  learning,  and  ingenuity 
discover  almost  as  good  Cross-Correspondences  between 
almost  any  set  of  manuscripts  ?     I  do  not  say  that  this 
is   so ;    but    I   should   need   a   good   deal   of    negative 


544       EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

evidence,  i.e.^  of  failure  to  discover  Cross  -  Corre- 
spondences between  other  manuscripts  which  were 
treated  in  the  same  way  as  these  automatic  scripts, 
before  I  was  prepared  to  stake  much  on  this  argument 
for  human  survival.  So  far  as  I  am  aware,  negative 
control  experiments  of  this  kind  have  not  been  tried. 
It  is  evident  that  they  would  be  terribly  laborious,  and 
it  is  hardly  to  be  expected  that  the  same  patience  and 
ingenuity  would  be  lavished  on  them  as  have  been 
devoted  to  the  interpretation  of  the  automatic  scripts 
in  which  positive  results  are  hoped  for. 

There  is  another  remark  to  be  made  on  the  Cross- 
Correspondences.  Suppose  that  they  rendered  it 
practically  certain  that  some  mind  other  than  the  con- 
scious minds  of  the  automatists  is  controlling  the  ex- 
periments, can  we  feel  any  confidence  that  it  is  the 
mind  of  a  certain  deceased  person  who  professes  to  be 
communicating?  Is  it  not  at  least  equally  probable 
that  it  might  be  the  unconscious  part  of  the  mind  of  one 
of  the  automatists  or  of  one  of  the  officers  of  the  Society 
for  Psychical  Research?  It  would  certainly  be  true  to 
say  that  some  of  the  automatists  (in  particular  Mrs 
Verrall)  were  well  aware  of  the  problem  of  getting 
evidence  for  survival  which  could  not  be  explained  away 
by  the  hypothesis  of  telepathy  between  the  living  ;  that 
it  must  have  occupied  their  thoughts  a  great  deal  ;  and 
that  they  must  have  had  a  permanent  desire  to  devise 
some  means  of  solving  it.  It  is  also  true  that  the 
alleged  communicators  in  the  Cross-Correspondences 
had  been  well  known  in  life  to  Mrs  Verrall  and  to  many 
prominent  and  active  members  of  the  vSociety  who  were 
not  themselves  automatists.  Now  I  think  that  we  may 
take  the  following  propositions  as  reasonably  well 
established,  {a)  That  when  a  person  is  greatly  in- 
terested in  a  problem  this  problem  is  often  worked  upon 
and  solved  by  processes  which  are  unconscious  relatively 
to  the  part  of  the  mind  which  is  normally  in  control  of 
his  body.     I  need  only  mention  in  support  of  this  the 


clear  i\ 
idium    p" 


EMPIRICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL   545 

quite  common  experience  of  solving  a  problem  while 
asleep,  or  the  post-hypnotic  calculations  which  I  spoke 
of  in  an  earlier  chapter.  (/;)  That  it  is  extremely  prob- 
able that  telepathy  can  and  does  take  place  between 
the  unconscious  parts  of  living  minds.  In  sittings  with 
Mrs  Leonard  and  other  mediums  I  have  met  with  clear 
cases  of  telepathy  between  myself  and  the  mec 
when  entranced.  But  I  have  noticed  that  these  almost  . 
invariably  involved  past  events  of  which  I  was  not  j 
consciously  thinking  at  the  time.  Thus  the  telepathic 
influence  must  have  been  due  to  mere  "traces",  or  at 
most  to  processes  of  thought  going  on  in  my  mind  with- 
out my  being  aware  of  them,  z'.e.,  processes  which  were 
unconscious  relatively  to  the  part  of  my  mind  which 
normally  controls  my  body,  (c)  That  the  unconscious 
part  of  the  mind  is  often  extremely  willing  to  "oblige" 
the  conscious  part  by  providing  "evidence"  for  what 
the  conscious  part  wishes  to  believe. 

Now,  if  these  three  propositions  be  admitted,  it  is  not 
unplausible  to  suggest  that  the  unconscious  part  of  the 
mind  of  one  of  the  automatists  worked  out  the  problem 
of  providing  "satisfactory  evidence"  for  survival  and 
telepathically  conveyed  the  fragmentary  messages,  which 
were  to  constitute  the  "evidence",  to  the  other  auto- 
matists. Personally  I  strongly  suspect  the  unconscious 
part  of  Mrs  Verrall's  mind  to  have  accomplished  this 
feat.  I  am  of  course  quite  well  aware  that  such  a  theory 
goes  far  beyond  anything  for  which  we  have  direct 
evidence  ;  for  it  seems  to  imply  that  the  unconscious 
part  of  Mrs  Verrall's  mind  was  capable  of  a  kind  of 
selective  telepathy,  conveying  so  much  and  no  more  to 
one  automatist  and  so  much  and  no  more  to  another 
automatist.  But  I  must  point  out  that,  if  we  do  not 
ascribe  this  power  to  any  embodied  mind,  we  have  to 
ascribe  it  to  the  disembodied  mind  of  the  supposed  com- 
municator. So  this  much  must  be  assumed  in  any  case 
if  we  accept  the  interpretation  which  the  investigators 
have  put  on  the  Cross-Correspondences.     And,  except 

2  ^\ 


546       EVIDENCE  FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

on  the  principle  of  Omne  ignotuiu  pro  magnifico^  I  do  not 
see  why  we  should  think  it  more  likely  that  the  dis- 
embodied mind  of  a  dead  man  should  be  able  to  exercise 
selective  telepathy  than  that  the  unconscious  part  of  the 
embodied  mind  of  a  living  member  of  the  Society  for 
Psychical  Research  should  be  able  to  do  so.  In  fact 
the  hypothesis  that  the  spirit  of  the  late  Dr  Verrall  is 
communicating  involves  the  assumption  both  of  an  other- 
wise unknown  power  of  selective  telepathy  and  of  an 
otherwise  unknown  substance,  viz.,  a  disembodied  spirit, 
to  exercise  this  power.  The  hypothesis  which  I  ten- 
tatively put  forward  makes  only  the  first  of  these  two 
assumptions.  It  therefore  has  a  greater  intrinsic  prob- 
ability ;  and  it  seems  equally  capable  of  explaining 
the  facts. 

I  pass  now  to  the  second  question.     Could  the  facts 
which  we  have  been  considering  be  explained  by  some- 
thing less  than  the  hypothesis  of  a  persistent  psychic 
factor?     It   will    be   remembered   that   the   facts  to  be 
explained   are  the  revelation   of  certain   details  in  the 
\  past  life  of  a  certain  dead  man,  which  are  unknown  at 
■  the  time  to  the  sitter  and  can  afterwards  be  verified  ;  or 
the  occurrence  of  certain  characteristic  tricks  of  voice 
and  manner  in   the  entranced  medium.     Now  it  must 
be  admitted  that  it  is  very  rare  for  a  detail  about  a  dead 
man's  past  life  to  be  verifiable  unless  it  is  known  or  has 
been  known  to  someone  now  living.     It  must  therefore 
be   admitted   to    be    theoretically   possible    that    these 
phenomena  are  due  to  telepathy  from  the  unconscious 
parts  of  the  minds  of  living  men  who  are  remote  from 
the    place   at   which    the   sitting   is    being   held.     But, 
although  this  is  conceivable,  I  cannot  regard  it  as  very 
plausible.     It  is  very  difficult  to  see  what  can  determine 
the   medium   to  select  just  those  pieces  of  information 
from  distant  minds  which  are  relevant  to  the  supposed 
communicator.      It  is  true  of  course  that  the  sitter  has 
generally   known    the    communicator;    and  we   should 
have  to  suppose  that  the  presence  of  a  man  who  has 


EMPIRICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL    547 

known  X  causes  the  medium  to  select  from  other 
minds  bits  of  information  about  X  and  to  reject  bits  of 
information  about  other  men.  On  any  view  some 
selective  action  on  the  part  of  the  sitter  must  be  postu- 
lated, since  in  the  main  those  who  are  supposed  to  be 
communicating  when  a  certain  man  has  a  sitting  with 
a  medium  are  people  whom  the  sitter  has  known.  In 
my  own  sittings  with  Mrs  Leonard,  e.g.^  the  alleged 
communicator  has  from  the  first  been  one  particular 
man  who  was  described  with  considerable  accuracy  and 
named  with  approximate  (though  not  complete)  accuracy 
at  the  first  sitting.  On  the  Compound  Theory  we 
should  have  to  suppose  that  the  presence  of  a  certain 
sitter  "  attracts  "  the  psychic  factors  of  certain  dead  men 
who  were  known  to  him.  On  the  purely  telepathic 
theory  we  should  have  to  suppose  that  the  presence  of 
the  sitter  causes  the  medium  to  "select"  from  various 
minds  scattered  about  the  world  certain  bits  of  informa- 
tion which  are  relevant  to  someone  whom  the  sitter  has 
known. 

Although  this  hypothesis  is  possible,  there  are,  I 
think,  two  arguments  which  make  slightly  against 
it  and  slightly  in  favour  of  the  Compound  Theory, 
(i)  On  the  purely  telepathic  theory  it  is  difficult  to  see 
wh)^  mediumistic  communications  should  not  be  as 
much  or  more  concerned  with  one's  living  friends  as 
with  those  who  have  died.  This  is  not  found  to  be  so. 
On  the  Compound  Theory  this  fact  is  explicable  ;  for, 
on  this  hypothesis,  the  psychic  factor  of  a  living  mind 
is  already  attached  to  a  certain  living  organism,  and 
this  would  presumably  make  it  difficult  or  impossible 
for  it  to  enter  at  the  same  time  into  the  same  relation 
with  the  organism  of  the  entranced  medium.  I  think 
that  some  weight  must  be  attached  to  this  argument, 
though  it  is  not  conclusive.  The  main  interest  and 
expectation  of  both  sitter  and  medium  is  to  get  messages 
which  purport  to  come  from  the  dead  and  not  from 
those  who  are  still  alive  ;  and  this  might  account  for 


548       EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

the  fact  that  the  medium  "selects"  bits  of  information 
about  dead  men,  even  on  the  purely  telepathic  theory. 

(2)  The  second  argument  is  due  to  Dr  Richard 
Hodgson.  He  used  it  against  the  hypothesis  of  tele- 
pathy from  the  sitter  and  in  favour  of  the  hypothesis 
that  the  messages  are  due  to  the  disembodied  spirits 
of  dead  men.  I  think  that  the  argument  can  be  adapted 
so  that  it  can  be  used  against  the  hypothesis  of  a  more 
extended  telepathy  and  in  favour  of  the  Compound 
Theory.  The  argument  may  be  put  as  follows.  Suppose 
that  a  number  of  sitters  Sj  .  .  .  S„  sit  with  a  certain 
medium,  and  that  a  number  of  communicators  Q  .  .  .  C,„ 
profess  to  give  messages  through  this  medium.  On  the 
Compound  Theory  the  adequacy  or  inadequacy  of  the 
communications  which  purport  to  come  from  a  certain 
communicator  C,  through  a  given  medium  would  pre- 
sumably depend  mainly  on  two  things  ;  (a)  on  the 
complexity  of  the  psychic  factor,  and  (d)  on  its  adapta- 
tion to  the  organism  of  the  medium.  There  is  no 
obvious  reason  why  the  number  and  accuracy  of  the 
messages  which  purport  to  come  from  a  given  communi- 
cator through  the  same  medium  should  vary  much  from 
one  sitter  to  another  ;  for  the  main  function  of  the  sitter, 
on  this  hypothesis,  is  simply  to  "attract"  a  certain  psychic 
factor  so  that  it  enters  into  a  temporary  combination 
with  the  medium's  organism.  If  this  happens  at  all,  the 
subsequent  proceedings  would  seem  to  depend  on  the 
psychic  factor  and  the  medium  rather  than  on  the  sitter. 
We  should  thus  expect  to  find  certain  "  communicators  " 
who  are  good  with  most  sitters,  and  others  who  are  bad 
with  most  sitters  ;  we  should  not  expect  to  find  certain 
sitters  who  are  good  with  most  "communicators"  and 
others  who  are  bad  with  most  "  communicators  "  .  On 
the  telepathic  hypothesis  we  should  expect  the  opposite 
result.  For,  on  this  view,  the  sitter  plays  a  much  more 
active  part.  His  thoughts  and  interests  must  determine 
the  particular  selection  of  information  which  the  medium 
makes  from  a  perfect  rag-bag  of  living  minds.     And  his 


EMPIRICAL   ARGUMENTS   FOR   SURVIVAL   549 


1 


power  to  do  this  would  presumably  depend  on  the  peculiar 
endowments  of  his  own  mind  and  on  its  adaptation  to 
the  mind  of  the  medium  with  whom  he  is  sitting.  On 
this  hypothesis  we  should  therefore  expect  that  there 
would  be  some  sitters  who  get  good  results  from  most 
alleged  communicators  through  a  given  medium  ;  and 
that  there  would  be  other  sitters  who  get  bad  results 
from  most  alleged  communicators  through  the  same 
medium. 

Now  Dr  Hodgson  had  an  enormous  amount  of  experi- 
ence of  the  results  of  sittings  with  Mrs  Piper  extending 
over  many  years.  And  he  carefully  studied  them  and 
classified  them  from  the  above  points  of  view.  His 
conclusion  was  that  certain  alleged  communicators  gave 
copious  and  accurate  information  to  most  sitters ;  and 
that  other  alleged  communicators  gave  fragmentary  and 
incorrect  information  to  most  sitters.  He  did  not  find 
that  certain  sitters  got  copious  and  accurate  information 
from  most  communicators ;  and  that  certain  other  sitters 
got  feeble  and  fragmentary  messages  from  most  com- 
municators. Thus,  on  the  whole,  the  actual  results  are 
such  as  might  be  expected  on  the  Compound  Theory 
and  are  not  such  as  might  be  expected  on  the  theory 
of  generalised  telepathy  from  living  minds.  On  the  a 
whole  then  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  there  is  slightly  \^ 
more  to  be  said  for  the  Compound  Theory  than  for  the  ^ 
other  alternatives. 

Conclusion. — The  view  that  the  mind  is  existentially 
dependent  on  the  organism  and  on  nothing  else  is 
compatible  with  all  the  normal  facts,  and  is  positively 
suggested  by  them,  though  they  do  not  necessitate  it. 
And  it  is  the  simplest  possible  view  to  take.  The  theory 
that  the  mind  merely  uses  the  body  as  an  instrument  is 
difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  normal  facts  ;  and  it  is 
doubtful  whether  there  are  any  well-established  abnormal 
phenomena  that  require  it.  The  theory  that  the  mind 
is  a  compound  substance,  whose  constituents  are  the 
organism  and  what  I  have  called  a  "psychic  factor",  is 


550       EVIDENCE   FOR   HUMAN   SURVIVAL 

compatible  with  all  the  normal  -facts  ;  though  it  is  not 
suggested  by  them,  and  is  more  complex  than  the  theory 
that  the  mind  is  existentially  dependent  on  the  organism 
and  on  it  alone.  This^  Compound  Theory  seems  to  be 
\.  the  minimum  assumption  that  will  explain  certain  fairly 
^  well  attested  abnormal  phenomena.  Of  course,  many 
people  will  unhesitatingly  reject  the  alleged  facts  on 
which  I  have  based  the  argument  of  the  latter  part  of 
this  chapter.  I  am  pretty  sure  that  they  will  be  wrong 
in  doing  so  ;  but  I  will  confine  myself  to  this  remark  for 
\  their  benefit.  Anyone  who  adopts  the  view  that  the 
\  mind  is  existentially  dependent  on  the  organism  alone 
is  taking  up  a  position  which  is  not  necessitated  by  the 
facts  which  everyone  admits,  and  which  can  hardly  be 
reconciled  with  the  very  possibility  of  many  alleged  facts 
for  which  there  is  at  least  respectable /r/;«(2/aaV  evidence. 
Now  this  (I  should  have  thought)  is  not  a  comfortable 
position  to  occupy.  It  compels  one  either  to  ignore  all 
the  phenomena  in  question,  or  to  be  continually  occupied 
in  explaining  them  away.  The  former  course  is  not 
scientifically  respectable  ;  for  it  is  certain  that  many 
people,  quite  as  sensible  as  oneself  and  far  more  expert, 
have  personally  investigated  these  matters  and  have 
persuaded  themselves  of  the  genuineness  of  these  pheno- 
mena and  of  the  impossibility  of  explaining  them  com- 
pletely by  fraud  or  mistake.  And  the  latter  course  may 
at  any  moment  be  barred  by  some  fact  which  we  simply 
cannot  explain  away.  Now  the  Compound  Theory  has 
at  least  this  merit.  It  is  compatible  with  all  the  facts 
which  everyone  admits  ;  it  has  nothing  against  it  except 
a  superstitious  objection  to  dualism  ;  and  it  leaves  open 
the  possibility  that  these  debatable  phenomena  are 
genuine.  At  the  same  time  it  does  not  compel  anyone 
to  accept  them.  It  is  quite  open  for  anyone  to  hold  that 
the  mind  is  a  compound  of  the  organism  and  of  a  psychic 
factor  which  is  not  itself  a  mind  ;  and  yet  to  doubt  or 
deny  that  there  is  any  conclusive  evidence  that  a  psychic 
factor  ever  persists  after  the  destruction  of  the  organism 


ixO^^d^lr^         ^   .wJ.y.Lyv^J/ 


EMPIRICAL   ARGUMENTS   EOR   SURVIVAL   551 

with  which  it  was  combined,  or  that  if  it  does  persist  it 
ever  combines  even  for  a  moment  with  the  organism  of 
some  living  human  being  to  form  a  temporary  mind. 
This  seems  to  me  to  be  the  great  merit  of  the  Compound 
Theory.  It  leaves  open  possibilities,  and  allows  us  to 
investigate  alleged  facts  without  an  invincible  a  priori 
prejudice  against  their  possibility.  And  yet  it  allows  us 
to  be  as  critical  as  we  like  about  each  of  these  alleged 
facts,  and  about  the  evidence  which  is  offered  for  each 
of  them. 

I  may  remark  in  conclusion  that  the  Compound  Theory     r 
has  certain  advantages  for  those  who  favour  the  theory     ! 
of  metempsychosis,  as  Dr  M'Taggart  does.      Instead     | 
of  a  single  mind  which  animates  a  successive  series  of     i 
organisms  we  should  have  a  single  psychic  factor  which     ( 
combines  with  such  a  series  of  organisms  to  form  a  sue-    I 
cessive  series  of  minds.     There  might  be  intervals  during    \ 
which  a  psychic  factor  has  become  dissociated  from  an 
organism  which  has  died  and  has  not  yet  entered  into 
combination  with  an  organism  that  is  about  to  be  born. 
During  such  intervals  this  psychic  factor  might  produce 
those  abnormal    phenomena  which    the  ordinary  Spiri- 
tualist takes  as  evidence  for  the  survival  of  a  certain 
human  mind.     I  do  not  know  of  any  facts  which  strongly 
suggest  metempsychosis  ;   but  it  is  a  possible  theory, 
and  it  has  the  advantage  of  dealing  with  the  "origin  " 
of  the  mind  at  conception  as  well  as  with  the  "  end  "  of 
the  mind  at  death.     And   it  seems  to  me  to  be  much 
more  plausiblewhen  stated  in  terms  of  a  persistent  psychic 
factor,  which  is  not  a  mind,  than  it  is  when  stated  in  terms 
of  a  persistent  mind  which  animates  successively  a  series 
of  organisms. 


SECTION   E 

Introductory  Remarks 

"  To  conclude,  there  is  nothing  in  this  whole  Discourse,  nor 
in  that  I  writ  before  ....  as  far  as  I  can  perceive,  contrary  to 
the  Word  of  God  or  to  Good  Manners  ;  or  to  the  disturbance  of 
Publique  Tranquillity.  Therefore  I  think  it  may  be  profitably 
printed,  and  more  profitably  taught  in  the  Universities,  in  case 
they  also  think  so  to  whom  judgment  of  the  same  belongeth. 
For  ....  the  Universities  are  the  Fountains  of  Civill  and  Morall 
Doctrine,  from  whence  the  Preachers  and  the  Gentry,  drawing 
such  water  as  they  find,  use  to  sprinkle  the  same  (both  from  the 
Pulpit  and  in  their  Conversation)  upon  the  People." 

(HoBBES,  Leviathan,  Conclusion) 


SECTION   E 

The  Unity  of  the  Mind  and  the  Unity 
OF  Nature 

Introductory  Remarks 

In  this  Section,  which  will  bring  this  book  to  an  end, 
I  propose  first  to  consider  the  internal  unity  of  the  mind. 
I  shall  state  and  criticise  certain  theories  which  have 
been  held  on  this  subject,  and  shall  try  to  make  a 
tentative  decision  between  them  or  to  show  that  on  the 
available  evidence  there  is  no  means  of  reaching:  even  a 
probable  decision.  This  will  occupy  the  first  chapter 
of  the  Section.  In  the  second  chapter  I  shall  consider 
for  the  last  time  the  status  of  the  mind  in  Nature  ;  and 
I  shall  conclude  with  a  few  words  about  the  probable 
prospects  of  Mind  in  the  course  of  future  evolution. 


555 


CHAPTER   XIII 

The  Unity  of  the  Mind 

I  SHALL  begin  by  mentioning  those  facts  about  the 
mind  which  everyone  admits  and  which  every  theory 
has  to  take  into  account. 

(i)  It  is  admitted  that  the  total  state  of  a  man's  mind 
at  any  moment  may  be,  and  generally  is,  differentiated. 
.  This  differentiation  takes  two  different  forms,     {a)  My 
A"' total    state   of  mind    at   any    moment   may   consist    of 
~r'         mental  events  of  various  kinds.     I  may  be  feeling  tired, 
wanti?ig  ted.,  thinking  of  vaj  book,  and  so  on.     {h)  There 
may   be   in    my   total   mental    state  at   any    moment   a 
\  number  of  mental  events  which  are  of  the  same  kind 

but  have  different  epistemological  objects.  I  may  be 
thinking  of  my  tea,  of  my  book,  of  the  multiplication- 
table,  and  so  on.  We  may  sum  this  up  by  saying  that 
the  total  state  of  a  mind  at  any  time  may  be-differentiated 
qualitatively  or  objectively  or  in  both  ways.  As  we 
have  seen,  identity  of  quality  is  compatible  with  diversity 
of  objects.  Similarly,  identity  ofobject  is  compatible 
with  diversity  of  quality.  E.g.,  I  might  at  the  same  time 
be  thinking  of  my  tea,  longing  for  my  tea,  and  so  on. 
Probably  every  total  state  of  mind  is  diversified  both 
qualitatively  and  objectively  ;  and  no  doubt  there  are 
intimate  causal  connexions  between  the  two  kinds  of 
differentiation.  Still,  they  are  distinct  forms  of  differentia- 
tion even  if  they  never  occur  in  isolation  from  each  other. 
(2)  On  the  face  of  it  there  are  two  fundamentally 
different  kinds  of  mental  events,  viz.,  those  which  do 
and  those  which  do  not  have  epistemological  objects. 
Compare,  e.g.,  the  two  statements  "  I  feel  tired  "or  "I 


THE   UNITY   OF   THE   MIND  557 

feel  cross"  with  the  two  statements  "  I  see  a  chair"  or 

"I  want  my  tea".     The  former  seem  to  express  liow^ 

and  not  what,  I  am  feeling.     The  latter  seem  to  express 

what,  and  not  how,  I  am  perceiving  or  desiring.     I  will   ■  -yljrr"? 

call    them    respectively    "non-referential"    and    "refer-  fl£^ 

ential"  mental  events.     (Cf.  Chap.  VI.)     Some  people 

have  argued  that  all  mental  events  are  really  referential. 

This   may  possibly    be  true  ;   but  their   arguments  do   ' 

not   convince  me,   and    their   conclusion   seems   to   me 

paradoxical.      I  think  it  very  likely  that  my  total  mental 

state  at  any  moment   is    never  wholly    non-referential  ' 

and  never  wholly  referential  ;   but   this    is  as   far  as  I 

am  willing  to  go.      I   therefore  assume  that  there  are 

these    two   different    kinds   of   mental    event,    however 

closely  they  may  always  be  connected  with  each  other 

in  real  life. 

(3)  At  the  same  time  there  exist  a  number  of  different  . 
total  mental  states,  which  we  say  "belong  to  different  ' 
minds  ".  It  is  possible  for  there  to  be  two  contemporary 
mental  events  which  have  exactly  the  same  determinate 
qualities  and  the  same  epistemological  object ;  but  these 
two  mental  events  cannot  belong  to  the  same  mind. 
(To  this  it  would  generally  be  added  that  no  mental 
event  can  belong  to  more  than  one  mind,  and  that  every 
mental  event  must  belong  to  some  mind.  But,  in  view 
of  the  facts  of  abnormal  and  supernormal  psychology, 

it  would  perhaps  be  unwise  to  insist  on  this  as  strongly 
as  on  the  other  points  which  have  been  mentioned.) 

(4)  Certain  series  of  successive  total  mental  states  are  ^ 
said  to  "belong  to  a  single  mind".  And  the  events  ''^ 
which  are  differentiations  of  a  pair  of  total  states  belong- 
ing to  the  same  mind  themselves  belong  to  that  mind. 
(It  would  commonly  be  held  that  every  total  mental 
state  is  part  of  the  history  of  some  mind  which  endures 
for  some  time  and  has  other  earlier  or  later  total  states.) 

These  are  the  main  facts  which  every  theory  has  to 
take  into  consideration.  I  now  propose  to  state  various 
theoretically  possible  analyses  of  them. 


558      UNITY   OF  MIND   AND   OF  NATURE 

Alternative  Theories  about  the  Unity  of  the  Mind. — 

We  may  begin  by  dividing  all  theories  into  two  great 

groups,  viz.  (A)  Centre-Theories,  and  (B)  Non-centre- 

Theories.      By  a  centre-theory  I  mean  a  theory  which 

*\*^/'^  ascribes  the  unity  of  the  mind  to  the  fact  that  there  is  a 

certain  particular   existent — a  Centre — which  stands  in 

a  common  asymmetrical  relation  to  all  the  mental  events 

which  would  be  said  to  be  states  of  a  certain  mind,  and 

does  not  stand   in   this   relation  to  any  mental    events 

which  would  not  be  said  to  be  states  of  this  mind.     By 

,    a    non-centre    theory    I    mean    one   which   denies    the 

existence  of  any  such  particular  Centre,  and  ascribes  the 

unity  of  the  mind  to  the  fact  that  certain  mental  events 

are  directly  inter-related  in  certain  characteristic  ways, 

and  that  other  mental  events  are   not  related  to  these 

j   in  the  peculiar  way  in  which  these  are  related  to  each 

I    other. 

Now  centre-theories  may  be  sub-divided  into  {a)  Pure 
Ego  Theories,  and  (d)  Theories  that  do  not  assume  a 
Pure  Ego.  By  a  Pure  Ego  I  understand  a  particular 
existent  which  is  of  a  different  kind  from  any  event ;  it 
owns  various»events,  but  it  is  not  itself  an  event.  No 
doubt  the  commonest  form  of  the  Centre  theory  has  in- 
volved a  Pure  Ego.  But  it  seems  conceivable  that  the 
unity  of  the  mind  might  be  due  to  the  existence  of  a 
Centre,  and  yet  that  this  centre  might  itself  be  an  event. 
It  is  possible  that  this  is  what  William  James  had  in 
mind  when  he  talked  of  the  "  passing  thought  "  as  being 
the  "thinker".  So  we  had  better  leave  room  for  theories 
of  this  type. 

{A,  a)  Pure  Ego  Theo}ies.  Theories  which  assume  a 
special  kind  of  existent  Centre — a  Pure  Ego — may  be 
divided  according  to  the  view  which  they  take  about 
mental  events.  A  mental  event  is  certainly  a  Substan- 
tive ;  i.e.,  it  is  the  kind  of  entity  which  can  be  a  logical 
subject  of  a  proposition,  but  cannot  pl^y  any  other  part 
in  a  proposition.  Buj^  there  are  two  different  kinds  of 
substantives,  viz.,  those  which   exist~and  tho:se-^wfhich 


THE  UNITY   OF  THE   MIND  559 

_onlj^subsist.  A  Pure  Ego,  if  there  be  such  a  thing,  is 
an  existent  substantive.  A  fact  or  a  proposition  is  a 
substantive,  in  the  sense  defined  above.  We  can  say 
that  *'The  execution  of  Charles  I  was  a  political  mis- 
take" or  that  "It  is  probable  that  Edwin  will  marry 
Angelina".  Here  we  have  facts  or  propositions  function- 
ing as  subjects  of  other  propositions.  And  they  cannot 
play  any  other  part  in  a  proposition.  They  are  therefore 
substantives.  But  they  do  not  exist  (though  they  may 
contain  existents  as  constituents)  ;  they  merely  subsist. 
Now,  granted  that  mental  events  are  substantives,  it 
might  be  held  (i)  that  they  are  merely  subsistent,  or 
(ii)  that  they  are  existent  substantives.  Non-centre 
theories  about  the  mind  are  obliged  to  hold  that  mental 
events  are  existent  substantives  ;  but  Pure  Ego  theories 
have  already  got  an  existent  substantive,  viz.,  the  Pure 
Ego.  They  can  therefore  take  their  choice  about  mental 
events.  They  can  regard  mental  events  either  as  facts 
about  Pure  Egos,  or  as  existents  of  a  peculiar  kind  which 
stand  in  specially  intimate  connexion  with  existents  of 
another  kind,  viz.,  Pure  Egos.  We  will  now  consider 
these  two  forms  of  Pure  Ego  theory  in  turn. 

(i)  On  this  view  there  is  a  plurality  of  different  Pure 
Egos.  All  these  Pure  Egos  have  certain  causal  char- 
acteristics or  "faculties",  e.g.^  the  power  of  remember- 
ing, the  power  of  reasoning  and  so'on.  Beside  this,  each 
Pure  Ego  at  each  moment  has  some  determinate  form  of 
some  determinable  non-causal  quality  ;  and  each  Pure 
Ego  at  each  moment  has  some  determinate  form  of  some 
determinable  relation  to  some  object  or  other.  A  mental 
event  is  the  fact  that  a  certain  Pure  Eg-o  has  a  certain 
determinate  form  of  a  certain  determinable  non-causal 
quality  at  a  certain  moment ;  or  it  is  the  fact  that  a 
certain  Pure  Ego  stands  at  a  certain  moment  in  a  certain 
determinate  form  of  some  determinable  non-causal  re- 
lation to  a  certain  object.  The  first  kind  of  fact  is  what 
we  have  called  a  "non-referential"  mental  event;  the 
second  kind  of  fact  is  what  we  have  called  a  "  referential  " 


56o       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND    OF   NATURE 

mental  event.  E.g.^  we  might  take  ''tiredness"  as  one 
determinable  quality,  and  "  crossness  "  as  another.  Then 
the  mental  event  of  feeling  tired  is  the  fact  that  a  certain 
Pure  Ego  has  a  certain  determinate  form  of  the  quality 
of  tiredness  at  a  certain  moment.  Again,  perceiving  and 
desiring  would  be  two  determinable  relations  ;  and  the 
mental  event  of  seeing  a  chair  would  be  the  fact  that  a 
certain  Pure  Ego  has  this  determinate  form  of  the  relation 
of  perceiving  at  a  certain  moment  to  a  certain  chair. 
Now  a  Pure  Ego  can  have  determinate  forms  of  several 
different  determinable  qualities  at  the  same  time  ;  e.g., 
it  can  at  the  same  time  have  the  quality  of  tiredness  in 
a  certain  degree  and  the  quality  of  crossness  in  a  certain 
degree.  Similarly,  it  may  have  the  same  determinate 
relation  to  several  different  objects  at  the  same  time,  or 
it  may  have  at  the  same  time  different  kinds  of  relation 
to  the  same  object.  A  total  mental  state  would  then  be 
the  fact  that  a  certain  Pure  Ego  at  a  certain  moment  has 
several  different  non-causal  qualities,  stands  in  non- 
causal  relations  of  several  different  kinds,  and  stands  in 
the  same  kind  of  non-causal  relation  to  several  different 
objects.  To  say  that  all  these  contemporary  mental 
events  are  differentiations  of  a  single  total  state  of  a 
certain  mind  is  just  to  say  that  each  of  them  is  a  fact 
about  the  same  Pure  Ego  and  the  same  moment  of  time 
and  about  different  qualities  or  relations  or  the  same 
relation  and  different  objects. 

So  much  for  what  we  might  call  the  "transverse  unity 
of  a  cross-section  of  the  history  of  a  mind"  on  this  view. 
The  "longitudinal  unity"  of  a  mind,  as  we  might  call 
it,  could  be  explained  on  this  view  in  two  alternative 
ways,  {a)  The  simplest  theory  would  be  that  the  same 
Pure  Ego  persists  ;  and  that  it  has  different  determinate 
qualities,  or  stands  in  different  determinate  relations,  or 
stands  in  the  same  determinate  relations  to  different 
objects,  at  different  times.  To  say  that  two  successive 
total  states  are  states  of  the  same  mind  is  just  to  say 
that  both  of  them  are  facts  about  the  same  Pure  Ego, 


THE   UNITY   OF   THE   MIND  561 

about  different  moments  of  time,  and  about  the  same  or 
different  qualities  or  relations  or  objects.  (/5)  It  would, 
however,  be  possible  to  hold  a  view  which  is  a  kind  of 
compromise  between  a  Central  and  a  non-Central 
Theory.  It  might  be  held  that  the  unity  of  each  total 
state  requires  a  Pure  Ego.  But  it  might  be  held  that 
the  longitudinal  unity  of  a  mind  does  not  require  that 
one  and  the  same  Pure  Ego  should  be  a  common  con- 
stituent of  a  series  of  successive  total  states.  It  might 
be  held  that  there  is  a  different  Pure  Ego  for  each 
different  total  state  of  the  same  mind,  and  that  two 
successive  total  states  are  assigned  to  the  same  mind 
because  of  certain  characteristic  relations  which  they 
have  to  each  other  and  which  they  do  not  have  to  other 
total  states  which  would  not  be  assigned  to  this  mind. 
This  second  Theory  is  a  Central  Theory  for  the  trans- 
verse unity,  and  a  non-Central  Theory  for  the  longi- 
tudinal unity  of  the  mind. 

Whichever  form  of  this  theory  we  may  take  it  follows 
that  every  mental  event  must  be  "owned"  by  some 
Pure  Ego.  For  every  mental  event  is  a  fact  about 
some  Pure  Ego,  and  it  may  be  said  to  be  "owned" 
by  the  Pure  Ego  which  it  is  about.  I  think  that  it 
would  also  follow  from  either  form  of  the  theory  that  no 
mental  event  could  be  owned  by  more  than  one  Pure 
Ego.  For  a  mental  event  is  the  fact  that  a  certain  Pure 
Ego  has  a  certain  quality  or  stands  in  a  certain  relation 
to  a  certain  object  at  a  certain  moment.  Now,  although 
two  Pure  Egos  might  have  precisely  the  same  quality 
and  stand  in  precisely  the  same  relation  to  the  same 
object  at  the  same  time,  yet  it  would  be  one  fact  that 
Pure  Ego  A  had  this  quality  or  stood  in  this  relation 
to  this  object,  and  it  would  be  another  fact  that  Pure 
Ego  B  did  so.  Hence  there  would  be  two  mental 
events  and  not  one.  Finally,  although  on  either  form 
of  the  theory  every  mental  event  would  be  owned  by 
some  Pure  Ego  and  no  mental  event  would  be  owned 
by    more  than  one,  it  would  be  possible  on  the  second 

2  N 


562       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

form  of  the  theory  that  there  might  be  mental  events 
which  were  not  states  of  any  mind.  For  there  might 
be  certain  mental  events  which  did  not  stand  in  such 
relations  to  any  mental  event  of  earlier  or  later  date  that 
the  two  could  be  regarded  as  successive  slices  of  the 
history  of  a  mind. 

(ii)  We  will  now  consider  the  second  great  division  of 
Pure  Ego  theories,  viz.,  those  which  regard  mental 
events  as  existent  substantives  and  not  merely  as  sub- 
sistent  facts  about  the  qualities  and  relations  of  Pure 
Egos.  On  this  type  of  theory  we  must  suppose  that 
non-causal  qualities,  such  as  tiredness  or  crossness, 
belong,  not  to  Pure  Egos,  but  to  mental  events.  We 
must  further  assume  a  peculiar  asymmetric  relation  of 
"ownership"  between  a  Pure  Ego  and  certain  mental 
events.  On  the  first  form  of  Pure  Ego  theory  "owner- 
ship "  was  not  a  peculiar  material  relation  ;  a  Pure  Ego 
owned  a  state  when  the  state  was  the  fact  that  this  Pure 
Ego  had  such  and  such  a  quality  or  stood  in  such  and 
such  a  relation  at  a  certain  time.  Ownership  was  thus 
the  formal  relation  of  a  subject  to  a  fact  about  that 
subject.  On  the  present  form  of  the  theory  mental 
events  are  not  facts  about  Pure  Egos,  and  the  owner- 
ship of  a  mental  event  by  a  Pure  Ego  cannot  be  dealt 
with  in  this  simple  way. 

Let  us  consider  the  analysis  of  a  typical  mental  state 
on  the  two  forms  of  the  Pure  Ego  theory.  We  will 
begin  with  the  kind  of  state  which  is  expressed  by  the 
phrase  "I  feel  tired".  On  the  first  form  of  the  theory 
this  can  be  analysed  into  :  "A  certain  Pure  Ego  has  a 
certain  determinate  form  of  the  determinable  quality  of 
tiredness  now."  On  the  second  form  of  the  theory  it 
would  be  analysed  into:  "There  is  a  mental  event 
characterised  by  a  certain  determinate  form  of  the  deter- 
minable quality  of  tiredness,  and  this  event  is  owned 
by  a  certain  Pure  Ego."  Next  let  us  consider  a  refer- 
ential mental  event,  such  as  that  which  would  be 
expressed  by  the  phrase:  "I  am  thinking  of  the  number 


THE   UNITY    OF   THP:   MIND  563 

2."  On  the  first  form  of  the  theory  this  could  be 
analysed  into:  ''A  certain  Pure  Ego  stands  now  in  a 
certain  determinate  form  of  the  determinable  relation 
of  'cognising'  to  the  number  2."  On  the  second  form 
of  the  theory  it  could  be  analysed  into:  ''There  is  a 
mental  event  which  stands  in  a  certain  determinate  form 
of  the  determinable  relation  of  'cognising'  to  the 
number  2,  and  this  event  is  owned  by  a  certain  Pure 
Ego." 

There  are  several  points  to  be  noticed  about  these 
alternative  analyses.  In  the  first  place,  on  both  theories 
there  is  a  relation  of  the  Pure  Ego  to  the  mental  event, 
and  also  a  relation  of  the  Pure  Ego  to  the  determinate 
quality,  in  the  case  of  a  non-referential  state  of  mind. 
On  the  first  theory,  the  Pure  Ego  is  characterised  directly 
by  tiredness  ;  on  the  second  theory,  the  Pure  Ego  has 
to  the  quality  of  tiredness  a  compound  relation  which  is 
the  logical  product  of  the  two  relations  of  "owning" 
and  "being  characterised  by".  For,  on  the  second 
theory,  the  Pure  Ego  owns  something  which  is 
characterised  by  tiredness.  The  difference  is  that,  on  the 
first  theory,  the  relation  between  the  Pure  Ego  and  the 
quality  is  direct,  like  that  of  father  to  son  ;  whilst,  on 
the  second  theory,  it  is  indirect,  like  that  of  uncle  to 
nephew.  Again,  on  the  first  theory,  the  relation  of 
Pure  Ego  to  mental  event  is  the  formal  relation  of  a 
subject  to  a  fact  about  that  subject ;  whilst,  on  the 
second  theory,  it  is  the  non-formal  relation  of  "owner- 
ship "  between  one  existent  substantive  of  a  certain  kind 
and  another  existent  substantive  of  a  different  kind. 
Similar  remarks  apply  to  referential  mental  states  on 
the  two  theories.  On  the  first  theory,  the  Pure  Ego 
stands  directly  in  a  cognitive  relation  to  an  object.  On 
the  second  theory,  it  stands  in  a  compound  relation  to 
this  object ;  this  relation  is  the  logical  product  of  the 
two  relations  of  "owning"  and  "cognising";  for  the 
Pure  Ego  owns  something  which  cognises  the  object. 
It  must,    therefore,   be   admitted   that   both  theories  are 


564       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

able  to  deal  with  all  the  various  relations  which  any 
theory  has  to  recognise  ;  they  differ  here  only  in  the 
fact  that  a  relation  which  is  direct  and  simple  on  one 
theory  is  indirect  and  complex  on  the  other.  Secondly, 
on  the  present  form  of  the  Pure  Ego  theory  it  is  not 
logically  impossible  that  there  should  be  mental  events 
which  are  not  owned  by  any  Pure  Ego  at  all  ;  nor  is  it 
logically  impossible  that  some  mental  events  should 
be  owned  at  once  by  several  Pure  Egos.  On  the  first 
form  of  the  theory  it  followed  logically  from  the  nature 
of  mental  events  that  there  could  not  be  unowned  or 
common  mental  events  ;  if  this  is  to  be  maintained  on 
the  present  form  of  the  theory  it  will  be  necessary  to 
add  certain  synthetic  propositions  about  the  relation 
of  "  ownership  ". 

There  is  one  other  point  which  had  better  bC  men- 
tioned at  this  stage.  As  stated  by  us,  both  forms  of 
the  Pure  Ego  theory  have  presupposed  a  plurality  of 
different  determinable  mental  qualities  and  a  plurality 
of  different  determinable  relations  to  an  epistemological 
object.  On  the  first  theory  these  qualities  directly 
characterise  the  Pure  Ego,  and  these  relations  directly 
connect  the  Pure  Ego  with  epistemological  objects  ;  on 
the  second  theory  the  qualities  directly  characterise 
mental  events,  and  the  relations  directly  connect  mental 
events  with  epistemological  objects.  Now  I  do  not 
think  that  either  theory  could  dispense  with  a  plurality 
of  different  determinable  mental  qualities.  For  there 
are  certainly  different  kinds  of  feeling,  such  as  "feeling 
tired",  "feeling  cross",  etc.,  and  it  seems  impossible 
to  regard  the  difference  between  feeling  tired  and  feeling 
cross  as  simply  a  difference  of  relation  to  some  object  or 
as  a  difference  in  the  objects  to  which  something  is 
related.  It  would  seem  then  as  if  "tiredness"  and 
"crossness"  were  so  many  different  non-relational 
determinables.  But,  if  we  once  grant  a  plurality  of 
different  determinable  mental  qualities,  it  might  be 
suggested    that    we    could    do    without    a    plurality    of 


THE   UNITY   OF   THE   MIND  565 

different  determinable  mental  relations  to  objects.  We 
have  counted  cognising  as  one  kind  of  determinable 
relation  to  an  object,  and  desiring  as  another  kind  of 
determinable  relation  to  an  object.  But  could  we  not 
manage  with  only  a  single  determinable  relation  to  an 
object,  which  we  might  call  "  objective  reference  "  ?  Might 
not  the  difference  between  cognising  and  desiring  simply 
be  a  difference  in  the  qualities  of  the  term  which  stands 
at  the  moment  in  the  relation  of  reference  to  an  object? 
On  the  first  form  of  the  Pure^Ego  theory  this  suggestion 
would  work  out  as  follows.  Suppose  I  think  of  my  tea 
first,  and  then  desire  my  tea.  There  would,  on  both 
occasions,  be  simply  some  determinate  form  of  the 
general  relation  of  reference  between  my  Pure  Ego  and 
my  tea.  But  on  the  second  occasion,  i.e.,  when  I  desired 
my  tea  in  addition  to  thinking  of  it,  my  Pure  Ego  would 
have  a  certain  characteristic  quality  which  it  did  not 
have  on  the  first  occasion.  A  thing  would  be  "  desired  " 
when  it  stood  in  the  relation  of  being  "referred  to" 
by  a  Pure  Ego  which  had  at  the  time  a  certain  specific 
quality.  On  the  second  form  of  the  Pure  Ego  theory 
the  suggestion  would  work  out  as  follows.  A  desire 
for  my  tea  would  be  a  mental  event  which  {a)  has  a 
certain  characteristic  quality,  and  {b)  has  the  relation  of 
objective  reference  to  my  tea.  A  mere  thought  of  my 
tea  would  be  a  mental  event  which  {a)  lacks  this  charac- 
teristic quality,  and  {b)  has  the  relation  of  objective 
reference  to  my  tea.  It  may  be  remarked  that  all  other 
mental  attitudes  towards  objects  presuppose  the  cognitive 
attitude  ;  we  cannot  desire,  fear,  hate,  or  love  anything, 
without  having  an  idea  of  the  object  towards  which  we 
take  this  attitude.  Hence  it  would  be  plausible  to 
identify  the  cognitive  relation  with  the  general  relation 
of  objective  reference  ;  and  to  suppose  that  all  other 
mental  attitudes  consist  of  the  holding  of  this  relation 
between  a  Pure  Ego  or  a  mental  event  and  an  epistemo- 
logical  object,  together  with  the  fact  that  this  Pure 
Ego  or  mental  event  has  at  the  time  a  certain  character- 


566       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

istic  quality  which  determines  whether  the  attitude  is 
called  "  desire  ",  or  "  love  ",  or  "  hate  "  or  what  not. 

Thus  we  get  a  cross-division  of  Pure  Ego  theories 
according  to  whether  they  do  or  do  not  assume  a 
plurality  of  different  kinds  of  relation  of  reference  to 
objects.  I  will  now  leave  the  exposition  of  the  various 
possible  forms  of  Pure  Ego  theory,  and  will  pass  to  the 
theory  of  a  Centre  which  is  an  event  and  not  a  Pure  Ego. 

{A,  b)  Central-Event  Theories.  It  is  evident  that  these 
form  a  kind  of  half-way  house  between  Pure  Ego 
theories  and  Non-Centre  Theories  of  the  mind.  They 
resemble  Pure  Ego  theories  in  the  fact  that  the 
unity  of  a  total  mental  state  at  any  moment  depends 
on  a  common  relation  in  which  all  its  differentiations 
stand  to  a  common  Centre.  They  resemble  Non-Centre 
Theories  in  the  fact  that  this  Centre  is  itself  an  event  and 
not  a  peculiar  kind  of  existent  substantive  ;  it  is  of  the 
same  nature  as  the  events  which  it  unifies.  I  think  that 
the  most  plausible  form  of  this  theory  would  be  to 
identify  the  Central  Event  at  any  moment  with  a  mass 
of  bodily  feeling.  The  longitudinal  unity  of  a  self 
through  a  period  of  time  would  then  depend  on  the 
fact  that  there  is  a  mass  of  bodily  feeling  which  goes  on 
continuously  throughout  this  period  and  varies  in 
quality  not  at  all  or  very  slowly.  At  any  moment  there 
are  many  such  masses  of  bodily  feeling,  which  are 
numerically  different  however  much  they  may  be  alike 
in  quality.  These  form  the  Centres  of  a  number  of 
different  contemporary  total  states  of  mind.  Each  of 
them  is  a  thin  slice  of  a  long  and  highly  uniform  strand 
of  bodily  feeling  ;  and  each  of  these  strands  of  bodily 
feeling  accounts  for  the  longitudinal  unity  of  one  mind. 

The  transverse  unity  of  a  total  mental  state  might  be 
accounted  for  in  two  different  ways  on  this  theory, 
which  are  similar  to  forms  (i)  and  (ii)  of  the  Pure  Ego 
theory,  (i)  We  might  suppose  that  each  cross-section 
of  one  of  these  strands  has  various  other  qualities  beside 
that  quality  in  which  all  adjacent  cross-sections  of  the 


THE   UNITY   OF   THE   MIND  567 

same  strand  closely  resemble  each  other.  These  other 
qualities  may  vary  sharply  between  adjacent  cross- 
sections  of  the  same  strand.  E.g.^  suppose  we  take 
two  adjacent  sections  of  a  certain  strand,  each  of 
which  lasts  for  a  minute.  There  may  be  a  predominant 
resemblance  in  quality  between  the  two  ;  but  the  first 
may  have  in  addition  a  "  toothachy "  quality,  and  the 
second  may  have  in  addition  a  "headachy"  quality. 
The  transverse  unity  of  the  total  mental  state  will 
consist  in  the  fact  that  the  same  Central  Event  has  a 
plurality  of  different  determinate  qualities  in  addition 
to  that  quality  in  which  it  resembles  adjacent  Central 
Events  of  the  same  strand.  So  far  we  have  con- 
sidered only  non  -  objective  mental  events.  Objective 
mental  events  could  be  dealt  with  as  follows.  We  might 
suppose  that  the  same  Central  Event,  which  has  these 
various  qualities,  also  stands  in  various  determinate 
forms  of  various  determinable  relations  to  various 
objects.  The  fact  that  a  Central  Event  stands  in  such 
and  such  a  determinate  form  of  such  and  such  a  relation 
to  such  and  such  an  object  will  be,  on  this  view,  what 
is  meant  by  saying  that  such  and  such  a  referential 
mental  state  is  occurring  in  such  and  such  a  mind. 

(ii)  The  other  alternative  would  be  to  assume  a 
plurality  of  existent  mental  events  beside  those  which 
are  bodily  feelings  and  constitute  Central  Events. 
These  other  events  would  then  have  characteristic 
mental  qualities  and  stand  in  characteristic  mental 
relations  to  objects  of  various  kinds.  And  the  transverse 
unity  of  a  total  mental  state  would  consist  in  the  fact 
that  a  single  central  bodily  feeling  stands  in  a  certain 
common  relation  to  a  number  of  other  mental  events, 
each  of  which  has  its  own  characteristic  qualities,  and 
some  of  which  stand  in  characteristic  relations  to  objects. 

As  in  the  case  of  the  Pure  Ego  theory,  we  might  try 
to  do  without  a  plurality  of  different  determinable  mental 
relations  to  objects,  provided  we  accept  a  plurality  of 
mental  qualities.     We  might  postulate   a  single  deter- 


568       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

minable  mental  relation  of  "objective  reference".  And 
we  might  distinguish  the  apparently  different  kinds  of 
objective  reference,  such  as  desire,  love,  fear,  etc.,  by 
characteristic  differences  in  the  quality  of  the  term  which 
stands  in  the  relation  of  objective  reference  to  an  object. 

(B)  Non-Central  Theories.  These  Theories  try  to 
dispense  wifh  the  assumption  of  Sin  existent  centre, 
whether  it  be  a  Pure  Ego  or  a  Central  Event.  The  unity 
of  a  total  mental  state  consists  in  the  fact  that  a  number 
of  contemporary  mental  events,  each  with  its  own  char- 
acteristic qualities,  are  directly  interrelated  in  certain 
characteristic  ways.  There  are  other  contemporary 
mental  events  which  are  not  related  in  these  ways  to  a 
given  set  of  interrelated  mental  events  of  this  kind. 
These  either  belong  to  no  mind  at  all,  or  to  a  contem- 
porary total  state  of  some  other  mind.  The  longitudinal 
unity  of  a  mind  is  due  to  the  fact  that  certain  non- 
contemporary  total  mental  states,  of  the  kind  just 
described,  are  related  to  each  other  in  characteristic 
ways.  It  is  obviously  logically  possible  on  such  a 
theory  that  there  should  be  mental  events  which  do  not 
belong  to  any  total  mental  state,  and  total  mental  states 
which  do  not  belong  to  any  mind. 

There  are  several  remarks  of  a  general  logical  character 
to  be  made  on  the  relation  between  Central  and  Non- 
Central  Theories,  (i)  If  a  number  of  terms  stand  in  a 
common  relation  to  a  certain  other  term  it  necessarily 
follows  that  they  will  stand  in  a  symmetrical  relation  to 
each  other.  E.g.,  if  A  and  B  be  both  children  of  X,  they 
necessarily  stand  in  the  relation  of  "  brother-or-sister  "  to 
each  other.  This  consequence  may  be  called  merely 
"analytic",  since  the  relation  of  "brother-or-sister" 
between  A  and  B  just  means  that  A  is  a  child  of  someone 
who  is  a  parent  of  B.  But  (ii)  the  fact  that  a  number  of 
terms  stand  in  a  common  relation  to  a  certain  other  term 
may  entail  a  consequence  about  the  relation  of  these 
terms  to  each  other  which  is  not  merely  analytic. 
Suppose,  e.g.,  that  four  points  A,  B,  C,  and  D  are  all 


THE  UNITY   OF  THE   MIND  569 

at  the  same  distance  from  a  point  X.     Then  it  necessarily 
follows  that  the  angle  ABD  is  equal  to  the  angle  ACD. 
This  consequence  about  the  relations  of  the  points  cannot 
be  called  merely  analytic  ;  for  it  is  certainly  not  a  mere 
restatement  or  weakening  of  the  statement  that  A,  B,  C, 
and  D  are  all  at  the  same  distance  from  X.     It  mieht 
have  been  recognised  by  a  person  who  had  never  sus- 
pected that  there  was  a  point  X  from  which  these  four 
points   were   equidistant.     We    must,    therefore,    admit 
that   the   direct    relations   which    we    discover    between 
a   number  of  terms   may   in    fact    be    entailed   by  their 
standing  in   a   common    relation    to   some   other   term, 
(iii)  If  a  number  of  terms  be  interrelated  directly  in  a 
characteristic  way  it   follows   analytically  that  there  is 
something  to  which  they  all  stand  in  a  common  asym- 
metrical   relation,    even    though    there    be    no    Existent 
Centre  in  the  system.     For  each  of  them  is  a  constituent 
in  \\\&fact  that  they  are  all  related  to  each  other  in  this 
particular  way  ;  and  so  this   fact  stands   in  a  common 
asymmetrical  relation  to  all  these  terms.     Thus,  even  if 
a  number  of  interrelated  terms  have  no  Existent  Centre, 
there  is  always   a   certain    substantive,   which  subsists 
though   it  does   not  exist,  which   stands  in   a  common 
asymmetrical  relation  to  all  of  them  and  might  be  called 
their   '*  Subsistent  Centre",      (iv)   What  has  just  been 
asserted  is  merely  an  analytic  consequence  of  the  fact 
that  the  terms  in  question  are  interrelated.     But  the  fact 
that  a    number  of  terms  are    directly    interrelated    may 
entail  the  synthetic  consequence  that  there  is  an  Existent 
Centre  which  stands  in  a  common  asymmetrical  relation 
to  them  all.     If  the  four  points  A,   B,   C,  and  D  be  so 
related  to  each  other  that  the  angle  ABD   is  equal  to 
the  angle  ACD  it  follows  that  these  points  are  concyclic, 
i.e.^  that  there  is  a  certain  point  X  from  which  they  are 
all  equidistant.     And  this  is  not  a  mere  restatement  or 
weakening  of  the  original  statement  about  the  equality 
of  the  two  angles.     It  must,  therefore,  be  admitted  that 
the  direct  relations  which  we  discover  among  a  set  of 


570       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

terms  may  in  fact  entail  that  there  is  a  certain  Existent 
Centre  which  stands  in  a  common  asymmetric  relation 
to  all  of  them.  Lastly  (v)  we  must  notice  that  theories 
of  the  Non-Central  Type  are  not  obliged  to  hold  that  the 
relations  which  bind  certain  contemporary  mental  events 
into  a  total  mental  state,  or  the  relations  which  bind 
certain  successive  total  mental  states  into  a  mind,  are 
dyadic  relations.  Both  kinds  of  relation  might  be  irre- 
ducibly  polyadic,  like  jealousy  or  trusteeship. 

I  have  mentioned  these  purely  logical  points  for  two 
opposite  reasons.  On  the  one  hand  it  is  often  objected 
in  limine  against  Non-Central  Theories  that  our  use  of 
personal  pronouns,  like  ''I"  and  "You",  presupposes 
that  we  recognise  the  existence  of  Centres  ;  and  that  Non- 
Central  Theories  are  necessarily  incapable  of  accounting 
for  this  fact.  We  see  that  this  preliminary  objection 
is  baseless.  Even  on  Non-Central  Theories  there  is 
necessarily  something  which  can  be  called  ''  J  "  or 
"You  ".  This  something  is  a  substantive,  and  it  stands 
in  a  common  asymmetrical  relation  to  "  my"  state  or  to 
"  your  "  states  respectively.  The  only  difference  between 
Central  and  Non-Central  Theories  is  about  the  logical 
nature  of  this  substantive.  On  Central  Theories  it  is  a 
particular  existent,  either  a  Pure  Ego  or  a  Central  Event. 
On  Non-Central  Theories  this  substantive  is  a  Fact  about 
certain  mental  events  and  their  interrelations,  and  so  its 
mode  of  being  is  subsistence  and  not  existence.  What 
the  opponents  of  Non-Central  Theories  have  to  prove  is, 
therefore,  not  simply  that  the  unity  of  the  mind  involves 
an  entity  other  than  its  states,  which  stands  in  a  common 
asymmetrical  relation  to  all  these  states  ;  but  that  this 
entity  is  an  existent  and  not  merely  a  subsistent  substantive. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  often  objected  in  limine  to 
Central  Theories  (and,  in  particular,  to  Pure  Ego 
Theories)  that  all  that  we  can  observe  is  mental  events 
and  their  direct  relations  to  each  other.  We  cannot 
observe  Pure  Egos  and  their  relations  to  mental  events 
or  to  objects.    As  against  this  preliminary  objection  it  was 


THE   UNITY   OF   THE   MIND  571 

worth  while  to  remark  that,  if  there  were  an  Existent 
Centre,  this  fact  might  entail  synthetically  the  subsistence 
of  certain  direct  relations  between  the  mental  events  which 
it  unifies.  And  conversely  that  the  subsistence  of  certain 
observable  relations  between  a  set  of  mental  events  might 
entail  that  there  was  an  Existent  Centre  to  which  they 
all  stood  in  a  certain  common  relation.  In  this  connexion 
the  following  remark  may  be  of  interest  by  way  of 
analogy.  The  existence  of  conic  sections  was  recognised, 
and  many  of  their  properties  were  worked  out,  long 
before  it  was  known  that  to  each  conic  section  there  is  a 
peculiar  point  (the  Focus)  and  a  peculiar  straight  line 
(the  Directrix)  and  that  all  the  other  properties  of  any 
conic  entail  and  are  entailed  by  the  fact  that  every  point 
on  it  is  such  that  its  distance  from  the  focus  bears  a  fixed 
ratio  to  its  distance  from  the  directrix. 

It  remains  to  be  noticed  that  Non-Central  Theories, 
like  Central  Theories,  may  take  two  different  forms 
according  to  whether  we  assume  a  plurality  of  diff"erent 
determinable  relations  of  objective  reference,  such  as 
cognising,  desiring,  loving,  etc.,  or  content  ourselves 
with  a  single  determinable  relation  of  objective  reference 
and  a  plurality  of  different  determinable  qualities  in  the 
terms  which  stand  in  this  relation  to  objects.  We  must 
remark  here,  however,  that  a  still  further  degree  of 
simplification  has  been  attempted  by  certain  philosophers, 
such  as  William  James  and  Bertrand  Russell.  All 
forms  of  all  theories  which  we  have  so  far  mentioned 
have  distinguished  sharply  between  the  constituents  of  a 
mind  and  its  objects.  The  objects  of  the  mind  were 
never  supposed  to  be  also  constituents  of  it,  except 
possibly  in  the  very  special  case  where  the  mind  is 
introspecting  and  making  one  of  its  own  states  into  an 
object.  On  the  first  form  of  the  Pure  Ego  theory  the 
mind  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  constituents  at  all. 
The  Pure  Ego  is  a  constituent  of  a  number  of  facts,  and 
the  objects  of  the  mind  are  constituents  of  some  of  these 
facts.      But  this  does  not  make  the  objects  constituents 


572       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

of  the  mind.  On  the  second  form  of  the  Pure  Ego 
theory  the  constituents  of  the  mind  are  the  Pure  Ego 
and  the  mental  events  which  it  owns.  Some  of  these 
mental  events  are  constituents  of  certain  facts  of  which 
the  objects  of  the  mind  are  also  constituents.  But  this 
again  does  not  make  the  objects  constituents  of  the 
mind.  On  the  theories  which  reject  the  Pure  Ego, 
which  we  have  so  far  considered,  the  constituents  of  the 
mind  are  mental  events.  Some  of  these  mental  events 
are  constituents  of  facts  of  which  the  objects  of  the  mind 
are  also  constituents  ;  but  this  does  not  make  the  objects 
of  the  mind  constituents  of  it.  The  form  of  Non-Central 
^      theory  which  we  have  now  to  mention   holds  that  the 

I      mind  is  composed  of  its  objects   interrelated    in    certain 

^v  .  \     characteristic  ways.     A  total  state  of  mind  just  is  the 

J*.  fact  that  a  certain  set  of  objects  are  related  to  each  other 

at  a  certain  m.oment  in  a  certain  way  ;  and  a  particular 

mental  event  just  is  the  fact  that  at  a  certain  moment  a 

'^  certain  object  stands  in  certain  relations  to  certain  other 
\    interrelated  objects. 

Discussion  of  the  Alternative  Theories.  I  have  now 
stated  and  tried  to  explain  all  the  alternative  theories 
about  the  unity  of  the  mind  with  which  I  am  acquainted. 
It  will  be  seen  that  they  are  very  numerous  ;  and  that 
none  of  them,  with  the  possible  exception  of  the  third 
form  of  Non-Central  Theory,  is  so  obviously  silly  that  it 
can  safely  be  dismissed  without  discussion.  And  even 
this  third  form  of  Non- Central  Theory  has  been  held 
by  such  eminent  men  that  it  would  be  impertinent  to 
ignore  it. 

Plurality  of  Relations  of  Refer ettce.  I  will  begin  by  con- 
sidering a  question  which  arises  on  all  the  alternatives, 
viz.,  whether  it  is  necessary  to  assume  a  plurality  of 
different  determinable  relations  of  reference  to  an  object 
as  well  as  a  plurality  of  different  determinable  mental 
qualities.  It  seems  to  me  that  it  would  not  be  possible 
to  dispense  with  a    plurality  of  different   determinable 


\ 


THE   UNITY   OF  THE   MIND  573 

relations  of  reference  on  the  first  form  of  the  Pure  Ego 
theory.  Let  us  consider,  e.g.,  the  two  attitudes  of  loving 
and  hating.  It  is  impossible  for  the  same  mind  to  love 
and  to  hate  the  same  object  at  the  same  time.  If  then 
we  suppose  that  the  statement  "  X  loves  A  "  means  '*  X 
has  the  quality  /,  and  stands  in  the  relation  of  reference 
to  A  ",  and  that  the  statement  '*  X  hates  A  "  means  "  X 
has  the  quality  h,  and  stands  in  the  same  relation  of 
reference  to  A",  we  shall  have  to  suppose  that  the 
qualities  /  and  h  are  incompatible  with  each  other.  But 
it  is  quite  certain  that  X  can  love  A  and  hate  B  at  the 
same  time.  And,  on  the  present  analysis,  this  would 
seem  to  require  X  to  have  at  the  same  time  the  two  in- 
consistent qualities  /and  k.  Now,  if  X  be  a  Pure  Ego, 
we  cannot  avoid  this  by  supposing  that  one  part  of  X 
has  the  quality  h  and  another  part  has  the  quality  /; 
for  X  will  not  have  parts.  Hence  it  seems  impossible 
to  accept  this  analysis  on  the  first  form  of  the  Pure  Ego 
theory.  The  same  result  may  be  brought  out  in  a 
different  way.  It  is  certain  that  I  may  cognise  both  A 
and  B,  and  desire  A  and  not  desire  B  at  the  same  time. 
Now,  if  "  X  desires  A  "  means  "  X  cognises  A  and  has 
the  quality  c/",  it  would  seem  to  follow  that,  when  X 
cognises  both  A  and  B  and  desires  onl}^  A,  X  must  both 
have  and  not  have  the  quality  d.  And  this  seems  to  be 
impossible  if  X  be  a  Pure  Ego.  Thus  I  think  we  may  ] 
conclude  that  the  first  form  of  the  Pure  Ego  theory  ) 
requires  a  plurality  of  different  determinable  relations  ] 
of  reference  as  well  as  a  plurality  of  different  mental  \^ 
qualities. 

This  kind  of  difficulty  does  not  arise  on  any  theory 
that  admits  of  a  plurality  of  existent  mental  events  in 
the  same  total  mental  state.  Take,  e.g.,  the  second 
form  of  the  Pure  Ego  theory.  Here  the  statement 
that  "X  cognises  A  and  B,  desires  A,  and  does  not 
desire  B  "  may  be  reduced  to  *'  X  owns  the  events  e_^  and 
ejs ;  ^,  and  e,,  both  stand  in  the  same  relation  of  reference 
to  the  objects  A  and  B  respectively  ;  and  ^,  has,  whilst 


574       UNITY   OF  MIND   AND   OF  NATURE 

e  lacks,  the  quality  ^."  There  is  no  inconsistency  in 
this.  Omitting  for  the  present  the  third  form  of  the 
Non-Central  Theory,  I  think  we  may  say  that  it  is 
logically  possible  for  all  the  other  theories  to  account 
for  the  facts  without  assuming  a  plurality  of  different 
determinable  relations  of  reference.  Can  we  go  any 
further  than  this? 

When  I  try  to  analyse  introspectively  such  referential 
situations  as  seeing  a  chair,  wanting  my  tea,  loving  my 
friend,  and  hating  nationalism,  and  when  I  compare 
them  with  each  other  and  with  other  situations  which 
I  can  introspect,  I  seem  to  be  pretty  certain  of  the 
following  propositions,  (i)  That  in  all  these  situations 
an  object  is  being  cognised  by  me.  (2)  That  in  each 
of  them  something  is  present  beside  this  object,  and 
that  there  is  an  asymmetrical  relation  between  this 
something  and  the  object.  (3)  That  there  is  a  qualita- 
tive difference  between  the  four  situations  which  does 
not  consist  in  the  fact  that  the  objects  differ  in  quality. 
For  I  find  that  desiring  my  tea  and  merely  thinking  of 
my  tea  differ  in  this  way,  although  their  objects  are  the 
same.  And  I  find  that  thinking  of  my  tea  and  thinking 
of  my  chair  do  not  differ  in  this  way,  although  their 
objects  differ  very  greatly  in  quality.  But  I  do  not 
find  that  introspection  tells  me  with  any  certainty 
whether  this  qualitative  difference  is  (a)  simply  a  differ- 
ence in  the  quality  of  the  non-objective  constituents  of 
the  situations,  or  {b)  simply  a  difference  in  the  asym- 
metrical relations  between  the  two  constituents,  or  (c)  a 
difference  in  both.  Still  (4)  there  are  some  facts  which 
make  the  alternative  {a)  somewhat  plausible.  There 
are  states  which  I  can  introspect,  which  are  called 
"emotional  moods",  such  as  crossness,  restlessness, 
etc.  These  seem  to  be  non-referential  mental  states. 
And  it  seems  that  certain  emotional  moods  bear  a 
strong  qualitative  resemblance  to  certain  emotions, 
which  are  referential  mental  situations.  E.g.^  there 
is    an  obvious  connexion  between   the  emotional  mood 


THE   UNITY   OF  THE   MIND  575 

of  crossness  and  the  emotion  of  anger  at  s(jme  definite 
object.  And  it  would  be  plausible  to  express  this  rela- 
tion by  saying  that  anger  is  a  state  of  crossness  "  directed 
at "  a  certain  cognised  object,  that  desire  is  a  state  of 
restlessness  ''directed  at"  a  certain  cognised  object, 
and  so  on.  It  seems  plain  to  me  that  the  relation  of 
''cognising"  is  not  the  same  as  the  relation  of  "being 
directed  at";  but  it  does  seem  plausible  to  suggest 
that  no  relations  are  involved  in  the  various  kinds 
of  referential  situation  except  the  two  relations  of 
"cognising"  and  "being  directed  at"  an  object;  and 
that  the  characteristic  differences  between  various  kinds 
of  referential  situation  are  wholly  due  to  differences  of 
quality  in  that  which  cognises  and  is  directed  at  the 
object. 

I  do  not  suppose  for  a  moment  that  this  argument  is 
conclusive.  In  the  first  place,  emotional  moods  may 
really  be  emotions  with  highly  indeterminate  objects. 
E.g.,  being  cross  may  consist  of  being  angry  with 
"things-in-general".  'In  that  case  the  suggestion  that 
the  various  kinds  of  emotion  are  just  so  many  different 
kinds  of  emotional  mood  "directed  at"  objects  breaks 
down.  Secondly,  it  is  perfectly  possible  that  the  rela- 
tion which  the  emotional  mood  of  crossness  bears  to  an 
object  in  the  emotion  of  anger  is  a  different  relation 
from  that  which  the  emotional  mood  of  restlessness 
bears  to  an  object  in  the  state  known  as  "desire".  I 
do  not  think  that  introspection  is  capable  of  refuting 
either  of  these  possibilities.  So  the  upshot  of  the  matter 
is  this.  Except  on  the  first  form  of  the  Pure  Ego  theory 
there  is  no  logical  impossibility  in  the  attempt  to  do 
without  a  plurality  of  different  determinable  relations 
of  reference  to  objects.  Introspection,  so  far  as  I  can 
see,  has  also  nothing  conclusive  to  say  against  the 
suggestion.  And  there  are  certain  facts  open  to  intro- 
spection which  slightly  favour  it.  The  only  other 
point  in  its  support  is  the  methodological  principle 
that  entities  are  not  to  be  needlessly  multiplied.     But 


(o^^J^.^ 


576       UNITY   OF  MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

this  is  only  a  guide  for  our  procedure  ;  it  is  not  a  law 
which  is  binding  upon  Nature. 

Refej'ential  and  N on- Referential  Situations  and  the  Third 
Form  of  Non-Central  Theory.  I  must  now  remind  the 
reader  of  a  distinction  which  we  drew  in  Chapter  VI, 
which  I  have  so  far  kept  in  the  background  in  this 
chapter  in  order  to  avoid  excessive  complication.  It 
will  be  remembered  that  we  distinguished  situations 
into  {a)  those  which  do  and  those  which  do  not  refer  to 
epistemological  objects,  and  {b)  those  which  do  and 
those  which_do^not  contain  objective  constituents.  These 
two  distinctions  we  expressed  respectively  by  the  phrases 
"  referential  "  and  "  non-referential  "  and  by  the  phrases 
**  objective"  and  "non-objective".  It  will  be  remem- 
bered that  we  said  that  there  are  probably  mental  events 
which  are  non-objective  and  non-referential,  e.g.,  vague 
feelings  ;  that  probably  all  mental  situations  which  are 
referential  are  also  objective  ;  and  that  possibly  there 
are  mental  situations,  such  as  pure  sensations  of  sounds, 
coloured  patches,  etc.,  which  are  objective  but  non- 
referential.  Finally,  we  must  remember  that,  in  per- 
ception, memory,  etc.,  the  objective  constituent  of  the 
situation  cannot  be  identified  with  the  epistemological 
object  of  the  situation  or  with  the  ontological  object 
(if  there  happens  to  be  one)  which  corresponds  to  this 
epistemological  object.  The  position  is  that  to  "refer 
to  such  and  such  an  epistemological  object"  is  3.  property 
of  any  situation  which  has  such  and  such  a  structure 
and  such  and  such  an  objective  constituent.  There  may 
be  no  ontological  object  corresponding  to  this  :  and, 
even  if  there  should  be  one,  it  cannot  as  a  rule  be  identi- 
fied with  the  objective  constituent  of  the  situation.  And 
we  have  seen  grave  reason  to  doubt  whether,  even  in 
the  case  of  veridical  perceptual  and  memory-situations, 
the  objective  constituent  is  ever  literally  a  part  of  the 
ontological  object  which  corresponds  to  the  situation. 

Bearing   these  facts    in    mind,  we    can    see   that   the 
various  alternative  theories  have  been  stated  too  simply 


THE  UNITY   OF  THE   MIND  577 

as  regards  referential  situations.  Such  an  event  as  **  I 
am  seeing  a  chair"  cannot  really  consist  in  the  fact  that 
a  certain  Pure  Ego  is  now  standing  in  a  certain  relation 
to  a  certain  chair  ;  at  best  it  can  only  consist  in  the  fact 
that  a  certain  Pure  Ego  is  standing  in  a  certain  relation 
to  a  certain  sensum.  If  the  perceptual  situation  be 
veridical  this  sensum  also  stands  in  a  certain  peculiar 
relation  to  a  certain  chair  ;  but  at  that  stage  we  have 
left  the  psychological  analysis  of  minds  and  mental 
events,  and  are  entering  the  region  of  epistemology  and 
ontology.  Similar  remarks  apply,  mutatis  mutandis^  to 
referential  situations  on  all  the  alternative  theories. 
Suppose  we  hold  that  a  referential  situation  consists  in 
the  fact  that  a  certain  events  and  not  a  certain  Pure  Ego, 
stands  in  a  certain  relation  to  a  certain  object.  We 
must  still  recognise  that  the  object  to  which  the  event 
stands  in  this  relation  is  not  the  chair,  or  table,  or  what 
not,  which  corresponds  to  the  epistemological  object  of 
the  situation  ;  even  if  there  be  such  a  thing,  as  there 
often  is  not.  The  object  to  which  the  event  stands 
in  this  relation  is  a  certain  sensum  or  image  ;  and  the 
further  question  whether  there  is  an  ontological  object 
corresponding  to  the  epistemological  object  of  the  situa- 
tion, and,  if  so,  how  the  sensum  or  image  is  related  to 
this  ontological  object,  does  not  arise  in  the  psychological 
analysis  of  the  situation. 

Since  these  remarks  apply  equally  to  all  theories 
about  the  structure  of  the  mind  they  do  not  directly 
help  us  to  decide  between  the  various  alternatives.  But 
they  enable  us  to  say  something  further  about  the  third  ) 
form  of  the  Non-Central  theory,  i.e.^  the  view  that  a 
mind  is  composed  of  its  objects,  suitably  interrelated, 
and  that  it  has  no  other  constituents.  The  natural  inter- 
pretation of  this  theory  would  be  that  the  mind  consists 
of  the  chairs,  tables,  people,  pink  rats,  unicorns,  etc., 
which  it  is  said  to  be  "aware  of;  i.e.^  that  its  con- 
stituents are  the  objects  which  it  refers  to,  and  that  it 
has  no  other  constituents.     Now  this  is  certainly  false. 

2  o 


\ 


578       UNITY   OF  MIND  AND   OF  NATURE 

When  a  drunkard  perceives  a  pink  rat  it  is  impossible 
that  one  of  the  constituents  of  his  mind  can  be  the  pink 
rat  that  he  is  perceiving  ;  for  there  are  no  pink  rats  to 
be  constituents  of  anything.  And  in  general  we  may- 
say  that,  even  when  there  is  an  ontological  object 
corresponding  to  a  referential  state  of  mind,  this  object 
is  not  a  constituent  of  the  state  and,  a  foj-tiori,  is  not  a 
constituent  of  the  mind.  Thus  the  theory  that  the 
constituents  of  the  mind  are  what  would  commonly  be 
called  its  "objects"  has  no  plausibility  whatever  if  by 
*' rts  objects"  you  mean  the  things  to  which  it  refers  in 
its  referential  states  of  mind.  The  theory  is  worth  dis- 
cussing only  on  the  assumption  that  by  *'its  objects" 
we  mean  the  objective  constituents  of  its  objective  states 
jDf  mind.  The  difference  between  the  two  alternatives 
is  roughly  this.  On  the  first  interpretation  the  theory 
asserts  that  the  constituents  of  the  mind  are  the  things 
that  it  perceives,  the  events  that  it  remembers,  and  so  on. 
This,  as  I  have  said,  may  be  rejected  at  once  as  absurd. 
On  the  second  interpretation  the  theory  asserts  that  the 
constituents  of  the  mind  are  the  appearances  to  it  of  the 
things  that  it  perceives,  of  the  events  that  it  remembers, 
and  so  on.  This,  so  far  as  I  can  understand,  is  the 
form  of  the  theory  which  Mr  Russell  defends  in  his 
Analysis  of  Mind ;  and  it  is  certainly  the  only  form  of  it 
which  is  capable  of  defence.  Now,  such  a  theory  makes 
certain  assertions  and  certain  denials,  (i)  It  asserts 
that  sensa  and  images  are  constituents  of  minds.  (2)  It 
denies  that  they  have  any  other  constituents.  (3)  Mr 
Russell  further  asserts  that  sensa  are  constituents  of 
physical  objects,  though  he  is  not  bold  enough  to  assert 
that  images  are  constituents  of  past  events.  We  may 
leave  this  third  assertion,  which  is  not  strictly  relevant 
to  our  present  discussion,  and  confine  ourselves  to 
(i)  and  (2). 

The  assertion  (i)  would  not  commonly  be  regarded  as 
particularly  startling.  Probably  most  philosophers  in 
the  past  have  regarded  sensa  and  images  as  constituents 


THE   UNITY   OF   THE   MIND  579 

of  minds.  The  difference  between  them  and  Mr  Russell 
here  is  simply  that  he  regards  sensa  as  being  ccjn- 
stituents  of  physical  objects  as  well  as  being  constituents 
of  minds,  whilst  they  would  almost  certainly  have  held 
that  what  is  a  constituent  of  a  mind  cannot  also  be  a 
constituent  of  a  physical  object.  It  is  in  the  denial 
(2)  that  Mr  Russell's  theory  would  commonly  be  held  to 
be  paradoxical.  It  would  commonly  be  held  that  any 
mind  contains  other  constituents  beside  sensa  and  images. 
In  so  far  as  Mr  Russell  denies  that  a  mind  contains  a 
perfectly  unique  constituent — a  Pure  Ego — in  addition 
to  sensa  and  images  a  great  many  psychologists 
and  philosophers  would  agree  with  him.  But  most 
people  would  say  that,  if  the  mind  had  no  constitu- 
ents except  sensa  and  images,  it  would  be  impossible 
to  account  for  the  distinction  between  non-objective 
mental  events,  such  as  feeling  cross  or  tired,  and  objec- 
tive mental  events,  such  as  sensing  a  flash  or  seeing  a 
gun.  I  am  not  at  all  clear  what  answer  Mr  Russell 
would  make  to  this  objection.  At  certain  points  in  his 
Analysis  of  Mind  he  makes  great  play  with  "feelings" 
of  various  specific  kinds,  e.g.^  "belief-feelings",  "feel- 
ings of  familiarity",  "feeling  of  reality",  and  so  on. 
But  he  does  not  seem  to  make  it  very  clear  what  he 
supposes  these  "feelings"  to  be.  Are  they  supposed 
to  be  sensa  or  images  of  a  peculiar  kind?  If  so,  the 
words  "  sensum  "  and  "  image  "  are  being  used  with  so 
wide  a  meaning  that  the  statement  that  the  only  con- 
stituents of  the  mind  are  sensa  and  images  is  hardly 
worth  making.  For  it  amounts  to  little  more  than  a 
denial  of  the  Pure  Ego  theory  ;  and  Mr  Russell  pre- 
sumably intended  to  do  more  than  flog  what  most  of 
his  contemporaries  rightly  or  wrongly  regard  as  a  dead 
horse.  I  notice  that  whenever  Mr  Russell  is  dealino- 
with  a  plainly  objective  mental  state,  such  as  a  memory 
or  a  belief,  he  introduces  a  "feeling"  in  addition  to  a 
group  of  ordinary  sensa  and  images.  Moreover,  it  is 
of  no  use  to  say  simply  that  a  belief,  e.g.,  is  such  and 


58o       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

such  a  group  of  sensa  or  images  "accompanied  by" 
such  and  such  a  feeling.  This  phrase  "accompanied 
by "  must  stand  for  some  more  specific  relation  than 
mere  coexistence  within  the  same  total  mental  state. 
For,  at  a  given  moment  I  may  believe  one  proposition 
and  merely  suppose  another  proposition.  If  a  belief- 
feeling  "accompanies"  the  first  set  of  images  and 
sensa,  it  must  equally  "accompany"  the  second  set, 
unless  "to  accompany"  means  something  more  specific 
than  to  "coexist  with  in  the  same  total  mental  state". 
And  it  is  evident  that  Mr  Russell  must  mean  something 
more  specific  by  "accompaniment"  ;  for  the  belief  is  to 
be  distinguished  from  the  contemporary  supposition  by 
the  fact  that  a  certain  feeling  "accompanies"  the  one 
set  of  images  and  does  not  "  accompany  "  the  other  and 
coexistent  set  of  images. 

Now,  I  understand  Mr  Russell's  programme  in  the 
Analysis  of  Llind  to  be  roughly  the  following.  I  think 
he^ants  to  show  {a)  that  the  ultimate  constituents  of  a 
mind  have  no  qualities  which  are  not  also  possessed  by 
constituents  of  things  which  are  not  minds.  In  support 
of  this  he  asserts  that  the  only  constituents  of  a  mind 
are  sensa  (which  he  believes  to  be  also  constituents  of 
physical  objects)  and  images  (which,  though  not  con- 
stituents of  physical  objects,  are  supposed  to  differ  from 
sensa  only  in  their  causal  characteristics  and  their 
spatio-temporal  relations  and  not  in  their  qualities). 
{b)  That  the  characteristically  "mental"  property  of 
reference  to  such  and  such  an  epistemological  object  is 
completely  analysable  into  causal  and  other  relations, 
which  occur  separately  or  in  other  combinations  among 
physical  things,  {c)  That  the  characteristic  qualities  of 
certain  groups  of  sensa  and  images  within  a  mind,  and 
the  characteristic  relations  of  such  groups  to  each  other, 
are  completely  analysable  into  qualities  and  relations 
which  occur  separately  or  in  other  combinations  among 
groups  of  sensa  which  are  not  contained  in  minds. 
And    {d)   that,   consequently,   even    if  introspection    be 


THE  UNITY   OF  THE   MIND  581 

possible,  it  has  nothing  special  to  teach  us.  I  hope 
that  this  is  a  fair  account  of  what  Mr  Russell  is  trying 
to  do. 

Now  it  seems  to  me  that,  so  long  as  such  a  cloud  of 
darkness  hangs  over  the  nature  of  "  feelings  "  and  the 
nature  of  the  relation  of  ''accompaniment",  it  is  doubt- 
ful whether  Mr  Russell  has  even  begun  to  fulfil  this 
programme.  If  a  "belief-feeling",  e.g.,  be  neither  a 
sensum  nor  an  image,  then  presumably  some  of  the 
ultimate  constituents  of  the  mind  do  possess  qualities 
which  are  not  possessed  by  the  constituents  of  physical 
objects,  and  section  [a)  of  the  programme  is  abandoned. 
Nor  is  the  case  very  much  better  if  we  suppose  that  a 
feeling  is  either  (a)  a  single  sensum  or  image,  or  {^) 
a  certain  group  of  sensa  or  images,  which  possesses  a 
peculiar  "feeling-quality"  in  addition  to  the  ordinary 
qualities  of  sensa  and  images.  It  is  extremely  hard  to 
believe  that  a  sensum  could  possess  the  quality  of 
"familiarity",  e.g.,  when  it  was  only  a  constituent  of  a 
physical  object  and  not  a  constituent  of  a  mind.  And, 
if  "familiarity"  or  "conviction"  be  qualities  of  certain 
groups  of  sensa  or  images,  it  is  extremely  hard  to 
believe  that  they  can  be  anything  but  emergent  qualities 
of  such  groups  ;  i.e.,  qualities  which  are  possessed  by 
groups  having  such  and  such  a  structure  and  such  and 
such  constituents  but  are  not  deducible  from  a  knowledge 
of  the  structure  of  the  group  and  the  qualities  of  its 
constituents.  On  either  alternative  there  will  be  specific 
and  unanalysable  mental  qualities.  And  this  directly 
wrecks  section  {c)  of  Mr  Russell's  programme,  and 
indirectly  wrecks  section  {d).  For,  if  "familiarity", 
e.g.,  be  a  quality  which  attaches  to  a  sensum  only 
when  it  becomes  a  constituent  of  a  mind,  or  if  it  be  an 
emergent  quality  of  groups  of  sensa  or  images  which 
occur  only  within  minds,  introspection  will  have  some- 
thing to  teach  us  which  we  can  learn  from  no  other 
source.  Introspection  will  not  indeed  disclose  any 
ultimate  existent  constituent  which  we  might  not  have 


582       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

met  with  in  ordinary  perception  ;  but  it  will  disclose 
certain  qualities  which  we  could  never  have  met  with 
otherwise,  and  it  will  disclose  the  fact  that  these  qualities 
belong  to  groups  which  have  such  and  such  a  structure 
and  such  and  such  constituents. 

Finally,  I  think  it  is  extremely  likely  that  there  are 
characteristically   "mental"   forms  of  structure,   which 
cannot   be  analysed    in    terms  of  relations  which  hold 
between  sensa  that  are  not  constituents  of  minds.     At 
any  rate  I  cannot  see  that  Mr  Russell  has  produced  any 
ground  for  doubting  this  proposition.     Let  us  take  an 
example.     We  are  told    that  the  difference  between  a 
mere   "sensation"  and  a  "  perception  "  consists  in  the 
fact  that  in   one  case  a  sensum  occurs  without,  and  in 
the  other  case  with,  certain  "accompaniments"  in  the 
way  of  other  sensa,  bodily  feelings,  images,  etc.     And 
we  are  told  that  these  "  accompaniments  "  are  explicable 
by   mnemic  causation,  which  is  not  peculiar  to  minds 
but  occurs  in  purely  physiological  and  biological  phe- 
nomena also.     To  this  I  answer  that  the  blessed  word 
"accompaniment"  tells  us  nothing.     The  essential  point 
is,  that  in  the  perceptual  situation  these  various  factors 
do    not   merely   coexist,  but  are   related  in   a  perfectly 
unique  way  to  form  that  perfectly  unique  kind  of  whole 
which  we  call  a  "perception  of  so-and-so".    The  unique- 
ness of  this  kind  of  whole  is  in  no  way  impugned  by  the 
statement  that  it  is  due  to  mnemic  causation  and  that 
mnemic  causation  occurs  also  outside  the  mind.      It  is 
no   doubt   true   that   the  other  factors  in  a  perceptual 
situation  would  not  be  added  to  the  sensum  which  is  its 
objective  constituent  unless  the  mind  had  the  powers  of 
retentiveness,   reproduction,  and  so  on.     And   it  is  no 
doubt  true  that  we  find  powers  of  retentiveness,  repro- 
duction, and  so  on,  in  living  bodies  as  well  as  in  minds. 
This   does    not   alter   the   fact   that,   in    the    perceptual 
situation,  these  various  factors  which  are  due  to  mnemic 
causation  are  fused  with  each  other  and  with  the  ob- 
jective constituent  in  a  perfectly  unique  and  character- 


THE   UNITY   OF   THE   MIND  583 

istic  way,  to  which  (so  far  as  we  know)  there  is  no 
analogy  outside  the  mind.  Thus  it  seems  to  me  that 
Mr  Russell  has  failed  to  show  that  there  are  not  specific 
and  unanalysable  "mental"  relations  between  different 
constituents  of  the  same  mind. 

I  may  now  sum  up  my  remarks  on  the  third  form  of 
the  Noh-Uentral  theory  as  follows,  (i)  It  is,  of  course, 
open  to  any  general  objections  which  there  may  be  to 
Non-Central  theories  as  such.  (2)  If  it  be  taken  to 
assert  that  the  constituents  of  the  mind  are  the  objects 
that  it  perceives,  the  events  that  it  remembers,  and  so 
on,  it  is  certainly  false.  For  in  many  cases  there  is  no 
ontological  object  which  corresponds  to  a  perceptual 
situation,  and  no  event  which  corresponds  to  a  memory- 
situation.  And,  even  when  such  situations  are  veridical 
and  have  ontological  objects  which  correspond  to  their 
epistemological  objects,  these  ontological  objects  are 
not  constituents  of  the  situations,  and,  a  fortiori^  are  not 
constituents  of  the  mind  which  owns  the  situations.  (3) 
The  theory  must,  therefore,  be  accepted,  if  at  all,  in 
something  like  Mr  Russell's  form  of  it,  which  makes 
the  constituents  of  the  mind  to  be  the  sensa  and  images 
which  are  appearances  to  it  of  the  objects  that  it  per- 
ceives and  the  events  which  it  remembers.  But,  even 
in  this  form,  it  requires  "feelings"  in  addition  to 
ordinary  sensa  and  images  ;  and  specific  relatioifs^be- 
tween  certain  feelings  an^  certain  groups  of  sensa  and 
images.  And  at  that  stage  it  differs  very  little  from  the 
other  forms  of  Non-Central  theory.  The  difference  con- 
sists mainly  in  the  fact  that  Mr  Russell  regards  sensa  as 
constituents  of  physical  objects,  whilst  most  philosophers 
who  would  admit  that  sensa  are  constituents  of  the  mind 
would  deny  that  they  are  also  constituents  of  physical 
objects.  But  this  is  a  difference  about  the  nature  of 
physical  objects,  and  not  a  difference  about  the  contents 
and  structure  of  the  mind,  (4)  I  have  also  tried,  inci- 
dentally, to  show  that  Mr  Russell  has  accomplished  little, 
if  anything,  of  his  attempt  to  get  rid  of  the  uniqueness 


4J' 


584       UNITY   OF  MIND  AND   OF   NATURE 

of  mind.  The  fact  is,  that  the  more  one  insists  on  the 
community  of  sttiff  between  mind  and  its  objects,  the 
more  one  will  have  to  insist  on  the  radical  differences  of 
structure  between  the  two,  and  on  the  emergence  of  new 
qualities  in  those  structures  which  are  peculiar  to  mind 
as  contrasted  with  matter. 

Central  and  N on- Central  TJieories.  We  can  now  con- 
sider the  great  division  of  theories  about  the  unity  of 
the  mind  into  Central  and  Non-Central  theories.  I  will 
begin  with  two  preliminary  remarks  :  neither  of  them 
is  conclusive,  and  they  bear  in  opposite  directions, 
(i)  The  prima  facie  presumption  in  favour  of  Central 
theories  and  against  Non-Central  theories  is  the  common 
usage  of  language,  which  strongly  suggests  the  exist- 
ence of  a  Centre.  We  say:  "/am  thinking  of  this 
book,  and  wanting  my  tea,  and  feeling  tired,  and  re- 
membering the  tie  that  my  friend  wore  yesterday." 
This  certainly  suggests  that  "  I  "  is  the  proper  name  of 
a  certain  existent  which  stands  in  a  common  asymmetric 
relation  to  all  those  contemporary  mental  events.  We 
say  further:  "/,  who  am  now  doing  and  feeling  these 
things,  was  yesterday  doing,  thinking,  wanting,  and 
feeling  such  and  such  other  things."  And  this  certainly 
suggests  that  "I"  is  the  proper  name  of  something 
which  existed  and  was  a  centre  yesterday  as  well  as 
to-day.  Now,  as  I  have  said  before,  it  is  unwise  either 
to  follow  blindly  the  guidance  of  language  or  to  ignore 
it  altogether.  Supporters  of  Non-Central  theories  can 
reply  that  they  too  admit  that  there  is  something  which 
can  be  called  ''I".  It  is  not  indeed  a  constituent  of 
my  empirical  self;  it  is  the  whole  complex  of  inter- 
related mental  events  which  are  said  to  be  ''mine". 
To  this  I  think  that  the  following  answer  must  be  made. 
No  doubt  the  ordinary  man  would  find  it  difficult  or 
impossible  to  tell  us  what  he  is  referring  to  when  he 
uses  the  word  "I"  ;  but  it  is  extremely  doubtful  whether 
he  means  to  refer  simply  to  the  fact  that  the  mental 
events  which  he  calls  "his"  are  interrelated  in  certain 


THE   UNITY   OF   THE   MIND  585 

characteristic  ways.  I  doubt  whether  anyone  except  a 
philosopher  engaged  in  philosophising  believes  for  a 
moment  that  the  relation  of  "himself"  to  "his  tooth- 
ache "  is  the  same  relation  as  that  of  the  British  Army 
to  Private  John  Smith.  Now,  I  am  not  suggesting  that 
we  should  accept  a  theory  because  it  seems  to  be  implied 
by  the  statements  of  plain  men.  God  forbid  !  But  I 
do  suggest  that  any  satisfactory  theory  must  account 
for  the  fact  that  plain  men  and  philosophers  in  ordinary 
life  express  themselves  in  language  which  strongly 
favours  one  alternative.  Now,  as  I  have  said  in  Chapter 
IV,  I  can  quite  understand  that  a  unity  of  centre  might 
appear  to  be  a  pure  unity  of  system  if  the  Centre  were 
such  that  it  could  not  be  directly  inspected.  But  I 
cannot  imagine  any  reason  why  what  is  in  fact  a  pure 
unity  of  system  should  appear  to  be  a  unity  of  centre. 
That  the  mind  does  appear  to  be  of  the  latter  kind  ■^. 
seems  pretty  certain.  And  I  think  that  this  fact  must  n\ 
be  regarded,  pro  tanto,  as  favouring  Central  Theories. 

(2)  The  main  preliminary  argument  against  Central 
theories  and  in  favour  of  Non-Central  theories  is  the 
alleged  fact  that  no  Existent  Centre  can  be  directly 
observed  ;  that  the  Centre  is  in  fact  postulated  ad  hoc  to 
explain  the  observed  unity,  and,  if  the  unity  can  be 
explained  without  it,  so  much  the  better.  This  kind  of 
argument  has  been  used  at  two  different  stages  in  the 
history  of  the  subject,  {a)  It  has  been  used  in  favour  of 
Non-Central  theories  as  against  Central  theories,  {b)  In 
these  latter  days  it  has  been  carried  further,  and  used  in 
favour  of  the  third  form  of  Non-Central  theory.  For,  it 
has  been  said  that  we  cannot  directly  observe  relations 
between  the  mind  and  its  objects.  When  we  try  to 
//z/rc'spect,  it  is  alleged,  we  find  ourselves  merely  in- 
specting  what  I  have  called  the  "  objective  constituents  " 
of  mental  situations,  i.e.,  sensa  and  images.  Hence  it 
is  more  prudent  to  take  the  view  that  the  mind  consists 
of  nothing  but  such  objective  constituents  interrelated  in 
certain  characteristic  ways.      I   have  dealt  incidentally 


586       UNITY   OF  MIND  AND   OF  NATURE 

with    both   these   arguments   in    the   chapter. on   Intro- 
spection.    The  fact  that  the  Centre   never  becomes  an 
object  of  introspection  is  no  objection  to  the  existence 
of  a  Centre  unless  a  Centre  be  the  sort  of  thing  which 
we  might    reasonably    hope    to    be    able    to    introspect 
if  it  existed.     Now,  if  there  were  a  Centre  which  is  a 
non-objective   constituent   of    all  our   mental    states,    it 
seems  unreasonable  to  expect  that  it  could  also  be  an 
objective  constituent  of  some  of  our  states.     To  put  the 
matter    generally:  —  The    relation    of    acquaintance    is 
essentially  asymmetrical,  and.  this  implies  that  the  term 
which  has   acquaintance   cannot   be   identical   with   the 
term  with  which  it  is  acquainted.     Thus,  if  there  were  a 
Centre,, it^could. not  be  acquainted  withT  itself  as  a  whole. 
Now,  if  the  Centre  were  a  Pure  Ego,  it  would  have  no 
parts  ;  hence,  if  it  could  not  be  acquainted  with  itself  as 
a  whole,  it  could  not  be  acquainted  with  itself  at  all. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  might  be  acquainted  with  facts  of 
which   it  is  a  constituent ;  and,  by  comparing  and  re- 
flecting on   these  facts,  it  might  come  to  a  discursive 
knowledge   of   its   own    existence   and    nature.      If  the 
\     Centre  were  not  a  Pure  Ego,  but  were  a  Central  Event 
of  long  duration  and  very  uniform  quality,  there  is  no 
reason   why  situations  should    not  arise,   in   which  the 
non-objective  constituent   is  a   later  slice   of  this  long 
event  and  the  objective  constituent  is  an  earlier  slice  of 
I    this   same  long  event.      But   then   it   is  by  no  means 
certain  that  such  situations  do  not  arise.     If  the  centre 
be  a  continuous  strand  of  very  uniform  bodily  feeling  it 
is  by  no  means  certain  that  I  cannot  now  remember  the 
particular  slice  of  this  strand  which  formed  the  Centre  of 
my  total  mental  state  some  time  ago.     Itse&ms-to  me 
therefore   that   there    is    very  little  in   this    preliminary 
"^  objection  to  Central  theories. 

'As  regards  the  further  extension  of  this  argument  in 
favour  of  the  third  form  of  the  Non-Central  theory  I  can 
only  repeat  what  I  said  at  the  end  of  Chapter  VI.  The 
argument    seems   to   assume   that,    if   objective    mental 


\ 


THE   UNITY   OF   THE   MIND 


587 


situations  consisted  of  an  objective  and  a  non-objective 
constituent  related  in  a  certain  way,  tiic  relaticjn  (which 
is  an  universal)  must  be  known  in  the  same  way  as  the 
objective  constituent  (which  is  a  particular).  And  this 
demand  is  absurd.  It  also  seems  to  forget  that  some  of 
the  constituents  of  a  total  situation  may  be  sensed  or  felt 
though  they  cannot  be  selected  or  inspected.  In  that 
case  they  may  be  there  in  addition  to  the  objective  con- 
stituent, and  we  may  know  that  they  are  there  (as  it 
seems  to  me  that  we  do),  although  we  do  not  at  the 
time  inspect  anything  but  the  objective  constituent. 

So  much  for  the  two  preliminary  arguments.  Neither 
is  very  strong  and  they  cut  in  opposite  directions  ;  so 
that  at  worst  we  may  regard  them  as  neutralising  each 
other.  But,  on  the  whole,  the  argument  for  Central 
theories  from  the  facts  of  language  seems  to  me  to  be 
slightly  stronger  than  the  argument  against  Central 
theories  from  alleged  negative  facts  about  introspection. 
For  the  first  argument  does  remind  us  of  a  certain  very 
persistent  "  appearance "  which  any  satisfactory  theory 
about  the  unity  of  the  mind  will  have  to  "  save  "  ;  and  it 
is  certainly  easier  to  "save"  it  on  the  Central  than  on 
the  Non-Central  type  of  theory.  And  the  second  1 
argument  does  seem  to  consist  in  doubting  the  reality  1 
of  something  merely  because  it  is  not  known  in  a 
particular  way  in  which,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  it 
could  not  be  known  even  if  it  zvere  real. 

I   pass    now  to  what   seems   to   me  to  be  the  really 
cruciaP  question     between     Central    and    Non-Central 
theories   of    the   unity   of    the    mind.       This    question 
concerns  the  nature  of  mental  events,  and  may  be  put 
as  follows  :   "  Can  we  take  the  notion  of  '  mental  event '  / 
as  fundamental,  and  define  the  notion  of  '  mental  sub-  ! 
stance '  in  terms  of  mental  events  and  certain  relations 
between  them?     Or  must  we  conceive  a  '  mental  event  'j 
as  consisting  in  the  fact  that  a  certain    Centre    has  atl 
a  certain  time  such  and  such  a  determinate  quality,  or 
such  and  such  a  determinate  relation  to  other  things?" 


yU^ 


588       UNITY   OF  MIND  AND   OF   NATURE 

In  order  to  deal  with  this  question  it  will  be  wise  to 
consider  the  partly  (but  only  partly)  analogous  question 
of  material  events  and  material  substances.  It  seems 
easier  to  take  the  notion  of  "  material  event  "  as  funda- 
mental and  the  notion  of  "material  substance"  as  de- 
rivative than  to  do  likewise  with  the  notions  of  "  mental 
event"  and  ''mental  substance".  But  I  believe  that 
this  is  due  to  the  fact  that  most  of  usjta^tly  assume 
something  like  the  Newtonian  theory  of  Absolute  Space. 
I  shall  (i)  show  why  this  is  so  ;  (ii)  show  that,  on  this 
view,  we  have  not  really  got  rid  of  a  plurality  of  existent 
substances  as  a  fundamental  notion  ;  and  (iii)  show  that, 
on  this  view  of  material  events,  there  is  no  very  close 
analogy  between  them  and  mental  events  ;  so  that,  even 
if  we  could  take  the  notion  of  "material  event"  as 
fundamental  and  the  notion  of  "material  substance" 
as  derivative  by  this  means,  we  should  have  no  reason 
to  suppose  that  we  could  do  likewise  with  the  notions 
of  "  mental  event"  and  "  mental  substance." 

(i)  If  we  think  of  Space  as  a  kind  of  pre-existing 
substance,  we  can  of  course  think  of  a  material  event 
as  the  fact  that  a  certain  region  of  Space  is  character- 
ised throughout  at  a  certain  moment  by  a  certain 
determinate  form  of  a  certain  determinable  quality  {e.g., 
by  a  certain  shade  of  a  certain  colour).  Now  the  same 
region  of  Space  can  be  characterised  throughout  at  the 
same  moment  by  determinate  forms  of  a  number  of 
different  determinable  qualities  {e.g.,  by  a  certain  shade 
of  a  certain  colour,  by  a  certain  degree  of  temperature, 
and  so  on).  Thus  we  can  suggest  with  some  plausibility 
that  the  unity  of  a  total  state  of  a  certain  material  sub- 
stance at  a  certain  moment  consists  in  the  fact  that  at 
this  moment  a  certain  region  of  Space  is  characterised 
throughout  by  determinate  forms  of  certain  determin- 
able qualities.  Again,  at  a  given  moment,  a  number 
of  separated  regions  of  Space  may  each  be  characterised 
throughout  by  the  same  (or  different)  determinate  forms 
of  the  same  determinable  qualities  ;  and  the  intervening 


THE   UNITY   OF   THE   MIND  589 

regions,  which  surround  and  separate  these,  may  not 
be  characterised  by  these  determinable  quahties  at  all. 
We  can  thus  suggest  with  some  plausibility  that  a 
plurality  of  contemporary  total  states  of  different  co- 
existing material  substances  consists  in  the  facts  just 
mentioned.  Finally,  a  certain  region  of  Space  may 
continue  for  some  time  to  be  characterised  throughout 
by  the  same  (or  by  continuously  varying)  determinate 
forms  of  the  same  determinables  ;  and  may  continue  to 
be  surrounded  by  regions  which  are  not  characterised 
by  these  determinables.  It  is  plausible  to  suggest  that 
this  is  what  we  mean  by  saying  that  a  certain  material 
substance  has  persisted  and  has  rested  for  so  long  in 
a  certain  place.  Or,  alternatively,  the  same  (or  con- 
tinuously varying)  forms  of  the  same  determinable 
qualities  may  successively  characterise  a  set  of  regions 
which  together  make  up  a  continuous  region  of  Space, 
which  is  surrounded  by  regions  that  are  not  character- 
ised throughout  this  period  by  these  determinables.  It 
is  plausible  to  suggest  that  this  is  what  we  mean  by 
saying  that  a  certain  material  substance  has  persisted 
and  has  moved  about  during  this  period. 

No  doubt  every  one  would  admit  that  something  more 
than  this  is  needed  to  complete  the  notion  of  persistent 
material  substances.  But  it  might  be  suggested  that 
the  '*  something  more  "  is  merely  a  causal  unity  between 
those  successive  events  which  are  counted  as  successive 
total  states  of  the  same  material  substance.  This  causal 
unity  would  consist  in  the  fact  that  the  variations  in  the 
determinate  forms  of  these  determinable  qualities  which 
characterise  successive  total  states  of  a  single  material 
substance  follow  certain  laws. 

(ii)  There  are  considerable  difficulties  in  this  view,  as 
I  pointed  out  in  Chapter  I,  when  we  remember  that 
some  material  substances  are  homogeneous  fluids  and 
not  solid  particles  with  definite  boundaries  separated  by 
regions  of  empty  Space.  But  the  point  on  which  I  want 
to  insist  here  is  a  different  one.      Even  if  it  be  granted 


590       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

that  by  this  means  we  make  the  notion  of  particular 
material  substances  (like  "this  penny"  or  "that  elec- 
tron ")  derivative  as  compared  with  the  notion  of 
material  events,  we  must  admit  in  turn  that  the  notion 
^  of  a  material  event  is  not  simple  and  that  it  involves 
';  the  notion  of  something  which  can  only  be  called  a 
"substance."  For  what  is  a  material  event,  on  this 
theory,  but  the /act  that  such  and  such  a  region  of  Space 
is  characterised  throughout  by  such  and  such  deter- 
minate forms  of  such  and  such  determinable  qualities? 
And  what  is  a  region  of  Space,  on  this  theory,  but  a 
timeless  particular  in  which  sometimes  one  quality,  some- 
times severalqualities,and  sometimes  perhapsnoqualities, 
inhere?  And  what  is  the  plurality  of  different  regions  of 
Space,  in  terms  of  which  the  plurality  of  coexisting 
material  substances  is  defined  on  this  theory,  but  a 
plurality  of  timeless  particulars  which  differ  so/o  numero  ? 
(iii)  It  is  plain  that  no  form  of  Non-Central  theory 
about  mental  events  and  mental  substances  could  be  at 
all  closely  analogous  to  the  above  theory  about  material 
events  and  substances.  For  the  theory  just  described 
is  essentially  a  peculiar  form  of  Central  Theory.  At 
any  given  moment  each  total  state  of  each  material 
substance  has  its  own  Centre,  viz.,  a  certain  region 
of  Space  which  the  substance  is  said  to  "occupy "at 
that  moment.  But  {a)  successive  total  states  of  the 
same  material  substance  may  have  different  Centres. 
For,  when  a  material  substance  is  said  to  "  move  about  ", 
the  Centre  of  each  of  its  successive  total  states  is  the 
region  which  it  is  said  to  "occupy"  at  each  successive 
moment.  And  {p)  the  same  Centre  may  at  different 
times  unify  total  states  of  different  material  substances. 
This  happens  if  one  material  substance  "moves  out 
of  a  certain  place "  and  another  material  substance 
"moves  into  this  place  ".  For  the  region  in  question 
would  be  first  the  Centre  of  an  earlier  total  state  of 
the  first  material  substance,  and  then  the  Centre  of  a 
later  total  state  of  the  second  material  substance. 


THE   UNITY   OF   THE   MIND  591 

An  analogous  theory  about  mental  events  and  minds 
would  be  a  peculiar  case  of  the  first  form  of  Pure  Ego 
theory.  Every  total  mental  state  would  be  the  fact  that 
a  certain  Pure  Ego  has  such  and  such  determinate  forms 
of  such  and  such  determinable  qualities  at  a  certain 
moment.  If  there  be  a  plurality  of  coexisting  total 
mental  states,  each  of  them  will  belong  to  a  different  Pure 
Ego.  But  {a)  successive  total  states  of  the  same  mind 
might  belong  to  different  Pure  Egos  ;  and  {b)  the  same 
Pure  Ego  might  be  the  Centre  of  successive  total  states 
of  different  minds.  (These  cases  could  arise  only  if 
there  were  changes  in  the  mental  realm  analogous  to 
motion  in  the  material  realm  ;  and  there  might  of  course 
be  no  reason  to  believe  this,  or  positive  reason  to 
disbelieve  it.) 

I  will  now  sum  up  the  argument  as  far  as  it  has  gone. 
{a)  The  view  that  material  events  are  logically  prior  to 
material  substances  is  rendered  plausible  by  the  tacit 
assumption  of  something  like  Absolute  Space, in  Newton's 
sense,  {b)  But  the  analogous  view  about  mental  events 
and  substances  would  be  a  form  of  Pure  Ego  theory, 
and  not  a  form  of  Non-Central  theory.  Hence  {c)  how- 
ever successful  this  type  of  theory  may  be  for  material 
events  and  substances,  its  success  cannot  be  used  to 
support  by  analogy  a  Non-Central  theory  of  the  unity 
of  the  mind.  On  the  contrary,  the  analogy  would 
support  the  first  form  of  Pure  Ego  theory,  though  it 
would  suggest  certain  possibilities  which  have  not 
generally  been  contemplated  by  upholders  of  the  Pure 
Ego  theory. 

The  next  stage  in  my  argument  is  this.  I  shall 
consider  (i)  whether  the  theory  that  material  events  are 
logically  prior  to  material  substances  can  be  stated 
and  rendered  plausible  without  the  assumption  of  some- 
thing like  Absolute  Space  in  Newton's  sense.  And 
then  (ii)  I  shall  consider  whether,  even  if  this  be  so, 
mental  events  and  their  qualities  and  relations  bear 
enough  analogy  to  material  events  and  their  qualities 


592       UNITY   OF  MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

and  relations  to   make   a  similar  theory  about  mental 
events  and  substances  plausible. 

(i)  We  must  of  course  begin  by  admitting  the  facts 
which  have  already  been  described  on  the  assumption 
of  Absolute  Space  in  Newton's  sense  ;  and  we  must 
then  try  to  reinterpret  them  without  this  assumption. 
Probably  there  are  several  alternative  ways  of  doing 
this  ;  but  the  following  seems  to  me  to  be  the  easiest  to 
state  briefly,  and  to  be  theoretically  possible. 

[a]  I  begin  by  distinguishing  two  fundamentally 
different,  though  intimately  connected,  kinds  of  deter- 
minable quality,  viz..  Positional  and  Non-Positional 
Qualities.  There  are  two  generally  recognised  deter- 
minable Positional  Qualities,  viz..  Temporal  and  Spatial 
Position.  A  Non-Positional  determinable  quality  can 
only  be  defined  negatively  as  any  determinable  quality, 
such  as  colour  or  temperature,  which  is  not  positional 
like  "being  in  such  and  such  a  place"  or  ''being  at 
such  and  such  a  date  ".  {b)  A  completely  determinate 
form  of  any  Non-Positional  Quality  can  characterise  a 
number  of  numerically  diverse  particular  existents. 
Any  particular  existent  which  is  characterised  by  some 
determinate  form  of  some  Non-Positional  Quality  will 
be  called  "an  instance  of  that  quality".  It  will  also 
be  called  an  instance  of  that  determinate  form  of  this 
quality  which  characterises  it.  {c)  Every  particular 
existent  is  characterised  by  some  determinate  form  of 
the  determinable  quality  of  Temporal  Position,  [d)  All 
the  instances  of  certain  Non-Positional  Qualities  must 
also  be  characterised  by  some  determinate  form  of  the 
determinable  quality  of  Spatial  Position.  Such  Non- 
Positional  Qualities  will  be  called  "  Material  Qualities  ". 
There  are  other  Non-Positional  Qualities  whose  in- 
stances are  not  necessarily  characterised  by  any  deter- 
minate form  of  the  quality  of  Spatial  Position.  These 
will  be  called  "Immaterial  Qualities",  {e)  The  same 
particular  existent  cannot  be  characterised  by  different 
determinate  forms  of  the  quality  of  Temporal  Position  ; 


THE   UNITY   OF   THE   MIND  593 

I.e.,  every  particular  existent  is  instantaneous.  (/)  If 
a  particular  existent  is  characterised  by  the  quality  of 
Spatial  Position  it  cannot  be  characterised  by  two 
different  determinate  forms  of  this  quality  ;  i.e.^  all 
particular  existents  which  are  instances  of  Material 
Qualities  are  punctiform  as  well  as  instantaneous.  We 
may  therefore  call  them  "Point-Instants",  {g)  There  can 
be  a  plurality  of  particular  existents  having  the  same 
determinate  quality  of  Temporal  Position  and  the  same 
determinate  form  of  the  same  Non-Positional  Quality. 
If  they  be  instances  of  a  Material  Quality  they  will  of 
course  have  to  have  different  deterniinate  forms  of  the 
quality  of  Spatial  Position.  (//)  There  can  be  a  plur- 
ality of  particular  existents  having  the  same  determinate 
form  of  the  quality  of  Spatial  Position  and  the  same 
determinate  form  of  some  Non-Positional  Quality. 
They  will  of  course  have  to  have  different  determinate 
forms  of  the  quality  of  Temporal  Position.  (/)  The 
same  particular  existent  may  be  characterised  by  deter- 
minate forms  of  a  number  of  different  Non-Positional 
Qualities.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  nothing  that  we  have 
said  precludes  the  possibility  that  the  same  particular 
existent  may  be  an  instance  both  of  Material  and  of 
Immaterial  Qualities.  It  is  true  that,  if  it  be  charac- 
terised by  a  Material  Quality  it  must  be  also  character- 
ised by  the  quality  of  Spatial  Position  ;  and  that,  if  it 
be  characterised  by  an  Immaterial  Quality,  it  need  not 
be  characterised  by  the  quality  of  Spatial  Position. 
But  we  have  not  said  that  what  is  characterised  by  an 
Immaterial  Quality  cannot  be  characterised  by  the  quality 
of  Spatial  Position.  (7)  Every  particular  existent  is  an 
instance  of  some  Non-Positional  Quality  in  addition  to 
being  characterised  by  some  determinate  form  of  the 
determinable  quality  of  Temporal  Position. 

So  far  we  have  considered  only  the  instantaneous  and 
the  punctiform.  We  take  the  fundamental  constituents 
of  the  material  world  to  be  instantaneous  punctiform 
particulars,  each  of  which  has  a  determinate  quality  of 

2  P 


594       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

Temporal  Position,  a  determinate  quality  of  Spatial 
Position,  and  determinate  forms  of  one  or  more  Non- 
Positional  Qualities.  Paulo  inajora  canamus.  (a)  The 
various  determinate  qualities  under  the  determinable  of 
Temporal  Position  form  a  continuous  one-dimensional 
order,  as,  e.g.y  do  the  determinate  qualities  under  the 
determinable  of  Temperature.  (It  used  to  be  assumed 
that  all  point-instants  fall  into  a  single  temporal  series. 
The  facts  on  which  the  Special  Theory  of  Relativity 
is  based  suggest  that  this  is  probably  not  true.  They 
suggest  that,  while  every  point-event  falls  into  so7ne 
series  of  this  kind,  they  do  not  all  fall  into  the  same 
series.  But  we  need  not  bother  about  these  complica- 
tions for  the  present  purpose.)  {b)  The  various  deter- 
minate qualities  under  the  determinable  of  Spatial 
Position  form  a  continuous  three-dimensional  order,  as, 
e.g.,  do  the  determinate  qualities  under  the  determinable 
of  Colour.  Point-instants  are  thus  ordered  in  various 
ways,  and  stand  in  various  temporal,  spatial  and  spatio- 
temporal  relations  to  each  other  in  virtue  of  the  deter- 
minate qualities  of  Temporal  and  Spatial  Position  which 
characterise  each  point-event,  {c)  Now  there  are  certain 
determinable  qualities  which  cannot  characterise  an  in- 
dividual point-instant,  but  which  can  and  do  characterise 
certain  complex  wholes  composed  of  point-instants  re- 
lated to  each  other  in  certain  ways  in  virtue  of  their 
various  Positional  Qualities.  I  will  call  these  "  Exten- 
sional  Qualities ".  [d)  The  only  Extensional  Quality 
connected  with  Temporal  Position  and  the  relations 
which  it  generates  is  Duration.  If  a  set  of  point-instants 
vary  continuously  in  their  qualities  of  Temporal  Position, 
the  whole  composed  of  them  has  a  certain  determinate 
duration,  which  depends  upon  the  determinate  relation 
between  the  determinate  qualities  of  Temporal  Position 
which  characterise  the  first  and  the  last  point-instant  of 
the  set.  [e)  The  Extensional  Qualities  connected  with 
the  quality  of  Spatial  Position  are  more  complicated, 
because    the   determinates   under    the   determinable   of 


THE   UNITY   OF   THE   MIND  595 

Spatial  Position  form  a  three-dimensional  (jrder.  We 
have  here  the  two  interconnected  determinable  Exten- 
sional  Qualities  of  Shape  and  Size.  There  is  no  need 
to  go  into  elaborate  details.  If  a  whole  composed  of 
point-instants  is  to  have  shape  and  size  the  first  con- 
dition is  that  all  the  point-instants  shall  have  the  same 
determinate  Temporal  Position.  The  other  condition  is 
that  the  determinate  qualities  of  Spatial  Position  pos- 
sessed by  the  various  point-instants  of  the  set  shall  vary 
continuously.  The  determinate  shape  and  size  possessed 
by  this  complex  whole  will  then  depend  on  the  deter- 
minate relations  between  the  determinate  qualities  of 
Spatial  Position  which  characterise  the  various  point- 
instants  which  form  the  boundary  of  the  set.  We 
might  sum  the  matter  up  by  saying  that  Extensional 
Qualities  are  emergent  from  the  relations  between 
different  determinate  forms  of  a  determinable  Positional 
Quality.  Positional  and  Extensional  Qualities  might 
be  classed  together  under  the  general  name  of "  Structural 
Qualities  "  ;  and  they  might  then  be  distinguished  from 
each  other  by  the  names  of  "Primitive"  and  "Emergent" 
Structural  Qualities  respectively. 

(/)  We  must  now  draw  some  rather  similar  distinc- 
tions among  Non-structural  Qualities.  We  may  divide 
them  first  into  those  which  can  characterise  individual 
point-instants  and  those  which  cannot.  The  former 
may  be  called  *' Primitive"  and  the  latter  "Non- 
primitive".  The  Primitive  Non-structural  Qualities  can 
be  subdivided  into  (i)  those  which  can  characterise  only 
point-instants ;  and  (2)  those  which  can  characterise 
both  point-instants  and  extensional  wholes  composed 
of  suitably  interrelated  point-instants.  These  might  be 
distinguished  as  "Non-extensible"  and  "Extensible" 
Non-structural  Qualities  respectively.  The  Non-primi- 
tive Non-structural  Qualities  might  be  subdivided  into 
(i)  those  which  can  characterise  any  extensional  whole, 
no  matter  what  may  be  its  determinate  duration,  shape, 
or    size ;    and    (2)  those   which   can   characterise    only 


596       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

extensional  wholes  which  have  a  certain  minimum  size, 
or  duration,  or  a  certain  determinate  shape,  etc.  The 
former  might  be  called  "  Homogeneous  "  and  the  latter 
"Non-Homogeneous"  Non-structural  Qualities. 

Granted  all  this,  we  can  see  how  the  notion  of  a 
material  substance  can  be  defined.  We  will  begin  with 
the  simplest  possible  case,  and  gradually  complicate  it. 
(a)  Imagine  a  set  of  point- instants  which  fulfil  the 
following  conditions:  (i)  They  all  have  the  same 
determinate  quality  of  Spatial  Position.  (2)  Their 
determinate  qualities  of  Temporal  Position  form  a  con- 
tinuous series,  so  that  the  whole  composed  of  these 
point -instants  has  a  certain  determinate  duration. 
(3)  Each  of  them  is  an  instance  of  several  determin- 
able Material  Qualities,  the  same  in  each  case.  And 
each  of  them  is  an  instance  of  the  same  determinate  form 
of  any  given  one  of  these  Material  Qualities.  A  whole 
of  this  kind  is  a  material  particle  which  endures  for 
]  a  period,  stays  in  one  place  for  that  period,  remains 
unaltered  in  quality  throughout  the  period,  and  at 
each  moment  has  a  plurality  of  different  states.  (<^)  We 
can  now  keep  all  the  conditions  as  before,  except  that 
the  various  point-instants  are  to  have  different  deter- 
minate values  of  some  of  the  determinable  Material 
Qualities  which  characterise  them  all.  We  now  have 
a  material  particle  which  endures,  stays  in  one  place, 
and  has  a  plurality  of  states  at  each  instant,  but 
changes  in  some  respects  during  the  period,  (c)  Now 
alter  condition  (i).  Let  the  various  point-instants  of 
the  series  no  longer  all  have  the  same  determinate 
quality  of  Spatial  Position.  Instead  let  the  deter- 
minate qualities  of  Spatial  Position  of  the  successive 
point-instants  vary  continuously  from  one  to  another. 
The  whole  composed  of  these  point-instants  is  now  a 
material  particle  which  endures,  has  at  each  instant 
a  plurality  of  different  states,  changes  qualitatively 
as  time  goes  on,  and  also  moves  about,  {d)  We  can 
now   further   complicate    matters   by   considering   sue- 


THE   UNITY   OF  THE  MIND  597 

cessive  sets  of  contemporary  point-instants.  vSuppose 
that  each  set  consists  of  point-events  which  are  exactly 
alike  in  all  respects  except  that  they  have  different 
determinate  qualities  of  Spatial  Position.  And  suppose 
that  these  determinate  qualities  of  Spatial  Position  vary 
continuously  from  one  point-instant  of  the  set  to  another. 
Then  the  set  as  a  whole  will  have  some  determinate  size 
and  some  determinate  shape  ;  it  will  form  a  line,  or  an 
area,  or  a  volume.  Suppose  now  that  every  point- 
instant  in  this  set  is  a  member  of  a  series  of  successive 
point-instants  of  the  kind  which  we  have  called  a 
"material  particle"  and  have  described  in  (a)  to  (c). 
Suppose  further  that  every  set  of  contemporary  point- 
instants,  such  that  one  point-instant  of  the  set  belongs 
to  each  of  these  material  particles,  is  a  whole  of  the 
kind  which  has  Shape  and  Size.  Then  we  have  got  a 
persistent  dody  of  finite  spatial  dimensions.  And  we 
could  quite  easily  define  the  conditions  under  which  we 
should  say  (i)  that  this  body  rests  and  keeps  its  shape 
and  size  constant,  or  (2)  that  it  rests  and  alters  in  shape 
and  size,  or  (3)  that  it  moves  and  keeps  its  shape  and 
size  constant,  or  (4)  that  it  moves  and  alters  its  shape  and 
size.  Lastly  (e),  having  got  our  finite  persistent  bodies, 
we  can  introduce  Non-primitive  Non-structural  Qualities  ; 
some  of  them  might  be  Homogeneous,  as  perhaps  mass 
is  ;  others  might  be  spatially  Heterogeneous,  i.e.  requir- 
ing a  whole  of  a  certain  minimum  size  to  inhere  in,  as 
is  probably  the  case  with  electric  charge  ;  and  others 
might  be  temporally  Heterogeneous,  i.e.,  requiring  a 
whole  of  a  certain  mimimum  duration  to  inhere  in,  as 
is  probably  the  case  with  magnetic  properties. 

I  have  now  tried  to  show  in  detail  how  it  would  be 
possible  to  take  the  notion  of  a  material  evei 
mental,  and  to  construct  the  notion  of  nic 
stances  out  of  it,  witliout  assuming  Absolute  Space  in 
Newton's  sense.  It  is  to  be  noted  that,  in  another  sense, 
we  have  assumed  both  Absolute  Space  and  Absolute 
Time.      We   have  assumed  that  there   are   spatial  and 


it  would  be  1 
mt  as  funda-J, 
naterial  sub-n^ 


598       UNITY   OF   MIND  AND   OF  NATURE 

temporal  positional  qualities^  and  that  spatial  and 
temporal  relations  depend  on  them.  Thus  our  theory 
of  Space  and  Time  is  absolute,  in  the  sense  that  it  is 
not  purely  relational.  But  it  is  not  absolute,  in  the 
sense  that  it  makes  the  points  of  Space  and  the  moments 
of  Time  to  be  existent  substantives  of  a  peculiar  kind, 
as  Newton's  theory  does.  The  only  existent  substan- 
tives which  we  assume  are  instantaneous  punctiform 
particulars,  which  have  determinate  qualities  of  Spatial 
and  Temporal  Position  and  determinate  forms  of 
determinable  Non-positional  Qualities.  Certain  sets 
of  these  form  wholes  which  have  the  qualities  of  shape, 
size,  and  duration,  in  virtue  of  the  relations  between 
their  Positional  Qualities.  Adopting  a  distinction  of 
Mr  Johnson's,  we  may  say  that  we  have  assumed  an 
"adjectival"  and  not  a  "substantival"  form  of  the 
Absolute  Theory. 

(ii)  I  can  now  pass  to  the  second  part  of  my  argu- 
ment. Granted  that  it  is  possible  to  take  the  notion  of  a 
material  event  as  fundamental  and  to  derive  the  notion 
of  a  material  substance,  without  smuggling  back  the 
notion  of  substance  under  the  guise  of  Absolute  Space 
in  Newton's  sense,  is  it  possible  to  do  likewise  with 
mental  events  and  mental  substances? 

First  of  all,  what  are  the  relevant  differences  between 
the  facts  in  the  two  cases?  The  fundamental  difference 
seems  to  be  this.  Mental  qualities  are  what  I  have 
called  "Immaterial";  i.e.,  although  any  existent  par- 
ticular which  is  an  instance  of  a  mental  quality  must 
have  some  determinate  quality  of  Temporal  Position,  it 
need  not  (and,  so  far  as  we  know,  does  not)  have  any 
form  of  the  quality  of  Spatial  Position.  It  follows  that, 
although  a  series  of  instantaneous  mental  events  may 
form  a  whole  which  has  the  Extensional  Quality  of 
duration,  a  set  of  contemporary  mental  events  will  not 
form  a  whole  which  has  the  Extensional  Qualities  of  size 
and  shape.  Now,  if  two  contemporary  material  events 
have   the   same   determinate    form    of    the    same    Non- 


THE   UNITY   OF  THE   MIND  599 

positional  Quality,  we  know  that  they  must  have 
different  determinate  forms  of  the  quality  of  vSpatial 
Position.  It  is  logically  possible  for  there  to  be  two 
contemporary  mental  events  which  have  the  same 
determinate  form  of  the  same  Mental  Quality  {e,g.^  it 
is  logically  possible  that  there  might  be  two  precisely 
similar  contemporary  thoughts  of  the  same  object,  even 
if  there  is  reason  to  think  that  this  is  causally  improbable 
or  impossible).  Now  there  seem  to  be  only  two  alterna- 
tive ways  of  explaining  this  fact.  The  two  precisely 
similar  thoughts  must  either  belong  to  different  Pure 
Egos,  or  there  must  be  some  non-spatio  -  temporal 
Positional  Quality  of  which  they  possess  different 
determinate  forms. 

I  said  that  there  are  only  two  commonly  recognised deter- 
minable  Positional  Qualities,  viz.,  Temporal  and  Spatial 
Position.  We  now  see  that,  if  we  want  to  make  up  a 
theory  of  mental  events  and  substances  analogous  to  that 
which  we  have  suggested  for  material  events  and  sub- 
stances, we  must  assume  a  third  determinable  Positional 
Quality  which  we  might  call  the  quality  of  "Mental 
Position  ".  We  must  suppose  that  every  mental  event 
is  an  instantaneous  particular  which  has  a  certain  deter- 
minate Temporal  Position  and  a  certain  determinate 
Mental  Position.  Two  mental  events  may  agree  in  every 
other  respect,  provided  that  they  differ  in  Temporal 
Position  ;  and  two  mental  events  may  agree  in  every 
other  respect,  provided  they  differ  in  Mental  Position  ; 
but  they  must  have  different  determinate  forms  of  one  or 
other  of  these  Positional  Qualities.  With  this  assump- 
tion it  would,  I  think,  be  possibljL-to-take  the  notion  of 
"  a  mind  "  as  definable.  A  total  state  of  mind  would  be 
an  instantaneous  particular  existent,  which  [a)  has  a 
determinate  quality  of  Temporal  Position,  {b)  has  a 
determinate  quality  of  Mental  Position,  and  {c)  is  an 
instance  of  several  different  Mental  Qualities.  Suppose 
now  that  there  were  a  set  of  instantaneous  events,  having 
the    following   characteristics,     {a)   They    all    have   the 


6oo       UNITY   OF  MIND   AND   OF  NATURE 

same  determinate  quality  of  Mental  Position,  {b)  They 
all  differ  in  their  Temporal  Position,  and  their  determinate 
qualities  of  Temporal  Position  form  a  continuous  series, 
so  that  they  form  a  whole  which  has  a  certain  deter- 
minate duration,  {c)  They  all  have  the  same  determin- 
able Mental  Qualities,  {d)  They  all  have  the  same 
determinate  form  of  some  of  these  Mental  Qualities. 
{e)  Some  of  them  have  different  forms  of  some  of  these 
Mental  Qualities,  but  these  different  determinate  forms  of 
the  same  determinable  Mental  Quality  vary  continuously 
from  one  instantaneous  event  of  the  set  to  another.  Then 
'  the  whole  thus  formed  might  fairly  be  called  a  '*  mind  ", 
which  endures,  has  a  number  of  different  mental  "  states  " 
at  each  moment,  changes  its  states  as  time  goes  on,  and 
so  on. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  kind  of  enduring  whole 
which  I  have  just  been  describing  as  a  "  mind  "  is  analo- 
gous, not  to  a  body,  but  to  a  material  particle.  And,  for 
reasons  which  will  appear  in  a  moment,  it  will  be  better 
not  to  call  this  very  simple  kind  of  mental  whole  a 
"mind".  We  will  call  it  a  'J^mental  particle"  instead. 
I  will  now  explain  why  I  make  this  su"gg^stion.  We 
know  that  the  determinate  qualities  under  the  deter- 
minable of  Spatial  Position  form  a  continuous  manifold 
of  three  dimensions,  like  the  determinate  qualities  under 
the  determinable  of  Colour.  Now  I  suggest  that  the 
determinate  qualities  under  the  determinable  of  Mental 
Position  may  form  a  manifold  of  more  than  one  dimen- 
sion ;  and  that,  if  this  be  so,  we  can  form  a  conception 
of  the  phenomena  of  the  Unconscious,  of  Multiple 
Personality,  of  Telepathy,  and  so  on,  in  terms  of  the 
present  theory,  A  body  consists  of  a  number  of  material 
particles,  such  that  any  set  of  contemporary  point-instants 
chosen  from  each  of  these  material  particles  forms  a 
whole  which  has  a  certain  size  and  shape.  And  the 
condition  for  this  is  that  the  determinate  qualities  of 
Spatial  Position  of  these  point-instants  vary  continuously 
from  one  point-instant  of  the  set  to  another.     Now  sub- 


THE   UNITY   OF  THE   MIND  6oi 

stitute  mental  particles,  as  defined  above,  for  material 
particles ;  and  substitute  Mental  Position  for  vSpatial 
Position.  Then,  if  the  determinate  qualities  under  the 
determinable  of  Mental  Position  form  a  manifold  of 
more  than  one  dimension,  a  mind  may  be  analogous  to 
a  body  and  may  have  something  analogous  to  size  and 
shape.  Two  entirely  different  minds  might  then  be 
analogous  to  two  entirely  separate  bodies.  Now  two 
bodies  may  come  into  contact  at  certain  times,  and  they 
may  touch  each  other  at  a  point,  or  along  a  line,  or  over 
an  area.  Similarly,  if  the  determinates  under  the  deter- 
minable of  Mental  Position  form  a  manifold  of  more 
than  one  dimension  it  will  be  possible  for  there  to  be 
'' mental  contact"  of  various  kinds  between  minds,  if 
a  mind  be  what  I  am  now  suggesting  that  it  is.  This 
might  be  what  happens  when  telepathic  communication 
takes  place  between  two  minds. 

I  will  now  consider  how  the  facts  of  Multiple  Person- 
ality might  be  explained  in  terms  of  such  a  theory  of 
mind  as  I  am  now  suggesting.  It  is  not  unreasonable 
to  suppose  that  all  the  mental  events  connected  with  a 
certain  living  brain  and  nervous  system  have  determinate 
qualities  of  Mental  Position  which  fall  within  certain 
limits  or  are  interrelated  in  some  special  way.  Let  us 
suppose,  e.g.,  that  the  relative  mental  positions  of  all 
the  mental  events  connected  with  a  brain  and  nervous 
system  at  a  given  moment  are  such  that  these  mental 
events  may  be  represented  by  points  on  the  surface  of  a 
certain  sphere.  It  would  be  reasonable  to  suppose  that 
the  determinate  mental  positions  of  all  the  mental  events 
that  belong  to  a  single  personality  are  interrelated  in 
some  still  more  special  way.  Let  us  suppose,  e.g.,  that 
the  relative  mental  positions  of  all  the  mental  events 
that  belong  to  a  single  personality  at  a  given  moment 
are  such  that  these  mental  events  may  be  represented 
by  a  conthmous  series  of  points  forming  a  great  circle  on 
the  surface  of  the  sphere.  Now  it  might  happen  that 
the    mental    events   connected  with  a  single  brain  and 


6o2       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF  NATURE 


nervous  system  at  a  certain  moment  can  be  divided  into 
three  sub-groups,  as  follows.  (A)  Those  whose  repre- 
sentative points  form  a  continuous  great  circle  A  on  the 
sphere.  (B)  Those  whose  representative  points  form 
another  continuous  great  circle  B  on  the  sphere.  (C) 
Those  whose  representative  points  are  isolated  dots  on 
the  sphere.     The  diagram  below  will  make  this  plain. 

Then  the  great  circles  A  and 
B  will  represent  two  contem- 
porary total  states  of  two  person- 
alities A  and  B  connected  with 
the  same  body.  The  points  x 
and  x  in  which  these  two  great 
circles  intersect  will  represent 
mental  events  which  are  common 
to  the  two  personalities  at  this 
moment.  And  the  isolated  dots,  such  as  /,  will 
represent  mental  events  which  are  connected  at  the 
moment  with  this  brain  and  nervous  system  but  do 
not  belong  to  any  personality.  It  would  of  course  be 
possible  to  represent  any  number  of  different  person- 
alities connected  with  the  same  body  by  introducing 
other  great  circles  continuously  filled  with  mental  events. 
On  this  representation  the  relations  between  the  person- 
alities are  symmetrical  ;  but  it  would  be  easy  to  devise 
a  representation  of  the  case  in  which  A  shares  all  B's 
mental  events  and  has  other  mental  events  which  are 
not  shared  by  B.  E.g.^  B  might  be  represented  by  the 
same  great  circle  as  before  ;  A  might  now  be  represented 
by  the  upper  hemisphere  which  stands  upon  this, 
supposed  to  be  continuously  occupied  by  mental  events  ; 
whilst  events  that  belong  to  neither  might  be  represented 
by  isolated  dots  on  the  lower  hemisphere. 

It  is  needless  to  go  into  further  detail.  The  essential 
point  to  notice  is  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  deal  with 
the  facts  of  abnormal  and  supernormal  psychology  if  we 
identified  a  mind  with  a  single  mental  particle,  whilst 
it  is  easy  to  deal  with  them  on  the  following  two  assump- 


THE   UNITY   OF   THE   MIND  603 

tions.  (a)  That  the  determinates  under  the  determinable 
of  Mental  Position  form  a  manifold  of  several  dimensions  ; 
and  (d)  that  a  mind  consists  of  a  number  of  mental 
particles,  such  that  the  mental  positions  of  contemporary 
mental  events  from  each  particle  vary  continuously  from 
one  mental  event  to  another,  so  that  a  mind  has  some- 
thing analogous  to  size  and  shape.^^ 

There  is  one  other  point  to  notice.  It  is  almost 
certain  that  the  Immaterial  Non-Positional  Qualities 
which  we  are  familiar  with  in  the  case  of  minds  are  non- 
homogeneous  in  respect  to  time.  By  this  I  mean  that 
they  cannot  characterise  single  instantaneous  mental 
events,  but  only  wholes  which  are  composed  of  certain 
continuous  series  of  mental  events  and  have  a  certain 
minimum  duration.  I  think  it  very  likely  too  that  the 
Mental  Qualities  with  which  we  are  familiar  can  char- 
acterise only  wholes  which  have  a  certain  minimum  of 
"Mental  Extension". 

Conclusion.  So  far  as  I  can  see  then,  there  isjio^a 
priori  objection  to  the  view  that  tlTe^notion  of  "mental 
event"  can  be  taken  as  fundamental  and  that  the  notioQ) 
of  "  mind  "  or  "  mental  substance  "  can  be  derived  from 
it.  It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  there  are  any  specfal 
empirical  facts  which  make  for  or  against  this  view. 
(i)  I  think  that  it  would  have  no  particular  advantage 
over  the  Pure  Ego  theory  if  we  were  confined  to  the 
psychology  of  normal  human  minds.  But  it  does 
seem  to  have  great  advantages  over  the  Pure  Ego 
theory  when  we  are  concerned  with  the  facts  of 
abnormal  and  supernormal  psychology  ;  just  as  the 
corresponding  theory  about  material  substances  has 
very  great  advantages  when  we  are  concerned  with 
abnormal  physical  facts,  such  as  mirror-images.  If 
then  it  be  equally  capable  of  explaining  the  facts  of 
normal  mental  life,  it  is  on  the  whole  to  be  slightly 
preferred  to  the  Pure  Ego  theory.  (2)  If  one  of  these 
facts  be  the  appearance  of  a  Centre  to  each  total  mental 


6o4       UNITY   OF  MIND  AND   OF  NATURE 

state,  the  present  theory  is  quite  capable  of  dealing 
with  it.  For  it  can  allow  of  a  Central  Event  in  every 
total  state  of  mind,  though  it  cannot  allow  that  the 
Centre  is  a  Pure  Ego.  (3)  I  think  that  one  empirical 
fact  on  which  supporters  of  the  Pure  Ego  theory  have 
relied  is  the  fact  of  Personal  Memory.  Now  this  fact 
has  two  sides  to  it,  viz.,  a  causal  and  an  epistemological 
side,  {a)  Causally  considered,  it  is  just  a  particular 
case  of  the  fact  that  an  event  which  has  happened  to 
a  substance  in  the  remote  past  may  partially  determine 
a  present  event  in  the  same  substance,  although  there 
has  been  nothing  to  show  for  it  in  the  interval.  This 
kind  of  causation  is  not  peculiar  to  minds.  And, 
granted  that  it  involves  the  persistence  of  something 
which  we  call  a  "trace",  I  have  tried  to  show  in 
Chapter  X  that  it  is  quite  easy  to  conceive  the  per- 
sistence of  a  trace  as  the  handing  on  of  a  certain 
structural  or  qualitative  modification  from  one  total 
event  to  the  next  total  event  in  a  successive  series 
of  specially  interconnected  total  events.  It  does 
not  involve  of  necessity  the  persistence  of  a  certain 
substantial  constituent.  Hence  the  Pure  Ego  is  not 
required  to  account  for  memory  on  its  causal  side,  (d) 
Epistemologically  the  peculiarity  of  memory  is  that 
the  memory-situation  claims  to  give  us  non-inferential 
and  intuitive  knowledge  of  an  event  in  our  own  past 
history.  Naturally,  memory  differs  from  all  non-mental 
mnemic  effects  in  the  fact  that  it  consists  of  a  cognitive 
event ;  for  the  power  to  cognise  is  characteristic  of 
minds.  But  this  peculiarity  by  itself  does  not  necessi- 
tate "the  assumption  of  a  Pure  Ego,  unless  cognition 
as  such  is  impossible  without  a  Pure  Ego  ;  and  I  do 
not  think  that  this  has  been  maintained.  Thus,  if 
Personal  Memory  requires  a  Pure  Ego,  it  must  do  so, 
not  because  it  is  causally  dependent  on  persistent  traces, 
and  not  because  it  is  a  form  of  cognition,  but  because 
it  claims  to  be  a  non-inferential  and  intuitive  cognition 
of  an  event  in  ones  own  past  history.      Now  there  are 


THE   UNITY   OF   THE   MIND  605 

two  distinct  points  to  be  considered  here,  viz.  (i)  that 
I  claim  to  \\2iV^ present  acquaintance  with  a  past  event  ; 
and  (ii)  that  I  claim  to  know  that  this  past  event  was  a 
state  oi  m.y  mind. 

(i)  I  do  not  see  that  the  hypothesis  of  a  Pure  Ego  is 
relevant  to  the  first  claim.  This  claim  is  that  there  are 
cognitive  situations  which,  as  wholes,  are  present,  and 
which  contain  as  their  objective  constituents  events 
which  are  past.  Supposing  this  to  be  possible  at  all,  I 
do  not  see  that  the  hypothesis  of  a  Pure  Ego  helps  us 
to  understand  the  possibility  of  such  situations.  If  a 
situation  can  be  present  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  one  of 
its  constituents  is  past,  it  does  not  seem  to  matter 
whether  the  other  constituent  be  a  timeless  Pure  Ego  or 
a  present  event.  In  fact  it  is  slightly  easier  to  under- 
stand the  position  on  the  latter  hypothesis  than  on  the 
former.  For,  on  the  latter  hypothesis,  the  situation 
which  is  present  contains  a  constituent  which  is  present ; 
whilst,  on  the  former,  it  contains  no  constituent  which 
is  present. 

(ii)  If  Personal  Memory  requires  a  Pure  Ego  this 
cannot  then  be  because  in  Personal  Memory  I  claim  to 
have  present  acquaintance  with  a  past  event ;  it  must  be 
because  I  claim  to  recognise  this  past  event  as  having 
been  a  state  of  myself.  Now,  on  the  Pure  Ego  theory 
to  recognise  that  a  past  event  was  a  state  of  myself  is  to 
recognise  that  its  subjective  constituent  is  numerically 
the  same  Pure  Ego  as  that  which  is  the  subjective 
constituent  of  my  present  act  of  remembering.  On  other 
theories  it  consists  in  recognising  that  the  past  event 
stands  in  certain  relations  of  qualitative  resemblance, 
causal  connexion,  and  identity  or  continuity  of  mental 
position,  with  my  present  act  of  remembering  and  with 
other  intermediate  states  which  I  can  remember.  I 
cannot  see  that  there  is  any  more  difficulty  in  supposing 
that  we  could  recognise  the  one  kind  of  fact  than  the 
other  ;  and  I  cannot  see  that  the  power  of  recognising 
the   second    kind    of    fact    requires   the    presence   of    a 


6o6       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

numerically  identical  substantial  constituent  common  to 
all  our  successive  total  states.  Hence  I  do  not  think 
that  the  facts  of  memory  require  the  hypothesis  of  a 
Pure  Ego. 

The  upsh^t^of_the_  matter  is  that  I  can  see  no  con- 
clusive reasoning  for  rejecting  or  accepting  the  Pure 
Ego  theory;  and  that  I  think  that  it  is  perfectly  possible 
to  state  a  theory  of  the  unity  of  the  mind  which  does 
not  involve  a  Pure  Ego.  And,  as  the  latter  theory 
seems  better  adapted  to  deal  with  the  facts  of  abnormal 
and  supernormal  psychology  than  the  former,  I  am 
inclined  slightly  to  prefer  it. 


CHAPTER   XIV 

Status  and  Prospects  of  Mind  in  Nature 

It  is  now  time  to  gather  together  the  various  threads  of 
the  earlier  chapters,  and  to  see  whether  we  can  come 
to  any  conclusions  about  the  probable  position  and 
probable  prospects  of  Mind  in  the  Universe.  It  appears 
to  me  thsLt  seventeen  different  types  of  rnetaphysical  theory 
are  possible  theoretically  on  the  relation  between  Mind-^ 
and  Matter.  I  will  first  proceed  to  justify  this  very 
startling  statement,  and  to  enumerate,  classify,  and 
name  the  theories.  Afterwards  I  shall  consider  the 
strong  and  weak  points  of  each,  and  see  whether  we 
can  come  to  any  tentative  decision  between  them. 

The  Seventeen  Types  of  Theory.  In  order  to  under- 
stand the  discussion  that  follows  the  reader  should 
refer  back  to  the  section  on  Pluralism  and  Monism  in 
Chapter  I,  where  I  defined  the  notion  of  "Differenti- 
ating Attributes"  and  distinguished  them  from  other 
kinds  of  attribute.  He  should  also  refer  to  Chapter  II, 
where  I  distinguished  between  those  non-differentiat- 
ing attributes  which  are  "  Emergent"  and  those  which 
are  not.  I  propose  here  to  call  non-differentiating  ? 
attributes  which  actually  apply  to  certain  things  in 
the  world,  but  are  not  emergent,  "Reducible  Attri- 
butes ".  It  will  be  necessary  to  introduce  one  further 
distinction  which  we  have  not  so  far  made  use  of.  Some 
attributes  have  application,  t.e.,  there  are  things  in  the 
Universe  which  have  these  attributes  in  some  deter- 
minate form.  Other  attributes  have  no  application. 
The  characteristic  of  being  a  fire-breathing  serpent,  or 


6o8       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

of  being  mistress  of  the  Duke  of  Bletchley,  applies  to 
nothing  in  the  world.  Now  it  is  held  by  many  people 
that  there  are  characteristics  which  do  not  in  fact  apply 
to  anything  but  which  seem  to  some  or  all  men  to  apply 
to  something.  E.g.,  if  Dr  M'Taggart  be  right,  it  can 
be  proved  that  the  characteristic  of  being  extended 
cannot  apply  to  anything.  But  it  certainly  seems 
to  all  men  as  if  there  were  extended  things.  I 
propose  to  call  a  characteristic  which  seems  to  apply 
to  certain  things,  but  does  not  in  fact  apply  to  any- 
thing, a  ''Delusive  Characteristic".  I  am  going  to 
use  words  in  such  a  way  that  Differentiating  Attri- 
butes, Emergent  Qualities,  and  Reducible  Qualities, 
are  to  be  understood  to  have  application  and  therefore 
not  to  be  delusive.  With  these  preliminary  explana- 
tions we  can  pass  to  our  classification  of  theoretically 
possible  types  of  metaphysical  theory  about  Mind  and 
matter. 

We  have  to  consider  the  two  attributes  of"  mentality  " 
and  "materiality".  We  at  once  find  three  great  divi- 
sions of  possible  theories.  (i)  Both  mentality  and 
materiality  might  be  differentiating  attributes.  (2)  One 
might  be  a  differentiating  attribute  and  the  other  not. 
Or  (3)  it  might  be  that  neither  is  a  differentiating 
attribute.  We  now  proceed  to  divide  up  these  three 
types  of  theory  in  turn. 

(i,  i)  Both  mentality  and  materiality  may  be  capable 
of  belonging  to  the  same  substance;  or  (i,  2)  it  may 
be  that  no  substance  can  have  both  these  differentiating 
attributes. 

(2,  i)  Mentality  might  be  a  differentiating  attribute 
and  materiality  not ;  or  (2,  2)  materiality  might  be  a 
differentiating  attribute  and  mentality  not.  We  now 
further  subdivide  these  alternatives  as  follows.  (2,  11) 
Materiality,  though  not  a  differentiating  attribute,  might 
still  have  application  ;  or  (2,  12)  materiality  might  be 
a  delusive  characteristic.  Similarly  (2,  21)  mentality, 
though  not  a  differentiating  attribute,  might  still  have 


STATUS   AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       609 

application  ;  or  (2,  22)  mentality  might  be  a  delusive 
characteristic.  The  alternatives  (2,  1.2)  and  (2,  22)  need 
no  further  subdivision  ;  but  the  alternatives  (2,  11)  and 
(2,  21)  both  need  further  subdivision.  Let  us  begin 
with  (2,  11).  It  might  be  that  materiality  is  (2,  in) 
an  emergent  characteristic;  or  (2,  112)  that  it  is  a 
reducible  characteristic.  Similarly,  it  might  be  (2,  211) 
that  mentality  is  emergent ;  or  (2,  212)  that  it  is  reducible. 
This  completes  the  subdivisions  of  alternative  (2). 

We  pass  now  to  the  subdivisions  of  alternative  (3). 
Granted  that  neither  mentality  nor  materiality  is  a  differ- 
entiating attribute,  there  are  three  alternatives  open. 
(3,  i)  Both  attributes  might  have  application  ;  or  (3,  2) 
one  might  have  application  and  the  other  be  delusive  ; 
or  (3,  3)  both  might  be  delusive.  The  last  alternative 
needs  no  further  subdivision  ;  the  first  two  require  to 
be  further  subdivided.  We  will  begin  with  (3,  i).  If 
mentality  and  materiality  both  have  application,  they 
may  (3,  11)  both  be  emergent;  or  (3,  12)  one  may  be 
emergent  and  the  other  reducible  ;  or  (3,  13)  they  may 
both  be  reducible.  The  first  and  third  of  these  alterna- 
tives need  no  further  subdivision,  but  the  second  divides 
into  two.  It  may  be  (3,  121)  that  mentality  is  emergent 
and  materiality  reducible  ;  or  (3,  122)  that  materiality  is 
emergent  and  mentality  reducible.  It  remains  to  sub- 
divide (3,  2).  If  one  of  the  attributes  has  application 
and  the  other  is  delusive,  it  may  be  (3,  21)  that  mentality 
has  application  and  materiality  is  delusive  ;  or  (3,  22) 
that  materiality  has  application  and  mentality  is  delusive. 
Each  of  these  latter  alternatives  subdivides  into  two 
viz.,  (3,  211)  that  mentality  is  emergent;  or  (3,  212)  that 
mentality  is  reducible;  or  (3,  221)  that  materiality  is 
emergent ;  or  (3,  222)  that  materiality  is  reducible. 

We  have  now  got  our  seventeen  alternative  theories, 
which  I  will  recapitulate  and  name. 

(i,  i)  Mentality  and  materiality  are  both  differenti- 
ating attributes  which  can  belong  to  the  same  substance. 
This  I  will  call  "  Dualism  of  Compatibles  ". 

2  Q 


6io       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND    OF   NATURE 

(i,  2)  Mentality  and  materiality  are  both  differenti- 
ating attributes,  but  they  cannot  both  belong  to  the 
same  substance.  This  I  will  call  "Dualism  of  In- 
compatibles  ". 

(2,  12)  Mentality  is  a  differentiating  attribute,  but 
materiality  is  delusive.  This  I  will  call  "Pure  Men- 
talisrri  ". 

(2, 22)  Materiality  is  a  differentiating  attribute,  but  men- 
tality is  delusive.     This  I  will  call  "Pure  Materialism". 

(2,  III)  Mentality  is  a  differentiating  attribute,  and 
materiality  is  an  emergent  characteristic.  This  I  will 
call  "Emergent  Mentalism  ". 

(2,  112)  Mentality  is  a  differentiating  attribute,  and 
materiality  is  a  reducible  characteristic.  This  I  will 
call  "  Reductive  Mentalism  ". 

(2,  211)  Materiality  is  a  differentiating  attribute,  and 
mentality  is  an  emergent  characteristic.  This  I  will 
call  "  Emergent  Materialism  ". 

(2,  212)  Materiality  is  a  differentiating  attribute,  and 
mentality  is  a  reducible  characteristic.  This  I  will  call 
"  Reductive  Materialism  ". 

(3,  11)  Neither  mentality  nor  materiality  is  a  differ- 
entiating attribute,  but  both  are  emergent  characteristics. 
This  I  will  call  "  Emergent  Neutralism  ". 

(3,  13)  Neither  mentality  nor  materiality  is  a  differen- 
tiating attribute,  but  both  are  reducible  characteristics. 
This  I  will  call  "  Reductive  Neutralism  ". 

(3,  121)  Neither  mentality  nor  materiality  is  a  differ- 
entiating attribute,  but  mentality  is  an  emergent  charac- 
teristic and  materiality  is  a  reducible  characteristic. 

(3,  122)  Neither  mentality  nor  materiality  is  a  differ- 
entiating attribute,  but  mentality  is  a  reducible  charac- 
teristic and  materiality  is  an  emergent  characteristic. 
I  class  these  two  alternatives  together  under  the  name 
of  "  Mixed  Neutralism  ". 

(3,  211)  Neither  mentality  nor  materiality  is  a  differ- 
entiating attribute,  but  mentality  is  emergent  and 
materiality  is  delusive. 


STATUS   AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       6ii 

(3,  212)  Neither  mentality  nor  materiality  is  a  differ- 
entiating attribute,  but  mentality  is  a  reducible  charac- 
teristic and  materiality  is  delusive.  I  class  these  two 
alternatives  together  under  the  name  of  "  Mentalistic 
Neutralism  ". 

(3,  221)  Neither  mentality  nor  materiality  is  a  differ- 
entiating attribute,  but  mentality  is  delusive  and 
materiality  is  an  emergent  characteristic. 

(3,  222)  Neither  mentality  nor  materiality  is  a  differ- 
entiating attribute,  but  mentality  is  delusive  and 
materiality  is  a  reducible  characteristic.  I  class  these 
two  alternatives  together  under  the  name  of  "  Material- 
istic Neutralism  ". 

(3^  3)  Neither  mentality  nor  materiality  is  a  differen- 
tiating attribute,  and  both  of  them  are  delusive.  This 
I  call  "  Pure  Neutralism  ". 

We  have  now  got  our  seventeen  alternative  possible 
theories  about  Mind  and  Matter  definitely  stated.  I 
propose  now  to  take  them  in  order,  to  explain  more 
fully  what  each  of  them  means,  and  to  consider  the 
strong  and  weak  points  (if  any)  in  each  of  them.  It 
may  then  be  possible  to  make  a  tentative  decision 
between  them. 

Discussion  of  the  Seventeen  Types  of  Theory.  It  will 
save  time  and  simplify  the  discussion  if  we  begin  by 
eliminating  those  alternatives  which  are  quite  plainly 
impossible.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  any  theory  which 
makes  mentality  a  delusive  characteristic  is  self-contra- 
dictory. For  to  say  that  mentality  is  a  delusive  char- 
acteristic is  to  say  that  it  in  fact  belongs  to  nothing,  but 
that  it  is  misperceived  or  misjudged  to  belong  to  some- 
thing. But,  if  there  be  misperceptions  or  misjudgments, 
there  are  perceptions  or  judgments  ;  and,  if  there  be 
perceptions  or  judgments,  there  are  events  to  which  the 
characteristic  of  mentality  applies.  This  enables  us  at 
once  to  eliminate  (2,  22)  Pure  Materialism  ;  (3,  221)  and 
(3,  222)  the  two  forms  of  Materialistic  Neutralism  ;  and 


6i2       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

(3,  3)  Pure  Neutralism.      We   have  thus   reduced  our 
alternatives  to  thirteen. 

There  are  two  other  types  of  theory  which,  I  believe, 
can  be  positively  refuted.  These  are  (2,  112)  Reductive 
Mentalism,  and  (2,  212)  Reductive  Materialism.  So  far 
as  I  am  aware,  Reductive  Mentalism  has  never  been 
held  ;  but  Reductive  Materialism  flourishes  to-day 
under  the  name  of  "Behaviourism".  I  will  therefore 
take  the  latter  theory  first,  and  try  to  prove  that  it  is 
absurd. 

Reductive  Materialism  or  ^^ Behaviour ism^\  This  theory 
holds  that  there  really  are  material  objects,  and  that 
materiality  is  a  differentiating  attribute.  And  it  also 
holds  that  the  characteristic  of  being  a  mind  or  being 
a  mental  process  reduces  to  the  fact  that  a  certain  kind 
of  body  is  making  certain  overt  movements  or  is  under- 
going certain  internal  physical  changes.  Of  course 
many  writers  who  call  themselves  "  Behaviourists"  are 
really  Epiphenomenalists,  and  Epiphenomenalism  is  an 
entirely  different  doctrine ;  but  there  is  a  residue  of 
quite  genuine  Behaviourists,  and  it  is  with  their  views 
which  we  are  now  concerned. 

Behaviourism  in  psychology  may  be  compared  to 
mechanism  in  biology.  But  there  is  a  very  important 
difference  between  the  problem  of  life  and  that  of  mind, 
which  makes  Behaviourism  in  psychology  much  less 
plausible  than  mechanism  in  biology.  The  one  and  only 
kind  of  evidence  that  we  ever  have  for  believing  that  a 
thing  is  alive  is  that  it  behaves  in  certain  characteristic 
ways.  E.g.,  it  moves  spontaneously,  eats,  drinks,  digests, 
grows,  reproduces,  and  so  on.  Now  all  these  are  just 
actions  of  one  body  on  other  bodies.  There  seems  to 
be  no  reason  whatever  to  suppose  that  "being  alive" 
means  any  more  than  exhibiting  these  various  forms  of 
bodily  behaviour.  That  is  why  Substantial  Vitalism, 
which  is  the  biological  analogue  of  Cartesian  Dualism 
in  psychology,  is  a  dead  issue  ;  and  w hyi  th e  whole 
controversy  about  life  is  really  between  Emergence  and 


STATUS  AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       613 

Mechanism.  But  the  position  about  consciousness, 
certainly  seems  to  be  very  different.  It  is  perfectly  true 
that  an  essential  part  of  our  evidence  for  believing  that 
anything  but  ourselves  has  a  mind  and  is  having  such 
and  such  experiences  is  that  it  performs  certain  charac- 
teristic bodily  movements  in  certain  situations.  E.g.^ 
we  observe  it  avoiding  obstacles,  repeating  some  series 
of  movements  again  and  again  with  suitable  variations 
until  a  certain  end  is  gained,  giving  appropriate  answers 
to  questions,  and  so  on.  When  external  bodies  behave 
in  these  ways,  we  are  inclined  to  associate  minds  and 
mental  processes  with  them  ;  and,  when  they  do  not, 
we  are  inclined  to  deny  these  to  them.  Now,  if  this 
were  the  only  evidence  that  we  ever  had  in  any  case  for 
the  existence  of  minds  and  mental  processes,  it  may  be 
admitted  that  the  latter  could,  at  most,  be  regarded  as 
purely  hypothetical  causes  of  certain  kinds  of  bodily 
behaviour.  And  it  might  then  be  plausible,  though  it 
would  certainly  not  be  logically  necessary,  to  suggest 
that  ''  having  a  mind  "  simply  means  '*  behaving  in  such 
and  such  ways  ".  But  it  is  plain  that  our  observation  of 
the  behaviour  of  external  bodies  is  not  our  only  or  our 
primary  ground  for  asserting  the  existence  of  minds  and 
mental  processes.  AndULt-seems  to  me  equally  plain 
that  by  "having  a  mind"  we  do  not  mean  simply 
"  behaving  in  such  and  such  ways  ".  These  points  can 
be  made  clear  as  follows. 

[a)  We  certainly  ascribe  mental  processes  to  ourselves 
as  well  as  to  others,  and  it  is  perfectly  certain  that  here 
our  ground  for  saying  that  we  are  having  such  and  such 
an  experience  is  not  the  fact  that  we  have  observed  our 
bodies  to  be  behaving  in  such  and  such  ways.  When 
I  say  that  I  am  seeing  a  chair  or  hearing  a  bell  I  am 
asserting  the  occurrence  of  an  experience.  Now  it  is 
possible  that,  whenever  I  have  the  first  kind  of  experi- 
ence, my  body  is  behaving  in  one  characteristic  way  ; 
and  that,  whenever  I  have  the  second  kind  of  experience, 
my  body  is  behaving  in  a  characteristically  different  way. 


i 


6i4       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

But,  even  if  this  be  in  fact  true,  it  is  perfectly  certain 
that  this  is  not  my  ground  for  saying  that  I  see  a  chair 
or  hear  a  bell.  I  often  know  without  the  least  doubt 
that  I  am  having  the  experience  called  "  seeing  a  chair  " 
when  I  am  altogether  uncertain  whether  my  body  is 
acting  in  any  characteristic  way.  And  again  I  dis- 
tinguish with  perfect  ease  between  the  experience  called 
"seeing  a  chair"  and  the  experience  called  "hearing 
a  bell "  when  I  am  quite  doubtful  whether  my  bodily 
behaviour,  if  any,  on  the  two  occasions  has  been  alike 
or  different.  If  then  the  Behaviourist  argues  that  mental 
processes,  in  so  far  as  they  differ  from  bodily  behaviour, 
are  purely  hypothetical  causes  of  such  behaviour  ;  and 
that  we  shall  keep  nearer  to  the  observable  facts  by 
dropping  these  hypothetical  entities  altogether ;  the 
answer  is  to  deny  his  premise.  If  we  confine  ourselves 
to  bodily  behaviour  it  is  perfectly  certain  that  we  are 
leaving  out  something  of  whose  existence  we  are  im- 
mediately aware  in  favourable  cases. 

(<5)  However  completely  the  behaviour  of  an  external 
body  answers  to  the  behaviouristic  tests  for  intelligence, 
it  always  remains  a  perfectly  sensible  question  to  ask  : 
"Has  it  really  got  a  mind,  or  is  it  merely  an  auto- 
maton ? "  It  is  quite  true  that  we  have  no  available 
means  of  answering  such  questions  conclusively.  It  is 
also  true  that,  the  more  nearly  a  body  answers  to  the 
behaviouristic  tests  for  intelligence,  the  harder  it  is  for 
us  in  practice  to  contemplate  the  possibility  of  its  having 
no  mind.  Still,  the  question:  "Has  it  a  mind?"  is 
never  silly  in  the  sense  that  it  is  meaningless.  At 
worst  it  is  silly  only  in  the  sense  that  it  does  not  gener- 
ally express  a  real  doubt,  and  that  we  have  no  means  of 
answering  it.  It  may  be  like  asking  whether  the  moon 
may  not  be  made  of  green  cheese  ;  but  it  is  not  like 
asking  whether  a  rich  man  may  have  no  wealth.  Now, 
on  the  behaviouristic  theory,  to  have  a  mind  just  means 
to  behave  in  certain  ways  ;  and  to  ask  whether  a  thing 
which  admittedly  does  behave  in  these  ways  has  a  mind 


STATUS  AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       615 

would  be  like  asking  whether  Jones,  who  is  admittedly 
a  rich  man,  has  much  wealth.  Since  the  question  can 
be  raised,  and  is  evidently  not  tautologous  or  self-con- 
tradictory, it  is  clear  that  when  we  ascribe  a  mind  or  a 
mental  process  to  an  external  body  we  do  not  mean 
simply  that  it  behaves  in  certain  characteristic  ways. 
If  the  Behaviourist  answers  that,  whatever  we  do  mean, 
this  is  all  that  we  ought  to  mean,  I  have  two  comments 
to  make,  (i)  We  have  a  right  to  mean  more,  because 
we  know  that  in  our  own  case  there  is  more,  (ii)  I 
would  invite  the  Behaviourist  to  explain  how,  on  his 
own  theory,  we  can  ever  have  come  to  make  the  mistake 
which  he  says  that  we  do  make.  If  in  fact  we  can 
observe  nothing  but  bodily  behaviour  in  ourselves  and 
others,  how  did  we  ever  come  to  entertain  the  hypothesis 
that  there  is  something  more  than  these  ;  and  how  did 
we  come  to  suppose  that  there  are  better  grounds  for 
assuming  the  presence  of  this  extra  factor  in  some  cases 
than  in  others?  On  the  ordinary  view  this  fact  is  easily 
explicable.  We  know  that  there  is  something  more 
than  bodily  behaviour  in  our  own  case,  because  we  can 
directly  observe  it.  We  find  that  certain  kinds  of  ex- 
perience in  ourselves  are  accompanied  by  certain  types 
of  bodily  behaviour.  If  we  find  external  bodies  which 
resemble  our  own  behaving  in  the  way  in  which  ours 
behave  when  we  have  a  certain  kind  of  experience,  we 
assume  that  there  is  a  similar  l^ind  of  experience  as- 
sociated with  these  bodies.  And  we  feel  more  confi- 
dence in  this  conclusion  the  more  closely  the  external 
body  and  its  behaviour  resemble  our  own.  Of  course 
such  an  inference  may  be  wrong  in  any  particular  case  ; 
it  is  even  possible  theoretically  that  it  is  wrong  in  all 
cases.  But  it  is  at  least  intelligible,  on  the  ordinary 
view,  how  we  come  to  make  this  hypothesis,  and  why 
we  feel  more  certain  of  it  in  some  cases  than  in  others. 
All  this  would  be  completely  inexplicable,  it  seems  to 
me,  if  Behaviourism  were  the  whole  truth.  If  Be- 
haviourism   be   true  we   all    make   a    mistake  which   it 


6i6       UNITY   OF  MIND  AND   OF  NATURE 

would   be   impossible   for   us   even   to  think  of  unless 
Behaviourism  were  false. 

I  propose  now  to  go  rather  more  into  detail  about 
the  behaviouristic  analysis  of  certain  special  kinds  of 
mental  process.  But,  before  I  do  this,  I  must  clear 
up  a  certain  ambiguity  about  the  meaning  of  "bodily 
behaviour ".  When  the  Behaviourist  says  that  all 
mental  processes  reduce  without  residue  to  the  fact 
that  the  body  is  behaving  in  a  certain  specific  way  he 
does  not  mean  to  confine  himself  to  gross  overt  actions, 
like  shrieking  or  kicking.  His  attempts  to  reduce  all 
mental  processes  to  bodily  behaviour  would  have  no 
plausibility  at  all  if  he  were  restricted  to  this  narrow 
sense  of  "behaviour".  He  always  includes  also  at 
least  such  bodily  movements  as  changes  of  blood- 
pressure,  incipient  movements  in  the  tongue  and  throat, 
convergence  and  accommodation  of  the  eyes,  and  so 
on.  This,  I  think,  is  quite  legitimate  ;  for  there  is  no 
essential  difference  between  movements  which  are  diffi- 
cult to  observe  simply  because  they  go  on  inside  the 
body  and  those  which  are  overt  and  easily  observable 
without  special  instruments  of  precision.  I  will  lump 
together  all  such  changes  under  the  name  of  "molar 
behaviour  !V-sLS.contrasted_with  "  molecular  behaviour  "; 
and  I  will  call  a  Behaviourist  who  thinks  that  aTl  mental 
processes  can  be  reduced  without  residue  to  molar  be- 
haviour a  "  molar  Behaviourist". 

But  it  is  very  difficult  to  get  the  Behaviourist  to  stop 
at  this  point.  When  overt  behaviour,  supplemented 
by  changes  of  blood-pressure,  incipient  movements  in 
the  throat,  etc.,  seems  inadequate  to  make  the  behaviour- 
istic analysis  of  some  mental  process  seem  plausible, 
the  Behaviourist  is  very  liable  to  appeal  to  hypothetical 
molecular  movements  in  the  brain  and  nervous  system. 
If  you  say  to  him  that  two  obviously  different  mental 
processes,  A  and  B  are  accompanied  by  indistinguish- 
able molar  behaviour,  or  that  qualitatively  indistinguish- 
able   mental    processes   are    accompanied    on    different 


STATUS  AND   PROSPECTS   OF  MIND       617 

occasions  by  obviously  different  kinds  of  molar  behaviour, 
he  is  liable  to  say;  **  Well,  at  any  rate,  the  correlated 
molecular  changes  in  the  brain  and  nervous  system 
must  have  been  different  in  the  one  case  and  exactly 
alike  in  the  other."  As  no  one  knows  anything  about 
these,  no  one  can  deny  that  this  may  be  true.  The 
Behaviourist  then  proceeds  to  identify  the  mental  pro- 
cess with  the  supposed  molecular  changes.  This  I 
will  call  "molecular  Behaviourism".  In  this  form  of  •) 
course  there  is  nothing  new  about  Behaviourism  ;  it  is 
just  old-fashioned  materialism  which  has  crossed  the  ; 
Atlantic  under  an  alias.  It  is  true  that  all  Behaviourism 
is  a  form  of  Reductive  Materialism  ;  but  it  does  at  least 
claim  to  be  a  new  form.  And  this  claim  can  be  upheld 
only  if  it  be  interpreted  to  mean  molar  Behaviourism- 
Of  course,  what  happens  is  that  a  man  starts  as  a  Molar 
Behaviourist  and  is  then  pushed  back  by  criticism  into 
Molecular  Behaviourism,  at  which  stage  his  theory 
has  lost  most  of  its  interest. 

I  am  now  going  to  consider  the  behaviouristic  account 
of  perception,  because  perception  is  the  mental  process  to 
which  Behaviourism  can  most  plausibly  be  applied.  If 
it  fails  to  give  an  adequate  account  of  perception,  it  is 
incredible  that  it  should  give  an  adequate  account  of 
memory,  imagination,  or  abstract  thinking.  I  will  first 
explain  why  I  hold  this.  If  a  certain  kind  of  mental 
process  is  to  be  reduced  to  a  certain  kind  of  bodily  be- 
haviour it  is  evidently  a  necessary,  though  by  no  means 
a  sufficient,  condition  that  there  shall  be  a  one  to  one 
correlation  between  the  two.  That  is,  it  must  be  quite 
certain  that  this  mental  process  never  happens  without 
this  bodily  behaviour,  and  that  this  bodily  behaviour 
never  happens  without  this  mental  process.  If  either 
ever  happens  without  the  other  it  is  certain  that  the  two 
cannot  be  identical  ;  though  of  course  they  might  not 
be  identical  even  if  one  never  did  happen  without  the 
other.  There  is  a  one  to  one  correlation  between  the 
events  in  the  life  of  Augustus  and  the  events  in  the  life 


6i8       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF  NATURE 

of  the  second  Roman  emperor,  because  the  name 
"Augustus"  and  the  phrase  "the  second  Roman 
emperor"  denote  the  same  person.  There  is  also  a  one 
to  one  correlation  between  the  movements  of  the  needles 
of  two  connected  telegraphic  instruments.  But  these 
are  nevertheless  two  different  sets  of  movements,  and 
not  a  single  set  with  two  different  names.  The  Be- 
haviourist has  to  show  that  mental  and  bodily  events 
are  connected  as  incidents  in  the  life  of  Augustus  and 
incidents  in  the  life  of  the  second  Roman  emperor  are 
connected.  He  will  have  done  nothing  relevant  if  he 
shows  only  that  they  are  connected  as  the  movements  of 
the  two  telegraph-needles  are  connected. 

Now  I  do  not  see  the  least  reason  to  believe  that  there 
is  any  kind  of  molar  behaviour  which  always  goes  on 
when  I  am  thinking  and  never  goes  on  at  any  other 
time  ;  and  the  same  remarks  apply  to  remembering  and 
imagining.  I  see  still  less  reason  to  believe  that  there 
is  one  kind  of  molar  behaviour  which  always  happens 
and  only  happens  when  I  am  thinking  of  Cleopatra's 
Needle,  and  another  kind  which  always  happens  and 
only  happens  when  I  am  thinking  of  the  Binomial 
Theorem.  If  you  say  that  there  may  be  molecular 
differences  in  these  cases  I  cheerfully  admit  it,  since 
neither  you  nor  I  can  possibly  know  anything  about 
the  matter.  It  seems  to  me  then  that  the  irreducible 
minimum  of  conditions  necessary  for  applying  Be- 
haviourism to  thinking,  remembering,  and  imagining, 
are  plainly  lacking  in  the  present  state  of  our  knowledge. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  more  or  less  plausible  to  hold 
that  there  is  a  certain  type  of  bodily  behaviour  which 
always  happens  and  only  happens  when  I  am  perceiving 
something.  And  it  is  more  or  less  plausible  to  hold 
that  this  behaviour  differs  in  a  characteristic  way  accord- 
ing to  whether  I  am  perceiving  A  or  B.  What  I 
propose  to  do  is  to  show  {a)  that  there  are  cases  where 
we  should  be  said  to  be  perceiving  a  certain  thing,  and 
where  it  is  by  no  means  certain  that  there  is  any  char- 


STATUS   AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       619 

acteristic  molar  behaviour  which  might  not  have  taken 
place  when  we  were  not  perceiving  this  thing ;  and 
{d)  that,  even  where  there  is  a  one  to  one  correlation 
between  my  perception  of  a  certain  object  and  certain 
molar  behaviour,  there  is  something  more  involved  in 
the  perception  than  the  mere  occurrence  of  this  molar 
behaviour. 

[a)  Whenever  we  perceive  we  perceive  some  definite 
object,  e.o-.,  a  chair  on  one  occasion  and  a  cat  on  another 
occasion.  A  complete  account  of  the  act  of  perceiving 
in  behaviouristic  terms  must  therefore  do  two  things- 
(i)  It  must  mention  some  special  kind  of  bodily 
behaviour  which  is  always  present  when  we  are  per- 
ceiving and  is  never  present  when  we  are  merely 
imagining  or  thinking  or  remembering.  And  (ii)  this 
kind  of  behaviour  must  be  such  that  a  meaning  can  be 
given  to  the  statement  that  one  bit  of  behaviour  of  the 
perceptual  kind  refers  specially  to  a  certain  chair  and 
that  another  bit  of  behaviour  of  the  perceptual  kind 
refers  specially  to  a  certain  cat. 

If  I  am  already  moving  about  I  shall  no  doubt  as  a 
rule  avoid  those  obstacles  which  I  perceive,  and  I  shall 
stumble  into  objects  which  lie  in  my  way  and  which  I 
do  not  perceive.  In  such  cases  there  is  no  doubt  certain 
bodily  behaviour  which  has  a  specific  relation  to  those 
objects  which  I  am  said  to  perceive.  And  there  is  no 
bodily  behaviour  having  this  specific  relation  to  objects 
which  I  am  said  not  to  perceive.  It  is  in  such  cases  as 
these  that  the  behaviouristic  analysis  of  perception  has 
most  plausibility.  For  here  we  may  admit  that  at  any 
rate  the  irreducible  minimum  of  conditions  for  the 
possibility  of  such  an  analysis  seems  to  be  fulfilled. 
But  even  these  examples  are  subject  to  the  following 
criticism.  We  are  not  dealing  here  merely  with  the 
perception  of  an  object,  but  with  the  perception  of  an 
object  which  is  an  obstacle  to  some  already  intended  and 
initiated  course  of  movement.  Surely,  as  I  walk  about 
a  room   (and,  still  more  so,  as  I  stand  still),  there  are 


620       UNITY   OF  MIND  AND   OF  NATURE 

many  objects  which  I  perceive  and  in  reference  to  which 
there  is  no  specific  molar  bodily  behaviour  of  the  kind 
mentioned.  There  are  plenty  of  objects  which  I  neither 
avoid  nor  stumble  over,  because  they  are  not  in  my 
way  or  because  I  am  not  moving  about.  And  yet  I 
may  be  perceiving  them. 

Perhaps  the  most  plausible  kind  of  bodily  behaviour 
to  take  as  present  in  all  cases  of  perception,  and  as 
specially  correlated  with  the  object  which  is  said  to  be 
perceived,  would  be  the  convergence  and  accommoda- 
tion of  the  eyes  on  to  the  place  where  the  object  is. 
But,  in  the  first  place,  this  applies  only  to  visual  per- 
ception. Secondly,  since  it  is  admitted  that  I  can  see 
two  things  in  different  places  at  the  same  time,  though 
not  perhaps  with  equal  clearness,  it  is  evident  that  my 
perception  of  one  at  least  of  them  cannot  be  accompanied 
by  the  convergence  of  my  eyes  on  to  the  place  which  it 
occupies.  Lastly,  even  when  we  find  a  man  blundering 
into  an  obstacle,  it  is  not  safe  to  assume  that  he  did  not 
perceive  it  unless  we  know  what  his  intentions  and 
wishes  are  at  the  time  and  that  his  body  is  under  the 
control  of  his  will.  No  doubt  it  is  generally  safe  to 
assume  that  a  person  does  not  want  to  be  dashed  to 
pieces.  And  no  doubt  it  is  generally  safe  to  assume 
that,  if  a  person  did  not  want  to  fall  over  a  precipice,  he 
could  stop  himself  from  doing  so  when  it  stares  him 
in  the  face.  Subject  to  these  conditions  it  would  no 
doubt  be  reasonable  to  conclude  that  a  man  who  walked 
over  a  precipice  had  not  perceived  it.  But  it  is  perfectly 
notorious  that  people  sometimes  do  walk  over  precipices 
which  they  perceive,  because  they  want  to  be  dashed  to 
pieces.  Audit  is  probable  that  some  people  walk  over 
precipices  which  they  perceive,  although  they  do  not 
wish  to  be  dashed  to  pieces,  because  the  height  exercises 
a  fascination  over  them  which  paralyses  their  wills. 
Such  happenings  are  relatively  uncommon  because  the 
wish  to  be  dashed  to  pieces  is  much  rarer  than  the  wish 
not  to  be,   and   because   contra -voluntary  ideo- motor 


STATUS   AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       621 

actions  on  this  scale  are  very  rare  indeed.  But  they  do 
happen.  It  is  thus  very  doubtful  whether  we  can  find 
any  kind  of  molar  bodily  behaviour  which  always  takes 
place  when  a  person  would  be  said  to  perceive  a  certain 
object  and  which  never  takes  place  when  a  person  would 
be  said  not  to  perceive  this  object.  And,  unless  this 
can  be  found,  the  attempt  to  reduce  perception  to  some 
kind  of  molar  bodily  behaviour  which  has  some  special 
reference  to  the  perceived  object  fails  in  limine. 

{b)  I  propose  now  to  waive  this  objection,  and  to 
assume  for  the  sake  of  argument  that  careful  enough 
investigation  of  a  man's  body  would  disclose  some 
specific  kind  of  molar  behaviour  which  always  takes 
place  when  he  perceives  A  and  never  takes  place  when 
he  does  not  perceive  A.  I  shall  now  show  that,  even 
if  this  be  so,  there  is  always  something  involved  in  the 
statement  that  this  man  perceives  A  over  and  above  the 
fact  that  his  body  is  behaving  in  this  specific  way.  It 
is  quite  certain  that,  whenever  it  is  true  to  say  that  I 
see  something,  it  is  true  that  I  have  a  sensation  of 
colour ;  that,  whenever  it  is  true  that  I  hear  a  bell,  it  is 
true  that  I  have  a  sensation  of  a  noise  ;  and  so  on.  In 
fact  every  perception  involves  a  sensation  as  an  essential 
factor,  although  it  involves  something  else  as  well. 
Perception,  therefore,  cannot  be  reduced  to  the  fact 
that  my  body  is  behaving  in  a  certain  way  towards 
a  certain  external  object  unless  the  sensational  ele- 
ment in  it  can  be  reduced  to  bodily  behaviour.  This 
quite  obvious  fact  may  be  illustrated  as  follows. 
There  is  a  perfectly  specific  relation  between  the  move- 
ments of  a  compass-needle  and  those  of  a  magnet  held 
near  it.  On  a  purely  behaviouristic  analysis  of  per- 
ception there  can  be  no  possible  reason  to  doubt  that 
the  compass-needle  perceives  the  magnet.  Yet,  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  nearly  every  one  would  deny  that  the 
needle  perceives  the  magnet ;  and  the  few  people  who 
would  suggest  that  it  does  would  admit  that  this  is  a 
paradoxical  proposition  which  needs  to  be  recommended 


k 


622       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

by  an  elaborate  set  of  arguments  such  as  those  used  by, 
Spinoza  or  by  Schopenhauer  in  establishing  their 
peculiar  metaphysical  systems  of  hylozoism.  This  is 
because  we  know  that  a  sensational  element  is  an 
essential  factor  in  what  we  understand  by  a  "percep- 
tion ",  and  because  we  are  very  doubtful  whether  there 
is  anything  of  the  kind  in  the  case  of  the  needle  and  the 
magnet. 

Now  can  statements  of  the  form  :  "I  am  aware  of  a 
red  patch"  or  "I  am  aware  of  a  tinkling  noise"  be 
reduced  to  statements  of  the  form:  "This  body,  or 
some  part  of  it,  is  behaving  in  such  and  such  a  way"? 
If  not,  behaviourism  has  manifestly  failed  even  in  the 
cases  which  are  antecedently  most  favourable  to  it. 

Let  us  suppose,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  when- 
ever it  is  true  to  say  that  I  have  a  sensation  of  a  red 
patch  it  is  also  true  to  say  that  a  molecular  movement  of 
a  certain  specific  kind  is  going  on  in  a  certain  part  of 
my  brain.  There  is  one  sense  in  which  it  is  plainly 
nonsensical  to  attempt  to  reduce  the  one  to  the  other. 
There  is  a  something  which  has  the  characteristic  of 
being  my  awareness  of  a  red  patch.  There  is  a  some- 
thing which  has  the  characteristic  of  being  a  molecular 
movement.  It  should  surely  be  obvious  even  to  the 
most  "advanced  thinker"  who  ever  worked  in  a  psycho- 
logical laboratory  that,  whether  these  "somethings" 
be  the  same  or  different,  there  are  two  different  charac- 
teristics. The  alternative  is  that  the  two  phrases  are 
just  two  names  for  a  single  characteristic,  as  are  the  two 
words  "  rich  "  and  "  wealthy  "  ;  and  it  is  surely  obvious 
that  they  are  not.  If  this  be  not  evident  at  first  sight, 
it  is  very  easy  to  make  it  so  by  the  following  considera- 
tions. There  are  some  questions  which  can  be  raised 
about  the  characteristic  of  being  a  molecular  movement, 
which  it  is  nonsensical  to  raise  about  the  characteristic 
of  being  an  awareness  of  a  red  patch  ;  and  conversely. 
About  a  molecular  movement  it  is  perfectly  reasonable 
to  raise  the  question  :   "Is  it  swift  or  slow,  straight  or 


STATUS  AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       623 

circular,  and  so  on?"  About  the  awareness  of  a  red 
patch  it  is  nonsensical  to  ask  whether  it  is  a  swift  or  a 
slow  awareness,  a  straight  or  a  circular  awareness,  and 
so  on.  Conversely,  it  is  reasonable  to  ask  about  an 
awareness  of  a  red  patch  whether  it  is  a  clear  or  a  con- 
fused awareness  ;  but  it  is  nonsense  to  ask  of  a  molecular 
movement  whether  it  is  a  clear  or  a  confused  movement. 
Thus  the  attempt  to  argue  that  "being  a  sensation  of 
so  andscr^nd^^*"being  a  bit  of  bodily  behaviour  of  such 
and  such  a  kind "  are  just  two  names  for  the  same 
characteristic  is  evidently  hopeless.  And  this  is  what 
the  Behaviourist  has  really  got  to  do. 

Of  course,  when  a  man  says  that  all  mental  states  are 
reducible  to  bodily  behaviour,  he  may  not  mean  any- 
thing so  radical  as  this.  He  may  admit,  e.g.,  that  to 
be  a  sensation  of  red  is  one  characteristic  and  to  be  a 
molecular  movement  of  a  certain  kind  is  another  char- 
acteristic. He  may  merely  wish  to  deny  that  the  two 
characteristics  belong  to  different  events  or  substances. 
He  may  wish  to  maintain  only  that  there  is  one  event 
which  has  the  two  characteristics  of  being  an  awareness 
of  a  red  patch  and  of  being  a  molecular  movement  of  a 
certain  kind  ;  that  there  are  events  which  have  only 
material  characteristics,  and  none  which  have  only 
mental  characteristics  ;  and  that  the  mental  properties 
of  those  events  which  do  have  mental  properties  are 
completely  determined  by  the  material  properties  which 
these  events  also  have.  Such  a  doctrine,  whether  true 
or  false,  cannot  be  dismissed  at  once  as  plainly  absurd. 
But  it  is  certainly  not  Behaviourism,  and  is  not  a  form 
of  Reductive  Materialism  ;  it  is  a  form  of  the  theory 
(2,  211),  i.e.,  oi  Emergent  Materialism. 

It  seems  to  me  then  that  Reductive  Materialism  in 
general,  and  strict  Behaviourism  in  particular,  may  be 
rejected.  They  are  instances  of  the  numerous  class  of 
theories  which  are  so  preposterously  silly  that  only  very 
learned  men  could  have  thought  of  them.  I  may  be 
accused   of  breaking   a   butterfly   on    a   wheel    in    this 


624       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

discussion  of  Behaviourism.  But  it  is  important  to 
remember  that  a  theory  which  is  in  fact  absurd  may  be 
accepted  by  the  simple-minded  because  it  is  put  forward 
in  highly  technical  terms  by  learned  persons  who  are 
themselves  too  confused  to  know  exactly_what  they 
mean.  When  this  happens,  as  it  has  happened  with 
Behaviourism,  the  philosopher  is  not  altogether  wasting 
time  by  analysing  the  theory  and  pointing  out  its 
implications. 

Reductive  Mentalism  (2,  112).  Reductive  mentalism 
would  be  the  counterpart  of  Behaviourism.  It  would 
consist  in  holding  that  the  material  characteristics  of 
being  extended  and  public,  of  having  position,  motion, 
etc.,  are  reducible  to  combinations  of  purely  mental 
characteristics.  And  there  is  precisely  the  same  reason 
to  deny  this  as  to  deny  the  opposite  doctrine  of  Reduc- 
tive Materialism.  So  far  as  I  know,  the  present  theory 
has  never  been  held.  All  mentalists  with  whose  works 
I  am  acquainted  have  held  that  material  characteristics 
are  delusive  appearances  of  certain  mental  characteristics. 
This  is  obvious  in  the  case  of  Leibniz,  Hegel,  Ward, 
Bradley,  and  M'Taggart.  Berkeley's  theory,  on  the 
face  of  it,  is  somewhat  different.  He  holds  that  sensa 
really  do  have  some  material  characteristics.  They 
really  are  extended,  coloured,  hot,  etc.,  and  they  really 
do  move  about  in  sense-fields.  But  {a)  they  are  also 
mental  events.  And  {U)  they  do  not  have  all  the 
characteristics  of  matter.  For  they  are  private,  fleeting, 
and  incapable  of  interacting  with  each  other,  {c)  The 
remaining  characteristics  of  matter  are  ascribed  to  God's 
habits  of  volition  by  Berkeley.  These  are  permanent, 
neutral,  and  capable  of  causal  action.  But  they  are  not 
extended  or  movable  ;  and  they  are  mental.  Thus,  in 
the  end,  materiality  is  a  delusive  characteristic  for 
Berkeley  as  for  other  mentalists.  There  is  nothing  which 
has  all  the  characteristics  of  materiality  ;  though  there 
are  some  things  which  have  some  of  these  characteristics, 
and  other  things  which   have   the   rest  of  them.     For 


STATUS  AND   PROSPECTS   OF  MIND       625 

Berkeley  materiality  is  a  delusive  characteristic,  in  the 
sense  in  which  the  characteristic  of  being  a  mermaid  is 
delusive  ;  z>.,  it  is  a  compound  characteristic  which 
applies  as  a  whole  to  nothing,  though  it  can  be  analysed 
into  factors  each  of  which  does  apply  to  something. 
For  M'Taggart  or  Hegel  materiality  is  delusive  in  a 
still  more  radical  sense.  It  is  a  compound  characteristic 
some  of  whose  factors  apply  to  nothing.  E.g.^  nothing, 
on  their  view,  is  really  extended. 

A  re  Mentality  and  Materiality  compatible  Characteristics  ? 
We  have  now  reduced  our  original  seventeen  candidates 
to  the  more  wieldly  number  of  eleven.  Can  we  make  a 
further  reduction?  The  most  promising  question  to 
raise  at  this  point  is  the  following.  Granted  that 
mentality  and  materiality  are  distinct  and  mutually 
irreducible  characteristics,  could  any  substance  or  event 
possess  both  of  them?  If  we  could  answer  this  in  the 
negative,  if  we  could  show  that  it  is  as  absurd  to 
suppose  that  the  same  event  or  substance  could  be  both 
mental  and  material  as  to  suppose  that  the  same  material 
substance  could  be  at  once  red  and  blue  all  over,  we 
could  make  a  considerable  clearance.  We  should  cer- 
tainly get  rid  of  (i,  i)  Dualism  of  Compatibles  ;  (2,  iii) 
Emergent  Mentalism,  and  (2,  211)  Emergent  Materialism. 
The  effect  on  the  various  Neutralistic  Theories  would 
be  less  marked  ;  it  would,  I  think,  still  be  possible  to 
keep  them  by  a  suitable  statement.  We  should  simply 
have  to  suppose  that  mental  and  material  characteristics 
both  emerge  from  certain  arrangements  of  the  same 
Neutral  Stuff;  but  that  they  never  both  emerge  from 
the  same  arrangements  of  this  Neutral  Stuff. 

Opposite  answers  have  been  given  to  the  question  at 
issue  by  different  philosophers  of  eminence.  Mr  Locke 
saw  no  reason  why  God  should  not  have  endowed  a 
material  substance  with  the  power  to  think.  Descartes 
and  Dr  M'Taggart  held  that  it  is  impossible  that  the 
same  event  or  substance  should  be  both  mental  and 
material.     The   argument   against  the  compatibility  of 

2    R 


626       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

the  two  characteristics  is  this.  Suppose  a  certain  event 
were  both  mental  and  material.  Since  it  is  material  it 
must  have  a  certain  shape  and  size.  But  is  it  not 
plainly  nonsense  to  talk  of  a  circular  thought  of  an  inch 
in  diameter?  Again,  suppose  that  at  a  certain  moment 
I  am  wanting  my  tea  and  thinking  of  the  square  root 
of  minus-one.  If  this  volition  and  this  thought  be  also 
material  events  they  must  have  spatial  positions  and 
stand  in  spatial  relations.  But  is  it  not  plainly  nonsense 
to  talk  of  a  volition  being  two  inches  to  the  north-west 
of  a  thought  ? 

I  should  like  to  believe  that  these  arguments  were 
conclusive,  because  it  would  greatly  simplify  our  pro- 
blem if  they  were.  But  I  cannot  honestly  say  that  they 
seem  to  me  to  be  conclusive.  I  admit,  of  course,  that 
such  statements  as  have  been  made  above  sound  very 
odd,  and  that  no  one  ever  thinks  of  making  them.  But 
these  facts  seem  capable  of  explanation.  Suppose  for 
the  moment  that  it  were  true  to  say  of  a  certain  event 
both  that  it  occupies  a  circular  region  in  a  brain  and 
that  it  is  someone's  desire  for  his  tea.  It  would  have 
to  be  admitted  that  the  two  characteristics  of  this  one 
event  are  known  in  quite  different  ways.  There  is  one 
and  only  one  person  to  whom  its  mental  characteristics 
are  directly  manifested,  viz.,  the  person  whose  desire  it 
is.  Its  material  characteristics  never  manifest  them- 
selves to  this  person  ;  and,  strictly  speaking,  they  do 
not  manifest  themselves  to  anyone.  For  v\o  om perceives 
the  position,  shape,  and  other  physical  characteristics 
of  this  event.  If  the  latter  characteristics  be  known  at 
all,  they  are  known  only  to  physiologists  by  an  elaborate 
and  precarious  process  of  hypothetical  and  analogical 
reasoning.  Now,  since  no  one  is  acquainted  with  the 
material  characteristics  of  any  mental  event,  even  if 
such  events  do  have  material  characteristics,  and  since 
every  one  is  acquainted  with  the  mental  characteristics 
of  some  mental  events,  it  is  not  surprising  that  it  should 
sound  odd  to  ascribe  determinate  spatial  qualities  and 


STATUS  AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       627 

relations  to  those  events  which  are  thoughts,  voliticjns, 
etc.  We  may  admit  {a)  that  the  presence  of  mentaUty 
does  not  ejitail  the  presence  of  materiahty  in  the  same 
object,  as,  e.g.^  the  presence  of  colour  entails  that  of 
extension.  So  far  as  one  can  see,  an  event  could  have 
been  mental  without  being  extended  or  material,  [b) 
That  nothing  which  manifests  mentality  also  manifests 
materiality.  There  is  thus  no  direct  empirical  evidence 
that  what  has  mentality  ever  has  also  materiality,  as 
there  is  direct  empirical  evidence  that  what  is  red  may 
also  be  hot.  But  the  real  question  is :  "  Does  the 
presence  of  mentality  in  an  object  entail  the  absence 
of  materiality  from  it  ? "  We  may  admit  {a)  and  {p) 
without  admitting  that  this  question  must  be  answered 
in  the  affirmative. 

Now  I  cannot  see  by  direct  inspection  that  what  is  ,^, 
material  cannot  also  be  mental.  Is  there  any  indirect  " 
way  of  proving  this  proposition?  It  might  be  said  that 
there  is  a  fundamental  difference  between  mentality 
and  all  those  qualities  which  admittedly  can  belong 
to  extended  objects.  Every  non-spatial  quality  which 
admittedly  can  belong  to  an  extended  object  is  an 
extensible  quality  ;  i.e.,  it  is  such  that  any  object  which 
possesses  it  must  be  extended.  It  is  obvious  that  colour, 
temperature,  etc.,  are  extensible  qualities  in  this  sense. 
Now  it  is  certain  that  mentality  is  not  an  extensible 
quality,  in  this  sense.  For,  as  we  have  seen,  it  is 
plainly  logically  possible  that  an  event  might  have 
mentality  without  being  extended.  Now  it  might  be 
suggested  that  it  is  a  self-evident  proposition  that  every 
non-spatial  quality  of  an  extended  object  must  be  an 
extensible  quality.  If  this  be  accepted,  it  follows  that 
mentality  cannot  be  a  quality  of  any  extended  object, 
and  therefore  that  mentality  and  materiality  are  incom- 
patible characteristics.  But  I  do  not  find  the  suggested 
proposition  self-evident  on  careful  inspection.  I  do 
indeed  find  it  self-evident  that  every  extended  object 
must  have  some  non-spatial  extensible  quality  ;  but  this  is 


^ 


628       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

quite  a  different  proposition  from  the  suggested  principle 
that  every  non-spatial  quality  of  any  extended  object  must 
be  an  extensible  quality.  Hence  I  see  no  impossibility 
in  the  supposition  that  one  and  the  same  thing  or  event 
may  have  both  mental  and  material  characteristics.  And 
I  can  see  what  causes  may  have  made  men  think  that 
the  two  characteristics  are  incompatible  even  if  they  be 
really  compatible. 

It  might  perhaps  be  admitted  that,  so  long  as  we 
confine  ourselves  to  isolated  mental  events,  we  cannot 
see  why  they  might  not  also  be  material.  But  it  might 
be  said  that,  when  we  consider  that  mental  events  are 
states  of  mind  whilst  material  events  are  states  of  body, 
and  that  the  characteristic  interrelations  of  mental 
events  within  a  mind  are  utterly  unlike  the  character- 
istic interrelations  of  material  events  within  a  body, 
we  see  that  it  is  necessary  to  assume  two  sets  of  events 
and  not  just  a  single  set  of  events  with  two  different 
characteristics.  This  again  is  not  obvious  to  me.  If  two 
events  have  each  two  different  determinable  character-  • 
istics  A  and  B  in  the  determinate  forms  a^  by  and  a^  b^ 
respectively,  they  can  obviously  stand  at  the  same  time 
in  two  very  different  determinable  relations  to  each 
other,  one  in  virtue  of  the  determinable  A  and  the  other 
in  virtue  of  the  determinable  B.  E.g.,  two  musical 
notes  may  be  identical  in  temporal  position,  whilst  one 
is  an  octave  lower  than  the  other  in  pitch.  It  therefore 
seems  perfectly  possible  that  a  set  of  events,  each  of 
which  had  both  material  and  mental  characteristics, 
mip^ht  form  a  whole  of  the  material  kind  in  virtue  of 
the  relations  which  depend  on  the  material  character- 
istics of  the  events,  and  might  also  form  a  whole  of  the 
mental  kind  in  virtue  of  the  relations  which  depend  on 
the  mental  characteristics  of  the  events.  Thus  a  series 
of  notes  is  at  once  a  tune,  in  virtue  of  the  relations  of 
pitch  which  depend  on  the  auditory  characteristics  of 
the  notes  ;  and  a  series  of  events  each  of  which  lasts  so 
long  and  is  separated  by  such  and  such  a  time-gap  from 


STATUS  AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MLND       629 

its  neighbours,  in  virtue  of  the  temporal  characteristics 
of  the  notes. 

I  should  like  to  point  out  that  the  doctrine  that  every 
event  which  is  mental  is  also  material  would  in  no  way 
entail  the  view  that  all  causation  is  physical  causation. 
To  say  that  the  event  e.^  is  determined  by  purely  physical 
causation  would  mean  that  the  necessary  and  sufficient 
condition  of  the  occurrence  of  ^^  is  the  occurrence  of  an 
event  e^  having  a  certain  determinate  material  character- 
istic 0,.  This  event  might  also  have  a  determinate 
mental  characteristic  >/r^ ;  but,  if  the  causation  be  purely 
physical,  the  possession  of  \^,  by  e^  will  be  causally 
irrelevant  to  e^_.  Now  it  is  obvious  that  this  is  only  one 
of  three  possible  alternatives.  In  the  first  place,  the 
possession  of  Q^  by  e-^  might  be  necessary  but  not 
sufficient  to  determine  e.^.  It  might  be  that  the  posses- 
sion of  ^j  by  ^1  was  also  necessary,  and  that  the  com- 
plete cause  of  e^  is  the  occurrence  of  an  event  e^  with  the 
material  characteristic  0^  and  the  mental  characteristic 
i/^j.  Secondly,  it  might  even  be  the  case  that  the  pos- 
session by  e^  of  0j  was  causally  irrelevant  to  e.-,  and  that 
the  occurrence  of  an  event  e^  having  the  mental  char- 
acteristic -(//-t  was  necessary  and  sufficient  to  determine 
^2"  This  might  be  true  even  if  in  fact  there  are  no 
events  which  have  mental  characteristics  without  having 
material  characteristics.  We  can  call  these  two  alterna- 
tives which  we  have  just  been  mentioning  "mixed 
causation  "  and  "  purely  mental  causation  "  respectively, 
I  have  thus  shown  that  the  types  of  theory  at  present 
under  discussion  do  not  preclude  mixed  causation  and 
purely  mental  causation,  as  might  perhaps  be  thought 
by  some. 

On  the  whole,  then,  I  can  see  no  conclusive  objection 
to  the  possibility  that  one  and  the  same  event  should^! 
have~Both  "mental  and   material    characteristics  or  that   ! 
one  and  the  same  substance  should  be  both  a  mind  and   1 
a  body^^     H'ence-i-eaTmDt^eject  off-hand  the  three  types 
of  theory  which   imply  that  this  possibility  is  realised. 


630       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

So  we  are   still   left  with    the  eleven  alternatives  with 
which  we  started  this  subsection. 

Theories  which  make  Materiality  delusive.  We  have 
seen  that  no  theory  which  makes  mentality  delusive 
can  be  accepted.  We  cannot  reject  on  the  same  grounds 
theories  which  make  materiality  delusive.  Nevertheless 
we  might  be  able  to  reject  such  theories  on  other 
grounds.  Let  us  consider  this  question  next.  We  are 
left  with  three  types  of  theory  which  make  materiality 
delusive,  viz.  (2,  12)  Pure  Mentalism,  and  (3,  211)  and 
(3,  212)  the  two  forms  of  Mentalistic  Neutralism. 

Of  these  theories  I  believe  that  Pure  Mentalism,  both 
in    its   less    radical   Berkeleian   form    and   in  the    more 
radical  form  in  which  it  is  held  by  Leibniz,  Hegel  and 
M'Taggart,  may  be  rejected.    The  theory  has  a  negative 
and  a  positive  side.    The  negative  side  is  that  materiality 
is  a  delusive  characteristic.     The  positive  side   is  that 
things  which    have  nothing  but   mental    qualities    and 
relations  are  misperceived  to  have  material  qualities  and 
relations.     Now  I  see  no  reason  to  believe  the  negative  . 
proposition,   and  strong  reasons  to  doubt   the  positive 
proposition.      Materiality    is   a    complex   characteristic, 
which    I    have   analysed    in    Chapter    IV.     {a)  All   the 
arguments  to  prove  that  some  of  the  constituent  char- 
acteristics of  materiality  {e.g.^   extension)    are   delusive 
seem  to  me  to  be  plainly  fallacious  (like  Bradley's)  or 
to  depend  on  premises  which  I  see  no  ground  for  accept- 
ing (like  M'Taggart's).     ib)  The   arguments   to  prove 
that,  whilst  none  of  the  constituent  characteristics    of 
materiality  are  delusive,   materiality  as  a  whole  is  de- 
lusive seem  to  me  to  prove  something  important,  but  not 
tJiis  proposition.      I  therefore  see  no  ground  to  believe 
that  materiality  is  delusive  either   in  the  more  radical 
sense  of  M'Taggart  and  Leibniz  or  in  the  less  radical 
sense  of  Berkeley,    {c)  It  seems  to  me  most  unlikely  that 
things  which  had  nothing  analogous  to  spatial  qualities 
and  relations  and  did  not  form  a  quasi-spatial  order  of 
at  least  three  dimensions  could  present  that  particular 


STATUS   AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       631 

system  of  interconnected  appearances  which  external 
objects  do  present.  And  I  do  not  see  that  minds  or 
mental  events,  connected  by  the  only  mental  relations 
with  which  we  are  acquainted,  would  fulfil  these  con- 
ditions. If  you  say  that  there  may  be  many  mental 
relations  with  which  we  are  unacquainted  I  of  course 
agree.  But  why  call  these  particular  relations  "  mental  " 
if  they  do  not  resemble  any  ineittal  relation  that  we  are 
acquainted  with,  and  do  resemble  spatial  relations? 

My  detailed  reasons  for  making  these  assertions  will 
be  found  in  Chapter  IV,  and  especially  in  the  sub- 
section headed  :  In  what  Sense  can  we  accept  Physical 
Objects  ?  On  the  whole  then  I  think  we  may  reject 
Pure  Mentalism,  and  thus  Tedu:cethFrrumlDeri5f  theories 
which  are  worth  serious  consideration  to  ten. 

Would  the  arguments  which  I  have  used  against 
Pure  Mentalism  apply  to  Mentalistic  Neutralism  ?  They 
would  apply  to  any  form  of  Neutralism  which  refuses 
to  allow  quasi-spatial  qualities  and  relations  to  the 
neutral  stuff  itself  or  to  certain  combinations  of  this 
neutral  stuff.  But  they  would  not  be  fatal  to  such  a 
form  of  Mentalistic  Neutralism  as  Mr  Russell  puts 
forward  in  his  Analysis  of  Mind.  For  Mr  Russell 
mentality  is  not  delusive,  since  it  does  belong  to  certain 
groups  of  suitably  interrelated  sensa.  And  materiality 
is  delusive,  in  the  less  radical  sense  in  which  it  is  so  for 
Berkeley,  though  not  in  the  more  radical  sense  in  which 
it  is  so  for  M'Taggart.  For  Mr  Russell's  neutral  stuff 
is  sensa;  and  these  really  are  extended  and  spatially 
related  to  each  other,  though  they  lack  the  remaining 
characteristics  which  are  essential  to  materiality.  These 
other  characteristics  really  do  belong  to  certain  groups 
of  interrelated  sensa  ;  but  these  groups  are  not  literally 
extended.  Hence  every  characteristic  involved  in 
materiality  has  application,  though  materiality  itself 
has  no  application.  Mr  Russ^irs_theory  is  therefore 
a  form  of  Mentalistic  Neutraljsm.  And  it  is  a  form 
to~which  my  arguments  do  not  apply,  since  his  neutral 


632       UNITY,  OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

stuff  really  does  have  spatial  qualities  and  relations. 
It  is  therefore  possible  for  Mr  Russell  to  "save  the 
appearances",  whilst,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  it  is  not 
possible  for  a  Pure  Mentalist  to  do  so.  So  we  cannot 
rule  out  the  two  forms  of  Mentalistic  Neutralism  at  this 
stage,  provided  that  they  are  suitably  stated. 

General  Remarks  on  Neutralistic  Theories.  It  will  be 
noticed  that  six  of  the  ten  theories  which  we  still  have 
on  our  hands  are  forms  of  Neutralism.  It  will  there- 
fore be  wise  to  consider  now  the  general  conditions 
which  any  neutralistic  theory  must  fulfil,  in  the  hope 
that  these  may  exclude  some  of  the  suggested  forms  of 
Neutralism.  I  understand  by  Neutralism  the  doctrine 
that  neither  mentality  nor  materiality  is  a  differentiating 
attribute,  so  that  the  fundamental  stuff  of  which  the 
existent  world  is  made  consists  of  one  or  more  sub- 
stances which  are  neither  mental  nor  material.  This 
fundamental  stuff  must  have  some  differentiating  attri- 
butes, and  by  hypothesis  these  are  neither  mentality  nor 
materiality.  Now  of  course  it  might  be  suggested  that 
the  differentiating  attributes  are  utterly  unknown  to  us. 
In  that  case  we  could  hardly  deny  the  possibility  of  any 
of  the  six  remaining  forms  of  Neutralism.  But  this 
purely  agnostic  Neutralism  is  not  worth  serious  con- 
sideration ;  for  it  is  useless  to  trouble  about  a  theory 
which,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  could  explain 
nothing.  I  shall  assume  then  that  the  differentiating 
attributes  of  the  fundamental  substance  or  substances 
are  attributes  which  we  are  acquainted  with. 

In  that  case  the  possible  suppositions  about  the 
nature  of  the  fundamental  stuff  are  very  restricted.  We 
are  directly  acquainted  at  most  with  two  kinds  of 
existent,  viz.,  sensa  or  images  and  sense-fields,  on  the 
one  hand,  and  mental  states  and  minds,  on  the  other. 
The  only  empirical  attributes  with  which  we  can  claim 
to  be  acquainted  are  the  qualities  of  each  of  these  two 
kinds  of  existent,  the  relations  of  sensa  or  images  to 
each  other  in  sense-fields,  the  relations  of  mental  states 


STATUS   AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       633 

to  each  other  in  minds,  and  the  relations  of  mental 
states  to  sensa  or  images.  In  addition  to  these 
empirical  characteristics,  which  we  become  acquainted 
with  by  abstraction  from  instances  which  manifest  them 
to  us,  there  are,  I  think,  certain  categorial  characteristics, 
such  as  the  relation  of  substance  and  state,  cause  and 
effect,  etc.  We  become  acquainted  with  these  on 
reflection  when  suitable  material  is  presented  to  us 
by  our  senses  or  by  introspection  ;  but  we  do  not 
reach  our  knowledge  of  them  simply  by  abstraction 
from  instances  which  manifest  them  to  us.  Now  these 
empirical  and  categorial  characteristics  are  the  only 
materials  that  any  human  being  has  or  can  have  for 
constructing  a  theory  of  the  Universe.  It  follows  that 
the  Neutralist  who  is  not  content  to  be  merely  agnostic 
about  his  neutral  stuff  can  ascribe  to  it  nothing  but  a 
selection  from  these  characteristics.  The  neutral  stuff 
must  be  supposed  either  [a]  to  have  some  of  the  factors 
included  in  materiality  and  none  of  those  included  in 
mentality  ;  or  (d)  to  have  some  of  the  factors  included 
in  mentality  and  none  of  those  included  in  materiality  ; 
or  ((f)  to  combine  some  of  the  factors  of  mentality  with 
some  of  the  factors  of  materiality.  Let  us  now  consider 
the  effects  of  these  three  hypotheses  on  the  six  forms  of 
Neutralism  which  still  remain. 

Before  we  can  do  this  a  little  preliminary  explanation 
is  needed.  I  have  admitted  that  materiality  is  a  complex 
characteristic.  The  fundamental  factor  involved  in  it  is 
extension.  This,  if  I  am  right,  carries  with  it  so//ie 
extensible  quality,  but  not  any  particular  extensible 
quality.  The  other  characteristics  are  publicity,  per- 
sistence, and  existential  independence  of  any  observing 
mind.  It  is  therefore  easy  to  understand  what  is 
meant  by  the  supposition  that  the  fundamental  stuff 
has  some  but  not  all  the  characteristics  involved  in 
materiality.  It  presumably  means  that  extension,  at 
any  rate,  is  ascribed  to  it,  and  existential  independ- 
ence   of    any    observing    mind.      But    the    correspond- 


634       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND    OF   NATURE 

ing  supposition  about  mentality  needs  some  further 
explanation. 

So  far  I  have  neither  asserted  nor  denied  that 
mentality  is  a  complex  characteristic.  Some  people 
would  no  doubt  hold  that  it  is  simple.  If  this  be  so,  the 
hypotheses  {b)  and  (c)  are  ruled  out,  and  the  Neutralist 
is  left  with  hypothesis  {a).  But  I  think  that  it  is 
arguable  that  mentality  is  a  complex  characteristic,  and 
that  it  may  be  analysed  somewhat  as  follows,  (i)  The 
irreducible  minimum  involved  in  mentality  would  seem 
to  be  the  fact  which  we  express  by  the  phrase  "feeling 
somehow",  e.g.,  feeling  cross  or  tired  or  hungry.  It 
seems  to  me  to  be  logically  possible  that  this  charac- 
teristic, which  we  might  call  "sentience",  could  belong 
to  a  thing  or  event  which  had  no  other  mental  charac- 
teristic. But  this  possibility  depends  partly  on  the  view 
that  we  take  about  the  proper  analysis  of  "feeling 
somehow  "  ;  and  I  can  discuss  the  question  better  when 
I  have  mentioned  the  other  factors  involved  in  mentality. 

(ii)  There  is  plainly  a  difference  between  the  fact  that 
something  exists  and  has  such  and  such  qualities  and 
relations  and  the  fact  that  something  manifests  its 
existence  and  manifests  certain  qualities  and  relations. 
Now  the  converse  of  manifestation  is  acquaintance, 
such  as  we  have  in  sensing  and  in  imaging.  I  think 
that  some  people  would  claim  to  reduce  sentience  to 
acquaintance  with  certain  peculiar  existents  and  their 
qualities.  It  might  be  held,  e.g.,  that  there  are  certain 
peculiar  qualities,  called  "tiredness",  "  hungriness ", 
"crossness",  etc.,  and  that  these  qualities  characterise 
certain  things  from  time  to  time.  When  this  happens 
something  is  tired  or  hungry  or  cross.  Now  a  thing 
which  is  tired  or  hungry  or  cross  may  manifest  itself 
to  itself,  or  to  something  else  which  is  uniquely  con- 
nected with  itself,  as  having  these  qualities.  We  then 
say  that  "tiredness  is  felt"  or  that  "there  is  a  feeling 
of  tiredness ".  I  introduce  the  two  alternatives  of 
"manifesting  itself  to  itself"  and   "manifesting  itself 


STATUS  AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       635 

to  something  which  is  uniquely  connected  with  itself", 
because  there  seem  to  be  two  alternative  forms  of  the 
theory  under  discussion.  (a)  It  might  be  held  that 
tiredness,  crossness,  etc.,  are  qualities  which  belong  to 
minds^  and  that  to  feel  tired  is  to  be  acquainted  with 
one's  own  mind  as  having  the  quality  of  tiredness  at  the 
moment.  Or  (/3)  it  might  be  held  (and  it  apparently  is 
held  by  Professor  Laird  and  Professor  Alexander)  that 
tiredness,  crossness,  etc.,  are  qualities  which  belong, 
not  to  minds,  but  to  living  organisms.  In  that  case  to 
feel  tired  is  to  be  acquainted  with  one's  own  organism 
or  with  some  part  of  it  as  having  the  quality  of  tired- 
ness at  the  moment.  Of  course  a  complete  account 
of  all  feelings  might  need  to  combine  both  these 
alternatives. 

If  we  accepted  either  of  these  alternatives  we  could 
take  acquaintance  as  the  fundamental  characteristic 
involved  in  mentality.  My  tentative  statement  that 
there  might  be  things  which  had  sentience  and  no  other 
mental  characteristic  would  then  have  to  be  modified 
as  follows.  We  should  have  to  say  that  there  might 
be  things  which  had  no  mental  characteristic  except 
acquaintance  with  themselves  or  their  organisms  as 
having  certain  peculiar  qualities,  such  as  tiredness, 
crossness,  etc. 

(iii)  Whether  sentience  be  a  mental  characteristic 
distinct  from  acquaintance,  or  whether  it  just  be  ac- 
quaintance with  certain  special  objects  as  having 
certain  special  qualities,  it  is  plain  that  mentality  as 
we  know  it  in  ourselves  involves  a  further  character- 
istic. This  may  be  called  "  referential  cognition  ".  We 
believe  in  the  existence  of  things  and  events  which  we 
are  not  at  the  moment  acquainted  with,  and  we  believe 
them  to  have  certain  qualities  and  relations  which  they 
are  not  manifesting  to  us  at  the  moment.  I  have_tned 
to  show  that  even  perception  is  referential  cognition. 
It  seems  clear  that  there  could  be  no  referential^ognitiorT 
without   acquaintance  ;    and    it   seems    to    me    logically 


636       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

possible  that  there  might  be  things  which  have  sentience 
and  acquaintance  without  referential  cognition. 

We  must  next  notice  that  we  find  in  ourselves  two 
different  kinds  of  referential  cognition,  which  I  will  call 
"intuitive"  and  ''discursive".  When  I  perceive  a 
chair  or  a  pink  rat,  my  perception  is  an  instance  of 
intuitive  referential  cognition  ;  when  I  merely  think  of 
a  chair  or  a  pink  rat,  my  thought  is  an  instance  of 
discursive  referential  cognition.  I  can  have  both 
intuitive  and  discursive  referential  cognition  of  certain 
objects  ;  but  there  are  many  objects,  such  as  Julius 
Ccesar  or  a  Hydrogen  atom,  of  which  I  can  have  only 
discursive  cognition.  Now  I  think  it  is  impossible  for 
there  to  be  referential  cognition  of  the  discursive  kind 
in  a  being  which  has  not  referential  cognition  of  the 
intuitive  kind  ;  but  it  seems  logically  possible  that  there 
should  be  things  which  have  intuitive  referential  cogni- 
tion without  discursive  referential  cognition. 

(iv)  Finally,  we  find  in  ourselves  what  may  be  called 
"  affective  attitudes  ".  Conations  and  the  various  kinds 
of  emotions  are  examples  of  these.  An  affective  attitude 
consists  in  "  feeling  some/^^z£^  towai-ds  sovaetking  ".  Now, 
if  I  am  to  be  able  to  take  up  an  affective  attitude  towards 
something,  this  something  must  fulfil  one  of  the  follow.- 
ing  conditions,  (a)  It  may  be  a  feeling  which  is  felt 
by  me.  E.g.,  I  may  dislike  my  present  feeling  of 
hunger.  (^)  It  may  be  something  which  I  am  ac- 
quainted with,  and  which  is  not  a  feeling  of  mine.  E.g., 
I  may  be  pleased  with  the  brightly  coloured  visual 
sensa  which  I  am  acquainted  with  when  I  see  a  fire- 
work display,  (y)  It  may  be  the  epistemological  object 
of  an  intuitive  referential  situation  of  which  I  am  subject. 
E.g.,  a  drunkard  may  be  frightened  at  the  pink  rats 
which  he  sees.  And  (S)  it  may  be  the  epistemological 
object  of  a  discursive  referential  situation  of  which  I  am 
subject.  E.g.,  I  may  desire  the  dinner  which  I  am  now 
thinking  of.  It  is  therefore  logically  impossible  that 
any  affective  attitude  should  exist  in  a  thing  that  did  not 


STATUS  AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       637 

possess  any  other  mental  characteristic  ;  but  it  does  seem 
possible  that  any  or  all  the  three  mental  characteristics 
previously  enumerated  should  exist  in  a  thing  which 
did  not  have  any  affective  attitudes  whatever.  Again, 
there  are  certain  affective  attitudes,  such  as  vc^lition, 
which  could  occur  only  in  a  being  which  has  discursive 
cognition  ;  there  are  others,  such  as  anger,  which  pre- 
suppose at  least  intuitive,  but  not  necessarily  discursive 
referential  cognition  ;  and  there  are  others,  such  as  mere 
liking  and  disliking,  which  presuppose  no  more  than 
acquaintance  or  mere  sentience. 

The  upshot  of  this  discussion  is  as  follows.  If 
"  mentality"  means  the  peculiar  characteristic  of  human 
minds,  we  must  admit  that  it  is  complex.  Its  factors 
may  be  divided  first  into  Affective  Attitudes  and  Other 
Factors.  The  relation  betweerTtKemis  that  it  is  logic- 
ally possible  for  the  Other  Factors  to  occur  without 
any  of  the  Affective  Attitudes,  whilst  it  is  not  logically 
possible  for  any  of  the  Affective  Attitudes  to  occur 
without  at  least  one  of  the  Other  Factors.  Secondly, 
we  can  arrange  the  Other  Factors  in  a  hierarchical 
order,  such  that  the  earlier  could  occur  without  the  later 
but  the  later  could  not  occur  without  all  the  earlier  ones. 
This  order  is  Sentience,  Acquaintance,  Intuitive  Refer- 
ential Cognition,  and  Discursive  Referential  Cognition. 
We  can  now  see  exactly  what  would  be  meant  by 
ascribing  some  but  not  all  of  the  factors  of  mentality  to 
the  supposed  neutral  stuff.  In  the  first  place,  it  would 
mean  that  the  neutral  stuff  was  supposed  to  have  the 
earlier  but  not  the  later  factors  (of  this  hierarchy).  And, 
secondly,  the  Neutral  Monist  might  ascribe  or  refuse 
to  ascribe  affective  attitudes  to  his  neutral  stuff.  (There 
are  some  affective  attitudes,  such  as  volition,  which  he 
must  refuse  to  ascribe  to  it  if  he  refuses  to  ascribe  the 
higher  members  of  the  hierarchy  of  Other  Factors  to  it.) 

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  consider  the  three  hypo- 
theses, and  to  note  the  effects  of  each  on  the  six  remain- 
ing forms  of  Neutralism.      I  will  first  try  to  show  that 


638       UNITY   OF  MIND  AND   OF  NATURE 

no  form  of  Neutralism  which  makes  mentality  a  i^educible 
characteristic  is  compatible  with  any  of  the  three 
hypotheses.  It  is  immediately  obvious  that  no  such 
form  of  Neutralism  is  compatible  with  hypothesis  («), 
which  ascribes  to  the  neutral  stuff  no  characteristics 
except  some  of  the  factors  of  materiality.  For  we  have 
already  argued  that  mentality  cannot  be  reduced  to 
materiality  as  a  whole  ;  and,  if  this  be  so,  a  fortiori,  it 
cannot  be  reduced  to  a  part  of  materiality. 

It  is  easy  to  show  that  such  forms  of  Neutralism  are 
also  incompatible  with  hypothesis  {b),  which  ascribes  to 
the  neutral  stuff  no  characteristics  except  some  of  the 
factors  of  mentality.  If  mentality  is  to  be  a  reducible 
characteristic  on  this  hypothesis  we  must  suppose  that 
the  higher  terms  in  the  hierarchy  of  mental  factors  can 
be  reduced  to  the  lower  terms  of  this  hierarchy.  Now 
it  seems  to  me  that  this  is  plainly  impossible  when  we 
clearly  understand  what  is  required.  Let  us  take  an 
example.  There  is  a  certain  event  which  has  the 
characteristic  of  being  a  perception  of  a  pink  rat. 
Let  us  make  the  most  favourable  assumption  possible 
for  the  reductive  type  of  theory.  Let  us  suppose  that 
this  perception  has  no  existent  constituents  except  events 
which  are  feelings  and  events  which  are  acquaintances 
with  sensa  and  images.  We  are  to  suppose  then  that 
this  perception  consists  of  such  events  interrelated  in 
certain  characteristic  ways,  and  of  nothing  else.  It 
seems  to  me  that  it  would  still  be  impossible  to  deduce 
from  the  fact  that  it  has  this  structure  and  is  composed 
of  these  constituents,  and  from  laws  which  are  entirely 
about  feelings  and  sensations,  that  this  event  will  be  the 
perception  of  an  epistemological  object  and  that  this 
epistemological  object  will  be  a  pink  rat.  Unless  we  had 
actually  met  with  events  which  were  perceptions  and 
had  epistemological  objects  I  do  not  see  that  we  could 
possibly  have  suspected  that  a  whole  composed  of  feel- 
ings and  sensations  interrelated  in  certain  ways  would 
have  the  property  of  being  the  perception  of  a  certain 


STATUS   AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       639 

epistemological  object.  Thus  the  characteristic  of  being 
a  perception  is  not  a  reducible  characteristic,  like  the 
behaviour  of  a  clock,  but  is  at  best  an  emergent 
characteristic,  like  the  behaviour  of  silver-chloride. 
Similarly,  I  do  not  see  the  least  reason  to  believe  that 
the  characteristic  of  being  a  discursive  cognition  c(juld 
be  reduced  to  characteristics  which  come  lower  in  the 
hierarchy  of  mental  factors.  If  such  reductions  can  be 
effected  it  is  quite  certain  that  no  one  has  made  even  a 
plausible  beginning  of  performing  the  reduction.  I  ' 
conclude  then  that  all  forms  of  Neutralism  which  make 
mentality  a  reducible  characteristic  are  incompatible  , 
with  hypothesis  {b)  as  well  as  with  hypothesis  {a).  ' 

What  about  hypothesis  (<:),  which  ascribes  to  the 
neutral  stuff  some  of  the  factors  of  mentality  and  some 
of  the  factors  of  materiality?  The  forms  of  Neutralism 
at  present  under  discussion  could  be  consistent  with 
{c)  only  on  the  supposition  that  the  higher  factors  of 
mentality,  though  not  reducible  to  the  lower  factors 
alone,  are  reducible  to  these  eked  out  with  some  of  the 
factors  of  materiality.  And  I  cannot  see  the  least  reason 
to  believe  that  the  addition  of  these  factors  of  materiality 
would  help  the  proposed  reduction.  I  am  therefore  inclined  \' 
to  reject  all  forms  of  Neutralism  which  make_  mentality  ; 
a  reducible  characteristic,  on  the  ground  that  thev  are  | 
inconsistent  with  all  the  intelligible  hypotheses  that  we 
can  make  about  the  neutral  stuff.  We  thus  get  rid  of 
(3,  13)  Reductive  Neutralism,  (3,  122)  the  second  form 
of  Mixed  Neutralism,  and  (3,  212)  the  second  form  of 
Mentalistic  Neutralism. 

We  are  thus  left  with  three  forms  of  Neutralism,  viz., 
(3,  11)  Emergent  Neutralism,  (3,  121)  the  first  form  of 
Mixed  Neutralism,  and  (3,  211)  the  first  form  of  Mental- 
istic Neutralism.  We  must  now  see  how  the  three 
hypotheses  affect  these  three  alternatives.  We  find  that 
hypothesis  {a)  is  consistent  with  all  of  them.  The  same 
is  true  of  hypothesis  {c).  But  hypothesis  {b)  would 
exclude  all  but  the  first  of  them,  as  I  will  now  show.     In 


640       UNITY   OF  MIND   AND   OF  NATURE 

the  first  place,  if  no  characteristic  be  ascribed  to  the 
neutral  stuff  except  some  of  the  factors  of  mentality, 
it  is  plain  that  no  form  of  Neutralism  which  makes 
materiality  a  reducible  characteristic  can  be  accepted. 
For  we  have  already  argued  that  materiality  cannot 
be  reduced  to  mentality  as  a  whole  ;  and,  if  this  be  so, 
a  fortiori^  it  cannot  be  reduced  to  a  part  of  mentality. 
This  removes  (3,  121)  the  first  form  of  mixed  Neutralism. 
Moreover,  this  hypothesis  is  incompatible  with  any 
form  of  Neutralism  which  makes  materiality  a  delusive 
characteristic.  For  we  have  argued  that  it  is  almost 
incredible  that  what  has  nothing  but  mental  qualities  and 
relations  should  appear  to  have  spatial  qualities,  motion, 
and  spatial  relations.  If  this  be  true,  it  is,  a  fortiori,  incred- 
ible that  what  has  only  some  of  the  factors  of  mentality 
should  appear  to  have  spatial  qualities,  to  move,  and  to 
stand  in  spatial  relations.  This  removes  (3,  211)  the 
first  form  of  Mentalistic  Neutralism.  Thus  we  may 
finally  classify  the  three  surviving  forms  of  Neutralism 
as  follows.  (I)  Theories  compatible  with  all  the  alterna- 
tive hypotheses: — (3,  11)  Emergent  Neutralism.  (II) 
Theories  compatible  with  (a)  and  (r)  but  not  with  {h) : — 
(3,  121)  the  first  form  of  Mixed  Neutralism,  and  (3,  211) 
the  first  form  of  Mentalistic  Neutralism. 

T/ie  Seven  remaining  Types  of  Theory,  We  have  now 
reduced  our  original  seventeen  types  of  theory  to  a 
modest  seven.  I  shall  now  take  these  seven  survivors 
in  order,  and  mention  what  seem  to  me  to  be  the  strong 
and  weak  points  to  each. 

(i)  We  will  begin  with  the  two  forms  of  Dualism.  If^ 
I  am  right  in  holding  that  materiality  and  mentality  are 
both  complex  characteristics  analysable  into  several 
factors,  it  cannot  strictly  be  said  that  either  is  a  differ- 
entiating attribute.  For  it  is  part  of  the  definition  of  a 
differentiating  attribute  that  it  shall  be  simple  and  un- 
analysable. What  then  must  we  understand  the  two 
types  of  Dualism  to  mean  when  they  say  that  mentality 
and  materiality  are  "differentiating  attributes"?    I  think 


STATUS   AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       641 

it  is  fairly  easy  to  see  what  they  mean.  Dualism  means 
to  assert  of  materiality  the  following  propositions,  (a) 
There  is  something  which  possesses  a//  the  factors  of 
materiality,  so  that  materiality  is  not  in  any  sense  a 
delusive  characteristic.  {d)  None  of  the  factors  of 
materiality  are  reducible  to  or  emergent  from  the  other 
factors  of  materiality,  or  mentality,  or  a  combination  of 
both.  This  is  of  course  quite  consistent  with  the  belief 
that  there  may  also  be  some  things  which  have  some 
of  the  factors  of  materiality  and  not  others.  It  merely 
insists  that,  if  there  be  such  things,  the  remaining  factors 
of  materiality  are  neither  reducible  nor  emergent  qualities 
of  certain  complex  wholes  composed  of  these  things. 
B.^-.,  sensa  would  have  some  but  not  all  the  factors  of 
materiality,  and  Dualism  is  not  compelled  to  deny  the 
existence  of  sensa.  But  it  is  compelled  to  assert  that 
there  are  a/so  material  things,  and  that  the  characteristics 
which  these  have  and  sensa  lack  are  not  emergent  or  re- 
ducible characteristics  of  certain  groups  of  interrelated 
sensa. 

I  take  it  that  Dualism  asserts  a  similar  pair  of  pro- 
positions about  mentality.  It  asserts  (a)  that  there  is 
something  which  possesses  a//  the  factors  of  mentality. 
And  (d)  that  the  higher  factors  of  mentality  are  neither 
reducible  to  nor  emergent  from  the  lower  factors  of 
mentality,  or  materiality,  or  a  combination  of  both. 
This  is  quite  consistent  with  admitting  that  there  may 
be  things  that  have  only  some  of  the  lower  factors  of 
mentality.  E-^',  the  minds  of  oysters  might  have 
nothing  but  sentience.  But  Dualism  is  compelled  to 
assert  that  there  are  some  things  which  have  all  the 
factors  of  mentality.  And  it  is  compelled  to  assert  that 
the  characteristics  which  human  minds  have  and  the 
minds  of  oysters  lack  are  not  emergent  or  reducible 
characteristics  of  certain  groups  of  interrelated  things 
which  have  nothing  but  sentience. 

We  now  understand  what  is  asserted  in  common  by 
theories   which    make    mentality   and    materiality    both 

2  s 


642       UNITY   OF  MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

''differentiating  attributes".  It  is  evident  that,  if  we 
accept  Dualism,  five  alternative  views  are  possible  about 
the  relations  between  mentality  and  materiality.  {a) 
They  may  be  incompatible  with  each  other,  (d)  The 
possession  of  materiality  may  entail  that  of  mentality, 
but  not  conversely,  {c)  The  possession  of  mentality 
may  entail  that  of  materiality,  but  not  conversely,  {d) 
The  possession  of  either  may  entail  that  of  the  other. 
And  (e)  the  possession  of  one  may  entail  neither  the 
possession  nor  the  absence  of  the  other.  Now  I  have 
argued  that  the  theory  that  the  two  are  incompatible, 
though  plausible  at  first  sight,  is  really  quite  groundless. 
I  therefore  reject  (i,  2)  the  Dualism  of  Incompatibles, 
which  was  Descartes'  theory.  We  can  therefore  confine 
ourselves  to  (i,  i)  the  Dualism  of  Compatibles,  which 
includes  the  remaining  four  alternatives.  I  see  no 
reason  for,  and  strong  empirical  reasons  against,  both 
(d)  and  (d).  On  the  face  of  it  there  are  plenty  of  things 
which  are  material  and  have  none  of  the  factors  of 
mentality.  I  do  not  know  that  [d]  has  ever  been  main- 
tained. But  I  understand  Spinoza  to  have  asserted  [d)  ; 
if  so,  he  appears  to  me  to  have  produced  no  reasons 
good  or  bad  for  his  belief.  We  are  thus  left  with  (c) 
and  {e).     Let  us  begin  with  {c). 

It  is  certain  that  we  have  no  empirical  evidence  in 
normal  experience  for  the  existence  of  anything  which 
possesses  any  factor  of  mentality  without  being  also 
material.  Thus  the  empirical  facts  are  all  in  accordance 
with  the  view  that  the  possession  of  mentality  entails 
that  of  materiality.  But,  in  the  first  place,  they  do 
not  require  this  view.  It  might  be  that  mentality  and 
materiality  are  logically  indifferent  to  each  other,  and 
yet  that,  in  the  actual  world  or  in  the  only  part  of  it 
that  comes  under  our  observation  in  this  life,  it  is  a  fact 
that  mentality  is  always  accompanied  by  materiality 
whilst  materiality  is  sometimes  unaccompanied  by 
mentality.  In  the  second  place,  the  empirical  facts 
would  suggest  causal  rather  than  logical  dependence  of 


STATUS   AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       643 

mentality  on  materiality.  For  the  only  things  which 
exhibit  signs  of  mentality  are  organisms,  i.e.,  certain 
very  special  and  complex  material  structures.  Now  this 
would  make  mentality,  not  a  "differentiating  attribute", 
even  in  the  wider  sense  in  which  we  are  at  present  using 
the  phrase,  but  an  etnergent  characteristic.  Finally, 
when  I  reflect  on  mentality  and  materiality  as  carefully 
as  I  can,  I  cannot  see  that  the  presence  of  the  former 
logically  entails  that  of  the  latter.  I  do  not  find  the 
least  difficulty  in  conceiving  of  a  being  which  had  all 
the  factors  of  mentality  and  none  of  the  factors  of 
materiality.  Some  philosophers  (perhaps  St  Thomas) 
seem  to  have  taken  an  intermediate  view.  They  seem 
to  have  held  that  some  of  the  lower  factors  of  mentality 
{e.g.,  sentience)  entail  materiality,  whilst  some  of  the 
higher  factors  {e.g.,  discursive  cognition)  do  not  entail 
it.  And  some  philosophers  seem  to  have  gone  further, 
and  to  have  maintained  that  the  higher  factors  of 
mentality  exclude  materiality.  I  see  no  ground  for 
holding  either  alternative.  I  cannot  see  any  a  priori 
reason  why  an  immaterial  being  should  not  have  sen- 
tience and  sensation  ;  or  why  a  material  being  should 
not  have  discursive  cognition. 

We  are  thus  left  with  alternative  (^),  viz.,  that  men- 
tality and  materiality  are  logically  indifferent  to  each 
other.  This  supposition  divides  into  five  factual  alter- 
natives analogous  to  the  five  logical  alternatives  which 
we  have  already  discussed,  (a)  Nothing  in  fact  has 
both  mentality  and  materiality.  (^)  Everything  which 
has  materiality  has  in  fact  mentality,  but  there  are  some 
things  which  have  mentality  without  materiality,  (y) 
Everything  which  has  mentality  has  in  fact  also  materi- 
ality, but  there  are  some  things  which  have  materiality 
without  mentality.  (^)  Everything  that  has  mentality 
has  in  fact  materiality,  and  everything  that  has  materi- 
ality has  in  fact  mentality.  And  (e)  some  things  have 
mentality  without  materiality,  some  things  have  both 
characteristics,  and  some  things  have  materiality  with- 


644       UNITY   OF  MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

out  mentality.  Now  we  must  admit  that  all  direct 
empirical  evidence  of  the  normal  kind  favours  (y).  We 
are  not  acquainted  with  anything  that  is  certainly  mental 
and  certainly  immaterial.  And  we  are  acquainted  with 
many  things  which  seem  to  be  material  and  do  not  show 
the  least  sign  of  being  mental.  Of  course  it  remains 
possible  that  there  may  be  things  which  are  mental  and 
immaterial  (e.g:,  angels),  but  that  they  cannot  or  do 
not  manifest  themselves  to  us.  But,  in  that  case,  there 
can  be  no  direct  empirical  evidence  for  their  existence. 
Again,  it  remains  possible  that  those  minds  which  do 
manifest  themselves  to  us  are  immaterial,  but  that  they 
stand  in  specially  intimate  relations  with  organisms 
and  have  to  manifest  themselves  by  means  of  these 
organisms.  But,  unless  we  hold  that  it  is  logically  im- 
possible for  what  is  mental  to  be  also  material,  there 
seems  to  be  nothing  in  the  normal  phenomena  to  sug- 
gest this.  And  I  have  argued  in  Chapter  XII  (i)  that 
there  are  serious  difficulties  in  squaring  this  Instru- 
mental Theory  of  the  relation  of  body  and  mind  with 
the  known  facts,  and  (ii)  that  the  abnormal  facts  dealt 
with  by  Psychical  Research  do  not  on  the  whole  sup- 
port it  and  do  in  certain  respects  conflict  with  it.  The 
existence  of  immaterial  mental  substances  therefore  re- 
mains a  mere  possibility  for  which  there  appears  to  be 
no  evidence  whatever,  normal  or  abnormal,  a  priori  or 
empirical. 

Again,  there  is  plainly  no  direct  empirical  evidence 
for  the  view  that  everything  which  is  material  is  in  fact 
also  mental.  If  we  accept  it  at  all  we  must  accept  it  as 
a  hypothesis  which  goes  beyond  and  appears  to  con- 
flict with  the  observable  facts.  We  must  therefore  ask 
(i)  whether  this  hypothesis  has  any  appreciable  ante- 
cedent probability,  and  (ii)  whether  it  explains  anything 
that  could  not  have  been  explained  equally  well  without 
it.  (i)  I  do  not  think  that  anyone  has  had  the  hardihood 
to  ascribe  all  the  factors  of  mentality  to  every  material 
substance.     At  most   they  have  regarded  some  of  the 


STATUS   AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       645 

lower  mental  factors,  such  as  sentience,  as  differentiating 
attributes  which  belong  to  all  bits  of  matter.  But  even 
this  seems  rash  to  the  last  degree.  It  is  no  doubt  true 
that  the  evidence  for  sentience  fades  gradually  away  as 
we  go  lower  in  the  scale  of  organisms.  It  is  therefore 
quite  possible  that  sentience  extends  below  the  point  at 
which  direct  evidence  for  it  ceases.  But  everything 
which  we  have  the  least  ground  for  believing  to  be 
sentient  is  a  living  organism  ;  i.e.^  a  highly  complicated 
material  structure  consisting  of  millions  of  molecules. 
Moreover,  every  organism  is  composed  of  a  compara- 
tively few  chemical  elements,  viz.,  Carbon,  Oxygen, 
Hydrogen,  Nitrogen,  Sulphur  and  Phosphorus.  It  is 
an  enormous  extrapolation  to  ascribe  any  kind  of 
sentience  to  inorganic  matter  which  does  not  consist  of 
these  elements.  Thus  the  antecedent  probability  of  the 
hypothesis  of  universal  sentience  seems  to  me  to  be 
vanishingly  small. 

(ii)  I  think  that  the  only  empirical  ground  that  anyone 
has  ever  had  for  ascribing  some  of  the  factors  of 
mentality  to  all  material  objects  is  indirect.  It  looks  as 
if  things  which  obviously  have  mentality  had  developed 
in  the  course  of  time  from  things  which  obviously  had 
materiality  and  seem  not  to  have  had  any  factor  of 
mentality.  And  it  is  thought  that  this  alleged  fact 
could  be  more  easily  explained  if  we  assumed  that  non- 
living matter  really  has  some  of  the  factors  of  mentality 
in  spite  of  all  appearances  to  the  contrary.  We  can 
deal  with  this  contention  very  shortly.  Any  theory 
which  regards  mentality  as  a  "  differentiating  attribute  ", 
even  in  the  looser  sense  defined  in  this  subsection, 
ipso  facto,  renounces  all  hope  of  ''explaining"  its  occur- 
rence. For,  by  definition,  it  holds  that  none  of  the 
higher  factors  of  mentality  are  reducible  to  or  emergent 
from  the  lower  factors  of  mentality  alone  or  in  combina- 
tion with  materiality.  Hence  it  is  not  of  the  least 
advantage  to  a  Dualistic  Theory  to  ascribe  some  of  the 
factors  of  mentality  to  all  matter  in  the  hope  that  it  will 


646       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

thereby  explain  the  occurrence  of  the  complete  charac- 
teristic of  mentality  in  certain  material  objects. 

I  therefore  conclude  that  the  only  form  of  Dualism 
for  which  there  is  the  least  evidence,  either  direct  or 
indirect,  is  (y)  which  asserts  that  everything  which  has 
mentality  has  also  materiality,  whilst  some  things  which 
have  materiality  have  no  factor  of  mentality.  Is  there 
any  good  reason  to  accept  Dualism  in  this  form  ?  I  do 
not  think  that  there  is.  All  the  empirical  facts  which 
make  it  unreasonable  for  the  Dualist  to  accept  any  but 
this  particular  form  of  Dualism  make  it  unreasonable 
for  him  to  accept  Dualism  at  all.  We  find  that  nothing 
exhibits  mentality  except  living  organisms,  and  that  all 
living  organisms 'of"a~certain  kind  and  degree  of  com- 
plexity do  exhibit  a  certain  number  of  the  factors  of 
mentality.  As  we  pass  to  more  and  more  complex 
organisms  we  find  that  higher  factors  of  mentality  are 
exhibited  by  them.  This  suggests  most  forcibly  that 
all  factors  of  mentality  are  emergent  or  reducible  ;  or,  if 
not,  that  only  the  lowest  factor '  of Tn e n tafily  is "  a  differ- 
entiating attribute,  whilst  the  higher  factors  are  reducible 
to  or  emergent  from  it  alone  or  in  combination  with 
materiality.  The  normal  facts  seem  to  me  to  be  alto- 
gether against  Dualism,  and  the  abnormal  facts  seem  to 
me  not  to  require  a  Dualism  of  mentality  and  materiality. 
We  may  therefore  pass  on  to  the  five  types  of  theory 
which  still  remain. 

(2)  We  can  at  once  dismiss  (2,  iii)  Emergent  Mental- 
ism.  For  this  makes  mentality  a  differentiating  attribute ; 
and  I  have  just  argued  that  this  is  most  improbable, 
even  when  it  is  interpreted  in  the  looser  sense  in  which 
we  had  to  interpret  it  in  order  to  make  it  possible  at  all. 
Hence  the  only  type  of  theory  which  remains  for  dis- 
cussion under  (2)  is  (2,  211)  Emergent  Materialism. 
This  asserts  {a)  that  materiality  is  a  differentiating  attri- 
bute", and  (<^)  that  mentality  is  an  emergent  characteristic. 

I  have  already  explained  what  a  person  must  be 
understood  to  mean    by  calling  materiality  a    "differ- 


STATUS   AND    PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       647 

entiating  attribute"  in  spite  of  its  being  a  complex 
characteristic.  He  must  mean  that  all  the  factors  of 
materiality  are  differentiating  attributes,  and  that  there 
are  in  fact  some  things  which  have  them  all.  Now  I 
have  argued  in  Chapter  IV  that  this  is  possible  and 
even  highly  probable.  I  have  therefore  no  objection  to 
the  first  paLrt_of_the  Theory  of  Emergent  Materialism. 
The  second  part  needs  a  little  further  explanation.  It 
might  be  held  in  a  more  or  a  less  radical  form.  The 
more  radical  form  would  assert  that  even  the  lowest 
factor  of  mentality,  viz.,  sentience,  is  an  emergent  char- 
acteristic of  certain  kinds  of  material  complex.  The 
higher  factors  of  mentality  would  of  course  be  emergent 
characteristics  of  complexes  composed  of  complexes 
which  have  the  lower  factors.  The  less  radical  form 
would  make  sentience  a  differentiating  attribute,  which 
in  fact  belongs  only  to  material  things  and  perhaps  only 
to  some  of  them.  The  higher  factors  of  mentality  would, 
as  before,  be  emergent  characteristics  of  complexes  com- 
posed of  complexes  which  have  the  lower  factors. 

I  see  no  reason  to  prefer  the  less  radical  form  of 
Emergent  Materialism  to  the  more  radical  form.  If  the 
higher  factors  of  mentality  could  be  reduced  to  the  lowest 
factor  there  might  be  something  to  be  said  for  making 
sentience  a  differentiating  attribute  which  belongs  to 
some  or  all  material  things  and  to  nothing  else.  Butj.  ^J 
actually  no  factor  in  the  mental  hierarchy  can  be^"  '  * 
reduced  to  any  or  all  of  the  lower  factors,  whether  taken 
by  themselves  or  combined  with  material  characteristics. 
And,  since  we  therefore  must  postulate  emergence  at 
every  stage  but  the  first,  there  seems  to  be  no  advantage 
in  refusing  to  postulate  it  at  the  first  stage  too. 

If  there  were  no  facts  to  be  considered  except  the 
normal  ones,  and  we  rejected  all  the  alleged  abnormal 
facts  dealt  with  by  Psychical  Research,  I  should  regard 
Emergent  Materialism  as  on  the  whole  the  most  reason- 
able view  to  take  of  the  status  and  relations  of  matter 
and    mind    in    Nature.       The    only  question   would    be 


) 


64S       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

whether  one  of  the  forms  of  Neutralism  might  not  be 
preferable.  1  shall  ignore  the  alleged  abnormal  facts 
for  the  present,  and  shall  discuss  the  three  forms  of 
Neutralism  which  still  remain. 

(3)  Of  the  three  remaining  forms  of  Neutralism  the 
only  one  against  which  I  have  a  positive  objection  to 
offer  is  (3,  121)  the  first  form  of  Mixed  Neutralism. 
This  type  of  theory  makes  materiality  a  reducible 
characteristic.  We  have  agreed  that  it  could  not  be 
reduced  to  any  or  all  the  factors  of  mentality.  Hence 
the  only  question  that  remains  is  whether  there  are  some 
factors  of  materiality  to  which  the  remaining  factors  of 
materiality  could  be  reduced.  If  this  were  so  it  would 
be  possible  to  ascribe  only  the  fundamental  factors  of 
materiality  to  the  neutral  stuff;  and  to  hold  that 
materiality  as  a  whole  is  reducible,  in  the  sense  that  its 
remaining  factors  could  be  proved  to  belong  to  certain 
complex  wholes  composed  of  elements  which  have  only 
these  fundamental  factors.  So  far  as  I  know,  this 
cannot  be  done.  At  any  rate  no  one  has  done  it,  or, 
to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  attempted  to  do  it.  I 
shall  therefore  reject  (3,  121)  the  first  form  of  Mixed 
Neutralism. 

The  two  remaining  forms  are  (3,  11)  Emergent  Neutral- 
ism, and  (3,  211)  the  first  form  of  Mentalistic  Neutralism. 
Both  these  types  of  theory  have  actually  been  held 
by  distinguished  philosophers.  Professor  Alexander's 
theory  xr^S^^^-rinu-  atid  Deity  is  a  form  of  Emergent 
Neutralism.  Mr  Russell's  theory  in  the  Analysis  of 
Mind  is'  a  form  of  the  first  kind  of  Mentalistic  Neutralism. 
Now  Emergent  Neutralism  takes  materiality  to  be  an 
emergent  characteristic,  and  the  first  form  of  Mentalistic 
Neutralism  takes  materiality  to  be  a  delusive  character- 
istic. Either  view  appears  to  me  to  be  possible,  but  I 
do  not  see  any  good  reason  to  believe  either.  I  have 
argued  that  it  is  possible  and  even  probable  that 
materiality  is  a  '' differentiating  attribute",  in  the  sense 
that  there  are  some  things  which    have  all  the  factors 


STATUS  AND   PROSPECTS   OF  MIND       649 

of  materiality  and  that  none  of  these  factors  are  either 
reducible  or  emergent.  There  are  not  the  same  strong 
empirical  reasons  for  refusing  to  take  materiality  as  a 
differentiating  attribute,  in  this  sense,  as  there  are  for 
refusing  to  take  mentality  as  a  differentiating  attribute 
in  a  similar  sense.  So  far  as  I  can  see,  the  only  merit 
of  these  two  remaining  forms  of  Neutralism  is  that  they 
introduce  rather  more  unity  into  the  world  as  a  whole 
than  we  could  admit  on  other  theories.  But  this  seems 
to  me  to  be  a  very  minor  virtue,  and  quite  insufficient 
to  justify  any  strong  preference  for  these  theories. 

It  will  be  noticed  that  Professor  Alexander's  theory 
may  be  regarded  as  a  more  radical  form  of  Emergent 
Materialism.  Emergent  Materialism  regards  materiality 
as  a  "  differentiating  attribute"  in  the  looser  sense,  and 
it  regards  mentality  as  an  emergent  characteristic  of 
certain  material  aggregates.  Professor  Alexander,  so 
far  as  I  can  understand  him,  ascribes  to  his  neutral  stuff 
only  some  of  the  factors  of  materiality,  viz.,  spatio- 
temporal  characteristics,  and  none  of  the  factors  of 
mentality.  Now,  if  this  be  the  right  interpretation,  I 
have  a  positive  objection  to  Professor  Alexander's  form 
of  Emergent  Neutralism.  For  it  seems  to  me  to  be 
impossible  for  anything  to  have  only  spatio-temporal 
characteristics  ;  it  seems  to  me  that  anything  that  has  j 
spatio-temporal  characteristics  must  also  have  some  ex-  | 
tensible  quality.  This,  however,  is  a  minor  point  for  / 
the  present  purpose.  If  Professor  Alexander  admitted  [ 
this  objection  it  would  be  quite  easy  for  him  to  ascribe  I 
some  non -spatio-temporal  extensible  quality  to  his 
neutral  stuff  and  then  carry  on  as  before. 

In  calling  Mr  Russell's  theory  a  form  of  the  first  kind 
of  Mentalistic  Neutralism  I  am  aware  that  I  am  beiner 
perhaps  too  charitable.  It  is  indeed  quite  certain  that 
he  regards  materiality  as  aT^eluJive  characteristic,  in 
the  mildfeFsense  in  which  Berkeley^did^so.  That  is,  he 
holds  that  nothing  lias  all  the  characteristics  of  matter, 
though  he  admits  that  each  characteristic  of  matter  be- 


650       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

longs  to  something.  What  I  am  not  certain  about  is 
whether  he  regards  mentality  as  an  emergent  character- 
istic or  as  a  reducible  characteristic.  I  am  sure  that  he 
would  like  to  hold  the  latter  view,  because  it  would  shock 
more  intensely  more  of  the  people  whom  he  likes  to 
shock.  If  he  really  does  hold  this  view  his  theory  is  a 
form  of  the  second  kind  of  Mentalistic  Neutralism,  and 
I  have  rejected  this  long  ago. 

The  upshot  of  the  discussion  is  that,  if  we  confine 
ourselves  to  normal  phenomena,  Emergent  Materialism, 
Emergent  Neutralism,  and  the  first  form  of  Mentalistic 
Neutralism  are  all  possible;  and  that  thereis  nothing 
to  suggest  any  theory  which  would  give  to  Mind  a 
more  important  and  self-subsistent  status  in  Nature. 
As  between  these  three  theories  I  prefer  Emergent 
Materialism  to  any  form  of  Emergent  Neutralism  or 
Mentalistic  Neutralism  with  which  I  am  acquainted. 
This  is  partly  because  I  think  it  possible  and  probable 
that  materiality  is  a  differentiating  attribute,  in  the  sense 
there  are  some  things  which  have  all  the  factors  of 
materiality  and  that  none  of  these  factors  are  emergent 
or  reducible.  And  it  is  partly  because  I  think  that  there 
are  difficulties  in  the  only  two  forms  of  Neutralism  with 
which  I  am  well  acquainted,  viz..  Professor  Alexander's 
and  Mr  Russell's.  But  it  is  quite  possible  that  these 
difficulties  will  some  day  be  removed  by  these  learned 
men  themselves,  or  by  successors  who  will  enjoy  the 
advantage  of  their  pioneer  work.  In  the  meanwhile, 
if  I  were  forced  to  choose  between  the  two,  I  think  I 
should  give  a  slight  preference  to  Mr  Russell's  form 
of  Neutralism.  If  I  am  not  to  regard  materiality  as  a 
"differentiating  attribute",  in  the  looser  sense,  I  think 
it  is  more  profitable  to  regard  it  as  a  delusive  character- 
istic, in  the  milder  sense  of  Berkeley  and  Russell,  than 
as  an  emergent  characteristic.  The  former  view  seems 
to  me  to  fit  better  into  the  facts  of  perception  than  the 
latter. 

Final  Considej'ations.     It  only  remains  to  consider  what 


STATUS   AND    PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       651 

effect  the  abnormal  and  supernormal  facts,  which  I  have 
so  far  ignored  in  this  Chapter,  will  have  on  the  above 
tentative  conclusions.  For  this  purpose  I  must  refer 
the  reader  back  to  the  latter  part  of  Chapter  XII.  I 
suggested  there  that,  in  the  present  state  of  Psychical 
Research,  there  is  some  evidence  for  persistence  after 
bodily  death,  but  hardly  any  that  justifies  a  belief  in 
survival.  And  I  suggested  that  the  facts  which  are  at 
present  reasonably  well  established  are  best  explained 
by  a  peculiar  form  of  the  view  that  mentality  is  an 
emergent  characteristic.  This  theory  I  called  the  "Com-  i 
pound  Theory ".  The  essential  point  of  it  is  that 
mentality  is  an  emergent  characteristic  of  a  compound 
composed  of  a  living  brain  and  nervous  system  and  of 
something  else  which  is  capable  of  persisting  for  some 
time  after  the  death  of  the  body  and  of  entering  into 
temporary  combination  with  the  brain  and  nervous 
system  of  certain  peculiarly  constituted  human  beings 
called  '*  mediums".  This  something  else  I  called  a 
"  Psychic  Factor". 

About  the  nature  of  this  Psychic  Factor  there  is  very 
little  that  can  at  present  be  said  with  certainty.  We 
can  say  positively  of  it  that  it  must  be  capable  of  carry- 
ing traces  of  experiences  which  happened  to  the  mind 
of  which  it  was  formerly  a  constituent.  And  negatively 
we  can  say  that  there  is  at  present  no  reason  to  believe 
and  strong  reason  to  doubt  that  it  has  the  higher  factors 
of  mentality.  It  remains  possible  that  it  may  have  some 
of  the  lower  factors  of  mentality,  such  as  sentience  ;  but 
I  do  not  see  anything  in  the  facts  to  require  or  to  suggest 
this  hypothesis.  Could  it  have  materiality  as  a  whole, 
or  any  of  the  factors  of  materiality?  It  certainly  has 
the  factor  of  persistence  ;  but  this  is  common  to  all 
substances  and  is  not  peculiar  to  matter.  If  w'e  say 
that  it  is  material  we  must  admit  that  it  is  an  unusual 
kind  of  matter.  It  is  not  destroyed  by  the  breaking  up 
of  the  body  with  which  it  was  connected  ;  it  does  not 
manifest   itself  to    sense-perception ;    and    it    does    not 


652       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

produce  ordinary  physical  and  chemical  effects.  On 
the  other  hand,  there  is  no  reason  why  it  should  not  be 
material  in  spite  of  these  peculiarities.  If  the  Psychic 
Factor  be  material,  and  if  it  have  none  of  the  factors 
of  mentality,  the  Compound  Theory  is  a  form  of 
Emergent  Materialism,  Thus  a  slightly  modified  form 
of_E.m«4:g€4rt--Ma4eriali^ni..as._  cam  patibifi .  wTtE^aTTniTre 
well-established  supernormal  facts,  so  far  as  I  can  see. 
A  fortiori,  these  facts  will  be  compatible  with  slightly 
modified  forms  of  the  two  kinds  of  Neutralism  which  I 
have  admitted  to  be  possible. 

It  is  perhaps  just  worth  while  to  mention  that,  if  the 
alleged  phenomena  of  materialisation  and  telekinesis 
were  well  established,  we  might  be  able  to  see  our  way 
to  a  more  definitely  materialistic  view  of  the  Psychic 
Factor.  For  the  so-called  "ectoplasm",  which  is 
alleged  to  be  involved  in  these  phenomena,  would  be  a 
peculiar  kind  of  matter  associated  with  the  ordinary 
matter  of  the  living  human  body.  It  would  then  be 
plausible  to  suggest  that  the  ectoplasm,  which  is  involved 
in  the  physical  phenomena  of  Psychical  Research,  is 
identical  with  the  Psychic  Factor,  which  is  required  to 
explain  some  of  the  mental  phenomena  of  Psychical 
Research.  At  present,  however,  the  physical  pheno- 
mena do  not  stand  on  the  same  evidential  level  as  the 
mental  phenomena.  It  is  much  harder  to  rule  out  all 
possibility  of  fraud  in  the  former  than  in  the  latter. 
And  it  is  harder  to  make  fraud  impossible  in  the  case 
of  alleged  materialisation  than  in  the  case  of  alleged 
telekinesis.  I  therefore  do  not  wish  this  suggestion 
to  be  regarded  as  any  more  than  a  pure  speculation. 

The  upshot  of  the  discussion  is  that  such  abnormal 
phenomena  as  are  at  present  reasonably  well  established 
do  not  require  us  to  accept  anything  more  than  a  slightly 
modified  form  of  one  of  the  three  types  of  theory  which 
we  accepted  as  possible  in  the  last  subsection.  They 
do  not  give  us  any  reason  to  ascribe  to  Mind  a  more 
important  and  self-subsistent  status  in  Nature  than  we 


STATUS  AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       65; 


were  prepared  to  give  it  when  we  confined  ourselves  to 
the  normal  phenomena.  It  is  of  course  possible  that  in 
future  we  might  get  empirical  evidence  for  survival  as 
distinct  from  va^xo.  persistence.  Some  people,  who  have 
much  more  extensive  practical  experience  of  Psychical 
Research  than  I  have,  would  say  that  we  have  such 
evidence  already ;  but,  as  I  have  tried  to  show  in 
Chapter  XII,  this  is  doubtful.  In  that  case  we  might 
be  forced  to  look  with  more  favour  on  Dualistic  theories 
which  make  mentality  a  differentiating  attribute.  But 
we  must  estimate  probabilities  on  the  evidence  that  we 
have,  and  not  on  the  evidence  which  our  successors  may 
have.  And,  on  all  the  evidence  which  is  available  to 
me,  which  I  have  tried  to  state  as  fairly  as  I  can  to  the 
reader  in  the  course  of  this  book,  I  judge  the  most 
likely  view  to  be  some  form  of  the  Compound  Theojy 
which  is  compatible  with  Emergent  Materialism. 


■/■ 


Prospects  of  Mind  in  Nature.  I  shall  end  this  book 
by  saying  something  about  the  probable  prospects  of 
Mind  in  Nature.  This  is  a  question  which  could  not 
be  profitably  asked  until  we  had  formed  some  opinion 
of  the  status  of  Mind  in  Nature.  But  it  does  not  follow 
that  we  can  make  any  very  definite  answer  to  it  even 
now. 

The  first  point  that  I  want  to  make  is  that  there  is 
nothing  in  Mentalism  as  such  to  justify  an  optimistic^ 
view  of  the  prospects  of  Mind,  and  nothing  in  Material- 
ism as  such  to  justify  a  pessimistic  view  of  the  prospects 
of  Mind.  Let  us  consider,  e.g.,  the  I^eibnitian  form  of 
Mentalism.  If  this  be  true  there  are  ^ertalniy  many 
mxinds  which  are  so  stupid  and  confused  that  aggregates 
of  them  appear  to  us  as  material  objects.  And,  although 
we  are  not  so  confused  as  this,  we  are  confused  enoue-h 
to  misperceive  such  aggregates  as  material  objects 
though  they  are  really  mental.  Now  it  is  quite  con- 
sistent with  Mentalism  as  such  that  all  the  minds  in  the 
Universe  should    be   getting   steadily    mor**  and    more 


^>j:y 


654       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

stupid  and  confused.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  minds 
which  are  now  so  confused  that  aggregates  of  them 
appear  to  us  as  material  objects  were  once  minds  like 
our  own.  And  it  is  quite  possible  that  our  minds  were 
once  clear  enough  not  to  misperceive  aggregates  of  very 
confused  minds  as  material  objects.  Mentalism  seems 
to  be  an  optimistic  theory  only  because  it  is  confused 
with  Idealism. 

By  "Idealism"  I  understand  the  doctrine  that  the 
%/^  ]  nature  of  the  Universe  is  such  that  those  characteristics 
which  are  "highest"  and  most  valuable  j/iust  either  be 
manifested  eternally  or  must  be  manifested  in  greater 
and  greater  intensity  and  in  wider  and  wider  extent  as 
time  goes  on.  It  so  happens  that  most  Idealists  have 
been  Mentalists  ;  but,  as  I  have  just  shown,  Mentalism 
is  no  guarantee  of  Idealism.  Leibniz  and  Berkeley 
were  both  Mentalists ;  but  their  optimism  was  based 
on  the  fact  that  they  were  Theists,  and  not  on  the  fact 
that  they  were  Mentalists.  And  it  is  perfectly  possible 
to  be  a  Theist  without  being  a  Mentalist,  or  a  Mentalist 
without  being  a  Theist. 

I  will  now  show  that,  just  as  Mentalism  as  such  does 
not  entail  Idealism,  so  Idealism  is  not  incompatible  with 
Materialism  as  such.  Suppose  that  mentality  is  an 
emergent  characteristic  of  certain  complicated  material 
aggregates.  It  remains  quite  possible  that  the  actual 
configuration  of  matter  in  the  Universe  and  the  actual 
laws  of  matter  are  such  that  aggregates  of  this  kind 
7nust  grow  more  and  more  complex,  and  that  a  larger 
and  larger  proportion  of  matter  must  be  aggregated  in 
this  way  as  time  goes  on.  In  that  case  we  should  have 
an  Idealistic  view  of  the  Universe  combined  with  a 
Materialistic  view  of  the  status  and  nature  of  Mind. 
Materialism  is  supposed  to  be  incompatible  with  Ideal- 
ism only  because  it  happens  to  be  associated  with  a 
particular  view  about  the  actual  laws  of  matter  and  the 
actual  configuration  of  matter  in  the  Universe.  And, 
as  we  have  seen,  the  former  theory  about  the  status  of 


STATUS  AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       655 

Mind   does    not   entail    any  particular    view    about   the 
laws  and  configurations  of  Matter. 

It  is  perhaps  worth  while  to  remark  before  going 
further  that  Mentalism  would  make  it  probable  that 
pain  and  frustration  are  much  more  widely  distributed 
in  the  Universe  than  there  is  any  reason  to  suppose  on 
a  materialistic  or  dualistic  theory.  We  all  treat  what 
we  regard  as  bits  of  inorganic  matter  wholly  as  means. 
Now,  if  the  Leibnitian  form  of  Mentalism  be  true,  what 
we  take  to  be  lumps  of  coal  and  pokers  are  really 
colonies  of  spirits  of  low  intelligence.  These  spirits 
must  presumably  have  at  least  sentience  ;  for  this  is 
the  lowest  factor  of  mentality.  Yet,  when  I  burn  a  bit 
of  coal  in  my  fire  and  poke  it  with  my  poker,  I  certainly 
treat  all  these  confused  but  sentient  spirits  merely  as 
means.  And  it  seems  quite  possible  that,  under  these 
circumstances,  their  sentience  will  be  tinged  with  pain. 
This  pain  would  be  absent  if  Materialism  or  Dualism 
were  true. 

I  claim  now  to  have  shown  that  there  is  no  special  ^ 
connexion  between  Mentalism  as  such  and  a  cheerful  . 
view  of  the  prospects  of  Mind,  and  no  special  connexion  \ 
between  Materialism  as  such  and  a  depressing  view  of 
the  prospects  of  Mind,  The  question  that  remains  is 
whether  we  know  anything  about  the  laws  and  con- 
figuration of  Matter  which  would  throw  any  light  on 
the  probable  prospects  of  Mind,  supposing  that  some 
form  of  Emergent  Materialism  is  true.  But,  before  we 
discuss  this  final  question,  there  is  a  more  fundamental 
issue  to  be  faced.  Some  philosophers,  e.g.^  Mr  Bradley 
and  the  Dean  of  St  Paul's,  have  held  that  the  whole 
notion  of  perpetual  progress  is  logically  impossible.  If 
this  be  so,  it  is  obviously  needless  to  discuss  the  question 
whether  it  is  causally  possible.  And  it  would  be  still 
more  futile  to  discuss  the  question  whether  it  is  likely 
or  unlikely  to  be  a  fact. 

Is  Perpetual  Progress  logically  possible  ?  We  must  begin 
by  drawing  some  distinctions  which  are  commonly  over- 


656       UNITY   OF  MIND  AND   OF  NATURE 

looked,  (i)  I  distinguish  between />er/>etua/  and  uniform 
progress.  The  latter  implies  the  former,  but  the  former 
does  not  imply  the  latter.  To  say  that  s  uniformly  pro- 
gresses means  that  every  later  state  of  s  is  better  than 
every  earlier  state  of  s.  To  say  that  s  perpetually  pro- 
gresses is  to  assert  the  following  two  propositions. 
[a)  \i  X  be  any  state  of  s  there  is  a  state  of  s  which 
succeeds  x  and  is  better  than  x  itself  and  all  x's  pre- 
decessors. And  {b)  if  x  be  any  state  of  s  there  is  no  state 
of  s  which  succeeds  x  and  is  worse  than  x  itself  and  all 
x's  predecessors.  This  of  course  leaves  it  quite  open 
that  some  of  the  successors  of  any  state  of  s  are  worse 
than  this  state  or  than  some  of  its  predecessors.  The 
definition  is  meant  to  allow  of  fluctuations  of  value, 
provided  that  their  maxima  increase  and  their  minima 
do  not  as  time  goes  on.  I  need  hardly  say  that  perpetual 
progress,  thus  defined,  is  perfectly  compatible  with  the 
view  that  the  value  of  no  state  oi  s  will  surpass  a  certain 
finite  magnitude.  For,  although  the  successive  maxima 
always  increase,  they  may  increase  at  a  diminishing 
rate  as  time  goes  on.  It  is  also  consistent  with  the 
definition  that  the  successive  minima  should  continually 
decrease,  and  that  they  should  approach  the  same  limit 
as  the  successive  maxima.  In  that  case  s^  though 
perpetually  progressing,  would  perpetually  approach 
(though  it  would  never  exactly  reach)  a  permanent 
condition  of  constant  finite  value.  Now  I  think  that 
;  most  philosophers  who  have  objected  to  the  notion  of 
\  perpetual  progress  have  done  so  because  they  supposed 
that  thfs  would  entail  [a)  a  uniform,  and  {U)  an  unlimited, 
increase  in  the  value  of  the  thing  wriich  is  said  to  be 
'*  perpetually  progressing."  We  now  see  that  this  is 
just  a  gross  mistake,  which  these  persons  might  have 
avoided  by  half  an  hour's  study  of  any  decent  intro- 
duction to  mathematics  even  if  they  were  not  acute 
enough  to  avoid  it  for  themselves.  I  may  add  that 
personally  I  see  no  logical  objection  even  to  the  notion 
of  uniform  and  unlimited  progress  ;  but  it  is  not  neces- 


STATUS   AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       657 

sary  to  defend  this  view,  since  it  is  not  entailed  by  the 
notion  of  perpetual  progress. 

(ii)  There  is  another  important  point  about  progress 
which  we  have  so  far  ignored.  We  have  spoken  as  if 
the  whole  value  of  a  thing  resided  in  its  successive 
states.  And  we  are  even  liable  to  talk  as  if  the  whole 
value  of  a  thing  were  concentrated  in  its  final  state,  if  it 
has  one.  This  is  of  course  a  mistake.  The  value  of  a 
thing  does  not  reside  in  any  one  of  its  states  ;  nor  is 
the  value  of  a  thing  the  sum  of  the  values  of  its  suc- 
cessive states.  It  would  obviously  be  absurd  to  identify 
the  value  of  the  Byzantine  Empire  with  the  value  of 
that  slice  of  its  history  which  occupied  the  last  second 
before  Constantinople  was  taken  by  the  Turks.  And  it 
would  be  equally  absurd  to  identify  the  value  of  the 
Byzantine  Empire  with  the  sum  of  the  values  of  all  the 
successive  slices  of  its  history  from  the  foundation  of 
Constantinople  by  Constantine  till  its  capture  by 
Mahomet  II.  For  it  is  plain  that  one  important  factor 
in  the  value  of  the  Empire  is  the  fact  that  after  a  time 
it  went  from  better  to  worse  and  not  from  worse  to  better. 
The  value  of  a  persistent  thing  is  a  quality  which 
inheres  in  its  whole  history  from  its  beginning,  if  it  had 
one,  to  its  end,  if  it  has  one.  If  it  be  still  existing  its 
value  is  a  quality  which  inheres  in  its  history  up  to  and 
including  its  present  state.  No  doubt  the  value  of  a 
thing  does  depend  in  some  complicated  way  on  the 
values  of  its  successive  states  ;  but  it  does  not  depend 
on  this  alone.  It  is  plain  that  the  temporal  order  in 
which  the  states  happen,  and  other  relations  between 
them,  make  a  great  difference  to  the  value  of  the 
persistent  thing  of  which  they  are  successive  states.  It 
is  necessary  to  modify  our  definition  of  "perpetual 
progress "  in  the  following  way  to  meet  these  facts. 
The  more  accurate  definition  will  run  as  follows.  To 
say  that  s  perpetually  progresses  is  to  assert  two  pro- 
positions ;  viz.,  (a)  If  x  be  any  state  of  s  then  there  is  a 
state  J  of  s  which  succeeds  x  and  is  such  that  the  value 

2  T 


658       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND    OF   NATURE 

of  the  whole  history  oi  s  up  to  and  including  j  is  greater 
than  the  value  of  the  whole  history  of  s  up  to  and  in- 
cluding X.  And  (d)  if  x  be  any  state  of  s  then  there  is 
no  state  j  of  s  which  succeeds  x  and  is  such  that  the 
value  of  the  whole  history  of  s  up  to  and  including  y  is 
less  than  the  value  of  the  whole  history  of  s  up  to  and 
including  x. 

This  would  of  course  leave  it  possible  that  some  later 
patches  of  the  history  of  s  are  worse  than  some  earlier 
patches  of  its  history.  I  think  it  would  even  leave  it 
possible  that  some  later  patches  of  the  history  of  s  are 
worse  than  a//  the  earlier  patches  of  its  history.  Suppose 
that  Ax  is  the  history  of  s  up  to  and  including  x.  And 
suppose  that  xB  is  a  patch  of  the  history  of  s  which 
immediately  succeeds  Ax.  Suppose  further  that  x3  is 
worse  than  Ax  and  than  every  slice  of  Ax.  It  is  never- 
theless theoretically  possible  that  the  whole  AB,  com- 
posed of  Ax  and  xB,  should  be  no  worse  than  Ax.  For 
the  value  of  a  whole  is  not  in  general  the  algebraic  sum 
of  the  values  of  its  parts.  E.g:,  A;r  might  be  an  early 
life  of  continual  sin,  and  xB  might  be  the  appropriate 
amount  of  regret  in  the  mind  of  the  sinner  for  this  par- 
ticular kind  and  amount  of  sin.  Then  I  should  say  that 
AB  is  better  than  Ax.  And  yet  xB  might  be  worse 
than  Ax.  The  pain  without  the  sin  might  have  a 
greater  disvalue  than  the  sin  without  the  pain.  It  is 
certainly  arguable  that  sin  w^ithout  sorrow  may  be  less 
bad  than  that  state  of  sorrow  for  purely  imaginary  sins 
which  occurs  in  religious  melancholia. 

Now  it  is  sometimes  objected  by  philosophers  to  the 
notion  of  perpetual  progress  that  it  places  the  whole 
value  of  a  thing  in  a  last  state  which,  by  hypothesis, 
can  never  be  reached.  If  the  notion  involved  this  it 
would  no  doubt  be  self-stultifying.  But  we  have  just 
seen  that  it  involves  nothing  of  the  kind.  Hence  this 
objection  is  quite  irrelevant.  And  I  think  we  may 
safely  conclude  that  there  is  no  purely  logical  objection 
to  the  notion  of  perpetual  progressT'^ 


STATUS   AND    PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       659 

Is  Perpetual  Progress  causally  possible  ?  Granted  that 
perpetual  progress  is  logically  possible,  it  only  remains 
to  ask  whether  it  is  causally  possible  on  that  view  of  the 
status  of  Mind  which  has  seemed  most  probable  in  the 
light  of  all  the  facts  which  are  at  present  available. 

I  will  first  remind  the  reader  that  the  view  about  the 
status  of  Mind  which  I  have  asserted  to  be  most  probable 
on  the  available  evidence  is  that  rnentality  is  an  emergent 
quality  of  a  compound  composed  of  a  living  brain  and 
nervous  system  and  another  constituent  which  is  not 
always  at  once  destroyed  when  the  brain  and  nervous 
system  are  broken  up.  As  we  obviously  know  extremely 
little  about  this  other  constituent,  I  will  say  what  I  have 
to  say  about  it  at  once,  and  clear  it  out  of  the  way.  It 
may  have  some  of  the  lower  factors  of  mentality,  though 
there  is  no  need  to  suppose  that  it  has.  And,  whether 
it  has  any  of  the  factors  of  mentality  or  not,  it  may  be 
matter  of  a  peculiar  kind.  All  that  we  positively  know 
about  this  constituent  is  that  it  is  capable  of  carrying 
traces  of  past  experiences  and  of  certain  personal 
peculiarities.  We  do  not  know  how  persistent  it  may 
be,  and  we  do  not  know  what  conditions,  if  any,  are 
capable  of  destroying  it.  But  we  do  know  that  it  is 
not  immediately  destroyed  by  those  processes  which 
destroy  brains  and  nervous  systems. 

It  is  therefore  possible  that,  even  if  a  cosmic  disaster 
were  to  destroy  all  living  organisms  (and  therefore,  on 
our  view,  all  minds)  in  the  Universe,  the  other  con- 
stituents of  these  minds  might  persist  indefinitely.  We 
might  imagine  them  blowing  about  the  Universe  for 
millions  of  years,  like  seeds  or  spores  or  uncombined 
chemical  elements,  waiting  for  suitable  material  con- 
ditions. Eventually  the  necessary  and  sufficient  con- 
ditions for  the  existence  of  living  organisms  might  once 
more  be  fulfilled  in  some  part  of  the  Universe,  and  some 
of  these  constituents  might  unite  with  them  to  form 
those  compounds  which  have  mentality  as  an  emergent 
characteristic.     And  the  new  minds,  thus  formed,  might 


i 


660       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

derive  certain  advantages  from  the  traces  left  by  the 
experiences  of  the  old  minds.  The  new  minds  might 
then  develop  for  millions  of  years,  thus  adding  fresh 
traces  to  the  persistent  constituents  of  the  wholes  of 
which  they  are  emergent  characteristics.  Another 
cosmic  disaster  might  eventually  happen,  and  the  pro- 
cess described  above  might  be  repeated.  Such  a  series 
of  events  as  I  have  been  imagining  would  be  quite 
consistent  with  perpetual^  though  not  with  uniform^ 
progress. 

I  have  spoken  as  if  these  persistent  constituents 
merely  waited  passively  for  the  development  of  living 
organisms,  and  then  combined  with  them.  This  may 
be  true.  But  it  is  also  possible  that  they  play  a  more 
active  part.  It  is  possible  that  the  development  of 
living  organisms  out  of  inorganic  matter  depends  on 
the  agency  of  such  persistent  constituents  as  well  as  on 
the  fulfilment  of  certain  conditions  in  ordinary  matter. 
We  never  find  highly  developed  organisms  without 
minds,  any  more  than  we  find  minds  without  organisms. 
It  therefore  seems^  not  unlikely  that_jhe__persistent  con- 
stituents of  minds  act  as  cause  factors  in  the  original 
production  of  living  organisms  from  inorganic  matter. 
"^It  remains  To  consider  brains  and  nervoUs  "systems, 
the  other  and  more  familiar  constituents  of  those  com- 
pounds which  have  the  emergent  characteristic  of  men- 
tality. On  our  view  they  are  just  as  necessary  for  the 
existence  of  minds  as  are  the  persistent  constituents 
which  we  have  been  discussing.  Even  if  the  persistent 
constituents  persist  indefinitely,  a  time  will  come  after 
which  there  will  be  no  more  minds,  if  the  laws  and  con- 
figurations of  ordinary  matter  be  such  that  after  a  time 
there  can  be  no  more  living  organisms.  And,  unless 
the  laws  and  configurations  of  ordinary  matter  allow  of 
perpetual  progress  in  the  complexity  of  living  organisms, 
there  is  no  likelihood  of  perpetual  progress  in  the  mental 
realm.  (I  say  "  no  likelihood  "  and  not  "  no  possibility  " 
here,  because  it  must  be  admitted  that  a  great  deal, of 


STATUS   AND    PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       66i 

mental  progress  can  be  secured  merely  by  improved 
social  organisation  and  recording  of  experiences,  with- 
out any  fundamental  change  in  the  individual  human 
organism  or  its  mind.) 

Now,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  the  situation,  according  to 
our  present  knowledge  about  matter,  is  roughly  as 
follows,  (i)  There  is  one  and  only  one  alleged  law  of 
physics  which  would  seem  to  make  it  very  probable  that, 
after  a  certain  time,  there  will  be  no  more  living  organ- 
isms, or  only  organisms  of  uniformly  decreasing  com- 
plexity. This  is  of  course  the  law  which  asserts  a 
perpetual  decrease  in  the  amount  of  available  energy  in 
the  Universe.  Now  there  are  two  remarks  to  be  made 
about  this  alleged  law.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  a 
statistical  law.  All  alleged  laws  of  nature  are  only 
probable  ;  but  this  law  is  peculiar  in  that  it  is  a  state- 
ment about  probability,  which  most  laws  are  not.  It 
says  that  a  process  by  which  the  available  energy  of  the 
Universe  should  be  increased  is  not  causally  impossible 
but  is  extremely  unlikely  to  happen  at  any  given  moment. 
It  does  not  follow  that  it  is  extremely  unlikely  to  happen 
at  some  moment  or  other  within  a  sufficiently  long  period 
of  time.  It  is  extremely  unlikely  that  a  person  will  be 
involved  in  a  railway  accident  on  any  assigned  day,  but 
it  is  by  no  means  unlikely  that  he  will  be  involved  in 
one  some  day  or  other  if  he  travels  by  train  every  day 
for  a  hundred  years.  It, seems  not  improbable  that  the! 
Universe  as  a  whole  may  pass  through  successive  phases  I 
of  ^'running  down  "  and  "  winding  up  "  ;  or  that,  while 
one  part  of  it  is  '' running  down",  another  part  of  it 
may  be  "  winding  up  ".  And  perhaps  the  fact  that  there 
still  is  available  energy  supports  the  view  that  such 
processes  of  "winding  up"  do  happen  from  time  to 
time  or  from  place  to  place.  A  full  discussion  of  this 
last  point  would  take  us  into  difficult  questions  about 
finite  and  infinite  duration,  and  about  (what  is  quite  a 
different  thing)  having  a  beginning  or  having  no  be- 
ginning in  time.     I  do  not  propose  to  enter   into  this 


662       UNITY   OF   MIND   AND   OF   NATURE 

subject  at   the  end   of  a   long   book  which   is   mainly 
concerned  with  quite  different  problems. 

A         Secondly,  even  if  the  amount  of  available  energy  in 

I     the   Universe  continually  diminishes,   it  does  not  seem 

to    me   to   be    impossible   that   there  should  always  be 

"^r    organisms  and  that  they  should  perpetually  grow  more 

Iji  complex.  It  is  very  easy  to  commit  a  fallacy  here.  We 
can  see  that,  if  any  existing  organism  were  put  into  con- 
ditions very  different  from  those  in  which  it  has  lived 
and  in  which  its  immediate  ancestors  have  lived,  it 
would  die  or  degenerate.  And  we  are  liable  to  conclude 
from  this  that  no  organism  could  live  or  be  highly 
developed  in  these  supposed  conditions.  This  argument 
forgets  that,  if  the  conditions  change  slowly  enough, 
the  organisms  may  have  time  to  adapt  themselves  to  the 
new  conditions,  and  that  this  adaptation  need  not  take 
the  form  of  degeneration.  It  is  certain  that  no  exist- 
ing organism,  or  only  very  simple  kinds  of  existing 
organism,  could  live  if  suddenly  placed  in  conditions  in 
which  there  is  much  less  available  energy  than  there  is 
at  present.  But  it  does  not  follow  from  this  that,  if  the 
available  energy  slowly  diminished,  the  descendants  of 
complex  organisms  might  not  be  able  to  live  and  flourish 
under  the  new  conditions.  It  is  quite  certain  that  there 
is  no  very  close  correlation  between  the  mere  size  of  the 
brain  and  nervous  system,  or  the  mere  strength  of  the 
organism,  and  high  intellectual  development.  If  any- 
one denied  this  he  might  be  advised  to  "go  to  the  ant, 
to  consider  her  ways,  and  be  wise".  For  here  we  have 
very  high  intellectual  development  accompanied  by  a 
very  small  brain  and  very  feeble  bodily  strength.  On 
the  whole  then  I  do  not  think  it  is  by  any  means  certain 
,     that  the  law  of  the  degradation  of  energy  precludes  the 

]3-    possibility  of  perpetual    mental  progress,   in  the  sense 
defined  by  us. 

(2)  Granted  that  the  laws  of  physics  oppose  no  in- 
superable bar  to  the  perpetual  progress  of  Mind,  it 
might  still  be  true  that  the  special  configurations  of  matter 


STATUS   AND   PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       663 

in  the  actual  Universe  do  so.     About  this  possibility  I 
have  the  following  remarks  to  make.      We  have  to  take 
the  ultimate  laws  of  matter  as  unalterable  data  ;   but  the 
configurations  of  matter  are   certainly  to   some    extent 
under  our  control.     And  they  certainly  come  more  and 
more  under  our  control  the  better  we  understand  the 
laws   of  matter.      In    particular   we    are   able    to    make 
material  complexes  which  have  new  emergent  qualities  ; 
this  happens  whenever  we  synthesise  a  new  chemical 
compound.      I  have  already  pointed  out  that  we  cannot 
set  limits  to  the  automatic  power  of  adaptation  possessed 
by    organisms,     provided    their    environment    changes 
slowly   enough.     I    wish    now   to    point   out   that    the  /i 
existence  of  minds  which  understand  the  laws  of  matter:J/ 
makes   a   great    difference   to    the    environment    itself,  i 
There  are,  e.g:,  thousands  of  chemical  compounds  now 
existing   which    probably    never   existed    before    in    the 
history  of  the    Universe,    and    which    almost   certainly 
would  not  have  existed  if  there  had  not  been  minds  which 
came  to  understand  the   laws  of  chemical  combination 
and  the  properties  of  the  chemical  elements.     Now  the 
greater  part  of  the  mind's  knowledge  and  control  over 
inorganic  matter  is  quite  new.     It  dates  from  the  time 
of  Galileo   and    Newton,     Such   as   it   is,    it   has  been 
gained  under  the  most  unfavourable  circumstances  by 
the  work  of  a  comparatively  small  group  of  men,  sur- 
rounded,  influenced,   and  often  opposed  by  a  majority 
whose  minds  are  warped  by  the  superstitions  and  heated 
by  the  emotions  of  patriotism  and  religion.     If  so  much 
control  over  inorganic  nature  has  been  gained  in  so  short 
a  time  and  under  such  unfavourable  conditions,  it  would 
be  rash  to  set  limits  to  the  possible  developments  of  this 
control  in  the  future. 

The  next  point  to  notice  is  that  the  human  mind  has 
not  as  yet  gained  any  comparable  degree  of  knowledge 
of  and  control  over  living  organisms.  When  we  re- 
member how  long  it  was  before  it  understood  the 
fundamental  structure  of  the  inorganic  world,  and  how 


664       UNITY   OF  MIND  AND   OF   NATURE 

much  this  understanding  depended  on  the  insight  of  a 
few  men  of  genius,  Hke  Galileo,  Newton,  Dalton,  and 
Maxwell,  we  shall  not  be  surprised  at  this.  And,  when 
we  remember  how  quick  and  cumulative  has  been  the 
growth  of  our  control  over  inorganic  matter  since 
Newton's  time,  we  need  not  despair  of  a  similar  growth 
of  control  over  living  organisms.  We  must  remember, 
however,  that,  even  if  we  had  enough  knowledge  of 
biology,  physiology,  and  genetics,  to  produce  healthier 
and  healthier  bodies  and  better  and  better  brains,  there 
might  be  insupera.b\e  /fsj/cAo/ogzca/  difficulties  in  applying 
it.  For  here  we  come  against  a  solid  mass  of  primitive 
emotions  and  superstitions,  many  of  which  are  crystal- 
lised in  theological  dogmas  and  supported  by  the 
authority  of  vast  ecclesiastical  organisations  like  the 
Church  of  Rome.  This  leads  me  to  the  last  remark 
which  I  wish  to  make. 

The  beginnings  of  a  genuine  science  of  organisms 
exist,  and  progress  in  this  science  might  at  any  moment 
become  rapid.  S ujjposi n g  that  E urope.  does 4iot  relapse 
into  barbarism  before  America  has  emerged  from  it,  it 
is  quite  possible  that  the"  hexT  Two  'hundred  years  may 
witness  as  great  an  advance  in  our  knowledge  of  living 
matter  as  the  last  two  hundred  years  witnessed  in  our 
knowledge  of  inorganic  matter.  But,  so  far  as  I  can 
see,  there  jire  not  even  the  beginnings  of  a  scientific 
psychology  of  the  individual  or  of  communities.  And, 
unless  this  defect  can  be  remedied,  there  seems  to  be 
no  hope  either  of  devising  a  stable  yet  progressive  social 
system  or  of  making  the  vast  alterations  in  men's  minds 
which  would  be  necessary  before  they  could  work  such 
a  system  and  live  happily  in  it. 

Now  undoubtedly  the  greatest  immediate  threat  to 
the  further  progress  of  the  human  mind  is  the  unequal 
development  of  these  three  branches  of  knowledge  ;  i.e., 
the  relatively  high  degree  of  our  control  over  inorganic 
nature,  combined  with  our  still  very  rudimentary  know- 
ledge of  biology  and  genetics,  and  with  the  complete 


STATUS   AND    PROSPECTS   OF   MIND       665 

absence  of  a  scientific  psychology  and  sociology.  The 
first  and  least  obvious  danger  of  this  state  of  affairs  is 
that  our  environment  and  mode  of  life  are  changed 
deliberately,  profoundly,  and  very  quickly  by  the 
application  of  physical  and  chemical  knowledge.  The 
human  organism  has  had  no  time  to  adapt  itself 
spontaneously  to  these  changes  ;  for  the  spontaneous 
evolutionary  adaptation  of  organisms  is  an  extremely 
slow  process.  It  therefore  seems  not  unlikely  that  there 
is  a  great  and  growing  disharmony  between  human 
organisms  and  their  environment ;  and  that,  unless  this 
can  be  corrected,  the  physical  and  mental  qualities  of 
the  human  race  may  degenerate.  Now  it  cannot  be 
corrected  except  by  a  deliberate  modification  of  human 
organisms,  which  shall  proceed  as  fast  as  the  deliberate 
modification  of  their  environment  now  proceeds.  And 
this  is  possible  only  if  we  have  a  scientific  knowledge 
of  biology,  physiology,  and  genetics  comparable  in 
extent  and  accuracy  to  our  knowledge  of  physics  and 
chemistry. 

The  more  obvious  danger  of  this  unequal  develop- 
ment of  our  knowledge  lies  in  the  fact  that  human 
control  over  inorganic  nature  provides  men  with  means 
of  destroying  life  and  property  on  a  vast  scale;  whilst 
the  present  emotional  make-up  of  men,  and  their  extra- 
ordinarily crude  and  inept  forms  of  social  organisation, 
make  it  only  too  likely  that  these  means  will  be  used. 
This  danger,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  could  be  averted  only  by 
deliberately  altering  the  emotional  constitution  of  man- 
kind, and  deliberately  constructing  more  sensible  forms 
of  social  organisation.  And  it  is  quite  useless  to  at- 
tempt the  latter  without  the  former.  In  order  to  do  this 
a  vast  development  of  scientific  psychology  would  be 
needed  for  two  different  reasons.  In  the  first  place,  it 
would  obviously  be  needed  in  order  to  know  how  to 
alter  the  emotional  make-up  of  the  individual.  But  this 
would  not  be  enough.  We  might  know  how  to  do  these 
things,   and   yet  it   might    be  quite    impossible  to  get 


666       UNITY   OF  MIND  AND   OF  NATURE 

people  to  submit  to  having  these  things  done  to  them, 
l^or  this  purpose  we  should  need  an  enormous  develop- 
ment of  what  Kant  calls  ''the  wholesome  art  of  per- 
suasion " ;  and  this  could  arise  only  on  the  basis  of  a 
profound  theoretical  knowledge  of  the  factors  which 
produce,  modify,  and  remove  non-rational  beliefs. 

Conclusion.  The  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter  seems 
to  be  that  perpetual  mental  progress  is  certainly  not 
logically  impossible,  and  certainly  not  causally  in- 
evitable, in  the  sense  of  being  bound  to  happen  what- 
ever we  may  do.  On  the  other  hand,  there  seems  to  be 
no  positive  reason  to  believe  that  it  is  causally  im- 
possible, in  the  sense  that  it  is  bound  not  to  happen 
whatever  we  may  do.  So  far  as  we  are  concerned,  the 
jDossibihty  depends  on  our  getting  an  adequate  know- 
ledge and  control  of  life  and  mind  before  the  combination 
of  Ignorance  on  these  subjects  with  knowledge  of  physics 
and  chemistry  wrecks  the  whole  social  system.  Which 
of  the  runners  in  this  very  interesting  race  will  win,  it  is 
impossible  to  foretell.  But  physics  and  death  have  a 
long  start  over  psychology  and  life. 

^--v*--:  irp  L..^  >  ^' 


e 


INDEX 


Aberration,  i65,  169 
Abnormal,   importance   of  the,    14, 
etc. 

phenomena,  538,  etc. 

Absolute,  the,  26 
Absolute  Space,  37 

Newtonian  form  of,  588,  etc. 

adjectival  theory  of,  597,  etc. 

Abstraction,  Principle  of  Extensive, 

447 
Acquaintance,  635 
Action,  one-sided,  of  Body  on  Mind, 

117,  etc.,  132 
Actions,  reflex  and  voluntary,  109, 
etc. 

■ ideo-motor,  620 

Acts,  mental,  275 

Adams,  discoverer  of  Neptune,  424, 

etc. 
Affective  attitudes,  636,  etc. 
Agnosticism,  423 
Alexander,    Prof.    S.,    on    '  Natural 

Piety,'  55 

on  feelings,  635 

• his  Emergent  Neutralism,  648, 

etc. 
Amaryllis,  493 

America,  United  States  of,  387 
hope  of  their  ultimate  civilisa- 
tion, 664 
Analysis   of  Mind,    294,    357,    370, 

441.  578,  580,  631, "648 
Angels,  644 
Animation,  95,  131 

and  control,  393 

Anne,  Queen,  her  death,  256 
Appearing,     multiple     relation     of^ 

178,  etc.,  263 
Application,  607,  etc. 
Aquinas,  St  Thomas,  on  separated 

substances,  440 

on  immortality,  483 

on  sentience  and  thought,  643 

Aston,  Dr  F.  W.,  484 

Attention,  introspective,   363,   etc., 

372,    etc.,     378,     etc.,    421, 

etc. 
Attributes,  substantial,  22 

differentiating,  22,  607 

in  Spinota's  sense,  31 

emergent  and  reducible,  607 


Augustus,  the  deified,  617,  etc. 
Authority,   as  a  ground  for  belief, 

482,  etc. 
Awareness,  simultaneous  undiscrim- 

inating,  380,  etc.,  421,  etc. 

"  Beauchamp,  Sally,"  374,  397,  etc., 

428,  etc.,  541 
Behaviour,  52,  etc. 

three   types   of  theory   about, 

54,  etc. 

chemical,  62,  etc.,  74 

vital,  67,  etc.,  75 

and  memory,  270,  etc. 

molar  and  molecular,  616,  etc. 

Behaviourism,  instance  of  a  '  silly  ' 
theory,  6,  623 

refutation  of,  612,  etc. 

molar  and  molecular,  617,  etc. 

and  perception,  619,  etc. 

Behaviourists,  and  images,  249 

and  Mr  Russell,  294 

and  Bergsonians,  333,  etc. 

Being,  realms  of,  25 

Belief-feelings,  579,  etc. 

Bergsonians,  on  intellect  and  in- 
tuition, 333,  etc. 

Berkeley,    G.,    on    sense-perception, 

147 
on  physical  objects,  183,  200, 

204,  423,  624,  etc. 
on     primary     and     secondary 

qualities,  207,  etc. 

and  belief  in  other  minds,  336 

his  theism,  654 

Berwick  (titular),  Duke  of,  256 
Blacklegs,  mediums  so  regarded  by 

clergymen,  519 
Body  and  Mind,  10,  17,  95,  etc. 

a  conservative  system,  105,  etc. 

Bosanquet,  B.,  and  survival,  520 
Bradley,  Mr  F.  H.,  his  monism,  7 
his  Absolute,  26 

on  survival,  519 

his  mentalism,  624 

on  the  notion  of  progress,  655 

Byzantine  Empire,  657 

CcBsar,  C.  J.,  271 

Calculations,  posthypnotic,  427,  etc. 


668 


INDEX 


Categories,  217,  etc.,  265,  etc. 
Causal  laws,  and  rules  of  sequence, 

452,  etc. 
mental,  material,   and  mixed, 

629 
Causation;    and   voluntary   action, 

loi,  etc. 

and  perception,  194,  etc. 

mnemic,    discussion    of,    440, 

etc. 

and  continuity,  458,  etc. 

Central  and  Non-central,  Theories  of 

Mind,  558,  etc.,  584,  etc. 
• their     logical     characteristics, 

568,  etc. 
Central-Event  Theories,  566,  etc. 
Centres,     existent    and    subsistent, 

569,  etc.,  584,  etc. 
Characteristics,  ultimate,  78 

extensible,  207,  627,  etc. 

categorial  and  empirical,  265, 

etc. 

reducible    and    emergent,    78, 

607 

causal  and  non-causal,  432,  etc. 

delusive,  608 

Christ,  J.,  484 

Cleopatra,  her  Needle,  618 

Co-Consciousness,  374,  396,  etc., 
428,  etc. 

Common -sense  view  of  perception, 
184,  etc. 

Compound  Theory  of  the  Mind,  535, 
etc.,  653,  etc. 

and  epiphenomenalism,  538 

and   mediumistic   phenomena, 

540 

and  multiple  personality,   541, 

etc. 

and  telepathy,  546,  etc. 

and  metempsychosis,  551 

Concept  of  Nature,  3 

Conceptualism,  18 

Conditions,  causal  and  epistemo- 
logical,  443,  etc. 

momentary  and  non-momen- 
tary, 448,  etc. 

persistent  and  transient,  457 

constitutive      and      epistemic, 

489,  etc.,  499,  etc.,  503,  etc. 

Conservative  Systems,  105,  etc. 

Constantine  the  Great,  657 

Constantinople,  fall  of,  657 

Continuity,  of  cause  and  effect,  458, 
etc. 

and  survival,  528,  etc. 

Controlling  mind,  374,  etc.,  393,  etc. 

Conventional  expression,  332,  etc. 

Creative  Theories  of  Sense-percep- 
tion, 201 

Critical  Scientific  Theory,  183,  etc. 


Cross-correspondences,  542,  etc. 
Crystal-gazing,  399 


Dalton,  /,,  664 

Date,  of  pervasion  and  of  emission, 

169,  etc. 
Deism,  90,  etc. 
Delusive  characteristics,  two  kinds 

of,  624,  etc. 
Descartes,  R.,  his  dualism,  20,  etc., 

99,  642 

on  matter,  200,  etc.,  333 

on  physics,  440 

on  thinking  substances,  624 

Design,  81,  etc. 

its  relation  to  teleology,  84,  etc. 

Desire,  sexual,  13 

Russell's  analysis  of,  294 

'  unconscious,'    366,    etc.,  370, 

etc. 

and  need,  370,  etc. 

Devils,    and    spiritualistic    seances, 

517,  etc. 
Discursive  and  intuitive  cognition, 

144,  etc.,  235,  etc.,  276 
Dispositions,  see  Traces 
Dissociation  of  a  Personality,  374 
Double-aspect  Theory,  133 
Dreams,  373 

emotion  felt  in,  416 

and  belief  in  survival,  522 

Driesch,  Prof.  H.,  58,  69 

Dualism,  of  compatibles  and  of  in- 

compatibles,  612,  625 

• Cartesian,  612 

five  alternative  forms  of,  642, 

etc. 
Duty,  and  freedom,  490 

and  immortality,  492,  etc. 

and  circumstances,  499 


Ectoplasm,  652 

Emergence,  Theory  of,  59,  61,  etc., 
77,  92,  etc.,  613 

Emergent  Materialism,  625 

two  forms  of,  646,  etc. 

and  Emergent  Neutral- 
ism, 650 

Emergent  Mentalism,  625,  646 

Neutralism,  639,  etc. 

Emotions,  unconscious,  364,  etc., 
415,  etc. 

and  emotional  moods,  574,  etc. 

Energy,  and  interaction,.  103,  etc. 

degradation  of,  661,  etc. 

Engrams,  441 

Enquiry  Concerning  Human  Under- 
standing, lOI 

Entelechies,  56,  etc.,  86 


INDEX 


669 


Epiphenomenalism,  118 

and  volition,  470,  etc. 

and  active  thinking,  471,  etc. 

and   unity  of  the   mind,   473, 

etc. 
and  survival,    476,    etc.,    520, 

533 

Epistemological  Introspection,  292 
etc.,  315 

Epistemological     Objects,     of    per- 
ceptual situations,  141,  etc. 

of  memory-situations,  227,  etc. 

of  conative  situations,  294 

'  Epistemologist's  Fallacy,'  292,  etc. 

Eternal       Consciousness,       Green's 
theory  of,  537 

Ethical    arguments,    logical    status 
of,  487,  etc. 

Ethical  premises,  pure  and  mixed, 
488 

Ethics,  Christian,  492,  etc. 

Euclid,  272 

Events,  momentary,  447,  etc. 

Evil,  intrinsic  and  instrumental,  504 

Existence,  18,  etc. 

Existents  and  abstracta,  18,  etc. 

Experiences,  accessible  and  inaccess- 
ible, 360,  etc. 

ignored,  misdescribed,  and  dis- 
located, 363,  etc. 

relatively     unconscious,     374, 

etc. 

and  other  mental  events,  375, 

etc. 

Expression,    natural    and    conven- 
tional, 323 

External  reference.    151,   etc.,   208, 
etc.,  215,  etc. 

Extraspective  situations,  328,  etc. 

Familiarity,  feeling  of,  215,  266,  445, 

579 
Feelings,    bodily,    and    perception, 

153 

and  introspection,  288 

and  inspection,  297 

and  mind-dependence,  304 

Fluid,  homogeneous,  motion  of,  36 
Form,  persistence  of,  34,  etc. 

sensible,  171,  etc. 

Freedom,  Kant's  argument  for,  490, 
etc. 

Galileo,  440,  663 

Genetic  method,  11 

George  IV,  King,  231,  250 

Gibbon,    Mr  E.,   on   the   virtues   of 

Negroes,  51 
on    the    tastes    of    a    learned 

Prelate,  517 


God,  Spinoza's  view  of,  24 

as  cause  of  sensations,  114 

Berkeley's  view  of,   148,    183, 

423 

■ alleged  direct  communion  with, 

318 

■ ethical  arguments  for  His  exist- 
ence, 491 

Green,  T.  H.,  on  the  Eternal  Con- 
sciousness, 537 

Gurney,  E.,  and  Psychical  Research, 
515 

Habit- memory,  225 

Haldane,  Prof.  J.  S.,  69 

Hardy,  Prof.  G.  H.,  cited  as  a  trust- 
worthy authority    483 

Hegel,  G.  W.  F.,  624 

Hell,  its  nearest  earthly  analogon, 
518 

Hendekalism,  24 

Hobbes,  Mr  T.,  his  materialism,  23 

on  alleged  revelations,  484 

Hodgson,  Dr  R.,  on  mediumistic 
communications,  548,  etc. 

Holborn  Review,  491 

Horace,  his  Odes,  492,  etc. 

Hume,  Mr  D.,  on  volition  and 
causation,  loi,  etc.,  132 

on  ideas  and  impressions,  234, 

264,  etc. 

on  self-knowledge,  281,  etc. 

on  causation,  454 

Hypnosis,  suggestibility  under,  428 

Idealism  and  survival,  519 

and  optimism,  654 

Idealists,  thrive  on  verbal  ambi- 
guities, 387 

Imitative  imagery,  capacity  for,  270 

Inconsistency,  two  senses  of,  505 

Inherence,  sensible  and  physical, 
163,  etc. 

Inspection  and  attentive  percep- 
tion, 299,  etc. 

Inspective  judgments,  300,  etc.,  315 

situations,  291,  etc.,  315 

their    objective    constituents, 

303,  etc. 

Instinct  and  the  Unconscious,  359, 
etc. 

Instrumental  Theory,  533,  etc. 

and   mediumistic  phenomena, 

540 

and  Psychical  Research,  644 

Intelligibility,    conditions    of,    507, 

etc. 
Interaction,  41 
two-sided,  arguments  against, 

97,  etc. 


670 


INDEX 


Interaction,  two-sided,  difficulty  of 
denying,  113,  etc. 

arguments  for,  118,  etc. 

Introspection,  275,  etc. 

its  objects,  276,  etc. 

its  fallibility,  284,  etc. 

epistemological,  292,  etc. 

psychological,  304,  etc.,  315 

of  sensations,  308,  etc. 

of  referential  situations,  311, 

etc. 

Russell's  view  of,  580,  etc. 

and  the  Self,  585,  etc. 

Introspective  situations,  classifica- 
tion of,  288,  etc. 


James,  W.,  his  argument  for  inter- 
action, 118,  etc. 

on  unity  of  the  self,  571 

Johnson,  Mr  W.  E.,  his  argument 
against  parallelism,  126,  etc., 

133 
on  occurrents  and  continuants, 

360 
on  constitutive  and  epistemic 

conditions,  489 

on  Absolute  Space,  598 

Jones,  Dr  E.,  his  '  family  pet,'  13 


Kant,  I.,  on  internal  perception,  420 

on  immortality,  483,  485 

on  freedom  and  duty,  490 

■ on    the     '  wholesome    art    of 

persuasion,'  656 
Knowledge,    unequal    development 

of,  664,  etc. 


Laird,  Prof.  J .,  on  feelings,  635 
Laws,  intra-  and  trans-physical,  52, 

79 
intra-    and    trans-ordinal,    77, 

etc. 
Leibniz,  G.,  his  pluralism,  7,  20,  23, 

24.  27 
on  matter,  96,   1S3,  200,  204, 

423 

on  unconscious  sensations,  402 

•  his  mentalism,  624 

his  theism,  654 

Leonard,  Mrs  0.,  mediumship  of,  16, 

394.  545 
Leverrier,    discoverer    of    Neptune, 

424,  etc. 
Leviathan,  484 
Littlewood,    Mr   J.    E.,    cited    as    a 

trustworthy  authority,  483 
Livingstone,  Dr,  and  the  lion,   361, 

415,  etc. 


Lloyd  Morgan,  Prof.  C,  58 
Locke,  Mr  J.,  on  matter,  201 

on     primary     and     secondary 

qualities,  207,  etc. 

on  internal  perception,  420 

on  thinking  substance,  625 

Lorentz,  Prof.,  47,  443 
Lotze,  H.,  on  survival.  519 


Macaulay,  Lord,  225 

McDougall,  Prof.   W.,  and  faculty- 
psycholog5^  389 

Machines,    as   teleological   systems, 
82 

natural  and  artificial,  87,  etc. 

McTaggart,  Dr  J.  M.  E.,  his  defini- 
tion of  '  substance,'  27,  etc. 

on  sets  of  parts,  296 

on  immortality,  485 

on  metempsychosis,  551 

on  materiality,  608,  etc. 

his  mentalism,  624 

on  thinking  substance,  625 

Mahomet  II ,  Sidtan,  657 

Malebranche,  Rev.  Father  N.,  162 

Material    substances,    and    events, 
5S8,  etc. 

Materialisation,  652 

Materialism,  21,  etc. 

pure,  emergent  and  reductive, 

610,  etc.,  623 

and  pessimism,  653,  etc. 

Materiality  and  mentality,  608,  etc. 

alleged  incompatibility  of,  625, 

etc. 

as    a    delusive    characteristic, 

630,  etc. 
Maxwell,  J.  C,  664 
Meaning,  unacquired,  266,  etc. 
Mechanism,  10,  41 

pure,  44.  etc.,  73 

biological,  58,  60,  76 

and  teleology,  86,  etc. 

and  design,  87,  etc. 

and  deism,  89,  etc. 

and  emergence,  92,  etc. 

Mechanistic  theories,  69,  etc. 
Meinong,  A.,  on  Objectives,  292 
Memory,    ambiguity   of   the    term, 
221 

perceptual,  222 

of  things  and  events,  224,  etc. 

•  non-perceptual,  268,  etc. 

of  propositions,  271,  etc. 

of  sentences,  273,  etc. 

and  traces,  444,  etc. 

Memory-images,  241,  etc. 

and  sensa,  258,  etc. 

Memory-judgments,      and      inspec- 
tion, 298,  etc,  316 


INDEX 


.671 


Memory-judgments,   and  introspec- 
tion, 312,  etc.,  316 
Memory-powers   and   memory-acts, 

222,  225 
Memory-situations,  144 
their   epistemological   objects, 

229 
their    objective    constituents, 

229 

analysis  of,  231,  etc. 

• negative,  245,  etc. 

and  perceptual  situations,  248, 

etc. 
Mental    events,    homogeneous    and 

heterogeneous,  290 

heterogeneous,  305,  etc. 

classification  of,  307,  etc. 

literally  unconscious,  372,  etc., 

389,  etc.,  401,  etc. 

owned  and  unowned,  376,  564 

■ and  processes,  417,  etc. 

and  Pure  Egos,  562,  etc. 

and    mental   substances,    587, 

etc. 
Mental  extension,  603 
Mental  particles,  600,  etc. 
Mental  powers,  436,  etc. 
Mental  processes,  and  events,  417, 

etc. 
unconscious    factors    in,    419, 

etc. 

wholly  unconscious,  423,  etc. 

Mental  substances,  and  events,  587, 

etc. 
Mental  theory  of  traces,  463,  etc. 

without  Pure  Ego,  465,  etc. 

Mentalism,  423 

pure,  emergent  and  reductive, 

610 

and  optimism,  653,  etc. 

and  idealism,  654 

Mentalistic    Neutralism,    631,    etc., 

639,  etc.,  648,  etc. 
Mentality,  analysis  of,  634,  etc. 
Metempsychosis,  and  the  Compound 

Theory,  551 
Method,  general  remarks  on,  6,  etc. 

genetic,  11,  etc. 

Microscopic    and    macroscopic   pro- 
perties, 47 

mnemic  events,  443 

Mind  and  Body,  10,  17 

knowledge  of  one's  own,  275, 

etc. 

Total  Unconscious,  391,  etc. 

unity  of,  556,  etc. 

status  of  in  Nature,  607,  etc. 

prospects  of  in  Nature,  653,  etc. 

Mind-dependence,  177,  403 

Mixed   Neutralism,   639,   etc.,    648, 

etc. 


Mnemic  phenomena,  10,  357,  390 

consequences,  215 

causation,  357,  422,  440,  etc. 

persistents,  360,  462,  etc.,  539, 

etc. 

ownership,  377 

events,  441,  etc.,  449,  etc. 

Mohammed,  484 
Monads,  22 
Monism,  7 

substantial,  27,  etc. 

neutral,  133 

Moods,  emotional,  574,  etc. 
Motor-capacity,  acquired,  269 
Multiple  Inherence,  Theory  of,  161, 

etc.,  206,  26O;  etc. 


Naive  Realism,  about  perception, 
184,  etc. 

about  memory,  243,  etc.,  250, 

etc. 

Natural  Expression,  323,  etc. 

Nebraska,  State  of,  387 

Needs,  unrecognised,  370,  etc. 

Negro  commentators,  10 

Negroes,  morality  of,  51 

Neptune,  discovery  of,  424,  etc. 

Neutralism,  emergent,  reductive 
mixed  and  pure,  610,  etc. 

— ■ —  mentalistic  and  materialistic 
611,  etc. 

general  remarks  on,  632,  etc. 

agnostic,  632 

Russell's       and       Alexander's 

forms  of,  650 

'  New  Psychology,'  absurd  preten- 
sions of,  389 

New  Realists,  on  sensation,  210,  etc. 

Newton,  Sir  I.,  440,  663 

Neiv  York,  State  of,  387 

Nominalism,  18 

Non-central  Theories  of  Mind,  568, 
etc. 

two  forms  of,  571,  etc. 

third  form  of,  577,  etc.,  586 

Non-structural  qualities,  primitive 
and  non-primitive,  595 

•  homogeneous  and  non -homo- 
geneous, 596 

Numbers,  Theory  of,  483 


Objectifiability,    psychological    and 

epistemological,  306,  etc. 
Objective  constituents,  of  perceptual 

situations,  148,  etc.,  219,  303 
of      memorj'-situations,      229, 

242,  etc. 
of  introspective  situations,  283. 

etc. 


672 


INDEX 


Objective     constituents,    of    extra- 

spective  situations,  328,  etc. 
Objective   reference,   of   perceptual 

situations,  151,  etc.,  220 
• of    memory  -  situations,    233, 

etc. 
of  introspective  situations,287, 

etc. 
of   inspective   situations,    303, 

etc. 
Objective  situations,  306 
Objects,  epistemological  and  onto- 

logical,  141,  305 
physical,    146,   etc.,    ig6,   etc., 

218,  etc. 
Old  Sarum,  252 
Ontological   objects,   of    perceptual 

situations,  142,  etc. 

of  memory-situations,  232 

of  conative  situations,  294 

Orders,  of  mental  events,  382 
of  causal  characteristics,  432, 

etc. 
Organisms,  as  teleological  systems, 

83 
intermediate   between   matter 

and  mind,  438,  464 
our    imperfect    control    over, 

663,  etc. 
Other  minds,  belief  in,  318,  etc. 
in     what     sense     '  perceived,' 

348,  etc. 
Ownership,  281,  etc.,  307,  375,  etc. 

■ literal  and  mnemic,  377,  etc. 

and    simultaneous    undiscrim- 

inating  awareness,  380,  etc. 
by  Pure  Ego,  561,  etc. 


Parallelism,  41 

• psycho-neural,  121,  etc. 

departmental,  124 

of  events,  125 

■ Mr  Johnson  on,  126 

psycho-physical,  133 

Parsimony,  Law  of,  530 

Particles,  mental  and  material,  600, 

etc. 
Past,  reality  of,  252 

• can  it  change  ?  256,  etc. 

Pastness,  origin  of  the  notion,  264, 

etc. 

secondary  signs  of,  268 

Perceptions,  unconscious,  410,  etc. 

internal  and  external,  420,  etc. 

• introspective     and     sensuous, 

421,  etc. 
■ behaviouristic,  account  of,  619, 

etc. 
Perceptual  memory,  223,  etc. 
and  repetition,  225,  etc. 


Perceptual  situations,  140,  etc. 
their    objective    constituents, 

148,  etc.,  219 
their  external  reference,    151, 

etc.,  220 

delusive,  154,  etc. 

theories  of,  157,  etc. 

their  subjective     constituents, 

209,  219 
Persistence,  tests  for,  460,  etc. 

and  survival,  539,  etc. 

Personality,  multiple,  16,  etc.,  393, 

etc. 
and   Compound   Theory,    541, 

etc. 

and  mental  position,  600,  etc. 

Petronius,  517 

Phantasms  of  the  Living,  329 

Phenomenalism,  422 

Physiological  theory  of  traces,  468, 

etc. 
'Piety,  natural,'  practised  by  Prof. 

Alexander,  55 
Piper,  Mrs,  her  mediumship,  549 
Plato,  386 

on  immortality,  483 

on     the     necessity     of     social 

myths,  511 
Pluralism  and  Monism,  17,  etc. 

about  the  Existent,  20,  etc. 

about     Differentiating     Attri- 
butes, 23,  etc. 
about  Specific   Properties,   24, 

etc.,  41 
substantival    and     adjectival, 

25,  etc. 
Podmore,    F.,    and    Psychical    Re- 
search, 515 
Point- instants,  593,  etc. 
Position,  spatio-temporal,  592,  etc. 

mental,  600,  etc. 

Positional  qualities,  599,  etc. 
Possession,  395 
Postulates,  217,  etc. 
Precedence,  immediate,  447,  etc. 
Present,  specious,  267,  etc. 
Presentations,  275 
Presentness  and  presentedness,  254 
Prince,  Dr  Morton,  374,  394 
Principle  of  Relativity,  3 
Principles  of  Natural  Knowledge,  3 
Privy  Council,  Judicial  Committee 

of,  32 
Probability,  intrinsic,  516 
Progress,  656,  etc. 
Psychic  Factor,  536,  etc.,  550,  651, 

etc. 

and  ectoplasm,  652 

and  cosmic  progress,  659,  etc. 

Psychical   Research,    and   survival, 

485.  651 


INDEX 


673 


Psychical    Research,    logical    difh- 

culties  of,  517 

the  Popish  view  of,  517 

and  dualism,  644 

and     Emergent     Materialism, 

647 

and  physical  phenomena,  652 

Society  for,  16,  etc.,  329,  514, 

etc.,  542,  etc. 
Psycho-analysts,  294,  362,  388,  etc., 

426,  etc.,  474,  etc. 
Pure  Ego,  214,  etc.,  278,  etc.,   314, 

376,  585,  etc. 

and  multiple  personality,  398 

— and  traces,  463,  etc.,  469,  etc., 

473 
theories   involving,    558,    etc., 

603,  etc. 

and  personal  memory,  604,  etc. 

Pure  Materialism,  611 
Pure  Mentalism,  631,  etc. 
Pure  Neutralism,  612 


Qualities,  emergent,  23,  581 

pure  and  relational,  52 

secondary,  71,  72,  80,  204,  etc. 

mental,    556,    564,    etc.,    581, 

598,  etc. 
positional  and  non-positional, 

592,  etc.,  599 
material  and  immaterial,  592, 

etc. 

extensional,  594,  etc. 

structural  and  non-structural, 

.595.  etc. 
Quantum  Theory,  435 


Rationality  and  righteousness,  504 

Realism,  18 

naive  and  critical,  422 

Reductive  Materialism,  refuted,  612, 
etc. 

Reductive  Mentalism,  624,  etc. 

Reductive  Neutralism,  638,  etc. 

Reference  objective,  565,  568 

Referential  cognition,  635,  etc. 

intuitive  and  discursive,  636 

Referential  situations,  305,  etc., 
556,  etc.,  576,  etc. 

Reflex  arc,  and  interaction,  107,  etc. 

Regions,  of  projection  and  perva- 
sion, 163,  etc. 

of  emission,  168 

Relations, mental,  565,  etc.,  572,  etc. 

Relativity,  Theory  of,  3,  204,  594 

Repetition,  and  memory,  225,  etc. 

Retentiveness,  269 

Rivers,  Dr  W.  H.  R.,  359,  etc.,  377 

Rome,  Church  of,  664 


Rubicon,  272 

Russell,  Hon.  B.  A.  W.,  on  vector- 
sums,  62, 

on  matter,  183,  200 

on  sensation,  210,  228,  etc. 

on  desire,  294,  etc. 

on   mnemic   phenomena,    357, 

422,  445 

on  '  unconscious  desires,'  370 

on  causal  laws,  452,  etc. 

on  unity  of  the  Self,  571,  578, 

etc. 

his  Neutralism,  631,  etc.,  648, 

etc. 

Rutherford,  Prof.  Sir  E.,  70,  484 


Saint  Paul's,  Very  Rev.  the  Dsan  of, 

655 
Schopenhauer,  A.,  622 
Scientific  Thought,  3,  4,  5,  10,  140, 

190,  194,  403 
Seeming,  49 
Selecting,  of  sensa,  297 
Selective    Theories    of    Perception, 

200,  etc. 
Self,    introspective    knowledge    of, 

277,  etc. 
Empirical  and  Total,  282,  etc., 

304.  314.  319 

Semon,  on  mnemic  phenomena,  357, 
441 

Sensa,  181 

apprehension     of,     209,     etc., 

296,  etc. 

and  images,  242,  etc.,  258,  etc. 

inspection  of,  297,  etc. 

undiscriminable,  403,  etc. 

Sensations,  causation  of,  113,  etc. 

and  perceptions,  145,  638,  etc. 

pure,  216 

unconscious,  402,  etc. 

Sense-fields,  195,  210,  etc. 

Sense-histories,  195 

Sensing,  296 

Sensum  Theory,  180,  etc. 

alleged  objections  to,  190,  etc. 

Sentience,  635,  etc. 

universal,  644,  etc. 

Separation,  temporal,  447,  etc. 

Sequence  and  causation,  452,  etc. 

Sets  of  Parts,  296,  etc.,  315 

Shape  and  size,  595,  597 

Sidgwick,  H.,  and  Psychical  Re- 
search, 515 

Mrs,  on  telepathy,  329 

Situations,  intuitive  and  discursive, 
144 

sensuous,  145 

referential  and  non-referential, 

305,  etc. 

2  U 


674 


INDEX 


Smith,    Prof.    N.    K.,    on    multiple 

inherence,  162 
Solipsism,  unpopularity  of,  317 
Space,  physical,  origin  of  the  notion, 

203,  etc. 

relational  theory  of,  38 

as  a  substance,  58S 

Space,  Time  and  Deity,  648 
Space-Time,  absolute,  186,  etc. 
— — -  relational,  190,  etc. 
Speech,  rational,  321,  332,  etc. 

capacitj-  for,  269  • 

Spinoza,  B.,  his  monism,  21,  etc. 

on  substance,  28,  etc. 

on  artificial  products,  113 

on  survival,  483 

his  hylozoism,  622 

— in  what  sense  a  dualist,  642 

Stout,   Prof.    G.   F.,  on  unacquired 

meaning,  267 
Structure,    and   causal   characteris- 
tics, 433,  etc. 

mental,  439,  etc.,  451,  etc.,  582 

Structural  Qualities,  595,  etc. 
Stumpf's  Argument,  409,  etc. 
Stuff,  persistence  of,  34,  etc. 

neutral,  625,  631 

Subconscious,  hearing,  405,  etc. 

mass,  390,  etc. 

Sub-groups,  unconscious,  391,  etc. 
Substance,  ambiguity  of  the  term, 

27,  etc. 
— —  material  and  mental,  588,  etc. 
Substantiality,  degrees  of,  31 
Substantives,     existent     and     sub- 

sistent,  558,  etc. 
Survival,  10 
causes  of  belief  in,  481,   etc., 

522,  etc. 

ethical  arguments  for,  487,  etc. 

a  socially  useful  nayth,  511,  etc. 

empirical  arguments  for,   514, 

etc. 
antecedent  probability  of,  515, 

etc. 

arguments  against,  524,  etc. 

and  persistence,  539,  etc. 

Tamer  Benefaction,  3,  etc.,  10 
Taylor,  Prof.  A.  E.,  his  arguments 

for  immortality,  491,  etc. 
Telegnostic  situations.  328,  etc. 
Telegram-argument,  120,  etc. 
Telekinesis,  652 
Teleology,  81,  etc. 
Telepathy,  16,  114 
evidence  for,  329 


Telepathy,      between      sitter     and 

medium,  394,  545 

selective,  545,  etc. 

and   Compound   Theory,    546, 

etc. 

and  mental  position,  600,  etc. 

Tests,  contrasted  with  descriptions 

and  definitions,  401,  etc. 
Theodora,     Empress,     her     lighter 

moments,  517 
Theory  of  Electrons,  443 
Thinking,  crystallised  and  fluid,  334 
Time,  and  existence,  19 

and  abstracta,  20 

Traces,  and  perception,  153,  170 

and  dispositions,  353,  357,  etc. 

and  stimuli,  413,  etc. 

theories  about,  422,  etc.,  463, 

etc. 
— and    causal    characteristics    of 

matter,  430,  etc. 

and  memory,  444 

and  mnemic     causation,     450, 

etc.,  458,  etc. 
Trialism,  24 

Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  32,  404 
late  Master  of,  224 

'  Unconscious,'   ambiguity  of,    354, 

etc. 
'  Unconscious,   The,'   ambiguity  of, 

386,  etc. 
Units,  natural,  34 
Unity,  of  centre  and  of  system,  212, 

etc.,  585    .  / 

V  err  all,  Dr  A.  W.,  his  alleged  com- 
munications, 546 

Mrs,  and  cross-correspond- 
ences, 544,  etc. 

Victoria,  Queen,  her  death,  256 

Vitalism,  10,  41 

substantial,  56,  69,  73,  91,  612 

emergent,58,  69,  73,  etc.,  91, etc. 

Voluntary  actions,  and  causation, 
114,  etc. 

Ward,  Prof.  J .,  his  mentalism,  624 

Waterloo,  Battle  of,  231 

Whitehead,  Prof.  A.  N.,  3,  etc.,  8,  47 

on  multiple  inherence,  162,  171 

on  Extensive  Abstraction,  447 

Writing,  automatic,  16 

indecency  in,  517 

cross-correspondences  in,   543, 

etc. 


PRINTED    IN    GREAT   BRITAIN    BY 
THE    EDINBURGH   TRESS,    9   AND    II    YOUNG   STREET,    EDINBURGH 


l>  6  %  ■■ 


p>' 


(p 


Gi  .' 


/  CUia. 


The  mind  and  its  place  in  natu  main 
150B863mC4 


3  15b2  D311b  3DbS 


