COLLEGE MISERICORDIA sy 
LIBRARY 
DALLAS, PENNSYLVANIA. 


THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY 
EDITED BY 
_E. PAGE, Lirr.D., AND W. H. D. ROUSE, Lirr.D. 


CICERO 


DE FINIBUS BONORUM ET MALORUM 


CICERO 
DE FINIBUS BONORUM 
ET MALORUM 


- WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY 
H. RACKHAM, M.A. 


FELLOW AND TUTOR OF CHRIST’ 8 COLLEGE, 
CAMBRIDGE 


LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN 


_ NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN CO. 
MCMXIV 


Introduction | 


Book I 
Book II 
Book III 
Book IV 
Book V 


Index 


CONTENTS 


G7 noe 


Page vii 


INTRODUCTION. 

The de Finibus Bonorum et Malorum is a treatise 7’ oe de Fini- 
on the theory of Ethics. It expounds and criticizes 
the three ethical systems most prominent in Cicero’s 
day, the Epicurean, the Stoic and that of the Aca- 
demy under Antiochus. The most elaborate of 
Cicero’s philosophical visti: it has had fewer 
readers than his less technical essays on moral sub- 
jects. But it is of importance to the student of philo- 
sophy as the only systematic account surviving 
from antiquity of those rules of life which divided 
the allegiance of thoughtful men during the cen- 
turies when the old religions had lost their hold and 
Christianity had not yet emerged. And the topics 
that it handles can never lose their interest. 


The title ‘About the Ends of Goods and Evils’ 74¢ meaning 
requires explanation. It was Aristotle who put the D4 gta 
ethical problem in the form of the question, What 
is the TéAos or End, the supreme aim of man’s en- 
deavour, in the attainment of which his Good or 
Well-being lies? For Aristotle, Telos connoted not 
only ‘aim,’ but ‘completion’; and he found the 
answer to his question in the complete development 
and right exercise of the faculties of man’s nature, 
and particularly of the distinctively human faculty 
of Reason. The life of the Intellect was the Best, 
the Chief Good; and lesser Goods were Means to 
the attainment of this End. Thus was introduced 
the notion of an ascending scale of Goods, and this 
affected the interpretation of the term Telos. Telos | 
came to be understood as denoting not so much the 
end or aim of endeavour as the end or extreme 

vii 


Cicero as a 
writer on 


philosophy. 


INTRODUCTION 


point of a series, the topmost good. To this was 
naturally opposed an extreme of minus value, the 
topmost, or rather bottommost, evil. The expres- 
sions tédos dyabGv, TéA0s KaxGv, ‘End of Goods, of 
Evils, do not occur in extant Greek (though Dio- 
genes has teAcxa xaxd, ‘final evils’), but they are 
attested by Cicero’s translation jints bonorum et malo- 
rum. Asa title for his book he throws this phrase 
into the plural, meaning ‘different views as to the 
Chief Good and Evil.’ Hence in title and to some 
extent in method, the de Finibus may be compared 
with such modern works as Martineau’s Types of 
Ethical Theory and Sidgwick’s Methods of Ethics. 


Cicero belongs to a type not unknown in English 
life, that of the statesman who is also a student and a 
writer. From his youth he aspired to play a part in 
public affairs, and the first step towards this ambition 
was to learn to speak. He approached Greek philo- 
sophy as part of a liberal education for a political 
eareer, and he looked on it as supplying themes for 
practice in oratory. But his real interest in it went 
deeper; the study of it formed his mind and hu- 
manized his character, and he loved it to the end of 
his life. : 

In his youth he heard the heads of the three chief 
Schools of Athens, Phaedrus the Epicurean, Diodo- 
tus the Stoic, and Philo the Academic, who had 
come to Rome to escape the disturbances of the 
Mithradatic War. When already launched in public 
life, he withdrew, at the age of 27 (79 B.c.), to devote 
two more years to philosophy and rhetoric. Six 
months were spent at Athens, and the introduction 


to de Finibus Book V gives a brilliant picture of his 
Vili 


INTRODUCTION 


student life there with. his friends. No passage 
more vividly displays what Athens and her memories 
meant to the cultivated Roman.. At Athens Cicero 
attended the lectures of the Epicurean Zeno and the 
Academic Antiochus. Passing on to Rhodes to 
work under the leading professors of rhetoric, he 
there met Posidonius, the most renowned Stoic of 
the day. He returned to Rome to plunge into his 
career as advocate and statesman; but his Letters 
show him continuing his studies in his intervals of 
leisure. For many years the Stoic Diodotus was an 
inmate of his house. 

Under the Triumvirate, as his influence in politics 
waned, Cicero turned more and more to literature. 
His earliest essay in rhetoric, the de IJnventione, had 
appeared before he was twenty-five; but his first 
considerable works on rhetoric and on_ political 
science, the de Oratore, de Republica, and de Legibus, 
were written after his return from exile in 57. The 
opening pages of de Finibus Book III give a glimpse 
of his studies at this period. In-51 he went as 
Governor to Cilicia; and he wrote no more until the 
defeat of Pompey at Pharsalus had destroyed his 
hopes for the Republic. 

After his reconciliation with Caesar and return to 
Rome in the autumn of 46, Cicero resumed writing 
on rhetoric. In February 45 came the death of his 
beloved daughter Tullia, followed soon after by the 
final downfall of the Pompeians at Munda. Crushed 
by public and private sorrow, he shut himself up in 
one of his country houses and sought distraction in 
unremitting literary work. He conceived the idea, 
as he implies in the preface to de Finibus, of render- 


ing a last service to his country by bringing the 
ix 


te of ay 
\ 
} 


libus. 


thod of 


nposttion. 


INTRODUCTION 


treasures of Greek thought within the reach of the 
Roman public. Both his Academica and de Finibus 
were compiled in the following summer; the latter 
was probably presented to Brutus, to whom it is 


- dedicated, on his visit to Cicero in August 45 (ad 


Att. XIII, 44). Seven months later Brutus was one 
of the assassins of Caesar. In the autumn of 44 
Cicero flung himself again into the arena with his 
attack on Antony, which led to his proscription and 
death in December 43. 

Excepting the de Oratore, de Republica and de 
Legibus, the whole of Cicero’s most important 
writings on philosophy and rhetoric belong to 
46-44 B.c. and were achieved within two years. 
Such a mass of work so rapidly produced could 
hardly be original, and in fact it made no claim to 
be so. It was designed as a sort of encyclopaedia 
of philosophy for Roman readers. Cicero’s plan was 
to take each chief department of thought in turn, 
and present the theories of the leading schools upon 
it, appending to each theory the criticisms of its 
opponents. Nor had his work that degree of inde- 
pendence which consists in assimilating the thought 
of others and recasting it in the mould of the writer's 
own mind. Hemerely chose some recent hand-baok 
on each side of the question under consideration, 
and reproduced it in Latin, encasing passages of 
continuous exposition in a frame of dialogue, and 
adding illustrations from Roman history and_ poetry. 
He puts the matter frankly in a letter to Atticus 
(XII, 52): “You will say, ‘What is your method in 
such compositions?’ They are mere transcripts, and 
cost comparatively little labour; I only supply the 


words, of which I have a copious flow.” In de Finibus 
x 


INTRODUCTION 


(I, 6) he rates his work a little higher, not without | 
justice, and claims to be the critic as well as the | 
interpreter of his authorities. 

This method of writing was consonant with Cicero’s Cicero's 
own position in philosophy. Since his early studies 2”/2s¢h4#« 
under Philo he had been a professed adherent of the eee: 
New Academy, and as such maintained a sceptical 
attitude on questions of knowledge. On morals he 
was more positive; though without a logical basis for - 
his principles, he accepted the verdict of the common 
moral conscience of his age and country. Epicure- | 
anism he abhorred as demoralizing. The Stoics ; 
repelled him by their harshness and narrowness, but i 
attracted him by their strict morality and lofty the- | 
ology. His competence for the task of interpreting 
Greek thought to Rome was of a qualified order. 
He had read much, and had heard the chief teachers 
of the day. But with learning and enthusiasm he — ~~ 
combined neither depth of insight nor scientific 
precision. Yet his services to philosophy must not 
be underrated. He introduced a novel style of ex- 
position, copious, eloquent, impartial and urbane; 
and he created a philosophical terminology. in Latin 
which has passed into the languages of modern 
Europe. 


The de Finibus consists of three separate dialogues, Contents of 
each dealing with one of the chief ethical systems 4¢ Finibus. 
of the day. The exponents of each system, and the 
minor interlocutors, are friends of Cicero’s younger 
days, all of whom were dead when he wrote; brief 
notes upon them will be found in the Index. The 
role of critic Cicero takes himself throughout. 

The first dialogue occupies Books I and II; in the | 

xi 


INTRODUCTION 


former the Ethics of Epicurus are expounded, and 
in the latter refuted from the Stoic standpoint. The 
scene is laid at Cicero’s villa in the neighbourhood 
of Cumae, on the lovely coast a little north of 
Naples. The spokesman of Epicureanism is L. Man- 
lius Torquatus, a reference to whose praetorship 
(II, 74) fixes the date of the conversation at 50 B.c., 
shortly after Cicero's return from his province of 
Cilicia. A minor part is given to the youthful 
C. Valerius Triarius. 

In the second dialogue the Stoic ethics are ex- 
pounded (in Book III) by M. Cato, and criticized (in 
Book IV) from the standpoint of Antiochus by 
Cicero. Cicero has run down to his place at Tuscu- 
lum, fifteen miles from town, for a brief September 
holiday, while the Games are on at Rome; and he 
meets Cato at the neighbouring villa of Lucullus, 
whose orphan son is Cato’s ward. A law passed by 
Pompey in 52 s.c. is spoken of (IV, 1) as new, so 
the date falls in that year; Cicero went to Cilicia 
in 51. 

The third dialogue (Book V) goes back to a much 
earlier period in’Cicero’s life. Its date is 79 and its 
scene Athens, where Cicero and his friends are 
eagerly attending lectures on philosophy. The posi- 
tion of the “Old Academy” of Antiochus is main- 
tained by M. Pupius Piso Calpurnianus, and after- 
wards criticized by Cicero from the Stoic point of 
view; the last word remains with Piso. The others 
present are Cicero’s brother and cousin, and _ his 
friend and correspondent Titus Pomponious Atticus, 
a convinced Epicurean, who had retired to Athens 
from the civil disorders at Rome, and did not return 
for over twenty years. 

xii 


INTRODUCTION 


In Book I the exposition of Epicureanism pro- Cicero's 
bably comes from some compendium of the school, nies ces for 
F z 3 . e Finibus. 
which seems to have summarized (1) Epicurus’s essay 
On the Telos, (2) a résumé of the points at issue 
between Epicurus and the Cyrenaics (reproduced I, 
55 ff), and (3) some Epicurean work on F riendship | 
(I, 65-70). (| 
The Stoic arguments against Epicurus in Book II 
Cicero derived very likely from Antiochus; but in the 
criticism of Epicurus there is doubtless more of 
Cicero’s own thought than anywhere else in the 
work. 
The authority for Stoicism relied on in Book HI 
was most probably Diogenes of Babylon, who is 
referred to by name at III, 33 and 49, 
Ip. Books IV and V Cicero appears to have followed 
Antiochus, 


Alexander the Great died in 323 and Aristotle in ost-Aristo- 
322 8.c. Both Epicurus and Zeno, the founder of fae 

aur htlosophy. 
Stoicism, began to teach at Athens about twenty years 
later. ‘The date marks a new era in Greek thought 
and Greek life. Speculative energy had exhausted 
itself; the schools of Plato and Aristotle showed 
little vigour after the death of their founders. En- 
lightenment had undermined religion, yet the philo- 
sophers seemed to agree about nothing except that 
things are not what they appear; and the plain 
man’s mistrust of their conclusions was raised into a 
system of Scepticism by Pyrrho. Meanwhile the 
outer order too had changed. For Plato and Aris- 
totle the good life could only be lived in a free 
city-state, like the little independent Greek cities 
which they.knew; but these had now fallen under 

xiii 


Epicurean- 
ism : 
Canonic. 


INTRODUCTION 


the empire of Macedon, and the barrier between 
Greek and barbarian was giving way. The wars of 
Alexander’s successors rendered all things insecure ; 
exile, slavery, violent death were possibilities with 
which every man must lay his account. 

Epicureanism and Stoicism, however antagonistic, 
have certain common features corresponding to the 
needs of the period. Philosophy was systematized, 
and fell into three recognized departments, Logic, 
Physics and Ethics; and for both schools the third 
department stood first in importance. Both schools 
offered dogma, not speculation; a way of life for man 
as man, not as Greek citizen. Both abandoned 
idealism, saw no reality save matter, and accepted 
sense experience as knowledge. Both studied the 
world of nature only in order to understand, the 
position of man. Both looked for a happiness 
secure from fortune’s changes; and found it in peace 
of mind, undisturbed by fear and desire. But here 
the rival teachers diverged: Epicurus sought peace 
in the liberation of man’s will from nature’s law, 
Zeno in submission to it; and in their conceptions 
of nature they differed profoundly. 


Formal Logic Epicurus dismissed as useless, but 
he raised the problem of knowledge under the 
heading of Canonic. The Canon or measuring-rod, 
the criterion of_truth, is furnished by the sensations 
and by the zd6y or feelings of pleasure and pain. 
Epicurus’s recognition of the latter as qualities of 
any state of consciousness and as distinct from the 
sensations of sight, hearing, etc., marks a notable 

1 Et mihi res non me rebus subiungere conor, says Horace 
of his lapses from Stoicism into Cyrenaicism. 

xiv 


; 


; INTRODUCTION 


-advance in psychology. The sensations and the — 
feelings determine our judgment and volition 
respectively, and they are all ‘true,’ ie., real data 
of experience. So are the rpoA‘wes, or ‘precon- 
ceptions’ by which we recognize each fresh sensa- 
tion, i.e., our general concepts; for these are accu- 
mulations of past sensations. It is in troAjwpes, 
“ opinions,’ i.e., judgments about sensations, that 
error can occur. Opinions are true only when con- 
firmed, or, in the case of those relating to imper- 
ceptible objects (e.g. the Void), when not contra- 
dicted by actual sensations. Thus Epicurus adum- 
brated, however crudely, a logic of inductive 
science. 

His Natural Philosophy is touched on in de Finibus, (Epicurean 
I,c. vi. It is fully set out in the great poem ae ie 
Cicero: s contemporary, Lucretius, who preaches his 
master’s doctrine with religious feuveus as a gospel 
_ of deliverance for the spirit of man. Epicurus adopt- 
ed the Atomic theory of Democritus, according to 
which the primary realities are an infinite number of 
tiny particles of matter, indivisible and indestructi- 
_ ble, moving by their own weight through an infinite 
expanse of empty space or Void. Our perishable 
world and all that it contains consists of temporary. 
clusters of these atoms interspersed with void. In- 
numerable other worlds beside are constantly form- 
ing and dissolving. This universe goes on of itself: 
there are gods, but they take no part in its guidance; 
they live a life of untroubled bliss in the empty spaces 
between the worlds. The human:soul like every- 
thing else is material; it consists of atoms of the 
smallest and most mobile sort, enclosed by the 
coarser atoms of the body, and dissipated when the 

xv 


Epicurean 
Ethics. 


INTRODUCTION 


body is dissolved by death. Death therefore means 
extinction. 

Thus man was relieved from the superstitions that 
preyed upon his happiness,—fear of the gods and 
fear of punishment after death. But a worse tyranny 
remained if all that happens is caused by inexorable 
fate. Here comes in the doctrine of the Swerve, 
which Cicero derides, but which is essential to the 
system. Democritus had taught that the heavier 
atoms fell faster through the void than the lighter 
ones, and so overtook them. Aristotle corrected the 
error; and Epicurus turned the correction to account. 
He gave his atoms a uniform vertical velocity, but 
supposed them to collidé by casually making a slight 
sideway movement. This was the minimum hypo- 
thesis that he could think of to account for the 
formation of things; and it served his purpose by 
destroying the conception of a fixed order in Nature. 
The capacity to swerve is shared by the atoms that 
compose the human soul; hence it accounts for the 
action of the will, which Epicurus regards as entirely 
undetermined. In this fortuitous universe man is 
free to make his own happiness. 

In Ethics Epicurus based himself on Aristippus, 
the pupil of Socrates and founder of the School of 
Cyrene. With Aristippus he held that pleasure is the 
only good, the sole constituent of man’s well-being. 
Aristippus had drawn the practical inference that 
the right thing to do is to enjoy each pleasure of the 
moment as it offers. His rule of conduct is summed 
up by Horace’s Carpe diem. But this naif hedonism 
was so modified by Epicurus as to become in his hands 
an entirely different theory. Its principal tenets are: 


that the goodness of pleasure is a matter of direct 


XV1 


INTRODUCTION 


intuition) and is attested by natural instinct, as seen 
in the actions of infants and animals;(that all men’s 
conduct does as a matter of fact aim at pleasure } that 
the proper aim is to secure the greatest balance of 
leasure over pain in the aggregate;) that absence 
of pain is the greatest pleasure,) which can only be 
varied, not augmented, by active’ ‘gratification of the 
sense ; that pleasure of the mind is based on pleasure 
of the body,\yet that mental pleasure may far sur- 
pass bodily in magnitude, including as it does with 
the consciousness of present gratification the memory 
of past and the hope of future pleasure; that ‘un- 
natural and unnecessary’ desires and emotions are a 
chief source of unhappiness; and that Prudence, 
Temperance or self-control, and the other recognized 
virtues are therefore essential to obtain a life of 
the greatest pleasure, though at the same time the 
virtues are of no value save as conducive to pleasure. 
This original, and in some respects paradoxical, 
development of hedonism gave no countenance to the 
-yoluptuary. On the contrary Epicurus both preached 
and practised the simple life, and the cultivation of 
the ordinary virtues, though under utilitarian sanc- 
tions which led him to extreme unorthodoxy in some 
particulars. Especially, he denied any absolute 
validity to Justice and to Law, and inculcated absten- 
tion from the active duties of citizenship. To Friend- 
ship he attached the highest value; and the School 
that he founded in his Garden in a suburb of Athens, 
and endowed by will, was as much a society of 
friends as a college of students. It still survived 
and kept the birthday of its founder in Cicero’s time. 
Epicurus is the forerunner of the English Utilita- 
rians; but he differs from them in making no attempt 
xvii 


Stoicism: its 
Logic. 


INTRODUCTION 


to combine hedonism with altruism. ‘The greatest 
happiness of the greatest number’ is a formula that 
has no counterpart in antiquity. The problem that 
occurs when the claims of self conflict with those of 
others was not explicitly raised by Epicurus. But it 
is against the egoism of his Ethics at least as much 
as against its hedonistic basis that Cicero’s criticisms 
are really directed. 


The Stoics paid much attention to Logic. In this 
department they included with Dialectic, which they 
developed on the lines laid down by Aristotle, 
Grammar, Rhetoric, and the doctrine of the Criterion. 
The last was their treatment of the problem of know- 
ledge. Like Epicurus they were purely empirical, 
but unlike him they conceded to the Sceptics that 
sensations are sometimes misleading. Yet true sensa- 
tions, they maintained, are distinguishable from false ; 
they have a ‘clearness’ which compels the ‘assent’ 
of the mind and makes it ‘comprehend’ or grasp 
the presentation as a true picture of the external 
object. Such a ‘ comprehensible presentation,’ 
Karadnar eK) oavracia, is the criterion of truth; it is 

a presentation that arises from an object actually 
present, in conformity with that object, stamped on 
the mind like the impress of a seal, and such as 
could not arise from an object not actually present.’ 
So their much-debated formula was elaborated in 
reply to Sceptical critics. If asked how it happens 
that false sensations do occur—e.g., that a straight 
stick half under water looks crooked—the Stoics 


replied that error only arises from inattention; care- 


ful observation will detect the absence of one or 


other of the notes of ‘clearness.’ The Wise Man 
XViil 


INTRODUCTION 


never ‘assents’ to an “incomprehensible presenta- 
tion.’ 

In contradiction to Epicurus, the Stoics taught Stoic 
that the universe is guided by, and in the last resort P/ysécs. 
is,God. The sole first cause is a divine Mind, which 
realizes itself periodically in the world-process. But 
this belief they expressed in terms uncompromisingly 
materialistic. Only the corporeal exists, for only the 
corporeal can act and be acted upon. Mind there- 
fore is matter in its subtlest form; it is Fire or 
Breath (spirit) or Aether. The primal fiery Spirit 
creates out of itself the material world that we know, 
and itself persists within the world as its heat, its 

“tension,” its soul; it is the cause of all movement, 
and the source of life in all animate creatures, ios 
souls are detached particles of the aa ame 

The notion of Fire as the primary substance the 
Stoics derived from Heracleitus. Of the process of 
creation they offered an elaborate account, a sort of 
imaginary physics or chemistry, operating with the 
hot and cold, dry and moist, the four elements of 
fire, air, earth and water, and other conceptions of 
previous physicists, which came to them chiefly 
through the Peripatetics. 

The world-process they conceived as going on 
according to a fixed law or formula (Adyos), effect 
following cause in undeviating sequence. This law 
they regarded impersonally as Fate, or personally as 
divine Providence; they even spoke of the Deity as 
being himself the Logos of creation. Evidences of 
design they found in the beauty of the ordered 
world and in its adaptation to the use and comfort 
of man. Apparent evil is but the necessary imperfec- 
tion of the parts as parts; the whole is perfectly good. 

xix 


Stotc Ethics. 


INTRODUCTION 


As this world had a beginning, so it will have an 
end in time; it is moving on towards a universal 
conflagration, in which all things will return to the 
primal Fire from which they sprang. But only for 
a moment will unity be restored. The causes that 
operated before must operate again; once more the 
creative process will begin, and all things will recur 
exactly as they have occurred already. So existence 
goes on, repeating itself in an unending series of 
identical cycles. 

Such rigorous determinism would seem to leave no 
room for human freedom or for moral choice. Yet the 
Stoics maintained that though man’s acts like all 
other events are fore-ordained, his willis free. Obey the 
divine ordinance iti any case he must, but it rests with 
him to do so willingly or with reluctance. To under- 
stand the world in which he finds himself, and to sub- 
mit his will thereto—herein man’s well-being lies. 

On this foundation they reared an elaborate struc- 
ture of Ethics. Their formula for conduct was “To 


, live in accordance with nature.’ To interpret this, 


they appealed, like Epicurus, to instinct, but with a 
different result. According to the Stoics, not plea- 
sure but self-preservation and things conducive to it 
are the objects at which infants and animals aim. 
Such objects are ‘ primary in the order of nature’; 
and these objects and others springing out of them, 
viz., all that pertains to the safety and the full deve- 
lopment of man’s nature, constitute the proper aim 
of human action. The instinct to seek these objects 
is replaced in the adult by deliberate intention; as 
his reason matures, he learns (if unperverted) to 
understand the plan of nature and to find his happi- 


ness in willing conformity with it. This rightness of 
ax 


INTRODUCTION 


~ understanding and of will (the Stoics did not separate 

the two, since for them the mind is one) is Wisdom 
or Virtue, which is the only good; their wrongness is 
Folly or Vice, the only eyil. Not that we are to ignore 
external things: on the contrary, it is in choosing 
among them as Nature intends that Virtue is exercised. 
But the attainment of the natural objectsisimmaterial; 
it is the effort to attain them alone that counts. 

This nice adjustment of the claims of Faith and 
Works was formulated in a series of technicalities. 
A seale of values was laid down, and on it a scheme 
of conduct was built up. Virtue alone is ‘good’ 
and ‘to be sought,’ Vice alone ‘evil’ and ‘to be 
shunned’; all else is ‘indifferent.’ But of things 
indifferent some, being in accordance with nature, 
are ‘promoted’ or ‘preferred’ (xponypéva), as 
having ‘worth’ (dia), and these are ‘to be 
chosen’; others, being contrary to nature, are ‘ de- 
promoted’ (drorponypéva) as having ‘unworth’ 
(dmaéia, negative value), and these are ‘to be re- 
jected’; while other things again are ‘absolutely 
indifferent, and supply no motive for action. ‘To 
aim at securing things promoted, or avoiding 
their opposites is an ‘appropriate act’ (xa6jxov) : 
this is what the young and uncorrupted do by in- 
stinct. When the same aim is taken by the rational 
adult with full knowledge of nature’s plan and 
deliberate intent to conform with it, then the 
‘appropriate act’ is “perfect, and is a ‘right 
action’ or ‘success’ (xarép$wpa).' Intention, not 


1 Cicero inevitably obscures the point in rendering caOjxov 
by offictum. To say that fungi officio, ‘to do one’s duty,’ 
is not vecte facere makes the doctrine sound more paradoxi- 
cal than it really was. 


XXi 


INTRODUCTION 


achievement, constitutes success. The only ‘ failure,’ 
‘error’ or ‘sin’ (the term dudprynpa includes all 
these notions) is the conduct of the rational being 
who ignores and violates nature. 

In identifying the Good with Virtue and in inter- 
preting Virtue by the conception of Nature, the 
Stoics were following their forerunners the Cynics; 
but they parted company with the Cynics in finding 
a place in their scheme for Goods in the ordinary 
sense. For though they place pleasure among 
things ‘absolutely indifferent,’ their examples of 
things “ promoted ’—life, health, wealth, ete.—are 
pretty much the usual objects of man’s endeavour. 
Hence, whereas the Cynics, construing ‘the natu- 
ral’ as the primitive or unsophisticated, had run 
counter to convention and even to decency, the 
Stoics in the practical rules deduced from their 
principles agreed in the main with current morality, 
and included the recognized duties to the family 
and the state. 

But their first principles themselves they enunci- 
ated in a form that was violently paradoxical. Virtue 
being a state of inward righteousness they regarded 
as something absolute. Either a man has attained to 
it, when he is at once completely wise, good and 
happy, and remains so whatever pain, sorrow, or 
misfortune may befall him; or he has not attained to 
it, in which case, whatever progress he has made 
towards it, he is still foolish, wicked and miserable. 
So stated, the ideal was felt to be beyond man’s 
reach. Chrysippus, the third head of the school, 
confessed that he had never known a Wise Man. 
Criticism forced the later Stoics to compromise. 


The Wise Man remained as a type and an ensample; 
Xxli 


INTRODUCTION 


_ but positive value was conceded to moral progress, 
and appropriate acts’ tended to usurp the place 
that strictly belonged to ‘ right acts.’ 


The last system to engage Cicero’s attention, that 7,,, 
of his contemporary Antiochus, is of much less in- Academy. 
terest than the two older traditions with which he 
ranges it. 

Within a century of the death of its founder Plato, 
the Academy underwent a complete transformation. 

 Arcesilas, its head in the middle of the third cen- 
tury B.c., adopted the scepticism that had been 
established as a philosophical system by Pyrrho two 
generations before, and denied the possibility of 
knowledge. He was accordingly spoken of as the 
founder of a Second or New Academy. His work 
was carried further a century afterwards by Car- 
neades. -Both these acute thinkers devoted them- 
selves to combating the dogmas of the Stoics. 
Arcesilas assailed their theory of knowledge; and 
Carneades riddled their natural theology with shafts 
that have served for most subsequent polemic of the 
‘kind. On the basis of philosophic doubt, the New 
‘Academy developed in Ethics a theory of reasoned 
| probability as a sufficient guide for life. 
The extreme scepticism of Carneades led to a 
reaction. Philo, who was his next successor but 
‘one, and who afterwards became Cicero’s teacher at 
Rome, reverted to a more positive standpoint. Doing 
violence to the facts, he declared that the teaching 
of the Academy had never changed since Plato, and 
that Arcesilas and Carneades, though attacking the 
Criterion of the Stoics, had not meant to deny all 
possibility of knowledge. The Stoic “ comprehen- 
xxiii 


Antiochus. 


INTRODUCTION 


sion’ was impossible, but yet there was a ‘clearness’ 
about some impressions that gives a conviction of 
their truth. 

The next head, Antiochus, went beyond this 
ambiguous position, and abandoned scepticism alto- 
gether. Contradicting Philo, he maintained that 
the true tradition of Plato had been lost, and pro- 
fessed to recover it, calling his school the “Old 
Academy.’ But his reading of the history of philo- 
sophy was hardly more accurate than Philo’s. He 
asserted that the teachings of the older Academics 
and Peripatetics and of the Stoics were, in Ethics 
at all events, substantially the same, and that Zeno 
had borrowed his tenets from his predecessors, 
merely concealing the theft by his novel termin- 


ology. 


The latter thesis is argued in de Finibus, Book IV, 
while Book V gives Antiochus’s version of the ‘Old 
Academic and Peripatetic’ Ethics, which he himself 
professed. - His doctrine is that Virtue is sufficient 
for happiness, but that. in the highest degree of | 
happiness bodily and external goods also form a part. 
The Stoics will not call these latter ‘ goods,’ but 
only ‘things promoted’; yet really they attach no 
less importance to them. 

Antiochus could only maintain his position by 
ignoring nice distinctions. The Ethics of Aris- 
totle in particular seem to have fallen into complete 
oblivion. Aristotle’s cardinal doctrines are, that 
well-being consists not in the state of virtue but in 
the active exercise of ali human excellences, and 
particularly of man’s highest gift of rational con- 
templation ; and that though for this a modicum of 
external goods is needed, these are but indispensable 

xxiv 


INTRODUCTION 


' conditions, and in no way constituent parts, of the 
Chief Good. 

The fact is that philosophy in Cicero’s day had 
lost all precision as well as originality. It must be 
admitted that de Finibus declines in interest when it 
comes to deal with contemporary thought. Not only 
does the plan of the work necessitate some repetition 
in Book V of argumentsalready rehearsed in Book IV; 
but Antiochus’s perversion of preceding systems 
impairs alike the criticism of the Stoics and the 
presentation of his own ethical doctrine. 


The text of this edition is founded on that of 
Madvig, whose representatives have kindly per- 
mitted use to be made of the latest edition of his 
de Finibus, dated 1876. Madvig first established 
the text of the book; and it is from no lack of 
appreciation for his Herculean labours that I have 
ventured here and there to modify his results, 
whether by adopting conjectures suggested in his 
notes, or by preferring MSS. readings rejected by 
him, or conjectures made by other scholars and in 
one or two places by myself. In supplementing 
Madvig’s work I have derived much help from the 
Teubner text of C. W. F. Miiller, 1904. Madvig’s 
punctuation I have altered throughout, both to con- 
form it with English usage and also occasionally to 
suggest a different connection of thought. 

Departures from Madvig’s text (referred to as 
Mdy.) are noted at the foot of the page. So also 
are MSS. variants of importance for the sense ; 
in such places the readings of the three best MSS. 
and of the inferior group are usually given. But no 
attempt is made to present a complete picture of 

XXV 


The Text. 


The critical 
Notes, 


The MSS. 


Editions. 


Translations. 


Books of 


Reference. 


INTRODUCTION 


the state of the MSS., for which the student must 
go to Madvig. 

The best MSS. of de Finibus are: A, Palatinus I, 
11th c., which ends soon after the beginning of 
Book IV; B, Palatinus II; and E, Erlangensis, 15th ec. 
These three form one family, within which B and E 
are more closely related. The other MSS. known 
to Madvig form a second family, inferior in general 
to the former, though, as Miiller points out, not to 
be entirely dispensed with. Both families according 
to Madvig descend from a late and already consider- 
ably corrupted archetype. ° 

The earliest edition is believed to have been 
printed at Cologne in 1467. Madvig’s great com- 
mentary (Copenhagen, 1839, 1869, 1876) supersedes 
all its predecessors. There is a small annotated 
edition, largely based upon Madvig, by W. M. L. 
Hutchinson (London, 1909). 

English translations are those of Samuel Parker 
(Tully's Five Books de Finibus, or Concerning the Last 
Objects of Desire and Aversion, done into English by 
S. P., Gent., revised... by Jeremy Collier, M.A., 
London, 1702; page-heading, Tully of Moral Ends ; 
a 2nd edition published by Bliss, Oxford, 1812); of 
Guthrie (London, 1744); of Yonge (in Bohn’s series, 
1848); and of J. S. Reid (Cambridge, 1883, now out 
of print). The first of these, and the German version 
of Kirchmann in the Philosophische Bibliothek (1 868), 


‘I have consulted occasionally, the former with plea- 


sure, but neither with much profit. 

The fullest treatment in English of the subjects 
dealt with in de Finibus will be found in Zeller’s 
Stoics, Epicureans and Sceptics and Eclectics. Zeller’s 


monumental work requires supplementing especially 
XXvi 


INTRODUCTION 


in regard to Stoicism. Recent books of value are 
Arnold’s Roman Stoicism, Hicks’s Stoic and Epicurean, 
and Bevan’s Stoics and Sceptics. Reid’s edition of 
Academica is a mine of information about Cicero’s 
philosophical work. For the sources, a selection for 
beginners is Adam’s Tevts to Illustrate Greek Philo- 
sophy after Aristotle. : 


I must express my gratitude to my friend Miss 
W. M. L. Hutchinson for reading the proofs of my 
translation and doing much to improve it. Nor can 
I forget my debt to the late Dr James Adam, whose 
lectures on de Finibus first aroused my interest in 
ethical theory. 

Le erat 


XXVii 


“eae. Sicneael 
Wb aides Ds ee 
ae we tA 3 <A 


Z ie upon >i dine ae B 2% fi 
att ria ‘elt o8 tals 


teed < kee bpeti ec a3 


nee: ne he fie ets we: 
BPA 
© 


_— 
“ 


ERRATUM. 


=e - , . ] ° 
On p. 22, note, for Democritus read Eepienrus,: 2" 4)" 


y oO a pets 3 | 


ae ee 
| 
\ 
- 
on . er) Re 
/ # 
= » + 
- a 
e 
' 
7 f 
Na 
be eT 
XXIX 
* 
~ Ss 
M2 
n° — Cs 
, ee . 


1 


wo 


M. TULLII CICERONIS 
DE 
FINIBUS BONORUM ET MALORUM 
LIBER PRIMUS 

“I. Non eram nescius, Brute, cum quae summis in- 
geniis exquisitaque doctrina philosophi Graeco ser- 
mone tractavissent ea Latinis litteris mandaremus, 
fore ut hic noster labor in varias reprehensiones in- 
curreret. Nam quibusdam, et iis quidem non admo- 
dum indoctis, totum hoc displicet philosophari. 
Quidam autem non tam id reprehendunt si remissius 
agatur, sed tantum studium tamque multam operam 
ponendam in eo non arbitrantur. Erunt etiam, et hi 
quidem eruditi Graecis litteris, contemnentes Lati- 
nas, qui se dicant in Graecis legendis operam malle 
consumere. Postremo aliquos futuros suspicor qui me 
ad alias litteras vocent, genus hoc scribendi, etsi sit 
elegans, personae tamen et dignitatis esse negent. 
Contra quos omnes dicendum breviter existimo. 
Quamquam. philosophiae quidem  vituperatoribus 
satis responsum est eo libro quo a nobis philosophia 
defensa et collaudata est cum esset accusata et 
vituperata ab Hortensio. Qui liber cum et tibi pro- 
batus videretur et iis quos ego posse iudicare arbi- 
trarer, plura suscepi, veritus ne movere hominum 
studia viderer, retinere non posse. Qui autem, si 


2This book was called Hortensius, and formed an-intro- 


duction to Cicero’s philosophical writings. Fragments only 
are extant, 


a) 


~ 


DE FINIBUS 
BOOK I 


I. My pear Brutus,—The following essay, I am Preface: choice 
well aware, attempting as it does to present in a Latin (ren eest 
dress subjects that philosophers of consummate 
ability and profound learning have already handled 
in Greek, is sure to encounter criticism from different 
quarters. Certain persons, and those not without 
some pretension to letters, disapprove of the study 
of philosophy altogether. Others do not so greatly 
object to it provided it be followed in dilettante 
fashion; but they do not think it ought to engage so 
large an amount of one’s interest and attention. A 
third class, learned in Greek literature and contemp- 
tuous of Latin, will say that they prefer to spend their 
time in reading Greek. Lastly, I suspect there will 
be some who will wish to divert me to other fields of 
authorship, asserting that this kind of composition, , 
though a graceful recreation, is beneath the dignity ~ 

-of my character and position. To all of these objec- 
tions I suppose I ought to make some brief reply. The Philosophy 
indiscriminate censure of philosophy has indeed been pra one ve 
sufficiently answered already in the book* which I 
wrote in praise of that study, in order to defend it 
against a bitter attack that had been made upon it 
by Hortensius. The favourable reception which that 
volume appeared to obtain from yourself and from 
others whom I considered competent judges en- 
couraged me to embark upon further undertakings ; 
for I did not wish to be thought incapable of sus- 
taining the interest that I had succeeded in arousing. 
B2 3 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


maxime hoc placeat, moderatius tamen id volunt fieri, 
difficilem quandam temperantiam postulant in eo 
quod semel admissum coerceri reprimique non potest ; 
ut propemodum iustioribus utamur illis qui omnino 
avocent a philosophia, quam his qui rebus infinitis 
modum constituant in reque eo meliore quo maior sit 
mediocritatem desiderent. Sive enim ad sapientiam 
perveniri potest, non paranda nobis solum ea sed 
fruenda etiam est; sive hoc difficile est, tamen nec 
modus est ullus investigandi veri nisi inveneris, et 
quaerendi defetigatio turpis est cum id quod quae- 
ritur sit pulcherrimum. Etenim si delectamur cum 
scribimus, quis est tam invidus qui ab eo nos abducat? 
Sin laboramus, quis est qui alienae modum statuat 
industriae? Nam ut Terentianus Chremes non: in- 
humanus, qui novum vicinum non vult 

Fodere aut arare aut aliquid ferre denique — 
(non enim illum ab industria sed ab illiberali labore 
deterret), sic isti curiosi, quos offendit noster minime 
nobis iniucundus labor. 

II. lis igitur est difficilius satisfacere qui se Latina 
scripta dicunt contemnere. In quibus hoc primum 
est in quo admirer, cur in gravissimis rebus non 
delectet eos sermo patrius, cum iidem fabellas Latinas 
ad verbum e Graecis expressas non inviti legant. 
Quis enim tam inimicus paene nomini Romano est, 
qui Enni Medeam aut Antiopam Pacuvi spernat aut 


"Terence, Heautontimorumenos, 1. 1. 17. 


4 


BOOK I. i-ii 


The second class of critics, who, however much they and of 
approve of philosophy, devertbeleds would rather ‘borough study. 
have it less eagerly prosecuted, are asking for a 
restraint that it is not easy to practise. he study 
is one that when once taken up admits of no restriction 
or control. In fact, the attitude of the former class, 
who attempt to dissuade us from philosophy alto- 
gether, seems almost less unreasonable than that of 
those who would set limits to what is essentially un- 
limited, and expect us to stop half-way in a study 
that increases in value the further it proceeds. / If 
Wisdom be attainable, let us not only win but enjoy 
it; or if attainment be difficult, still there is no end , 
to the search for truth, other than its discovery. It | 
were base to flag in the pursuit, when the object pur- / 
sued is so supremely lovely. Indeed if we like writing, 
who would be so churlish as to debar us from it? Or 
if we find it a labour, who is to set limits to another 
man’s exertions? No doubt it is kind of Chremes 
in Terence’s play to urge his new neighbour 

Neither to dig nor plough nor burdens bear*: 
for it is not industry in general, but toil of a menial 
kind, from which he would deter him; but only a ¢ 
busybody would take exception to an occupation ° } 
which, like mine, is a labour of love. 

II. A more difficult task therefore is to deal with Justification of 
rendering Greek 
the objection of those who profess a contempt for philosophy into 
Latin writings as such. What astonishes me first of al] 44. 
about them is this,—why should they dislike their ( 
native language for serious and important subjects, } 
when they are quite willing to read Latin plays trans- } 
lated word for word from the Greek ? Who has such} 
a hatred, one might almost say, for the very name of 


Roman, as to despise and reject the Medea of Ennius 


5) 


ei 


a 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
reiciat quod se iisdem Euripidis fabulis delectari 
dicat, Latinas litteras oderit? Synephebos ego, in- 
quit, potius Caecili aut Andriam Terenti quam ut- 
ramque Menandri legam? A quibus tantum dissentio 
ut, cum Sophocles vel optime scripserit Electram, 
tamen male conversam Atili mihi legendam putem, 
de quo Licinius ‘ferreum scriptorem,’ verum opinor 
scriptorem tamen, ut legendus sit. Rudem enim 
esse omnino in nostris poetis aut inertissimae segnitiae 
est aut fastidi delicatissimi. Mihi quidem nulli satis 
eruditi videntur quibus nostra ignota sunt. An 
Utinam ne in nemore— 
nihilo minus legimus quam hoc idem Graecum, quae — 
autem de bene beateque vivendo a Platone disputata 
io si 


nos non interpretum fungimur munere, sed tuemer 


sunt, haec explicari non placebit Latine? 


ea quae dicta sunt ab iis quos probamus, eisque no- 
strum iudicium et nostrum scribendi ordinem adiungi- 
mus? |\quid habent cur Graeca anteponant iis quae 
et splendide dicta sint neque sint conversa de Graecis? 
Nam si dicent ab illis has res esse tractatas, ne ipsos 
quidem Graecos est cur tam multos legant quam 
legendi sunt. Quid enim est a Chrysippo praeter- 


missum in Stoicis? Legimus tamen Diogenem, An- 


«The opening of Ennius’s Medea Exsul, cp. Euripides, 
Medea 3f. 


6 


BOOK I. ii 


_ or the Antiope of Pacuvius, and give as his reason that 
though he enjoysthe Parrednondiive plays of Euripides 
he cannot endure books written in Latin ? What, he 
cries,am I toread The Young Comrades of Gadciitiiss or 
Terence’s Maid of Andros, when I might be reading 
the same two comedies of Menander? With this sort 
of person I disagree so strongly, that, admitting the 
Electra of Sophocles to be a masterpiece, I yet think 
- Atilius’ S$ poor translation of it worth my while to 
read. ‘An iron writer,’ Licinius called him; wstalle 
in my opinion, a writer all the same, and pictues 
deserving to be read. For to be entirely unversed 
in our own poets argues either the extreme of mental 
inactivity or else a refinement of taste carried to the 
point of excess. To my mind no one can be styled 
a well-read man who does not know our native 
literature. If we read 
Would that in forest glades-—* 

just as readily as the same passage in the Greek, 
shall we object to having Plato’s discourses on 
morality, and happiness set before the reader in 
Latin? / And supposing that for our part we do not 
fill the bffice of a mere translator, but, while preserv- | 
ing the doctrines of our chosen authorities, add 
thereto our own criticism and our own arrangement: 
what ground have these objectors for ranking the 
writings of Greece above compositions that are at 
once brilliant in style and not mere translations from 
Greek originals? Wpattaps they will rejoin that the 
subject has been dealt with by the Greeks already. But 
then what reason have they for reading the multitude 
of Greek authors either that one has toread? Take 
Stoicism: what aspect of it has Chrysippus left 
untouched? Yet we read Diogenes, Antipater, 


7 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


tipatrum, Mnesarchum, Panaetium, multos alios, in 
primisque familiarem nostrum Posidonium. Quid? 
Theophrastus mediocriterne delectat cum tractat 
locosab Aristotele ante tractatos? Quid? Epicureinum 
desistunt de iisdem, de quibus et ab Epicuro scriptum 
est et ab antiquis, ad arbitrium suum scribere? Quodsi 
Graeci leguntur a Graecis, iisdem de rebus alia ratione 
- compositis, quid est cur nostri a nostris non legantur? 

III. Quamquam si plane sic verterem Platonem 
aut Aristotelem ut verterunt nostri poetae fabulas, 
male, credo, mererer de meis civibus si ad eorum 
cognitionem divina illa ingenia transferrem. Sed id 
neque feci adhuc nec mihi tamen ne faciam inter- 
dictum puto. Locos quidem quosdam, si videbitur, 
transferam, et maxime ab iis quos modo nominavi, 
cum -inciderit ut id apte fieri possit; ut ab Homero 
Ennius, Afranius a Menandro solet. Nec vero, ut 
noster Lucilius, recusabo quo minus omnes mea 
legant. Utinam esset ille Persius! Scipio vero et 
Rutilius multo etiam magis; quorum ille iudicium 
reformidans Tarentinis. ait se et Consentinis et 
Siculis scribere. Facete is quidem, sicut alia’; sed 
neque tam docti tum erant ad quorum iudicium 
elaboraret, et sunt illius scripta leviora, ut urbanitas 
summa appareat, doctrina mediocris. Ego autem 
quem timeam lectorem, cum ad te, ne Graecis qui- 


lalia Mdv. ; alias MSS. 


4Lucilius, the satirist, 148-103 B.C., avowed that he wrote 
for the moderately learned like Laelius, not for great 
scholars like Persius: ‘ Persium non curo legere, Laelium 
Decimum volo’ (Cic. de Or. 2.25). In the next sentence 
here Cicero seems to refer to some other passage of 
Lucilius, in which he put his claims still lower and pro- 
fessed to write for illiterate provincials, not for cultured 
noblemen like Scipio Africanus Minor and P, Rutilius Rufus. 


8 


- Mnesarchus, Panaetius, and many others, not least 
our friend Posidonius. Again, Theophrastus handles 
topics previously treated by Aristotle, yet he gives 
us no small pleasure all the same. Nor do the Epi- 
cureans cease from writing as the spirit moves them 
on the same questions on which Epicurus and the 
ancients wrote. If Greek writers find Greek readers 
when presenting the same subjects in a different 
setting, why should not Romans be read by Romans? 
III. Yet even supposing I gave a direct trans- 
lation of Plato or Aristotle, exactly as our poets 
have done with the plays, would it not, pray, be 
a patriotic service to introduce those transcendent 
intellects to the acquaintance of my fellow-country- 
men? Asa matter of fact, however, this has not been 
my procedure hitherto, though I do not feel I am de- 
barred from adopting it. ignadegs I expressly reserve 
the right of borrowing certain passages, if I think 
fit, and particularly from the philosophers just men- 
tioned, when an appropriate occasion offers for so 
doing; just as Ennius regularly borrows from Homer, 
and Afranius from Menander. Nor yet shall I object, 
like our Lucilius,* to all the world’s reading what I 
write. I only wish his Persius were alive to-day! 
and still more Scipio and Rutilius, in fear of whose 
criticism Lucilius protests that he writes for the 
public of Tarentum, Consentia and Sicily. Here of eo 
course, as elsewhere, he is not to be taken too 
seriously. As a matter of fact, there were not such 
learned critics in his day, to tax his best efforts; and 
also his writings are in a lighter vein: they show 
consummate wit, but no great erudition. I, however, 
need not be afraid of any reader, if I am so bold 
as to dedicate my book to you, who rival even 


9 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
dem cedentem in philosophia, audeam scribere? 
Quamquam a te ipso id quidem facio provocatus 
gratissimo mihi libro quem ad me de virtute misisti. 
Sed ex eo credo quibusdam usu venire ut abhorreant 
a Latinis, quod inciderint in inculta quaedam et 
horrida, de malis Graecis Latine scripta deterius. 
Quibus ego assentior, dum modo de iisdem rebus ne 
Graecos quidem legendos putent. Res vero bonas 
verbis electis graviter ornateque dictas quis non 
legat? Nisi qui se plane Graecum dici velit, ut a 
Scaevola est praetore salutatus Athenis Albucius. 
Quem quidem locum cum multa venustate et omni 


sale idem Lucilius, apud quem praeclare Scaevola: 


“Graecum te, Albuci, quam Romanum atque 

Sabinum, 

Municipem Ponti, Tritanni, centurionum, 

Praeclarorum hominum ac primorum signife- 
rumque, 

Maluisti dici; Graece ergo praetor Athenis, 

Id quod maluisti, te, cum ad me accedis, saluto: 

‘Xatpe,’ inquam, ‘Tite!’ Lictores, turma omnis 
cohorsque!: 

‘Xaipe, Tite!’ Hine hostis mi Albucius, hine 
inimicus.”’ 


‘cohorsque Manutius, Mdv.; chorusque, MSS. 
10 


NY 
BOOK I. iii 
_ the Greeks as a philosopher. Still, you yourself 

challenged me to the venture, by dedicating to me 
your delightful essay On Virtue. But I have no 
doubt that the reason why some people take a 
. dislike to Latin literature is that they have happened 
to meet with certain illiterate and uncouth produc- 
tions which are bad Greek books in worse Latin 
versions. J have no quarrel with these persons, 
provided that they also refuse to read the Greek 
writers on the same subjects. But given a noble 
theme, and a refined, dignified and graceful style, 
who would not read a Latin book? Unless it be some 
one ambitious to be styled a Greek out-and-out, as 
Albucius was greeted by Scaevola when the latter 
was praetor at Athens. I am again referring to 
Lucilius, who relates the anecdote with much neat- 
ness and point; he puts the following excellent lines 
into the mouth of Scaevola: 

“You vow’d, Albucius, that to suit ye 

*Twas as a Greek we must repute ye; 

“Roman’ and ‘Sabine’ being names 

Your man of ton and taste disclaims! 

You scorn’d to own your native town,— 

Which bore such captains of renown 

' As Pontius and Tritannius bold, 

Who in the van Rome’s ensigns hold. 

And so, at Athens when I lay, 

And your respects you came to pay, 

My worship, humouring your freak, 

Gave you good-morrow straight in Greek, 

With © Chaire, Titus!’ ‘ Chaire,’ baw] 

Guards, aides-de-camps, javelin-men and all ! 

—Hence comes it that Albucius hates me, 


Hence as his bitterest foe he rates me.” 
Z 11 


CICERO DE FINIBUS ~— 7 


5 5 z - : 1 
10 Sed iure Mucius. Ego autem mirari satis non” queo, 


11 


unde hoc sit tam insolens domesticarum rerum fasti- 
dium. Non est omnino hic docendi locus, sed ita 
sentio et saepe disserui, Latinam linguam non modo 
non inopem, ut vulgo putarent, sed locupletiorem 
etiam esse quam Graecam. Quando enim nobis, vel 
dicam aut oratoribus bonis aut poetis, postea quidem 
quam fuit quem imitarentur, ullus orationis vel 
copiosae vel elegantis ornatus defuit? 

IV. Ego vero, quoniam” forensibus operis, laboribus, 
periculis non deseruisse mihi videor praesidium in 
quo a populo Romano locatus sum, debeo profecto, 
quantumcumque possum, in eo quoque elaborare ut 
sint opera, studio, labore meo doctiores cives mei, 
nec cum istis tanto opere pugnare qui Graeca legere 
malint, modo legant illa ipsa, ne simulent, et iis 
servire qui vel utrisque litteris uti velint vel; si suas 
habent, illas non magno opere desiderent. Qui 
autem alia malunt scribi a nobis, aequi esse debent, 
quod et scripta multa sunt, sic ut plura nemini e 
nostris, et scribentur fortasse plura si vita suppetet; 
et tamen qui diligenter haec quae de philosophia 
litteris mandamus legere assueverit, iudicabit nulla 


ad legendum his esse potiora. Quid est enim in 


mtrart satis non Mdv. (satis mirari non Or.); mirari non 


MSS. 
2 gquoniam Mdv., cum MSS. 
Ke 


BOOK I. iii-iv 

10 Mucius’s sarcasm was however deserved. But for 
amy part I can never cease wondering what can be 
the origin of the exaggerated contempt for home pro- 
ducts that is now fashionable. It would of course 
be out of place to attempt to prove it here, but in my 
opinion, as I have often argued, the Latin language, 
so far from having a poor vocabulary, as is commonly 
supposed, is actually richer than the Greek. When 
have we, that is to say when have our competent 
orators or poets, at all events since they have had 
models to copy, ever lacked any of the resources 
either of the florid or the chaste style? 

IV. In my own case, just as I trust I have done The task not 
my duty, amidst the arduous labours and perils of a aye aay 
public career, at the post to which the Roman people $*tesman. 
appointed me, so it is assuredly incumbent on me 
also to use my best endeavours, with such zeal, 
enthusiasm and energy as I possess, to promote the 
advancement of learning among my fellow-country- 
men. | Nor need I be greatly concerned to join issue 
with Resple who prefer to read Greek, provided that 
they actually do read it and do not merely pretend 
to do so.It is my business to serve those who 
desire to enjoy both literatures, or who, if books in 
their own language are available, do not feel any 

11 great need of Greek ones. Those again who would 
rather have me write on other subjects may fairly 
be indulgent to one who has written much already 
—in fact no one of our nation more—and who per- 
haps will write still more if his life be prolonged. 
And even were it not so, anyone who has made a 
practice of studying my philosophical writings will 
pronounce that none of them are better worth read- supreme impor. 
ing than the present treatise. For what problem tance of ethics. 
13 


12 


13 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


vita tanto opere quaerendum quam cum omnia in 
philosophia, tum id quod his libris quaeritur, qui sit 
finis, quid extremum, quid ultimum quo sint omnia 
bene vivendi recteque faciendi consilia referenda; 
quid sequatur natura ut summum ex rebus expeten- 
dis, quid fugiat ut extremum malorum? Qua de re 
cum sit inter doctissimos summa dissensio, quis alie- 
num putet eius esse dignitatis quam mihi quisque 
tribuat, quid in omni munere vitae optimum et 
verissimum sit exquirere? An, partus ancillae 
sitne in fructu habendus, disseretur inter principes 
civitatis, P. Scaevolam Maniumque Manilium, ab 
iisque M. Brutus dissentiet (quod et acutum genus 
est et ad usus civium non inutile, nosque ea scripta 
reliquaque eiusdem generis et legimus libenter et 
legemus); haec quae vitatn omnem continent 
neglegentur? Nam ut sint illa vendibiliora, haec 
uberiora certe sunt. Quamquam id quidem licebit 
iis existimare qui legerint. Nos autem hance omnem 
quaestionem’ de finibus bonorum et malorum fere 
a nobis explicatam esse his litteris’ arbitramur, in 
quibus, quantum potuimus, non modo quid nobis 
probaretur sed etiam quid a singulis philosophiae 
disciplinis diceretur persecuti sumus. 


V. Ut autem a facillimis ordiamur, prima veniat 


jitters: Mdv. with others conjectures Libris. 
14 


Ww 


BOOK I. iv-v 


‘does life offer so important as all the topics of 


philosophy, and especially the question raised in 
these volumes—What is the End, the final and 
ultimate aim, which gives the standard for all prin- 
ciples of right living and of good conduct? What 
does Nature pursue as the thing supremely desirable, 


‘what does she avoid as the ultimate evil? It is 


a subject on which the most learned philosophers 
disagree profoundly; who then can think it de- 
rogatory to such esteem as each may assign to 
me, to investigate what is the highest good and the 
truest rule in every relationship of etre we to 
have our leading statesmen debating such topics as 
whether the offspring of a female slave is to be con- 
sidered as belonging to the party who has hired her, 
Publius Scaevola and Manius Manilius upholding 
one opinion and Marcus Brutus the contrary (not but 
what such discussions raise nice points of law, as 
well as being of practical importance for the business 
of life; and we read and shall continue to read with 
pleasure the treatises in question and others of the 
same nature); and shall these questions which cover 
the entire range of conduct be neglected? Legal 
handbooks no doubt command a readier sale, but 
philosophy is unquestionably richer. in interest. 
However, this is a point that may be left to the 
reader to decide. In the present work we believe 
we have given a more or less exhaustive exposition 
of the whole subject of the Ends of Goods and 
Evils. The book is intended to contain so far as 
possible a complete account, not only of the views 
that we ourselves accept, but also of the doctrines 
enunciated by all the different schools of philosophy. 

V..To begin with what is easiest, let us first pass 

15 


14 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


in medium Epicuri ratio, quae plerisque notissima 
est; quam a nobis sic intelleges expositam, ut ab 
ipsis qui eam disciplinam probant non soleat accura- 
tius explicari. Verum enim invenire volumus, non 
tamquam adversarium aliquem convincere. 

Accurate autem quondam a L. Torquato, homine 
omni doctrina erudito, defensa est Epicuri sententia 
de voluptate, a meque ei responsum, cum C. Triarius, 
in primis gravis et doctus adulescens, ei disputationi 
interesset. Nam cum ad me in Cumanum salutandi 
causa uterque venisset, pauca primo inter nos de 
litteris, quarum summum erat in utroque studium; 
deinde Torquatus, “Quoniam nacti te,” inquit, 
“sumus aliquando otiosum, certe audiam quid sit quod 
Epicurum nostrum non tu quidem oderis, ut fere 
faciunt qui ab eo dissentiunt, sed certe non probes, 
eum quem ego arbitror unum vidisse verum maxi- 
misque erroribus animos hominum liberavisse et 
omnia tradidisse quae pertinerent ad bene beateque 
vivendum; sed existimo te, sicut nostrum Triarium, 
minus ab eo delectari quod ista Platonis, Aristoteli, 
Theophrasti orationis ornamenta neglexerit. Nam 
illud quidem adduci vix possum, ut ea quae senserit 
ille tibi non vera videantur.’’ “Vide quantum,” in- 
quam, “fallare, Torquate. Oratio me istius philo- 
sophi non offendit; nam et complectitur verbis quod 
vult et dicit plane quod intellegam; et tamen ego 
a philosopho, si afferat eloquentiam, non asperner, si 


16 


BOOK I. v 


in review the system of Epicurus, which to most Introduction to 


“men is the best known of any. Our exposition of it 


2 The Ethics of 


as you shall see, will be as accurate as any usually Epicurus: 


_ given even by the professed adherents of his school. 


For our object is to discover the truth, not to refute %!°8"*- 


an opponent. 

An elaborate defence of the hedonistic theory 
of Epicurus was once delivered by Lucius Tor- 
-quatus, a scholar of consummate erudition; to him 
I replied, and Gaius Triarius, a youth of remark- 
_able learning and seriousness of character, assisted at 
_the discussion. Both of these gentlemen had called 

to pay me their respects at my place at Cumae. We 
first exchanged a few remarks about literature, of 
which both were enthusiastic students. Then Tor- 
quatus said, “ As we have for once found you at 
- leisure, I am resolved to hear the reason why you 
regard my master Epicurus, not indeed with hatred, 
as do most of those who do not share his views, but 
at all events with disapproval. I myself consider him 
_as the one person who has discerned the truth, and 
who has delivered men from the gravest errors and 
imparted to them all there is to know about right 
conduct and happiness. The fact is, I think that you 
are like our friend Triarius, and dislike Epicurus be- 
cause he has neglected the graces of style that you 
find in your Plato, Aristotle and Theophrastus. For 
‘I can scarcely bring myself to believe that you think 
‘his opinions untrue.’ “Let me assure you, Tor- 
quatus,” said I, “that you are entirely mistaken. 
With your master’s style I have no fault to find. 
He expresses his meaning adequately, and gives me 
‘a plain intelligible statement. Not that I despise 
‘eloquence in a philosopher if he has it to offer, but 
Cc Lie 


* 


16 


17 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


non habeat, non admodum flagitem. Re mihi non 
aeque satisfacit!, et quidem locis pluribus. Sed “quot 
homines, tot sententiae’; falli igitur possumus.” 
“Quamobrem tandem,” inquit, “non satisfacit? te 
enim iudicem aequum puto, modo quae dicat ille 
bene noris.” “Nisi mihi Phaedrum,” inquam, 
“mentitum aut Zenonem putas, quorum utrumque 
audivi, cum mihi nihil sane praeter sedulitatem 
probarent, omnes mihi Epicuri sententiae satis notae 
sunt; atque eos quos nominavi cum Attico nostro 
frequenter audivi, cum miraretur ille quidem utrum- 
que, Phaedrum autem etiam amaret; cotidieque 
inter nos ea quae audiebamus conferebamus, neque 
erat umquam controversia quid ego intellegerem, sed 
quid probarem.” 

VI. “Quid igitur est?” inquit; “audire enim 
cupio quid non probes.” “ Principio,” inquam, “in 
physicis, quibus maxime gloriatur, primum totus est 
alienus. | Democritea dicit, perpauca mutans, sed ita 
ut ea quae corrigere vult mihi quidem depravare 
videatur. Ille atomos quas appellat, id est corpora 
individua propter soliditatem, censet in infinito inani, 
in quo nihil nec summum nec infimum nec medium 
nec intimum” nec extremum sit, ita ferri ut con- 
cursionibus inter se cohaerescant, ex quo efficiantur 


1satisfacit Mdv. as below; MSS. here satisfecit. 
*intimum Jonas, Miiller ; wl¢imwm Mdv. with MSS. 


4Terence, Phormio 454. 
18 


BOOK I. v-vi 


- I should not greatly insist on it if he has not. But 
_ his matter I do not find so satisfactory, and that in 
more points than one. However, ‘many men, many 
minds’ *: so it is possible that I am mistaken.” “What 
is it, pray,” he said, “to which you take exception? 
For I recognize you as a just critic, provided you 
6 really know what his doctrines are.” “ Oh,’ said I, 
ee 
I know the whole of Epicurus’s opinions well 
- enough,—unless you think that Phaedrus or Zeno 
- did not tell me the truth. I have heard both of them 
lecture, though to be sure they convinced me of 
nothing but their own devotion to the system. In- 
deed I regularly attended those professors, in com- 
pany with our friend Atticus, who for his part had an 
_ admiration for them both, and a positive affection for 
Phaedrus. Every day we used to discuss together in 
private what we had heard at lecture, and there was 
never any dispute as to what I could understand ; 
the question was, what I could accept as true.” 
VI. “Well then, what is the point?” said he; “I Cicero states 
- should very much like to know what it is that you See, Me 
_ disagree with.” “Let me begin,” I replied, “ with pe Nain 
the subject of Natural Philosophy, which is Epicurus’s either eae 
" particular boast. Here, in the first place, he is entirely % "°t ""* 
second-hand. His doctrines are those of Democritus,’ 
_ with a very few modifications. And as forthelatter, 
where he attempts to improve upon his original, in_ 
“my opinion he only succeeds in making things worse. | 
Democritus believes in certain things which he terms 
‘atoms,’ that is, bodies so solid as to be indivisible, 
moving about in a vacuum of infinite extent, which 
has neither top, bottom nor middle, neither centre nor 
circumference. The motion of these’atoms is such 
that they collide and so cohere together; and from 
c2 19 


—_ 


fon * 
/Plicet 
gue 


P| 
pa 


18 


19 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


ea quae sint quaeque cernantur omnia; eumque 
motum atomorum nullo a principio sed ex aeterno 
tempore intellegi convenire. Epicurus autem, in 
quibus sequitur Democritum, non fere labitur. Quam- 


quam utriusque cum multa non probo, tum illud in 


-primis, quod, cum in rerum natura duo quaerenda 


sint, unum quae materia sit ex qua quaeque res 
efficiatur, alterum quae vis sit quae quidque efiiciat, 
de materia disseruerunt, vim et causam efficiendi 
reliquerunt. Sed hoc commune vitium; illae Epicuri 
propriae ruinae: censet enim eadem illa individua et 
solida corpora ferri deorsum suo pondere ad lineam 3 
hune naturalem esse omnium corporum motum; 
deinde ibidem homo acutus, cum illud occurreret, si 
omnia deorsum e regione ferrentur et, ut dixi, ad 
lineam, numquam fore ut atomus altera alteram 
posset attingere, itaque attulit rem commenticiam: 
declinare dixit atomum perpaulum, quo nihil posset 
fieri minus; ita effici complexiones et copulationes et 
adhaesiones atomorum inter se, ex quo efficeretur 
mundus omnesque partes mundi quaeque in eo 
essent. Quae cum res tota ficta sit pueriliter, tum 
ne efficit quidem! quod vult. Nam et ipsa declinatio 
ad libidinem fingitur (ait enim declinare atomum 
sine causa, quo nihil turpius physico quam fieri quid- 


1 quidem inserted by edd. 
20 


* ™ 


BOOK I. vi 


E- this process result the whole of the things that exist 
and that we see. Moreover, this movement of the 


wa 


TW vye 


il 


: not-considered the question of force or the efficient. 


atoms must not be conceived as starting from a be- 
ginning, but as having gone on from all eternity. 
Epicurus for his part, where he follows Democritus, 
makes no serious blunders. Still, there is a great 


deal in each of them with which I do not agree, and 
especially this: in the study of Nature there are two. i 
questions to be asked, first, what is the matter out |, 
of which each thing is made, second, what is the force | « 
by which it is made; now Democritus and Epicurus | 


have discussed the question of matter, but they have 


cause. But this is a defect shared by both; I now 


- ome to the lapses peculiar to Epicurus. He believes’ 


- that these same indivisible solid bodies are borne by 


— 


their own weight perpendicularly downward, which 
he holds is the natural motion of all bodies; but then 


in the very same breath, being sharp enough to 
recollect that if they all travelled downwards in 
a straight line, and, as I said, perpendicularly, no one 
atom would ever be able to overtake any other atom, 
- he consequently introduced an idea of his own inven- 
- tion: he said that the atom makes a very tiny swerve, 


es 2 


—the smallest divergence possible; and so are pro- 
duced entanglements and combinations and cohe- 


‘sions of atoms with atoms, which result in the creation 
of the world and all its parts, and of all that in them 
is. Now not only is the whole of this affair a piece 
_of childish fancy, but it does not even achieve the 


_ result that its author desires. The swerving is itself | 
an arbitrary fiction; for Epicurus says the atoms 


swerve without a cause,—yet this is the capital 
offence in a natural philosopher, to speak of some- 


F 21 


a 


+3 


Ld 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


quam sine causa dicere), et illum motum naturalem 
omnium ponderum, ut ipse constituit, e regione in- 
feriorem locum petentium, sine causa eripuit atomis; 
nec tamen id cuius causa haec finxerat assecutus est. 
Nam si omnes atomi declinabunt, nullae umquam 
cohaerescent; sive aliae declinabunt, aliae suo nutu 
recte ferentur, primum erit hoc quasi provincias 
atomis dare, quae recte, quae oblique ferantur, de- 
inde eadem illa atomorum (in quo etiam Democritus 
haeret) turbulenta concursio hune mundi ornatum 
efficere non poterit. Ne illud quidem physici, credere 
aliquid esse minimum; quod profecto numquam 
putavisset si a Polyaeno familiari suo geometrica 
discere maluisset quam illum etiam ipsum dedocere. 
Sol Democrito magnus videtur, quippe homini erudito 
in geometriaque perfecto; huic pedalis fortasse: tan- 
tum enim esse censet quantus videtur, vel paulo aut 
maiorem aut minorem. Ita quae mutat ea corrumpit, 
quae sequitur sunt tota Democriti, atomi, inane, 
imagines, quae «iSwAa nominant, quorum incursione 
non solum videamus sed etiam cogitemus; infinitio 
ipsa, quam dzeipiav vocant, tota ab illo est, tum in- 
numerabiles mundi qui et oriantur et intereant 


aDemocritus explained sight as being caused by the 
impact on the eye of films or husks which are continually 
being thrown off from the surface of objects. These 
‘images,’ penetrating to the mind through the pores of the 
body, also caused mental impressions 
22 


BOOK I. vi 


# thing taking place uncaused. Then also he gratuit- 
ously deprives the atoms of what he himself declared 


to be the natural motion of all heavy bodies, namely, 


- movement in a straight line downwards, and yet he 


~ 


does not attain the object for the sake of which this 
fiction was devised. For, if all the atoms swerve, 
none will ever come to cohere together; or if some 
swerve while others travel in a straight line, at 
their own will and pleasure, in the first place this 


- will be tantamount to assigning to the atoms their 


different spheres of authority, some to travel straight 
and some sideways; while secondly (and this is a 
weak point with Democritus also) this riotous 
hurly-burly of atoms could not possibly result in the 


_ ordered beauty of the world we know. Again, it is 


- unworthy of a natural philosopher to deny the infinite ~~, 4 


divisibility 6f matter; an error that assuredly Epi- 
curus would have avoided, if he had been willing to 
let his friend Polyaenus teach him geometry instead 
of making Polyaenus himself unlearn it. Democritus, 
being an educated man and well versed in geo- 


metry, thinks the sun is of vast size; Epicurus con-} 


siders it perhaps a foot in diameter, for he pro- 


- nounces it to be exactly as large as it appears, or a 


little larger or smaller. —'Thus where Epicurus alters. 
the doctrines of Democritus, he alters them for the’ 
worse; while for those ideas which he adopts, the 


credit belongs entirely to Democritus,—the atoms, 


the void, the images,* or as they call them, ezddla, 


whose impact is the cause not only of vision but also / 


of thought; the very conception of infinite space, 


apeiria as they term it, is entirely derived from 


Democritus; and again the countless numbers of 


‘worlds that come into existence and pass out of 


23 


° 


22 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


cotidie. Quae etsi mihi nullo modo probantur, 
tamen Democritum, laudatum a ceteris, ab hoc, qui 
eum unum secutus esset, nollem vituperatum. 

VII. ‘Iam in altera philosophiae parte, quae est 
quaerendi ac disserendi, quae Aoyi«7 dicitur, iste 
vester plane, ut mihi quidem videtur, inermis ac nu- 
dus est. eae definitiones; nihil de dividendo ac 
partiendo!docet; non quomodo efficiatur concluda- 
turque ratio tradit; non qua via captiosa solvantur, 
ambigua distinguantur ostendit; \judicia rerum in 
sensibus ponit, quibus si semel aligniid falsi pro vero 
probatum sit, sublatum esse omne iudicium veri et 
falsi putat.... 

...Confirmat autem illud vel maxime quod ipsa 
natura, ut ait ille, sciscat et probet, id est voluptatem 
et dolorem. Ad haec et quae sequamur et quae fu- 
giamus refert omnia. Quod quamquam Aristippi est 
a Cyrenaicisque melius liberiusque defenditur, tamen 
eiusmodi esse iudico ut nihil homine videatur indi- 
gnius. Ad maiora enim quaedam nos natura genuit et 
conformavit, ut mihi quidem videtur. Ac fieri potest 
ut errem; sed ita prorsus existimo, neque eum Tor- 
quatum qui hoc primus cognomen invenit! aut torquem 
illum hosti detraxisse ut aliquam ex eo perciperet 
corpore voluptatem aut cum Latinis tertio consulatu 

linvenit B, E; invenerit A and inf. MSS. 


4In Greek Logic dialpeors, the method of defining a species 
by dividing and subdividing a genus: cp. Bk. II. § 26. 

b The interpretation is here uncertain, and probably more 
than one sentence has been lost. 


ZA 


BOOK I. vi-vii 


existence every day. For my own part I reject 
these doctrines altogether; but still I could wish 

_ that Democritus, whom every one else applauds, had 
not been vilified by Epicurus who took him as his sole 
guide. 

} VII. “Turn next to the second division of philo- Formal Logic he) 

_sophy, the department of Method and of Dialectic, bie eke ae 
which is termed Logiké. Of the whole armour of 
Logic your founder, as it seems to me, is absolutely 
- destitute. (He does away with Definition: he has no 
- doctrine of Division or Partition®; he gives no rules | 

for Deduction or Syllogistic Inference, and imparts | 

no method for resolving Dilemmas or for detect- ( 

ing Fallacies of Equivocation. The Criteria of 

reality he places in sensation; once let the senses 

accept as true something that is false, and every 
possible criterion of truth and falsehood seems to 

him to be immediately destroyed. . 

’ .>He lays the very greatest enn upon that his Ethical 
Ewhich, as he declares, Nature herself decrees and pas car 

sanctions, that is the feelings of_pleasure and _pain. ‘¢ Bcc a my 
These he maintains lie at the root of every act of Pleasure; 
choice and of avoidance. This is the doctrine of 
_ Aristippus, and it is upheld more cogently and more 
_ frankly by the Cyrenaics; but nevertheless _it is 
in my judgment | a doctrine in the last degree UN-  epeenntiy 


7 ANSE NON A 


at all events h has created anil endewed us for higher , 

ends. 1 may possibly be mistaken; but I am abso- ©& 
-lutely convinced that the Tiara who first won 

that surname did not wrest the famous necklet from 
his foe in the hope of getting from it any physical 
enjoyment, nor did he fight the battle of the Veseris 
against the Latins in his third consulship for the sake 

25 


a a | 


24 


CICERO DE. FINIBUS 


conflixisse apud Veserim propter voluptatem. Quod 
vero securi percussit! filium, privavisse se etiam vi- 
detur multis voluptatibus, cum ipsi naturae patrioque 
amori praetulerit ius maiestatis atque imperi. 
“Quid? T.? Torquatus, is qui consul cum Cn. Octavio 
fuit, cum illam severitatem in eo filio adhibuit quem 
in adoptionem D. Silano emancipaverat, ut eum, 
Macedonum legatis accusantibus quod pecunias prae- 
torem in provincia cepisse arguerent, causam apud se 
dicere iuberet, reque ex utraque parte audita pro- 
nuntiaret eum non talem videri fuisse in imperio 
quales eius maiores fuissent, et in conspectum suum 
venire vetuit, numquid tibi videtur de voluptatibus 
suis cogitavisse? Sed ut omittam pericula, labores, 
dolorem etiam quem optimus quisque pro patria et 
pro suis suscipit, ut non modo nullam captet sed 
etiam praetereat omnes voluptates, dolores denique 
quosvis suscipere malit quam deserere ullam offici 
partem, ad ea quae hoc non minus declarant sed vi- 
dentur leviora veniamus. Quid ‘tibi, Torquate, quid 
huic Triario litterae, quid historiae cognitioque rerum, 
quid poetarum evolutio, quid tanta tot versuum me- 
moria voluptatis affert? Nec mihi illud dixeris: Haec 
enim ipsa mihi sunt voluptati, et erant illa Torquatis. 
Numquam hoc ita defendit Epicurus neque Metro- 


_dorus aut quisquam eorum qui aut saperet aliquid 


‘ percussit Mdv.; percusserit MSS. 
*7T. edd. from Liv. epit. 54; Z. MSS. 


26 


BOOK I. vii 


of pleasure. Indeed in sentencing his son to be be- 


ae 


headed, it would seem that he actually deprived 
himself of a great deal of pleasure; for he sacrificed 
his natural instincts of paternal affection to the 
claims of state and of his military office. 

“Then, think of the Titus Torquatus who was consul 


with Gnaeus Octavius; when he dealt so sternly 


with the son who had passed out of his paternal con- 
trol through his adoption by Decius Silanus—when 


~ he summoned him into his presence to answer to the 


charge preferred against him by a deputation from 
Macedonia, of accepting bribes while praetor in that 
province—when, after hearing both sides of the case, 
he gave judgment that he found his son guilty of 


- having conducted himself in office in a manner un- 
worthy of his ancestry, and banished him for ever 


from his sight,—think you he had any regard for his 
own pleasure? But I pass over the dangers, the 
toils, the actual pain that all good men endure for 


country and for friends, not only not seeking plea- 


sure, but actually renouncing pleasures altogether, 
and preferring to undergo every sort of pain rather 
than be false to any portion of their duty. Let us 


- turn to matters seemingly less important, but equally 


conclusive. What actual pleasure do you, Torquatus, 
or does Triarius here, derive from literature, from 
history and learning, from turning the pages of the 
poets and committing vast quantities of verse to 
memory? Do not tell me that these pursuits are in 
themselves a pleasure to you, and that so were the 
deeds I mentioned to the Torquati. That line of 
defence was never taken by Epicurus or Metrodorus, 
nor by any one of them if he possessed any intelli- 
gence or had mastered the doctrines of your school. 
Bie 


26 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 

aut ista didicisset. Et quod quaeritur saepe cur tam 
multi sint Epicurei, sunt aliae quoque causae, sed 
multitudinem haec maxime allicit quod ita putant 
dici ab illo, recta et honesta quae sint, ea facere ipsa 
per se laetitiam, id est voluptatem, Homines optimi 
non intellegunt totam rationem everti si ita res se 
habeat. Nam si concederetur, etiamsi ad corpus nihil 
referatur, ista sua sponte et per se esse iucunda, per 
se esset et virtus et cognitio rerum, quod minime ille 
vult, expetenda. 

“ Haec igitur Epicuri non probo,” inquam. “De ce- 
tero vellem equidem aut ipse doctrinis fuisset instru- 
ctior (est enim. quod tibi ita videri necesse est, non 
satis politus iis artibus quas qui tenent eruditi appel- 
lantur), aut ne deterruisset alios a studiis. Quamquam 
te quidem video minime esse deterritum.” 

VIII. Quae cum dixissem, magis ut illum provo- 
carem quam ut ipse loquerer, tum Triarius leniter 
arridens: “Tu quidem,” inquit, “totum Epicurum 
paene e philosophorum choro sustulisti. Quid ei 
reliquisti nisi te, quoquo modo loqueretur, intelle- 
gere quid diceret? Aliena dixit in physicis, nec ea 
ipsa quae tibi probarentur. Si qua in iis corrigere 
voluit, deteriora fecit. Disserendi artem nullam 
habuit. Voluptatem cum summum bonum diceret, 


primum in eo ipso parum vidit, deinde hoe quoque 
28 


BOOK I. vii-viii 


Again, as to the question often asked, why so many 


~ men are Epicureans, though it is not the only reason, 


6 


the thing that most attracts the crowd is the belief that 

Epicurus declares right conduct and moral worth to 

be intrinsically and of themselves delightful, which 

means productive of pleasure. These worthy people 

do not realize that, if this is true, it upsets the 

theory altogether. If it were admitted that goodness 

is spontaneously and_ intrinsically pleasant, even 

without any reference to bodily feeling, then virtue 

would be desirable for its own sake, and so also would 

knowledge ; but this Epicurus by no means allows. 
“These then,” said I, “are the doctrines of Epi- and lastly, he 

curus that I cannot accept. For the rest, I could eee 

desire that he himself had been better equipped 

with learning (since even you must recognize that 

he is deficient in that liberal culture which confers 

on its possessor the title of an educated man) or at 

all events that he had not deterred others from study. 

Although I am aware that he has not succeeded in 

deterring you.” 

VIII. I had spoken rather with the intention of Triarius remarks 
drawing out Torquatus than of delivering a discourse Pee ante 
of my own. But Triarius interposed, with a smile: pores no 
“Why, you have practically expelled Epicurus at all, 
altogether from the philosophic choir. What have 
you left to him except that, whatever his style may 
be, you find his meaning intelligible? Hisdoctrines 4 ,,,, 
in Natural Philosophy were second-hand, and in your , 
opinion unsound at that; and his attempts to improve 
on his authority only tide things worse. Dialectic 
he had none. His 3 identification of the Chief Good 
with pleasure in the first place was in itself an 
error, and secondly this also was not original; for it 


29 


8 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


alienum; nam ante Aristippus, et ille melius. Addi- 
disti ad extremum, etiam indoctum fuisse.” “Fieri,” 
inquam, “ Triari, nullo pacto potest ut non dicas quid 
non probes eius a quo dissentias. Quid enim me 
prohiberet Epicureum esse, si probarem quae ille 
diceret? cum praesertim illa perdiscere ludus esset. 
Quamobrem dissentientium inter se reprehensiones 
non sunt vituperandae; maledicta, contumeliae, tum 
iracundae! contentiones concertationesque in dispu- 
tando pertinaces indignae philosophia mihi videri 
solent.” Tum Torquatus: “ Prorsus,”’ inquit, ‘ assentior; 
neque enim disputari sine reprehensione, nec cum 
iracundia aut pertinacia recte disputari potest. Sed 
ad haec, nisi molestum est, habeo quae velim.’”? “An 
me,” inquam, “ nisi te audire vellem, censes haec di- 
cturum fuisse?”’ “ Utrum igitur percurri omnem Epi- 
curi disciplinam placet, an de una voluptate quaeri, de 
qua omne certamen est?’’ ‘Tuo vero id quidem,” 


> 


inquam, “‘arbitratu.” “Sic faciam igitur,” inquit : 
““unam rem explicabo eamque maximam; de physicis 
alias; et quidem tibi et declinationem istam atomo- 
rum et magnitudinem solis probabo, et Democriti 
errata ab Epicuro reprehensa et correcta permulta. 
Nunc dicam de voluptate, nihil scilicet novi, ea tamen 


A 9 ce 
quae te ipsum probaturum esse confidam. Certe,” 


1tracundae Mdv.; iracundiae MSS. 
30 


BOOK I. viii 
had been said before, and said better, by Aristippus. 


- To crown all you added that Epicurus was a person 


@ 


of no_education.”’ “Well, Triarius,’ I rejoined, 

“when one disagrees with a man, it is essential to 
say what it is that one objects to in his views. What 
should prevent me from being an Epicurean, if I 
accepted the doctrines of Epicurus? especially as 
the system is an exceedingly easy one to master. 
You must not find fault with members of opposing 
schools for criticizing each other’s opinions; though 
I always feel that insult and abuse, or ill-tempered 
wrangling and bitter, obstinate controversy are 


beneath the dignity of philosophy.” “T am quite of Torquatus’ 


your mind,” said Torquatus; “it is impossible to de- 
bate without criticizing, but it is equally impossible 
to debate properly with ill-temper or obstinacy. But 
I have something I should like to say in reply to all 
this, if it will not weary you.” “Do you suppose,” 


said I, “that I should have said what I have, unless_ 


I wanted to hear you?” “Then would you like me 
to make a rapid review of the whole of Epicurus’s 
system, or to discuss the single topic of pleasure, 
which is the one main subject of dispute?” “Oh,” 
I said, “that must be for you to decide.” “Very 
well then,” said he, “this is what I will do, I will 
expound a single topic, and that the most important. 
Natural Philosophy we will postpone ; though I will 
undertake to prove to you both your swerve of the 
atoms and size of the sun, and also that very many errors 
of Democritus were criticized and corrected by Epi- 
curus. But on the present occasion I will speak about 


undertakes 
Epicurus’s 


defence, 


and limits the 
discussion to 
Ethics, 


pleasure ; not that I have anything original to con-— 


tribute, yet I am confident that what I say will com- 


mand even your acceptance.” “ Be assured,” I said, 
31 


(So) 


<2) 


30 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


inquam, “ pertinax non ero tibique, si mihi probabis 
ea quae dices, libenter assentiar.” “ Probabo,” inquit, 
“modo ista sis aequitate quam ostendis. Sed uti 
oratione perpetua malo quam interrogare aut interro- 
gari.” “ Ut placet,’’ inquam. Tum dicere exorsus est. 

IX. “Primum igitur,” inquit, “sic agam ut ipsi 
auctori huius disciplinae placet: constituam quid et 
quale sit id de quo quaerimus, non quo ignorare.vos 
arbitrer, sed ut ratione et via procedat oratio, Quaeri- 
mus igitur quid sit extremum et ultimum bonorum, 
quod omnium philosophorum sententia tale debet esse 
ut ad id omnia referri oporteat, ipsum autem nusquam. 
Hoe Epicurus in voluptate ponit, quod summum 
bonum esse vult summumque malum dolorem; idque 
instituit docere sic: Omne animal simul atque natum 
sit voluptatem appetere eaque gaudere ut summo 
bono, dolorem aspernari ut summum malum et quan- 
tum possit a se repellere; idque facere nondum de- 
pravatum, ipsa natura incorrupte atque integre iudi- 
cante. Itaque negat opus esse ratione neque 
disputatione quamobrem voluptas expetenda, fu- 
giendus dolor sit. Sentiri haec! putat, ut calere 
ignem, nivem esse albam, mel dulce, quorum nihil 
oportere exquisitis rationibus confirmare, tantum 
satis esse admonere. (Interesse enim inter argumen- 
tum conclusionemque rationis et inter mediocrem 
animadversionem atque admonitionem: altera occulta 


\ haec A; hoc Mdv. with other MSS, 
32 


~ 


— 


BOOK I. viii-ix 

“that I shall not be obstinate, but will gladly own 

“myself convinced if you can prove your case to my 
satisfaction.”’ “I shall do so,” he rejoined, “ provided 
you are as fair-minded as you promise. But I prefer 

to employ continuous discourse rather than question 

and answer.’ “As you please,” said I. Sohe began. 

IX. “I will start then,” he said, “in the manner 

approved by the author of the system himself, by 

settling what is the essence and quality of the thing 

that is the object of our inquiry; not that I suppose 

you to be ignorant of it, but se this is the___-_— 
logical method of procedure.<_ We are inquiring, Pleasure the 
then, what is the final and ultimate Good, which as re 
all philosophers are agreed must be of such a nature) universal instinct 
as to be the End to which all other things are ide gone ic S 
means, while it is not itself a means to anything 
else. This Epicurus finds in pleasure; pleasure he 

holds to be the Chief Good, pain the Chief Evil. 

This he sets out to prove as follows: Every animal, 

as soon as it is born, seeks for pleasure, and delights 
in it as the Chief Good, while it recoils from pain as 
the Chief Evil, and so far as possible avoids it. This 
it does as long as it remains unperverted, at the 
_ prompting of Nature’s own unbiased and honest 

verdict. Hence Epicurus refuses to admit any neces- 

sity for argument or discussion to prove that pleasure 

is desirable and pain to be avoided. These facts, 
he thinks, are perceived by the senses, as that fire 

is hot, snow white, honey sweet, none of which 

things need be proved by elaborate argument: it is 

enough merely to draw attention to them. (For there 

is a difference, he holds, between formal syllogistic 

proof of a thing and a mere notice or reminder: 

the former is the method for discovering abstruse 

D ra) 


cod 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


quaedam et quasi involuta aperiri, altera prompta et 
aperta indicari.') Etenim quoniam detractis de ho- 
mine sensibus reliqui nihil est, necesse est quid aut 
ad naturam aut contra sit a natura ipsa iudicari. Ea 
quid percipit aut quid iudicat, quo aut petat aut 
fugiat aliquid, praeter voluptatem et dolorem? Sunt 
autem quidam e nostris qui haec subtilius velint 
tradere, et negent satis esse quid bonum sit aut quid 
malum sensu iudicari, sed animo etiam ac ratione 
intellegi posse et voluptatem ipsam per se esse ex- 
petendam et dolorem ipsum per se esse fugiendum. 
Itaque aiunt hane quasi naturalem atque insitam in 
animis nostris inesse notionem ut alterum esse appe- 
tendum, alterum aspernandum sentiamus. Alii autem, 
quibus ego assentior, cum a philosophis compluribus 
permulta dicantur cur nec voluptas in bonis sit nu- 
meranda nec in malis dolor, non existimant oportere 
nimium nos causae confidere, sed et argumentandum 
et accurate disserendum et rationibus conquisitis de 
voluptate et dolore disputandum putant. 

X. “Sed ut perspiciatis unde omnis iste natus error 
sit voluptatem accusantium doloremque laudantium, 
totam rem aperiam, eaque ipsa quae ab illo inventore 
veritatis et quasi architecto beatae vitae dicta sunt 
explicabo. Nemo enim ipsam - voluptatem quia 
voluptas sit aspernatur aut odit aut fugit, sed quia 
consequuntur magni dolores eos qui ratione volupta- 
tem sequi nesciunt. Neque porro quisquam est qui do- 

‘indicari inf. MS.; zudicari Mdy. with other MSS, 


34 


BOOK I. ix-x 


_and recondite truths, the latter for indicating facts 
that are obvious and evident.) Strip mankind of 
sensation, and nothing remains; it follows that 
Nature herself is the judge of that which is in accord- 
ance with or contrary to nature. What does Nature 
perceive or what does she judge of, beside pleasure 
and pain, to guide her actions of desire and of 
avoidance? Some members of our school however 
would refine upon this doctrine; these say that it is 
not enough for the judgment of good and evil to 
rest with the senses} the facts that pleasure is in 
and for itself desirable and pain in and for itself 
to be avoided can also be grasped by the intellect 
and the reason. Accordingly they declare that 
the perception that the one is to be sought after and 
the other avoided is a natural and innate idea of the 
mind. Others again, with whom I agree, observing 
that a great many philosophers do advance a vast 
array of reasons to prove why pleasure should not be 
counted as a good nor pain as an evil, consider that 
we had. better not be too confident of our case; in 
their view it requires elaborate and reasoned argu- 
ment, and abstruse theoretical discussion of the 
“nature of pleasure and pain. z 
X. “But I must explain to you howall this mistaken But this instinct 
, 4 ‘ ; is qualified by 
idea of reprobating pleasure and extolling pain arose. calculation: men 
To do so, I will give you a complete account of the 3m ree tus 
system, and expound the actual teachings of the of pleasure over 
: pain. 
great explorer of the truth, the master-builder of 
human happiness. No one rejects, dislikes or avoids 
pleasure itself, because it is pleasure, but because 
those who do not know how to pursue pleasure 
rationally encounter consequences that are extremely 
painful. Nor again is there anyone who loves or 
p2 . 35 


3A 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


lorem ipsum quia dolor sit amet, consectetur, adipisci 
velit, sed quianonnumquam eiusmoditemporaincidunt 
ut labore et dolore magnam aliquam quaerat volupta- 
tem. Ut enim ad minima veniam, quis nostrum 
exercitationem ullam corporis suscipit laboriosam, 
nisi ut aliquid ex ea commodi consequatur? Quis 
autem vel eum iure reprehenderit qui in ea voluptate 
velit esse quam nihil molestiae consequatur, vel illum 
qui dolorem eum fugiat quo voluptas nulla pariatur? 
At vero eos et accusamus et iusto odio dignissimos 
ducimus qui blanditiis praesentium voluptatum dele- 
niti atque corrupti quos dolores et quas molestias 
excepturi sint occaecati cupiditate non provident, 
similique sunt in culpa qui officia deserunt mollitia 
animi, id est laborum et dolorum fuga. Et harum 
quidem rerum facilis est et expedita distinctio. Nam 
libero tempore, cum soluta nobis est eligendi optio 
cumque nihil impedit quo minus id quod maxime 
placeat facere possimus, omnis voluptas assumenda 
est, omnis dolor repellendus. Temporibus autem 
quibusdam et aut officiis debitis aut rerum necessita- 
tibus saepe eveniet ut et voluptates repudiandae sint 
et molestiae non recusandae. Itaque earum rerum 
hic tenetur a sapiente delectus ut aut reiciendis 
voluptatibus maiores alias consequatur aut perferendis 
doloribus asperiores repellat. 

“Hane ego cum teneam sententiam, quid est 
cur verear ne ad eam non possim accommodare 
Torquatos nostros? quos tu paulo ante cum me- 
moriter tum etiam erga nos amice et benevole 


36 


BOOKTIA& 
pursues or desires to obtain pain of itself, because it fl 
is pain, but because occasionally circumstances occur i 
in which toil and pain can procure him some great/ 
pleasure. To take a trivial example, which of us ever 
undertakes laborious physical exercise, except to ob- 
tain some advantage from it? But who has any right 
to find fault with a man who chooses to enjoy a plea- 
sure that has no annoying consequences, or one who 
avoids a pain that produces no resultant pleasure? On /~ 
the other hand, we denounce with righteous indigna- 
tion and dislike men who are so beguiled and demora- 
lized by the charms of the pleasure of the moment, so 
blinded by desire, that they cannot foresee the pain 
_and trouble that are bound to ensue; and equal blame 
belongs to those who fail in their duty through 
weakness of will, which is the same as saying through 
shrinking from toil and pain. These,cases are per- 
fectly simple and easy to distinguish. /In a free hour, 
when our power of choice is untrammelled and when 
nothing prevents our being able to do what we like 
best, every pleasure is to be welcomed and every 
pain avoided. But in certain circumstances and 
owing to the claims of duty or the obligations of 
business it will frequently occur that pleasures have 
to be repudiated and annoyances accepted. The wise 
man therefore always holds in these matters to this 
principle of selection: he rejects pleasures to secure 
other greater pleasures, or else he endures pains to 


avoid worse pains. 
“This being the theory 1 hold, why need I be afraid This explains 
of not being able to reconcile it with the case of the fae aie a 
the Torquati_ my.ancestors? Your references to them terested. 
just now were historically correct, and also showed 
your kind and friendly feeling towards myself; but 
an 


BO 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
collegisti; nec me tamen laudandis maioribus meis 
corrupisti nec segniorem ad respondendum reddidisti. 
Quorum facta quemadmodum, quaeso, interpretaris? 
Sicine eos censes aut in armatum hostem impetum 
fecisse aut in liberos atque in sanguinem suum tam 
crudeles fuisse, nihil ut de utilitatibus, nihil ut de 
commodis suis cogitarent? At id ne ferae quidem 
faciunt, ut ita ruant itaque turbent ut earum motus 
et impetus quo pertineant non intellegamus; tu tam 
egregios viros censes tantas res gessisse sine causa? 
Quae fuerit causa mox videro; interea hoe tenebo, si 
ob aliquam causam ista, quae sine dubio praeclara 
sunt, fecerint, virtutem iis per se ipsam causam non 
fuisse.—Torquem detraxit hosti.—Et quidem se texit 
ne interiret.— At magnum periculum adiit.—In oculis 
quidem exercitus.—Quid ex eo est consecutus?— 
Laudem et caritatem, quae sunt vitae sine metu 
degendae praesidia firmissima.—Filium morte multa- 
vit.—Si sine causa, nollem me ab eo ortum, tam 
importuno tamque crudeli; sin ut dolore suo sanciret 
militaris imperi disciplinam exercitumque in gravis- 
simo bello animadversionis metu contineret, saluti 
prospexit civium, qua intellegebat contineri suam. 
Atque haec ratio late patet. In quo enim maxime 
consuevit iactare vestra se oratio, tua praesertim, qui 


studiose antiqua persequeris, claris et fortibus viris 
38 


BOOK I. x 


all the same I am not to be bribed by your flattery 
of my family, and you will not find me a less resolute 
opponent. Tell me, pray, what explanation do you 
put upon their actions? \ Do you really believe that 
they charged an armed enemy, or treated their 
children, their own flesh and blood, so cruelly, with- 
out a thought for their own interest or advantage? 
_ Why, even wild animals do not act in that way; 
they do not run amok so blindly that we cannot dis- 


cern any purpose in their movements and their on- | 
slaughts. Can you then suppose that those heroic 


men performed their famous deeds without any 
motive at all? What their motive was, I will con- 
sider in a moment: for the present I will confidently 
assert, that if they had a motive for those undoubt- 
edly glorious exploits, that motive was not a love of 
virtue in and for itself.—He wrested the necklet 
from his foe.—Yes, and saved himself from death.— 
But he braved great danger.—Yes, before the eyes 
of an army.—What did he get by it?—Honour and 
esteem, the strongest guarantees of security in life. 
—He sentenced his own son to death.—If from no 
motive, I am sorry to be the descendant of anyone 
so savage and inhuman; but if his purpose was by 
inflicting pain upon himself to establish his authority 
as a commander, and to tighten the reins of 
discipline during a very serious war by holding 
over his army the fear of punishment, then his 
action aimed at ensuring the safety of his fellow- 
| citizens, upon which he knew his own depended. 
And this is a_ principle of wide application. 
People of your school, and especially yourself, who 
are so diligent a student of history, have found a 
favourite field for the display of your eloquence in 


39 


37 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


commemorandis eorumque factis non emolumento 
aliquo sed ipsius honestatis decore laudandis, id 
totum evertitur eo delectu rerum quem modo dixi 
constituto, ut aut voluptates omittantur maiorum 
voluptatum adipiscendarum causa aut dolores susci- 
piantur maiorum dolorum effugiendorum gratia. 

XI. “Sed de clarorum hominum factis illustribus 
et gloriosis satis hoc loco dictum est. Erit enim iam 
de omnium virtutum cursu ad voluptatem proprius 
disserendi locus. Nunc autem explicabo voluptas 
ipsa quae qualisque sit, ut tollatur error omnis 
imperitorum intellegaturque ea quae voluptaria, 
delicata, mollis habeatur disciplina quam gravis, 
quam continens, quam severa sit. Non enim hance 
solam sequimur quae suavitate aliqua naturam ipsam 
movet et cum iucunditate quadam percipitur sensibus, 
sed maximam voluptatem illam habemus quae per- 
cipitur omni dolore detracto. Nam quoniam, cum 
privamur dolore, ipsa liberatione et vacuitate omnis 
molestiae gaudemus, omne autem id quo gaudemus 
voluptas est (ut omne quo offendimur dolor), doloris 
omnis privatio recte nominata est voluptas. Ut enim, 
cum cibo et potione fames sitisque depulsa est, ipsa 
detractio molestiae consecutionem affert voluptatis, 


sic in omni re doloris amotio successionem efficit 
40 


BOOK I. x-xi 


recalling the stories of brave and famous men of old, | 
and in praising their actions, not on utilitarian 
grounds, but on account of the splendour of abstract 
moral worth. But all of this falls to the ground if the 
principle of selection that I have just mentioned be 
established,—the principle of forgoing pleasures for 
the purpose of getting greater pleasures, and en- 
during pains for the sake of escaping greater pains. 
XI. “But enough has been said at this stage about The highest 
the glorious exploits and achievements of the heroes ee ee 
of renown. The tendency of all of the virtues to pain. 
produce pleasure is a topic that will be treated in its 
own place later on. At present I shall proceed to 
expound the essence and the quality of pleasure it- 
self, and shall endeavour to remove the misconcep- 
tions of ignorance and to make you realize how 
serious, how temperate, how austere is the school 
that is supposed to be sensual, lax and luxurious. 
The pleasure we pursue is not that kind alone which 
affects our physical being with a definite delightful 
feeling,—a positively agreeable perception of the 
senses; on the contrary, the greatest pleasure accord- 
ing to us is that which is experienced as a result of 
the complete removal of pain. /When we are released 
from pain, the mere sensation of complete emancipa- 
tion and relief from uneasiness is in itself a source of 
gratification. But everything that causes gratification 
is a pleasure (just as everything that causes annoyance 
is a pain). Therefore the complete removal of pain 
has correctly been termed a pleasure. For example, 
when hunger and thirst are banished by food and 
drink, the mere fact of getting rid of uneasiness 
brings a resultant pleasure in its train. So generally, 
the removal of pain causes pleasure to take its 
| 4] 


38 


39 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
voluptatis. Itaque non placuit Epicuro medium esse 
quiddam inter dolorem et voluptatem; illud enim 
ipsum quod quibusdam medium videretur, cum omni 
dolore careret, non modo voluptatem esse verum 
etiam summam voluptatem. Quisquis enim sentit 
quemadmodum sit affectus, eum necesse est aut in 
voluptate esse aut.in dolore. Omnis autem privatione 
doloris putat Epicurus terminari summam voluptatem, 
ut postea variari voluptas distinguique possit, augeri 
amplificarique non possit. At etiam Athenis, ut a 
patre audiebam, facete et urbane Stoicos irridente, 


statua est-in Ceramico Chrysippi sedentis porrecta 


‘manu, quae manus significet illum in hac esse 


rogatiuncula delectatum: ‘Numquidnam manus tua, 
sic affecta quemadmodum affecta nunc est, deside- 
rat?’—‘Nihil sane.’— At si voluptas esset bonum, 
desideraret.’—‘Ita credo. —‘Non est igitur volu- 
ptas bonum.’ Hoc ne statuam quidem dicturam pater 
aiebat si loqui posset. Conclusum est enim contra 
Cyrenaicos satis acute, nihil ad Epicurum. Nam si 
ea sola voluptas esset quae quasi titillaret sensus, ut 
ita dicam, et ad eos cum suavitate afflueret et illabe- 
retur, nec manus esse contenta posset nec ulla pars 
vacuitate doloris sine iucundo motu voluptatis. Sin 
autem summa voluptas est, ut Epicuro placet, nihil 


dolere, primum tibi recte, Chrysippe, concessum est, 
42 


BOOK I. xi 


place. Epicurus consequently maintained that there 
‘is no such thing as a neutral state of feeling’ inter- 
mediate between pleasure and pain; for the state 
supposed by some thinkers to be neutral, being 
characterized as it is by entire absence of pain, is it- 


self, he held, a pleasure, and, what is more, a pleasure >< 


of the highest order. A man who is conscious of his 
condition at all must necessarily feel either pleasure 
or pain. But complete absence of pain Epicurus 
considers to be the limit and highest point of 
pleasure; beyond this point pleasure may vary in 
| kind, but it cannot vary in intensity or degree. Yet at 
Athens, so my father used to tell me when he wanted 
to air his wit at the expense of the Stoics, in the 
Ceramicus there is actually a statue of Chrysippus 
seated and holding out one hand, the gesture being 


intended to indicate the delight which he used to — 


take in the following little syllogism: ‘Does your 
hand want anything, while it is in its present condi- 


tion?’ Answer: ‘No, nothing.’ — “Butif pleasure were 
a good, it would want pleasure.’— Yes, I suppose it 
would.’ —‘ Therefore pleasure is not a pod.” An argu- 


ment, as my father declared, which not even a statue 
- would employ, if a statue could speak ; because though 
it is cogent enough as an objection to the Cyrenaics, 
‘it does not touch Epicurus. For if the only kind of 
pleasure were that which so to speak tickles the 
senses, an influence permeating them with a feeling 
of delight, neither the hand nor any other member 
could be satisfied with the absence of pain unaccom- 
panied by an agreeable and active sensation of 
pleasure. Whereas if, as Epicurus holds, the highest 
pleasure be to feel no pain, Chrysippus’s interlocutor, 
though justified in making his first admission, that 
43 


& 


40 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


nihil desiderare manum cum ita esset affecta, secun- 
dum non recte, si voluptas esset bonum, fuisse 
desideraturam. Idcirco enim non desideraret quia 
quod dolore caret id in voluptate est. 

XII. “ Extremum autem esse bonorum voluptatem 
ex hoc facillime perspici potest: Constituamus ali- 
quem magnis, multis, perpetuis fruentem et animo 
et corpore voluptatibus, nullo dolore nec impediente 
nec impendente; quem tandem hoc statu praestabili- 
orem aut magis expetendum possimus dicere? In- 
esse enim necesse est in eo qui ita sit affectus et 
firmitatem animi nec mortem nec dolorem timentis, 
quod mors sensu careat, dolor in longinquitate levis, 
in gravitate brevis soleat esse, ut eius magnitudinem 
celeritas, diuturnitatem allevatio consoletur. Ad ea 
cum accedit ut neque divinum numen horreat nec 
praeteritas voluptates effuere patiatur earumque 
assidua recordatione laetetur, quid est quod huc 
possit, quo melius sit, aecedere? Statue contra ali- 
quem confectum tantis animi corporisque doloribus 
quanti in hominem maximi cadere possunt, nulla spe 
proposita fore levius aliquando, nulla praeterea 
neque praesenti nec exspectata voluptate; quid eo 
miserius dici aut fingi potest? Quod si vita doloribus 
referta maxime fugienda est, summum _profecto 
malum est vivere cum dolore; cui sententiae consen- 
taneum est ultimum esse bonorum cum voluptate 
vivere. Nec enim habet nostra mens quidquam ubi 


‘guo melius sit Miller; guod melius sit Mdv. with MSS, 
4A 


LQ 


—_ 


_ BOOK I. xi-xii 


his hand in that condition wanted nothing, was not 


' justified in his second admission, that if pleasure were 


a good, his hand would have wanted it. And the 
reason why it would not have wanted pleasure is, 
that to be without pain is to be in a state of pleasure. 


XII. “The truth of the position that pleasure is the Pleasure proved 


ultimate good will most readily appear from the 


the Chief Good 
by extreme 


following illustration. Let us imagine a man living ©ses of happi- 


in the continuous enjoyment of numerous and vivid 
pleasures alike of body and of mind, undisturbed 
either by the presence or by the prospect of pain: 
what possible state of existence could we describe as 
being more excellent or more desirable? One so 
situated must possess in the first place a strength of 
mind that is proof against all fear of death or of 
pain; he will know that death means complete un- 
consciousness, and that pain is generally light if long 
and short if strong, so that its intensity is compen- 
sated by brief duration and its continuance by 
diminishing severity. { Let such a man moreove1 


have no dread of any supernatural power; let him - 


never suffer the pleasures of the past to fade away, 
but constantly renew their enjoyment in recollec- 


- tion,—and his lot will be one which will not admit 


of further improvement. Suppose on the other hand 
a person crushed beneath the heaviest load of mental 
and of bodily anguish to which humanity is liable. 
Grant him no prospect of ultimate relief in view; 
let him neither have nor hope to have a gleam of 
pleasure. Can one describe or imagine a more piti- 
able state? If then a life full of pain is the thing 


- most to be avoided, it follows that to live in pain is 


the highest evil; and this position implies that a life 
of pleasure is the ultimate good. In fact the mind 
45 


ness and misery 


43 


CICERO DE FINIBUS . 


consistat tamquam in extremo, omnesque et metus et 
aegritudines ad dolorem referuntur, nec praeterea 
est res ulla quae sua natura aut sollicitare possit aut 
angere. 

“ Praeterea et appetendi et refugiendi et omnino 
rerum gerendarum initia proficiscuntur aut a volu- 
ptate aut a dolore. Quod cum ita sit, perspicuum 
est omnes rectas res atque laudabiles eo referri ut 
cum voluptate vivatur. Quoniam autem id est vel 
summum vel ultimum vel extremum bonorum (quod 
Graeci téAos nominant) quod ipsum nullam ad aliam 
rem, ad id autem res referuntur omnes, fatendum est 
summum esse bonum iucunde vivere. 

XII. “Id qui in una virtute ponunt et splendore 
nominis capti quid natura postulet non intellegunt, 
errore maximo, si Epicurum audire voluerint, libera- 
buntur. Istae enim vestrae eximiae pulchraeque 
virtutes nisi voluptatem efficerent, quis eas aut 
laudabiles aut expetendas arbitraretur? Ut enim 
medicorum scientiam non ipsius artis sed bonae 
valetudinis causa probamus, et gubernatoris ars, quia 
bene navigandi rationem habet, utilitate, non arte 
laudatur, sic sapientia, quae ars vivendi putanda est, 
non expeteretur si nihil efficeret; nunc expetitur 
quod est tamquam artifex conquirendae et compa- 
randae voluptatis. (Quam autem ego dicam volu- 


ai.e. pain of body: dolorem here has its strict sense. 


46 


BOOK I. xii-xiii 


possesses nothing in itself upon which it can rest as 

final. Every fear, every sorrow can be traced back 
_to pain*; there is no other thing besides pain which 

is of its own nature capable of causing either anxiety 

or distress. 

“Pleasure and pain moreover supply the motives Pleasure and 

of desire and of avoidance, and the springs of conduct pain ibe ple 

generally. This being so, it clearly follows that and sole stan- 

actions are right and praiseworthy only as being a bs 
-means to the attainment of a life of pleasure. But 

that which is not itself a means to anything else, but 

to which all else is a means, is what the Greeks term 

the Telos, the highest, ultimate or final Good. It 

must therefore be admitted that the Chief Good is to 

live agreeably. 

XIII. “ Those who place the Chief Good in virtue The Virtues not 
alone are beguiled by the glamour of a name, and Anmetirger 
do not understand the true demands of nature. If means to Plea- 
they will consent to listen to Epicurus, they will be -"” 
delivered from the grossest error. Your school 
dilates on the transcendent beauty of the virtues; 
but were they not productive of pleasure, who would 
deem them either praiseworthy or desirable? We 

‘esteem the art of medicine not for its interest as 
a science but for its conduciveness to health ¥ the art 
of navigation is commended for its practical and not 
‘its scientific value, because it conveys the rules for 
sailing a ship with success. So also Wisdom, 
which must be considered as the art of living, Wisdom; 
if it effected no result would not be desired; but as 
it is, it is desired, because it is the artificer that 
procures and produces pleasure. (The meaning that 
I attach to pleasure must by this time be clear to 


you, and you must not be biased against my argu- 
47 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


ptatem iam videtis, ne invidia verbi labefactetur 
oratio mea.) Nam cum ignoratione rerum bonarum 
et malarum maxime hominum vita vexetur, ob eum- 
que errorem et voluptatibus maximis saepe priventur 
et durissimis animi doloribus torqueantur, sapientia 
est adhibenda, quae et terroribus cupiditatibusque 
detractis et omnium falsarum opinionum temeritate 
derepta certissimam se nobis ducem praebeat ad 
voluptatem. Sapientia enim est una quae maesti- 
tiam pellat ex animis, quae nos exhorrescere metu 
non sinat; qua praeceptrice in tranquillitate vivi 
potest, omnium cupiditatum ardore restincto. Cupi- 
ditates enim sunt insatiabiles, quae non modo singulos 
homines sed universas familias evertunt, totam etiam 
labefactant saepe rem publicam. Ex cupiditatibus 
odia, discidia, discordiae, seditiones, bella nascuntur. 
Nec eae se foris solum iactant nec tantum in alios 
caeco impetu incurrunt, sed intus etiam in animis 
inelusae inter se dissident atque discordant; ex quo 
vitam amarissimam necesse est efhici, ut sapiens so- 
lum, amputata circumcisaque inanitate omni et errore, 
naturae finibus contentus sine aegritudine possit et 
sine metu vivere. Quae est enim aut utilior aut ad 
bene vivendum aptior partitio quam illa qua est usus 
Epicurus? qui unum genus posuit earum cupiditatum 
quae essent et naturales et necessariae, alterum quae 
naturales essent nec tamen necessariae, tertium quae 
nec naturales nec necessariae; quarum ea ratio est 
ut necessariae nec opera multa nec impensa explean- 


tur; ne naturales quidem multa desiderant, propterea 
48 


BOOK I. xiii 


“ment owing to the discreditable associations of the 
term.) The great disturbing factor in man’s life is 


ignorance of good and evil; mistaken ideas about 
these frequently rob us of our greatest pleasures, and 
torment us with the most cruel pain of mind/ Hence 
we need the aid of Wisdom, to rid us of jour fears 
and appetites, to root out all our errors and pre- 
judices, and to serve as, our infallible guide to the 
attainment of pleasure. Wisdom alone can banish 


sorrow from our hearts and protect us from alarm 


= 


and apprehension; put yourself to school with her, 
and you may live in peace, and quench the glowing 
flames of desire. For the desires are incapable 
of satisfaction; they ruin not individuals only but 
whole families, nay often shake the very foundations 
of the state. It is they that are the source of hatred, 
quarrelling and strife, of sedition and of war. Nor 
do they only flaunt themselves abroad, or turn their 
blind onslaughts solely against others; even when 
prisoned within the heart they quarrel and fall out 
among themselves; and this cannot but render the 
whole of life embittered. Hence only the Wise 
Man, who prunes away all the rank growth of vanity 


- and error, can possibly live untroubled by sorrow and 


-_ 


by fear, content within the bounds that nature has 
set. Nothing could be more instructive, more help- 
ful to right living, than Epicurus’s doctrine as to 
the different classes of the desires. One kind he 
classified as both natural and necessary, a second as 
natural without being necessary, and a third as 


‘neither natural nor necessary; the principle of 


classification being that the necessary desires are 

gratified with little trouble or expense; the natural 

desires also require but little, since nature’s own 
E 49 


46 


48 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


quod ipsa natura divitias quibus contenta sit et para- 
biles et terminatas habet; inanium autem cupidi- 
tatum nec modus ullus nec finis inveniri potest. 
XIV. Quod’si vitam omnem perturbari Videmus 
errore et inscientia, sapientiamque esse solam quae nos 
a libidinum impetu et a formidinum terrore vindicet et 
ipsius fortunae modice ferre doceat iniurias et omnes 
monstret vias quae ‘ad quietem et tranquillitatem 
ferant, quid est cur dubitemus dicere et sapientiam 
propter voluptates expetendam et insipientiam pro- 
pter molestias esse fugiendam ? 

“Eademque ratione ne temperantiam quidem pro- 
pter se expetendam esse dicemus, sed quia pacem 
animis afferat et eos quasi concordia quadam placet 
ac leniat. Temperantia est enim quae in rebus 
aut expetendis aut fugiendis ut rationem sequamur 
monet. Nec enim satis est iudicare quid faciendum 
non faciendumve sit, sed stare etiam oportet in eo 
quod sit iudicatum. Plerique autem, quod tenere 
atque servare id quod ipsi statuerunt non possunt, 
victi et debilitati obiecta specie, voluptatis tradunt 
se libidinibus constringendos nee quid eventurum 
sit provident, ob eamque causam propter voluptatem 
et parvam et non necessariam et quae vel aliter 
pararetur et qua etiam carere possent ‘sine dolore, 
tum in morbos graves, tum in damna, tum in dede- 
cora incurrunt, saepe etiam legum iudiciorumque 
poenis obligantur. Qui autem ita frui volunt volu- 
ptatibus ut nulli propter eas consequantur dolores, et 


a znanzs hollow, vain, unreal, as the opposite of ‘natural’ 
(cf. § 53 and Bk. II. § 26), means ‘based on a false idea of 
what is good or necessary’: ai dé (r@v éribupiav) ode puotkat 
ovre dvayKatar, GAMA mapa Keviy défav yuduerat. Epicurus in 
Diogenes Laertius To. 149. 

“i}6) 


BOOK I. xiii-xiv 


riches, which suffice to content her, are both easily 
procured and limited in amount; but for the imagin- 
ary* desires no bound or limit can be discovered. 
XIV. If then we observe that ignorance and error 
reduce the whole of life to confusion, while Wisdom 
alone is able ‘to protect us from the onslaughts of 
appetite and the menaces of fear, teaching us to 
bear even the affronts of fortune with moderation, 
and showing us all the paths that lead to calmness 
-and to peace, why should we hesitate to avow that 
Wisdom is to be desired for the sake of the pleasures 
it brings and Folly to be avoided because of its 
injurious consequences? 

“The same principle will lead us to pronounce that Temperance; 
Temperance also is not desirable for its own sake, 
but because it bestows peace of mind, and soothes 
the heart with a tranquillizing sense of harmony. 
For it is temperance that warns us to be guided by 
reason in what we desire and avoid. Nor is it enough 
to judge what it is right to do or to leave undone; 

_we also need to abide by our judgment. Most men 
however lack tenacity of purpose; their resolution 
weakens and succumbs as soon as the fair form of 
pleasure meets their gaze, and they surrender them- 
selves prisoners to their passions, failing to foresee 
the inevitable result. / Thus for the sake of a pleasure 
at once small in amount and unnecessary, and one 
which they might have procured by other means or 
even denied themselves altogether without pain, they 
incur serious disease, or loss of fortune, or disgrace, 
and not infrequently become liable to the penalties 
of the law and of the courts of justice. Those on 
the other hand who are resolved so to enjoy their 
pleasures as to avoid all painful consequences there- 
Ea 51 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


qui suum iudicium retinent ne voluptate victi faciant 
id quod sentiant non esse faciendum, ii voluptatem 
maximam adipiscuntur praetermittenda voluptate. 
Iidem etiam dolorem saepe perpetiuntur ne, si id 
non faciant, incidant in maiorem. Ex quo intelle- 
gitur nec intemperantiam propter se esse fugiendam, 
temperantiamque expetendam non quia voluptates 
fugiat sed quia maiores consequatur. 

XV. “Eadem fortitudinis ratio reperietur. Nam 
neque laborum perfunctio neque perpessio dolorum 
per se ipsa allicit, nec patientia nec assiduitas nec 
vigiliae nec ipsa quae laudatur industria, ne fortitudo 
quidem, sed ista’sequimur ut sine cura metuque vi- 
vamus animumque et corpus quantum efficere possi-_ 
mus molestia liberemus. Ut enim mortis metu 
omnis quietae vitae status perturbatur, et ut suc- 
cumbere doloribus eosque humili animo imbecilloque 
ferre miserum est, ob eamque debilitatem animi 
multi parentes, multi amicos, nonnulli patriam, 
plerique autem se ipsos penitus perdiderunt, sic 
robustus animus et excelsus omni est liber cura et 
angore, cum et mortem contemnit, qua qui affecti 
sunt in eadem causa sunt qua antequam nati, et ad 
dolores ita paratus est ut meminerit maximos morte 
finiri, parvos multa habere intervalla requietis, me- 
diocrium nos esse dominos, ut si tolerabiles sint 
feramus, si minus, animo aequo e vita, cum ea non 


placeat, tamquam e theatro exeamus. Quibus rebus 
ss 
52 


BOOK I. xiv-xv 


from, and who retain their faculty of judgment and 
avoid being seduced by pleasure into courses that 
they perceive to be wrong, reap the very highest 
pleasure by forgoing pleasure. Similarly also they 
often voluntarily endure pain, to avoid_ incur- 
ring greater pain by not doing so. This clearly 
proves that Intemperance is not undesirable for its 
own sake, while Temperance is desirable not because 
it renounces pleasures, but because it procures 
greater pleasures. 
XV. “The same account will be found to hold good Courage; 
of Courage. The performance of labours, the endu- 
rance of pains, are not in themselves attractive, nor 
are patience, industry, watchfulness, nor yet that 
much lauded virtue, perseverance, nor even courage ; 
but we aim at these virtues in order to live without 
anxiety and fear and so far as possible to be free 
from pain of mind and body. The fear of death 
plays havoe with the calm and even tenor of life, 
and to bow the head to pain and bear it abjectly and 
_feebly is a pitiable thing; such weakness has caused 
many men to betray their parents or their friends, 
some their country, and very many utterly to ruin 
themselves. So on the other hand a strong and 
lofty spirit is entirely free from anxiety and sorrow. 
It makes light of death, for the dead are only as 
_they were before they were born. It is schooled to 
encounter pain by recollecting that pains of great 
severity are ended by death, and slight ones have 
frequent intervals of respite; while those of medium 
intensity lie within our own control: we can bear / — 
them if they are endurable, or if they are not, we ““" 
may serenely quit life’s theatre, when the play has 
ceased to please us. These considerations prove 
53 


51 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


intellegitur nec timiditatem ignaviamque vituperari 
nec fortitudinem patientiamque laudari suo nomine, 
sea illas reici quia dolorem pariant, has optari quia 
voluptatem. 

XVI. “Iustitia restat, ut de omni virtute sit dictum ; 
sed similia fere dici possunt. Ut enim sapientiam, 
temperantiam, fortitudinem copulatas esse docui cum 
voluptate ut ab ea nullo modo nec divelli nee dis- 
trahi possint, sic de iustitia iudicandum est, quae non 
modo numquam nocet cuiquam, sed contra semper 
aliquid impertit' cum sua vi atque natura, quod 
tranquillet animos, tum spe nihil earum rerum de- 
futurum quas natura non depravata desideret. . Et? 
quemadmodum temeritas et libido et ignavia semper 
animum excruciant et semper sollicitant turbulen- 
taeque sunt, sic improbitas si® cuius in mente con- 
sedit, hoc ipso quod adest turbulenta est; si vero 
molita quidpiam est, quamvis occulte fecerit, num- 
quam tamen id confidet fore semper occultum. 
Plerumque improborum facta primo suspicio inse- 
quitur, dein sermo atque fama, tum accusator, tum 
iudex; multi etiam, ut te consule, ipsi se indicave- 
runt. Quod si qui satis sibi contra hominum con- 
scientiam saepti esse et muniti videntur, deorum 
tamen horrent, easque ipsas sollicitudines quibus 
eorum animi noctesque diesque exeduntur a dis im- 
mortalibus supplici causa importari putant. Quae 
autem tanta ex improbis factis ad minuendas vitae 


limpertit supplied by Miller; Mdv. marks lacuna. 

* Et inserted by Mdv. 

Simprobitas si supplied by Mdv. (cp. zmproborum, im- 
probe, improbis, improbitatem below). 


54 


BOOK I. xv-xvi 


_ that timidity and cowardice are not blamed, nor 


-courage and endurance praised, on their own 


account; the former are rejected because they 
bring pain, the latter coveted because they produce 


_ pleasure. 


XVI. “It remains to speak of J ustice, to complete 
the list of the virtues; but this admits of practically 
the same treatment as the others. Wisdom, Tem- 
perance and Courage I have shown to be so closely 
linked with Pleasure that they cannot possibly be 
severed or sundered from it. The same must be 
deemed to be the case with Justice. Not only does 
Justice never cause anyone harm, but on the con- 
trary it always brings some benefit, partly owing to 
its essentially tranquillizing influence upon the mind, 
partly because of the hope that it warrants of a never- 
failing supply of the things that uncorrupted nature 
really needs. And just as Rashness, Licence and 
Cowardice ever tormentthe mind, everawaken trouble 
and discord, so Unrighteousness, when firmly rooted 


- in the heart, eauses restlessness by the mere fact of 


its presence;/and if once it has found expression in 
some deed Of wickedness, however secret the act, 
yet it can never feel assured that it will always remain 
undetected. The usual consequences of crime are, 
first suspicion, next gossip and rumour, then comes 
the accuser, then the judge; many wrongdoers have 
even turned evidence against themselves, as happened 
in your consulship. / And even if any think them- 
selves well fenced and fortified against detection by 
their fellow-men, they still dread the eye of heaven, 
and fancy that the pangs of anxiety night and day 
gnawing at their hearts are sent by Providence to 
punish them. But what can wickedness contribute 
519) 


Justice or 
Righteousness. 


52 


53 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


molestias accessio potest fieri, quanta ad augendas 
cum conscientia factorum tum poena legum odioque 
civium? Et tamen in quibusdam neque pecuniae 
modus est neque honoris neque imperi nec libidinum 
nec epularum nec reliquarum cupiditatum, quas nulla 
praeda umquam improbe parta minuit, potiusque in- 
flammat, ut coercendi magis quam dedocendi esse 
videantur. Invitat igitur vera ratio bene sanos ad 
iustitiam, aequitatem, fidem. Neque homini infanti 
aut impotenti iniuste facta conducunt, qui nec facile 
efficere possit quod conetur nec obtinere si effecerit, 
et opes vel fortunae vel ingeni liberalitati magis con- 
veniunt, qua qui utuntur benevolentiam sibi con- 
ciliant et, quod aptissimum est ad quiete vivendum, 
caritatem; praesertim cum omnino nulla sit causa 
peccandi: quae enim cupiditates a natura profici- 
scuntur, facile explentur sine ulla iniuria; quae autem 
inanes sunt, iis parendum non est, nihil enim de- 
siderabile concupiscunt ; plusque in ipsa iniuria detri- 
menti est quam in iis rebus emolumenti quae pariuntur 
iniuria. Itaque ne iustitiam quidem recte quis dixerit 
per se ipsam optabilem, sed quia iucunditatis vel 


plurimum afferat. Nam diligi et carum esse iucun- 


dum est propterea quia tutiorem vitam et voluptatum! 


pleniorem efficit. Itaque non ob ea solum incom- 


moda quae eveniunt improbis fugiendam improbita- 
tem putamus, sed multo etiam magis quod, cuius in 


‘voluptatum Miler; voluptatem Mdv. with MSS. 
56 


BOOK I. xvi 


towards lessening the annoyances of life, commen- 
surate with its effect in increasing them, owing to 
the burden of a guilty conscience, the penalties of 
the law and the hatred of one’s fellows? Yet never- 
theless some men indulge without limit their avarice, 
ambition and love of power, lust, gluttony and 
those other desires, which ill-gotten gains can never 
diminish but rather must inflame the more; inso- 
much that they appear proper subjects for restraint 
rather than for reformation. Men of sound natures, 
therefore, are summoned by the voice of true reason 
to justice, equity and honesty.) For one without 
eloquence or resources dishonesty is not good policy, 
since it is difficult for such a man to succeed in his 
designs, or to make good his success when once 
achieved. On the other hand, for the rich and 
clever generous conduct seems more in keeping, 
and liberality wins them affection and good will, the 
surest means to a life of peace; especially as there 
really is no motive for transgressing: since the 
desires that spring from nature are easily gratified 
without doing any man wrong, while those that are 
imaginary ought to be resisted, for they set their 
affections upon nothing that is really wanted; while 
‘there is more loss inherent in Injustice itself than 
there is profit in the gains it brings. Hence Justice 
also-cannot correctly be said to be desirable in and 
for itself; it is so because it is so highly productive 
of gratification. For esteem and affection are grati- 
fying, because they render life safer and fuller of 
pleasure. Hence we hold that Unrighteousness is 
to be avoided not simply on account of the dis- 
advantages that result from being unrighteous, but 
even far more because when it dwells in a man’s 
aT 


54 


> 55 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


animo versatur, numquam sinit eum respirare, num- 
quami acquiescere. ; ; é 
Quod si ne ipsarum quidem virtutum laus, in qua 
maxime ceterorum philosophorum exultat oratio, re- 
perire exitum potest nisi dirigatur ad voluptatem, 
voluptas autem est sola quae nos vocet ad se et alliciat 
suapte natura, non potest esse dubium quin id sit 
summum atque extremum bonorum omnium, beateque 
vivere nihil aliud sit nisi cum voluptate vivere. 
XVII. “ Huic certae stabilique sententiae quae sint 
coniuncta explicabo brevi. Nullusinipsis error est fini- 
bus bonorum et malorum, id est in voluptate aut in 
dolore, sed iniisrebus peccant cum e quibus haec effici- 
anturignorant. Animiautem voluptates et dolores nasci 
fatemur e corporis voluptatibus et doloribus (itaque 
concedo quod modo dicebas, cadere causa si quie nostris 
aliter existimant, quos quidem video esse multos, sed 
imperitos); quamquam autem et laetitiam nobis volu- 
ptas animi et molestiam dolor afferat, eorum tamen 
utrumque et ortum esse e corpore et ad corpus referri; 
nec ob eam causam non multo maiores esse et voluptates 
et dolores animi quam corporis. Nam corpore nihil nisi 
praesens et quod adest sentire possumus, animo au- 
tem et praeterita et futura. Ut enim aeque doleamus 
animo],' cum corpore dolemus, fieri tamen permagna 
accessio potest sialiquod aeternum et infinitum impen- 


1lanimo] bracketed by Mdv. 


a This chapter appears to be an unintelligent transcript of 
a summary of the Epicurean answers to the following 
Cyrenaic criticisms; (1) pleasure is sometimes rejected, 
owing to mental perversion, (2) all pleasure is not bodily, 
(3) bodily pleasures are stronger than mental ones, (4) 
absence of pain is not pleasure, (5) memory and anticipation 
of pleasure are not real pleasures. 

b See § 25 above. 


58 


BOOK I. xvi-xvii 


heart it never suffers him to breathe freely or know 
‘a moment’s rest. 

“Tf then even the glory of the Virtues, on which 

all the other philosophers love to expatiate so 
eloquently, has in the last resort no meaning unless - 
it be based on pleasure, whereas pleasure is the only 
thing that is intrinsically attractiye and alluring, it 
cannot be doubted that pleasure is the one supreme 
and final Good and that a life of happiness is nothing 
else than a life of pleasure. 

XVII. *“The doctrine thus firmly established has Mental pleasures 
corollaries which I will briefly expound. (1) The Ends ot a 
of Goods and Evils themselves, that is, pleasure and he Ae ea 
pain, are not open to mistake; where people go wrong OPE eae 
is in not knowing what things are productive of : 

pleasure and pain. (2) Again, we aver that mental 
pleasures and pains arise out of bodily ones (and 
therefore I allow your contention” that any Epicureans 
who think otherwise put themselves out of court; and 
I am aware that many do, though not those who can 
speak with authority); but although men do experi- 
ence mental pleasure that is agreeable and mental 
pain that is annoying, yet both of these we assert 
arise out of and are based upon bodily sensations. 
(3) Yet we maintain that this does not preclude 
mental pleasures and pains from being much more 
intense than those of the body; since the body can feel 
only what is present to it at the moment, whereas the 
mind is also cognizant of the past and of the future. 
For granting that pain of body is equally painful, 
yet our sensation of pain can be enormously increased 
by the belief that some evil of unlimited magnitude 
and duration threatens to befall us hereafter. And 
59 


57 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


dere malum nobis opinemur. Quod idem licet transferre 
in voluptatem, ut ea maior sit si nihil tale metuamus. 
Iam illud quidem perspicuum est, maximam animi 
aut voluptatem aut molestiam plus aut ad beatam aut 
ad miseram vitam afferre momenti quam eorum 
utrumvis si aeque diu sit in corpore. Non placet 
autem detracta voluptate aegritudinem statim conse- 
qui, nisi in voluptatis locum dolor forte successerit; 
at contra gaudere nosmet omittendis doloribus, 
etiamsi voluptas ea quae sensum moveat nulla suc- 
cesserit; eoque intellegi potest quanta voluptas sit 
non dolere. Sed ut iis bonis erigimur quae expecta- 
mus, sic laetamur iis quae recordamur. Stulti autem 
malorum memoria torquentur; sapientes bona prae- 
terita: grata recordatione renovata delectant. Est 
autem situm in nobis ut et adversa quasi perpetua 
oblivione obruamus et secunda iucunde ac suayiter 
meminerimus. Sed cum ea quae praeterierunt acri 
animo et attento intuemur, tum fit ut aegritudo se- 
quatur si illa mala sint, si bona, laetitia. 

XVIII. “O praeclaram beate vivendi et apertam et 
simplicem et directam viam! Cum enim certe nihil 
homini possit melius esse quam vacare omni dolore et 
molestia perfruique maximis et animi et corporis 
voluptatibus, videtisne quam nihil praetermittatur 
quod vitam adiuvet, quo facilius id quod propositum 
est summum bonum consequamur? Clamat Epicurus, 
is quem vos nimis Voluptatibus esse deditum dicitis, 
non posse iucunde vivi nisi sapienter, honeste iuste- 
que vivatur, nec sapienter, honeste, iuste nisi iucunde. 


60 


BOOK I. xvii-xviii 


_the same consideration may be transferred to plea- 


— © 


‘sure: a pleasure is greater if not accompanied by any 


apprehension of evil. This therefore clearly ap- 
pears, that intense mental pleasure or distress con- _ 
tributes more to our happiness or misery than a 
bodily pleasure or pain of equal duration. (4) But we 
do not agree that when pleasure is withdrawn un- 
easiness at once ensues, unless the pleasure happens 
to have been replaced by a pain: while on the other 
hand one is glad to lose a pain even though no active 


sensation of pleasure comes in its place: a fact that 


4 


serves to show how great a pleasure is the mere 
absence of pain. (5) But just as we are elated by 
the anticipation of good things, so we are delighted 
by their recollection. Fools are tormented by the 
remembrance of former evils; to wise men memory 
is a pleasure—by it they renew the goods of the past. 
We have the power if we will both to obliterate 
our misfortunes by a sort of permanent forgetfulness 
and to summon up pleasant and agreeable memories 
of our successes. But when we concentrate our mental 
vision closely on the events of the past, then sorrow 
or gladness ensues according as these were evil or good. 

XVIII. “Here is indeed a royal road to happiness 4 life of enjoy- 
—open, simple, and direct! For clearly man can ™fi! a 
have no greater good than complete freedom from and vice versa. 
pain and sorrow coupled with the enjoyment of the 
highest bodily and mental pleasures. /Notice then 


‘how the theory embraces every possible enhancement 


of life, every aid to the attainment of that Chief 

Good which is our object. Epicurus, the man whom 

you denounce as a voluptuary, cries aloud that no ¥1 
one can live pleasantly without living wisely, honour- 


ably and justly, and no one wisely, honourably and 
61 


58 


59 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


Neque enim civitas in seditione beata esse potest nec 
in discordia dominorum domus; quo minus animus a 
se ipse dissidens secumque discordans gustare partem 
ullam liquidae voluptatis et liberae potest. Atqui 
pugnantibus et contrariis studiis consiliisque semper 
utens nihil quieti videre, nihil tranquilli potest. 
Quod si corporis gravioribus morbis vitae iucunditas 
impeditur, quanto magis animi morbis impediri 
necesse est! Animi autem morbi sunt cupiditates 
immensae et inanes divitiarum, gloriae, dominationis, 
libidinosarum etiam voluptatum. Accedunt aegritu- 
dines, molestiae, maerores, qui exedunt: animos con- 
ficiuntque curis hominum non intellegentium nihil 
dolendum esse animo quod sit a dolore corporis prae- 
senti futurove seiunctum. Nec vero quisquam stultus 
non horum morborum aliquo laborat; nemo igitur 
stultus! non miser. Accedit etiam mors, quae 
quasi saxum Tantalo semper impendet; tum super- 
stitio, qua qui est imbutus quietus esse numquam 
potest. Praeterea bona praeterita non meminerunt, 
praesentibus non fruuntur; futura modo exspectant, 
quae quia certa esse non possunt, conficiuntur et an- 
gore et metu; maximeque cruciantur cum sero sen- 
tiunt frustra se aut pecuniae studuisse aut imperiis 
aut opibus aut gloriae. Nullas enim consequuntur 
voluptates quarum potiendi spe inflammati multos 
labores magnosque susceperant. Ecce autem alii mi- 
nuti et angusti, aut omnia semper desperantes, aut ma- 


1 stultus Baiter, Miller; est Mdvy. with MSS. 
62 


BOOK'T. xviii 


justly without living pleasantly. For a city rent by Control of the 
faction cannot prosper, nor a house whose masters P2ssions the 
are at strife; much less then can a mind divided happiness. 
against itself and filled with inward discord taste any 
particle of pure and liberal pleasure. But one who is | , 
perpetually swayed by conflicting and incompatible | 
counsels and desires can know no peace or calm. | 
Why, if the pleasantness of life is diminished by | 
the more serious bodily diseases, how much more 
must it be diminished by the diseases of the mind! 
Butextravagant and imaginary desires, for riches, fame, 
power, and also for licentious pleasures, are nothing 
but mental diseases. Then, too, there are grief, 
trouble and sorrow, which gnaw the heart and con- 
sume it with anxiety, if men fail to realize that the 
mind need feel no pain unconnected with some pain 
of body, present or to come. Yet there is no foolish 
man but is afflicted by some one of these diseases; 
therefore there is no foolish man that is not unhappy. 
Moreover, there is death, the stone of Tantalus ever 
hanging over men’s heads; and superstition, that 
poisons and destroys all peace of mind. Besides, they 
do not recollect their past nor enjoy their present 
blessings; they only look forward to those of the 
future, and as these are of necessity uncertain, they 
are consumed with agony and terror; and the climax 
of their torment is when they perceive too late that 
all their dreams of wealth or station, power or fame, 
have come to nothing. For they never attain any of 
the pleasures, the hope of which inspired them to 
undergo all their arduous toils. Or look again at 
others, petty, narrow-minded men, or confirmed pes- 
simists, or spiteful, envious, ill-tempered creatures, un- 
sociable, abusive, cantankerous; others again enslaved 
63 


62 


63 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


levoli, invidi, difficiles, lucifugi, maledici, morosi,’ alii 
autem etiam amatoriis levitatibus dediti, alii petu- 
lantes, alii audaces, protervi, iidem intemperantes et 
ignavi, numquam in sententia permanentes, quas ob 
causas in eorum vita nulla est intercapedo molestiae. 
Igitur neque stultorum quisquam beatus neque sapi- 
entium non beatus. Multoque hoc melius nos verius- 
que quam Stoici. Illi enim negant esse bonum quid- 
quam nisi nescio quam illam umbram quod appellant 
honestum, non tam solido quam splendido nomine; 
virtutem autem nixam hoc honesto nullam requirere 
voluptatem atque ad beate vivendum se ipsa esse 
contentam. 

XIX. “Sed possunt haec quadam ratione dici non 
modo non repugnantibus, verum etiam approbantibus 
nobis. Sic enim ab Epicuro sapiens semper beatus 
inducitur: finitas habet cupiditates ; neglegit mortem ; 
de dis immortalibus sine ullo metu vera sentit; non 
dubitat, si ita melius sit, migrare de vita. His rebus 
instructus semper est in voluptate. Neque enim 
tempus est ullum quo non plus voluptatum habeat 
quam dolorum. Nam et praeterita grate meminit 
et praesentibus ita potitur ut animadvertat quanta 
sint ea quamque iucunda, neque pendet ex futuris, 
sed expectat illa, fruitur praesentibus; ab iisque vitiis 
quae paulo ante collegi abest plurimum, et cum stul- 
torum vitam cum sua comparat, magna aflicitur vo- 
luptate. Dolores autem si qui incurrunt, numquam 
vim tantam habent ut non plus habeat sapiens quod 
gaudeat quam quod angatur. Optime vero Epicurus, 
quod ‘exiguam’ dixit ‘fortunam intervenire sapienti, 


‘ morost Lambinus; monstrost Mdv. with MSS. 


64 


. 


BOOK I. xviii-xix 


to the follies of love, impudent or reckless, wanton, 
headstrong and yet irresolute, always changing their 
minds. Such failings render their lives one unbroken 
round of misery. The conclusion is that no foolish 
man can be happy, nor any wise man fail to be 
happy. This is a truth that we establish far more 
conclusively than do the Stoics. For they maintain 
that nothing is good save that vague phantom which 
they entitle Moral Worth, a title more splendid than 
substantial; and say that Virtue resting on this 
_ Moral Worth has no need of pleasure, but is a 
her own sufficient happiness. 

XIX. “At the same time this Stoic doctrine can be The Wise Man 
stated in a form which we do not object to, and in- eben tes 
deed ourselves endorse. For Epicurus thus represents 
the Wise Man as always happy: his desires are kept 
within bounds; death he disregards; he has a true 
conception, untainted by fear, of the Divine nature; 
if it be expedient to depart from life, he does not 
hesitate to do so. Thus equipped he enjoys per- 
petual pleasure, for there is no moment when the 
pleasures he experiences do not outbalance the 
pains; since he remembers the past with delight, 
grasps the present with a full realization of its 
pleasantness, and does not rely upon the future; 
he looks forward to it, but finds his true enjoyment 
in the present. Also he is entirely free from the 
vices that I instanced a few moments ago, and he 
derives no inconsiderable pleasure from comparing 
his own existence with the life of the foolish. More- 
over, any pains that the Wise Man may encounter are 
never so severe but that he has more cause for glad- 
ness than for sorrow. Again, it is a fine saying of prone thes ae 


Epicurus that ‘the Wise Man is but little interfered tune. 
F 65 


\ 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


maximasque ab eo et gravissimas res consilio ipsius 
et ratione administrari; neque maiorem voluptatem 
ex infinito tempore aetatis percipi posse quam ex hoc 
percipiatur quod videamus esse finitum.’ In diale- 
ctica autem vestra nullam existimavit esse nec ad 
melius vivendum nec ad commodius disserendum 
vim. In physicis plurimum posuit. Ea scientia et 
verborum vis et natura orationis et consequentium 
repugnantiumve ratio potest perspici; omnium autem 
rerum natura cognita levamur superstitione, liberamur 
mortis metu, non conturbamur ignoratione rerum, e 


- qua ipsa horribiles exsistunt saepe formidines ; denique 
’ etiam morati melius erimus cum didicerimus quid 


64 


natura desideret. Tum vero, si stabilem scientiam 
rerum tenebimus, servata illa quae quasi delapsa de 
caelo est ad cognitionem omnium regula, ad quam 
omnia iudicia rerum dirigentur, numquam ullius 
oratione victi sententia desistemus. Nisi autem 
rerum natura perspecta erit, nullo modo poterimus 
sensuum iudicia defendere. Quidquid porro animo 
cernimus, id omne oritur a sensibus; qui si omnes 
veri erunt, ut Epicuri ratio docet, tum denique po- 
terit aliquid cognosci et percipi. Quos qui tollunt 
et nihil posse percipi dicunt, ii remotis sensibus ne 


®Epicurus discarded the orthodox Logic (cp. § 22), but 
attacked some of its problems in the light of his Natural 
Philosophy: e.g. denying necessity in Nature, he denied 
the Law of the Excluded Middle (Academica 2.97, and see 
W. M. L. Hutchinson, de Fintbus p. 234). The ‘criterion’ or 
test of truth he treated under the head of ‘ Canonic’ (xavay, 
regula, a measuring-rod). Being based on his theory of 
sensation (§ 21), ‘Canonic’ was ranged under ‘Physic’ 
(Diogenes Laertius, 10. 30). It made the senses infallible, 
and the sole source of knowledge; and it gave rules for 
testing the validity of inference from sensation, which are 
a crude adumbration of a Logic of Induction, 


66 


BOOK I. xix 


with by fortune: the great concerns of life, the things 

that matter, are controlled by his own wisdom and 
reason’; and that ‘no greater pleasure could be 
derived from a life of infinite duration than is actually 
afforded by this existence which we know to be 

finite.’ Logic, on which your school lays such stress, Logic is useless; 
he held to be of no effect either as a guide to conduct er pe 
or as an aid to thought. Natural Philosophy he Hey orenenes # 
deemed all-important. This science* explains to us the criterion of 


1 : 3 g truth, is valuable 
_ the meaning of terms, the nature of predication, and as removing the 
Jf 


the law of consistency and contradiction 3 Aecondly, ee 
a thorough knowledge of the facts of nature relieves : 
us of the burden of superstition, frees us from fear of 
death, and shields us against the disturbing effects 
of ignorance, which is often in itself a cause of 
terrifying apprehensions; lastly, to learn what na- 
ture’s real requirements are improves the moral 
character also. Besides, it is only by firmly grasping 
a well-established scientific system, observing the 
Rule or Canon that has fallen as it were from heaven 
to afford us a knowledge of the universe—only by 
making that Canon the test of all our judgments, that 
' we can hope always to stand fast in our belief, un- 
| shaken by the eloquence of any man./ On the other 
hand, without a full understanding of the world of 
nature it is impossible to maintain the truth of our 
sense-perceptions. Further, every mental presenta- 
tion has its origin in sensation; so that no knowledge 
or perception is possible, unless all sensations are 
true, as the theory of Epicurus teaches that they 
are. Those who deny the validity of sensation and 
say that nothing can be perceived, having excluded 


F2 67 


66 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


id ipsum quidem expedire possunt quod disserunt. 
Praeterea sublata cognitione et scientia tollitur om- 
nis ratio et vitae degendae et rerum gerendarum. 
Sic e physicis et fortitudo sumitur contra mortis 
timorem et constantia contra metum religionis et 
sedatio animi, omnium rerum occultarum ignoratione 
sublata, et moderatio, natura cupiditatum generi- 
busque earum explicatis, et, ut modo docui, cogni- 
tionis regula et iudicio ab eodem illo constituto veri 
a falso distinctio traditur. 

XX. “Restat locus huic disputationi vel maxime 
necessarius, de amicitia, quam si voluptas summum 
sit bonum affirmatis nullam omnino fore; de qua 
Epicurus quidem ita dicit, omnium rerum quas ad 
beate vivendum sapientia comparaverit nihil esse - 
maius amicitia, nihil uberius, nihil iucundius. Nee 
vero hoc oratione solum sed multo magis vita et 
factis et moribus comprobavit. Quod quam magnum 
sit fictae veterum fabulae declarant, in quibus tam 
multis tamque variis, ab ultima antiquitate repetitis, 
tria vix amicorum paria reperiuntur, ut ad Orestem 
pervenias profectus a Theseo. At vero Epicurus una 
in domo, et ea quidem angusta, quam magnos quan- 
taque amoris conspiratione consentientes tenuit ami- 
corum greges! quod fit etiam nune ab Epicureis. 
Sed ad rem redeamus; de hominibus dici non ne- 
cesse est. Tribus igitur modis video esse a nostris 
de amicitia disputatum. Alii, cum eas voluptates 


68 


BOOK I. xix-xx 


‘the evidence of the senses, are unable even to ex- 
pound their own argument. Besides, by abolishing 
knowledge and science they abolish all possibility of 
rational life and action. Thus Natural Philosophy 
supplies courage to face the fear of death; resolution 
to resist the terrors of religion; peace of mind, for 
it removes all ignorance of the mysteries of nature; 
self-control, for it explains the nature of the desires 
and distinguishes their different kinds; and, as 
I showed just now, the Canon or Criterion of Know- 
ledge, which Epicurus also established, gives a method 
of discerning truth from falsehood. 

XX. “There remains a topic that is pre-eminently Friendship 
germane to this discussion, I mean the subject of ee 
Friendship. Your school maintains that if pleasure Hp enh Be 
be the Chief Good, friendship will cease to exist. utility. 
Now Epicurus’s pronouncement about friendship is 
that of all the means to happiness that wisdom has 
devised, none is greater, none more fruitful, none 
more delightful than this. Nor did he only com- 
mend this doctrine by his eloquence, but far more 
by the example of his life and conduct. How great a 
thing such friendship is, is shown by the mythical 
stories of antiquity. Review the legends from the re- 
motest ages, and, copious and varied as they are, you 
will barely find in them three pairs of friends, beginning 
with Theseus and ending with Orestes. Yet Epicurus 
in a single house and that a small one maintained a 
whole company of friends, united by the closest 
sympathy and affection; and this still goes on in the 
Epicurean school. But to return to our subject, for 
there is no need of personal instances: I notice Three theories of 
that the topic of friendship has been treated by P™ndship- 
Epicureans in three ways. (1) Some have denied 


69 


67 


68 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


quae ad amicos pertinerent negarent esse per se ip- 
sas tam expetendas quam nostras expeteremus, quo 
loco videtur quibusdam stabilitas amicitiae vacillare, 
tuentur tamen eum locum seque facile, ut mihi vide- 
tur, expediunt. Ut enim virtutes, de quibus ante 
dictum est, sic amicitiam negant posse a voluptate- 
discedere. Nam cum solitudo et vita sine amicis 
insidiarum et metus plena sit, ratio ipsa monet ami- 
citias comparare, quibus partis confirmatur animus et 
a spe pariendarum voluptatum seiungi non potest. 
Atque ut odia, invidiae, despicationes adversantur 
voluptatibus, sic amicitiae non modo fautrices fidelis- 
simae sed etiam. effectrices sunt voluptatum tam 
amicis quam sibi; quibus non solum praesentibus 
fruuntur sed etiam spe eriguntur consequentis ac po- 
steri temporis. Quod quia nullo modo sine amicitia 
firmam et perpetuam iucunditatem vitae tenere pos- 
sumus neque vero ipsam amicitiam tueri nisi aeque 
amicos et nosmet ipsos diligamus, idcirco et hoc ipsum 
efficitur in amicitia et amicitia cum voluptate connecti- 
tur. Nam et laetamur amicorum laetitia aeque atque 
nostra et pariter dolemus angoribus. Quocirca eodem 
modo sapiens erit affectus ergaamicum quoinse ipsum, 
quosque labores propter suam voluptatem susciperet, 
eosdem suscipiet propter amici voluptatem. Quae- 
que de virtutibus dicta sunt, quemadmodum eae 
semper voluptatibus inhaererent, eadem de amicitia 
dicenda sunt. Praeclare enim Epicurus his paene ver- 
bis: ‘Eadem,’ inquit, ‘ sententia confirmavit animum 


ne quod aut sempiternum aut diuturnum timeret ma- 
70 


BOOK I. xx 


_ that pleasures affecting our friends are in them- 
selves to be desired by us in the same degree as we 
desire our own pleasures. This doctrine is thought 
by some critics to undermine the foundations of friend- 
ship; however, its supporters defend their position, 
and in my opinion have no difficulty in making good 
their case. They argue that friendship can no more 
be sundered from pleasure than can the virtues, 
which we have discussed already. A solitary, friend- 
less life must be beset by secret dangers and alarms. 
Hence reason itself advises the acquisition of 
friends; their possession gives confidence, and a 

17 firmly rooted hope of winning pleasure. And just 

as hatred, jealousy and contempt are hindrances to 

pleasure, so friendship is the most trustworthy pre- 
server and also creator of pleasure alike for our 
friends and for ourselves. It affords us enjoyment 
in the present, and it inspires us with hopes for the 
near and distant future. Thus it is not possible to 
secure uninterrupted gratification in life without 
friendship, nor yet to preserve friendship itself un- 
less we love our friends as much as ourselves. Hence 
this unselfishness does occur in friendship, while also 
friendship is closely linked with pleasure. For we 
rejoice in our friends’ joy as much as in our own, 
and are equally pained by their sorrows. Therefore 
the Wise Man will feel exactly the same towards his 
friend as he does towards himself, and will exert 
himself as much for his friend’s pleasure as he would 
for his own. All that has been said about the essen- 
tial connexion of the virtues with pleasure must be 

repeated about friendship. Epicurus well said (I 

give almost his exact words): “The same creed that 

has given us courage to overcome all fear of ever- 
71 


69 


70 


71 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


lum, quae perspexit in hoc ipso vitae spatio amicitiae 
praesidium esse firmissimum.’ Sunt autem quidam 
Epicurei timidiores paulo contra vestra convicia sed 
tamen satis acuti, qui verentur ne, si amicitiam pro- 
pter nostram voluptatem expetendam putemus, tota 
amicitia quasi claudicare videatur. Itaque primos 
congressus copulationesque et consuetudinum insti- 
tuendarum voluntates fieri propter voluptatem, cum 
autem usus progrediens familiaritatem effecerit, tum 
amorem efflorescere tantum ut, etiamsi nulla sit 
utilitas ex amicitia, tamen ipsi amici propter se ipsos 
amentur. Etenim si loca, si fana, si urbes, si gym- 
nasia, si campum, si canes, si equos, si ludicra exer- 
cendi aut venandi, consuetudine adamare solemus, 
quanto id in hominum consuetudine facilius fieri 
poterit? et iustius? Sunt autem qui dicant foedus 
esse quoddam sapientium ut ne minus amicos quam 
se ipsos diligant. Quod et posse fieri intellegimus 
et saepe evenire” videmus, et perspicuum est nihil ad 
iucunde vivendum reperiri posse quod coniunctione tali 
sit aptius. : 

“Quibus ex omnibus iudicari potest non modo non 
impediri rationem amicitiae si summum bonum in 
voluptate ponatur, sed sine hoc institutionem omnino 
amicitiae non posse reperiri. 

XXI. “Quapropter si ea quae dixi sole ipso illu- 
striora et clariora sunt, si omnia hausta® e fonte 
naturae, si tota oratio nostra omnem sibi fidem 

‘ poterit most edd.; potwerit Mdv. with MSS. 


2 eventre Holm; + enzm Mdv. with MSS. 
2 omnia dixi hausta MSS.; dixi bracketed by Mdv. 


72 


BOOK I. xx-xxi 


lasting or long-enduring evil hereafter, has discerned 
that friendship is our strongest safeguard in this 
present term of life.’—(2) Other Epicureans though by 
no means lacking in insight are a little less courage- 
ous in defying the opprobrious criticisms of the 
Academy. They fear that if we hold friendship to 
_be desirable only for the pleasure that it affords to 
ourselves, it will be thought that it is crippled alto- 
gether. They therefore say that the first advances 
and overtures, and the original inclination to form an 
attachment, are prompted by the desire for pleasure, 
but that when the progress of intercourse has led to 
intimacy, the relationship blossoms into an affection 
strong enough to make us love our friends for their 
own sake, even though no practical advantage accrues 
from their friendship. Does not familiarity endear to 
us localities, temples, cities, gymnasia and playing- 
grounds, horses and hounds, games and field-sports? 
Then how much more natural and reasonable that it 
should have the same result in the case of our inter- 
course with our fellow-men!—(3) The third view is 
that wise men have made a sort of compact to love 
their friends no less than themselves. We can under- 
stand the possibility of this, and indeed we often see 
it happen. Clearly no more effective means to happi- 
ness could be found than such an alliance. 

“ All these considerations go to prove not only that 
the rationale of friendship is not impaired by the 
identification of the Chief Good with pleasure, but 
also that without this no foundation for friendship 
whatsoever can be found. 

XXI. “If then the theory I have set forth is 
clearer and more luminous than daylight itself; if 
it is derived entirely from Nature’s source; if my 


73 


Peroration: 
Epicurus the 
great teacher of 
mankind, 


72 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


sensibus confirmat, id est incorruptis atque integris 
testibus, si infantes pueri, mutae etiam bestiae paene 
loquuntur, magistra ac duce natura, nihil esse pro- 
sperum nisi voluptatem, nihil asperum nisi dolorem, 
de quibus neque depravate iudicant neque corrupte, 
nonne ei maximam gratiam habere debemus qui hac 
exaudita quasi voce naturae sic eam firme graviterque 
comprehenderit ut omnes bene sanos in viam placa- 
tae, tranquillae, quietae, beatae vitae deduceret? 
Qui quod tibi parum videtur eruditus, ea causa est 
quod nullam eruditionem esse duxit nisi quae beatae 
vitae disciplinam iuvaret.. An ille tempus aut in 
poetis evolvendis, ut ego et Triarius te hortatore 
facimus, consumeret, in quibus nulla solida utilitas 
omnisque puerilis est delectatio, aut se, ut Plato,.in 
musicis, geometria, numeris, astris contereret, quae 
et a falsis initiis profecta vera esse non possunt et si 
essent vera nihil afferrent quo iucundius, id est quo 
melius viveremus; — eas ergo artes persequeretur, 
vivendi artem tantam tamque operosam et perinde 
fructuosam relinqueret? “Non ergo Epicurus ineru- 
ditus, sed ii indocti qui quae pueros non didicisse 
turpe est ea putant usque ad senectutem esse di- 
scenda.” Quae cum dixisset, “Explicavi,’ inquit, 
“sententiam meam et eo quidem consilio, tuum 
iudicium ut cognoscerem, quae mihi facultas, ut id 
meo arbitratu facerem, ante hoc tempus numquam 
est data.” 


BOOK I. xxi 


whole discourse relies throughout for confirmation 
on the unbiased and unimpeachable evidence of the 
senses; if lisping infants, nay even dumb animals, 
prompted by Nature’s teaching, almost find voice to 
proclaim that there is no welfare but pleasure, no 
hardship but pain—and their judgment in these 
matters is neither sophisticated nor biased—ought 
we not to feel the greatest gratitude to him who 
listened to this utterance of Nature’s voice, and 
grasped its import so firmly and so fully that he has 
guided all sane-minded men into the paths of peace 
and happiness, calmness and repose? You are 
pleased to think him uneducated. The reason is 
that he refused to consider any education worth the 
name that did not help to school us in happiness. 
Was he to spend his time, as you encourage Triarius 
and me to do, in perusing poets, who give us nothing 
solid and useful, but merely childish amusement? 
Was he to occupy himself like Plato with music and 
geometry, arithmetic and astronomy, which starting 
from false premises cannot be true, and which more- 
over if they were true would contribute nothing to 
make our lives pleasanter and therefore better? 
Was he, I say, to study arts like these, and neglect 
the master art, so difficult and correspondingly so 
fruitful, the art of living? No! Epicurus was not 
uneducated: the real philistines are those who ask 
us to go on studying till old age the subjects that 
we ought to be ashamed not to have learnt in 
boyhood.” Thus concluding, he added: “T have 
explained my own view, but solely with the object 
of learning what your verdict is. I have never 
hitherto had a satisfactory opportunity of hearing 
lage 
a6 


~ es a aNe var 


pide se aT: ss 

3 aitbriestet 3 2% ee ii 
ee a ee i sabes dant vu mig eo ce 
eae gon tix aeinthiawe sul sostends ee 
‘ Rup ee armed mets sedated 


fa Sets dish Se aaibencks Snare, 43a ie 
saciael Babies: Mihi dalk nega wer shh San - 

Tiered Siti ert Gres. att: f ati ¥ i 

f E 7p” Assis = ogi fdas jopate 43° ry. fain tis = ig 

3 apes “ yn Fr : : ; = ; 7 


ay sir 7 4 


ak etal a neh fy he 3 at baat 
nates j AGES fan a 2 ei Proce es): f zat 
AV its ‘ 57 ae 


ie espace saa Sache aires 


= - i 


M. TULLII CICERONIS 
DE 
FINIBUS BONORUM ET MALORUM 
LIBER SECUNDUS 


I. Hic cum uterque me intueretur seseque ad audi- 
endum significarent paratos, “Primum,’ inquam, 
“deprecor ne me tamquam philosophum putetis 
scholam vobis aliquam explicaturum, quod ne in ipsis 
quidem philosophis magno opere umquam probavi. 
Quando enim Socrates, qui parens philosophiae iure 
dici potest, quidquam tale fecit? Korum erat iste 
mos qui tum sophistae nominabantur; quorum e 
numero primus est ausus Leontinus Gorgias in con- 
ventu ‘poscere quaestionem,’ id est iubere dicere 
qua de re quis vellet audire. Audax negotium, dice- 
rem impudens, nisi hoc institutum postea translatum 
ad nostros philosophos esset. Sed et illum quem no- 
minavi et ceteros sophistas, ut e Platone intellegi 
potest, lusos videmus a Socrate. Is enim percontando 
atque interrogando elicere solebat eorum opiniones 
quibuscum disserebat, ut ad ea quae ii respondissent 
si quid videretur diceret. Qui mos cum a posteriori- 
bus non esset retentus, Arcesilas eum revocavit insti- 
tuitque ut ii qui se audire vellent non de se quaere- 
rent sed ipsi dicerent quid sentirent; quod cum 
dixissent, ille contra. Sed eum qui audiebant quoad 


poterant defendebant sententiam suam; apud ceteros 
78 


DE FINIBUS 
BOOK II 


I. Upon this they both looked at me, and signified Refutation of 
their readiness to hear me. So I began: “First of all, I ap Saale 
beg of you not to imagine that I am going to deliver replying to 


you a formal lecture, like a professional philosopher. Eble 

That is a procedure which even in the case of philo- 240Pt the 
sophers I have never very much approved. Socrates, method. 
who is entitled to be styled the father of philosophy, 
never did anything of the sort. It was the method of 
his contemporaries the Sophists, as they were called. 

It was one of the Sophists, Gorgias of Leontini, who 
first ventured in an assembly to ‘invite a question,’ 
that is, to ask anyone to state what subject he desired 
to nay discussed. A bold undertaking, indeed, I 
should call it a piece of effrontery, had not this cus- 
tom later on passed over into our own school. But 
we see that Socrates made fun of the aforesaid 
Gorgias and the rest of the Sophists also, as we 
can learn from Plato. His own way was to ques- 

‘tion his interlocutors and by a process of cross- 
examination to elicit their opinions, so that he might 
express his own views by way of rejoinder to their 
answers. This practice was abandoned by his suc- 
cessors, but was afterwards revived by Arcesilas, who 
made it a rule that those who wished to hear him 
should not ask him questions but should state their 
own opinions; and when they had done so he argued 
against them. But whereas the pupils of Arcesilas did 
their best to defend their own position, with the rest of 
the philosophers the student who has put a question 

79 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


autem philosophos qui quaesivit aliquid tacet; quod 
quidem iam fit etiam in Academia. Ubi enim is qui 
audire vult ita dixit: ‘Voluptas mihi videtur esse 
summum bonum,’ perpetua oratione contra disputa- 
tur, ut facile intellegi possit eos qui aliquid sibi videri 
dicant non ipsos in ea sententia esse sed audire velle 
contraria. Nos commodius agimus. Non enim 
solum Torquatus dixit quid sentiret sed etiam cur. 
Ego autem arbitror, quaamquam admodum delectatus 
sum eius oratione perpetua, tamen commodius, cum 
in rebus singulis insistas et intellegas quid quisque 
concedat, quid abnuat, ex rebus concessis concludi 
quod velis et ad exitum perveniri. Cum enim fertur 
quasi torrens oratio, quamvis multa cuiusquemodi 
rapiat, nihil tamen teneas, nihil reprehendas,? nus- 
quam orationem rapidam coerceas. 

“Omnis autem in quaerendo quae via quadam et 
ratione habetur oratio praescribere primum debet, ut 
quibusdam in formulis: EA RES AGETUR, ut inter quos 
disseritur conveniat quid sit id de quo disseratur. 
II. Hoe positum in Phaedro a Platone probavit Epi- 
curus sensitque in omni disputatione id fieri oportere. 
Sed quod proximum fuit non vidit. Negat enim 
definiri rem placere, sine quo fieri interdum non 

‘reprehendas Mdv. with B; other MSS. apprehendas. 


a Phaedrus 237 B. 
80 


‘a 


BOOK II. i-ii 


is then silent; and indeed this is nowadays the cus- 
tom in the Academy too. The would-be learner says, 
for example, “The Chief Good in my opinion is 
pleasure,’ and the contrary is then maintained in a 
formal discourse; so that it is not hard to realize that 
those who say they are of a certain opinion do not 
actually hold the view they profess, but want to hear 
what can be argued against it. We are adopting a 
more profitable mode of procedure, for Torquatus has 


not only told us his own opinion but also his reasons 


for holding it. Still, for my part, though I enjoyed his 
long discourse very much, I believe all the same that 
it is better to stop at point after point, and make out 


what each person is willing to admit and what he 


denies, and then to draw such inferences as one 
desires from these admissions and so arrive at one’s 
conclusion. When the exposition goes rushing on 
like a mountain stream in spate, it carries along 


with it a vast amount of miscellaneous material, but 


there is nothing one can take hold of or rescue from 


the flood; there is no point at which one can stem 


the torrent of oratory. 
“However, in philosophical investigation a metho- 


-dical and systematic discourse must always begin by 
formulating a preamble like that which occurs in 


certain forms of process at law, “This shall be the 


‘point at issue’; so that the parties to the debate 


may be agreed as to what the subject is about which 
they are debating. II. This rule is laid down by 
Plato in the Phaedrus,* and it was approved by 
Epicurus, who realized that it ought to be followed 
in every discussion. But he failed to see what this 
involved. For he says that he does not hold with 
giving a definition of the thing in question; yet 
G 81 


> 


Epicurus, neg- 
lecting Defini- 
tion, confounded 
two things 
under the term 
* pleasure’: 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
potest ut inter eos qui ambigunt conveniat quid sit 
id de quo agatur; velut in hoc ipso de quo nunc dis- 
putamus. Quaerimus enim finem bonorum; possu- 
musne hoc scire quale sit, nisi contulerimus inter nos, 
cum finem bonorum dixerimus, quid finis, quid etiam 
sit ipsum bonum? Atqui haec patefactio quasi rerum 
opertarum, cum quid quidque sit aperitur, definitio 
est; qua tu etiam imprudens utebare nonnumquam. 
Nam hunc ipsum sive finem sive extremum sive ulti- 
mum definiebas id esse quo omnia quae recte fierent 
referrentur neque id ipsum usquam referretur. Prae- 
clare hoc quidem. Bonum ipsum etiam quid esset 
fortasse si opus fuisset definisses aut quod esset natura 
appetendum, aut quod prodesset, aut quod iuvaret, 
aut quod liberet modo. Nune idem, nisi molestum 
est, quoniam tibi non omnino displicet definire et id 
facis cum vis, velim definias quid sit voluptas, de quo 
omnis haec quaestio est.”’ “Quis, quaeso,” inquit, 
“est qui quid sit voluptas nesciat aut qui quo magis 
id intellegat definitionem aliquam desideret?” “Me 
ipsum esse dicerem,” inquam, “nisi mihi viderer 
habere bene cognitam voluptatem et satis firme con- 
ceptam animo atque comprensam. Nune autem dico 
ipsum Epicurum nescire et in eo nutare, eumque qui 


crebro dicat diligenter oportere exprimi quae vis 
82 


; BOOK II. ii 


without this it is sometimes impossible for the dis- 
putants to agree what the subject under discussion 
is; as, for example, in the case of the very question 
we are now debating. We are trying to discover the 
End of Goods ; but how can we possibly know whatthe 
nature of this is, without compar ing notes as to what 
we mean, in the phrase ‘ End of Goods,’ by the term 

*End’ and also by the term ‘Good’ cls ? Now this 
process of disclosing latent meanings, of revealing 
what a particular thing is, is the process of definition; 
and you yourself now and then unconsciously em- 
ployed it. For you repeatedly defined this very 
conception of the End or final or ultimate aim as 

‘that to which all right actions are a means while it 
is not itself a means to anything else.’ Excellent so 
far. Very likely had occasion arisen you would 
have defined the Good itself, either as ‘the naturally 
desirable,’ or ‘the beneficial,’ or ‘the delightful,’ or 
just feHat which we like.’ Well then, if you don’t 
mind, as you do not entirely disapprove of definition, 
and indeed practise it when it suits your purpose, | 
should be glad if you would now define pleasure, the 
thing which is the subject of the whole of our pre- 
sent inquiry.” “Dear me,’ cried Torquatus, “who 
is there who does not know what pleasure is? Who 
needs a definition to assist him to understand 
it?” “I should say that I myself was such a per- 
son,’ I replied, “did I not believe that as a matter 
of fact I do fully understand the nature of pleasure, 
and possess a well-founded conception and compre- 
hension of it. As it is, I venture to assert that 
Epicurus himself does not know what pleasure is, 
but is in two minds about it. He is always harping 


on the necessity of carefully sifting out the meaning 
G2 83 


“I 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
subiecta sit vocibus, non intellegere interdum quid 
sonet haec vox voluptatis, id est quae res huic voci 
subiciatur.” 

III. Tum ille ridens: “Hoc vero,” inquit, “ opti- 
mum, ut is qui finem rerum expetendarum volupta- 
tem esse dicat, id extremum, id ultimum bonorum, — 
id ipsum quid et quale sit nesciat!”’ “ Atqui,” in- 
quam, “aut Epicurus quid sit voluptas aut omnes 
mortales qui ubique sunt nesciunt.”’ “Quonam,” 
inquit, “modo?” “Quia voluptatem hanc esse sen- 
tiunt omnes quam sensus accipiens movetur et iucun- 
ditate quadam perfunditur.” “Quid ergo? istam 
voluptatem,’ inquit, “Epicurus ignorat?” “Non 
semper,” inquam; “nam interdum nimis etiam 
novit, quippe qui testificetur ne intellegere quidem 
se posse ubi sit aut quod sit ullum bonum praeter 
illud quod cibo et potione et aurium delectatione et 
obscena voluptate capiatur. An haec ab eo non di- 
cuntur?” “Quasi vero me pudeat,’’ inquit, “isto- 
rum aut non possim quemadmodum ea dicantur 
ostendere!” “Ego vero non dubito,”’ inquam, “quin 
facile possis, nec est quod te pudeat sapienti assentiri 
qui se unus, quod sciam, sapientem profiteri sit ausus. 
Nam Metrodorum non puto ipsum professum, sed, 


cum appellaretur ab Epicuro, repudiare tantum bene- 
84 


BOOK ILI. ii-iii 


underlying the terms we employ, and yet he occa- 
sionally fails to understand what is the import of 
the word ‘pleasure,’ that is, what is the thing that 
underlies the word.” 
III. Torquatus Jaughed. “Come, that is a good viz. pleasure 
joke,” he said, “that the author of the doctrine —— sod obs 


that pleasure is the End of things desirable, the sence of pain, 
final and ultimate Good, should actually not iia pease 
what manner of thing pleasure itself is!”’ “‘ Well,’’ Pleasue. 

I replied, “either Epicurus does not know See 
pleasure is, or the rest of mankind all the world over 

do not.” “How so?” he asked. “ Because the 
universal opinion is that pleasure is a sensation 
actively stimulating the percipient sense and diffus- 

ing over it a certain agreeable feeling.” “‘ What 

then?” he replied; “does not Epicurus recognize 

pleasure in your sense?” “Not always,” said I; 

“now and then, I admit, he is only too well-ac- 
quainted witb it; for he solemnly avows that he 

‘cannot even understand what Good there can be or 

where it can be found, apart from that which is 

derived from food and drink, the delight of the ears, 

and the grosser forms of gratification. Do I mis- 


represent his words?” “ Just as if I were ashamed 
of all that,” he cried, “ or unable to explain the sense 
in which it is spoken!” “Oh,” said I, “I haven’t 


the least doubt you can explain it with ease. And 
you have no reason to be ashamed of sharing the 
opinions of a Wise Man—who stands alone, so far 
as I am aware, in venturing to arrogate to himself 
that title. For I do not suppose that Metrodorus 
himself claimed to be a Wise Man, though he did 
not care to refuse the compliment when the name 
was bestowed upon him by Epicurus; while the 
$5 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


ficium noluisse; septem autem illi non suo sed popu- 
lorum suffragio omnium nominati sunt. Verum hoc 
loco sumo verbis his eandem certe vim voluptatis 
Epicurum nosse quam ceteros. Omnes enim iucun- 
dum motum quo sensus hilaretur Graece 7dovjv, 
Latine voluptatem vocant.” “Quid est igitur,” in- 
quit, “quod requiras?”’ “Dicam,” inquam, “et qui- 
dem discendi causa magis quam quo te aut Epicurum 
reprensum velim.” “Ego quoque,’” inquit, * didi- 
cerim libentius si quid attuleris quam te reprende- 
rim.” “Tenesne igitur,’ inquam, “ Hieronymus 
Rhodius quid dicat esse summum bonum, quo putet 
omnia referri oportere?” “Teneo,” inquit, “ finem 
illi videri nihil dolere.”’ “Quid? idem iste,” in- 
quam, “de voluptate quid sentit?” “Negat esse 
eam,” inquit, “propter se expetendam.” “Aliud 
igitur esse censet gaudere, aliud non dolere.” “Et 
quidem,” inquit, ““vehementer errat; nam, ut paulo 
ante docui, augendae voluptatis finis est doloris omnis 
amotio.” “Non dolere,’”’ inquam, “istud quam vim 
habeat postea videro; aliam vero vim voluptatis esse, 
aliam nihil dolendi, nisi valde pertinax fueris, con- 
cedas necesse est.” “Atqui reperies,” inquit, “in 
hoe quidem pertinacem; dici enim nihil potest 


% i nH 993 CO pk wae A 
verius. stne, quaeso,’ inquam, sitienti in bi- 


86 


BOOK II. iii 


Seven Wise Men of old received their appellation 
not by their own votes, but by the universal suffrages 
of mankind. Still, for the present I take it for 
granted that in the utterance in question Epicurus 
undoubtedly recognizes the same meaning of ‘ plea- 
sure’ as everybody else. Every one uses the Greek 
word hédoné and the Latin voluptas to mean an agree- 
able and exhilarating stimulation of the sense.” 

Well then,” he asked, - what more do you want ?”’ 
“T will tell you,” I said, “ though more for the sake 
of ascertaining the truth than from any desire to 
criticize yourself or Epicurus.”” “TI also,” he replied, 
“would much rather learn anything you may have 
to contribute, than criticize your views.” “Do you 
remember, then,” I said, “what Hieronymus of 
Rhodes pronounces to be the Chief Good, the stan- 
dard as he conceives it to which all other things 
should be referred?”’ “ Iremember,” said he, “ that 
he considers the End to be freedom from pain.” 
“Well,” said I, “what is the same philosopher’s 
view about pleasure?” “He thinks that pleasure 
is not desirable in itself.” “Then in his opinion to 
feel pleasure is a different thing from not feeling 
pain?” “Yes,” he said, “ and there he is seriously 
mistaken, since, as I have just shown, the complete 
removal of pain is the limit of the increase of 

leasure.” “Oh,” I said, “as for the formula 

freedom from pain, I will consider its meaning 
later on; but unless you are extraordinarily obstinate 
you are bound to admit that “freedom from. pain’ 
does not mean the same as _pleasure.’”’ Well, 
but on this point you will find me obstinate,” said 
he; “for it is as true as any proposition can be.” 
Pray,” said I, “when a man is thirsty, is there any 


87 


10 


11 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 

bendo voluptas?”’ “Quis istud possit,’” inquit, 
“negare?” “Eademne quae restincta siti?” “Tmmo 
alio genere. Restincta enim sitis stabilitatem 
voluptatis habet, illa autem voluptas ipsius restin- 
ctionis in motu est.” “Cur igitur,’ inquam, “res 
tam dissimiles eodem nomine appellas?” “ Quid 
paulo ante,” inquit, “ dixerim nonne meministi, cum 
omnis dolor detractus esset, variari, non augeri volu- 
ptatem?” “Memini vero,” inquam ; “sed tu istuc 
dixti bene Latine, parum plane. Varietas enim 
Latinum verbum est, idque proprie quidem in dis- 
paribus coloribus dicitur, sed transfertur in multa 
disparia: varium poema, varia oratio, varii mores, 
varia fortuna, voluptas etiam varia dici solet, cum 
percipitur e multis dissimilibus rebus dissimiles effi- 
cientibus voluptates. Eam si varietatem diceres, in- 
tellegerem, ut etiam non dicente te intellego; ista 
varietas quae sit non satis perspicio, quod ais cum 
dolore careamus tum in summa voluptate nos esse, 
cum autem vescamur iis rebus quae duleem motum 
afferant sensibus, tum esse in motu voluptatem, quae? 
faciat varietatem voluptatum, sed non augeri illam 
non dolendi voluptatem, quam cur voluptatem ap- 
pelles nescio.” 


IV. “An_ potest,” inquit ille,? “quidquam esse 


‘quae MSS.; gui Davis, Mdv., but cp. § 75. 
* inguit ille or ille inguit MSS.; iile Mdv. brackets. 
88 


BOOK II. iii-iv 
pleasure in the act of drinking } >” “That is unde- 
niable,’ he answered. “Is it the same Pleasure as 
the pleasure of having quenched one’s thirst ?”’ 
“No, it is a different kind of pleasure. For the 
pleasure of having quenched one’s thirst is a ‘ static’ 
pleasure, but the pleasure of actually quenching ; iti is 


a ‘kinetic’ pleasure.” “Why then,” I asked, “do 
you call ‘two such different thinks by the same 
name?” “Do you not remember,” he replied, 


“what I said just now, that when all pain has been 


removed, pleasure may vary in kind but cannot be 
increased in degree?” ‘Oh, yes, I remember,” 
said 1; “ but though your language was quite correct 
fin fo: your meaning was far from clear. ‘ Varia- 
tion’ is a good Latin term; we use it strictly of 
different colours, but it is applied metaphorically to 
a number of things that differ: we speak of a varied 
poem, a varied speech, a varied character, varied 
fortunes. Pleasure too can be termed varied when 
‘it is derived from a number of unlike things pro- 
ducing unlike feelings of pleasure. If this were the 
variation you spoke of, I could understand the term, 
_just as I understand it even without your speaking 
of it. But I cannot quite grasp what you mean by 
‘variation’ when you say that when we are free from 
pain we experience the highest pleasure, and that 
when we are enjoying things that excite a pleasant 
activity of the senses, we then experience an active 
or ‘kinetic’ pleasure that causes a variation of our 
pleasant sensations, but no increase in the former 
pleasure that consists in absence of pain—although 
why you should call this ‘pleasure’ I cannot make 
out.” 
IV. “Well,” he asked, “can anything be more 
89 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


suavius quam nihil dolere?”’ “Immo sit sane nihil 
melius,” inquam, ‘(nondum enim id quaero), num pro- 
pterea idem voluptas est quod, ut ita dicam, indolen- 
tia?” “Plane idem,” inquit, “et maxima quidem, 
gua fieri nulla maior potest.” “Quid dubitas igitur,” 
inquam, ““summo bono a te ita constituto ut id totum 
in non dolendo sit, id tenere unum, id tueri, id 
defendere? Quid enim necesse est, itamquam 
meretricem in matronarum coetum, sic voluptatem 
in virtutum concilium adducere? Invidiosum nomen 
est, infame, suspectum. Itaque hoc frequenter dici 
solet a vobis, non intellegere nos quam dicat Epicurus 
voluptatem. Quod quidem mihi si quando dictum 
est (est autem dictum non parum saepe), etsi satis 
clemens sum in disputando, tamen interdum soleo 
subirasci. Egone non intellego, quid sit 1)d0v7) 
Graece, Latine ‘voluptas’? utram tandem linguam 
nescio? Deinde qui fit, ut ego nesciam, sciant 
omnes quicumque Epicurei esse voluerint? Quod 
vestri quidem vel optime disputant, nihil opus esse 
eum qui futurus sit philosophus scire litteras. Itaque 
ut maiores nostri ab aratro adduxerunt? Cincinnatum 
illum ut dictator esset, sic vos de pagis omnibus 


colligitis bonos illos quidem viros sed certe non per- 


ladduxerunt: some inf. MSS. abduxerunt. 


90 


BOOK II. 


- pleasant than freedom from ieee “Still,” I 


replied, “granting there is nothing better (that 
point I waive for the moment), surely it does not 


_ therefore follow that what I may call the negation 


mw 


of pain is the same thing as pleasure?” “Absolutely ‘ 
the same,” said he, “indeed the negation of pain is 
a very intense pleasure, the most intense pleasure 
possible.” “If then,” said I, “according to your 
account the Chief Good consists entirely in feeling 
no pain, why do you not keep to this without waver- 
ing? Why do you not firmly maintain this concep- 
tion of the Good and no other? What need is there 
to introduce so abandoned a character as Mistress 
Pleasure into the company of those respectable ladies 
the Virtues? Her very name is suspect, and lies 
under a cloud of disrepute—so much so that you 
Epicureans are fond of telling us that we do not 
understand what Epicurus means by pleasure. I 
am a reasonably good-tempered disputant, but for 
my own part when I hear this assertion (and I 
have encountered it fairly often), I am sometimes 
inclined to be a little irritated. Do I not understand 
the meaning of the Greek word hédoné, the Latin 
voluptas? Pray which of these two languages is 
it that I am not acquainted with? Moreover how 
comes it that I do not know what the word means, 
while all and sundry who have elected to be Epicu- 
reans do? As for that, your sect argues very 
plausibly that there is no need for the aspirant to 
philosophy to be a scholar at all. And you are as 


- good as your word. Our ancestors brought old Cin- 


cinnatus from the plough to be dictator. You ran- 
sack the country villages for your assemblage of 
doubtless respectable but certainly not very learned 


91 


There is no 

verbal mis- 

understanding: 

n50v7 

is exactly 

translated by 
cited 

easure.’ 


13 


14 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


eruditos. Ergo illi intellegunt quid Epicurus dicat, 
ego non intellego? Ut scias me intellegere, primum 
idem esse! dico ‘voluptatem,’ quod ille 7j8ovjv. Et 
quidem saepe quaerimus verbum Latinum par Graeco 
et quod idem valeat; hic nihil fuit quod quaereremus. 
Nullum inveniri verbum potest quod magis idem 
declaret Latine quod Graece, quam declarat “volu-- 
ptas.’ Huic verbo omnes qui ubique sunt qui Latine 
seiunt duas res subiciunt, laetitiam in animo, com- 
motionem suavem iucunditatis in corpore. Nam et 
ille apud Trabeam ‘voluptatem animi nimiam’ lae- 
titiam dicit, eandem quam ille Caecilianus quia ‘omni- 
bus laetitiis laetum’ esse se narrat. Sed hoc interest, 
quod ‘voluptas’ dicitur etiam in animo (vitiosa res, ut 
Stoici putant, qui eam sic definiunt: ‘sublationem 
animi sine ratione opinantis se magno bono frui’), 
non dicitur “laetitia’ nec ‘gaudium’ in corpore. In 
eo autem voluptas omnium Latine loquentium more 
ponitur, cum percipitur ea quae sensum aliquem 
moveat iucunditas. Hane quoque ‘iucunditatem,’ 
si vis, transfer in animum (‘iuvare’ enim in utroque 


dicitur ex eoque ‘iucundum’), modo intellegas inter 
illum qui dicat 


Tanta laetitia auctus sum ut nihil constet,” 


Tesse Mdv. brackets, but cp. II 77, III 22, V 18, 20 
(Miller). 


2ut nthil constet: some inf. MSS. ut mthi non constem. 


«Cicero quotes the verse also Tusc. 4. 35 and ad Fam. 2, 
9g. 2 (where he also refers to the following phrase from 
Caecilius Statius): it appears to have run ‘ego voluptatem 
animi nimiam summum esse errorem arbitror.’ 


92 


BOOK II. iv 


3 adherents. Well, if these gentlemen can under- 
stand what Epicurus means, cannot I? I will prove 
to you that I do. In the first place, I mean the 
same by ‘pleasure’ as he does by hédoné. One often 
has some trouble to discover a Latin word that shall 
be the precise equivalent of a Greek one; but in 
this case no search was necessary. No instance can 
be found of a Latin word that more exactly con- 

_veys the same meaning as the corresponding Greek 
word than does the word voluptas. Every person in 
the world who knows Latin attaches to this word 
two ideas—that of gladness of mind, and that of a 
delightful excitation of agreeable feeling in the 
body. On the one hand there is the character in 
-Trabea who speaks of ‘excessive pleasure of the 
mind, * meaning gladness, the same feeling as is in- 
tended by the person in Caecilius who describes him- 
self as being ‘glad with every sort of gladness.’ But 
there is this difference, that the word ‘pleasure’ can 
denote a mental as well as a bodily feeling (the 
former a vicious emotion, in the opinion of the Stoics, 
who define it as‘ elation of the mind under an irrational 
conviction that it is enjoying some great good’), 
whereas ‘joy’ and ‘gladness’ are not used of bodily 

4 sensation. However pleasure according to the 
usage of all who speak good Latin consists in the 
enjoyment of a delightful stimulation of one of the 
senses. The term ‘delight’ also you may apply if 
you like to the mind (‘to delight’ is said of both 
mind and body, and from it the adjective  delight- 
ful’ is derived), so long as you understand that 
between the man who says 

So full am I of gladness 
That I am all confusion, 


93 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


et eum qui 
Nunc demum mihi animus ardet, 


quorum alter laetitia gestiat, alter dolore crucietur, 
esse illum medium: 

Quamquam haec inter nos nuper notitia admodum est, 
qui nec laetetur nec angatur; itemque inter eum qui 
potiatur corporis expetitis voluptatibus et eum qui 
excrucietur summis doloribus esse eum qui utroque 
careat. 

V. “Satisne igitur videor vim verborum tenere, an 
sum etiam nunc vel Graece loqui vel Latine docen- 
dus? Et tamen vide ne, si ego non intellegam quid 
Epicurus loquatur, cum Graece ut videor luculenter 
sciam, sit aliqua culpa eius qui ita loquatur ut non 
intellegatur. Quod duobus modis sine reprensione 
fit, si aut de industria facias, ut Heraclitus, cogno- 
mento qui cxotrevds perhibetur, quia ‘de natura 
nimis obscure memoravit, aut cum rerum obscuritas, 
non verborum, facit ut non intellegatur oratio, qualis 
est in Timaeo Platonis. Epicurus autem, ut opinor, 
nec non vult si possit plane et aperte loqui, nec de 
re obscura, ut physici, aut artificiosa, ut mathematici, 
sed de illustri et facili et iam in vulgus pervagata 
loquitur. Quamquam non negatis nos intellegere 
quid sit voluptas, sed quid ille dicat; e quo efficitur 


® The first quotation is from an unknown comic writer ; 
the second from Caecilius Statius, who makes a ‘heavy 
father’ say ‘Nunc enim demum mihi animus ardet, nunc 
meum cor cumulatur ira’ (quoted in full by Cicero p70 Cael. 
37); the third is from Terence, Heautontim., |. 1, cf. 1§ 3 
above : Chremes’ mild interest in his new neighbour, the 
Self-Tormentor, is rather oddly instanced as an illustration 
of the neutral state of emotion intermediate between mental 
pleasure and pain. 

> The quotation is possibly from Lucilius. 


94 


BOOK II. iv-v 
and him who says 
Now, now my soul with anger burns, 


one of whom is transported with gladness and the 
other tormented with painful emotion, there is the 
intermediate state: 


Though our acquaintanceship is but quite recent,* 


where the speaker feels neither gladness nor sor- 
row; and that similarly between the enjoyment of 
the most desirable bodily pleasures and the endurance 
of the most excruciating pains there is the neutral 
state devoid of either. 

V. “Well, are you satisfied that I have grasped the 
meaning of the terms, or do I still require lessons in 
the use of either Greek or Latin? And even supposing 
that I do not understand what Epicurus says, still I 
believe I really have a very clear knowledge of Greek, 
so that perhaps it is partly his fault for using such 
unintelligible language. Obscurity is excusable on 
two grounds: it may be deliberately adopted, as in 
the case of Heraclitus, 


The surname of the Obscure who bore, 
So dark his philosophic lore’; 


or the obscurity may be due to the abstruseness of 
the subject and not of the style—an instance of 
this is Plato’s Timaeus. But Epicurus, in my opinion, 
has no intention of not speaking plainly and clearly 
if he can, nor is he discussing a recondite subject 
like natural philosophy, nor a technical subject such 
as mathematics, but a lucid and easy topic, and one 
that is generally familiar already. And yet you 
Epicureans do not deny that we understand what 
pleasure is, but what he means by it; which proves 


95 


16 


17 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


non ut nos non intellegamus quae vis sit istius verbi, 
sed ut ille suo more loquatur, nostrum neglegat. 
Si enim idem dicit quod Hieronymus, qui censet 
summum bonum esse sine ulla molestia vivere, cur 
mavult dicere voluptatem quam vacuitatem doloris, 
ut ille facit, qui quid dicat intellegit? sin autem 
voluptatem putat adiungendam eam quae sit in motu 
(sic enim appellat hance dulcem, ‘in motu, illam 
nihil dolentis, “in stabilitate’), quid tendit? cum 
efficere non possit ut cuiquam qui ipse sibi notus sit, 
hoe est qui suam naturam sensumque perspexerit, 
vacuitas doloris et voluptas idem esse videatur. Hoc 
est vim afferre, Torquate, sensibus, extorquere ex 
animis cognitiones verborum quibus imbuti sumus. 
Quis est enim qui non videat haec esse in natura 
rerum tria? unum cum in voluptate sumus, alterum 
cum in dolore, tertium hoe in quo nune equidem 
sum, credo item vos, nec in dolore nec in voluptate; 
ut in voluptate sit qui epuletur, in dolore qui tor- 
queatur: tu autem inter haec tantam multitudi-— 
nem hominum interiectam non vides nec laetantium 
nec dolentium?” “Non prorsus,” inquit, “ omnesque 
qui sine dolore sint in voluptate, et ea quidem sum- 


5 ce . . 
ma, esse dico.” Ergo in eadem voluptate eum qui 


a A reminiscence of the maxim yv@0 ceaurév, ‘know thy- 
self,’ inscribed on the temple of Apollo at Delphi. 
96 


BOOK II. v 


not that we do not understand the real meaning of 
the word, but that Epicurus is speaking an idiom of 
his own and ignoring our accepted terminology. For if Absence of pain 
he means the same as Hieronymus, who holds that pe 
the Chief Good is a life entirely devoid of trouble, pleasure and 
why does he insist on using the term pleasure, and ?*” 
not rather ‘freedom from pain,’ as does Hieronymus, 
who understands his own meaning? Whereas if his 
view is that the End must include kinetic pleasure 
(for so he describes this vivid sort of pleasure, calling 
it kinetic’ in contrast with the pleasure of freedom 
from pain, which is ‘static’ pleasure), what is he 
really aiming at? For he cannot possibly convince 
any person who knows himself*—anyone who has 
studied his own nature and sensations—that freedom 
from pain is the same thing as pleasure. To identify 
them, Torquatus, is to do violence to the senses ; it 
is uprooting from our minds the knowledge of the 
‘meaning of words imbedded in them. Who is not 
aware that the world of experience contains these 
three states of feeling: first, the enjoyment of 
pleasure ; second, the sensation of pain; and third, 
which is my own condition and doubtless also yours 
at the present moment, the absence of both pleasure 
and pain? Pleasure is the feeling of a man eating 
a good dinner, pain that of one being broken on 
the rack; but do you really not see that inter- 
mediate between those two extremes lies ‘a vast 
‘multitude of persons who are feeling neither gratifi- 
cation nor pain?” “T certainly do not,” said he; 
““T maintain that all who are without pain are 
enjoying pleasure, and what is more the highest 
form of pleasure.” “Then you think that a man 
who, not being himself thirsty, mixes a drink for 


H 97 


18 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
alteri misceat mulsum ipse non sitiens, et eum qui 
illud sitiens bibat?” 

VI. Tum ille: “Finem, inquit, interrogandi, si 
videtur; quod quidem ego a principio ita me malle 
dixeram, hoe ipsum providens, dialecticas captiones.” 
ce i re 22 © ee * * 

Rhetorice igitur,’ inquam, nos mavis quam diale- 


ctice disputare?” “Quasi vero,”’ inquit, “ perpetua 
oratio rhetorum solum, non etiam philosophorum sit.” 
“Zenonis est,” inquam, “hoe Stoici; omnem vim 
loquendi, ut iam ante Aristoteles, in duas tributam 
esse partes, rhetoricam palmae, dialecticam pugni 
similem esse dicebat, quod latius loquerentur rhetores, 
dialectici autem compressius. Obsequar igitur volun- 
tati tuae dicamque si potero rhetorice, sed hac rhe- 
torica philosophorum, non nostra illa forensi, quam 
necesse est, cum populariter loquatur, esse interdum 
paulo hebetiorem. Sed dum dialecticam, Torquate, 
contemnit Epicurus, quae una continet omnem et 
perspiciendi quid in quaque re sit scientiam et 
iudicandi quale quidque sit et ratione ac via dispu- 
tandi, ruit in dicendo, ut mihi quidem videtur, nec 
ea quae docere vult ulla arte distinguit; ut haec ipsa 
quae modo loguebamur. Summum a vobis bonum 


voluptas dicitur. Aperiendum est igitur quid sit- 
98 


BOOK II. v-vi 


- another, feels the same pleasure as the thirsty man 


who drinks it?”’ 

VI. At this Torquatus exclaimed : “ A truce to ques- 
tion and answer, if you do not mind. I told you 
from the beginning that I preferred continuous 
speeches. I foresaw exactly what would happen; I 
knew we should come to logic-chopping and quib- 
bling.”” “Then,” said I, “would you sooner we 
adopted the rhetorical and not the dialectical mode 
of debate?” “Why,” he cried, “just as if continuous 
discourse were proper for orators only, and not for 
philosophers as well!” “That is the view of Zeno 
the Stoic,’ I rejoined; “he used to say that the 
faculty of speech in general falls into two depart- 
ments, as Aristotle had already laid down; and that 
Rhetoric was like the palm of the hand, Dialectic 
like the closed fist; because rhetoricians employ an 
expansive style, and dialecticians one that is more 
compressed. So I will defer to your wish, and will 
speak if I can in the rhetorical manner, but with the 
rhetoric of the philosophers, not with the sort which 
we use inthe law-courts. The latter being addressed 
to the public ear must necessarily sometimes be a little 
lacking in subtlety. Epicurus however, Torquatus, 
in his contempt for dialectic, which comprises at once 
the entire science of discerning the essence of 
things, of judging their qualities, and of conducting 


Torquatus de- 
ciining fur- 
ther questions, 
Cicero proceeds 
continuously. 


Epicurus shoul 
have professed 
dual End, plea- 
sure plus 

absence of pain 


a systematic and logical argument,—Epicurus, I say, . 


makes havoc of his exposition. He entirely fails, in 
my opinion at all events, to impart scientific precision 
to the doctrines he desires to convey. Take for 
example the particular tenet that we have just been 
discussing. The Chief Good is pleasure, say you Epi- 
cureans. Well then, you must explain what pleasure 


n2 99 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


voluptas; aliter enim explicari quod quaeritur 


non potest. Quam si explicavisset, non tam haesi- 


19 


taret; aut enim eam voluptatem tueretur quam 
Aristippus, id- est qua sensus dulciter ac iucunde 
movetur, quam etiam pecudes si loqui possent apel- 
larent voluptatem; aut, si magis placeret suo more 
loqui quam ut 


Omnes Danai atque Mycenenses, 
Attica pubes, 


reliquique Graeci qui hoe anapaesto citantur, hoc 
non dolere solum voluptatis nomine appellaret, illud 
Aristippeum contemneret; aut, si utrumque probaret, 
ut probat, coniungeret doloris vacuitatem cum volu- 
ptate et duobus ultimis uteretur. Multi enim et 
magni philosophi haec ultima bonorum iuncta fece- 
runt; ut Aristoteles! virtutis usum cum vitae perfe- 
ctae prosperitate coniunxit, Callipho adiunxit ad 
honestatem voluptatem, Diodorus ad eandem hone- 
statem addidit vacuitatem doloris. Idem fecisset 
Epicurus, si sententiam hance, quae nune Hiereonymi 
est, coniunxisset cum Aristippi vetere sententia. Ili 
enim inter se dissentiunt; propterea singulis finibus 
utuntur, et, cum uterque Graece egregie loquatur, nec 
Aristippus, qui voluptatem summum bonum dicit, in 
voluptate ponit non dolere, neque Hieronymus, qui 


1ut Aristoteles; inf. MSS. ut Aristoteles qui. 


a From some tragedy unknown. 


100 


BOOK II. vi 


is; otherwise it is impossible to make clear the sub- 
ject under investigation. Had Epicurus cleared up 
the meaning of pleasure, he would not have fallen 
into such confusion. Either he would have upheld 
pleasure in the same sense as Aristippus, that is, an 
agreeable and delightful excitation of the sense, which 
is what even dumb cattle, if they could speak, would 
call pleasure; or, if he preferred to use an idiom of 
his own, instead of speaking the language of the 


Danaans one and all, men of Mycenae, 
Scions of Athens,* 


and the rest of the Greeks invoked in these anapaests, 
he might have confined the name of pleasure to this 
state of freedom from pain, and despised pleasure as 
Aristippus understands it; or else, if he approved of 
both sorts of pleasure, as in fact he does, then he 
ought to combine together pleasure and absence of 
pain, and profess two ultimate Goods. Many dis- 
tinguished philosophers have as a matter of fact thus 
interpreted the ultimate Good as composite. For 
instance, Aristotle combined the exercise of virtue 
with well-being lasting throughout a complete life- 
time; Callipho united pleasure with moral worth; 
Diodorus to moral worth added freedom from pain. 
Epicurus would have followed their example, had he 
coupled the view we are discussing, which as it is 
belongs to Hieronymus, with the old doctrine of 
Aristippus. For there is a real difference of opinion 
between them, and accordingly each sets up his own 
separate End; and as both speak unimpeachable 
Greek, Aristippus, who calls pleasure the Chief 
Good, does not count absence of pain as pleasure, 
while Hieronymus, who makes the Chief Good 
101 


20 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
summum bonum statuit non dolere, voluptatis nomine 
umquam utitur pro illa indolentia, quippe qui ne in 
expetendis quidem rebus numeret voluptatem. 

VII. “Duae sunt enim res quoque, ne tu verba 
solum putes. Unum est sine dolore esse, alterum 
cum voluptate ; vos ex his tam dissimilibus rebus non 
modo nomen unum (nam id facilius paterer), sed 
etiam rem unam ex duabus facere conamini, quod 
fieri nullo modo potest. Hic, qui utrumque probat, 
ambobus debuit uti, sicut facit re neque tamen divi- 
dit verbis. Cum enim eam ipsam voluptatem quam 
eodem nomine omnes appellamus laudat locis pluri- 
mis, audet dicere ne suspicari quidem se ullum bonum 
seiunctum ab illo Aristippeo genere voluptatis; at- 
que ibi hoe dicit ubi omnis eius est oratio de summo 
bono. In alio vero libro, in quo breviter compre- 
hensis gravissimis sententiis quasi oracula edidisse 
sapientiae dicitur, scribit his verbis, quae nota tibi 
profecto, Torquate, sunt (quis enim vestrum non edi- 
dicit Epicuri xvpias Sd&as, id est quasi maxime ratas, 
quia gravissimae sint ad beate vivendum breviter 
enuntiatae sententiae ?) animadverte igitur, rectene 
hane sententiam interpreter: “Si ea quae sunt 
luxuriosis eflficientia voluptatum liberarent eos deo- 


rum et mortis et doloris metu docerentque qui 
102 


BOOK IL. vi-vii 


absence of pain, never employs the name pleasure 
to denote this negation of pain, and in fact does 
not reckon pleasure among things desirable at all. 
VII. “For you must not suppose it is merely a Butasit is he 
verbal distinction: the things themselves are differ- ‘tated these 


‘ ee ; two thi 
ent. To be without pain is one thing, to feel one; for (1) 


pleasure another; yet you Epicureans try to combine ie tea 
these quite dissimilar feelings—not merely under a fight sensual. 
single name (for that I could more easily tolerate), be cantina 
but as actually being a single thing, instead of really ™™"°? 
two; which is absolutely impossible. Epicurus, 
approving both sorts of pleasure, ought to have re- 
cognized both sorts; as he really does in fact, 
though he does not distinguish them in words. In 
a number of passages where he is commending that 
real pleasure which all of us call by the same name, 
he goes so far as to say that he cannot even imagine 
any Good that is not connected with pleasure of the 
kind intended by Aristippus. This is the language 
that he holds in the discourse dealing solely with 
the topic of the Chief Good. Then there is an- 
other treatise containing his most important doc- 
trines in a compendious form, in which we are 
told he uttered the very oracles of Wisdom. Here 
he writes the following words, with which you, 
Torquatus, are of course familiar (for every good 
Epicurean has got by heart the master’s Kuriai Doxai 
or Authoritative Doctrines, since these brief aphor- 
isms or maxims are held to be of sovereign efficacy 
for happiness). So I will ask you kindly to notice 
whether I translate this maxim correctly: ‘If the 
things in which sensualists find pleasure could deliver 
them from the fear of the gods and of death and 
pain, and could teach them to set bounds to their 
108 


22 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


essent fines cupiditatum, nihil haberemus quod re- 
prehenderemus,’ cum undique complerentur volupta- 
tibus nec haberent ulla ex parte aliquid aut dolens 
aut aegrum, id est autem malum.’”’ 

Hoc loco tenere se Triarius non potuit. “Obsecro,” 
inquit, ““ Torquate, haec dicit Epicurus?” (quod mihi 
quidem visus est, cum sciret, velle tamen confitentem 
audire Torquatum). At ille non pertimuit saneque 
fidenter: ““Istis quidem ipsis verbis,”’ inquit ; “sed 
quid sentiat non videtis.” “Si alia sentit,’ inquam, 
“alia loquitur, numquam intellegam quid sentiat ; 
sed plane dicit quod intellegit. Idque si ita dicit, 
non esse reprendendos luxuriosos si sapientes sint, 
dicit absurde, similiter et si dicat non reprendendos 
parricidas si nec cupidi sint nec deos metuant nec 
mortem nec dolorem. Et tamen quid attinet luxu- 
riosis ullam exceptionem dari aut fingere aliquos qui, 
cum luxuriose viverent, a summo philosopho non re- 
prenderentur eo nomine dumtaxat, cetera caverent? 
Sed tamen nonne reprenderes, Epicure, luxuriosos 
ob eam ipsam causam quod ita viverent ut perse- 
querentur cuiusquemodi voluptates, cum esset prae- 
sertim, ut ais tu, summa voluptas nihil dolere? 
Atqui reperiemus asotos primum ita non religiosos 
ut ‘edint de patella,’ deinde ita mortem non ti- 
mentes ut illud in ore habeant ex Hymnide: 


1 haberemus: inf. MSS. haereremus ; quod reprehenderemus 
added by Mdv., cf. § 23. 


aApparently proverbial for shameless gluttony. The 
patella was used for offerings of food made to the house- 
hold gods, 

bA comedy by Caecilius Statius, translated from the 
Greek of Menander. 


104 


BOOK II. vii 


desires, we should have no reason to blame them, 
since on every hand they would be abundantly sup- 
plied with pleasures, and on no side would be exposed 
to any pain or grief, which are the sole evil.’”’ 
At this. point Triarius could contain himself no 
longer. “ Seriously now, Torquatus,’ he broke out, 
“does Epicurus really say that?” (For my own 
part, I believe that he knew it to be true, but 
wanted to hear Torquatus admit it.) Torquatus, 
nothing daunted, answered with complete assurance: 
* Certainly, ee are his very words. But you 
don’ t understand his meaning.” “Oh,” I retorted, 
“if he means one thing and says another, I never 
shall understand his meaning. But he dees not; 
he states the case clearly as he understands it. If 
his meaning is that sensualists are not to be blamed 
provided they are wise men, he is talking nonsense. 
He might as well say that parricides are not to be 
blamed provided they are free from avarice and 
from fear of the gods, of death and of pain. Even 
so, what is the point of granting the sensual any 
saving clause? Why imagine certain fictitious per- 
sons who, though living sensually, would not be 
blamed by the wisest of philosophers, at all events 
for their sensuality, and who avoided other faults? 
All the same, Epicurus, would not you blame sen- 
sualists for the very reason that their one object in 
life is the pursuit of pleasure of any and every sort, 
especially as according to you the highest pleasure 
is to feel no pain? Yet we shall find profligates in 
the first place so devoid of religious scruples that 
they will ‘ eat the food on the paten,’* and secondly 
so fearless of death as to be always quoting the lines 


from the Hymnis”: 


105 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


Mihi sex menses satis sunt vitae; septimum Orco 
spondeo. 


Iam doloris medicamenta illa Epicurea tamquam de 
narthecio proment: “Si gravis, brevis: si longus, 
levis.’ Unum nescio, quomodo possit, si luxuriosus 
sit, finitas cupiditates habere. 

VIII. “Quid ergo attinet dicere: ‘Nihil haberem 
quod reprenderem, si finitas cupiditates haberent?’ 
Hoc est dicere: “Non reprenderem asotos si non 
essent asoti.’ Isto modo ne improbos quidem si es- 
sent boni viri. Hic homo severus luxuriam ipsam 
per se reprendendam non putat. Et hercule, Tor- 
quate, ut verum loquamur, si summum bonum volu- 
ptas est, rectissime non putat. Nolim enim mihi 
fingere asotos, ut soletis, qui in mensam vomant et 
qui de conviviis auferantur crudique postridie se 
rursus ingurgitent, qui solem, ut aiunt, nec occiden- 
tem umquam viderint nec orientem, qui consumptis 
patrimoniis egeant. Nemo nostrum istius generis 
asotos iucunde putat vivere. Mundos, elegantes, 
optimis cocis, pistoribus, piscatu, aucupio, venatione, 
his omnibus exquisitis, vitantes cruditatem, quibus 
“vinum defusum e pleno sit, t hirsizon! (ut ait Luci- 
lius) cui nihil dum sit vis et sacculus abstulerit,’ ad- 

Lhirsizon, hirsyphon or the like, MSS.; and for dum sit 
some have dempsit, dempserit. No plausible reconstruction 


has been suggested; but the reference seems to be to the 


process of straining wine to remove the lees and get rid of 
vis, harshness of flavour. 


aCf. I § 4o. 
106 


BOOK II. vii-viii 
_ Enough for me six months of life, the seventh to 
Hell I pledge! 

Or if they want an antidote to pain, out comes from 
their medicine-chest the great Epicorcan panacea, 

“Short if it’s strong, light if it’s long.’ Only one 
point I can’t make out: how can a man at once be 
a sensualist and keep his desires within bounds? 

VIII. “What then is the point of saying ‘I should 
have no fault to find with them if they kept their 
desires within bounds’? That is tantamount to 
saying ‘I should not blame the profligate if they 
were not profligate.’ On that principle you would 
not blame the dishonest either, if they were upright 
men. Here is a rigid moralist, who thinks that 
sensuality is not in itself blameworthy! And I 
profess, Torquatus, on the hypothesis that pleasure 
is the Chief Good he is perfectly justified in think- 
ing so. I had rather not draw disgusting pictures, 
as you are so fond of doing, of debauchees who are 
sick at table, have to be carried home from dinner- 
parties, and next day gorge themselves again before 
they have recovered from the effects of the night 
before; men who, as the saying goes, have never seen 
either sunset or sunrise; men who run through their 
inheritance and sink into penury. None of us sup- 
poses that profligates of that description live plea- 
santly. No, but fastidious gourmets, with first-rate 
chefs and confectioners, fish, birds, game, and all of 
phe very best; careful of their digestion; with 
Wine in flask - 
Decanted from a new-broach’d cask, . 

as Lucilius has it, 
Wine of tang bereft, 


All harshness in the strainer left; 
107 


24 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 

hibentes ludos et quae sequuntur, illa quibus detractis 
clamat Epicurus se nescire quid sit bonum; adsint 
etiam formosi pueri qui ministrent; respondeat his 
vestis, argentum, Corinthium, locus ipse, aedificium ; 
— hos ergo asotos bene quidem vivere aut beate 
numquam dixerim. Ex quo efficitur non ut voluptas 
ne sit voluptas, sed ut voluptas non sit summum 
bonum. Nec ille qui Diogenem Stoicum adulescens, 
post autem Panaetium audierat, Laelius eo dictus est 
sapiens quod non intellegeret quid suavissimum esset 
(nec enim sequitur ut cui cor sapiat ei’ non sapiat 
palatus), sed quia parvi id duceret. 


O lapathe, ut iactare nec es satis cognitus qui sis! 
In quo Laelius clamores codos ille solebat 
Edere, compellans gumias ex ordine nostros. 


Praeclare‘Laelius, et recte codds, illudque vere: 


€ . . . . . 
O Publi, o gurges, Galloni, es homo miser,’ inquit. 

‘ ga . . Sa 5 
Cenasti in vita numquam bene, cum omnia in ista 
Consumis squilla atque acipensere cum decimano.’ 


Is haec loquitur qui in voluptate nihil ponens negat 


eum bene cenare qui omnia ponat in voluptate; et 


aThis passage of Lucilius is alluded to by Horace Sat. 
2. 2. 46, where it appears that Gallonius was an auctioneer, 
notorious for having introduced acifenser (sturgeon ?) to 
Roman tables. 


108 


BOOK II. viii 


with the accompaniment of dramatic performances 

and their usual sequel, the pleasures apart from 
which Epicurus, as he loudly proclaims, does not 

know what Good is; give them also beautiful boys 

to wait upon them, with drapery, silver, Corinthian 
bronzes, and the scene of the feast, the banqueting- 

room, all in keeping; take profligates of this sort; 

that these live well or enjoy happiness I will never 

allow. The conclusion is, not that pleasure is not 
pleasure but that pleasure is not the Chief Good. 

The famous Laelius, who had been a pupil of Dio- 
genes the Stoic in is youth and later of Panaetius, yet really 
was not called ‘the Wise’ because he was no judge Pe mene 
of good eating (for a wise mind is not necessarily ness; 
incompatible with a nice palate), but because he 

set little store by it. 


Dinner of herbs, how all the earth 
Derides thee and ignores thy worth! 
Tho’ Laelius, our old Roman sage, 
Shouted thy praises to the age, 

Our gourmands one by one arraigning. 


Bravo, Laelius, ‘sage’ indeed. How true too the 
lines: 
“O bottomless gulf of gluttony, 
Publius Gallonius,’ cried he, 
‘You're a poor devil, truth to tell, 
Who never in your life dined well, 
No, never once, although you pay 
A fortune for a fish away, 
Lobster or sturgeon Brobdingnagian. 


The speaker is a man who, setting no value on 

pleasure, declares that he who makes pleasure his 

all in all cannot dine well. Observe, he does not 
109 


7a 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


tamen non negat libenter umquam cenasse Gallo- 
nium (mentiretur enim), sed bene. Ita graviter et 
severe voluptatem secernit a bono. Ex quo illud 
efficitur, qui bene cenent omnes libenter cenare, qui 
libenter, non continuo bene. Semper Laelius bene. 
Quid bene? Dicet Lucilius: 


cocto, 
Condito, 
sed cedo caput cenae: 
sermone bono, 
quid ex eo? 


si quaeris, libenter; 


veniebat enim ad cenam ut animo quieto satiaret 
desideria naturae. Recte ergo is negat umquam 
bene cenasse Gallonium, recte miserum, cum prae- 
sertim in eo omne studium consumeret. Quem 
libenter cenasse nemo negat. Cur igitur non bene? 
Quia quod bene, id recte, frugaliter, honeste; ille 
porro prave,! nequiter, turpiter cenabat; non 
igitur bene.” Nec lapathi suavitatem acipenseri 
Galloni Laelius anteponebat, sed suavitatem ipsam 
neglegebat; quod non faceret si in voluptate sum- 
mum bonum poneret. 

IX. Semovenda est igitur voluptas non solum ut 
recta sequamini sed etiam ut loqui deceat fruga- 


‘porro male prave MSS.; male Mdv. hrackets. 
* bene inserted by Mdv. 


110 


BOOK II. viii-ix 


3 say Gallonius never dined pleasantly (which oer 


be untrue), but never well. So strict and severe is 
the distinction he draws between pleasure and good. 


_ The conclusion is that though all who dine well dine 
pleasantly, yet he who dines pleasantly does not 


“Tt 


necessarily dine well. Laelius always dined well. 
What does well’ mean? Lucilius shall say: 


Well-cook’d, well-season’d, 
ah, but now the principal dish: 
; with a deal 

Of honest talk, 


and the result: 
a pleasant meal; 


for he came to dinner that with mind at ease he 
might satisfy the wants of Nature.  Laelius is 
right therefore in denying that Gallonius ever 
dined well, right in calling him unhappy, and that 


- too although all his thoughts were centred on the 


pleasures of the table. No one will deny that he 
dined pleasantly. Then why not ‘well’? Because 
‘well’ implies rightly, respectably, worthily ; whereas 
Gallonius dined wrongly, disreputably, basely ; there- 
fore he did not dine well. It was not that Laelius 
thought his ‘dinner of herbs’ more palatable than 
Gallonius’s sturgeon, but that he disregarded the 
pleasures of the palate altogether; and this he could 
not have done, had he made the Chief Good consist 
in pleasure. 

1X. “Consequently you are bound to discard plea- 
sure, not merely if you are to guide your conduct 
aright, but even if you are to be able consistently to 
use the language of respectable people. Can we 

111 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


liter. Possumusne ergo in vita summum bonum di- 
cere quod ne in cena’ quidem posse videamur ? 
Quomodo autem philosophus loquitur ? “Tria genera 
cupiditatum, naturales et necessariae, naturales et 
non necessariae, nec naturales nec necessariae.’ 
Primum divisit ineleganter ; duo enim genera quae 
erant, fecit tria. Hoc est non dividere sed frangere. 
Qui haec didicerunt quae ille contemnit, sic solent : 
‘Duo genera cupiditatum, naturales et inanes; 
naturalium duo, necessariae et non necessariae.’ 
Confecta res esset. Vitiosum est enim in dividendo 
partem in genere numerare. Sed hoe sane conce- 
damus. Contemnit disserendi elegantiam ; confuse 
loquitur; gerendus est mos, modo recte sentiat. 
Equidem illud ipsum non nimium probo et tantum 
patior, philosophum loqui de cupiditatibus finiendis. 
An potest cupiditas finiri? Tollenda est atque ex- 
trahenda radicitus. Quis est enim in quo sit cupi- 
ditas, quin recte cupidus dici possit? Ergo et avarus 
erit, sed finite, et adulter, verum habebit modum, et 
luxuriosus, eodem modo. Qualis ista philosophia est 
quae non interitum afferat pravitatis sed sit contenta 
mediocritate vitiorum? Quamquam in hac divisione 
rem ipsam prorsus probo, elegantiam desidero. Ap- 
pellet haec desideria naturae; cupiditatis nomen 
servet alio, ut eam cum de avaritia, cum de intem- 


‘quod ne in cena Thos. Bentley ; cum id ne in cena Mav. 
with MSS. 


aSee note on Bk. I. § 45, 
112 


—— 


BOOK IL. ix 


possibly therefore call a thing the Chief Good with 
regard to living, when we feel we cannot call it so 
even in regard to dining? But how says our philo- ana moreover 
sopher? ‘The desires are of three kinds, natural Bis three-fold 


classification ot 
and necessary, natural but not necessary, neither Desires is 


natural nor necessary.” To begin with, this is a ma 
clumsy division ; it makes three classes whet there 
are really only two. This is not dividing but 
hacking in pieces. Thinkers trained in the science 
which Epicurus despised usually put it thus: “The 
desires are of two kinds, natural and imaginary?; 
natural desires again fall into two subdivisions, 
necessary and not necessary.’ That would have 
_ rounded it off properly. It is a fault in division to 
reckon a species as a genus. Still, do not let us 
stickle about form. Epicurus despises the -niceties 
of dialectic; he affects a careless style; we must 
humour him in this, provided that his meaning is 
correct. But for my own part! cannot cordially approve, 
I merely tolerate, a philosopher who talks of setting 
bounds to the desires. Is it possible for desire to 
be kept within bounds? It ought to be destroyed, 
uprooted altogether. On your principle there is no 
- form of desire whose possessor could not be morally 
approved. He will be a miser—within limits; an 
adulterer—in moderation; a sensualist—to the 
same extent. What sort of a philosophy is this, 
that instead of dealing wickedness its death-blow, 
is satisfied with moderating our vices? Albeit I 
quite approve the substance of this classification ; it 
is the form of it to which I take exception. Let 
him speak of the first class. as ‘the needs of 
nature, and keep the term ‘desire’ for another 
occasion, to be put on trial for its life when he , 
1 113 


28 


29 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
perantia, cum de maximis vitiis loquetur tamquam 
capitis accuset. 

“Sed haec quidem liberius ab eo dicuntur et 
saepius. Quod equidem non reprendo; est enim 
tanti philosophi tamque nobilis audacter sua de- 
creta defendere. Sed tamen ex eo quod eam volu- 
ptatem quam omnes gentes hoc nomine appellant 
videtur amplexari saepe vehementius, in magnis 
interdum versatur angustiis, ut hominum conscientia 
remota nihil tam turpe sit quod voluptatis causa non 
videatur esse facturus. Deinde ubi erubuit (vis 
enim est permagna naturae), confugit illue ut neget 
accedere quidquam posse ad voluptatem nihil dolen- 
tis. At iste non dolendi status non vocatur voluptas. 
Non laboro, inquit, de nomine.—Quid quod res alia 
tota est >—Reperiam multos vel innumerabiles potius 
non tam curiosos nec tam molestos quam vos estis, 
quibus quidquid velim facile persuadeam.—Quid 
ergo dubitamus quin, si non dolere voluptas sit 
summa, non esse in voluptate dolor sit maximus ? 
cur id non ita fit?—Quia dolori non voluptas con- 
traria est sed doloris privatio. 

X. “Hoe vero non videre, maximo argumento esse 
voluptatem illam, qua sublata neget se intellegere 
omnino quid sit bonum (eam autem ita persequitur : 


quae palato percipiatur, quae auribus,—cetera addit, 
114 


* 


BOOK II. ix-x 


- comes to deal with Avarice, Intemperance, and all 


the major vices. 

“This classification of the desires is then a subject 
on which Epicurus is fond of enlarging. Not that 
I find fault with him for that; we expect so great and 
famous a philosopher to maintain his dogmas boldly. 
But he often seems unduly eager to approve of plea- 
sure in the common acceptation of the term, for this 
occasionally lands him in a very awkward position. 
It conveys the impression that there is no action so 
base but that he would be ready toe commit it for 
the sake of pleasure, provided he were guaranteed 
against detection. Afterwards, put to the blush by 
this conclusion (for the force of natural instinct after 
all is overwhelming), he turns for refuge to the 
assertion that nothing can enhance the pleasure of 
freedom from pain. Oh but,’ we urge, your static 
condition of feeling no pain is not what is termed 
pleasure at all.’—‘ I don’t trouble about the name,’ 
he replies.—‘ Well, but the thing itself is abso- 
lutely different.’ Oh, I can find hundreds and 
thousands of people less precise and tiresome than 


- yourselves, who will be glad to accept as true any- 


thing I like to teach them.’—‘ Then why do we not 
go a step further and argue that, if not to feel pain 
is the highest pleasure, therefore not to feel pleasure 
is the greatest pain? Why does not this hold good ?’ 
—‘ Because the opposite of pain is not pleasure but 
absence of pain.’ 

X. “But fancy his failing to see how strong a proof 
it is that the sort of pleasure, without which he 
declares he has no idea at all what Good means (and 
he defines it in detail as the pleasure of the palate, 
of the ears, and subjoins the other kinds of 

12 115 


(2) while else- 
where he falls 
back on absence 
of pain as the 
Chief Good. 


If it be so, why 
do we desire 
pleasure? 


30 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 

quae si appelles, honos praefandus sit)—hoc igitur, 
quod solum bonum severus et gravis philosophus no- 
vit, idem non videt ne expetendum quidem esse, 
quod eam voluptatem hoc eodem auctore non desi- 
deremus, cum dolore careamus! Quam haec sunt 
contraria! Hic si definire, si dividere didicisset, si 
loquendi vim, si denique consuetudinem verborum 
teneret, numquam in tantas salebras incidisset. Nune 
vides quid faciat. Quam nemo umquam voluptatem 
appellavit, appellat; quae duo sunt, unum facit. Hane 
in motu voluptatem (sic enim has suaves et quasi 
dulces voluptates appellat) interdum ita extenuat ut 
M’. Curium putes loqui, interdum ita laudat ut quid 
praeterea sit bonum neget se posse ne suspicari qui- 
dem. Quae iam oratio non a philosopho aliquo sed a 
censore opprimenda est; non est enim vitium in ora- 
tione solum sed etiam in moribus. Luxuriam non 
reprendit, modo sit vacua infinita cupiditate et timore. 
Hoc loco discipulos quaerere videtur, ut qui asoti esse 
velint philosophi ante fiant. 

<a primo, ut opinor, animantium ortu petitur origo 
summi boni. Simul atque natum animal est, gaudet 
voluptate et eam appetit ut bonum, aspernatur 
dolorem ut malum. De malis autem et bonis ab 
iis animalibus quae nondum depravata sint ait opti- 


me iudicari. Haec et tu ita posuisti et verba 


116 


BOOK It=. 


_ pleasure, which cannot be specified without an 
apology),—he fails, I say, to see that this, the sole 

Good with which our strict and serious philosopher 

is acquainted, is actually not even desirable, in- 
asmuch as on his own showing we feel no need of 

this sort of pleasure, so long as we are free from 

pain! How inconsistent this is! If only Epicurus This incon- 
had studied Definition and Division, if he understood gone toin 
the meaning of Predication or even the customary ™rality. 
uses of terms, he would never have fallen into such a 
quandary. As it is, you see what he does. He 

calls a thing pleasure that no one ever called by that 

name before ; he confounds two things that are dis- 

tinct. The ‘kinetic’ sort of pleasure (for so he 

terms the delightful and so to speak sweet-flavoured 
pleasures we are considering) at one moment he so 
disparages that you would think you were listening 

to Manius Curius, while at another moment he so 

extols it that he tells us he is incapable even of 
imagining what other good there can be. Now that 

is language that does not call for a philosopher to 
answer it,—it ought to be put down by the police. 

His morality is at fault, and not only his logic. He 

does not censure profligacy, provided it be free 

from unbridled desire, and from fear of conse- 
quences. Here he seems to be making a bid for 
disciples: the would-be roué need only turn philo- 
sopher. — 

“For the origin of the Chief Good he goes back, I Again, if in- 
understand, to the birth of living things. As soon as epee 
an animal is born, it delights in pleasure and seeks it ee cigeat Ae 
as a good, but shuns pain as an evil. Creatures as yet Chief Good. 
uncorrupted are according to him the best judges of 
Good and Evil. That isthe position both as you ex- 

rer 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 

vestra sunt. Quam multa vitiosa! Summum enim 
bonum et malum vagiens puer utra voluptate 
diiudicabit, stante an movente? quoniam, si dis 
placet, ab Epicuro loqui discimus. Si stante, hoe 
natura videlicet vult, salvam esse se, quod concedi- 
mus; si movente, quod tamen dicitis, nulla turpis 
voluptas erit quae praetermittenda sit, et simul non 
proficiscitur animal illud modo natum a summa vo- 
luptate, quae est a te posita in non dolendo. Nec 
tamen argumentum hoc Epicurus a parvis petivit aut 
etiam a bestiis, quae putat esse specula naturae, ut 
diceret ab iis duce natura hance voluptatem expeti 
nihil dolendi. Neque enim haec movere potest ap- 
petitum animi, nec ullum habet ictum quo pellat 
animum status hic non dolendi (itaque in hoc eodem 
peccat Hieronymus), at ille pellit qui permulcet sen- 
sum voluptate. Itaque Epicurus semper hoc utitur 
ut probet voluptatem natura expeti, quod ea volu- 
ptas quae in motu sit et parvos ad se alliciat et bestias, 
non illa stabilis in qua tantum inest nihil dolere. 
Qui igitur convenit ab alia voluptate dicere naturam 
proficisci, in alia summum bonum ponere? 

XI. “Bestiarum vero nullum iudicium puto. Quam- 
vis enim depravatae non sint, pravae tamen esse pos- 
sunt. Ut bacillum aliud est inflexum et incurvatum 


de industria, aliud ita natum, sic ferarum natura non 
118 


‘tw 


BOOK II. x-xi 


_ pounded it and as it is expressed in the phraseology of 
your school. What a mass of fallacies! Which kind 
of pleasure will it be that guides a mewling infant 
to distinguish between the Chief Good and Evil, 
“ static’ pleasure or ‘kinetic’ ?—since we learn our 
language, heaven help us! from Epicurus. If the 
“ static’ kind, the natural instinct is clearly towards 
Be preetrvation: as we agree; but if the ‘kinetic,’ 
and this is what nevertheless you maintain, then no 
pleasure will be too base to be accepted; and also 
our new-born animal in this case does not find its 
earliest motive in the highest form of pleasure, since 
this on your showing consists in absence of pain. 
For this latter doctrine, however, Epicurus cannot 
have gone to children nor yet to animals, which ac- 
cording to him give a true reflection of nature; he 
could hardly say that natural instinct guides the 
young to desire the pleasure of freedom from pain. 
This cannot excite appetition; the ‘static’ condition 
of feeling no pain exerts no driving-power, supplies 
no impulse to the will (so that Hieronymus also is 
wrong here); it is the positive sensation of pleasure 
and delight that furnishes a motive. Accordingly 
Epicurus’s standing argument to prove that pleasure 
is naturally desired is that infants and animals are 
attracted by the ‘kinetic’ sort of pleasure, not the 
* static’ kind which consists merely in freedom from 
pain. Surely then it is inconsistent to say that 
natural instinct starts from one sort of pleasure, but 
that the Chief Good is found in another. 
/ XI. “As for the lower animals, I set no value on th reality, 
their verdict. Their instincts may be wrong, although Lig staeee 
we cannot say they are perverted. One stick has sure, but self- 
been bent and twisted on purpose, another has grown preservation. 
119 


34 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


est illa quidem depravata mala disciplina, sed natura 
sua. Nec vero ut voluptatem expetat natura movet 
infantem, sed tantum ut se ipse diligat, ut integrum 
se salvumque velit. Omne enim animal, simul est 
ortum,' et se ipsum et omnes partes suas diligit, du- 
asque quae maximae sunt in primis amplectitur, ani- 
mum et corpus, deinde utriusque partes. Nam sunt 
et in animo praecipua quaedam et in corpore, quae 
cum leviter agnovit, tum discernere incipit, ut ea 
quae prima data sint natura appetat asperneturque 
contraria. In his primis naturalibus voluptas insit 
necne, magna quaestio est; nihil vero putare esse 
praeter voluptatem, non membra, non sensus, non 
ingeni motum, non integritatem corporis, non vale- 
tudinem, summae mihi videtur inscitiae. Atque ab 
isto capite fluere necesse est omnem rationem bono- 
rum et malorum. Polemoni et iam ante Aristoteli 
ea prima visa sunt quae paulo ante dixi. Ergo nata 
est sententia veterum Academicorum et Peripateti- 
corum ut finem bonorum dicerent secundum naturam 
vivere, id est virtute adhibita frui primis a natura 
datis. Callipho ad virtutem nihil adiunxit nisi volupta- 
tem; Diodorus vacuitatem doloris. .. . 7 His omnibus 
quos dixi consequentes sunt fines bonorum: Aristippo 
simplex voluptas; Stoicis consentire naturae, quod 
esse volunt e virtute, id est honeste vivere, quod ita 


' simul est ortum a conjecture of Mdv., who prints simul 
[ez] ortwm est with MSS. 
*Mdv. marks a lacuna. A sentence has been lost indi- 


cating the ‘primary objects of desire’ of the philosophers 
next mentioned. 


aji.e. soundness of the limbs and of the senses. 


120 


BOOK II. xi 


crooked; similarly the nature of wild animals, though 
not indeed corrupted by bad education, is corrupt of 
its own nature. Again in the infant the natural in- 
stinct is not to seek pleasure; its instinct is merely 
towards self-regard, self-preservation and protection 
frominjury. Every living creature, from the moment 
of birth, loves itself and all its members; primarily 
this self-regard embraces the two main divisions of 
mind and body, and subsequently the parts of each 
of these. Both mind and body have certain excel- 
lences; of these the young animal grows vaguely 
conscious, and later begins to discriminate, and to 
seek for the primary endowments of Nature and shun 
their opposites. Whether the list of these primary But in any case 
natural objects of desire includes pleasure or not is a eae 
much debated question; but to hold that it includes bases his End 
3 3 on the primary 
nothing else but pleasure, neither the limbs, nor the instincts as he 
senses,* nor mental activity, nor bodily integrity nor oe 
health, seems to me to be the height of stupidity. 
And on one’s view as to the objects of instinctive 
desire must depend one’s whole theory of Goods and 
Evils. Polemo, and also before him Aristotle, held that 
the primary objects were the ones I have just men- 
tioned. Thus arose the doctrine of the Old Academy 
and of the Peripatetics, maintaining that the End of 
Goods is to live in accordance with Nature, that is, to 
enjoy the primary gifts of Nature’s bestowal with the 
accompaniment of virtue. Callipho coupled with virtue 
pleasure alone; Diodorus freedom from pain.... 
In the case of all the philosophers mentioned, their 
End of Goods logically follows: with Aristippus 
it is pleasure pure and simple; with the Stoics, 
harmony with Nature, which they interpret as mean- 
ing virtuous or morally good life, and further explain 
121 


35 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
interpretantur, vivere cum intellegentia rerum earum 
quae natura evenirent, eligentem ea quae essent 
secundum naturam reicientemque contraria. Ita tres 
sunt fines expertes honestatis, unus Aristippi vel 
Epicuri, alter Hieronymi, Carneadi tertius; tres in 
quibus honestas cum aliqua accessione, Polemonis, 
Calliphontis, Diodori; una simplex, cuius Zeno auctor, 
posita in decore tota, id est in honestate. (Nam 
Pyrrho, Aristo, Erillus iam diu abiecti.) Reliqui sibi 
constiterunt, ut extrema cum initiis convenirent, ut 
Aristippo voluptas, Hieronymo doloris vacuitas, Car- 
neadi frui principiis naturalibus esset extremum ; 
XII. Epicurus autem cum in prima commendatione 
voluptatem dixisset, si eam quam Aristippus, idem 
tenere debuit ultimum bonorum quod ille; sin eam 
quam Hieronymus, fecisset idem ut voluptatem illam 
Aristippi in prima commendatione poneret?? 

“Nam quod ait sensibus ipsis. iudicari voluptatem 
bonum esse, dolorem malum, plus tribuit sensibus 
quam nobis leges permittunt cum? privatarum litium 
iudices sumus. Nihil enim possumus iudicare nisi 
quod est nostri iudici; in quo frustra iudices solent, 


- . ¢a . . 
cum sententiam pronuntiant, addere: si quid mei 


\Aristippi... poneret ? ed.;[Aristippi].. . poneret. Mdv., 
Miller. 
* cum inserted here by Mdv., after Zitiwm by Orelli. 
122 


wt 


BOOK II. xi-xii 
_ this as meaning to live with an understanding of the 
natural course of events, selecting things that are in 
accordance with Nature and rejecting the opposite. 
Thus there are three Ends that do not include 
moral worth, one that of Aristippus or Epicurus, the 
second that of Hieronymus, and the third that of 
Carneades; three that comprise moral goodness to- 
gether with some additional element, those of Polemo, 
Callipho and Diodorus; and one theory that is simple, 
~ of which Zeno was the author, and which is based 
entirely on propriety, that is, on moral worth. (As 
for Pyrrho, Aristo and Erillus, they have long ago 
been exploded.) All of these but Epicurus were 
consistent, and made their final Ends agree with their 
first principles,—Aristippus holding the End to be 
Pleasure, Hieronymus freedom from pain, Carneades 
the enjoyment of the primary natural objects. 
XII. Whereas Epicurus, if in saying that pleasure so that Epicurus 
was the primary object of attraction, he meant sls fe aa 
pleasure in the sense of Aristippus, ought to have ao pp 
maintained the same ultimate Good as Aristippus ; from the 
or if he made pleasure in the sense of Hieronymus his ee 
Chief Good, should he at the same time have allowed pe ie ees 
himself to wie the former kind of pleasure, that of S 
Aristippus, the primary attraction? 

“The fact is that when he says that the verdict of Not the senses, 


but the reason 
the senses themselves decides pleasure to be good and must decide the 


pain evil, he assigns more authority to the senses than Fo end es 
the law allows to us when we sit as judges in private Virtue. 

suits. We cannot decide any issue not within our 
jurisdiction ; and there is not really any point in the 

proviso which judges are fond of adding to their ver- 

dicts: ‘if it be a matter within my jurisdiction,’ for 


if it were not within their jurisdiction, the verdict 
123 


38 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
iudici est’; si enim non fuit eorum iudici, nihilo 
magis hoc non addito illud est iudicatum. Quid 
iudicant sensus? Dulce, amarum, leve, asperum, 
prope, longe, stare, movere, quadratum, rotundum. 
Aequam!? igitur pronuntiabit sententiam ratio, ad- 
hibita primum divinarum humanarumque rerum 
scientia, quae potest appellari rite sapientia, deinde 
adiunctis virtutibus, quas ratio rerum omnium do- 
minas, tu voluptatum satellites et ministras esse 
voluisti; quarum adeo omnium ex” sententia pro- 
nuntiabit primum de voluptate, nihil esse ei loci, 
non modo ut sola ponatur in summi boni sede quam 
quaerimus, sed ne illo quidem modo ut ad honesta- 
tem applicetur. De vacuitate doloris eadem sen- 
tentia erit. Reicietur etiam Carneades, nec ulla de 
summo bono ratio aut voluptatis non dolendive par- 
ticeps aut honestatis expers probabitur. Ita relin- 
quet duas, de quibus etiam atque etiam consideret. 
Aut enim statuet nihil esse bonum nisi honestum, 
nihil malum nisi turpe, cetera aut omnino_ nihil 
habere momenti aut tantum ut nec expetenda nec 
fugienda sed eligenda modo aut reicienda sint; aut 
anteponet eam quam cum honestate ornatissimam, 
tum etiam ipsis initiis naturae et totius perfectione 
vitae locupletatam videbit. Quod eo liquidius faciet, 


"aeguam Mdv., guam MSS. 
*ex supplied by ed. 


= 


BOOK II. xii 


-would be equally invalid were the proviso omitted. 


What does come under the verdict of the senses? 
Sweetness, sourness, smoothness, roughness, proxi- 
mity, distance; whether an object is stationary or 
moving, square or round. A just decision can there- 
fore only be delivered by Reason, with the aid in 
the first place of that knowledge of things human 
and divine, which may rightly claim the title of 


_ Wisdom ; and secondly with the assistance of the 


io) 


Virtues, which Reason would have to be the mistresses 
of all things, but you considered as the handmaids 
and subordinates of the pleasures. After calling all 
of these into council, she will pronounce first as to 
Pleasure, that she has no claim, not merely to be 
enthroned alone in the seat of that Chief Good 
which we are seeking, but even to be admitted as 
the associate of Moral Worth. As regards freedom 
from pain her decision will be the same. — For Car- 
neades will be put out of court, and no theory of 
the Chief Good will be approved that either includes 
pleasure or absence of pain, or does not include 
moral worth. Two views will thus be left. After 
prolonged consideration of these, either her final 
verdict will be that there is no Good but moral 
worth and no Evil but moral baseness, all other 
things being either entirely unimportant or of so 
little importance that they are not desirable or to be 
avoided, but only to be selected or rejected ; or else 
she will prefer the theory which she will recognize 
as including the full beauty of moral worth, enriched 
by the addition of the primary natural objects and 
of a life completed to its perfect span. And her 
judgment will be all the clearer, if she can first of all 


settle whether the dispute between these rival 
Les 


39 


40 


41 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


si perspexerit rerum inter eas verborumne sit con- 
troversia. 

XIII. “ Huius ego nunc auctoritatem sequens idem 
faciam. Quantum enim potero, minuam contentiones 
omnesque sententias simplices eorum in quibus nulla 
est virtutis adiunctio omninoa philosophia semovendas 
putabo,—primum Aristippi Cyrenaicorumque om- 
nium, quos non est veritum in ea voluptate quae 
maxima dulcedine sensum moveret summum bonum 
ponere, contemnentes istam vacuitatem doloris. Hi 
non viderunt, ut ad cursum equum, ad arandum 
bovem, ad indagandum canem, sic hominem ad duas 
res, ut ait Aristoteles, ad intellegendum et ad! agen- 
dum esse natum, quasi mortalem deum, contraque ut 
tardam aliquam et languidam pecudem ad pastum et 
ad procreandi voluptatem hoe divinum animal ortum 
esse voluerunt, quo nihil mihi videtur absurdius. 
Atque haec contra Aristippum, qui eam voluptatem 
non modo summam sed solam etiam ducit, quam omnes 
unam appellamus voluptatem. Aliter autem vobis 
placet. Sed ille, ut dixi, vitiose. Nec enim figura 
corporis nec ratio excellens ingeni humani significat 
ad unam hane rem natum hominem ut frueretur 
voluptatibus. Nec vero audiendus Hieronymus, cui 
summum bonum est idem quod vos interdum vel 
potius nimium saepe dicitis, nihil dolere. Non enim, 
si malum est dolor, carere eo malo satis est ad bene 


‘ad supplied by Mdv. 
126 


BOOK II. xii-xiii 


theories is one of fact, or turns on verbal differences 


) 


only. 
XIII. “Guided by the authority of Reason I will 
now adopt a similar procedure myself. As far as 


_ possible I will narrow the issue, and will assume 
_ that all those theories of the simple type, that in- 


clude no admixture of virtue, are to be eliminated 
from philosophy altogether. First among these 
comes the system of Aristippus and the Cyrenaic 


school in general, who did not shrink from finding 


— 


their Chief Good in pleasure of the sort that excites 
the highest amount of actively agreeable sensation, 
and who despised your freedom from pain. They 
failed to see that just as the horse is designed by 
nature for running, the ox for ploughing, and the dog 
for hunting, so man, as Aristotle observes, is born for 
two purposes, thought and action: he is as it were a 


mortal God. The Cyrenaics held on the contrary 


that this godlike animal came into being, like some 


- dull, half-witted sheep, in order to feed and to enjoy 
- the pleasure of procreation,—a view that seems to me 
_ the climax of absurdity. So much in answer to Aris- 
_ tippus, who considers pleasure in the only sense in 


which we all of us employ the term to be not merely 
the highest but the sole pleasure that exists. Your 
school holds a different view. However, as I said, 
Aristippus is wrong. Neither man’s bodily con- 
formation nor his surpassing mental faculty of reason 
indicates that he was born for the sole purpose of en- 
joying pleasure. Nor yet can we listen to Hierony- 
mus, whose Chief Good is the same as is occasionally, 
or rather only too frequently, upheld by yourselves, 
freedom from pain. If pain is an evil, to be without 
this evil is not enough to constitute the Good Life. 
127 


All theories not 
including Virtue 
in the End must 
be discarded; 


AS 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


vivendum. Hoe dixerit potius Ennius: 
Nimium boni est cui nihil est mali; 


nos beatam vitam non depulsione mali sed adeptione 
boni iudicemus, nec eam cessando, sive gaudentem, 
ut Aristippus, sive non dolentem, ut hic, sed agendo 
aliquid considerandove quaeramus. 

““Quae possunt eadem contra Carneadeum illud 
summum bonum dici, quod is non tam ut probaret pro- 
tulit, quam ut Stoicis quibuscum bellum gerebat oppo- 
neret ; id autem eiusmodi est ut additum ad virtutem 
auctoritatem videatur habiturum et expleturum cumu- 
late vitam beatam, de quo omnis haec quaestio est. 
Nam qui ad virtutem adiungunt vel voluptatem, quam 
unam virtus minimi facit, vel vacuitatem doloris, quae 
etiamsi malo caret tamen non est summum bonum, 
accessione utuntur non ita probabili, nec tamen cur id 
tam parce tamque restricte faciant intellego. Quasi 
enim emendum eis sit quod addant ad virtutem, pri- 
mum vilissimas res addunt, deinde singulas potius 
quam omnia quae prima natura approbavisset ea cum 
honestate coniungerent. Quae quod! Aristoni et 
Pyrrhoni omnino visa sunt pro nihilo, ut inter optime 
valere et gravissime aegrotare nihil prorsus dicerent 
interesse, recte iam pridem contra eos desitum est 
disputari. Dum enim in una virtute sic omnia esse 

lguod Mdv.; cum MSS: 


a Frog. Eanius Ss tragedy Hecuba, cf, Euripides, Flec. 62+ 
Keivos O\Biworaros OTw kar Fuap Tuyxdver undev Kakdv. 


128 


BOOK II. xiii 
Let Ennius say if he likes that 


‘ 


Enough, and more, of good 
Is his who hath no ill ;* 


but let us reckon happiness not by the avoidance of 
evil but by the attainment of good. Let us seek it 
not in the idle acceptance whether of positive delights, 
like Aristippus, or of freedom from pain, like Hier- 
onymus, but in a life of action or of study. 

The same arguments can be urged against the Chief 
Good of Carneades, which he advanced less from a 
desire to prove it true than to use it as a weapon in 
his battle with the Stoics; though it is such that if 
added to Virtue it may be thought to be of import- 
ance and to be likely to augment the sum total of 
Happiness, which is the one subject of our inquiry. 
Whereas those who join with Virtue either pleasure, 
the one thing she values least, or freedom from pain, 
which even though it is devoid of evil yet is not the 
Chief Good, make a less satisfactory combination; 
nor yet can I understand why they go to work in so 
cautious and niggardly a fashion. You would think 
they had to purchase the commodity which is to be 
added to virtue. To begin with they choose the 
cheapest things they can find to add, and then they 
each dole out one only, instead of coupling with moral 
worth all. the things initially approved by Nature. 
Aristo and Pyrrho thought all these things utterly and those deny- 
worthless, and said, for example, that there was abso- pes ste parka 
lutely nothing to choose between the most perfect need not be 
health and the most grievous sickness; and conse- ' 
quently men have long ago quite rightly given up 
wguing against them. For in insisting upon the 
anique importance of virtue in such a sense as to 

K 129 


44 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


voluerunt ut eam rerum selectione exspoliarent, nec ei 
quidquam-aut unde oriretur darent aut ubi niteretur, 
virtutem ipsam quam amplexabantur sustulerunt. 
Erillus autem ad scientiam omnia révocans unum 
quoddam bonum vidit, sed nec optimum nec quo vita 
gubernari possit. Itaque hie ipse iam pridem est 
reiectus; post enim Chrysippum non sane est dispu- 
tatum. 

XIV. “ Restatis igitur vos ; nam cum Academicis in- 
certa luctatio est, qui nihil affirmant et quasi desperata 
cognitione certi id sequi volunt quodcumque veri 
simile videatur. Cum Epicuro autem hoc plus est 
negoti quod e duplici genere voluptatis coniunctus 
est, quodque et ipse et amici eius et multi postea de- 
fensores eius sententiae fuerunt, et nescio quomodo, 
is qui auctoritatem minimam habet, maximam vim, 
populus cum illis facit. Quos nisi redarguimus, om- 
nis virtus, omne decus, omnis vera laus deserenda 
est. Ita ceterorum sententiis semotis, relinquitur 
non mihi cum Torquato sed virtuti cum voluptate 
certatio. Quam quidem certationem homo et acutus 
et diligens, Chrysippus, non contemnit, totumque 
discrimen summi boni in earum comparatione posi- 
tum putat. Ego autem existimo, si honestum esse 
aliquid ostendero quod sit ipsum sua vi propter seque 
expetendum, iacere vestra omnia. Itaque eo quale 


sit breviter ut tempus postulat constituto, accedam 
130 


BOOK II. xiii-xiv 


rob it of any power of choice among external things 
and to deny it any starting-point or basis, they 
destroyed the very virtue they desired to cherish. 
Again, Erillus, in basing everything on knowledge, 
fixed his eyes on one definite Good, but this not the 
greatest Good, nor one that could serve as the guide 
of life. Accordingly Erillus himself has long ago 
been set aside; since Chrysippus no one has even 
troubled to refute him. 

XIV. “ Accordingly your school remains ; for there 
is no coming to grips with the Academics, who 
affirm nothing positively, and despairing of a know- 
ledge of certain truth, make up their minds to take 
apparent probability as their guide. Epicurus how- 
ever is a more troublesome opponent, because he is a 
combination of two different sorts of pleasure, and 
because besides himself and his friends there have 
been so many later champions of his theory, which 
somehow or other enlists the support of that least 
competent but most powerful adherent, the general 
public. Unless we refute these adversaries, all virtue, 
all honour, all true merit must be abandoned. Thus, 
when all the other systems have been discarded, 
there remains a duel in which the combatants are, 
not myself and Torquatus, but Virtue and Pleasure. 
This contest is by no means ignored by so penetrating 
and so industrious a writer as Chrysippus, who con- 
siders that the rivalry between pleasure and virtue is 
the cardinal issue in the whole question of the Chief 
Good. My own view is that, if I can succeed in 
proving the existence of Moral Worth as a thing 
essentially and for itself desirable, your entire system 
at once collapses. Accordingly I will begin by de- 
fining, with such brevity as the occasion demands, 

K2 131 


There remains 
the issue, Virtue 
v. Pleasure. 


45 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


ad omnia tua, Torquate, nisi memoria forte de- 
fecerit. 

“Honestum igitur id intellegimus quod tale est ut 
detracta omni utilitate sine ullis praemiis fructibusve 
per se ipsum possit iure laudari. Quod quale sit, 
non tam definitione, qua sum usus, intellegi potest 
(quamquam aliquantum potest) quam communi om- 
nium iudicio et optimi cuiusque studiis atque factis, 
qui permulta ob eam unam causam faciunt quia 
decet, quia rectum, quia honestum est, etsi nullum 
consecuturum emolumentum vident. Homines 
enim, etsi aliis multis, tamen hoc uno plurimum 
a bestiis differunt quod rationem habent a natura 
datam mentemque acrem et vigentem celer- 
rimeque multa simul agitantem et, ut ita dicam, 
sagacem, quae et ‘causas rerum et consecutiones 
videat et similitudines transferat et disiuncta con- 
iungat et cum praesentibus futura copulet om- 
nemque complectatur vitae consequentis statum. 
Eademque ratio fecit hominem hominum appeten- 
tem cumque iis natura et sermone et usu congruen- 
tem, ut profectus a caritate domesticorum ac suorum 
serpat longius et se implicet primum civium, deinde 
omnium mortalium societate atque, ut ad Archytam 
scripsit Plato, non sibi se soli natum meminerit sed 
patriae, sed suis, ut perexigua pars ipsi relinquatur. 


* Plato, Epistle ix. 
132 


BOOK II. xiv 


the nature of Moral Worth ; and then, Torquatus, I 
will proceed to deal with each of your points, unless 
my memory should happen to fail me. 

By Moral Worth, then, we understand that Morality (‘ the 
which is of such a nature that, though devoid of all ea 
utility, it can justly be commended in and for itself, Maree pes 
apart from any profit or reward. A formal definition and have their é 
such as I have given may do something to indicate [09's bum" 
its nature; but this is more clearly explained by the 
general verdict of mankind at large, and by the aims 
and actions of all persons of high character. Good 
men do a great many things from which they antici- 
pate no advantage, solely from the motive of pro- 
priety, morality and right. For among the many 
points of difference between man and the lower ani- 
mals, the greatest difference is that Nature has 
bestowed on man the gift of Reason, of an active, 
vigorous intelligence, able to prosecute several trains 
of thought with great swiftness at the same time, 
and having, so to speak, a keen scent to discern the 
sequence of causes and effects, to draw analogies, 
combine things separate, connect the future with 
the present, and survey the entire field of the sub- 
sequent course of life. It is Reason moreover that 
has inspired man with a relish for his kind; 
she has produced conformity of character, of lan- 
zuage and of habit; she has prompted the indi- 
vidual, starting from friendship and from family 
uffection, to expand his interests, forming social 
ties first with his fellow-citizens and later with all 
mankind. She reminds him that, as Plato puts it in 
nis letter to Archytas,* man was not born for self 
ilone, but for country and for kindred, claims that 
eave but a small part of him for himself. Nature 

133 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


46 Et quoniam eadem natura cupiditatem ingenuit ho- 


ce 


~ 


48 


mini veri videndi, quod facillime apparet cum vacui 
curis etiam quid in caelo fiat scire avemus, his initiis 
inducti omnia vera diligimus, id est fidelia, simplicia, 
constantia, tum vana, falsa, fallentia odimus, ut frau- 
dem, periurium, malitiam, iniuriam. Eadem ratio 
habet in se quiddam amplum atque magnificum, ad 
imperandum magis quam ad parendum accommoda- 
tum, omnia humana non tolerabilia solum sed etiam 
levia ducens, altum quiddam et excelsum, nihil timens, 
nemini cedens, semper invictum. Atque his tribus 
generibus honestorum notatis, quartum sequitur et 
in eadem pulchritudine et aptum ex illis tribus, in 
quo inest ordo et moderatio. Cuius similitudine 
perspecta in formarum specie ac dignitate, transitum 
est ad honestatem dictorum atque factorum. Nam 
ex his tribus laudibus quas ante dixi, et temeritatem 
reformidat et non audet cuiquam aut dicto protervo 
aut facto nocere, vereturque quidquam aut facere aut 
eloqui quod parum virile videatur. 

XV. “Habes undique expletam et perfectam, Tor- 
quate, formam honestatis, quae tota quattuor his vir- 
tutibus quae a te quoque commemoratae sunt conti- 
netur. Hane se tuus Epicurus omnino ignorare dicit 


quam aut qualem esse velint ii qui honestate summum 
134 


BOOK II. xiv-xv. 


has also engendered in mankind the desire of con- 
templating truth. This is most clearly manifested 
in our hours of leisure; when our minds are at 


€ase we are eager to acquire knowledge even of 


the movements of the heavenly bodies. This 


primary instinct leads us on to love all truth as such, (2) Justice 


that is, all that is trustworthy, simple and consistent, 
and to hate things insincere, false and deceptive, 
such -as cheating, perjury, Malice and injustice. 


(rt) Wisdom, 


Further, Reason possesses an intrinsic element of (3) Courage, 


dignity and grandeur, suited rather to require 
obedience than to render it, esteeming all the acci- 
dents of human fortunes not merely as endurable 
but also as unimportant; a quality of loftiness and 
elevation, fearing nothing, submitting to no one, 
ever unsubdued. These three kinds of moral good- ( 
ness being noted, there follows a fourth kind, 
possessed of equal beauty, and indeed combining in 
itself the-other three. This is the principle of order 
and of restraint. From recognizing something 
analogous to this principle in the beauty and dignity 
of outward forms, we pass to beauty in the moral 
sphere of speech and conduct. Each of the three 
excellences mentioned before contributes something 
to this fourth one: it dreads rashness; it shrinks 
from injuring anyone by wanton word or deed; and 
it fears to do or say anything that may appear 
unmanly. 

XV. “There, Torquatus, is a full, detailed and com- 
plete account of Moral Worth, a whole of which these 
four virtues, which you also ironstone, constitute the 
parts. Yet your Epicurus tells us that he is utterly 
ata loss to know what nature or qualities are assigned 
to this Morality by those who make it the measure 

135 


4) Temperance, 


Morality is not, 
as Epicurus says, 
a mere conyen- 
tion, 


49 


50 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
bonum metiantur. Si enim ad honestatem omnia 
referantur neque in ea voluptatem dicant inesse, ait 
eos voce inani sonare (his enim ipsis verbis utitur), 
neque intellegere nec videre sub hancvocem honestatis 
quae sit subicienda sententia. -.Ut enim consuetudo 
loquitur, id solum dicitur honestum quod est popular 
fama gloriosum. Quod, inquit, quamquam voluptati- 
bus quibusdam est saepe iucundius, tamen expetitur 
propter voluptatem. Videsne quam sit magna dis- 
sensio? Philosophus nobilis, a quo non solum Graecia 
et Italia sed etiam omnis barbaria commota est, 
honestum quid sit, si id non sit in voluptate, negat 
se intellegere, nisi forte illud quod multitudinis 
rumore laudetur. Ego autem hoc etiam turpe esse 
saepe iudico et, si quando turpe non sit, tum esse non 
turpe cum id a multitudine laudetur quod sit ipsum 
per se rectum atque laudabile ; tamen non ob eam 
causam illud dici esse honestum quia laudetur a 
multis, sed quia tale sit ut, vel si ignorarent id ho- 
mines vel si obmutuissent, sua tamen pulchritudine 
esset specieque laudabile. Itaque idem natura victus, 
cui obsisti non potest, dicit alio loco id quod a te 
etiam paulo ante dictum est, non posse iucunde vivi 
nisi etiam honeste. Quid nunc ‘honeste’ dicit? 
idemne quod ‘iucunde’? Ergo ita: non posse 


* Here as elsewhere no translation can convey the double 
meaning of the word honestum, ‘honourable,’ used as an 
equivalent of 76 caddy, ‘ the morally beautiful or good.’ 


136 


BOOK II. xv 
of the Chief Good. For if Morality be the standard 


to which all things are referred, while yet they will 


not allow that pleasure forms any part of it, he de- 
clares that they are uttering sounds devoid Gf sense 


(those are his actual words), and that he has no 


notion or perception whatever of any meaning 
that this term Morality can have attached to it. In 
common parlance ‘moral’ (honourable)? means 
merely that which ranks high in popular esteem. 


_ And popular esteem, says Epicurus, though often in 


itself more agreeable than certain forms of pleasure, 
yet is desired simply as a means to pleasure. Do 
you realize how vast a difference of opinion this is ? 
Here is a famous philosopher, whose influence has 
spread not only over Greece and Italy but through- 
out all barbarian lands as well, protesting that he can- 
not understand what Moral Worth is, if it does not 
consist in pleasure ; unless indeed it be that which 
wins the approval and applause of the multitude. 
For my part I hold that what is popular is often posi- 
tively base, and that, if ever it is not base, this is only 
when the multitude happens to applaud something 
that is right and praiseworthy in and for itself ; which 
even so is not called ‘moral’ (honourable) because 
it is widely applauded, but because it is of such a 
nature that even if men were unaware of its exist- 
ence, or never spoke of it, it would still be worthy of 


praise for its own beauty and loveliness. Hence 


aes 


Epicurus is compelled by the irresistible force of in- 
stinct to say in another passage what you also said 
just now, that it is impossible to live pleasantly with- 
out also living morally (honourably). What does he 
mean by ‘morally’ now? The same as ‘pleasantly’ ? 


If so, does it amount to saying that it is impossible 
137 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


honeste vivi nisi honeste vivatur? An nisi populari 
fama? Sine ea igitur iucunde negat posse se vivere?? 
Quid turpius quam sapientis vitam ex insipientium 
sermone pendere? Quid ergo hoc loco intellegit 
honestum? Certe nihil nisi quod possit ipsum prop- 
ter se iure laudari. Nam si propter voluptatem, 
quae est ista laus quae possit e macello peti?» Non 
is vir est ut, cum honestatem eo loco habeat ut sine 
ea iucunde neget posse vivi, illud honestum quod 
populare sit sentiat et sine eo neget iucunde vivi 
posse, aut quidquam aliud honestum intellegat nisi 
quod sit rectum ipsumque per se, sua vi, sua sponte, 
sua natura laudabile. 

XVI. “Itaque, Torquate, cum diceres clamare Epi- 
curum non posse iucunde vivi nisi honeste et sapi- 
enter et iuste viveretur, tu ipse mihi gloriari videbare. 
Tanta vis inerat in verbis propter earum rerum quae 
significabantur his verbis dignitatem, ut altior fieres, 
ut interdum insisteres, ut nos intuens quasi testifica- 
rere laudari honestatem et iustitiam aliquando ab 
Epicuro. Quam te decebat iis verbis uti quibus si 
philosophi non uterentur, philosophia omnino non 
egeremus.. Istorum enim verborum amore, quae 
perraro appellantur ab Epicuro, sapientiae, fortitudi- 
nis, iustitiae, temperantiae, praestantissimis ingeniis 


1 posse se vivere Mdv. ; posse vivi Orelli; posse vivere MSS. 
138 


51 


BOOK II. xv-xvi 


tolive morally unless you—live morally? Or, unless 
you make public opinion your standard? He means 
then that he cannot live pleasantly without the 
approval of public opinion? But what can be baser 
than to make the conduct of the Wise Man depend 
upon the gossip of the foolish ? What therefore does 
he understand by ‘moral’ in this passage? Clearly, 
nothing but that which can be rightly praised for its 
own sake. For if it be praised as. being a means to 
pleasure, what is there creditable about this? You 
can get pleasure at the provision-dealer’s. No,— 
Epicurus, who esteems Moral Worth so highly as to 
say that it is impossible to live pleasantly without it, 
is not the man to identify ‘moral’ (honourable) with 
‘popular’ and maintain that it is impossible to live 
pleasantly without popular esteem ; he cannot under- 
stand ‘moral’ to mean anything else than that 
which is right,—that which is in and for itself, 
independently, intrinsically, and of its own nature 
praiseworthy. 

XVI. “This, Torquatus, accounts for the glow of 
pride with which, as I noticed, you informed us how 
loudly Epicurus proclaims the impossibility of living 
pleasantly without living morally, wisely and justly. 
Your words derived potency from the grandeur of 
the things that they denoted ; you drew yourself up to 
your full height, and kept stopping and fixing us with 
your gaze, and solemnly asseverating that Epicurus 
does occasionally commend morality and justice. 
Were those names never mentioned by philosophers 
we should have no use for philosophy ; how well they 
sounded on your lips! Too seldom does Epicurus 
speak to us of Wisdom, Courage, Justice, Temperance. 


Yet it is the love that those great names inspire which 
139 


Self-interest 

does not ac- 

count for the 
Virtues, e.g. 

Justice. 


92 


54 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


homines se ad philosophiae studium contulerunt. 
Oculorum, inquit Plato, est in nobis sensus acerrimus, 
quibus sapientiam non cernimus; quam illa ardentes 
amores excitaret sui, si videretur!! Cur tandem? an 
quod ita callida est ut optime possit architectari vo- 
luptates? Cur iustitia laudatur? aut unde est hoc 
contritum vetustate proverbium : *quicum in tene- 
bris’”? Hoc, dictum in una re, latissime patet, ut 
in omnibus factis re, non teste moveamur. Sunt enim 
levia et perinfirma quae dicebantur a te, animi con- 
scientia improbos excruciari, tum etiam poenae timore 
qua aut afficiantur aut semper sint in metu ne affici- 
antur aliquando. Non oportet timidum aut imbecillo 
animo fingi non bonum illum virum, qui quidquid 
fecerit ipse se cruciet omniaque formidet, sed omnia 
callide referentem ad utilitatem, acutum, versutum, 
veteratorem, facile ut excogitet quomodo occulte, 
sine teste, sine ullo conscio fallat. An tu me de 
L. Tubulo putas dicere? qui cum praetor quaestionem 
inter sicarios exercuisset, ita aperte cepit pecunias ob 
rem ijudicandam ut anno proximo P. Seaevola tribunus 
plebis ferret ad plebem, vellentne de ea re quaeri. 
Quo plebiscito decreta a senatu est consuli quaestio 
Cn. Caepioni; profectus in exsilium Tubulus statim 
nec respondere ausus ; erat enim res aperta. 


‘st videretur Mdyv. om. with A, B, E, but cp. Plato, 
Phaedr. 250 D. dys yap qui dturdrn Tov did TOD cwuaros 
epxerar alcOnoéwy, 7) ppdyvnors obx dparar. Sewods yap dv maperyev 
épwras, el Tt Tovodrov éaurijs evapyés eldwrov mapelyero eis 
dw idv. 

* guicum in tenebris mices inf. MSS. Cp. de Off: 3. 77, cum 
enim fidem alicuius laudant, dignum esse dicunt quicum in 
tenebris mices (sc. digitis), 


140 


52 


53 


54 


BOOK II. xvi 


has lured the ablest of mankind to devote themselves 
to philosophical studies. The sense of sight, says 
Plato, is the keenest sense we possess, yet our eyes 
cannot behold Wisdom; could we see her, what 
passionate love would she awaken! And why is 
this so? Is it because of her supreme ability and 
cunning in the art of contriving pleasures? Why is 
Justice commended? What gave rise to the old 
familiar saying, ‘A man with whom you might play odd 
and even in the dark’? This proverb strictly applies 
to the particular case of honesty, but it has this 
general application, that in all our conduct we should 
be influenced by the character of the action, not by 
the presence or absence of a witness. How weak 
and ineffectual are the deterrents you put forward, 
—the torture of a guilty conscience, and the 
fear of the punishment that offenders incur, or at 
all events stand in continual dread of incurring in the 
end! We must not picture our unprincipled man as 
a poor-spirited coward, tormenting himself about his 
past misdeeds, and afraid of everything; but as 
shrewdly calculating profit in all he does, sharp, 
dexterous, a practised hand, fertile in devices for 
cheating in secret, without witness or accomplice. 
Don’t suppose I am speaking of a Lucius Tubulus, 
who when he sat as praetor to try charges of murder 
made so little concealment of taking bribes for his 
verdict that next year the tribune of the plebs, 
Publius Scaevola, moved in the plebeian assembly for 
aspecial inquiry. The bill passed the plebs, and the 
senate commissioned the consul Gnaeus Caepio to 
hold the investigation; but Tubulus promptly left 
the country, and did not venture to stand his foal, 


so open was his guilt. 
141 


Or 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


XVII. “Non igitur de improbo sed de‘ callido im- 
probo quaerimus, qualis Q. Pompeius in foedere Nu- 
mantino infitiando fuit, nee vero omnia timente sed 
primum qui animi conscientiam non curet, quam 
scilicet comprimere nihil est negoti. Is enim qui 
occultus et tectus dicitur, tantum abest ut se indicet, 
perficiet etiam ut dolere alterius improbe facto vi- 
deatur ; quid est enim aliud esse versutum? 

“Memini me adesse P. Sextilio Rufo cum is rem ad 
amicos ita deferret, se esse heredem Q. Fadio Gallo, 
cuius in testamento scriptum esset se ab eo rogatum ut 
omnis hereditas ad filiam perveniret. Id Sextilius 
factum negabat; poterat autem impune; quis enim 
redargueret ? Nemo nostrum credebat, eratque veri 
similius hune mentiri, cuius interesset, quam illum, 
qui id se rogasse scripsisset quod debuisset rogare. 
Addebat etiam se in legem Voconiam iuratum contra 
eam facere non audere, nisi aliter amicis videretur. 
Aderamus nos quidem adulescentes, sed multi am- 
plissimi viri, quorum nemo censuit plus Fadiae dan- 
dum quam posset ad eam lege Voconia pervenire. 
Tenuit permagnam Sextilius hereditatem unde, si 
secutus esset eorum sententiam qui honesta et recta 
emolumentis omnibus et commodis anteponerent, 

‘de inserted by Mdv. 


a Presumably a-reference to the customary oath to main- 
tain the laws, taken on assuming an office of state. The 
Voconian law prohibited a woman from being left heir to 
an estate. It was evaded by bequeathing the estate to a 
friend who had promised to hand it on to the intended 
heiress. 

>The Voconian law appears to have allowed a bequest 
to a woman, provided it did not exceed the amount that 
passed to the ‘heres’ proper. Either such a minor bequest 
had been made to Fadia, or this sentence means she was to 
get nothing. 


142 


» 


BOOK II. xvii 


a, ce * F 
- XVII “It is not therefore a question of a rascal For crafty dis- 


5 


merely, but of a crafty rascal, like Quintus Pompeius ee 


when he disowned the treaty he had made with the tion; and 
Numantines; nor yet of a timid, ¢ dly k pied 
3 ye a timid, cowardly Knave, fies some risk in 
but of one who to begin with is deaf to the voice of bth iy 
conscience, which it is assuredly no difficult matter 
to stifle. The man we call stealthy and secret, so 
far from betraying his own guilt, will actually make 
believe to be indignant at the knavery of another ; 
that is what we mean by a cunning old hand. 

“I remember assisting at a consultation which 
Publius Sextilius Rufus held with his friends on the 
following matter. He had been left heir to Quintus 
Fadius Gallus. Fadius’s will contained a statement 
that he had requested Sextilius to allow the whole of 
the estate to pass to his daughter. Sextilius now de- 
nied the arrangement, as he could do with impunity, 
for there was no one to rebut him. Not one of us 
believed his denial ; it was more probable that he 
should be lying, as his pocket was concerned, than 
the testator, who had left it in writing that he had 
made a request which it had been his duty to make. 
Sextilius actually went on to say that, having sworn 
to maintain the Voconian law,* he would not venture 
to break it, unless his friends thought he ought to 
do so. I was only a young man, but many of the 
company were persons of high consideration ; and 
every one of these advised him not to give Fadia 
more than she was entitled to get under the Voconian 
law.” Sextilius kept a handsome property, not a 
penny of which he would have touched had he 
followed the advice of those who placed honour and 
right above all considerations of profit and advantage. 
Do you therefore suppose that he was afterwards 

143 


56 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


nummum nullum! attigisset. Num igitur eum postea 
censes anxio animo aut sollicito fuisse ? Nihil minus, 
contraque illa hereditate dives ob eamque rem laetus. 
Magni enim aestimabat pecuniam non modo non 
contra leges sed etiam legibus partam ; quae quidem 
vel cum periculo est quaerenda vobis; est enim 
effectrix multarum et magnarum voluptatum. 

“Ut igitur illis qui, recta et honesta quae sunt, ea 
statuunt per se expetenda, adeunda sunt saepe peri- 
cula decoris honestatisque causa, sic vestris, qui omnia 
voluptate metiuntur, pericula adeunda sunt ut adipi- 
scantur magnas voluptates. Si magna res, magna 
hereditas agetur, cum pecunia voluptates pariantur 
plurimae, idem erit Epicuro vestro' faciendum, si 
suum. finem bonorum sequi volet, quod Scipioni, 
magna gloria proposita si Hannibalem in Africam 
retraxisset. Itaque quantum adiit periculum! Ad 
honestatem enim illum omnem conatum suum re- 
ferebat, non ad voluptatem. Sic vester sapiens, 
magno aliquo emolumento commotus, cum causa,” 
si opus erit, dimicabit. Occultum facinus esse po- 
tuerit, gaudebit ; deprehensus omnem poenam con- 
temnet. Erit enim instructus ad mortem contemnen- 
dam, ad exilium, ad ipsum etiam dolorem. Quem 
quidem vos cum improbis poenam proponitis impe- 
tibilem facitis, cum sapientem semper boni plus 
habere vultis tolerabilem. 

XVIII. “ Sed finge non solum callidum eum qui ali- 


Tnummum nullum ; some inf. MSS. ne nummum quidem 
unum. 

*cum causa Mdv. marks as corrupt, and conjectures cum 
amico. Inf. MSS. have anim causa. 


144 


BOOK IL. xvii-xviii 


troubled by remorse? Not a bit of it. On the con- 


trary, the inheritance made him a rich man, and he 
was thoroughly pleased with himself in consequence. 
He thought he had scored heavily: he had won a 
fortune, not only by no illegal means, but actually 
by the aid of the law. And according to your school 
it is right to try to get money even at some risk; 
for Money procures many very delightful pleasures. 
“Therefore just as those who hold that things right 
and honourable are desirable for their own sake must 
often take risks in the cause of honour and morality, 
so Epicureans, who measure all things by pleasure, 


_may properly take risks in order to obtain consider- 


- 


able pleasures. If a large sum of money or a great 
inheritance is at stake, inasmuch as money buys a 
vast number of pleasures, your Epicurus, if he wishes 
to attain his own End of Goods, will have to act 
as Scipio did, when he had the chance of winning 
great renown by enticing Hannibal back to Africa, 
To do so, he risked enormous dangers. For honour 
and not pleasure was the aim of that great enter- 
prise. Similarly, your Epicurean Wise Man, when 
stirred by the prospect of some considerable gain, 
will fight to the death, if need be, and with good 
reason. Do circumstances allow his crime to go 
undetected, so much the better; but if found out, 
he will make light of every penalty. For he will 
have been schooled to make light of death, of exile, 
even of pain itself. The latter indeed you make 
out to be unendurable when you are enacting 
penalties for the wicked, but easy to bear when 
you are maintaining that the Wise Man will always 
command a preponderance of Good. 

XVIII. “But suppose that our evil-doer is not only 

L 145 


In fact, disin- 
terested Justice 
is contrary to 
Epicurus’s prin- 
ciples, 


58 


Sr 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
quid improbe faciat, verum etiam praepotentem, ut 
M. Crassus fuit,—qui tamen solebat’ uti suo bono,— 
ut hodie est noster Pompeius, cui recte facienti gratia 
est habenda; esse enim quam vellet iniquus poterat 
impune. Quam multa vero iniuste fieri possunt quae 
nemo possit reprehendere! Si te amicus tuus moriens 
rogaverit ut hereditatem reddas suae filiae, nec_us- 
quam id scripserit, ut scripsit Fadius, nec cuiquam 
dixerit, quid facies? Tu quidem reddes; ipse Epi- 
curus fortasse redderet; ut Sex. Peducaeus, Sex. Ste 
is qui hune nostrum reliquit efigiem et humanitatis 
et probitatis suae filium, cum doctus, tum omnium 
vir optimus et iustissimus, cum sciret nemo eum ro- 
gatum a C. Plotio, equite Romano splendido, Nur- 
sino, ultro ad mulierem venit eique nihil opinanti viri 
mandatum exposuit hereditatemque reddidit. Sed _ 
ego ex te quaero, quoniam idem tu certe fecisses, 
nonne intellegas eo maiorem vim esse naturae quod 
ipsi vos, qui omnia ad vestrum commodum et ut ipsi 
dicitis ad voluptatem referatis, tamen ea faciatis e 
quibus appareat non voluptatem vos sed officium se- 
qui, plusque rectam naturam quam rationem pravam 
valere? Siscieris, inquit Carneades, aspidem occulte 
latere uspiam et velle aliquem imprudentem super 


eam assidere cuius mors tibi emolumentum futura sit, 
146 


BOOK II. xviii 
clever but also supremely powerful, as was Marcus 
_ Crassus,—who however was mostly content to rely 
on his private resources ; or like our friend Pompeius 
_ at the present time, who deserves our gratitude for his 
upright conduct, since he might be as unjust as he 
liked with impunity. But how many unrighteous 
acts are possible which no one would be in a position 
to censure! Ifa friend of yours requests you on his 
death-bed to hand over his estate to his daughter, 
_without leaving his intention anywhere in writing, 
as Fadius did, or speaking of it to anybody, what will 
you do? You no doubt will hand over the money ; 
perhaps Epicurus himself would have done the same ; 
as did Sextus Peducaeus, son of Sextus, a scholar and 
a gentleman of scrupulous honour, who left behind 
him a son, our friend of to-day, to recall his father’s 
culture and integrity. No one knew that a similar 
_ request had been made to Sextus by a distinguished 
- Roman knight named Gaius Plotius, of Nursia ; but 
_ Sextus of his own accord went to Plotius’s widow, in- 
formed her, much to her surprise, of her husband’s 
commission, and handed over the property to her. 
But the question I want to put to you is this: since 
_ you yourself would undoubtedly have done the same, 
do you not see that the force of natural instinct is all 
the more firmly established by the fact that even you 
Epicureans, who profess to make your own interest 
and pleasure your sole standard, nevertheless perform 
actions that prove you to be really aiming not at 
pleasure but at duty; prove, I say, that the natural 
impulse towards right is more powerful than corrupt 
) reason? Suppose, says Carneades, you should know 
that there is a viper lurking somewhere, and that 
some one, by whose death you stand to profit, is about 
L2 147 


= 


60 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 

improbe feceris nisi monueris ne assidat. Sed im- 
punite tamen; scisse enim te quis coarguere possit? 
Sed nimis multa. Perspicuum est enim, nisi aequitas, 
fides, iustitia proficiscantur a natura, et si omnia haec 
ad utilitatem referantur, virum bonum non posse re- 
periri, deque his rebus satis multa in nostris de re 
publica libris sunt dicta a Laelio. 

XIX. “ Transfer idem ad modestiam vel temperan- 
tiam, quae est moderatio cupiditatum rationi obediens. 
Satisne ergo pudori consulat si quis sine teste libidini 
pareat? An est aliquid per se ipsum flagitiosum, 
etiamsi nulla comitetur infamia? Quid? fortes 
viri voluptatumne calculis subductis proelium ineunt, 
sanguinem pro patria profundunt, an quodam animi 
ardore atque impetu concitati? Utrum tandem 
censes, Torquate, Imperiosum illum, si nostra verba 
audiret, tuamne de se orationem libentius auditurum 
fuisse an meam, cum ego dicerem nihil eum fecisse 
sua causa omniaque rei publicae, tu contra nihil nisi 
sua? Si vero id etiam explanare velles, apertiusque 
diceres nihil eum fecisse nisi voluptatis causa, quo- 
modo eum tandem laturum fuisse existimas? Esto; 
fecerit, si ita vis, Torquatus propter suas utilitates 
(malo enim dicere quam voluptates, in tanto prae- 


sertim viro); num etiam eius collega P. Decius, 
148 


BOOK II. xviii-xix 


to sit down on it unawares; then you will do a 
wicked deed if you do not warn him not to sit down. 
But still your wickedness would go unpunished, for 
who could possibly prove that you knew? How- 
ever, I labour the point unnecessarily. It is obvious 
that, if fair-dealing, honesty and justice have not their 
source in nature, and if all these things are only 
valuable for their utility, no good man can anywhere 
be found. The subject is fully discussed by Laelius - 
_in my volumes On the State. 
| XIX. “Apply the same test to Temperance or yor will these 
Moderation, which means the control of the appetites ow fe 
in obedience to the reason. Suppose a man yields to Courage. 
vicious impulses in secret,—is that no offence against 
purity? Or is it not true that an act can be sinful in 
itself, even though no disgrace attends it? And again, 
does a brave soldier go into battle and shed his blood 
for his country upon a nice calculation of the balance 
of pleasures, or in hot blood and under the stimulus 
of impulse? Come, Torquatus, if the great Im- 
periosus were listening to our debate, which of our 
two speeches about himself would he have heard 
with greater satisfaction, yours or mine? Me declar- 
ing that no deed of his was done for selfish ends, but 
all from motives of patriotism, or you maintaining 
that he acted solely for self? And suppose you had 
wanted to make your meaning clearer, and had said 
more explicitly that all his actions were prompted by 
desire for pleasure, pray how do you imagine he 
would have taken it? But grant your view ; assume 
if you like that Torquatus acted for his own advan- 
tage (I would sooner put it in that way than say “for 
his own pleasure,’ especially in the case of so great 
a man). Yet what about his colleague Publius 
149 


" 


62 


63 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


princeps in ea familia consulatus, cum se devoverat 
et equo admisso in mediam aciem Latinorum irruebat, 
aliquid de voluptatibus suis cogitabat? ubi ut eam 
caperet aut quando? cum sciret confestim esse mori- 
endum, eamque mortem ardentiore studio peteret 
quam Epicurus voluptatem petendam putat. Quod 
quidem eius factum nisi esset iure laudatum, non 
esset imitatus quarto consulatu suo filius, neque porro 
ex eo natus.cum Pyrrho bellum gerens consul cecidis- 
set in proelio seque e continenti genere tertiam 
victimam rei publicae praebuisset. Contineo me ab 
exemplis. Graecis hoc modicum est, Leonidas, 
Epaminondas, tres aliqui aut quattuor: ego si nostros 
colligere coepero, perficiam illud quidem ut se vir- 
tuti tradat constringendam voluptas, sed dies me 
deficiet, et, ut A. Varius, qui est habitus iudex durior, 
dicere consessori solebat, cum datis testibus alii 
tamen citarentur: “Aut hoe testium satis est aut 
nescio quid satis sit,’ sic a me satis datum est te- 
stium. Quid enim? te ipsum, dignissimum maiori- 
bus tuis, voluptasne induxit ut adulescentulus eripe- 
res P. Sullae consulatum? Quem cum ad patrem 
tuum rettulisses, fortissimum virum, qualis ille vel 
consul vel civis cum semper, tum post consulatum 
fuit! Quo quidem auctore nos ipsi ea gessimus ut 
omnibus potius quam ipsis nobis consuluerimus. _ 
“At quam pulchre dicere videbare, cum ex altera 


a A reference to the suppression of the Catalinarian con- 
spiracy and Cicero’s subsequent exile, 


150 


BOOK II. xix 


_ Decius, the first of his family to be consul? When 


Decius vowed himself to death, and setting spurs to 
his horse was charging into the thickest of the Latin 
ranks, surely he had no thought of personal pleasure ? 
Pleasure where to be enjoyed or when? For he 


_ knew he must die in a moment, aye and he courted 


death with more passionate ardour than Epicurus 
would have us seek pleasure. Had not his exploit 
earned renown, it would not have been imitated by 


his son in his fourth consulship; nor would the 


latter’s son again, commanding as consul in the war 
with Pyrrhus, have also fallen in battle, third in suc- 
cession of his line to give himself a victim for the 
state. I refrain from further instances. The Greeks 
have but a modest list,—Leonidas, Epaminondas, 
some three or four; but were I to begin to cite the 


heroes of our race, I should doubtless succeed in 


making Pleasure yield herself prisoner to Virtue, but 


_—daylight would fail. before I had done. Aulus 
- Varius, noted for his severity as a judge, used to say 


to his colleague on the bench, when after witnesses 
had been produced still further witnesses were 
called : ‘Either we have evidence enough already, 
or I do not know what evidence can be enough.’ 
Well, I have cited witnesses enough. Why, you 
yourself, in every way a worthy scion of your stock, 
—was pleasure the inducement that led you, a mere 
youth, to wrest the consulship from Publius Sulla ? 
You won that office for your gallant father; and what 
a consul he was! What a patriot, all his life long 
and more especially after his consulship! It was 
with his support that I carried through an affair, 
which was for all men’s interest rather than my own.* 


“But how well you thought you put your case 
151 


64 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 

parte ponebas cumulatum aliquem plurimis et maximis 
voluptatibus nullo nee praesenti nec futuro dolore, 
ex altera autem cruciatibus maximis toto corpore 
nulla nec adiuncta nee sperata voluptate, et quaere- 
bas quis aut hoc miserior aut superiore illo beatior ; 
deinde concludebas summum malum esse dolorem, 
summum bonum voluptatem ! 

XX. “L. Thorius Balbus fuit, Lanuvinus, qaem 
meminisse tu non potes; is ita vivebat ut nulla tam 
exquisita posset inveniri voluptas qua non abundaret. 
Erat et cupidus voluptatum et eius generis intelle- 
gens et copiosus; ita non superstitiosus ut illa plurima 
in sua patria sacrificia et fana contemneret; ita non 
timidus ad mortem ut in acie sit ob rem publicam 
igterfectus. Cupiditates non Epicuri divisione finie- 
bat sed sua satietate. Habebat tamen rationem 
valetudinis; utebatur iis exercitationibus ut ad 
cenam et sitiens et esuriens veniret, eo cibo qui et 
suavissimus esset et idem facillimus ad concoquen- 
dum, vino et ad voluptatem et ne noceret. Cetera 
illa adhibebat, quibus demptis negat se Epicurus 
intellegere quid sit bonum. Aberat omnis dolor; 
qui si adesset, nec molliter ferret et tamen medicis 
plus quam philosophis uteretur. Color egregius, in- 


tegra valetudo, summa gratia'; vita denique conferta 
152 


BOOK II. xix-xx 


_ when you pictured on the one hand a pérson loaded 


14, 


with an abundance of the most delightful pleasures 
and free from all pain whether present or in pros- 
pect, and on the other one racked throughout his 
frame by the most excruciating pains, unqualified by 
any pleasure or hope of pleasure ; then proceeded to 
ask who could be more wretched than the latter or 
more happy than the former; and finally drew the 
conclusion that pain was the Chief Evil and pleasure 
the Chief Good ! 

XX. “Well, there was a certain Lucius Thorius of 
Lanuvium, whom you cannot remember; he lived 
on the principle of enjoying in the fullest measure 
all the most exquisite pleasures that could possibly 
be found. His appetite for pleasures was only 
equalled by his taste and ingenuity in devising them. 
He was so devoid of superstition as to scoff at all the 
sacrifices and shrines for which his native place is 
famous; and so free from fear of death that he died 
in battle for his country. Epicurus’s classification 
of the desires meant nothing to him; he knew no 
limit but satiety. At the same time he was care- 
ful of his health: took sufficient exercise to come 
hungry and thirsty to table; ate what was at once 
most appetizing and most digestible ; drank enough 
wine for pleasure and not too much for health. Nor 
did he forgo those other indulgences in the absence 
of which Epicurus declares that he cannot under- 
stand what Good is. Pain he never experienced at 
all; had it come to him, he would have borne it 
with fortitude, yet would have called in a doctor 
sooner than a philosopher. He had excellent health 
and asound constitution. He was extremely popular. 
In short, his life was replete with pleasure of every 

Los 


The voluptuary 


really less 
happy than 


Regulus, Lucre- 
tia or Verginius. 


65 


66 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


voluptatum dmnium varietate. Hune vos beatum,— 
ratio quidem vestra sic cogit; at ego quem huic 
anteponam non audeo dicere; dicet pro me ipsa 
virtus, nec dubitabit isti vestro beato M. Regulum 
anteponere, quem quidem, cum sua voluntate, nulla 
vi coactus praeter fidem quam dederat hosti, ex 
patria Carthaginem revertisset, tum ipsum, cum 
vigiliis et fame cruciaretur, clamat virtus beatiorem 
fuisse quam potantem in rosa Thorium. Bella magna 
gesserat, bis consul fuerat, triumpharat, nec tamen 
sua illa superiora tam magna neque tam praeclara 
ducebat quam illum ultimum casum quem propter 
fidem. constantiamque susceperat ; qui nobis misera- 
bilis videtur audientibus, illi perpetienti erat volu- 
ptarius. Non enim hilaritate nec lascivia nec risu 
aut ioco, comite levitatis, ‘saepe etiam tristes firmi- 
tate et constantia sunt beati. Stuprata per vim 
Lucretia a regis filio testata cives se ipsa interemit. 
Hic dolor populi Romani duce et auctore Bruto causa 
civitati libertatis fuit, ob eiusque mulieris memoriam 
primo anno et vir et pater eius consul est factus. 
Fenuis L. Verginius unusque de multis sexagesimo 
anno post libertatem receptam virginem filiam sua 


manu occidit potius quam ea Ap. Claudi libidini, qui 


2 


tum erat cum” summo imperio, dederetur. 


1 Before saepe inf. MSS. insert sed. 
2 cum inserted by I, Miller. 


154 


55 


66 


BOOK II. xx 


variety. Your school pronounces him a happy man, 
at least your theory requires you to do so. But I 
place above him—I do not venture to say whom: 
Virtue herself shall speak for me, and she will not 
hesitate to rank Marcus Regulus higher than this 
typically happy man, as you would call him. Regulus, 
of his own free will and under no compulsion except 
that of a promise given to an enemy, returned from 
his native land to Carthage; yet Virtue proclaims 
that when he had done so he was happier while 
tormented with sleeplessness and hunger than Thorius 
carousing on his couch of roses. Regulus had fought 
great wars, had twice been consul, had celebrated a 
triumph ; yet all his earlier exploits he counted less 
great and glorious than that final disaster, which he 
chose to undergo for the sake of honour and of 
loyalty: a pitiable end, as it seems to us who hear 
of it, but full of pleasure for him who endured it. 
Gaiety and merriment, laughter and jesting, those 
comrades: of frivolity, are not the only signs of 
happiness ; often in sadness those are happy whose 
wills are strong and true. Lucretia outraged by 
the royal prince called on her fellow-citizens to 
witness her wrong and died by her own hand. The 
indignation that this aroused in the Roman People, 
under the leadership and guidance of Brutus, won 
freedom for the state ; and in gratitude to Lucretia’s 
memory both her husband and her father were made 
consuls for the first year of the republic. Sixty years 
after our liberties had been won, Lucius Verginius, 
a poor man of humble station, killed his maiden 
daughter with his own hand rather than surrender 
her to the lust of Appius Claudius, who then held 
the highest power in the state. 
155 


67 


68 


69 


CICERO. DE FINIBUS 


XXI. “Aut haec tibi, Torquate, sunt vituperanda 
aut patrocinium voluptatis repudiandum. Quodautem 
patrocinium aut quae ista causa est voluptatis quae 
nec testes ullos e claris viris nec laudatores poterit 
adhibere? Ut enim nos ex annalium monumentis 
testes excitamus eos quorum omnis vita consumpta 
est in laboribus gloriosis, qui voluptatis nomen audire 
non possent, sic in vestris disputationibus historia 
muta est. Numquam audivi in Epicuri schola Lycur- 
gum, Solonem, Miltiadem, Themistoclem, Epami- 
nondam nominari, qui in ore sunt ceterorum philoso- 
phorum omnium. Nunc vero, quoniam haec nos 
etiam tractare coepimus, suppeditabit nobis Atticus 
noster e thesauris suis quos et quantos viros! Nonne 
melius est de his aliquid quam tantis voluminibus de 
Themista loqui? Sint ista Graecorum; quamquam 
ab iis philosophiam et omnes ingenuas disciplinas 
habemus; sed tamen est aliquid quod nobis non 
liceat, liceat illis. Pugnant Stoici cum Peripateticis. 
Alteri negant quidquam esse bonum nisi quod ho- 
nestum sit, alteri plurimum se et longe longeque 
plurimum tribuere honestati, sed tamen et in corpore 
et extra esse quaedam bona. Et certamen honestum 
et disputatio splendida! Omnis est enim de virtutis 
dignitate contentio. At cum tuis cum disseras, 
multa sunt audienda etiam de obscenis voluptatibus, 
de quibus ab Epicuro saepissime dicitur. Non potes 
ergo ista tueri, Torquate, mihi crede, si te ipse et 


a Atticus wrote historical and biographical miscellanies. 


156 


a7 


58 


BOOK II. xxi 


XXI. “Either, Torquatus, you must reprobate 
these actions, or you must give up your championship 
of Pleasure. But what defence can Pleasure offer, 
what case can you make out for her, when she will 
be able to produce no famous men as her witnesses 
or supporters? On our side we cite in evidence 
from our records and our annals men who spent their 


‘whole lives in glorious toils, men who would not have 


borne to hear pleasure so much as named; but 
in your discourses history isdumb. In the school of 
Epicurus I never heard one mention of Lycurgus, 
Solon, Miltiades, Themistocles, Epaminondas, who 
are always on the lips of the other philosophers. And 
now that we Romans too have begun to treat of these 
themes, what a marvellous roll of great men will our 
friend Atticus supply to us from his store-houses of 
learning’!* Would it not be better to talk of these than 
to devote those bulky volumes to Themista? Let us 
leave that sort of thing to the Greeks. True we owe 
to them philosophy and all the liberal sciences; yet 
there are topics not permitted to us, that are allow- 
able for them. Battle rages between the Stoics and 
the Peripatetics. One school declares that nothing 
is good but Moral Worth, the other that, while it 
assigns the greatest, and by far the greatest, value 
to Morality, yet still some bodily and external things 
are good. Here is an honourable quarrel, fought out 
in high debate! For the whole dispute turns on the 
true worth of virtue. But when one argues with 
your friends, one has to listen to a great deal about 
even the grosser forms of pleasure! Epicurus is 
always harping upon them! Believe me then, Tor- 
quatus, if you will but look within, and study your 
own thoughts and inclinations, you cannot con- 
157 


Epicureanism 
cannot appeal to 
the great names 
of history. 


It paints the 
Virtues as the 


handmaids of 


Pleasure, 


yy 


-~J 


0 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


tuas cogitationes et studia perspexeris; pudebit te, 


-inquam, illius tabulae quam Cleanthes sane com- 


mode verbis depingere solebat. Iubebat eos qui 
audiebant secum ipsos cogitare pictam in tabula 
voluptatem pulcherrimo vestitu et ornatu regali in 
solio sedentem; praesto esse virtutes ut ancillulas, 
quae nihil aliud agerent, nullum suum officium duce- 
rent nisi ut voluptati ministrarent, et eam tantum ad 
aurem admonerent (si modo id pictura intellegi pos- 
set) ut caveret ne quid faceret imprudens quod offen- 
deret animos hominum, aut quidquam e quo oriretur 
aliquis dolor. ‘Nos quidem virtutes sic natae sumus 
ut tibi serviremus ; aliud negoti nihil habemus.’ 
XXII. “At negat Epicurus (hoc enim vestrum 
lumen est) quemquam qui honeste non vivat iucunde 
posse vivere. Quasi ego id curem quid ille aiat aut 
neget; illud quaero, quid ei qui in voluptate sum- 
mum bonum ponat consentaneum sit dicere. Quid 
affers cur Thorius, cur Chius Postumius,! cur om- 
nium horum magister, Orata, non iucundissime vi- 
xerit? Ipse negat, ut ante dixi, luxuriosorum vitam 
reprendendam nisi plane fatui sint, id est nisi aut 
cupiant aut metuant. Quarum ambarum rerum cum 
medicinam pollicetur, luxuriae licentiam pollicetur. 
His enim rebus detractis negat se reperire in asoto- 
rum vita quod reprendat. Non igitur potestis volu- 
ptate omnia dirigentes aut tueri aut retinere virtutem. 
Nam nec vir bonus ac iustus haberi debet qui ne 


1Inf. MSS. have Postumtus cur Chtus. Mdy. marks 
a corruption, suspecting that three persons were enu- 
merated before cur omnium horum: perhaps cur Hirrius 
(an epicure mentioned by Varro and Pliny the Elder), cur 
Postumtus. 


158 


70 


[1 


BOOK II. xxi-xxii. 


tinue: to defend the doctrines you profess. You 
will be put to the blush, I say, by the picture that 
Cleanthes used to draw so cleverly in his lectures. 
He would tell his audience to imagine a paint- 
ing representing Pleasure, decked as a queen, and 
gorgeously apparelled, seated on a throne; at her 
side should stand the Virtues as her handmaids, 
who should make it their sole object and duty to 
minister to Pleasure, merely whispering in her ear 
the warning (provided this could be conveyed by the 
painter’s art) to beware of unwittingly doing aught 
to offend public opinion, or anything from which pain 
might result. “As for us Virtues, we were born to 
be your slaves; that is our one and only business.’ 
XXII. “But, you will tell me, your great luminary In reality it has 


: 2 + * i 
Epictrus denies that anyone who does not live peter e ee 


morally can live pleasantly. As if I cared what appearance of 


2 > i .,, virtue. 
Epicurus says or denies! What I ask is, what is it 


consistent for a man to say who places the Chief 
Good in pleasure? What reason can you give for 
thinking that Thorius, or Postumius of Chios, or the 
master of them all, Orata, did not live extremely 
pleasant lives? Epicurus himself says that the life 
of sensualists is blameless, if they are not utter 
fools—for that is what his proviso, if they are free 
from fear and from desire,’ amounts to. And, as he 
offers an antidote for both desire and fear, he vir- 
tually offers free indulgence for sensuality. Eliminate 
those passions, he says, and he cannot find anything 
to blame in a life of profligacy. Consequently you 
Epicureans, by taking pleasure as the sole guide, 
make it impossible for yourselves either to uphold 
or to retain virtue. For a man is not to be thought 
good and just who refrains from doing wrong to 
159 


(3 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


malum habeat abstinet se ab iniuria; nosti, credo, 
illud: 


Nemo pius est qui pietatem— ; 


cave putes quidquam esse verius. Nec enim dum 
metuit iustus est, et certe si metuere destiterit non 
erit; non metuet autem sive celare poterit sive 
opibus magnis quidquid fecerit obtinere, certeque 
malet existimari vir bonus ut non sit, quam esse ut 
non putetur. Ita, quod certissimum est,’ pro vera 
certaque iustitia simulationem nobis iustitiae traditis 
praecipitisque quodam modo ut nostram stabilem 
conscientiam contemnamus, aliorum errantem opi- 
nionem aucupemur. Quae dici eadem de ceteris 
virtutibus possunt, quarum omnia fundamenta vos in 
voluptate tamquam in aqua ponitis. Quid enim? 
fortemne possumus dicere eundem illum Torqua- 
tum ? — delector enim, quamquam te non possum, 
ut ais, corrumpere, delector, inquam, et familia vestra 
et nomine; et hercule mihi vir optimus nostrique 
amantissimus, A. Torquatus, versatur ante oculos, 
cuius quantum studium et quam insigne fuerit erga 
me temporibus illis quae nota sunt omnibus, scire 
necesse est utrumque vestrum; quae mihi ipsi, qui 
volo et esse et haberi gratus, grata non essent nisi 
eum perspicerem mea causa mihi amicum fuisse, non 
sua; nisi hoc dicis, sua, quod interest omnium recte 
facere.. Si id dicis, vicimus; id enim volumus, id 


‘quod certissimum est Mdy. suspects as an inept inter- 
polation. 


aAn unknown quotation. Mdv. suggests that the sen- 
tence ended with metu colzt or the like. 
bCp. § 62 above. 


160 


BOOK II. xxii 


-avoid incurring harm; no doubt you know the 


line: 
None is good, whose love of goodness — ;* 


believe me, nothing can be truer. As long as his 
motive is fear, he is not just, and assuredly as soon 
as he ceases to fear, he will not be just; and he will 
not feel fear, if he can conceal his wrong-doing, or is 
sufficiently powerful to brazen it out; and he will 
assuredly prefer the reputation without the reality 
of goodness to the reality without the reputation. So 
your school undoubtedly preaches the pretence of 
justice instead of the real and genuine thing. Its 


_ lesson amounts to this—we are to despise the trust- 


© 


* 


worthy voice of our own conscience, and to run after 
the fallible imaginations of other men. The same 
applies in the case of the other virtues. Basing them 
entirely on pleasure you are laying their foundations 
in water. Why, take the great Torquatus again: 
ean he really be called brave ?—for I delight, albeit 
my flattery, as you put it, is powerless to bribe 
you, I delight, I say, in your name and lineage; and 
indeed I have personal recollections of that distin- 
guished man, Aulus Torquatus, who was an affec- 
tionate friend of my own, and whose signal loyalty 
and devotion to me in circumstances that are within 
universal knowledge? must be familiar to you both ; 
yet for my part, anxious as I am to feel and show a 
proper gratitude, I would not have thanked him for 
his friendship had I not known that it was dis- 
interested; unless you choose to say that it was for 


his own interest in the sense that it is to every 


man’s interest to act rightly. If you do say so, we 
have won our case; for our one principle, our one 
M 161 


73 


74 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
contendimus, ut offici fructus sit ipsum officium. Hoe 
ille tuus non vult, omnibusque ex rebus voluptatem 
quasi mercedem exigit. Sed ad illum redeo; si vo- 
luptatis causa cum Gallo apud Anienem depugnavit 
provocatus et ex eius spoliis sibi et torquem et co- 
gnomen induit ullam aliam ob causam nisi quod ei 
talia facta digna viro videbantur, fortem non puto. 
Iam si pudor, si modestia, si pudicitia, si uno verbo 
temperantia poenae aut infamiae metu coercebuntur, 
non sanctitate sua se tuebuntur, quod adulterium, 
quod stuprum, quae libido non se proripiet ac proiciet 
aut occultatione proposita aut impunitate aut li- 
centia ? 

“Quid? illud, Torquate, quale tandem videtur,—te 
isto nomine ingenio gloria, quae facis, quae cogitas, 
quae contendis quo referas, cuius rei causa perficere 
quae conaris velis, quid optimum denique in vita 
iudices, non audere in conventu dicere? Quid enim 
mereri velis, iam cum magistratum inieris et in con- 
tionem ascenderis (est enim tibi edicendum quae sis 
observaturus in iure dicendo, et fortasse etiam, si tibi 
erit visum, aliquid de maioribus tuis et de te ipso dices 
more maiorum),—quid merearis igitur ut dicas te in 
eo magistratu omnia voluptatis causa facturum esse 


teque nihil fecisse in vita nisi voluptatis causa ?>— 
162 


BOOK ILI, xxii 


‘3 contention is, that duty is its own reward. This 
your great master does not allow; he expects 
everything to pay—to yield its quota of pleasure. 
But I return to old Torquatus. If it-was to win 
pleasure that he accepted the Gallic warrior’s chal- 
lenge to single combat on the banks of the Anio, 
and if he despoiled him and assumed his necklet 
and the corresponding surname for any other reason 
than that he thought such deeds became a man, I 
do not consider him brave. Again, if modesty, self- 
control, chastity, if in a word Temperance is to 
depend for its sanction on the fear of punishment or 
of disgrace, and not to maintain itself by its own 
intrinsic sacredness, what form of adultery, vice or 
lust will not break loose and run riot when it is 
assured of concealment, impunity or indulgence. 

‘4 “Or what, pray, are we to think of the situation if No public man 
you, Torquatus, bearing the name you do, and gifted Doe 
and distinguished as you are, dare not profess before a 
public audience the real object of all your actions, 
aims and endeavours, the motive that inspires you 
to accomplish your undertakings, what it is in short 
that you consider the greatest good in life? In re- 
turn for what payment or consideration, when not 
long hence you have attained to public office and 
come forward to address a meeting (for you will have 
to announce the rules that you propose to observe in 
administering justice, and very likely also, if you 
think good, you will follow the time-honoured custom 
of making some reference to your ancestors and to 
yourself), —for what consideration then would you con- 
sent to declare that you intend in office to guide your 
conduct solely by pleasure, and that pleasure has 
been your aim in every action of your life ?2—‘Do you 

M2 163 


75 


76 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


‘An me, inquis, “tam amentem putas ut apud 
imperitos isto modo loquar ?’—At tu eadem ista dic 
in iudicio aut, si coronam times, dic in senatu. Num- 
quam facies. Cur, nisi quod turpis oratio est ? Mene 
ergo et Triarium dignos existimas apud quos turpiter 
loquare? 

XXIII. “ Verum esto: verbum ipsum voluptatis 
non habet dignitatem, nec nos fortasse intellegi- 
mus; hoe enim identidem dicitis, non intellegere nos 
quam dicatis voluptatem. Rem videlicet difficilem 
et obscuram! Individua cum dicitis et intermundia, 
quae nec sunt ulla nec possunt esse, intellegimus ; 
voluptas, quae passeribus nota est omnibus, a nobis 
intellegi non potest? Quid si efficio ut fateare me 
non modo quid sit voluptas scire (est enim iucundus 
motus in sensu), sed etiam quid eam tu velis esse? 
Tum enim eam ipsam vis quam modo ego dixi, et 
nomen imponis in motu ut sit et faciat aliquam varie- 
tatem, tum aliam quandam summam voluptatem cui 
addi nihil possit ; eam tum adesse cum dolor omnis 
absit ; eam stabilem appellas. Sit sane ista voluptas. 
Die in quovis conventu te omnia facere ne doleas. 
Si ne hoc quidem satis ample, satis honeste dici 
putas, dic te omnia et in isto magistratu et in omni 


vita utilitatis tuae causa facturum, nihil nisi quod 
164 


‘BOOK II. xxii-xxiti 


- take me for such an imbecile,’ you exclaim, ‘as to talk 


in that fashion before ignorant people ?’—Well, make 
the same profession in a law-court, or if you are afraid 
of the public there, say it in the senate. You will 
never doit. Why not, unless because such language 
is disgraceful? Then what a compliment to Torquatus 
and myself, to use it in our presence! 

XXII I. “But let us grant your position. The actual 
word ‘pleasure’ has an undignified sound; and per- 
haps we do not understand its eT you are 
always repeating that we do not understand what 
you mean by pleasure. As though it were a difficult 
or recondite notion! We understand you when you 
talk of ‘indivisible atoms’ and ‘cosmic interspaces,’ 
things that don’t exist and never can exist; then is 
our intelligence incapable of grasping the meaning 
of pleasure, a feeling known to every sparrow? What 
if I force you to admit that I do know not only what 
pleasure really is (it is an agreeable activity of the 
sense), but also what you mean by it? For at one 
moment you mean by it the feeling that I have just 
defined, and this you entitle ‘kinetic’ pleasure, as 
producing a definite change of feeling, but at another 
moment you say it is quite a different feeling, which 
is the acme and climax of pleasuré, but yet consists 
merely in the complete absence of pain; this you 
call ‘static’ pleasure. Well, grant that pleasure is 
the latter sort of feeling. Profess in any public 
assembly that the motive of all your actions is the 
desire to avoid pain. If you feel that this too does 
not sound sufficiently dignified and respectable, say 
that you intend both in your present office and all 
your life long to act solely for the sake of your own 


advantage,—to do nothing but what willpay, nothing 
165 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


expediat, nihil denique nisi tua causa; quem cla- 
morem contionis aut quam spem consulatus eius qui 
tibi paratissimus est futuram putas? Eamne rationem 
igitur sequere? qua tecum ipse et cum tuis utare, pro- 
fiteri et in medium proferre non audeas? At vero 
illa quae Peripatetici, quae Stoici dicunt, semper tibi 
in ore sunt in iudiciis, in senatu. Officium, aequi- 
tatem, dignitatem, fidem, recta, honesta, digna im- 
perio, digna populo Romano, omnia pericula pro re 
publica, mori pro patria,—haec cum loqueris, nos 
barones stupemus, tu videlicet tecum ipse rides. 
Nam inter ista tam magnifica verba tamque praeclara 
non habet ullum voluptas locum, non modo illa quam 
in motu esse dicitis, quam omnes urbani, rustici, 
omnes, inquam, qui Latine loquuntur, voluptatem 
vocant, sed ne haec quidem stabilis, quam praeter 
vos nemo appellat voluptatem. XXIV. Vide igitur 
ne non debeas verbis nostris uti, sententiis tuis. Quod 
si vultum tibi, si incessum fingeres quo gravior vide- 
rere, non esses tui similis ; verba tu fingas, et ea dicas 
quae non sentias? aut etiam, ut vestitum, sic sen- 
tentiam habeas aliam domesticam, aliam forensem, 
ut in fronte ostentatio sit, intus veritas occultetur ? 
Vide, quaeso, rectumne sit. Mihi quidem eae verae 
videntur opiniones quae honestae, quae laudabiles, 
quae gloriosae, quae in senatu, quae apud populum, 


* sequere A; most MSS. seguare. 


166 


BOOK II. xxiii-xxiv 


_ in short that is not for your own interest; imagine 
the uproar among the audience! What would be- 
come of your chances of the consulship, which as it 
is seems to be a certainty for you in the near future ? 
Will you then adopt a rule of life which you can ap- 
peal to in private and among friends but which you 
dare not openly profess or parade in public? Ah, 
but it is the vocabulary of the Peripatetics and the 
Stoics that is always on your lips, in the law-courts 
and the senate. Duty, Fair-dealing, Moral Worth, 
Fidelity, Uprightness, Honour, the Dignity of office, 
the Dignity of the Roman People, Risk all for the 

- state, Die for your Country,—when you talk in 
this style, we simpletons stand gaping in admiration, 

‘7 —and you no doubt laugh in your sleeve. For in that 

glorious array of high-sounding words, pleasure finds 

no place, not only what your school calls ‘ kinetic’ 
pleasure, which is what every one, polished or rustic, 
every one, 1 say, who can speak Latin, means by 
pleasure, but not even this ‘static’ pleasure, which 
no one but you Epicureans would call pleasure at all. 
XXIV. Well then, are you sure you have any right 
to employ our words with meanings of your own? If 
you assumed an unnatural expression or demeanour, 
in order to look more important, that would be insin- 
cere. Are you then to affect an artificial language, 
and say what you do not think? Or are you to 
change your opinions like your clothes, and have one 
set for indoor wear and another when you walk 
abroad? Outside, all show and pretence, but your 
genuine self concealed within? Reflect, I beg of 
you, is this honest? In my view those opinions are 
true which are honourable, praiseworthy and noble 
—which can be openly avowed in the senate and 


167 


78 


19 


‘ CICERO DE FINIBUS 


quae in omni coetu concilioque profitendae sint, ne 
id non pudeat sentire quod pudeat dicere. 

“ Amicitiae vero locus ubi esse potest aut quis 
amicus esse cuiquam quem non ipsum amet propter 
ipsum? Quid autem est amare, e quo nomen du- 
ctum amicitiae est, nisi velle bonis aliquem affici quam 
maximis etiamsi ad se ex iis nihil redundet*? Pro- 
dest, inquit, mihi eo esse animo. Immo videri for- 
tasse. Esse enim, nisi eris, non potes”; qui autem 
esse poteris nisi te amor ipse ceperit? quod non 
subducta utilitatis ratione effici solet, sed ipsum a se 
oritur et sua sponte nascitur. “At enim sequor 
utilitatem.’ Manebit ergo amicitia tam diu quam 
diu sequetur utilitas, et, si utilitas constituet amici- 
tiam, tollet eadem. Sed quid ages tandem si utilitas 
ab amicitia, ut fit saepe, defecerit? Relinquesne ? 
quae ista amicitia est? Retinebis? qui convenit? 
quid enim de amicitia statueris utilitatis causa expe- 
tenda vides. ‘Ne in odium veniam si amicum de- 
stitero tueri... Primum cur ista res digna odio est 
nisi quod est turpis? Quod si ne quo incommodo 
afficiare non relinques amicum, tamen, ne sine fructu 
alligatus sis, ut moriatur optabis. Quid si non 
modo utilitatem tibi nullam afferet, sed iacturae 


' vedundet Mdv.; MSS. redeunt et, redeat et, redeat guid. 

? For the suspicious words esse enim, nisi eris, non potes, 
which make the following sentence tautological, Graser 
conjectures esse enim, nisi videris, non prodest. ‘* ‘It pays 
me (you say) to be a disinterested friend.’ No, to seem so 
perhaps: it doesn’t pay to be so without seeming so. But 
how can you be so unless, etc... .” 


168 


BOOK II. xxiv 


_ the popular assembly, and in every company and 
gathering, so that one need not be ashamed to say 
what one is not ashamed to think. 

“Again, how will friendship be possible? How Friendship 
can one man be another man’s friend, if he does not on Vole aa 
love him in and for himself? What is the meaning 
of ‘to love’—from which our word for friendship is 
derived—except to wish some one to receive the 
greatest possible benefits even though one gleans 
no advantage therefrom oneself? ‘It pays me,’ you 
say, to be a disinterested friend.’ No, perhaps it 
pays you to seem so. Be so you cannot, unless you 
really are ; but how can you be a disinterested friend 
unless you feel genuine affection? Yet affection 
does not commonly result from any calculation of 
expediency. It is a spontaneous growth; it springs 
up of itself. ‘But,’ you will say, ‘I am guided by 
expediency.’ Then your friendship will last just so 
long as it is attended by expediency. If expediency 
creates the feeling it will also destroy it. But what, 
pray, will you do, if, as often happens, expediency 
parts company with friendship? Will you throw 
your friend over? What sort of friendship is that ? 
Will you keep him? How does that square with 
your principles? You remember your pronounce- 
ment that friendship is desirable for the sake of 
expediency. “I might become unpopular if I left 
a friend in the lurch.’ Well, in the first place, why 
is such conduct unpopular, unless because it is base ? 
And if you refrain from deserting a friend because 
to do so will have inconvenient consequences, still 
you will long for his death to release you from an 
unprofitable tie. What if he not only brings you 
no advantage, but causes you to suffer loss of pro- 


169 


81 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


rei familiaris erunt faciundae, labores suscipiendi, 
adeundum vitae periculum? ne tum quidem te re- 
spicies et cogitabis sibi quemque natum esse et suis 
voluptatibus? Vadem te ad mortem tyranno dabis 
pro amico, ut Pythagoreus ille Siculo fecit tyranno, 
aut Pylades cum sis, dices te esse Oresten ut mo- 
riare pro amico, aut si esses Orestes, Pyladem refel- 
leres, te indicares, et si id non probares, quo minus 
ambo una necaremini non deprecarere*? 

XXV. “Faceres tu quidem, Torquate, haee omnia; 
nihil enim arbitror magna laude dignum esse quod - 
te praetermissurum credam aut mortis aut doloris 
metu. Non quaeritur autem quid naturae tuae con- 
sentaneum sit, sed quid disciplinae. Ratio ista quam 
defendis, praecepta quae didicisti, quae probas, fun- 
ditus evertunt amicitiam, quamvis eam Epicurus, ut 
facit, in caelum efferat laudibus. ‘At coluit ipse 
amicitias.’ Quis, quaeso, illum negat et bonum 
virum et comem et humanum fuisse? De ingenio 
eius in his disputationibus, non de moribus quaeritur. 
Sit ista in Graecorum levitate perversitas, qui male- 
dictis insectantur eos a quibus de veritate dissenti- 
unt. Sed quamvis comis in amicis tuendis fuerit, 
tamen, si haee vera sunt (nihil enim affirmo), non 
satis acutus fuit. ‘ At multis se probavit.’ Et qui- 
dem iure fortasse ; sed tamen non gravissimum est 
testimonium multitudinis. In omni enim arte vel 

'deprecarere edd.; precarere Mdv. with the MSS. 

aPhintias, pleading for his friend Damon before Dionysius, 
‘tyrant’ of Syracuse; Dionysius pardoned them both and 
begged to become a third in such a friendship. Cf. OfF 3. 45. 

bCf. V. 63. Cicero refers to a scene in the Dulorestes of 


Pacuvius, where Thoas King of the Tauri wished to kill 


whichever of the two captives brought before him was 
Orestes. 


170 : 


BOOK II. xxiv-xxv 


- perty, to undergo toil and trouble, to risk your life ? 
Will you not even then take interest into account, and 
reflect that each man is born for himself and for his 

_ own pleasure? Will you go bail with your life to a 
tyrant on behalf of a friend, as the famous Pytha- 
gorean* did to the Sicilian despot? or being Pylades? 
will you say you are Orestes, so as to die in your 
friend’s stead? or supposing you were Orestes, 
would you say Pylades was lying and reveal your 

identity, and if they would not believe you, would 

you entreat that you both might die together ? 

XXV. “Yes, Torquatus, you personally would do all pee wes 
these things; for I do not believe there is any high or better has kis 
noble action which fear of pain or death could induce *°* 
you to forgo. But the question is not what conduct is 
consistent with your character, but what is consis- 
tent with your tenets. The system you uphold, 
the principles you have studied and accept, under- 
mine the very foundations of friendship, however 
much Epicurus may, as he does, praise friendship up 
to the skies. ‘But,’ you tell me, ‘ Epicurus himself 
had many friends.’ Who pray denies that Epicurus was 

_agood man, and a kind and humane man? In these 
discussions it is his intellect and not his character 
that is in question. Let us leave to the frivolous 
Greeks the wrong-headed habit of attacking and abus- 
ing the persons whose views of truth they do not 
share. Epicurus may have been a kind and faithful 
friend ; but if what I say is true (for I do not dog- 

- matize), he was not a very acute thinker. “But he 

_won many disciples.’ Yes, and perhaps he deserved 
to do so; but still the witness of the crowd does not 
carry much weight; for as in every art or study or 
science of any kind, so in right conduct itself, 

171 


~~ 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 

studio vel quavis scientia, vel in ipsa virtute, optimum 
quidque rarissimum est. Ac mihi quidem, quod et 
ipse bonus vir fuit et multi Epicurei et fuerunt et 
hodie sunt et in amicitiis fideles et in omni vita con- 
stantes et graves nec voluptate sed officio consilia 
moderantes, hoc videtur maior vis honestatis et 
minor voluptatis. Ita enim vivunt quidam ut eorum 
vita refellatur oratio. Atque ut ceteri dicere existi- 
mantur melius quam facere, sic hi mihi videntur facere 
melius quam dicere. 

82 XXVI. “Sed haec nihil sane ad rem; illa videamus 
quae a te de amicitia dicta sunt. E quibus unum 
mihi videbar ab ipso Epicuro dictum cognoscere, 
amicitiam a voluptate non posse divelli ob eamque 


rem colendam esse quod, cum? 


sine ea tuto et sine 
metu vivi non posset, ne iucunde quidem posset. 
Satis est ad hoc responsum. Attulisti aliud humanius 
horum recentiorum, numquam dictum ab ipso illo, 
quod sciam, primo utilitatis causa amicum expeti, 
cum autem usus accessisset, tum ipsum amari per se, 
etiam omissa spe voluptatis. Hoc etsi multis modis 
reprendi potest, tamen accipio quod dant; mihi enim 
satis est, ipsis non satis. Nam aliquando posse recte 
fieri dicunt, nulla exspectata nec quaesita voluptate. 
83 Posuisti etiam dicere alios foedus quoddam inter se 


1 cum inserted by Mdvy. 
172 


BOOK II, xxv-xxvi 


‘supreme excellence is extremely rare. And to my 
_ mind the fact that Epicurus himself was a good man 
and that many Epicureans both have been and to- 
day are loyal to their friends, consistent and high- 
principled throughout their lives, ruling their con- 
duct by duty and not by pleasure,—all this does but 
enforce the value of moral goodness and diminish 
that of pleasure. The fact is that some persons’ 
lives and behaviour refute the principles they pro- 
fess. Most men’s words are thought to be better 
than their deeds ; these people’s deeds on the con- 
trary seem to me better than their words. 

XXVI. “ But this I admit is a digression. Let us The three Epi- 
return to what you said about friendship. In one of Se erie 
your remarks I seemed to recognize a saying of Epi- **° 2! untrue. 
curus himself,—that friendship cannot be divorced 
from pleasure, and that it deserves to be cultivated 
for the reason that without it we cannot live secure 
and free from alarm, and therefore cannot live agree- 
ably. Enough has been said in answer to this already. 
You quoted another and a more humane dictum 
of the more modern Epicureans, which so far as I 
know was never uttered by the master himself. This 
was to the effect that, although at the outset we 
desire a man’s friendship for utilitarian reasons, yet 
when intimacy has grown up we love our friend for 
his own sake, even if all prospect of pleasure be left 
out of sight. It is possible to take exception to this 
position on several grounds; still I welcome their 
concession, as it is sufficient for my case and not 
sufficient for theirs. For it amounts to saying 
that moral action is occasionally possible,—action 
prompted by no anticipation or desire of pleasure. 
3 You further alleged that other thinkers speak of 

173 


‘~ 


84 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


facere sapientes ut, quemadmodum sint in se ipsos 
animati, eodem modo sint erga amicos; id et fieri 
posse et saepe esse factum et ad voluptates percipi- 
endas maxime pertinere. Hoc foedus facere si 
potuerunt, faciant etiam illud, ut aequitatem, mode- 
stiam, virtutes omnes per se ipsas gratis diligant. An 
vero si fructibus et emolumentis et utilitatibus 
amicitias colemus, si nulla ecaritas erit quae faciat 
amicitiam ipsam sua sponte, vi sua, ex se et propter 
se expetendam, dubium est quin fundos et insulas 
amicis anteponamus? Licet hic rursus ea comme- 
mores quae optimis verbis ab Epicuro de laude ami- 
citiae dicta sunt. Non quaero quid dicat, sed quid 
convenienter possit rationi et sententiae suae dicere. 
“ Utilitatis causa amicitia est quaesita.’ Num igitur 
utiliorem tibi hunc Triarium putas esse posse quam 
si tua sint Puteolis granaria? Collige omnia quae 
soletis: ‘Praesidium amicorum.’ Satis est tibi in 
te, satis in legibus, satis in mediocribus amicitiis 
praesidi ; iam contemni non poteris; odium autem 
et invidiam facile vitabis: ad eas enim res ab Epi- 
curo praecepta dantur. Et tamen tantis vectigalibus 
ad liberalitatem utens, etiam sine hac Pyladea amici- 
tia multorum te benevolentia praeclare tuebere et 
munies. At quicum ioca seria, ut dicitur, quicum 
arcana, quicum occulta omnia? Tecum optime, 


deinde etiam cum mediocri amico. Sed fac ista esse 
174 


=— 


> ss) 


BOOK II. xxvi 


wise men as making a sort of mutual compact 
‘to entertain the same sentiments towards their 


friends as they feel towards themselves; this (you 
said) was possible, and in fact had often occurred ; 
and it was highly conducive to the attainment of 
pleasure. If men have succeeded in making this 
compact, let them make a further compact to love 
fair-dealing, self-control, and all the virtues, for their 
own sakes and without reward. If on the other 
hand we are to cultivate friendships for their results, 
for profit and utility; if there is to be no affection to 
render friendship in and for itself, intrinsically and 
spontaneously, desirable; can we doubt that we shall 
value land and house-property more than friends ? 
It is no good your once again repeating Epicurus’s 
admirable remarks in praise of friendship. I am not 
asking what Epicurus actually says, but what he can 
say consistently while holding the theory he pro- 
fesses. ‘Friendship is originally sought after from 
motives of utility.’ Well, but surely you don’t reckon 
Triarius here a more valuable asset than the granaries 
at Puteoli would be if they belonged to you? Cite 
all the stock Epicurean maxims. Friends are a pro- 
tection.’ You can protect yourself; the laws will 
protect you; ordinary friendships offer protection 
enough; soon you will be too powerful to be des- 
pised; moreover you will easily avoid hatred and 
envy,—Epicurus gives rules for doing so! And even 
otherwise, with so large an income to give away, you 
can dispense with the romantic sort of friendship 
that we have in mind; you will have plenty of well- 
wishers to defend you quite effectively. But a con- 
fidant, to share your ‘ grave thoughts or gay’ as the 
saying is, all your secrets and private cc gat 


86 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
non importuna; quid ad utilitatem tantae pecuniae? 
Vides igitur, si amicitiam sua caritate metiare, nihil 
esse praestantius, sin emolumento, summas familiari- 
tates praediorum fructuosorum mercede superari. 
Me igitur ipsum ames oportet, non mea, si veri amici 
futuri sumus. 

XXVII. “Sed in rebus apertissimis nimium longi 
sumus. Perfecto enim et concluso neque virtutibus 
neque amicitiis usquam locum esse si ad voluptatem 
omnia referantur, nihil praeterea est magno opere © 
dicendum. Ac tamen, ne cui loco non videatur 
esse responsum, pauca etiam nune dicam ad reli- 
quam orationem tuam. Quoniam igitur omnis sum- 
ma philosophiae ad beate vivendum refertur, idque 
unum expetentes homines se ad hoc studium contu- 
lerunt, beate autem vivere alii in alio, vos in vo- 
luptate ponitis, item contra miseriam omnem in 
dolore, id primum videamus, beate vivere vestrum 
quale sit. Atque hoc dabitis, ut opinor, si modo sit 
aliquid esse beatum, id oportere totum poni in pote- 
state sapientis. Nam si amitti vita beata potest, 
beata esse non potest. Quis enim confidit semper 
sibi illud stabile et firmum permansurum quod fragile 
et caducum sit? Qui autem diffidit perpetuitati 


bonorum suorum, timeat necesse est ne aliquando 


176 


BOOK II. xxvi-xxvii 


_ best confidant is yourself; you may also confide in a 
friend of the average type. But granting that 
_ friendship has the conveniences you mention, what 
are they compared with the advantages of such vast 
wealth? You see then that although if you measure 
friendship by the test of its own charm it is unsur- 
passed in value, by the standard of profit the most 
affectionate intimacy is outweighed by the rents of a 
valuable estate. So you must love me myself, not 
- my possessions, if we are to be genuine friends. 
XXVII. “But we dwell too long upon the obvious. Not true that 
For when it has been conclusively proved that if the Wise Man 


: ; will always be 
pleasure is the sole standard there is no room left happy, if plea- 


either for virtue or friendship, there is no great need Good: oe 
to say anything further. Still I do not want you to 
think I have failed to answer any of your points, so 
I will now say a few words more in reply to the 
remainder of your discourse. The end and aim of 
every system of philosophy is the attainment of hap- 
piness; and desire for happiness is the sole motive 
that has led men to engage in this study. But 
different thinkers make happiness consist in different 
things. According to your school it consists in 
* pleasure, and conversely misery consists solely in 
pain. Let us then begin by examining what sort of 
thing happiness as you conceive it is. You will grant, 
I suppose, that if there is such a thing as happiness, 
it is bound to be attainable in its entirety by the 
Wise Man. For if happiness once won can be lost, 
a happy life is impossible. Since who can feel 
confident of permanently and securely retaining a 
possession that is perishable and precarious? yet 
one who is not sure of the permanence of his Goods, 
must inevitably fear that a time may come when he 


N 177 


87 


88 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


amissis illis sit miser. Beatus autem esse in maxi- 
marum rerum timore nemo potest. Nemo igitur 
esse beatus potest. Neque enim in aliqua parte sed 
in perpetuitate temporis vita beata dici! solet, nec 
appellatur omnino vita nisi confecta atque absoluta, 
nec potest quisquam alias beatus esse, alias miser ; 
qui enim existimabit posse se miserum esse, beatus 
non erit. Nam cum suscepta semel est beata vita, 
tam permanet quam ipsa illa effectrix beatae vitae 
sapientia, neque exspectat ultimum tempus aetatis, 
quod Croeso scribit Herodotus praeceptum a Solone. 

“ At enim, quemadmodum tute dicebas, negat Epi- 
curus ne diuturnitatem quidem temporis ad beate 
vivendum aliquid afferre, nec minorem voluptatem 
percipi in brevitate temporis quam si illa sit sempi- 
terna. Haec dicuntur inconstantissime. Cum enim 
summum bonum in voluptate ponat, negat infinito 
tempore aetatis voluptatem fieri maiorem quam finito 
atque modico. Qui bonum omne in virtute ponit, 
is potest dicere perfici beatam vitam perfectione vir- 
tutis: negat enim summo bono afferre incrementum 
diem; qui autem voluptate vitam effici beatam pu- 
tabit, qui sibi is conveniet si negabit voluptatem 
crescere longinquitate? Igitur ne dolorem quidem. 
An dolor longissimus quisque miserrimus, volupta- 
tem non optabiliorem diuturnitas facit? Quid est 
igitur cur ita semper deum Epicurus beatum appel- 
let et aeternum? Dempta enim aeternitate nihilo 
beatior Iuppiter quam Epicurus; uterque enim sum- 

1 diet Mdy.; duct MSS, 
178 


BOOK II. xxvii 


- may lose them and so be miserable. But no one 


87 


can be happy who fears utter ruin. Therefore no 
one can be happy at all. For we usually speak ot 
a life as a happy one not in reference to a part 
of it, but to the whole of a lifetime ; indeed “a life’ 


‘means a finished and complete life ; nor is it possible 


to be at one time happy and at another miserable, 
since he who thinks that he may be miserable, will 
not be happy. For when happiness has once been 


achieved, it is as permanent as Wisdom itself, which 


is the efficient cause of happiness; it does not wait 


for the end of our mortal term, as Croesus in Hero- 


dotus’ s history was warned by Solon to do. 


“It may be rejoined that Epicurus, as you your- 2° that plea- 


sure is not 


self were saying, denies that long duration can increased by 


duration. 


add anything to happiness; he says that as much 
pleasure is enjoyed in a brief span of time as if 
pleasure were everlasting. In saying this he is 
grossly inconsistent. He places the Chief Good 
in pleasure, and yet he says that no greater pleasure 
would result from a lifetime of endless duration than 
from a limited and moderate period. If a person 


finds the sole Good in Virtue, it is open to him to 
‘say that the happy life is consummated by the con- 


summation of Virtue; for his position is that the 
Chief Good is not increased by lapse of time. But 
if one thinks that happiness is produced by pleasure, 
how can he consistently deny that pleasure is in- 
creased by duration? If it is not, pain is not either. 
Or if pain is worse the longer it lasts, is not pleasure 
rendered more desirable by continuance? Epicurus 
always speaks of the Deity as happy and everlasting ; 
but on what ground? Take away his everlasting 
life, and Jove is no happier than Epicurus; each of 
N2 179 


89 


90 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


mo bono fruitur, id est voluptate. ‘At enim hic 
etiam dolore!’ At eum nihili facit; ait enim se, 
si uratur, ‘Quam hoc suave!’ dicturum. Qua igitur 
re a deo vincitur si aeternitate non vincitur? In 
qua quid est boni praeter summam voluptatem et 
eam sempiternam? Quid ergo attinet gloriose loqui 
nisi constanter loquare? In voluptate corporis 
(addam, si vis, animi, dum ea ipsa, ut vultis, sit e 
corpore) situm est vivere beate. Quid? istam vo- 
luptatem perpetuam quis potest praestare sapienti ? 
Nam quibus rebus efficiuntur voluptates, eae non 
sunt in potestate sapientis. Non enim in ipsa sa- 
pientia positum est beatum esse, sed in iis rebus 
quas sapientia comparat ad voluptatem. Totum 
autem id externum est, et quod externum, id in 
casu est. Ita fit beatae vitae domina fortuna, quam 
Epicurus ait exiguam intervenire sapienti. 

XXVIII. ““ Age,’ inquies, “ista parva sunt. Sapi- 
entem locupletat ipsa natura, cuius divitias Epicurus 
parabiles esse docuit. —Haec bene dicuntur, nec 
ego repugno; sed inter sese ipsa pugnant. Negat 
enim tenuissimo victu, id est contemptissimis escis 
et potionibus, minorem voluptatem percipi quam 
rebus exquisitissimis ad epulandum. Huic ego, si 
negaret quidquam interesse ad beate vivendum quali 
uteretur victu, concederem; laudarem etiam; verum 


al.e, in the brazen bull of Phalaris, cf. V. 80, 85. 
180 


BOOK II. xxvii-xxviii 


them enjoys the Chief Good, that is to say, pleasure. 
“Ah but,’ you say, ‘Epicurus is liable to pain as well.’ 
Yes, but he thinks nothing of pain; for he tells us 
hat if he were being burnt to death? he would 
exclaim, ‘ How delightful this is!’ Wherein then 
is he inferior to God, except that God lives for ever ? 
But what good has everlasting life to offer beside 
supreme and never-ending pleasure? What then is 
the use of your high-flown language, if it be not 
consistent? Physical pleasure (and I will add if you 
like mental pleasure, so long as this, as you hold, is 
understood to have its source in the body) consti- 
tutes happiness. Well, who can guarantee this 
pleasure for the Wise Man in perpetuity? For the 
things that produce pleasure are not in the Wise 
Man’s control; since happiness does not consist in 
wisdom itself, but in the means to pleasure which 
wisdom can procure. But all the apparatus of pleasure 
is external, and what is external must depend on 
chance. Consequently happiness becomes the slave 
of fortune; yet Epicurus says that fortune inter- 
feres with the Wise Man but little! 
XXVIII. “‘Come,’ you will say, ‘these are trivial gyen if the 

objections. The Wise Man is endowed with Nature’s Wise Man's 


needs can be 
own riches, and these, as Epicurus has shown, are easily satis- 


easy of attainment.’ This is excellently said, anid he 
do not combat it; but Epicurus’s own statements P32! 

are at war with each other. He tells us that the 

simplest fare, that is, the meanest sorts of food and 

drink, afford no less pleasure than a banquet of the 

rarest delicacies. For my part, if he said that it 

made no difference to happiness what. sort. of food 

he ate, I should agree, and what is more I should 

applaud; for he would be telling the truth. I 

181 


91 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


enim diceret, idque Socratem, qui voluptatem nullo 
loco numerat, audio dicentem, cibi condimentum 
esse famem, potionis sitim. Sed qui ad voluptatem 
omnia referens vivit ut Gallonius, loquitur ut Frugi 
ille Piso, non audio, nec eum-quod sentiat dicere 
existimo. Naturales divitias dixit parabiles esse 
quod parvo esset natura contenta. Certe, nisi volu- 
ptatem tanti aestimaretis. Non minor, inquit, volu- 
ptas percipitur ex vilissimis rebus quam ex pretiosis- 
simis. Hoe est non modo cor non habere sed ne 
palatum quidem. Qui enim voluptatem ipsam con- 
temnunt, iis licet dicere se acipenserem maenae non 
anteponere; cui vero in voluptate summum bonum 
est, huic omnia sensu, non ratione sunt iudicanda, 
eaque dicenda optima quae sunt suavissima. Verum 
esto; consequatur summas voluptates non modo parvo, 
sed per me nihilo, si potest; sit voluptas non minor 
in nasturcio illo quo vesci Persas esse solitos scribit 
Xenophon, quam in Syracusanis mensis quaea Platone 
graviter vituperantur; sit, inquam, tam facilis quam 
vultis comparatio voluptatis; quid de dolore dicemus? 
cuius tanta tormenta sunt ut in iis beata vita, si 
modo dolor summum malum est, esse non _possit.. 
Ipse enim Metrodorus, paene alter Epicurus, beatum 
esse describit his fere verbis: cum corpus bene con- 
stitutum sit et sit exploratum ita futurum. An id 
exploratum cuiquam potest esse, quomodo se hoe 
habiturum sit corpus non dico ad annum, sed ad 
vesperum? Dolor igitur, id est summum malum, 


aXen. Cyropaed. 1. 2. 8. 
bP. Ep. 7. 326 B, also Rep. 404 D. 
182 


BOOK II. xxviii 


will listen to Socrates, who holds pleasure of no 


account, when he says that the best sauce for food 
is hunger and the best flavouring for drink thirst. 
But I will not listen to one who makes pleasure the- 
sole standard, when while living like Gallonius he 
talks like Piso the Thrifty; I refuse to believe in his 
sincerity. He said that natural wealth is easily won, 
because nature is satisfied with little. Undoubtedly, 
—if only you Epicureans did not value pleasure so 
highly. As much pleasure, he says, is derived from 
the cheapest things as from the most costly. Dear 
me, his palate must be as dull as his wits. Persons 
who despise pleasure in itself are at liberty to say that 
they value a sturgeon no higher than a sprat; but a 
man whose chief good consists in pleasure is bound 
to judge everything by sensation, not by reason, and 
to call those things the best which are the pleasant- 
est. However, let us grant his point: let him get 
the highest pleasures cheap, or for all I care for 
nothing, if he can; allow that there is as much 
pleasure to be found in the cress salad which accord- 
ing to Xenophon? formed the staple diet of the 
Persians, as in the Syracusan banquets which Plato? 
takes to task so severely; grant, I say, that pleasure 
is as easy to get as your school makes out;—but 
what are we to say of pain? Pain ean inflict such 
tortures as to render happiness absolutely impossible, 
that is, if it be true that pain is the Chief Evil. 
Metrodorus himself, who was almost a second Epi- 
curus, describes happiness (I give almost his actual 
words) as ‘sound health, and an assurance of its 
continuance.’ Can anyone have an assurance of 
what his health will be, I don’t say a year hence, 


but this evening? It follows that we can never be 
183 


93 


94 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


metuetur semper etiamsi non aderit ; iam enim adesse 
poterit. Qui potest igitur habitare in beata vita summi 
mali metus? Traditur, inquit, ab Epicuro ratio ne- 
glegendi doloris. Iam id ipsum absurdum, maximum 
malum neglegi. Sed quae tandem ista ratio est? 
“Maximus dolor,’ inquit, “brevis est.’ Primum quid 
tu dicis breve? deinde dolorem quem maximum? 
Quid enim? Summus dolor plures dies manere non 
potest? Vide ne etiam menses! Nisi forte eum 
dicis qui simul atque arripuit interficit. Quis istum 
dolorem timet? Illum mallem levares quo optimum 
atque humanissimum virum, Cn. Octavium, M. F., 
familiarem meum, confici vidi, nec vero semel nec ad 
breve tempus sed et saepe et plane diu. Quaos ille, 
di immortales! cum omnes artus ardere viderentur, 
cruciatus perferebat! Nec tamen miser esse, quia 
summum id malum non erat, tantummodo laboriosus 
videbatur. At miser, si in flagitiosa atque vitiosa vita 
afflueret voluptatibus. 

XXIX. “Quod autem magnum dolorem brevem, 
longinquum levem esse dicitis, id non intellego quale 
sit. Video enim et magnos et eosdem bene longin- 
quos dolores; quorum alia toleratio est, verior, qua 
uti vos non potestis qui honestatem ipsam per se 
non amatis, Fortitudinis quaedam praecepta sunt 
ac paene leges, quae effeminari virum vetant in 


dolore. Quamobrem turpe putandum est, non dico 
184 


ws 


_" 


BOOK II. xxviii-xxix 


_ free from the apprehension of pain, which is the Chief 
Evil, even when it is absent, for at any moment it 
may be upon us. How then can life be happy- when 
haunted by fear of the greatest Evil? ‘Ah but, he 
rejoins, ‘ Epicurus teaches a method for rae ine 
pain.’ To begin with, the mere idea of disregard- 
ing that which is the greatest of evils is absurd. But 
what is this method, pray? “The severest pain,’ says 
he, ‘is brief.’ First of all, what do you mean by 
brief? and secondly, wih do you mean by the 
_ severest pain? Why, cannot the most intense pain 
last for several days? You may find it last for 
months! Unless indeed you mean a seizure that 
instantaneously kills you. But no one is afraid of 
such a pain as that. I want you rather to alleviate 
such agony as I have seen ‘afflicting my excellent 
and amiable friend, Gnaeus Octavius, son of Marcus; 
and that not once only or for a short time, but 
repeatedly and for very long periods. Great heavens, 
what torments he used to suffer! All his joints felt 
as if on fire. And yet one did not think of him 
as miserable, because such pain was not the greatest 
evil,—only as afflicted. Miserable he would have 
- been if he had lived a life of profligacy and vice sur- 
rounded by. every pleasure. 

XXIX. “As for your maxim that severe pain is Epicurus’s 
short and prolonged pain light, I cannot make out what Le lyre oe 
it may mean. For I see pains that are at once severe 
and considerably prolonged; and the truer way to 
endure them is that other method, which you who do 
not love moral worth for its own sake are not able 

to employ. Courage has its precepts and its rules, 

rules of constraining force, that forbid a man to 

show womanish weakness in pain. Hence it must 
185 


95 


96 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


dolere (nam id quidem est interdum necesse), sed 
5 € 
“saxum illud Lemnium’ clamore Philocteteo fune- 
stare,’ 
Quod eiulatu, questu, gemitu, fremitibus 
Resonando mutum flebiles voces refert. 


Huic Epicurus praecentet, si potest, cui 


boty viperino morsu venae viscerum 
Veneno imbutae taetros cruciatus cient! 


Sic Epicurus: ‘ Philocteta, si gravis dolor, brevis.’* At 
iam decimum annum in spelunea iacet. “Si longus, 
levis; dat enim intervalla et relaxat.’ Primum non 
saepe, deinde quae est ista relaxatio, cum et praeter- 
iti doloris memoria recens est et futuri atque im- 
pendentis torquet timor? Moriatur, inquit. Fortasse 
id optimum, sed ubi illud: ‘Plus semper voluptatis?’ 
Si enim ita est, vide ne facinus facias cum mori 
suadeas. Potius ergo illa dicantur, turpe esse, viri 
non esse debilitari dolore, frangi, suecumbere. Nam 
ista vestra: ‘Si gravis, brevis; si longus, levis’ dictata 
sunt. Virtutis, magnitudinis animi, patientiae, for- 
titudinis fomentis dolor mitigari solet. . 
XXX. “Audi, ne longe abeam, moriens quid dicat 
Epicurus, ut intellegas facta eius cum dictis discre- 
pare: ‘Epicurus Hermarcho S. Cum ageremus, inquit, 


1 F inserted by Baiter. 
2,87 (or szt) gravis dolor, brevis inf. MSS.; sz brevis dolor, 
levis A, B, E.—Mdv. ‘Philocteta, st! Brevis dolor.’ But cp. 


22 and gs. 


4 Quoted probably from the Philoctetes of Attius. 
186 


BOOK II. xxix-xxx 


-be considered a disgrace, I do not say to feel pain 
(that is sometimes inevitable), but that “rock of 
Lemnos to outrage’ * with the cries of a Philoctetes, 


Till the dumb stones utter a voice of weeping, 
Echoing his wails and plaints, his sighs and 
groanings. 


Let Epicurus soothe with his spells, if he can, the 
man whose 


Veins and vitals, from the viper’s fang 
Envenom’d, throb with pangs of anguish dire. 


Thus Epicurus: ‘Philoctetes! If pain is severe, it is 
short.’ Oh, but he has been languishing in his cave 
these ten years past. ‘If it is long, it is light: for . 
it grants intervals of respite.’ In the first place, 
these are few and far between; and secondly, what 
is the good of a respite embittered by recent pain 
still fresh in memory, and tormented by fear of pain 
impending in the future? Let him die, says Epicu- 
rus. Perhaps that were the best course, but what 
becomes of the maxim about ‘a constant preponder- 
ance of pleasure’? If that be true, are you not guilty 
of a crime in advising him to end his life? Well 
then, let us rather tell him that it is base and un- 
manly to be enfeebled, crushed and overpowered by 
pain. As for the formula of your sect, “Short if 
it’s strong, light if it’s long,’ it is a tag for copy- 
books. Virtue, magnanimity, endurance, courage, 
—it is these that have balm to assuage pain. 
XXX. “But I must not digress too far. Let me fortitude is the 
repeat the dying words of Epicurus, to prove to you gt et lie 
the discrepancy between his practice and his prin- words show. 


ciples: ‘Epicurus to Hermarchus, greeting. I write 
187 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


‘vitae beatum et eundem supremum diem, scribe- 
bamus haec. Tanti aderant vesicae et torminum 
morbi ut nihil ad eorum magnitudinem posset acce- 
dere.’ Miserum hominem! Si dolor summum malum 
est, dici aliter non potest. :Sed audiamus ipsum. 
“Compensabatur,’ inquit, “tamen cum his omnibus 
animi laetitia quam capiebam memoria rationum in- 
ventorumque nostrorum. Sed tu, ut dignum est tua 
erga me et philosophiam voluntate ab adulescentulo 
97 suscepta, fac ut Metrodori tueare liberos.’ Non ego 
iam Epaminondae, non Leonidae mortem huius 
morti antepono ; quorum alter cum vicisset Lacedae- 
monios apud Mantineam atque ipse gravi vulnere 
exanimari se videret, ut primum dispexit, quaesivit 
salvusne esset clipeus. Cum salvum esse flentes sui 
respondissent, rogavit essentne fusi hostes. Cum id 
quoque ut cupiebat audivisset, evelli iussit eam qua 
erat transfixus hastam. Ita multo sanguine profuso 
in laetitia et victoria est mortuus. Leonidas autem, 
rex Lacedaemoniorum se in Thermopylis trecen- 
tosque eos quos eduxerat Sparta, cum esset proposita 
aut fuga turpis aut gloriosa mors, opposuit hostibus. 
Praeclarae mortes sunt imperatoriae; philosophi 
autem in suis lectulis plerumque moriuntur. Refert 
tamen quomodo. Beatus sibi videtur esse moriens. 
Magna laus.* ‘ Compensabatur,’ inquit, ‘ cum sum- 
98 mis doloribus laetitia.” Audio equidem philosophi 
vocem, Epicure ; sed quid tibi dicendum sit oblitus 
es. Primum enim, si vera sunt ea quorum recorda- 


‘MSS. Refert tamen quod sibi videtur esse morienti magna 
laus, with variants guo modo, videbatur and moriens. Mdv. 
restores as above, inserting deatus. 


188 


BOOK II. xxx 


_these words,’ he says, ‘on the happiest, and the last, 
day of my life. I am suffering from diseases of the 
bladder and intestines, which are of the utmost 
possible severity.’ Unhappy creature! If pain is 
the Chief Evil, that is the only thing to be said. But 
let us hear his own words. “Yet all my sufferings,’ 

he continues, ‘are counterbalanced by the j joy which 
I derive from remembering my theories and dis- 
coveries. I charge you, by the devotion which from 
-your youth up you have displayed towards myself 
and towards philosophy, to protect the children of 
-Metrodorus.’ When I read this I rank the death- 
scene of Epicurus on a level with those of Epami- 
nondas and of Leonidas. Epaminondas had defeated 
the Lacedemonians at Mantinea, and perceived him- 
self to be mortally wounded. As soon as he regained 
consciousness he inquired if his shield were safe. 
His weeping followers told him that it was. He 
asked, were the enemy routed. Satisfied on this 
point also, he bade them pluck out the spear that 
pierced his side. A rush of blood followed, and so 
in the hour of joy and victory he died. Leonidas, 
king of the Lacedemonians, had to choose between 
-dishonourable flight and a glorious death; with the 
three hundred warriors that he had brought from 
Sparta he confronted the foe at Thermopylae. It is 
glorious to fall when leading an army; but philoso- 
phers mostly die in their beds. Still the manner of 
their death makes a difference. Epicurus counts 
himself. happy in his last moments. All honour to 
him. ‘My joy,’ he writes, “counterbalances the 
severest pain.’ There, Epicurus, it is true, I hear 
the voice of a philosopher; but you forget what you 
logically ought to say. In the first place, if the thing 

189 


99 


100 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


tione te gaudere dicis, hoc est si vera sunt tua scripta 
et inventa, gaudere non potes; nihil enim iam habes 
quod ad corpus referas; est autem a te semper di- 
ctum nec gaudere quemquam nisi propter corpus nec 
dolere. Praeteritis, inquit,-gaudeo. Quibusnam 
praeteritis? si ad corpus pertinentibus, rationes 
tuas te video compensare cum istis doloribus, non 
memoriam corpore perceptarum voluptatum; sin 
autem ad animum, falsum est quod negas animi 
ullum esse gaudium quod non referatur ad corpus. 
Cur deinde Metrodori liberos commendas? quid in? 
isto egregio tuo officio et tanta fide (sic enim existimo) 
ad corpus refers ? 

XXXI. “ Huc et illuc, Torquate, vos versetis licet ; 
nihil in hac praeclara epistula scriptum ab Epicuro 
congruens et conveniens decretis eius reperietis. Ita 
redarguitur ipse a sese, convincunturque” scripta eius 
probitate ipsius ac moribus. Nam ista commendatio 
puerorum, memoria et caritas amicitiae, summorum 
officiorum in extremo spiritu conservatio indicat in- 
natam esse homini probitatem gratuitam, non invita- 
tam voluptatibus nec praemiorum mercedibus evoca- 
tam. Quod enim testimonium maius quaerimus, quae 
honesta et recta sint, ipsa esse optabilia per sese, 
cum videamus tanta officia morientis? Sed ut epi- 
stulam laudandam arbitror eam quam modo totidem 
fere verbis interpretatus sum, quamquam ea cum 
summa eius philosophia nullo modo congruebat, sic 

‘MSS. om. the preposition; Mdv. suggests zm, but writes 
ex with most edd. 


*convincunturgue Mdv. after Davis; vincunturgue, ven- 
euntque MSS. 


190 


BOOK II. xxx-xxxi 


in the recollection of which you profess to find plea- 


Y 


sure, I mean your writings and your theories, are 
true, you cannot really be feeling pleasure. All 
feelings referable to the body are over for you; yet 
you have always maintained that no one feels either 
pleasure ‘or pain except on account of the body. He 
says ‘I take pleasure in my past feelings.’ What 
past feelings? If you mean bodily feelings, I notice 
that it is not the memory of bodily delights, but your 
philosophical theories, that counterbalance for you 
your present pains ; if mental feelings, your doctrine 
that there is no delight of the mind not ultimately 
referable to the body is an error. And secondly, 
why do you provide for the children of Metrodorus? 
What standard of bodily pleasure are you following 
in this signal act (for so I esteem it) of loyalty and 
duty? 

XXXI. “ Yes, Torquatus, you people may turn and 
twist as you like, but you will not find a line in this 
famous letter of Epicurus that is not inconsistent and 
incompatible with his teachings. Hence he is his 
own refutation; his writings are disproved by the 
uprightness of his character. That provision for 
the care of the children, that loyalty to friend- 
ship and affection, that observance of these solemn 
dutieswith his latest breath, provethat there wasinnate 
in the man a disinterested uprightness, not evoked by 
pleasure nor elicited by prizes and rewards. Seeing 
so strong a sense of duty in a dying man, what clearer 
evidence do we want that morality and rectitude 


are desirable for their own sakes? But while I think bow fogsnare 


that the letter I have just translated almost word for 


for word is most admirable, although entirely incon- 


is provision 


the pos- 
thumous cele- 
bration of his 


sistent with the general tenor of his philosophy, yet birthday. 


191 


101 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
eiusdem testamentum non solum a philosophi gravi- 
tate sed etiam ab ipsius sententia iudico discrepare. 
Scripsit enim et multis saepe verbis et breviter aper- 
teque in eo libro quem modo nominavi, ‘mortem 
nihil ad nos pertinere; quod enim dissolutum sit, id 
esse sine sensu; quod autem sine sensu sit, id nihil 
ad nos pertinere omnino.’ Hoc ipsum elegantius 
poni meliusque potuit. Nam quod ita positum est, 
“quod dissolutum sit, id esse sine sensu,’ id eiusmodi 
est ut non satis plane dicat quid sit dissolutum. Sed 
tamen intellego quid velit. Quaero autem quid sit 
quod, cum dissolutione, id est morte sensus omnis ex- 
stinguatur, et cum reliqui nihil sit omnino quod per- 
tineat ad nos, tam accurate tamque diligenter caveat 
et sanciat ‘ut Amynomachus et Timocrates, heredes 
sui, de Hermarchi sententia dent quod satis sit ad 
diem agendum natalem suum quotannis mense Game- 
lione, itemque omnibus mensibus vicesimo die lunae 
dent ad eorum epulas qui una secum philosophati 
sint, ut et sui.et Metrodori memoria colatur.’ Haec 
ego non possum dicere non esse hominis quamvis et 
belli et humani, sapientis vero nullo modo, physici 
praesertim, quem se ille esse vult, putare ullum esse 
cuiusquam diem natalem. Quid? idemne potest esse 
dies saepius qui semel fuit? Certe non potest. An 
eiusdemmodi? Ne id quidem, nisi multa annorum 


intercesserint milia, ut omnium siderum eodem unde 
192 


BOOK II. xxxi 


-I consider his will to be quite out of harmony not 


only with the dignity of a philosopher but also with 
his own pronouncement. For he repeatedly argued 


_ at length, and also stated briefly and plainly in the 


book I have just mentioned, that ‘death does not 
affect us at all; for a thing that has experienced dis- 
solution must be devoid of sensation ; and that which 
is devoid of sensation cannot affect us in any degree 


_whatsoever.” The maxim such as it is might have 
| been better and more neatly put. For the phrase, 


“what has experienced dissolution must be devoid of 
sensation, does not make clear what it is that has 
Bipetienced dissolution. However in spite of this 
I understand the meaning intended. What I want 
to know is this: if all sensation is annihilated by dis- 


solution, that is, by death, and if nothing whatever 


2. 


that can affect us remains, why is it that he makes 


such precise and careful provision and stipulation 


“that his heirs, Amynochus and Timocrates, shall 
after consultation with Hermarchus assign a sufficient 
sum to celebrate his birthday every year in the 
month of Gamelion, and also on the twentieth day 


_of every month shall assign a sum for a banquet to 


his fellow-students in philosophy, in order to keep 
alive the memory of himself and of Metrodorus’? 
That these are the words of as amiable and kindly a 
man as you like, I cannot deny; but what business 
has a philosopher, and especially a natural philoso- 
pher, which Epicurus claims to be, to think that any 
day can be anybody’s birthday? Why, can the 
identical day that has once occurred recur again and 
again? Assuredly it is impossible. Or can a similar 
day recur? This too is impossible, except after an 
interval of many thousands of years, when all the 


oO 193 


103 


104 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


profecta sint fiat ad unum tempus reversio. Nullus 
est igitur cuiusquam dies natalis. “At habetur.’ Et 
ego id scilicet nesciebam! Sed ut sit, etiamne post 
mortem coletur? idque testamento cavebit is qui 
nobis quasi oraculum ediderit nihil post mortem ad 
nos pertinere? Haec non erant eius qui innumera- 
biles mundos infinitasque regiones, quarum nulla 
esset ora, nulla extremitas, ‘mente peragravisset.’ 
Num quid tale Democritus? (Ut alios omittam, hune 
appello quem ille unum secutus est.) Quod si dies 
notandus fuit, eumne potius quo natus, an eum quo 
sapiens factus est? ‘Non potuit,’ inquies, ‘ fieri 
sapiens nisi natus esset.’ Isto modo ne si avia qui- 
dem eius nata non esset. Res tota, Torquate, non 
doctorum hominum, velle post mortem epulis cele- 
brari memoriam sui nominis. Quos quidem dies 
quemadmodum agatis et in quantam hominum face- 
torum urbanitatem incurratis, non dico; nihil opus 
est litibus; tantum dico magis fuisse vestrum agere 
Epicuri diem natalem quam illius testamento cavere 
ut ageretur. 

XXXII. “Sed ut ad propositum revertamur (de 
dolore enim cum diceremus, ad istam epistulam de- 
lati sumus), nunc totum illud coneludi sic licet: Qui in 


a This conception is found in Plato, Zzmaeus 39, and was 
accepted by ancient astronomers, who calculated the period 
of the Great Year or Perfect Year, as it was called, at 
12,954 Solar years. 

»Lucretius I, 74 omne immensum peragravit mente 
animogue. 


194 


BOOK II. xxxi-xxxii 


heavenly bodies simultaneously achieve their return 
to the point from which they started.* It follows 
that there is no such thing as anybody’s birthday. 
“All the same, people do keep birthdays.’ Much 
obliged, I am sure, for the information! But even 
granting birthdays, is a person’s birthday to be 
observed when he is dead? And to provide for 
this by will—is this appropriate for a man who 
told us in oracular tones that nothing can affect us 
after death? Such a provision ill became one whose 
intellect had roamed’ over unnumbered worlds and 
realms of infinite space, unbounded and unending. 
Did Democritus do anything of the kind? (To 
omit others, I cite the case of the philosopher who 
was Epicurus’s only master.) And if a_ special 
day was to be kept, did he do well to take the day 
on which he was born, and not rather that on which 
he became a Wise Man? You will object that he 
could not have become a Wise Man if he had not 
first of all been born. You might equally well say, 
if his grandmother had not been born either. The 
entire notion of wishing one’s name and memory to 
-be celebrated by a banquet after one’s death is alien 
to aman of learning. I won’t refer to your mode of 
keeping these anniversaries, or to the ridicule you 
bring upon yourselves from persons with a sense of 
humour. We do not want to quarrel. I only remark 
that it was more your business to keep Epicurus’s 
birthday than his business to provide by will for its 
celebration. 

XXXU. “ But to return to our subject (for we were untrue that 
discussing the question of pain, when we digressed a oe 
to the letter of Epicurus), The whole matter may 
now be put in the following syllogism: A man un- 

0% 195 ‘ 


105 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


summo malo est, is tum cum in eo est non est beatus; 
sapiens autem semper beatus est et est aliquando in 
dolore; non est igitur summum malum dolor. Jam 
illud quale tandem est, bona praeterita non effluere 
sapienti, mala meminisse non oportere? Primum in 
nostrane est potestate quid meminerimus? Themi- 
stocles quidem, cum ei Simonides an quis alius artem 
memoriae polliceretur, ‘Oblivionis,’ inquit, “mallem; 
nam memini etiam quae nolo, oblivisci non possum 
quae volo.’ Magno hic ingenio; sed res se tamen 
sic habet ut nimis imperiosi philosophi sit vetare 
meminisse. Vide ne ista sint Manliana vestra aut 
maiora etiam, si imperes quod facere non possim. 
Quid si etiam iucunda memoria est praeteritorum 
malorum? ut proverbia nonnulla veriora sint quam 
vestra dogmata. Vulgo enim dicitur: “Iucundi acti 
labores’; nec male Euripides (concludam, si potero, 
Latine; Graecum enim hune versum nostis omnes): 
Suavis laborum est praeteritorum memoria. 
Sed ad bona praeterita redeamus. Quae si a vobis 
talia dicerentur qualibus C. Marius uti poterat, ut 
expulsus, egens, in palude demersus tropaeorum re- 
cordatione levaret dolorem suum, audirem et plane 
probarem. Nec enim absolvi beata vita sapientis 


aSee § 60. ; 
> From the lost Andromeda: adX 750 To cwhévra pera bat 
wréywv: quoted by Plutarch, etc. 


196 


7 BOOK IL. xxxii 
-dergoing the supreme Evil is not for the time being 
happy; but the Wise Man is always happy, and some- 
times undergoes pain; therefore pain is not the 
supreme Evil. And again, what is the sense of the 
maxim that the Wise Man will not let past blessings 
fade from memory, and that it is a duty to forget 
past misfortunes? To begin with, have we the power 
to choose what we shall remember? Themistocles 
at all events, when Simonides or some one offered to 
teach him the art of memory, replied that he would 
prefer the art of forgetting; “for I remember,’ said 
he, ‘even things I do not wish to remember, but I 
cannot forget things I wish to forget.’ Epicurus 
‘was avery able man; but still the fact of the matter 
is that a philosopher who forbids us to remember 
lays too heavy a charge upon us. Why, you are as 
great a martinet as your ancestor Manlius,* or 
greater, if you order me to do what is beyond 
my power. What if the memory of past evils be 
actually pleasant? proving certain proverbs truer 
than the tenets of your school. There is a popular 
saying to the effect that ‘Toil is pleasant when ’tis 
over’; and Euripides well writes (I will attempt a 
yerse translation; the Greek line is known to you 
all): 
Sweet is the memory of sorrows past.” 


But let us return to the question of past blessings. 
If your school meant by these the sort of successes 
that Gaius Marius could fall back on,-enabling him 
when a penniless exile up to his chin in a swamp to 
lighten his sufferings by recollecting his former 
victories, I would listen to you, and would unreserv- 
edly assent. Indeed it would be impossible for the 
197 


106 


107 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
neque ad: exitum perduci poterit, si prima quaeque 
bene ab eo consulta atque facta ipsius oblivione ob- 
ruentur. Sed vobis voluptatum perceptarum recor- 
datio vitam beatam facit, et quidem corpore perce- 
ptarum; nam si quae sunt aliae, falsum est omnes 
animi voluptates esse e corporis societate. Corporis 
autem voluptas si etiam praeterita delectat, non 
intellego cur Aristoteles Sardanapalli epigramma 
tanto opere derideat, in quo ille rex Syriae glorietur 
se omnes secum abstulisse libidinum voluptates. Quod 
enim ne vivus quidem, inquit, diutius sentire poterat 
quam dum fruebatur, quomodo id mortuo potuit per- 
manere? Fluit igitur voluptas corporis et prima 
quaeque avolat, saepiusque relinquit causam paeni- 
tendi quam recordandi. Itaque beatior Africanus 
cum patria illo modo loquens: 
Desine, Roma, tuos hostes— 

reliquaque praeclare: 

Nam tibi moenimenta mei peperere labores. 
Laboribus hic praeteritis gaudet, tu iubes voluptati- 
bus; et hic se ad ea revocat e quibus nihil umquam 
rettulerit ad corpus, tu totus haeres in corpore, 

XXXIII. “Illud autem ipsum qui obtineri potest, 
quod dicitis omnes animi et voluptates et dolores ad 
corporis voluptates ac dolores pertinere? Nihilne 
te Petpet sonatas (video quicum loquar), te igitur, 


aIn a work now lost. The lines referred to run xed’ exw 
baa Eparyor Kal ePtBpica Kal obv pwr Téprv’ €radov" 7a dé Tohha 
kal 6\Gia mavra AéXvvTaL. (ap. Athen. 336a.) 

b Apparently from the Annals of Ennius. 


198 


BOOK II. xxxii-xxxiii 


happiness of the Wise Man to attain its final and 
ultimate perfection, if all his previous wise designs 
and achievements were to be erased from his memory. 
But with you it is the recollection of pleasures 
enjoyed that gives happiness; and those must be 
bodily pleasures,—for if it be any others, it ceases to 
be true that mental pleasures all arise from the 
connection of the mind with the body. Yet 
if bodily pleasure even when past can give 
delight, I do not see why Aristotle* should be so 
contemptuous of the epitaph of Sardanapalus. The 
famous Syrian monarch boasts that he has taken 
with him all the sensual pleasures that he has 
enjoyed. How, asks Aristotle, could a dead man 
continue to experience a feeling which even while 
alive he could only be conscious of so long as he was 
actually enjoying it? So that bodily pleasures are 
transient; each in turn evaporates, leaving cause for 
regrets more often than for recollection. Accordingly 
Africanus must be counted happier than Sardanapa- 
lus, when he addresses his country with the words: 


Cease, Rome, thy foes— 
and the glorious conclusion: 
My toils have won thee battlements secure. 


His past toils are what he delights in, whereas you 
bid us dwell upon our past pleasures; he recalls ex- 
periences that never had any connection with bodily 
enjoyment, but you never rise above the body. 
XXXIIL. “ Again how can you possibly defend the 
dictum of your school, that all mental pleasures and 
pains alike are based on pleasures and pains of the 
body? Do you, Torquatus (for I bethink me who it 
is Iam addressing)—do you personally never experi- 


193 


b 


or that all 
mental pleasures 
are fundamen- 
tally physical, 


108 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


Torquate, ipsum per se nihil delectat? Omitto digni- 
tatem, honestatem, speciem ipsam virtutum, de qui- 
bus ante dictum est; haec leviora ponam: poema, 
orationem.cum aut scribis aut legis, cum omnium 
factorum, cum regionum conquiris historiam, signum, 
tabula, locus amoenus, ludi, venatio, villa Luculli 
(nam si tuam dicerem, latebram haberes; ad corpus 
diceres pertinere)—sed ea quae dixi ad corpusne re- 
fers? an est aliquid quod te sua sponte delectet? 
Aut pertinacissimus fueris si perstiteris ad corpus ea 
quae dixi referre, aut deserueris totam Epicuri volu- 
ptatem si negaveris. 

“ Quod vero a te disputatum est maiores esse vo- 
luptates et dolores animi quam corporis, quia trium 
temporum particeps animus sit, corpore autem prae- 
sentia solum sentiantur, qui id probari! potest ut is 
qui propter me aliquid gaudeat plus quam ego ipse 
gaudeat? [ Animo voluptas oritur propter voluptatem 
corporis, et maior est animi voluptas quam corporis; 
ita fit ut gratulator laetior sit quam is cui gratulatur.*| 
Sed dum efficere vultis beatum sapientem cum maxi- 
mas animo voluptates, percipiat omnibusque partibus 
maiores quam corpore, quid occurrat non videtis. 
Animi enim dolores quoque percipiet omnibus parti- 
bus maiores quam corporis. Ita miser sit aliquando 
necesse est is quem vos beatum semper vultis esse; 


1qui id probari B; guid id prob. E; guid probari, qui 
prob. other MSS. 
® Animo—gratulatur rejected by edd. as a note clumsily 
explaining the simile in the form of which the preceding 
reductio ad absurdum is expressed—body : mind :: happy 
person : sympathizing friend. : 
200 


BOOK IL. xxxiii 


ence delight in some thing for its own sake? I 
_ pass over moral worth and goodness, and the in- 
trinsic beauty of the virtues, of which we spoke be- 
_ tore. I will suggest less serious matters, reading or 

writing a poem or a speech, the study of history or 
geography, statues, pictures, beautiful scenery; 
sport, hunting, Lucullus’s country house (I won’t 
mention your own, for that would give you a loop- 
hole of escape; you would say it is a source of bodily 
enjoyment); but take the things I have mentioned,— 
do you connect them with bodily sensation? Is there 
nothing which of itself affords you delight? Persist 
in tracing back the pleasures I have instanced to the 
body—and you show yourself impervious to argu- 
ment; recant—and you abandon Epicurus’s concep- 
tion of pleasure altogether. oC 

- As for your contention that mental pleasures and but that they 
5 A nevertheless 
pains are greater than bodily, because the mind appre- outweigh bodily 
hends all three periods of time, whereas the body P!*s™"* 
perceives only present sensations, surely it is absurd 
to say that a man who rejoices in sympathy with 
my pleasure feels more joy than I feel myself. 
[Pleasure of the mind arises out of sympathy with 
that of the body, and pleasure of the mind is greater 
than that of the body ; thus it comes about that one 
who offers congratulations feels more delight than 
the person congratulated.] But when you try to 
prove the Wise Man happy on the ground that he 
enjoys the greatest mental pleasures, and that these 
are infinitely greater than bodily pleasures, you do 
not see the difficulty that meets you. For it follows 
that the mental pains which he experiences will also 
be infinitely greater than the bodily ones. Hence 
he whom you maintain to be always happy would 
201 


110 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


nec vero id dum omnia ad voluptatem doloremqué 
referetis efficietis umquam. Quare aliud aliquod, 
Torquate, hominis summum bonum reperiendum 
est; voluptatem bestiis concedamus, quibus vos de 
summo bono testibus uti soletis. Quid si etiam 
bestiae multa faciunt, duce sua quaeque natura, par- 
tim indulgenter vel cum labore, ut in gignendo, in 
educando, perfacile ut! appareat aliud quiddam iis 
propositum, non voluptatem? partim cursu et pera- 
gratione laetantur; congregatione aliae coetum quo- 
dam modo civitatis imitantur; videmus in quodam 
volucrium genere nonnulla indicia pietatis, co- 
gnitionem, memoriam; in multis etiam desideria vide- 
mus; ergo in bestiis erunt secreta a voluptate 
humanarum quaedam simulacra virtutum, in ipsis 
hominibus virtus nisi voluptatis causa nulla erit? Et 
homini, qui ceteris animantibus plurimum praestat, 
praecipui a natura nihil datum esse dicemus? 
XXXIV. “Nos vero, si quidem in voluptate sunt 
omnia, longe multumque superamur a bestiis, quibus 
ipsa terra fundit ex sese pastus varios atque abun- 
dantes nihil laborantibus; nobis autem aut vix aut 
ne vix quidem suppetunt multo labore quaerentibus. 
Nec tamen ullo modo summum pecudis bonum et 
hominis idem mihi videri potest. Quid enim tanto 
opus est instrumento in optimis artibus comparandis, 
quid tanto concursu honestissimorum studiorum, tanto 


: 1 ut supplied by Miiller. 
202 


09 


BOOK II. xxxiii-xxxiv 


inevitably be sometimes miserable ; nor in fact will 
you ever prove him to be invariably happy, as long 
as you make pleasure and pain the sole standard. 
Therefore we are bound, Torquatus, to find some 
other Chief Good for man. Let us leave pleasure 
to the lower animals, to whose evidence on this 
question of the Chief Good your school is fond of 
appealing. But what if even animals are prompted 
by their several natures to do many actions conclu- 
sively proving that they have some other End in view 
than pleasure ? Some of them show kindness even at 
the cost of trouble, as for instance in giving birth to 
and rearing, their offspring ; some delight in running 
and roaming about ; others are gregarious, and create 
something resembling a social polity; in a certain 
class of birds we see some traces of affection for 
human beings, recognition, recollection; and in many 
we even notice regret for a lost friend. If animals 
therefore possess some semblance of the human 
virtues unconnected with pleasure, are men them- 
selves to display no virtue except as a means to 
pleasure? And shall we say that man, who so far 
surpasses all other living creatures, has been 
gifted by nature with no exceptional endowment ? 
XXXIV. “As a matter of fact if pleasure be all in 
all, the lower animals are far and away superior to 
ourselves. The Earth herself without labour of 
theirs lavishes on them food from her stores in great 
variety and abundance; whereas we with the most 
laborious efforts can scarcely if at all supply our 
needs. Yet I cannot think that the Chief Good can 
possibly be the same for a brute beast and for a man. 
What is the use of all our vast machinery of cul- 


ture, of the‘great company of liberal studies, of the 
203 


Even animals 
evince disin- 
terested mo- 
tives, 


. 


Peroration: 
Man is made 
for higher 
Ends than 
pleasure. 


dot. 


11 


Q 


0 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


virtutum comitatu, si ea nullam ad aliam rem nisi ad 
voluptatem conquiruntur? Ut, si Xerxes, cum tantis 
classibus tantisque equestribus et pedestribus coplis, 
Hellesponto iuncto, Athone perfosso, mari ambula- 


visset, terra! 


navigavisset, si, cum tanto impetu in 
Graeciam venisset, causam quis ex eo quaereret tan- 
tarum copiarum tantique belli, mel se auferre ex 
Hymetto voluisse diceret, certe sine causa vide- 
retur tanta conatus, sic nos sapientem, plurimis et 
gravissimis artibus atque virtutibus instructum et 
ornatum, non, ut illum, maria pedibus peragrantem, 
classibus montes, sed omne caelum totamque cum 
universo mari terram mente complexum, voluptatem 
petere si dicemus, mellis causa dicemus tanta moli- 
tum. 

“Ad altiora quaedam et magnificentiora, mihi 
crede, Torquate, nati sumus; nec id ex animi solum 
partibus, in quibus inest memoria rerum innumera- 
bilium, in te quidem infinita, inest coniectura conse- 
quentium non multum a divinatione differens, inest 
moderator cupiditatis pudor, inest ad humanam 
societatem? iustitiae fida custodia, inestin perpetiendis 
jaboribus adeundisque periculis firma et  stabilis 
doloris mortisque contemptio ;—ergo haec in animis; 
tu autem etiam membra ipsa sensusque considera, qui 
tibi, ut reliquae corporis partes, non comites solum vir- 


‘mari. . terra Baiter; Mdv. approves, but prints maria 
. terram with MSS. t 
* soctetatem tuendam one inf. MS. 


204 


BOOK II. xxxiv 


goodly fellowship of the virtues, if all these things © 
are sought after solely for the sake of pleasure? 
Suppose when Xerxes led forth his huge fleets 
and armies of horse and foot, bridged the Helles- 
pont, cut through Athos, marched over sea and 
sailed over land—suppose on his reaching Greece 
with his great armada some one asked him the 
reason for all this enormous apparatus of warfare, 
and he were to reply that he had wanted to procure 
some honey from Hymettus! surely he would 
be thought to have had no adequate motive for 
so vast an undertaking. So with our Wise Man, 
equipped and adorned with all the noblest accom- 
plishments and virtues, not like Xerxes traversing 
the seas on foot and the mountains on shipboard, but 
mentally embracing sky and earth and sea in their 
entirety—to say that this man’s aim is pleasure is to 
say that all his high endeavour is for the sake of a 
little honey. 

“No, Torquatus, believe me, we are born for 
loftier and more splendid purposes. Nor is this 
evidenced by the mental faculties alone, including 
as they do a memory for countless facts, in your 
case indeed a memory of unlimited range; a power 
of forecasting the future little short of divination; 
the sense of modesty to curb the appetites; love of 
justice, the faithful guardian of human society; con- 
tempt of pain and death, remaining firm and stead- 
fast when toil is to be endured and danger under- 
gone. ‘These are our mental endowments. But I 
would also have you consider our bodily frame, and 
our organs of sensation, which latter like the other 


parts of the body you for your part will esteem not 


- as the comrades merely but actually as the servants or 


205 


114 


115 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


tutum sed ministri etiam videbuntur. Quod si in ipso 
corpore multa voluptati praeponenda sunt, ut vires, 
valetudo, velocitas, pulchritudo, quid tandem in 


‘animis censes? in quibus doctissimi illi veteres inesse 


quiddam caeleste et divinum putaverunt. Quod si 
esset in voluptate summum bonum, ut dicitis, 
optabile esset in maxima voluptate nullo inter- 
vallo interiecto dies noctesque versari, cum omnes 
sensus dulcedine omni quasi perfusi moverentur. 
Quis est autem dignus nomine hominis qui unum 
diem totum velit esse in genere isto voluptatis? 
Cyrenaici quidem non recusant; vestri haec vere- 
cundius, illi fortasse constantius. Sed lustremus 
animo non has maximas artes quibus qui carebant 
inertes a maioribus nominabantur, sed quaero num 
existimes, non dico Homerum, Archilochum, Pinda- 
rum, sed Phidian, Polyclitum, Zeuxim ad voluptatem ~ 
artes suas direxisse. Ergo opifex plus sibi proponet 
ad formarum quam civis excellens ad factorum pul- 
chritudinem? Quae autem est alia causa erroris 
tanti, tam longe lateque diffusi, nisi quod is qui 
voluptatem summum bonum esse decernit non cum 
ea parte animi in qua inest ratio atque consilium, 
sed cum cupiditate, id est cum animi levissima parte 
deliberat? Quaero enim de te, si sunt di, ut vos 
etiam putatis, qui possint esse beati cum voluptates 
corpore percipere non possint, aut si sine eo genere 
voluptatis, beati sunt, cur similem animi usum in 


sapiente esse nolitis. 
206 


we 


A 


BOOK II. xxxiv 


the virtues. But if even the body has many attributes 
of higher value than pleasure, such as strength, health, 
beauty, speed of foot, what pray think you of the 
mind? The wisest sages of antiquity believed that the 
mind contains an element of the celestial and divine. 
Whereas if the Chief Good consisted in pleasure as 
your school avers, the ideal of happiness would be 
to pass days and nights in the enjoyment of the 
keenest pleasure, without a moment’s intermission, 
every sense drenched and stimulated with every sort 
of delight. But who that is worthy to be called a 
human being would choose to pass a single entire 
day in pleasure of that description? The Cyrenaics, 
it is true, do not repudiate it; on this point your 


_ friends are more decent, but the Cyrenaics perhaps 


15 


more consistent. But let us pass in review not these 
‘arts’ of first importance, a lack of which with our 
ancestors gave a man the name of ‘inert’ or good- 
for-nothing, but I ask you whether you believe that, 
I do not say Homer, Archilochus or Pindar, but 
Phidias, Polyclitus and Zeuxis regarded the purpose 
of their art as pleasure. Then shall a craftsman 
have a higher ideal of external than a distinguished 
citizen of moral beauty? But what else is the 
cause of an error so profound and so very widely 
diffused, than the fact that he who decides that 
pleasure is the Chief Good judges the question not 
with the rational and deliberative part of his mind, 
but with its lowest part, the faculty of desire? For 
I ask you, if gods exist, as your school too believes, 
how can they be happy, seeing that they cannot 
enjoy bodily pleasures? or, if they are happy without 
that kind of pleasure, why do you deny that the Wise - 
Man is capable of a like purely mental. activity? - 
207 


116 


UL 


118 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 

XXXV. “Lege laudationes, Torquate, non eorum 
qui sunt ab Homero laudati, non Cyri, non Agesilai, 
non Aristidi aut Themistocli, non Philippi aut Ale- 
xandri; lege nostrorum hominum, lege vestrae fami- 
liae ; neminem videbis ita laudatum ut artifex callidus 
comparandarum voluptatum diceretur. Non elogia 
monumentorum id significant, velut hoc ad portam: 
HUNC UNUM PLURIMAE CONSENTIUNT GENTES POPUL] PRI- 
MARIUM FUISSE viRUM. Idne consensisse de Calatino 
plurimas gentes arbitramur, primarium populi fuisse 
quod praestantissimus fuisset in conficiendis volupta- 
tibus? Ergo in iis adulescentibus bonam spem esse . 
dicemus et magnam indolem quos suis commodis in- 
servituros et quidquid ipsis expediat facturos arbitra- 
bimur? Nonne videmus quanta perturbatio rerum 
omnium consequatur, quanta confusio? Tollitur 
beneficium, tollitur gratia, quae sunt vincla concor- 
diae. Nec enim cum tua causa cui commodes bene- 
ficium illud habendum est, sed feneratio, nec gratia 
deberi videtur ei qui sua causa commodaverit. 
Maximas vero virtutes iacere omnes necesse est 
voluptate dominante; sunt etiam turpitudines plu- 
rimae quae, nisi honestas natura plurimum valeat,. 
cur non cadant in sapientem non est facile defen- 
dere. Ac ne plura complectar (sunt enim innume- 


rabilia), bene laudata virtus voluptatis aditus inter- 
208 


BOOK II. xxxw 


6 XXXV. “Read the panegyries, Torquatus, not of 
the heroes praised by Homer, not of Cyrus or Agesi- 
laus, Aristides or Themistocles, Philip or Alexander ; 
but read those delivered upon our own great men, 
read those of your own family. You will not find 
anyone extolled for his skill and cunning in procuring 
pleasures. This is not the purport of laudatory epi- 
taphs, like that one near the city gate: ~ 


HERE LYETH ONE WHOM ALL MANKIND AGREE 
RoME’s FIRST AND GREATEST CITIZEN TO BE. 


7 Do we suppose that all mankind agreed that Hedonism must 
Calatinus was Rome’s greatest citizen because of his SY?Y*t ™orals- 
surpassing eminence in the acquisition of pleasures? 

Then are we to say that a youth is a young man ot 
great promise and high character, when we judge 
‘him likely to study his own interests and to do 
whatever will be for his personal advantage? Do 
we not see what a universal upheaval and confusion 
would result from such a principle? It does away 
with generosity and with gratitude, the bonds of 
mutual harmony. If you lend a man money for 
_ your own advantage, this cannot be considered an 
' act of generosity—it is usury; no gratitude is owing 
to a man who lends money for gain. In fact if 
pleasure usurps the sovereignty, all the cardinal 
virtues must inevitably be dethroned; and indeed 
there are a number of morally base actions which 
ean with difficulty be proved inconsistent with the 
character of the Wise Man, unless it be a law of 

- nature that moral goodness'should be supreme. Not personal appeal 

to bring forward further arguments (for they are *? Torquatus. 
countless in number) any honest panegyric of 
Virtue must needs keep Pleasure at arm’s length. 

P 209 


Ww 


119 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


cludat necesse est. Quod iam a me exspectare noli; 
tute introspice in mentem tuam ipse eamque omni 
cogitatione pertractans percontare ipse te, per- 
petuisne malis voluptatibus perfruens in ea quam 
saepe usurpabas tranquillitate degere omnem aeta- 
tem sine dolore, assumpto etiam illo quod vos quidem 
adiungere soletis sed fieri non potest, sine doloris 
metu, an, cum de omnibus gentibus optime mere- 
rere, cum opem indigentibus salutemque ferres, vel 
Herculis perpeti aerumnas. Sic enim maiores nostri 
labores non fugiendos tristissimo tamen verbo aerum- 
nas etiam in deo nominaverunt. Elicerem! ex te 
cogeremque ut responderes, nisi vererer ne Hercu- 
lem ipsum ea quae pro salute gentium summo labore 
gessisset voluptatis causa gessisse diceres.”’ 


Quae cum dixissem, “ Habeo,” inquit Torquatus, 
“ad quos ista referam, et, quamquam aliquid ipse 
poteram, tamen invenire malo paratiores.”” “‘ Fami- 
liares nostros, credo, Sironem dicis et Philodemum, 
cum optimos viros, tum homines doctissimos.” 
“ Recte,’” inquit, “ intellegis.” “Age sane,” in- 
quam; “sed erat aequius Triarium aliquid de dis- 
sensione nostra iudicare.” “Eiuro,” inquit arridens, 
“iniquum, hac quidem de re ; tu enim ista lenius, hic 
Stoicorum more nos vexat.” Tum Triarius: “ Posthaec 
quidem,” inquit, “audacius, nam haee ipsa mihi erunt 


1 elicerem Baiter, Mdv.; MSS. eligerem, exigerem. 


210 


‘BOOK II. xxxv 


Do not expect me further to argue the point; look 
within, study your own consciousness. Then after 
full and careful introspection, ask yourself the ques- 
tion, would you prefer to pass your whole life in 
that state of calm which you spoke of so often, 
amidst the enjoyment of unceasing pleasures, free 
from all pain, and even (an addition which your 
school is fond of postulating but which is really im- 
possible) free from all fear of pain, or to be a bene- 
factor of the entire human race, and to bring succour 
and safety to the distressed, even at the cost of 
enduring the agonies of a Hercules? Agonies—that 
was indeed the sad and gloomy name which our 
ancestors bestowed, even in the case of a god, upon 
labours which yet were not to be evaded. I would 
press my question and drag an answer from you, 


~ were I not afraid lest you should say that Hercules 


himself in the toils and labours that he wrought for 
the preservation of mankind was acting for the sake 
of pleasure!” 

Here I concluded. “I am at no loss for authori- 
ties,” said Torquatus, “to whom to refer your argu- 
ments. I might be able to do some execution myself, 
but I prefer to find better equipped champions.” 
“No doubt you allude to our excellent and learned 
friends Siro and Philodemus.” “You are right,” he 
replied. “Pray appeal to them,” said I; “but it 
would be fairer to let Triarius pronounce some ver- 
dict on our dispute.” “I formally object to him as 
prejudiced,” he rejoined with a smile, “at all events 
on this issue. You have shown us some mercy, but 
Triarius lays about him like a true Stoic.” “ Oh,” 
interposed Triarius, “Tl fight more boldly still next 
time, for I shall have the arguments I have just 

P2 211 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


in promptu quae modo audivi; nec ante aggrediar 
quam te ab istis quos dicis instructum videro.” Quae 
cum essent dicta, finem fecimus et ambulandi et dis- 
putandi. 


22 


BOOK IL. xxxv 


heard ready to my hand, though I won't attack you 
till I see you have been armed by the instructors 
whom you mention.” And with these words we 
brought our promenade and our discussion to an end 
together. 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


BOOK IT 


J 


M. TULLII CICERONIS 
DE 
FINIBUS BONORUM ET MALORUM - 
LIBER TERTIUS 


I. Voluptatem quidem, Brute, si ipsa pro se lo- 
quatur nec tam pertinaces habeat patronos, conces- 
suram arbitror, convictam superiore libro, dignitati. 
Etenim sit impudens si virtuti diutius repugnet aut 
si honestis iucunda anteponat aut pluris esse contendat 
dulcedinem corporis ex eave natam laetitiam quam 
gravitatem animi atque constantiam. Quare illam 
quidem dimittamus et suis se finibus tenere iubeamus, 
ne blanditiis eius illecebrisque impediatur disputandi 
severitas. Quaerendum est enim ubi sit illud sum- 
mum bonum quod reperire volumus, quoniam et 
voluptas ab eo remota est et eadem fere contra eos 
dici possunt qui vacuitatem doloris finem bonorum 
esse voluerunt; nec vero ullum probetur oportet? 
summum bonum quod virtute careat, qua nihil possit? 
esse praestantius. \ 

Itaque quamquam in eo sermone qui cum Tor- 
quato est habitus non remissi fuimus, tamen haec 
acrior est cum Stoicis parata contentio. Quae 
enim de voluptate dicuntur, ea nec acutissime 
nec abscondite disseruntur; neque enim qui de- 


' oportet Miiller ; ut A, B, E; other MSS. omit; Mdv. Zar 


* possit B and inf. MSS, ; posset A, E; potest Mdv. 
216 


DE FINIBUS 
BOOK III 


I. My pear Brutus.—Were Pleasure to speak for 
herself, in default of such redoubtable advocates as 
she now has to defend her, my belief is that she 
would own defeat. Vanquished by the arguments 
of our preceding Book, she would yield the victory 
to true Worth. Indeed she would be lost to shame 
if she persisted any longer in the battle against 
Virtue, and rated what is pleasant above what is 
morally good, or maintained that bodily enjoyment 
or the mental gratification which springs from it is 
of higher value than firmness and dignity of character. 
- Let us then give Pleasure her dismissal, and bid her 
_ keep within her own domains, lest her charms and 
blandishments put snares in the way of strict philo- 
sophical debate. The question before us is, where is 
that Chief Good, which is the object of our inquiry, 
to be found? Pleasure we haye eliminated; the 
doctrine that the End of Goods consists in freedom 
from pain is-open to almost identical objections ; and 
in fact no Chief Good can be accepted that is with- 
out the element of Virtue, the most excellent thing 
that can exist. 


Introduction to 
Books III and 
IV: Stoic Ethics. 


Hence although in our debate with Torquatus Stoicism 


we did not spare our strength, nevertheless a keener 
struggle now awaits us with the Stoics. For pleasure 


harder to combat 
than Epicurean- 
ism because of 
its close reason- 


is a topic that does not lend itself to very subtle or ing and novel 


profound discussion ; its champions are little skilled in 
; Oy 


terminology. 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


fendunt eam versuti in disserendo sunt nec qui 

3 contra dicunt causam difficilem repellunt. Ipse etiam 
dicit Epicurus ne argumentandum quidem esse de 
voluptate, quod sit positum iudicium eius in sensibus, 
ut commoneri nos satis sit, nihil attineat doceri. 
Quare illa nobis simplex fuit in utramque partem 
disputatio. Nec enim in Torquati sermone quidquam 
implicatum aut tortuosum fuit, nostraque, ut mihi 
videtur, dilucida oratio. Stoicorum autem non 
ignoras quam sit subtile vel spinosum potius disse- 
rendi genus, idque cum Graecis, tum magis nobis 
quibus etiam verba parienda sunt imponendaque 
nova rebus novis nomina. Quod quidem nemo 
mediocriter doctus mirabitur, cogitans in omni arte 
cuius usus vulgaris communisque non sit multam 
novitatem nominum esse cum constituantur earum 
rerum vocabula quae in quaque arte versentur. 

4 Itaque et dialectici et physici verbis utuntur iis quae 
ipsi Graeciae nota non sint,) geometrae vero et 
musici, grammatici etiam, more quodam loquuntur 
suo; ipsae rhetorum artes, quae sunt totae forenses 
atque populares, verbis tamen in docendo quasi 
privatis utuntur ac suis. 

II. Atque ut omittam has artes elegantes et in- 
genuas, ne opifices quidem tueri sua artificia possent 
nisi vocabulis uterentur nobis incognitis, usitatis sibi, 
Quin etiam agri cultura, quae abhorret ab omni 
politiore elegantia, tamen eas res in quibus versatur 


fe 1 sint Mdv.; sunt MSS. : 
218 


BOOK III. i-ii 


dialectic, and their adversaries have no difficult case to 


refute. In fact Epicurus himself declares that there is 
no occasion to argue about pleasure at all: its criterion 


_ resides in the senses, so that proof is entirely super- 


fluous; a reminder of the facts is all that is needed. 
Therefore our preceding debate consisted of a simple 
statement of the case on either side. There was 
nothing abstruse or intricate in the discourse of 
Torquatus, and my own exposition was, I believe, as 


clear as daylight. But the Stoics, as you are aware, 


affect an exceedingly subtle or rather crabbed style 
of argument; and if the Greeks find it so, still more 
must we, who have actually to create a vocabulary, 
and to invent new terms to convey new ideas. This 


* necessity will cause no surprise to anyone of moderate 


7 


learning, when he reflects that in every branch ot 
science lying outside the range of common everyday 
practice there must always be a large degree of 
novelty in the vocabulary, when it comes to fixing a 
terminology to denote the conceptions with which 
the science in question deals. Thus Logic and Natural 
Philosophy alike make use of terms unfamiliar even 
to Greece; Geometry, Music, Grammar also, have an 
idiom of their own. Even the manuals of Rhetoric, 


_which belong entirely to the practical sphere and to 


the life of the world, nevertheless employ for pur- 
poses of instruction a sort of private and peculiar 
phraseology. 


II. And to leave out of account these liberal arts Apology for 


and accomplishments, even artisans would be unable 

to preserve the tradition of their crafts if they did 

not make use of words unknown to us though 

familiar to themselves. Nay, agriculture itself, a sub- 

ject entirely unsusceptible of literary refinement, has 
219 


coining new 
words in Latin, 


Or 


CICERO. DE: FINIBUS 


nominibus notavit novis. Quo magis hoc philosopho 
faciendum est; ars est enim philosophia vitae, de 
qua disserens arripere verba de foro non potest. 
Quamquam ex omnibus philosophis Stoici plurima — 
novaverunt, Zenoque eorum princeps non tam rerum 
inventor fuit quam verborum novorum. Quod si in 
ea lingua quam plerique uberiorem putant concessum 
est ut doctissimi homines de rebus non pervagatis 
inusitatis verbis uterentur, quanto id nobis magis 
est concedendum qui ea nune primum audemus 
attingere? Et quoniam saepe diximus, et quidem 
cum aliqua querela non Graecorum modo, sed eorum 
etiam qui se Graecos magis quam nostros haberi 
volunt, nos non modo non vinci a Graecis verborum 
copia sed esse in ea etiam superiores, elaborandum 
est ut hoc non in nostris solum artibus sed etiam in 
illorum ipsorum assequamur. Quamquam ea verba 
quibus instituto veterum utimur pro Latinis, ut ipsa 
philosophia, ut rhetorica, dialectica, grammatica, 
geometria, musica, quamquam Latine ea dici pote- 
rant, tamen quoniam usu percepta sunt nostra duca- 
mus. Atque haec quidem de rerum nominibus. 

De ipsis rebus autem saepenumero, Brute, vereor 
ne reprehendar, cum haec ad te scribam, qui cum 
in philosophia, tum in optimo genere philosophiae 
tantum processeris. Quod si facerem quasi te eru- 


aCp. 1, 8 fh 
b viz. Ethics. 


BOOK IIL. ii 


yet had to coin technical terms to denote the things 
with which it is occupied. All the more is the 
philosopher compelled to do likewise; for philosophy 
is the Science of Life, and cannot be discussed in 
language taken at random from the street. Still of 
all the philosophers the Stoics have been the greatest 
innovators in this respect, and Zeno their founder 
was rather an inventor of new terms than a dis- 
coverer of new ideas. But if men so learned, using 
-a language generally supposed to be more copious 
than our own, were allowed in handling recondite 
subjects to employ unfamiliar terms, how much 
more right have we to claim this licence who are 
venturing now to approach these topics for the first 
time? Moreover we have often declared, and this 
under some protest not from Greeks only but also from 
persons who would rather be considered Greeks than 
Romans,* that in fullness of vocabulary we are not 
merely not surpassed by the Greeks but are actually 
‘their superiors. We are therefore bound to do our 
utmost to make good this claim not in our native 
arts only but also in those that belong to the Greeks 
themselves. However, words which the practice of 
past generations permits us to employ as Latin, e.g. 
the term ‘philosophy’ itself, or ‘rhetoric,’ ‘logic,’ 
“ grammar,’ ‘geometry,’ ‘music’ we may consider as 
being our own; the ideas might it is true have been 
translated into Latin, but the Greek terms have been 
naturalized by use. So much for terminology. 

As regards my subject, I often fear, Brutus, that I ana for dedi- 
shall meet with censure for writing upon this topic to Cating to Brutus 
you, who are yourself so great an adept in philosophy, philosophy: 
andin the highest branch of philosophy.” Did I assume 


the attitude of an instructor, such censure would be 
221 


CICERO DE FINIBUS | 
diens, iure reprehenderer. Sed ab eo plurimum 
absum neque ut ea cognoscas quae tibi notissima 
sunt ad te mitto, sed quia facillime in nomine tuo 
acquiesco et quia te habeo aequissimum eorum studio- 
rum quae mihi communia tecum sunt existimatorem 
et iudicem. Attendes igitur ut soles diligenter, 
eamque controversiam diiudicabis quae mihi fuit 
cum avunculo tuo, divino ac singulari viro. 

Nam in Tusculano cum essem vellemque e biblio- 
theca pueri Luculli quibusdam libris uti, veni in eius 
villam ut eos ipse ut solebam depromerem. Quo cum 
venissem, M. Catonem quem ibi esse nescieram vidi in 
bibliotheca sedentem, multis circumfusum Stoicorum 
libris. Erat enim ut scis in eo aviditas legendi, nec 
satiari poterat; quippe qui ne reprensionem quidem 
vulgi inanem reformidans in ipsa curia soleret legere 
saepe dum senatus cogeretur, nihil operae rei publicae 
detrahens; quo magis tum in summo otio maximaque 
copia quasi helluari libris, si hoe verbo in tam clara 
re utendum est, videbatur. Quod cum accidisset, 
ut alter alterum necopinato videremus, surrexit sta- 
tim. Deinde prima illa quae in congressu solemus: 
“Quid tu,” inquit, “huc? a villa enim credo;” et: 
“Si ibi te esse scissem, ad te ipse venissem.” 


ee . . ce 5 - . 
Heri,” inquam, " ludis commissis ex urbe profectus 
222 


BOOK III. ii 


deserved. But nothing could be farther from me. 


w 


I dedicate my work to you, not to teach you what 
you know extremely well already, but because your 
name gives me a very comforting sense of support, 
and because I find in you a most impartial judge and 
critic of the studies which I share with yourself. 
You will therefore grant me, as always, your closest 
attention, and act as umpire of the debate which I 
held with that remarkable man of genius, your uncle. 

I was down at my place at Tusculum, and wanted 
to consult some books from the library of the young 
Lucullus; so I went to his country-house, as I was in 
the habit of doing, to help myself to the volumes I 
needed. On my arrival, seated in the library I 
found Marcus Cato; I had not known he was there. 
He was surrounded by piles of books on Stoicism; 
for he possessed, as you are aware, a voracious appe- 
tite for reading, and could never have enough of it; 
indeed it was often his practice actually to brave the 
idle censure of the mob by reading in the senate- 
house itself, while waiting for the senate to assemble, 
—he did not steal any attention from public business. 
So it may well be believed that when I found him 
taking a complete holiday, with a vast supply of 
books at command, he had the air of indulging in a 
literary debauch, if the term may be applied to so 
honourable an occupation. Upon this chance en- 
counter, each of us being equally surprised to see 
the other, he at once rose, and we began to exchange 
the usual greetings. “What brings you here?” cried 


he; “ You are from your country-seat, I suppose. Had 


I known you were there,” he continued, vl should 

have anticipated you with a visit.” “Yes,” I 

answered, ‘the games began yesterday, so I came 
223 


Scene and per- 
sons of the 
second dialogue. 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


veni ad vesperum. Causa autem fuit huc veniendi 
ut quosdam hinc libfos promerem. Et quidem, Cato, 
hane totam copiam iam Lucullo nostro notam esse 
oportebit; nam his libris eum malo quam reliquo 
ornatu villae delectari. Est enim mihi magnae curae 
(quamquam hoe quidem proprium tuum munus est) 
ut ita erudiatur ut et patri et Caepioni nostro et tibi 
tam propinquo respondeat. Laboro autem non sine 
causa; nam et avi eius memoria moveor (nec enim 
ignoras quanti fecerim Caepionem, qui, ut opinio 
mea fert, in principibus iam esset si viveret) et? 
Lucullus mihi versatur ante oculos, vir cum omnibus? 
excellens, tum mecum et amicitia et omni voluntate 
9 sententiaque coniunctus.” “ Praeclare,’”’ inquit, “ facis 
cum et eorum memoriam tenes quorum uterque tibi 
testamento liberos suos commendavit, et puerum 
diligis. Quod autem meum munus dicis non equidem 
recuso, sed te adiungo socium. Addo etiam illud, 
multa iam mihi dare signa puerum et pudoris et 
ingeni; sed aetatem vides.’ “Video equidem,” 
inquam ; “sed tamen iam infici debet iis artibus quas 
si dum est tener combiberit, ad maiora veniet para- 
tior.’” “Sic; et quidem diligentius saepiusque ista 
loquemur inter nos agemusque communiter. Sed 
residamus,”’ inquit, “si placet.”” Itaque fecimus. 
1 Halm conj. LZ. Lucullus. 
? Baiter conj. omnibus virtutibus. 


aThe young Lucullus’s grandfather, Q. Servilius Caepio, 
was quaestor 100 B.C. and died 90 B.C. when Cicero was 16. 
But the following words seem to refer to a Caepio who, had 
he not died prematurely, would be in the prime of life when 
Cicero writes. This must mean the Caepio of the pre- 
ceding sentence, Lucullus’s uncle, who may well have left 
Cicero as the guardian of his son, as is stated below. We 
may assume that avzisa slip, either of Cicero’s or of a 
copyist’s, for avunculé (Schiitz), 

224 


BOOK III. ii 


out of town, and arrived late in the afternoon. My 


reason for coming on here was to get some books 
from the library. By the way, Cato, it will soon be 
time for our friend Lucullus to make acquaintance 


with this fine collection; for I hope he will take 


more pleasure in his library than in all the other 


_ appointments of his country-house. I am extremely 


anxious (though of course the responsibility belongs 
especially to you) that he should have the kind of 
education that will turn him out after the same 
pattern as his father and our dear Caepio, and also 
yourself, to whom he is so closely related. And I 
have every motive for my interest in him. I cherish 
the memory of his grandfather? (and you are aware 


_ howhighly I esteemed Caepio, who in my belief would 
_ to-day be in the front rank, were he still alive). And 


_ 


also Lucullus is always present to my mind; he was 

a man of surpassing eminence, united to me in senti- 
cae . ° 6 

ment and opinion as well as by friendship.” I com- 


“mend you,” rejoined Cato, “for your loyalty to the 


memory of men who both bequeathed their children 


to your care, as well as for your affectionate interest 
in the lad. My own responsibility, as you call it, I 


’ by no means disown, but I enlist you to share it 


with me. Moreover I may say that the youth 
already seems to me to show many signs both of 
modesty and talent; but you know how young he 
is.” ““I do,” said I, “but all the same it is time for him 
to be dipping into studies which, if allowed to soak 
in at this impressionable age, will render him better 
equipped when he comes to the business of life.” 
“True, and we will discuss this matter again several 
times more fully and take commonaction. But let us be 
seated,” he said, “if agreeable to you.’’ So we sat down. 
Q ; 225 


10 


11 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


Ill. Tum ille: “Tu autem cum ipse tantum libro- 
rum habeas, quos hic tandem requiris?”’ “Commen- 
tarios quosdam,’ inquam, “Aristotelios, quos hic 
sciebam esse, veni ut auferrem, quos legerem dum 
essem otiosus; quod quidem nobis non saepe con- 
tingit.” “Quam vellem,’ inquit, “te ad Stoicos 
inclinavisses! Erat enim, si cuiusquam, certe tuum 
nihil praeter virtutem in bonis ducere.”’ “Vide ne 
magis, inquam, tuum fuerit, cum re idem tibi quod 
mihi videretur, non nova te rebus nomina imponere. 
Ratio enim nostra consentit, pugnat oratio.” “‘ Mi- 
nime vero,” inquit ille, “ consentit. Quidquid enim 
praeter id quod honestum sit expetendum esse dixe- 
ris in bonisque numeraveris, et honestum ipsum, 
quasi virtutis lumen, exstinxeris et virtutem penitus 
everteris.” “Dicuntur ista, Cato, magnifice,” in- 
quam; “sed videsne verborum gloriam tibi cum 
Pyrrhone et cum Aristone, qui omnia exaequant, 
esse communem? de quibus cupio scire quid sentias.” 
“gone quaeris,” inquit, “ quid sentiam? quos bonos 
viros, fortes, iustos, moderatos aut audivimus in re 
publica fuisse aut ipsi vidimus, qui sine ulla doctrina, 
naturam ipsam secuti, multa laudabilia fecerunt, eos 
melius a natura institutos fuisse quam institui potuis- 
sent a philosophia, si ullam aliam probavissent praeter 
eam quae nihil aliudin bonis haberet nisi honestum, 


nihil nisi turpe in malis; ceterae philosophorum disci- 
226" 


BOOK oi 
) III, Cato then resumed: “ But what pray are the Preliminary 


discussion. 


books that you must come here for, when you have so Cato: if any- 
large a library of Pe thing besides 
fs y your own: “I have come to Mori Wort 


fetch some commentaries on Aristotle,’ I replied, desirable, Virtue 
which I knew were here. I wanted to read them is overt omy ; 
during my holiday ; I do not often get any leisure.” proved (isto 
“How I wish,” said he, * “that you had thrown in always happy. 
your lot with the Stoics! You of all men might 
have been expected to reckon virtue as the only 
good.” “‘ Perhaps you might rather have been ex- 
pected,” I answered, “to refrain from adopting a 
new terminology, when in substance you think as I 
do. Our principles agree; it is our language that is 
at variance.” “Indeed,” he rejoined, “they do not 
agree in the least. Ouice pronounce anything to be 
desirable, once reckon anything as a good, other than 
Moral Worth, and you have extinguished the very 
light of virtue, Moral Worth itself, and overthrown 
virtue entirely.’ “That all sounds very fine, Cato,” 
I replied, “but are you aware that you share your 
lofty pretensions with Pyrrho and with Aristo, who 
make all things equal in value? I should like to know 
what your opinion is of them.” “My opinion?” he 
‘said. “You ask what my opinion is? That those 
_ good, brave, just and temperate men, of whom we 
have heard as having lived in our state, or whom we 
have ourselves seen, who under the guidance of 
Nature herself, without the aid of any learning, did 
many glorious deeds,—that these men were better 
educated by nature than they could possibly have 
been by philosophy had they accepted any other 
system of philosophy than the one that counts 
Moral Worth the only good and Moral Baseness the 
only evil. All other philosophical systems—in vary- 
Q2 225 


13 


14 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


plinae, omnino alia magis alia, sed tamen omnes quae 
rem ullam virtutis expertem aut in bonis aut in malis 
numerent, eas non modo nihil adiuvare arbitror neque 
afferre! quo meliores simus, sed ipsam depravare natu- 
ram. Nam nisi hoc obtineatur,idsolum bonum esse quod 
honestum sit, nullo modo probari possit beatam vi- 
tam virtute effici; quod si ita sit, cur opera philoso- 
phiae sit danda, nescio. Si enim sapiens aliquis miser 
esse possit, ne ego istam gloriosam memorabilemque 
virtutem non magno aestimandam putem.” 

IV. “Quae adhuc, Cato, a te dicta sunt, eadem,” 
inquam, “ dicere posses si sequerere Pyrrhonem aut 
Aristonem. Nec enim ignoras iis istud honestum 
non summum modo sed etiam ut tu vis solum bonum 
videri; quod si ita est, sequitur id ipsum quod te 
velle video, omnes semper beatos esse sapientes. 
Hosne igitur laudas et hane eorum,” inquam, “ sen- 
tentiam sequi nos censes oportere?” “ Minime vero 
istorum quidem,” inquit; “cum enim virtutis hoe 
proprium sit, earum rerum quae secundum naturam 
sint habere delectum, qui omnia sic exaequaverunt 
ut in utramque partem ita paria redderent uti nulla 
selectione uterentur, hi virtutem ipsam sustulerunt.” 
““TIstud quidem,” inquam, optime dicis; sed quaero, 
nonne tibi faciendum idem sit nihil dicenti bonum 
quod non rectum honestumque sit, reliquarum rerum 
discrimen omne tollenti.’ “Si quidem,” inquit, 
“tollerem; sed relinquo.” “ Quonam modo?”’ in- 


1 afferre edd.; affirmare MSS., and Mdv. with mark of 
corruption. 


228 


initia nin 


BOOK III. iii-iv 


ing degrees no doubt, but still all,—which reckon 
anything of which virtue is not an element either as 
a good or an evil, do not merely, as I hold, give us no 
assistance or support towards becoming better men, 
but are actually corrupting to the character. Either 
this point must be firmly maintained, that Moral 
Worth is the sole good, or it is absolutely impos- 
sible to prove that virtue constitutes happiness. And 
in that case I do not see why we should trouble to 
study philosophy. For if a Wise Man could be 
miserable, I should not set much value on your 
_ vaunted and belauded virtue.’ 
2 & IV. “ What you have said so far, Cato,” I answered, 
might equally well be said by a follower of Pyrrho 
or of Aristo. They, as you are aware, think as you 
do, that this Moral Worth you speak of is not merely 
the chief but the only Good; and from this of 
necessity follows the proposition that I notice you 
maintain, namely, that the Wise are always happy. 
Do you then,” I asked, “ commend these philosophers, 
and think that we ought to adopt this view of theirs?” 
“T certainly would not have you adopt their view,” he 
said; “for it is of the essence of virtue to exercise 
choice among the things in accordance with nature; 
so that philosophers who make all things absolutely 
equal, rendering them indistinguishable either as 
better or worse, and leaving no room for selection 
} among them, have abolished virtue itself.’ “ Excel- 
lently put,” I rejoined; “but pray are. not you 
committed to the same position, if you say that only 
what is right and moral is good, and abolish all dis- 
tinction between everything else?” “Quite so,’ 
said he, “if I did abolish all distinction, but I do 


not.” “How so?” I said. “If only virtue, only that 
229 


+ 


Cicero: How do 
you differ from 
Aristo and 
Pyrrho? They 
make all things 
absolutely indif- 
ferent: do not 
you? 


Or 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


Coa. . . 
quam. “ Si una virtus, unum istud quod honestum 


appellas, rectum, laudabile, decorum (erit enim 
notius quale sit pluribus notatum vocabulis idem 
declarantibus), id igitur, inquam, si solum est bonum, 
quid habebis praeterea quod sequare? aut, si nihil 
malum nisi quod turpe, inhonestum, indecorum, pra- 
vum, flagitiosum, foedum (ut hoe quoque pluribus 
nominibus insigne faciamus), quid praeterea dices esse 
fugiendum?” “Non ignoranti tibi,’”’ inquit, “quid 
sim dicturus, sed aliquid, ut ego suspicor, ex mea 
brevi responsione arripere cupienti non respondebo 


ad singula; explicabo potius, quoniam otiosi sumus, 


nisi alienum putas, totam Zenonis Stoicorumque sen- 
tentiam.” “Minime id quidem,” inquam, “alienum, 
multumque ad ea quae quaerimus explicatio tua 
ista profecerit.” “Experiamur igitur,” inquit; “ etsi 
habet haec Stoicorum ratio difficilius quiddam et 
obscurius. Nam cum in Graeco sermone haec ipsa 
quondam rerum nomina novarum . . .* non videban- 
tur, quae nune consuetudo diuturna trivit; quid 
censes' in Latino fore?” “Facillimum id quidem 
est,” inquam. “Si enim Zenoni licuit, cum rem 
aliquam invenisset inusitatam, inauditum quoque ei 
rei nomen imponere, cur non liceat Catoni? Nec 
tamen exprimi verbum e verbo necesse erit, ut inter- 
pretes indiserti solent, cum sit verbum quod idem 
declaret magis usitatum; equidem soleo etiam, quod 
uno Graeci, si aliter non possum, idem pluribus 


1 Mdv. marks lacuna, and conjectures novarwm nova 
erant ferenda non videbantur, 


250 


BOOK III. iv 


one thing which you call moral, right, praiseworthy, 
becoming (for its nature will be better understood if 
it is denoted by a number of synonyms), if then, I 
say, this is the sole good, what other object of pur- 
suit will you have beside it? or, if there be nothing 
bad but what is base, dishonourable, disgraceful, 
evil, sinful, foul (to make this clear also by using a 
variety of terms), what else will you pronounce 
worthy to be avoided?” “ You know quite well,” he 
retorted, “what I am going to say; but I suspect you Cato proposes 
want to catch up something in my answer if I put it Oe ee 
shortly. So I won’t answer you point by point. Philosophy. 
Instead of that, as we are at leisure, I will expound, : 
unless you think it out of place, the whole system of 
Zeno and the Stoics.” “Out of place?” I cried. 
“By no means. Your exposition will be of great 
assistance towards solving the questions we are ask- 
ing.” “Then let us make the attempt,” said he, 
“ albeit there is a considerable element of difficulty Apology for its 
and obscurity in this Stoic system. For at one time *™olesy- 
even the terms employed in Greek for its novel 
conceptions seemed unendurable, when they were 
novel, though now daily use has made them familiar; 
what then do you think will be the case in Latin?” 
“Do not feel the least difficulty on that score,” said 
I. “If when Zeno invented some novel idea he 
was permitted to denote it by an equally unheard-of 
word, why should not Cato be permitted to do so 
too? Though all the same it need not be a hard 
and fast rule that every word shall be represented 
by its exact counterpart, when there is a more 
familiar word conveying the same meaning. That 
is the way of a clumsy translator. Indeed my own 
practice is to use several words to give what is ex- 
231 


16 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 

verbis exponere. Et tamen puto concedi nobis 
oportere ut Graeco verbo utamur, si: quando minus 
oceurret Latinum, ne hoc “ephippiis’ et ‘ acrato- 
phoris’ potius quam * proégmenis’ et ‘ apoproégme- 
nis’ concedatur. Quamquam haec quidem * praepo- 
sita’ recte et ‘reiecta’ dicere licebit.” “ Bene facis,” 
inquit, “quod me adiuvas; et istis quidem quae 
modo dixisti utar potius Latinis; in ceteris subvenies 
si me haerentem videbis.” “Sedulo,” inquam “ fa- 
ciam. Sed’ fortuna fortes; quare conare, quaeso. 
Quid enim possumus hoe agere divinius?”’ 

V. “Placet his,” inquit, “quorum ratio mihi pro- 
batur, simul atque natum sit animal (hine enim est 
ordiendum), ipsum sibi conciliari et commendari ad 
se conservandum et ad suum statum eaque quae 
conservantia sunt eius status diligenda, alienari 
autem ab interitu iisque rebus quae interitum vi- 
deantur afferre. Id ita esse sic probant, quod ante 
quam voluptas aut dolor attigerit, salutaria appetant 
parvi aspernenturque contraria, quod non fieret nisi 
statum suum diligerent, interitum timerent. Fieri 
autem non posset ut appeterent aliquid nisi sensum 


haberent sui eoque se diligerent. | Ex quo intellegi 
232 


BOOK III. iv-v 


pressed in Greek by one, if I cannot convey, the 


' sense otherwise. And at the same time I hold that we 


QO 


may fairly claim the licence to employ a Greek word 
when no Latin word is readily forthcoming. Why 
should this licence be granted to ephippia (saddles) 
and acratophora (jars for neat wine) more than to 
proegmena and apoproégmena? These latter however 
it is true may be correctly translated ‘ preferred’ and 
¢ g as 6 

rejected. Thanks for your assistance,” he said. 

I certainly shall use for choice the Latin equiva- 
lents you have just given; and in other cases you shall 
come to my aid if you see me in difficulties.” “I'll 
do my best,” I replied. “But fortune favours the 
bold; so pray make the venture. What sublimer 
occupation could we find ?”’ 

V. He began: “It is the view of those whose statement and 
system I adopt, that immediately upon birth (for defence of Stoic 
that is the proper point to start from) a living 1. The Nature of 

the Chief Good. 


creature feels an attachment for itself, and an The new-born 


impulse to preserve itself and to feel affection for creature instinc- 
tively seeks self- 


_ its own constitution and for those things which tend preservation and 


the things con- 


_ to preserve that constitution ; while on the other hand gucive to it: in- 


cluding health 


it conceives an antipathy to destruction and to those 
and knowledge, 


~ things which appear to threaten destruction. In but not pleasure 


proof of this opinion they urge that infants desire 
things conducive to their health and reject things 
that are the opposite before they have ever felt 
pleasure or pain; this would not be the case, unless 
they felt an affection for their own constitution and 
were afraid of destruction. But it would be impossible 
that they should feel desire at all unless they pos- 


_ sessed self-consciousness, and consequently felt affec- 


tion for themselves. This leads to the conclusion 


that it is love of self which supplies the primary 
2338 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


debet principium ductum esse a se diligendo. In 
principiis autem naturalibus plerique Stoici non pu- 
tant voluptatem esse ponendam; quibus ego vehe- 
menter assentior, ne, si voluptatem natura posuisse 
in iis rebus videatur quae primae appetuntur, multa — 
turpia sequantur. Satis esse autem argumenti vide- 
tur quamobrem illa quae prima sunt ascita natura 
diligamus, quod est nemo quin, cum utrumvis liceat, 
aptas malit et integras omnes partes corporis quam ~ 
eodem usu imminutas aut detortas habere. 

“Rerum autem cognitiones (quas vel comprehensi- 
ones vel perceptiones vel, si haec verba aut minus pla- 
cent aut minus intelleguntur, cataAjWers appellemus 
licet), eas igitur ipsas propter se asciscendas arbitra- 
mur, quod habeant quiddam in se quasi complexum et 
continens veritatem. Id autem in parvis intellegi 
potest, quos delectari videamus, etiamsi eorum nihil 
intersit, si quid ratione per se ipsi invenerint. Artes 
etiam ipsas propter se assumendas putamus, cum quia 
sit in iis aliquid dignum assumptione, tum quod con- 
stent ex cognitionibus et contineant quiddam in se 
ratione constitutum et via. A falsa autem assensione 
magis nos alienatos esse quam a ceteris rebus phew 
Soo contra naturam, arbitrantur. 

“(Iam membrorum, id est, partium corporis alia 
videntur propter eorum usum a natura esse donata, 
ut manus, crura, pedes, ut ea quae sunt intus in 
corpore, quorum utilitas quanta sit a medicis etiam 


a This parenthesis has no relevance to the context. 


254 


BOOK III. v 


7 impulse to action. Pleasure on the contrary, accord- 
ing to most Stoics, is not to be reckoned among 
the primary objects of natural impulse ; and I very 
strongly agree with them, for fear lest - many 
immoral consequences would follow if we held that 
nature has placed pleasure among the earliest objects 
of desire. But the fact of our affection for the 
objects first adopted at nature’s prompting seems to 
require no further proof than this, that there is no one 
who, given the choice, would not prefer to have all 
the parts of his body sound and whole, rather than 
maimed or distorted although equally serviceable. 

Again, acts of cognition (which we may term 
comprehensions or perceptions, or, if these words are 
distasteful or obscure, katalépseis), — these we con- 
sider meet to be adopted for their own sake, because 
they possess an element that so to speak embraces 
and contains the truth. This can be seen in the 
ease of children, whom we may observe to take 
pleasure in finding something out for themselves by 
the use of reason, even though they gain nothing by 

8 it. The sciences also, we consider, are things to be 
chosen for their own sake, partly because there is in 
them something worthy of choice, partly because 

they consist of acts of cognition and contain an 
element of fact established by methodical reasoning. 
The mental assent to what is false, as the Stoics 
believe, is more repugnant to us than all the other 
things that are contrary to nature. 

“(Again,? of the members or parts of the body, 
some appear to have been bestowed on us by nature 
for the sake of their use, for example the hands, 
legs, feet, and the internal organs, as to the degree 


of whose utility even physicians are not agreed; 
235 


19 


20 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 

disputatur, alia autem nullam ob utilitatem quasi 
ad quendam ornatum, ut cauda pavoni, plumae 
versicolores columbis, viris mammae atque barba. ) 
Haec dicuntur fortasse ieiunius; sunt enim quasi 
prima elementa naturae, quibus ubertas orationis 
adhiberi vix potest; nec equidem eam cogito conse- 
ctari; verum tamen cum de rebus grandioribus dicas, 
ipsae res verba rapiunt; ita fit cum gravior, tum 
etiam splendidior oratio.”’ “Est ut dicis,” inquam; 
“sed tamen omne quod de re bona dilucide dicitur, 
mihi praeclare dici videtur. Istiusmodi autem res 
dicere ornate velle puerile est, plane autem et 
perspicue expedire posse docti et intellegentis viri.” 

VI. “ Progrediamur igitur, quoniam,” inquit, “ab his 
principiis naturae discessimus, quibus congruere de- 
bent quae sequuntur. Sequitur autem haec prima 
divisio: Aestimabile esse dicunt (sic enim, ut opinor, 
appellemus) id quod aut ipsum secundum naturam 
sit aut tale quid efficiat, ut selectione dignum pro- 
pterea sit quod aliquod pondus habeat dignum aesti- 
matione, quam illi ¢€/av vocant, contraque inaestima- 
bile quod sit superiori contrarium., ~ Initiis igitur ita 
constitutis ut ea quae secundum naturam sunt ipsa 


propter se sumenda sint contrariaque item reicienda, 
236 


— 


BOOK III. v-vi 


__ while others serve no useful purpose, but appear to 
be intended for ornament: for instance the pea- 
cock’s tail, the plumage of the dove with its shifting 
colours, and the breasts and beard of the male human 
being.) All this is perhaps somewhat baldly ex- 
pressed; for it deals with what may be called the 
primary elements of nature, to which any embellish- 
ment of style can scarcely be applied, nor am I for my 
part concerned to attempt it. On the other hand, 
when one is treating of more majestic topics the style 
instinctively rises with the subje¢t, and the brilliance 
of the language increases with the dignity of the 
theme.” “True,” I rejoined; “but to my mind, 
any clear statement of an important topic possesses 
excellence of style. It would be childish to desire 
an ornate style in subjects of the kind with which 
you are dealing. A man of sense and education will 
be content to be able to express his meaning plainly 


and clearly.” 

Vie To proceed then,” he continued, “for we have Such things are 
been digressing from the primary impulses of nature ; Dees kn 
and with these the later stages must be in harmony. 34. their, con- 
The next step is the following fundamental classifi- tess’ and ‘ to be 
cation: That which is in itself in accordance with *°t*’ 
nature, or which produces something else that is so, 
and which therefore is deserving of choice as 
possessing a certain amount of positive value— 
axia as the Stoics call it—this they pronounce to be 
‘valuable’ (for so I suppose we may translate it); 
and on the other hand that which is the contrary of 
the former they term ‘valueless.’ The initial prin- 
ciple being thus established that things in accordance 
with nature are ‘things to be taken’ for their own 
sake, and their opposites similarly ‘things to be 

237 


21 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


primum est officium (id enim appello KaOjKov) ut se 
conservet in naturae statu, deinceps ut ea teneat 
quae secundum naturam sint pellatque contraria; 
qua inventa selectione et item reiectione, sequitur 
deinceps cum officio selectio, deinde ea perpetua, 
tum ad extremum constans consentaneaque naturae, 
in qua primum inesse incipit et intellegi quid sit 
quod vere bonum possit dici. Prima est enim con- 
ciliatio hominis ad ea quae sunt secundum naturam ; 
simul autem cepit intellegentiam vel notionem potius, 
quam appellant évvoray illi, viditque rerum agenda- 
rum ordinem et ut ita dicam concordiam, multo eam 
pluris aestimavit quam omnia illa quae prima dilexe- 
rat, atque ita cognitione et ratione collegit ut sta- 
tueret in eo collocatum summum illud hominis per 
se laudandum et expetendum bonum; quod cum 
positum sit in eo quod onoAoyiav Stoici, nos appelle- 
mus convenientiam, si placet, — cum igitur in eo sit 
id bonum quo omnia referenda sunt, honeste facta 
ipsumque honestum, quod solum in bonis ducitur, 
quamquam post oritur, tamen id solum vi sua et 


aThe Latin is here inadequate ; what is meant is appa- 
rently that the adult deliberately selects the natural Goods 
which as a child he pursued instinctively, and that the 
selection is now an offictum. If however cum officio is the 
mark of selectio at this later stage, Cicero is inaccurate 
above when he applies offictum to the instinct of self- 
preservation and the instinctive choice of natural Goods. 
On the other hand it is not clear why these should not be 
included under kathékon ‘appropriate action’ or officium 
as defined at § 58, ‘an act of which a probable account or 
reason can be given,’ : 


238 


BOOK III. vi 


rejected,’ the first ‘appropriate act’ (for so I render Appropriate 


(+) 


the Greek kathékon) is to preserve oneself in one’s * 


natural constitution ; the next is to retain those things 
which are in auiice with nature and to repel 
those that are the contrary; then when this principle 
of choice and also of rejection has been discovered, 
there follows next in order choice conditioned Later we choose 
by “appropriate action’;* then, such choice be- {2m ,Ssliberate- 


’ ly, as in harmony 
come a fixed habit; and finally, choice fully with eae 
A : t E - isis Morality— 
rationalized and in harmony with nature. It is at the right pie 
5 not the attain- 
this final stage that the Good properly so called first rene Sivchis 
emerges and comes to be understood in its true the iy Good 
on 00 
nature. Man’s first attraction is towards the things m 
in accordance with nature; but as soon as he has 


attained to understanding, or rather to conscious in- 


_ telligence—in Stoic phraseology ennota—and has dis- 


cerned the order and so to speak harmony that should 
govern conduct, he then esteems this harmony far 
more highly than all the things for which he originally 
felt an affection, and by exercise of intelligence and 


_ reason infers the conclusion that in this order resides 


the Chief Good of man, the thing that is praise- 
worthy and desirable for its own sake; and that in- 


' asmuch as this consists in what the Stoics term 


homologia and we with your approval may call ‘ con- 
formity ’°’—inasmuch I say as in this resides that 
Good which is the End to which all else is a means, 
moral conduct and Moral Worth itself, which alone 
is counted asa good, although of subsequent develop- 
ment, is nevertheless the sole thing that is for its 


b*To live conformably,’ em. (nv, was Zeno’s 
formula for the End; it was interpreted as meaning ‘to 
live on one harmonious plan.” Cleanthes added, r7 pice, 
£to live in conformity with nature.’ 


239 


22 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


dignitate expetendum est, eorum autem quae sunt 
prima naturae propter se nihil est expetendum. 
Cum vero illa quae officia esse dixi proficiscantur ab 
initiis naturae, necesse est ea ad haec referri, ut 
recte dici possit omnia officia eo referri ut adipisca- 
mur principia naturae, nec tamen ut hoc sit bonorum 
ultimum, propterea quod non inest in primis naturae 
conciliationibus honesta actio; consequens est enim 
et post oritur, ut dixi. Est tamen ea secundum 
naturam multoque nos ad se expetendam magis hor- 
tatur quam superiora omnia. Sed ex hoc primum 
error tollendus est, ne quis sequi existimet ut duo 
sint ultima bonorum. Ut enim si cui propositum sit 
collineare hastam aliquo aut sagittam, sicut’ nos 
ultimum in bonis dicimus, sic illi facere omnia quae 
possit ut collineet: huic in eiusmodi similitudine 
omnia sint facienda ut collineet, et tamen, ut omnia 
faciat quo propositum assequatur, sit” hoc quasi ulti- 
mum quale nos summum in vita bonum dicimus, illud 
autem ut feriat, quasi seligendum, non expetendum. 

VII. “Cum autem omnia officia a principiis naturae - 


- proficiscantur, ab iisdem necesse est proficisci ipsam 


sapientiam. Sed quemadmodum saepe fit ut is qui 
commendatus sit alicui pluris eum faciat cui com- 
mendatus quam illum a quo sit, sic minime mirum 


\sicut MSS.; sic Mdv., bracketing sic 21li—collineet : the 
sentence so emended may be rendered ‘‘ For suppose a 
man were to set himself to take true aim at a mark with a 
spear or an arrow, this purpose would correspond to the 
Ultimate Good as we define it. The archer in this illustra- 
tion would have to do all he could to aim straight, and yet 
it is this doing all he could to attain his purpose that would 
constitute his Ultimate End, as we call it, answering to 
the Chief Good, as defined by us, in the conduct of life; 
the actual hitting of the mark would be, in our phrase, 
‘to be chosen,’ not ‘to be desired.’ ” 2 szt edd.; sic MSS. 

240 


BOOK III. vi-vii 


own efficacy and value desirable, whereas none of the 
primary objects of nature is desirable for its own sake, 
But since those actions which I have termed ‘appro- 
priate acts’ are based on the primary natural objects, 
it follows that the former are means to the latter. 
Hence it may correctly be said that all ‘appropriate 
acts * are means to the end of attaining the primary 
needs of nature. Yetit must not be inferred that their 
attainment is the ultimate Good, inasmuch as moral 
action is not one of the primary natural attractions, 
but is an outgrowth of these, a later development, as 
Thave said. At thesame time moralactionisin accord- 
ance with nature, and stimulates our desire far more 
strongly than all the objects that attracted us earlier, 
But at this point a caution is necessary at the outset. 
It will be an error to infer that this view implies two 
Ultimate Goods. For though if a man were to make 
it his purpose to take a true aim with a spear or 
arrow at some mark, his ultimate end, corresponding 
to the ultimate good as we pronounce it, would be 
‘to do all he could to aim straight: the man in this 
illustration would have to do everything to aim 
straight, and yet, although he did everything to 
‘attain his purpose, his ‘ultimate End,’ so to speak, 
would be what corresponded to what we call the 
Chief Good in the conduct of life, whereas the actual . 
hitting of the mark would be in our phrase “to be 
chosen’ but not ‘to be desired.’ 

VII. “Again, as all ‘appropriate acts’ are based Allscton | 
on the primary impulses of nature, it follows that tive, deliberate, 
Wisdom itself is based on them also. But as it often le that pigs 
happens that a man who is introduced to another planoflife. 
values this new friend more highly than he does the 
person who gave him the introduction, so in like 

R 241 


24 


25 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


est primo nos sapientiae commendari ab_ initiis 
naturae, post autem ipsam sapientiam nobis cariorem 
fieri quam ‘illa sint a quibus ad hane venerimus. 
Atque ut membra nobis ita data sunt ut ad quandam 
rationem vivendi data esse appareant, sic appetitio 
animi, quae d6pu7 Graece vocatur, non ad quodvis 
genus vitae sed ad quandam formam vivendi videtur 
data, itemque et ratio et perfecta ratio. Ut enim 
histrioni actio, saltatori motus non quivis sed certus 
quidam est datus, sic vita agenda est certo genere 
quodam, non quolibet; quod genus conveniens con- 
sentaneumque dicimus. Nec enim gubernationi aut 
medicinae similem sapientiam esse arbitramur, sed 
actioni illi potius quam modo dixi et saltationi, ut in 
ipsa insit, non foris petatur extremum, id est artis 
effectio. Et tamen est etiam alia cum his ipsis 
artibus sapientiae dissimilitudo, propterea quod in 
illis quae recte facta sunt non continent tamen 
omnes partes e quibus constant; quae autem nos aut 
recta aut recte facta dicamus, si placet, illi autem 
appellant xarop@wuata, omnes numeros virtutis con- 
tinent. Sola enim sapientia in se tota conversa est, quod 
idem in ceteris artibus non fit. Inscite autem medicinae 
et gubernationis ultimum cum ultimo sapientiae com- 
paratur. Sapientia enim et animi magnitudinem 


a Effectio is here taken as equivalent to the Aristotelian 
praxis, as in § 45; but it might be construed as having the 
sense of ‘effectus’ in Tuse. 2, 3, viz. exgon in its wider 
sense, the product of an art, covering both praxis, the 
actual exercise of the art, which is the product of a 
‘practic’ art, and evgon in the narrower sense, ‘effectus’ 
in § 32, the extraneous product of a ‘ poiétic’ or con- 
structive art. 


242 


aii | 


BOOK III. vii 


manner it is by no means surprising that though we 


are first introduced to Wisdom by the primary natural 
instincts, afterwards Wisdom itself becomes dearer to 


us than are the instincts from which we came to her. 


_ And just as our limbs are so fashioned that it is clear 


that they were bestowed upon us with a view to a 
certain mode of life, so our faculty of appetition, in 
Greek hormé, was obviously designed not for any kind 

of life one may choose, but for a particular mode of 
living: and the same is true of Reason and of per- 
fected Reason. For just as an actor or dancer has wisdomitsown 
assigned to him not any but a certain particular part ="4- 
or dance, so life has to be conducted in a certain 
fixed way, and not in any way we like. This fixed 
way we speak of as ‘conformable’ and suitable. In 
fact we do not consider Wisdom to be like seamanship 

or medicine, but rather like the arts of acting and 

of dancing just mentioned; its End, being the 
actual exercise? of the art, is contained within the 


_art itself, and is not something extraneous to it. At 


the same time there is also another point which 

marks a dissimilarity between Wisdom and these 

same arts. In the latter a movement perfectly 
executed nevertheless does not involve all the 
various motions which together constitute the sub- 

ject matter of the art; whereas in the sphere of 
conduct, what we may call, if you approve, “right ‘ Right ace 
actions, or ‘rightly performed actions,’ in Stoic tes ange 
phraseology katorthémata, contain all the categories of aspect of Virtue, 
virtue. For Wisdom alone is entirely self-contained, “"'* °"* 
which is not the case with the other arts. It is 

erroneous, however, to place the End of medicine or 

of navigation exactly on a par with the End of 


Wisdom. For Wisdom includes also magnanimity 
R2 243 


26 


LoS) 
~I 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


complectitur et iustitiam et ut omnia quae homini 
accidant infra se esse iudicet, quod idem ceteris arti- 
bus non contingit. Tenere autem virtutes eas ipsas 
quarum modo feci mentionem nemo poterit nisi 
statuerit nihil esse quod intersit aut differat aliud ab 
alio praeter honesta et turpia. 

“ Videamus nunc quam sint praeclare illa his quae 
iam posui consequentia. Cum enim hoc sit extre- 
mum (sentis enim, credo, me iam diu quod 7éAos 
Graeci dicunt id dicere tum extremum, tum ulti- 
mum, tum summum; licebit etiam finem pro extremo 
aut ultimo dicere)—cum igitur hoe sit extremum, 
congruenter naturae convenienterque vivere, neces- 
sario sequitur omnes sapientes semper feliciter, abso- 
lute, fortunate vivere, nulla re impediri, nulla prohi- 
beri, nulla egere. Quod autem continet non magis 
eam disciplinam de qua loquor quam vitam fortunas- 
que nostras, id est ut quod honestum sit id solum 
bonum iudicemus, potest id quidem fuse et copiose 
et. omnibus electissimis verbis gravissimisque sen- 
tentiis rhetorice | et augeri et ornari; sed consectaria 
me Stoicorum brevia et acuta delectant. 

VIII. “Coneluduntur igitur eorum argumenta 
sic: Quod est bonum, omne laudabile est; quod 
autem laudabile est, omne est honestum; bonum 
igitur quod est, honestum est. Satisne hoc conclu- 
sum videtur? Certe; quod enim efficiebatur ex iis 
duobus quae erant sumpta, in eo vides esse conclu- 


! ryhetorice some inf. MSS. and some edd. omit. 
Q44 


BOOK IIL. vii-viii 


.and justice and a sense of superiority to all the 
accidents of man’s estate, but this is not the case 
with the other arts. Again, even the very virtues I 
have just mentioned cannot be attained by anyone 
unless he has realized that all things are indifferent 
and indistinguishable except moral worth and base- 
ness. 
} “We may now observe how strikingly the prin- Hence the 
"St 5 : Sapiensis always 
ciples I have established support the following happy. 
corollaries. Inasmuch as the final aim—(and you 
have observed, no doubt, that I have all along been 
translating the Greek term felos either by ‘final’ or 
“ultimate aim,’ or “chief Good,’ and for ‘final or 
ultimate aim’ we may also substitute “End’)—inas- 
much then as the final aim is to live in agreement 
and harmony with nature, it necessarily follows 
that all wise men at all times enjoy a happy, perfect 
and fortunate life, free from all hindrance, inter- 
ference or want. The essential principle not merely 
of the system of philosophy I am discussing but 
also of our life and fortunes is, that we should believe 
Moral Worth to be the only good. This principle virtue the sole 
might be amplified and elaborated in the rhetorical path ae vc. oF 
manner, with great length and fullness and with 
all the resources of choice diction and impressive 
argument; but for my own part I like the terse and 
_ pointed syllogisms of the Stoies. 
VIII. “They put their arguments in the follow- (1) Good= 
: ie ‘ : - laudable= 
ing syllogistic form: Whatever is good is praise- honourable 
worthy: but whatever is praiseworthy is morally ‘™!; 
honourable: therefore that which is good is morally 
honourable. Do you think this is a valid deduction? 
Undoubtedly it is so: you can see that the conclusion 
rests on an inference logically drawn from the two 
245 


oe 


i) 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


sum. Duorum autem e quibus effecta conclusio 
est contra superius dici solet non omne bonum esse 
laudabile; nam quod laudabile sit honestum esse 
conceditur. I[llud autem perabsurdum, bonum esse 
aliquid quod non expetendum sit, aut expetendum 
quod non placens, aut si id, non etiam diligendum ; 
ergo et probandum; ita etiam laudabile; id autem 
honestum. Ita fit ut quod bonum sit id etiam 
honestum sit. 

“Deinde quaero quis aut dé misera vita possit 
gloriari aut de non beata. De sola igitur beata. 
Ex quo efficitur gloriatione, ut ita dicam, dignam 
esse beatam vitam, quod non possit nisi honestae 
vitae iure contingere. Ita fit ut honesta vita beata 
vita sit. Et quoniam is cui contingit ut iure laude- 
tur habet insigne quiddam ad decus et ad gloriam, 
ut ob ea quae tanta sint beatus dici iure possit, idem 
de vita talis viri rectissime dicetur. Ita si beata vita 
honestate cernitur, quod honestum est id bonum 
solum habendum est. 

“Quid vero? negarine ullo! modo possit num- 
quam ” quemquam stabili et firmo et magno animo, 
quem fortem virum dicimus, effici posse, nisi consti- 
tutum sit non esse malum dolorem? Ut enim qui 
mortem in malis ponit non potest eam non timere, 
sic nemo ulla in re potest id quod malum esse decre- 
verit non curare idque contemnere. Quo posito et 
omnium assensu approbato, illud assumitur, eum qui 


‘negarine ullo Davis, Mdv.; négari nullo MSS, 
2numguam inserted by Mdv., 


246 


BOOK III. viii 


_ premises. The usual line of reply is to deny the 
major premise, and say that not everything good is 
praiseworthy; for there is no denying that what is 
_ praiseworthy is morally honourable. But it would 
be paradoxical to maintain that there is something 
good which is not desirable; or desirable that is not 
pleasing; or if pleasing, not also esteemed; and 
therefore approved as well; and so also praiseworthy. 
But the praiseworthy is the morally honourable. 
- Hence it follows that what is good is also morally 
honourable. 

Next I ask, who can be proud of a life that is (2) happy= 
miserable or not happy? It follows that one can only iecliponabies 
be proud of one’s lot when it is a happy one. This 
proves that the happy life is a thing that deserves, so 
to speak, that one should be proud of it; and this can- 
not rightly be said of any life but one morally honour- 
able. Therefore the moral life is the happy life. And 
the man who deserves and wins praise has exceptional 
cause for pride and self-satisfaction; but these things 
count for so much that he can justly be pronounced 
happy; therefore the life of such a man can with 
full correctness be described as happy also. Thus if 
Moral Worth is the criterion of happiness, Moral 

-Worth must be deemed the only Good. 

“Once more ; could it be denied that it is impos- (3) brave=in- 
sible for there ever to exist a man of steadfast, firm forune=hanpy. 
and lofty mind, such a one as we call a brave man, 
unless it be established that pain is not an evil? For 
just as it is impossible for one who counts death as 
an evil not to fear death, so in no case can a man 
disregard and despise a thing that he decides to be 
evil. This being laid down as generally admitted, 
we take as our minor premise that the brave and 

247 


30 


31 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


magno sit animo atque forti omnia quae cadere in 
hominem possint despicere ac pro nihilo putare. 
Quae cum ita sint, effectum est nihil esse malum 
quod turpe non sit. Atque iste vir altus et excel- 
lens, magno animo, vere fortis, infra se omnia humana 
ducens, is, inquam, quem efficere volumus, quem 
quaerimus, certe et confidere sibi debet ac suae vitae 
et actae et consequenti et bene de sese iudicare, 
statuens nihil posse mali incidere sapienti. Ex quo 
intellegitur idem illud, solum bonum esse quod 
honestum sit, idque esse beate vivere, honeste, id est 
cum virtute vivere. 

IX. “ Nec vero ignoro, varias phildssphortes fuisse 
sententias, eorum dico qui summum bonum, quod 
ultimum appello, in animo ponerent. Quae quam- 
quam vitiose quidam secuti sunt, tamen non modo 
iis tribus qui virtutem a summo bono segregaverunt, 
cum aut voluptatem aut vacuitatem doloris aut prima 
naturae in summis bonis ponerent, sed etiam alteris 
tribus qui mancam fore putaverunt sine aliqua acces- 
sione virtutem ob eamque rem trium earum rerum 
quas supra dixi singuli singulas addiderunt, his tamen 
omnibus eos antepono, cuicuimodi sunt, qui summum 
bonum in animo atque in virtute posuerunt. Sed 
sunt tamen perabsurdi et ii qui cum scientia vivere 
ultimum bonorum, et qui nullam rerum differentiam 
esse dixerunt atque ita sapientem beatum fore, 
nihil aliud alii momento ullo anteponentem, et qui,! 


‘et gui inserted by Mdv. 


a For these various schools see V 20-23. 
248 


BOOK III. viii-ix 


high-minded man despises and holds of no account 
all the accidents to which mankind is liable. The 
conclusion follows that nothing is evil that is not 
base. Also, your lofty, distinguished, magnanimous 
and truly brave man, who thinks all human vicissi- 
tudes beneath him, I mean, the character we desire 
to produce, our ideal man, must unquestionably have 
faith in himself and in his own career both past and 


- future, and think well of himself, holding that no ill 


30 


can befall the wise man. Here then is another proof 
of the same position, that Moral Worth alone is good, 
and that to live honourably, that is virtuously, is to 
live happily. 

IX. “I am well aware, it is true, that varieties of 2, The Stoic 
opinion have existed among philosophers, I mean ete 
among those of them who have placed the Chief Good, parison with 


the ultimate aim as I call it, in the mind. In follow- ee it 


-ing out these various views some of them fell into ‘$aneror 


31 


either to includ 
errors; but nevertheless I rank all those, of whatever other things tha 
type, who have placed the Chief Good in the mind uit; Virtee, 
and in virtue, not merely above the three philoso- the Chief Good- 
phers* who dissociated the Chief Good from virtue 
altogether and identified it either with pleasure or 
freedom from pain or the primary impulses of nature, 
but also above the other three, who held that virtue 
would be incomplete without some enhancement, 
and therefore added to it one or other respectively 
of the three things I have just enumerated. But still yet it is also er- 
. . . roneous to cour 
those thinkers are quite beside the mark who pro- ail other things 
nounced the ultimate Good to be a life devoted to ‘diferent, sinc 
knowledge; and those who declared that all things right choice 
are indifferent, and that the Wise Man will secure “7°78 ‘"°™ 
happiness by not preferring any one thing in the 
least degree to any other; and those again who said, 
249 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


ut quidam Academici constituisse dicuntur, extremum 
bonorum et summum munus esse sapientis obsistere 
visis assensusque suos firme sustinere. His singulis 
copiose responderi solet. Sed quae perspicua sunt 
longa esse non debent; quid.autem apertius quam, 
si selectio nulla sit ab iis rebus quae contra naturam 
sint earum rerum quae sint secundum naturam, ~ 
tollatur! omnis ea quae quaeratur laudéturque pru- 
dentia? Circumscriptis igitur iis sententiis quas 
posui, et iis si quae similes earum sunt, relinquitur 
ut summum bonum sit vivere scientiam adhibentem 
earum rerum quae natura eveniant, seligentem quae 
secundum naturam et quae contra naturam sint 
reicientem, id est convenienter congruenterque 
naturae vivere. 

“Sed in ceteris artibus cum dicitur artificiose, 
posterum quodam modo et consequens putandum 
est, quod illi érvyevynuatcxdy appellant ; cum autem 
in quo sapienter dicimus,” id a primo rectissime 
dicitur. Quidquid enim a sapiente proficiscitur, 
id continuo debet expletum esse omnibus suis 
partibus; in eo enim positum est id quod dicimus 
esse expetendum. Nam ut peccatum est patriam 
prodere, parentes violare, fana depeculari, quae sunt 
in effectu, sic timere, sic maerere, sic in libidine esse 
peccatum est etiam sine effectu. Verum ut haec non 


1 tollatur: Mdvy. adds a mark of corruption 
2 dictmus A omits. 


250 


” 


BOOK III. ix 


as some members of the Academy are said to have 
maintained, that the final Good and supreme duty of 
the Wise Man is to resist appearances and resolutely 


_ withhold his assent to the reality of sense-impres- 


sions. It is customary .to take these doctrines seve- 
rally and reply to them at length. But there is 
really no need to labour what is self-evident; and 
what could be more obvious than that, if we can 
exercise no choice as between things consonant with 
and things contrary to nature, no scope is left at all 
for the much-prized and belauded virtue of Prudence? 
Eliminating therefore the views just enumerated and Recapitulatior 
any others that resemble them, we are left with the 
conclusion that the Chief Good consists in applying 
to the conduct of life a knowledge of the working of 
natural causes, choosing what is in accordance with 
nature and rejecting what is contrary to it; in other 
words, the Chief Good is to live in agreement and in 
harmony with nature. 
“But in the other arts when we speak of an Morality a 
‘ Ro ovty F bs matter of inter 
artistic’ performance, this quality must be con- tion, not of re- 
sidered as in a sense subsequent to and a result of sults. 
the action; it is what the Stoics term epigennématikon 
(in the nature of an after-growth). Whereas in con- 
duct, when we speak of an act as ‘wise,’ the term is 
applied with full correctness from the first inception 


_ of the act. For every action that the Wise Man 


initiates must necessarily be complete forthwith in 
all its parts; since the thing desirable, as we term 
it, consists in his activity. As it is a sin to betray 
one’s country, to use violence to one’s parents, to 
rob a temple, where the offence lies in the result of 
the act, so the passions of fear, grief and lust are 


sins, even when no extraneous result ensues. The 
251 


33 


34 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


in posteris et in consequentibus, sed in primis con- 
tinuo peccata sunt, sic ea quae proficiscuntur a vir- 
tute, susceptione prima, non perfectione, recta sunt 
iudicanda. 

X. “‘Bonum autem quod in hoc sermone totiens 
usurpatum est id etiam definitione explicatur. Sed 
eorum definitiones paulum oppido inter se differunt, 
et tamen eodem spectant. Ego assentior Diogeni 
qui bonum definierit id quod esset natura absolutum. 
Id autem sequens illud etiam quod prodesset (&déAnua 
enim sic appellemus) motum aut statum esse dixit e 
natura absoluto. Cumque rerum notiones in animis 
fiant si aut usu aliquid cognitum sit aut coniunctione 
aut similitudine aut collatione rationis, hoe quarto 
quod extremum posui boni notitia facta est. Cum 
enim ab iis rebus quae sunt secundum naturam 
ascendit animus collatione rationis, tum ad notionem 
boni pervenit. Hoc autem ipsum bonum non acces- 
sione neque crescendo aut cum ceteris comparando, 
sed propria vi sua et sentimus et appellamus bonum. 
Ut enim mel, etsi dulcissimum est, suo tamen proprio 
genere saporis, non comparatione cum aliis dulce 
esse sentitur, sic bonum hoc de quo agimus est illud 
quidem plurimi aestimandum, sed ea aestimatio 
genere valet, non magnitudine. Nam cum aestimatio, 
quae a&ia dicitur, neque in bonis numerata sit nec 


rursus in malis, quaantumcumque eo addideris, in suo 
252 


BOOK III. ix-x 


latter are sins not in their subsequent effects, but 
immediately upon their inception; similarly, actions 
springing from virtue are to be judged right from 
their first inception, and not in their successful 
completion. 

X. “Again, the term “Good, which has been Definition and 
employed so frequently in this discourse, is also ex- Nateet 
plained by definition. The Stoic definitions do in- 
deed differ from one another in a very minute degree, 
but they all point in the same direction. Personally 
I agree with Diogenes in defining the Good as that 
whichis by nature perfect. In consonance with this he 
pronounced the ‘beneficial’ (for so let us render the 
Greek dpheléma) to be a motion or state in accordance 
with that which is by nature perfect. Now notions 
of things are produced in the mind when something 
has become known either by experience or by com- 
bination of ideas or by likeness or by analogy. The 
fourth and last method in this list is the one that has 
given usthe conception of the Good. The mindascends 
by analogy from the things in accordance with nature 
till finally it arrives at the notion of Good. At the 
same time Goodness is absolute, and is not a ques- 
tion of degree; the Good is recognized and pro- 
nounced to be good from its own inherent properties 
and not by comparison with other things. Just as 
honey, though extremely sweet, is yet perceived to 
be sweet by its own peculiar kind of flavour and not 
by being compared with something else, so this 
Good which we are discussing is superlatively valu- 
able, yet the value in its case depends on kind and not 
on quantity. Value, in Greek asia, is not counted as a 
Good nor yet as an Evil; so that however much you 
increase it in amount, it will still remain the same 

253 


36 


: CICERO DE FINIBUS 


genere manebit. Alia est igitur propria aestimatio 
virtutis, quae genere, non crescendo valet. 

“Nec vero perturbationes animorum, quae vitam 
insipientium miseram acerbamque reddunt (quas 
Graeci 740y appellant, poteram ego verbum ipsum 
interpretans morbos appellare, sed non conveniret? 
ad omnia; quis enim misericordiam aut ipsam ira- 
cundiam morbum solet dicere? at illi dicunt za6os; 
sit igitur perturbatio, quae nomine ipso vitiosa de- 
clarari videtur; nec: eae perturbationes vi aliqua 
naturali moventur?; omnesque eae sunt genere quat- 
tuor, partibus plures, aegritudo, formido, libido, 
quamque Stoici communi nomine corporis et animi 
noov"nv appellant, ego malo laetitiam appellare, quasi 
gestientis animi elationem voluptariam:) perturba- 
tiones autem nulla naturae vi commoventur, omniaque 
ea sunt opiniones ac iudicia levitatis; itaque his 
sapiens semper vacabit. 

XI. “Omne autem quod honestum sit id esse 
propter se expetendum, commune nobis est cum 
multorum aliorum philosophorum sententiis. Praeter 
enim tres disciplinas quae virtutem a summo bono 
excludunt, ceteris omnibus philosophis haee est 
tuenda sententia, maxime tamen his qui® nihil aliud 
in bonorum numero nisi honestum esse voluerunt. 
Sed haec quidem est perfacilis et expedita de- 
fensio. Quis est enim aut quis umquam fuit aut 
avaritia tam ardenti aut tam effrenatis cupiditatibus, 


‘conveniret edd. ; conveniet MSS. 

2 nec—moventur Mdv. brackets. 

3 his qui Mdv.; his Stoicis gui MSS. 
254 


BOOK III. x-xi 


in kind. The value of Virtue is therefore peculiar 
f and distinct ; it depends on kind and not on degree. 
| Sacer cr the emotions of the mind, which harass The passions no 
and embitter the life of the foolish (the Greek term 7°74! mstinets 
for these is pathos, and I might have rendered this 
literally and styled them ‘diseases,’ but the word 
‘disease’ would not suit all instances; for example, 
no one speaks of pity, nor yet anger, as a disease, 
though the Greeks term these pathos. Let us then 
accept the term ‘emotion,’ the very sound of which 
seems to denote something vicious, and these emo- 
tions are not excited by any natural influence. The 
list of the emotions is divided into four classes, with 
numerous subdivisions, namely sorrow, fear, lust, and 
that mental emotion which the Stoics call by a name 
that also denotes a bodily feeling, hédoné ‘ pleasure,’ 
but which I prefer to style ‘delight,’ meaning the 
sensuous elation of the mind when in a state of ex- 
ultation), these emotions, I say, are not excited by 
any influence of nature; they are all of them mere 
fancies and frivolous opinions. Therefore the Wise 
Man will always be free from them. 

XI. “The view that all Moral Worth is intrinsi- Morality the sole 
cally desirable is one that we hold in common with ea 2 PES 
many other systems of philosophy. Excepting three st ero: and 
schools that shut out Virtue from the Chief Good 
altogether, all the remaining philosophers are com- 
mitted to this opinion, and most of all the Stoics, 
with whom we are now concerned, and who hold 
that nothing else but Moral Worth is to be counted 
as a good at all. But this position is one that is ex- 
tremely simple and easy to defend. For who is there, 
or who ever was there, of avarice so consuming and 
appetites so unbridled, that, even though willing to 

255 


38 


39 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


ut eandem illam rem quam adipisci scelere quovis 
velit non multis partibus malit ad sese etiam omni 
impunitate proposita sine facinore quam illo modo 
pervenire? 

“Quam vero utilitatem aut quem fructum petentes 
scire cupimus illa quae occulta nobis sunt, quomodo 
moveantur quibusque de causis ea quae versantur! in 
caelo? Quis autem tam agrestibus institutis vivit 
aut quis contra studia naturae tam vehementer obdu- 
ruit ut a rebus cognitione dignis abhorreat easque 
sine voluptate aut utilitate aliqua non requirat et 
pro nihilo putet? aut quis est qui maiorum? aut Afri- 
canorum aut eius quem tu in ore semper habes, 
proavi mei ceterorumque virorum fortium atque 
omni virtute praestantium facta, dicta, consilia co- 
gnoscens nulla animo afficiatur voluptate? Quis 
autem honesta in familia institutus et educatus inge- 
nue non ipsa turpitudine etiamsi eum laesura non sit 
offenditur? quis animo aequo videt eum quem impure 
ac flagitiose putet vivere? quis non odit sordidos, 
vanos, leves, futiles? Quid autem dici poterit, si 
turpitudinem non ipsam per se fugiendam esse Sta- 
tuemus, quo minus homines tenebras et solitudinem 
nacti nullo dedecore se abstineant, nisi eos per se 
foeditate sua turpitudo ipsa deterreat? Innume- 
rabilia dici possunt in hane sententiam; sed non. 
necesse est. Nihil est enim de quo minus dubitari 
possit quam et honesta expetenda per se et eodem 
modo turpia per se esse fugienda. Constituto autem 

‘ea quae versantur Mdv. conj., but prints ea versentur 


with MSS. (which also have versantur). 


*maiorum aut Weidner conj.; Maximorum aut, Mdv.; 
maliorum, ut. 


256 


8 


BOOK III. xi 


commit any crime to achieve his end, and even 
though absolutely secure of impunity, yet would not 
a hundred times rather attain the same object by 
innocent than by guilty means? 

“ Again, what desire for profit or advantage under- 
lies our curiosity to learn the secrets of nature, the 
mode and the causes of the movements of the 
heavenly bodies? Who lives in such a boorish state, 
or who has become so rigidly insensible to natural 
impulses, as to feel a repugnance for these lofty 
studies and eschew them as valueless apart from any 
pleasure or profit they may bring? Or who is there 
who feels no sense of pleasure when he hears of the 
wise words and brave deeds of our forefathers,—of 
the Africani, or my great-grandfather whose name 
is always on your lips, and the other heroes of valour 
and of virtue? On the other hand, what man of 
good breeding, brought up in an honourable family, 
is not shocked by moral baseness as such, even when 
it is not calculated to do him personally any harm? 
who can view without disgust a person whom he 
believes to be dissolute and an evil liver? who does 
not hate the mean, the empty, the frivolous, the 
worthless? Moreover, if we decide that baseness is 
not a thing to be avoided for its own sake, what 
arguments can be urged against men’s indulging in 
every sort of unseemliness in privacy and under 
cover of darkness, unless they are deterred by the 
essential and intrinsic ugliness of what is base? 
Endless reasons could be given in support of this 
view, but they are not necessary. For nothing is 
less open to doubt than that what is morally good is 
to be desired for its own sake, and similarly what is 


9 morally bad is to be avoided for its own sake, Again, 


oe 257, 


4.0 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


illo de quo ante diximus, quod honestum esset id esse 
solum bonum, intellegi necesse est pluris id quod 
honestum sit aestimandum esse quam illa media quae 
ex eo comparentur. Stultitiam autem et timiditatem 
et iniustitiam et intemperantiam cum dicimus esse 
fugienda propter eas res quae ex ipsis eveniant, non 
ita dicimus ut cum illo quod positum est, solum id 
esse malum quod turpe sit, haec pugnare videatur 
oratio, propterea quod ea non ad corporis incommo- 
dum referuntur sed ad turpes actiones quae oriuntur 
e vitiis (quas enim xaxias Graeci appellant, vitia malo 
quam malitias nominare).” 

XI. “Ne tu,” inquam, “Cato, verbis illustribus 
et id quod vis declarantibus! Itaque mihi videris 
Latine docere philosophiam et ei quasi civitatem 
dare; quae quidem adhuc peregrinari Romae vide- 
batur nec offerre sese nostris sermonibus, et ista 
maxime propter limatam quandam et rerum et 
verborum tenuitatem. (Scio enim esse quosdam qui 
quavis lingua philosophari possint; nullis enim parti- 
tionibus, nullis definitionibus utuntur, ipsique dicunt 
ea se modo probare quibus natura tacita assentiatur ; 
itaque in rebus minime obscuris non multus est apud 
eos disserendi labor.) Quare attendo te studiose et 
quaecumque rebus iis de quibus hic sermo est no- 
mina imponis memoriae mando; mihi enim erit 


iisdem istis fortasse iam utendum. Virtutibus igitur — 


rectissime mihi videris et ad consuetudinem nostrae 
orationis vitia posuisse contraria. Quod enim vitu- 


avitium means normally a defect or imperfection rather 
than a moral failing or vice. 


258 


BOOK Ii. xi-xii 


the principle already discussed, that Moral Worth is 
the sole Good, involves the corollary that it is of more 
value than those neutral things which it procures. 
On the other hand when we say that folly, cowardice, 
injustice and intemperance are to be avoided because 
of the consequences they entail, this dictum must 
not be so construed as to appear inconsistent with 
the principle already laid down, that moral baseness 
alone is evil; for the reason that the statement does 
not refer to bodily harm but to the base actions to 
which these vices give rise (the term ‘vice’? I prefer 
to ‘badness’ as a translation of the Greek hakia).”’ (The translatio 
XII. “Indeed, Cato,” said I, “your language is of kaxéa.) 
lucidity itself; it conveys your meaning exactly. In 
fact I feel you are teaching philosophy to speak 
Latin, and naturalizing her as a Roman citizen. 
Hitherto she has seemed a foreigner at Rome, and 
not able to fall in with our ways of speaking; and 
this is especially so with your Stoic system because 
of its precision and subtlety alike of thought and 
language. (There are some philosophers, I know, who 
could express their ideas in any language; for they 
ignore Division and Definition altogether, and them- 


-. selves profess that they seek to commend only those 


principles which receive the tacit assent of nature. 
Hence, their ideas being so far from recondite, expo- 
sition is with them no laborious matter.) So I am 
following you attentively, and am committing to 
memory all the terms you use to denote the con- 
ceptions we are discussing. For very likely I shall 
soon have to employ the same terms myself. Well, 
I think you are quite correct in calling the oppo- 
site of the virtues ‘vices.’ This is in conformity 
with the usage of our language. The word ‘vice’ 
$2 259 


41 


“4.2 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
perabile est per se ipsum, id eo ipso vitium nomina- 
tum puto, vel etiam a vitio dictum vituperari. Sin 
kaxtav malitiam dixisses, ad aliud nos unum certum 
vitium consuetudo Latina traduceret; nunc omni 
virtuti vitium contrario nomine opponitur.” 

Tum ille: “ His igitur ita positis,”’ inquit, “sequi- 
tur magna contentio, quam tractatam a Peripateticis 
mollius (est enim eorum consuetudo dicendi non 
satis acuta propter ignorationem dialecticae) Carnea- 
des tuus egregia quadam exercitatione in dialecticis 
summaque eloquentia rem in summum discrimen 
adduxit, propterea quod pugnare non destitit in 
omni hac quaestione quae de bonis et malis appelletur 
non esse rerum Stoicis cum Peripateticis contro- 
versiam sed nominum. Mihi autem nihil tam perspi- 
cuum videtur quam has sententias eorum philoso- 
phorum re inter se magis quam verbis dissidere; 
maiorem multo inter Stoicos et Peripateticos rerum 
esse aio discrepantiam quam verborum, quippe cum 
Peripatetici omnia quae ipsi bona appellant pertinere 
dicant ad beate vivendum, nostri non ex omni quod 
aestimatione aliqua dignum sit compleri vitam beatam 
putent. 

XIII. “An vero certius quidquam potest esse 
quam illorum ratione qui dolorem in malis ponunt 
non posse sapientem beatum esse cum eculeo tor- 


queatur? Korum autem qui dolorem in malis non 
260 


BOOK III. xii-xiii 


denotes, I believe, that which is in its own nature 
‘vituperable’ ; or else ‘vituperable’ is derived from 
vice. Whereas if you had rendered kakia by 
€ € . 

badness’ (‘malice’), Latin usage would point us to 
another meaning, that of a single particular vice. 
As it is, we make ‘vice’ the opposite term to ‘virtue’ 
in general.” 

“Well, then,” resumed Cato, “these principles stoies’ disagre 

established there follows a great dispute, which on ee ae us 
the side of the Peripatetics was carried on with no merely verbal: 
great pertinacity (in fact their ignorance of logic ren- 
ders their habitual style of discourse somewhat defi- 
cient in cogency); but your leader Carneades with his 
exceptional proficiency in logic and his consummate 
eloquence brought the controversy to a head. Car- 
neades never ceased to contend that on the whole 
so-called ‘problem of good and evil, there was no 
disagreement as to facts between the Stoics and the 
Peripatetics, but only as to terms. For my part, how- 
ever, nothing seems to me more manifest than that 
there is more of a real than a verbal difference of 
opinion between those philosophers on these points. 
I maintain that there is a far greater discrepancy 
between the Stoics and the Peripatetics as to facts 
than as to words. The Peripatetics say that all the 
things which under their system are called goods con- 
tribute to happiness; whereas our school does not 
believe that total happiness comprises everything 
that deserves to have a certain amount of value 
attached to it. 

XIII. “ Again, can anything be more certain than for under the 
that on the theory of the school that counts pain as ae Scpnes 
an evil, the Wise Man cannot be happy. when he is not always 
being tortured on the rack? Whereas the systém RapPY, 

261 


48 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


habent ratio certe cogit ut in omnibus tormentis 
conservetur beata vita sapienti. Etenim si dolores 
eosdem tolerabilius patiuntur qui excipiunt eos pro 
patria quam qui leviore de causa, opinio facit, non 
natura, vim doloris aut maiorem aut minorem. Ne 
illud quidem est consentaneum, ut si cum tria genera 
bonorum sint, quae sententia est Peripateticorum, eo 
beatior quisque sit, quo sit corporis aut externis bonis 
plenior, ut hoc idem approbandum sit nobis, ut qui 
plura habeat ea quae in corpore magni aestimantur 
sit beatior. [li enim corporis commodis compleri 
vitam beatam putant, nostri nihil minus. Nam cum 
ita placeat, ne eorum quidem bonorum quae nos bona 
vere appellemus frequentia beatiorem vitam fieri aut 
magis expetendam aut pluris aestimandam, certe 
minus ad beatam vitam pertinet multitudo corporis 
commodorum. Etenim si et sapere expetendum sit 
et valere, coniunctum utrumque magis expetendum 
sit quam sapere solum, neque tamen si utrumque sit 
aestimatione dignum, pluris sit coniunctum quam 
sapere ipsum separatim.! Nam qui valetudinem 
aestimatione aliqua dignam iudicamus neque eam 
tamen in bonis ponimus, iidem censemus nullam esse 
tantam aestimationem ut ea virtuti anteponatur ; 
quod idem Peripatetici non tenent, quibus dicendum 
est quae et honesta actio sit et sine dolore eam magis 
esse expetendam quam si esset eadem actio cum 
dolore. Nobis aliter videtur ; recte secusne, postea ; 
sed potestne rerum maior esse dissensio ? 


1 separatim MSS.; separatum Mdvy. 


° 


43 


AA 


BOOK III. xiii 


that considers pain no evil clearly proves that the Wise 
Man retains his happiness amidst the worst torments. 
The mere fact that men endure the same pain more 
easily when they voluntarily undergo it for the sake of 
their country than when they suffer it for some lesser 
cause, shows that the intensity of the pain depends on 
the state of mind of the sufferer, not on its own intrin- 


sic nature. Further, on the Peripatetic theory that and (2)happine 


there are three kinds of goods, the more abundantly 
supplied a man is with bodily or external goods, the 
happier he is; but it does not follow that we Stoics can 
accept the same position, and say that the more a man 
has of those bodily things that are highly valued the 
happier he is. For the Peripatetics hold that the sum of 
happiness includes bodily advantages, but we deny 
this altogether. We hold that the multiplication even 
of those goods that in our view are truly so called does 
not render life happier or more desirable or of higher 
value; even less therefore is happiness affected by 
the accumulation of bodily advantages. Clearly if 
wisdom and health be both desirable, a combination 
of the two would be more desirable than wisdom 
alone; but it is not the case that if both be deserv- 
ing of value, wisdom plus wealth is worth more than 
wisdom by itself separately. We deem health to be 
deserving of a certain value, but we do not reckon 
it a good; at the same time we rate no value so 
highly as to place it above virtue. This is not the 
view of the Peripatetics, who are bound to say that 
an action which is both morally good and not attended 
by pain is more desirable than the same action if 
accompanied by pain. We think otherwise—whether 
rightly or wrongly, I will consider later ; but how could 
there be a wider or more real difference of opinion? 
263 


45 


46 


AT 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


XIV. “Ut enim obscuratur et offunditur luce solis 
lumen lucernae, et ut interit in’ magnitudine maris 
Aegaei stilla mellis et ut in divitiis Croesi terunci 
accessio et gradus unus in ea via quae est hine ‘in 
Indiam, sic, cum sit is bonorum finis quem Stoici 
dicunt, omnis ista rerum corporearum aestimatio 
splendore virtutis et magnitudine obscuretur et ob- 
ruatur atque intereat necesse est. Et quemadmo- 
dum opportunitas (sic enim appellemus evxacpiav) 
non fit maior productione temporis (habent enim 
suum modum quae opportuna dicuntur), sic recta 
effectio (katép$wo.v enim ita appello, quoniam rectum 
factum xatdépOwpa), recta igitur effectio, item con- 
venientia, denique ipsum bonum, quod in eo positum 
est ut naturae consentiat, crescendi accessionem 
nullam habet. Ut enim opportunitas illa, sic haec 
de quibus dixi, non fiunt temporis productione 
maiora. Ob eamque causam Stoicis non videtur opta- 
bilior nec magis expetenda beata vita si sit longa 
quam si brevis; utunturque simili: Ut, si cothurni 
laus illa esset, ad pedem apte convenire, neque multi 
cothurni paucis anteponerentur nec maiores minori- 
bus, sic, quorum omne bonum convenientia atque 
opportunitate finitur, ea? nec plura paucioribus nec 
longinquiora brevioribus anteponentur.® Nec vero satis 
acute dicunt: Si bona valetudo pluris aestimanda sit 
longa quam brevis, sapientiae quoque usus longissimus 
quisque sit plurimi. Non intellegunt valetudinis 


1 in inserted by Halm, Mdv. 

2 ea inserted by Miiller (finztur e nec A). 

°anteponentur MSS.; anteponent Mdv. 
264 


5 


BOOK III. xiv 
XIV. “The light of a lamp is eclipsed and over- 


- powered by the rays of the sun ; a drop of honey is lost 


ran) 


in the vastness of the Aegean sea; an additional six- 
pence is nothing amid the wealth of Croesus, orasingle 
step in the journey from here to India. Similarly if 
the Stoic definition of the End of Goods be accepted, 
it follows that all the value you set on bodily advan- 
tages mnst be absolutely eclipsed and annihilated by 
the brilliance and the majesty of virtue. And just 
as opportuneness (for so let us translate eukairia) is 
not increased by prolongation of time (since things 
we call opportune have attained their proper 


Morality, and 

therefore happi- 

ness, not en- 

hanced by dura- 
ion. 


measure), so right conduct (for thus I translate - 


katorthosis, since katorthoma is a single right action), 
right conduct, I say. and also propriety, and lastly 
Good itself, which consists in harmony with nature, 
are not capable of increase or addition. For these 
things that I speak of, like opportuneness before men- 
tioned, are not made greater by prolongation. And on 
this ground the Stoics do not deem happiness to be 
any more attractive or desirable if it be lasting than if 
it be brief; and they use this illustration: Just as, sup- 
posing the merit of a shoe were to fit the foot, many 
shoes would not be superior to few shoes nor bigger 
shoes to smaller ones, so, in the case of things the 
good of which consists solely and entirely in pro- 
priety and opportuneness, a larger number of these 
things will not be rated higher than a smaller 
number nor those lasting longer to those of shorter 
duration. Nor is there much point in the argu- 
ment that, if good health is more valuable when 
lasting than when brief, therefore the exercise of 
wisdom also is worth most when it continues longest. 


This ignores the fact that, whereas the value of 
265 


48 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
aestimationem spatio iudicari, virtutis opportunitate ; 
ut videantur qui illud dicant iidem hoc esse dicturi, 
bonam mortem et bonum partum meliorem longum 
esse quam brevem. Non vident alia brevitate pluris 
aestimari, alia diuturnitate. Itaque consentaneum 
est his quae dicta sunt ratione illorum qui illum 
bonorum finem quod appellamus extremum, quod 
ultimum, crescere putent posse, iisdem placere esse 


alium alio etiam sapientiorem, itemque alium magis 


_alio vel peccare vel recte facere, quod nobis non 


licet dicere qui crescere bonorum finem non putamus. 
Ut enim qui demersi sunt in aqua nihilo magis respi- 
rare possunt si non longe absunt a summo, ut iam 
lamque possint emergere, quam si etiam tum essent 
in profundo, nec catulus ille qui iam appropinquat ut 
videat plus cernit quam is qui modo est natus, item 
qui processit aliquantum ad virtutis habitum nihilo 
minus in miseria est quam ille qui nihil processit. 
XV. “Haec mirabilia videri intellego; sed cum 
certe superiora firma ac vera sint, his autem ea 
consentanea et consequentia, ne de horum quidem 
est veritate dubitandum. Sed quamquam negant 
nec virtutes nec vitia crescere, tamen utrumque 


eorum fundi quodam modo et quasi dilatari putant. 


49 Divitias autem Diogenes censet non eam modo vim 


ai.e, They may be exercised on a larger or smaller scale. 


266 


BOOK III. xiv-xv 


health is estimated by duration, that of virtue is 

_ measured by opportuneness; so that those who use 
the argument in question might equally be expected 
to say that an easy death or an easy child-birth would 
be better if protracted than if speedy. They fail to 
see that some things are rendered more valuable 

48 by brevity as others by prolongation. So it is con- 
sistent with the principles already stated that those 
who deem the End of Goods, that which we term wisaom inca- 
the extreme or ultimate Good, to be capable of pable of degree 
degree, are on their own theory also bound to 
hold that one man can be wiser than another, and 
similarly that one can commit a more sinful or more 
righteous action than another; which it is not open 
to us to say, who do not think that the End of 
Goods can vary in degree. For just as a drowning 
man is no more able to breathe if he be not far from 
the surface of the water, so that he might at any 
moment emerge, than if he were actually at the 
bottom already, and just as a puppy on the point of 
opening its eyes is no less blind than one just born, 
similarly a man that has made some progress towards 
the state of virtue is none the less in misery than he 
that has made no progress at all. 

XV. “Iam aware that all this seems paradoxical ; yet capable of 
but as our previous conclusions are undoubtedly true le expans 
and well established, and as these are the logical 
inferences from them, the truth of these inferences 
also cannot be called in question. Yet although the 
Stoics deny that either virtues or vices can be in- 
creased in degree, they nevertheless believe that 
both of them can be in a sense expanded and 

9 widened in scope.* Wealth again, in the opinion of Wealth 


267 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


habere ut quasi duces sint ad voluptatem et ad vale- 
tudinem bonam, sed etiam uti ea contineant: non 
idem facere eas in virtute neque in ceteris artibus, 
ad quas esse dux pecunia potest, continere autem 
non potest; itaque si voluptas aut si bona valetudo 
sit in bonis, divitias quoque in bonis esse ponendas : 
at si sapientia bonum sit, non sequi ut etiam divitias 
bonum esse dicamus. Neque ab ulla re quae non sit 
in bonis id quod sit in bonis contineri potest; ob 
eamque causam, quia cognitiones comprensionesque 
rerum, e quibus efliciuntur artes, appetitionem mo- 
vent, cum divitiae non sint in bonis, nulla ars divitiis 
contineri potest. Quod si de artibus concedamus, 
virtutis tamen non sit eadem ratio, propterea quod 
haec plurimae commentationis et exercitationis indi- 
geat, quod idem in artibus non sit, et quod virtus 
stabilitatem, firmitatem, constantiam totius vitae 
complectatur nec haec eadem in artibus esse videa- 
mus. 
“Deinceps explicatur differentia rerum: quam si 
non ullam esse diceremus, confunderetur omnis vita, 
ut ab Aristone, neque ullum sapientiae munus aut 
opus inveniretur, cum inter res eas quae ad vitam 
degendam pertinerent nihil omnino interesset neque 
ullum dilectum adhiberi oporteret. Itaque cum 
esset satis constitutum id solum esse bonum quod 
esset honestum et id malum solum quod turpe, tum 
inter illa quae nihil valerent ad beate misereve 


alt is to be remembered that ‘artes,’ ¢echnaz, included 
professions, trades and handicrafts as well as sciences and 
the fine arts, and it is of the simpler crafts that philo- 
sophers, following Socrates, were mostly thinking when 
they compared and contrasted the other ‘artes’ with the 
‘ars vivendi.’ 


268 


BOOK III. xv 


Diogenes, though so important for pleasure and 
health as to be not merely conducive but actually 
essential to them, yet has not the same effect in rela- 
tion to virtue, nor yet in the case of the other arts; for 
money may be a guide to these but cannot form an 
essential factor in them; therefore although if -plea- 
sure or if good health be a good, wealth also must be 
counted a good, yet if wisdom is a Good, it does not 
follow that we must also pronounce wealth to be a 
good. Nor can anything which is not a good be essen- 
tial to a thing that is a good; and hence, because 
acts of cognition and of comprehension, which form 
the raw material of the arts, excite desire, since 
wealth is not a good, wealth cannot be essential to 
any art. But even if we allowed wealth to be 
essential to the arts, the same argument neverthe- 
less could not be applied to virtue, because virtue (as 
Diogenes argues) requires a great amount of thought 
and practice, which is not the case to the same extent 
with the arts,* and because virtue involves life-long 
steadfastness, strength and consistency, whereas these 
qualities are not equally manifested in the arts. 

“Next follows an exposition of the difference be- 
tween things; for if we maintained that all things ¢ 
were absolutely indifferent, the whole of life would 
be thrown into confusion, as it is by Aristo, and no 
function or task could be found for wisdom, since 
there would be absolutely no distinction between 
the things that pertain to the conduct of life, and 
no choice need be exercised among them. Accoutl 
ingly after conclusively proving that morality alone 
is good and baseness alone evil, the Stoics went on 
to affirm that among those things which were of no 
importance for happiness or misery, there was 


269 


3. The doctrine 
of Thies Indif- 
ferent, 


All things but 
Virtue and Vice 
are indifferent, 
since they con- 
tribute nothing 
to happiness; 


51 


at 


es?) 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


vivendum aliquid tamen quod differret esse voluerunt, 
ut essent eorum alia aestimabilia, alia contra, alia 
neutrum. Quae autem aestimanda essent, eorum in 
aliis satis esse causae quamobrem quibusdam antepo- 
nerentur, ut in valetudine, ut in integritate sensuum, 
ut in doloris vacuitate, ut gloriae, divitiarum, simi- 
lium rerum, alia autem non esse eiusmodi; itemque 
eorum quae nulla aestimatione digna essent, partim 
satis habere causae quamobrem reicerentur, ut dolo- 
rem, morbum, sensuum amissionem, paupertatem, 
ignominiam, similia horum, partim non item. Hine 
est illud exortum quod Zeno zponypéevov, contraque 
quod dazromrponypevoy nominavit, cum uteretur- in 
lingua copiosa factis tamen nominibus ac novis, quod 
nobis in hac inopi lingua non conceditur ; quaamquam 
tu hane copiosiorem etiam soles dicere. Sed non 
alienum est, quo facilius vis verbi intellegatur, ra- 
tionem huius verbi” faciendi Zenonis exponere. 
XVI. “ Ut enim, inquit, nemo dicit in regia regem 
ipsum quasi productum esse ad dignitatem (id est 
enim zponypévov), sed eos qui in aliquo honore sunt 
quorum ordo proxime accedit, ut secundus sit, ad 
regium principatum, sic in vita non ea quae primo 
ordine® sunt, sed ea, quae secundum locum obtinent, 
mponypeva, id est, producta nominentur; quae vel ita 
appellemus (id erit verbum e verbo) vel promota et 
remota vel ut dudum diximus praeposita vel praeci- 


1 rerum : rerum in ust conj. O. Hein. 

2 verbi om. A. 

* primo ordine conj. Mdv.; primorie loco MSS.; primario 
doco with mark of corruption, Mdv. 


270 


7 


BOOK III. xv-xvi 


_ nevertheless an element of difference, making some 
of them of positive and others of negative value, 
and others neutral. Again among things valuable but they are dif- 
—e.g. health, unimpaired senses, freedom from pain, ig oigmeee 
fame, wealth and the like—they said that some afford standard of _ 
us adequate grounds for preferring them to other irri ty | oe 
things, while others are not of this nature; and simi- eter pie 
larly among those things which are deserving of no neutral. 
value some afford adequate grounds for our rejecting 
them, such as pain, disease, loss of the senses, poverty, 
disgrace, and the like; others not so. Hence arose the 
distinction, in Zeno’s terminology, between proégmena 
and the opposite, apoproégmena—for Zeno using the 
copious Greek language still employed novel words 
coined for the occasion, a licence not allowed to us 
with the poor vocabulary of Latin; though you are 
fond of saying that Latin is actually more copious than 
Greek. However, to make it easier to understand 
the meaning of this term it will not be out of place 
to explain the method which Zeno pursued in coin- 
ing it. 
XVI. “In a royal court, Zeno remarks, no one 

speaks of the king himself as ‘ promoted’ to honour 
(for that is the meaning of proégmenon), but the term 
is applied to those holding some office of state 
whose rank most nearly approaches, though it is 
second to, the royal pre-eminence ; similarly in the 
conduct of life the title proégmenon, that is, “ pro- 
moted,’ is to be given not to those things which are 
in the first rank, but to those which hold the second 
place; for these we may use either the term sug- 

ested (for that will be a literal translation) or 

advanced’ and ‘degraded,’ or the term we have 
been using all along, ‘preferred’ or ‘superior, and 

271 


Cr 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


pua, et illa reiecta. Re enim intellecta in verbo- 
rum usu faciles esse debemus. Quoniam autem 
omne quod est bonum primum locum tenere dicimus, 
necesse est nec bonum esse nec malum hoe quod 
praepositum vel praecipuum nominamus; idque ita 
definimus, quod sit indifferens cum aestimatione 
mediocri; quod enim illi aé:adopov dicunt, id mihi 


‘ita occurrit ut indifferens dicerem. Neque enim 


illud fieri poterat ullo modo ut nihil relinqueretur in 
mediis quod aut secundum naturam esset aut contra, 
nec, cum id relinqueretur, nihil in his poni quod 
satis aestimabile esset, nec hoc posito non aliqua esse 
praeposita. Recte igitur haec facta distinctio est; 
atque etiam ab iis quo facilius res perspici possit hoc 
simile ponitur: Ut enim, inquiunt, si hoc fingamus 
esse quasi finem et ultimum, ita iacere talum ut 
rectus assistat, qui ita talus erit iactus ut cadat 
rectus praepositum quiddam habebit ad finem, qui 
aliter contra, neque tamen illa praepositio tali ad 
eum quem dixi finem pertinebit, sic ea quae sunt 
praeposita referuntur illa quidem ad finem sed ad 
eius vim naturamque nihil pertinent. 

“Sequitur illa divisio, ut bonorum alia sint ad 
illud ultimum pertinentia (sic enim appello quae 
teAcka dicuntur; nam hoc ipsum instituamus, ut 
placuit, pluribus verbis dicere quod uno non poteri- 


a Taiz, real or artificial, were used as dice ; they had four 
long sides and two pointed ends; of the sides two were 
broad and two narrow. The talus was said to be rectus 
when lying on.a narrow side, and pronus when on a broad 
side. Thus cadere rectus, to alight upright when thrown, 
would be the first stage towards assistere rectus, to remain 
standing upright. 

272 


BOOK III. xvi 


_ for the opposite ‘rejected.’ If the meaning is intel- 
' ligible we need not be punctilious about the use of 
3 words. But since we declare that everything that 
is good occupies the first rank, it follows that this 
which we entitle preferred or superior is neither 
good nor evil; and accordingly we define it as being 
indifferent but possessed of a moderate value—since 
it has occurred to me that I may use the word 
‘indifferent’ to represent their term adiaphoron. 
For in fact, it was inevitable that the class of inter- 
_ mediate things should contain some things that were 
either in accordance with nature, or the reverse, and 
_ this being so, that this class should include some things 
which possessed moderate value, and, granting this, 
that some things of this class should be ‘ preferred.’ 
There were good grounds therefore for making this 
distinction ; and furthermore, to elucidate the matter 
still more clearly they put forward the following illus- 
tration: Just as, supposing we were to assume that 
our end and aim is to throw a knuckle-bone * in such 
a way that it may stand upright, a bone that is thrown 
so as to fall upright will be in some measure ‘ pre- 
_ ferred’ or advanced in relation to the proposed end, 
and one that falls otherwise the reverse, and yet 
that ‘advance’ on the part of the knuckle-bone will 
not be a constituent part of the end indicated, so 
those things which are ‘preferred’ are means it is 
true to the End but are in no sense constituents of 
its. essential nature. 

“Next comes the division oof goods into three Goods classed as 
classes, first those which are ‘constituents’ of the«gmient™ 
final End (for so I represent the term telika, this Wee being 

being a case of an idea which we may decide, as we 
agreed, to express in several words as we cannot do 
i 273 


ee 


a 


56 


57 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


mus, ut res intellegatur), alia autem efficientia, quae 
Graeci rountixd, alia utrumque. De pertinentibus 
nihil est bonum praeter actiones honestas, de effi- 
cientibus nihil praeter amicum, sed et pertinentem 
et efficientem sapientiam volunt esse. Nam quia 
sapientia est conveniens actio, est in illo 1 pertinenti 
genere quod dixi; quod autem honestas actiones 
affert et efficit, id? efficiens dici potest. 

XVII. “Haec quae praeposita dicimus partim sunt 
per se ipsa praeposita, partim quod aliquid efficiunt, 
partim utrumque: per se, ut quidam habitus oris et 
vultus, ut status, ut motus, in quibus sunt et prae- 
ponenda quaedam et reicienda; alia ob eam rem 
praeposita dicentur quod ex se aliquid efficiant, ut 
pecunia, alia autem ob utramque rem, ut integri 
sensus, ut bona valetudo. De bona autem fama 
(quam enim appellant evdo&/av aptius est bonam 
famam hoc loco appellare quam gloriam), Chrysippus 
quidem et Diogenes detracta utilitate ne digitum 
quidem eius causa porrigendum esse dicebant, qui- 
bus ego vehementer assentior. Qui autem post eos 
fuerunt, cum Carneadem sustinere non possent, hance 
quam dixi bonam famam ipsam propter se praeposi- 
tam et sumendam esse dixerunt, esseque hominis 
ingenui et liberaliter educati velle bene audire a 
parentibus, a propinquis, a bonis etiam viris, idque 


_ propter rem ipsam, non propter usum; dicuntque, ut 


lest in illo Mdv.; est illo A, B, E; est cum illo inf. MSS. 
2 td Mdv. brackets. 


274 


BOOK III. xvi-xvii 


so in one, in order to make the meaning clear), 

- secondly those which are ‘ productive’ of the End, 
the Greek poiétika; and thirdly those which are 
both. The sole instance of a good of the ‘con- 
stituent’ class is moral action; the sole instance of 
a ‘productive’ good is a fia Wisdom, according 
to the Stoics, is both constituent and a RS ; 
for as being itself an appropriate activity it comes 

_ under what I called the constituent class ; as causing 
and producing moral actions, it can be called pro- 

ductive. 

6 XVII. “These things which we call * preferred ’ A corresponding 
are in some cases preferred for their own sake, in ot epee 
others because they produce a certain result, and in indifferents’ 
others for both reasons; for their own sake, as a 
certain cast of features and of countenance, or a 
certain pose or movement, things which may be in 
themselves either preferable or to be rejected ; 
others will be called preferred because they produce 
a certain result, for example, money; others again 
for both reasons, like sound senses and good health. 

7 About good fame (that term being a better transla- (the classing 
tion in this context than ‘glory’ of the Stoic ex- Deine disouted) 
pression eudoxia) Chrysippus and Diogenes used to 
aver that, apart from any practical value it may 
possess, it is not worth stretching out a finger for ; 
and I strongly agree with them. On the other hand 
their successors, finding themselves unable to resist 
the attacks of Carneades, declared that good fame, 
as I have called it, was preferred and desirable for 
its own sake, and that a man of good breeding and 
liberal education would desire to have the good 
opinion of his parents and relatives, and of good 
men in general, and that for its own sake and not 

TZ 275 


58 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


liberis consultum velimus etiamsi postumi futuri sint 
propter_ipsos, sic futurae post mortem famae tamen 
esse propter rem etiam detracto usu consulendum. 

“Sed cum quod honestum sit id solum bonum esse 
dicamus, consentaneum tamen est fungi officio cum 
id officium nec in bonis ponamus nec in malis. Est 
enim aliquid in his rebus probabile, et quidem ita ut 
eius ratio reddi possit; ergo ut etiam probabiliter 
acti ratio reddi possit; est autem officium quod ita 
factum est ut eius facti probabilis ratio reddi possit; 
ex quo intellegitur officium medium quiddam esse 
quod neque in bonis ponatur neque in contrariis. 
Quoniamque in iis rebus quae neque in virtutibus 
sunt neque in vitiis, est tamen quiddam quod usui 
possit esse, tollendum id non est. Est autem eius 
generis actio quoque quaedam, et quidem talis ut 
ratio postulet agere aliquid et facere eorum; quod 
autem ratione actum est id officium appellamus; est 


igitur officium eius generis quod nec in bonis ponatur 


nec in contrariis. 

XVIII. “Atque perspicuum etiam illud est, in 
istis rebus mediis aliquid agere sapientem. Judicat 
igitur cum agit officium illud esse. Quod quoniam 


numquam fallitur in iudicando, erit in mediis rebus 
976 
276 


BOOK III. xvii-xviii 


_ for any practical advantage; and they argue that 


just as we study the welfare of our children, even of 
such as may be born after we are dead, for their 
own sake, so a man ought to study his reputation 


even after death, for itself, even apart from any 


advantage. 

“But although we pronounce Moral Worth to be 
the sole good, it is nevertheless consistent to perform 
an appropriate act, in spite of the fact that we count 
appropriate action neither a good nor an evil. For in 
the sphere of these neutral things there is an element 
of reasonableness, in the sense that an account can 
be rendered of it, and therefore in the sense that an 
account can also be rendered of an act reasonably 
performed ; now an appropriate act is an act so per- 
formed that a reasonable account can be rendered 
of its performance ; and this proves that an appro- 
priate act is an intermediate thing, to be reckoned 
neither as a good nor as the opposite. And since 
those things which are neither to be counted among 
virtues nor vices nevertheless contain a factor which 
can be useful, their element of utility is worth pre- 
serving. Again, this neutral class also includes action 
of a certain kind, viz. such that reason calls upon us 
to do or to produce some one of these neutral things ; 
but an action reasonably performed we call an appro- 
priate act ; appropriate action therefore is included 
in the class which is reckoned neither as good nor 
the opposite. 

XVIII. “It is also clear that some actions are 
performed by the Wise Man in the sphere of these 
neutral things. Well then, when he does such an 
action he judges it to be an appropriate act. And 
as his judgment on this point never errs, therefore 


Q7T 


An ‘ appropriat 
action ’ consists 
in selecting 
among in- 
different things 
those in accord 
ance with 
nature; this as 
donc by the 
Sapiens become: 
a ‘right 
action.’ 


60 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
officium. Quod efficitur hac etiam conclusione rationis ; 
Quoniam enim videmus esse quiddam quod recte 
factum appellemus, id autem est perfectum officium, 
erit etiam inchoatum ; ut, si iuste depositum reddere 
in recte factis sit, in officiis ponatur depositum red- 
dere ; illo enim addito ‘ iuste,’ fit recte factum, per se 
autem hoc ipsum reddere in officio ponitur. Quoni- 
amque non dubium est quin in iis quae media dica- 
mus. sit aliud sumendum, aliud reiciendum, quidquid 
ita fit aut dicitur omne officio continetur. Ex quo 
intellegitur quoniam se ipsi omnes natura diligant, 
tam insipientem quam sapientem sumpturum quae 
secundum naturam sint reiecturumque contraria. Ita 
est quoddam commune officium sapientis et insi- 
pientis ; ex quo efficitur versari in iis quae media 
dicamus. Sed cum ab his omnia proficiscantur 
officia, non sine causa dicitur ad ea referri omnes 
nostras cogitationes, in his et excessum e vita et in 
vita mansionem. In quo enim plura_ sunt quae 
secundum naturam sunt, huius officium est in vita 
manere; in quo autem aut sunt plura contraria aut 
fore videntur, huius officium est e vita excedere. 


E quo apparet et sapientis esse aliquando officium 
278 


BOOK III, xviii 


_ appropriate action will exist in the sphere of these 
neutral things. This is also proved by the following 
syllogistic argument: We observe that something 
exists which we call right action; but this is an 
appropriate act perfectly performed ; therefore there 
will also be such a thing as an imperfect appropriate 
act ; so that, if to restore a trust as a matter of prin- 
ciple is a right act, to restore a trust must be counted 
as an appropriate act; the addition of the qualifica- 
tion ‘on principle’ makes it a right action ; the mere 
restitution in itself is counted an appropriate act. 
Again, since there can be no question but that the class 
of things we call neutral includes some things worthy 
to be chosen and others to be rejected; therefore 
whatever is done or described in this manner is en- 
tirely included under the term appropriate action. 
This shows that since love of self is implanted by 
nature in all men, both the foolish and the wise alike 
will choose what is in accordance with nature and re- 
ject the contrary. Thus there is a region of appropriate 
action which is common to the wise and the unwise ; 
and this proves that appropriate action deals with 
the things we call neutral. But since these neutral 4. Practical 
things form the basis of all appropriate acts, there {Uugiens. |. 
is good ground for the dictum that it is with these an ‘appro- 
things that all our practical deliberations deal, in- ” pg» 
cluding the will to live and the will to quit this life. 
When a man’s circumstances contain a preponderance 
of things in accordance with nature, it is appropriate 
for him to remain alive; when he possesses or sees 
in prospect a majority of the contrary things, it is 
appropriate for him to depart from life. This makes 
it plain that it is on occasion appropriate for the 
Wise Man to quit life although he is happy, and also 

279 


61 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


excedere e vita cum beatus sit, et stulti manere in 
vita cum sit miser. Nam bonum illud et malum quod 
saepe iam dictum est postea consequitur ; prima autem 
illa naturae sive secunda sive contraria sub iudicium 
sapientis et dilectum cadunt, estque illa subiecta 
quasi materia sapientiae. Itaque et manendi in vita 
et migrandi ratio omnis iis rebus quas supra dixi 
metienda. Nam neque...! virtute retinetur in vita, 
nec iis qui sine virtute sunt mors est oppetenda. Et 
saepe officium est sapientis desciscere a vita cum sit 
beatissimus, si id opportune facere possit. Sic enim 
censent, opportunitatis esse beate vivere quod est | 
convenienter naturae vivere.? Itaque a sapientia 
praecipitur se ipsam si usus sit sapiens ut relinquat. 
Quamobrem cum vitiorum ista vis non sit ut causam 
afferant mortis voluntariae, perspicuum est etiam 
stultorum qui iidem miseri sint officium esse manere 
in vita, si sint in maiore parte earum rerum quas 
secundum naturam esse dicimus. Et quoniam exce- 
dens e vita et manens aeque miser est, nec diuturnitas 
magis ei vitam fugiendam facit, non sine causa dicitur 
iis qui pluribus naturalibus frui possint esse in vita 
manendum. 

XIX. “Pertinere autem ad rem arbitrantur in- 
tellegi natura fieri ut liberi a parentibus amentur; 


Hs Mdv. conj. neque ts gui virtute utitur retinetur or the 
ike. 


* Quod—vivere after facere possit above MSS., Mdv. after 
Baiter suggests the transposition. 


280 


BOOK III. xviii-xix 


of the Foolish Man to remain in life although he is 
miserable. For with the Stoics good and evil, as 
has repeatedly been said already, are a subsequent 
outgrowth; whereas the primary things of nature, 
: whether favourable or the reverse, fall under the 

judgment and choice of the Wise Man, and form 
so to speak the subject-matter, the given material 
with which wisdom deals. Therefore the reasons 
both for remaining in life and for departing from it 
are to be measured entirely by the primary things 
of nature aforesaid. For the virtuous man is not 
necessarily retained in life by virtue, and also those 
who are devoid of virtue need not necessarily seek 
death. And very often it is appropriate for the Wise 
Man to abandon life at a moment when he is enjoy- 
ing supreme happiness, if an opportunity offers for 
making a timely exit. For the Stoic view is that 
happiness, which means life in harmony with nature, 
is a matter of seizing the right moment. So that 
Wisdom her very self upon occasion bids the Wise 
Man to leave her. Hence, as vice does not possess 
the power of furnishing a reason for suicide, it is clear 
that even for the foolish, who are also miserable, it 
is appropriate to remain alive if they possess a pre- 
dominance of those things which we pronounce to 
be in accordance with nature. And since the fool is 
equally miserable when departing from life and 
when remaining in it, and the undesirability of his 
life is not increased by its prolongation, there is 
good ground for saying that those who are in a 
position to enjoy a preponderance of things that are 
natural ought to remain in life. 

XIX. “ Again, it is held by the Stoics to be im- Social duties ar 
portant to understand that nature creates in parents ae bey 

281 


63 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


a quo initio profectam communem humani generis 
societatem persequimur. Quod primum intellegi 
debet figura membrisque corporum, quae ipsa de- 
clarant, procreandi a natura habitam esse rationem, 
Neque vero haec inter se congruere possent ut na- 
tura et procreari vellet et diligi procreatos non 
curaret. Atque etiam in bestiis vis naturae perspici 
potest; quarum in fetu et in educatione laborem 
cum cernimus, naturae ipsius vocem videmur audire. 
Quare ut! perspicuum est natura nos a dolore abhor- 
rere, sic apparet a natura ipsa ut eos quos genueri- 
mus amemus impelli. Ex hoc nascitur ut etiam 
communis hominum inter homines naturalis sit com- 
mendatio, ut oporteat hominem ab homine ob id 
ipsum quod homo sit non alienum videri. Ut enim 
in membris alia sunt tamquam sibi nata, ut oculi, ut 
aures, alia etiam ceterorum membrorum usum adiu- 
vant, ut crura, ut manus, sic immanes quaedam 
bestiae sibi solum natae sunt, at illa quae in concha 
patula pina dicitur, isque qui enat e concha, qui quod 
eam custodit pinoteres vocatur, in eandemque cum 
se recepit includitur, ut videatur monuisse ut cave- 
ret, itemque formicae, apes, ciconiae aliorum etiam 
‘ut inserted by edd. 


aA reminiscence of Terence, who humorously puts this 
Stoic tag into the mouth of Chremes as an excuse for his 
neighbourly curiosity: Homo sum, humani nila mealienum 
puto, Heaut. 25, Cp. 1 3, II 14. 

bA mussel in whose ‘beard’ a small crab is often found 
entangled. The notion of their partnership is found in 
ee Chrysippus introduced it as an illustration in 

thics. 


282 


BOOK III. xix 


_ an affection for their children; and parental affec- 


tion is the germ of that social community of the 
human race to which we afterwards attain. This 
cannot but be clear in the first place from the con- 
formation of the body and its members, which by 
themselves are enough to show that nature’s scheme 
included the procreation of offspring. Yet it could 
not be consistent that nature should at once intend 
offspring to be born and make no provision for that 
offspring when born to be loved and cherished. 
Even in the lower animals nature’s operation can be 
clearly discerned; when we observe the labour that 
they spend on bearing and rearing their young, we 
seem to be listening to the actual voice of nature. 
Hence as it is manifest that it is natural for us to 
shrink from pain, so it is clear that we derive from 
nature herself the impulse to love those to whom we 


have given birth. From this impulse is developed 


the sense of mutual attraction which unites human 
beings as such; this also is bestowed by nature. 
The mere fact of their common humanity requires 
that one man should feel another man to be akin to 
him.* For just as some of the parts of the body, 
such as the eyes and the ears, are created as it were 
for their own sakes, while others like the legs or the 
hands also subserve the utility of the rest of the 
members, so some very large animals are born for 
themselves alone; whereas the sea-pen,? as it is 
called, in its roomy shell, and the creature named 
the ‘ pinoteres’ because it keeps watch over the sea- 
pen, which swims out of the sea-pen’s shell, then re- 
tires back into it and is shut up inside, thus appear- 
ing to have warned its host to be on its guard—these 


creatures, and also the ant, the bee, the stork, do 
283 


Parental affec- 


tion, 


Philanthropia. 


64 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


causa quaedam faciunt. Multo haec! coniunctius 
homines.” Itaque natura sumus apti ad coetus, con- 
cilia, civitates. 

“Mundum autem censent regi numine deorum 
eumque esse quasi communem urbem et civitatem 
hominum et deorum, et unumquemque nostrum eius 
mundi esse partem; ex quo illud natura consequi ut 
communem utilitatem nostrae anteponamus. Ut 
enim leges omnium salutem singulorum saluti ante- 
ponunt, sic vir bonus et sapiens et legibus parens et 
civilis offici non ignarus utilitati omnium plus quam 
unius alicuius aut suae consulit. Nec magis est vitu- 
perandus proditor patriae quam communis utilitatis 
aut salutis desertor propter suam utilitatem aut 
salutem. Ex quo fit ut laudandus is sit qui mortem 
oppetat pro re publica, quod deceat cariorem nobis 
esse patriam quam nosmet ipsos. Quoniamque illa 
vox inhumana et scelerata ducitur eorum qui negant 
se recusare quo minus ipsis mortuis terrarum omnium 
deflagratio consequatur (quod vulgari quodam versu 
Graeco pronuntiari solet), certe verum est etiam iis 
qui aliquando futuri sint esse propter ipsos con- 
sulendum. 

XX. “Ex hac animorum affectione testamenta 
commendationesque morientium natae sunt. . Quod- 
que nemo in summa solitudine vitam agere velit ne 
cum infinita quidem voluptatum abundantia, facile 
intellegitur nos ad coniunctionem congregationem- 
que hominum et ad naturalem communitatem esse 


1Multo haec A,B, E; Multo mags haec inf. MSS. 
2 coniunctius homines Mdv.; coniunctio est hominis MSS. 


a éuod Oavdyros yata px Ojrw rupl: said to have been quoted 
by Tiberius and Nero. 


284 


or 


BOOK III. xix-xx 


certain actions for the sake of others besides them- 
' selves. With human beings this bond of mutual aid 
is far more intimate. It follows that we are by 
nature fitted to form unions, societies and states. 
Again, they hold that the universe is governed the Cosmopolis. 
by divine will; it is a city or state of which both 
‘men and gods are members, and each one of us is a 
part of this universe; from which it is a natural 
consequence that we should prefer the common 
advantage to our own. For just as the laws set | 
the safety of all above the safety of individuals, so 
a good, wise and law-abiding man, conscious of his 
duty to the state, studies the advantage of all more 
than that of himself or of any single individual. The 
traitor to his country does not deserve greater repro- 
bation than the man who betrays the common 
advantage or security for the sake of his own advan- 
tage or security. This explains why praise is owed Patriotism. 
to one who dies for the commonwealth, because it 
_ becomes us to love our country more than ourselves, 
And as we feel it wicked and inhuman for men to 
declare (the saying is usually expressed in a familiar 
Greek line*) that they care not if, when they them- 
selves are dead, the universal conflagration ensues, 
it is undoubtedly true that we are bound to study 
the interest of posterity also for its own sake. 

XX. “This is the feeling that has given rise to Care for 
the practice of making a will and appointing ponesies: 
guardians for one’s children when one is dying. 

And the fact that no one would care to pass his life 

alone in a desert, even though supplied with pleasures 

in unbounded profusion, readily shows that we are 

born for society and intercourse, and for a natural phe imparting of 

partnership with our fellow men. Moreover nature knowledge. 
284 


66 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


natos. Impellimur autem natura ut prodesse velimus 
quam plurimis in primisque docendo rationibusque 
prudentiae tradendis. Itaque non facile est invenire 
qui quod sciat ipse non tradat alteri; ita non solum 


~ ad discendum propensi sumus verum etiam ad docen- 


67 


dum. Atque ut tauris natura datum est ut pro vi-' 
tulis contra leones summa vi impetuque contendant, 
sic ii qui valent opibus atque id facere possunt, ut de 
Hercule et de Libero accepimus, ad servandum genus 
hominum natura incitantur. Atque etiam Iovem 
cum Optimum et Maximum dicimus cumque eundem 
Salutarem, Hospitalem, Statorem, hoc ¢ intellegi volu- 
mus, salutem hominum in eius esse Tae Minime 
autem convenit, cum ipsi inter nos viles neglectique 
simus, postulare ut dis immortalibus cari simus et ab 
iis diligamur. Quemadmodum igitur membris uti- 
mur prius quam didicimus cuius ea utilitatis causa 
habeamus, sic inter nos natura ad civilem communi- 
tatem coniuncti et consociati sumus. Quod ni ita se 
haberet, nec iustitiae ullus esset nec bonitati locus. 
“Sed! quomodo hominum inter homines iuris 
esse vincula putant, sic homini nihil iuris esse cum 
bestiis. Praeclare enim Chrysippus cetera nata esse 
hominum causa et deorum, eos autem communitatis et 
societatis suae, ut bestiis homines uti ad utilitatem — 
suam possint sine iniuria; quoniamque ea natura 
esset hominis ut ei cum genere humano quasi civile 


1 sed Mdv.; et MSS. 
286 


BOOK III. xx 


inspires us with the desire to benefit as many people 
_ as we can, and especially by imparting information and 

6 the principles of wisdom. Hence it would be hard to 
discover anyone who will not impart to another any 
knowledge that he may himself possess ; so strong is 
our propensity not only to learn but also to teach. 

And just as bulls have a natural instinct to fight The protection 
with all their strength and force in defending their the weak. 
calves against lions, so men of exceptional gifts and 
capacity for service, like Hercules and Liber in the 
legends, feel a natural impulse to be the protectors 

of the human race. Also when we confer upon Jove 

the titles of Most Good and Most Great, of Saviour, 

Lord of Guests, Rallier of Battles, what we mean to 

imply is that the safety of mankind lies in his keep- 

ing. But how inconsistent it would be for us to 

expect the immortal gods to love and cherish us, 

when we ourselves despise and neglect one another! 
Therefore just as we actually use our limbs before 

we have learnt for what particular useful purpose 

they were bestowed upon us, so we are by nature 

united and allied in the common society of the state. 

Were this not so, there would be no room either for 

justice or benevolence. 

7 “But just as they hold that man is united with Animals have n 
man by the bonds of right, so they consider that no "8"** 
right exists as between man and beast. For Chry- 
sippus well said, that all other things were created for 
the sake of men and gods, but that these exist for their 
own mutual fellowship and society, so that men can 
make use of beasts for their own purposes without 
injustice. And the nature of man, he said, is such, 
that as it were a code of law subsists between the fhe rights of 
individual and the human race, so that he who up- ™an. 

287 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


ius intercederet, qui id conservaret eum iustum, qui 
migraret iniustum fore. Sed quemadmodum, thea- 
trum eum commune sit, recte tamen dici potest eius 
esse eum locum quem quisque occuparit, sic in urbe 
mundove communi non adversatur ius quo minus 
suum quidque cuiusque sit. Cum autem ad tuendos 
conservandosque homines hominem natum esse vi- 
deamus, consentaneum est huic naturae ut sapiens 
velit gerere et administrare rem publicam atque, ut 
e natura vivat, uxorem adiungere et velle ex ea 
liberos. Ne amores quidem sanctos a sapiente alienos 
esse arbitrantur. Cynicorum autem rationem atque 
vitam alii cadere in sapientem dicunt, si qui eius- 
modi forte casus inciderit ut id faciendum sit, alii 
nullo modo. 

XXI. “Ut vero conservetur omnis homini erga 
hominem societas, coniunctio, caritas, et emolumenta 
et detrimenta (quae ddeArjuara et BAduparaappellant) 
communia esse voluerunt, quorum altera prosunt, 
nocent altera; neque solum ea communia verum 
etiam paria esse dixerunt. Incommoda autem et 
commoda (ita enim evypnotipara et dvexpnoTipata 
appello) communia esse voluerunt, paria noluerunt. 
Illa enim quae prosunt aut quae nocent aut bona 
sunt aut mala, quae sint paria necesse est; commoda 
autem et incommoda in eo genere sunt quae prae- 
posita et reiecta dicimus ; ea possunt paria non esse. 
Sed emolumenta’ communia esse dicuntur, recte 


1 After emolumenta. Lambinus inserts e¢ detrimenta. 


a The Cynics cast off the ties of country and family, and 


proclaimed themselves Kosmou Politai, citizens of the | 


Universe and members of the universal brotherhood of 
man. 


288 


milly 


58 


BOOK III. xx-xxi 


holds this code will be just and he who departs from 
it, unjust. But just as though the theatre is a 
public place it is yet correct to say that the parti- 
cular seat a man has taken belongs to him, so in the 
state or in the universe, though these are common 
to all, no principle of justice militates against the 
possession of private property. Again, since we see 
that man is designed by nature to safeguard and 
protect his fellows, it follows from this natural dis- 
position, that the Wise Man should desire to engage 
in politics and government, and also to live in ac- 
cordance with nature by taking to himself a wife and 
desiring to have children by her. Even the passion 
of love when pure is not thought incompatible with 
the character of the Stoic Sage. As for the principles 
and habits of the Cynics,* some say that these befit 
the Wise Man, if circumstances should happen to 
indicate this course of action ; but other Stoics reject 
the Cynic rule unconditionally. 

XXI. “Tosafeguard the universal alliance, solidarity 
and affection that subsist between all mankind, the 
Stoics held that both ‘benefits’ and ‘injuries’ (in their 
terminology, dphelémata and blammata) are common, 
the former doing good and the latter harm ; and they 
pronounced them to be not only ‘common’ but also 

equal.’ ‘Disadvantages’ and ‘advantages’ (for so I 
render euchréstémata and duschréstemata) they held to 
be ‘common’ but not ‘equal.’ For things ‘beneficial’ 
and ‘injurious’ are goods and evils respectively; and 
these must needs be equal; but ‘advantages’ and 
‘disadvantages’ belong to the class we speak of as 
‘preferred’ and ‘rejected, and these may differ in 


¢ Ore £8 . 
degree. But whereas benefits’ and injuries’ are 


U 289 


Property 


Politics and 
family life a 
duty. 


‘Goods’ 
benefit all the 
Wise in com- 
mon, andso 
equally; ‘ thing: 
preferred ’ are 
common but no 
equal, 


70 


vy 


1 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


autem facta et peccata non habentur communia. 
* Amicitiam autem adhibendam esse censent quia 
sit ex eo genere quae prosunt. Quamquam autem 
in amicitia alii dicant aeque caram esse sapienti 
rationem amici ac suam, alii autem sibi cuique 
cariorem suam, tamen hi quoque posteriores fatentur 
alienum esse a iustitia, ad quam nati esse videamur, 
detrahere quid de aliquo quod sibi assumat. Minime 
vero probatur huic disciplinae de qua loquor aut 
iustitiam aut amicitiam propter utilitates ascisci aut 
probari. Eaedem enim utilitates poterunt eas labe- 
factare atque pervertere. Etenim nec iustitia nec 
amicitia esse omnino poterunt nisi ipsae per se 
expetuntur.! Ius autem, quod ita dici appellarique 
possit, id esse natura; alienumque esse a sapiente 
non modo iniuriam cui facere verum etiam nocere. 
Nec vero rectum est cum amicis aut bene meritis 
consociare aut coniungere iniuriam; gravissimeque 
et verissime defenditur numquam aequitatem ab 
utilitate posse seiungi, et quidquid aequum iustumque 
esset id etiam honestum, vicissimque quidquid esset 
honestum id iustum etiam atque aequum fore. 
‘expetuntur : inf. MSS. expetantur. 


4 Moral and immoral acts (a) viewed for their results for 
good and ill affect all mankind, (b) viewed in themselves 
concern the agent only; while in both aspects they do not 
admit of degree, but are either good or bad, right or wrong 
absolutely. Whereas things indifferent (i.e. everything but 
moral good and evil) are more or less advantageous or the 


reverse, both to the person immediately concerned and to 
the world at large. 


290 


BOOK Ill. xxi 


pronounced to be ‘common,’ righteous and sinful 
acts are not considered ‘common.’* 

“They recommend the cultivation of friendship, Friendship, lik 
classing it among ‘things beneficial.’ In friendship dic offer Virtw 
some profess that the Wise Man will hold his friends’ Mes ea . 
interests as dear as his own, while others say that a 
man’s own interests must necessarily be dearer to 
him ; at the same time the latter admit that to en- 

‘rich oneself by another’s loss is an action repugnant 
to that justice towards which we seem to possess a 
natural propensity. But the school I am discussing 
emphatically rejects the view that we adopt or ap- 
prove either justice or friendship for the sake of 
their utility. For if it were so, the same claims of 
utility would be able to undermine and overthrow — 
them. In fact the very existence of both justice 
and friendship will be impossible if they are not 
desired for their own sake. Right moreover, properly 
so styled and entitled, exists (they aver) by nature ; 
and it is foreign to the nature of the Wise Man not 
only to wrong but even to hurt anyone. Nor again 
is it righteous to enter into a partnership in wrong- 
doing with one’s friends or benefactors; and it is 
most truly and cogently maintained that honesty 
is always the best policy, and that whatever is fair 
and just is also honourable,” and conversely whatever 
is honourable will also be just and fair. 


b The sense seems here to require u/z/e, ‘useful,’ rather 
than honestum, unless honestum is intended to mean ‘held 
in popular esteem,’ and so profitable. 


U2 291 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


72  ‘“Ad easque virtutes de quibus disputatum est dia- 
lecticam etiam adiungunt et physicam easque ambas 
virtutum nomine appellant, alteram quod habeat 
rationem ne cui falso assentiamur neve umquam 
captiosa probabilitate fallamur, eaque quae de bonis 
et malis didicerimus ut tenere tuerique possimus; 
nam sine hac arte quemvis arbitrantur a vero abduci 
fallique posse. Recte igitur, si omnibus in rebus 
temeritas ignoratioque vitiosa est, ars ea quae tollit 
haec virtus nominata est. 

73 XXII. “Physicae quoque non sine causa tributus 
idem est honos, propterea quod qui convenienter 
naturae victurus sit ei proficiscendum est ab omni 
mundo atque ab eius procuratione. Nec vero potest 
quisquam de bonis et malis vere iudicare nisi omni 
cognita ratione naturae et vitae etiam deorum, et 
utrum conveniat necne natura hominis cum universa. 
Quaeque sunt vetera praecepta sapientium, qui iubent 
“tempori parere’ et “sequi deum’ et “se noscere,’ et 
“nihil nimis,’ haec sine physicis quam vim habeant 
(et habent maximam) videre nemo potest. Atque 
etiam. ad iustitiam colendam, ad tuendas amicitias 
et reliquas caritates quid natura valeat haec una 
cognitio potest tradere; nec vero pietas adversus 
deos nec quanta iis gratia debeatur sine explicatione 
naturae intellegi potest. 


ee . . . 
74 Sed iam sentio me esse longius provectum quam 
292 


BOOK III. xxi-xxii 


72 “To the virtues we have discussed they also add Logic and 
Dialectic and Natural Philosophy. Both of these Philosophy at 
they entitle by the name of virtue; the former Virtues. 
because it conveys a method that guards us from 
giving assent to any falsehood or ever being deceived 
by specious probability, and enables us to retain 
and to defend the truths that we have learned about 
good and evil; for without the art of Dialectic 
they hold that any man may be seduced from truth 
into error. If therefore rashness and ignorance are 
in all matters fraught with mischief, the art which 
removes them is correctly entitled a virtue. 

73 XXII. “The same honour is also bestowed with 
good reason upon Natural Philosophy, because he 
who is to live in accordance with nature must base 
his principles upon the system and government of 
the entire world. Nor again can anyone judge truly 
of things good and evil, save by a knowledge of the 
whole plan of nature and also of the life of the gods, 
and of the answer to the question whether the 
nature of man is or is not in harmony with that of 

_ the universe. And no one without Natural Philo- 
sophy can discern the value (and their value is very 
great) of the ancient maxims and precepts of the 
Wise Men, such as to ‘ obey occasion,’ ‘ follow God,’ 
‘know thyself,’ and “moderation in all things.’ Also 

this science alone can impart a conception of the 
power of nature in fostering justice and maintaining 
friendship and the rest of the affections ; nor again 
without unfolding nature’s secrets can we understand 
the sentiment of piety towards the gods or the 
degree of gratitude that we owe to them. 

74 “However I begin to perceive that I have let 5,Conclusion: 
myself be carried beyond the requirements of the Stoicsystem. 

293 


75 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


proposita ratio postularet. Verum admirabilis com- 
positio disciplinae incredibilisque me rerum traxit 
ordo; quem per deos immortales nonne miraris? 
Quid enim aut in natura, qua nihil est aptius, nihil 
descriptius, aut in operibus manu factis tam compo- 
situm tamque compactum et coagmentatum inveniri 
potest? quid posterius priori non convenit? quid 
sequitur quod non respondeat superiori? quid non 
sic aliud ex alio nectitur ut si ullam litteram moveris 
labent omnia? Nec tamen quidquam est quod mo- 
veri possit. 

5 Quam gravis vero, quam magnifica, quam constans 
conficitur persona sapientis! qui, cum ratio docuerit 
quod honestum esset id esse solum bonum, semper 
sit necesse est beatus vereque omnia ista nomina 
possideat quae irrideri ab imperitis solent. Rectius 
enim appellabitur rex quam Tarquinius qui nec se 
nec suos regere potuit, rectius magister populi (is 
enim est dictator) quam Sulla qui trium pestifero- 
rum vitiorum, luxuriae, avaritiae, crudelitatis magi- 
ster fuit, rectius dives quam Crassus qui nisi eguisset 
numquam Euphraten nulla belli causa transire vo- 
luisset. Recte eius omnia dicentur qui scit uti solus 
omnibus; recte etiam pulcher appellabitur (animi 
enim liniamehta sunt pulchriora quam corporis) recte 
solus liber, nec dominationi cuiusquam parens nec 


a The old title of the dictators at Rome. Cicero plays on 
the meaning of magister, ‘teacher.’ 


294 


75 


BOOK III. xxii 


plan that I set before me. The fact is that I have been 
led on by the marvellous structure of the Stoic sys- 
tem and the miraculous sequence of its topics ; pray 
tell me seriously, does it not fill you with admiration ? 
Nothing is more finished, more nicely ordered, than 
nature ; but what has nature, what have the pro- 


ducts of handicraft to show that is so well con-: 


structed, so firmly jointed and welded into one? 
Where do you find a conclusion inconsistent with 


its premise, or a discrepancy between an earlier and 


a later statement? Where is lacking such close 
interconnexion of the parts that, if you alter a single 
letter, you shake the whole structure? Though 
indeed there is nothing that it would be possible to 
alter. 

“Then, how dignified, how lofty, how consistent 
is the character of the Wise Man as they depict it! 
Since reason has proved that moral worth is the sole 
good, it follows that he must always be happy, and 
that all those titles which the ignorant are so fond of 
deriding do in very truth belong to him. For he 
will have a better claim to the title of King than 
Tarquin, who could not rule either himself or his 
subjects; a better right to the name of ‘ Master* of 
the People’ (for that is what a dictator is) than 
Sulla, who was a master of three pestilential vices, 
licentiousness, avarice and cruelty ; a better claim to 
be called rich than Crassus, who had he needed 
nothing would never have been induced to cross the 
Euphrates for any military reason. Rightly will he 
be said to own all things, who alone knows how to 
use all things ; rightly also will he be styled beauti- 
ful, for the beauty of the soul is fairer than that of 


the body ; rightly the one and only free man, as sub- 
295 


Praise of the 
Wise Man. 


76 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


obediens cupiditati, recte invictus, cuius etiamsi 
corpus constringatur, animo tamen vincula inici 
nulla possint. Nec exspectat’ ullum tempus aetatis, 
ut tum denique iudicetur beatusne fuerit cum ex- 
tremum vitae diem morte confecerit ; quod ille unus 
e septem sapientibus non sapienter Croesum monuit, 
nam si beatus umquam fuisset, beatam vitam usque 
ad illum a Cyro exstructum rogum pertulisset. Quod 
si ita est ut neque quisquam nisi bonus vir et omnes 
boni beati sint, quid philosophia magis colendum aut 
quid est virtute divinius?” 


lexpectat ed.: expectet MSS., edd. (‘transit ad poten- © 
tialem orationis formam’ Mdv.). 


296 


16 


BOOK III. xxii 


ject to no man’s authority, and slave of no appetite ; 
rightly unconquerable, for though his body be thrown 
into fetters, no bondage can enchain his soul. Nor 
does he wait for any period of time that the decision 
whether he has been happy or not may be finally 
pronounced only when he has rounded off his life’s 
last day in death,—the famous warning so unwisely 
given to Croesus by old Solon, one of the seven 
Wise Men; for had Croesusever been happy, he would 
have carried his happiness uninterrupted to the pyre 
raised for him by Cyrus. If then it be true that all 
the good and none but the good are happy, what 
possession is more precious than philosophy, what 
more divine than virtue?”’ 


297 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


M. TULLI CICERONIS 
DE 
FINIBUS BONORUM ET MALORUM 
LIBER QUARTUS 


I. Quae cum dixisset, finem ille. Ego autem: 
“Ne tu, inquam, Cato, ista exposuisti, ut tam multa, 
memoriter, ut tam obscura, dilucide. Itaque aut 
omittamus contra omnino velle aliquid aut spatium 
sumamus ad cogitandum; tam enim diligenter, 
etiamsi minus vere (nam nondum id quidem audeo 
dicere), sed tamen! accurate non modo fundatam 
verum etiam exstructam disciplinam non est facile 
perdiscere.” Tum ille: “Ain tandem?” inquit; 
“cum ego te hac nova lege videam eodem die accu- 
satori respondere et tribus horis perorare, in hac me 
causa tempus dilaturum putas? quae tamen a te 
agetur non melior quam illae sunt quas interdum 
obtines. Quare istam quoque aggredere, tractatam 
praesertim et ab aliis et a te ipso saepe, ut tibi 
deesse non possit oratio.” Tum ego: “Non meher- 
cule,” inquam, “soleo temere contra Stoicos, non quo 
illis admodum assentiar, sed pudore impedior; ita 
multa dicunt, quae vix intellegam.” “Obscura,” 
inquit, ““quaedam esse confiteor; nec tamen ab illis 
ita dicuntur de industria, sed inest in rebus ipsis 


1 sed tamen : Lambinus conjectures sed tamen tam, Davis 
sed tam. Perhaps audeo dicere, sed tamen) non modo; and 
bracket accurate as interpolated. 


* Passed by Pompey, 52 B.c., to limit the concluding 
speeches in lawsuits to two hours for the prosecution and 
three for the defence, both to be delivered on the same day. 

300 


DE FINIBUS 
BOOK IV 


1 I. With these words he concluded. ip most Refutation of th 
faithful and lucid exposition, Cato,” said 1, “con- {o0S7s"™ PY 
sidering the wide range of your subject at ite Introduction. 
obscurity. Clearly I must either give up all idea ot 
replying, or must take time to think it over; it is 
no easy task to get a thorough grasp of a system so 
elaborate, even if erroneous (for on that point I do not 
yet venture to speak), but at all events so highly finish- 
ed both in its first principles and in their working out.” 

“You don’t say so!” replied Cato. “Do you sup- 
pose I am going to allow our suit to be adjourned, 
when I see you under this new law* replying for 
the defence on the same day as your opponent con- 
cludes for the prosecution, and keeping your speech 
within a three hours’ limit? Though you will find 
your present case as shaky as any of those which 
you now and then succeed in pulling off. So tackle 
this one like the rest, particularly as the subject is 
familiar; others have handled it before, and so have 
you me oeatedly so that you can Bard. be gravelled 

2 for lack of matter.” “I protest,’ I exclaimed, “I 
am not by way of challenging the Stoics high tin: 
not that I agree with them entirely, but modesty 
restrains me: there is so much in their doctrines 
that I can hardly understand.’”’ “I admit,” he said, 

“that some parts are obscure, but the Stoics do not 

affect an obscure style on purpose; the obseurity i is 

inherent in the subjects themselves.” “ How is it, 
301 


iS) 


CICERO DE FINIBUS . 
obscuritas.” “Cur igitur easdem res,’ inquam, 
“ Peripateticis dicentibus verbum nullum est quod 
non intellegatur?”” “Easdemne res?” inquit; “an 
parum disserui non verbis Stoicos a Peripateticis sed 
universa re et tota sententia dissidere?”” “ Atqui,” 
inquam, “ Cato, si istud obtinueris, traducas me ad 
te totum licebit.’’ “Putabam equidem satis,” inquit, 
“me dixisse. Quare ad ea primum, si videtur; sin 
aliud quid voles, postea.”’ “Immo istud quidem,” 


E “é < 1 
inquam, quo loco quidque... 


nisi iniquum postulo, 
arbitratu meo.” “Ut placet,’ inquit; “etsi enim 
illud erat aptius, aequum cuique concedere.” 

Il. “Existimo igitur,’ inquam, “Cato, veteres 
illos Platonis auditores, Speusippum, Aristotelem, 
Xenocratem, deinde eorum Polemonem, Theophra- 
stum, satis et copiose et eleganter habuisse constitu- 
tam disciplinam, ut non esset causa Zenoni cum 
Polemonem audisset cur et ab eo ipso et a superiori- 
bus dissideret; quorum fuit haec institutio, in qua 
animadvertas velim quid mutandum putes, nec 
exspectes dum ad omnia dicam quae a te dicta sunt; 
universa enim illorum ratione cum tota vestra con- 
fligendum puto. Qui cum viderent ita nos esse 
natos ut et communiter ad eas virtutes apti essemus 


‘occurrerit or some similar word has been lost. 
o 
802 


BOOK IV. i-ii 


- then,” I replied, “that when the same subjects are 
‘discussed by the Peripatetics, every word is intelli- 
gible?”’ “The same subjects?” he cried. “ Have 
I not said enough to show that the disagreement 
between the Stoics and the Peripatetics is not a 
matter of words, but concerns the entire substance 
of their whole system?” “O well, Cato,” I re- 
joined, “if you can prove that, you are welcome to 
claim me as a whole-hearted convert.” “I did 
think,” said he, “that I had said enough. So let us 
take this question first, if you like; or if you. prefer 
another topic, we will take this later on.” “Nay,” 
said I, as to that matter I shall use my own dis- 
cretion, unless this is an unfair stipulation, and deal 
with each subject as it comes up.” “Have it your 

way,” he replied : ‘my plan would have been more 
_ suitable, but it is fair to let a man choose for 
himself.” 

II. “ My view then, Cato,’ I proceeded, “ is this, Review of older 
that those old disciples of Plato, Speusippus, Aris- Pitonsts from 
_totle and Xenocrates, and afterwards their pupils oeded 4g 228). 

Polemo and Theophrastus, had developed a body of Their three-fold 

doctrine that left nothing to be desired either in saoey ratiecaa 
fullness or finish, so that Zeno on becoming the pupil Py the Stoics. 
of Polemo had no reason for differing either from his 
master himself or from his master’s predecessors. 

The outline of their theory -was as follows—but 

I should be glad if you would call attention to any 

point you may desire to correct without waiting for 

me to deal with the whole of your discourse; for I 

think I shall have to place their entire system in 

conflict with the whole of yours. Well, these philo- 

sophers observed (1) that we are so constituted as 

to have a natural aptitude for the recognized and 

303 


wy 


— 4 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


quae notae illustresque sunt, iustitiam dico, tempe- 
rantiam, ceteras generis eiusdem (quae omnes similes 
artium reliquarum materia tantum ad meliorem 
partem et tractatione differunt), easque ipsas virtutes 
viderent nos magnificentius appetere et ardentius; 
habere etiam insitam quandam vel potius innatam 
cupiditatem scientiae, natosque esse ad congrega- 
tionem hominum et ad societatem communitatemque 
generis humani, eaque in maximis ingeniis maxime 
elucere, totam philosophiam tres in partes diviserunt, 
quam partitionem a Zenone esse retentam videmus. 
Quarum cum una sit qua mores conformari putantur, 
differo eam partem, quae quasi stirps est huius 
quaestionis; qui sit enim finis bonorum, mox; hoc 
loco tantum dico a veteribus Peripateticis Academi- 
cisque, qui re consentientes vocabulis differebant, 
eum locum quem civilem recte appellaturi videmur 
(Graeci rroAuTeKov) graviter et copiose esse tractatum. 

III. “Quam multa illi de re publica scripserunt, 
quam multa de legibus! quam multa non solum 
praecepta in artibus sed etiam exempla in orationi- 
bus bene dicendi reliquerunt! Primum enim ipsa 
illa quae subtiliter disserenda erant polite apteque 
dixerunt, tum definientes, tum partientes, ut vestri 
etiam; sed vos squalidius; illorum vides quam niteat 


®This sentence might appear to imply that the three 
departments of philosophy were (1) Ethics, (2) Physics and 
Logic, (3) Politics; but in the following chapters Cicero 
adopts the normal division, (1) Logic, c. IV, (2) Physics, 
c. V, (3) Ethics, cc. VI foll., with its two subordinate 
branches of Politics and Rhetoric which are dismissed 
parenthetically in c. III. 


304 


_ standard virtues in general, I mean Justice, Tem- 
“perance and the others of that class (all of which 
resemble the rest of the arts and differ only by ex- 
celling them in the material with which they work 
and in their treatment of it); they observed more- 
over that we pursue these virtues with a more lofty 
enthusiasm than we do the arts; and (2) that 
we possess an implanted or rather an innate appe- 
tite for knowledge, and (3) that we are naturally 
disposed towards social life with our fellow men 
and towards fellowship and community with the 
human race; and that these instincts are displayed 
most clearly in the most highly endowed natures.* 
Accordingly they divided philosophy into three 
departments, a division that was retained, as we 
5 notice, by Zeno. One of these departments is the Ethics deferred; 
science that is held to give rules for the formation Porhevaaret 
of moral character; this part, which is the founda- Rhetoric, fully 


r ‘ : treated by the 
tion of our present discussion, I defer. For I shall Old academy 


consider later the question, what is the End of Goods. pela Se 
For the present I only say that the topic of what I 
think may fitly be entitled Civic Science (the adjec- 
tive in Greek is politikos) was handled with authority 

_ and fullness by the early Peripatetics and Academics, 

who agreed in substance though they differed in 
terminology. 

III. “What a vast amount they have written on 
politics and on jurisprudence! how many precepts of 
oratory they have left us in their treatises, and how 
many examples in their discourses! In the first 
place, even the topics that required close reasoning 
they handled in a neat and polished manner, em- 
ploying now definition, now division; as indeed 
your school does also, but your style is rather out- 

x 305 


6 


“I 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


oratio. Deinde ea quae requirebant orationem 
ornatam et gravem, quam magnifice sunt dicta ab 
illis, quam splendide! de iustitia, de temperantia, de 
fortitudine, de amicitia, de aetate degenda, de phi- 
losophia, de capessenda re publica, hominum nec? 
spinas vellentium, ut Stoici, nec ossa nudantium, 
sed eorum qui grandia ornate vellent, enucleate 
minora dicere. Itaque quae sunt eorum consola- 
tiones, quae cohortationes, quae etiam monita et 
consilia scripta ad summos viros! Erat enim apud 
eos, ut est rerum ipsarum natura, sic dicendi exerci- 
tatio duplex. Nam quidquid quaeritur, id habet aut 
generis ipsius sine personis temporibusque aut iis 
adiunctis facti aut iuris aut nominis controversiam. 
Ergo in utroque exercebantur; eaque disciplina 
effecit tantum illorum utroque in genere dicendi 
copiam. Totum genus hoc Zeno et qui ab eo sunt 
aut non potuerunt tueri* aut noluerunt, certe re- 
liquerunt. Quamquam scripsit artem rhetoricam 
Cleanthes, Chrysippus etiam, sed sic ut si quis 
obmutescere concupierit nihil aliud legere debeat- 
Itaque vides quomodo loquantur: nova verba fingunt, 
deserunt usitata. At quanta conantur!—mundum 
hune omnem oppidum esse. nostrum. Vides quan- 
tam rem agat ut Circeiis qui habitet totum hunc 
mundum suum municipium esse existimet. Incendit 


1 nec Miiller; 202 Mdv.; de MSS. 
2twert inserted by Cobet, Mdv. omits. 


®Cp. III, 64. 
306 


BOOK IV. iii 


3 at-elbows, while theirs is noticeably elegant. Then, 
in themes demanding ornate and dignified treat- 
ment, how imposing, how brilliant is their diction! 
On Justice, Temperance, Courage, Friendship, on the 
conduct of life, the pursuit of wisdom, the career 
of the statesman,—no hair-splitting like that of the 
Stoics, no bare skeleton of argument, but the loftier 
passages studiously ornate, and the minor topics 
studiously plain and clear. As a result, think of 
their consolations, their exhortations, even their 
warnings and counsels, addressed to men of the 
highest eminence! In fact, their rhetorical exercises 
were twofold, like the nature of the subjects them- 
selves. For every question for debate can be argued 
either on the general issue, ignoring the persons or 
circumstances involved, or, these also being taken 
into consideration, on a point of fact or of law or of 
nomenclature. They therefore practised themselves 
in both kinds; and this training produced their 
remarkable fluency in each class of discussion. This Politics neg- 
whole field Zeno and his successors were either Bion oa ae 
unable or unwilling to cover; at all events they Ethics inferior. 
left it untouched. Cleanthes it is true wrote a 
- treatise on rhetoric, and Chrysippus wrote one too, 
but what are they like? why, they furnish a com- 
plete manual for anyone whose ambition is to hold his 
tongue; you can judge then of their style, coining 
new words, discarding those approved by use. ‘ But,’ 
you will say, ‘think how vast are the themes that 
they essay! for example, that this entire universe is 
our own town.’* You see the magnitude of 
a Stoic’s task, to convince an inhabitant of Circeii 
that the whole vast world is his own borough! ‘If 
so; he must rouse his audience to enthusiasm.’ 
x2 307 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


igitur eos qui audiunt. Quid? ille incendat? Re- 
stinguet citius si ardentem acceperit. Ista ipsa 
quae tu breviter, regem, dictatorem, divitem solum 
esse sapientem, a te quidem apte ac rotunde; 
quippe; habes enim a rhetoribus; illorum vero ista 
ipsa quam exsilia de virtutis vi! quam tantam volunt 
esse ut beatum per se efficere possit. Pungunt 
enim, quasi aculeis, interrogatiunculis angustis, 
quibus etiam qui assentiuntur nihil commutantur 
animo et iidem abeunt qui venerant; res enim for- 
tasse verae, certe graves, non ita tractantur ut 
debent, sed aliquanto minutius. 

IV. “Sequitur disserendi ratio cognitioque naturae ; 
nam de summo bono mox, ut dixi, videbimus et ad 
id explicandum disputationem omnem conferemus. 
In his igitur partibus duabus nihil erat quod Zeno 
commutare gestiret; res enim se praeclare habebat, 
et quidem in utraque parte. Quid enim ab antiquis 
ex eo genere quod ad disserendum valet praetermis- 
sum est? qui et definierunt plurima et definiendi 
artes reliquerunt, quodque est definitioni adiun- 
ctum, ut res in partes dividatur, id et fit ab illis et 
quemadmodum fieri oporteat traditur; item de con- 
trariis, a quibus ad genera formasque generum vene- 
runt. Iam argumenti ratione conclusi caput esse 
faciunt ea quae perspicua dicunt; deinde ordinem 


sequuntur; tum quid verum sit in singulis extrema 
508 


BOOK IV. iii-iv 


What? a Stoic rouse enthusiasm? He is much 


more likely to extinguish any enthusiasm the student 


7 


may have had to begin with. Even those brief 
maxims that you propounded, that the Wise Man 
alone is king, dictator, millionaire,—neatly rounded 
off no doubt as you put them; of course, for you 
learnt them from professors of rhetoric;—but how 
bald are those very maxims, on the lips of the Stoics, 
when they talk about the potency of virtue,—virtue 
which they rate so highly that it can of itself, they 
say, confer happiness! Their meagre little syllo- 
gisms are mere pin-pricks; even if they convince 
the intellect, they cannot convert the heart, and the 
hearer goes away no better than he came. What 
they say is possibly true, and certainly important; 
but the way in which they say it is wrong; it is far 
too niggling. 

IV. “Next come Logic and Natural Science ; for As for Logic, the 
the problem of Ethics, as I said, we shall notice Se ee 
later, concentrating the whole force of the discussion !¢¢ti¢; 
upon its solution. In these two departments then, 
there was nothing that Zeno need have desired to 
alter ; since all was in a most satisfactory state, and 
that in both departments. For in the subject of 
Logic, what had the ancients left undealt with? They 
defined a multitude of terms, and left treatises on 
Definition ; of the kindred art of the Division of a 
thing into its parts they give practical examples, and 
lay down rules for the process; and the same with 
the Law of Contradictories, from which they arrived 
at genera and species. Then, in Deductive reason- 
ing, they start with what they term self-evident 
propositions ; from these the argument proceeds by 
rule; and finally the conclusion gives the inference 

309 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


9 conclusio est. Quanta autem ab illis varietas argu- 


10 


mentorum ratione concludentium eorumque cum 
captiosis interrogationibus dissimilitudo! Quid quod 
pluribus locis quasi denuntiant ut neque sensuum 
fidem sine ratione nec rationis sine sensibus exqui- 
ramus atque ut eorum alterum ab altero ne! sepa- 
remus? Quid? ea quae dialectici nunc tradunt et 
docent, nonne ab illis instituta sunt?” De quibus 
etsi a Chrysippo maxime est elaboratum, tamen a 
Zenone minus multo quam ab antiquis; ab hoc autem 
quaedam non melius quam veteres, quaedam omnino 
relicta. Cumque duae sint artes quibus perfecte 
ratio et oratio compleatur, una inveniendi, altera 
disserendi, hanc posteriorem et Stoici et Peripatetici, 
priorem autem illi egregie tradiderunt, hi omnino ne 
attigerunt quidem. Nam e quibus locis quasi the- 
sauris argumenta depromerentur, vestri ne suspicati 
quidem sunt, superiores autem artificio et via tradi- 
derunt. Quae quidem ars® efficit ne necesse sit 


.iisdem de rebus semper quasi dictata decantare neque 


a commentariolis suis discedere. Nam qui sciet ubi 
quidque positum sit quaque eo veniat, is, etiamsi 
quid obrutum erit, poterit eruere semperque esse in 
disputandosuus. Quod etsi ingeniis magnis praediti 
quidam dicendi copiam sine ratione consequuntur, ars 


‘ne supplied by Lambinus, Mdv. 


2 After zzstituta swnt all but one inferior MS. add in neni 
sunt: Mdv. brackets. 


3 ars Mdy,: om. A, other MSS, ves. 


aCp. I, 
bs Inventio,? Topiké, arranged stock arguments in ‘loci,’ 
topo?, pigeon-holes as it were of the memory: Cp. V, 2. 
310 


BOOK IV. iv 


9 valid in the particular case. Again, how many different 
forms of Deduction they distinguish, and how widely 
these differ from sophistical syllogisms*! Think how 
earnestly they reiterate the warning, that we must 
not expect to find truth in sensation unaided by 
reason, nor in reason without sensation, and that we 
are not to divorce the one from the other! Was it 
not they who first laid down the rules that form the 
stock-in-trade of professors of logic to-day? Logic, 
no doubt, was very fully worked out by Chrysippus, 
but much less was done in it by Zeno than by the 
older schools; and in some parts of the subject 
his work was no improvement on that of his pre- 
decessors, while other parts he neglected altogether. 

0 Of the two sciences which between them cover andneglected 
the whole field of reasoning and of oratory, one the Piscevccy of 
Science of Topics» and the other that of Logic, 
the latter has been handled by both Stoics and 
Peripatetics, but the former, though excellently 
taught by the Peripatetics, has not been touched by 
the Stoics at all. Of Topics, the store-chambers in 
which arguments are arranged ready for use, your 
school had not the faintest notion, whereas their 
predecessors propounded a regular technique and 
method. This science of Topics saves one from 
always having to drone out the same stock argu- 
ments on the same subjects without ever departing 
from one’s notes. For a man who knows under what 
general heading each argument comes, and how to 
lay his hand on it, will always be able to unearth 
any particular argument however far out of sight it 
lies, and will never lose his self-possession in debate. 
The fact is that although some men of genius attain 


to eloquence without a system, nevertheless science 
Fe | 


11 


12 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


tamen est dux certior quam natura. Aliud est enim 
poetarum more verba fundere, aliud ea quae dicas 
ratione et arte distinguere. 

V. “Similia dici possunt de explicatione naturae, 
qua et hi’ utuntur et vestri, neque vero ob duas 
modo causas, quomodo Epicuro videtur, ut pellatur 
mortis et religionis metus; sed etiam modestiam 
quandam cognitio rerum caelestium affert iis qui 
videant quanta sit etiam apud deos moderatio, quan- 
tus ordo, et magnitudinem animi deorum opera et 
facta cernentibus, iustitiam etiam, cum cognitum 
habeas quod sit summi rectoris ac domini numen, 
quod consilium, quae voluntas; cuius ad naturam 
apta ratio vera illa et summa lex a philosophis dicitur. 
Inest in eadem explicatione naturae insatiabilis quae- 
dam e cognoscendis rebus voluptas, in qua una, 
confectis rebus necessariis, vacui negotiis honeste ac 
liberaliter possimus vivere. Ergo in hac ratione tota 
de maximis fere rebus Stoici illos secuti sunt, ut et 
deos esse et quattuor ex rebus omnia constare dice- 
rent. Cum autem quaereretur res admodum difficilis 
num quinta quaedam natura videretur esse ex qua 
ratio et intellegentia oriretur, in quo etiam de animis 
cuius generis essent quaereretur, Zeno id dixit esse 
ignem; nonnulla deinde aliter, sed ea pauca; de 
maxima autem re eodem modo, divina mente atque 


1 gua et hi Mdv.; que hic, gua hic MSS. 


a Aristotle spoke of a fifth sort of matter, ‘ body moving 
in acircle, aetherial, unchanged,’ which was the origin of 
the heavenly bodies ; but he nowhere states that mind is 
composed of this, but on the contrary always regards mind 
as incorporeal, 


312 


BOOK IV. iv-v 


is a safer guide than nature. A poetic out-pouring 
_ of language is one thing, the systematic and scientific 
marshalling of one’s matter is another. 

V. Much the same may be said about Natural tn physics too 
Philosophy, which is pursued both by the Peripatetics ee ad 
and by your school, and that not merely for the two are muchinfe- 


objects, recognized by Epicurus, of banishing super- nes. ras 
stition and the fear of death. Besides these benefits, 
the study of the heavenly phenomena bestows 
a power of self-control that arises from the percep- 
tion of the consummate restraint and order that 
obtain even among the gods; also loftiness of mind 
is inspired by contemplating the creations and 
actions of the gods, and justice by realizing the 
will, design and purpose of the Supreme Lord 
and Ruler to whose nature we are told by philo- 
sophers that the True Reason and Supreme Law 
are conformed. The study of Natural Philosophy 
also affords the inexhaustible pleasure of acquiring 
_ knowledge, the sole pursuit which can afford an hon- 
ourable and elevated occupation for the hours of leisure 
left when business has been finished. Now in the whole 
of this branch of philosophy, on most of the impor- 
- tant points the Stoics followed the Peripatetics, 
maintaining the existence of the gods and the 
creation of the world out of the four elements. 
Then, coming to the very difficult question, whether 
we are to believe in the existence of a fifth substance,* 
as the source of reason and intellect, and bound up 
with this the further question of the nature of the 
soul, Zeno declared this substance to be fire; next,” 
as to some details, but only a few, he diverged from 
his predecessors, but on the main question he agreed 
that the universe as a whole and its chief parts are 
$13 


13 


14 


CICERO. DE FINIBUS 


natura mundum universum atque eius maximas partes 
administrari. Materiam vero rerum et copiam apud 
hos exilem, apud illos uberrimam reperiemus. Quam 
multa ab iis conquisita et collecta sunt de omnium 
animantium genere, ortu, membris, aetatibus ! quam 
multa de rebus iis quae gignuntur e terra! quam 
multae quamque de variis rebus et causae cur quid- 
que fiat et demonstrationes quemadmodum quidque 
fiat ! qua ex omni copia plurima et certissima argu- 
menta sumuntur ad cuiusque rei naturam explican- 
dam. Ergo adhuc, quantum equidem_ intellego, 
causa non videtur fuisse mutandi nominis; non enim, 
si omnia non sequebatur, idcirco non erat ortus 
illinc. Equidem'‘etiam Epicurum, in physicis quidem, 
Democriteum puto. Pauca mutat, vel plura sane; at 
cum de plurimis eadem dicit, tum certe de maxi- 
mis. Quod idem cum vestri faciant, non satis ma- 
gnam tribuunt inventoribus gratiam. 

VI. “Sed haec hactenus. Nunc videamus, quaeso, 
de summo bono, quod continet philosophiam, quid 
tandem attulerit quamobrem ab inventoribus tam- 
quam a parentibus dissentiret. Hoc igitur loco, 
quamquam a te, Cato, diligenter est explicatum finis 
hic bonorum et qui a Stoicis et quemadmodum di- 
ceretur, tamen ego quoque exponam, ut perspicia- 
mus si potuerimus quidnam a Zenone noyi sit allatum. 


ai.e. for Zeno’s school to be called Stoic and not Peri- 
patetic. 


314 


BOOK IV. v-vi 


- governed by a divine mind and substance. In point 
of fullness, however, and fertility of treatment we 
shall find the Stoics meagre, whereas the Peripatetics 
are copious in the extreme. What stores of facts 
they discovered and collected about the classification, 
reproduction, morphology and biology of animals 
of every kind! and again about plants! How 
copious and wide in range their explanations of the 
causes and demonstrations of the mode of different 
natural phenomena! and all these stores supply them 
with numerous and conclusive arguments to ex- 
plain the nature of each particular thing. So far 
then, as far as I at least can understand the case, 
there appears to have been no reason for the change 
of name*; that Zeno was not prepared to follow the 
Peripatetics in every detail did not alter the fact 
that he had sprung from them. For my own part I 
consider Epicurus also, at all events in natural 
philosophy, simply a pupil of Democritus. He makes 
a few modifications, or indeed a good many; but on 
most points, and unquestionably the most important, 
he merely echoes his master. Your leaders do the 
same, yet neglect to acknowledge their full debt to 
the original discoverers. 

VI. “But leaving this let us now, if you please, In Ethics, the 
turn to Ethics. On the subject of the Chief Good, opens pro 
which is the keystone of philosophy, what precise ny ieee ¢ 
contribution did Zeno make to justify his quarrelling nature 
with his parents, the originators of the doctrine? 
Under this head you, Cato, gave a careful exposition 
of the Stoics’ conception of this “End of Goods,’ and 
of the meaning they attached to the term ; still I also 
will restate it, to enable us to perceive, if we can, 
what element of novelty was introduced by Zeno. 

315 


15 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


Cum enim superiores, e quibus planissime Polemo, 
secundum naturam vivere summum bonum esse 
dixissent, his verbis tria significari Stoici dicunt, 
unum eiusmodi, vivere adhibentem scientiam earum 
rerum quae natura evenirent; hunc ipsum Zenonis 
aiunt esse finem, declarantem illud quod a te dictum 
est, convenienter naturae vivere. Alterum signifi- 
cari idem ut si diceretur officia media omnia aut 
pleraque servantem vivere. Hoc sic expositum dis- 
simile est superiori; illud enim rectum est (quod 
xatépOwpa dicebas) contingitque sapienti soli; hoc 
autem inchoati cuiusdam offici est, non perfecti, quod 
cadere in nonnullos insipientes potest. Tertium 
autem, omnibus aut maximis rebus iis quae secun- 
dum naturam sint fruentem vivere. Hoc non est 
positum in nostra actione; completur enim et ex eo 
genere vitae quod virtute fruitur' et ex iis rebus 
quae sunt secundum naturam neque sunt in nostra 
potestate. Sed hoc summum bonum quod tertia 
significatione intellegitur, eaque vita quae ex summo 
bono degitur, quia coniuncta ei virtus est, in sapien- 
tem solum cadit, isque finis bonorum, ut ab ipsis 
Stoicis scriptum videmus, a Xenocrate atque ab 
Aristotele constitutus est. Itaque ab iis constitutio 
illa prima naturae a qua tu quoque ordiebare his 
prope verbis exponitur. 


‘fruitur: inferior MSS, have finitur. 


aCp. III, 59. 
316 


BOOK IV. vi 


_ Preceding thinkers, and among them most explicitly 


Polemo, had explained the Chief Good as being 
to live in accordance with nature.’ This formula 
receives from the Stoics three interpretations. The 
first runs thus, ‘to live in the light of a knowledge of 
the natural sequence of causation.’ This conception 
of the End they declare to be identical with Zeno’s, 
being an explanation of your phrase ‘ to live in agree- 
ment with nature.’ Their second interpretation is that interpreted as 
it means the same as ‘to live in the performance of ey ne ae 
all, or most, of one’s intermediate duties.? The m sede 
Chief Good as thus expounded is not the same as ee dy 
that of the preceding interpretation. That is ‘right 
action’ (katorthoma was your term), and can be 
achieved only by the Wise Man, but this belongs to 
duty merely inchoate, so to speak, and not perfect, 
which may sometimes be attained by the foolish. 
Again, the third interpretation of the formula is ‘ to 
live in the enjoyment of all, or of the greatest, of those 
things which are in accordance with nature.’ This 
does not depend solely on our own conduct, for it 
involves two factors, first a mode of life enjoying 
virtue, secondly a supply of the things which are in 
accordance with nature but which are not within 
our control. But the Chief Good as understood in 
the third and last interpretation, and life passed on 
the basis of the Chief Good, being inseparably coupled 
with virtue, lie within the reach of the Wise Man 
alone ; and this is the account of the End of Goods, 
as we read in the writings of the Stoics themselves, 
which was given by Xenocrates and Aristotle. They 
therefore describe the primary constitution of nature, 
which was your starting point also, more or less in 


the following terms. 
7 ony . 


16 


ef 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


VIL.“ Omnis natura vult esse conservatrix sui, ut 
et salva sit et in genere conservetur suo. Ad hance 
rem aiunt artes quoque requisitas quae naturam 
adiuvarent, in quibus ea numeretur in primis quae 
est vivendi ars, ut tueatur quod a natura datum sit, 
quod desit acquirat; iidemque diviserunt naturam 
hominis in animum et corpus ; cumque eorum utrum- 
que per se expetendum esse dixissent, virtutes quo- 
que utriusque eorum per se expetendas esse dicebant; 
et? cum animum infinita quadam laude anteponerent 
corpori, virtutes quoque animi bonis corporis ante- 
ponebant. Sed cum sapientiam totius hominis cu- 
stodem et procuratricem esse vellent, quae esset 
naturae comes et adiutrix, hoc sapientiae munus esse 
dicebant ut cum? eum tueretur qui constaret ex 
animo et corpore, in utroque iuvaret eum ac conti- 
neret. Atque ita re simpliciter primo collocata, 
reliqua subtilius persequentes corporis bona facilem 
quandam rationem habere censebant, de animi bonis 
accuratius exquirebant, in primisque reperiebant esse 
in iis iustitiae semina, primique ex omnibus philo- 
sophis natura tributum esse docuerunt ut ii qui pro- 
creati essent a procreatoribus amarentur, et, id quod 
temporum ordine antiquius est, ut coniugia virorum 
et uxorum natura coniuncta esse dicerent, qua ex 
stirpe orirentur amicitiae cognationum. Atque ab 
his initiis profecti omnium virtutum et originem et 


e¢ Lambinus ; Mdv. om. with MSS. 
2 cum inserted by Mdv. 


318 : 


BOOK IV. vii 


62> NVI. “ Every natural organism aims at being its Forstarting 
_ own preserver, so as to secure its safety and also its Se Abarat 
preservation true’ to its specific type. With this Per bape 
object, they declare, man called in the aid of the count of body as 
arts also to assist nature ; and chief among the arts Ree ees 
is counted the art of living, which aims at guarding ee Jabal 
the gifts that nature has bestowed and at obtaining tant, ree 
those that are lacking. They further divided the 
nature of man into soul and body. Each of these 
parts they pronounced to be desirable for its own 
sake, and consequently they said that the virtues 
also of each were desirable for their own sakes; at 
the same time they extolled the soul as infinitely 
surpassing the body in glory, and accordingly placed 
the virtues also of the mind above the goods of the 
i body. But they held that wisdom is the guardian 
and protectress of the whole man, as being the com- 
rade and helper of nature, and so they said that the 
function of wisdom, as protecting a being that con- 
sisted of a mind and a body, was to assist and pre- 
serve him in respect of both. After thus laying the 
first broad foundations of the theory, they went on 
to work it out in greater detail. The goods of the 
body, they held, required no particular explanation, and also the 
but the goods of the soul they investigated with find, viz, the 
more elaboration, finding in the first place that in Vittues. 
them lay the germs of Justice; and they were the 
first of any philosophers to teach that the love of 
parents for their offspring is a provision of nature ; 
and that nature, so they pointed out, has ordained 
the union of men and women in marriage, which is 
prior in order of time, and is the root of all the 
family affections. Starting from these first prin- 
ciples they traced out the origin and growth of all 
319 


18 


19 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


progressionem persecuti sunt. Ex quo magnitudo 
quoque animi exsistebat qua facile posset répugnari 
obsistique fortunae, quod maximae res essent in 
potestate sapientis; varietates autem iniuriasque for- 
tunae facile veterum philosophorum praeceptis in- 
stituta vita superabat. Principiis autem a natura 
datis amplitudines quaedam bonorum excitabantur, 
partim profectae a contemplatione rerum occultarum, 
quod erat insitus menti cognitionis amor, e quo etiam 
rationis explicandae disserendique cupiditas conse- 
quebatur; quodque hoc solum animal natum est 
pudoris ac verecundiae particeps appetensque con- 
victum hominum ac societatem animadvertensque in 
omnibus rebus quas ageret aut diceret ut ne quid ab 
eo fieret nisi honeste ac decore, his initiis et? ut 
ante dixi seminibus a natura datis, temperantia, 
modestia, iustitia et omnis honestas perfecte absoluta 
est. 

VIII. “ Habes,’”’ inquam, “Cato, formam eorum 
de quibus loquor philosophorum. Qua _ exposita 
scire cupio quae causa sit cur Zeno ab hac antiqua 
constitutione desciverit, quidnam horum ab eo non 
sit probatum: quodne omnem naturam conservatri- 
cem sui dixerint, an quod omne animal ipsum sibi 
commendatum ut se salvum? in suo genere inco- 
lumeque vellet, an quod,® cum omnium artium finis 
is esset quem natura maxime quaereret, idem statui 
debere de totius arte vitae, an quod, cum ex animo 


let inserted by Mdv. 
2 se salvuum Lambinus, Mdv.; se e¢ salvum MSS. 
3 guod inserted by Mdvy. 

320 


BOOK IV. vii-viii 


the virtues. From the same source was developed 
loftiness of mind, which could render us proof against 
the assaults of fortune, because the things that ® 
matter were under the control of the Wise Man; 
whereas to the vicissitudes and blows of fortune a 
life directed by the precepts of the old philosophers 
could easily rise superior. Again, upon the founda- 
tions given by nature was erected a spacious struc- 
ture of excellences, partly based on the contemplation 
of the secrets of nature, since the mind possessed an 
innate love of knowledge, whence also resulted the 
passion for argument and for discussion; and also, 
since man is the only animal endowed with a sense 
of modesty and shame, with a desire for intercourse 
and society with his fellows, and with a scrupulous 
care in all his words and actions to avoid any con- 
duct that is not honourable and seemly, from these 
beginnings or germs, as I called them before, of 
nature’s bestowal, were developed Temperance, Self- 
control, Justice and moral virtue generally in full 
flower and perfection. 

VIII. “There, Cato,” I said, “is an outline of the Theretore Zeno 
philosophers of whom I am speaking. Having put abiaan wile 
it before you, I should be glad to learn what reason ™inleey, 
Zeno had for seceding from this old-established 
system. Which precisely of these doctrines did he 
think unsatisfactory: the doctrine that every organism 
instinctively seeks its own preservation? or that every 
animal has an affection for itself, prompting it to 
desire its own continuance safe and unimpaired in 
its specific type? or that, since the End of every art 
is some special natural requirement, the same must 
be affirmed as regards the art of life as a whole? or 
that, as we consist of soul and body, these and also 

Y 321 


20 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


constaremus @t corpore, et haec ipsa et eorum vir- 
tutes per se esse sumendas. An vero displicuit ea 
quae tributa est animi virtutibus tanta praestantia? 
an quae de prudentia, de cognitione rerum, de con- 
iunctione generis humani, quaeque ab iisdem de 
temperantia, de modestia, de magnitudine animi, de 
omni honestate dicuntur? Fatebuntur Stoici haec 
omnia dicta esse praeclare neque eam causam Zenoni 
desciscendi fuisse. Alia quaedam dicent, credo, 
magna antiquorum esse peccata quae ille veri inve- 
stigandi cupidus nullo modo ferre potuerit. Quid 
enim perversius, quid intolerabilius, quid stultius 
quam bonam valetudinem, quam dolorum omnium 
vacuitatem, quam integritatem oculorum reliquorum- 
que sensuum ponere in- bonis potius quam dicerent 
nihil omnino inter eas res iisque contrarias interesse? 
ea enim omnia quae illi bona dicerent praeposita 
esse, non bona; itemque illa quae in corpore excel- 
lerent stulte antiquos dixisse per se esse expetenda; 
sumenda potius quam expetenda; ea denique omni 
vita quae in virtute una consisteret, illam vitam quae 
etiam ceteris rebus quae essent secundum naturam 
abundaret, magis expetendam non esse sed magis 
sumendam; cumque ipsa virtus efficiat ita beatam 
vitam ut beatior esse non possit, tamen quaedam 
deesse sapientibus tum cum sint beatissimi; itaque 


eos id agere ut a se dolores, morbos, debilitates 
repellant. 
Be 


te: 


20 


BOOK IV. viii 


the virtues of these are desirable for their own 
sakes? Or again, did he take exception to the 
ascription of such pre-eminence to the virtues of the 
soul? or with what they say about prudence and 
knowledge, about the sense of human fellowship, or 
about temperance, self-control, magnanimity, and 
moral virtue in general? No, the Stoics will admit 
that all of these doctrines are admirable, and that 
Zeno’s reason for secession did not lie here. As I 
understand, they will accuse the ancients of certain 
grave errors in other matters, which that ardent 
seeker after truth found himself quite unable to 
tolerate. What, he asked, could have been more 
insufferably foolish and perverse than to take good 
health, freedom from all pain, or soundness of eye- 
sight and of the other senses, and class them as 
goods, instead of saying that there was nothing 
whatever to choose between these things and their 
opposites? According to him, all these things 
which the ancients called good, were not good, but 
‘preferred’; and so also with bodily excellences, it 
was foolish of the ancients to call them, “desirable 
for their own sakes’; they were not ‘desirable’ 
but ‘worth adopting’; and in short, speaking 
generally, a life bountifully supplied with all the 
other things in accordance with nature, in addition 
to virtue, was not ‘more desirable,’ but only ‘more 
worth adopting’ than a life of virtue and virtue 
alone; and although virtue of itself can render 
life as happy as it is possible for it to be, yet 
there are some things that Wise Men lack at the 
very moment of supreme happiness; and accordingly 
they do their best to protect themselves from pain, 
disease and infirmity. 
¥2 323 


21 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


IX. “O magnam vim ingeni causamque iustam cur 
nova exsisteret disciplina! Perge porro: sequuntur 


enim ea quae tu scientissime complexus es, omnium — 


insipientiam, iniustitiam, alia vitia similia esse, om- 
niaque peccata esse. paria, eosque qui natura doctri- 
naque longe ad virtutem processissent, nisi eam 
plane consecuti essent, summe esse miseros, neque 
inter eorum vitam et improbissimorum quidquam 
omnino interesse, ut Plato, tantus ille vir, si sapiens 
non fuerit, nihilo melius quam quivis improbissimus 
nec beatius vixerit. Haec videlicet est correctio 
philosophiae veteris et. emendatio, quae omnino 
aditum nullum habere potest in urbem, in forum, in 
curiam. Quis enim ferre posset ita logquentem eum 
qui se auctorem vitae graviter et sapienter agendae 
profiteretur, nomina rerum commutantem,! cumque 
idem sentiret quod omnes, quibus rebus eandem 
vim tribueret alia nomina imponentem, verba modo 
mutantem, de opinionibus nihil detrahentem? Pa- 
tronusne causae in epilogo pro reo dicens negaret 
esse malum exsilium, publicationem bonorum? haee 
reicienda esse, non fugienda? nec misericordem 
iudicem esse oportere? In contione autem si 
loqueretur, si Hannibal ad portas venisset murumque 
iaculo traiecisset, negaret esse in malis capi, venire, 
interfici, patriam amittere? An senatus, cum trium- 


‘nomina rerum commutantem bracketed by Mdv. and 


earlier Edd. 
324 


BOOK IV. ix 
21 IX. “What acuteness of intellect! What a satis- and thisso 


factory reason for the creation of a new philosophy! ee 
But proceed further; for we now come to _ the Common Sense 
doctrine, of which you gave such a masterly summary, 
that all men’s folly, injustice and other vices are 
alike and all sins are equal ; and that those who by 
nature and training have made considerable pro- 
gress towards virtue, unless they have actually 
attained to it, are utterly miserable, and there is 
nothing whatever to choose between their existence 
and that of the wickedest of mankind, so that the 
great and famous Plato, supposing he was not a 
Wise Man, lived a no better and no happier life 
than any unprincipled scoundrel. And this, if you 
please, is your revised and corrected version of the 
old philosophy, a version that could not possibly be 
produced in civic life, in the law-courts, in the 
senate! For who could tolerate such a way of speak- 
ing in one who claimed to be an authority on wise and 
moral conduct? Who would allow him to alter 
the names of things, and while really holding the 
same opinions as everybody else, to impose different 
names on things to which he attaches the same 
meanings as other people, just altering the terms 
while leaving the ideas themselves untouched? 
22 Could an advocate wind up his defence of a client by 
declaring that exile and confiscation of property are 
not evils? that they are ‘to be rejected,’ but not 
“to be shunned’? that it is not a judge’s duty to 
show mercy? Or supposing him to be addressing a 
meeting of the people; Hannibal is at the gates 
and has flung a javelin over the city walls; could he 
say that captivity, enslavement, death, loss of 
country are no evils? Could the senate, decreeing 
325 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


. € . . > 
phum Africano decerneret, quod eius virtute, aut 


“felicitate’ posset dicere, si neque virtus in ullo 


-nisi in’ sapiente nec felicitas vere dici potest? 


Quae est igitur ista philosophia quae communi more 
in foro loquitur, in libellis suo? praesertim cum 
quod illi suis verbis significant” in eo nihil novetur,” 
eaedem res maneant alio modo. Quid enim interest, 
divitias, opes, valetudinem bona dicas anne prae- 
posita, cum ille qui ista bona dicit nihilo plus iis tri- 
buat quam tu qui eadem illa praeposita nominas? 
Itaque homo in primis ingenuus et gravis, dignus illa 
familiaritate Scipionis et Laeli, Panaetius, cum ad 
Q. Tuberonem de dolore patiendo scriberet, quod 
esse caput debebat si probari posset, nusquam posuit 
non esse malum dolorem, sed quid esset et quale, 
quantumque in eo esset alieni, deinde quae ratio 
esset perferendi; cuius quidem, quoniam Stoicus 
fuit, sententia condemnata mihi videtur esse inanitas 
ista verborum. 

X. “Sed ut propius ad ea, Cato, accedam quae a 
te dicta sunt, pressius agamus eaque quae modo 
dixisti cum iis conferamus quae tuis antepono. Quae 
sunt igitur communia vobis cum antiquis, iis sic 
utamur quasi concessis; quae in controversiam ve- 


‘Zn om. most MSS, 
* significant Kayser ; significent MSS., Mdv. 
3 After novetur MSS, add de tpsts rebus nthil mutetur. 


326 


23 


24 


BOOK IV. ix-x 


a triumph to Africanus, use the formula, “whereas 
by reason of his valour,’ or “good fortune,’ if no 
one but the Wise Man can truly be said to possess 
either valour or good fortune? What sort of a 
philosophy then is this, which speaks the ordinary 
language in public, but in its treatises employs an 
idiom of its own? and that though the doctrines 
which the Stoics express in their own peculiar 
terms contain no actual novelty; the ideas remain 
the same, though clothed in another dress. Why, 
what difference does it make whether you call 
wealth, power, health ‘goods,’ or ‘things pre- 
ferred, when he who calls them goods assigns no 
more value to them than you who style exactly the 
same things ‘preferred’? This is why so eminent 
and high-minded an authority as Panaetius, a worthy 
member of the famous circle of Scipio and Laelius, 
in his epistle to Quintus Tubero on the endurance 
of pain, has nowhere made what ought to have been 
his most effective point, if it could be shown to be 
true, namely that pain is not an evil; instead he 
defines its nature and properties, estimates the de- 
gree of its divergence from nature, and lastly pre- 
scribes the method by which it is to be endured. 
So that by his vote, seeing that he was a Stoic, your 
terminological fatuities seem to me to stand con- 
demned. 

X. “But I want to come to closer quarters, Cato, 
with the actual system as you stated it; so let us 
press the matter home, and compare the doctrines 
you have just enunciated with those which I think 
superior to yours. Let us then take for granted the 
tenets that you hold in common with the ancients, 
but discuss, if you are willing, those about which 

Sat 


Refutation of 
the Stoics’ 
Ethics on the 
basis of their 
common ground 
with the an- 
cients (§§ 24-55). 


hs) 
Or 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
niunt, de iis si placet disseramus.” “Mihi vero,” 
inquit, “placet agi subtilius et ut ipse dixisti pres- 
sius. Quae enim adhuc protulisti, popularia sunt; 
ego autem a te elegantiora desidero.”’ “A mene 
tu?” inquam; “sed tamen enitar, et si minus multa 
mihi occurrent non fugiam ista popularia. Sed 
positum sit primum nosmet ipsos commendatos esse 
nobis primamque ex natura hanc habere appetitionem 
ut conservemus nosmet ipsos. Hoc convenit; sequi- 
tur illud ut animadvertamus qui simus ipsi, ut nos 
quales oportet esse servemus. Sumus igitur homines; 
ex animo constamus et corpore, quae sunt cuiusdam 
modi, nosque oportet, ut prima appetitio naturalis 
postulat, haee diligere constituereque ex his finem 


illum summi boni atque ultimi; quem si prima vera 


sunt ita constitui necesse est, earum rerum quae sint 


secundum naturam quam plurima et quam maxima 
adipisci. Hunce igitur finem illi tenuerunt, quodque 
ego pluribus verbis, illi brevius, secundum naturam 
vivere, hoc iis bonorum videbatur extremum. 

XI. “Age nunc isti doceant, vel tu potius (quis 
enim ista melius?), quonam modo ab iisdem princi- 


piis profecti efficiatis ut honeste vivere (id est enim 
328 


uaatinbet 


BOOK IV. x-xi 


‘there is dispute.” “Oh,” said he, “I am quite 
willing for the debate to go deeper; to be pressed 


home, as you phrase it. The arguments you have 


so far"put forward are of the popular order; but I 


look to you to give me something more out of the 
common.” “ What, do you look to me ?”’ said I. “ But 
all the same I will do my best, and if I am short of 


_ matter, I shall not shrink from the arguments you are 


Vt 


pleased to call popular. But let it be granted to Both start from 
begin with, that we have an affection for ourselves, sale Pere e 
and that the earliest impulse bestowed upon us by cludes body as 
nature is a desire for self-preservation. On this we siete 
are agreed; and the implication is that we must 

study what we ourselves are, in order to keep our- 

selves true to our proper character. We are then 

human beings, consisting of soul and body, and these 

of a certain kind. These we are bound to esteem, as 

our earliest natural instinct demands, and out of 

these we must construct our End, our Chief and 


Ultimate Good. And, if our premises are correct, 


this End must be pronounced to consist in the 


ue 


attainment of the largest number of the most im- 
portant of the things in accordance with nature. This 


_ then was the conception of the End that they up- 


held; the supreme Good they believed to be the thing 
which I have described at some length, but which 
they more briefly expressed by the formula “life ac- 
cording to nature. 

XI. “Now then let us call upon your leaders, or But the Stoics’ 
better upon yourself (for who is more qualified to Sead RPE ee 
speak for your school ?) to explain this: how in the evena disem- 
world do you contrive, starting from the same first pecs domes 


principles, to reach the conclusion that the Chief 
Good is morality of life?—for that is equivalent to 


329 


27 


_— 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


vel e virtute vel naturae congruenter vivere) sum- 
mum bonum sit, et quonam modo aut quo loco 
corpus subito deserueritis omniaque ea quae secun- 
dum naturam cum sint absint a nostra potestate, 
ipsum denique officium. Quaero igitur quomodo hae 
tantae commendationes a natura profectae subito a 
sapientia relictae sint. Quod si non hominis sum- 
mum bonum quaereremus sed cuiusdam animantis, 
is autem esset nihil nisi animus (liceat enim fingere 
aliquid eiusmodi quo verum facilius reperiamus), 
tamen illi animo non esset hic vester finis. Deside- 
raret enim valetudinem, vacuitatem doloris, appeteret 
etiam conservationem sui earumque rerum custodiam, 
finemque sibi constitueret secundum naturam vivere, 
quod est ut dixi habere ea quae secundum naturam 
sint vel omnia vel plurima et maxima. Cuiuscum- 
que enim modi animal constitueris, necesse est, 
etiamsi id sine corpore sit ut fingimus, tamen esse in 
animo quaedam similia eorum quae sunt in corpore. 
ut nullo modo nisi ut exposui constitui possit finis 
bonorum. Chrysippus autem exponens differentias 
animantium ait alias earum corpore excellere, alias 
autem animo, nonnullas valere utraque re; deinde 
disputat quod cuiusque generis animantium statu: 
deceat extremum. Cum autem hominem in eo ge- 


nere posuisset ut ei tribueret animi excellentiam 
330 


BOOK IV. xi 


your ‘life in agreement with virtue’ or ‘life in har- 
“mony with nature.’ By what means or at what 
point did you suddenly discard the body, and all 
those things which are in accordance with nature 
but out of our control, and lastly duty itself? My 
question then is, how comes it that so many things 
that Nature strongly recommends have been sud- 
denly abandoned by Wisdom? Even if we were not 
seeking the Chief Good of man but of some living 
creature that consisted solely of a mind (let us allow 
ourselves to imagine such a creature, in order to 
facilitate our discovery of the truth), even so that 
mind would not accept this End of yours. For such 
a being would ask for health and freedom from pain, 
and would also desire its own preservation, and 
security for the goods just specified ; and it would 
set up as its End to live according to nature, which 
means, as I said, to possess either all or most and the 
most important of the things which are in accord- 
ance with nature. In fact you may construct a 
living creature of any sort you like, but even if it 
be devoid of a body like our imaginary being, never- 
theless its mind will be bound to possess certain 
attributes analogous to those of the body, and con- 
sequently it will be impossible to set up for it an 
End of Goods on any other lines than those which I 
have laid down. Chrysippus, on the other hand, in 
his survey of the different species of living things 
states that in some the body is the principal part, in 
others the mind, while there are some that are equally 
endowed in respect of either ; and then he proceeds to 
discuss what constitutes the ultimate good proper to 
each species. Man he has placed under that species in 
which the mind is principal ; and yet he so defines 
331 


29 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


summum bonum id constituit, non ut excellere ani- 
mus sed ut nihil esse praeter animum videretur. 
XII. Uno autem modo in virtute sola summum 
bonum recte poneretur, si quod esset animal quod 
totum ex mente constaret, id ipsum tamen sic ut ea 
mens nihil haberet in se quod esset secundum natu- 
ram, ut valetudo est. Sed id ne cogitari quidem 
potest quale sit ut non repugnet ipsum sibi. 

“Sin dicunt! obscurari quaedam nec apparere 
quia valde parva sint, nos quoque concedimus; quod 
dicit Epicurus etiam de voluptate, quae minimae 
sint voluptates, eas obscurari saepe et obrui; sed non 
sunt in eo genere tantae commoditates corporis 
tamque productae temporibus tamque multae. Ita- 
que in quibus propter eorum exiguitatem obscuratio 
consequitur, saepe accidit ut nihil interesse nostra 
fateamur sint illa necne sint (ut in sole, quod a te 
dicebatur, lucernam adhibere nihil interest aut 
teruncium adicere Croesi pecuniae); quibus autem 
in rebus tanta obscuratio non fit, fieri tamen potest 
ut id ipsum quod interest non sit magnum (ut ei 
qui iucunde vixerit annos decem si aeque vita 
iucunda menstrua addatur, quia momentum aliquod 
habeat ad iucundum accessio,” bonum sit; si autem 
id non concedatur, non continuo vita beata tollitur). 
Bona autem corporis huic sunt quod posterius posui 
similiora. Habent enim accessionem dignam in qua 
elaboretur: ut mihi in hoe Stoici iocari videantur 


‘dicunt Mdy.; dicit MSS. (in next line E has dicunt 
for dicit. 


2 ad iucundum accessio edd. with inf. MSS., but ?— 
Other MSS. have ad tucundum or iucundam accessionem. 


Soe 


BOOK IV. xi-xii 


man’s End as to make it appear, not that he is prin- 

cipally mind, but that he consists of nothing else. 

XII. But the only case in which it would be correct 

to place the Chief Good in virtue alone is if there 

existed a creature consisting solely of pure intellect, 

with the further proviso that this intellect were 

devoid of any attribute that is in accordance with 

nature, such as health. But it is impossible even 

to imagine a self-consistent picture of what such a 

creature would be like. 

If on the contrary they urge that certain things Bodily andex- 

are so extremely small that they are eclipsed and lost tn! goods are 


z f ‘ F not all eclipsed 
sight of altogether, we too admit this ; Epicurus also by mental goods: 


says the same of pleasure, that the smallest pleasures fey Aaa ; 
are often eclipsed and disappear. But things so im- P° ee 
portant, permanent and numerous as the _ bodily according to 
advantages in question are not in this category. On" 
the one hand therefore, with things so small as to 
be eclipsed from view, we are often bound to admit 
that it makes no difference to us whether we have 
them or not (just as, to take your illustration, it makes 
no difference if you light a lamp in the sunshine, 
or add sixpence to the wealth of Croesus); while on 
the other hand, with things which are not so com- 
pletely eclipsed, it may nevertheless be the case that 
the precise difference they make is not very great 
(thus, if a man who has lived ten years enjoyably 
were given an additional month of equally enjoy- 
able life, the addition to his enjoyment, being of 
some value, would be a good thing, but yet the re- 
fusal of the addition does not forthwith annihilate 
his happiness). Now bodily goods resemble rather 
the latter sort of things. For they contribute some- 
thing worth taking trouble to obtain; so that I feel 
333 


31 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


interdum cum ita dicant, si ad illam vitam quae cum 
virtute degatur ampulla aut strigilis accedat, sum- 
pturum sapientem eam vitam potius quo haec adiecta 
sint nec beatiorem tamen ob eam causam fore. Hoe 
simile tandem est? non risu potius quam oratione 
eiciendum? Ampulla enim sit necne sit, quis non 
iure optimo irrideatur si laboret? At vero pravi- 
tate! membrorum et cruciatu dolorum si quis quem 
levet, magnam ineat gratiam; nec si ille” sapiens ad 
tortoris eculeum a tyranno ire cogatur similem ha- 
beat vultum et si ampullam perdidisset, sed ut 
magnum et difficile certamen iniens, cum sibi cum 
capitali adversario, dolore, depugnandum videret, 
excitaret omnes rationes fortitudinis ac patientiae 
quarum praesidio iniret difficile illud ut dixi ma- 
gnumque proelium. Deinde non quaerimus quid 
obscuretur aut intereat quia sit admodum parvum, 
sed quid tale sit ut expleat summam. Una voluptas 
e multis obscuratur in illa vita voluptaria ; sed tamen 
ea, quamvis parva sit, pars est eius vitae quae posita 
est in voluptate. Nummus in Croesi divitiis obscu- 
ratur, pars est tamen divitiarum. Quare obscurentur 
etiam haec quae secundum naturam esse dicimus in 
vita beata, sint modo partes vitae beatae. 

XIII. “Atqui si, ut convenire debet inter nos, 
est quaedam appetitio naturalis ea quae secundum 
naturam sunt appetens, eorum omnium est aliqua 


1 pravilate Bentley, Mdv.; gravilate MSS. 
2 alle om. E, Mdv. brackets, Miiller cps. § 20. 


334 


~*~ BOOK IV. xii-xiii 


_ the Stoics must sometimes be joking on this point, 
' when they say that if to the life of virtue be added 
an oil-flask or a flesh-brush, the Wise Man will 
choose the life so augmented, by preference, but yet 
will not on that account be any happier. Pray does 
this illustration really hold good? is it not rather to 
be dismissed with a laugh than seriously refuted ? 
Who does not richly deserve to be laughed at if he 
troubles about having or not having an oil-flask ? But 
rid a man of bodily deformity or agonies of pain, 
and you earn his deepest gratitude ; and if the Wise 
Man is ordered by a tyrant to go to the rack, he would 
not wear the same look as if he had lost his oil-flask. 
He would feel that he had a severe and searching 
ordeal before him; and seeing that he was about to 
encounter the supreme antagonist, pain, he would 
summon up all his principles of courage and endur- 
ance to fortify him against that severe and searching 
struggle aforesaid.—Again, the question is not 
whether such and such a good is so trifling as to be 
eclipsed or lost altogether, but whether it is of such 
a sort as to contribute to the sum total. In the life 
of pleasure of which we spoke, one pleasure is lost to 
sight among the many; but all the same, small as it is, 
it is a part of the life that is based upon pleasure. A 
halfpenny is lost to sight amidst the riches of Croesus ; 
still it forms part of those riches. Hence the circum- 
stances according to nature, as we call them, may be 
unnoticed in a life of happiness, only you must allow 
that they are parts of that happiness. 

XIII. “ Yet if, as you and we are bound to agree, ana must be 
there does exist a certain natural instinct to desire ie ia oo oft 
the things in accordance with nature, the right proce- 
dure is to add together all these things in one definite 

335 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


summa facienda. Quo constituto tum licebit otiose 
ista quaerere, de magnitudine rerum, de excellentia 
quanta in quoque sit ad beate vivendum, de istis 
ipsis obscurationibus quae propter exiguitatem vix 
aut ne vix quidem appareant. Quid de quo nulla 
dissensio est? Nemo enim est qui aliter dixerit quin 
omnium naturarum simile esset id ad quod omnia 
referrentur, quod est ultimum rerum appetendarum. 
Omnis enim est natura diligens sui. Quae est enim 
quae se umquam deserat aut partem aliquam sui aut 
eius partis habitum aut vim aut ullius earum rerum 
quae secundum naturam sunt aut motum aut statum ? 
Quae autem natura suae primae institutionis oblita 
est? Nulla profecto est? quin suam vim retineat a 
primo ad extremum. Quomodo igitur evenit ut 
hominis natura sola esset quae hominem relinqueret, 
quae oblivisceretur corporis, quae summum bonum 
non in toto homine sed in parte hominis poneret? 
Quomodo autem, quod ipsi etiam fatentur constatque 
inter omnes, conservabitur ut simile sit omnium 
naturarum illud ultimum de quo quaeritur? Tum 
enim esset simile si in ceteris quoque naturis id 
cuique esset ultimum quod in quaque excelleret. 
Tale enim visum est ultimum Stoicorum. Quid 
dubitas igitur mutare principia naturae? Quod? 
enim dicis, omne animal, simul atque sit ortum, 
applicatum esse ad se diligendum esseque in se 
conservando occupatum, quin potius ita dicis, omne 


lest supplied by Mdv. 
* Quod conj. Miller; MSS. and edd. Quid—occupatum ? 


336 


BOOK IV. xiii 


total. This point established, it will then be open 

to us to investigate at our leisure your questions 

about the importance of the separate items, and the 

value of their respective contributions to happiness, 

and about that eclipse, as you call it, of the things 

so small as to be almost or quite imperceptible. 

Then what of a point on which no disagreement Acreature’s 
exists? I mean this: no one will dispute that the pees es 
supreme and final End, the thing ultimately de- the whole of it; 
sirable, is analogous fae all natural species alike. 

For love of self is inherent in every species; since 

what species exists that ever deserts itself or any 

part of itself, or any habit or faculty of any such part, 

or any of the things in accordance with nature, either 

in motion or at rest? What species ever forgot its 

own original constitution? Assuredly there is not 

one that does not retain its own proper faculty from 

start to finish. How then came it about that, of all 

the existing species, mankind alone should abandon 

man’s nature, forget the body, and find its Chief 

Good not in the whole man but in a part of man? 

How moreover is the axiom to be retained, admitted 

as it is even by the Stoics and accepted universally, 

that the End which is the subject of our inquiry is 
analogous for all species? For the analogy to hold, 

every other species also would have to find its Hind 

in that part of the organism which in that particular 

species is the highest part; since that, as we have 

seen, is how the Stoics conceive the End of man. 

Why then do you hesitate to alter your conception 6, eice the Stoics 
of the primary instincts to correspond? Instead of should say that 


the primary im- 


_ saying that every animal from the moment of its pulse is to 
cherish the best 


birth is devoted to love of itself and engrossed in part of oneself 
preserving itself, why do you not rather say that only. 


Z 337 


35 


36 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


animal applicatum esse ad id quod in eo sit optimum 
et in eius unius occupatum esse custodia, reliquasque 
naturas nihil aliud agere nisi ut id conservent quod 
in quaque optimum sit? Quomodo autem optimum, si 
bonum praeterea nullum est? Sin autem reliqua appe- 
tenda sunt, cur, quod est ultimum rerum appetenda- 
rum, id non aut ex omnium earum aut ex plurimarum 
et maximarum appetitione concluditur? Ut Phidias 
potest a primo instituere signum idque perficere, 
potest ab alio inchoatum accipere et absolvere, huic 
similis est sapientia ; non enim ipsa genuit hominem 
sed accepit a natura inchoatum ; hance ergo intuens 
debet institutum illud quasi signum absolvere. Qua- 
lem igitur hominem natura inchoavit? et quod est 
munus, quod opus sapientiae? quid est quod ab ea 
absolvi et perfici debeat? Si nihil [in eo quod 
perficiendum est]! praeter motum ingeni quendam, 
id est, rationem, necesse est huic ultimum esse ex 
virtute agere ; rationis enim perfectio est virtus; si 
nihil nisi corpus, summa erunt illa, valetudo, vacuitas 
doloris, pulchritudo, cetera. XIV. Nune de hominis 
summo bono quaeritur; quid igitur dubitamus in 
tota eius natura quaerere quid sit effectum? Cur 
enim constet inter omnes omne officium munusqu¢ 
sapientiae in hominis cultu esse occupatum, alii (née 
me existimes contra Stoicos solum dicere) eas sen 


lin eo quod perficiendum est bracketed by ed., cp. § 27 f. 
Mdv. in quo (i.e. in aliquo animal) perfictendum est. 


338 


BOOK IV. xiii-xiv 


every animal is devoted to the best part of itself 
and engrossed in protecting that alone, and that 
every other species is solely engaged in preserving 
the part that is respectively best in each? But in 
what sense is one part the best, if nothing beside it 
is good at all? While if on the contrary other 
_ things also are desirable, why does not the supremely 
desirable thing consist in the attainment of all, or of 
the greatest possible number and the most important, 
of these things? A Pheidias can start to make a statue 
from the beginning and carry it to completion, or he 
can take one rough-hewn by some one else and 
finish that. The latter case typifies the work of But Wisdom’s 
Wisdom. She did not create man herself, but took {8% 10 perfect 
him over in the rough from Nature ; her business is neglecting no 
_ to finish the statue that Nature began, keeping her Cana 
35 eyes on Nature meanwhile. What sort of thing 
_ then is man as rough-hewn by Nature? and what is 
the function and the task of Wisdom? what is it 
that needs to be consummated by her finishing 
touch? If it is a creature consisting solely of a 
certain operation of the intellect, that is, reason, its 
highest good must be activity in accordance with 
virtue, since virtue is reason’s consummation. If it 
is nothing but a body, the chief things will be health, 
36 freedom from pain, beauty and the rest. XIV. But 
as a matter of fact the creature whose Chief Good 
we are seeking is man. Surely then our course is 
to inquire what Nature’s handiwork has been in 
man—the whole man. All are agreed that the duty 
and function of Wisdom is entirely centred in the 
work of perfecting man; but then some thinkers 
(for you must not imagine that I am tilting at the 
Stoics only) produce theories which place the Chief 
Z2 339 


, 


37 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


tentias afferunt ut summum bonum in eo genere 
ponant quod sit extra nostram potestatem, tamquam 
de inanimo aliquo’ loquantur, alii contra, quasi 
corpus nullum sit hominis, ita praeter animum nihil 
curant, cum praesertim ipse quoque animus non 
inane nescio quid sit (neque enim id possum intel- 
legere) sed in quodam genere corporis, ut ne is 
quidem virtute una contentus sit sed appetat vacui- 
tatem doloris. Quamobrem utrique idem faciunt ut 
si laevam partem neglegerent, dexteram tuerentur, 
aut ipsius animi, ut fecit Erillus, cognitionem ample- 
xarentur, actionem relinquerent. Eorum enim om- 
nium, multa praetermittentium dum eligant aliquid 
quod sequantur, quasi curta sententia; at vero illa 
perfecta atque plena eorum qui, cum de hominis 
summo bono quaererent, nullam in eo neque animi 
neque corporis partem vacuam tutela reliquerunt. 
Vos autem, Cato, quia virtus, ut omnes -fatemur, 
altissimum locum in homine et maxime excellentem 
tenet et quod eos qui sapientes sunt absolutos et 
perfectos putamus, aciem animorum nostrorum 
virtutis splendore praestringitis. In omni enim 
animante est summum aliquid atque optimum, ut in 
equis, in canibus, quibus tamen et dolore vacare 
opus est et valere; sic igitur in homine perfectio 
ista in eo potissimum quod est optimum, id est, in 
virtute laudatur. Itaque mihi non satis videmini 
considerare quod iter sit naturae quaeque progressio. 
Non enim, quod facit in frugibus, ut, cum ad spicam 
perduxerit ab herba, relinquat et pro nihilo habeat 
herbam, idem facit in homine cum eum ad rationis 


de inanimo aliquo Mdv.; in annali quo E ; in animali quo 
B; de inanimali quo inf, MSS. 


340 


37 


BOOK IV. xiv 


Good in the class of things entirely outside our con- 
trol, as though they were discussing some creature 
devoid of a mind; while others on the contrary 
ignore everything but mind, just as if man had no 
body ; and that though even the mind is not an 
empty, impalpable something (a conception to 
me unintelligible), but in some sort corporeal, and 
therefore even the mind is not satisfied with virtue 
alone, but desires freedom from pain. In fact, with 
each school alike it is just as if they should ignore 
the left side of their bodies and protect the right, 
or, in the mind, like Erillus, recognize cognition but 
leave the practical faculty out of account. They pick 
and choose, pass over a great deal and fasten onasingle 
aspect ; so that all their systems are one-sided. The 
full and perfect philosophy was that which, investi- 
gating the Chief Good of man, left no part either of 
his mind or body uncared-for. Whereas your friends, @lbeit his highest 


perfection is 


Cato, on the strength of the fact, which we all manifested in 


admit, that virtue is man’s highest and supreme 


his noblest part. 


excellence and that the Wise Man is the perfect 
and consummate type of humanity, try to dazzle our 
mental vision with virtue’s radiance. Every animal, 
for instance the horse, or the dog, has some supreme 
good quality, yet at the same time they require to 
have health and freedom from pain ; similarly there- 
fore in man that consummation you speak of attains 
its chief glory in what is his chief excellence, namely 


virtue. 


This being so, I feel you do not take suffi- But when Nature 
adds the higher 


cient pains to study Nature’s method of procedure. faculties she does 


e not take away 


With the growing corn, no doubt, her way is to guide }' 
: ower, 
its development from blade to ear, and then discard 
the blade as of no value; but she does not do the 
same with man, when she has developed in him the 


341 


38 


39 


40 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


habitum perduxit.1 Semper enim ita assumit aliquid 
ut ea quae prima dederit non deserat. Itaque 
sensibus rationem adiunxit et ratione effecta sensus 
non reliquit. Ut si cultura vitium, cuius hoc munus 
est ut efficiat ut vitis cum omnibus partibus suis 
quam optime se habeat,—sed sic intellegamus (licet 
enim, ut vos quoque soletis, fingere aliquid docendi 
causa): si igitur illa cultura vitium in vite insit ipsa, 
cetera, credo, velit quae ad colendam vitem attine- 
bunt sicut antea, se autem omnibus vitis partibus 
praeferat statuatque nihil esse melius in vite quam 
se ; similiter sensus, cum accessit ad naturam, tuetur 
illam quidem sed etiam se tuetur; cum autem 
assumpta est ratio, tanto in dominatu locatur ut 
omnia illa prima naturae huius tutelae subiciantur. 
Itaque non discedit ab eorum curatione quibus 
praeposita vitam omnem debet gubernare ; ut mirari 


? inconstantiam non possim. Naturalem 


satis istorum 
enim appetitionem, quam vocant oppjv, itemque 
oficium, ipsam etiam virtutem volunt esse earum 
rerum quae secundum naturam sunt. Cum autem 
ad summum bonum volunt pervenire, transiliunt 
omnia et duo nobis opera pro uno relinquunt, ut 
alia sumamus, alia expetamus, potius quam uno fine 
utrumque concluderent. 


XV. “At enim [namj?° dicitis virtutem non posse 


1 perduxit Mdv. (cp. V, 41 caepimus), perduxerit MSS. 

2 tstorum Mdv.; eorum MSS. 

%nam of best MSS. Mdv. brackets: other MSS. veram, 
natura, and tam dicetis. 


342 


38 


39 


4.0 


BOOK IV. xiv-xv 


faculty of reason. For she continually superadds 
fresh faculties without abandoning her previous gifts. 
Thus she added to sensation reason, and after 
creating reason did not discard sensation. Suppose 
the art of viticulture, whose function is to bring the 
vine with all its parts into the most thriving con- 
dition—at least let us assume it to be so (for we 
may invent an imaginary case, as you are fond of 
doing, for purposes of illustration); suppose then 
the art of viticulture were a faculty residing in the 
vine itself, this faculty would desire, doubtless, as 
before, every condition requisite for the health of 
the vine, but would rank itself above all the other 
parts of the vine, and would consider itself the 
noblest element in the vine’s organism. Similarly 
when an animal organism has acquired the faculty 
of sensation, this faculty protects the organism, it is 
true, but also protects itself; but when reason has 
been superadded, this is placed in such a position of 
dominance that all the primary gifts of nature are 
placed under its protection. Accordingly Reason 
never abandons its task of safeguarding the earlier 
elements; its business is by controlling these to 
steer the whole course of life; so that I cannot 
sufficiently marvel at the inconsistency of your 
teachers. Natural desire, which they term horme, 
and also duty, and even virtue itself they reckon 
among things according to Nature. Yet when they 
want to arrive at the Supreme Good, they leap over all 
of these, and leave us two operations instead of one; 
some things we are to ‘adopt,’ others to ‘desire’ ; 
instead of including both operations under a single 
End. 

XV. “But you protest that if other things than 

343 


41 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


constitui, si ea quae extra ‘virtutem sint ad beate 
vivendum pertineant. Quod totum contra est; in- 
troduci enim virtus nullo modo potest, nisi omnia 
quae leget quaeque reiciet unam referentur ad 
summam. Nam si omnino nos* neglegemus, in 
Aristonea vitia incidemus et peccata obliviseemurque 
quae virtuti ipsi principia dederimus; si ea non neg- 
legemus neque tamen ad finem summi boni refere- 
mus, non multum ab Erilli levitate aberimus;” 
duarum enim vitarum nobis erunt instituta capienda. 
Facit enim ille duo seiuncta ultima bonorum, quae 
ut essent vera coniungi debuerunt; nunc ita separan- 
tur ut diiuncta sint, quo nihil potest esse perversius. 
Ttaque contra est ac dicitis; mam constitui virtus 
nullo modo potest nisi ea quae sunt prima naturae 
ut ad summam pertinentia tenebit. Quaesita enim 
virtus est non quae relinqueret naturam sed quae 
tueretur; at illa ut vobis placet partem quandam 
tuetur, reliquam deserit. Atque ipsa hominis insti- 
tutio si loqueretur hoc diceret, primos suos quasi 
coeptus appetendi fuisse ut se conservaret in ea 
natura in qua ortus esset. Nondum autem explana- 
tum satis erat quid maxime natura vellet. Explanetur 
igitur. Quid ergo? aliud ? intellegetur nisi uti ne quae 
pars naturae neglegatur? In qua si nihil est praeter 


‘nos: edd. conj. ea. Mdv. marks as corrupt, and conj. 
omnino omnia praeter animos neglegemus. Perhaps omnino 
nostra corpora neglegemus. 

*aberimus Cobet (‘admodum  probabiliter’? Mdv.): 
aberrabimus Mdv., MSS. 

* Quid ergo? aliud ed. Quid ergo ailtud Mav. etc. 


4i.e. our own nature. 


344 


BOOK: IV. xv 


virtue go to make up happiness, virtue cannot be virtue is under. 
established. As a matter of fact it is entirely the oe ae aes 
other way about: it is impossible to find a place for cording to Na- 
virtue, unless all the things that she chooses and pres ee hapa 
rejects are reckoned towards one sum-total of good. B°ss; forvittne 
For if we entirely ignore ourselves,” we shall fall into lecting these, anc 
the mistakes and errors of Aristo, forgetting the oe 
things that we assigned as the origins of virtue "4" 
herself; if while not ignoring these things, we yet 
do not reckon them in the End or Chief Good, we 
shall be well on the road towards the extravagances 
of Erillus, since we shall have to adopt two different 
rules of life at once. Erillus sets up two separate 
ultimate Goods, which, supposing his view were 
true, he ought to have united in one; but as it is he 
makes them so separate as to be mutually exclusive 
alternatives, whichissurely the extreme of perversity. 
Hence the truth is just the opposite of what you 
say; virtue is an absolute impossibility, unless it 
holds to the objects of the primary instincts as 
going to make up the sum of good. For we started 
to look for a virtue that should protect, not abandon, 
nature; whereas virtue as you conceive it protects a 
particular part of our nature but leaves the remainder 
in the lurch. Man’s constitution itself, if it could 
speak, would declare that its earliest tentative 
movements of desire were aimed at preserving 
itself in the natural character with which it was 
born into the world. But at that stage the principal 
intention of nature had not yet been fully revealed. 
Well, suppose it revealed. What then? will it be 
construed otherwise than as forbidding that any 
part of man’s nature should be ignored? If man 
consists solely of a reasoning faculty, let it be granted 
B45 


4.2 


43” 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


rationem, sit in una virtute finis bonorum; sin est 
etiam corpus, ista explanatio naturae nempe hoc 
effecerit ut ea quae ante explanationem tenebamus 
relinquamus. Ergo id est convenienter naturae 
vivere, a natura discedere. . Ut quidam philosophi, 
cum a sensibus profecti maiora quaedam et diviniora 
vidissent, sensus reliquerunt, sic isti, cum ex appeti- 
tione rerum virtutis pulchritudinem aspexissent, 
omnia quae praeter virtutem ipsam viderant abiece- 
runt, obliti naturam omnem appetendarum rerum 
ita late patere ut a principiis permanaret ad fines, 
neque intellegunt se rerum illarum pulchrarum 
atque admirabilium fundamenta subducere. 

XVI. “Itaque mihi videntur omnes quidem illi 
errasse qui finem ‘'bonorum esse dixerunt honeste 
vivere, sed alius alio magis; Pyrrho scilicet maxime, 
qui virtute constituta nihil omnino quod appetendum 
sit relinquat; deinde Aristo, qui nihil relinquere 
non est ausus, introduxit autem, quibus commotus 
sapiens appeteret aliquid, ‘quodcumque! in mentem 
incideret’ et ‘quodcumque tamquam occurreret.’ Is 
hoe melior quam Pyrrho quod aliquod® genus appe- 
tendi dedit, deterior quam ceteri quod penitus a 
natura recessit. Stoici autem quod finem bonorum 
in una virtute ponunt, similes sunt illorum; quod 
autem principium offici quaerunt, melius quam 


‘quodcum@gue edd., cf. § 47; guod cuiqgue MSS. 
* quod aliquod B, E; quod vel aliquod inf. MSS.; quod 
[vel] al. Mdv. 


346 


AQ 


43 


BOOK IV. xv-xvi 


that the End of Goods is contained in virtue alone; 
but if he has a body as well, the revelation of our 
nature, on your showing, will actually have resulted 
in our relinquishing the things to which we held 
before that revelation took place. At this rate ‘to 
live in harmony with nature’ means to depart from 
nature. There have been philosophers who, after 
rising from sensation to the recognition of nobler 
and more spiritual faculties, thereupon threw the 
senses on one side. Similarly your friends, starting 
from the instinctive desires, came to behold virtue 
in all her beauty, and forthwith flung aside all they - 
had ever seen besides virtue herself, forgetting that 
the whole instinct of appetition is so wide in its 
range that it spreads from the primary objects of 
desire right up to the ultimate Ends, and not realiz- 
ing that they are undermining the very foundations 
of the graces which they so much admire. 

XVI. “In my view, therefore, while all who have Therefore every 
defined the End of Goods as the life of moral con- ‘hepry that 
duct are in error, some are more wrong than others. sole good is erro: 
The most Wavtalan no doubt is Pyrrho, because his Fee aio a 
conception of virtue leaves nothing as an object of St0ls share with 
desire whatever. Next in error comes Aristo, who Pyrrho, though 
did not venture to go so far as Pyrrho, but who re pean a 
introduced as the Wise Man’s motives of desire Sn pelak of 

‘whatever chanced to enter his mind’ and ‘ what- 
ever struck him.’ Aristo was better than Pyrrho in 
so far as he allowed desire of some sort, but worse 
than the rest because he departed so utterly from 


nature. Now the Stoics in placing the End of 


Goods in virtue alone resemble the philosophers 
already mentioned; but in trying to find a founda- 


tion for virtuous action they are an improvement 
347 


AA: 


45 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


Pyrrho; quod ea non ‘occurrentia’ fingunt, vincunt 
Aristonem; quod autem ea quae ad naturam accom- 
modata et per se assumenda esse dicunt non adiun- 
gunt ad finem bonorum, desciscunt a natura et 
quodam modo sunt non dissimiles Aristonis. Ile 
enim ‘occurrentia’ nescio quae comminiscebatur; 
hi autem ponunt illi quidem prima naturae, sed ea 
seiungunt a finibus et summa bonorum; quae cum 
“praeponunt’ ut sit aliqua rerum selectio, naturam 
videntur sequi; cum autem negant ea quidquam ad 
beatam vitam pertinere, rursus naturam relinquunt. 

“Atque adhuc ea dixi, causa cur Zenoni non 
fuisset,! quamobrem a superiorum auctoritate dis- 
cederet; nunc reliqua videamus, nisi aut ad haec, 
Cato, dicere aliquid vis aut nos iam longiores sumus.”’ 
“Neutrum vero,” inquit ille; ““nam et a te perfici 
istam disputationem volo nec tua mihi oratio longa 
videri potest.” “Optime,’” inquam; “quid enim 
mihi potest esse optatius quam cum Catone, omnium 
virtutum auctore, de virtutibus disputare? Sed pri- 
mum illud vide, gravissimam illam vestram senten- 
tiam, quae familiam ducit, honestum quod sit id esse 
solum bonum honesteque vivere bonorum finem, 
communem fore vobis cum omnibus qui in una virtute 
constituunt finem bonorum; quodque dicitis infor- 
mari non posse virtutem si quidquam nisi quod 


‘ea dixt, causa cur Zenoni non fuisset (cum forcurE)MSS., 
Miller; Mdv. marks as corrupt, and suggests eam dixt 
causam (z.e. eam causam egi, sic disputavi, ut ostende- 
rem), Zenoni non fuisse quamobrem —. Mdv. formerly con- 
jectured ea dixi, causam Zenont non fuisse. 


348 


teumre 


4.4 


15 


BOOK IV. xvi 


upon Pyrrho, and in not finding this in imaginary 

“things that strike the mind’ they do better than 
Aristo ; though in speaking of certain things as 
(ouitable to nature’ and ‘to be adopted for their 
own sakes,’ and then refusing to include them in 
the End of Goods, they desert nature and approxi- 
mate in some degree to Aristo. For Aristo invented 
his vague ‘things that strike the mind’; while the 
Stoics, though recognizing, it is true, the primary 
objects of nature, yet allow no connection between 
these and their Ends or sum of Goods. In making 
the primary objects ‘preferred,’ so as to admit a cer- 
tain principle of choice among things, they seem to 
be following nature, but in refusing to allow them to 
have anything to do with happiness, they again 
abandon nature. 

“So far what I have said was to show why Zeno 
had no grounds for seceding from the earlier autho- 
rities. Now let us turn our attention to the rest of 
my points, unless, Cato, you desire to say anything 
in reply to this, or unless we have gone on too long 
already.” “Neither is the case,” he answered, 
“since I am eager for you to faviah your argu- 
ment, and no discourse of yours could seem to me 
long.” “Thank you very much,” I rejoined; “for 
Bias could I desire better than to discuss the sub- 
ject of virtue with that pattern of all the virtues 
Cato? But first I would have you observe that the 
most important of all your doctrines, the head of 
the array, namely that Moral Worth alone is good 
and that the moral life is the End of Goods, will be 
shared with you by all those who make the End of 
Goods consist of virtue alone; and your view that 


it is impossible to frame a conception of Virtue if 
349 


46 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 

honestum sit numeretur, idem dicetur ab illis quos 
modo nominavi. Mihi autem aequius videbatur 
Zenonem cum Polemone disceptantem, a quo quae 
essent principia naturae acceperat, a communibus 
initiis progredientem videre ubi primum insisteret 
et unde causa controversiae nasceretur, non, stantem 
cum iis qui ne dicerent quidem sua summa bona 
esse a natura profecta, uti iisdem argumentis quibus 
illi uterentur iisdemque sententiis. 

XVII. “Minime vero illud probo quod, cum 
docuistis ut vobis videmini solum bonum esse quod 
honestum sit, tum rursum dicitis initia proponi ne- 
cesse esse apta et accommodata naturae quorum ex 
selectione virtus possit existere. Non enim in sele- 
ctione virtus ponenda erat, ut id ipsum guod erat 
bonorum ultimum aliud aliquid acquireret. Nam 
omnia quae sumenda quaeque legenda aut optanda 
sunt inesse debent in summa bonorum, ut is qui eam 
adeptus sit nihil praeterea desideret. Videsne ut 
quibus summa est ‘in voluptate perspicuum sit quid 
iis faciendum sit aut non faciendum? ut nemo dubi- 
tet eorum omnia officia quo spectare, quid sequi, 
quid fugere debeant? Sit hoc ultimum bonorum 
quod nunc a me defenditur; apparet statim quae 


sint officia, quae actiones. Vobis autem, quibus nihil 
350: 


46 


BOOK IV. xvi-xvii 


anything beside Moral Worth be counted in it, will 
also be maintained by the philosophers whom I just 
now mentioned. ‘To my mind it would have been 
fairer for Zeno in his dispute with Polemo, whose 
teaching as to the primary impulses of nature he 
had adopted, to have started from the fundamental 


‘tenets which they held in common, and to have 


marked the point where he first called a halt and 
where occasion for divergence arose; not to take his 
stand with thinkers who did not even profess to hold 
that the Chief Good, as they severally conceived 
it, was based on natural instinct, and employ the 
same arguments and the same doctrines as they did. 

XVII. “Another point to which I take great 
exception is that, when you have proved, as you 
think, that Moral Worth alone is good, you then 
turn round and say that of course there must be 
advantages adapted to our nature set before us as a 
starting point, in exercising choice among which 
advantages virtue may be able to come into exis- 
tence. Now it was a mistake to make virtue consist 
in an act of choice, for this implies that the very 
thing that is the ultimate Good itself seeks to get 
something else. Surely the sum of Goods must 
include everything worth adopting, choosing or 
desiring, so that he who has attained it may not 
want anything more. In the case of those whose 
Chief Good consists in pleasure, notice how clear it is 
what things they are to do or not to do; no one can 
be in doubt as to the proper scope of all their duties, 
what these must aim at and what avoid. Or grant 
the ultimate Good that I am now upholding, and it 
becomes clear at once what one’s duties are and 
what actions are prescribed. But you, who have no 

gol 


Inconsistency of 
making the 
Chief Good 
something dis- 
tinct from the 
natural motives 
of action, 


47 


48 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


est aliud propositum nisi rectum atque honestum, unde 
offici, unde agendi principium nascatur non reperietis. 
Hoc igitur quaerentes’ omnes, et ii qui quodcumque 
in mentem veniat aut quodcumque occurrat se sequi 
dicunt? et vos, ad naturam revertemini.* Quibus 
natura iure responderit non esse verum aliunde finem 
beate vivendi, a se principia rei gerendae peti; esse 
enim unam rationem qua et principia rerum agen- 
darum et ultima bonorum continerentur, atque ut 
Aristonis esset explosa sententia dicentis nihil dif- 
ferre aliud ab alio nec esse res ullas praeter virtutes 
et vitia inter quas quidquam omnino interesset, sic 
errare Zenonem qui nulla in re nisi in virtute aut 
vitio* propensionem ne minimi quidem momenti ad 
summum bonum adipiscendum esse diceret et, cum 
ad beatam vitam nullum momentum cetera habe- 
rent, ad appetitionem tamen® rerum esse in iis 
momenta diceret ; quasi vero haec appetitio non ad 
summi boni adeptionem pertineret! Quid autem 
minus consentaneum est quam quod aiunt cognito 
summo bono reverti se ad naturam ut ex ea petant 
agendi principium, id est offici? Non enim actionis 
aut offici ratio impellit ad ea quae secundum naturam 
sunt appetenda, sed ab iis et appetitio et actio com- 
movetur. 

XVIII. “Nune venio ad illa tua brevia, quae con- 
sectaria esse dicebas, et primum illud, quo nihil 


1 guaerentes Gbrenz, Mdv.; guaeritis MSS. 

2 dicunt ed.; dicent MSS., Mdv. 

3 revertemint Mdv. with inf. MSS.; vexertimini B, E. 

4 aut vitio some edd. bracket. 

° cetera haberent . . . tamen Mdv. with Davis and Bremi; 
Ea res haberet. .. autem MSS. 


352 


BOOK IV. xvii-xviii 


other standard in view but abstract right and 
morality, will not be able to find a source and start- 
ing point for duty and for conduct. In the search 
for this you will all of you have to return to nature,— 
both those who say that they follow whatever comes 
into their mind or whatever occurs to them, and you 
yourselves. Both will be met by Nature’s very just 
reply that it is unfair that the standard of Happiness 
should be sought elsewhere while the springs of con- 
duct are derived from herself; that there is a single 
principle which must cover both the springs of 
action and the ultimate Goods; and that just as 
Aristo’s doctrine has been quite discredited, that 
everything is absolutely indifferent and there is 
nothing whatever to choose between any things 
at all excepting virtues and vices, so Zeno was 
mistaken in saying that nothing else but virtue 
or vice affected even in the smallest degree the 
attainment of the Chief Good, and that although 
other things had no effect whatever upon happi- 
ness, they yet had some influence upon our de- 
sires; just as though desire, if you please, bore no 
relation whatever to the attainment of the Chief 
Good! But what can be more inconsistent than the 
procedure they profess, to ascertain the Chief Good 
first, and then to return to Nature, and demand from 
her the primary motive of conduct or of duty? Con- 
siderations of conduct or duty do not supply the 
impulse to desire the things that are in accordance 
with nature ; it is these things which excite desire 
and give motives for conduct. 
XVIII. “I now come to those concise proofs of The Stoic syllo- 
yours which you said were so conclusive. I will {oy0u0° ® 
false premises, or 


are based on 
start with one as concise as anything could be : fals Heaneanbed 
AA 353 invalid; 


49 


50 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


potest brevius: ‘Bonum omne laudabile; laudabile 


autem omne honestum; bonum igitur omne hone- 


stum.’ O plumbeum pugionem! Quis enim tibi 
primum illud concesserit? (quo quidem concesso, 
nihil opus est secundo ; si enim omne bonum lauda- 
bile est, omne honestum est); quis igitur tibi istud 
dabit praeter Pyrrhonem, Aristonem eorumve simi- 
les? quos tu non probas. Aristoteles, Xenocrates, 
tota illa familia non dabit, quippe qui valetudinem, 
vires, divitias, gloriam, multa alia bona esse dicant, 
laudabilia non dicant. Et hi quidem ita non sola 
virtute finem bonorum contineri putant, ut rebus 
tamen omnibus virtutem anteponant; quid censes 
eos esse facturos, qui omnino virtutem a bonorum 
fine segregaverunt, Epicurum, Hieronymum, illos 
etiam, si qui Carneadeum finem tueri volunt? Jam 
aut Callipho aut Diodorus quomodo poterunt tibi 
istud concedere, qui ad honestatem aliud adiungunt, 
quod ex eodem genere non sit? Placet igitur tibi, 
Cato, cum res sumpseris non concessas, ex illis effi- 
cere, quod velis? Iam ille sorites est.) quo nihil 
putatis esse vitiosius, “quod bonum sit, id esse opta- 
bile; quod optabile, id expetendum; quod expe- 
tendum, id laudabile’; dein reliqui gradus, sed ego 
in hoc resisto; eodem enim modo tibi nemo dabit, 
quod expetendum sit, id esse laudabile. Illud vero 
minime consectarium, sed in primis hebes, illorum 


lest inserted by Baites, Mdv. 


a Cp. note on II, 48. 
354 


49 


50 


BOOK IV. xviii 


‘Everything good is praiseworthy ; but everything 
praiseworthy is honourable (moral*); therefore 
everything good is honourable (moral).’ What a 
dagger of lead! Why, who will grant you your 
major premise? (and if this be granted there is 
no need of the minor; for if everything good is 
praiseworthy, then everything good is honourable). 
Who, I say, will grant you this, except Pyrrho, 
Aristo and their fellows, whose doctrines you reject? 
Aristotle, Xenocrates and the whole of their follow- 
ing will not allow it; because they call health, 
strength, riches, fame and many other things good, 
but do not call them praiseworthy. And these, 
though holding that the End of Goods is not 
limited to virtue alone, yet rate virtue higher than 
all other things; but what do you suppose will be 
the attitude of those who entirely dissociated virtue 
from the End of Goods, Epicurus, Hieronymus, 
and also of any supporters of the End of Carneades? 
Or how will Callipho or Diodorus be able to grant 
your premise, who combine with Moral Worth 
another factor belonging to an entirely different 
category? Are you then content, Cato, to take 
disputed premises for granted, and draw from these 
the conclusion you want? And again, the following 
proof is a sorites, which according to you is a most 
fallacious form of reasoning: what is good is to be 
wished ; what is to be wished is desirable ; what is 
desirable is praiseworthy’; and so on through the 
remaining steps, but I call a halt at this one, for, just 
as before, no one will grant you that what is desira- 
ble is praiseworthy. And once again, here is an argu- 
ment which so far from being conclusive is stupid to a 
degree, though, of course, the Stoic leaders and not 
AA2 355 


on 


52 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


scilicet, non tuum, “gloriatione dignam esse beatam 
vitam, quod non possit sine honestate contingere, ut 
jure quisquam glorietur.’ 1 Dabit hoc Zenoni Polemo; 
etiam magister eius et tota illa gens et reliqui qui 
virtutem omnibus rebus multo anteponentes adiun- 
gunt ei tamen aliquid summo in bono finiendo; si 
enim virtus digna est gloriatione, ut est, tantumque 
praestat reliquis rebus ut dici vix possit, et beatus 
esse poterit virtute una praeditus carens ceteris, nec 
tamen illud tibi concedet, praeter virtutem nihil in 
bonis esse ducendum. Illi autem quibus summum 
bonum sine virtute est, non dabunt fortasse vitam 
beatam habere in quo possit iure gloriari; etsi illi 
quidem etiam voluptates faciunt interdum gloriosas. 

XIX. “Vides igitur te aut ea sumere quae non 
concedantur aut ea quae etiam concessa te nihil 
iuvent. Equidem in omnibus istis conclusionibus 
hoc putarem philosophia nobisque dignum, et maxi- 
me cum summum bonum quaereremus, vitam nostram, 
consilia, voluntates, non verba corrigi. Quis enim 
potest istis quae te ut ais delectant brevibus et 
acutis auditis de sententia decedere? Nam cum 
exspectant et avent audire cur dolor malum non sit, 
dicunt illi asperum esse dolere, molestum, odiosum, 
contra naturam, difficile toleratu, sed quia nulla sit 
in dolore nec fraus nec improbitas nec malitia nec 


1 ut—glorietur Manutius rejects as interpolated. 


“Viz. that only what is moral is a thing to be proud of. 


356 


BOOK IV. xviii-xix 


yourself are responsible for that: ‘ Happiness is a 
thing to be proud of, whereas it cannot be the case 
that anyone should have good reason to be proud 
without Moral Worth.’ The minor premise? Polemo 
will concede to Zeno, and so will his master and the 
whole of their clan, as well as all the other philoso- 
phers that while ranking virtue far above all else yet 
couple some other thing with it in defining the Chief 
Good ; since if virtue is a thing to be proud of, as it 
is, and if it is almost inexpressibly superior to every- 
thing else, Polemo will be able to be happy if 
endowed solely with virtue, and destitute of all 
besides, and yet he will not grant you that nothing 
except virtue is to be reckoned as a good. Those on 
the other hand whose Supreme Good dispenses with 
virtue, will perhaps decline to grant that happiness 
contains any just ground for pride; although they, 
it is true, sometimes make out even pleasures to 
be things to be proud of. 

XIX. “So you see that you are either making and such play- 
assumptions which cannot be granted or ones which po eles 
even if granted do you no good. For my own part, as Hen or to 
regards all these Stoic syllogisms, I should have S 
thought that to be worthy of philosophy and of 
ourselves, particularly when the subject of our ‘. 
inquiry is the Supreme Good, the argument ought 
to amend our lives, purposes and wills, not just 
correct our terminology. Would those concise epi- 
grams which you say give you so much pleasure 
make any man alter his opinions? Here are people all 
agog to learn why pain is no evil; and the Stoics tell 
them that though pain is irksome, annoying, hateful, 
unnatural and hard to bear, it is not an evil, because 
it involves no dishonesty, wickedness or malice, no 

357 


D3 


54 


55 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


culpa nec turpitudo non esse illud malum. Haeec 
qui audierit, ut ridere non curet, discedet tamen 
nihilo firmior ad dolorem ferendum quam venerat. 
Tu autem negas fortem esse quemquam posse qui 
dolorem malum putet. Cur fortior sit si illud quod 
tute concedis asperum et vix ferendum putabit? Ex 
rebus enim timiditas, non ex vocabulis nascitur. Et 
ais, si una littera commota sit, fore tota ut labet disci- 
plina. Utrum igitur tibi litteram videor an totas 
paginas commovere? Ut enim sit apud illos, id 
quod est a te laudatum, ordo rerum conservatus et 
omnia inter se apta et connexa (sie enim aiebas), 
tamen persequi non debemus si a falsis principiis 
profecta congruunt ipsa sibi et a proposito non aber- 
rant. In prima igitur constitutione Zeno tuus a 
natura recessit, cumque summum bonum posuisset 
in ingeni praestantia quam virtutem vocamus, nec 
quidquam aliud esse bonum dixisset nisi quod esset 
honestum, nec virtutem posse constare si in ceteris 
rebus esset quidquam quod aliud alio melius esset 
aut peius, his propositis tenuit prorsus consequentia. 
Recte dicis; negare non possum; sed ita falsa sunt 
ea quae consequuntur, ut illa e quibus haec nata 
sunt vera esse non possint. Docent enim nos, ut 
scis, dialectici, si ea quae rem aliquam sequantur, 
falsa sint, falsam illam ipsam esse quam sequantur. 
Ita fit illa conclusio non solum vera sed ita perspicua 


_ ut dialectici ne rationem quidem reddi putent opor- 


tere: Si illud, hoc; non autem hoc; igitur ne illud 


quidem. Sic consequentibus vestris sublatis prima 
358 


BOOK IV. xix 


moral blame or baseness. He who hears this may 

or may not want to laugh, but he will not go away any 

stronger to endure pain than he came. You how- 

ever say that no one can be brave who thinks pain 

an evil. Why should he be braver for thinking it 

what you yourself admit it to be, irksome and 

almost intolerable? Timidity springs from facts, 

not from words. And you aver that if a single letter 

be altered, the whole system will totter. Well then, 

do you think I alter a letter or whole pages? Even 

allowing that the Stoics deserve the praise you gave 

them for the methodical arrangement and perfect 

logical connection (as you described it) of their 

system, still we are not bound to accept a chain of Moreover, the 
reasoning because it is self-consistent and keeps to Me logical the 


the line laid down, if it starts from false premises. thes hg 
Now your master Zeno deserted nature in framing io be tales bt 
his first principles; he placed the supreme Good in Sy ope falvenes 
that intellectual excellence which we term virtue, sions. 
and declared that nothing but Moral Worth is good, 
and that virtue cannot be established if among the 
rest of things any one thing is better than any 
other; and he adhered to the logical conclusions 
from these premises. Quite true, I can’t deny it. 
But the conclusions are so false that the premises 
from which they sprang cannot be true. For the 
logicians teach us, as you are aware, that if the 
consequences that follow from a proposition be 
false, the proposition from which those consequences 
follow must itself be false. On this is based the 
following syllogism, which is not merely true, but so 
self-evident that the logicians assume it as axiomatic: 
If A is B, C is D; but C is not D; therefore A is 
not B. Thus, if your conclusions are upset, your 
359 


56 


57 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


tolluntur. Quae sequuntur igitur? Omnes qui 
non sint sapientes aeque miseros esse; sapientes 
omnes summe beatos; recte facta omnia aequalia, 
omnia peccata paria ;—quae cum magnifice primo dici 
viderentur, considerata minus probabantur. Sensus 
enim cuiusque et natura rerum atque ipsa veritas 
clamabat quodam modo non posse adduci ut inter 
eas res quas Zeno exaequaret nihil interesset. 

XX. “ Postea tuus ille Poenulus (scis enim Citieos 
clientes tuos e Phoenica profectos), homo igitur 
acutus, causam non obtinens repugnante natura, verba 
versare coepit; et primum rebus iis quas nos bonas 
dicimus concessit ut haberentur aestimabiles’ et ad 
naturam accommodatae, faterique coepit sapienti, 
hoe est, summe beato commodius tamen esse si ea 
quoque habeat quae bona non audet appellare, 
naturae accommodata esse concedit; negatque Plato- 
nem, si sapiens non sit, eadem esse in causa qua 
tyrannum Dionysium: huic mori optimum esse 
propter desperationem sapientiae, illi propter spem 
vivere; peccata autem partim esse tolerabilia, partim 
nullo modo, propterea quod alia peccata plures, alia 
pauciores quasi numeros offici praeterirent; iam 
insipientes alios ita esse ut nullo modo ad sapientiam 
possent pervenire, alios qui possent, si id egissent, 
sapientiam consequi. Hic loquebatur aliter atque 
omnes, sentiebat idem quod ceteri. Nec vero 


laestimabiles Hein, Miller; aptae, habiles MSS.; Mdv. 
br. habdiles. 


«Zeno came from Citium in Cyprus, said to have been 
the seat of a Phoenician colony; and the Phoenicians were 
proverbially crafty. Cato superintended the reduction of 
Cyprus to a Roman province, and Cicero in his Letters 
speaks of the island as under Cato’s protection. 


360 


6 


BOOK IV. xix-xx 


premises are upset also. What then are your con- 

clusions? That those who are not wise are all 

equally wretched; that the wise are all supremely 

happy; that all right actions are equal, all sins 

on a par;—these dicta may have had an imposing 

sound at.a first hearing, but upon examination they 

began to seem less convincing. For common sense, 

the facts of nature, truth herself seemed to cry 

aloud that nothing should persuade them that there 

was actually no difference between the things which 

Zeno made out to be equal. 
mex Subsequently your little Phoenician (Low Zena difers een 

you are aware that your clients of Citium originally bang ves ee 

came from Phoenicia*), with the cunning of his race, than in sub- 

on failing to make good his case in defiance of Herc 50.4 

Nature’s protest, set about juggling with words. seers pi: 

First he allowed the things that we in our school they were vir- 

call goods to be considered ‘valuable’ and “suited a ee 

to nature,’ and he began to admit that though ee OS 

man were wise, that is supremely happy, it would 

yet be an advantage to him if he also possessed the 

things which he is not bold enough to call goods, 

but allows to be ‘suited to nature.’ He main- 

tains that Plato, even if he be not wise, is not in the 

same case as the tyrant Dionysius: Dionysius must ~ 

despair of wisdom, and his best fate would be to die; 

but Plato has hopes of it, and had better live. Again, 

he allows that some sins are endurable, while 

others are unpardonable, because some sins transgress 

more and others fewer points of duty; moreover 

some fools are so foolish as to be utterly incapable of 


attaining wisdom, but others might conceivably by 


great effort attain to wisdom. In all this though his 


language was peculiar, his meaning was the same as 
361 


58 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 

minoris aestimanda ducebat ea quae ipse bona 
negaret esse quam illi qui ea bona esse dicebant. 
Quid igitur voluit sibi qui illa mutaverit? Saltem 
aliquid de pondere detraxisset et paulo minoris 
aestimavisset ea quam Peripatetici, ut sentire quo- 
que aliud, non solum dicere videretur. Quid? de 
ipsa beata vita, ad quam omnia referuntur, quae 
dicitis? Negatis eam esse quae expleta sit iis rebus 
omnibus quas natura desideret, totamque eam in 
una virtute ponitis. Cumque omnis controversia 
aut de re soleat aut de nomine esse, utraque earum 
nascitur si aut res ignoratur aut erratur in nomine. 
Quorum si neutrum est, opera danda est ut verbis 
utamur quam usitatissimis et quam maxime aptis, id 
est rem declarantibus. Num igitur dubium est quin, 
si in re ipsa nihil peccatur a superioribus, verbis illi 
commodius utantur? Videamus igitur sententias 
eorum; tum ad verba redeamus. 

XXI. “Dicunt appetitionem animi moveri cum 
aliquid ei secundum naturam esse videatur; omnia- 
que quae secundum naturam sint aestimatione 
aliqua digna, eaque pro eo quantum in quoque sit 
ponderis esse aestimanda; quaeque secundum natu- 
ram sint, partim nihil habere in sese eius appetitionis 


de qua saepe iam diximus, quae nec honesta nec 
362 


BOOK IV. xx-xxi 


that of everybody else. In fact he set no lower value 
on the things he himself denied to be good than did 
those who said they were good. What then did 
he want by altering their names? He ought at 
least to have diminished their importance and to 
have set a slightly lower value on them than the 
Peripatetics, so as to make the difference appear to 
be one of meaning and not merely of language. 
Again, what do you and your school say about 
happiness itself, the ultimate end and aim of all 
things? You will not have it to be the sum of all 
nature’s requirements, but make it consist of virtue 
alone. Now all disputes usually turn either on 
facts or on names; ignorance of fact or error as to 
terms will cause one or the other form of dispute 
respectively. If neither source of difference is 
present, we must be careful to employ the terms 
most generally accepted and those most suitable, 
that is, those that best describe the fact. Can we 
doubt that, if the older philosophers are not mis- 
taken on the point of fact, their terminology is the 
more convenient one? Let us then consider their 
opinions and return to the question of terminology 


later. 

XXI. “Their statements are that appetition is The ancients 
excited in the mind when something appears to it Pa hengt iy. 
to be in accordance with nature; and that all things rape is 
that are in accordance with nature are worth some fused to call 
yalue, and are to be valued in proportion to the im- ‘"’™8°°%* 
portance that they severally possess; and that of 
those things which are in accordance with nature, 
some excite of themselves none of that appetition 
of which we have often spoken already, and these 
are to be called neither honourable nor praiseworthy, 

363 


60 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


laudabilia dicantur, partim quae voluptatem habeant 
in omni animante, sed in homine rationem etiam; 
ex ea quae sint apta, ea honesta, ea pulchra, ea 
laudabilia, illa autem superiora naturalia nominantur, 
quae coniuncta cum honestis vitam beatam perficiunt 
et absolvunt. Omnium autem eorum commodorum 
quibus non illi plus tribuunt qui illa bona esse dicunt 
quam Zeno qui negat, longe praestantissimum esse 
quod honestum esset atque laudabile: sed si duo 
honesta proposita sint, alterum cum valetudine, 
alterum cum morbo, non esse dubium ad utrum 
eorum natura nos ipsa deductura sit; sed tamen 
tantam vim esse honestatis tantumque eam rebus 
omnibus praestare et excellere ut nullis nec suppliciis 
nec praemiis demoveri_possit ex eo quod rectum 
esse decreverit; omniaque quae dura, difficilia, 
adversa videantur, ea virtutibus iis quibus a natura 
essemus ornati obteri posse; non facile illa quidem, 
nec contemneénda esse? (quid enim esset in virtute 
tantum?), sed ut hoe iudicaremus, non esse in his 
partem maximam positam beate aut secus vivendi. 
Ad summam ea quae Zeno aestimanda et sumenda 
et apta naturae esse dixit, eadem illi bona appellant; 


‘non facile illa quidem (sc. obteri posse) nec contemnenda 
esse conj. Mdvy., who prints with a mark of corruption the 
MSS. non faciles illas quidem nec contemnendas (quid etc.). 


«This confused passage is conjecturally remedied by 
W. M. L. Hutchinson, de Fin. p. 235, who for zz sese sug- 
gests in stirpe (cp. V, 10 stirpium naturas), and for volu- 
ptatem, voluntatem (cp. Tusc. IV, 12). Lastly the clause 
guae nec honesta nec laudabilia dicantur logically should 
come immediately after guaeque secundum naturam sint, 
though Cicero may have carelessly misplaced it. The 


364 


BOOK IV. xxi 


while some are those which are objects of pleasure 


_ in every living creature, but in man are objects of 


9 


the reason also ;* those which are suitable in accord- 
ance with reason are called honourable, beautiful, 
praiseworthy ; but the former class are called natural, 
the class which coupled with things morally worthy 
render happiness perfect and complete. They fur- 
ther hold that of all those advantages, which they 
who call them goods rate no more highly than does 
Zeno who says they are not goods, by far the most 
excellent is Moral Worth and what is_praise- 
worthy; but if one is offered the choice between 
Moral Worth plus health and Moral Worth plus 
disease, there is no doubt to which of the two Nature 
herself will guide us; though at the same time 
Moral Worth is so potent, and so overwhelmingly 
superior to all other things, that no penalties or 
rewards can induce it to swerve from what it has 
decided to be right; and all apparent hardships, 
difficulties and obstacles can be trodden under foot 


_ by the virtues with which nature has adorned us; 


0 


not that these hardships are easily overcome or to 
be made light of (else where were the merit of 
virtue?), but so as to lead us to the verdict that 
these things are not the main factor in our happi- 
ness or the reverse. In fine, the ancients entitle 
the same things ‘good’ that Zeno pronounced 
‘valuable,’ “to be adopted,’ and “suited to nature’; 


sentence will then run: ‘Things in accordance with nature, 
which the Stoics pronounce neither moral nor praiseworthy, 
(1) in plants excite none of the appetition of which we have 
often spoken, but (2) in animals excite volition, and parti- 
cularly (3) in man excite the reason also (i.e, are the objects 
of rational choice).’ 

365 


61 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


vitam autem beatam illi eam quae constaret ex iis 
rebus quas dixi, aut plurimis aut gravissimis, Zeno — 
autem quod suam, quod propriam’ speciem habeat 
cur appetendum sit, id solum bonum appellat, bea- 
tam autem vitam eam solam quae cum virtute 
degatur. 

XXII. “Si de re disceptari oportet, nulla mihi 
tecum, Cato, potest esse dissensio; nihil est enim de 
quo aliter tu sentias atque ego, modo commutatis 
verbis ipsas res conferamus. Nec hoc ille non vidit 
sed verborum magnificentia est et gloria delectatus; 
qui si ea quae dicit ita sentiret ut verba significant, 
quid inter eum et vel Pyrrhonem vel Aristonem 
interesset? Sin autem eos non probabat, quid attinuit 
cum iis quibuscum re concinebat verbis discrepare? 
Quid si reviviscant Platonis illi et deinceps qui eorum 
auditores fuerunt et tecum ita loquantur? ‘Nos cum 
te, M. Cato, studiosissimum philosophiae, iustissimum 
virum, optimum iudicem, religiosissimum testem, 
audiremus, admirati sumus quid esset cur nobis 
Stoicos anteferres, qui de rebus bonis et malis sen- 
tirent ea quae ab hoc Polemone Zeno cognoverat, 
nominibus uterentur iis quae prima specie admirati- 
onem, re explicata risum moverent. Tu autem, si 
tibi illa probabantur, cur non propriis verbis illa 
tenebas? sin te auctoritas commovebat, nobisne 
omnibus et Platoni ipsi nescio quem illum antepone- 
bas? praesertim cum in re publica princeps esse 


' quod propriam br. Baiter; Mdv. conj. guendam propriam. 


366 


BOOK IV. xxi-xxii 


and they call a life happy which comprises either 
the largest number or the most important of the 
things aforesaid: Zeno on the contrary calls nothing 
good but that which has a peculiar charm and 
attractiveness of its own, and no life happy but the 
life of virtue. 

XXII. “If, Cato, the discussion is to turn on Zeno’s novel 
facts, disagreement between me and yourself is out Hedin 2 
of the question: since your views and mine are the Drevemen taney, 
same in every particular, if only we compare the cients? 
actual substance after making the necessary changes 
in terms. Zeno was not unaware of this, but he was 
beguiled by the pomp and circumstance of language; 
had he really thought what he says, in the actual 
sense of the words he uses, what difference would 
there be between him and either Pyrrho or Aristo? 

If on the other hand he rejected Pyrrho and 
Aristo, what was the point of quarrelling about words 
with those with whom he agreed in substance? 
What if the pupils of Plato were to come to life 
again, and their pupils again in succession, and were 
to address you in this fashion? “As we listened, 
Marcus Cato, to so devoted a student of philosophy, so 
just a man, so upright a judge, so scrupulous a witness 
as yourself, we marvelled what reason could induce 
you to reject us for the Stoics, whose views on good 
and evil were the views that Zeno learnt from Polemo 
here, but who expressed those views in terms at first 
sight startling and upon examination ridiculous. If 
“you accepted those views on their merits, why did 
you not hold them under their own terminology ? or 
if you were swayed by authority, could you prefer 
that nobody to all of us, even to Plato himself? 
especially when you aspired to play a leading part in 
367 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


velles ad eamque tuendam cum summa tua dignitate 
maxime a nobis ornari atque instrui posses. A’ nobis 
enim ista quaesita, a nobis descripta, notata, prae- 
cepta sunt, omniumque rerum publicarum rectionis 
genera, status, mutationes, leges etiam et instituta ac 
mores civitatum perscripsimus. Eloquentiae vero, 
quae et principibus maximo ornamento est et qua 
te audimus valere plurimum, quantum tibi ex monu- 
mentis nostris addidisses!’ Ea cum dixissent, quid 
tandem talibus viris responderes?” “ Rogarem te,” 
inquit, “ut diceres pro me tu idem qui illis orationem 
dictavisses, vel potius paulum loci mihi ut iis re- 
sponderem dares, nisi et te audire nune mallem et 
istis tamen alio tempore responsurus essem, tum 
scilicet cum tibi.” 

XXIII. “ Atque si verum respondere velles, Cato, 
haec erant dicenda, non eos tibi non probatos, tantis 
ingeniis homines tantaque auctoritate, sed te anim- 
_ advertisse quas res illi propter antiquitatem parum 
vidissent, eas a Stoicis esse perspectas, eisdemque de 
rebus hos cum acutius disseruisse, tum sensisse gravius 
et fortius, quippe qui primum valetudinem bonam 
expetendam negent esse, eligendam dicant, nec quia 
bonum sit valere sed quia sit nonnihilo aestimandum 
(neque tamen pluris illis videtur, qui illud non dubi- 
tant bonum dicere;) hoc vero te ferre non potuisse, 
quod antiqui illi quasi barbati (ut nos de nostris 

1 A inserted by Lambinus, Mdv. 


a The early Romans wore beards, whereas for several 
generations before Cicero it had been usual to shave. 


368 


BOOK IV. xxii-xxiii 


the state, and we were the very persons to arm and 


§ equip you to protect the state with all the weight of 


your high character. Why, it is we who invented 
political philosophy ; its classifications, its nomencla- 
ture, its practical rules are our creation; on all the 
various forms of government, their stability, their 
revolutions, the laws, institutions and customs of 
states, we have written exhaustively. Oratory again 
is the proudest distinction of the statesman, and in 
it you, we are told, are pre-eminent ; but how vastly 


_ you might have enriched your eloquence from the 


Ts 


records of our genius.’ What answer, pray, could you 
give to these words from such men as those?” “I 
would beg of you,” replied Cato, “to be my spokes- 
man also, as you have been their prompter in this 
harangue; or rather I would ask you to grant me a 
moment’s space in which to answer them, if it were 
not that for the present I prefer to listen to you, 
and also intend to reply to your champions at another 
time, I mean when I reply to yourself.” 

XXIII. “Well, Cato, if you wanted to answer The Stoics’ 
truly, this is what you would have to say: that with pep cn salt 
all respect for the high authority of men so gifted, examined. 
you had observed that the Stoics had discovered 


truths which they in those early days had naturally 


failed to see; the Stoics had discussed the same sub- 
jects with more insight and had arrived at bolder and 
more profound conclusions; first, they said that good 
health is not desirable but is worthy of selection, and 
that not because to be well is a good, but because 
it has some positive value (not that any greater 
value is attached to it by the older school who do 
not hesitate to call it a good) ; well then, you couldn’t 
stand those bearded? old fogies (as we call our own 


BB 369 


63 


64 


65 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


solemus dicere) crediderint, eius qui honeste viveret, 
si idem etiam bene valeret, bene audiret, copiosus 
esset, optabiliorem fore vitam melioremque et magis 
expetendam quam illius qui, aeque vir bonus, multis 
modis esset, ut Enni Alemaeo, 


ee 3 oT: . . : 
circumventus morbo, exsilio atque inopia.’ 


Illi igitur antiqui non tam acute optabiliorem illam 
vitam putant, praestantiorem, beatiorem ; Stoici au- 
tem tantummodo praeponendam in seligendo, non 
quo beatior ea vita sit, sed quod ad naturam accom- 
modatior; et qui sapientes non sint, omnes aeque 
miseros esse. Stoici hoe videlicet viderunt, illos 
autem id fugerat superiores,’ homines sceleribus et 
parricidiis inquinatos nihilo miseriores esse quam eos 
qui, cum caste et integre viverent, nondum perfe- 
ctam illam sapientiam essent consecuti. Atque hoe 
loco similitudines eas quibus illi uti solent dissimilli- 
mas proferebas. Quis enim ignorat, si plures ex 
alto emergere velint, propius fore eos quidem ad 
respirandum, qui ad summam aquam iam appro- 
pinquent sed nihilo magis respirare posse quam eos 
qui sint in profundo? nihil igitur adiuvat procedere 
et progredi in virtute quominus miserrimus sit ante- 
quam ad eam pervenerit, quoniam in aqua nihil 
adiuvat. Et quoniam catuli qui iam dispecturi sunt 
caeci aeque et ii qui modo nati, Platonem quoque 
necesse est, quoniam nondum videbat sapientiam, 
aeque caecum animo ac Phalarim fuisse. 

XXIV. “Ista similia non sunt, Cato, in quibus 


'After superiores MSS. add gui arbitrabantur; edd, 
omit, i 


370 


BOOK IV. xxiii-xxiv 


Roman ancestors) believing that a man who lived 
morally, if he also had health, wealth and reputation, 
had a preferable, better, more desirable life than he 
who, though equally good, was, like Alemaeon in 
Ennius, 
In divers ways beset 
With sickness, banishment and poverty. 


63 Those men of old then, with their duller wits, think 
that the former life is more desirable, more excellent, 
more happy; the Stoics on the other hand consider 
it merely to be preferred for choice, not because it is 
a happier life but because it is more adapted to 
nature. The Stoics we must suppose discerned a 
truth that had escaped their predecessors, namely 
that men defiled by crimes and murders are no 
more miserable than those who though pious and 
upright in their lives have not yet attained ideal and 
64 perfect wisdom. It was at this point that you brought Their analogies 
forward those extremely false analogies which the *° Prove alt fool 
equally miser- 
Stoics are so fond of employing. For who cannot able are 
see that if there are several people plunged in deep ‘"'*" 
water and trying to get out, those already approach- 
ing the surface, though nearer to breathing, will 
be no more able actually to breathe than those at 
the bottom? You infer that improvement and 
progress in virtue are of no avail to save a man from 
being utterly wretched, until he has actually arrived 
at virtue, since to rise in the water is of no avail. 
Again, since puppies on the point of opening their 
eyes are as blind as those only just born, it follows 
that Plato, not having yet attained to the vision of 
wisdom, was just as blind mentally as Phalaris! 
5 XXIV. “ Really, Cato, there is no analogy between 
BB2 371 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


quamvis multum processeris, tamen illud in eadem 
causa est a quo abesse velis, donec evaseris. Nec 
enim ille respirat antequam emersit, et catuli aeque 
caeci priusquam dispexerunt ac si ita futuri semper 
essent. Illa sunt similia: hebes acies est cuipiam 
oculorum, corpore alius languescit’; hi curatione ad- 
hibita levantur in dies; valet alter plus cotidie, alter 
videt; his similes sunt omnes qui virtuti student; 
levantur vitiis, levantur erroribus. Nisi forte censes 
Ti. Gracchum patrem non” beatiorem fuisse quam 
filium, cum alter stabilire rem publicam studuerit, 
alter evertere. Nec tamen ille erat sapiens; quis 
enim hoc? aut quando? aut ubi? aut unde? sed 
quia studebat laudi et dignitati, multum in virtute 
66 processerat. Confer? avum tuum Drusum cum C. 
Graccho, eius fere aequali. Quae hic rei publicae 
vulnera imponebat, eadem ille sanabat. Si nihil est 
quod tam miseros faciat quam impietas et scelus, ut 
iam omnes insipientes sint miseri, quod profecto 
sunt, non est tamen aeque miser qui patriae consulit 
et is qui illam exstinctam cupit. Levatio igitur vi- 
tiorum magna fit in‘ iis qui habent ad virtutem pro- 
67 gressionis aliquantum. Vestri autem progressionem 
ad virtutem fieri aiunt, levationem vitiorum fieri 
negant. At quo utantur homines acuti argumento 
ad probandum operae pretium est considerare. 


\ languescit inf. MSS.; nxescit B E ; senescit Mdv. 

2 non inserted by edd. 

5 Confer|am] Miller; Conferam B E; Conferam autem inf. 
MSS. ; Conferam [autem] . : aequali? Mdv. 

tin E, om. B and other MSS, 


372 


66 


57 


BOOK IV. xxiv 


progress in virtue and cases such as you describe, in 
which however far one advances, the situation one 
wishes to escape from still remains the same until 
one has actually emerged from it. The man does 
not breathe until he has risen to the surface; the 
puppies are as blind before they have opened their 
eyes as if they were going to be blind always. Good 
analogies would be these: one man’s eyesight is dim, 
another’s general health is weak; apply remedies, 
and they get better day by day; every day the one 
is stronger and the other sees better; similarly with 
all who earnestly pursue virtue; they get better, 
their vices and errors are gradually reduced. Surely 
you would not maintain that the elder Tiberius 
Gracchus was not happier than his son, when the one 
devoted himself to the service of the state and the 
other to its destruction. But still the elder Gracchus 
was not a Wise Man; who ever was? or when, or 
where, or how? Still he aspired to fame and honour, 
and therefore had advanced to a high point in virtue. 
Compare your grandfather Drusus with Gaius 
Gracchus, who was nearly his contemporary. The 
former strove to heal the wounds which the latter 
inflicted on the state. If there is nothing that makes 
men so miserable as impiety and crime, granted that 
all who are foolish are miserable, as of course they 
are, nevertheless a man who serves his country is not 
so miserable as one who longs for its ruin. There- 
fore those who achieve definite progress towards 
virtue undergo a great diminution of their vices. 
Your teachers, however, while allowing progress 
towards virtue, deny diminution of vice. But it is 
worth while to examine the argument on which these 
clever people rely for the proof. Their line is this: In 
373 


The obvious 
inequalities of 
wickedness prove 
that there are 
degrees of virtue 


68 


69 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


Quarum, inquit, artium summae crescere possunt, 
earum etiam contrariorum summa poterit augeri; ad 
virtutis autem summam accedere nihil potest; ne 
vitia quidem igitur crescere poterunt, quae sunt vir- 
tutum contraria. Utrum igitur tandem perspicuisne 
dubia aperiunturan dubiis perspicua tolluntur? Atqui 
hoc perspicuum est, vitia alia aliis’ esse maiora; illud 
dubium, ad id quod summum bonum dicitis ecquae- 
nam fieri possit accessio. Vos autem, cum perspicuis 
dubia debeatis illustrare, dubiis perspicua conamini 
tollere. Itaque eadem? ratione qua sum paulo ante 
usus haerebitis. Si enim propterea vitia alia aliis 
maiora non sunt quia ne ad finem quidem bonorum 
eum quem vos facitis quidquam potest accedere, 
quoniam perspicuum est vitia non esse omnium paria, 
finis bonorum vobis mutandus est. Teneamus enim 
illud necesse est, cum consequens aliquod falsum 
sit, illud cuius id consequens sit non posse esse 
verum. 

XXV. “Quae est igitur causa istarum angustiarum? 
Gloriosa ostentatio in constituendo summo bono. 
Cum enim quod honestum sit id solum bonum esse 
confirmatur, tollitur cura valetudinis, diligentia rei 
familiaris, administratio rei publicae, ordo gerendo- 
rum negotiorum, officia vitae; ipsum denique illud 
honestum, in quo uno vultis esse omnia, deserendum 
est; quae diligentissime contra Aristonem dicuntur 
a Chrysippo. Ex ea difficultate illae ‘fallaciloquae,’ 
ut ait Attius, ‘malitiae,’ natae sunt. Quod enim 


lalia aliis Lambinus, Mdv.; alia in aliis MSS. 
* Itaque eadem Mdv.; Ltaque rursus eadem Baiter ; atgue 
usus eadem B E, 


374 


68 


19 


BOOK IV. xxiv-xxv 


the case of arts or sciences which admit of advance- 
ment, the opposite of those arts and sciences will also 
admit of advance; but virtue is absolute and incap- 
able of increase ; therefore the vices also, being the 
opposite of the virtues, are incapable of gradation. 
Pray tell me then, does a certainty explain an un- 
certainty, or does an uncertainty disprove a cer- 
tainty? Now, that some vices are worse than others 
is certain; but whether the Chief Ggod, as you Stoics 
conceive it, can be subject to increase is not certain. 
Yet instead of employing the certain to throw light 
on the uncertain, you endeavour to make the uncer- 
tain disprove the certain. Therefore you can be 
checkmated by the same argument as I employed 
just now. If the proof that one vice cannot be 
worse than another depends on the fact that the End 
of Goods, as you conceive it, is itself incapable of 
increase, then you must alter your End of Goods, 
since it is certain that the vices of all men are not 
equal. For we are bound to hold that if a conclusion 
is false, the premise on which it depends cannot be 
true. 
XXV. “Now what has landed you in this impasse ? The Stoics misle¢ 
Simply your pride and vainglory in constructing thelr invonsist 
your Chief Good. To maintain that the only Good cney in calling 


th esame tbings 
is Moral Worth is to do away with the care of one’s ‘indifferent ’ 


health, the management of one’s estate, participation eka J 
in politics, the conduct of affairs, the duties of life; 
nay, to abandon that Moral Worth itself, which 
according to you is the be-all and the end-all 
of existence; objections that were urged most 
earnestly against Aristo by Chrysippus. This is the 
difficulty that gave birth to those “base conceits 
deceitful-tongued,’ as Attius has it. Wisdom had no 
375 


70 


(al 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


sapientia pedem ubi poneret non habebat sublatis 
officiis omnibus, officia autem tollebantur delectu 
omni et discrimine remoto, quae esse non’ poterant 
rebus omnibus sic exaequatis ut inter eas nihil 
interesset, ex his angustiis ista evaserunt deteriora 


‘quam Aristonis. Illa tamen simplicia; vestra ver- 


suta. Roges enim Aristonem, bonane ei videantur 
haec, vacuitas doloris, divitiae, valetudo; neget. 
Quid? quae contraria sunt his malane? Nihilo 
magis. Zenonem roges; respondeat totidem verbis. 
Admirantes quaeramus ab utroque quonam modo 
vitam agere possimus si nihil interesse nostra pute- 
mus, valeamus aegrine simus, vacemus an cruciemur 
dolore, frigus, famem propulsare possimus necne 
possimus. Vives, inquit Aristo, magnifice atque 
praeclare; quod erit cumque visum ages; numquam 
angere, numquam cupies, numquam timebis. Quid 
Zeno? Portenta haec esse dicit neque ea ratione ullo 
modo posse vivi; se dicere” inter honestum et turpe 
nimium quantum, nescio quid immensum, inter 
ceteras res nihil omnino interesse. Idem adhuc; 
audi reliqua et risum contine si potes. Media illa, 
inquit, inter quae nihil interest, tamen eiusmodi 
sunt ut eorum alia eligenda sint, alia reicienda, alia 
omnino neglegenda, hoc est ut eorum alia velis, alia 
nolis, alia non cures.— At modo dixeras nihil in istis 


1 non inserted by edd. 
®se dicere Mdv.; sed dicere B, E; sed differre other MSS. 
376 


BOOK IV. xxv 


ground to stand on when desires were abolished; 


_ desires were abolished when all choice and distinc- 


tion was done away with; distinction was impossible 
when all things were made absolutely equal and in- 
different ; and these perplexities resulted in your 
paradoxes, which are worse than those of Aristo. 
His were at all events frank and open, whereas yours 
are disingenuous. Ask Aristo whether he deems 
freedom from pain, riches, health to be goods, and 
he will answer No. Well, are their opposites bad ? 
No, likewise. Ask Zeno, and his answer would be 
identically the same. In our surprise we should 
inquire of each, how can we possibly conduct our 
lives if we think it makes no difference to us whether 


.We are well or ill, free from pain or in torments of 


agony, safe against cold and hunger or exposed to 
them. O, says Aristo, you will get on splendidly, 
capitally; you will do exactly what seems good to 
you; you will never know sorrow, desire or fear. 
What is Zeno’s answer? ‘This doctrine is a philo- 
sophical monstrosity, he tells us, it renders life 
entirely impossible ; his view is that while between 
the moral and the base a vast, enormous gulf is 
fixed, between all other things there is no difference 
whatever. So far this is the same as Aristo; but 
hear what follows, and restrain your laughter if you 
can. These intermediate things, says Zeno, which 
have no difference between them, are still of such a 
nature that some of them are to be selected and 
others rejected, while others again are to be entirely 
ignored ; that is, they are such that some you wish 
to have, others you wish not to have, and about others 
you do not care.— But you told us just now that 
there was no difference among them.’— “And I say 
Su 


72 


73 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


esse quod interesset.’— Et nunc idem dico,’ inquiet, 
“sed ad virtutes et ad vitia nihil interesse.’ 

XXVI. “ Quis istud, quaeso, nesciebat? Verum 
audiamus.— Ista,’ inquit, “quae dixisti, valere, 
locupletem esse, non dolere, bona non dico sed 
dicam Graece zponypeva, Latine autem producta 
(sed praeposita aut praecipua malo; sit! tolerabilius 
et mollius); illaautem, morbum, egestatem, dolorem, 
non appello mala sed si libet reiectanea. Itaque 
illa non dico me expetere sed legere, nec optare 
sed sumere, contraria autem non fugere sed quasi 
secernere. Quid ait Aristoteles reliquique Pla- 
tonis alumni? Se omnia quae secundum naturam 
sint bona appellare, quae autem contra mala. Vi- 
desne igitur Zenonem tuum cum Aristone verbis 
consistere,” re dissidere; cum Aristotele et illis re 
consentire, verbis discrepare? Cur igitur cum de re 
conveniat non malumus usitate loqui? Aut doceat 
paratiorem me ad contemnendam pecuniam fore si 
illam in rebus praepositis quam si in bonis duxero, 
fortioremque in patiendo dolore si eum asperum et 
difficilem perpessu et® contra naturam esse quam si 
malum dixero. Facete M. Piso familiaris noster et 
alia multa et hoc loco* Stoicos irridebat. ‘Quid 
enim?’ aiebat; “bonum negas esse divitias, praeposi- 
tum esse dicis; quid adiuvas? avaritiamne minuis? 


1 sit B, Mdv.; fit E; sic other MSS. 

2 consistere: inf. MS. consentire ; Cobet, Miiller concinere, 

3 perpessu et inf. MSS., Mdv.; perpesst B, E; perpessu si 
Gorenz, Miiller. 

47oco Mdv. with inf. MSS.; modo B, E, Miiller, 


378 


we 


BOOK IV. xxv-xxvi 


the same now,’ he will reply, ‘but i mean no dif- 
- ference in respect of virtue and vice.’ 

XXVI. “Who, pray, did not know that? How- The Stoics’ 
ever, let us hear what he has to say.— “The things ,{bings Ce 
you mentioned,’ he continues, ‘health, affluence, Ply Aristotle’s 
freedom from pain, I do not call ae bor boa eo 
call them in Greek proegmena, that is in your lan- 
guage “brought forward” (though I will rather use 

preferred” or ~ pre-eminent,’ as these sound 
smoother and more aces Gable and on the other 
hand disease, poverty and pain I do not style evils, 
but, if you please, “things rejected. a Accordingly 
I ae not speak of “desiring” but “selecting” these 
things, not of “wishing” but “adopting” them, and 
not of “avoiding” their opposites but so to speak 

discarding” them.’ What say Aristotle and the 
other pupils of Plato? That they call all things in 
accordance with nature good and all things contrary 
to nature bad. Do you see therefore that between 
your master Zeno and Aristo there is a verbal har- 
mony but a real difference; whereas between him 
and Aristotle and the rest there is a real agreement 
and a verbal disagreement? Why, then, as we are 
_ agreed as to the fact, do we not prefer to employ 
the usual terminology? Or else let him prove that 
I shall be readier to despise money if I believe it to 
be a ‘thing preferred’ than if I believe it to be a 
good, and braver to endure pain if I say it is irk- 
some and hard to bear and contrary to nature, than 
if I call it an evil. Our friend Marcus Piso was 
often witty, but never more so than when he ridi- 
culed the Stoics on this score. ‘What?’ he said, 
‘You tell us wealth is not good but you say it is 
“preferred”; how does that help matters? do you 

379 


74 


wee 


CICERO DE FINEBUS 


Quomodo? Si verbum sequimur, primum longius 
verbum praepositum quam bonum.’— Nihil ad rem!’ 
—‘Ne sit sane; at certe gravius. Nam bonum ex 
quo appellatum sit, nescio; praepositum ex eo credo, 
quod praeponatur aliis: id mihi magnum videtur.’ 
Itaque dicebat plus tribui divitiis a Zenone qui eas 
in praepositis poneret quam ab Aristotele qui bonum 
esse divitias fateretur sed neque magnum bonum et 
prae rectis honestisque contemnendum ac despici- 
endum nec magno opere expetendum; omninoque 
de istis omnibus verbis a Zenone mutatis ita disputa- 
bat, et quae bona negarentur esse ab eo et quae 
mala, illa laetioribus nominibus appellari ab eo quam 
a nobis, haec tristioribus. Piso igitur hoe modo, vir 
optimus tuique, ut scis, amantissimus; nos paucis ad 
haee additis finem faciamus aliquando; longum est 
enim ad omnia respondere quae a te dicta sunt. 
XXVII. “Nam ex eisdem verborum praestigiis et 
regna nata vobis sunt et imperia et divitiae, et tantae 
quidem ut omnia quae ubique sint sapientis esse 
dicatis. Solum praeterea formosum, solum liberum, 
solum civem; stultos! omnia contraria, quos etiam 
insanos esse vultis. Haec zapddo€&a illi, nos admira- 
bilia dicamus. Quid autem habent admirationis 
cum prope accesseris? Conferam tecum quam cuique 


1 stultos inserted by Mdv. 
380 


BOOK IV. xxvi-xxvii 


_ diminish avarice? In what way? If it is a question 


= 


-of words, to begin with “preferred” is a longer 


word than “good.”’—‘That is no matter.’— 
Granted, by all means; but it is certainly more 
impressive. For I do not know the derivation of 
_, 800d,” whereas  preferred’’ I suppose means 
placed before” other things; this implies to my 
mind something very important.’ Accordingly he 
would maintain that Zeno gives more importance to 
wealth, by classing it as ‘preferred, than did 
Aristotle, who admitted wealth to be a good, yet 
not a great good, but one to be thought lightly of 
and despised in comparison with uprightness and 
Moral Worth, and not to be greatly desired; and 
on Zeno’s innovations in terminology generally he 
would declare that the names he actually gave 
to the things which he denied to be good or evil 
were pleasanter and gloomier respectively than the 
names by which we call them. So said Piso, an 
excellent man and, as you know, a devoted friend 
to yourself. For my part, let me add a few words 
more and then finally conclude. For it would be a 
long task to reply to all your arguments. 

XXVII. “The same verbal legerdemain supplies 
you with your kingdoms and empires and riches, 
riches so vast that you declare that everything the 
world contains is the property of the Wise Man. 
He alone, too, you say, is beautiful, he alone a free 
man and a citizen: while the foolish are the 
opposite of all these, and according to you insane 
into the bargain. The Stoics call these paradoza, 
as we might say ‘startling truths.’ But what is 
there so startling about them viewed at close 
quarters? I will consult you as to the meaning you 

381 


Their paradoxes 
turn out to be 
truisms, and 
their favourite 
analogies will not 
hold water. 


75 


76 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


verbo rem subicias; nulla erit controversia. Omnia 
peccata paria dicitis. Non ego tecum iam ita ioca- 
bor ut iisdem his de rebus cum L. Murenam te 
accusante defenderem. Apud imperitos tum illa 
dicta sunt; aliquid etiam coronae datum; nune 
agendum est subtilius. Peccata paria.—Quonam 
modo ?—Quia nec honesto quidquam honestius nec 
turpi turpius.—Perge porro, nam de isto magna dis- 
sensio est; illa argumenta propria videamus cur 
omnia sint paria peccata.1—Ut, inquit, fidibus plu- 
ribus, si nulla earum ita contenta nervis sit ut con- 
centum servare possit, omnes aeque incontentae 
sint, sic peccata, quia discrepant, aeque discrepant; 
paria sunt igitur.—Hic ambiguo ludimur. Aeque 
enim contingit omnibus fidibus ut incontentae sint; 
illud non continuo ut aeque incontentae. Collatio 
igitur ista te nihil iuvat; nec enim, omnes avaritias 
si aeque avaritias esse dixerimus, sequetur ut etiam 
aequas esse dicamus. Ecce aliud simile dissimile: 
ut enim, inquit, gubernator aeque peccat si palearum 
navem evertit et si auri, item aeque peccat qui 
parentem et qui servum iniuria verberat.—Hoce non 
videre, cuius generis onus navis vehat, id ad guber- 
natoris artem nihil pertinere! itaque aurum_pale- 
amne portet, ad bene aut ad male gubernandum 
nihil interesse; at quid inter parentem et servulum 


beasene paria peccata B, E, Mdv.; peccata sint paria inf. 


2 See the remarkable passage in Cicero’s Pro Murena, 
60-66. 


382 


BOOK IV. xxvii 


attach to each term; there shall be no dispute. 
You Stoics say that all transgressions are equal. I 
won't jest with you now, as I did on the same sub- 
jects when you were prosecuting and I defending 
Lucius Murena.* On that occasion I was addressing 
a jury, not an audience of scholars, and I even had 
to play to the gallery a little; but now I must reason 
more closely. Transgressions are equal.—How so, 
pray ?—Because nothing can be better than good or 
baser than base.—Explain further, for there is much 
disagreement on this point; let us have your special 
arguments to prove how all transgressions are equal, 
—Suppose, says my opponent, of a number of lyres 
not one is so strung as to be in tune; then all are 
equally out of tune; similarly with transgressions, 
since all are departures from rule, all are equally 
departures from rule; therefore all are equal.— 
Here we are put off with an equivocation. All the 
lyres equally are out of tune; but it does not follow 
that all are equally out of tune. So your com- 
parison does not help you; for it does not follow 
that because we pronounce every case of avarice 
equally to be avarice, we must therefore pronounce 
them all to be equal. Here is another of these 
false analogies: A skipper, says my adversary, com- 
mits an equal transgression if he loses his ship with 
a cargo of straw and if he does so when laden with 
gold; similarly a man is an equal transgressor if he 
beats his parent or his slave without due cause.— 
Fancy not seeing that the nature of the cargo has 
nothing to do with the skill of the navigator! so 
that whether he carries gold or straw makes no dif- 
ference as regards good or bad seamanship; whereas 
the distinction between a parent and a mere slave 
383 


lord 


~ 


7 


8 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


intersit intellegi et potest et debet. Ergo in guber- 
nando nihil, in officio plurimum interest quo in genere 
peccetur. Et si in ipsa gubernatione neglegentia est 
navis eversa, maius est peccatum in auro quam in 
palea. Omnibus enim artibus volumus attributam 
esse eam quae communis appellatur prudentia, — 
quam omnes qui cuique’ artificio praesunt debent 
habere. Ita ne hoe quidem modo paria” peccata 
sunt. 

XXVIII. “Urguent tamen et nihil remittunt, 
Quoniam, inquiunt, omne peccatum imbecillitatis et 
inconstantiae est, haec autem vitia in omnibus stultis 
aeque magna sunt, necesse est paria esse peccata, 
Quasi vero aut concedatur in omnibus stultis aeque 
magna esse vitia et eadem imbecillitate et inconstantia 
L. Tubulum fuisse qua illum cuius is condemnatus 
est rogatione P. Scaevolam; et quasi nihil inter res 
quoque ipsas in’ quibus peccatur intersit, ut, quo 
hae maiores minoresve sint, eo quae peccentur in 
his rebus aut maiora sint aut minora! Itaque (iam 
enim concludatur oratio) hoc uno vitio maxime mihi 
premi videntur tui Stoici, quod se posse putant duas 
contrarias sententias obtinere. Quid enim est tam 
repugnans quam eundem dicere quod honestum sit 
solum id bonum esse, qui dicat appetitionem rerum 
ad vivendum accommodatarum a natura profectam? 
Ita cum ea volunt retinere quae superiori sententiae 

1qui cuigue MSS., Miiller; cuicumgue Mdv. 


2ne hoc quidem modo paria Lambinus, Miiller; ne hoc 
modo paria quidem MSS,, Mdv. 


384 


BOOK IV. xxvii-xxviii 


is one that cannot and ought not to be overlooked. 

Hence the nature of the object upon which the 

offence is committed, which in navigation makes no 

‘difference, in conduct makes all the difference. 

Indeed in the case of navigation too, if the loss of 

the ship is due to negligence, the offence is greater 

with a cargo of gold than with one of straw. For 

the virtue known generally as prudence is an attri- 

bute as we hold of all the arts, and every master 

craftsman in any branch of art ought to possess it. 

Hence this proof also of the equality of transgres- 

sion breaks down. ; 
XXVIII. “However, they press the matter, and All wickednesses 

will not give way. Every transgression, they argue, Sey 

is a proof of weakness and instability of character ; but 

all the foolish possess these vices in an equal manner; 

therefore all transgressions must be equal. As though 

it were admitted that all foolish people possess an 

equal degree of vice, and that Lucius Tubulus was 

exactly as weak and unstable as Publius Scaevola who 

broughtin the bill for his condemnation ; and as though 

there were no difference also between the respective 

circumstances in which the transgressions are com- 

mitted, so that the magnitude of the transgression 

varies in proportion to the importance of the cir- 

cumstances! And therefore (since my discourse Stoicism is an 

must now conclude) this is the one chief defect Meer 

under which your friends the Stoics seem to me to tible views. 

labour,—they think they can maintain two contrary 

opinions at once. How can you have a greater 

inconsistency than for the same person to say both 

that Moral Worth is the sole good and that we have 

a natural instinct to seek the things conducive to 


life? Thus in their desire to retain ideas consonant 
cc 385 


79 


80 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


conveniunt, in Aristonem incidunt; cum id fugiunt, 

re eadem defendunt quae Peripatetici, verba tenent 
; ss J eg 

mordicus. Quae rursus dum sibi evelli ex ordine 


nolunt,” horridiores evadunt, asperiores, duriores et 


oratione et moribus. Quam illorum tristitiam atque 
asperitatem fugiens Panaetius nec acerbitatem 
sententiarum nec disserendi spinas probavit, fuitque 
in altero genere mitior, in altero illustrior, semperque 
habuit in ore Platonem, Aristotelem, Xenocratem, 
Theophrastum, Dicaearchum, ut ipsius scripta de- 
clarant. Quos quidem tibi studiose et diligenter 
tractandos magno opere censeo. Sed quoniam et 
advesperascit et mihi ad villam revertendum est, 
nune quidem hactenus; verum hoe idem faciamus 
saepe.” “Nos vero,” inquit ille; “nam quid pos- 
sumus facere melius? Et hance quidem primam 
exigam a te operam, ut audias me quae a te dicta sunt 
refellentem. Sed memento te quae nos sentiamus 
omnia probare, nisi quod verbis aliter utamur, mihi 
autem vestrorum nihil probari.”” “Scrupulum, in- 
quam, abeunti; sed videbimus.”’ Quae cum essent 
dicta, discessimus. 


‘ordine MSS., Mdv. (explaining ‘ex ordine disciplinae’); 
ore Manutius ; perhaps oratione. 
* nolunt inf. MSS.; volunt B, E. 


386 


BOOK IV. xxviii 


with the former doctrine they are landed in the 
position of Aristo; and when they try to escape from 
this they adopt what is in reality the position of the 
Peripatetics, though still clinging tooth and nail to 
their own terminology. Unwilling again to take 
the next step and weed out this terminology, they 
end by being rougher and more uncouth than ever, 
full of asperities of style and even of manners. 
Panaetius strove hard to avoid this uncouth and re- 
pellant development of Stoicism, censuring alike the 
harshness of its doctrines and the crabbedness of 
its logic. In doctrine he was mellower, and in 
style more lucid. Plato, Aristotle, Xenocrates, 
Theophrastus and Dicearchus were constantly on 
his lips, as his writings show; and these authors I 
strongly advise you to take up for your most careful 
study. But evening is closing in, and I must be 
getting home. So enough for the present; but I hope 
we may often renew this conversation.” “Indeed 
we will,” he replied; “what better occupation could 
we have? and the first favour I shall ask of you is 
to listen to my refutation of what you have said. 
But bear in memory that whereas you really accept 
all of our opinions save for the difference of termin- 
ology, I on the contrary do not accept any of the 
tenets of your school.” “A parting shot indeed!” 
said I; “but we shall see.” And with these words 
I took my leave. 


cc2 387 


3 


wires nat 4eFui spelt gary. Fsiur + 


te ienitivas, aiid eit sat geet deaky, 
ear prito oi fide: Oe 


4 sai 
Pe 


Ebel faodsside Sit vot ata ' 


; Aut nie 5 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


BOOK V 


M. TULLI CICERONIS 
DE 
FINIBUS BONORUM ET MALORUM 
LIBER QUINTUS 


I. Cum audissem Antiochum, Brute, ut solebam,' 
cum M. Pisone in eo gymnasio quod Ptolemaeum 
vocatur, unaque nobiscum Q. frater et T. Pomponius 
Luciusque Cicero, frater noster cognatione patruelis, 
amore germanus, constituimus inter nos ut ambula- 
tionem postmeridianam conficeremus in Academia, 
maxime quod is locus ab omni turba id temporis 
vacuus esset. Itaque ad tempus ad Pisonem omnes. 
Inde vario sermone sex illa a Dipylo stadia confeci- 
mus. Cum autem venissemus in Academiae non sine 
causa nobilitata spatia, solitudo erat ea quam volue- 
ramus. Tum Piso: “Naturane nobis hoc,” inquit, 
“datum dicam an errore quodam, ut, cum ea loca 
videamus in quibus memoria dignos viros acceperi- 
mus multum esse versatos, magis moveamur quam si 
quando eorum ipsorum aut facta audiamus aut scri- 
ptum aliquod legamus? Velut ego nunc moveor. 
Venit enim mihi Platonis in mentem, quem accepi- 
mus primum hic disputare solitum; cuius etiam illi 
propinqui hortuli non memoriam solum mihi afferunt 
sed ipsum videntur in conspectu meo ponere. Hic 
Speusippus, hic Xenocrates, hic eius auditor Polemo; 


1 solebam Mdv.; solebat MSS. 
390 


1 


DE FINIBUS 
BOOK V 


I. My Dear Brutus,—Once I had been attending 
a lecture of Antiochus, as I was in the habit o 
doing, with Marcus Piso, in the building called the 
School of Ptolemy; and with us were my brother 
Quintus, Titus Pomponius, and Lucius Cicero, whom 
I loved as a brother but who was really my we cousin. 
We arranged to take our afternoon stroll in the 
Academy, chiefly because the place would be quiet 
and deserted at that hour of the day. Accordingly 
at the time appointed we met at our rendezvous, 
Piso’s lodgings, and starting out conversed on various 
subjects while we covered the three-quarters of a 
mile from the Dipylon Gate. When we reached the 
walks of the Academy, which are so deservedly fa- 
mous, we had them entirely to ourselves, as we had 
hoped. Thereupon Piso remarked : Fe whether it is 
a natural instinct or a mere illusion, I canit say; but 
one’s emotions are more strongly aroused by seeing 
the places that tradition records to have been the 
favourite resort of men of note in former days, than 
by hearing about their deeds or reading their writings. 
My own feelings at the present moment are a case 
in point. I am reminded of Plato, the first philoso- 
pher, so we are told, that made a practice of holding 
discussions in this place; and indeed his garden 
close at hand yonder not only recalls his memory but 
seems to bring the actual man before my eyes. This 
was the haunt of Speusippus, of Xenocrates, and of 
Xenocrates’ pupil Polemo, who used to sit on the 

391 


Bk. V: The 


f Ethics of Anti- 


ochus. 
i Introduction: 
Persons and 
Scene of the 
third dialogue. 


Philosophical 
and literary 
associations of 
Athens. 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


cuius illa ipsa sessio fuit quam videmus. Equidem 
etiam curiam nostram (Hostiliam dico, non hane no= 
vam, quae minor mihi esse videtur posteaquain est 
maior) solebam intuens Scipionem, Catonem, Lae- 
lium, nostrum vero in primis avum Cogitare; tanta 
vis admonitionis inest in locis; ut non sine causa ex 
iis memoriae ducta sit disciplina.” 

Tum Quintus: “Est plane, Piso, ut dicis,” inquit. 
“Nam me ipsum huc modo venientem convertebat 
ad sese Coloneus ille locus, cuius incola Sophocles 
ob oculos versabatur, quem scis quam admirer quam- 
que eo delecter. Me quidem ad altiorem memoriam 
Oedipodis huc venientis et illo mollissimo carmine 
quaenam essent haec ipsa loca requirentis species 
quaedam commovit, inaniter scilicet, sed commovit 
tamen.”’ 

Tum Pomponius: “At ego, quem vos ut deditum 
Epicuro insectari soletis, sum multum equidem cum 
Phaedro, quem unice diligo, ut scitis, in Epicuri 
hortis, quos modo praeteribamus, sed veteris pro- 
verbi admonitu “vivorum memini’; nec tamen Epi- 
curi licet oblivisci, si cupiam, cuius imaginem non 
modo in tabulis nostri familiares sed etiam in poculis 
et in anulis habent.” . 


a The senate-house, ascribed by tradition to King Tullus 
Hostilius, was enlarged by Sulla a year or two before the 
date of the dialogue. 

>Presumably L. Piso Frugi, the ‘Man of Worth,’ 
cp. II, 90. 

¢°Greek Mnemonics or memoria technica, said to have 
been invented by the poet Simonides, cp. II, 104, seems to 
have been based on visual memory; it arranged the subjects 
to be remembered in 7é70, loci. The art was associated 
with Inventio as a branch of Rhetoric, cp. IV, ro. 


392- 


BOOK V. i 


very seat we see over there. For my own part 
even the sight of our senate-house at home (I mean 
the Curia Hostilia, not the present new building, 
which seems to me to be smaller since its enlarge- 
ment)* used to call up to me thoughts of Scipio, 
Cato, Laelius, and chief of all, my grandfather ;” such 
powers of suggestion do places possess. No won- 
der the scientific training of the memory is based 
upon locality.” ¢ 
“Perfectly true, Piso,” rejoined Quintus. “I my- 
self on the way here just now noticed yonder village 
of Colonus, and it brought to my imagination Sopho- 
cles who resided there, and who is as you know my 
great admiration and delight. Indeed my memory 
took me further back ; for I had a vision of Oedipus, 
advancing towards this very spot and asking in those 
most tender verses,? “What place is this ?’—a mere 
fancy no doubt, yet still it affected me strongly.” 
ce . . “e 
For my part,” said Pomponius, you are fond of 
attacking me as a follower of Epicurus, and I do 
spend much of my time with Phaedrus, who as you 
know is my dearest friend, in Epicurus’s Gardens* 
which we passed just now; but I obey the old saw: ! 
I ‘think of those that are alive.’ Still I could not 
forget Epicurus, even if I wanted; the members of 
our body not only have picturés of him, but even 
have his likeness on their drinking-cups and rings.” 


4d Sophocles Oedipus Coloneus, 1 f.: 
téxvov Tuprod yépovros, ’Avrvyévyn, Tlyas 
xXdpous aplyped’ 7} ray avdpav modu ; ‘ 
e Bequeathed by Epicurus as a sort of college to his suc- 
cessors. 
£‘ Vivorum meminerimus’ occurs in Petronius 43 and 75, 
of shaking off vain regrets. 


393 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


Il. Hie ego: “Pomponius quidem,” inquam, 
“noster iocari videtur, et fortasse suo iure; ita enim 
se Athenis collocavit ut sit paene unus ex Atticis, ut 
id etiam cognomen videatur habiturus; ego autem 
tibi, Piso, assentior, usu hoc venire ut acrius ali- 
quanto et attentius de claris viris locorum admonitu 
cogitemus. Scis enim me quodam tempore Meta- 
pontum venisse tecum neque ad hospitem ante 
devertisse quam Pythagorae ipsum illum locum ubi. 
vitam ediderat sedemque viderim. Hoc autem tem- 
pore, etsi multa in omni parte Athenarum sunt in 
ipsis locis indicia summorum virorum, tamen ego illa 
moveor exhedra; modo enim fuit Carneadis; quem 
videre videor (est enim nota imago), a sedeque ipsa 
tanta ingeni magnitudine orbata desiderari illam vo- 
cem puto.” 

Tum Piso: “ Quoniam igitur aliquid omnes, quid 
Lucius noster?” inquit; “an eum locum libenter 
invisit ubi Demosthenes et Aeschines inter se de- 
certare solitisunt? Suo enim quisque? studio maxime 
ducitur.”’ 

Et ille, cum erubuisset, “ Noli,” inquit, “ex me 
quaerere, qui in Plialericum etiam descenderim, quo 
in loco ad fluctum-aiunt declamare solitum Demo- 
sthenem ut fremitum assuesceret voce vincere. Modo 
etiam paulum ad dexteram de via declinavi ut ad 
Pericli sepulerum accederem. Quamquam id qui- 


‘ guisque Mdv. with inf. MSS.; unus guisque B, E. 


a This prophecy after the event shows that Cicero’s frienc 
and correspondent derived the name by which he is besi 
known from his long residence at Athens. 

> Carneades died 129 B.C., fifty years before the suppose 
date of this dialogue. 


394 


4 


BOOK V. ii 


II. “ As for our friend Pomponius,” I interposed, “I 


_ believe he is joking ; and no doubt he is a licensed 


wit, for he has so taken root in Athens that he is 
almost an Athenian; in fact I expect he will get 
the surname of Atticus!* But I, Piso, agree with 
you; it is a common experience that places do 
strongly stimulate the imagination and vivify our 
ideas of famous men. You remember how I once 
came with you to Metapontum, and would not go to 
the house where we were to stay until I had seen the 
abode of Pythagoras and the very place where he 
breathed his last. All over Athens, I know, there 
are many reminders of eminent men in the actual 
places where they lived; but at the present moment 
it is that hall over there which appeals to me; for 
not long ago” it belonged to Carneades. I fancy I 
see him now (for his portrait is well known), and I 
can imagine that the very place where he used to sit 
misses the sound of his voice, and mourns the loss of 
that mighty intellect.” 

“Well, then,” said Piso, “as we all have some 
association that appeals to us, what is it that interests 
our young friend Lucius? Does he enjoy visiting the 
spot where Demosthenes and Aeschines used to fight 
their battles?. For we are all mainly influenced by 
our own particular study.” 

“Pray don’t ask me,” answered Lucius with a blush ; 
“T have actually made a pilgrimage down to the Bay 
of Phalerum, where they say Demosthenes used to 
practise declaiming on the beach, to learn to pitch 
his voice so as to overcome an uproar. Also only just 
now I turned off the road a little way on the right, 
to visit the tomb of Pericles. Though in fact there 

395 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


dem infinitum est in hac urbe; quacumque enim 
ingredimur, in aliqua historia vestigium ponimus.” 
Tum Piso : “ Atqui, Cicero, inquit, ista studia si ad 
imitandos summos viros spectant, ingeniosorum sunt, 
sin tantummodo ad indicia veteris memoriae cogno- 
scenda, curiosorum; te autem hortamur omnes, 
currentem quidem ut spero, ut eos quos novisse 


. ° . . . : : e . . : 
vis imitari etiam velis.” Hic ego:  Etsi facit hic 
. . ee . . oo 
quidem,” inquam, Piso, ut vides, ea quae praecipis, 
tamen mihi grata hortatio tua est.’’ Tum ille ami- 


cissime, ut solebat: “Nos vero,” inquit, “* omnes 
omnia ad huius adulescentiam conferamus, in primis- 
que ut aliquid suorum studiorum philosophiae quoque 
impertiat, vel ut te imitetur quem amat, vel ut illud 
ipsum quod studet facere possit ornatius. Sed utrum 
hortandus es nobis, Luci,” inquit, “an etiam tua 
sponte propensus es? Mihi quidem Antiochum, 
quem audis, satis belle videris attendere.’ Tum 
ille timide vel potius verecunde: “ Facio,” inquit, 
“equidem ; sed audistine modo de Carneade? Rapior 
illuc ; revocat autem Antiochus; nec est praeterea, 
quem audiamus.”’ 

Ill. Tum Piso: “Etsi hoc,” inquit, “ fortasse non 
poterit sic abire cum hic adsit’’ (me autem dicebat), 
“tamen audebo te ab hac Academia nova ad illam 
veterem vocare, in qua, ut dicere Antiochum audiebas, 
non ii soli numerantur qui Academici vocantur, 
Speusippus, Xenocrates, Polemo, Crantor ceterique, 
sed etiam Peripatetici veteres, quorum princeps 
Aristoteles, quem excepto Platone haud scio an recte 


396 


BOOK VV. ii-iii 
is no end to it in this city; wherever you go you 
tread historic ground.” 

“Well, Cicero,” said Piso, ‘“these enthusiasms 
befit a young man of parts, if they lead him to copy 
the example of the great. If they only stimulate 
antiquarian curiosity, they are mere dilettantism. 
But we all of us exhort you—and I hope it is a case 
of spurring a willing steed—to resolve to imitate 
your heroes as well as to know about them.” “He 
is practising your precepts already, Piso,’ said I, 
ce 

as you are aware; but all the same thank you fs 
encouraging him.” “ Well,” said Piso, with his usual 
amiability, “let us all join forces to promote the lad’s 
improvement ; and especially let us try to make him 
spare some of his interest for philosophy, either so as 
to follow the example of yourself for whom he has 
such an affection, or in order to be better equipped for 
the very study to which he is devoted. But, Lucius,” 
he asked, “do you need our urging, or have you ana- 
tural leaning of your own towards philosophy? Youare 
keeping Antiochus’s lectures, and seem to me to bea 
pretty attentive listener.” “Itry tobe,” replied Lucius 
with a timid or rather a modest air ; “but have you 
heard any lectures on Carneades lately? He attracts 
me immensely ; but Antiochus calls me in the other 
direction ; and there is no other lecturer to go to.’ 
III. Pe ’ said Piso, “it will not be alto- Piso recom: 
sether easy, while our friend here” (meaning me) Readesy? eke 
is by, still I will venture to urge you to leave the the views ad- 


present New Academy for the Old, which includes, Tatocies as 
as you heard Antiochus declare, not only those who era pa mt 
bear the name of Academics, Speusippus, Xenocrates, and Peripatetics. 
Polemo, Crantor and the rest, but also the early 
Peripatetics, headed by their chief, Aristotle, who, 

397 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


dixerim principem philosophorum. Ad eos igitur 
converte te, quaeso. Ex eorum enim scriptis et 
institutis cum omnis doctrina liberalis, omnis historia, 
omnis sermo elegans sumi potest, tum varietas est 
tanta artium ut nemo sine eo instrumento ad ullam 
rem illustriorem satis ornatus possit accedere. Ab 
his oratores, ab his imperatores ac rerum publicarum 
principes exstiterunt. Ut ad minora veniam, mathe- 
matici, poetae, musici, medici denique ex hac tam- 
quam omnium artificum?’ officina profecti sunt.” 
Atque ego: “Scis me,” inquam, “istud idem sentire, 
Piso, sed a te opportune facta mentio est; studet 
enim meus audire Cicero quaenam sit istius veteris 
quam commemoras Academiae de finibus bonorum 
Peripateticorumque sententia. Censemus autem 
facillime te id explanare posse, quod et Staseam 
Neapolitanum multos annos habueris apud te et 
complures iam menses Athenis haee ipsa te ex 
Antiocho videamus exquirere.”’ Et ille ridens: 
“Age, age,” inquit, “(satis enim scite me nostri 
sermonis principium esse voluisti), exponamus adu- 
lescenti si quae forte possumus. Dat enim id nobis 
solitudo, quod si qui deus diceret, numquam putarem, 
mein Academia tamquam philosophum disputaturum. 
Sed ne, dum huic obsequor, vobis molestus sim.” 
“Mihi,” inquam, “qui te id ipsum rogavi?”’? Tum, 
Quintus et Pomponius cum idem se velle dixissent, 
Piso exorsus est; cuius oratio attende quaeso, Brute, 


lartificim B, E, Miller ; artivim with inf. MSS. Mdv. 
398 


~BOOK VN. iii 


if Plato be excepted, I almost think deserves to be 
_ called the prince of philosophers. Do you then 
join them, I beg of you. From their writings and 
teachings can be learnt the whole of liberal culture, 
of history and of style; moreover they include such 
a variety of sciences, that without the equipment 
that they give no one can be adequately prepared 
to embark on any of the higher careers. They have 
produced orators, generals and statesmen. To come 
to the less distinguished professions, this factory of 
experts in all the sciences has turned out mathema- 
ticians, poets, musicians and physicians.” “ You know 
that I agree with you about that, Piso,’ I replied; 
“but you have raised the point most opportunely ; 
for my cousin Cicero is eager to hear the doctrine 
of the Old Academy of which you speak, and of the 
Peripatetics, on the subject of the Ends of Goods. 
We feel sure you can expound it with the greatest 
ease, for you have had Staseas from Naples in your 
household for many years, and also we know you 
have been studying this very subject under Anti- 
ochus for several months at Athens.” “Here goes, 
then,” replied Piso, smiling, “(for you have craftily 
arranged so that our discussion shall start with me), 
let me see what I can do to give the lad a lecture. If 
an oracle had foretold that I should find myself dis- 
coursing in the Academy like a philosopher, I should 
not have believed it, but here I am, thanks to the 
place being so deserted. Only don’t let me bore the 
rest of you while I am obliging our young friend.” 
“What, bore me?” said I. “ Why, it is I who asked 
you to speak.” Thereupon Quintus and Pomponius 
having declared that they wished it too, Piso began, 
And I will ask you, Brutus, kindly to consider 
399 


10 


11 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


satisne videatur Antiochi complexa esse sententiam, 
quam tibi qui fratrem eius Aristum frequenter audi- 
eris maxime probatam existimo. 

IV. Sic est igitur locutus. “Quantus ornatus in 
Peripateticorum disciplina sit, satis est a me, ut 
brevissime potuit, paulo ante dictum. Sed est forma 
eius disciplinae, sicut fere ceterarum, triplex: una 
pars est naturae, disserendi altera, vivendi tertia. 
Natura sic ab iis investigata est ut nulla pars caelo, 
‘mari, terra (ut poetice loquar) praetermissa sit. 
Quin etiam, cum de rerum initiis omnique mundo 
locuti essent, ut multa non modo probabili argumen- 
tatione sed etiam necessaria mathematicorum ratione 
concluderent, maximam materiam ex rebus per se 
investigatis ad rerum occultarum cognitionem attu- 
lerunt. Persecutus est Aristoteles animantium om- 
nium ortus, victus, figuras, Theophrastus autem 
stirpium naturas omniumque fere rerum quae e terra 
gignerentur causas atque rationes; qua ex cognitione 
facilior facta est investigatio rerum occultissimarum. 
Disserendique ab iisdem non dialectice solum sed 
etiam oratorie praecepta sunt tradita; ab Aristote- 
leque principe de singulis rebus in utramque partem 
dicendi exercitatio est instituta, ut non contra omnia 
semper, sicut Arcesilas, diceret, et tamen ut in om- 
nibus rebus quidquid ex utraque parte dici posset 
expromeret. Cum autem tertia pars bene vivendi 


praecepta quaereret, ea quoque est ab iisdem non 
400 


BOOK VV. iii-iv 
whether you think his discourse a satisfactory sum- 
mary of the doctrine of Antiochus, which I believe to 
be the system which you most approve, as you have 
often attended the lectures of his brother Aristus. 

IV. Accordingly Piso spoke as follows: “ About 2. Preliminary 
the educational value of the Peripatetic system I p2UE 2 oe. 
have said enough, in the briefest possible way, a few art ati 
moments ago. Its arrangement, like that of most Philosophy; 
other systems, is threefold: one part deals with Roi eae 
nature, the second with discourse, and the third 2=4 Politics. 
with conduct. Natural Philosophy the Peripatetics 
have investigated so thoroughly that no region in 
sky or sea or land (to speak poetically) has been 
passed over. Nay more, in treating of the origin of 
creation and the constitution of the universe they 
have established much of their doctrine not merely 
by probable arguments but by conclusive mathe- 
matical demonstration, applying a quantity of material 


- derived from facts that they have themselves in- 


— 


vestigated to the discovery of other facts beyond the 
reach of observation. Aristotle gave a complete 
account of the birth, nutrition and structure of all 
living creatures, Theophrastus of the natural history 


_ of plants and the causes and constitution of vege- 


table organisms in general; and the knowledge thus 
attained facilitated the investigation of the most 
obscure questions. In Logic their teachings include 
the rules of rhetoric as well as of dialectic; and Aris- 
totle their founder set on foot the practice of argu- 
ing pro and contra upon every topic, not like 
Arcesilas, always controverting every proposition, 
but setting out all the possible arguments on either 
side in every subject. The third division of philo- 
sophy investigates the rules of human well-being; 
DD 40] 


12 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


solum ad privatae vitae rationem, sed etiam ad rerum 


publicarum rectionem relata. Omnium fere civita- 
tum non Graeciae solum, sed etiam barbariae ab 
Aristotele mores, instituta, disciplinas, a Theophrasto 
leges etiam cognovimus. Cumque uterque eorum 
docuisset qualem in re publica principem esse! con- 
veniret, pluribus praeterea conscripsisset qui esset 
optimus rei publicae status, hoc amplius Theophra- 
stus, quae essent in re publica rerum inclinationes et 
momenta temporum quibus esset moderandum ut- 
cumque res postularet. Vitae autem degendae ratio 
maxime illis quidem placuit quieta, in contempla- 
tione et cognitione posita rerum, quae quia deorum 
vitae erat simillima, sapiente visa est. dignissima. 
Atque his de rebus et splendida est eorum et illustris 
oratio. 

V. “De summo autem bono quia duo genera libro- 
rum sunt, unum populariter scriptum quod é&wrepiKdv 
appellabant, alterum limatius quod in commentariis 
reliquerunt, non semper idem dicere videntur; nec 
in summa tamen ipsa aut varietas est ulla, apud hos 
quidem quos nominavi, aut inter ipsos dissensio. Sed 
cum beata vita quaeratur idque sit unum quod philo- 
sophia spectare et sequi debeat, sitne ea tota sita in 
potestate sapientis an possit aut labefactari aut eripi 
rebus adversis, in eo nonnumquam variari inter eos 
et dubitari videtur. Quod maxime efficit Theo- 


1 esse inserted by edd. 


aNot only the extant treatises on Ethics but the whole 
of the extant works of Aristotle, except the recently- 
discovered Athenian Constitution, belong to this latter 
class. 


402 


BOOK V. iv-v 


this too was treated by the Peripatetics, so as to com- 
prise not only the principles of individual conduct 
but also of the government of states. From Aristotle 
we learn the customs, institutions and regulations, 
and from Theophrastus the laws also, of nearly all 
the states not only of Greece but of the barbarians as 
well. Both described the proper qualifications of a 
sovereign,both moreoverwrote lengthytreatises onthe 
best form of constitution ; Theophrastus treated more 
fully the subject of political vicissitudes and move- 
ments which have to be controlled as the occasion de- 
mands. Among the alternative ideals of conduct they 
gave the highest place to the life of retirement, 
devoted to contemplation and to study. This was pro- 
nounced to be most worthy of the Wise Man, as most 
nearly resembling the life of the gods. These topics 
they handle ina style as brilliant as it is illuminating. 


V. “Their books on the subject of the Chief Divergences 


Good fall into two classes, one popular in style, and 
this class they used to call their exoteric works; the 
other more carefully wrought.* The latter treatises 
they leftin the form of note-books. This distinction oc- 
casionally gives them an appearance of inconsistency ; 
but as a matter of fact in the main bulk of their 
doctrine there is no divergence, at all events among 
the philosophers I have mentioned, and no dis- 
agreement between them. But on the chief object 
of inquiry, namely Happiness, and the one question 
which philosophy has to consider and to investigate, 
whether this lies entirely within the control of the 
Wise Man, or whether it can be impaired or destroyed 
by adversity, here there does appear sometimes to 
exist among them some divergence and uncertainty. 
This effect is chiefly produced by Theophrastus’s 
DD2 4.03 


within the 
School on the 
importance of 
external goods. 


13 


14 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


phrasti de beata vita liber, in quo multum admodum 
fortunae datur; quod si ita se habeat, non possit 
beatam vitam praestare sapientia. Haec mihi vide- 
tur delicatior, ut ita dicam, molliorque ratio quam 
virtutis vis gravitasque postulat. Quare teneamus 
Aristotelem et eius filium Nicomachum, cuius accu- 
rate scripti de moribus libri dicuntur illi quidem 
esse Aristoteli, sed non video cur non potuerit patri 
similis esse filius. Theophrastum tamen adhibeamus 
ad pleraque, dum modo plus in virtute teneamus 
quam ille tenuit firmitatis et roboris. Simus igitur 
contenti his. _Namque horum posteri meliores illi 
quidem, mea sententia, quam reliquarum philosophi 
disciplinarum, sed ita degenerant uf ipsi ex se nati 
esse videantur. Primum Theophrasti, Strato, physi- 
cum se voluit; in quo etsi est magnus, tamen nova 
pleraque, et perpauca de moribus. Huius, Lyco, 
oratione locuples, rebus ipsis ieiunior. Concinnus 
deinde et elegans huius, Aristo, sed ea quae desi- 
deratur a magno philosopho gravitas in eo non 
fuit; scripta sane et multa et polita, sed nescio 
quo pacto auctoritatem oratio non habet. 

Praetereo multos, in his doctum hominem et sua- 
vem, Hieronymum, quem iam cur Peripateticum 
appellem nescio; summum enim bonum exposuit 
vacuitatem doloris; qui autem de summo bono dis- 


a Aristotle’s principal work on Ethics is entitled The Ni- 
chomachean Ethics, to distinguish it from two other treatises 
ascribed to him, the Hudemian Ethics and the Magna 
Moralia. The title may imply that the book was dedicated 
to, or possibly that it was edited by, Nichomachus; but 
hardly, pace Cicero, that it was written by him, since he 
died in battle while still a youth. It seems certain that 
Cicero had never read, or had forgotten, the book, for he 
entirely ignores its distinctive doctrines. Cp. IV 12 n. 

404 


BOOK V. v 


book On Happiness, in which a very considerable 
amount of importance is assigned to fortune; for 
if this be correct, wisdom alone could not guar- 
antee happiness. This theory seems to me to be, 
if I may so call it, too enervating and unmanly to be 
adequate to the force and dignity of virtue. Hence 
we had better keep to Aristotle and his son Nico- 
machus; the latter's elaborate volumes on Ethics 
are ascribed, it is true, to Aristotle, but I do not see 
why the son should not have been capable of emu- 
lating the father.* Still, we may use Theophrastus 
on most points, so long as we maintain a larger 
element of strength and solidity in virtue than he 
did. Let us then limit ourselves to these authori- Decline of the 
ties. Their successors are indeed in my opinion sonPatetic 
superior to the philosophers of any other school, but 
are so unworthy of their ancestry that one might 
imagine them to have been their own fathers. To 
begin with, Theophrastus’s pupil Strato set up to be 
a natural philosopher; but great as he is in this de- 
partment, he is nevertheless for the most part an in- 
novator; and on ethics he has hardly anything. His 
successor Lyco has a copious style, but his matter is 
somewhat barren.’ Lyco’s pupil Aristo is polished 
and graceful, but has not the authority that we 
expect to find in a great thinker; he wrote much, 
it is true, and he wrote well, but his style is some- 
how lacking in weight. 

“T pass over a number of writers, including the 
learned and entertaining Hieronymus. Indeed I 
know no reason for calling the latter a Peripatetic 
at all; for he defined the Chief Good as freedom 
from pain: and to hold a different view of the 
Chief Good is to hold a different system of philo- 

405 


15 


16 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


sentit, de tota philosophiae ratione dissentit. Crito- 
laus imitari voluit antiquos; et quidem est gravitate 
proximus et redundat oratio; ac tamen ne? is quidem 
in patriis institutis manet. Diodorus, eius auditor, 
adiungit ad honestatem vacuitatem- doloris. Hic 
quoque suus est, de summoque bono dissentiens dici 
vere Peripateticus non potest. Antiquorum autem 
sententiam Antiochus noster mihi videtur persequi 
diligentissime, quam eandem Aristoteli fuisse et 
Polemonis docet. 
’ VI. “Facit igitur Lucius noster prudenter qui 
audire de summo bono potissimum velit; hoe enim 
constituto in philosophia constituta sunt omnia. 
Nam ceteris in rebus sive praetermissum sive igno- 
ratum est quidpiam, non plus incommodi est quam 
quanti quaeque earum rerum est in quibus negle- 
ctum est aliquid; summum autem bonum si ignore- 
tur, vivendi rationem ignorari necesse est; ex quo 
tantus error consequitur ut quem in portum se 
recipiant scire non possint. Cognitis autem rerum 
finibus, cum intellegitur quid sit et bonorum extre- 
mum et malorum, inventa vitae via est conforma- 
tioque omnium officiorum, inventum igitur,? quo 
quidque referatur; ex quo, id quod omnes expe- 
tunt, beate vivendi ratio inveniri et comparari potest. 
“Quod quoniam in quo sit magna dissensio est, 
Carneadia nobis adhibenda divisio est, qua noster 
Tne added by edd. 


2inventum igitur Miller ; cum igitur B, E ; est igitur inf. 
MSS. cum exigitur (i.e. examinatur) Mdv. 


406 


BOOK V. vy-vi 


sophy altogether. Critolaus professed to imitate 

the ancients; and he does in fact come nearest 

to them in weight, while his style is copious to a 

degree; all the same, even he is not true to his 

ancestral principles. Diodorus, his pupil, couples 

with Moral Worth freedom from pain. He too 

stands by himself; differing about the Chief Good 

he cannot correctly be called a Peripatetic. Our 

master Antiochus seems to me to adhere most scru- Antiochus has 
pulously to the doctrine of the ancients, which able ee 
according to his teaching was common to Aristotle 

and to Polemo. 

15 VI. “Our young friend Lucius is therefore well 3. The first prin 
advised jn desiring most of all to hear about the GRC ($8228): 
Chief Good; for when you have settled that point in aane be Dae’ 
a system of philosophy, you have settled everything. instincts, 

On any other topic, some degree of incompleteness 
or uncertainty causes no more mischief than is pro- 
portionate to the importance of the particular topic 
on which the neglect has occurred; but uncertainty 
as to the Chief Good necessarily involves uncertainty 
as to the principles of conduct, and this must carry 
men so far out of their course that they cannot 
know what harbour to steer for. On the other hand 
when we have ascertained the Ends of things, 
knowing the ultimate Good and ultimate Evil, we 
have discovered a map of life, a chart of all the 

16 duties; and therefore have discovered a standard to 
which each action may be referred; and from this 
we can discover and construct that rule of happiness 
which all desire. 


“Now there is great difference of opinion as to Carneades’ 
classification of 


what constitutes the ultimate End. Let us therefore aii possible ethi- 
adopt the classification of Carneades, which our Say eatin: 
407 


17 


18 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


Antiochus libenter uti solet. Ile igitur vidit non 
modo quot fuissent adhue philosophorum de summo 
bono sed quot omnino esse possent sententiae. 
Negabat igitur ullam esse artem quae ipsa a se 
proficisceretur; etenim semper illud extra est quod 
arte comprehenditur. Nihil opus est exemplis hoc 
facere longius; est enim perspicuum nullam artem 
ipsam in se versari, sed esse aliud artem ipsam, 
aliud quod propositum sit arti; quoniam igitur, ut 
medicina valetudinis, navigationis gubernatio, sic 
vivendi ars est prudentia, necesse est eam quoque 
ab aliqua re esse constitutam et profectam. Consti- 
tit autem fere inter omnes, id, in quo prudentia 
versaretur et quod assequi vellet, aptum et accom- 
modatum naturae esse oportere et tale ut ipsum per 
se invitaret et alliceret appetitum animi, quem dpyjv 
Graeci vocant. Quid autem sit quod ita moveat 
itaque a natura in primo ortu appetatur, non constat, 
deque eo est inter philosophos, cum summum bonum 
exquiritur, omnis dissensio. Totius enim quaestionis 
eius quae habetur de finibus bonorum et malorum, 
cum quaeritur in his quid sit extremum, quid ulti- 
mum, fons reperiendus est in quo sint prima invita- 
menta naturae ; quo invento omnis ab eo quasi capite 
de summo bono et malo disputatio ducitur. 

VII. “ Voluptatis alii primum appetitum putant et 


primam depulsionem doloris; vacuitatem doloris alii 
408 


BOOK V. vi-vii 


teacher Antiochus is very fond of employing. Car- 
neades passed in review all the dpinions as to the 
‘Chief Good, not only that actually had been held by 
philosophers hitherto, but that it was possible to 
hold. He then pointed out that no science or art 
can start wholly from itself; it must always have some 
subject-matter which is outside itself. There is no 
need to enlarge upon or illustrate this point; for it 
is evident that no art is occupied with itself: the art 
is distinct from the subject with which it deals; 
since therefore, as medicine is the art of health and 
navigation the art of sailing the ship, so Prudence 
or Practical Wisdom is the art of conduct, it follows . 
that Prudence also must take its being and origin 
from something. Now practically all have agreed The End must be 
that the subject with which Prudence is occupied ** Damony with 
and the end which it desires to attain is bound to fee ase 
be something intimately adapted to our nature; it : 
must be capable of directly arousing and awakening 
an impulse of desire, what in Greek is called hormé. 
But what it is that at the first moment of our ex- 
istence excites in our nature this impulse of desire, 
—as to this there is no agreement. It is at this 
point that all the difference of opinion among stu- 
dents of the ethical problem arises. Of the whole 
inquiry into the Ends of Goods and Evils and the 
question which among them is ultimate and final, 
the fountain-head is to be found in the earliest 
instincts of nature; discover these and you have the 
source of the stream, the starting-point of the debate 
as to the Chief Good and Evil. Silif Ths possible ob 
VII. ~ One school holds that our earliest desire is jects of natural 
for pleasure and our earliest repulsion is from pain; Revises “Gi) 
another thinks that freedom from pain is the earliest Bey air toe 
409 natural goods, 


19 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


censent primum ascitam et primum declinatum do- 
lorem; ab iis alii quae prima secundum naturam 
nominant proficiscuntur, in quibus numerant incolu- 
mitatem conservationemque omnium partium, vale- 
tudinem, sensus integros, doloris vacuitatem, vires, 
pulchritudinem, cetera generis eiusdem, quorum si- 
milia sunt prima in animis, quasi virtutum igniculi 
et semina. Ex his tribus cum unum aliquid sit quo 
primum natura moveatur vel ad appetendum vel ad 
repellendum nec quidquam omnino praeter haec 
tria possit esse, necesse est omnino officium aut 
fugiendi aut sequendi ad eorum aliquid referri, ut 
illa prudentia quam artem vitae esse diximus in 
earum trium rerum aliqua versetur a qua totius vitae 
ducat exordium. 

“Ex eo autem quod statuerit esse quo primum 
natura moveatur, exsistet recti etiam ratio atque 
honesti, quae cum aliquo uno ex tribus illis congru- 
ere possit, ut aut id honestum sit, facere omnia! 
voluptatis causa etiamsi eam non consequare, aut 
non dolendi etiamsi id assequi nequeas, aut eorum 
quae secundum naturam sunt adipiscendi etiamsi 
nihil consequare. Ita fit ut quanta differentia est in 
principiis naturalibus, tanta sit in finibus bonorum 
malorumque dissimilitudo.—Alii rursum iisdem a 
principiis omne officium referent aut ad voluptatem 


1 After omnia MSS. add aut, Mdv. brackets. 
410 


19 


BOOK V. vii 


thing welcomed, and pain the earliest thing avoided; 

others again start from what they term the primary 

objects in accordance with nature, among which they 

reckon the soundness and safety of all the parts of 

the body, health, perfect senses, freedom from pain, 

strength, beauty and the like, analogous to which 

are the primary intellectual excellences which are 

the sparks and seeds of the virtues. Now it must 

be one or other of these three sets of things which 

first excites our nature to feel desire or repulsion; 

nor can it be anything whatsoever beside these three 

things. It follows therefore that every right act 

of avoidance or of pursuit is aimed at one of these 

objects, and that consequently one of these three 

must form the subject-matter of Prudence, which we 

spoke of as the art of life; from one of the three 

Prudence derives the initial motive of the whole of 

conduct. 

“Now, from whichever Prudence decides to be the End must 

the object of the primary natural impulses, will arise eens 


a theory of right and of Moral Worth which may the attainment 
correspond with one or other of the three objects hers are 
aforesaid. Thus Morality will consist either in 
aiming all our actions at pleasure, even though one 
may not succeed in attaining it; or at absence of 
pain, even though one is unable to secure it; or at 
getting the things in accordance with nature, even 
though one does not attain any of them. Hence 
there is a divergence between the different concep- 
tions as to the Ends of Goods and Evils, precisely 
equivalent to the difference of opinion as to the 
primary natural objects.—Others again starting from 
the same primary objects will make the sole stan- 
dard of right action the actual attainment of plea- 
411 


20 


21 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


aut ad non dolendum aut ad prima illa secundum 
naturam obtinenda. 

“ Expositis iam igitur sex de summo bono senten- 
tiis, trium proximarum hi principes: voluptatis Ari- 
stippus, non dolendi Hieronymus, fruendi rebus iis 
quas primas secundum naturam esse diximus Carne- 
ades non ille quidem auctor sed defensor disserendi 
causa fuit. Superiores tres erant quae esse possent; 
quarum est una sola defensa eaque vehementer. 
Nam voluptatis causa facere omnia cum, etiamsi nihil 
consequamur, tamen ipsum illud consilium ita faciendi 
per se expetendum et honestum et solum bonum sit, 
nemo dixit. Ne vitationem quidem doloris ipsam 
per se quisquam in rebus expetendis putavit nisi 
etiam evitare posset.. At vero facere omnia ut adi- 
piscamur quae secundum naturam sunt etiamsi ea 
non assequamur, id esse et honestum et solum per 
se expetendum et solum bonum Stoici dicunt. 

VIII. “Sex igitur hae sunt simplices de summa 
bonorum malorumque sententiae, duae sine patrono, 
quattuor defensae. Iunctae autem et duplices ex- 
positiones summi boni tres omnino fuerunt, nec vero 
plures, si penitus rerum naturam videas, esse potue- 
runt. Nam aut voluptas adiungi potest ad honesta- 
tem,.ut Calliphonti Dinomachoque placuit, aut doloris 
vacuitas, ut Diodoro, aut prima naturae, ut antiquis, 
quos eosdem Academicos et Peripateticos nominamus. 


aThis is obviously incorrect; for formal completeness, 
Carneades ought to have made six composite Ends, by 
combining Morality with the pursuzt of each of the three 
primary objects of desire as well as with their attainment; 
but no doubt at this point he felt the unreality of his scheme 
and drew back, since Morality, according to Aristippus, 
Epicurus and the Stoics was the pursuit of pleasure, free- 
dom from pain, and the natural goods respectively. 


412. 


—— 


BOOK V. vii-viii 


sure, freedom from pain, or the primary things in 
accordance with nature, respectively. 

“Thus we have now set forth six views as to the 
Chief Good. The leading upholders of the latter 
three are; of pleasure, Aristippus; of freedom from 
pain, Hieronymus; of the enjoyment of what we 
have called the primary things in accordance with 
nature, Carneades,—that is, he did not originate 
this view but he upheld it for polemical purposes. 
The three former were possible views, but only one 
of them has been actually maintained, though that 
with great vigour. No one has asserted pleasure to 


‘be the sole aim of action in the sense that the mere 


intention of attaining pleasure, although unsuccess- 
ful, is in itself desirable and moral and the only 
good. Nor yet has anyone held that the effort to 
avoid pain is in itself a thing desirable, without one’s 
being able actually to avoid it. On the otherhand, that 
morality consists in using every endeavour to obtain 
the things in accordance with nature, and that this 
endeavour even though unsuccessful is itself the sole 
thing desirable and the sole good, is actually main- 
tained by. the Stoics. 

VIII. “These then are the six simple views about 
the End of Goods and Evils; two of them without a 
champion, and four actually eaaheid: Of composite 
or dualistic definitions of the Supreme Good there 
have been three in all; nor were more than three 
possible, if you examine the nature of the case 
closely.2 There is the combination of Morality with 
pleasure, adopted by Callipho and Dinomachus; 
with freedom from pain, by Diodorus; or with the 
primary objects of nature, the view of the ancients, as 
we entitle both the Academics and the Peripatetics. 

413 


(Of these six 
possible Ends, 
four actually 
upheld.) 


(The Stoic view.) 


or the End may 
consist in the 
combination of 
one of these 
three things with 
Virtue. 


23 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


“Sed quoniam non possunt omnia simul dici, haec 
in praesentia nota esse debebunt, voluptatem semo- 
vendam esse, quando ad maiora quaedam, ut iam ap- 
parebit, natisumus. De vacuitate doloris eadem fere 
dici solent quae de voluptate.1 Nec vero alia sunt 
quaerenda contra Carneadiam illam sententiam ; quo- 
cumque enim modo summum bonum sic exponitur ut 
id vacet honestate, nec officia nec virtutes in ea ratione 
nec amicitiae constare possunt. Coniunctio autem cum — 
honestate vel voluptatis vel non dolendi id ipsum 
honestum quod amplecti vult id efficit turpe. Ad eas 
enim res referre quae agas, quarum una si quis malo 
careat in summo eum bono dicat esse, altera versetur 
in levissima parte naturae, obscurantis est omnem 
splendorem honestatis, ne dicam inquinantis. Restant 
Stoici, qui, cum a Peripateticis et Academicis omnia 
transtulissent, nominibus aliis easdem res secuti sunt. 

“Hos contra singulos dici est melius; sed nunc 
quod agimus; de illis cum volemus. 

“Democriti autem securitas, quae est animi tranquil- 
litas,? quam appellavit? ei@vplav, eo separanda fuit ab 
hae disputatione, quia ista animi tranquillitas ea 
est ipsa beata vita; quaerimus autem non quae sit 
sed unde sit. Jam explosae eiectaeque sententiae 
Pyrrhonis, Aristonis, Erilli, quod in hune orbem 


‘After voluptate, MSS. add: Quoniam igitur et de 
voluptate cum Torguato et de honestate, in qua una omne 
bonum poneretur, cum Catone est disputatum, primum, 
quae contra voluptatem dicta sunt, eadem fere cadunt 
contra vacuitatem doloris. Edd. reject this reference to 
the two earlier dialogues as an interpolation, since they are 
supposed to take place at a later date than the present one. 

*tranquillitas Miller ; tranquillitas tanguam BE ; [tam- 
quam] trang. Mdv. 

Sappellavit inf. MSS., Miiller ; appellant B, E, Mdv. 

414 


22 


23 


BOOK V. viii 


“e ° ° 5 . 
But it is impossible to set forth the whole of our Rejecting such 
sy 7 of these alterna- 
position at once; so for the present we need only tives scinclude 


notice that pleasure must be discarded, on the ground i the End plea- 
that Tl b 1 E sure or absence 
at, as wi e shown later, we are intended by of pain, or do 


G m : « not include Vir- 
nature for greater things. Freedom from pain is {ie sswellas 


open to practically the same objections as pleasure. certain theories 
which do not 


‘Nor need we look for other arguments to refute the fall under the 


am’ 8 ’ : above classifica- 
opinion of Carneades; for any-conceivable account tian.iye are: Tee 


of the Chief Good which does not include the factor with the End of 
of Moral Worth gives a system under which there pearance 
is no room either for duty, virtue or friendship. "hich /sreally. | 
Moreover the combination with Moral Worth either too, viz. Virtue 
of pleasure or of freedom from pain debases the aha 
very morality that it aims at supporting. For to 
uphold two standards of conduct jointly, one of which 
declares freedom from evil to be the Supreme Good, 
while the other is a thing concerned with the most 
frivolous part of our nature, is to dim, if not to defile, 
all the radiance of Moral Worth. There remain the 
Stoics, who took over their whole system from the 
Peripatetics and the Academics, adopting the same 
ideas under other names. 

“The best way to deal with these different schools 
would be to refute each separately; but for the present 
we must keep to the business in hand; we will dis- 
cuss these other schools at our leisure. 

“The calmness or tranquillity of mind which is 


the Chief Good of Democritus, euthumia as he calls it, 


has had to be excluded from this discussion, because 


this mental tranquillity is in itself the happiness in 

question; and we are inquiring not what happiness 

is, but what produces it. Again, the discredited 

and abandoned theories of Pyrrho, Aristo and Erillus 

cannot be brought within the circle we have drawn, 
415 


24 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


quem circumscripsimus incidere non possunt, adhi- 
bendae omnino non fuerunt. Nam cum omnis haec 
quaestio de finibus et quasi de extremis bonorum et 
malorum ab eo proficiscatur quod diximus naturae 
esse aptum et accommodatum, quodque ipsum per 
se primum appetatur, hoc totum et ii tollunt qui in 
rebus iis in quibus nihil aut honestum aut turpe sit 
negant esse ullam causam cur aliud alii anteponatur 
nec inter eas res quidquam omnino putant interesse, 
et Erillus, si ita sensit, nihil esse bonum praeter 
scientiam, omnem consili capiendi causam inven- 
tionemque offici sustulit. 

“Sic exclusis sententiis reliquorum, cum praeter- 
ea nulla esse possit, haec antiquorum valeat ne- 
cesse est. Igitur* instituto veterum, quo etiam Stoici 
utuntur, hine capiamus exordium. 

IX. “ Omne animal se ipsum diligit, ac simul ost 
ortum?” id agit ut se conservet, quod hic ei primus ad 
omnem vitam tuendam appetitus a natura datur, se 
ut conservet atque ita sit affectum ut optime secun- 
dum naturam affectum esse possit. Hanc initio in- 
stitutionem confusam habet et incertam, ut tantum- 
modo se tueatur qualecumque sit ; sed nec quid sit 
nec quid possit nec quid ipsius natura sit intellegit. 
Cum autem processit paulum et quatenus quidque® 
se attingat ad seque pertineat perspicere coepit, tum 
sensim incipit progredi seseque agnoscere et intelle- 


1 [gitur: inf. MSS. ergo. 


2 est ortum conj. Miiller, cp. II, 33; e¢ or ut ortum est 
MSS.; [ez] ortum est Mdv. 


3 guidque Baiter, Miiller ; guidguid MSS., Mdy, 
416 


BOOK VV. viii-ix 

and so we have not been concerned to consider them 
at all. For the whole of this inquiry into the Ends 
or, so to speak, the limits of Goods and Evils must 
begin from that which we have spoken of as adapted 
and suited to nature and which is the earliest object 
of desire for its own sake; now this is entirely done 
away with by those who maintain that, in the sphere 
of things which contain no element of Moral Worth 
or baseness, there is no reason why any one thing 
should be preferred to any other, and who consider 
these things to be absolutely indifferent; and Erillus 
also, if he actually held that there is nothing good but 
knowledge, destroyed every motive of rational action 
and every clue to right conduct. 

“Thus we have eliminated the views of all the 
other philosophers; and no other view is possible; 
therefore this doctrine of the Ancients must hold 
good. Let us then follow the practice of the old 
philosophers, adopted also by the Stoics, and make 
this our starting-point. 

IX. * Every living creature loves itself, and from 4. Proof of the 
the moment of birth strives to secure its own preser- Bi aatiey abe 
vation ; because the earliest impulse bestowed on it 6004. (§§ 24-75) 


by nature for its life-long protection is the instinct Yen cedars 
for self-preservation and for the maintenance of {opment are 
itself in the best condition possible to it'in accord- raga Damtral 
ance with its nature. At the outset this tendency aim of all 
is vague and uncertain, so that it merely aims at pro- “°*™™* 
tecting itself whatever its character may be; it does 
notunderstand itself norits own capacitiesand nature. 
When, however, it has grown a little older, and has 
begun to notice the measure in which different 
things affect and concern itself, it now gradually 
commences to make progress. Self-consciousness 

EE 417 


CICERO DE FINIBUS ; 
gere quam ob causam habeat eum quem diximus 
animi appetitum, coeptatque et ea quae naturae sentit 
apta appetere et propulsare contraria. Ergo omni 
animali illud quod appetit positum est in eo quod 
naturae est accommodatum. Ita finis bonorum 
exsistit, secundum naturam vivere sic affectum ut 
optime affici possit ad naturamque accommodatissime. 
Quoniam autem sua cuiusque animantis natura est, 
necesse est finem quoque omnium hunc esse ut natura 
expleatur (nihil enim prohibet quaedam esse et inter 
se animalibus reliquis et cum bestiis homini commu- 
nia, quoniam omnium est natura communis), sed 
extrema illa et summa quae quaerimus inter anima- 
lium genera distincta et dispertita sint et sua cuique 
propria et ad id apta quod cuiusque natura desideret. 
= 
Quare cum dicimus omnibus animalibus extremum 
esse secundum naturam vivere, non ita accipiendum 
est quasi dicamus unum esse omnium extremum ; 
sed ut omnium artium recte dici potest commune 
esse ut in aliqua scientia versentur, scientiam autem 
suam cuiusque artis esse, sic commune animalium 
omnium secundum naturam vivere, sed naturas esse 
diversas, ut aliud equo sit e natura, aliud bovi, aliud 
homini, et tamenin omnibus summa communis, et qui- 


dem non solum in animalibus sed etiam in rebus 
418 


BOOK V. ix 


dawns, and the creature begins to understand the 
reason why it possesses the instinctive appetition 
aforesaid, and to try to obtain the things which it 
perceives to be adapted to its nature and to repel 
their opposites. Every living creature therefore 
finds its object of appetition in the thing suited to 
its nature. Thus arises the End of Goods, namely 
to live in accordance with nature and in that condi- 
tion which is the best and most suited to nature 
that is possible. At the same time every animal has 
its own nature ; and consequently, while for all alike 
the End consists in the satisfaction of that nature 
(for there is no reason why certain things should 
not be common to all the lower animals, and also 
to the lower animals and man, since all have a com- 
mon nature), yet the ultimate and supreme objects 
that we are investigating must be differentiated and 
distributed among the different kinds of animals, 
each kind having its own peculiar to itself and 
adapted to the requirements of its individual nature. 
Hence when we say that the End of all living crea- 
tures is to live in accordance with nature, this must 
not be construed as meaning that all have one 
and the same End; but just as it is correct to say 
that all the arts and sciences have the common 
characteristic of occupying themselves with some 
branch of knowledge, while each art has its own 
particular branch of knowledge belonging to it, so 
all animals have the common End of living accord- 
ing to nature, but their natures are diverse, so that 
one thing is in accordance with nature for the horse, 
another for the ox, and another for man, and yet in 
all the Supreme End is common, and that not only 
in animals but also in all those things upon which 
EE2 419 


27 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


omnibus iis quas natura alit, auget, tuetur ; in quibus 
videmus ea quae gignuntur e terra multa quodam 
modo efficere ipsa sibi per se quae ad vivendum cre- 
scendumque valeant, ut suo’ genere perveniant ad 
extremum ; ut iam liceat una comprehensione omnia 
complecti non dubitantemque dicere omnem naturam 
esse servatricem sui idque habere propositum quasi 
finem et extremum, se ut custodiat quam in optime 
sui generis statu; ut necesse sit omnium rerum quae 
natura vigeant similem esse finem, non eundem. Ex 
quo intellegi debet homini id esse in bonis ultimum 
secundum naturam vivere, quod ita interpretemur 
vivere ex hominis natura undique perfecta et nihi 
requirente. Haec igitur nobis explicanda sunt; sec 
si enodatius, vos ignoscetis. Huius enim aetat 
nunc” haee primum fortasse audientis servire debe 
mus.” “Ita prorsus,” inquam; “etsi ea quiden 
quae adhue dixisti quamvis ad aetatem recte ist 
modo dicerentur.”’ 

X. “Exposita igitur,’’ inquit, “terminatione rerun 
expetendarum, cur ista se res ita habeat ut dix 
deinceps demonstrandum est. Quamobrem ordia. 
mur ab eo quod primum posui, quod idem reapst 
primum est, ut intellegamus omne animal se ipsum 
diligere. Quod quamquam dubitationem non habe 
(est enim infixum in ipsa natura comprehenditurque 
suis cuiusque sensibus, sic ut contra si quis dicer 


‘ut suo Mdv.; et suo MSS. ; Miiller conj. uz zn suo. 

*aetati nunc. . audientis (conj. Mdv.) Miiller; aetati e 
huic nunc. . audienti MSS., Mdv. 

3 comprehenditurque edd.; comprehenditur MSS. 


4.20 


BOOK iV. “ik=x 


nature bestows nourishment, increase and protec- 


' tion. Among these things we notice that plants 


can, in a sense, perform on their own behalf a num- 


_ ber of actions conducive to their life and growth, so 


x 


that they may attain their End after their kind. So 
that finally we may embrace all animate existence in 
one broad generalization, and say without hesitation, 
that all nature is self-preserving, and has before it 
the end and aim of maintaining itself in the best pos- 
sible condition after its kind ; and that consequently 
all things endowed by nature with life have a similar, 
but not anidentical, End. This leads to the inference, 
that the ultimate Good of man is life in accordance 
with nature, which we may interpret as meaning life 
in accordance with human nature developed to its 
full perfection and supplied with all its needs. This, 
then, is the theory that we have to expound; but if it 
requires a good deal of explanation, you will receive 
it with forbearance. For this is perhaps the first 
time that Lucius has heard the subject debated, and 
we must make allowance for his youth.” “ Very 
true,” said I; “albeit the style of your discourse so 
far has been suited to hearers of any age.” 

X. “Well then,” he resumed, “having explained 
what the principle is which determines what things 
are desirable, I have next to show why the matter is 
as I have stated. Let us therefore begin from the posi- 
tion which I laid down first and which isalso first in the 
order of reality: let us understand that every living 
creature loves itself. The fact that this is so admits of 


no doubt, for indeed it is a fundamental fact of nature, 


and one that everybody can grasp for himself by the 

evidence of his senses, so much so that did anyone 

choose to deny it, he would not get a hearing; 
421 


Hence the End 
of man is the 
realization of 
human nature at 
its fullest 
development. 


Self-love 
universal; 


28 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


velit non audiatur), tamen ne quid praetermittamu: 
rationes quoque cur hoc ita sit afferendas puto. Ets: 
qui potest intellegi aut cogitari esse aliquod anima’ 
quod se oderit? Res enim concurrent contrariae. Nar 
cum appetitus ille animi aliquid ad se trahere coeperii 
consulto quod sibi obsit, quia sit sibi Inimicus, cur 
id sua causa faciet, et oderit se et simul diliget, quoc 
fieri non potest. Necesseque est si quis ipse sib 
inimicus est eum quae bona sunt mala putare, bon: 
contra quae mala, et quae appetenda fugere et quae 
fugienda appetere ; quae sine dubio vitae est eversio 
Neque enim, si nonnulli reperiuntur qui aut laqueo: 
aut alia exitia quaerant, aut’ ille apud Terentium 
qui “decrevit tantisper se minus iniuriae suo nate 
facere (ut ait ipse) dum fiat miser,’ inimicus ipse sib 
putandus est. Sed alii dolore moventur, alii cupidi 
tate ; iracundia etiam multi efferuntur et, cum i1 
mala scientes irruunt, tum se optime sibi consuler 
arbitrantur. Itaque dicunt nec dubitant : 

“Mihi sic est usus; tibi ut opus est facto, face.’ 
Qui ipsi sibi? bellum indixissent, cruciari dies, nocte 
torqueri vellent, nec vero sese ipsi accusarent ob ean 
causam quod se male suis rebus consuluisse dicerent 
eorum enim est haec querela qui sibi cari sunt sese 
que diligunt. Quare, quotienscumque dicetur mal. 

‘aut: aut ut MSS.; aut [ud] Mdv. 

2 Oui ipst sibi MSS., edd.; gud ipst si E; qué stbi aps 
inf. MS. Perhaps Quz sz ipsz sibi ed. 


a Terence Heautontimorumenos (The Self-tormentor) 14’ 
b From the same play, 1. 80. 


422 


28 


29 


BOOK V. x 


nevertheless, so that no step may be omitted, I sup- 
pose I ought also to give reasons to show why it is 
so. Yet how can you form any intelligible concep- 
tion of an animal that should hate itself? The thing 
is a contradiction in terms. For the creature being 
its own enemy, the instinctive appetition we spoke 
of will deliberately set about drawing to itself some- 
thing harmful to itself; yet it will be doing this 
for its own sake; therefore the animal will both 
hate and love itself at the same time, which is im- 
possible. Also, if a man is his own enemy, it follows 
that he will think good evil and evil good ; that he 
will avoid things that are desirable and seek things 
that ought to be avoided ; but this undeniably would 
mean to turn the whole of life upside down. A few 
people may be found who attempt to end their lives 
with a halter or by other means; but these, or the 
character of Terence* who (in his own words) ‘ re- 
solved that if he made himself to suffer, he so made 
less the wrong he did his son,’ are not to be put down 
as haters of themselves. The motive with some is 
grief, with others passion ; many are rendered insane 
by anger, and plunge into ruin with their eyes open, 
fancying all the time that what they do is for their 
own best interests. Hence they say, and say in all 
sincerity : 

“It is my way; do you do as it suits you.’ 
Men who had really declared war against themselves 
would court days of torment and nights of anguish, 
nor would they reproach themselves for having 
done so and say that they had been misguided and 
imprudent: such lamentations show that they love 
and care for themselves. It follows that whenever 

423 


for (i) to desire 
one’s own harm 
is a contradic- 
tion in terms; 


30 


31 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


quis de se mereri sibique inimicus esse atque hostis, 
vitam denique fugere, intellegatur aliquam subesse 
eiusmodi causam ut ex eo ipso intellegi possit sibi 
quemque esse carum. Nec vero id satis est, nemi- 
nem esse qui ipse se oderit, sed illud quoque intelle- 
gendum est, neminem esse qui quomodo se habeat 
nihil sua censeat interesse. Tolletur enim appetitus 
animi si, ut in iis rebus inter quas nihil interest 
neutram in partem propensiores sumus, item in 
nobismet ipsis quemadmodum affecti simus_ nihil 
nostra arbitrabimur interesse. 

XI. “ Atque etiam illud si qui dicere velit, perab- 
surdum sit, ita diligi a sese quemque ut ea vis 
diligendiad aliam rem quampiam referatur, nonad eum 
ipsum qui sese diligat. Hoc cum in amicitiis, cum 
in officiis, cum in virtutibus dicitur, qaomodocumque 
dicitur, intellegi tamen quid dicatur potest; in 
nobismet ipsis autem ne? intellegi quidem ut? 
propter aliam quampiam rem, verbi gratia propter 
voluptatem, nos amemus; propter nos enim illam, 
non propter eam nosmet ipsos diligimus. Quam- 
quam quid est quod magis perspicuum sit quam? non 
modo carum sibi quemque, verum etiam vehementer 
carum esse ? quis est enim aut quotus quisque cui 
mors cum appropinquet non 

“refugiat timido sanguen atque exalbescat metu’? 
Etsi hoe quidem est in vitio, dissolutionem naturae 


‘ne, ut, quam inserted by edd. 


aFrom the same passage of Ennius’s Alcmaeon as is 
quoted at IV, 62. 


A QA 


BOOK V. x-xi 


it is said of a man that he has ruined himself and 

is his own worst enemy, and that he is tired of 

life, you may be sure that there is really an ex- 
planation which would justify the inference, even 

from such a case as this, that every man loves him- (i) nor is any- 
self. Nor is it enough to say that nobody exists ng imdiferent 
who hates himself; we must also realize that no- fate; 

body exists who thinks it makes no difference to him 

what his own condition is. For it will be destructive 

of the very faculty of desire if we come to think of 

our Own circumstances as a matter of indifference to 

us, and feel in our own case the absolute neutrality 

which is our attitude towards the things that are 

really indifferent. 

XI. “It would also be utterly absurd if any- (iii) love of other 
one desired to maintain that, though the fact of te Tor 
self-love is admitted, this instinct of affection is really self-love; 
directed towards some other object and not towards 
the person himself who feels it. When this is said 
of friendship, of right action or of virtue, whether 
correct or not, it has some intelligible meaning ; but 
in the case of ourselves it is utterly meaningless to 
say that we love ourselves for the sake of something 
else, for example, for the sake of pleasure. Clearly we 
do not love ourselves for the sake of pleasure, but 
pleasure for the sake of ourselves. Yet what fact is (iv) self-love 
more self-evident than that every man not merely apne hes 
loves himself, but loves himself very much indeed ? even in children, 
For who is there, what percentage of mankind, : 


whose 


“Blood does not ebb with horror, and face turn pale 
with fear,’ * 


at the approach of death? No doubt it is a fault to 
4AQ45 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


tam valde perhorrescere (quod item* est reprehen- 
dendum in dolore); sed quia fere sic afficiuntur 
omnes, satis argumenti est ab interitu naturam ab- 
horrere ; idque quo magis quidam ita faciunt ut iure 
etiam reprehendantur, hoc magis intellegendum est 
haec ipsa nimia in quibusdam futura non fuisse nisi 
quaedam essent modica natura. Nec vero dico 
eorum metum mortis qui, quia privari se vitae bonis 
arbitrentur aut quia quasdam post mortem formidines 
extimescant aut si? metuant ne cum dolore morian- 
tur, idcireo mortem fugiant; in parvis enim saepe 
qui nihil eorum cogitant, si quando iis ludentes 
minamur praecipitaturos alicunde, extimescunt. Quin 
etiam ‘ ferae,’ inquit Pacuvius, 

“quibus abest ad praecavendum intellegendi astutia,’ 
iniecto terrore mortis ‘ horrescunt.’ Quis autem de 
ipso sapiente aliter existimat quin, etiam cum decre- 
verit esse moriendum, tamen discessu a suis atque 
ipsa relinquenda luce moveatur? Maxime autem 
in hoc quidem genere vis est perspicua naturae, cum 
et mendicitatem multi perpetiantur ut vivant, et 
angantur appropinquatione mortis confecti homines 
senectute, et ea perferant quae Philoctetam videmus 
in fabulis ; qui cum cruciaretur non ferendis dolori- 
bus, propagabat tamen vitam aucupio; “ configebat 
tardus celeres, stans volantes, ut apud Attium est, 


‘item: Mdv. conj. zdem. 
2st: Miiller conj. guia. 


iS) 


BOOK V. xi 


recoil so violently from the dissolution of our being 
(and the same timidity in regard to pain is blame- 
worthy); but the fact that practically everybody has 
this feeling is conclusive proof that nature shrinks 
from destruction ; and the more some people act thus 
—as indeed they do to a blameworthy degree—the 
more it is to be inferred that this very excess would not 
have occurred in exceptional cases, were not a cer- 
tain moderate degree of such timidity natural. I am 
not referring to the fear of death felt by those who 
shun death because they believe it means the loss of 
the good things of life, or because they are afraid 
of certain horrors after death, or if they dread lest 
death may be painful: for very often young children, 
who do not think of any of these things, are terribly 
frightened if in fun we threaten to let them fall 


° 4 . > . 
from a height. Even wild creatures,’ says Pacuvius, 


“Lacking discourse of reason 
To look before,’ 


when seized with fear of death, ‘bristle with 
horror.’ Who does not suppose that the Wise Man 
himself, even when he has resolved that he must 
die, will yet be affected at parting from his friends 
and quitting the very light of day? The strength 
of natural impulse, in this manifestation of it, is 
extremely obvious, since many men endure to beg 
their bread in order that they may live, and men 


broken with age suffer anguish at the approach of 


death, and endure torments like those of Philoctetes 
in the play; who though racked with intolerable 
pains, nevertheless prolonged his life by fowling; , 


“Slow he pierced the swift with arrows, standing 


shot them on the wing,’ 
4.27 


in Wise Men, a1 
in the miserab] 


23 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


pennarumque contextu corpori tegumenta faciebat. 
De hominum genere aut omnino de animalium lo- 
quor, cum arborum et stirpium eadem paene natura 
sit? Sive enim, ut doctissimis viris visum est, maior 
aliqua causa atque divinior hane vim ingenuit, sive 
hoc ita fit fortuito, videmus ea quae terra gignit 
corticibus et radicibus valida servari, quod contingit 
animalibus sensuum distributione et quadam com- 
pactione membrorum. Qua quidem de re quamquam 
assentior iis qui haec omnia regi natura putant, quae si 
natura neglegat, ipsa esse non possit,! tamen concedo 
ut qui de hoc dissentiunt existiment quod velint ac vel 
hoc intellegant, si quando naturam hominis dicam, ho- 
minem dicere me; nihil enim hoc differt. Nam prius 
a se poterit quisque discedere quam appetitum earum 
rerum quae sibi conducant amittere. JIure igitur 
gravissimi. philosophi initium summi boni a natura 
petiverunt et illum appetitum rerum ad naturam 
accommodatarum ingeneratum putaverunt omnibus, 
quia continetur” ea commendatione naturae qua se 
ipsi diligunt. 

XII. “Deinceps videndum est, quoniam satis 
apertum est sibi quemque natura esse carum, quae 
sit hominis natura. Id est enim de quo quaerimus. 
Atqui perspicuum est hominem e corpore animoque 
constare, cum primae sint animi partes, secundae 


a | possit B, E, Mdv. ; possint inf. MSS. 

“quia continetur suggested by Mdv., who prints guia 
continentur , quit continentur MSS.; gui continetur Sché- 
mann. 


428 


BOOK V. xi-xii 


as Attius has it, and wove their plumage together to (v) the law of 
33 make himself garments. But do I speak-of the S¢{Prsctvation 
human race or of animals generally, when the nature 22imate nature. 
of trees and plants is almost the same? For whether 
it be, as very learned men have thought, that this 
capacity has been engendered in them by some 
higher and diviner power, or whether it is the result 
of chance, we see that the vegetable species secure 
by means of their bark and roots that support and 
protection which animals derive from the distribu- 
tion of the sensory organs and from the well-knit 
framework of the limbs. On this matter I agree, it 
is true, with those who hold that all these things 
are regulated by nature, because if nature were to 
neglect them her own existence would be impossible; 
yet I allow those who think otherwise on this point 
to hold what view they please: whenever I men- 
tion ‘the nature of man,’ let them, if they like, 
understand me to mean ‘man,’ as it makes no 
difference. For the individual can no more lose the 
instinct to seek the things that are good for him 
than he can divest himself of his own personality. 
The wisest authorities have therefore been right in 
finding the basis of the Chief Good in nature, and in 
holding that this instinctive desire for things suited 
to our nature is innate in all men, because it is 
founded on that natural attraction which makes 
them love themselves. 
$4 XII. “Having made it sufficiently clear that Review of 
every one by nature loves himself, we must next ™™* "ture: 
examine what is the nature of man. For it is human 
nature that is the object of our investigation. Now 
it is manifest that man consists of body and mind, 
although the parts of the mind hold the first place 
429 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 

corporis. Deinde id quoque videmus, et ita figu- 
ratum corpus ut excellat aliis, animumque ita consti- 
tutum ut et sensibus instructus sit et habeat prae- 
stantiam mentis cui tota hominis natura pareat, in 
qua sit mirabilis quaedam vis rationis et cognitionis 
et scientiae virtutumque omnium. Nam quae corpo- 
ris sunt ea nec auctoritatem cum animi partibus 
comparandam et cognitionem habent faciliorem. 
Itaque ab his ordiamur. 

35° “Corporis igitur nostri partes totaque figura et 
forma et statura quam apta ad naturam sit apparet, 
neque est dubium quin frons, oculi, aures et reliquae 
partes quales propriae sint hominis intellegatur; sed 
certe opus est ea valere et vigere et naturales motus 
ususque habere, ut nec absit quid eorum nec aegrum 
debilitatumve sit. Id enim natura desiderat. Est 
autem etiam actio quaedam corporis quae motus et 
status naturae congruentes tenet; in quibus si 
peccetur distortione et depravatione quadam ac 
motu statuve deformi, ut si aut manibus ingrediatur 
quis aut non ante sed retro, fugere plane se ipse et 
hominem exuens ex homine naturam odisse videatur. 
Quamobrem etiam sessiones quaedam et flexi fracti- 
que motus, quales protervorum hominum aut mollium 


esse solent, contra naturam sunt, ut etiamsi animi 
430 


BOOK V. xii 


and those of the body the second. Next we further 
observe both that man’s body is of a structure sur- 
passing that of other animals, and that his mind is so 
constituted as not only to be equipped with senses 
but also to possess the predominant factor of intel- 
lect, which commands the obedience of the whole 
of man’s nature, being endowed with the marvellous 
faculties of reason, of cognition, of knowledge and of 
all the virtues. For the attributes of the body are 
not comparable in importance with the parts of the 
mind; and moreover they are easier to understand. 
We will therefore begin with them. 

“Tt is manifest how well the parts of our body, The body: its 
and its entire figure, form and stature are adapted nae ee 
to our nature; and that special conformation of the by its parts. 
brow, eyes, ears and other parts which is appropriate 
to man, can be recognized without hesitation by the 
understanding; but of course it is necessary that - 
these organs should be healthy and vigorous and 
possessed of their natural motions and uses; no part 
must be lacking and none must be diseased or en- 
feebled. This is a requirement of nature. Again, 
our body also possesses a faculty of action which 
keeps its motions and postures in harmony with 
nature; and any error in these, due to distortion 
or deformity or abnormality of movement or pos- 
ture,—for example, if a man were to walk on his 
hands, or backwards instead of forwards,—would 
make a man appear alienated from himself, as 
if he had stripped off his proper humanity and 
hated his own nature. Hence certain attitudes in 
sitting, and slouching, languishing movements, such 
as are affected by the wanton and the effeminate, are 
contrary to nature, and though really arising from a 

431 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


vitio id eveniat tamen in corpore mutari hominis 
natura videatur. Itaque e contrario moderati aequa- 
bilesque habitus, affectiones ususque corporis apti 
esse ad naturam videntur. 

“Tam vero animus non esse solum sed etiam cuius- 
dam modi debet esse, ut et omnes partes suas habeat 
incolumes et de virtutibus nulla desit. Atque in 
sensibus est sua cuiusque virtus, ut ne quid impediat 
quo minus suo sensus quisque munere fungatur in 
iis rebus celeriter expediteque percipiendis quae 
subiectae sunt sensibus. XIII. Animi autem et eius 
animi partis quae princeps est quaeque mens nomi- 
natur plures sunt virtutes, sed duo prima genera, 
unum earum quae ingenerantur suapte natura ap- 
pellanturque non voluntariae, alterum’ earum quae 
in voluntate positae magis proprio nomine appellari 
solent, quarum est excellens in animorum laude prae- 
stantia. Prioris generis est docilitas, memoria; quae 
fere omnia appellantur uno ingeni nomine, easque 
virtutes qui habent ingeniosi vocantur. Alterum 
autem genus est magnarum verarumque virtutum 
quas appellamus voluntarias, ut prudentiam, tem- 
perantiam, fortitudinem, iustitiam et reliquas generis 
eiusdem. 

“Et summatim quidem haec erant de corpore ani- 
moque dicenda, quibus quasi informatum est quid 
hominis natura postulet; ex quo perspicuum est, 
quoniam ipsi a nobis diligamur omniaque et in animo 


lalterum inf. MSS., Mdv.; alterum autem E. 
432 


36 


BOOK V. xii-xiii 


defect of mind, suggest to the eye a bodily perver- 
sion of man’s nature. And so, on the contrary, a 
controlled and well-regulated bearing, condition and 
movement of the body have the appearance of being 
in harmony with nature. 

‘Turning now to the mind, this must a only The Senses 
exist, but also be of a certain character; it must 
have all its parts intact and lack none of the virtues. 
The senses also possess their several virtues or excel- 
lences, consisting in the unimpeded performance of 
their several functions of swiftly and readily per- 
ceiving the objects presented to them.. XIII. The Themina,and its 
mind, on the other hand, and that dominant part of nee 
the ind which is called the intellect, possess many metro ae 
excellences or virtues, but these are of two main peadaig on voli- 
classes; one class consists of those excellences which HO viz» moral 
are the result of our natural endowments and which 
are called non-volitional; and the other of those 
which, depending on our volition, are usually styled 
‘virtues’ in the more special sense; and the latter are 
the pre-eminent glory and distinction of the mind. 
To the former class belong receptiveness and memory; 
and practically all the excellences of this class are 
included under one name of “talent, and their 
possessors are spoken of as ‘talented.’ The other 
class consists of the lofty virtues properly so called, 
which we speak of as dependent on volition, for 
instance, Prudence, Temperance, Courage, Justice, 
and the others of the same kind. 

“ Such is the account, a brief one, it is true, that Self-love com- 


rehends the 
it was necessary to give of the body and the mind. Paivation of all 


_ It has indicated in outline what the requirements these excel- 


lences: 
of man’s nature are; and it has clearly shown 


that, since we love ourselves, and desire all our 


FF 433 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


et in corpore perfecta velimus esse, ea nobis ipsa 
cara esse propter se et in iis esse ad bene vivendum 
momenta maxima. Nam cui proposita sit conservatio 
sui, necesse est huic partes quoque sui caras esse, 
carioresque quo perfectiores sint et magis in suo 
genere laudabiles. Ea enim vita expetitur quae sit 
animi corporisque expleta virtutibus, in eoque sum- 
mum bonum poni necesse est, quando quidem id tale 
esse debet ut rerum expetendarum sit extremum. 
Quo cognito dubitari non potest quin, cum ipsi 
homines sibi sint per se et sua sponte cari, partes 
quoque et corporis et animi et earum rerum quae 
sunt in utriusque motu et statu sua caritate colantur 
et per se ipsae appetantur. Quibus expositis facilis 
est coniectura ea maxime esse expetenda ex nostris 
quae plurimum habent dignitatis, ut optimae cuius- 
que partis quae! per se expetatur virtus sit expetenda 
maxime. Ita fiet ut animi virtus corporis virtuti 
anteponatur animique virtutes non voluntarias vin- 
cant virtutes voluntariae, quae quidem proprie vir- 
tutes appellantur multumque excellunt, propterea 
quod ex ratione gignuntur qua nihil est in homine 
divinius. . Etenim omnium rerum quas et creat na- 
tura et tuetur, quae aut sine animo sunt aut non?” 
multo secus, earum summum bonum in corpore est; 
ut non inscite illud dictum videatur in sue, animum 
illi pecudi datum pro sale, ne putisceret. XIV. Sunt 


‘Perhaps guae maxime per se ed, 
* non inserted by edd, 


434 \ 


38 


BOOK V. xiii 


attributes both of mind and body to be perfect, 
our mind and body are themselves dear to us for 
their own sakes, and are of the highest importance 
for our general well-being. For he who aims at the 
preservation of himself, must necessarily feel an affec- 
tion for the parts of himself also, and the more so, 
the more perfect and admirable in their own kind 
they are. For the life we desire is one fully equipped 
with the virtues of mind and body; and such a life 
must constitute the Chief Good, inasmuch as it must 
necessarily be such as to be the limit of things desir- 
able. This truth realized, it cannot be doubted that, 
as men feel an affection towards themselves for their 
own sakes and of their own accord, the parts also of 
the body and mind, and of those faculties which are 
displayed in each while in motion or at rest, are 
esteemed for their own attractiveness and desired 
for their own sake. From these explanations, it 
may readily be inferred that the most desirable of 
our attributes are those possessed of the highest 
intrinsic worth; so that the most desirable excel- 
lences are the excellences of the noblest parts of us, 
which are desirable for their own sake. The result 
will be that excellence of mind will be rated higher 
than excellence of body, and the volitional virtues 
of the mind will surpass the non-volitional; the 
former, indeed, are the “ virtues’ specially so called, 
and are far superior, in that they spring from reason, 
the most divine element in man. For the inanimate 
or nearly inanimate creatures that are under nature’s 
charge, all of them have their supreme good in the 
body; hence it has been cleverly said, as I think, about 
the pig, that a mind has been bestowed upon this 
animal to serve as salt and keep it from going bad. 
FF2 435 


especially of 
moral virtue, as 
springing from 
reason, the 
highest part of 
man; 


39 


40 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


autem bestiae quaedam in quibus inest aliquid simile 
virtutis, ut in leonibus, ut in canibus, ut? in equis, 
in quibus non corporum solum ut in suibus sed etiam 
animorum aliqua ex parte motus quosdam videmus. 
In homine autem summa omnis animi est et in animo 
rationis, ex qua virtus est, quae rationis absolutio 
definitur, quam etiam atque etiam explicandam 
putant. 

“Rarum etiam rerum quas terra gignit educatio 
quaedam et perfectio est non dissimilis animantium ; 
itaque et vivere vitem et mori dicimus, arboremque 
et novellam et vetulam et vigere et senescere; ex 
quo non est alienum ut animantibus sic illis et apta 
quaedam ad naturam putare et aliena, earumque 
augendarum et alendarum quandam cultricem esse, 
quae sit scientia atque ars agricolarum, quae circum- 
cidat, amputet, erigat, extollat, adminiculet, ut quona- 
tura ferat eo possint ire; ut ipsae vites si loqui possint 
ita se tractandas tuendasque esse fateantur. Et nunc 
quidem quod eam tuetur, ut de vite potissimum 
loquar, est id extrinsecus; in ipsa enim parum magna 
vis inest ut quam optime se habere possit si nulla 
cultura adhibeatur. At vero si ad vitem sensus ac- 
cesserit, ut appetitum quendam habeat et per se 
ipsa moveatur, quid facturam putas? An ea quae 
per vinitorem antea consequebatur per se ipsa cura- 

1 ut inserted by edd. 


a This definition of moral virtue and the doctrine above 
of its superiority to intellectual excellence (the exact oppo- 
site of Aristotle’s view) are Stoic tenets foisted on the Peri- 
patetics by Antiochus. 


436 


BOOK V. xiv 


XIV. But there are some animals which possess 
something resembling virtue, for example, lions, 
dogs and horses ; in these we observe not only bodily 
movements as in pigs, but in some degree a sort of 
mental activity also. In man, however, the Supreme 
End appertains entirely to the mind, and to the 
rational part of the mind, which is the source of 
virtue; and virtue is defined as the perfection of 
reason,* a doctrine which the Peripatetics think can- 
not be expounded too often. 
ce 

Plants also have a development and progress to but also the 
maturity that is not unlike that of animals; hence (weouaat 
“we speak of a vine as living and dying, or of a tree Bis patie, Vee 

i Q 3 ‘ e shares with 
as young or old, in the prime of life or decrepit; animals and 
consequently it is appropriate to suppose that with °°" 245 
them as with animals certain things are suited and 
certain other things foreign to their nature; and 
that their growth and nurture is tended by a foster- 
mother, the science and art of husbandry, which 
trims and prunes, straightens, raises and props, 
enabling them to follow the course that nature pre- 
scribes, till the vines themselves, could they speak, 
would acknowledge this to be their proper mode of 
treatment and of tendance. In reality, of course, 
the power that tends the vine, to take that parti- 
cular instance, is something outside of it; for the 
vine does not possess force enough in itself to be 
able to attain its highest possible development with- 
out the aid of cultivation. But suppose the vine to 
receive the gift of sensation, bestowing on it some 
degree of appetition and power of movement; then 
what do you think it will do? Will it not endeavour 
to provide for itself the benefits which it previously 
obtained by the aid of the vine-dresser? But do 
437 


41 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


bit? Sed videsne accessuram ei curam ut sensus 
quoque suos eorumque omnem appetitum et si qua 
sint adiuncta ei membra tueatur? Sic ad illa quae 
semper habuit iunget ea quae postea accesserint,* 
nec eundem finem habebit quem cultor eius habebat, 
sed volet secundum eam naturam quae postea eiadiun- 
cta erit? vivere. Ita similis erit ei finis boni atque 
antea fuerat, neque idem tamen; non enim iam stirpis 
bonum quaeret sed animalis. Quid si non sensus 
modo ei datus sit verum etiam animus hominis? non 
necesse est et illa pristina manere ut tuenda sint et. 
haec multo esse cariora quae accesserint, animique 
optimam quamque partem carissimam, in eaque ex- 
pletione naturae summi boni finem consistere, cum 
longe multumque praestet mens atque ratio? Sic 
exstitit® extremum omnium appetendorum atque 
ductum a prima commendatione naturae multis 
gradibus ascendit ut ad summum perveniret, quod 
cumulatur ex integritate corporis et ex mentis ratione 
perfecta. 

XV. “Cum igitur ea sit quam exposui forma na- 
turae, si ut initio dixi simul atque ortus esset se 
quisque cognosceret iudicareque posset quae vis et 
totius esset naturae et partium singularum, continuo 
videret quid esset hoe quod quaerimus, omnium 
rerum quas expetimus summum et ultimum, nec 
ulla in re peccare posset. Nunc vero a primo quidem 
mirabiliter oceulta natura est nec perspici nec 

1 accesserint MSS., edd.; Mdv. suggests accesserunt. 

2 erit Miller; s7t MSS.; est Mdv. 

‘ste extitit Mdv.; sic et, sicque, sitque MSS. 

438 


4.1 


BOOK V. xiv-xv 


you mark how it will further be concerned to pro- 
tect its sensory faculties also and all their appetitive 
instincts, and any additional organs it may have 
developed? Thus with the properties that it always 
possessed it will combine those subsequently added 
to it, and it will not have the same End as the hus- 
bandman who tended it had, but will desire to live in 
accordance with that nature which it hassubsequently 
aequired. Andsoits End or Good will be similar to, but 
not the same as, what it was before; it will no longer 
seek the Good of a plant, but that of an animal. Sup- 
pose again that it have bestowed upon it not merely 
sensation but also a human mind. Will it not result 
that while its former properties remain objects of 
its care, these added properties will be far more dear 
to it, and that the best part of the mind will be the 
dearest of all? Will it not find its End or Chief 
Good in this crowning development of its nature, 
inasmuch as intellect and reason are far and away 
the highest faculties that exist? Thus there has 
emerged the final term of the series of objects of 
desire; thus guided by the primary attraction of 
nature it has risen by many stages till it has reached 
the summit, the consummation of perfect bodily in- 
tegrity combined with the fyll development of the 
mental faculty of reason. 

XV. “The plan of our nature being then that 
which I have explained, if, as I said at the outset, 


Man’s End the 
perfection of his 
whole being. 


Man attains only 
gradually toa 
knowledge of 


every man as soon as he is born could know himself is nature, 


and could appreciate the powers of his nature as a 
whole and of its several parts, he would at once per- 
ceive what is this thing that we seek, the highest and 
last of the objects of our desires, and he would be in- 


capable of error in anything. But as it is, our nature 
439 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


cognosci potest; progredientibus autem aetatibus 
sensim tardeve potius quasi nosmet ipsos cognoscimus. 
Itaque prima illa commendatio quae a natura nostri 
facta est nobis incerta et obscura est, primusque 
appetitus ille animi tantum agit ut salvi atque 
integri esse possimus; cum autem dispicere coepi- 
mus, et sentire quid simus et quid ab” animantibus 
ceteris differamus, tum ea sequi incipimus ad quae 
nati sumus. Quam similitudinem videmus in bestiis, 
quae primo in quo loco natae sunt ex eo se non 
commovent; deinde suo quaeque appetitu movetur; 
serpere anguiculos, nare anaticulas, evolare merulas, 
cornibus uti videmus boves, nepas aculeis, suam 
denique cuique naturam esse ad vivendum ducem. 
Quae similitudo in genere etiam humano apparet. 
Parvi enim primo ortu sic iacent, tamquam omnino 
sine animo sint; cum autem paulum firmitatis acces- 
sit, et animo utuntur et sensibus, conitunturque 
sese ut erigant, et manibus utuntur, et eos agno- 
scunt a quibus educantur; deinde aequalibus dele- 
ctantur libenterque se cum iis congregant dantque 
se ad ludendum fabellarumque auditione ducuntur, 
deque eo quod ipsis superat aliis gratificari volunt, 
animadvertuntque ea quae domi fiunt curiosius, 
incipiuntque commentari aliquid et discere, et eorum 
quos vident volunt non ignorare nomina, quibusque 
rebus cum aequalibus decertant si vicerunt efferunt 
se laetitia, victi debilitantur animosque demittunt; 


1 coepimus Mdv. with some MSS. (cp. 42 accessit), coeperi- 
mus B, E. 

2 ab added by edd. 

Saccessit Mdv. with B and E, inf. MSS. accesserit. 


440 


BOOK V. xv 


at the beginning is curiously hidden from us, and we 
cannot fully realize or understand it; yet as we grow 
older we gradually or I should say tardily come, as it 
were, to know ourselves. Accordingly, the earliest 
feeling of attraction which nature has created in us 
towards ourselves is vague and obscure, and the 
earliest instinct of appetition only strives to secure 
our safety and freedom from injury. When, however, 
discernment dawns and we begin to perceive what 
we are and how we differ from the rest of living 
creatures, we then commence to pursue the objects 
for which we are intended by nature. Some re- 
semblance to this process we observe in the lower 
animals. At first they do not move from the place 
where they were born. Then they begin to move, 
under the influence of their several instincts of 
appetition; we see little snakes gliding, ducklings 
swimming, blackbirds flying, oxen using their horns, 
scorpions their stings; each in fact has its own 
nature as its guide to life. A similar process is 
clearly seen in the human race. Infants just born 
lie as if absolutely inanimate; when they have 
acquired some small degree of strength, they exer- 
cise their mind and their senses; they strive to 
stand erect, they use their hands, they recognize 
their nurses; then they take pleasure in the society 
of other children, and enjoy meeting them, they 
take part in games and love to hear stories; they 
desire to bestow of their own abundance in bounty 
to others; they take a keen interest in what goes on 
in the household; they begin to reflect and to learn, 
and want to know the names of the people they 
see; in competition with their companions they are 
elated by victory, discouraged and disheartened by 
44) 


43 


deh 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


quorum sine causa fieri nihil putandum est. Est 
enim natura sic generata vis hominis ut ad omnem 
virtutem percipiendam facta videatur, ob eamque 
causam parvi virtutum simulacris quarum in se 
habent semina sine doctrina moventur; sunt enim 
prima elementa naturae, quibus auctis virtutis quasi 
germen! efficitur. Nam cum ita nati factique simus 
ut et agendi aliquid et diligendi aliquos et liberali- 
tatis et referendae gratiae principia in nobis contine- 
remus atque ad scientiam, prudentiam, fortitudinem 
aptos animos haberemus a contrariisque rebus alienos, 
non sine causa eas quas dixi in pueris virtutum quasi 
scintillas videmus, e quibus accendi philosophi ratio 
debet, ut eam quasi deum ducem subsequens ad 
naturae perveniat extremum. Nam ut saepe iam 
dixi in infirma aetate imbecillaque mente vis naturae 
quasi per caliginem cernitur; cum autem progrediens 
confirmatur animus, agnoscit ille quidem naturae 
vim, sed ita ut progredi possit longius, per se sit 
tantum” inchoata. 

XVI. “Intrandum igitur est in rerum naturam et 
penitus quid ea postulet pervidendum ; aliter enim 
nosmet ipsos nosse non possumus. Quod praeceptum 
quia maius erat quam ut ab homine videretur, idcirco 
assignatum est deo. Iubet igitur nos Pythius Apollo 
noscere nosmet ipsos; cognitio autem haec est una 
nostri ut vim corporis animique norimus sequamur- 
que eam vitam quae rebus iis® perfruatur. 


1 germen Gronovius, Mdv.; carmen MSS. 
2 tantum Mdv.; tamen MSS. 
3 rebus zis Miller (cp. § 46 and IV, 28, utraque re); rebus 
his B, E; rebus ipsis inf. MSS. ; [rebus] zis Mdv. 
44.2 


BOOK V. xv-xvi 


defeat. For every stage of this development there 

must be supposed to be a reason. It is that human (but the germ 
capacity is so constituted by nature that it appears 2 thevirtues 
designed to achieve every kind of virtue; hence im the impulses 
children, without instruction, are actuated by sem- eer ay 
blances of the virtues, of which they possess in them- 

selves the seeds, for those are primary elements of 

our nature, which seeds sprout and blossom into 

virtue. For we are so constituted from birth as to 

contain within us the primary instincts of activity, of 

affection, of liberality and of gratitude; we are also 

gifted with minds that are adapted to knowledge, 
prudence and courage, and averse from their oppo- 

sites; hence we see the reason why we observe in 

children those sparks of virtue I have mentioned, 

from which the philosopher’s torch of reason must 

be kindled, that he may follow reason as his divine 

guide and so arrive at nature’s goal. For as I have 
repeatedly said already, in the years of immaturity 

and intellectual weakness the powers of our nature 

are discerned as through a mist; but as the mind 

grows older and stronger it learns to know the 

capacity of our nature, while recognizing that this 

nature is susceptible of further development and has 

by itself only reached an incomplete condition. 

XVI. “We must therefore penetrate into the To know our- 
nature of things, and come to understand thoroughly Si¥¢5 {Pe 
its requirements ; otherwise we cannot know our- must be studied. 
selves. That precept was too high for man’s dis- 
cernment, and was therefore ascribed to a god. It 
is therefore the Pythian Apollo who bids us ‘know 
ourselves’; but the sole road to self-knowledge is to 
know the powers of body and of mind, and to follow 
the path of life that gives us their full realization. 

443 


A5 


46 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


“Quoniam autem is animi appetitus a principio fuit, 
ut ea quae dixi quam perfectissima natura haberemus, 
confitendum est, cum id adepti simus quod appetitum 
sit, in eo quasi in ultimo consistere naturam atque 
id esse summum bonum; quod certe universum sua 
sponte ipsum expeti et propter se mecesse est, quo- 
niam ante demonstratum est etiam singulas eius partes 
esse per se expetendas. 

“Tn enumerandis autem corporis commodis si quis 
praetermissam a nobis voluptatem putabit, in aliud 
tempus ea quaestio differatur. Utrum enim sit volu- 
ptas in iis rebus quas primas secundum naturam esse 
diximus necne sit, ad id quod agimus nihil interest. 
Si enim, ut mihi quidem videtur, non explet bona 
naturae voluptas, iure praetermissa est; sin autem 
est in ea quod quidam volunt, nihil impedit hane 
nostram comprehensionem summi boni; quae enim 
constituta sunt prima naturae, ad ea si voluptas acces- 
serit, unum aliquod accesserit commodum corporis 
neque eam constitutionem summi boni quae est pro- 
posita mutaverit. 

XVII. “Et adhuc quidem ita nobis progressa ratio 
est ut ‘ea duceretur omnis a prima commendatione 
naturae. Nunc autem aliud iam argumentandi se- 
quamur genus, ut non solum quia nos diligamus sed 
quia cuiusque partis naturae et in corpore et in 
animo sua quaeque vis sit, idcirco in his rebus summe? 

1 summe edd.; summa MSS. 


a his rebus seems to refer to cutusque partis naturae, cp. 
§ 44 note, and § 56 ‘ et corpore et animo moveri.’ 


AAA 


£5 


BOOK V. xvi-xvii 


“ Now inasmuch as our original instinct of desire The perfection 
was for the possession of the parts aforesaid in their ofthe whole 
fullest natural perfection, it must be allowed that, the Chief Good. 
when we have attained the object of our desire, our 
nature takes its stand in this as its final End, and 
this constitutes our Chief Good; and that this End 
as a whole must be desired intrinsically and in and 
for itself, follows of necessity from the fact that the 
several parts of it also have already been proved to 
be desirable for themselves. 

If however anyone thinks that our enumeration (It is immaterial 
of bodily advantages is incomplete owing to the 22¢tbe Pleasure 
omission of pleasure, let us postpone this question to duded in the. 

2 E ‘ nd, as a bodily 
another time. For whether pleasure is or is not one good.) 
of the objects we have called the primary things in 
accordance with nature makes no difference for our 
present inquiry. If, as I hold, pleasure adds nothing 
to the sum-total of nature’s goods, it has rightly been 
omitted. If on the contrary pleasure does possess 
the property that some assign to it, this fact does 
not impair the general outline we have just given of 
the Chief Good; since if to the primary objects of 
nature as we have explained them, pleasure be added, 
this only adds one more to the list of bodily advan- 
tages, and does not alter the interpretation of the 
Chief Good which has been propounded. 

XVII. “So far as our argument has proceeded (B) The perfec- 
hitherto, it has been based entirely upon the primary (pnn4ccrer 
attractions of nature. But from this point on let us uoon § ater 
adopt a different line of reasoning, namely to show its own sake. 
that, in addition to the argument from self-love, the 
fact that each part of our nature, both mental and 
bodily, possesses its own peculiar energy goes to prove 


that the activity of our several parts * is pre-eminently 
4A5 


47 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


nostra sponte moveamur. Atque ut a corpore ordiar, 
videsne ut si quae in membris prava aut debilitata 
aut imminuta sint occultent homines? ut etiam con- 
tendant et elaborent, si efficere possint, ut aut non 
appareat corporis vitium aut quam minimum ap- 
pareat, multosque etiam dolores curationis causa 
perferant ut, si ipse usus membrorum non modo non 
maior verum etiam minor futurus sit, eorum tamen 
species ad naturam revertatur? Etenim cum omnes 
natura totos se expetendos putent, nec id ob aliam 
rem sed propter ipsos, necesse est eius etiam partes 
propter se expeti quod universum propter se expe- 
tatur. Quid? in motu et in statu corporis nihil inest 
quod animadvertendum esse ipsa natura iudicet? 
quemadmodum quis ambulet, sedeat, qui ductus oris, 
qui vultus in quoque sit? nihilne est in his rebus 
quod dignum libero aut indignum esse ducamus? 
Nonne odio multos dignos putamus qui quodam 
motu aut statu videntur naturae legem et modum 
contempsisse? Et quoniam haec deducuntur de 
corpore, quid est cur non recte pulchritudo etiam 
ipsa propter se expetenda ducatur? Nam si pravita- 
tem imminutionemque corporis propter se fugiendam 
putamus, cur non etiam, ac fortasse magis, propter 
se formae dignitatem sequamur? Et si turpitudinem 
fugimus in statu et motu corporis, quid est cur pul- 
chritudinem non sequamur? Atque etiam vale- 
tudinem, vires, vacuitatem doloris non _propter 


utilitatem solum sed etiam ipsas propter se ex- 
446 = 


BOOK V. xvii 


spontaneous. To start with the body, do you notice The body: 
how men try to hide a deformed or infirm or maimed heath stent 
limb? They actually take great pains and trouble jerenenvely 
to conceal, if they possibly can, their bodily defect, hee 
or at all events to let it be seen as little as possible; 
they even undergo painful courses of treatment in 
order to restore the natural appearance of their 
limbs, even though the actual use of them will not 
only not be improved but will even be diminished. 
In fact, since every man instinctively thinks that he 
himself in his entirety is a thing to be desired, and 
this not for the sake of anything else but for his own 
sake, it follows that when a thing is desired as a 
whole for its own sake, the parts also of that thing 
are desired for their own sakes. Again, is there 
nothing in the movements and postures of the body 
which Nature herself judges to be of importance? A 
man’s mode of walking and sitting, his particular 
cast of features and expression? is there nothing in 
these things that we consider worthy or unworthy 
of a free man? Do we not often think people 
deserving of dislike, who by some movement or 
posture appear to have violated a law or principle of 
nature? And since people try to get rid of these 
defects of bearing, why should not even beauty 
have a good claim to be considered as desirable 
for its own sake? For if we think imperfection or 
mutilation of the body things to be avoided for their 
own sake, why should we not with equal or perhaps 
still greater reason pursue dignity of form for its 
own sake? And if we avoid ugliness in bodily 
movement and posture, why should we not pursue 
beauty? Health also, and strength and freedom 
from pain we shall desire not merely for their utility 

4A 


48 


49 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


petemus. Quoniam enim natura suis omnibus 
expleri partibus vult, hunc statum corporis per se 
ipsum expetit qui est maxime e natura, quae tota 
perturbatur si aut aegrum corpus est aut dolet aut 
caret viribus. 

XVIII. “Videamus animi partes, quarum est con- 
spectus illustrior; quae quo sunt excelsiores, eo dant 
clariora indicia naturae. Tantus est igitur innatus in 
nobis cognitionis amor et scientiae ut nemo dubitare 
possit quin ad eas res hominum natura nullo emolu- 
mento invitata rapiatur. Videmusne,ut pueri ne ver- 
beribus quidem a contemplandis rebus perquirendis- 
que deterreantur? ut pulsi recurrant? ut aliquid scire 
se gaudeant? ut id aliis narrare gestiant? ut pompa, 
ludis atque eiusmodi spectaculis teneantur ob eamque 
rem vel famem et sitim perferant? Quid vero? qui 
ingenuis studiis atque artibus delectantur, nonne 
videmus eos nec valetudinis nec rei familiaris habere 
rationem omniaque perpeti ipsa cognitione et scientia 
captos et cum maximis curis et laboribus compensare 
eam quam ex discendo capiant voluptatem? Mihi 
quidem Homerus huiusmodi quiddam vidisse videtur 
in iis quae de Sirenum cantibus finxerit.1 . Neque 
enim vocum suayitate videntur aut novitate quadam 
et varietate cantandi revocare eos solitae qui prae- 
tervehebantur, sed quia multa se scire profitebantur, 
ut homines ad earum saxa discendi cupiditate ad- 


‘ finxerit inf. MSS.; others finxit (perhaps rightly Mdv.); 
jfinxerint B, E. 


448 


48 


49 


BOOK V. xvii-xviii 


but also for their own sakes. For since our nature 
aims at the full development of all its parts, she 
desires for its own sake that state of body which is 


most in accordance with himself; because she is” 


thrown into utter disorder if the body is diseased or 
in pain or weak. 

XVIII. “Let us consider the parts of the mind, 
which are of nobler aspect. The loftier these are, 
the more unmistakable indications of nature do 
they afford. So great is our innate love of learning 
and of knowledge, that no one can doubt that 
man’s nature is strongly attracted to these things 
even without the lure of any profit. Do we 
notice how children cannot be deterred even by 
punishment from studying and inquiring into the 
world around them? Drive them away, and back 
they come. They delight in knowing things; they 
are eager to impart their knowledge to others; 


- pageants, games and shows of that sort hold them 


spell-bound, and they will even endure hunger 
and thirst so as to be able to see them. Again, 
take persons who delight in the liberal arts and 
studies; do we not see them careless of health or 
business, patiently enduring any inconvenience 
when under the spell of learning and of science, 
and repaid for endless toil and trouble by the 
pleasure they derive from acquiring knowledge? For 
my part I believe Homer had something of this sort 
in view in his imaginary account of the songs of the 
Sirens. Apparently it was not the sweetness of 
their voices or the novelty and diversity of their 
songs, but their professions of knowledge that used 
to attract the passing voyagers; it was the passion 
for learning that kept men rooted to the Sirens’ 
GG 449 


The mind: (i) 
the cognitive 
faculty; know- 
ledge attractive 
apart from 

its utility: 


50 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


haerescerent. Ita enim invitant Ulixem (nam verti, 
ut quaedam Homeri, sic istum ipsum locum): 


O decus Argolicum, quin puppim flectis, Ulixes, 

Auribus ut nostros possis agnoscere cantus ? 

Nam nemo haec umquam est transvectus caerula 
cursu, 

Quin prius astiterit vocum dulcedine captus, 

Post, variis avido satiatus pectore musis, 

Doctior ad patrias lapsus pervenerit oras. 

Nos grave certamen belli clademque tenemus, 

Graecia quam Troiae divino numine vexit, 

Omniaque e latis rerum vestigia terris. 


Vidit Homerus probari fabulam non posse si canti- 
unculis tantus irretitus vir teneretur; scientiam 
pollicentur, quam non erat mirum sapientiae cupido 
patria esse! cariorem. Atque omnia quidem scire 
cuiuscumquemodi sint cupere curiosorum, duci vero 
maiorum rerum contemplatione ad cupiditatem sci- 
entiae summorum virorum est putandum. 

XIX. “Quem enim ardorem studi censetis fuisse in 
Archimede, qui dum in pulvere quaedam describit 
attentius, ne patriam quidem captam esse senserit ! 
quantum Aristoxeni ingenium consumptum videmus 
in musicis! quo studio Aristophanem putamus aeta- 
tem in litteris duxisse! Quid de Pythagora, quid 
de Platone aut de Democrito loquar? a quibus 
propter discendi cupiditatem videmus ultimas terras 
esse peragratas. Quae qui non vident, nihil um- 
quam magnum ac” cognitione dignum amaverunt. 


lesse most MSS. omit. 
2 magnum ac Bremius, Mdv. ; magna MSS. 


4 Odyssey, 12, 184 ff. 
450 


BOOK V. xviii-xix 


rocky shores. This is their invitation to Ulysses 
(for I have translated this among other passages of 
Homer): 


Ulysses, pride of Argos, turn thy bark 
And listen to our music. Never yet 
Did voyager sail these waters blue, but stayed 
His course, enchanted by our voices sweet, 
And having filled his soul with harmony, 
Went on his homeward way a wiser man. 
We know the direful strife and clash of war 
That Greece by Heaven’s mandate bore to Troy, 
And whatsoe’er on the wide earth befalls.* 


Homer was aware that his story would not sound plau- 
sible if the magic that held his hero immeshed was 
the charm of mere melody! It is knowledge that the 
Sirens offer, and it was no marvel if a lover of wisdom 
held this dearer than his home. An itch for miscel- 
laneous omniscience no doubt stamps a man as a 
mere dilettante; but it must be deemed the mark 
of a superior mind to be led on by the contemplation 
of high matters to a passionate love of knowledge. 
XIX. “What an ardour for study, think you, pos- 
sessed Archimedes, who was so absorbed in a diagram 
he was drawing in the dust that he was unaware even 
of the capture of his native city! What genius do 
we see expended by Aristoxenus on the theory of 
music! Imagine the zeal of a lifetime that Ari- 
stophanes devoted to literature !_ Why should I speak 
of Pythagoras, or of Plato, or Democritus? For they, 
we are told, in their passion for learning travelled 
through the remotest parts of the earth! Those 
who are blind to these facts have never been en- 
amoured of some high and worthy study. And 
GG2 451 


ail 


or 
(a9) 


53 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
Atque hoc loco qui propter animi voluptates coli 
dicunt ea studia quae dixi, non intellegunt idcirco 
esse ea propter se expetenda quod nulla utilitate 
obiecta delectentur animi atque ipsa scientia etiamsi 
incommodatura sit gaudeant. Sed quid attinet de 
rebus tam apertis plura requirere? Ipsi enim quae- 
ramus a nobis stellarum motus contemplationesque 
rerum caelestium eorumque omnium quae naturae 
obscuritate occultantur cognitiones quemadmodum 
nos moveant, et quid historia delectet quam solemus 
persequi usque ad extremum, praetermissa repeti- 
mus, inchoata persequimur. Nec vero sum nescius 
esse utilitatem in historia, non modo voluptatem. 
Quid cum fictas fabulas e quibus utilitas nulla elici 
potest cum voluptate legimus? Quid cum volumus 
nomina eorum qui quid gesserint nota nobis esse, 
parentes, patriam, multa praeterea minime neces- 
saria? Quid quod homines infima fortuna, nulla spe 
rerum gerendarum, opifices denique delectantur 
historia ? maximeque eos videre possumus res gestas 
audire et legere velle qui a spe gerendi absunt con- 
fecti senectute. Quocirca intellegi necesse est in 
ipsis rebus quae discuntur et cognoscuntur invita- 
menta inesse quibus ad discendum cognoscendumque 
moveamur. Ac veteres quidem philosophi in beato- 


rum insulis fingunt qualis futura sit vita sapientium, 
452 


51 


2 


BOOK V. xix 


those who in this connexion allege that the studies 
I have mentioned are pursued for the sake of mental 
pleasure fail to see that they are proved to be 
desirable for their own sake by the very fact that 
the mind feels delight in them when no bait of 
advantage is held out, and finds enjoyment in the 
mere possession of knowledge even though it is 
likely to be a positive disadvantage to its possessor. 
But what is the point of inquiring further into 
matters so obvious? Let us ask ourselves the ques- 
tion, what feelings are produced in us by the motions 
of the stars and by contemplating the heavenly 
bodies and studying all the obscure and secret realms 
of nature ; what pleasure we derive from books on 
history, which we are so fond of perusing to the very 
last page, turning back to parts we have omitted, 
and pushing on to the end when we have once be- 
gun. Not that I am unaware that history is useful 
as well as entertaining. But what of our reading 
fiction, from which no utility can be extracted? What 
of our eagerness to learn the names of people who 
have done something notable, their parentage, birth- 
place, and many quite unimportant details beside? 
What of the delight that is taken in history by men 
of the humblest station, who have no expectation of 
participating in public life, even mere artisans? Also 
we may notice that the persons most eager to hear 
and read of public affairs are those who are debarred 
by the infirmities of age from any prospect of taking 
part in them. Hence we are forced to infer that 
the objects of study and knowledge contain in them- 
selves the allurements that entice us to study and to 
learning. The old philosophers picture what the life 
of the Wise will be in the Islands of the Blest, and 
453 


54 


55 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


quos cura omni liberatos, nullum necessarium vitae 
cultum aut paratum requirentes, nihil aliud acturos 
putant nisi ut omne tempus inquirendo ac discendo 
in naturae cognitione consumant. Nos autem non 
solum beatae vitae istam esse oblectationem videmus 
sed etiam levamentum miseriarum; itaque multi 
cum in potestate essent hostium aut tyrannorum, 
multi in custodia, multi in exsilio dolorem suum 
doctrinae studiis levarunt. Princeps huius civitatis 
Phalereus Demetrius, cum patria pulsus esset iniuria, 
ad Ptolemaeum se regem Alexandream contulit. 
Qui cum in hac ipsa philosophia ad quam te horta- 
mur excelleret Theophrastique esset auditor, multa 
praeclara in illo calamitoso otio scripsit non ad usum 
aliquem suum quo erat orbatus; sed animi cultus 
ille erat ei ‘quasi quidam humanitatis cibus. Equi- 
dem e Cn. Aufidio, praetorio, erudito homine, oculis 
capto, saepe audiebam cum se lucis magis quam utili- 
tatis desiderio moveri diceret. Somnum denique 
nobis, nisi requietem corporibus et medicinam quan- 
dam laboris afferret, contra naturam putaremus 
datum; aufert enim sensus actionemque tollit om- 
nem; itaque si aut requietem natura non quaereret 
aut eam posset alia quadam ratione consequi, facile 
pateremur, qui etiam nunc agendi aliquid discendi- 
que causa prope contra naturam vigilias suscipere 
soleamus. 

XX. “Suntautem etiam clariora vel plane perspicua 


minimeque dubitanda indicia naturae, maxime scilicet 
454 


55 


BOOK V. xix-xx 


imagine them released from all anxiety, needing none 
of the necessary equipment or accessories of life, and 
with nothing else to do but to spend their whole time 
upon study and research in the science of nature. Weon 
the other hand see in such studies not only the amuse- 
ment of a life of happiness, but also the alleviation of 
misfortune ; hence the numbers of men who when they 
had fallen into the power of enemies or tyrants, or 
when they were in prison or in exile, have solaced their 
sorrow with the pursuit of learning. Demetrius of 
Phalerum, the ruler of this city, when unjustly 
banished from his country, repaired to the court of 
King Ptolemy at Alexandria. Being eminent in the 
very system of philosophy which we are recommend- 
ing to you, and a pupil of Theophrastus, he employed 
the leisure afforded by his disaster in composing a 
number of excellent treatises, not for any practical 
use in his own case, for from this he was debarred; 
but he found a sort of food for his intellectual tastes 
in thus cultivating his mind. I myself frequently 
heard the blind ex-praetor and scholar Gnaeus Aufi- 
dius declare that he felt the actual loss of light more 
than the inconvenience of blindness. Take lastly the 
gift of sleep: did it not bring us repose for our bodies 
and an antidote to labour, we should think it a viola- 
tion of nature, for it robs us of sensation and entirely 
suspends our activity ; so that if our nature did not 
require repose or could obtain it in some other man- 
ner, we should be quite content, inasmuch as even 
as it is we frequently deny ourselves slumber, almost 
to the point of doing violence to nature, in the in- 
terests of business or of study. 

XX. “Even more striking, and in fact absolutely 
obvious and convincing natural indications are not 

455 


(ii) the moral 
nature: the love 
of activity 
universal, 


56 


57 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


in homine sed in omni animali, ut appetat animus 
agere semper aliquid neque ulla condicione quietem 
sempiternam possit pati. Facile est hoc cernere in 
primis puerorum aetatulis. Quamquam enim vereor 
ne nimius in hoe genere videar, tamen omnes veteres 
philosophi, maxime nostri, ad incunabula accedunt, 
quod? in pueritia facillime se arbitrentur naturae 
voluntatem posse cognoscere. Videmus igitur ut 
conquiescere ne infantes quidem possint; cum vero 
paulum processerunt, lusionibus vel laboriosis dele- 
ctantur, ut ne verberibus quidem deterreri possint. 
Eaque cupiditas agendi aliquid adulescit una cum 
aetatibus. Itaque ne si iucundissimis quidem nos 
somniis usuros putemus, Endymionis somnum nobis 
velimus dari, idque si accidat mortis instar putemus. 
Quin etiam inertissimos homines, nescio qua singu- 
lari nequitia praeditos, videmus tamen et corpore et 
animo moveri semper et, cum re nulla impediantur 
necessaria, aut alveolum poscere aut quaerere quem- 
piam ludum aut sermonem aliquem requirere, cumque 
non habeant ingenuas ex doctrina oblectationes, cireu- 
los aliquos et sessiunculas consectari. Ne? bestiae qui- 
dem quas delectationis causa concludimus, cum copio- 
sius alantur quam si essent liberae, facile patiuntur 
sese contineri, motusque solutos et vagos a natura sibi 
tributos requirunt. Itaque ut quisque optime natus 
institutusque est, esse omnino nolit in vita si gerendis 
negotiis orbatus possit paratissimis vesci voluptatibus. 


‘quod. . arbitrentur inf. MSS., Miller; others guod . . 
arbitrantur; qui. . arbitrentur B, E, Mdv. 
* Ne inf. MSS., Mdv.; guin ne B, guin te E. 


456 


Saat 


BOOK V. xx 


wanting, more particularly no doubt in man, but 
also in every living creature, of the presence of a 
positive craving for constant activity. Perpetual re- 
pose is unendurable on any terms. This is a fact 
that may be readily detected in children of the 
tenderest age, if I may risk being thought to lay un- 
due stress on a field of observation sanctioned by the 
older thinkers, all of whom, and my own school more 
than others, go to the nursery, because they believe 
that Nature reveals her plan to them most clearly in 
childhood. Even infants, we notice, are incapable of 
keeping still. Children of a somewhat more advanced 
age delight in games involving considerable exertion, 
from which not even fear of punishment can restrain 
them. And this passion for activity grows as they 
grow older. The prospect of the most delightful 
dreams would not reconcile us to falling asleep for 
ever: Endymion’s fate we should consider an exact 
image of death. Observe the least energetic among 
men: even in a notorious idler both mind and body 
are constantly in motion; set him free from unavoid- 
able occupations, and he calls for a dice-board, goes 
off to some sport, or looks for somebody to chat with, 
seeking at the club or at some trivial social gather- 
ing a substitute for higher and more intellectual 
amusements. Even the wild animals that we keep in 
cages for our entertainment find their captivity irk- 
some, although they are better fed than if they were 
at large; they miss their natural birthright of free and 
untrammelled movement. Hence the abler and 
more accomplished a man is, the less he would care 
to be alive at all if debarred from taking part in 
affairs, although allowed to consume an unlimited 
supply of pleasures. Men of ability either choose 
457 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


Nam aut privatim aliquid gerere malunt, aut qui 
altiore animo sunt capessunt rem publicam honoribus 
imperiisque adipiscendis, aut totos se ad studia do- 
ctrinae conferunt; qua in vita tantum abest ut volu- 
ptates consectentur, etiam curas, sollicitudines, vigi- 
lias perferunt, optimaque parte hominis, quae in nobis 
divina ducenda est, ingeni et mentis acie fruuntur, 
nec voluptatem requirentes nec fugientes laborem; 
nec vero intermittunt aut admirationem earum rerum 
quae sunt ab antiquis repertae aut investigationem 
novarum; quo studio cum satiari non possint,? om- 
nium ceterarum rerum obliti nihil abiectum, nihil 
humile cogitant; tantaque est vis talibus in studiis, 
ut eos etiam qui sibi alios proposuerunt fines bonorum, 
quos utilitate aut voluptate dirigunt, tamen in rebus 
quaerendis explicandisque naturis aetates conterere 
videamus. 

XXI. “Ergo hoc quidem apparet, nos ad agendum 
esse natos. Actionum autem genera plura, ut ob- 
scurentur etiam maioribus minora, maximae autem 
sunt primum, ut mihi quidem videtur et iis quorum 
nune in ratione versamur, consideratio cognitioque 
rerum caelestium et earur: quas a natura occultatas 
et latentes indagare ratio potest, deinde rerum publi- 
carum administratio aut administrandi scientia, tum 
prudens, temperata, fortis, iusta ratio, reliquaeque 
virtutes et actiones virtutibus congruentes, quae uno 
verbo complexi omnia honesta dicimus; ad quorum 

* possint Ernesti, Miiller ; posswnt MSS., Mdv. 


aA reference to the Epicureans’ interest in natural 
science, illustrated by Lucretius. 


458 


BOOK V. xx-xxi 


a life of private activity, or, if of loftier ambition, 
aspire to a public career of political or military office, 
or else they devote themselves entirely to study and 
learning; and the devotees of learning are so far 
from: making pleasure their aim, that they actually 
endure care, anxiety and loss of sleep, and in the 
exercise of the noblest part of man’s nature, the 
divine element within us (for so we must consider 
the keen edge of the intellect and the reason), they 
ask for no pleasure and avoid no toil; they are 
ceaselessly occupied in marvelling at the discoveries 
of the ancients or in pursuing new researches of their 
own; insatiable in their appetite for study, they 
forget all else besides, and harbour not one base or 
mean thought. So potent is the spell of these pur- 
suits, that even those who profess to follow other 
Ends of Goods, defined by utility or pleasure, may 
yet be seen to spend their whole lives in investigating 
and unfolding the processes of nature.* 

XXI. “It is therefore at all events manifest that 
we are designed by nature for activity. Activities 
are of various kinds, so much so that the more im- 
portant actually eclipse the less; but the most 
important are, first (according to my own view and 
that of those with whose system we are now occu- 
pied) the contemplation and the study of the 
heavenly bodies and of those secrets and mysteries of 
nature which reason has the capacity to penetrate ; 
secondly, the practice and the theory of politics ; 
thirdly, the principles of Prudence, Temperance, 
Bravery and Justice, with the remaining virtues and 
the activities consonant therewith, all of which we 
may sum up under the single term of Morality ; 
towards the knowledge and practice of which, when 

459 


The virtues are 
activities, im- 
planted as 
instincts by 
nature, and 
developed by 
reason. 


60 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


et cognitionem et usum iam corroborati natura ipsa 
praeeunte deducimur. Omnium enim rerum prin- 
cipia parva sunt, sed suis progressionibus usa augen- 
tur; nec sine causa; in primo enim ortu inest 
teneritas ac mollitia quaedam, ut nec res videre 
optimas nec agere possint. Virtutis enim beataeque 
vitae, quae duo maxime expetenda sunt, serius lumen 
apparet, multo etiam serius, ut plane qualia sint 
intellegantur. Praeclare enim Plato: ‘Beatum cui 
etiam in senectute contigerit ut sapientiam verasque 
opiniones assequi possit!’ Quare quoniam de primis 
naturae commodis satis dictum est, nunc de maioribus 
consequentibusque videamus. Natura igitur corpus 
quidem hominis sic et genuit et formavit ut alia in 
primo ortu perficeret, alia progrediente aetate finge-_ 
ret, neque sane multum adiumentis externis et 
adventiciis uteretur ; animum autem reliquis rebus 
ita perfecit ut corpus ; sensibus enim ornavit ad res 
percipiendas idoneis ut nihil aut non multum adiu- 
mento ullo ad suam confirmationem indigerent’; quod 
autem in homine praestantissimum atque optimum 
est, id deseruit. Etsi dedit talem mentem quae 
omnem virtutem accipere posset, ingenuitque sine 
doctrina notitias parvas rerum maximarum et quasi 
instituit docere, et induxit in ea quae inerant 
tamquam elementa virtutis. Sed virtutem ipsam 
inchoavit ; nihil amplius. Itaque nostrum est (quod 
nostrum dico, artis est) ad ea principia quae accepi- 
lindigerent Bremi; indigeret Mdv. with MSS. 


aPlato, Laws 653A. 
4.60 


BOOK V. xxi 


we have grown to maturity, we are led onward by 
nature’s own guidance. All things are small in their 
first beginnings, but they grow larger as they pass 
through their regular stages of progress. And there 
is a reason for this, namely that at the moment of 
birth we possess a certain weakness and softness 


‘which prevent our seeing and doing what is best. 


The radiance of virtue and of happiness, the two things 
most to be desired, dawns upon us later, and far later 
still comes a full understanding of their nature. 

Happy the man,’ Plato well says, ‘who even in old 
age has the good fortune to be able to achieve wisdom 
and true opinions.’* Therefore since enough has 
been said about the primary goods of nature, let us 
now consider the more important things that follow 
later. In generating and developing the human 
body, Nature’s procedure was to make some parts 
perfect at birth, and to fashion other parts as it 
grew up, without making much use of external and 
artificial aids. The mind on the other hand she endowed 
with its remaining faculties in the same perfection as 
the body, equipping it with senses already adapted 
to their function of perception and requiring little or 
no assistance of any kind to complete their develop- 
ment; but the highest and noblest part of man’s 
nature she neglected. It is true she bestowed an 
intellect capable of receiving every virtue, and im- 
planted in it at birth and without instruction 
embryonic notions of the loftiest ideas, laying the 
foundation of its education, and introducing it to the 
elements of virtue, if I may so call them, which it 
already possessed. But of virtue itself she merely 
gave the germ and no more. Therefore it rests 
with us (and when I say with us, I mean with our 

461 


61 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


mus consequentia exquirere, quoad sit id quod 
volumus effectum; quod quidem pluris est haud 
paulo magisque ipsum propter se expetendum quam 
aut sensus aut corporis ea quae diximus, quibus 
tantum praestat mentis excellens perfectio ut vix 
cogitari possit quid intersit. Itaque omnis honos, 
omnis admiratio, omne studium ad virtutem et ad 
eas actiones quae virtuti consentaneae sunt refertur, 
eaque omnia quae aut ita in animis sunt aut ita 
geruntur uno nomine honesta dicuntur. : 

= Quorum omnium quae sint notitiae quaeque signi- 
ficentur rerum! vocabulis quaeque cuiusque vis et 
natura sit mox videbimus; XXII. hoe autem loco 
tantum explicemus, haec honesta quae dico, praeter- 
quam quod nosmet ipsos diligamus, praeterea suapte 
natura per se esse expetenda. Indicant pueri, in 
quibus ut in speculisnatura cernitur. Quanta studia 
decertantium sunt! quanta ipsa certamina! ut illi 
efferuntur laetitia cum vicerunt! ut pudet victos! ut 
se accusari nolunt! quam cupiunt laudari! quos illi 
labores non” perferunt ut aequalium principes sint ! 
quae memoria est in iis bene merentium, quae 
referendae gratiae cupiditas! Atque ea in optima 
quaque indole maxime apparent, in qua haec honesta 
quae intellegimus a natura tamquam adumbrantur. 
Sed haec in pueris; expressa vero in iis aetatibus 
quae iam confirmatae sunt. Quis est tam dissimilis 


‘ significentur rerum inf. MSS., Mdv. ; significent rerum 
B, E; Mdv. conj. significentur eorum; Davis guibusque 
significentur [reruni]. 

“non bracketed by Mdv. 


a Viz. § 67. 


BOOK V. xxi-xxii 


science), in addition to the elementary principles 
bestowed upon us, to seek out their logical develop- 
ments, until our full purpose is realized. For this is 
much more valuable and more intrinsically desirable 
than either the senses or the endowments of the 
body above alluded to; since those are surpassed 
in an almost inconceivable degree by the matchless 
perfection of the intellect. Therefore all honour, 
all admiration, all enthusiasm is directed towards 
virtue and towards the actions in harmony with 
virtue, and all such properties and processes of the 
mind are entitled by the single name of Moral 
Worth. 

“The connotation of all these conceptions and the 
signification of the terms that denote them, and their 
several values and natures we shall study shortly; 
XXII. for the present let us merely explain that this 
Morality to which I allude is an object of our desire, 
not only because of our love of self, but also intrinsi- 
cally and for its own sake. A hint of this is given by 
children, in whom nature is discerned as in a mirror. 
How hotly they pursue their rivalries! how fierce 
their contests and competitions! what exultation 
they feel when they win, and what shame when 
they are beaten! How they dislike blame! how they 
covet praise! what toils do they not undergo to 
stand first among their companions! how good their 
memory is for those who have shown them kindness, 
and how eager they are to repay it! And these 
traits are most apparent in the noblest characters, in 
which the moral excellences, as we understand them, 
are already roughly outlined by nature. But this 
belongs to childhood; the picture is filled in at the 
age when the character is fully formed. ao is 

403 


Moral excellence 
an End in itself: 
proved from (a) 
the conduct of 
children, 


(b) popular 
sentiment. 


63 


64 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


homini qui non moveatur et offensione turpitudinis 
et comprobatione honestatis? quis est qui non oderit 
libidinosam, protervam adulescentiam ? quis contra in 
illa aetate pudorem, constantiam, etiamsi sua nihil 
intersit, non tamen diligat ? quis Pullum Numitorium 
Fregellanum proditorem, quamquam rei publicae no- 
strae profuit, non odit? quis huius? urbis conserva- 
torem Codrum, quis Erechthei filias non maxime 
laudat ? cui Tubuli nomen odio non est? quis Aristi- 
dem non mortuum diligit? An obliviscimur quanto 
opere in audiendo in® legendoque moveamur cum 
pie, cum amice, cum magno animo aliquid factum 
cognoscimus? Quid loquor de nobis qui ad laudem 
et ad decus nati, suscepti, instituti sumus? qui 
clamores vulgi atgue imperitorum excitantur in the- 
atris, cum illa dicuntur : 


Ego sum Orestes, 
contraque ab altero.: 
Immo enimvero ego sum, inquam, Orestes! 


Cum autem etiam exitus ab utroque datur contur- 
bato errantique regi: 


Ambo ergo una necarier precamur, 


quotiens hoc agitur, ecquandone nisi admirationibus 
maximis? Nemo est igitur quin hane affectionem 
animi prebet atque laudet qua non modo utilitas 
nulla quaeritur sed contra utilitatem etiam conserva- 
tur fides. Talibus exemplis non fictae solum fabulae 
verum etiam historiae refertae sunt, et quidem 


* huius inserted by Miiller, suggested by Mdv. 
2in Mdv. brackets. 


aCf. II, 79, note. 
464 


BOOK V. xxii 


so unlike a human being as to feel no repulsion at 
baseness and no approval for goodness? Who is 
there that does not hate a youth spent in debauchery 
and wantonness? Who on the contrary would not 
esteem modesty and orderliness in the young, even 
though he has no personal concern in them? 
Who does not hate the traitor Pullus Numitorius of 
Fregellae, although he did a service to our country? 
Who does not praise and extol Codrus, the preserver 
of this city, or honour the daughters of Erechtheus ? 
or loathe the very name of Tubulus? or love the 
memory of Aristides? Do we forget the strong 
emotion that we feel when we hear or read of some 
deed of piety, of friendship or of magnanimity? But 
I need not speak of ourselves, whose birth, breeding 
and education point us towards glory and towards 
honour; think of the uneducated multitude,—what 
a tempest of applause rings through the theatre at 
the words: 
I am Orestes, 


and at the rejoinder : 
No, no, ’tis I, I say, I am Orestes. 


And then when each offers a solution to the king in 


_ his confusion and perplexity : 


Then prithee slay us both; we'll die together : 


as often as this scene? is acted, does it ever fail to 
arouse the greatest enthusiasm? This proves that all 
men without exception approve and applaud the dis- 
position that not only seeks no advantage for itself, 
but is loyal and true even to its own disadvantage. 
These high examples crowd the pages not only of 


romance but also of history, and especially the history 
465 
HH 


65 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


maxime nostrae. Nos enim ad sacra Idaea accipienda 
optimum virum delegimus ; nos tutores regibus misi- 
mus; nostri imperatores pro salute patriae sua capita 
yoverunt; nostri consules regem inimicissimum 
moenibus iam appropinquantem monuerunt a veneno 
ut caveret; nostra in re publica et quae per vim 
oblatum stuprum voluntaria morte lueret inventa 
est et qui filiam interficeret ne stupraretur; quae 
quidem omnia et innumerabilia praeterea quis est 
quin intellegat et eos qui fecerint dignitatis splendore 
ductos immemores fuisse utilitatum suarum nosque 
cum ea laudemus nulla alia re nisi honestate duci ? 
XXIII. “Quibus rebus breviter expositis (nee 
enim sum copiam quam potui, quia dubitatio in re 
nulla erat, persecutus), sed his rebus concluditur 
profecto et virtutes omnes et honestum illud quod 
ex iis oritur et in illis haeret per se esse expetendum. 
In omni autem honesto de quo loquimur nihil est 
tam illustre nec quod latius pateat quam coniunctio 
inter homines hominum et quasi quaedam societas 
et communicatio utilitatum et ipsa caritas generis 
humani, quae nata a primo satu, quod a procreatori- 
bus nati diliguntur et tota domus coniugio et stirpe 
coniungitur, serpit sensim foras, cognationibus pri- 
mum, tum affinitatibus, deinde amicitiis, post vicini- 


a Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica, chosen, in obedience to 
an oracle, as man of blameless life, to receive the image of 
Cybele, which was brought from Phrygia to Rome 204 B.C. 

bM. Aemilius Lepidus administered Egypt, on the death 


of King Ptolemy Epiphanes, 181 B.c., as guardian of his 
sons. : 


oThe Decit, ep. il, Or. 
@C, Fabricius and Q. Aemilius Papius, 278 B.c., warned 
Pyrrhus that his physician had offered to poison him. 
€ Lucretia, cp. II, 66. f Virginius, bid. 
4166 | 


BOOK V. xxii-xxiii % 


of our own country. It was we who chose our most 
virtuous citizen* to receive the sacred emblems from 
Ida; we who sent guardians to royal princes; our 
generals® sacrificed their lives to save their country ; 
our consuls4 warned the king who was their bitterest 
foe, when close to the walls of Rome, to be on his 
guard against poison; in our commonwealth was 
found the lady* who expiated her outraged honour 
by a self-sought death, and the father who killed 
his daughter to save her from shame. Who is there 
who cannot see that all these deeds and countless 
others besides were done by men who were inspired 
by the splendour of moral greatness to forget all 
thought of interest, and are praised by us from no 
other consideration but that of Moral Worth? 

XXIII. “The considerations thus briefly set out (©) Relation of 
(for I have not aimed at such a full account as Need aed 
might have given, since the matter admitted of no 84 
uncertainty), these considerations then lead to the 
undoubted conclusion that all the virtues, and the 
Moral Worth which springs from them and inheres 
in them, are intrinsically desirable. But in_ the Justice the lead- 
whole moral sphere of which we are speaking there ("6 vzie,andin 
is nothing more glorious nor of wider range than therest, 
the solidarity of mankind, that species of alliance 
and partnership of interests and that actual affection 
which exists between man and man, which, coming 
into existence immediately upon our birth, owing to 
the fact that children are loved by their parents and 
the family as a whole, is bound together by the ties 
of marriage and parenthood, gradually spreads its 
influence beyond the home, first by blood relation- 
ships, then by connections through marriage, later by 
friendships, afterwards by the bonds of neighbourhood, 

HH2 467 


66 


67 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 

tatibus, tum civibus et iis qui publice socii atque 
amici sunt, deinde totius complexu gentis humanae; 
quae animi affectio suum cuique tribuens atque hance 
quam dico societatem coniunctionis humanae muni- 
fice et aeque tuens iustitia dicitur, cui sunt adiun- 
ctae pietas, bonitas, liberalitas, benignitas, comitas, 
quaeque sunt generis eiusdem. Atque haec ita 
iustitiae propria sunt ut sint virtutum reliquarum 
communia. Nam cum sic hominis natura generata 
sit ut habeat quiddam ingenitum quasi civile atque 
populare, quod Graeci zoAitexov vocant, quidquid 
aget quaeque virtus, id a communitate et ea quam 
exposui caritate ac societate humana non abhorrebit, 
vicissimque iustitia, ut ipsa fundet se usu in ceteras 
virtutes, sic illas expetet. Servari enim iustitia nisi 
a forti viro, nisi a sapiente non potest. Qualis est 
igitur omnis haec quam dico conspiratio consensus- 
que virtutum, tale est illud ipsum honestum; quando 
quidem honestum aut ipsa virtus est aut res gesta 
virtute; quibus rebus vita consentiens virtutibusque 
respondens recta et honesta et constans et naturae 
congruens existimari potest. 


“Atque haec coniunctio confusioque virtutum 
tamen a philosophis ratione quadam distinguitur. 
Nam cum ita copulatae connexaeque sint ut omnes 
omnium participes sint nec alia ab alia possit se- 


parari, tamen proprium suum cuiusque munus est, 
468 


BOOK V. xxiii 


then to fellow-citizens and political allies and friends, 
and lastly by embracing the whole of the human race. 
This sentiment, assigning each his own and main- 
taining with generosity and equity that human soli- 
darity and alliance of which I speak, is termed 
Justice; connected with it are dutiful affection, 
kindness, liberality, good-will, courtesy and the 
other graces of the same kind. And while these 
belong peculiarly to Justice, they are also factors 
shared by the remaining virtues. For human nature 
is so constituted at birth as to possess an innate 
element of civic and national feeling, termed in 
Greek poltikon; consequently all the actions of 
every virtue will be in harmony with the human 
affection and solidarity I have described, and Justice 
in turn-will diffuse its agency through the other vir- 
tues, and so will aim at the promotion of these. For 
only a brave and a wise man can preserve Justice. 
Therefore the qualities of this general union and 
combination of the virtues of which I am speaking 
belong also to the Moral Worth aforesaid; inasmuch 
as Moral Worth is either virtue itself or virtuous 
action; and life in harmony with these and in accord- 
ance with the virtues can be deemed right, moral, 
consistent, and in agreement with nature. 

““At the same time this complex of interfused 
virtues can yet be theoretically resolved into its 
separate parts by philosophers. . For although the 
virtues are so closely united that each participates 
in every other and none can be separated from any 
other, yet on the other hand each has its own special 
function. Thus Courage is displayed in toils and 
dangers, Temperance in forgoing pleasures, Pru- 
dence in the choice of goods and evils, Justice in 


469 


although they 
can be distin- 
guished 

theoretically. 


68 


69 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


ut fortitudo in laboribus periculisque cernatur, tem- 
perantia in praetermittendis voluptatibus, prudentia 
in delectu bonorum et malorum, iustitia in suo cuique 
tribuendo. Quando igitur inest in omni virtute 
cura quaedam quasi foras spectans aliosque appetens 
atque complectens, exsistit illud, ut amici, ut fratres, 
ut propinqui, ut affines, ut cives, ut omnes denique 
quoniam unam societatem hominum esse volumus) 
propter se expetendi sint. Atqui eorum nihil est 
eius generis ut sit in fine atque extremo bonorum. 
Ita fit ut duo genera propter se expetendorum re- 
periantur, unum quod est in iis in quibus completur 
illud extremum, quae sunt aut animi aut corporis; 
haec autem quae sunt extrinsecus, id est quae neque 
in animo insunt neque in corpore, ut amici, ut paren- 
tes, ut liberi, ut propinqui, ut ipsa patria, sunt illa 
quidem sua sponte cara, sed eodem in genere quo 
illa non sunt. Nec vero umquam summum bonum 
assequi quisquam posset si omnia illa, quae sunt extra 
quamquam expetenda, summo bono continerentur. 
XXIV. “Quomodo igitur, inquies, verum esse 
poterit omnia referri ad summum bonum, si amici- 
tiae, si propinquitates, si reliqua externa summo 
bono non continentur? Hac videlicet ratione, quod 
ea quae externa sunt iis tuemur officiis quae oriuntur 
a suo cuiusque genere virtutis. Nam et amici cultus 
et parentis ei qui officio fungitur in eo ipso prodest 
quod ita fungi officio in recte factis est, quae sunt 
orta a’ virtutibus. Quae quidem sapientes sequuntur 
utentes tamquam” duce natura; non perfecti autem 


la inserted by Lambinus, Mdv. 
*utentes tamguam Mdv. brackets; utentes sequuntur 


tamquam MSS.; Mdv. conj. videntes sequuntur duce natura 
eam viam. 


470 


Si eee 


BOOK V. xxiii-xxiv 
All involve rela- 


‘giving each his due. As then each virtue contains Ske oie othck 
an element not merely self-regarding, which em- men; which are 
braces other men and makes them its end, there ee ace 
results a state of feeling in which friends, brothers, papas, 
kinsmen, connections, fellow-citizens, and finally al] part of the 
human beings (since our belief is that all mankind ge) 
are united in one society) are things desirable for 

their own sakes. Yet none of these relations is 

such as to form part of the End and Ultimate Good. 

Hence it results that we find two classes of things 

desirable for their own sakes; one class consists of 

those things which constitute the Ultimate Good 

aforesaid, namely goods of mind or body; the latter 

set, which are external goods, that is, goods that 

belong neither to the mind nor to the body, such as 

friends, parents, children, relatives and one’s country 

itself, while intrinsically precious to us, yet are not 

included in the same class as the former. Indeed, 

no one could ever attain the Chief Good, if all those 

goods, which though desirable are external to us, 

formed part of the Chief Good. 

XXIV. “How then, you will object, can it be although to do 
true that all things are means to the Chief Good, if ora 2 Kee 
friendships and relationships and the other external ° virtue: 
goods are not part of the Chief Good? The answer 
is that it is in this way: we maintain these external 
goods by those acts of duty which spring from the 
particular class of virtue connected with each. For 
example, dutiful conduct towards friends and parents 
benefits the doer from the very fact that such per- 
formance of duty is a right action, and right actions 
take their rise from virtues. And whereas the Wise, a deg ed 
under nature’s guidance, make right action their virtue. 


aim, on the other hand men not perfect and yet 
471 


70 


(pl 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


homines et tamen ingeniis excellentibus praediti 
excitantur saepe gloria, quae habet speciem hone- 
statis et similitudinem. Quod si ipsam honestatem 
undique perfectam atque absolutam, rem unam prae- 
clarissimam omnium maximeque laudandam, penitus 
viderent, quonam gaudio complerentur, cum tanto 
opere eius adumbrata opinione laetentur? Quem 
enim deditum voluptatibus, quem cupiditatum in- 
cendiis inflammatum in iis potiendis quae acerrime 
concupivisset tanta laetitia perfundiarbitramur quanta 
aut superiorem Africanum Hannibale victo aut poste- 
riorem Carthagine eversa? Quem Tiberina descensio 
festo illo die tanto gaudio affecit quanto L. Paulum, 
cum regem Persem captum adduceret, eodem flumine 
invectio? Age nunc, Luci noster, exstrue animo altitu- 
dinem excellentiamque virtutum ; iam non dubitatis 
quin earum compotes homines magno animo erectoque 
viventes semper sint beati; qui omnes motus fortunae 
mutationesque rerum et temporum leves et imbecillos 
fore intellegant si in virtutis certamen venerint. Illa 
enim quae sunt a nobis bona corporis numerata com- 
plent ea quidem beatissimam vitam, sed ita ut sine 
illis possit beata vita exsistere. Ita enim parvae et 
exiguae sunt istae accessiones bonorum ut, quemad= 
modum stellae in radiis solis, sic istae in virtutum 
splendore ne cernantur quidem. Atque hoe ut vere 
dicitur, parva esse ad beate vivendum momenta ista 
corporis commodorum, sic nimis violentum est nulla 
esse dicere; qui enim sic disputant, obliti mihi 


a The festival of Fors Fortuna, June 24, described by 
Ovid Fasti, 6, 774. 


AT 2 


.o 


nila £ 


‘BOOK V. xxiv 


endowed with noble characters often respond to the 
stimulus of honour, which has some show and sem- 
‘blanee of Moral Worth. But if they could fully 
_ discern Moral Worth itself in its absolute perfection 
_and completeness, the one thing of all others most 
splendid and most glorious, how enraptured would 
they be, if they take such a delight in the mere 
shadow and reputation of it? What devotee of plea- 
sure, though consumed by most glowing passions, 
can be supposed to feel such transports of rapture 
in winning the objects of his keenest desires, as were 
felt by the elder Africanus upon the defeat of 
Hannibal, or by the younger at the overthrow of 
Carthage? Who ever experienced so much delight 
from the voyage down the Tiber on the day of the 
festival* as Lucius Paulus felt when he sailed up 
the river leading King Perses captive in his train? Virtue alone 
Come now, my dear Lucius, build in your imagina- abhi clean 
tion the lofty and towering structure of the vir- recrnip hire 
tues; then you will feel no doubt that those who 
achieve them, guiding themselves by magnanimity 
and uprightness, are always happy; realizing as they 
do that all the vicissitudes of fortune, the ebb and 
flow of time and of circumstance, will be trifling and 
feeble if brought into conflict with virtue. The 
things we reckon as bodily goods do, it is true, form 
_a factor in supreme happiness, but yet happiness is 
possible without them. For those supplementary 
goods are so small and slight that in the full radiance 
of the virtues they are as invisible as the stars in 
sunlight. Yet true though it is that these bodily 
advantages are of but slight importance for happi- 
ness, to say that they are of no importance is too 
sweeping; those who maintain this appear to me to 
A73 


73 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


videntur quae ipsi fecerint* principia naturae. Tri- 
buendum est igitur his aliquid, dum modo quantum 
tribuendum sit intellegas. Est enim? philosophi non 
tam gloriosa quam vera quaerentis nec pro nihilo 
putare ea quae secundum naturam illi ipsi gloriosi 
esse fateantur,® et videre tantam vim virtutis tan- 
tamque ut ita dicam auctoritatem honestatis esse * ut 
reliqua non illa quidem nulla sed ita parva sint ut 
nulla esse videantur. Haec est nec omnia spernentis 
praeter virtutem et virtutem ipsam suis laudibus 
amplificantis oratio; denique haec est undique com- 
pleta et perfecta explicatio summi boni. 

“Hine ceteri particulas arripere conati suam 
quisque videri voluit afferre sententiam. XXV. 
Saepe ab Aristotele, a Theophrasto mirabiliter est 
laudata per se ipsa rerum scientia; hoc uno captus 
Erillus scientiam summum bonum esse defendit, 
nec rem ullam aliam per se expetendam. Multa 
dicta sunt ab antiquis de contemnendis ac despi- 
ciendis rebus humanis; hoc unum Aristo tenuit: 
praeter vitia atque virtutes negavit rem esse ullam 
aut fugiendam aut expetendam. Positum est a 
nostris in iis esse rebus quae secundum naturam 
essent non dolere; hoc Hieronymus summum bonum 
esse dixit. At vero Callipho et post eum Diodorus, 
cum alter voluptatem adamasset, alter vacuitatem 


) fecerint Lambinus, Mdv.; egerint MSS.; cecerint Gifa- 
nius. 
2entm Davis, Mdv,; tamen MSS. 
‘fateantur (conj. Mdv.) Miiller; fatentur E, Mdv.; fate- 
bantur B and inf. MSS. 
4 esse inserted by Mdv. 


AT 4 


BOOK V. xxiv-xxv 


have forgotten those first principles of nature which 
they have themselves established. Some weight 
then must be given to bodily goods provided one 
understands what is the proper amount of weight. 
The genuine philosopher, who aims at truth and not 
ostentation, while refusing on the one hand to deny 
all value to the things which even those high- 
sounding teachers themselves admit to be in ac- 
cordance with nature, will on the other hand realize 
that virtue is so potent, Moral Worth invested so to 
speak with such authority, that all those other goods, 
though not worthless, are so small as to appear 
worthless. This is the language that a man will 
hold who while not despising all else but virtue yet 
extols virtue herself with her own proper praises ; in 
short, this is the full, finished and complete account 
of the Chief Good. 

“From this system all the other schools have en- 
deavoured to appropriate fragments; which each has 
hoped may pass for original. XXV. Aristotle and 
Theophrastus often and admirably praised knowledge 
for its own sake; Erillus, captivated by this single 
tenet, maintained that knowledge was the Chief 
Good and that nothing else was desirable as an end in 
itself. The ancients enlarged on the duty of rising 
proudly superior to human fortunes; Aristo singled 
out this one point, and declared that nothing but 
vice or virtue was either to be avoided or desired. 
Our school included freedom from pain among 
the things in accordance with nature ; Hieronymus 
made it out to be the Supreme Good. On the other 
hand Callipho and later Diodorus, the one having 
fallen in love with pleasure, and the other with 
freedom from pain, could neither of them dispense 

> 475 


(D) This the sol 
complete system 
other schools 
have borrowed 
fragments of it, 
the Stoics have 
conveyed it 
whole. 


7A 


15 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


doloris, neuter honestate carere potuit, quae est a 
nostris laudata maxime. Quin etiam ipsi voluptarii 
deverticula quaerunt et virtutes habent in ore totos 
dies voluptatemque dumtaxat primo expeti dicunt,* 
deinde consuetudine quasi alteram quandam naturam 
effici, qua impulsi multa faciant” nullam quaerentes 
voluptatem. Stoici restant. Ei quidem non unam 
aliquam aut alteram rem® a nobis, sed totam ad se 
nostram philosophiam transtulerunt. Atque ut 
reliqui fures earum rerum quas ceperunt signa com- 
mutant, sic illi ut sententiis nostris pro suis uterentur 
nomina tamquam rerum notas mutaverunt. Ita re- 
linquitur sola haee disciplina digna studiosis ingenu- 
arum artium, digna eruditis, digna claris viris, digna — 
principibus, digna regibus.”’ 

Quae cum dixisset paulumque institisset, “Quid 
est?’ inquit; “satisne vobis videor pro meo iure in 
vestris auribus commentatus?’’ Et ego: “Tu vero,” 
inquam, “ Piso, ut saepe alias, sic hodie ita nosse ista 
visus es ut, si tui nobis potestas saepius fieret, non 
multum Graecis supplicandum putarem. Quod qui- 
dem eo probavi magis quia memini Staseam Neapo- 
litanum, doctorem illum tuum, nobilem sane Peripa- 
teticum, aliquanto ista secus dicere solitum, assen- 
tientem iis qui multum in fortuna secunda aut 
adversa,. multum in bonis aut malis corporis pone- 
rent.” ““ Est ut dicis,” inquit; “sed haec ab Antiocho, 
familiari nostro, dicuntur multo melius et fortius 


1 guaerunt.. habent.. dicunt Lambinus, Miiller; guae- 
rant..habeant. icant MSS., Mdv., with mark of cor- 
ruption ; - quaerunt, ut. De Breehe Davis. 

* faciant T. Bentley, Miiller ; faciunt MSS., Mdv. 

3 vem inserted by T. Bentley, Mdv. 


AT6 


BOOK V_ xxv 


with Moral Worth, which by our school was extolled 
above all else. Even the votaries of pleasure take 
refuge in evasions: the name of virtue is on their 
lips all the time, and they declare that pleasure is 
only at first the object of desire, and that later habit 
produces a sort of second nature, which supplies a 
motive for many actions not aiming at pleasure at 
all. There remain the Stoics. The Stoics have 
conveyed from us not some one or other item, but 
our entire system of philosophy. It is a regular 
practice of thieves to alter the marks upon stolen 
goods; and the Stoics, in order to pass off our 
opinions as their own, have changed the names, 
which are the marks of things. Our system there- 
fore is left as the sole philosophy worthy of the 
student of the liberal arts, of men of learning, of 
men of eminence, rank, and power.” 
ze After these words he paused, and then added: 
How now? Do you judge me to have used my 
opportunity well? Does the sketch I have given 
satisfy my audience?”” “Why, Piso,’ I replied, 
“you have shown such a knowledge of your theory, 
on this, as on many other occasions, that I do not 
think we should have to rely much upon the aid of 
the Greeks, if we had more frequent opportunities 
of hearing you. And I was all the more ready to 
be convinced by you because I remember that your 
great teacher, Staseas of Naples, a Peripatetic of 


‘unquestionable repute, used to give a somewhat 


different account of your system, agreeing with 
those who attached great importance to good and 
bad fortune, and to bodily goods and evils.” “That 
is true,” said he; “but our friend Antiochus is a far 
better and far more uncompromising exponent of the 


ATT 


6 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


quam a Stasea dicebantur. Quamquam ego non 
quaero quid tibi a me probatum sit, sed huic Ciceroni 
nostro, quem discipulum cupio a te abducere.” 
XXVI. Tum Lucius: “Mihi vero ista valde pro- 
bata sunt, quod item fratri puto.” Tum mihi Piso: 
“Quid ergo?” inquit; “‘dasne adulescenti veniam? 
an eum discere ea mavis quae cum plane perdidi- 
cerit nihil sciat?”’ “Ego vero isti,’” inquam, “per- 
mitto; sed nonne meministi licere mihi ista probare 
quae sunt a te dicta? Quis enim potest ea quae pro- 
babilia videantur ei! non probare?” “An vero,” 
inquit, * quisquam potest probare quod perceptum, 
quod comprehensum, quod cognitum non habet?” 
“Non est ista,’ inquam, “Piso, magna dissensio. 
Nihil est enim aliud quamobrem mihi percipi nihil 
posse videatur nisi quod percipiendi vis ita definitur 
a Stoicis ut negent quidquam posse percipi nisi tale 
verum quale falsum esse non possit. Itaque haec 
cum illis est dissensio, cum Peripateticis nulla sane. 
Sed haec omittamus; habent enim et bene longam 
et satis litigiosam disputationem; illud mihi a te 
nimium festinanter dictum videtur, sapientes omnes 
esse semper beatos. Nescio quomodo praetervolavit 
oratio. Quod nisi ita efficitur, quae Theophrastus 
de fortuna, de dolore, de cruciatu corporis dixit, cum 
quibus coniungi vitam beatam nullo modo posse 


tei MSS., edd.; ea two inf. MSS.; perhaps fofest quae 
probabilia sibi videantur ea ed. 


*A reference to the scepticism of the New Academy of 
Arcesilas and Carneades; their doctrines, that certainty was 
unattainable and that reasonable probability was a suffi- 
cient guide for life, are avowed by Cicero in the following 
sentences. : 


478 


BOOK V. xxv-xxvi 


system than Staseas used to be. Though I don’t 
want to know how far I succeeded in convincing 
you, but how far I convinced our friend Cicero here; 
I want to kidnap your pupil from you.” 

XXVI. To this Lucius replied: “Oh, I am quite s. Charge of in- 
convinced by what you have said, and I think my butted (69 76-94 
brother is so too.” “How now?” said Piso to me, Sasi 
“Has the young man your consent? or would you an ee. 
rather he should study a system which, when he is ples of the New 
perfect in it, will end in his knowing nothing?” # peeeed 
“Oh, I leave him his liberty,” said I; “but don’t 
you remember that it is quite open to me to approve 
the doctrines you have stated? Since who can 
refrain from approving statements that appear to 
him probable?” ‘But,’ said he, “can anyone 
approve that of which he has not full perception, 
comprehension and knowledge?’? “There is no 
great need to quarrel about that, Piso,’ I rejoined. 

The only thing that makes me deny the possibility 
of perception is the Stoics’ definition of that term; 
they maintain that nothing can be perceived except 
a true presentation having such a character as no 
false presentation can possess. Here then | have a 
quarrel with the Stoics, but certainly none with the 
Peripatetics. However let us drop this question, 
for it involves a very long and somewhat contentious 
debate. It is the doctrine that the Wise Man is yutis it con- 
always and invariably happy that I would challenge sistent? If 


as too hurriedly touched upon by you. Your Pie pert of the 
discourse somehow skimmed past this point. But Eug/s Virtue 
unless this doctrine is proved, I am afraid that happiness? 
the truth will lie with Theophrastus, who held that 
misfortune, sorrow and bodily anguish were incom- 


479 


78 


“I 
io) 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


putavit, vereor ne vera sint. Nam illud vehementer 
repugnat, eundem beatum esse et multis malis op- 
pressum. Haec quomodo conveniant non sane in- 
tellego.” “Utrum igitur tibi,” inquit, “non placet 
virtutisne esse tantam vim ut ad beate vivendum se 
ipsa contenta sit, an, si id probas, fieri ita posse negas 
ut ii qui virtutis compotes sint etiam quibusdam 
malis affecti beati sint?” “Ego vero volo in virtute 
vim esse quam maximam; sed quanta sit alias, nunc 
tantum possitne esse tanta, si quidquam extra virtu- 
tem habeatur in bonis.” “ Atqui,” inquit, “ si Stoicis 
concedis ut virtus sola si assit vitam efficiat beatam, 
concedis etiam Peripateticis. Quae enim mala illi 
non audent appellare, aspera autem et incommoda et 
reicienda et aliena naturae esse concedunt, ea nos 
mala dicimus sed exigua et paene minima. Quare 
si potest esse beatus is qui est in asperis reiciendis- 
que rebus, potest is quoque esse qui est in parvis 
malis.” Etego: “ Piso, inquam, si est quisquam qui 
acute in causis videre soleat quae res agatur, is es 
profecto tu. Quare attende, quaeso. Nam adhuc, 
meo fortasse vitio, quid ego quaeram non perspicis.”’ 
“Tstic sum,” inquit, “exspectoque quid ad id quod 
quaerebam respondeas.” 

XXVII. “Respondebo me non quaerere,’ inquam, 
“hoe tempore quid virtus efficere possit, sed quid 
constanter dicatur, quid ipsum a se dissentiat.’’ 


ce > ° 5 ce 3 ce . 
Quo,” inquit, modo?” Quia cum a Zenone,” 
480 


BOOK V. xxvi-xxvii 


patible with happiness. For that a man can be at 
once happy and overwhelmed with evils is violently 
repugnant to common sense. How happiness and 
misfortune can go together I entirely fail to under- 
stand.” “Which position then do you question?” 
he replied ; “ that virtue is so potent that she need 
not look outside herself for happiness? or, if you 
accept this, do you deny that the virtuous can be 
happy even when afflicted by certain evils?”’ “Oh, I 
would rate the potency of virtue as high as possible; 
but let us defer the question of her exact degree of 
greatness; the only point is now, could she be so 
great as she is, if anything outside virtue be classed 
; as a good?” “Yet,” said he, “if you concede to the Piso: Yes, Virtue 
Stoics that the presence of virtue alone can produce & pe fucation 
happiness, you concede this also to the Peripatetics. external evils are 
What the Stoics have not the courage to call evils, Soa ee 
but admit to be irksome, detrimental, ‘to be rejected,’ 
and not in accordance with nature, we say are evils, 
though small and almost negligible evils. Hence if a 
man can be happy when surrounded by circumstances 
that are irksome and to be rejected, he can also be 
happy when surrounded by trifling evils.” “ Piso,” I 
rejoined, “ you, if anyone, are a sharp enough are 
to see at a glance the real point at issue in a dispute. 
Therefore I beg your close attention. For so far, 
though perhaps I am to blame, you do not grasp the 
point of my question.” ‘I am all attention,” he 
replied,” and await your reply to my inquiry.’ 
) XXVIII. “My reply will be,” said I, “that I am not Cicero: But if 
misfortunes are 
at the present asking what result virtue can produce, evils, can Virtue 
but what is a consistent and what a self-contradic- Botan? 
tory account of it.” “ How do you mean?”’ said he. 
“Why,” I said, “ first Zeno enunciates the lofty and 
if 481 


80 


81 


_ CICERO DE FINIBUS 


inquam, “hoc magnifice tamquam ex oraculo editur: 
‘Virtus ad beate vivendum se ipsa contenta est, 
‘Quare?’ inquit; respondet: “Quia nisi quod hone- 
stum est nullum est aliud bonum.”’ Non quaero iam 
verumne sit; illud dico, ea quae dicat praeclare inter 
se cohaerere. Dixerit hoc idem Epicurus, semper 
beatum esse sapientem; quod quidem solet ebullire 
nonnumquam; quem quidem cum summis doloribus 
conficiatur, ait dicturum: ‘Quam suave est! quam 
nihil curo!’ Non pugnem ‘cum homine, cur tantum 
aberret! in natura boni; illud urgueam, non intel- 
legere eum quid sibi dicendum sit cum dolorem sum- 
mum malum esse dixerit. Eadem nune mea adver- 
sum te oratio est. Dicis eadem omnia et bona et 
mala quae quidem?” dicunt ii qui numquam philoso- 
phum pictum ut dicitur viderunt, valetudinem, vires, 
staturam, formam, integritatem unguiculorum om- 
nium bona,® deformitatem, morbum, debilitatem 
mala. Iam illa externa parce tu quidem; sed haec 
cum corporis bona sint, eorum conficientia certe in 
bonis numerabis, amicos, liberos, propinquos, divitias, 
honores, opes. Contra hoc attende me nihil dicere; 
illud dicere,* si ista mala sunt in quae potest incidere 
sapiens, sapientem esse non satis esse ad beate vi- 
vendum.” “Immo vero,” inquit, “ad beatissime 
vivendum parum est, ad beate satis.” “Animad- 
verti,” inquam, “te isto modo paulo ante ponere, et 
scio ab Antiocho nostro dici sic solere; sed quid 


 aberret Miller; habeat MSS.; abeat (‘tam longe a nobis 
discedat’) Mdv. 

2 quidem Mav. brackets. 

3 dona inserted by Lambinus, Mdv. 

4illud dicere inserted by Mdv. 


482 


BOOK V. xxvii 


oracular utterance, ‘Virtue need not look outside 
herself for happiness’; ‘Why?’ says some one. 
“ Because,’ he answers, nothing else is good but 
what is morally good.’ I am not now asking whether 
this is true; what I say is that Zeno’s statements are 
) admirably logical and consistent. Suppose Epicurus 
to say the same thing, that the Wise Man is always 
happy,—for he is fond of ranting like this now and 
then, and indeed tells us that when the Wise Man is 
suffering torments of pain, he will say ‘How pleasant 
this is! how little I mind!’—Well, I should not join 
issue with the man as to why he goes so far astray 
about the nature of the Good; what I should insist 
is that he does not understand what is the necessary 
corollary of his own avowal that pain is the supreme 
evil. I take the same line now against you. As to 
what is good and what is evil, your account agrees 
entirely with that of those who have never set eyes 
on a philosopher, even in a picture, as the saying is: 
you call health, strength, height, beauty, soundness 
of every part from top to toe, goods, and ugliness, 
disease and weakness evils. As for external goods, 
you were, it is true, cautious; but since these bodily 
excellences are goods, you will doubtless reckon as 
goods the things productive of them, namely friends, 
children, relations, riches, rank and power. Mark 
that against this I say nothing; what I say is, if mis- 
fortunes which a Wise Man may encounter are as you 
say evils, tobe wise is not enough for happiness.”’ “Say Piso: Yes, 


though not 
rather,’ said he, “not enough for supreme happiness, er endect 
but it is enough for happiness.” I noticed,” [ happiness. 


replied, “you made that distinction a little time Cicero: How 
ago, and I am aware that our master Antiochus is = Ras 


fond of saying the same; but what can be more un- happiness? 
112 483 


83 


ha 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


minus probandum quam esse aliquem beatum nec 
satis beatum? Quod autem satis est, eo quidquid 
accessit! nimium est; et nemo nimium beatus est; 
igitur® nemo beato beatior.”’ “Ergo,” inquit, “tibi 
Q. Metellus, qui tres filios consules vidit, e quibus 
unum etiam et censorem et triumphantem, quartum 
autem praetorem, eosque salvos reliquit et tres filias 
nuptas, cum ipse consul, censor, augur fuisset et 
triumphasset, ut sapiens fuerit, nonne beatior quam, 
ut item sapiens fuerit, qui in potestate hostium vi- 
giliis et inedia necatus est, Regulus?” 

XXVIII. “Quid me istud,” inquam, “rogas? 
Stoicos roga.” “Quid igitur,’ inquit, “ eos respon- 
suros putas?” “Nihilo beatiorem esse Metellum 
quam Regulum.”’ “Inde igitur,”’ inquit, “ ordien- 
dum est.” “'Tamen a proposito,”’ inquam, “ aberra- 
mus. Non enim quaero quid verum sed quid cuique 
dicendum sit. Utinam quidem dicerent alium alio 
beatiorem ! iam ruinas videres. In virtute enim sola 
et in ipso honesto cum sit bonum positum cumque 
nec virtus ut placet illis nec honestum crescat, idque 
bonum solum sit quo qui potiatur necesse est beatus 
sit, cum augeri id non possit in quo uno positum est 
beatum esse, qui potest esse quisquam alius alio 
beatior? Videsne ut haee concinant? Et hercule 
(fatendum est enim quod sentio) mirabilis est apud 
illos contextus rerum. Respondent extrema primis, 


hoe Miiller (cf. IV, 37 perduxit); accesserit i 


*igitur Miller; et MSS,, Mdv. who marks as corrupt 
A484 


BOOK V. xxvii-xxviii 


satisfactory than to say that a man is happy but not 
happy enough? Any addition to what is enough 
makes too much; now no one has too much happi- 
ness; therefore no one can be hap ier than happy.” 

Then in your view,” he said, “was not Quintus 


Piso: Itis 


Metellus, who saw thrée sons consuls, and one of °bvicus that 


these made censor and celebrating a triumph as 


there are. 


well, and a fourth praetor, and who left his four sons — 


alive and well and three daughters married, having 
himself been consul, censor and augur and having had 
a triumph,—supposing him to have been a Wise Man, 
was he not happier than Regulus, who died a cap- 
tive in the hands of the enemy, from starvation and 
want of sleep, allowing him also to have been a 
Wise Man?” 

XXVIII. “Why,” said I, “do you ask that ques- 
tion of me? Ask the Stoics.” “ What answer 
then,” he said, “do you think they would give?” 
¥) That Metellus is no _ happier than Regulus.”’ 
is Well then,’ said he, let us start from. that.” 

Still,’ said I, _ we are wandering from our subject. 
For I am not inquiring what is true, but what each 
school ought consistently to say. I only wish they 
said that there were degrees of happiness! then you 
would see a collapse! For since the Good consists 
solely in virtue and in actual Moral Worth, and 
neither virtue nor Moral Worth, as they hold, ad- 
mits of increase, and since that alone is good 
which necessarily makes its possessor happy, when 
that which alone constitutes happiness does not 
allow of increase, how can anyone possibly be hap- 
pier than anyone else? Do you see how logical this 
is? And in fact (for I must admit what I really 
think) their system is a marvellously consistent whole. 

485 


Cicero: But it 
is inconsistent 
to say that the 
Wise Man is 
always happy, 
unless with the 
Stoics you deny 
pain to be 

an evil. 


84 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 
media utrisque, omnia omnibus; quid sequatur, quid 
repugnet, vident. Ut in geometria, prima si dede- 
ris, danda sunt omnia. Concede nihil esse bonum 
nisi quod honestum sit ; concedendum est in virtute 


1 vitam beatam. Vide rursus retro. 


positam esse 
Dato hoc, dandum est illud. Quod vestri non item. 
‘Tria genera bonorum’: proclivi currit oratio. Venit 
ad extremum ; haeret in salebra; cupit enim dicere 
nihil posse ad beatam vitam deesse sapienti. Honesta 
oratio, Socratica, Platonis etiam. “Audeo dicere, 
inquit. Non potes, nisi retexueris illa. Paupertas 
si malum est, mendicus esse beatus nemo potest 
quamvis sit sapiens. At Zeno eum non beatum mo- 
do sed etiam divitem dicere ausus est. Dolere malum 
est; in crucem qui agitur beatus esse non potest. 
Bonum liberi; misera orbitas; bonum patria; mi- 
serum exsilium; bonum valetudo; miser morbus: 
bonum integritas corporis; misera debilitas ; bonum 
incolumis acies; misera caecitas. Quae si potest 
singula consolando levare, universa quomodo sustine- 
bit? Sit enim idem caecus, debilis, morbo gravissime 
affectus, exsul, orbus, egens, torqueatur eculeo; quem 
hune appellas, Zeno? ‘Beatum,’ inquit. Etiam 
beatissimum? ‘Quippe,’ inquiet, ‘cum tam? docu- 


‘ esse inserted by Mdv. 
2 cum tam inf. MSS., edd.; cum B, E; cum.. non magi 
habere Baiter. 


486 


BOOK V. xxvin 


The conclusions agree with the first principles, the 
middle steps with both, in fact every part with every 
other. They understand what inference follows from 
and what contradicts a given premise. It is like 
geometry: grant the premises and you must grant 
everything. Admit that there is no good but Moral 
Worth, and you are bound to admit that happiness 
consists in virtue. Or again conversely: given the 
latter, you must grant the former. Your school are 
not so logical. Three classes of goods’: your ex- 
position runs smoothly on. It comes to its conclu- 
sion, and now it sticks at a rough place; for it wants 
to assert that the Wise Man can lack no requisite 
of happiness. That is the moral style, the style 
of Socrates, and of Plato too. ‘I dare assert it,’ 
eries the Academic. You cannot, unless you recast 
the earlier part of the argument. If poverty is an 
evil, no beggar can be happy, be he as wise as you 
like. But Zeno dared to say that a wise beggar was 
not only happy but also wealthy. Pain is an evil: 
then a man sentenced to crucifixion cannot be 
happy. Children are a good: then childlessness is 
miserable; one’s country is a good: then exile is 
miserable; health is a good : then the sick man is mise- 
rable ; soundness of body is a good: then infirmity 
is miserable ; good eyesight is a good: then blind- 
ness is miserable. Perhaps the philosopher’s conso- 
lations can alleviate each of these misfortunes singly ; 
but how will he enable us to endure them all at 
once? Suppose a man to be at once blind, infirm, 
afflicted by dire disease, in exile, childless, destitute 
and tortured on the rack; what is your name, Zeno, 
for him? “A happy man,’ says Zeno. A supremely 
happy man as well? “To be sure,’ he will reply, 
487 


85 


86 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 

erim gradus istam rem non habere quam virtutem, 
in qua sit ipsum etiam beatum.’ Tibi hoc incredi- 
bile quod beatissimum; quid? tuum credibile? Si 
enim ad populum me vocas, eum qui ita sit affectus 
beatum esse numquam probabis; si ad prudentes, 
alterum fortasse dubitabunt, sitne tantum in virtute | 
ut ea praediti vel in Phalaridis tauro beati sint; 
alterum non dubitabunt, quin et Stoici convenientia 
sibi dicant et vos repugnantia. ‘Theophrasti igitur,’ 
inquit, ‘ tibi liber ille placet de beata vita?’ Tamen 
aberramus a proposito, et ne longius, prorsus, inquam, 
Piso, si ista mala sunt, placet.” “Nonne igitur,” 
inquit, “tibi videntur mala?” “Id quaeris,” inquam, 
“in quo utrum respondero verses te huc atque illuc 
necesse est.” “Quo tandem modo?” inquit. “Quia 
si mala sunt, is qui erit in iis beatus non erit; si mala 
non sunt, iacet omnis ratio Peripateticorum.” Et 
ille ridens: “ Vidéo,” inquit, “ quid agas; ne disci- 
pulum abducam times.” “Tu vero,” inquam, “ducas 
licet si sequetur ; erit enim mecum si tecum erit.”’ 

XXIX. “Audi igitur,” inquit, “Luci; teeum enim 
mihi instituenda oratio est. Omnis auctoritas philo- 
sophiae, ut ait Theophrastus, consistit in beata vita 


comparanda ; beate enim vivendi cupiditate incensi 
488 


BOOK V. xxviii-xxix 


¢ 
- because I have proved that happiness no more 
admits of degrees than does virtue, in which happi- 
ness itself consists.’ To you the statement that he is 
supremely happy is incredible; but what of your 
own view? is it credible? Call me before a jury of 
ordinary people, and you will never persuade them 
that the man so afflicted is happy; refer the case to 
the learned, and it is possible that on one of the two 
counts they will be doubtful about their verdict, 
whether virtue has such efficacy that the virtuous 
will be happy even in the bull of Phalaris: but on 
the other, they will find without hesitation that the 
Stoic doctrine is consistent and yours self-contradic- 
tory. ‘Ah,’ says the Academic, ‘then you agree 
with Theophrastus in his great work On Happiness ?’ 
However, we are wandering from the subject; and 
to cut the matter short, Piso,” I said, “I do fully 
agree with Theophrastus, if misfortunes, as you say, 
are evils.” “Then don’t you think they are evils?” 
he said. “To that question,” said I, “whichever 
reply I make, you will be bound to shift and shuffle.” 
“ How so exactly?” he asked. “ Because,” I replied, 
“if they are evils, the man who suffers from them 
will not be happy; and on the other hand if they 
are not evils, down topples the whole Peripatetic 
system.” “I see what you are at,” cried he smiling; 
“you are afraid of my robbing you of a pupil.” “Oh,” 
aid I, “ you are welcome to convert him if he wants 
0 be converted; for if he is in your fold, he will be 
n mine.” EON 
XXIX. “Listen then, Lucius,” said Piso, “for I phers have 


found happiness 


nust address myself to you. The whole importance in wisdom. The 
Stoics admit 


f philosophy lies, as Theophrastus says, in the attain- prosperity is 


* eat j j~ ‘ preferable ’; 
nent of happiness; since an ardent desire for happi fd oniy 26Ken 


489 tion of terms; 


87 


88 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


omnes sumus. Hoc mihi cum tuo fratre convenit. 
Quare hoc videndum est, possitne nobis hoe ratio 
philosophorum dare. Pollicetur certe. Nisi enim 
id faceret, cur Plato Aegyptum peragravit ut a sacer- 
dotibus barbaris numeros et caelestia acciperet ? cur 
post Tarentum ad Archytam? cur ad reliquos Pytha- 
goreos, Echecratem, Timaeum, Arionem Locros, ut, 
cum Socratem expressisset, adiungeret Pythagore- 
orum disciplinam eaque quae Socrates repudiabat 
addisceret ? cur ipse Pythagoras et Aegyptum lustra- 
vit et Persarum magos adiit? cur tantas regiones 
barbarorum pedibus obiit, tot maria transmisit? cur 
haec eadem Democritus? qui (vere falsone, quaerere 
nolumus!) dicitur se oculis privasse ; certe, ut quam 
minime animus a cogitationibus abduceretur, patri- 
monium neglexit, agros deseruit incultos, quid 
quaerens aliud nisi vitam beatam? Quam si etiam 
in rerum cognitione ponebat, tamen ex illa investi-— 
gatione naturae consequi volebat bono ut esset animo; 
id enim ille summum bonum ecv6uuiav et saepe 
a0apuBiav appellat, id est animum terrore liberum. 
Sed haec etsi praeclare, nondum tamen perpolita; 
pauca enim, neque ea ipsa enucleate, ab hoc de 
virtute quidem dicta. Post enim haec in hac urbe 
primum a Socrate quaeri coepta, deinde in hunec 


locum delata sunt, nec dubitatum quin in virtute 
‘ quaerere nolumus Miiller ; guaereremus. 


490 


7 


wy 


BOOK V. xxix 


ness possesses us all. On this your brother and I 
are agreed. Hence what we have to consider is 
this, can the system of the philosophers give us 
happiness? It certainly professes to do so. Were 
it not so, why did Plato travel through Egypt to 
learn arithmetic and astronomy from _ barbarian 
priests? Why did he later visit Archytas at Taren- 
tum, or the other Pythagoreans, Echecrates, Ti- 
maeus and Arion, at Locri, intending to append to 
his picture of Socrates an account of the Pythagorean 
system and to extend his studies into those branches 
which Socrates repudiated? Why did Pythagoras 
himself scour Egypt and visit the Persian magi? why 
did he travel on foot through those vast barbarian 
lands and sail across those many seas? Why did 
Democritus do the same? Itis related-of the latter 
(whether truly or falsely we are not concerned to 
inquire) that he deprived himself of eyesight; and 
it is certain that in order that his mind should be 
distracted as little as possible from reflection, he 
neglected his paternal estate and left his land uncul- 
tivated, engrossed in the search for what else but 
happiness? Even if he supposed happiness to consist 
in knowledge, still he designed that his study of 
natural philosophy should procure him peace of mind ; 
since that is his conception of the Chief Good, which 
he entitles euthumia, or often athambia, that is free- 
dom from alarm. But what he said on the subject, 
however excellent, nevertheless lacks the finishing 
touches; for indeed about virtue he said very little, 
and that not clearly expressed. For it was later 
that these inquiries began to be pursued at Athens 
by Socrates, first in the city, and afterwards the study 


was transferred to the place where we now are; and 
491 


89 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


omnis ut bene sic etiam beate vivendi spes ponere- 
tur. Quae cum Zeno didicisset a nostris, ut in 
actionibus praescribi solet, DE EADEM RE FEcIT? ALIO 
mopo. Hoc tu nunc in illo probas. Scilicet vocabulis 
rerum mutatis inconstantiae crimen ille effugit, nos 
effugere non possumus!. Ile Metelli vitam negat 
beatiorem quam Reguli, praeponendam tamen; nec 
magis expetendam, sed magis sumendam; et, si optio 
esset, eligendam Metelli, Reguli reiciendam; ego, 


- quam ille praeponendam et magis eligendam, beati- 


orem hance appello, nec ullo minimo? momento plus 


ei vitae tribuo quam Stoici. Quid interest, nisi quod 
ego res notas notis verbis appello, illi nomina nova 
quaerunt quibus idem dicant? Ita quemadmodum 
in senatu semper est aliquis qui interpretem postulet, 
sic isti nobis cum interprete audiendi sunt. Bonum 
appello quidquid secundum naturam est, quod contra, 
malum; nec ego solus, sed tu etiam, Chrysippe, in 
foro, domi; in schola desinis. Quid ergo? aliter 
homines, aliter philosophos loqui putas oportere? 
Quanti quidque sit, aliter docti et indocti; sed cum 
constiterit inter doctos quanti res quaeque sit,—si 
homines essent, usitate loquerentur ;—-dum res ma- 
neant, verba fingant arbitratu suo. 


1 FECIT edd. bracket. 
2 minimo inf, MSS., Mdv.; omnino B, E. 


aThis preamble seems to have guarded the plaintiff 
against being non-suited ona plea of chose jugée, in case 
that having failed in his suit he chose to bring it in again 
under a different formula. 

bi.e. when an audience was given to Greek-speaking 
envoys. 


492 


BOOK V. xxix 


no one doubted that all hope alike of right conduct 
and of happiness lay in virtue. Zeno having learnt 
this doctrine from our school proceeded to deal with 
“the same matter in another manner, as the common 
preamble * to an indictment has it. You now approve 
of this procedure on his part. He, no doubt, can 
change the names of things and be acquitted of in- 
consistency, but we cannot! He denies that the life 
of Metellus was happier than that of Regulus, yet 
calls it ‘ preferable’ ; not more desirable, but more 
worthy of adoption ’ ; and given the choice, that of 
Metellus is “to be selected’ and that of Regulus 
‘rejected.’ Whereas the life he called ‘preferable’ and 
“more worthy to be selected’ I term happier, though I 


‘do not assign any the minutest fraction more value to 


that life than do the Stoics. What is the difference 
except that I apply familiar terms to familiar things, 
whereas they invent new names to express the same 
meaning? Thus just as in the senate there is always 
some one who demands an interpreter,” so we must 
use an interpreter when we give audience to your 
school. I call whatever is in accordance with nature 
good and what is contrary to nature bad; nor am I 
alone in this: you, Chrysippus, do so too in business 
and in private life, but you leave off doing so in the 
lecture-room. What then? do you think philo- 
sophers should speak a different language from 
ordinary human beings? ‘The learned and the un- 
learned may differ as to the values of things; but 
when the learned are agreed what each thing’s value 
is,—if they were human beings, they would adopt the 
recognized form of expression; but so long as the 
actual things remain, let them coin new words at 


their pleasure. 
493 


90 


91 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 

XXX. “Sed venio ad inconstantiae crimen, ne sae- 
pius dicas me aberrare; quam tu ponis in verbis, ego 
positam in re putabam. Si satis erit hoc perceptum, in 
quo adiutores Stoicos optimos habemus, tantam vim 
esse virtutis ut omnia si ex altera parte ponantur ne 
appareant quidem, cum omnia quae illi commoda 
certe dicunt esse et sumenda et eligenda et prae- 
posita (quae ita definiunt ut satis magno aestimanda 
sint), haee igitur cum ego tot nominibus a Stoicis 
appellata, partim novis et commenticiis ut ista : pro- 
ducta’ et ‘reducta, partim idem significantibus 
(quid enim interest, expetas an eligas? mihi quidem 
etiam lautius videtur quod eligitur et ad quod de- 
lectus adhibetur), sed, cum ego ista omnia bona 
dixero, tantum refert quam magna dicam; cum ex- 
petenda, quam valde. Sin autem nec expetenda 
ego magis quam tu eligenda, nec illa pluris aesti- 
manda ego qui bona, quam tu qui producta appellas, 
omnia ista necesse est obscurari nec apparere et in 
virtutis tamquam in solis radios incurrere. At enim 
qua in vita est aliquid mali, ea beata esse non potest 
Ne seges quidem igitur spicis uberibus et crebris si 


avenam uspiam videris, nec mercatura quaestuosa si 
AQ4 


BOOK V. xxx 


90 XXX. “But I come to the charge of inconsis- we assign no 
tency, or you will say I digress too often. You oeeptnie % 
make inconsistency a matter of words, but I imagined oo bc 
it to be a question of fact. Only let it be clearly 
grasped, and in this we have the Stoics as our 
strongest supporters, that such is the power of virtue 
that all other things, if ranged on the opposite 
side to it, are absolutely imperceptible in com- 
parison; then, as for all the things which they 
admit to be ‘advantageous and ‘to be adopted’ 
and ‘selected’ and ‘preferred’ (terms which they 
define so as to mean possessed of considerable value), 
when I style these things, which receive so many 
names from the Stoics, some new and original, like 
your words ‘ promoted’ and ‘ degraded,’ some iden- 
tical in meaning (for what difference is there between 
‘desiring’ a thing and ‘selecting’ it? to my ear 
there is a more sumptuous sound about a thing 
that is selected, and to which choice is applied), 
—however when I call all these things good, the 
only thing that matters is, how good do I mean; 
when I call them desirable, the only question is, 
how desirable? But if on the other hand I do not 
think them more ‘to be desired’ than you ‘to be 
selected,’ and if I who call them good do not deem 
them more valuable than you who call them ‘ pro- 
moted,’ all these external things will necessarily be 
eclipsed and rendered imperceptible by the side of 
virtue; to encounter its radiance is like meeting the 

j1 rays of the sun. But you will say that a life which 1¢ you say that 
contains some evil cannot be happy. At that rate Lo igen ped 
a crop of corn is not a heavy and abundant crop if byil we reply 

at a thing is 

you can spy a single stalk of wild oat anywhere judged by its 

among it; a business is not profitable if among Seatpepor 
495 


92 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


in maximis lucris paulum aliquid damni contraxerit. 
An hoc usquequaque, aliter in vita? et non ex 
maxima parte de tota iudicabis? an dubium est quin 
virtus ita maximam partem obtineat in rebus huma- 
nis ut reliquas obruat? Audebo igitur cetera quae 
secundum naturam sint bona appellare nec fraudare 
suo vetere nomine potius quam aliquod! novum ex- 
quirere; virtutis autem amplitudinem quasi in altera 
librae lance ponere. Terram, mihi crede, ea lanx 
et maria deprimet. Semper enim ex eo quod maxi- 
mas partes. continet latissimeque funditur tota res 
appellatur. Dicimus aliquem hilare vivere; ergo 
si semel tristior effectus est hilara vita amissa est? 
At hoc in eo M. Crasso, quem semel ait in vita 
risisse Lucilius, non contigit, ut ea re minus ayéAacTos, 
ut ait idem, vocaretur. Polycratem Samium felicem 
appellabant. Nihil acciderat ei quod nollet nisi 
quod anulum quo delectabatur in mari abiecerat. 
Ergo infelix una molestia, felix rursus cum is ipse 
anulus in praecordiis piscis inventus est? Ille 
vero si insipiens (quod certe, quoniam tyrannus), 
numquam beatus; si sapiens, ne tum quidem miser 
cum ab Oroete praetore Darei in crucem actus est. 
“At multis malis affectus.’ Quis negat? sed ea mala 


virtutis magnitudine obruebantur. 


‘potius quam aliquod Lambinus, Miiller; guam aliquid 
(aliquam B, E) potius MSS., Mdv. with mark of corruption, 
suggesting regue aliquid potius. 


ai.e. ‘unsmiling.’ 
b The story is told by Herodotus, 3.40 foll. 
°i.e. on the supposition that he was a Wise Man. 


4.96 


BOOK V. xxx 


enormous profits it suffers a single loss. Does one 
principle hold good in everything else, but another 
‘in conduct? Will you not judge of the whole by 
the largest part? Is there any doubt that virtue 
occupies so large a part in human affairs that it 
eclipses every other factor? Well then, I shall make 
bold to call the other things in accordance with 
nature ‘goods,’ and not cheat them of their old 
name, rather than excogitate some new one; but I 
shall place the massive bulk of virtue in the opposite 
scale of the balance. Believe me, that scale will 
weigh down the earth and the seas. It is a uni- 
versal rule that any whole takes its name from its 
most predominant and preponderant part. We 
say that a man is a cheerful fellow; but if he is 
once in rather low spirits, has he therefore lost 
his title to cheerfulness for ever? Well, the rule 
was not applied to Marcus Crassus, who according 
to Lucilius laughed but once in his life; that one 
exception did not prevent his being called agelastos,* 
as Lucilius has it. Polycrates of Samos was called 
“the fortunate.’ Not a single untoward circum- 
stance had ever befallen him, except that he had 
thrown his favourite ring overboard at sea.’ Did 
that single annoyance then make him unfortunate? 
and did he become fortunate again when the very 
same ring was found in a fish’s belly? But Poly- 
crates, if he was foolish (which he certainly was, 
since he was a tyrant), was never happy; if wise, he 
was not miserable even when crucified by Oroetes, 
the satrap of Darius. ‘But,’ you say, ‘many evils 
befell him!’ Who denies it? but those evils were 
eclipsed by the magnitude of his virtue.° 
KK 497 


Virtue out- 
weighs all else 


93 


94 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


XXXI. “An ne hoe quidem Peripateticis con- 
cedis, ut dicant omnium bonorum virorum, id est 
sapientium, omnibus virtutibus ornatorum, vita 
omnibus partibus plus habere semper boni quam 
mali? Quis hoc dicit? Stoici scilicet. Minime; sec 
isti ipsi qui voluptate et dolore omnia metiuntur 
nonne clamant sapienti plus semper adesse quoc 
velit quam quod nolit? Cum tantum igitur in virtute 
ponant ii qui fatentur se virtutis causa, nisi ea volupta 
tem faceret,! ne manum quidem versuros fuisse, quic 
facere nos oportet qui quamvis minimam praestan 
tiam animi omnibus bonis corporis anteire dicamu: 
ut ea ne in conspectu quidem relinquantur? Qui 
est enim qui hoc cadere in sapientem dicere audeat 
ut si fieri possit virtutem in perpetuum abiciat w 
dolore omni liberetur? Quis nostrum dixerit (quo 
non pudet ea quae Stoici aspera dicunt mala dicere) 
melius esse turpiter aliquid facere cum voluptat 
quam honeste cum dolore? Nobis Heracleotes ill 
Dionysius flagitiose descivisse videtur a Stoicis pro 
pter oculorum dolorem. Quasi vero hoc didicisset ; 
Zenone, non dolere cum doleret! Tllud audiera 
nec tamen didicerat, malum illud non esse quia turp: 
non esset, et esse” ferendum viro. Hic si Peripa 
teticus fuisset, permansisset, credo, in sententia, qu 
dolorem malum dicunt esse, de asperitate autem eiu 
fortiter ferenda praecipiunt eadem, quae Stoici. E 

1 faceret Mikkelsen, Miiller; accirvet inf. MSS., Mdv. wit 


mark of corruption ; voluptate maceret B, E. 
2 esse Manutius, Mdv., esse¢ MSS. 


498 


BOOK V. xxxi 
XXXI. “Or do you even refuse to let the Peripa- Even the 


tetics say that every part of the life of all good, that agarose 
is of all wise men, men whom every virtue decks, eee 
always comprises more good than evil? Who does of what be see 
say this? The Stoics, you suppose? Not at all; eee 
but the very people who measure all things ae 
pleasure and pain, do not they cry aloud that the 
Wise Man always has more of what he likes than ot 
what hedislikes ? Wlientherefore so much importance 
is assigned to virtue by those who confess that they 
would not raise a hand for the sake of virtue if it 
did not produce pleasure, what are we to do, who 
say that the smallest amount you like to mention 
of mental excellence surpasses all the goods of the 
body, and renders them completely imperceptible? 
For who is there who would venture to say that it 
would become the Wise Man to discard virtue for 
ever (were this possible) for the sake of securing 
absolute freedom from pain? Who of our school 
(which is not ashamed to call evils what the Stoics 
term “ annoyances’) was ever known to say that it is 
better to commit a pleasant sin than to do the pain- 
ful right? In our view Dionysius of Heraclea was In not denying 
wrong to secede from the Stoics because of a malady 5 Sateg nies is 
of the eyes. As though Zeno had ever taught him apes Fortine 
that to feel pain was not painful! What he had - 
heard, though he had not learnt the lesson, was that 
pain was not an evil, because not morally bad, and 
that it was manly to endure it. Had Dionysius 
been a Peripatetic, I believe he would never have 
changed his opinions; the Peripatetics say that pain 
is an evil, but on the duty of bearing the annoy- 
ance it causes with fortitude their teaching is the 
same as that of the Stoics. And indeed your friend 
KK2 499 


95 


96 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


quidem Arcesilas tuus, etsi fuit in disserendo perti- 
nacior, tamen noster fuit; erat enim Polemonis; is 
cum arderet podagrae doloribus visitassetque homi- 
nem Charmides Epicureus? perfamiliaris et tristis 
exiret, ‘Mane, quaeso,’ inquit, “Charmide noster 
nihil illine huc pervenit.’ .Ostendit pedes et pectus 
Ac tamen hic mallet non dolere. 

XXXII. “ Haec igitur est nostra ratio, quae tib’ 
videtur inconstans, cum propter virtutis caelesterr 
quandam et divinam tantamque praestantiam, ut 
ubi virtus sit resque magnae et summe laudabile: 
virtute gestae, ibi esse miseria et aerumna non possit 
tamen labor possit, possit molestia, non dubiten 
dicere omnes sapientes semper esse beatos, sed tamer 
fieri posse ut sit alius alio beatior.” “Atqui_ iste 
locus est, Piso, tibi etiam atque etiam confirmandus, 
inquam ; ~ quem si tenueris, non modo meum Cicero 
nem sed etiam me ipsum abducas licebit.” Tun 
Quintus: “ Mihi quidem,” inquit, “ satis hoc confir 
matum videtur, laetorque eam” philosophiam, cuiu 
antea supellectilem pluris aestimabam quam posses 
siones reliquarum (ita mihi dives videbatur ut ab e 
petere possem quidquid in studiis nostris concupis 
sem), hance igitur laetor etiam acutiorem repertan 
quam ceteras, quod quidam ei deesse dicebant.’ 
“Non quam nostram quidem,” inquit Pomponiu 
iocans; “sed mehercule pergrata mihi fuit® orati 
tua. Quae enim dici Latine posse non arbitrabai 


1 Epicureus Mdv.; Epicurus B, E; Epicuri inf. MSS. 
2 Jaetorque eam Davis, Mdv.; laetor guidem MSS. 
3 fuit inserted by Mdv. : 


500 


BOOK V. ert 


Arcesilas, though he was rather too dogmatic in 
debate, was still one of us; for he was a pupil of 
Polemo. When Polemo was racked with the tor- 
ments of gout he was visited by an intimate friend, 
the Epicurean Charmides. The latter was depart- 
ing in distress. ‘Stay, I beg of you, friend Char- 
mides,’ cried Polemo; no pain from here has got to 
there’ (pointing to his feet and his breast). Yet 
Polemo would have preferred not to feel pain. 
XXXII. “This then is our system which you 6- Conclusion, 
think inconsistent. I on the other hand, seeing the 
celestial and divine excellence of virtue, excellence 
so great that where virtue and the mighty and most 
glorious deeds that she inspires are found, there 
misery and sorrow cannot be, though pain and 
annoyance can, do not hesitate to declare that every 
Wise Man is always happy, but yet that it is possible 
for one to be happier than another.” “Well, Piso,” 
said I, “ that is a position which you will find needs 
a great deal of defending; and if you can hold to it, 
you are welcome to convert not only my cousin 
Cicero, but also myself.” “For my part,’ remarked 
Quintus, “I think the position has been satisfac- 
torily defended, and I am delighted that the philo- 
sophy whose household gear I previously thought 
more precious than the landed estates of the other 
schools (I deemed her so rich that I might go to her 
for all that I coveted in our studies), I rejoice, I say, 
that this philosophy has been found to be actually 
subtler than the rest,—a quality i in which she was 
said by some to be deficient.” “Not subtler than 
ours at all events,” said Pomponius playfully; “but 
I protest I was most delighted by your discourse. 
You have expressed ideas that I thought it impos- 
501. 


CICERO DE FINIBUS 


ea dicta sunt a te, nec minus plane, quam dicuntur 
a Graecis, verbis aptis.' Sed tempus est, si videtur; 
et recta quidem ad me.” Quod cum ille dixisset et 
satis disputatum videretur, in oppidum ad Pomponium 


perreximus omnes. 


lyerbis aptis Miller brackets with Baiter. 


502 


BOOK V. xxxii 


sible to express in Latin, and you have expressed 
them as lucidly as do the Greeks, and in apt lan- 
‘guage. But our time is up, if you please; let us 
make straight for my quarters.’ At these words, as 
it was felt there had been enough discussion, we all 
proceeded to the town to Pomponius’s house. 


503 


INDEX 


cademy (the Platonic School of 
Philosophy), pp. xxiiif; 1, 2; v, 1 

.cademy, the Old(i.e. before Arcesilas’s 
headship), 11, 84; rv, 5; v, 7 

.cademy, the New (i.e. from Arcesilas 
onwards), 11, 43; v, 7, 76n 

diaphoron, 111, 53 

eschines (Athenian orator), v, 5 

franius (writer of Roman historical 
tragedies, b. c. 150 B.c.), 1, 7 

fricanus; see Scipio 

gelastos, v, 92 

gesilaus (King of Sparta 398-360 B.c., 
pan i in Xenophon’s Agesi- 
aus), 11, 116 

Ibucius, Titus, 1, 8 

Jexander the Great (King of Mace- 
don, 336-323 B.c.), 1, 116 

mimals created for man, 11, 67; 
pleasure and pain not sole motives 
of, 11, 109; in captivity, v, 56 

ntiochus (restorer of the “Old” 
Academy, d. 68 B.c.), p- xxiv; v, 1, 
6ff, 14, 75, 81 

ntipater (head of Stoic School c. 44 
B.C.), 1,6 

‘peiria, 1, 21 

poproégmena, p- xxi; 11115, 51 

ppetitio, prima, appetitus pr.; see 
Prima naturae 

reesilas (founder of Second or New 
Academy; c. 315-240 B.c.), p. xxiii; 
ur, 2; v, 87 

rchilochus (Greek lyric poet, c. 720- 
676 z.c.), 11, 115 

rchimedes (of Syracuse, most famous 
of ancient mathematicians, b. 287 
B.c.), v, 50 

rchytas (of Tarentum, philosopher 
and mathematician, fl. 400 B.c.), 
11, 45; v, 87 

rion (Pythagorean philosopher), v, 
8 


ristides (Athenian general and states- 
man, called ‘‘ The Just,” d. c. 470 
B.C.), 11, 116 

ristippus (hedonistic philosopher of 
Cyrene, b. c. 428 B.c.), p- xvi; 1, 22; 
ur, 18ff, 347, 39, 41; v, 20 

risto (of Ceos, head of Peripatetic 
School, ¢c. 224 B.c.), 111, 50; rv, 40, 
43, 47, 49, 60, 68/; v, 13 


Aristo (of Chios, a heterodox Stoic, 
fl. c. 260 B.c.), 1, 35, 43; m1, 11; rv, 
40; v, 23, 73 

Aristophanes (of Byzantium, scholar, 
b. c. 260 B.c., head of Alexandrian 
library, editor of Homer, Plato, 
etc.), v, 50 

Aristotle (384-322 B.c.), p- vii; 1, 6, 7; 
11,17, 19, 34, 40, 106; 111, 10; 1v, 3; 
v, 7, 11f, 73; style, 1,14. See Peri- 
patetics ; 

Aristoxenus (of Tarentum, pupil of 
Aristotle, philosopher and musician, 
fl. 320 B.c.), v, 50 

Aristus (philosopher of ‘‘ Old’? Aca- 
demy, brother of Antiochus), v, 8 

Athambia, v, 87 

Athens, philosophical and literary 
associations of, v, 2ff : 

Athos, Mount (promontory of Mace- 
donia; traces of Xerxes’ canal still 
visible), 11, 112 

Atilius (Roman dramatist c. 200 B.c.), 


1,5 

Atoms, 1, 17ff 

Atticus, Titus Pomponius (friend and 
correspondent of Cicero), 1, 16; 11, 
67; v, 1, 3, 96; origin of surname, 
v,4 

Attius, (Roman tragic poet, b.170 B.c.), 
11, 94; rv, 68; v, 32 

Aufidius, Gnaeus (Roman statesman 
and historian, praetor 103 B.c.), v, 


54 
Axia; see Value 


Barbati, rv, 62 

Blammata, 111, 69 

Brutus, Lucius Junius (consul 509 
B.C.), 11, 66 

Brutus, Marcus Junius (the tyranni- 
cide), 1,1; 111, 1; v, 1,8 

Brutus, Marcus. Junius (jurisconsult, 
father of the preceding), 1, 12 


Caecilius Statius (Roman writer of 
comedies c. 200 B.c.), 1, 4; u, 13; 
14, 22 

Caepio, Gnaeus (consul), 1, 54 

Caepio (half-brother of Cato), 111, 8 

Calatinus, A. Atilius (cos. 268 and 254 
B.c. during first Punic War; buried 


505 


INDEX 


outside the Porta Capena at Rome), 
MLZ i 

Callipho (probably a disciple of Epi- 
curus), 11, 19, 34f; 1v, 50; v, 21, 73 

Canonic, p- xiv; 1, 22, 63 

Carneades (head of the Academy, 
visited Rome 156 B.c.), p- xxiii; 1, 
35, 38, 42, 59; 111, 41; rv, 49; v, 4, 
6, 20. Carneades’ classification of 
ethical theories, v, 16/f 

Catalinarian conspiracy, the, m1, 62, 


72 
Cato, M. (95-48 B.c.), spokesman of 
Stoicism.in Bks. m1 and Iv. 
Cato, M. Porcius, the Censor (284-179 
B.C.), V, 2 
Causation, 1, 18, 19 
Ceramicus (suburb of Athens), 1, 39 
Charmides, v, 94 
“Children show natural impulses, 1, 30; 
11, 33; 111, 16; v, 42/, 48, 55, 61 
Chremes (the title-part of Terence’s 
Self-Tormentor), 1, 3; v, 287 
Chrysippus (third head and “ second 
founder ’’ of the Stoic School, 280- 
207 B.c.), 1, 6, 39; mu, 43/; Iv, 7, 
9, 68 
Cicero, Lucius (cousin of Marcus), v, 
’ 
Cicero, Marcus Tullius, adherent of 
‘““New ”’ Academy, v, 76; pp- viiiff 
Cicero, Quintus (br. of Rearen v,1 
Circeii (a town of Latium), rv, 7 
Citium, tv, 56 
Claudius, Appius (consul and decemvir 
451 B.c.), 1, 66 
Cleanthes (second head of Stoic 
School), rv, 7 
Codrus (last of the legendary Kings of 
Athens, fell disguised as a common 
soldier in battle against the 
Heraclidae because of an oracle 
that the side whose leader was 
killed should win), v, 62 
Cognition, modes of, 111, 33 
Colonus, v, 3 
Commendatio, prima (see prima na- 
turae), 11, 35 
Conciliationes, primae naturae (see 
prima naturae), 111, 22 
Conscience, 1,51 
Consectaria, 111, 26; 1v, 49 
Corinthian bronzes, 11,23 _ 
“ Cosmopolitanism,” Stoic, 111, 64, 69; 
Iv, 
Courage, 1, 49 


506 


Crantor (Academic philosopher, fi. 
300 B.c.), v, 7 

Crassus, Marcus, called agelastos, v, 92 

Crassus, Marcus (son of the former), 
surnamed Dives), 11, 57 

Crassus, Marcus (son of Dives; the 
triumvir, fell in Parthia 53 B.c.), 
ut, 75 

Criterion of truth, p. xviii; 1, 30, 63f; 
v, 76 

Critolaus (successor of Aristo as head 
of Peripatetic School; envoy to 
Rome 155 B.c.), v, 14 

Croesus (King of Lydia), 111, 75 

Cumanum, 1,14 

Curia Hostilia, v, 2 

Curius, Manius Dentatus (thrice con- 
sul, conqueror of Pyrrhus 274 B.c.), 
m1, 30 

Cynics and Stoics compared, p- xxii 

Cyrenaics (the School of Aristippus), 
I, 23, 39; 11, 39/7, 114 

Cyrus, King of Persia, 111, 76 

Cyrus (the Younger, fell in battle 
against his brother Artaxerxes, 
King of Persia, 400 B.c.; the hero of 
Xenophon’s Anabasis and Cyro- 
paedeia), 11, 116 


Damon, ur, 79n 
Darius (King of Persia 521-485 B.c.), 
92 


Vv, 

Decii, the, 11, 60; v, 64n 

Declinatio atomorum, 1, 19 

Definition, n, 4/ 

Demetrius of Phalerum (ruler of 
Athens under Cassander, banished 
on liberation of Athens by Deme- 
trius Poliorcetes, 307 B.c.), v, 54 

Democritus (Greek philosopher; foun. 
der, with his master Leucippus, of 
atomism; c. 460-361 B.c.), 1, 17f, 
11, 102; rv, 13; v, 50, 87 

Democritus, Ethics of, v, 23 

Demosthenes (the Athenian orator, d. 
322 B.c.), v, 5 } 

Desires, 1, 43 

Desires classified, 1, 45; 11, 26 

Dialectic (see also Logic), 11, 17f 

arene (pupil of Aristotle), rv 


Dinomachus (a philosopher associate¢ 
ae Seo Tusc. v, 30, with Callipho) 
Vv; 


INDEX 


_ Diodorus (head of Peripatetic School, 
d. c. 120 8B.c.), 11, 19, 34f; rv, 50; 
v, 14, 21, 73 

Diogenes (head of Stoic School: visited 

~ Rome 156 B.c.), 1, 6; 11, 24; : 

Dionysius of Heraclea (a disciple of 

anne who became a Cyrenaic), v, 

Dionysius, (tyrant of Syracuse, visited 

by Srwet H, 79n; tv, 56 
Dipylon (city-gate of Athens to 


-W.), Vv, 

Division, 1, 22; 11, 26 

Drusus, M. Livius (tribune 122 B.c., 
opponent of Gaius Gracchus), rv, 66 

Duty, Stoic doctrine of, 1, 16 

Duschréstemata, 111, 69 


peneccs tes (Pythagorean philosopher), 

v, 8 

Effectio, 111, 24, 45 

Effectus, 111, 32 

Egyptian science, v, 87 

Eidola, 1, 21 

End, the definition of, 1, 42; 11, 5 

‘Endymion (in the Greek myth, a 
youth eternally asleep, beloved by 
the Moon), v, 55 

Ennius (Roman tragic and epic poet), 
-239-169 B.c.), 1, 4, 17; 1, 41, 106; 
Iv, 62; v, 31 

Epaminondas (Theban- general and 
statesman, d. 362 B.c.), 11, 62, 67, 


97 

Epicurean School, 1, 65; 1, 12, 101; 
v, 3 

-Epicureanism, attacked, 1, 13-26; di- 

vergences of doctrine, 1, 31, 66/f; 
11, 82; ethics expounded, p. xvi; 1, 
29; ethics refuted, 11; logic, p. xiv; 
I, 22, 63; 11, 26, 30; physics, p. xv; 
1, 17ff, 63f; 1v, 13; motives forstudy- 
ing, Iv, 9, 1 

Epicurus (342-279 B.c.), 1 and 1, 
passim; v, 80; birthday kept by his 
school, 1, 101; claimed title of 
Sapiens, 11, 7; debt to Democritus, 
1, 18ff; friendships, 1, 65; 11, 80, 96; 
maxims, 1, 20; quoted, 1, 57, 63, 68; 
11, 84, 96, 100; unlearned, 1, 20, 26, 
71f; portraits of, v, 3; will, 11, 96ff 

Epigennématikon, 111, 32 

Erechtheus (legendary King of Athens, 


who in obedience to an oracle sacri- 
ficed his youngest daughter to secure 
victory in a war, and the rest of 
Lega daughters killed themselves), 


Vv, 

Erillus (of Carthage, a heterodox 
Stoic, disciple of Zeno), 11, 35, 43; 
Iv, 36, 40; v, 23, 73 

Ethics, the Peripatetic, v, 11ff 

Ethics, the Nicomachean, v, 12 

Euchréstemata, 111, 69 

Eukairia, 11, 45 

Euripides (Attic tragedian, 480-406 
B.C.), 1, 4, 5; 11, 105 

Euthumia, v, 23, 87 

Expetenda, rv, 19 


Fabricius, Gaius, v, 64n 

Finibus, de, meaning of title, p- vii; 
date of composition, p. x; sources 
of, p. xiii; text of, p- xxv; MSS. of, 
p- xxvi 

oe Fortuna (goddess of fortune), v, 

n 
Fortune does not touch the Wise, 1 


63 
Friendship, 1, 65/f; 1, 78/f; 111, 70 


Gallonius, Publius, 11, 24, 90 

Gallus, Quintus Fadius, 11, 55 

Gloriatio, 111, 28 

Gods, Stoic view of, 111, 66/ 

Good, the Chief, views as to, classified, 
111, 30 

Good defined, 11, 5; 11, 33 

Goods, external, 111, 41 ff; 1v, 29ff, 58f 

Gorgias (the Sophist, came to Athens 
427 B.c.), 11, 2 

Gracchus, (1) Tiberius, tribune 187 
B.c., twice consul; (2) Tiberius, 
tribune, 133; and (3) Gaius, tribune, 
123, agrarian reformers, sons of (1), 
Iv, 657 


Hannibal (Carthaginian invader of 
Italy 218 B.c.), tv, 22 

Happiness, Epicurean rule of, i, 57/f; 
Stoic and Peripatetic views of, 111, 
41 ff 

Hellespont (the Dardanelles, bridged 
with boats by Xerxes), 11, 112 

Heroclitus (philosopher of Ephesus, fl. 
510 B.c.), 11,15 

507 


INDEX 


Hercules, 11, 118 

Hermarchus (succeeded Epicurus as 
head of school), 11, 96, 101 

Hieronymus (heterodox pupil of Aris- 
totle), 1, 8, 16; 19, 32, 35, 41; 1v, 
49; v, 14, 20, 73 

Hirrius, 1, 60n 

History, charm of, v, 51f 

Homer, 1, 7; 11, 115, 116; v, 49 

Homologia, 111, 21 

Honestum, 1, 61; 11, 87/, 45, 48 (see 
note) 

Honesty the best policy, 1, 52 

Hormé, see Prima naturae 

Hortensius Hortalus, Q. (Cicero’srival 
as an orator, 114-50 s.c.), 1, 2 

Hortensius (Cicero’s, an Introduction 
to Philosophy, extant only in frag- 
ments), 1, 2 

Hymettus, mountain in Attica fa- 
mous for its honey), 11, 112, 

Hymnis, ur, 22 


Imagines, 1, 21 

Inane, 1, 17, 21 

Indifferent things, 111, 50/f 

Initia naturae; see Prima naturae 

Instinct of new-born animals 
Prima naturae), 1, 80; 1, 31, 337 

Institutio, rv, 32 

Intention, Morality depends on, 11, 
32 


(see 


Interrogatiuncula, 1, 39; 1v, 7 
Inventio, tv, 10 


Justice, i, 50; v, 65/ 


Kakia, ut, 40 

Katalépsis, p. xviii; 11, 17 

Kathékon, p. xxi; 11, 20 
Katorthomata; see Recta 

Katorthésis, 111, 45 

“ Know thyself,” 11, 16; v, 44 
Knowledge, love of, instinctive, v, 48 
Kuriai doxai, 11, 20 


Laelius, C. (Roman statesman, friend 
of Scipio Africanus Minor, cons. 
140 B.c.), 1, 24, 59; rv, 23 

Lanuvium (city of Latium), 11, 63 

Laudabile, m1, 27; 1v, 49 

Leonidas (Spartan King, d. 480 3.c.), 
11, 62, 97 


508 


Lepidus, Marcus Aemilius, v. 64n ' 
Licinius (perhaps Porcius Licinus, a 
critic a little senior to Cicero), 1, 5 
Locri (Greek colony in S. Italy), v, 87 
Logic, Epicurean, 1, 22, 63; 11, 26, 30; 
Stoic, i, 63; m1, 72; 1v, 8; Peripa- 
tetic, v, 10 5 
Lucilius (founder of Roman satura), 
148-108 B.c.), 1, 7, 9; 11, 15, 28, 247 © 
Lucretia (wife of Lucius Tarquinius 
Collatinus), 11, 66; v, 64n 
Lucretius (Roman poet 95-55 B.c.), 1, 
102 


Lucullus (Roman millionaire, con- 
queror of Mithridates), 1, 8 

Lucullus (son of the above and nephew 
and ward of Cato, fell at Philippi on 
the Republican side 42 B.c.), 1, 


Gi 

Lyco (fourth head of Peripatetic 
School), v, 13 

Lycurgus (founder of the Spartan 
constitution), 11, 67 


Magi, the Persian, v, 87 

Magister populi, 1, 75 

Manilius, Manius (cos. 149 8.c., jurist), 
1,12 

Manlius; see Torquatus 

Mantinea, battle of (362 B.c.), 11, 96 

Marius, Gaius (157-87 3.c., conqueror 
of Jugurtha, and of the German afd 
Celtic invaders; in the civil wars 
proscribed by Sulla and arrested in 
the marshes of the Liris), 11, 105 

Media, 111, 58/; and see Indifferent 
things 

Memory, control of, 1, 57; 11, 1047 

Memory, training of, v, 2 

Menander (writer of Attic comedy) 
342-291 B,c.), 1, 4, 7 2 

Metapontum (an old Greek city in the 
South of Italy), v, 4 

Metellus, Quintus Macedonicus (con- 
sul 148 B.c.), v, 82 

Metrodorus (pupil of Epicurus), 1, 25; 
11, 7, 92, 96, 101 

Miltiades (Athenian general, defeated 
ee at Marathon 490 B.c.), m1, 


Mnesarchus (head of Stoic School, 
teacher of Antiochus), 1, 6 

Moral Worth, Morality; see Honestum 

Murena, T. (cos. 63, defended by 
Cicero on charge of bribery), 1v, 74 


INDEX 


| Natural Philosophy; see Physics 
Naturalia; see Prima naturae 
Nature, Life in accordance with, pp. 
Xx, xxii; Iv, 14ff 
Nicomachus, v, 12 
Numantia (in Spain, chief town of 
Celtiberians), 11, 54 


Octavius, Gnaeus, 11, 93 
Oedipus, v, 3 
cia, p- xxi; 111, 20ff, 58/f 
duoroyla, m1, 21 
Opheléma, 111, 33, 69 
Orata (=aurata, a fish; nickname of 
C. Sergius, a gourmet), 11, 70 
Orestes (friend of Pylades in Greek 
legends), 1, 65; 11, 79; v, 63 
_ Opi}; see Prima naturae 
Oroetes, v, 92 


Pacuvius (Roman tragic poet, 220- 
¢c. 130 B.c.), 1, 49; 11, 79; v, 31, 63 

Pain; see Pleasure and pain 

Pain, absence of, the greatest pleasure, 
1, 37ff, 56; 11, 8ff 

Pain, absence of=“‘ Static’ pleasure, 
1,9,16 * 

Pain, short if strong, light if long, 1, 
40; 11, 22 

Panaetius (head of Stoic School), 180- 
111 B.c.), 1, 6; 11, 24; 1v, 23, 79 

Papius, Quintus Aemilius, v, 64n 

Paradoxa, iv, 74 

Passions, not natural, m1, 35 

Pathos; 111, 35 

Paulus; see Perses 

Peducaens, Sextus (propraetor in 
Sicily 75 B.c. when Cicero was 
quaestor), 11, 58 

Perception, Stoic doctrine of, v, 76 

Pericles (Athenian statesman, d. 429 
B.C.), V, 5 ; 

Peripatetics (the School of Aristotle), 
ur, 34; m1, 41; 1v, 5; v, 7; system 
reviewed, v, 9/; divergences on 
Ethics, v, 12; decline of, v, 13; in- 
cluded in the Old Academy, v, 7 

Peripatetics and Academic Ethics 
identified, v, 14; 21; expounded, v, 
247; misrepresented, v, 38n 

Perses (last King of Macedonia, con- 
quered by L. Aemilius Paulus 168 
B.C.), V, 71 

Persians’ frugal diet, 1, 92 


Persius, 1, 7 

Phaedrus (Epicurean philosopher, 
teacher of Cicero), 1, 16; v, 3 

Phalaris (cruel tyrant of Acragas, 550 
B.C.), Iv, 64; v, 85 

Phalerum (a harbour of Athens), 


v, 5 

Pheidias (Greek sculptor 490-432 B.c.), 
m1, 115; tv, 34 

Philanthropia, 111, 63 

Philip (King of Macedon 359-336 B.c.), 
m1, 116 

Philo, pp. viii, xxiii 

Philoctetes (Greek hero bitten by 
snake on voyage to Troy and ma- 
rooned on isle of Lemnos; the hero 
of tragedies by Sophocles and 
Attius), 1, 94; v, 32 

Philodemus (Epicurean philosopher, 
a at Rome in Cicero’s day), 11 

9 

Philosophy, its three parts, Iv, 4 

Phintias, 11, 790 

Physics, Epicurean, 1, 17/f, 63/; 1v, 3; 
Peripatetic, 1v, 13; v, 9; Stoic, 111, 
73; Iv, 11 

i (Greek lyric poet, b. c. 523 
B.c.), 11, 115 

Piso Frugi (cos. 133 B.c., opponent of 
Gaius Gracchus and author of 
first law against extortion in the 
provinces), 11, 90; v, 2 

Piso Marcus (consul 61 B.c., spokes- 
man of system of Antiochus in 
Bk. V), 1v, 73; v, passim. 

Plato (Athenian philosopher, 428-347 
B.C.), 11, 2, 15, 45, 52, 92, 102n; 
ae 21, 56, 79; v, 2, 7, 50, 58, 84, 

7 


Pleasure defined, 11, 6, 8; absence of 
pain the greatest, 1, 37/f, 56; u, 8/f; 
Epicurean, calculation of, 1, 32/f; 
mental and bodily, 1, 55; 11, 13, 107/; 
mental, Stoic view of, 111, 33; per- 
ceived directly, 1, 30; u, 36; pri- 
mary instinct for, 1, 30; sensual, a 
fundamental good, 11, 29, 64, 68; 
“static” and ‘‘ kinetic’? confused 
by Epicurus, 11, 9, 16; Peripatetic 
and Academic, view of, v, 45 

Pleasure and pain not sole motives, 
1, 23ff; 11, 109/; the ultimate good 
and evil, 1, 29ff, 40ff; u, 7 

Pleasure and virtue, 1, 57/f 

Plotius, Gaius, 1, 58 

Poittika, 11, 55 


509 


INDEX 


Polemo (head of the Academy 315-273 
B.C.), 1, 34, 35f; Iv, 3, 45, 51, 61; 
v, 2, 7, 14, 94 

Politics, Stoic, 111, 68; 1v, 7, 9 

Politics, Peripatetic, rv, 56; v, 11 

Polyaenus (geometrician, friend of 
Epicurus), 1, 19 

Polycleitus (Greek sculptor, fl. 459- 
412 B.c.). 11, 115 

Polycrates (tyrant of Samos, d. 522 
B.C.), V, 92 

Pompeius, Quintus (cons. 141 B.c.), m1, 

5 


Pompeius (Gnaeus Magnus, the trium- 
vir), 0, 57 

Pomponius; see Atticus 

Posidonius (Stoic philosopher, pupil of 
Panaetius and friend of Cicero), 1, 6 

Postumius, 11, 60 

‘Preferred ” things, 111, 51/f; rv, 19 

Prima naturae, 11, 21, 30; T& Tp@Ta 
KaTa vow, the earliest objects 
which nature prompts a new-born 
animal to seek, or the instincts 
to seek such objects (the two 
senses not always distinguished) 
also rendered by naturalia, 11, 61; 
prima naturalia, u, 34; prima 
secundum naturam, v, 18, 19, 45; 
prima natura data, u, 34; initia 
naturae, 1, 38; 1, 22; prima 
naturae conciliationes, 111, 22 (cf. in 
prima commendatio naturae, 11, 35, 
40); principia naturae, 111, 22, 23; 
prima or principia a natura data, 
11, 34; 1v, 18; principia naturalia, 11, 
35; 111,17 ; prima ex natura appetitio, 
Iv, 25; naturalis appetitio, Iv, 39; 
quam vocant dpu77v, m1, 23; v, 17; 
primus appetitus, v, 24; re quae pri- 
mae appetuntur, 11, 17; prima 
ascita natura, 111, 17; prima naturae 
commoda, v, 58; prima invitamenta 
naturae, v, 17 

Principia naturae, naturalia= prima 
mnaturae, which see; in a broader 
ow: prima constitutionaturae, v, 


Proegmena, p- xxi; 11, 15, 51/; 1v, 72 

Probability, v, 76 

Progress, Stoic doctrine of, 1v, 67 

Ptolemalum, y, 1 

Ptolemy (the first, surnamed Soter, 
King of Egypt 325-285 B.c.), v, 54 

Pullus Numitorius, Quintus (Volscian 


510 


general, betrayed Fregellae to the 
Romans 828 B.c.), v, 62 

Pylades, 11, 79 ; 

Pyrrho (of Elis, founder of Sceptic 
School), p- xiii; 1, 35,43; m1, 11,12; 
Iv, 43, 49, 61; v, 23 

Pyrrhus (King of Epirus, 318-273 B.c.), 
11, 61; v, 64n 

Pythagoras (an early Greek philoso- 
pher), v, 4, 50, 87 


Recta, recte facta, KaTopOwuara, p. 
xxi; 11, 24, 45, 59 

Regulus, Marcus (invaded Africa in 
first Punic War, 256 B.c.), um, 65; 
y, 82, 88 

“ Reflected ”’ things, 111, 51/f 

Republica, de (Cicero’s treatise, extant 
in fragments), 11, 59 

Rhetoric compared with Dialectic, 1, 
17 


Rhetoric, Peripatetic, rv, 5; v, 10 
Rufus, Publius Sextilius, nm, 55 
Rutilius, 1, 7 


Saptens; see Wise Man 

Sardanapalus, 1, 106 

Scaevola Mucius, 1, 8 

Scaevola, Publius (jurist, pontifex 
mara B.C. 131), 1,12; 1, 54; 1v, 

Scepticism, v, 76; in the Academy, 
In, 32 

mie fee Publius Cornelius Nasica, vy, 

4n 

Scipio (Publius Cornelius Africanus 
Major, the conqueror of Hannibal, 
202 B.c.), 11, 56, 106; rv, 22; v, 70 

Scipio (Publius Africanus Minor, con- 
queror of Carthage, 146 B.c.),«1, 7; 
Iv, 23; v, 70 

Scipiones, 111, 37 

Self-love, primary instinct; 111, 26 

Self-preservation the universal pri- 
mary impulse, v, 24 

Senses, sole and infallible source of 
knowledge, 1, 30, 64; pronounce 
_pleasure good, 1, 30; 11, 36 

Simonides (Greek lyric poet, inventor 
of mnemonics, b. 556 8.c.), 0, 104; 
v, 2n 

Sirens, the, v, 49 

Siro (Epicurean philosopher, taught 
at Rome, c. 50 B.c.). 11, 119 


INDEX 


Socrates (Athenian philosopher 469- 
399 B.c.), 11, 17, 90; v, 84, 87, 88 

Solon (Athenian reformer, c. 595 B.c.), 
ur, 67; 111, 76 

_ Sophists (Greek professors of higher 
Sg Tagies in 5th and 4th cent. B.c.), 
i, 

Sophocles, 1, 5; v, 3 

Sorites (Gr. soros, a heap: a train of 
argument consisting of a series of 
syllogisms, each proving a premise 
of the next, but with the interme- 
ae conclusions not expressed), tv, 


Speusippus (successor of Plato as 
head of the Academy), tv, 3; v, 2,7 

Stasea (Peripatetic philosopher of 
Naples, resided with Piso), v, 8,75 

Stoicism, Ethics m1, 16ff; Logic, p. 
xviii; 1, 63; 111, 72; p- xx; Iv, 8/; 
Physics, p- xix; 1v, 11; Politics, rv, 7; 
terminology novel, 111, 3ff; v, 22; 
and Peripateticism, real difference 
between asserted, 111, 41/f; denied, 
Iv, 3ff; v, 22, 74; its Chief Good de- 
ke v, 20; inconsistency of, 1v, 68, 


Strato (third head of Peripatetic 
School) v, 13 

Suicide, 1, 49; 111, 60f 

Sulla (Roman dictator, d. 78 B.c.), 11, 
75 


Sumenda, tv, 19 
Syracusan luxury, 11, 92 


Tali, 111, 54 

Tarentum (Greek colony in S. Italy), 
v, 87 

Tarquinius (Superbus, the last king of 
Rome, banished 510 B.c.), 11, 75 

Telika, 1, 55 

Telos, p. vii; 1, 42; 111, 26 

Temperance, 1, 47 

Terence (P. Terentius:Afer, Roman 
writer of comedy, c- 190-159 B.c.), 1, 
3, 4; 11, 14; v, 297 

Themista (wife of Leonteus of Lamp- 
sacus, and like her husband,a pupil 
of Epicurus, one of whose ethical dis- 
courses was in the form of a lauda- 
tion of her), 11, 67 

Themistocles (Athenian general, de- 
feated Persians at Salamis 480 B.c.), 
m1, 67, 1047, 116 

Theophrastus (successor of Aristotle 


as head of Peripatetic School), 
18, 14; 1v, 3, 79; v, 11f, 54, 78, 77, 


Ther Bop vise, battle of (490 B.c.), 11, 


Theseus (King of Athens and friend 
of Peirithous in Greek legends), 1, 

Thorius, Lucius, 11, 63/, 70 

Title of de Finibus, p. vii 

ie (Pythagorean philosopher), v, 


Topics; see Inventio 

Torquatus, Titus Manlius Imperiosus 
(won surname of Torquatus 361 
B.C.), 1, 23, 34/; 11, 60, 727, 105 

Torquatus, T, Manlius (consul 65 
B.C.), 1, 24, 347 * 

Torquatus, Aulus (friend of Cicero, 
in exile as a Pompeian), 11, 72 

Torquatus, Lucius Manlius (praetor 
49 B.c., see ul, 74; fell fighting on 
Pompeian side in Africa); spokes- 
man for Epicureanism, 1, 13-end; 11 

Trabea (Roman comic dramatist, fl. 
130 B.c.), 11, 13 

Triarius, Gaius (Pompeian, fell in 
battle), interlocutor, 1, 13-end; 11, 

Tubero, Q. (praetor 123 B.c.), rv, 23 

Tubulus, Lucius (praetor 142 B.c.), 11, 
54; 1v, 77; v, 62 

Tusculum, Cicero’s villa at, 111, 7 


Ulysses v, 49 


Vacuum, 1, 17, 21 

Value, Stoic doctrine of, 11, 20, 34 

Verginius, Lucius, 11, 66; v, 64n 

Veseris, battle of the (near Mt. Vesu - 
vius, 340 B.c., final conquest of the 
Latins), 1, 23 

Virtue based on pleasure, 1, 42 ff 

Virtue and Reason, v, 36 

Virtues, “ voluntary ” and “ inyolun- 
tary,’”’ v, 36 

Voconian law, 11, 55 


Wisdom, absolute, 111, 48 

Wisdom brings peace of mind, 1, 43/ 

Wise Man alone happy, 1, 61/; 11 86/; 
always happy, 1, 62; 111, 42; 1v, 31; 
v, 77}f; displays love of life, v. 32; 
Epicurus a, 11, 7; 1v, 3; limits his 
desires, 1, 44, 58/; the Stoic, 111, 75/; 
Iv, 7, 21f 

Wise Men, the Seven, 11, 7; 111, 73, 76 


511 


INDEX 


Xenocrates (third head of the Aca- 
demy), tv, 3, 49, 79; v, 2,7 

Xenophon, 1, 92; and see Agesilaus 
and Cyrus 

Xerxes (King of Persia, 
Greece 480 B.c.), 11, 112 


invaded 


Zeno (founder of Stoic School, c. 309 
B.C.), 1, 17, 353 111, 15ff; Iv, 3, 7, 9, 
13, 19, 44; his birthplace, rv, 56 

Zeno (Epicurean philosopher, 
temporary of Cicero), 1, 16 

Zeuxis (Greek painter, b. c. 450 B.c.), 
uw, 115 


con- 


LETCHWORTH ? AT THE ARDEN PRESS 


Unless this book is returned on or before the last da 
below a fine will be charged. Fairness to other honey 
enforcement of this rule necessary. 


- 


APR EL 


DEC 0 7 260% 


BEG eal 
eee 4 


MAR 15 a ' 5 = | 
; “hap oe oon | 


875. ea8a fied og" > tatgen 


Cicero 


| De finibus bonorum et malorun,. 


ii Hi T [ 7 ao 


* 82817 


COLLEGE MISERICORDIA LIBRARY, 
DALLAS, PENNSYLVANIA 


soe 
Bot y 


