Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2026 


https://archive.org/details/philosophicalwor0001eliz_g7m7 


THE PHILOSOPHICAL WORKS 
OF 


DESCARTES 


RENDERED INTO ENGLISH BY 


ELIZABETH S. HALDANE, GH., LL.D. 


AND 


G. R. T. ROSS, M.A., D. Putt. 


IN TWO VOLUMES 


VOLUMEI 


CAMBRIDGE 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 


1968 


PUBLISHED BY 
THE SYNDICS OF THE CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 


Bentley House, 200 Euston Road, London, N.W.1 
American Branch: 32 East 57th Street, New York, N. Y. 10022 


First Edition 1911 
Reprinted, with corrections 1931 


EOD 
1967 
1968 


Reprinted in the United States of America 


PREFACE 


rJXHE aim of this edition is to present to English readers 

all the philosophical works of Descartes which were 
originally intended for publication. More than one valuable 
translation of the treatises which give a general view of 
Descartes’ system has already appeared. But certain others 
which are quite indispensable for a thorough comprehension 
of his views have not yet been made accessible to English 
readers. The chief of these are probably the “Rules for the 
Direction of the Understanding” and the “Passions of the 
Soul.” As a matter of fact the “Passions of the Soul” was 
actually translated into English by an anonymous writer in 
the year 1650, but this translation is now exceedingly 
rare, and no other has appeared until the present time. 
In the “Passions” we find the full exposition of Descartes’ 
theory that mental and physiological phenomena may be 
explained by simple mechanical processes. It was a com- 
pletely new departure to state that such matters were 
capable of being interpreted thus, and one that has had a 
fundamental influence on the psychology and physiology of 
the present time. 

It is also most important to mark the result of Descartes’ 
speculations on contemporary thought; and the complete 
translation now presented of the “Objections” directed against 
the “Meditations,” published together with Descartes’ replies 
thereto, in the second volume, will enable the English reader 


vi Preface 


to realize the novelty of the Cartesian doctrine, and the 
enormous effect it had upon European thought at the time. 
He will further be able to judge better of the success of 
Descartes’ attempts to extricate himself from the difficulties 
which his philosophy undoubtedly contains. 

The works translated here are the “Rules,” the “Method,” 
the “Meditations, with the “Objections and Replies,” part of 
the “Principles,” the “Search after Truth,” the “ Passions,” 
and the “Notes.” Unfortunately it has been found impossible 
to include Descartes’ philosophical correspondence and his 
more specially physiological treatises, but perhaps in the not 
too distant future the work of the present translators will be 
supplemented in this direction. 

The translators have used the new and complete edition 
of Descartes’ Works which has been prepared by M. Adam 
and the late M. Tannery (Paris, Léopold Cerf). The translator 
of the “Rules for the Direction of the Understanding” has 
also had recourse to an edition published by Dr Artur 
Buchenau (Leipzig, Diirr’schen Buchhandlung 1907). More- 
over his especial thanks are due to Mr W. R. Boyce Gibson, 
who already had a translation of the work in manuscript, for 
kindly permitting him to use, as he did with great profit, this 
previous version. 


K. S. HALDANE 
G. R. T. ROSS 


March 1911 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 
Translators’ Preface . tiny Pont ; : ‘nite ‘ : : Vv 
“Rules for the Direction of the Mind” A ; : : - ix 
“Discourse on the Method of Rightly Conducting the Reason” . 79 
“Meditations on First Philosophy” : : ‘ ; 5 ; 131 
“The Principles of Philosophy” . ete : ; : ; 201 
“The Search after Truth”  . é : ; : ; , - 303 
“The Passions of the Soul” . ‘ : : : : F f 829 
“Notes directed against a certain Programme” . : : : 429 


Index . c ‘ F s : - ; : . 5 ; 451 


RULES FOR THE DIRECTION 
OF THE MIND 


“RULES FOR THE DIRECTION OF 
OUR INTELLIGENCE.” 


PREFATORY NOTE. 


‘'a1s seems to be the earliest of Descartes’ philosophical works. 
The editors of the latest French edition of his works assign it to 
the year 1628 (Quvres, edit. Adam et Tannery, Vol. x. pp. 486 
sqq.), just before his removal to Holland and nine years after the 
idea of a new Method in philosophy first occurred to him. 

The work was to have been complete in thirty-six rules falling 
into three parts containing twelve rules each. The first part gives 
the general nature of Descartes’ new Method ; while in the second 
a transition is made to its application in the field of Mathematics. 
Unfortunately the treatise, which was never completed, breaks off 
after Rule XXI, and indeed the explanation of the last three rules 
is also omitted. The third part was to have shown the application 
af the Method to the general problems of Philosophy. 

The treatise was not published during the author’s lifetime 
and appeared first in print in the Opuscula Posthuma published at 
Amsterdam in 1701. The original MS. had passed to Clerselier and 
was employed by Arnauld and Nicole, the authors of the Port Royal 
Logic, in their second edition of that work, which appeared in 1664. 
It appears now to be irrevocably lost. The Amsterdam edition 
seems to have been made from a copy left in Holland, and M. Adam 
has been able to collate the text with another copy (not in Descartes’ 
handwriting) which Leibniz secured in Holland in 1670 and which 
still remains in the Royal Public Library of Hanover. 

Much of the doctrine contained in this work will be afterwards met 
with in the “Method,” “ Meditations,” etc., but there are important 
points in which there is a discrepancy between the earlier and later 
writings. More noteworthy still is the fact that there are several 
speculative suggestions (e.g. certain of those about ‘simple natures’) 
which never received further development in Descartes’ philosophy. 

For further information about our author’s mathematical doctrine 
the reader is referred to his Géometrie, ete. 


Go RAT Re 


RULES FOR THE DIRECTION OF 
THE MIND’. 


Rute lI. 


The end of study should be to direct the mind towards the 
enunciation of sound and correct judgments on all matters that 
come before tt. 


Whenever men notice some similarity between two things, they 
are wont to ascribe to each, even in those respects in which the two 
differ, what they have found to be true of the other. Thus they 
erroneously compare the sciences, which entirely consist in the 
cognitive exercise of the mind, with the arts, which depend upon an 
exercise and disposition of the body. They see that not all the arts 
can be acquired by the same man, but that he who restricts himself 
to one, most readily becomes the best executant, since it is not 
so easy for the same hand to adapt itself both to agricultural 
operations and to harp-playing, or to the performance of several such 
tasks as to ene alone. Hence they have held the same to be true of 
the sciences also, and distinguishing them from one another accord- 
ing to their subject matter, they have imagined that they ought to 
be studied separately, each in isolation from all the rest. But this 
is certainly wrong. For since the sciences taken all together are iden- 
tical with human wisdom, which always remains one and the same, 
however applied to different subjects, and suffers no more differen- 
tiation proceeding from them than the light of the sun experiences 
from the variety of the things which it illumines, there is no need 
for minds to be confined at all within limits; for neither does the 
knowing of one truth have an effect like that of the acquisition of 


Ingenii, 


2 Rules 


one art and prevent us from finding out another, it rather aids us to 
do so. Certainly it appears to me strange that so many people 
should investigate human customs with such care, the virtues of 
plants, the motions of the stars, the transmutations of metals, and 
the objects of similar sciences, while at the same time practically 
none bethink themselves about good understanding, or universal 
Wisdom, though nevertheless all other studies are to be esteemed 
not so much for their own value as because they contribute some- 
thing to this. Consequently we are justified in bringing forward 
this as the first rule of all, since there is nothing more prone to 
turn us aside from the correct way of seeking out truth than this 
directing of our inquiries, not towards their general end, but towards 
certain special investigations. Ido not here refer to perverse and 
censurable pursuits like empty glory or base gain; obviously 
counterfeit reasonings and quibbles suited to vulgar understanding 
open up a much more direct route to such a goal than does a sound 
apprehension of the truth. But I have in view even honourable and 
laudable pursuits, because these mislead us in a more subtle fashion. 
For example take our investigations of those sciences conducive to 
the conveniences of life or which yield that pleasure which is found 
in the contemplation of truth, practically the only joy in life that 
is complete and untroubled with any pain. There we may indeed 
expect to receive the legitimate fruits of scientific inquiry ; but if, 
in the course of our study, we think of them, they frequently cause 
us to omit many facts which are necessary to the understanding of 
other matters, because they seem to be either of slight value or of 
little interest. Hence we must believe that all the sciences are so 
inter-connected, that it is much easier to study them all together 
than to isolate one from all the others. If, therefore, anyone wishes 
to search out the truth of things in serious earnest, he ought not to 
select one special science; for all the sciences are conjoined with 
each other and interdependent: he ought rather to think how to 
increase the natural light of reason, not for the purpose of resolving 
this or that difficulty of scholastic type’, but in order that his 
understanding may light his will to its proper choice in all the 
contingencies of life. In a short time he will see with amazement 
that he has made much more progress than those who are eager 
about particular ends, and that he has not only obtained all that 
they desire, but even higher results than fall within his expecta- 
tion. 


2 scholae, 


For Direction 3 


Rote II. 


Only those objects should engage our attention, to the sure and 
tndubitable knowledge of which our mental powers seem to be 
adequate. 


Science in its entirety is true and evident cognition, He is no 
more learned who has doubts on many matters than the man who 
has never thought of them; nay he appears to be less learned if he 
has formed wrong opinions on any particulars. Hence it were better 
not to study at all than to occupy one’s self with objects of such 
difficulty, that, owing to our inability to distinguish true from false, 
we are forced to regard the doubtful as certain ; for in those matters 
any hope of augmenting our knowledge is exceeded by the risk of 
diminishing it. Thus in accordance with the above maxim we 
reject all such merely probable knowledge and make it a rule to 
trust only what is completely known and incapable of being doubted. 
No doubt men of education may persuade themselves that there is 
but little of such certain knowledge, because, forsooth, a common 
failing of human nature has made them deem it too easy and open 
to everyone, and so led them to neglect to think upon such truths ; 
but I nevertheless announce that there are more of these than they 
think—truths which suffice to give a rigorous demonstration of 
innumerable propositions, the discussion of which they have hitherto 
been unable to free from the element of probability. Further. 
because they have believed that it was unbecoming for a man of 
education to confess ignorance on any point, they have so accus- 
tomed themselves to trick out their fabricated explanations, that 
they have ended by gradually imposing on themselves and thus have 
issued them to the public as genuine. 

But if we adhere closely to this rule we shall find left but few 
objects of legitimate study. For there is scarce any question 
occurring in the sciences about which talented men have not dis- 
agreed. But whenever two men come to opposite decisions about 
the same matter one of them at least must certainly be in the wrong, 
and apparently there is not even one of them who knows; for if the 
reasoning of the second was sound and clear he would be able so to 
lay it before the other as finally to succeed in convincing Ais under- 
standing also. Hence apparently we cannot attain to a perfect 
knowledge in any such case of probable opinion, for it would be 
rashness to hope for more than others have attained to. Con- 


2 ingenia, 


4 Rules 


sequently if we reckon correctly, of the sciences already discovered, 
Arithmetic and Geometry alone are left, to which the observance of 
this rule reduces us. 

Yet we do not therefore condemn that method of philosophizing 
which others have already discovered and those weapons of the 
schoolmen, probable syllogisms, which are so well suited for polemics. 
They indeed give practice to the wits of youths and, producing 
emulation among them, act as a stimulus ; and it is much better for 
their minds to be moulded by opinions of this sort, uncertain though 
they appear, as being objects of controversy among the learned, than 
to be left entirely to their own devices. For thus through lack of 
guidance they might stray into some abyss; but as long as they 
follow in their masters’ footsteps, though they may diverge at times 
from the truth, they will yet certainly find a path which is at least 
in this respect safer, that it has been approved of by more prudent 
people. We ourselves rejoice that we in earlier years experienced 
this scholastic training ; but now, being released from that oath of 
allegiance which bound us to our old masters, and since, as becomes 
our riper years, we are no longer subject to the ferule, if we wish 
in earnest to establish for ourselves those rules which shall aid us in 
scaling the heights of human knowledge, we must admit assuredly 
among the primary members of our catalogue that maxim which 
forbids us to abuse our leisure as many do, who neglect all easy 
quests and take up their time only with difficult matters ; for they, 
though certainly making all sorts of subtle conjectures and elaborat- 
ing most plausible arguments with great ingenuity, frequently find 
too late that after all their labours they have only increased the 
multitude of their doubts, without acquiring any knowledge what- 
soever. 

But now let us proceed to explain more carefully our reasons for 
saying, as we did a little while ago, that of all the sciences known as 
yet, Arithmetic and Geometry alone are free from any taint of 
falsity or uncertainty. We must note then that there are two ways 
by which we arrive at the knowledge of facts, viz. by experience and 
by deduction. We must further observe that while our inferences 
from experience’ are frequently fallacious, deduction, or the pure 
illation of one thing from another, though it may be passed over, if 
it is not seen through’, cannot be erroneous when performed by an 


1 experientias. This is a technical term used (like experimentum) for in- 
ductive arguments. 

2 sinon videatur. Leibniz’s ms, adds in brackets ‘ea opus esse.’ ‘Tr. ‘if it 
is not seen to be necessary.’ 


For Direction 6 


understanding that is in the least degree rational. And it seems to 
me that the operation is profited but little by those constraining 
bonds by means of which the Dialecticians claim to control human 
reason, though I do not deny that that discipline may be serviceable 
for other purposes. My reason for saying so is that none of the 
mistakes which men can make (men, I say, not beasts) are due to 
faulty inference ; they are caused merely by the fact that we found 
upon a basis of poorly comprehended experiences, or that propositions 
are posited which are hasty and groundless. 

This furnishes us with an evident explanation of the great 
superiority in certitude of Arithmetic and Geometry to other sciences. 
The former alone deal with an object so pure and uncomplicated, 
that they need make no assumptions at all which experience renders 
uncertain, but wholly consist in the rational deduction of con- 
sequences. ‘They are on that account much the easiest and clearest 
of all, and possess an object such as we require, for in them it is 
scarce humanly possible for anyone to err except by inadvertence. 
And yet we should not be surprised to find that plenty of people of 
their own accord prefer to apply their intelligence to other studies, 
or to Philosophy. The reason for this is that every person permits 
himself the liberty of making guesses in the matter of an obscure 
subject with more confidence than in one which is clear, and that it 
is much easier to have some vague notion about any subject, no 
matter what, than to arrive at the real truth about a single question 
however simple! that may be. 

But one conclusion now emerges out of these considerations, viz. 
not, indeed, that Arithmetic and Geometry are the sole sciences to 
be studied, but only that in our search for the direct road towards 
truth we should busy ourselves with no object about which we 
cannot attain a certitude equal to that of the demonstrations of 
Arithmetic and Geometry. 


Route III. 


In the subjects we propose to investigate, our inquiries should be 
directed, not to what others have thought®, nor to what we ourselves 
conjecture, but to what we can clearly and perspicuously behold and 
with certainty deduce ; for knowledge is not won in any other way. 


To study the writings of the ancients is right, because it is @ 
great boon for us to be able to make use of the labours of so many 


2 facili. 2 senserint. 


6 Rules 


men; and we should do so, both in order to discover what they 
have correctly made out in previous ages, and also that we may 
inform ourselves as to what in the various sciences is still left for 
investigation. But yet there is a great danger lest in a too absorbed 
study of these works we should become infected with their errors, 
guard against them as we may. For it is the way of writers, when- 
ever they have allowed themselves rashly and credulously to take 
up a position in any controverted matter, to try with the subtlest 
of arguments to compel us to go along with them. But when, 
on the contrary, they have happily come upon something certain 
and evident, in displaying it they never fail to surround it with 
ambiguities, fearing, it would seem, lest the simplicity of their 
explanation should make us respect their discovery less, or because 
they grudge us an open vision of the truth. 

Further, supposing now that all were wholly open and candid, 
and never thrust upon us doubtful opinions as true, but expounded 
every matter in good faith, yet since scarce anything has been 
asserted by any one man the contrary of which has not been alleged 
by another, we should be eternally uncertain which of the two to 
believe. It would be no use to total up the testimonies in favour 
of each, meaning to follow that opinion which was supported by the 
greater number of authors; for if it is a question of difficulty that 
is in dispute, it is more likely that the truth would have been 
discovered by few than by many. But even though all these men 
agreed among themselves, what they teach us would not suffice for 
us. For we shall not, e.g. all turn out to be mathematicians though 
we know by heart all the proofs that others have elaborated, unless 
we have an intellectual talent that fits us to resolve difficulties of 
any kind. Neither, though we have mastered all the arguments of 
Plato and Aristotle, if yet we have not the capacity for passing a 
solid judgment on these matters, shall we become Philosophers ; we 
should have acquired the knowledge not of a science, but of history. 

I lay down the rule also, that we must wholly refrain from ever 
mixing up conjectures with our pronouncements on the truth of 
things. This warning is of no little importance. There is no 
stronger reason for our finding nothing in the current? Philosophy 
which is so evident and certain as not to be capable of being 
controverted, than the tact that the learned, not content with the 
recognition of what is clear and certain, in the first instance hazard 
the assertion of obscure and ill-comprehended theories, at which 

1 vulgari. 


For Direction 7 


they have arrived merely by probable conjecture. Then afterwards 
they gradually attach complete credence to them, and mingling 
them promiscuously with what is true and evident, they finish by 
being unable to deduce any conclusion which does not appear to 
depend upon some proposition of the doubtful sort, and hence is 
not uncertain. 

But lest we in turn should slip into the same error, we shall here 
take note of all those mental operations by which we are able, 
wholly without fear of illusion, to arrive at the knowledge of things. 
Now I admit only two, viz. intuition and induction. 

By intuition I understand, not the fluctuating testimony of the 
senses, nor the misleading judgment that proceeds from the blundering 
constructions of imagination, but the conception which an unclouded 
and attentive mind gives us so readily and distinctly that we are 
wholly freed from doubt about that which we understand. Or, 
what comes to the same thing, ¢ntuition is the undoubting concep- 
tion of an unclouded* and attentive mind, and springs from the light 
of reason alone; it is more certain than deduction itself, in that it 
is simpler, though deduction, as we have noted above, cannot by us 
be erroneously conducted. ‘Thus each individual can mentally have 
intuition of the fact that he exists, and that he thinks; that the 
triangle is bounded by three lines only, the sphere by a single 
superficies, and so on. Facts of such a kind are far more numerous 
than many people think, disdaining as they do to direct their 
attention upon such simple matters. 

But in case anyone may be put out by this new use of the term 
intuition? and of other terms which in the following pages I am 
similarly compelled to dissever from their current meaning, I here 
make the general announcement that I pay no attention to the way 
in which particular terms have of late been employed in the schools, 
because it would have been difficult to employ the same terminology 
while my theory was wholly different. All that I take note of is the 
meaning of the Latin of each word, when, in cases where an appro- 
priate term is lacking, I wish to transfer to the vocabulary that 
expresses my own meaning those that I deem most suitable. 

This evidence and certitude, however, which belongs to intuition, 
is required not only in the enunciation of propositions, but also in 
discursive reasoning of whatever sort. For example consider this 
consequence: 2 and 2 amount to the same as 3 and 1. Now we 


1 purae. ' om 
® ‘Intuitus’ is but sparingly used in Descartes’ later writings. 


8 Rules 


need to see intuitively not only that 2 and 2 make 4, and that 
likewise 3 and 1 make 4, but further that the third of the above 
statements is a necessary conclusion from these two. 

Hence now we are in a position to raise the question as to why 
we have, besides intuition, given this supplementary method of 
knowing, viz. knowing by deduction, by which we understand all 
necessary inference from other facts that are known with certainty. 
This, however, we could not avoid, because many things are known 
with certainty, though not by themselves evident, but only deduced 
from true and known principles by the continuous and uninterrupted 
action of a mind? that has a clear vision of each step in the process. 
It is in a similar way that we know that the last link in a long 
chain is connected with the first, even though we do not take in by 
means of one and the same act of vision all the intermediate links 
on which that connection depends, but only remember that we have 
taken them successively under review and that each single one is 
united to its neighbour, from the first even to the last. Hence we 
distingypish this mental intuition from deduction by the fact that 
into the conception of the latter there enters a certain movement or 
succession, into that of the former there does not. Further deduction 
does not require an immediately presented evidence such as intuition 
possesses ; its certitude is rather conferred upon it in some way by 
memory. The upshot of the matter is that it is possible to say 
that those propositions indeed which are immediately deduced from 
first principles are known now by intuition, now by deduction, 
i.e. in a way that differs according to our point of view. But the 
first principles themselves are given by intuition alone, while, on the 
contrary, the remote conclusions are furnished only by deduction. 

These two methods are the most certain routes to knowledge, 
and the mind should admit no others. All the rest should be 
rejected as suspect of error and dangerous. But this does not 
prevent us from believing matters that have been divinely revealed 
as being more certain than our surest knowledge, since belief in 
these things’, as* all faith in obscure matters, is an action not of 
our intelligence‘, but of our will. They should be heeded also since, 
if they have any basis in our understanding, they can and ought to 
be, more than all things else, discovered by one or other of the ways 
above-mentioned, as we hope perhaps to show at greater length on 
some future opportunity. 


1 cogitationis. 2 «that faith of ours,’ Leibniz’s ms. 
3 <ut> quaecunque est de obscuris. 4 ingenii. 


' For Direction 9 


Rute IV. 


There is need of a method for finding out the truth. 


So blind is the curiosity by which mortals are possessed, that 
they often conduct their minds along unexplored routes, having no 
reason to hope for success, but merely being willing to risk the 
experiment of finding whether the truth they seek lies there. As 
well might a man burning with an unintelligent desire to find 
treasure, continuously roam the streets, seeking to find something 
that a passer by might have chanced to drop. This is the way in 
which most Chemists, many Geometricians, and Philosophers not a 
few prosecute their studies. I do not deny that sometimes in these 
wanderings they are lucky enough to find something true. But 
I do not allow that this argues greater industry on their part, but 
only better luck. But however that may be, it were far better 
never to think of investigating truth at all, than to do so without 
a method. For it is very certain that unregulated inquiries and 
confused reflections of this kind only confound the natural light 
and blind our mental powers. Those who so become accustomed to 
walk in darkness weaken their eye-sight so much that afterwards 
they cannot bear the light of day. This is confirmed by experience ; 
for how often do we not see that those who have never taken to 
letters, give a sounder and clearer decision about obvious matters 
than those who have spent all their time in the schools? Moreover 
by a method I mean certain and simple rules, such that, if a man 
observe them accurately, he shall never assume what is false as true, 
and will never spend his mental efforts to no purpose, but will 
always gradually increase his knowledge and so arrive at a true 
understanding of all that does not surpass his powers. 

These two points must be carefully noted, viz. never to assume 
what is false as true, and to arrive at a knowledge which takes in all 
things. For, if we are without the knowledge of any of the things 
which we are capable of understanding, that is only because we 
have never perceived any way to bring us to this knowledge, or 
because we have fallen into the contrary error. But if our method 
rightly explains how our mental vision should be used, so as not to 
fall into the contrary error, and how deduction should be discovered 
in order that we may arrive at the knowledge of all things, I do not 
see what else is needed to make it complete; for I have already 


10 Rules 


said that no science is acquired except by mental intuition or 
deduction. There is besides no question of extending it further in 
order to show how these said operations ought to be effected, 
because they are the most simple and primary of all. Consequently, 
unless our understanding were already able to employ them, it 
could comprehend none of the precepts of that very method, not 
even the simplest. But as for the other mental operations, which 
Dialectic does its best to direct by making use of these prior ones, 
they are quite useless here ; rather they are to be accounted impedi- 
ments, because nothing can be added to the pure light of reason 
which does not in some way obscure it. 

Since then the usefulness of this method is so great that without 
it study seems to be harmful rather than profitable, I am quite 
ready to believe that the greater minds of former ages had some 
knowledge of it, nature even conducting them to it. For the human 
mind has in it something that we may call divine, wherein are 
scattered the first germs of useful modes of thought. Consequently 
it often happens that however much neglected and choked by 
interfering studies they bear fruit of their own accord. Arithmetic 
and Geometry, the simplest sciences, give us an instance of this; 
for we have sufficient evidence that the ancient Geometricians made 
use of a certain analysis which they extended to the resolution of 
all problems, though they grudged the secret to posterity. At the 
present day also there flourishes a certain kind of Arithmetic, called 
Algebra, which designs to effect, when dealing with numbers, what 
the ancients achieved in the matter of figures. These two methods 
are nothing else than the spontaneous fruit sprung from the 
inborn principles of the discipline here in question; and I do not 
wonder that these sciences with their very simple subject matter’ 
should have yielded results so much more satisfactory than others 
in which greater obstructions choke all growth. But even in the 
latter case, if only we take care to cultivate them assiduously, fruits 
will certainly be able to come to full maturity. 

This is the chief result which I have had in view in writing this 
treatise. For I should not think much of these rules, if they had 
no utility save for the solution of the empty problems with which 
Logicians and Geometers have been wont to beguile their leisure ; 
my only achievement thus would have seemed to be an ability to 
argue about trifles more subtly than others. Further, though much 


4 objecta. 


For Direction ll 


mention is here made of numbers and figures, because no other 
sciences furnish us with illustrations of such self-evidence and cer- 
tainty, the reader who follows my drift with sufficient attention will 
easily see that nothing is less in my mind than ordinary Mathematics, 
and that I am expounding quite another science, of which these 
illustrations are rather the outer husk than the constituents. Such 
a science should contain the primary rudiments of human reason, 
and its province ought to extend to the eliciting of true results in 
every subject. T'o speak freely, I am convinced that it is a more power- 
ful instrument of knowledge than any other that has been bequeathed 
to us by human agency, as being the source of all others. But as 
for the outer covering I mentioned, I mean not to employ it to cover 
up and conceal my method for the purpose of warding off the vulgar ; 
rather I hope so to clothe and embellish it that I may make it more 
suitable for presentation to the human mind. 

When first I applied my mind to Mathematics I read straight 
away most of what is usually given by the mathematical writers, 
and I paid special attention to Arithmetic and Geometry, because 
they were said to be the simplest and so to speak the way to all the 
rest. But in neither case did I then meet with authors who fully 
satisfied me. I did indeed learn in their works many propositions 
about numbers which I found on calculation to be true. As to 
figures, they in a sense exhibited to my eyes a great number of 
truths and drew conclusions from certain consequences. But they 
did not seem to make it sufficiently plain to the mind itself why 
those things are so, and how they discovered them. Consequently 
I was not surprised that many people, even of talent and scholarship, 
should, after glancing at these sciences, have either given them up as 
being empty and childish or, taking them to be very difficult and 
intricate, been deterred at the very outset from learning them. For 
really there is nothing more futile than to busy one’s self with bare 
numbers and imaginary figures in such a way as to appear to rest 
content with such trifles, and so to resort to those superficial demon- 
strations, which are discovered more frequently by chance than by skill, 
and are a matter more of the eyes and the imagination than of the 
understanding, that in a sense one ceases to make use of one’s reason. 
I might add that there is no more intricate task than that of solving 
by this method of proof new difficulties that arise, involved as they are 
with numerical confusions. But when I afterwards bethought myself 
how it could be that the earliest pioneers of Philosophy in bygone 
ages refused to admit to the study of wisdom any one who was not 


12 Rules 


versed in Mathematics, evidently believing that this was the easiest 
and most indispensable mental exercise and preparation for laying 
hold of other more important sciences, I was confirmed in my 
suspicion that they had knowledge of a species of Mathematics very 
different from that which passes current in our time. I do not 
indeed imagine that they had a perfect knowledge of it, for they 
plainly show how little advanced they were by the insensate rejoic- 
ings they display and the pompous thanksgivings' they offer for the 
most trifling discoveries. I am not shaken in my opinion by the 
fact that historians make a great deal of certain machines of theirs. 
Possibly these machines were quite simple, and yet the ignorant 
and wonder-loving multitude might easily have lauded them as 
miraculous. But I am convinced that certain primary germs of 
truth implanted by nature in human minds—though in our case the 
daily reading and hearing of innumerable diverse errors stifle them 
—had a very great vitality in that rude and unsophisticated age of 
the ancient world. Thus the same mental illumination which let 
them see that virtue was to be preferred to pleasure, and honour to 
utility, although they knew not why this was so, made them recog- 
nize true notions in Philosophy and Mathematics, although they 
were not yet able thoroughly to grasp these sciences. Indeed 
I seem to recognize certain traces of this true Mathematics in 
Pappus and Diophantus, who though not belonging to the earliest 
age, yet lived many centuries before our own times. But my 
opinion is that these writers then with a sort of low cunning, 
deplorable indeed, suppressed this knowledge. Possibly they acted 
just as many inventors are known to have done in the case of their 
discoveries, i.e. they feared that their method being so easy and 
simple would become cheapened on being divulged, and they 
preferred to exhibit in its place certain barren truths, deductively 
demonstrated with show enough of ingenuity, as the results of their 
art, in order to win from us our admiration for these achievements, 
rather than to disclose to us that method itself which would have 
wholly annulled the admiration accorded. Finally there have been 
certain men of talent who in the present age have tried to revive this 
same art. For it seems to be precisely that science known by the 
barbarous name Algebra, if only we could extricate it from that vast 
array of numbers and inexplicable figures by which it is overwhelmed, 
so that it might display the clearness and simplicity which, we 


1 sacrificia, 


For Direction 13 


@ 

imagine, ought to exist in a genuine Mathematics. It was these 
reflections that recalled me from the particular studies of Arithmetic 
and Geometry to a general investigation of Mathematics, and there- 
upon I sought to determine what precisely was universally meant by 
that term, and why not only the above mentioned sciences, but also 
Astronomy, Music, Optics, Mechanics and several others are styled 
parts of Mathematics. Here indeed it is not enough to look to the 
origin of the word; for since the name ‘Mathematics’ means 
exactly the same thing as ‘scientific study’, these other branches 
could, with as much right as Geometry itself, be called Mathematics. 
Yet we see that almost anyone who has had the slightest schooling, 
can easily distinguish what relates to Mathematics in any question 
from that which belongs to the other sciences. But as I considered 
the matter carefully it gradually came to light that all those matters 
only were referred to Mathematics in which order and measure- 
ment are investigated, and that it makes no difference whether it be 
in numbers, figures, stars, sounds or any other object that the 
question of measurement arises. I saw consequently that there 
must be some general science to explain that element as a whole 
which gives rise to problems about order and measurement, restricted 
as these are to no special subject matter. This, I perceived, was 
called ‘ Universal Mathematics,’ not a far fetched designation, but 
one of long standing which has passed into current use, because in 
this science is contained everything on account of which the others 
are called parts of Mathematics. We can see how much it excels in 
utility and simplicity the sciences subordinate to it, by the fact that 
it can deal with all the objects of which they have cognizance and 
many more besides, and that any difficulties it contains are found in 
them as well, added to the fact that in them fresh difficulties arise 
due to their special subject matter which in it do not exist. But now 
how comes it that though everyone knows the name of this science 
and understands what is its province even without studying it atten- 
tively, so many people laboriously pursue the other dependent 
sciences, and no one cares to master this one? I should marvel 
indeed were I not aware that everyone thinks it to be so very easy, 
and had I not long since observed that the human mind passes over 
what it thinks it can easily accomplish, and hastens straight away to 
new and more imposing occupations. 

I, however, conscious as I am of my inadequacy, have resolved 


1 disciplina. 


14 Rules 


that in my investigation into truth I shall follow obstinately such an 
order as will require me first to start with what is simplest and 
easiest, and never permit me to proceed farther until in the first 
sphere there seems to be nothing further to be done. This is why 
up to the present time to the best of my ability I have made a study 
of this universal Mathematics ; consequently I believe that when 
I go on to deal in their turn with more profound sciences, as I hope 
to do soon, my efforts will not be premature. But before I make 
this transition I shall try to bring together and arrange in an 
orderly manner, the facts which in my previous studies I have noted 
as being more worthy of attention. Thus I hope both that at a 
future date, when through advancing years my memory is enfeebled, 
I shall, if need be, conveniently be able to recall them by looking in 
this little book, and that having now disburdened my memory of 
them I may be free to concentrate my mind on my future studies. 


Rute V 


Method consists entirely in the order and disposition of the objects 
towards which our mental vision must be directed if we would find out 
any truth. We shall comply with it exactly if we reduce involved 
and obscure propositions step by step to those that are simpler, and 
then starting with the intuitive apprehension of all those that are 
absolutely simple, attempt to ascend to the knowledge of all others by 
precisely similar steps. 


In this alone lies the sum of all human endeavour, and he who 
would approach the investigation of truth must hold to this rule as 
closely as he who enters the labyrinth must follow the thread which 
guided Theseus. But many people either do not reflect on the 
precept at all, or ignore it altogether, or presume not to need it. 
Consequently they often investigate the most difficult questions with 
so little regard to order, that, to my mind, they act like a man who 
should attempt to leap with one bound from the base to the summit 
of a house, either making no account of the ladders provided for his 
ascent or not noticing them. It is thus that all Astrologers behave, 
who, though in ignorance of the nature of the heavens, and even 
without having made proper observations of the movements of the 
heavenly bodies, expect to be able to indicate their effects. This is 
also what many do who study Mechanics apart from Physics, and 
rashly set about devising new instruments for producing motion. 


For Direction 15 


Along with them go also those Philosophers who, neglecting 
experience, imagine that truth will spring from their brain like 
Pallas’ from the head of Zeus?. 

Now it is obvious that all such people violate the present rule. 
But since the order here required is often so obscure and intricate 
that not everyone can make it out, they can scarcely avoid error 
unless they diligently observe what is laid down in the following 
proposition. 


Rute VI. 


In order to separate out what is quite simple from what is complea, 
and to arrange these matters methodically, we ought, in the case of 
every series in which we have deduced certain facts the one from the 
other, to notice which fact is simple, and to mark the interval, greater, 
less, or equal, which separates all the others from this. 


Although this proposition seems to teach nothing very new, it 
contains, nevertheless, the chief secret of method, and none in the 
whole of this treatise is of greater utility. For it tells us that all 
facts can be arranged in certain series, not indeed in the sense of 
being referred to some ontological genus such as the categories 
employed by Philosophers in their classification, but in so far as 
certain truths can be known from others; and thus, whenever a 
difficulty occurs we are able at once to perceive whether it will be 
profitable to examine certain others first, and which, and in what 
order. 

Further, in order to do that correctly, we must note first that 
for the purpose of our procedure, which does not regard things as 
isolated realities’, but compares them with one another in order to 
discover the dependence in knowledge of one upon the other, all 
things can be said to be either absolute or relative. 

I call that absolute which contains within itself the pure and 
simple essence of which we are in quest. Thus the term will be 
applicable to whatever is considered as being independent, or a 
cause, or simple, universal, one, equal, like, straight, and so forth ; 
and the absolute I call the simplest and the easiest of all, so that 
we can make use of it in the solution of questions. 

But the relative is that which, while participating in the same 
nature, or at least sharing in it to some degree which enables us to 
relate it to the absolute and to deduce it from that by a chain of 


1 Minerva. 2 Jovis. 3 naturas, 


16 Rules 


operations, involves in addition something else in its concept which 
I call relativity’. Examples of this are found in whatever is said to 
be dependent, or an effect, composite, particular, many, unequal, 
unlike, oblique, etc. These relatives are the further removed from 
the absolute, in proportion as they contain more elements of 
relativity subordinate the one to the other. We state in this rule 
that these should all be distinguished and their correlative con- 
nection and natural order so observed, that we may be able by 
traversing all the intermediate steps to proceed from the most 
remote to that which is in the highest degree absolute. 

Herein lies the secret of this whole method, that in all things 
we should diligently mark that which is most absolute. For some 
things are from one point of view more absolute than others, but 
from a different standpoint are more relative. Thus though the 
universal is more absolute than the particular because its essence is 
simpler, yet it can be held to be more relative than the latter, 
because it depends upon individuals for its existence, and so on. 
Certain things likewise are truly more absolute than others, but yet 
are not the most absolute of all. Thus relatively to individuals, 
species is something absolute, but contrasted with genus it is 
relative. So too, among things that can be measured, extension is 
something absolute, but among the various aspects of extension® it 
is length that is absolute, and so on. Finally also, in order to bring 
out more clearly that we are considering here not the nature of 
each thing taken in isolation, but the series involved in knowing 
them, we have purposely enumerated cause and equality among our 
absolutes, though the nature of these terms is really relative. For 
though Philosophers make cause and effect correlative, we find that 
here even, if we ask what the effect is, we must first know the cause 
and not conversely. Equals too mutually imply one another, but 
we can know unequals only by comparing them with equals and not 
per contra. 

Secondly we must note that there are but few pure and simple 
essences*, which either our experiences or some sort of light innate 
in us enable us to behold as primary and existing per se, not as 
depending on any others. These we say should be carefully noticed, 
for they are just those facts which we have called the simplest in 
any single series. All the others can only be perceived as deduc- 
tions from these, either immediate and proximate, or not to be 


1 respectus. 2 extensiones. % naturas. 


For Direction 17 


attained save by two or three or more acts of inference. The 
number of these acts should be noted in order that we may perceive 
whether the facts are separated from the primary and simplest 
proposition by a greater or smaller number of steps. And so 
pronounced is everywhere the inter-connection of ground and con- 
sequence, which gives rise, in the objects to be examined, to those 
series to which every inquiry must be reduced, that it can be 
investigated by a sure method. But because it is not easy to make 
a review of them all, and besides, since they have not so much to 
be kept in the memory as to be detected by a sort of mental 
penetration, we must seek for something which will so mould our 
intelligence as to let it perceive these connected sequences im- 
mediately whenever it needs to do so. For this purpose I have 
found nothing so effectual as to accustom ourselves to turn our 
attention with a sort of penetrative insight! on the very minutest of 
the facts which we have already discovered. 

Finally we must in the third place note that our inquiry ought 
not to start with the investigation of difficult matters. Rather, 
before setting out to attack any definite problem, it behoves us first, 
without making any selection, to assemble those truths that are 
obvious as they present themselves to us, and afterwards, proceeding 
step by step, to inquire whether any others can be deduced from 
these, and again any others from these conclusions and so on, in 
order. ‘This done, we should attentively think over the truths we 
have discovered and mark with diligence the reasons why we have 
been able to detect some more easily than others, and which these 
are. Thus, when we come to attack some definite problem we shall 
be able to judge what previous questions it were best to settle first. 
For example, if it comes into my thought that the number 6 is 
twice 3, I may then ask what is twice 6, viz. 12; again, perhaps 
I seek for the double of this, viz. 24, and again of this, viz. 48. 
Thus I may easily deduce that there is the same proportion between 
3 and 6, as between 6 and 12, and likewise 12 and 24, and so on, 
and hence that the numbers 3, 6, 12, 24, 48, etc. are in continued 
proportion. But though these facts are all so clear as to seem 
almost childish, I am now able by attentive reflection to understand 
what is the form involved by all questions that can be propounded 
about the proportions or relations’ of things, and the order in which 
they should be investigated ; and this discovery embraces the sum 
of the entire science of Pure Mathematics. 

4 cum quadam sagacitate, 3 habitudines, 


18 Rules 


For first I perceive that it was not more difficult to discover the 
double of six than that of three; and that equally in all cases, when 
we have found a proportion between any two magnitudes, we can 
find innumerable others which have the same proportion between 
them. So too there is no increase of difficulty, if three, or four, or 
more of such magnitudes are sought for, because each has to be 
found separately and without any relation to the others. But next 
I notice that though, when the magnitudes 3 and 6 are given, one 
can easily find a third in continued proportion, viz. 12, it is yet not 
equally easy, when the two extremes, 3 and 12, are given, to find 
the mean proportional, viz. 6. When we look into the reason for 
this, it is clear that here we have a type of difficulty quite different 
from the former; for, in order to find the mean proportional, we 
must at the same time attend to the two extremes and to the 
proportion which exists between these two in order to discover a 
new ratio by dividing the previous one; and this is a very different 
thing from finding a third term in continued proportion with two 
given numbers. I go forward likewise and examine whether, when 
the numbers 3 and 24 were given, it would have been equally easy to 
determine one of the two intermediate proportionals, viz. 6 and 12. 
But here still another sort of difficulty arises more involved than 
the previous ones, for on this occasion we have to attend not to one 
or two things only but to three, in order to discover the fourth. 
We may go still further and inquire whether if only 3 and 48 had 
been given it would have been still more difficult to discover one 
of the three mean proportionals, viz. 6, 12, and 24. At the first 
blush this indeed appears to be so; but immediately afterwards 
it comes to mind that this difficulty can be split up and lessened, 
if first of all we ask only for the mean proportional between 3 and 
48, viz. 12, and then seek for the other mean proportional between 
8 and 12, viz. 6, and the other between 12 and 48, viz. 24. Thus 
we have reduced the problem to the difficulty of the second type 
shown above. 

These illustrations further lead me to note that the quest for 
knowledge about the same thing can traverse different routes, the 
one much more difficult and obscure than the other. Thus to find 
these four continued proportionals, 3, 6, 12, and 24, if two con- 
secutive numbers be assumed, e.g. 3 and 6, or 6 and 12, or 12 and 
24, in order that we may discover the others, our task will be easy. 
In this case we shall say that the proposition to be discovered is 
directly examined. But if the two numbers given are alternates, 


For Direction 19 


like 3 and 12, or 6 and 24, which are to lead us to the discovery of 
the others, then we shall call this an indirect investigation of the 
first mode. Likewise if we are given two extremes like 3 and 24, 
in order to find out from these the intermediates 6 and 12, the 
investigation will be indirect and of the second mode. Thus I 
should be able to proceed further and deduce many other results 
from this example ; but these will be sufficient, if the reader follows 
my meaning when I say that a proposition is directly deduced, or 
indirectly, and will reflect that from a knowledge of each of these 
matters that are simplest and primary, much may be discovered in 
other sciences by those who bring to them attentive thought and a 
power of sagacious analysis. 


Rute VII. 


If we wish our science to be complete, those matters which promote 
the end we have in view must one and all be scrutinized by a move- 
ment af thought which is continuous and nowhere interrupted ; they 
must also be included in an enumeration which is both adequate and 
methodical. 


It is necessary to obey the injunctions of this rule if we hope to 
gain admission among the certain truths for those which, we have 
declared above, are not immediate deductions from primary and 
self-evident principles. For this deduction frequently involves such 
a long series of transitions from ground to consequent that when we 
come to the conclusion we have difficulty in recalling the whole of 
the route by which we have arrived at it. This is why I say that 
there must be a continuous movement of thought to make good this 
weakness of the memory. Thus, e.g. if I have first found out by 
separate mental operations what the relation is between the magni- 
tudes A and B, then what between B and C, between C and D, 
and finally between D and £, that does not entail my seeing what 
the relation is between A and #, nor can the truths previously 
learnt give me a precise knowledge of it unless [ recall them all. 
To remedy this I would run them over from time to time, keeping 
the imagination moving continuously in such a way-that while it is 
intuitively perceiving each fact it simultaneously passes on to the 
next ; and this I would do until I had learned to pass from the first 
to the last so quickly, that no stage in the process was left to the 
care of the memory, but I seemed to have the whole in intuition 
before me at the same time. ‘This method will both relieve the 


20 Rules 


memory, diminish the sluggishness of our thinking, and definitely 
enlarge our mental capacity. 

But we must add that this movement should nowhere be inter- 
rupted. Often people who attempt to deduce a conclusion too 
quickly and from remote principles do not trace the whole chain of 
intermediate conclusions with sufficient accuracy to prevent them 
from passing over many steps without due consideration. But it is 
certain that wherever the smallest link is left out the chain is 
broken and the whole of the certainty of the conclusion falls to the 
ground. 

Here we maintain that an enumeration [of the steps in a proof] 
is required as well, if we wish to make our science complete. For 
resolving most problems other precepts are profitable, but enumera- 
tion alone will secure our always passing a true and certain judgment 
on whatsoever engages our attention ; by means of it nothing at all 
will escape us, but we shall evidently have some knowledge of every 
step. 

This enumeration or induction is thus a review or inventory of 
all those matters that have a bearing on the problem raised, which 
is so thorough and accurate that by its means we can clearly and 
with confidence conclude that we have omitted nothing by mistake. 
Consequently as often as we have employed it, if the problem defies 
us, we shall at least be wiser in this respect, viz. that we are quite 
certain that we know of no way of resolving it. If it chance, as 
often it does, that we have been able to scan all the routes leading 
to it which lie open to the human intelligence, we shall be entitled 
boldly to assert that the solution of the problem lies outside the 
reach of human knowledge. 

Furthermore we must note that by adequate enumeration or 
induction is only meant that method by which we may attain surer 
conclusions than by any other type of proof, with the exception of 
simple intuition. But when the knowledge of some matter cannot 
be reduced to this, we must cast aside all syllogistic fetters and 
employ induction, the only method left us, but one in which all 
confidence should be reposed. For whenever single facts have been 
immediately deduced the one from the other, they have been already 
reduced, if the inference was evident, to a true intuition. But if we 
infer any single thing from various and disconnected facts, often our 
intellectual capacity is not so great as to be able to embrace them 
all in a single intuition ; in which case our mind should be content 
with the certitude attaching to this operation, It is in precisely 


For Direction 21 


similar fashion that though we cannot with one single gaze distin- 
guish all the links of a lengthy chain, yet if we have seen the 
connection of each with its neighbour, we shall be entitled to say 
that we have seen how the first is connected with the last. 

I have declared that this operation ought to be adequate, 
because it is often in danger of being defective and consequently 
exposed to error. For sometimes, even though in our enumeration 
we scrutinize many facts which are highly evident, yet if we omit 
the smallest step the chain is broken and the whole of the certitude 
of the conclusion falls to the ground. Sometimes also, even though 
all the facts are included in an accurate enumeration, the single 
steps are not distinguished from one another, and our knowledge of 
them all is thus only confused. 

Turther, while now the enumeration ought to be complete, now 
distinct, there are times when it need have neither of these 
characters ; it was for this reason that I said only that it should be 
adequate. For if I want to prove by enumeration how many genera 
there are of corporeal things, or of those that in any way fall under the 
senses, I shall not assert that they are just so many and no more, 
unless I previously have become aware that I have included them 
all in my enumeration, and have distinguished them each separately 
from all the others. But if in the same way I wish to prove that 
the rational soul is not corporeal, I do not need a complete enumera- 
tion ; it will be sufficient to include all bodies in certain collections 
in such a way as to be able to demonstrate that the rational soul 
has nothing to do with any of these. If, finally, I wish to show by 
enumeration that the area of a circle is greater than the area of all 
other figures whose perimeter is equal, there is no need for me to 
call in review all other figures ; it is enough to demonstrate this of 
certain others in particular, in order to get thence by induction’ the 
same conclusion about all the others. 

I added also that the enumeration ought to be methodical. This 
is both because we have no more serviceable remedy for the defects 
already instanced, than to scan all things in an orderly manner ; 
and also because it often happens that if each single matter which 
concerns the quest in hand were to be investigated separately, no 
man’s life would be long enough for the purpose, whether because 
they are far too many, or because it would chance that the same 
things had to be repeated too often. But if all these facts are 
arranged in the best order, they will for the most part be reduced to 


1 This seems to be a different sense of the word ‘inductio’ from that above, 


22 Rules 


determinate classes, out of which it will be sufficient to take one 
example for exact inspection, or some one feature in a single case, 
or certain things rather than others, or at least we shall never have 
to waste our time in traversing the same ground twice. The 
advantage of this course is so great that often many particulars can, 
owing to a well devised arrangement, be gone over in a short space 
of time and with little trouble, though at first view the matter 
looked immense. 

But this order which we employ in our enumerations can for the 
most part be varied and depends upon each man’s judgment. For 
this reason, if we would elaborate it in our thought with greater 
penetration, we must remember what was said in our fifth proposi- 
tion?, There are also many of the trivial things of man’s devising, 
in the discovery of which the whole method lies in the disposal of 
this order. Thus if you wish to construct a perfect anagram by the 
transposition of the letters of a name, there is no need to pass from 
the easy to the difficult, nor to distinguish absolute from relative. 
Here there is no place for these operations ; it will be sufficient to 
adopt an order to be followed in the transpositions of the letters 
which we are to examine, such that the same arrangements are 
never handled twice over. The total number of transpositions 
should, e.g. be split up into definite classes, so that it may imme- 
diately appear in which there is the best hope of finding what is 
sought. In this way the task is often not tedious but merely child’s 
play. 

However, these three propositions should not be separated, 
because for the most part we have to think of them together, and 
all equally tend towards the perfecting of our method. There was 
no great reason for treating one before the other, and we have 
expounded them but briefly here. The reason for this is that in the 
rest of the treatise we have practically nothing else left for con- 
sideration. ‘Therefore we shall then exhibit in detail what here we 
have brought together in a general way. 


Route VIII. 


If in the matters to be examined we come to a step in the series 
of which our understanding is not sufficiently well able to have an 
intuitive cognition, we must stop short there. We must make no 
attempt to examine what follows; thus we shall spare ourselves 
superfluous labour. 

1 Cf, p. 14 


For Direction 23 


The three preceding rules prescribe and explain the order to be 
followed. The present rule, on the other hand, shows when it is 
wholly necessary and when it is merely useful. Thus it is necessary 
to examine whatever constitutes a single step in that series, by which 
we pass from relative to absolute, or conversely, before discussing 
what follows from it. But if, as often happens, many things pertain 
to the same step, though it is indeed always profitable to review 
them in order, in this case we are not forced to apply our method of 
observation so strictly and rigidly. Frequently it is permissible to 
proceed farther, even though we have not clear knowledge of all the 
facts it involves, but know only a few or a single one of them. 

This rule is a necessary consequence of the reasons brought 
forward in support of the second. But it must not be thought that 
the present rule contributes nothing fresh towards the advancement 
of learning, though it seems only to bid us refrain from further 
discussion, and apparently does not unfold any truth. For beginners, 
indeed, it has no further value than to teach them how not to waste 
time, and it employs nearly the same arguments in doing so as 
Rule II. But it shows those who have perfectly mastered the seven 
preceding maxims, how in the pursuit of any science so to satisfy 
themselves as not to desire anything further. For the man who 
faithfully complies with the former rules in the solution of any 
difficulty, and yet by the present rule is bidden desist at a certain 
point, will then know for certainty that no amount of application 
will enable him to attain to the knowledge desired, and that not 
owing to a defect in his intelligence, but because the nature of the 
problem itself, or the fact that he is human, prevents him. But this 
knowledge is not the less science than that which reveals the nature 
of the thing itself; in fact he would seem to have some mental 
defect who should extend his curiosity farther. 

But what we have been saying must be illustrated by one or two 
examples. If, for example, one who studies only Mathematics were 
to seek to find that curve which in dioptrics is called the anaclastic, 
that from which parallel rays are so refracted that after the refrac- 
tion they all meet in one point,—it will be easy to see, by 
applying Rules V and VI, that the determination of this line depends 
upon the relation which the angles of refraction bear to the angles 
of incidence. But because he is unable to discover this, since it is 
a matter not of Mathematics but of Physics, he is here forced to 
pause at the threshold. Nor will it avail him to try and learn this 
from the Philosophers or to gather it from experience; for this 


24 Rules 


would be to break Rule III. Furthermore this proposition is both 
composite and relative ; but in the proper place we shall show that 
experience is unambiguous only when dealing with the wholly 
simple and absolute. Again, it will be vain for him to assume some 
relation or other as being that which prevails between such angles, 
and conjecture that this is the truest to fact; for in that case he 
would be on the track not of the anaclastic, but merely of that curve 
which could be deduced from his assumption. 

If, however, a man who does not confine his studies to Mathe- 
matics, but, in accordance with the first rule, tries to discover the 
truth on all points, meets with the same difficulty, he will find in 
addition that this ratio between the angles of incidence and of 
refraction depends upon changes in their relation produced by vary- 
ing the medium. Again these changes depend upon the manner in 
which the ray of light traverses the whole transparent body ; while 
the knowledge of the way in which the light thus passes through 
presupposes a knowledge of the nature of the action of light, to 
understand which finally we must know what a natural potency is in 
general, this last being the most absolute term in the whole series in 
question. When, therefore, by a mental intuition he has clearly 
comprehended the nature of this, he will, in compliance with Rule V, 
proceed backwards by the same steps. And if when he comes to 
the second step he is unable straightway to determine the nature of 
light, he will, in accordance with the seventh rule, enumerate all the 
other natural potencies, in order that the knowledge of some other 
of them may help him, at least by analogy (of which more anon), to 
understand this. his done, he will ask how the ray traverses the 
whole of the transparent body, and will so follow out the other 
points methodically, that at last he will arrive at the anaclastic 
itself. Though this has long defied the efforts of many inquirers, 
I see no reason why a man who fully carried out our method should 
fail to arrive at a convincing knowledge of the matter. 

But let us give the most splendid example of all. If a man 
proposes to himself the problem of examining all the truths for the 
knowledge of which human reason suffices—and I think that this is 
a task which should be undertaken once at least in his life by every 
person who seriously endeavours to attain equilibrium’ of thought—, 
he will, by the rules given above, certainly discover that nothing can 
be known prior to the understanding, since the knowledge of all 


1 bonam mentem. 


For Direction 25 


things else depends upon this and not conversely. Then, when he 
has clearly grasped all those things which follow proximately on the 
knowledge of the naked understanding, he will enumerate among 
other things whatever instruments of thought we have other than 
the understanding ; and these are only two, viz. imagination and 
sense. He will therefore devote all his energies to the distinguishing 
and examining of these three modes of cognition, and seeing that in 
the strict sense truth and falsity can be a matter of the understand- 
ing alone, though often it derives its origin from the other two 
faculties, he will attend carefully to every source of deception in 
order that he may be on his guard. He will also enumerate exactly 
all the ways leading to truth which lie open to us, in order that he 
may follow the right way. They are not so many that they cannot 
all be easily discovered and embraced in an adequate enumeration. 
And though this will seem marvellous and incredible to the inexpert, 
as soon as in each matter he has distinguished those cognitions 
which only fill and embellish the memory, from those which cause 
one to be deemed really more instructed, which it will be easy for 
him to do ...... ‘; he will feel assured that any absence of further 
knowledge is not due to lack of intelligence or of skill, and that 
nothing at all can be known by anyone else which he is not capable 
of knowing, provided only that he gives to it his utmost mental 
application. And though many problems may present themselves, 
trom the solution of which this rule prohibits him, yet because he 
will clearly perceive that they pass the limits of human intelligence, 
he will deem that he is not the more ignorant on that account; 
rather, if he is reasonable, this very knowledge, that the solution 
can be discovered by no one, will abundantly satisfy his curiosity. 

But lest we should always be uncertain as to the powers of the 
mind, and in order that we may not labour wrongly and at random 
before we set ourselves to think out things in detail, we ought once 
in our life to inquire diligently what the thoughts are of which the 
human mind is capable. In order the better to attain this end we 
ought, when two sets of inquiries are equally simple, to choose the 
more useful. 

This method of ours resembles indeed those devices employed by 
the mechanical crafts, which do not need the aid of anything outside 
of them, but themselves supply the directions for making their own 
instruments. Thus if a man wished to practise any one of them, 


1 The Amsterdam ed. of 1701 indicates an omission here, 


26 Rules 


eg. the craft of a smith, and were destitute of all instruments, he 
would be forced to use at first a hard stone or a rough lump of iron 
as an anvil, take a piece of rock in place of a hammer, make 
pieces of wood serve as tongs, and provide himself with other such 
tools as necessity required. Thus equipped, he would not then at 
once attempt to forge swords or helmets or any manufactured article 
of iron for others to use. He would first of all fashion hammer, 
anvil, tongs, and the other tools useful for himself. This example 
teaches us that, since thus at the outset we have been able to 
discover only some rough precepts, apparently the innate possession 
of our mind, rather than the product of technical skill, we should 
not forthwith attempt to settle the controversies of Philosophers, or 
solve the puzzles of the Mathematicians, by their help. We must 
first employ them for searching out with our utmost attention all 
the other things that are more urgently required in the investigation 
of truth. And this since there is no reason why it should appear 
more difficult to discover these than any of the answers which the 
problems propounded by Geometry or Physics or the other sciences 
are wont to demand. 

Now no more useful inquiry can be proposed than that which 
seeks to determine the nature and the seope of human knowledge. 
This is why we state this very problem succinctly in the single 
question, which we deem should be answered at the very outset with 
the aid of the rules which we have already laid down. This 
investigation should be undertaken once at least in his life by 
anyone who has the slightest regard for truth, since in pursuing it 
the true instruments of knowledge and the whole method of 
inquiry come to light. But nothing seems to me more futile than 
the conduct of those who boldly dispute about the secrets of nature, 
the influence of the heavens on these lower regions, the predicting 
of future events and similar matters, as many do, without yet 
having ever asked even whether human reason is adequate to the 
solution of these problems. Neither ought it to seem such a toilsome 
and difficult matter to define the limits of that understanding? of 
which we are directly aware’ as being within us, when we often have 
no hesitation in passing judgment even on things that are without us 
and quite foreign to us. Neither is it such an immense task to 
attempt to grasp in thought all the objects comprised within this 
whole of things, in order to disvover how they singly fall under our 


1 {ngenii, 3 sentimus. 


For Direction 27 


mental scrutiny. For nothing can prove to be so complex or so 
vague as to defeat the efforts of the method of enumeration above 
described, directed towards restraining it within certain limits or 
arranging it under certain categories’. But to put this to the test 
in the matter of the question above propounded, we first of all 
divide the whole problem relative to it into two parts ; for it ought 
either to relate to us who are capable of knowledge, or to the things 
themselves which can be known : and these two factors we discuss 
separately. 

In ourselves we notice that while it is the understanding alone 
which is capable of knowing, it yet is either helped or hindered by three 
other faculties, namely imagination, sense, and memory. We must 
therefore examine these faculties in order, with a view to finding out 
where each may prove to be an impediment, so that we may be on 
our guard; or where it may profit us, so that we may use to the 
full the resources of these powers. This first part of our problem 
will accordingly be discussed with the aid of a sufficient enumeration, 
as will be shown in the succeeding proposition. 

We come secondly to the things themselves which must be con- 
sidered only in so far as they are the objects of the understanding. 
From this point of view we divide them into the class (1) of those 
whose nature is of the extremest simplicity and (2) of the complex 
and composite. Simple natures must be either spiritual or corporeal or 
at once spiritual and corporeal. Finally among the composites there 
are some which the understanding realises to be complex before it 
judges that it can determine anything about them; but there are 
also others which it itself puts together. All these matters will be 
expounded at greater length in the twelfth proposition, where it will 
be shown that there can be no falsity save in the last class—that of 
the compounds made by the understanding itself. ‘This is why we 
further subdivide these into the class of those which are deducible 
from natures which are of the maximum simplicity and are known 
per se, of which we shall treat in the whole of the succeeding book? ; 
and into those which presuppose the existence of others which the 
facts themselves show us to be composite. ‘I'o the exposition of 
these we destine the whole of the third’ book. 

But we shall indeed attempt in the whole of this treatise to 
follow so accurately the paths which conduct men to the knowledge 

2 This begins at Prop. XIII. Of the later propositions we have the titles 


only in the case of XIX—XXI, while the last three are entirely lacking. 
3 Apparently not even begun, 


28 Rules 


of the truth and to make them so easy, that anyone who has — 
perfectly learned the whole of this method, however moderate may 
be his talent, may see that no avenue to the truth is closed to him 
from which everyone else is not also excluded, and that his ignorance 
is due neither to a deficiency in his capacity nor to his method of 
procedure. But as often as he applies his mind to the understanding 
of some matter, he will either be entirely successful, or he will 
realise that success depends upon a certain experiment which he is 
unable to perform, and in that case he will not blame his mental 
capacity although he is compelled to stop short there. Or finally he 
may show that the knowledge desired wholly exceeds the limits of 
the human intelligence ; and consequently he will believe that he is 
none the more ignorant on that account. For to have discovered 
this is knowledge in no less degree than the knowledge of anything 
else. 


Rute IX. 


We ought to give the whole of our attention to the most insignifi- 
cant and most easily mastered facts, and remain a long time in 
contemplation of them until we are accustomed to behold the truth 
clearly and distinctly. 


We have now indicated the two operations of our understanding, 
intuition and deduction, on which alone we have said we must rely 
in the acquisition of knowledge. Let us therefore in this and in the 
following proposition proceed to explain how we can render ourselves 
more skilful in employing them, and at the same time cultivate the 
two principal faculties of the mind, to wit perspicacity, by viewing 
single objects distinctly, and sagacity, by the skilful deduction of 
certain facts from others. 

Truly we shall learn how to employ our mental intuition from 
comparing it with the way in which we employ our eyes. For he 
who attempts to view a multitude of objects with one and the same 
glance, sees none of them distinctly ; and similarly the man who is 
wont to attend to many things at the same time by means of a single 
act of thought is confused in mind. But just as workmen, who are 
employed in very fine and delicate operations and are accustomed 
to direct their eyesight attentively to separate points, by practice 
have acquired a capacity for distinguishing objects of extreme minute- 
ness and subtlety ; so likewise do people who do not allow their 
thought to be distracted by various objects at the same time, but 


For Direction 29 


always concentrate it in attending to the simplest and easiest 
particulars, are clear-headed. 

But it is a common failing of mortals to deem the more difficult 
the fairer; and they often think that they have learned nothing 
when they see a very clear and simple cause for a fact, while at the 
same time they are lost in admiration of certain sublime and 
profound philosophical explanations, even though these for the most 
part are based upon foundations which no one has adequately 
surveyed—a mental disorder which prizes the darkness higher than 
the light. But it is notable that those who have real knowledge 
discern the truth with equal facility whether they evolve it from 
matter that is simple or that is obscure; they grasp each fact by an 
act of thought that is similar, single, and distinct, after they have 
once arrived at the point in question. The whole of the difference 
between the apprehension of the simple and of the obscure lies in the 
route taken, which certainly ought to be longer if it conducts us 
from our initial and most absolute principles to a truth that is 
somewhat remote. 

Everyone ought therefore to accustom himself to grasp in his 
thought at the same time facts that are at ounce so few and so simple, 
that he shall never believe that he has knowledge of anything which 
he does not mentally behold with a distinctness equal to that of the 
objects which he knows most distinctly of all. It is true that some 
men are born with a much greater aptitude for such discernment 
than others, but the mind can be made much more expert at such 
work by art and exercise. But there is one fact which I should here 
emphasize above all others; and that is that everyone should firmly 
persuade himself that none of the sciences, however abstruse, is to be 
deduced from lofty and obscure matters, but that they all proceed 
only from what is easy and more readily understood. 

For example if I wish to examine whether it is possible for a 
natural force to pass at one and the same moment to a spot at 
a distance and yet to traverse the whole space in between, I shall 
not begin to study the force of magnetism or the influence of the 
stars, not even the speed of light, in order to discover whether 
actions such as these occur instantaneously; for the solution of 
this question would be more difficult than the problem proposed, 
I should rather bethink myself of the spatial motions of bodies, 
because nothing in the sphere of motion can be found more obvious 
to sense than this. I shall observe that while a stone cannot pass to 
another place in one and the same moment, because it is a body, yet 


30 Rules 


a force similar to that which moves the stone is communicated 
exactly instantaneously if it passes unencumbered’ from one object to 
another. For instance, if I move one end of a stick of whatever 
length, I easily understand that the power by which that part of the 
stick is moved necessarily moves also all its other parts at the same 
moment, because then the force passes unencumbered and is not 
imprisoned in any body, e.g. a stone, which bears it along. 

In the same way if I wish to understand how one and the same 
simple cause can produce contrary effects at the same time, I shall 
not cite the drugs of the doctors which expel certain humours and 
retain others; nor shall I romance about the moon’s power of warm- 
ing with its light and chilling by means of some occult power. 
I shall rather cast my eyes upon the balance in which the same 
weight raises one arm at the same time as it depresses the other, or 
take some other familiar instance. 


Rute X. 


In order that it may acquire sagacity the mind should be exercised 
in pursuing just those inquiries of which the solution has already been 
Sound by others; and it ought to traverse in a systematic way even 
the most trifling of men’s inventions, though those ought to be 
preferred in which order is explained or implied. 


I confess that my natural disposition is such that I have always 
found, not the following of the arguments of others, but the discovery 
of reasons by my own proper efforts, to yield me the highest intel- 
lectual satisfaction. It was this alone that attracted me, when 
I was still a young man, to the study of science. And whenever 
any book by its title promised some new discovery, before I read 
further, I tried whether I could achieve something similar by means 
of some inborn faculty of invention’, and I was careful lest a 
premature perusal of the book might deprive me of this harmless 
pleasure. So often was I successful that at length I perceived that 
I no longer came upon the truth by proceeding as others commonly 
do, viz. by pursuing vague and blind inquiries and relying more on 
good fortune than on skill. I saw that by long experience I had dis- 
covered certain rules which are of no little help in this inquiry, and 
which I used afterwards in devising further rules. Thus it was 
that I diligently elaborated the whole of this method and came to 


1 nuda. 2? sagacitatem. 


For Direction 31 


the conclusion that I had followed that. plan of study which was the 
most fruitful of all. 

But because not all minds are so much inclined to puzzle things 
out unaided, this proposition announces that we ought not imme- 
diately to occupy ourselves with the more difficult and arduous 
problems, but first should discuss those disciplines! which are easiest 
and simplest, and those above all in which order most prevails. 
Such are the arts of the craftsmen who weave webs and tapestry, or 
of women who embroider or use in the same work threads with 
infinite modification of texture. With these are ranked all play 
with numbers and everything that belongs to Arithmetic, and the 
like. It is wonderful how all these studies discipline our mental 
powers, provided that we do not know the solutions from others, but 
invent them ourselves. For since nothing in these arts remains 
hidden, and they are wholly adjusted to the capacity of human 
cognition, they reveal to us with the greatest distinctness innumer- 
able orderly systems, all different from each other, but none the less 
conforming to rule, in the proper observance of which systems of 
order consists the whole of human sagacity. 

It was for this reason that we insisted that method must be 
employed in studying those matters ; and this in those arts of less 
importance consists wholly in the close observation of the order 
which is found in the object studied, whether that be an order exist- 
ing in the thing itself, or due to subtle human devising. Thus if we 
wish to make out some writing in which the meaning is disguised by 
the use of a cypher, though the order here fails to present itself, we 
yet make up an imaginary one, for the purpose both of testing all the 
conjectures we may make about single letters, words or sentences, 
and in order to arrange them so that when we sum them up we shall 
be able to tell all the inferences that we can deduce from them. We 
must principally beware of wasting our time in such cases by 
proceeding at random and unmethodically; for even though the 
solution can often be found without method, and by lucky people 
sometimes quicker, yet such procedure is likely to enfeeble the 
faculties and to make people accustomed to the trifling and the 
childish, so that for the future their minds will stick on the surface 
of things, incapable of penetrating beyond it. But meanwhile we 
must not fall into the error of those who, having devoted themselves 
solely to what is lofty and serious, find that after many years of 


1 artes, 


32 Rules 


toil they have acquired, not the profound knowledge they hoped for, 
but only mental confusion. Hence we must give ourselves practice 
first in those easier disciplines, but methodically, so that by open 
and familiar ways we may ceaselessly accustom ourselves to penetrate 
as easily as though we were at play into the very heart of these 
subjects. For by this means we shall afterwards gradually feel (and 
in a space of time shorter than we could at all hope for) that 
we are in a position with equal facility to deduce from evident 
first principles many propositions which at first sight are highly 
intricate and difficult. 

It may perhaps strike some with surprise that here, where we are 
discussing how to improve our power of deducing one truth from 
another, we have omitted all the precepts of the dialecticians, by 
which they think to control the human reason. They prescribe 
certain formulae of argument, which lead to a conclusion with such 
necessity that, if the reason commits itself to their trust, even 
though it slackens its interest and no longer pays a heedful and 
close attention to the very proposition inferred, it can nevertheless 
at the same time come to a sure conclusion by virtue of the form of 
the argument alone. Exactly so; the fact is that frequently we 
notice that often the truth escapes away out of these imprisoning 
bonds, while the people themselves who have used them in order to 
capture it remain entangled in them. Other people are not so 
frequently entrapped; and it is a matter of experience that the 
most ingenious sophisms hardly ever impose on anyone who uses his 
unaided reason, while they are wont to deceive the sophists them- 
selves, 

Wherefore as we wish here to be particularly careful lest our 
reason should go on holiday while we are examining the truth of any 
matter, we reject those formulae as being opposed to our project, 
and look out rather for all the aids by which our thought may be 
kept attentive, as will be shown in the sequel. But, to say a few 
words more, that it may appear still more evident that this style of 
argument contributes nothing at all to the discovery of the truth, 
we must note that the Dialecticians are unable to devise any 
syllogism which has a true conclusion, unless they have first secured 
the material out of which to construct it, ie. unless they have 
already ascertained the very truth which is deduced in that syllogism. 
Whence it is clear that from a formula of this kind they can gather 
nothing that is new, and hence the ordinary Dialectic is quite value- 
less for those who desire to investigate the truth of things, Its only 


For Direction 33 


possible use is to serve to explain at times more easily to others the 
truths we have already ascertained ; hence it should be transferred 
from Philosophy to Rhetoric. 


Rois XI. 


Tf, after we have recognized intuitively a number of simple 
truths, we wish to draw any inference from them, it is useful to run 
them over in a continuous and uninterrupted act of thought, to reflect 
upon their relations to one another, and to grasp together distinctly 
a number of these propositions so far as is possible at the same time. 
For this is a way of making our knowledge much more certain, and 
of greatly increasing the power of the mind. 


Here we have an opportunity of expounding more clearly what 
has been already said of mental intuition in the third and seventh 
rules. In one passage? we opposed it to deduction, while in the 
other we distinguished it from enumeration only, which we defined 
as an inference drawn from many and diverse things*. But the 
simple deduction of one thing from another, we said in the same 
passage‘, was effected by intuition. 

It was necessary to do this, because two things are requisite for 
mental intuition. Firstly the proposition intuited must be clear 
and distinct; secondly it must be grasped in its totality at the same 
time and not successively. As for deduction, if we are thinking of 
how the process works, as we were in Rule III, it appears not to 
occur all at the same time, but involves a sort of movement on the 
part of our mind when it infers one thing from another. We were 
justified therefore in distinguishing deduction in that rule from 
intuition. But if we wish to consider deduction as an accomplished 
fact, as we did in what we said relatively to the seventh rule, then it 
no longer designates a movement, but rather the completion of a 
movement, and therefore we suppose that it is presented to us by 
intuition when it is simple and clear, but not when it is complex 
and involved. When this is the case we give it the name of 
enumeration or induction, because it cannot then be grasped as a 
whole at the same time by the mind, and its certainty depends to 
some extent on the memory, in which our judgments about the 
various matters enumerated must be retained, if from their assem- 
blage a single fact is to be inferred. 


1 Cf, pp. 5, 19. 2 Cf, p. 8. 3 Cf. p. 20. ‘Ch p. 7% 


34 Rules 


All these distinctions had to be made if we were to elucidate 
this rule. We treated of mental intuition solely in Rule IX; the 
tenth dealt with enumeration alone; but now the present rule 
explains how these two operations aid and complete each other. In 
doing so they seem to grow into a single process by virtue of a sort 
of motion of thought which has an attentive and vision-like know- 
ledge of one fact and yet can pass at the very same moment to 
another. 

Now to this co-operation we assign a two-fold advantage. Firstly 
it promotes a more certain knowledge of the conclusion with which 
we are concerned, and secondly it makes the mind readier to discover 
fresh truths. In fact the memory, on which we have said depends 
the certainty of the conclusions which embrace more than we can 
grasp in a single act of intuition, though weak and liable to fail us, 
can be renewed and made stronger by this continuous and constantly 
repeated process of thought. Thus if diverse mental acts have led 
me to know what is the relation between a first and a second 
magnitude, next between the second and a third, then between the 
third and a fourth, and finally the fourth and a fifth, that need not 
lead me to see what is the relation between the first and the fifth, 
nor can I deduce it from what I already know, unless I remember 
all the other relations. Hence what I have to do is to run over 
them all repeatedly in my mind, until I pass so quickly from the 
first to the last that practically no step is left to the memory, and 
I seem to view the whole all at the same time. 

Everyone must see that this plan does much to counteract the 
slowness of the mind and to enlarge its capacity. But in addition 
we must note that the greatest advantage of this rule consists in 
the fact that, by reflecting on the mutual dependence of two pro- 
positions, we acquire the habit of distinguishing at a glance what is 
more or less relative, and what the steps are by which a relative 
fact is related to something absolute. For example, if I run over a 
number of magnitudes that are in continued proportion, I shall 
reflect upon all the following facts: viz. that the mental act is 
entirely similar—and not easier in the one case, more difficult in 
another—by which I grasp the relation between the first and the 
second, the second and third, third and fourth, and so on; while 
yet it is more difficult for me to conceive what the relation of the 
second is to the first and to the third at the same time, and much 
more difficult still to tell its relation to the first and fourth, and so 
on. These considerations then lead me to see why, if the first and 


For Direction 35 


second alone are given, I can easily find the third and fourth, and all 
the others; the reason being that this process requires only single 
aud distinct acts of thought. But if only the first and the third 
are given, it is not so easy to recognize the mean, because this can 
only be accomplished by means of a mental operation in which two 
of the previous acts are involved. If the first and the fourth 
magnitudes alone are given, it is still more difficult to present to 
ourselves the two means, because here three acts of thought come 
in simultaneously. It would seem likely as a consequence that it 
would be even more difficult to discover the three means between 
the first and the fifth. The reason why this is not so is due toa 
fresh fact ; viz. even though here four mental acts come together 
they can yet be disjoined, since four can be divided by another 
number. Thus I can discover the third by itself from the first and 
fifth, then the second from the first and third, and so on. If one 
accustoms one’s self to reflect on these and similar problems, as often 
as a new question arises, at once one recognizes what produces its 
special difficulty, and what is the simplest method of dealing with 
all cases ; and to be able to do so is a valuable aid to the discovery 
of the truth. 


Rue XII. 


Finally we ought to employ all the aids of understanding, imagi- 
nation, sense and memory, first for the purpose of having a distinct 
intuition of simple propositions ; partly also in order to compare the 
propositions to be proved with those we know already, so that we may 
be able to recognize their truth; partly also in order to discover the 
truths, which should be compared with each other so that nothing may 
be left lacking on which human industry may exercise itself. 


This rule states the conclusion of all that we said before, and 
shows in general outline what had to be explained in detail, in this 
wise. 

In the matter of the cognition of facts two things alone have to 
be considered, ourselves who know and the objects themselves which 
are to be known. Within us there are four faculties only which we 
can use for this purpose, viz. understanding, imagination, sense and 
memory. The understanding is indeed alone capable of perceiving 
the truth, but yet it ought to be aided by imagination, sense and 
memory, lest perchance we omit any expedient that lies within our 
power. On the side of the facts to be known it is enough to 


36 Rules 


examine three things; first that which presents itself spontaneously, 
secondly how we learn one thing by means of another, and thirdly 
what (truths) are deduced from what. This enumeration appears to 
me to be complete, and to omit nothing to which our human powers 
can apply. : 

I should have liked therefore to have turned to the first point 
and to have explained in this passage, what the human mind is, 
what body, and how it is ‘informed’ by mind ; what the faculties in 
the complex whole are which serve the attainment of knowledge, 
and what the agency of each is. But this place’ seems hardly to 
give me sufficient room to take in all the matters which must be 
premised before the truth in this subject can become clear to all. 
For my desire is in all that I write to assert nothing controversial 
unless I have already stated the very reasons which have brought 
me to that conclusion, and by which I think that others also may 
be convinced. 

But because at present I am prevented from doing this, it will 
suffice me to explain as briefly as possible that mode of viewing 
everything within us which is directed towards the discovery of 
truth, which most promotes my purpose. You need not believe 
that the facts are so unless you like. But what prevents us follow- 
ing these suppositions, if it appears that they do no harm to the 
truth, but only render it all much clearer? In Geometry you do 
precisely the same thing when you make certain assumptions about 
a quantity which do not in any way weaken the force of your 
arguments, though often our experience of its nature in Physics 
makes us judge of it quite otherwise. 

Let us then conceive of the matter as follows :—all our external 
senses, in so far as they are part of the body, and despite the fact 
that we direct them towards objects, so manifesting activity, viz. a 
movement in space, nevertheless properly speaking perceive in virtue 
of passivity alone, just in the way that wax receives an impression? 
from a seal. And it should not be thought that all we mean to 
assert is an analogy between the two. We ought to believe that the 
way is entirely the same in which the exterior figure of the sentient 
body is really modified by the object, as that in which the shape of 
the surface of the wax is altered by the seal. This has to be 
admitted not only in the case of the figure, hardness, roughness, etc. 
of a body which we perceive by touch, but even when we are aware 


1 <locus> is added in another hand in the Hanover ms. 
2 figuram, 


For Direction 37 


of heat, cold, and the like qualities. It is likewise with the other 
senses, The first opaque structure in the eye receives the figure 
impressed upon it by the light with its various colours; and the 
first membrane? in the ears, the nose, and the tongue that resists 
the further passage of the object, thus also acquires a new figure 
from the sound, the odour, and the savour, as the case may be. 

It is exceedingly helpful to conceive all those matters thus, for 
nothing falls more readily under sense than figure, which can be 
touched and seen. Moreover that nothing false issues from this 
supposition more than from any other, is proved by the fact that the 
concept of figure is so common and simple that it is involved in 
every object of sense. Thus whatever you suppose colour to be, 
you cannot deny that it is extended and in consequence possessed 
of figure. Is there then any disadvantage, if, while taking care not 
to admit any new entity uselessly, or rashly to imagine that it exists, 
and not denying indeed the beliefs of others concerning colour, but 
merely abstracting from every other feature except that it possesses 
the nature of figure, we conceive the diversity existing between 
white, blue, and red, etc., as being like the difierence between the 
following similar figures? The same argument applies to all cases ; 


Waa 
AVE 
yeaah 
Vad ecaa 


for it is certain that the infinitude of figures suffices to express all 
the differences in sensible things. 

Secondly we must believe that while the external sense is 
stimulated? by the object, the figure which is conveyed to it is 
carried off to some other part of the body, that part called the 
common sense’, in the very same instant and without the passage 


1 cutem. 

2 movetur. 4 

3 gensus communis. This theory is indistinguishable from one interpreta- 
tion of the Aristotelian doctrine of a central sense with a central organ in the 


body. 


38 Rules 


of any real entity from one to the other. It is in exactly the same 
manner that now when I write I recognize that at the very moment 
when the separate characters are being written down on the paper, 
not only is the lower end of the pen moved, but every motion in 
that part is simultaneously shared by the whole pen. All these 
diverse motions are traced by the upper end of the pen likewise in 
the air, although I do not conceive of anything real passing from 
the one extremity to the other. Now who imagines that the con- 
nection between the different parts of the human body is slighter 
than that between the ends of a pen, and what simpler way of 
expressing this could be found? 

Thirdly we must believe that the common sense has a function 
like that of a seal, and impresses on the fancy or imagination, as 
though on wax, those very figures and ideas which come uncon- 
taminated and without bodily admixture from the external senses. 
But this fancy is a genuine part of the body, of sufficient size to 
allow its different parts to assume various figures in distinctness 
from each other and to let those parts acquire the practice of 
retaining the impressions for some time. In the latter case we 
give the faculty the name of memory. 

In the fourth place we must conceive that the motor force or 
the nerves themselves derive their origin from the brain, in which 
the fancy is located, and that the fancy moves them in various ways, 
just as the external senses act on the common sense, or the lower 
extremity of the pen moves the whole pen. This example also 
shows how the fancy can be the cause of many motions in the 
nerves, motions of which, however, it does not have the images 
stamped upon it, possessing only certain other images from which 
these latter follow. Just so the whole pen does not move exactly 
in the way in which its lower end does; nay the greater part seems 
to have a motion that is quite different from and contrary to that 
of the other. This lets us understand how all the motions of the 
other animals can come about, though we can ascribe to them no 
knowledge at all, but only fancy of a purely corporeal kind. We 
can explain also how in ourselves all those operations occur which 
we perform without any aid from the reason. 

Finally and in the fifth place, we must think that that power by 
which we are properly said to know things, is purely spiritual, and 
not less distinct from every part of the body than blood from bone, 
or hand from eye. It is a single agency, whether it receives 
impressions from the common sense simultaneously with the fancy, 


For Direction 39 


or applies itself to those that are preserved in the memory, or forms 
new ones. Often the imagination is so beset by these impressions 
that it is unable at the same time to receive ideas from the common 
sense, or to transfer them to the motor mechanism in the way 
befitting its purely corporeal character. In all these operations 
this cognitive power is at one time passive, at another active, and 
resembles now the seal and now the wax. But the resemblance on 
this occasion is only one of analogy, for among corporeal things 
there is nothing wholly similar to this faculty. It is one and the 
same agency which, when applying itself along with the imagination 
to the common sense, is said to see, touch, etc.; if applying itself to 
the imagination alone in so far as that is endowed with diverse 
impressions, it is said to remember ; if it turn to the imagination in 
order to create fresh impressions, it is said to imagine or conceive ; 
finally if it act alone it is said to understand. How this latter 
function takes place I shall explain at greater length in the proper 
place. Nowit is the same faculty that in correspondence with those 
various functions is called either pure understanding, or imagination, 
or memory, or sense. It is properly called mind! when it either 
forms new ideas in the fancy, or attends to those already formed. 
We consider it as capable of the above various operations, and this 
distinction between those terms must in the sequel be borne in mind. 
But after having grasped these facts the attentive reader will gather 
what help is to be expected from each particular faculty, and dis- 
cover how far human effort can avail to supplement the deficiencies 
of our mental powers. 

For, since the understanding can be stimulated by the imagina- 
tion, or on the contrary act on it; and seeing that the imagination 
can act on the senses by means of the motor power applying them 
to objects, while they on the contrary can act on it, depicting on it 
the images of bodies; considering on the other hand that the 
memory, at least that which is corporeal and similar to that of the 
brutes, is in no respect distinct from the imagination ; we come to 
the sure conclusion that, if the understanding deal with matters in 
which there is nothing corporeal or similar to the corporeal, it 
cannot be helped by those faculties, but that, on the contrary, to 
prevent their hampering it, the senses must be banished and the 
imagination as far as possible divested of every distinct impression. 
But if the understanding proposes to examine something that can 


1 ingenium. 


40 Rules 


be referred to the body, we must form the idea of that thing as 
distinctly as possible in the imagination ; and in order to effect this 
with greater ease, the thing itself which this idea is to represent 
must be exhibited to the external senses. Now when the under- 
standing wishes to have a distinct intuition of particular facts a 
multitude of objects is of no use to it. But if it wishes to deduce 
one thing from a number of objects, as often has to be done, we 
must banish from the ideas of the objects presented whatsoever 
does not require present attention, in order that the remainder may 
be the more readily retained in memory. In the same way it is not 
on those occasions that the objects themselves ought to be presented 
to the external senses, but rather certain compendious abbreviations 
which, provided they guard the memory against lapse, are the 
handier the shorter they are. Whosoever observes all these recom- 
mendations, will, in my opinion, omit nothing that relates to the 
first part of our rule. 

Now we must approach the second part of our task. That was 
to distinguish accurately the notions of simple things from those 
which are built up out of them; to see in both cases where falsity 
might come in, so that we might be on our guard and give our 
attention to those matters only in which certainty was possible. 
But here, as before, we must make certain assumptions which 
probably are not agreed on by all. It matters little, however, 
though they are not believed to be more real than those imaginary 
circles by means of which Astronomers describe their phenomena, 
provided that you employ them to aid you in discerning in each 
particular case what sort of knowledge is true and what false. 

Finally, then, we assert that relatively to our knowledge single 
things should be taken in an order different from that in which we 
should regard them when considered in their more real nature. 
Thus, for example, if we consider a body as having extension and 
figure, we shall indeed admit that from the point of view of the 
thing itself it is one and simple. For we cannot from that point of 
view regard it as compounded of corporeal nature, extension and 
figure, since these elements have never existed in isolation from 
each other. But relatively to our understanding we call it a 
compound constructed out of these three natures, becayse we have 
thought of them separately before we were able to judge that all 
three were found in one and the same subject. Hence here we shall 
treat of things only in relation to our understanding’s awareness of 
them, and shall call those only simple, the cognition of which is so 


For Direction Al 


clear and so distinct that they cannot be analysed by the mind into 
others more distinctly known. Such are figure, extension, motion, 
etc.; all others we conceive to be in some way compounded out of 
these. This principle must be taken so universally as not even to 
leave out those objects which we sometimes obtain by abstraction 
from the simple natures themselves. This we do, for example, when 
we say that figure is the limit of an extended thing, conceiving by 
the term limit something more universal than by the term figure, 
since we can talk of a limit of duration, a limit of motion, and so on. 
But our contention is right, for then, even though we find the 
meaning of limit by abstracting it from figure, nevertheless it should 
not for that reason seem simpler than figure. Rather, since it is 
predicated of other things, as for example of the extreme bounds of 
a space of time or of a motion, etc., things which are wholly different 
from figure, it must be abstracted from those natures also; con- 
sequently it is something compounded out of a number of natures 
wholly diverse, of which it can be only ambiguously predicated, 
Our second assertion is that those things which relatively to our 
understanding’ are called simple, are either purely intellectual? or 
purely material, or else common both to intellect and to matter. 
Those are purely intellectual which our understanding’ apprehends by 
means of a certain inborn light, and without the aid of any corporeal 
image. That a number of such things exist is certain; and it is 
impossible to construct any corporeal idea which shall represent to 
us what the act of knowing is, what doubt is, what ignorance, and 
likewise what the action of the will is which it is possible to term 
volition, and so with other things. Yet we have a genuine know- 
ledge of all these things, and know them so easily that in order to 
recognize them it is enough to be endowed with reason. Those 
things are purely material which we discern only in bodies; e.g. 
figure, extension, motion, etc. Finally those must be styled common 
which are ascribed now to corporeal things, now to spirits, without 
distinction. Such are existence, unity, duration and the like. To 
this group also we must ascribe those common notions which are, as 
it were, bonds for connecting together the other simple natures, and 
on whose evidence all the inferences which we obtain by reasoning 
depend. The following are examples :—things that are the same as 
a third thing are the same as one another. So too:—things which 
do not bear the same relation to a third thing, have some diversity 


1 intellectus. 2 intellectuales. 


42 Rules 


from each other, etc. As a matter of fact these common notions 
can be discerned by the understanding either unaided’ or when it is 
aware of the images of material things. 

But among these simple natures we must rank the privative and 
negative terms corresponding to them in so far as our intelligence 
grasps them. For it is quite as genuinely an act of knowledge by 
which I am intuitively aware of what nothing is, or an instant, or 
rest, as that by which I know what existence is, or lapse of time, or 
motion. This way of viewing the matter will be helpful in enabling 
us henceforth to say that all the rest of what we know is formed by 
composition out of these simple natures. Thus, for example, if 
I pronounce the judgment that some figure is not moving, I shall 
say that in a certain sense my idea’ is a complex of figure and rest; 
and so in other cases. 

Thirdly we assert that all these simple natures are known per se 
and are wholly free from falsity. It will be easy to show this, 
provided we distinguish that faculty of our understanding by which 
it has intuitive awareness of things and knows them, from that 
by which it judges, making use of affirmation and denial. For we 
may imagine ourselves to be ignorant of things which we really 
know, for example on such occasions as when we believe that in such 
things, over and above what we have present to us or attain to by 
thinking, there is something else hidden from us, and when this 
belief of ours is false. Whence it is evident that we are in error if 
we judge that any one of these simple natures is not completely 
known by us. For if our mind attains to the least acquaintance 
with it, as must be the case, since we are assumed to pass some 
judgment on it, this fact alone makes us infer that we know it 
completely. For otherwise it could not be said to be simple, but 
must be complex—a compound of that which is present in our percep- 
tion of it, and that of which we think we are ignorant. 

In the fourth place we point out that the union of these things 
one with another is either necessary or contingent. It is necessary 
when one is so implied in the concept of another in a confused sort 
of way that we cannot conceive either distinctly, if our thought 
assigns to them separateness from each other. Thus figure is 
conjoined with extension, motion with duration or time, and so on, 
because it is impossible to conceive of a figure that has no extension, 
nor of a motion that has no duration. Thus likewise if I say 


1 puro. 2 cogitatio, 


For Direction 43 


‘four and three are seven,’ this union is necessary. For we do not 
conceive the number seven distinctly unless we include in it the 
numbers three and four in some confused way. In the same way 
whatever is demonstrated of figures or numbers is necessarily united 
with that of which it is affirmed. Further, this necessity is not 
restricted to the field of sensible matters alone. The conclusion is 
necessary also in such a case—If Socrates says he doubts everything, 
it follows necessarily that he knows this at least—that he doubts. 
Likewise he knows that something can be either true or false, and so 
on, for all those consequences necessarily attach to the nature of 
doubt. The union, however, is contingent in those cases where the 
things are conjoined by no inseparable bond. Thus when we say a 
body is animate, a man is clothed, etc. Likewise many things are 
often necessarily united with one another, though most people, not 
noticing what their true relation is, reckons them among those that 
are contingently connected. As example, I give the following 
propositions :—‘I exist, therefore God exists’: also ‘I know, there- 
fore I have a mind distinct from my body, etc. Finally we must 
note that very many necessary propositions become contingent when 
converted. Thus though from the fact that I exist I may infallibly 
conclude that God exists, it is not for that reason allowable to affirm 
that because God exists I also exist. 

Fifthly we remark that no knowledge is at any time possible of 
anything beyond those simple natures and what may be called their 
intermixture or combination with each other. Indeed it is often 
easier to be aware of several of them in union with each other, than 
to separate one of them from the others. For, to illustrate, I am 
able to know what a triangle is, though I have never thought that in 
that knowledge was contained the knowledge of an angle, a line, the 
number three, figure, extension, etc. But that does not prevent me 
from saying that the nature of the triangle is composed of all these 
natures, and that they are better known than the triangle since they 
are the elements which we comprehend in it. It is possible also 
that in the triangle many other features are involved which escape 
our notice, such as the magnitude of the angles, which are equal to 
two right angles, and the innumerable relations which exist between 
the sides and the angles, or the size of the area, etc. 

Sixthly, we say that those natures which we call composite are 
known by us, either because experience shows us what they are, or 
because we ourselves are responsible for their composition. Matter 
of experience consists of what we perceive by sense, what we hear 


44 Rules 


from the lips of others, and generally whatever reaches our under- 
standing either from external sources or from that contemplation 
which our mind directs backwards on itself. Here it must be noted 
that no direct experience can ever deceive the understanding if it 
restrict its attention accurately to the object presented to it, just as 
it is given to it either at firsthand’ or by means of an image; and 
if it moreover refrain from judging that the imagination faithfully 
reports the objects of the senses, or that the senses take on the true 
forms of things, or in fine that external things always are as they 
appear to be; for in all these judgments we are exposed to error. 
This happens, for example, when we believe as fact what is merely a 
story that someone has told us ; or when one who is ill with jaundice 
judges everything to be yellow because his eye is tinged with yellow. 
So finally, too, when the imagination is diseased, as in cases of 
melancholia, and a man thinks that his own disorderly fancies 
represent real things. But the understanding of a wise man will not 
be deceived by these fancies, since he will judge that whatever 
comes to him from his imagination is really depicted in it, but yet 
will never assert that the object has passed complete and without 
any alteration from the external world to his senses, and from his 
senses to his imagination, unless he has some previous ground for 
believing this. Moreover we ourselves are responsible for the com- 
position of the things present to our understanding when we believe 
that there is something in them which our mind never experiences 
when exercising direct perception®. Thus if a man suffering 
from jaundice persuades himself that the things he sees are yellow, 
this thought of his will be composite, consisting partly of what his 
imagination represents to him, and partly of what he assumes on his 
own account, namely that the colour looks yellow not owing to the 
defect in his eye, but because the things he sees really are yellow. 
Whence the conclusion comes that we can go wrong only when the 
things we believe are in some way compounded by ourselves. 
Seventhly, this compounding can come about in other ways, 
namely by impulse, by conjecture, or by deduction. Impulse sways 
the formation of judgments about things on the part of those whom 
their own initiative constrains to believe something, though they can 
assign no reason for their belief, but are merely determined either by 
some higher Power, or by their own free will, or by their fanciful 


1 prout illam habet vel in se ipso. 
2 This translation is doubtful. The Latin might at least equally well mean 
‘which our mind perceives immediately without any experience,’ 


For Direction 45 


disposition. The first cause is never a source of error, the second 
rarely, the third almost always. But a consideration of the first 
does not concern us here because it does not fall within the province 
of human skill’, The working of conjecture is shown, for ex- 
ample, in this: water which is at a greater distance from the 
centre of the globe than earth, is likewise less dense substance, and 
likewise the air which is above the water, is still rarer; hence we 
hazard the guess that above the air nothing exists but a very pure 
aether, which is much rarer than air itself. Moreover nothing that 
we construct in this way really deceives us, if we merely judge it to 
be probable and never affirm it to be true; in fact it makes us better 
instructed. 

Deduction is thus left to us as the only means of putting things 
together so as to be sure of their truth. Yet in it too there may be 
many defects. Thus if, in this space which is full of air, there is 
nothing to be perceived either by sight, touch, or any other sense, 
we conclude that the space is empty, we are in error, and our 
synthesis of the nature of a vacuum with that of this space is wrong. 
This is the result as often as we judge that we can deduce anything 
universal and necessary from a particular or contingent fact. But it 
is within our power to avoid this error, if, for example, we never 
interconnect any objects unless we are directly aware that the 
conjunction of the one with the other is wholly necessary. Thus we 
are justified if we deduce that nothing can have figure which has not 
extension, from the fact that figure and extension are necessarily 
conjoined. 

From all these considerations we conclude firstly—that we have 
shown distinctly and, as we judge, by an adequate enumeration, what 
we were originally able to express only confusedly and in a rough 
and ready way. This was that mankind has no road towards certain 
knowledge open to it, save those of self-evident intuition and neces- 
sary deduction; further, that we have shown what those simple 
natures are of which we spoke in the eighth proposition. It is also 
quite clear that this mental vision extends both to all those simple 
natures, and to the knowledge of the necessary connections between 
them, and finally to everything else which the understanding 
accurately experiences either at first hand? or in the imagination. 
Deduction, however, will be further treated in what follows. 

Our second conclusion is that in order to know these simple 


2 artem. 2 in se ipso. 


46 Rules 


natures no pains need be taken, because they are of themselves 
sufficiently well known. Application comes in only in isclating 
them from each other and scrutinizing them separately with steadfast 
mental gaze. There is no one whose intelligence is so dull as not to 
perceive that when he is seated he in some way differs from what he 
is when standing. But not everyone separates with equal distinct- 
ness the nature of position! from the other elements contained in the 
cognition in question, or is able to assert that in this case nothing 
alters save the position. Now it is not without reason that we call 
attention to the above doctrine ; for the learned have a way of being 
so clever as to contrive to render themselves blind to things that are 
in their own nature evident, and known by the simplest peasant. 
This happens when they try to explain by something more evident 
those things that are self-evident. For what they do is either to 
explain something else, or nothing at all. Who, for instance, does 
not perfectly see what that is, whatsoever it may be, in respect of 
which alteration occurs when we change position®? But is there 
anyone who would grasp that very thing when he was told that 
place? is the surface of the body surrounding us?* This would be 
strange seeing that that surface can change though I stay still and do 
not change my place, or that, on the contrary, it can so move along 
with me that, although it continues to surround me, I am neverthe- 
less no longer in the same place. Do not these people really seem 
to use magic words which have a hidden force that eludes the grasp 
of human apprehension? They define motion, a fact with which 
everyone is quite familiar, as the actualisation oy what exists in 
potentiality, in so far as it is potential! Now who understands 
these words? And who at the same time does not know what 
motion is? Will not everyone admit that those philosophers have 
been trying to find a knot ina bulrush? We must therefore main- 
tain that no definitions are to be used in explaining things of this 
kind lest we should take what is complex in place of what is simple. 
We must be content to isolate them from each other, and to give 
them, each of us, our individual attention, studying them with that 
degree of mental illumination which each of us possesses. 

Our third conclusion is that the whole of human knowledge 
consists in a distinct perception of the way in which those simple 
natures combine in order to build up other objects. It is important 
to note this ; because whenever some difficulty is brought forward 


2 situs, * locum, 8 Cf. reply to VI. Obj. (7). 


For Direction 47 


for examination, almost everyone is brought to a standstill at the 
very outset, being in doubt as to the nature of the notions he ought 
to call to mind, and believing that he has to search for some new 
kind of fact previously unknown to him. Thus, if the question is, 
‘what is the nature of the magnet?’ people like that at once pro- 
gnosticate difficulty and toil in the inquiry, and dismissing from mind 
every well-known fact, fasten on whatsoever is most difficult, vaguely 
hoping that by ranging over the fruitless field where multifarious 
causes lie, they will find something fresh. But he who reflects that 
there can be nothing to know in the magnet which does not consist 
of certain simple natures evident in themselves, will have no doubt 
how to proceed. He will first collect all the observations with 
which experience can supply him about this stone, and from these 
he will next try to deduce the character of that inter-mixture of 
simple natures which is necessary to produce all those effects which 
he has seen to take place in connection with the magnet. This 
achieved, he can boldly assert that he has discovered the real nature 
of the magnet in so far as human intelligence and the given 
experimental observations can supply him with this knowledge. 
Finally, it follows fourthly from what has been said that we 
must not fancy that one kind of knowledge is more obscure than 
another, since all knowledge is of the same nature throughout, and 
consists solely in combining what is self-evident. This is a fact 
recognized by very few. People have their minds already occupied 
by the contrary opinion, and the more bold among them, indeed, 
allow themselves to uphold their private conjectures as though they 
were sound demonstrations, and in matters of which they are wholly 
ignorant feel premonitions of the vision of truths which seem to 
present themselves through a cloud. These they have no hesitation 
in propounding, attaching to their concepts certain words by means 
of which they are wont to carry on long and reasoned out discus- 
sions, but which in reality neither they nor their audience understand. 
On the other hand more diffident people often refrain from many 
investigations that are quite easy and are in the first degree 
necessary to life, merely because they think themselves unequal to 
the task. They believe that these matters can be discovered by 
others who are endowed with better mental faculties, and embrace 
the opinion of those in whose authority they have most confidence. 
We assert fifthly’ that by deduction we can get only things from 


1 So Leibniz’s us. The Amsterdam edition has eighthly which carries on 
the previous list of assertions. 


48 Rules 


words, canse from effect, or effect from cause, like from like, or parts 
or the whole itself from the parts...... % 

For the rest, in order that there may be no want of coherence in 
our series of precepts, we divide the whole matter of knowledge into 
simple propositions and ‘questions.’ In connection with simple 
propositions the only precepts we give are those which prepare our 
cognitive faculties for fixing distinctly before them any objects, 
whatsoever they are, and scrutinizing them with keen iutelligence, 
since propositions of this type do not arise as the result of inquiry, 
but present themselves to us spontaneously. This part of our task 
we have undertaken in the first twelve rules, in which, we believe, we 
have displayed everything which, in our opinion, can facilitate the 
exercise of our reason. But as to ‘questions’ some of them can be 
perfectly well comprehended, even though we are ignorant of their 
solution; these we shall treat by themselves in the next twelve 
rules. Finally there are others, whose meaning is not quite clear, 
and these we reserve for the last twelve. This division has been 
made advisedly, both in order to avoid mentioning anything which 
presupposes an acquaintance with what follows, and also for the 
purpose of unfolding first what we feel to be most important first to 
inculcate in cultivating the mental powers. Among the ‘questions’ 
whose meaning is quite plain, we must to begin with note that we 
place those only in which we perceive three things distinctly ; to 
wit, the marks by which we can identify what we are looking for 
when it occurs ; what precisely the fact is from which our answer 
ought to be deduced ; and how it is to be proved that these (the 
ground and its consequence) so depend one on another that it is 
impossible for either to change while the other remains unchanged. 
In this way we shall have all the premisses we require, and the only 
thing remaining to be shown will be how to discover the conclusion. 
This will not be a matter of deducing some one fact from a single 
simple matter (we have already said that we can do this without the 
help of rules), but of disentangling so skilfully some one fact that is 
conditioned by a number of others which all involve one another, that 
in recognizing it there shall be no need to call upon a higher 
degree of mental power than in making the simplest inference. 
‘Questions’ of this kind, being highly abstract and occurring almost 
exclusively in Arithmetic and Geometry, seem to the inexperienced 


; There seems to be a break here. For a continuation of the doctrine cf, 
p. 51. 

2 Quaestiones. Inverted commas have been employed wherever it is im- 
portant to remember Descartes’ special technical of this term. 


For Direction 49 


of little value. But I warn them that people ought to busy and 
exercise themselves a long time in learning this art, who desire to 
master the subsequent portions of this method, in which all the 
other types of ‘question’ are treated. 


Rue XIII. 


Once a ‘ question’ is perfectly understood, we must free it of every 
conception superfluous to its meaning, state it in its simplest terms, 
and, having recourse to an enumeration, split it up into the various 
sections beyond which analysis cannot go in minuteness. 


This is the only respect in which we imitate the Dialecticians ; 
just as they, in teaching their doctrine of the forms of syllogism, 
assume that the terms or matter of their syllogisms are already 
known, so also we on this occasion lay it down as a prerequisite that 
the question to be solved should be perfectly understood. But we 
do not, as they, distinguish two extremes and a middle term. The 
following is the way in which we look at the whole matter. Firstly, 
in every ‘question’ there must be something of which we are ignorant; 
otherwise there is no use asking the question. Secondly, this very 
matter must be designated in some way or other; otherwise there 
would be nothing to determine us to investigate it rather than 
anything else. Thirdly, it can only be so designated by the aid of 
something else which is already known. All three conditions are 
realised even in questions that are not fully understood. Thus if 
the problem be the nature of the magnet, we already know what is 
meant by the two words ‘magnet’ and ‘nature,’ and this knowledge 
determines us to seek one sort of answer rather than another, and 
so on. But over and above this, if the question is to be perfectly 
stated, we require that it should be wholly determinate, so that we 
shall have nothing more to seek for than what can be inferred from 
the data. For example some one might set me the question, what 
is to be inferred about the nature of the magnet from that set of 
experiments precisely which Gilbert’ asserts he has performed, be 
they trustworthy or not. So again the question may be, what my 
conclusion is as to the nature of sound, founding my judgment 
merely on the precise fact that the three strings A, B, and C give 
out an identical? sound, when by hypothesis B, though twice as 
thick as A, but not longer, is kept in tension by a weight that is 


1 Gilbertus, presumably the English physicist W. Gilbert 1540-1603 author 
of De Magneto (1600). 
2 aequalem. 


50 Rules 


twice as heavy; while C, though no thicker than A, but merely 
twice as long, is nevertheless kept in tension by a weight four times 
as heavy. Other illustrations might be given; but they all make it 
quite clear how all imperfectly expressed ‘questions’ may be reduced 
to others whose meaning is quite clear, as I shall show at greater 
length in the proper place. We see also how it is possible to follow 
this rule in divesting any difficulty, where the problem is properly 
realised, of every superfluous conception, and in reducing it to a form 
in which we no longer deem that we are treating of this or that 
special matter, but are dealing only in a general way with certain 
magnitudes which have to be fitted together’. Thus, to illustrate, 
after we have limited ourselves to the consideration of this or 
that set of experiments merely relative to the magnet, there is no 
difficulty in dismissing from view all other aspects of the case. 

We add also that the problem* ought to be reduced to its simplest 
statement in accordance with Rules V and VI, and resolved into 
parts in accordance with Rule VII. Thus if I employ a number of 
experiments in investigating the magnet, I shall run them over 
successively, taking each by itself. Again if my inquiry is about 
sound, as in the case above, I shall separately consider the relation 
between strings A and B, then that between A and C, and so on, 
so that afterwards my enumeration of results may be sufficient, and 
may embrace every case. ‘These three rules are the only ones which 
the pure understanding need observe in dealing with the terms of 
any proposition before approaching its ultimate solution, though 
that requires us to employ the following eleven rules. The third 
part of this Treatise will show us more clearly how to apply them. 
Further by a ‘question’ we understand everything in which either 
truth or falsity is found ; and we must enumerate the different types 
of ‘question’ in order to determine what we are able to accomplish 
in each case. 

We have already said that there can be no falsity in the mere 
intuition of things, whether they are simple or united together. 
So conceived these are not called ‘questions,’ but they acquire 
that designation so soon as we prepare to pass some determinate 
judgment about them. Neither do we limit the title to those 
questions which are set us by other people. His own ignorance, or 
more correctly his own doubt, presented a subject of inquiry to 
Socrates when first he began to study it and to inquire whether it 


? ‘componendas, Amsterdam edit.; ‘ compared with one another,’ Leibniz’s us. 
2 difficultatem. 


For Direction 51 


was true that he doubted everything, and maintained that such was 
indeed the case. 

Moreover in our ‘questions’ we seek to derive either things from 
words, or causes from effects, or effects from causes, or the whole 
or other parts from parts, or to infer several of these simultaneously. 

We are said to seek to derive things from words when the 
difficulty consists merely in the obscurity of the language employed. 
To this class we refer firstly all riddles, like that of the Sphinx 
about the animal which to begin with is four-footed, then two- 
footed, and finally three-footed. A similar instance is that of the 
fishers who, standing on the bank with rods and hooks ready for the 
capture of fish, said that they no longer possessed those creatures which 
they had caught, but on the other hand had those which they had 
not yet been able to catch. So in other cases ; but besides these, in 
the majority of matters on which the learned dispute, the question 
is almost always one of names. We ought not to judge so ill of 
our great thinkers as to imagine that they conceive the objects 
themselves wrongly, in cases where they do not employ fit words 
in explaining them. ‘Thus when people call place the surface of the 
surrounding body, there is no real error in their conception ; they 
merely employ wrongly the word place, which by common use 
signifies that simple and self-evident nature in virtue of which a 
thing is said to be here or there. ‘This consists wholly in a certain 
relation of the thing said to be in the place towards the parts of the 
space external to it, and is a feature which certain writers, seeing 
that the name place was reserved for the surface of the surrounding 
body, have improperly called the thing’s ¢ntrinsic position’. So it 
is in other cases ; indeed these verbal questions are of such frequent 
occurrence, that almost all controversy would be removed from 
among Philosophers, if they were always to agree as to the meaning 
of words. 

We seek to derive causes from effects when we ask concerning 
anything, whether it exists or what it is’... 

Since, however, when a ‘question’ is propounded for solution we 
are frequently unable at once to discern its type, or to determine 
whether the problem is to derive things from words, or causes from 
effects, etc., for this reason it seems to be superfluous to say more 
here in detail about these matters. It will occupy less space and 


1 ubi intrinsecum. 

2 There is obviously a lacuna here. The lost ms. seems to have contained 
matter which is partly reproduced in a passage by Arnauld in the 2nd edition 
of the Port-Royal Logic, Cf. A. and T. x. pp. 470 sqq. 


52 Rules 


will be more convenient, if at the same time we go over in order all 
the steps which must be followed if we are to solve a problem of 
any sort. After that, when any ‘question’ is set, we must strive to 
understand distinctly what the inquiry is about. 

For frequently people are in such a hurry in their investigations, 
that they bring only a blank understanding to their solution, without 
having settled what the marks are by which they are to recognize 
the fact of which they are in search, if it chance to occur. This is 
a proceeding as foolish as that of a boy, who, sent on an errand by 
his master, should be so eager to obey as to run off without having 
received his orders or knowing where to go. 

However, though in every ‘ question’ something must be unknown, 
otherwise there is no need to raise it, we should nevertheless so 
define this unknown element by means of specific conditions that 
we shall be determined towards the investigation of one thing 
rather than another. These are conditions to which, we maintain, 
attention must be paid at the very outset. We shall succeed in 
this if we so direct our mental vision as to have a distinct and 
intuitive presentation of each by itself, and inquire diligently how 
far the unknown fact for which we are in search is limited by each. 
For the human mind is wont to fall into error in two ways here ; 
it either assumes more than is really given in determining the 
question, or, on the other hand, leaves something out. 

We must take care to assume neither more nor less than our 
data furnish us. This applies chiefly to riddles and other problems 
where the object of the skill employed is to try to puzzle people’s 
wits. But frequently also we must bear it in mind in other ‘questions,’ 
when it appears as though we could assume as true for the purpose 
of their solution a certain matter which we have accepted, not 
because we had a good reason for doing so, but merely because we 
had always believed it. Thus, for example, in the riddle put by the 
Sphinx, it is not necessary to believe that the word ‘foot’ refers 
merely to the real foot of an animal; we must inquire also whether 
the term cannot be transferred to other things, as it may be, as it 
happens, to the hands of an infant, or an old man’s staff, because in 
either case these accessories are employed as feet are in walking. So 
too, in the fishermen’s conundrum, we must beware of letting the 
thought of fish occupy our minds to the exclusion of those creatures 
which the poor so often carry about with them unwillingly, and 
fling away from them when caught. So again, we must be on our 
guard when inquiring into the construction of a vessel, such as we 


For Direction 53 


once saw, in the midst of which stood a column and upon that a 
figure of Tantalus in the attitude of a man who wants to drink. 
Water when poured into the vessel remained within without leaking 
as long as it was not high enough to enter the mouth of Tantalus ; 
but as soon as it touched the unhappy man’s lips the whole of it at 
once flowed out and escaped. Now at the first blush it seems as if 
the whole of the ingenuity consisted in the construction of this 
figure of Tantalus, whereas in reality this is a mere accompaniment 
- of the fact requiring explanation, and in no way conditions it. For 
the whole difficulty consists solely in the problem of how the vessel 
was constructed so as to let out the whole of the water when that 
arrived at a certain height, whereas before none escaped. Finally, 
likewise, if we seek to extract from the recorded observations of the 
stars an answer to the question as to what we can assert about 
their motions, it is not to be gratuitously assumed that the earth is 
immoveable and established in the midst of the universe, as the 
Ancients would have it, because from our earliest years it appears 
to be so. We ought to regard this as dubious, in order afterwards 
to examine what certainty there is in this matter to which we are 
able to attain. So in other cases. 

On the other hand we sin by omission when there is some 
condition requisite to the determination of the question either 
expressed in it or in some way to be understood, which we do not 
bear in mind. This may happen in an inquiry into the subject of 
perpetual motion, not as we meet with it in nature in the movements 
of the stars and the flowing of springs, but as a motion contrived 
by human industry. Numbers of people have believed this to be 
possible, their idea being that the earth is in perpetual motion in a 
circle round its own axis, while again the magnet retains all the 
properties of the earth, A man might then believe that he would 
discover a perpetual motion if he so contrived it that a magnet should 
revolve in a circle, or at least that it communicated its own motion 
along with its other properties to a piece of iron. Now although 
he were to succeed in this, it would not be a perpetual motion 
artificially contrived; all he did would be to utilize a natural 
motion, just as if he were to station a wheel in the current of a 
river so as to secure an unceasing motion on its part. Thus in 
his procedure he would have omitted a condition requisite for the 
resolution of his problem. 

When we have once adequately grasped the meaning of a 
‘question,’ we ought to try and see exactly wherein the difficulty 


54 Rules 


consists, in order that, by separating it out from all complicating 
circumstances, we may solve it the more easily. But over and above 
this we must attend to the various separate problems involved in it, 
in order that if there are any which are easy to resolve we may 
omit them; when these are removed, only that will remain of which 
we are still in ignorance. Thus in that instance of the vessel which 
was described a short time ago, it is indeed quite easy to see how 
the vessel should be made; a column must be fixed in its centre, a 
bird? must be painted on it. But all these things will be set aside 
as not touching the essential point; thus we are left with the 
difficulty by itself, consisting in the fact that the whole of the water, 
which had previously remained in the vessel, after reaching a certain 
height, flows out. It is for this that we have to seek a reason. 

Here therefore we maintain that what is worth while doing is 
simply this—to explore in an orderly way all the data furnished by 
the proposition, to set aside everything which we see is clearly 
immaterial, to retain what is necessarily bound up with the problem, 
and to reserve what is doubtful for a more careful examination. 


Rue XIV. 


The same rule is to be applied also to the real extension of bodies. 
It must be set before the imagination by means of mere figures, for 
this is the best way to make it clear to the understanding. 


But? in proposing to make use of the imagination as an aid to 
our thinking, we must note that whenever one unknown fact is 
deduced from another that is already known, that does not show 
that we discover any new kind of entity, but merely that this whole 
mass of knowledge is extended in such a way that we perceive that 
the matter sought for participates in one way or another in the 
nature of the data given in the proposition. For example if a man 
has been blind from his birth it is not to be expected that we shall 
be able by any train of reasoning to make him perceive the true 
ideas of the colours which we have derived from our senses. But if 
a man has indeed once perceived the primary colours, though he 
has never seen the intermediate or mixed tints, it is possible for 


1 Leibniz’s ms. has ‘axis’ and Garnier conjectures ‘fingenda’ T 
‘a valve must be fitted in it.’ } 8 ranslate 


? Clearly the sense is continuous with that of the last paragraph in the 


exposition of the previous rule. The formulated rule has in this case at least 
been inserted later. 


For Direction 55 


him to construct the images of those which he has not seen from 
their likeness to the others, by a sort of deduction. Similarly if in 
the magnet there be any sort of nature?! the like of which our mind 
has never yet known, it is hopeless to expect that reasoning will 
ever make us grasp it; we should have to be furnished either with 
some new sense or with a divine intellect, But we shall believe 
ourselves to have attained whatever in this matter can be achieved 
by our human faculties, if we discern with all possible distinctness 
that mixture of entities or natures already known which produces 
just those effects which we notice in the magnet. 

Indeed all these previously known entities, viz. extension, figure, 
motion and the like, the enumeration of which does not belong to 
this place, are recognized by means of an idea which is one and the 
same in the various subject matters. The figure of a silver crown 
which we imagine, is just the same as that of one that is golden. 
Further this common idea is transferred from one subject to another, 
merely by means of the simple comparison by which we affirm that 
the object sought for is in this or that respect like, or identical with, 
or equal to a particular datum. Consequently in every train of 
reasoning it is by comparison merely that we attain to a precise 
knowledge of the truth. Here is an example:—all A is B, all B 
is C, therefore all A is C. Here we compare with one another a 
quaesitum and a datum, viz. A and C, in respect of the fact that 
each is B, and so on. But because, as we have often announced, 
the syllogistic forms are of no aid in perceiving the truth about 
objects, it will be for the reader’s profit to reject them altogether 
and to conceive that all knowledge whatsoever, other than that 
which consists in the simple and naked intuition of single inde- 
pendent objects, is a matter of the comparison of two things or 
more, with each other. In fact practically the whole of the task set 
the human reason consists in preparing for this operation ; for when 
it is open and simple, we need no aid from art, but are bound to 
rely upon the light of nature alone, in beholding the truth which 
comparison gives us. 

We must further mark that comparison should be simple and 
open, only as often as guaesitum and datum participate equally in 
a certain nature. Note that the only reason why preparation 18 
required for comparison that is not of this nature is the fact that 
the common nature we spoke of does not exist equally in both, but 


1 entis, 2 mente. 


56 Rules 


is complicated with certain other relations or ratios. The chief 
part of our human industry consists merely in so transmuting these 
ratios as to show clearly a uniformity? between the matter sought 
for and something else already known. 

Next we must mark that nothing can be reduced to this unifor- 
mity?, save that which admits of a greater and a less, and that all 
such matter is included under the term magnitude. Consequently 
when, in conformity with the previous rule, we have freed the terms 
of the problem from any reference to a particular subject, we shall 
discover that all we have left to deal with consists of magnitudes in 
general. 

We shall, however, even in this case make use of our imagination, 
employing not the naked understanding but the intellect as aided by 
images of particulars? depicted on the fancy. Finally we must note 
that nothing can be asserted of magnitudes in general that cannot 
also be ascribed to any particular instance’. 

This lets us easily conclude that there will be no slight profit 
in transferring whatsoever we find asserted of magnitudes in general 
to that particular species of magnitude which is most easily and 
distinctly depicted in our imagination. But it follows from what we 
stated about the twelfth rule that this must be the real extension of 
body abstracted from everything else except the fact that it has 
figure ; for in that place we represented the imagination itself along 
with the ideas it contains as nothing more than a really material 
body possessing extension and figure. This is also itself evident; 
for no other subject displays more distinctly differences in ratio of 
whatsoever kind. Though one thing can be said to be more or less 
white than another, or a sound sharper or flatter, and so on, it is yet 
impossible to determine exactly whether the greater exceeds the 
less in the proportion two to one, or three to one, etc., unless 
we treat the quantity as being in a certain way analogous to the ex- 
tension of a body possessing figure. Let us then take it as fixed 
and certain that perfectly definite ‘questions’ are almost free from 
difficulty other than that of transmuting ratios so that they may be 
stated as equations’. Let us agree too that everything in which 
we discover precisely this difficulty, can be easily, and ought to be, 


1 aequalitas. 2 speciebus. 
3 An alternative way of translating this paragraph would be to make the 
previous sentence follow the present one. We should then have to bein it 
differently, viz. ‘This will teach us even then to make use of our imagination etc.’ 
4 ‘in proportionibus in aequalitates evolvendis,’ conj. A. and T. ; ‘in aequali- 
tatibus,’ Leibniz’s us.; ‘inaequalitatis,’ Amsterdam ed. : 


For Direction 57 


disengaged from reference to every other subject, and immediately 
stated in terms of extension and figure. Itis about these alone that. 
we shall for this reason henceforth treat, up to and as far as the 
twenty-fifth rule, omitting the consideration of everything else. 

My desire is that here I may find a reader who is an eager 
student of Arithmetic and Geometry, though indeed I should prefer 
him to have had no practice in thesesarts, rather than to be an 
adept after the ordinary standard. For the employment of the rules 
which I here unfold is much easier in the study of Arithmetic and 
Geometry (and it is all that is needed in learning them) than in 
inquiries of any other kind. Further its usefulness as a means 
towards the attainment of a profounder knowledge is so great, that 
T have no hesitation in saying that it was not the case that this part 
of our method was invented for the purpose of dealing with 
mathematical problems, but rather that mathematics should be 
studied almost solely for the purpose of training us in this method. 
I shall presume no knowledge of anything in mathematics except 
perhaps such facts as are self-evident and obvious to everyone. But 
the way in which people ordinarily think about them, even though 
not vitiated by any glaring errors, yet obscures our knowledge with 
many ambiguous and ill-conceived principles, which we shall try 
incidentally to correct in the following pages. 

By extension we understand whatever has length, breadth, and 
depth, not inquiring whether it be a real body or merely space ; nor 
does it appear to require further explanation, since there is nothing 
more easily perceived by our imagination. Yet the learned frequently 
employ distinctions so subtle that the light of nature is dissipated 
in attending to them, and even those matters of which no peasant 
is ever in doubt become invested in obscurity. Hence we announce 
that by extension we do not here mean anything distinct and 
separate from the extended object itself; and we make it a rule not 
to recognize those metaphysical’ entities which really cannot be 
presented to the imagination. For even though someone could 
persuade himself, for example, that supposing every extended object 
in the universe were annihilated, that would not prevent extension 
in itself alone existing, this conception of his would not involve the 
use of any corporeal image’, but would be based on a false judgment 
of the intellect working by itself. He will admit this himself, if he 
reflect attentively on this very image of extension when, as will then 


1 philosophica, 2 idea. 


58 Rules 


happen, he tries to construct it in his imagination. For he will 
notice that, as he perceives it, it is not divested of a reference to 
every object, but that his imagination of it is quite different from 
his judgment about it. Consequently, whatever our understanding 
may believe as to the truth of the matter, those abstract entities 
are never given to our imagination as separate from the objects in 
which they inhere. 

But since henceforth we are to attempt nothing without the aid 
of the imagination, it will be worth our while to distinguish carefully 
the ideas which in each separate case are to convey to the under- 
standing the meaning of the words we employ. To this end we 
submit for consideration these three forms of expression :—extension 
occupies place, body possesses extension, and extension is not body. 

The first statement shows how extension may be substituted for 
that which is extended. My conception is entirely the same if 
I say extension occupies place, as when I say that which is extended 
occupies place. Yet that is no reason why, in order to avoid 
ambiguity, it should be better to use the term that which is extended ; 
for that does not indicate so distinctly our precise meaning, which is, 
that a subject occupies place owing to the fact that it is extended. 
Someone might interpret the expression to mean merely that which 
is extended is an object occupying place, just in the same way as if 
I had said that which is animate occupies place. This explains why 
we announced that here we would treat of extension’, preferring that 
to ‘the extended?,’ although we believe that there is no difference in 
the conception of the two. 

Let us now take up these words: body possesses extension. Here 
the meaning of extension is not identical with that of body, yet we 
do not construct two distinct ideas in our imagination, one of body, 
the other of extension, but merely a single image of extended body; 
and from the point of view of the thing it is exactly as if I had 
said : body is extended, or better, the extended is extended. This is 
a peculiarity of those entities which have their being merely in 
something else, and can never be conceived without the subject in 
which they exist. How different is it with those matters which are 
really distinct from the subjects of which they are predicated. If, 
for example, I say Peter has wealth, my idea of Peter is quite 
different from that of wealth. So if I say Pawl is wealthy, my 
image is quite different from that which I should have if I said the 


1 extensio. 2 extensum. 


For Direction 59 


wealthy man is wealthy. Failure to distinguish the diversity between 
these two cases is the cause of the error of those numerous people 
who believe that extension contains something distinct from that 
which is extended, in the same way as Paul’s wealth is something 
different from Paul himself. 

Finally, take the expression : extension is not body. Here the 
term extension is taken quite otherwise than as above. When we 
give it this meaning there is no special idea corresponding to it in 
the imagination. In fact this entire assertion is the work of the 
naked understanding, which alone has the power of separating out 
abstract entities of this type. But this is a stumbling-block for 
many, who, not perceiving that extension so taken, cannot be 
grasped by the imagination, represent it to themselves by means of 
a genuine image. Now such an idea necessarily involves the concept 
of body, and if they say that extension so conceived is not body, 
their heedlessness involves them in the contradiction of saying that 
the same thing is at the same time body and not body. It is likewise 
of great moment to distinguish the meaning of the enunciations in 
which such names as extension, figure, number, superficies, line, point, 
unity, etc. are used in so restricted a way as to exclude matters from 
which they are not really distinct. Thus when we say: extension or 
Jigure is not body; number is not the thing that is counted ; a super 
Jicies is the boundary of a body, the line the limit of a surface, the 
point of a line; unity is not u quantity, etc.; all these and similar 
propositions must be taken altogether outside the bounds of the 
imagination, if they are to be true. Consequently we shall not 
discuss them in the sequel. 

But we should carefully note that in all other propositions in 
which these terms, though retaining the same signification and 
employed in abstraction from their subject matter, do not exclude 
or deny anything trom which they are not really distinct, it is both 
possible and necessary to use the imagination as an aid. The reason 
is that even though the understanding in the strict sense attends 
merely to what is signified by the name, the imagination nevertheless 
ought to fashion a correct image’ of the object, in order that the 
very understanding itself may be able to fix upon other features 
belonging to it that are not expressed by the name in question, 
whenever there is occasion to do so, and may never imprudently 
believe that they have been excluded. Thus, if number be the 


1 ideam. 


60 Rules 


question, we imagine an object which we can measure by summing 
a plurality of units. Now though it is allowable for the understand- 
ing to confine its attention for the present solely to the multiplicity 
displayed by the object, we must be on our guard nevertheless not 
on that account afterwards to come to any conclusion which implies 
that the object which we have described numerically has been 
excluded from our concept. But this is what those people do who 
ascribe mysterious properties to number, empty inanities in which 
they certainly would not believe so strongly, unless they conceived 
that number was something distinct from the things we number. In 
the same way, if we are dealing with figure, let us remember that we 
are concerned with an extended subject, though we restrict ourselves 
to conceiving it merely as possessing figure. When body is the 
object let us reflect that we are dealing with the very same thing, 
taken as possessing length, breadth and depth. Where superficies 
comes in, our object will still be the same’ though we conceive it as 
having length and breadth, and we shall leave out the element of 
depth, without denying it. The line will be considered as having 
length merely, while in the case of the point the object, though 
still the same, will be divested in our thought of every characteristic 
save that of being something existent. 

In spite of the way in which I have dwelt on this topic, I fear 
that men’s minds are so dominated by prejudice that very few are 
free from the danger of losing their way here, and that, notwithstand- 
ing the length of my discourse, I shall be found to have explained 
myself too briefly. ‘Those very disciplines Arithmetic and Geometry, 
though the most certain of all the sciences, nevertheless lead us 
astray here. For is there a single Arithmetician who does not 
believe that the numbers with which he deals are not merely held in 
abstraction from any subject matter by the understanding, but are 
really distinct objects of the imagination? Does not your Geome- 
trician obscure the clearness of his subject by employing irreconcile- 
able principles? He tells you that lines have no breadth, surfaces 
no depth; yet he subsequently wishes to generate the one out of the 
other, not noticing that a line, the movement of which is conceived 
to create a surface, is really a body; or that, on the other hand, the 
line which has no breadth, is merely a mode of body. But, not 
to take more time in going over these matters, it will be more 
expeditious for us to expound the way in which we assume our 


1 Adopting A. and T.’s conjecture of ‘idem’ for ‘item,’ 


For Direction 61 


object should be taken, in order that we may most easily give a 
proof of whatsoever is true in Arithmetic and Geometry. 

Here therefore we deal with an extended object, considering 
nothing at all involved in it save extension, and purposely refraining 
from using the word quantity, because there are certain Philosophers 
so subtle as to distinguish it also from extension. We assume such 
a simplification of our problems as to leave nothing else to be 
inquired about except the determination of a certain extension by 
comparing it with a certain other extension that is already deter- 
minately known. For here we do not look to discover any new sort 
of fact; we merely wish to make a simplification of ratios, be they 
ever so involved, such that we may discover some equation? 
between what is unknown and something known. Since this is so, 
it is certain that whatsoever differences in ratio exist in these sub- 
jects can be found to prevail also between two or more extensions. 
Hence our purpose is sufficiently served if in extension itself we 
consider everything that can aid us in setting out differences in 
ratio ; but there are only three such features, viz. dimension, unity 
and figure. 

By dimension I understand nothing but the mode and aspect 
according to which a subject is considered to be measurable. Thus 
it is not merely the case that length, breadth and depth are dimen- 
sions; but weight also is a dimension in terms of which the heaviness 
of objects is estimated. So, too, speed is a dimension of motion, and 
there are an infinite number of similar instances, For that very 
division of the whole into a number of parts of identical nature, 
whether it exist in the real order of things or be merely the work of 
the understanding, gives us exactly that dimension in terms of 
which we apply number to objects. Again that mode which con- 
stitutes number is properly said to be a species of dimension, though 
there is not an absolute identity between the meaning of the two 
terms. For if we proceed by taking part after part until we reach 
the whole, the operation is then said to be counting, whereas if 
conversely we look upon the whole as something split up into parts, 
it is an object which we measure. Thus we measure centuries by 
years, days, hours and moments, while if we count up moments, 
hours, days and years, we shall finish with a total of centuries. 

It clearly follows that there may be an infinite number of dimen- 
sions in the same subject, which make no addition at all to the 


1 ut illud, quod est ignotum, aequale cuidam cognito reperiatur. 


62 Rules 


objects which possess them, but have the same meaning whether 
they are based on anything real in the objects themselves, or are the 
arbitrary inventions of our own mind. Weight is indeed something 
real existing in a body, and the speed of motion is a reality, and so 
with the division of a century into years and days. But it is other- 
wise with the division of the day into hours and moments, etc. Yet 
all these subdivisions are exactly similar if considered merely from 
the point of view of dimension, as we ought to regard them both 
here and in the science of Mathematics. It falls rather to Physics 
to inquire whether they are founded on anything real. 

Recognition of this fact throws much light on Geometry, since in 
that science almost everyone goes wrong in conceiving that quantity 
has three species, the line, the superficies, and the solid. But we 
have already stated that the line and the superficies are not 
conceived as being really distinct from solid body, or from one 
another. Moreover if they are taken in their bare essence as 
abstractions of the understanding, they are no more diverse species 
of quantity than the ‘animal’ and ‘living creature’ in man are 
diverse species of substance. Incidentally also we have to note that 
the three dimensions of body, length, breadth and depth, are only in 
name distinct from one another. For there is nothing to prevent us, 
in any solid body with which we are dealing, from taking any of the 
extensions it presents as the length, or any other as its depth, and 
so on. And though these three dimensions have a real basis in 
every extended object qua extended, we have nevertheless no special 
concern in this science with them more than with countless others, 
which are either mental creations or have some other ground in 
objects. For example in the case of the triangle, if we wish to 
measure it exactly, we must acquaint ourselves with three features 
of its existence, viz. either its three sides, or two sides and an angle, 
or two angles and its area, and so forth. Now these can all be 
styled dimensions. Similarly in a trapezium five facts have to be 
noted, in a tetrahedron six, and so on. But if we wish to choose 
here those dimensions which shall give most aid to our imagination, 
we shall never attend at the same time to more than one or two of 
those depicted in our imagination, even though we know that in the 
matter set before us with which we are dealing several others are 
involved. For the art of our method consists in distinguishing as 
many elements as possible, so that though we attend to only a few 
simultaneously, we shall yet cover them all in time, taking one after 
the other. 


For Direction 63 


The unit is that common element in which, as above remarked, 
all the things compared with each other should equally participate. 
If this be not already settled in our problems, we can represent it by 
one of the magnitudes already presented to us, or by any other 
magnitude we like, and it will be the common measure of all the 
others. We shall understand that in it there exists every dimension 
found in those very widely sundered facts which are to be com- 
pared with each other, and we shall conceive it either (1) merely 
as something extended, omitting every other more precise deter- 
mination—and then it will be identical with the point of Geometry, 
considered as generating a line by its movement; or (2) we shall 
conceive it as a line, or (3) as a square. 

To come to figures, we have already shown above how it is they 
alone that give us a means of constructing the images of all objects 
whatsoever. It remains to give notice in this place, that of the 
innumerable diverse species of figure, we shall employ only those 
which most readily express differences of relation or proportion. 
Moreover there are two sorts of objects only which are compared 
with each other, viz. numerical assemblages! and magnitudes. Now 
there are also two sorts of figures by means of which these may be 
presented to our conception. For example we have the points 


which represent a triangular? number, or again the ‘tree which 
illustrates genealogical relation as in such a case— 


Father 


Son Daughter 


So in similar instances. Now these are figures designed to express 


1 multitudines. : . é Se 
2 ‘triangularis,’ conjecture, A. and T. Previous versions give ‘triangulorum. 


‘Triangular’ numbers are the sums of the natural numbers, viz. 1, 3, 6, 10, ete., 
and thus can be constructed from any number n according to the formula 
n(n+1) 

2 e 


64 Rules 


numerical assemblages; but those which are continuous and un- 
divided like the triangle, the square, etc., 


explain the nature of magnitudes. 

But in order that we may point out which of all these figures we 
are going to use, it ought to be known that all the relations which 
can exist between things of this kind, must be referred to two heads, 
viz. either to order or to measurement. 

We must further realise that while the discovery of an order is 
no light task, as may be seen throughout this treatise, which makes 
this practically its sole subject, yet once the order has been dis- 
covered there is no difficulty at all in knowing it. The seventh rule 
shows us how we may easily review in sequence mentally the 
separate elements which have been arranged in order, for the reason 
that in this class of relation the bond between the terms is a direct 
one involving nothing but the terms themselves, and not requiring 
mediation by means of a third term, as is the case in measurement. 
The unfolding of relations of measurement will therefore be all that 
we shall treat of here. For I recognize the order in which A and B 
stand, without considering anything except these two—the extreme 
terms of the relation. But I can recognize the ratio of the 
magnitude of two to that of three, only by considering some third 
thing, namely unity, which is the common measure of both. 

We must likewise bear in mind that, by the help of the unit we 
have assumed, continuous magnitudes can sometimes be reduced in 
their entirety to numerical expressions, and that this can always be 
partly realised. Further it is possible to arrange our assemblage of 
units in such an order that the problem which previously! was one 
requiring the solution of a question in measurement, is now a 
matter merely involving an inspection of order. Now our method 
helps us greatly in making the progress which this transformation 
effects. 

Finally remember that of the dimensions of continuous mag- 
nitude none are more distinctly conceived than length and breadth, 
and that we ought not to attend to more than these two simul- 
taneously in the same figure, if we are to compare two diverse things 


1 ‘pertinebat,’ conj. A. and T.; edd. and ms. ‘ pertineat.’ 


For Direction 65 


with each other. The reason is, that when we have more than two 
diverse things to compare with each other, our method consists in 
reviewing them successively and attending only to two of them at 
the same time. 

Observation of these facts leads us easily to our conclusion. 
This is that there is no less reason for abstracting our propositions 
from those figures of which Geometry treats, if the inquiry is one 
involving them, than from any other subject matter. Further, in 
doing so we need retain nothing but rectilinear and rectangular 
superficies, or else straight lines, which we also call figures, because 
they serve quite as well as surfaces in aiding us to imagine an object 
which actually has extension, as we have already said. Finally 
those same figures have to represent for us now continuous magni- 
tudes, again a plurality of units or number also. Human ingenuity 
can devise nothing simpler for the complete expression of differences 
of relation. 


Rute XV. 


It is likewise very often helpful to draw these figures and display 
them to the external senses, in order thus to facilitate the continued 


fixation of our attention. 


The way in which these figures should be depicted so that, in 
being displayed before our eyes, the images may be the more 
distinctly formed in our imagination is quite self-evident. To begin 
with we represent unity in three ways, viz. by a square, U, if we 
consider our unit as having length and breadth, or secondly by 
a line, , if we take it merely as having length, or lastly by a 
point, «, if we think only of the fact that it is that by aid of which 
we construct a numerical assemblage. But however it is depicted 
and conceived, we shall always remember that the unit is an object 
extended in every direction, and admitting of countless dimensions. 
So also the terms of our proposition, in cases where we have to 
attend at the same time to two different magnitudes belonging to 
them, will be represented by a rectangle whose two sides will be the 
two magnitudes in question. Where they are incommensurable* 
with our unit we shall employ the following figure, 


[peat vier of 


1 A correction first made by Garnier. The Amsterdam ed. and Leibniz’s 
ms. have ‘commensurabiles.’ 


66 Rules 


but where they are commensurable? we shall use this 


or this 


and nothing more is needed save where it js a question of a 
numerical assemblage of units. Finally if we attend only to one of 
the magnitudes of the terms employed, we shall portray that either 
as a rectangle, of which one side is the magnitude considered and 


the other is unity, thus [________|—and _ this will happen 
whenever the magnitude has to be compared with some surface. Or 
we shall employ a line alone, in this fashion, , if we take it as 
an incommensurable? length ; or thus, « « e e e, if it be a number. 


Rure XVI. 


When we come across matters which do not require our present 
attention, tt ts better, even though they are necessary to our conclusion, 
to represent them by highly abbreviated symbols, rather than by 
complete figures. This guards against error due to defect of memory 
on the one hand, and, on the other, prevents that distraction of thought 
which an effort to keep those matters in mind while attending to other 
inferences would cause. 


But* because our maxim is that not more than two different 
dimensions out of the countless number that can be depicted in our 
imagination ought to be the object either of our bodily or of our men- 
tal vision, it is of importance so to retain all those outside the range 
of present attention that they may easily come up to mind as often 
as need requires. Now memory seems to be a faculty created by 
nature for this very purpose. But since it is liable to fail us, and 
in order to obviate the need of expending any part of our attention 


1 If we adopt a different punctuation of the text, the sentence will continue 
‘and it is only a question of a numerical assemblage of units,’ omitting what 
follows the figures. 

2 It is not clear whether this means ‘incommensurable with the standard 
unit of length’ or ‘incommensurable with a surface.’ 

3 Cf. note on Rule XLV. ad init. 


For Direction 67 


in refreshing it, while we are engaged with other thoughts, art has 
most opportunely invented the device of writing. Relying on the 
help this gives us, we leave nothing whatsoever to memory, but 
keep our imagination wholly free to receive the ideas which are 
immediately occupying us, and set down on paper whatever ought 
to be preserved. In doing so we employ the very briefest symbols, 
in order that, after distinctly examining each point in accordance 
with Rule IX, we may be able, as Rule XI bids us do, to traverse 
them all with an extremely rapid motion of our thought and include 
as many as possible in a single intuitive glance. 

Everything, therefore, which is to be looked upon as single from 
the point of view of the solution of our problem, will be represented 
by a single symbol which can be constructed in any way we please. 
But to make things easier we shall employ the characters a, b, c, etc. 
for expressing magnitudes already known, and A, B, C, ete. for 
symbolising those that are unknown. To these we shall often prefix 
the numerical symbols, 1, 2, 3, 4, etc., for the purpose of making 
clear their number, and again we shall append those symbols to the 
former when we want to indicate the number of the relations which 
are to be remarked in them. Thus if I employ the formula 2a* that 
will be the equivalent of the words ‘the double of the magnitude 
which is symbolised by the letter a, and which contains three 
relations.’ By this device not only shall we economize our words, 
but, which is the chief thing, display the terms of our problem in 
such a detached and unencumbered way that, even though it is so 
full as to omit nothing, there will nevertheless be nothing superfluous 
to be discovered in our symbols, or anything to exercise our mental 
powers to no purpose, by requiring the mind to grasp a number of 
things at the same time. 

In order that all this may be more clearly understood, we must 
note first, that while Arithmeticians have been wont to designate 
undivided magnitudes by groups of units, or else by some number, 
we on the other hand abstract at this point from numbers themselves 
no less than from Geometrical figures or anything else, as we did 
a little time ago. Our reason for doing this is partly to avoid the 
tedium of a long and superfluous calculation, but chiefly that those 
portions of the matter considered which are relevant to the problem 
may always remain distinct, and may not be entangled with numbers 
that are of no help tous at all. Thus if we are trying to find the 
hypotenuse of the right-angled triangle whose sides are 9 and 12, 


the Arithmetician will tell us that it is ,/225, ie. 15. But we shall 


68 Rules 


write a and b in place of 9 and 12, and shall find the hypotenuse to 
be Va?+6?; and the two members of the expression a? and 6? will 
remain distinct, whereas the number confuses them altogether. 

Note further that by the number of relations attaching to a 
quantity I mean a sequence of ratios in continued proportion, such 
as the Algebra now in vogue attempts to express by sundry dimen- 
sions and figures. It calls the first of these the radix, the second 
the square, the third the cube, the fourth the biquadratic, and so on. 
I confess that for a long time I myself was imposed upon by these 
names. For, after the straight line and the square there was nothing 
which seemed to be capable of being placed more clearly before my 
imagination than the cube and the other figures of the same type; 
and with their aid I succeeded in solving not a few difficulties. But 
at last, after testing the matter well, I discovered that I had never 
found out anything by their means which I| could not have recog- 
nized more easily and distinctly without employing their aid. I saw 
that this whole nomenclature must be abandoned, if our conceptions 
are not to become confused ; for that very magnitude which goes by 
the name of the cube or the biquadratic, is nevertheless never to be 
presented to the imagination otherwise than as a line or a surface, 
in accordance with the previous rule. We must therefore be very 
clear about the fact that the radix, the square, the cube, etc., are 
merely magnitudes in continued proportion, which always imply the 
previous assumption of that arbitrarily chosen unit of which we spoke 
above. Now the first proportional is related to this unit directly 
and by a single ratio. But the second proportional requires the 
mediation of the first, and consequently is related to the unit by a 
pair of ratios. ‘The third, being mediated by the first and second, 
has a triple relation to the standard unit, and so on. Therefore we 
shall henceforth call that magnitude, which in Algebra is styled the 
radix, the first proportional; that called the square we shall term 
the second proportional, and so in other cases. 

Finally it must be noticed that even though here, in order to 
examine the nature of a difficulty, we abstract the terms involved 
from certain numerical complications, it yet often happens that a 
simpler solution will be found by employing the given numbers than 
if we abstract from them. ‘This is due to the double function of 
numbers, already pointed out, which use the same symbols to 
express now order, and now measure. Hence, after seeking a solution 
in general terms for our problem, we ought to transform its terms by 
substituting for them the given numbers, in order to see whether 


For Direction 69 


these supply us with any simpler solution. Thus, to illustrate, after 
seeing that the hypotenuse of the right-angled triangle whose sides 
are a and b is Va?+5?, we should substitute 81 for a, and 144 for 
b°. These added together give 225, the root of which, or mean 
proportional between unity and 225, is 15. This will let us see that 
a hypotenuse whose length is 15 is commensurable with sides whose 
lengths are 9 and 12, quite apart from the general law that it is the 
hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle whose sides are as 3 to 4. We, 
whose object is to discover a knowledge of things which shall be 
evident and distinct, insist on all those distinctions. It is quite 
otherwise with Arithmeticians, who, if the result required turns up, 
are quite content even though they do not perceive how it depends 
upon the data, though it is really in knowledge of this kind alone 
that science properly consists. 

Moreover, it must be observed that, as a general rule, nothing 
that does not require to be continuously borne in mind ought to be 
committed to memory, if we can set it down on paper. This is to 
prevent that waste of our powers which occurs if some part of our 
attention is taken up with the presence of an object in our thought 
which it is superfluous to bear in mind. What we ought to do is to 
make a reference-table and set down in it the terms of the problem 
as they are first stated. Then we should state the way in which the 
abstract formulation is to be made and the symbols to be employed, 
in order that, when the solution has been obtained in terms of these 
symbols, we may easily apply it, without calling in the aid of 
memory at all, to the particular case we are considering : for it is 
only in passing from a lesser to a greater degree of generality that 
abstraction has any raison d'etre. What 1 should write therefore 
would be something like this:— 


A 
15 
9 
Ee 12 - 


In the right-angled triangle ABC to find the hypotenuse AC 
(stating the problem abstractly, in order that the derivation of the 
length of the hypotenuse from the lengths of the sides may be quite 


70 Rules 


general). Then for AB, which is equal to 9, I shall substitute @; 
for BC, equal to 12, I put }, and similarly in other cases. 

To conclude, we draw attention to the fact that these four rules 
will be further employed in the third part of this Treatise, though 
we shall conceive them somewhat more generally than we have been 
doing. But all this will be explained in its proper place. 


Rute XVII. 


When a problem is proposed for discussion we should run tt over, 
taking a direct course, and for this reason neglecting the fact that 
some of its terms are known, others unknown. To follow the true 
connection, when presenting to mind the dependence of separate items 
on one another, will also aid us to do this, 


The four previous rules showed us how, when the problems are 
determinate and fully comprehended, we may abstract them from 
their subject matter and so transform them that nothing remains to 
be investigated save how to discover certain magnitudes, from the 
fact that they bear such and such a relation to certain other magni- 
tudes already given. But in the five following rules we shall now 
explain how these same problems are to be treated in such a way 
that though a single proposition contains ever so many unknown 
magnitudes they may all be subordinated to one another ; the second 
will stand to the first, as the first to unity, and so too the third to 
the second, and the fourth to the third, and so in succession, making, 
however numerous, a total magnitude equal to a certain known 
magnitude. In doing this our method will be so sure that we may 
safely affirm that it passes the wit of man to reduce our terms to 
anything simpler. 

For the present, however, I remark that in every inquiry that is 
to be solved by deduction there is one way that is plain and direct, 
by which we may more easily than by any other pass from one set 
of terms to another, while all other routes are more difficult and 
indirect. In order to understand this we must remember what was 
said relative to the eleventh rule, where we expounded the nature of 
that chain of propositions, a comparison of the neighbouring members 
of which enables us to see how the first is related to the last, even 
though it is not so easy to deduce the intermediate terms irom the 
extremes, Now therefore if we fix our attention on the interdepend- 


For Direction vil 


ence of the various links, without ever interrupting the order, so 
that we may thence infer how the last depends upon the first, we 
review the problem in a direct manner. But, on the other hand, if, 
from the fact that we know the first and the last to be connected 
with each other in a certain way, we should want to deduce the 
nature of the middle terms which connect them, we should then be 
following an order that was wholly indirect and upside down. But 
because here we are considering only involved inquiries, in which 
the problem is, given certain extremes, to find certain intermediates 
by the inverse process of reasoning, the whole of the device here 
disclosed will consist in treating the unknown as though they were 
known, and thus being able to adopt the easy and direct method of 
investigation even in problems involving any amount of intricacy. 
There is nothing to prevent us always achieving this result, since 
we have assumed from the commencement of this section of our 
work that we recognize the dependence of the unknown terms in the 
inquiry on those that are known to be such that the former are 
determined by the latter. This determination also is such that if, 
recognizing it, we consider the terms which first present themselves 
and reckon them even though unknown among the known, and thus 
deduce from them step by step and by a true connection all the 
other terms, even those which are known, treating them as though 
they were unknown, we shall fully realise the purpose of this rule. 
Illustrations of this doctrine, as of the most of what is immediately 
to follow, will be reserved until the twenty-fourth rule’, since it will 
be more convenient to expound them there. 


Rute XVIII. 


To this end only four operations are required, addition, subtrac- 
tion, multiplication and division. Of these the two latter are often 
to be dispensed with here, both in order to avoid any unforeseen com- 
plication, and because it will be easier to deal with them at a later 
stuge. 


It is often from lack of experience on the part of the teacher 
that the multiplicity of rules proceeds; and matters that might 
have been reduced to one general rule are less clear if distributed 
among many particular statements. Wherefore we propose to 
reduce the whole of the operations which it is advisable to employ 
in going through our inquiry, ie. in deducing certain magnitudes 


1 No such rule has been found among Descartes’ papers. 


72 Rules 


from others, to as few as four heads. It will become clear when we 
come to explain these how it is that they suffice for the purpose. 

This is how we proceed. If we arrive at the knowledge of one 
magnitude owing to the fact that we already know the parts of 
which it is composed, the process is one of addition. If we discover 
the part because we already know the whole and the excess of the 
whole over this part, it is division. Further it is impossible to derive 
a magnitude from others that are determinately fixed, and in which 
it is in any way contained, by any other methods. But if we have 
to derive a magnitude from others from which it is wholly diverse 
and in which it is in nowise contained, we must find some other way 
of relating it to them. Now if we trace out this connection or 
relation directly we must employ multiplication; if indirectly, 
division. 

In explaining clearly these latter two operations the fact must be 
grasped that the unit of which we spoke before is here the basis and 
foundation of all the relations, and has the first place in the series 
of magnitudes in continued proportion. Further, remember that 
the given magnitudes occupy the second position, while those to be 
discovered stand at the third, the fourth and the remaining: points 
in the series, if the proportion’ be direct. If, however, the pro- 
portion be indirect, the magnitude to be discovered occupies the 
second position or the other intermediate points, and that which is 
given, the last. 

Thus if it is stated that as unity is to a, say to 5, which is given, 
so is b, i.e. 7, to the magnitude to be found?, which is abd, i.e. 35, 
then @ and dare at the second position, and ad, their product, at the 
third. So too if we are further told that as 1 is to c, say 9, so is ab, 
say 35, to the magnitude we are seeking, i.e. 315, then adc is in the 
fourth position, and is the product of two multiplications among the 
terms a, 6 and c, which are at the second position ; so it is in other 
cases. Likewise as 1 is to a, say 5, so @, ie. 5, is to a’, ie. 25. 
Again, as unity is to a, ie. 5, so is a’, ie. 25, to a’, ie. 125; and 
finally as unity is to a, i.e. 5, so is a’, i.e. 125, to a‘, i.e. 625, and so 
on. For the multiplication is performed in precisely the same way, 
whether the magnitude is multiplied by itself or by some other quite 
different number. 

But if we now are told that, as unity is to a, say 5, the given 


1 A correction first made by Cousin—‘ proportio’ instead of ‘ propositio.’ 
2 Note that here Descartes does not, and could not conveniently, adhere to 
his scheme of employing capital letters for the unknown quantities. 


For Direction 73 


divisor, so is B, say 7, the quaesitum, to ab, i.e. 35, the given 
dividend, we have on this occasion an example of the indirect or 
inverted order. For the only way to discover B, the quaesitum, is to 
divide the given ab by a, which is also given. The case is the same 
if the proposition is, ‘as unity is to A, say 5, the quaesitum, so is 
this A to a’, i.e. 25, which is given’; or again, ‘as unity is to A, 
ie. 5, the guaesitum, so is A%, i.e. 25, which we also have to 
discover, to a’, i.e. 125, which is given’; similarly in other cases. 
All these processes fall under the title ‘division,’ although we must 
note that these latter specimens of the process contain more difficulty 
than the former, because the magnitude to be found comes in a 
greater number of times in them, and consequently it involves a 
greater number of relations in such problems. For on such occa- 
sions the meaning is the same as if the enunciation were, ‘extract 
the square root of a”, i.e. 25,’ or ‘extract the cube root of a’, i.e. 125,’ 
and so in other cases. This then is the way in which Arithmeticians 
commonly put the matter. But alternatively we may explain the 
problems in the terms employed by Geometricians: it comes to the 
same thing if we say, ‘find a mean proportional between that 
assumed magnitude, which we call unity, and that indicated by a?,’ 
or ‘find two mean proportionals between unity and a%,’ and so in 
other cases. 

From these considerations it is easy to infer how these two 
operations suffice for the discovery of any magnitudes whatsoever 
which are to be deduced from others in virtue of some relation. And 
now that we have grasped them, the next thing to do is to show 
how these operations are to be brought before the scrutiny of the 
imagination and how presented to our actual vision, in order that we 
may explain how they may be used or practised. 

In addition or subtraction we conceive our object under the 
aspect of a line, or of some extended magnitude in which length is 
alone to be considered. For if we are to add line a to line J, 


a b 
YH —— 


we add the one to the other in the following way ad, 
a a 
2 ae ee rer es re 


and get as a result c. 


an ee 


74 Rules 
But if the smaller has to be taken from the larger, viz. b from a, 


d a 
————— _—_——— ST 


we place the one above the other thus, 


b 
———————— 


and this will give us that part of the larger which the smaller cannot 
cover, viz. : 

In multiplication we also conceive the given magnitudes as lines. 
But we imagine a rectangle to be constructed out of them ; for, if 
we multiply a by 8, 


a b 
i ‘ 


we fit them together at right angles in the following way, 


a 


and so make the rectangle 


Again, if we wish to multiply ab by «, 


For Direction 75 
we ought to conceive ab as a line, viz. ab, 


a 6 
EE 


in order that to represent abc we may obtain the following figure : 


H 
' 
' 
i. 
' 
' 
1 
' 
' 
: 
’ 
' 

-+ 
! 
' 
' 
1 
! 
' 
' 
1 
! 
‘ 
! 

al 
1 
! 

‘ 
H 
: 
: 


Finally in a division in which the divisor is given, we imagine the 
magnitude to be divided to be a rectangle, one side of which is the 
divisor and the other the quotient. Thus if the rectangle ad is to 
be divided by a, 


we take away from it the breadth a and are left with b for quotient: 


76 Rules 


On the contrary if this rectangle is divided by 5, we take away the 
height 4, and the quotient will be a, 


a 


ee 


But in those divisions in which the divisor is not given, but only 
indicated by some relation, as when we are bidden extract the square 
or cube root, then we must note that the term to be divided and all 
the others must be always conceived as lines in continued propor- 
tion, of which the first is unity, the last the magnitude to be 
divided. The way in which any number of mean proportionals 
between this and unity may be discovered will be disclosed in its 
proper place. At present it is sufficient to have pointed out that 
according to our hypothesis those operations have not yet been fully 
dealt with here, since to be carried out they require an indirect and 
reverse movement on the part of the imagination ; and at present 
we are treating only of questions in which the movement of thought 
is to be direct. 

As for the other! operations, they can be carried out with the 
greatest ease in the way in which we have stated they are to be 
conceived. Nevertheless it remains for us to show how the terms 
employed in them are to be constructed. For even though on our 
first taking up some problem we are free to conceive the terms 
involved as lines or as rectangles, without introducing any other 
figures, as was said in reference to the fourteenth rule, nevertheless 
it is frequently the case that, in the course of the solution, what was 
a rectangle, constructed by the multiplication of two lines, must 
presently be conceived as a line, for the purpose of some further 
operation. Or it may be the case that the same rectangle, or a line 
formed by some addition or subtraction, has next to be conceived as 
some other rectangle drawn upon the line by which it is to be 
divided. 

It is therefore worth our while here to expound how every rect- 
angle may be transformed into a line, and conversely how a line or 
even a rectangle may be turned into another rectangle of which 
the side is indicated. This is the easiest thing in the world for 
Geometricians to do, provided they recognize that whenever we com- 
pare lines with some rectangle, as here, we always conceive those 
lines as rectangles, one side of which is the length that we took to 


1 ie. the direct operations, 


For Direction a9 


represent our unit. For if we do so the whole matter resolves itself 
into the following proposition: Given a rectangle, to construct 
another rectangle equal to it upon a given side. 

Now though this problem is one familiar to a mere beginner in 
Geometry, I wish to explain it, lest I should seem to have omitted 
something’, 


Rue XIX. 


Employing this method of reasoning we have to find out as many 
magnitudes as we have unknown terms, treated as though they were 
known, for the purpose of handling the problem in the direct way ; 
and these must be expressed in the two different ways. For this will 
give us as many equations as there are unknowns. 


Rute XX. 


Having got our equations, we must proceed to carry out such 
operations as we have neglected, taking cure never to multiply where 
we can divide. 


Rute XXI. 


If there are several equations of this kind, we should reduce them 
all to a single one, viz. that the terms of which do not occupy so many 
places in the series of magnitudes that are in continued proportion. 
The terms of the equation should then be themselves arranged in the 
order which this series follows. 


THE Enp?. 
1 ‘The rest is wanting’ is added here both in the Amsterdam ed. and in 


Leibniz’s ms. ; — 
m3 This appears both in the Amsterdam ed, and in Leibniz’s us, 


DISCOURSE ON METHOD 


——_—_—________, 


PREFATORY NOTE TO THE METHOD. 


The Discourse on the Method and Essays was originally published 
anonymously in 1637 by Jan Maire of Leiden, in somewhat shabby 
form. It was Descartes’ first published work, the much talked of 
‘World’ or ‘Cosmos’ having been suppressed or destroyed on his 
hearing of the condemnation of Galileo in 1632. In 1636, however, 
when forty years of age, he felt that it was time to bring his views 
before the public and publish them abroad. The Elzevirs naturally 
suggested themselves as the publishers to be selected, especially as 
they had once before made advances and as the original member of 
the firm resided in Leiden, where Descartes probably was at the 
time. They, however, had become less friendly, evidently doubting 
the success of an anonymous book of the kind, and consequently 
the author went elsewhere. Descartes endeavoured to preserve the 
anonymity of his work with scrupulous care, and was annoyed by 
his zealous but fussy friend Mersenne showing the work to others, 
and announcing the authors name, with the ostensible object of 
obtaining from the King of France permission for its publication. 
In the end he found himself compelled to avow his authorship. 


The book was written in French ‘the language of my country,’ 
as Descartes says, ‘in the hope that those who avail themselves of 
their natural reason alone, may be better judges of my opinions 
than those who give heed only to the writings of the ancients.’ 
Four hundred copies were given him for distribution to his friends 
and this was probably all the remuneration that he expected ; none 
other seems in any case to have come to him. 


The Latin version is the work of Etienne de Courcelles, a 
protestant minister at Amsterdam, and was published in 1644 by 
Louis Elzevir at the same time as the ‘Principles.’ The Essays 
(the Dioptric, the Meteors and the Geometry) which are termed 
‘Essays on this Method’ have not been translated here. 


JPaSe Teh 


DISCOURSE ON THE METHOD OF RIGHTLY 
CONDUCTING THE REASON AND SEEK- 
ING FOR TRUTH IN THE SCIENCES. 


Lf this Discourse appears too long to be read all at once, it may 
be separated into six portions. And in the first there will be found 
various considerations respecting the sciences; in the second, the 
principal rules regarding the Method which the author has sought 
out; while in the third are some of the rules of morality which he 
has derived from this Method. In the fourth are the reasons by 
which he proves the existence of God and of the human soul, which 
form the foundation of his Metaphysic. In the fifth, the order of 
the questions regarding physics which he has investigated, and 
particularly the explanation of the movement of the heart, and of 
some other difficulties which pertain to medicine, as also the difference 
between the soul of man and that of the brutes. And in the last 
part the questions raised relate to those matters which the author 
believes to be requisite in order to advance further in the investigation 
of nature, in addition to the reasons that caused him to write. 


Part I, [| rhe daa ctor, 


Good sense is of all things in the world the most equally 
distributed, for everybody thinks himself so abundantly provided 
with it, that even those most difficult to please in all other matters 
do not commonly desire more of it than they already possess. It 
is unlikely that this is an error on their part; it seems rather to 
be evidence in support of the view that the power of forming a 
good judgment and of distinguishing the true from the false, which 
is properly speaking what is called Good sense or Reason, is by 
nature equal in all men. Hence too it will show that the diversity 
of our opinions does not proceed from some men being more rational 
than others, but solely from the fact that our thoughts pass through 


82 Discourse 


diverse channels and the same objects are not considered by all. 
For to be possessed of good mental powers is not sufficient; the 
principal matter is to apply them well. The greatest minds are 
capable of the greatest vices as well as of the greatest virtues, and 
those who proceed very slowly may, provided they always follow the 
straight road, really advance much faster than those who, though 
they run, forsake it. 

For myself I have never ventured to presume that my mind was 
in any way more perfect than that of the ordinary man; I have 
even longed to possess thought as quick, or an imagination as 
accurate and distinct, or a memory as comprehensive or ready, 
as some others. And besides these I do not know any other 
qualities that make for the perfection of the human mind. For 
ag to reason or sense, inasmuch as it is the only thing that 
constitutes us men and distinguishes us from the brutes, I would 
fain believe that it is to be found complete in each individual, 
and in this I follow the common opinion of the philosophers, who 
say that the question of more or less occurs only in the sphere of 
the accidents and does not affect the jorms or natures of the 
individuals in the same species. 

But I shall not hesitate to say that I have had great good 
fortune from my youth up, in lighting upon and pursuing certain 
paths which have conducted me to considerations and maxims from 
which I have formed a Method, by whose assistance it appears to 
me I have the means of gradually increasing my knowledge and of 
little by little raising it to the highest possible point which the 
mediocrity of my talents and the brief duration of my life can 
permit me to reach. For I have already reaped from it fruits of 
such a nature that, even though I always try in the judgments 
I make on myself to lean to the side of self-depreciation rather 
than to that of arrogance, and though, looking with the eye of a 
philosopher on the diverse actions and enterprises of all mankind, 
I find scarcely any which do not seem to me vain and useless, I do 
not cease to receive extreme satisfaction in the progress which 
I seem to have already made in the search after truth, and to form 
such hopes for the future as to venture to believe that, if amongst 
the occupations of men, simply as men, there is some one in par- 
ticular that is excellent and important, that is the one which I have 
selected. 

It must always be recollected, however, that possibly I deceive 
myself, and that what I take to be gold and diamonds is perhaps no 


on the Method 83 


more than copper and glass. I know how subject we are to 
delusion in whatever touches ourselves, and also how much the 
judgments of our friends ought to be suspected when they are in 
our favour. But in this Discourse I shall be very happy to show 
the paths I have followed, and to set forth my life as in a picture, 
so that everyone may judge of it for himself; and thus in learning 
from the common talk what are the opinions which are held of it, a 
new means of obtaining self-instruction will be reached, which I shall 
add to those which I have been in the habit of using. 

Thus my design is not here to teach the Method which everyone 
should follow in order to promote the good conduct of his Reason, 
but only to show in what manner I have endeavoured to conduct 
my own. Those who set about giving precepts must esteem them- 
selves more skilful than those to whom they advance them, and if 
they fall short in the smallest matter they must of course take the 
blame for it. But regarding this Treatise simply as a history, or, if 
you prefer it, a fable in which, amongst certain things which may be 
imitated, there are possibly others also which it would not be right 
to follow, I hope that it will be of use to some without being hurtful 
to any, and that all will thank me for my frankness. 

I have been nourished on letters since my childhood, and since 
I was given to believe that by their means a clear and certain 
knowledge could be obtained of all that is useful in life, I had an 
extreme desire to acquire instruction. But so soon as I had 
achieved the entire course of study at the close of which one is 
usually received into the ranks of the learned, I entirely changed 
my opinion. For I found myself embarrassed with so many doubts 
and errors that it seemed to me that the effort to instruct myself 
had no effect other than the increasing discovery of my own 
ignorance. And yet I was studying at one of the most celebrated 
Schools in Europe, where I thought that there must be men of 
learning if they were to be found anywhere in the world. I learned 
there all that others learned; and not being satisfied with the 
sciences that we were taught, I even read through all the books 
which fell into my hands, treating of what is considered most curious 
and rare. Along with this I knew the judgments that others had 
formed of me, and I did not feel that I was esteemed inferior to my 
fellow-students, although there were amongst them some destined 
to fill the places of our masters. And finally our century seemed 
to me as flourishing, and as fertile in great minds, as any which 
had preceded. And this made me take the liberty of judging all 


84 Discourse 


others by myself and of coming to the conclusion that there was no 
learning in the world such as I was formerly led to believe it 
to be. 

I did not omit, however, always to hold in esteem those exercises 
which are the occupation of the Schools. I knew that the Languages 
which one learns there are essential for the understanding of all 
ancient literature; that fables with their charm stimulate the mind 
and histories of memorable deeds exalt it; and that, when read 
with discretion, these books assist in forming a sound judgment. 
I was aware(that the reading of all good books is indeed like a 
conversation with the noblest men of past centuries who were the 
authors of them, nay a carefully studied conversation, in which 
they reveal to us none but the best of their thoughts.| I deemed 
Eloquence to have a power and beauty beyond compare ; that Poesy 
has most ravishing delicacy and sweetness; that in Mathematics 
there are the subtlest discoveries and inventions which may 
accomplish much, both in satisfying the curious, and in furthering 
all the arts, and in diminishing man’s labour; that those writings 
that deal with Morals contain much that is instructive, and many 
exhortations to virtue which are most useful ; that Theology points 
out the way to Heaven; that Philosophy teaches us to speak with 
an appearance of truth on all things, and causes us to be admired 
by the less learned; that Jurisprudence, Medicine and all other 

Sciences) bring honour and riches to those who cultivate them ; and 
finally that it is good to have examined all things, even those most 
full of superstition and falsehood, in order that we may know their 
just value, and avoid being deceived by them. 

But I considered that I had already given sufficient time to 
languages and likewise even to the reading of the literature of the 
ancients, both their histories and their fables. For to converse 
with those of other centuries is almost the same thing as to travel. 
It is good to know something of the customs of different peoples in 
order to judge more sanely of our own, and not to think that 
everything of a fashion not ours is absurd and contrary to reason, 
as do those who have seen nothing. But when one employs too 
much time in travelling, one becomes a stranger in one’s own 
country, and when one is too curious about things which were 
practised in past centuries, one is usually very ignorant about those 
which are practised in our own time. Besides, fables make one 
imagine many events possible which in reality are not so, and 
even the most accurate of histories, if they do not exactly mis- 


on the Method 85 


represent or exaggerate the value of things in order to render 
them more worthy of being read, at least omit in them all the 
circumstances which are basest and least notable; and from this 
fact it follows that what is retained is not portrayed as it really is, 
and that those who regulate their conduct by examples which they 
derive from such a source, are liable to fall into the extravagances of 
the knights-errant of Romance, and form projects beyond their power 
of performance. 

I esteemed Eloquence most highly and I was enamoured of 
Poesy, but I thought that both were gifts of the mind rather than 
fruits of study. Those who have the strongest power of reasoning, 
and who most skilfully arrange their thoughts in order to render 
them clear and intelligible, have the best power of persuasion even 
if they can but speak the language of Lower Brittany and have 
never learned Rhetoric. And those who have the most delightful 
original ideas and who know how to express them with the maximum 
of style and suavity, would not fail to be the best poets even if the 
art of Poetry were unknown to them. 

Most of all was I delighted with Mathematics because of the 
certainty of its demonstrations and the evidence of its reasoning ; 
but I did not yet understand its true use, and, believing that it was 
of service only in the mechanical arts, I was astonished that, seeing 
how firm and solid was its basis, no loftier edifice had been reared 
thereupon. On the other hand I compared the works of the 
ancient pagans which deal with Morals to palaces most superb and 
magnificent, which are yet built on sand and mud alone. They 
praise the virtues most highly and show them to be more worthy 
of being prized than anything else in the world, but they do not 
sufficiently teach us to become acquainted with them, and often 
that which is called by a fine name is nothing but insensibility, or 
pride, or despair, or parricide. 

I honoured our Theology and aspired as much as anyone to 
reach to heaven, but having learned to regard it as a most highly 
assured fact that the road is not less open to the most ignorant 
than to the most learned, and that the revealed truths which 
conduct thither are quite above our intelligence, I should not have 
dared to submit them to the feebleness of my reasonings; and 
I thought that, in order to undertake to examine them and succeed 
in so doing, it was necessary to have some extraordinary assistance 
from above and to be more than a mere man. 

I shall not say anything about Philosophy, but that, seeing that 


86 Discourse 


it has been cultivated for many centuries by the best minds that 
have ever lived, and that nevertheless no single thing is to be found 
in it which is not subject of dispute, and in consequence which is 
not dubious, I had not enough presumption to hope to fare better 
there than other men had done. And also, considering how many 
conflicting opinions there may be regarding the self-same matter, all 
supported by learned people, while there can never be more than 
one which is true, I esteemed as well-nigh false all that only went 
as far as being probable. 

Then as to the other sciences, inasmuch as they derive their 
principles from Philosophy, I judged that one could have built 
nothing solid on foundations so far from firm. And neither the 
honour nor the promised gain was sufficient to persuade me to 
cultivate them, for, thanks be to God, I did not find myself in a 
condition which obliged me to make a merchandise of science for 
the improvement of my fortune; and, although I did not pretend to 
scorn all glory like the Cynics, I yet had very small esteem for what 
I could not hope to acquire, excepting through fictitious titles. 
And, finally, as to false doctrines, I thought that I already knew 
well enough what they were worth to be subject to deception 
neither by the promises of an alchemist, the predictions of an 
astrologer, the impostures of a magician, the artifices or the empty 
boastings of any of those who make a profession of knowing that of 
which they are ignorant. 

This is why, as soon as age permitted me to emerge from the 
control of my tutors, I entirely quitted the study of letters. And 
resolving to seek no other science than that which could be found 
in myself, or at least in the great book of the world, I employed the 
rest of my youth in travel, in seeing courts and armies, in inter- 
course with men of diverse temperaments and conditions, in collecting 
varied experiences, in proving myself in the various predicaments in 
which I was placed by fortune, and under all circumstances bringing 
my mind to bear on the things which came before it, so that I might 
derive some profit from my experience. For it seemed to me that 
I might meet with much more truth in the reasonings that each 
man makes on the matters that specially concern him, and the issue 
of which would very soon punish him if he made a wrong judgment, 
than in the case of those made by a man of letters in his study 
touching speculations which lead to no result, and which bring 
about no other consequences to himself excepting that he will be 
all the more vain the more they are removed from common sense, 


on the Method 87 


since in this case it proves him to have employed so much the more 
ingenuity and skill in trying to make them seem probable. And 
I always had an excessive desire to learn to distinguish the true 
from the false, in order to see clearly in my actions and to walk 
with confidence in this life. 

It is true that while I only considered the manners of other 
men I found in them nothing to give me settled convictions; and 
I remarked in them almost as much diversity as I had formerly seen 
in the opinions of philosophers. So much was this the case that 
the greatest profit which I derived from their study was that, in 
seeing many things which, although they seem to us very extra- 
vagant and ridiculous, were yet commonly received and approved 
by other great nations, I learned to believe nothing too certainly of 
which I had only been convinced by example and custom. Thus 
little by little I was delivered from many errors which might have 
obscured our natural vision and rendered us less capable of listening 
to Reason. But after I had employed several years in thus studying 
the book of the world and trying to acquire some experience, I one 
day formed the resolution of also making myself an object of study 
and of employing all the strength of my mind in choosing the road 
I should follow. This succeeded much better, it appeared to me, 
than if I had never departed either from my country or my books, 


Part II. 


I was then in Germany, to which country I had been attracted 
by the wars which are not yet at an end. And as I was returning 
from the coronation of the Emperor to join the army, the setting in 
of winter detained me in a quarter where, since I found no society to 
divert me, while fortunately I had also no cares or passions to 
trouble me, I remained the whole day shut up alone in a stove-heated 
room, where I had complete leisure to occupy myself with my own 
thoughts. One of the first of the considerations that occurred to me 
was that there is very often less perfection in works composed of 
several portions, and carried out by the hands of various masters, 
than in those on which one individual alone has worked. Thus 
we see that buildings planned and carried out by one archi- 
tect alone are usually more beautiful and better proportioned 
than those which many have tried to put in order and improve, 
making use of old walls which were built with other ends in view. 
In the same way also, those ancient cities which, originally mere 
villages, have become in the process of time great towns, are usually 


88 Discourse 


badly constructed in comparison with those which are regularly 
laid out on a plain by a surveyor who is free to follow his own ideas. 
Even though, considering their buildings each one apart, there is 
often as much or more display of skill in the one case than in the 
other, the former have large buildings and small buildings indis- 
criminately placed together, thus rendering the streets crooked and 
irregular, so that it might be said that it was chance rather than 
the will of men guided by reason that led to such an arrangement. 
And if we consider that this happens despite the fact that 
from all time there have been certain officials who have had the 
special duty of looking after the buildings of private individuals in 
order that they may be public ornaments, we shall understand how 
difficult it is to bring about much that is satisfactory in operating 
only upon the works of others. Thus I imagined that those people 
who were once half-savage, and who have become civilized only by 
slow degrees, merely forming their laws as the disagreeable necessities 
of their crimes and quarrels constrained them, could not succeed in 
establishing so good a system of government as those who, from the 
time they first came together as communities, carried into effect the 
constitution laid down by some prudent legislator. Thus it is quite 
certain that the constitution of the true Religion whose ordinances 
are of God alone is incomparably better regulated than any other. 
And, to come down to human affairs, I believe that if Sparta was 
very flourishing in former times, this was not because of the excel- 
lence of each and every one of its laws, seeing that many were very 
strange and even contrary to good morals, but because, being drawn 
up by one individual, they all tended towards the same end. And 
similarly I thought that the sciences found in books—in those at 
least whose reasonings are only probable and which have no demon- 
strations, composed as they are of the gradually accumulated 
opinions of many different individuals—do not approach so near to 
the truth as the simple reasoning which a man of common sense can 
quite naturally carry out respecting the things which come imme- 
diately before him. Again I thought that since we have all been 
children before being men, and since it has for long fallen to us 
to be governed by our appetites and by our teachers (who often 
enough contradicted one another, and none of whom perhaps 
counselled us always for the best), it is almost impossible that our 
judgments should be so excellent or solid as they should have been 
had we had complete use of our reason since our birth, and had we 
been guided by its means alone. 


on the Method 89 


It is true that we do not find that all the houses in a town are 
rased to the ground for the sole reason that the town is to be 
rebuilt in another fashion, with streets made more beautiful; but 
at the same time we see that many people cause their own houses to 
be knocked down in order to rebuild them, and that sometimes they 
are forced so to do where there is danger of the houses falling of 
themselves, and when the foundations are not secure. From such 
examples I argued to myself that there was no plausibility in the 
claim of any private individual to reform a state by altering every- 
thing, and by overturning it throughout, in order to set it right 
again. Nor is it likewise probable that the whole body of the 
Sciences, or the order of teaching established by the Schools, should 
be reformed. But as regards all the opinions which up to this time 
I had embraced, I thought I could not do better than endeavour 
once for all to sweep them completely away, so that they might later 
on be replaced, either by others which were better, or by the same, 
when I had made them conform to the uniformity of a rational 
scheme. And I firmly believed that by this means I should succeed 
in directing my life much better than if I had only built on old found- 
ations, and relied on principles of which I allowed myself to be in 
youth persuaded without having inquired into their truth. For 
although in so doing I recognised various difficulties, these were at the 
same time not unsurmountable, nor comparable to those which are 
found in reformation of the most insignificant kind in matters which 
concern the public. In the case of great bodies it is too difficult a 
task to raise them again when they are once thrown down, or even 
to keep them in their places when once thoroughly shaken; and 
their fall cannot be otherwise than very violent. Then as to any 
imperfections that they may possess (and the very diversity that is 
found between them is sufficient to tell us that these in many cases 
exist) custom has doubtless greatly mitigated them, while it has 
also helped us to avoid, or insensibly corrected a number against 
which mere foresight would have found it difficult to guard. And 
finally the imperfections are almost always more supportable than 
would be the process of removing them, just as the great roads 
which wind about amongst the mountains become, because of being 
frequented, little by little so well-beaten and easy that it is much 
better to follow them than to try to go more directly by climbing 
over rocks and descending to the foot of precipices. 

This is the reason why I cannot in any way approve of those 
turbulent and unrestful spirits who, being called neither by birth 


90 Discourse 


nor fortune to the management of public affairs, never fail to have 
always in their minds some new reforms. And if I thought that in 
this treatise there was contained the smallest justification for this 
folly, I should be very sorry to allow it to be published. My design 
has never extended beyond trying to reform my own opinion and to 
build on a foundation which is entirely my own. If my work has 
given me a certain satisfaction, so that I here present to you a draft 
of it, I do not so do because I wish to advise anybody to imitate it. 
Those to whom God has been most beneficent in the bestowal of 
His graces will perhaps form designs which are more elevated ; but 
I fear much that this particular one will seem too venturesome for 
many. The simple resolve to strip oneself of all opinions and beliefs 
formerly received is not to be regarded as an example that each man 
should follow, and the world may be said to be mainly composed of 
two classes of minds neither of which could prudently adopt it. 
There are those who, believing themselves to be cleverer than they 
are, cannot restrain themselves from being precipitate in judgment 
and have not sufficient patience to arrange their thoughts in proper 
order ; hence, once a man of this description had taken the liberty 
of doubting the principles he formerly accepted, and had deviated 
from the beaten track, he would never be able to maintain the path 
which must be followed to reach the appointed end more quickly, 
and he would hence remain wandering astray all through his life. 
Secondly, there are those who having reason or modesty enough to 
judge that they are less capable of distinguishing truth from false- 
hood than some others from whom instruction might be obtained, 
are right in contenting themselves with following the opinions of 
these others rather than in searching better ones for themselves. 
For myself I should doubtless have been of these last if I had 
never had more than a single master, or had I never known the 
diversities which have from all time existed between the opinions of 
men of the greatest learning. But I had been taught, even in my 
College days, that there is nothing imaginable so strange or so little 
credible that it has not been maintained by one philosopher or other, 
and I further recognised in the course of my travels that all those 
whose sentiments are very contrary to ours are yet not necessarily 
barbarians or savages, but may be possessed of reason in as great or 
even a greater degree than ourselves. I also considered how very 
different the self-same man, identical in mind and spirit, may 
become, according as he is brought up from childhood amongst the 
French or Germans, or has passed his whole life amongst Chinese or 


on the Method 91 


cannibals. I likewise noticed how even in the fashions of one’s 
clothing the same thing that pleased us ten years ago, and which 
will perhaps please us once again before ten years are passed, seems 
at the present time extravagant and ridiculous. I thus concluded 
that it is much more custom and example that persuade us than 
any certain knowledge, and yet in spite of this the voice of the 
majority does not afford a proof of any value in truths a little 
difficult to discover, because such truths are much more likely to 
have been discovered by one man than by a nation. I could not, 
however, put my finger on a single person whose opinions seemed 
preferable to those of others, and I found that I was, so to speak, 
constrained myself to undertake the direction of my procedure. 

But like one who walks alone and in the twilight I resolved to go 
so slowly, and to use so much circumspection in all things, that if 
my advance was but very small, at least I guarded myself well from 
falling. I did not wish to set about the final rejection of any single 
opinion which might formerly have crept into my beliefs without 
having been introduced there by means of Reason, until I had first 
of all employed sufficient time in planning out the task which I 
had undertaken, and in seeking the true Method of arriving at a 
knowledge of all the things of which my mind was capable. 

Among the different branches of Philosophy, I had in my younger 
days to a certain extent studied Logic; and in those of Mathe- 
matics, Geometrical Analysis and Algebra—three arts or sciences 
which seemed as though they ought to contribute something to the 
design I had in view. But in examining them I observed in respect 
to Logic that the syllogisms and the greater part of the other teaching 
served better in explaining to others those things that one knows (or 
like the art of Lully, in enabling one to speak without judgment of 
those things of which one is ignorant) than in learning what is new. 
And although in reality Logic contains many precepts which are 
very true and very good, there are at the same time mingled with 
them so many others which are hurtful or superfluous, that it is 
almost as difficult to separate the two as to draw a Diana or a 
Minerva out of a block of marble which is not yet roughly hewn. 
And as to the Analysis of the ancients and the Algebra of the 
moderns, besides the fact that they embrace only matters the most 
abstract, such as appear to have no actual use, the former is always 
go restricted to the consideration of symbols that it cannot exercise 
the Understanding without greatly fatiguing the Imagination ; and 
in the latter one is so subjected to certain rales and formulas that 


92 Discourse 


the result is the construction of an art which is confused and obscure, 
and which embarrasses the mind, instead of a science which contri- 
butes to its cultivation. This made me feel that some other Method 
must be found, which, comprising the advantages of the three, is yet 
exempt from their faults... And as a multiplicity of laws often 
furnishes excuses for evil-doing, and as a State is hence much better 
ruled when, having but very few laws, these are most strictly observed ; 
so, instead of the great number of precepts of which Logic is com- 
posed, I believed that I should find the four which I shall state 
quite sufficient, provided that I adhered to a firm and constant 
resolve never on any single occasion to fail in their observance. 

(The first of these was to accept nothing as true which I did not 
clearly recognise to be so: that is to say, carefully to avoid precipi- 
tation and prejudice in judgments, and to accept in them nothing 
more than what was presented to my mind so clearly and distinctly 
that I could have no occasion to doubt it. 

{The second was to divide up each of the difficulties which 
I examined into as many parts as possible, and as seemed requisite 
in order that it might be resolved in the best manner possible. 

The third was to carry on my reflections in due order, com- 
mencing with objects that were the most simple and easy to under- 
stand, in order to rise little by little, or by degrees, to knowledge of 
the most complex, assuming an order, even if a fictitious one, among 
those which do not follow a natural sequence relatively to one 
another. 

(The last was in all cases to make enumerations so complete and 
reviews so general that I should be certain of having omitted 
nothing. 

Those long chains of reasoning, simple and easy as they are, of 
which geometricians make use in order to arrive at the most difficult 
demonstrations, had caused me to imagine that all those things 
which fall under the cognizance of man might very likely be 
mutually related in the same fashion ; and that, provided only that we 
abstain from receiving anything as true which is not so, and always 
retain the order which is necessary in order to deduce the one 
conclusion from the other, there can be nothing so remote that we 
cannot reach to it, nor so recondite that we cannot discover it. 
And I had not much trouble in discovering which objects it was 
necessary to begin with, for I already knew that it was with the 
most simple and those most easy to apprehend. Considering also 
that of all those who have hitherto sought for the truth in the 


on the Method 93 


Sciences, it has been the mathematicians alone who have been able 
to succeed in making any demonstrations, that is to say producing 
reasons which are evident and certain, I did not doubt that it had 
been by means of a similar kind that they carried on their investi- 
gations. I did not at the same time hope for any practical result in 
so doing, except that my mind would become accustomed to the 
nourishment of truth and would not content itself with false reason- 
ing. But for all that I had no intention of trying to master all 
those particular sciences that receive in common the name of 
Mathematics; but observing that, although their objects are 
different, they do not fail to agree in this, that they take nothing 
under consideration but the various relationships or proportions 
which are present in these objects, I thought that it would be 
better if I only examined these proportions in their general aspect, 
and without viewing them otherwise than in the objects which would 
serve most to facilitate a knowledge of them. Not that I should in 
any way restrict them to these objects, for I might later on all the 
more easily apply them to all other objects to which they were 
applicable. Then, having carefully noted that in order to compre- 
hend the proportions I should sometimes require to consider each 
one in particular, and sometimes merely keep them in mind, or take 
them in groups, I thought that, in order the better to consider them 
in detail, I should picture them in the form of lines, because I could 
find no method more simple nor more capable of being distinctly 
represented to my imagination and senses. I considered, however, 
that in order to keep them in my memory or to embrace several at 
once, it would be essential that I should explain them by means of 
certain formulas, the shorter the better. And for this purpose it was 
requisite that I should borrow all that is best in Geometrical 
Analysis and Algebra, and correct the errors of the one by the 
other. 

As a matter of fact, I can venture to say that the exact observa- 
tion of the few precepts which I had chosen gave me so much 
facility in sifting out all the questions embraced in these two sciences, 
that in the two or three months which I employed in examining 
them—commencing with the most simple and general, and making 
each truth that I discovered a rule for helping me to find others— 
not only did I arrive at the solution of many questions which I had 
hitherto regarded as most difficult, but, towards the end, it seemed 
to me that I was able to determine in the case of those of which I 
was still ignorant, by what means, and in how far, it was possible to 


94 Discourse 


solve them. In this I might perhaps appear to you to be very vain 
if you did not remember that having but one truth to discover in 
respect to each matter, whoever succeeds in finding it knows in its 
regard as much as can be known. It is the same as with a child, for 
instance, who has been instructed in Arithmetic and has made an 
addition according to the rule prescribed ; he may be sure of having 
found as regards the sum of figures given to him all that the human 
mind can know. For, in conclusion, the Method which teaches us 
to follow the true order and enumerate exactly every term in the 
matter under investigation contains everything which gives certainty 
| to the rules of Arithmetic. 

' But what pleased me most in this Method was that I was certain 
by its means of exercising my reason in all things, if not perfectly, 
at least as well as was in my power. And besides this, I felt in 
making use of it that my mind gradually accustomed itself to con- 
ceive of its objects more accurately and distinctly ; and not having 
restricted this Method to any particular matter, I promised myself to 
apply it as usefully to the difficulties of other sciences as I had done to 
those of Algebra. Not that on this account I dared undertake to 
examine just at once all those that might present themselves ; for 
that would itself have been contrary to the order which the Method 
prescribes. But having noticed that the knowledge of these diffi- 
culties must be dependent on principles derived from Philosophy in 
which I yet found nothing to be certain, I thought that it was 
requisite above all to try to establish certainty in it. I considered 
also that since this endeavour is the most important in all the 
world, and that in which precipitation and prejudice were most to 
be feared, I should not try to grapple with it till I had attained to 
a much riper age than that of three and twenty, which was the age 
I had reached. I thought, too, that I should first of all employ 
much time in preparing myself for the work by eradicating from my 
mind all the wrong opinions which I had up to this time accepted, 
and accumulating a variety of experiences fitted later on to afford 
matter for my reasonings, and by ever exercising myself in the 
Method which | had prescribed, in order more and more to fortify 
myself in the power of using it. 


on the Method 95 


Part III. 


And finally, as it is not sufficient, before commencing to rebuild 
the house which we inhabit, to pull it down and provide materials 
and an architect (or to act in this capacity ourselves, and make a 
careful drawing of its design), unless we have also provided our- 
selves with some other house where we can be comfortably lodged 
during the time of rebuilding, so in order that I should not remain 
irresolute in my actions while reason obliged me to be so in my 
judgments, and that I might not omit to carry on my life as happily 
as I could, I formed for myself a code of morals for the time being 


maxims I should like to enumerate to you. 

The first was to obey the laws and customs of my country, 
adhering constantly to the religion in which by God’s grace 
I had been instructed since my childhood, and in all other 
things directing my conduct by opinions the most moderate in 
nature, and the farthest removed from excess in all those which are 
commonly received and acted on by the most judicious of those with. 
whom I might come in contact. For since I began to count my own 
opinions as nought, because I desired to place all under examina- 
tion, I was convinced that I could not do better than follow those 
held by people on whose judgment reliance could be placed. And 
although such persons may possibly exist amongst the Persians and 
Chinese as well as amongst ourselves, it seemed to me that it was 
most expedient to bring my conduct into harmony with the ideas of 
those with whom I should have to live; and that, in order to 
ascertain that these were their real opinions, I should observe what 
they did rather than what they said, not only because in the corrupt 
state of our manners there are few people who desire to say all that 
they believe, but also because many are themselves ignorant of their 
beliefs. For since the act of thought by which we believe a thing 
is different from that by which we know that we believe it, the one 
often exists without the other. And amongst many opinions all 
equally received, I chose only the most moderate, both because 
these are always most suited for putting into practice, and probably 
the best (for all excess has a tendency to be bad), and also because 
I should have in a less degree turned aside from the right path, 
supposing that I was wrong, than if, having chosen an extreme 
course, I found that I had chosen amiss. I also made a point of 
counting as excess all the engagements by means of which we limit 


96 Discourse <~ 


in some degree our liberty. Not that I hold in low esteem those 
laws which, in order to remedy the inconstancy of feeble souls, 
permit, when we have a good object in our view, that certain vows 
be taken, or contracts made, which oblige us to carry out that 
object. This sanction is even given for security in commerce 
where designs are wholly indifferent. But because I saw nothing 
in all the world remaining constant, and because for my own part 
I promised myself gradually to get my judgments to grow better 
and never to grow worse, I should have thought that I had com- 
mitted a serious sin against commonsense if, because I approved 
of something at one time, I was obliged to regard it similarly at 
a later time, after it had possibly ceased to meet my approval, or 
after I had ceased to regard it in a favourable light. 

My second maxim was that of being as firm and resolute in my 


actions as I could be, and not to follow less faithfully opinions the 
‘most dubious, when my mind was once made up regarding them, 
than if these had been beyond doubt. In this I should be following 
the example. of travellers, who, finding themselves lost in a forest, 
know that they ought not to wander first to one side and then to 
the other, nor, still less, to stop in one place, but understand that 
they should continue to walk as straight as they can in one direction, 
not diverging for any slight reason, even though it was possibly 
chance alone that first determined them in their choice. By this 
means if they do not go exactly where they wish, they will at least 
arrive somewhere at the end, where probably they will be better off 
than in the middle of a forest. And thus since often enough in the 
actions of life no delay is permissible, it is very certain that, when it 
is beyond our power to discern the opinions which carry most truth, 
we should follow the most probable ; and even although we notice 
no greater probability in the one opinion than in the other, we at 
least should make up our minds to follow a particular one and 
afterwards consider it as no longer doubtful in its relationship to 
practice, but as very true and very certain, inasmuch as the reason 
which caused us to determine upon it is known to be so. And 
henceforward this principle was sufficient to deliver me from all the 
penitence and remorse which usually affect the mind and agitate 
the conscience of those weak and vacillating creatures who allow 
themselves to keep changing their procedure, and practise as good, 
things which they afterwards judge to be evil. 

My third maxim was to try always to conquer myself rather 
than fortune, and to alter my | desires rather than change the order 


on the Method 97 


of the world, and generally to accustom myself to believe that there 
is nothing entirely within our power but our own thoughts: so that 
after we have done our best in regard to the things that are without 
us, our ill-success cannot possibly be failure on our part’. And this 
alone seemed to me sufficient to prevent my desiring anything in 
the future beyond what I could actually obtain, hence rendering me 
content ; for since our will does not naturally induce us to desire 
anything but what our understanding represents to it as in some 
way possible of attainment, it is certain that if we consider all good 
things which are outside of us as equally outside of our power, we 
should not have more regret in resigning those goods which appear 
to pertain to our birth, when we are deprived of them for no fault 
of our own, than we have in not possessing the kingdoms of China 
or Mexico. In the same way, making what is called a virtue out of 
a necessity, we should no more desire to be well if ill, or free, if in 
prison, than we now do to have our bodies formed of a substance as 
httle corruptible as diamonds, or to have wings to fly with like 
birds. I allow, however, that to accustom oneself to regard all 
things from this point of view requires long exercise and meditation 
often repeated ; and I believe that it is principally in this that is to 
be found the secret of those philosophers who, in ancient times, 
were able to free themselves from the empire of fortune, or, 
despite suffering or poverty, to rival their gods in their happiness. 
For, ceaselessly occupying themselves in considering the limits which 
were prescribed to them by nature, they persuaded themselves so 
completely that nothing was within their own power but their 
thoughts, that this conviction alone was sufficient to prevent their 
having any longing for other things. And they had so absolute a 
mastery over their thoughts that they had some reason for esteeming 
themselves as more rich and more powerful, and more free and more 
happy than other men, who, however favoured by nature or fortune 
they might be, if devoid of this philosophy, never could arrive at all 
at which they aim. 

And last of _all to conclude this moral code, I felt it incumbent 


eS 


life i an order ‘to. try to. choose out the best ; and without wishing to 


—s 


1 “*So that whatever does not eventuate after we have done all in our power 
that it should happen is to be accounted by us as among the things which 
evidently cannot be done and which in philsepitonl phrase are called im- 
possible.” Latin Version, 


98 Discourse 


prescribed myself. I had experienced so much satisfaction since 
beginning to use this method, that I did not believe that any 
sweeter or more innocent could in this life be found,—every day 
discovering by its means some truths which seemed to me suffi- 
ciently important, although commonly ignored by other men. The 
satisfaction which I had so filled my mind that all else seemed 
of no account. And, besides, the three preceding maxims were 
founded solely on the plan which I had formed of continuing to 
instruct myself. For since God has given to each of us some light 
with which to distinguish truth from error, I could not believe that 
I ought for a single moment to content myself with accepting the 
opinions held by others unless I had in view the employment of my 
own judgment in examining them at the proper time; and I could 
not have held myself free of scruple in following such opinions, if 
nevertheless I had not intended to lose no occasion of finding 
superior opinions, supposing them to exist; and finally, I should 
not have been able to restrain my desires nor to remain content, if 
I had not followed a road by which, thinking that I should be 
certain to be able to acquire all the knowledge of which I was 
capable, I also thought I should likewise be certain of obtaining all 
the best things which could ever come within my power. And 
inasmuch as our will impels us neither to follow after nor to flee 
from anything, excepting as our understanding represents it as 
good or evil, it is sufficient to judge wisely in order to act well, and 
the best judgment brings the best action—that is to say, the 
acquisition of all the virtues and all the other good things that it is 
possible to obtain. When one is certain that this point is reached, 
one cannot fail to be contented. 

Having thus assured myself of these maxims, and having set 
them on one side along with the truths of religion which have 
always taken the first place in my creed, I judged that as far as the 
rest of my opinions were concerned, I could safely undertake to rid 
myself of them. And inasmuch as I hoped to be able to reach my 
end more successfully in converse with man than in living longer 
shut up in the warm room where these reflections had come to me, 
I hardly awaited the end of winter before I once more set myself to 
travel. (And in all the nine following years I did nought but roam 


on the Method 99 


hither and thither, trying to be a spectator rather than an actor in 
all the comedies the world displays. | More especially did I reflect 
in each matter that came before me as to anything which could 
make it subject to suspicion or doubt, and give occasion for mistake, 
and I rooted out of my mind all the errors which might have 
formerly crept in. | Not that indeed I imitated the sceptics, who 
only doubt for the sake of doubting, and pretend to be always 
uncertain ; for, on the contrary, my design was only to provide 
myself with good ground for assurance, and to reject the quicksand 
and mud in order to find the rock or clay.{ In this task it seems to 
me, I succeeded pretty well, since in trying to discover the error or 
uncertainty of the propositions which I examined, not by feeble 
conjectures, but by clear and assured reasonings, I encountered 
nothing so dubious that I could not draw from it some conclusion 
that was tolerably secure, if this were no more than the inference 
that it contained in it nothing that was certain. And just as in 
pulling down an old house we usually preserve the debris to serve 
in building up another, so in destroying all those opinions which 
I considered to be ill-founded, I made various observations and 
acquired many experiences, which have since been of use to me in 
establishing those which are more certain. And more than this, 
I continued to exercise myself in the method which I had laid down 
for my use; for besides the fact that I was careful as a rule to 
conduct all my thoughts according to its maxims, I set aside some 
hours from time to time which I more especially employed in 
practising myself in the solution of mathematical problems according 
to the Method, or in the solution of other problems which though 
pertaining to other sciences, I was able to make almost similar to 
those of mathematics, by detaching them from all principles of other 
sciences which I found to be not sufficiently secure. You will see 
the result in many examples which are expounded in this volume’. 
And hence, without living to all appearance in any way differently 
from those who, having no occupation beyond spending their lives 
in ease and innocence, study to separate pleasure from vice, and 
who, in order to enjoy their leisure without weariness, make use of 
all distractions that are innocent and good, I did not cease to 
prosecute my design, and to profit perhaps even more in my study 
of Truth than if I had done nothing but read books or associate 
with literary people. 


1 The Dioptrics, Meteors and Geometry were published originally in the 
same volume, 


100 Discourse 


These nine years thus passed away before I had taken any defi- 
nite part in regard to the difficulties as to which the learned are in 
the habit of disputing, or had commenced to seek the foundation of 
any philosophy more certain than the vulgar. And the example 
of many excellent men who had tried to do the same before me, but, 
as it appears to me, without success, made me imagine it to be so 
hard that possibly I should not have dared to undertake the task, 
had I not discovered that someone had spread abroad the report 
that I had already reached its conclusion. I cannot tell on what 
they based this opinion ; if my conversation has contributed any- 
thing to it, this must have arisen from my confessing my ignorance 
more ingenuously than those who have studied a little usually do. 
And perhaps it was also due to my having shown forth my reasons 
for doubting many things which were held by others to be certain, 
rather than from having boasted of any special philosophic system. 
But being at heart honest enough not to desire to be esteemed as 
different from what I am, I thought that I must try by every means 
in my power to render myself worthy of the reputation which I had 
gained. And it is just eight years ago that this desire made me 
resolve to remove myself from all places where any acquaintances 
were possible, and to retire to a country such as this’, where the 
long-continued war has caused such order to be established that the 
armies which are maintained seem only to be of use in allowing 
the inhabitants to enjoy the fruits of peace with so much the more 
security ; and where, in the crowded throng of a great and very 
active nation, which is more concerned with its own aftairs than 
curious about those of others, without missing any of the con- 
veniences of the most populous towns, I can live as solitary and 
retired as in deserts the most remote. 


Part IV. 


I do not know that I ought to tell you of the first meditations 
there made by me, for they are so metaphysical and so unusual that 
they may perhaps not be acceptable to everyone. And yet at the 
same time, in order that one may judge whether the foundations 
which I have laid are sufficiently secure, I find myself constrained 
in some measure to refer to them. Fora long time I had remarked 
that it is sometimes requisite in common life to follow opinions 
which one knows to be most uncertain, exactly as though they were 
indisputable, as has been said above. But because in this case 

1 i.e, Holland, where Descartes settled in 1629. 


on the Method 101 


I wished to give myself entirely to the search after Truth, I thonght 
that it was necessary for me to take an apparently opposite course, 
and to reject as absolutely false everything as to which I could 
imagine the least; sound of doubt, tn order to soo if afterwards 
there remained @nything in my belief that was entirely certain. 
Thus, because Our senses sometimes deceive us, I wished to suppose 
that nothing is just as they cause us to imagine it to be; and 
because there are men who deceive themselves in their reasoning 
and fall into paralogisms, even concerning the simplest matters of 
geometry, and judging that I was as subject to error as was any 
other, I rejected as false all the reasons formerly accepted by me as 
demonstrations. And since all the same thoughts and concep- 
tions which we have while awake may also come to us in sleep, 
without any of them being at that time true, I resolved to assume 
that everything that ever entered into my mind was no more true 
than the illusions of my dreams. {But immediately afterwards 
I noticed that whilst I thus wished to think all things false, it was 
absolutely essential that the ‘I’ who thought this should be some- 
what, and remarking that this truth ‘TI think, therefore I am’ was 
so certain and so assured that all the most extravagant suppositions 
brought forward by the sceptics were incapable of shaking it, I came 
to the conclusion that I could receive it without scruple as the first 
principle of the Philosophy for which I was seeking.) ; 

And then, examining attentively that which I was, I saw that 
I could conceive that I had no body, and that there was no world nor 
place where I might be ; but yet that I could not for all that conceive 
that I was not. On the contrary, I saw from the very fact that 
I thought of doubting the truth of other things, it very evidently 
and certainly followed that I was; on the other hand if I had 
only ceased from thinking, even if all the rest of what I had ever 
imagined had really existed, I should have no reason for thinking that 
I had existed. From that I knew that I was a substance the whole 
essence or nature of which is to think, and that for its existence 
there is no need of any place, nor does it depend on any material 
thing; so that this ‘me,’ that is to say, the soul by which I am 
what I am, is entirely distinct from body, and is even more easy to 
know than is the latter ; and even if body were not, the soul would ' 
not cease to be what it is. 

After this I considered generally what in a proposition is 
requisite in order to be true and certain; for since I had just 
discovered one which I knew to be such, I thought that I ought 


102 Discourse 


also to know in what this certainty consisted. And having remarked 
that there was nothing at all in the statement ‘J think, therefore 
I am’ which assures me of having thereby made a true assertion, 
excepting that I see very clearly that to think it is necessary to be, 
I came to the conclusion that I might assume, as a general rule, 
that the things which we conceive very clearly and distinctly are 


all true—remembering, however, that there is some difficulty in 


. ascertaining \ s which are those that we distinctly conceive. 
Following upon this this , and reflecting on the fact that I doubted, 


and that consequen ntly 1 my existence was not quite perfect (for saw 


clearly that it was a greater perfection to know than to doubt), 
I pesolved. to Anquire uheke I had learnt to think of anything more 


perfect. As to the thoughts which I had of many other things 
outside of me, like the heavens, the earth, light, heat, and a 
thousand others, I had not so much difieulty in knowing whence 
they came, because, remarking nothing in them which seemed to 
render them superior to me, I could believe that, if they were true, 
they were dependencies upon my nature, in so far as it possessed 
some perfection ; and if they were not true, that I held them from 
nought, that is to say, that they were in me because I had some- 
thing lacking in my nature. But this could not apply to the 
idea of a Being more perfect than my own, for to hold it from 
nought would be manifestly impossible ; and because it is no less 

contradictory to say of the more perfect that it is what results 
from and depends on the less perfect, than to say that there is 
something which proceeds from nothing, it was equally impossible 
that I should hold it from myself. In this way it could but follow 
that it had been placed in me by a Nature which was really more 
perfect than mine Gould be, and which even had within itself all the 
perfections of which” T could form any idea—that is to Say, to put it 
in a word, which was God: To which I added that since I knew 
some perfections: which I did not possess, [ was not the only being 
in existence (I shall here use freely, if you will allow, the terms of 
the School) ; but that there was necessarily some other more perfect 
Being on which I depended, or from which I acquired all that I 
had. For if I had existed alone and independent of any others, 
so that I should have had from myself all that perfection of being 
in which I participated to however small an extent, I should have 
been able for the same reason to have had all the remainder which 


on the Method 103 


I knew that I lacked ; and thus I myself should have been infinite, 
eternal, immutable, omniscient, all-powerful, and, finally, I should 
have all the perfections which I could discern in God. For, in 
pursuance of the reasonings which I have just carried on, in order 
to know the nature of God as far as my nature is capable of knowing 
it, I had only to consider in reference to all these things of which 
I found some idea in myself, whether it was a perfection to possess 
them or not. And I was assured that none of those which indicated 
some imperfection were in Him, but that all else was present ; and 
I saw that doubt, inconstancy, sadness, and such things, could not 
be in Him considering that I myself should have been glad to be 
without them. In addition to this, I had ideas of many things 
which are sensible and corporeal, for, although I might suppose that 
I was dreaming, and that all that I saw or imagined was false, 
I could not at the same time deny that the ideas were really in my 
thoughts. But because I had already recognised very clearly in 
myself that the nature of the intelligence is distinct from that of 
the body, and observing that all composition gives evidence of 
dependency, and that dependency is manifestly an imperfection, 
‘T came to the conclusion that it could not be a perfection in God to 
be composed of these two natures, and that consequently He was 
not so composed. I judged, however, that if there were any bodies 
in the world, or even any intelligences or other natures which were 
not wholly perfect, their existence must depend on His power in 
such a way that they could not subsist without Him for a single 
moment. 

After that I desired to seek for other truths, and having put 
before myself the object of the geometricians, which I conceived to 
be a continuous body, or a space indefinitely extended in length, 
breadth, height or depth, which was divisible into various parts, and 
which might have various figures and sizes, and might be moved 
or transposed in all sorts of ways (for all this the geometricians 
suppose to be in the object of their contemplation), I went through 
some of their simplest demonstrations, and having noticed that this 
great certainty which everyone attributes to these demonstrations is 
founded solely on the fact that they are conceived of with clearness, 
in accordance with the rule which I have just laid down, I also 
noticed that there was nothing at all in them to assure me of the 
existence of their object. For, to take an example, I saw very well 
that if we suppose a triangle to be given, the three angles must 
certainly be equal to two right angles; but for all that I saw no 


104 Discourse 


reason to be assured that there was any such triangle in existence, 
while on the contrary, on reverting to the examination of the idea 


which I had of a Perfect Bein Being, I found that in this case existence 


was implied in it the saune manner in which the equality of. of its 


aston Faw We one or or even more evidently still. Conse- 
quently it is at Jeast as certain that God, who is a Being so perfect, 
is, or exists, as any demonstration of geometry can possibly be. 
What causes many, however, to persuade themselves that there 
is difficulty in knowing this truth, and even in knowing the nature 
of their soul, is the fact that aa never raise their minds above the 
things of sense, or that they are so accusto omed to consider nothing 
excepting by imagining it, which is a mode of thought specially 
adapted to material objects, that all that is not capable of being 
imagined appears to them not to be intelligible at all. This is 
pues enough from the fact that even the philosophers in the 
Schools hold it as a maxim that there is nothing in the under- 
standing which has not first of all been in the senses, in which 
there is certainly no doubt that the ideas of God and of the soul 
have never been. And it seems to me that those who desire to 
make use of their imagination in order to understand these ideas, 
act in the same way as if, to hear sounds or smell odours, they 
should wish to make use of their eyes: excepting that there is 
indeed this difference, that the sense of sight does not give us less 
assurance of the truth of its objects, than do those of scent or of 
hearing, while neither our imagination nor our senses can ever 
assure us of anything, if our understanding does not intervene. 
If there are finally any persons who are not sufficiently persuaded 
of the existence of God and of their soul by the reasons which I 
have brought forward, I wish that they should know that all other 
things of which they perhaps think themselves more assured (such 
as possessing a body, and that there are stars and an earth and so 
on) are less certain. For, although we have a moral assurance of 
these things which is such that it seems that it would k be extravagant 
in us to doubt them, at the same time no one, unless he is devoid 
of reason, can deny, when a metaphysical certainty is in question, 
that there is sufficient cause for our not having complete assur- 
ance, by observing the fact that when asleep we may similarly 
imagine that we have another body, and that we see other stars 
and another earth, without there being anything of the kind. 


on the Method 105 


For how do we know that the thoughts that come in dreams are 
more false than those that we have when we are awake, seeing that 
often enough the former are not less lively and vivid than the 
latter? And though the wisest minds may study the matter as 
much as they will, I do not believe that they will be able to give 
any sufficient reason for removing this doubt, unless they presuppose 
the existence of God. For to begin with, that which I have just 
taken as a rule, that is to say, that all the things that we very 
clearly and very distinctly conceive of are true, is certain only 
because God is or exists, and that He is a Perfect Being, and that 
all that is in us issues from Him. From this it follows that our 
ideas or notions, which to the extent of their being clear or distinct 
are ideas of real things issuing from God, cannot but to that extent 
be true. So that though we often enough have ideas which have 
an element of falsity, this can only be the case in regard to those 
which have in them somewhat that is confused or obscure, because 
in so far as they have this character they participate in negation 
—that is, they exist in us as confused only because we are not 
quite perfect. And it is evident that there is no less repugnance 
in the idea that error or imperfection, inasmuch as it is imper- 
fection, proceeds from God, than there is in the idea of truth or 
perfection proceeding from nought. But if we did not know that 
all that is in us of reality and truth proceeds from a perfect and 
infinite Being, however clear and distinct were our ideas, we should 
not have any reason to assure ourselves that they had the perfection 
of being true. 

But after the knowledge of God and of the soul has thus 
rendered us certain of this rule, it is very easy to understand that 
the dreams which we imagine in our sleep should not make us in 
any way doubt the truth of the thoughts which we have when 
awake. For even if in sleep we had some very distinct idea such as 
a geometrician might have who discovered some new demonstration, 
the fact of being asleep would not militate against its truth. And 
as to the most ordinary error in our dreams, which consists in 
their representing to us various objects in the same way as do our 
external senses, it does not matter that this should give us occasion 
to suspect the truth of such ideas, because we may be likewise often 
enough deceived in them without our sleeping at all, just as when 
those who have the jaundice see everything as yellow, or when stars 
or other bodies which are very remote appear mach smaller than 
they really are. For, finally, whether we are awake or asleep, we 


106 Discourse 


should never allow ourselves to be persuaded excepting by the 
evidence of our Reason. And it must be remarked that I speak of _ 


SS . 
our Reason and not of our imagination nor of our senses; Just as 


though we ¢ee the sun very clearly, we should not for that reason 
judge that it is of the size of which it appears to be; likewise we 
could quite well distinct imagine the head of a lion on the body of 
a goat, without necessari cluding that a chimera exists. For 
Reason does not insist that whatever we see or imagine thus is a 
truth, but it tells us clearly that all our ideas or notions must have 
some foundation of truth. For otherwise it could not be possible 
that God, who is all perfection and truth, should have placed them 
within us. And because our reasonings are never so evident nor so 
complete during sleep as during wakefulness, although sometimes 
our imaginations are then just as lively and acute, or even more so, 
Reason tells us that since our thoughts cannot possibly be all true, 
because we are not altogether perfect, that which they have of truth 
must infallibly be met with in our waking experience rather than 
in that of our dreams. 


Part V. 


I should be very glad to proceed to show forth the complete 
chain of truths which I have deduced from these first, but because 
to do this it would have been necessary now to speak of many 
matters of dispute among the learned, with whom I have no desire 
to embroil myself, I think that it will be better to abstain. I shall 
only state generally what these truths are, so that it may be left to 
the decision of those best able to judge whether it would be of use 
for the public to be more particularly informed of them or not. 
I always remained firm in the resolution which I had made, not to 
assume any other principle than that of which I have just made 
use, in order to demonstrate the existence of God and of the Soul, 
and to accept nothing as true which did not appear to be more clear 
and more certain than the demonstrations of the geometricians had 
formerly seemed. And nevertheless I venture to say that not only 
have I found the means of satisfying myself in a short time as 
to the more important of those difficulties usually dealt with in 
philosophy, but I have also observed certain laws which God has so 
established in Nature, and of which He has imprinted such ideas 
on our minds, that, after having reflected sufficiently upon the 
matter, we cannot doubt their being accurately observed in all that 
exists or is done in the world. Further, in considering the sequence 


on the Method 107 


of these laws, it seems to me that I have discovered many truths 
more useful and more important than all that I had formerly learned 
or even hoped to learn. 

But because I tried to explain the most important of these in a 
Treatise* which certain considerations prevented me from publishing, 
I cannot do better, in making them known, than here summarise 
briefly what that Treatise contains. I had planned to comprise in 
it all that I believed myself to know regarding the nature of material 
objects, before I set myself to write. However, just as the painters 
who cannot represent equally well on a plain surface all the various 
sides of a solid body, make selection of one of the most important, 
which alone is set in the light, while the others are put in shadow 
and made to appear only as they may be seen in looking at the former, 
so, fearing that I could not put in my Treatise all that I had in my 
mind, I undertook only to show very fully my conceptions of light. 
Later on, when occasion occurred, I resolved to add something 
about the sun and fixed stars, because light proceeds almost entirely 
from them ; the heavens would be dealt with because they transmit 
light, the planets, the comets and the earth because they reflect it, 
and more particularly would all bodies which are on the earth, 
because they are either coloured or transparent, or else luminous ; 
and finally I should deal with man because he is the spectator of 
all. For the very purpose of putting all these topics somewhat in 
shadow, and being able to express myself freely about them, without 
being obliged to adopt or to refute the opinions which are accepted 
by the learned, I resolved to leave all this world to their disputes, 
and to speak only of what would happen in a new world if God now 
created, somewhere in an imaginary space, matter sufficient where- 
with to form it, and if He agitated in diverse ways, and without 
any order, the diverse portions of this matter, so that there resulted 
a chaos as confuscd as the poets ever feigned, and concluded His 
work by merely lending His concurrence to Nature in the usual 
way, leaving her to act in accordance with the laws which He had 
established. So, to begin with, I described this matter and tried to 
represent it in such a way, that it seems to me that nothing in the 
world could be more clear or intelligible, excepting what has just 
been said of God and the Soul. For I even went so far as expressly 
to assume that there was in it none of these forms or qualities 
which are so debated in the Schools, nor anything at all the 


1 i.e, ‘Le Monde,’ suppressed on hearing of Galileo’s condemnation, 


108 Discourse 


knowledge of which is not so natural to our minds that none could 
even pretend to be ignorant of it. Further I pointed out what are 
the laws of Nature, and, without resting my reasons on any other 
principle than the infinite perfections of God, I tried to demonstrate 
all those of which one could have any doubt, and to show that they 
are of such a nature that even if God had created other worlds, He 
could not have created any in which these laws would fail to be 
observed. After that, I showed how the greatest part of the matter 
of which this chaos is constituted, must, in accordance with these 
laws, dispose and arrange itself in such a fashion as to render it 
similar to our heavens ; and how meantime some of its parts must 
form an earth, some planets and comets, and some others a sun 
and fixed stars. And, enlarging on the subject of light, I here 
explained at length the nature of the light which would be found in 
the sun and stars, and how from these it crossed in an instant the 
immense space of the heavens, and how it was reflected from the 
planets and comets to the earth. ‘To this I also added many things 
touching the substance, situation, movements, and all the different 
qualities of these heavens and stars, so that I thought I had said 
enough to make it clear that there is nothing to be seen in the 
heavens and stars pertaining to our system which must not, or at 
least may not, appear exactly the same in those of the system which 
I described. From this point I came to speak more particularly of 
the earth, showing how, though I had expressly presupposed that 
God had not placed any weight in the matter of which it is 
composed, its parts did not fail all to gravitate exactly to its centre; 
and how, having water and air on its surface, the disposition of the 
heavens and of the stars, more particularly of the moon, must cause 
a flux or reflux, which in all its circumstances is similar to that 
which is observed in our seas, and besides that, a certain current 
both of water and air from east to west, such as may also be observed 
in the tropics. I also showed how the mountains, seas, fountains 
and rivers, could naturally be formed in it, how the metals came to 
be in the mines and the plants to grow in the fields ; and generally 
how all bodies, called mixed or composite, might arise. And 
because I knew nothing but fire which could produce light, excepting 
the stars, I studied amongst other things to make very clear all 
that pertains to its nature, how it is formed, how nourished, how 
there is sometimes only heat without light, and sometimes light 
without heat; I showed, too, how different colours might by it be 
induced upon different bodies and qualities of diverse kinds, how 


on the Method 109 


some of these were liquefied and others solidified, how nearly all can 
be consumed or converted into ashes and smoke by its means, and 
finally how of these ashes, by the intensity of its action alone, it 
forms glass. Since this transformation of ashes into glass seemed 
to me as wonderful as any other process in nature, I took particular 
pleasure in describing it. 

I did not at the same time wish to infer from all these facts 
that this world has been created in the manner which I described ; 
for it is much more probable that at the beginning God made it 
such as it was to be. But it is certain, and it is an opinion 
commonly received by the theologians, that the action by which 
He now preserves it is just the same as that by which He at first 
created it. In this way, although He had not, to begin with, given 
this world any other form than that of chaos, provided that the 
laws of nature had once been established and that He had lent His 
aid in order that its action should be according to its wont, we may 
well believe, without doing outrage to the miracle of creation, that 
by this means alone all things which are purely material might in 
course of time have become such as we observe them to be at 
present ; and their nature is much easier to understand when we 
see them coming to pass little by little in this manner, than were 
we to consider them as all complete to begin with. 

From a description of inanimate bodies and plants I passed on 
to that of animals, and particularly to that of men. But since 
I had not yet sufficient knowledge to speak of them in the same 
style as of the rest, that is to say, demonstrating the effects from 
the causes, and showing from what beginnings and in what fashion 
Nature must produce them, I contented myself with supposing that 
God formed the body of man altogether like one of ours, in the 
outward figure of its members as well as in the interior conformation 
of its organs, without making use of any matter other than that 
which I had described, and without at the first placing in it a 
rational soul, or any other thing which might serve as a vegetative 
or as a sensitive soul; excepting that He kindled in the heart one of 
these fires without light, which I have already described, and which 
I did not conceive of as in any way different from that which makes 
the hay heat when shut up before it is dry, and which makes new 
wine grow frothy when it is left to ferment over the fruit. For, 
examining the tunctions which might in accordance with this sup- 
position exist in this body, I found precisely all those which might 
exist in us without our having the power of thought, and con- 


110 Discourse 


sequently without our soul—that is to say, this part of us, distinct 
from the body, of which it has just been said that its nature is to 
think—contributing to it, functions which are identically the same 
as those in which animals lacking reason may be said to resemble 
us. For all that, I could not find in these functions any which, 
being dependent on thought, pertain to us alone, inasmuch as we 
are men; while I found all of them afterwards, when I assumed 
that God had created a rational soul and that He had united it 
to this body in a particular manner which I described. 

But in order to show how I there treated of this matter, I wish here 
to set forth the explanation of the movement of heart and arteries 
which, being the first and most general movement that is observed 
in animals, will give us the means of easily judging as to what we 
ought to think about all the rest. And so that there may be less 
difficulty in understanding what I shall say on this matter, I should 
like that those not versed in anatomy should take the trouble, before 
reading this, of having cut up before their eyes the heart of some 
large animal which has lungs (for it is in all respects sufficiently 
similar to the heart of a man), and cause that there be demonstrated 
to them the two chambers or cavities which are within it. There is 
first of all that which is on the right side, with which two very large 
tubes or channels correspond, viz. the vena cava, which is the 
principal receptacle of the blood, and so to speak the trunk of a 
tree of which all the other veins of the body are the branches ; and 
there is the arterial vein which has been badly named because it 
is nothing but an artery which, taking its origin from the heart, 
divides, after having issued from it, into many branches which 
proceed to disperse themselves all through the lungs. Then there 
is secondly the cavity on the left side with which there again 
correspond two tubes which are as large or larger than the pre- 
ceding, viz. the venous artery, which has also been badly named, 
because it is nothing but a vein which comes from the lungs, where 
it is divided into many branches, interlaced with those of the 
arterial vein, and with those of the tube which is called the windpipe, 
through which enters the air which we breathe; and the great 
artery which, issuing from the heart, sends its branches throughout 
the body. I should also wish that the eleven little membranes, 
which, like so many doors, open and shut the four entrances which 
are in these two cavities, should be carefully shown. There are of 
these three at the entrance of the vena cava, where they are so 
arranged that they can in nowise prevent the blood which it contains 


on the Method 111 


from flowing into the right cavity of the heart and yet exactly prevent 
its issuing out ; there are three at the entrance to the arterial vein, 
which, being arranged quite the other way, easily allow the blood 
which is in this cavity to pass into the lungs, but not that which is 
already in the lungs to return to this cavity. here are also two 
others at the entrance of the venous artery, which allow the blood 
in the lungs to flow towards the left cavity of the heart, but do not 
permit its return; and three at the entrance of the great artery, 
which allow the blood to flow from the heart, but prevent its return. 
There is then no cause to seek for any other reason for the number 
of these membranes, except that the opening of the venous artery 
being oval, because of the situation where it is met with, may be 
conveniently closed with two membranes, while the others, being 
round, can be better closed with three. Further, I should have my 
readers consider that the grand artery and the arterial vein are 
much harder and firmer than are the venous artery and the vena 
cava ; and that these two last expand before entering the heart, 
and there form so to speak two pockets called the auricles of the 
heart, which are composed of a tissue similar to its own; and also 
that there is always more heat in the heart than in any other part 
of the body; and finally that this heat is capable of causing any 
drop of blood that enters into its cavities promptly to expand and 
dilate, as liquids usually do when they are allowed to fall drop by 
drop into some very hot vessel. 

After this I do not need to say anything with a view to explaining 
the movement of the heart, except that when its cavities are not 
full of blood there necessarily flows from the vena cava into the 
right cavity, and from the venous artery into the left, enough blood 
to keep these two vessels always full, and being full, that their orifices, 
which are turned towards the heart, cannot then be closed. But as 
soon as two drops of blood have thus entered, one into each of the 
cavities, these drops, which cannot be otherwise than very large, 
because the openings by which they enter are very wide and the 
vessels from whence they come are very full of blood, rarefy and 
dilate because of the heat which they find there. By this means, 
causing the whole heart to expand, they force home and close the 
five little doors which are at the entrances of the two vessels 
whence they flow, thus preventing any more blood from coming 
down into the heart ; and becoming more and more rarefied, they 
push open the six doors which are in the entrances of the two other 
vessels through which they make their exit, by this means causing 


112 Discourse 


all the branches of the arterial vein and of the great artery to expand 
almost at the same instant as the heart. This last immediately 
afterward contracts as do also the arteries, because the blood which 
has entered them has cooled ; and the six little doors close up again, 
and the five doors of the vena cava and of the venous artery re-open 
and make a way for two other drops of blood which cause the heart 
and the arteries once more to expand, just as we saw before. And 
because the blood which then enters the heart passes through these 
two pouches which are called auricles, it comes to pass that their 
movement is contrary to the movement of the heart, and that they 
contract when it expands. For the rest, in order that those who 
do not know the force of mathematical demonstration and are 
unaccustomed to distinguish true reasons from merely probable 
reasons, should not venture to deny what has been said without 
examination, I wish to acquaint them with the fact that this 
movement which I have just explained follows as necessarily from 
the very disposition of the organs, as can be seen by looking at the 
heart, and from the heat which can be felt with the fingers, and 
from the nature of the blood of which we can learn by experience, 
as does that of a clock from the power, the situation, and the form, 
of its counterpoise and of its wheels. 

But if we ask how the blood in the veins does not exhaust itself 
in thus flowing continually into the heart, and how the arteries do 
not become too full of blood, since all that passes through the heart 
flows into them, I need only reply by stating what has already been 
written by an English physician’, to whom the credit of having 
broken the ice in this matter must be ascribed, as also of being the 
first to teach that there are many little tubes at the extremities of 
the arteries whereby the blood that they receive from the heart 
enters the little branches of the veins, whence it returns once 
more to the heart; in this way its course is just a perpetual 
circulation. He proves this very clearly by the common experience 
of surgeons, who, by binding the arm moderately firmly above the 
place where they open the vein, cause the blood to issue more 
abundantly than it would have done if they had not bound it at 
all; while quite a contrary result would occur if they bound it 
below, between the hand and the opening, or if they bound it very 
firmly above. For it is clear that when the bandage is moderately 
tight, though it may prevent the blood already in the arm from 


+ Harvey (Latin Tr.). 


on the Method 113 


returning to the heart by the veins, it cannot for all that prevent 
more blood from coming anew by the arteries, because these are 
situated below the veins, and their walls, being stronger, are less 
easy to compress; and also that the blood which comes from the 
heart tends to pass by means of the arteries to the hand with 
greater force than it does to return from the hand to the heart by 
the veins. And because this blood escapes from the arm by the 
opening which is made in one of the veins, there must necessarily 
be some passages below the ligature, that is to say, towards the 
extremities of the arm, through which it can come thither from the 
arteries. This physician likewise proves very clearly the truth of that 
which he says of the course of the blood, by the existence of certain 
little membranes or valves which are so arranged in different places 
along the course of the veins, that they do not permit the blood to 
pass from the middle of the body towards the extremities, but only 
to return from the extremities to the heart; and further by the 
experiment which shows that all the blood which is in the body 
may issue from it in a very short time by means of one single artery 
that has been cut, and this is so even when it is very tightly bound 
very near the heart, and cut between it and the ligature, so that 
there could be no ground for supposing that the blood which flowed 
out of it could proceed from any other place but the heart. 

But there are many other things which demonstrate that the 
true cause of this motion of the blood is that which I have stated. 
To begin with, the difference which is seen between the blood which 
issues from the veins, and that which issues from the arteries, can 
only proceed from the fact, that, being rarefied, and so to speak 
distilled by passing through the heart, it is more subtle and lively 
and warmer immediately after leaving the heart (that is to say, 
when in the arteries) than it is a little while before entering it (that 
is, when in the veins). And if attention be paid, we shall find that 
this difference does not appear clearly, excepting in the vicinity of 
the heart, and is not so clear in those parts which are further 
removed from it. Further, the consistency of the coverings of 
which the arterial vein and the great artery are composed, shows 
clearly enongh that the blood beats against them with more force 
than it does in the case of the veins. And why should the left 
cavity of the heart and the great artery be larger and wider than 
the right cavity and the arterial vein, if it is not that the blood of 
the venous artery having only been in the lungs since it had passed 
through the heart, is more subtle and rarefies more effectively and 


114 Discourse 


easily than that which proceeds immediately from the vena cava? 
And what is it that the physicians can discover in feeling the pulse, 
unless they know that, according as the blood changes its nature, it 
may be rarefied by the warmth of the heart in a greater or less 
degree, and more or less quickly than before? And if we inquire 
how this heat is communicated to the other members, must it not 
be allowed that it is by means of the blood which, passing through 
the heart, is heated once again and thence is spread throughout 
all the body? From this it happens that if we take away the blood 
from any particular part, by that same means we take away from it 
the heat; even if the heart were as ardent as a red hot iron it 
would not suffice to heat up the feet and hands as it actually does, 
unless it continually sent out to them new blood. We further 
understand from this that the true use of respiration is to carry 
sufficient fresh air into the lungs to cause the blood, which comes 
there from the right cavity of the heart, where it has been rarefied 
and so to speak transformed into vapours, to thicken, and become 
anew converted into blood before falling into the left cavity, without 
which process it would not be fit to serve as fuel for the fire which 
there exists. We are confirmed in this statement by seeing that 
the animals which have no lungs have also but one cavity in their 
hearts, and that in children, who cannot use them while still within 
their mother’s wombs, there is an opening by which the blood flows 
from the vena cava into the left cavity of the heart, and a conduit 
through which it passes from the arterial vein into the great artery 
without passing through the lung. Again, how could digestion be 
carried on in the stomach if the heart did not send heat there by 
the arteries, and along with this some of the more fluid parts of 
the blood which aid in dissolving the foods which have been there 
placed? And is not the action which converts the juice of foods 
into blood easy to understand if we consider that it is distilled by 
passing and repassing through the heart possibly more than one or 
two hundred times in a day? What further need is there to explain 
the process of nutrition and the production of the different humours 
which are in the body, if we can say that the force with which 
the blood, in being rarefied, passes from the heart towards the 
extremities of the arteries, causes some of its parts to remain among 
those of the members where they are found and there to take the 
place of others which they oust; and that according to the situation 
or form or smallness of the little pores which they encounter, 
certain ones proceed to certain parts rather than others, just as 


on the Method 115 


a number of different sieves variously perforated, as everyone has 
probably seen, are capable of separating different species of grain? 
And finally what in all this is most remarkable of all, is the gene- 
ration of the animal spirits, which resemble a very subtle wind, or 
rather a flame which is very pure and very vivid, and which, con- 
tinually rising up in great abundance from the heart to the brain, 
thence proceeds through the nerves to the muscles, thereby giving 
the power of motion to all the members. And it is not necessary 
to suppose any other cause to explain how the particles of blood, 
which, being most agitated and most penetrating, are the most 
proper to constitute these spirits, proceed towards the brain rather 
than elsewhere, than that the arteries which carry them thither are 
those which proceed from the heart in the most direct lines, and 
that according to the laws of Mechanics, which are identical with 
those of Nature, when many objects tend to move together to the 
same point, where there is not room for all (as is the case with the 
particles of blood which issue from the left cavity of the heart and 
tend to go towards the brain), the weakest and least agitated parts 
must necessarily be turned aside by those that are stronger, which 
by this means are the only ones to reach it. 

I had explained all these matters in some detail in the Treatise 
which I formerly intended to publish. And afterwards I had shown 
there, what must be the fabric of the nerves and muscles of the 
human body in order that the animal spirits therein contained 
should have the power to move the members, just as the heads of 
animals, a little while after decapitation, are still observed to move 
and bite the earth, notwithstanding that they are no longer animate ; 
what changes are necessary in the brain to cause wakefulness, sleep 
and dreams ; how light, sounds, smells, tastes, heat and all other 
qualities pertaining to external objects are able to imprint on it 
various ideas by the intervention of the senses ; how hunger, thirst 
and other internal affections can also convey their impressions upon 
it ; what should be regarded as the ‘common sense’ by which these 
ideas are received, and what is meant by the memory which retains 
them, by the fancy which can change them in diverse ways and out 
of them constitute new ideas, and which, by the same means, distri- 
buting the animal spirits through the muscles, can cause the members 
of such a body to move in as many diverse ways, and in a manner as 
suitable to the objects which present themselves to its senses and 
to its internal passions, as can happen in our own case apart from 
the direction of our free will. And this will not seem strange 


116 Discourse 


to those, who, knowing how many different automata or moving 
machines can be made by the industry of man, without employing 
in so doing more than a very few parts in comparison with the 
great multitude of bones, muscles, nerves, arteries, veins, or other 
parts that are found in the body of each animal. From this 
aspect the body is regarded as a machine which, having been made 
by the hands of God, is incomparably better arranged, and possesses 
in itself movements which are much more admirable, than any of 
those which can be invented by man. Here I specially stopped to 
show that if there had been such machines, possessing the organs 
and outward form of a monkey or some other animal without reason, 
we should not have had any means of ascertaining that they were 
not of the same nature as those animals. On the other hand, if 
there were machines which bore a resemblance to our body and 
imitated our actions as far as it was morally possible to do so, we 
should always have two very certain tests by which to recognise 
that, for all that, they were not real men. The first is, that they 
could never use speech or other signs as we do when placing our 
thoughts on record for the benefit of others. For we can easily 
understand a machine’s being constituted so that it can utter words, 
and even emit some responses to action on it of a corporeal kind, 
which brings about a change in its organs; for instance, if it is 
touched in a particular part it may ask what we wish to say to it; 
if in another part it may exclaim that it is being hurt, and so on. 
But it never happens that it arranges its speech in various ways, in 
order to reply appropriately to everything that may be said in its 
presence, as even the lowest type of man can do. And the second 
difference is, that although machines can perform certain things as 
well as or perhaps better than any of us can do, they infallibly fall 
short in others, by the which means we may discover that they did 
not act from knowledge, but only from the disposition of their 
organs. For while reason is a universal instrument which can serve 
for all contingencies, these organs have need of some special adapta- 
tion for every particular action. From this it follows that it is 
morally impossible that there should be sufficient diversity in any 
machine to allow it to act in all the events of life in the same way 
as our reason causes us to act. 

By these two methods we may also recognise the difference 
that exists between men and brutes. For it is a very remarkable 
fact that there are none so depraved and stupid, without even 
excepting idiots, that they cannot arrange different words together, 


on the Method 117 


forming of them a statement by which they make known their 
thoughts ; while, on the other hand, there is no other animal, 
however perfect and fortunately circumstanced it may be, which 
can do the same. It is not the want of organs that brings this 
to pass, for it is evident that magpies and parrots are able to 
utter words just like ourselves, and yet they cannot speak as 
we do, that is, so as to give evidence that they think of what 
they say. On the other hand, men who, being born deaf and dumb, 
are in the same degree, or even more than the brutes, destitute of 
the organs which serve the others for talking, are in the habit of 
themselves inventing certain signs by which they make themselves 
understood by those who, being usually in their company, have 
leisure to learn their language. And this does not merely show 
that the brutes have less reason than men, but that they have none 
at all, since it is clear that very little is required in order to be able 
to talk. And when we notice the inequality that exists between 
animals of the same species, as well as between men, and observe 
that some are more capable of receiving instruction than others, it 
is not credible that a monkey or a parrot, selected as the most 
perfect of its species, should not in these matters equal the stupidest 
child to be found, or at least a child whose mind is clouded, 
unless in the case of the brute the soul were of an entirely different 
nature from ours. And we ought not to confound speech with 
natural movements which betray passions and may be imitated by 
machines as well as be manifested by animals; nor must we think, 
as did some of the ancients, that brutes talk, although we do not 
understand their language. For if this were true, since they have 
many organs which are allied to our own, they could communicate 
their thoughts to us jast as easily as to those of their own race. 
It is also a very remarkable fact that although there are many 
animals which exhibit more dexterity than we do in some of their 
actions, we at the same time observe that they do not manifest 
any dexterity at all in many others. Hence the fact that they do 
better than we do, does not prove that they are endowed with mind, 
for in this case they would have more reason than any of us, and 
would surpass us in all other things. It rather shows that they 
have no reason at all, and that it is nature which acts in them 
according to the disposition of their organs, just as a clock, which 
is only composed of wheels and weights is able to tell the hours and 
measure the time more correctly than we can do with all our wisdom. 

I had described after this the rational soul and shown that it 


118 Discourse 


could not be in any way derived from the power of matter, like the 
other things of which I had spoken, but that it must be expressly 
created. I showed, too, that it is not sufficient that it should be 
lodged in the human body like a pilot in his ship, unless perhaps for 
the moving of its members, but that it is necessary that it should 
also be joined and united more closely to the body in order to have 
sensations and appetites similar to our own, and thus to form a 
true man. In conclusion, I have here enlarged a little on the subject 
of the soul, because it is one of the greatest importance. For next 
to the error of those who deny God, which I think I have already 
sufficiently refuted, there is none which is more effectual in leading 
feeble spirits from the straight path of virtue, than to imagine that 
the soul of the brute is of the same nature as our own, and that in 
consequence, after this life we have nothing to fear or to hope for, 
any more than the flies and ants. As a matter of fact, when one 
comes to know how greatly they differ, we understand much better 
the reasons which go to prove that our soul is in its nature entirely 
independent of body, and in consequence that it is not lable to 
die with it. And then, inasmuch as we observe no other causes 
capable of destroying it, we are naturally inclined to judge that it 
is immortal. 


Part VI. 


It is three years since I arrived at the end of the Treatise 
which contained all these things ; and I was commencing to revise it 
in order to place it in the hands of a printer, when I learned that 
certain persons, to whose opinions I defer, and whose authority 
cannot have less weight with my actions than my own reason has 
over my thoughts, had disapproved of a physical theory published a 
little while before by another person!. I will not say that I agreed 
with this opinion, but only that before their censure I observed in 
it nothing which I could possibly imagine to be prejudicial either to 
Religion or the State, or consequently which could have prevented 
me from giving expression to it in writing, if my reason had 
persuaded me to do so: and this made me ur that among my 
own opinions one might be found which should be misunderstood, 
notwithstanding the great care which I have always taken not to 
accept any new beliefs unless I had very certain proof of their 
truth, and not to give expression to what could tend to the dis- 


1 i.e. Galileo, 


on the Method 119 


advantage of any person. This sufficed to cause me to alter the 
resolution which I had made to publish. For, although the reasons 
for my former resolution were very strong, my inclination, which 
always made me hate the profession of writing books, caused me 
immediately to find plenty of other reasons for excusing myself 
from doing so. And these reasons, on the one side and on the 
other, are of such a nature that not only have I here some interest 
in giving expression to them, but possibly the public may also have 
some interest in knowing them. 

I have never made much of those things which proceed from 
my own mind, and so long as I culled no other fruits from the 
Method which I use, beyond that of satisfying myself respecting 
certain difficulties which pertain to the speculative sciences, or 
trying to regulate my conduct by the reasons which it has taught 
me, I never believed myself to be obliged to write anything about 
it. For as regards that which concerns conduct, everyone is so 
confident of his own common sense, that there might be found as 
many reformers as heads, if it were permitted that others than those 
whom God has established as the sovereigns of his people, or at 
least to whom He has given sufficient grace and zeal to be prophets, 
should be allowed to make any changes in that. And, although 
my speculations give me the greatest pleasure, I believed that others 
also had speculations which possibly pleased them even more. But 
so soon as I had acquired some general notions concerning Physics, 
and as, beginning to make use of them in various special difficulties, 
I observed to what point they might lead us, and how much they 
differ from the principles of which we have made use up to the 
present time, I believed that I could not keep them concealed 
without greatly sinning against the law which obliges us to procure, 
as much as in us lies, the general good of all mankind. For they 
caused me to see that it is possible to attain knowledge which is 
very useful in life, and that, instead of that speculative philosophy 
which is taught in the Schools, we may find a practical philosophy 
by means of which, knowing the force and the action of fire, water, 
air, the stars, heavens and all other bodies that environ us, as dis- 
tinctly as we know the different crafts of our artisans, we can in the 
same way employ them in all those uses to which they are adapted, 
and thus render ourselves the masters and possessors of nature. 
This is not merely to be desired with a view to the invention of an 
infinity of arts and crafts which enable us to enjoy without any 
trouble the fruits of the earth and all the good things which are to 


120 Discourse 


be found there, but also principally because it brings about the 
preservation of health, which is without doubt the chief blessing 
and the foundation of all other blessings in this life. For the mind 
depends so much on the temperament and disposition of the bodily 
organs that, if it is possible to find a means of rendering men wiser 
and cleverer than they have hitherto been, I believe that it is in 
medicine that it must be sought. It is true that the medicine 
which is now in vogue contains little of which the utility is remark- 
able; but, without having any intention of decrying it, I am sure 
that there is no one, even among those who make its study a 
profession, who does not confess that all that men know is almost 
nothing in comparison with what remains to be known; and that 
we could be free of an infinitude of maladies both of body and mind, 
and even also possibly of the infirmities of age, if we had sufficient 
knowledge of their causes, and of all the remedies with which nature 
has provided us. But, having the intention of devoting all my life to 
the investigation of a knowledge which is so essential, and having 
discovered a path which appears to me to be of such a nature that 
we must by its means infallibly reach our end if we pursue it, 
unless, indeed, we are prevented by the shortness of life or by lack 
of experience, I judged that there was no better provision against 
these two impediments than faithfully to communicate to the 
public the little which I should myself have discovered, and to beg 
al] well-inclined persons to proceed further by contributing, each 
one according to his own inclination and ability, to the experiments 
which must be made, and then to communicate to the public all the 
things which they might discover, in order that the last should 
commence where the preceding had left off; and thus, by joining 
together the lives and labours of many, we should collectively 
proceed much further than any one in particular could succeed in 
doing. 

I remarked also respecting experiments, that they become so 
much the more necessary the more one is advanced in knowledge, 
for to begin with it is better to make use simply of those which 
present themselves spontaneously to our senses, and of which we 
could not be ignorant provided that we reflected ever so little, 
rather than to seek out those which are more rare and recondite ; 
the reason of this is that those which are more rare often mislead 
us so long as we do not know the causes of the more common, and 
the fact that the circumstances on which they depend are almost 
always so particular and so minute that it is very difficult to observe 


on the Method 121 


them. But in this the order which I have followed is as follows : 
I have first tried to discover generally the principles or first causes 
of everything that is or that can be in the world, without consider- 
ing anything that might accomplish this end but God Himself who 
has created the world, or deriving them from any source excepting 
from certain germs of truths which are naturally existent in our 
souls. After that I considered which were the primary and most 
ordinary effects which might be deduced from these causes, and it 
seems to me that in this way I discovered the heavens, the stars, 
an earth, and even on the earth, water, air, fire, the minerals and 
some other such things, which are the most common and simple of 
any that exist, and consequently the easiest to know. Then, when 
I wished to descend to those which were more particular, so many 
objects of various kinds presented themselves to me, that I did not 
think it was possible for the human mind to distinguish the forms or 
species of bodies which are on the earth from an infinitude of others 
which might have been so if it had been the will of God to place 
them there, or consequently to apply them to our use, if it were not 
that we arrive at the causes by the effects, and avail ourselves of 
many particular experiments. In subsequently passing over in my 
mind all the objects which have ever been presented to my senses, 
I can truly venture to say that I have not there observed anything 
which I could not easily explain by the principles which I had 
discovered. But I must also confess that the power of nature is so 
ample and so vast, and these principles are so simple and general, 
that I observed hardly any particular eftect as to which I could not 
at once recognise that it might be deduced from the principles in 
many different ways; and my greatest difficulty is usually to discover 
in which of these ways the effect does depend upon them. As to 
that, I do not know any other plan but again to try to find experi- 
ments of such a nature that their result is not the same if it has to 
be explained by one of the methods, as it would be if explained by 
the other. For the rest, I have now reached a position in which 
I discern, as it seems to me, sufficiently clearly what course must 
be adopted in order to make the majority of the experiments which 
may conduce to carry out this end. But I also perceive that they 
are of such a nature, and of so great a number, that neither my 
hands nor my income, though the latter were a thousand times larger 
than it is, could suffice for the whole; so that just in proportion as 
henceforth I shall have the power of carrying out more of them or 
less, shall I make more or less progress in arriving at a knowledge 


122 Discourse 


of nature. This is what I had promised myself to make known by 
the Treatise which I had written, and to demonstrate in it so clearly 
the advantage which the public might receive from it, that I should 
induce all those who have the good of mankind at heart—that is to 
say, all those who are really virtuous in fact, and not only by a false 
semblance or by opinion—both to communicate to me those experi- 
ments that they have already carried out, and to help me in the 
investigation of those that still remain to be accomplished. 

But I have since that time found other reasons which caused me 
to change my opinion, and consider that I should indeed continue 
to put in writing all the things which I judged to be of importance 
whenever I discovered them to be true, and that I should bestow on 
them the same care as I should have done had I wished to have 
them printed. I did this because it would give me so much the 
more occasion to examine them carefully (for there is no doubt that 
we always scrutinize more closely what we think will be seen by 
many, than what is done simply for ourselves, and often the things 
which have seemed true to me when I began to think about them, 
seemed false when I tried to place them on paper); and because 
I did not desire to lose any opportunity of benefiting the public if 
I were able to do so, and in order that if my works have any value, 
those into whose hands they will fall after my death, might have the 
power of making use of them as seems best to them. I, however, 
resolved that I should not consent to their being published during 
my lifetime, so that neither the contradictions and controversies to 
which they might possibly give rise, nor even the reputation, such 
as it might be, which they would bring to me, should give me any 
occasion to lose the time which I meant to set apart for my own 
instruction. For although it is true that each man is obliged to 
procure, as much as in him lies, the good of others, and that to be 
useful to nobody is popularly speaking to be worthless, it is at the 
same time true that our cares should extend further than the 
present time, and that it is good to set aside those things which 
may possibly be adapted to bring profit to the living, when we have 
in view the accomplishment of other ends which will bring much 
more advantage to our descendants. In the same way I should 
much like that men should know that the little which I have 
learned hitherto is almost nothing in comparison with that of which 
I am ignorant, and with the knowledge of which I do not despair of 
being able to attain. For it is much the same with those who little 
by little discover the truth in the Sciences, as with those who, 


on the Method Da 


commencing to become rich, have less trouble in obtaining great 
acquisitions than they formerly experienced, when poorer, in arriv- 
ing at those much smaller in amount. Or we might compare 
them to the Generals of our armies, whose forces usually grow in 
proportion to their victories, and who require more leadership in 
order to hold together their troops after the loss of a battle, than is 
needed to take towns and provinces after having obtained a success. 
For he really gives battle who attempts to conquer all the difficulties 
and errors which prevent him from arriving at a knowledge of the 
truth, and it is to lose a battle to admit a false opinion touching 
a matter of any generality and importance. Much more skill is 
required in order to recover the position that one beforehand 
held, than is necessary to make great progress when one already 
possesses principles which are assured. For myself, if I have 
succeeded in discovering certain truths in the Sciences (and I hope 
that the matters contained in this volume will show that I have 
discovered some), I may say that they are resultant from, and 
dependent on, five or six principal difficulties which I have sur- 
mounted, and my encounter with these I look upon as so many 
battles in which I have had fortune on my side. I will not even 
hesitate to say that I think I shall have no need to win more than 
two or three other victories similar in kind in order to reach the 
accomplishment of my plans. And my age is not so advanced but 
that, in the ordinary course of nature, I may still have sufficient 
leisure for this end. But I believe myself to be so much the 
more bound to make the most of the time which remains, as I have 
the greater hope of being able to employ it well. And without 
doubt I should have many chances of being robbed of it, were I to 
publish the foundations of my Physics ; for though these are nearly 
all so evident that it is only necessary to understand them in order 
to accept them, and although there are none of them as to which 
I do not believe myself capable of giving demonstration, yet because 
it is impossible that they should accord with all the various opinions 
of other men, I foresee that I should often be diverted from my 
main design by the opposition which they would bring to birth. 

We may say that these contradictions might be useful both in 
making me aware of my errors, and, supposing that I had reached 
some satisfactory conclusion, in bringing others to a fuller under- 
standing of my speculations; and, as many can see more than can 
a single man, they might help in leading others who from the 
present time may begin to avail themselves of my system, to assist 


124 Discourse 


me likewise with their discoveries. But though I recognise that I am 
extremely liable to err, and though I almost never trust the first 
reflections that I arrive at, the experience which I have had of the 
objections which may be made to my system prevents my having 
any hope of deriving profit from them. For I have often had 
experience of the judgments both of those whom I have esteemed 
as my friends, and of some others to whom I believed myself to be 
indifferent, and even, too, of some whose ill-feeling and envy would, 
I felt sure, make them endeavour to reveal what affection concealed 
fror the eyes of my friends. But rarely has it happened that any 
objection has been made which I did not in some sort foresee, unless 
where it was something very far removed from my subject. In this 
way hardly ever have I encountered any censor of my opinions who 
did not appear to me to be either less rigorous or less judicial than 
myself. And I certainly never remarked that by means of disputa- 
tions employed by the Schools any truth has been discovered of 
which we were formerly ignorant. And so long as each side 
attempts to vanquish his opponent, there is a much more serious 
attempt to establish probability than to weigh the reasons on either 
side ; and those who have for long been excellent pleaders are not 
for that reason the best judges. 

As to the advantage which others may receive from the com- 
munication of my reflections, it could not be very great, inasmuch 
as I have not yet carried them so far as that it is not necessary to 
add many things before they can be brought into practice. And 
I think I can without vanity say that if anyone is capable of doing 
this, it should be myself rather than another—not indeed that there 
may not be in the world many minds incomparably superior to my 
own, but because no one can so well understand a thing and make 
it his own when learnt from another as when it is discovered for 
himself. As regards the matter in hand there is so much truth in 
this, that although I have often explained some of my opinions to 
persons of very good intelligence, who, while I talked to them 
appeared to understand them very clearly, yet when they recounted 
them I remarked that they had almost always altered them in such 
a manner that I could no longer acknowledge them as mine. On 
this account I am very glad to have the opportunity here of begging 
my descendants never to believe that what is told to them proceeded 
from myself unless I have myself divulged it. And I do not in the 
least wonder at the extravagances attributed to all the ancient 
philosophers whose writings we do not possess, nor do I judge from 


on the Method 125 


these that their thoughts were very unreasonable, considering that 
theirs were the best minds of the time they lived in, but only that 
they have been imperfectly represented to us. We see, too, that it 
hardly ever happens that any of their disciples surpassed them, and 
I am sure that those who most passionately follow Aristotle now-a- 
days would think themselves happy if they had as much knowledge 
of nature as he had, even if this were on the condition that they 
should never attain to any more. ‘They are like the ivy that 
never tries to mount above the trees which give it support, and 
which often even descends again after it has reached their summit; 
for it appears to me that such men also sink again—that is to say, 
somehow render themselves more ignorant than they would have 
been had they abstained from study altogether. For, not content 
with knowing all that is intelligibly explained in their author, 
they wish in addition to find in him the solution of many 
difficulties of which he says nothing, and in regard to which he 
possibly had no thought at all. At the same time their mode of 
philosophising is very convenient for those who have abilities of 
a very mediocre kind, for the obscurity of the distinctions and 
principles of which they make use, is the reason of their being able 
to talk of all things as boldly as though they really knew about 
them, and defend all that they say against the most subtle and 
acute, without any one having the means of convincing them to the 
contrary. In this they seem to me like a blind man who, in order 
to fight on equal terms with one who sees, would have the latter to 
come into the bottom of a very dark cave. I may say, too, that 
it is in the interest of such people that I should abstain from 
publishing the principles of philosophy of which I make use, for, 
being so simple and evident as they are, I should, in publishing 
them, do the same as though I threw open the windows and caused 
daylight to enter the cave into which they have descended in order 
to fight. But even the best minds have no reason to desire to be 
acquainted with these principles, for if they wish to be able to talk 
of everything and acquire a reputation for learning, they will 
more readily attain their end by contenting themselves with the 
appeufance of truth which may be found in all sorts of things 
without much trouble, than in seeking for truth which only reveals 
itself little by little in certain spheres, and which, when others come 
into question, obliges one to confess one’s ignorance. If, however, 
they prefer the knowledge of some small amount of truth to the 
vanity of seeming to be ignorant of nothing, which knowledge 18 


126 Discourse 


doubtless preferable, or if they desire to follow a course similar 
to my own, it is not necessary that I should say any more than 
what I have already said in this Discourse. For if they are capable 
of passing beyond the point I have reached, they will also so much 
the more be able to find by themselves all that I believe myself to 
have discovered ; since, not having examined anything but in its 
order, it is certain that what remains for me to discover is in itself 
more difficult and more recondite than anything that I have hitherto 
been able to meet with, and they would have much less pleasure in 
learning from me than from themselves. Besides, the habit which 
they will acquire of seeking first things that are simple and then 
little by little and by degrees passing to others more difficult, will 
be of more use than could be all my instructions. For, as regards 
myself, I am persuaded that if from my youth up I had been taught 
all the truths of which I have since sought the demonstrations, or 
if I had not had any difficulty in learning them, I should perhaps 
never have known any others, or at least I should never have 
acquired the habit or facility which I think I have obtained, of ever 
finding them anew, in proportion as I set myself to seek for them. 
And, in a word, if there is any work at all which cannot be so well 
achieved by another as by him who has begun it, it is that at which 
T labour. 

It is true as regards the experiments which may conduce to 
this end, that one man could not possibly accomplish all of them. 
But yet he could not, to good advantage, employ other hands than 
his own, excepting those of artisans or persons of that kind whom 
he could pay, and whom the hope of gain—which is a very effectual 
incentive—might cause to perform with exactitude all the things 
they were directed to accomplish. As to those who, whether by 
curiosity or desire to learn, might possibly offer him their voluntary 
assistance, not only are they usually more ready with promises than 
with performance, planning out fine sounding projects, none of which 
are ever realised, but they will also infallibly demand payment for 
their trouble by requesting the explanation of certain difficulties, or 
at least by empty compliments and useless talk, which could not 
occupy any of the student’s time without causing it to be lost. 
And as to the experiments already made by others, even if they 
desired to communicate these to him—which those who term them 
secrets would never do—they are for the most part accompanied by 
so many circumstances or superfluous matter, that it would be very 
difficult for him to disentangle the truth. In addition to this he 


on the Method 127 


would find nearly all so badly explained, or even so false (because 
those who carried them out were forced to make them appear to be 
in conformity with their principles), that if there had been some 
which might have been of use to him, they would hardly be worth 
the time that would be required in making the selection. So true 
is this, that if there were anywhere in the world a person whom one 
knew to be assuredly capable of discovering matters of the highest 
importance and those of the greatest possible utility to the public, 
and if for this reason all other men were eager by every means in 
their power to help him in reaching the end which he set before 
him, I do not see that they could do anything for him beyond 
contributing to defray the expenses of the experiments which might 
be requisite, or, for the rest, seeing that he was not deprived of his 
leisure by the importunities of anyone. But, in addition to the 
fact that I neither esteem myself so highly as to be willing to 
promise anything extraordinary, nor give scope to an imagination 
so vain as to conceive that the public should interest itself greatly 
in my designs, I do not yet own a soul so base as to be willing to 
accept from anyone whatever a favour which it might be supposed 
I did not merit. 

All those considerations taken together were, three years ago, 
the cause of my not desiring to publish the Treatise which I had on 
hand, and the reason why I even formed the resolution of not bringing 
to light during my life any other of so general a kind, or one by 
which the foundations of Physics could be understood. But since 
then two other reasons came into operation which compelled me to 
bring forward certain attempts, as I have done here, and to render 
to the public some account of my actions and designs. ‘The first is 
that if I failed to do so, many who knew the intention I formerly 
had of publishing certain writings, might imagine that the causes 
for which I abstained from so doing were more to my disadvantage 
than they really were ; for although I do not care immoderately for 
glory, or, if I dare say so, although I even hate it, inasmuch as 
I judge it to be antagonistic to the repose which I esteem above all 
other things, at the same time I never tried to conceal my actions 
as though they were crimes, nor have I used many precautions 
against being known, partly because I should have thought it 
damaging to myself, and partly because it would have given me a 
sort of disquietude which would again have militated against the 
perfect repose of spirit which I seek. And forasmuch as having 
in this way always held myself in a condition of indifference as 


128 Discourse 


regards wnether 1 was known or was not known, I have not yet 
been able to prevent myself from acquiring some sort of reputation, 
I thought that I should do my best at least to prevent myself from 
acquiring an evil reputation. The other reason which obliged me 
to put this in writing is that I am becoming every day more and 
more alive to the delay which is being suffered in the design which 
I have of instructing myself, because of the lack of an infinitude of 
experiments, which it is impossible that I should perform without 
the aid of others: and although I do not flatter myself so much as 
to hope that the public should to any large degree participate in my 
interest, I yet do not wish to be found wanting, both on my own 
account, and as one day giving occasion to those who will survive 
me of reproaching me for the fact that I might have left many 
matters in a much better condition than I have done, had I not too 
much neglected to make them understand in what way they could 
have contributed to the accomplishment of my designs. 

And I thought that it was easy for me to select certain matters 
which would not be the occasion for many controversies, nor yet 
oblige me to propound more of my principles than I wish, and 
which yet would suffice to allow a pretty clear manifestation of what 
I can do and what I cannot do in the sciences. In this I cannot 
say whether I have succeeded or have not succeeded, and I do not 
wish to anticipate the judgment of any one by myself speaking of 
my writings; but I shall be very glad if they will examine them. 
And in order that they may have the better opportunity of so 
doing, I beg all those who have any objections to offer to take the 
trouble of sending them to my publishers, so that, being made 
aware of them, I may try at the same time to subjoin my reply. By 
this means, the reader, seeing objections and reply at the same 
time, will the more easily judge of the truth ; for I do not promise 
in any instance to make lengthy replies, but just to avow my errors 
very frankly if I am convinced of them; or, if I cannot perceive 
them, to say simply what I think requisite for the defence of the 
matters I have written, without adding the exposition of any new 
matter, so that I may not be endlessly engaged in passing from one 
side to the other. 

If some of the matters of which I spoke in the beginning of the 
Dioptrics and Meteors should at first sight give offence because 
I call them hypotheses and do not appear to care about their proof, 
let them have the patience to read these in entirety, and I hope 
that they will find themselves satisfied. For it appears to me that 


on the Method 129 


the reasonings are so mutually interwoven, that as the later ones 
are demonstrated by the earlier, which are their causes, the earlier 
are reciprocally demonstrated by the later which are their effects. 
And it must not be imagined that in this I commit the fallacy 
which logicians name arguing in a circle, for, since experience 
renders the greater part of these effects very certain, the causes 
from which I deduce them do not so much serve to prove their 
existence as to explain them; on the other hand, the causes are 
explained by the effects. And I have not named them hypotheses 
with any other object than that it may be known that while I 
consider myself able to deduce them from the primary truths 
which I explained above, yet I particularly desired not to do so, in 
order that certain persons may not for this reason take occasion to 
build up some extravagant philosophic system on what they take 
to be my principles, and thus cause the blame to be put on me. 
I refer to those who imagine that in one day they may discover all 
that another has arrived at in twenty years of work, so soon as he 
has merely spoken to them two or three words on the subject; while 
they are really all the more subject to err, and less capable of 
perceiving the truth as they are the more subtle and lively. For 
as regards the opinions that are truly mine I do not apologise for 
them as being new, inasmuch as if we consider the reasons of them 
well, I assure myself that they will be found to be so simple and so 
conformable to common sense, as to appear less extraordinary and 
less paradoxical than any others which may be held on similar 
subjects. And I do not even boast of being the first discoverer of 
any of them, but only state that I have adopted them, not because 
they have been held by others, nor because they have not been so 
held, but only because Reason has persuaded me of their truth. 
Even if artisans are not at once able to carry out the invention? 
explained in the Dioptrics, I do not for that reason think that it 
can be said that it is to be condemned ; for, inasmuch as great 
address and practice is required to make and adjust the mechanism 
which I have described without omitting any detail, I should not be 
less astonished at their succeeding at the first effort than I should 
be supposing some one were in one day to learn to play the guitar 
with skill, just because a good sheet of musical notation were set up 
before him. And if I write in French which is the language of my 
country, rather than in Latin which is that of my teachers, that is 


1 Doubtless the machine for the purpose of cutting lenses which Descartes 
so minutely describes. 


130 Discourse on the Method 


because I hope that those who avail themselves only of their natural 
reason in its purity may be better judges of my opinions than those 
who believe only in the writings of the ancients; and as to those 
who unite good sense with study, whom alone I crave for my judges, 
they will not, I feel sure, be so partial to Latin as to refuse to 
follow my reasoning because I expound it in a vulgar tongue. 

For the rest, I do not desire to speak here more particularly of 
the progress which I hope in the future to make in the sciences, 
nor to bind myself as regards the public with any promise which 
I shall not with certainty be able to fulfil. But I will just say 
that I have resolved not to employ the time which remains to me 
in life in any other matter than in endeavouring to acquire some 
knowledge of nature, which shall be of such a kind that it will 
enable us to arrive at rules for Medicine more assured than those 
which have as yet been attained ; and my inclination is so strongly 
opposed to any other kind of pursuit, more especially to those 
which can only be useful to some by being harmful to others, that 
if certain circumstances had constrained me to employ them, I do 
not think that I should have been capable of succeeding. In so 
saying I make a declaration that I know very well cannot help me 
to make myself of consideration in the world, but to this end I have 
no desire to attain; and I shall always hold myself to be more 
indebted to those by whose favour I may enjoy my leisure without 
hindrance, than I shall be to any who may ofter me the most 
honourable position in all the world. 


MEDITATIONS 
ON FIRST PHILOSOPHY 


PREFATORY NOTE TO THE MEDITATIONS. 


The first edition of the ‘Meditations’ was published in Latin by 
Michael Soly of Paris ‘at the Sign of the Phoenix’ nepal 
Privilegio et Approbatione Doctorum. The Royal ‘privilege’ was 
indeed given, but the ‘approbation’ seems to have been of a most 
indefinite kind. The reason of the book being published in France 
and not in Holland, where Descartes was living in a charming 
country house at Endegeest near Leiden, was apparently his fear 
that the Dutch ministers might in some way lay hold of it. His 
friend, Pére Mersenne, took charge of its publication in Paris and 
wrote to him about any difficulties that occurred in the course of 
its progress through the press. The second edition was however 
published at Amsterdam in 1642 by Louis Elzevir, and this edition 
was accompanied by the now completed ‘Objections and Replies.” 
The edition from which the present translation is made is the second 
just mentioned, and is that adopted by MM. Adam and Tannery as 
the more correct, for reasons that they state in detail in the preface 
to their edition. The work was translated into French by the 
Duc de Luynes in 1642 and Descartes considered the translation 
so excellent that he had it published some years later. Clerselier, 
to complete matters, had the ‘Objections’ also published in French 
with the ‘Replies,’ and this, like the other, was subject to Descartes’ 
revision and correction. ‘This revision renders the French edition 
specially valuable. Where it seems desirable an alternative reading 
from the French is given in square brackets, 


E. 8. H. 


1 For convenience sake the ‘Objections and Replies’ are published in the 
second volume of this edition. 


| SeRBo NN e | 
TO THE MOST WISE AND ILLUSTRIOUS THE 


DEAN AND DOCTORS OF THE SACRED 
FACULTY OF THEOLOGY IN PARIS. 


The motive which induces me to present to you this Treatise is 
so excellent, and, when you become acquainted with its design, 
I am convinced that you will also have so excellent a motive for 
taking it under your protection, that I feel that I cannot do better, 
in order to render it in some sort acceptable to you, than in a few 
words to state what I have set myself to do. 

I have always considered that the two questions respecting God_ 
and the Nour were the chief of those that ought to be demonst ght to be demonstrated 
by y philosophical rather than theological argument. For although 
it is quite enough for us faithful ones to accept by means of faith 
the fact that the human soul does not perish with the body, and 
that God exists, it certainly does not seem possible ever to persuade 
infidels of any religion, indeed, we may almost say, of any moral 
virtue, unless, to begin with, we prove these two facts by means of 
the natural reason. And inasmuch as often in this life greater 
rewards are offered for vice than for virtue, few people would prefer 
the right to the useful, were they restrained neither by the fear 
of God nor the expectation of another life; and although it is 
absolutely true that we must believe that there is a God, because 
we are so taught in the Holy Scriptures, and, on the other hand, 
that we must believe the Holy Scriptures because they come from 
God (the reason of this is, that, faith being a gift of God, He who 
gives the grace to cause us to believe other things can likewise give 
it to cause us to believe that He exists), we nevertheless could not 
place this argument before infidels, who might accuse us of reasoning 
in a circle. And, in truth, I have noticed that you, along with all 
the theologians, did not only affirm that the existence of God may 
be proved by the natural reason, but also that it may be inferred 


134 Dedication 


from the Holy Scriptures, that knowledge about Him is much clearer 
than that which we have of many created things, and, as a matter 
of fact, is so easy to acquire, that those who have it not are 
culpable in their ignorance. This indeed appears from the Wisdom 
of Solomon, chapter xiii, where is is said ‘ Howbeit they are not to 
be excused ; for if their understanding was so great that they could 
discern the world and the creatures, why did they not rather find out 
the Lord thereof?’ and in Romans, chapter i., it is said that they 
are ‘without excuse’; and again in the same place, by these words 
‘that which may be known of God is manifest in them,’ it seems as 
though we were shown that all that which can be known of God 
may be made manifest by means which are not derived from 
anywhere but from ourselves, and from the simple consideration 
“purpose to inquire how this is so, and how God may be more easily 
and certainly known than the things of the world. 

And as regards the soul, although many have considered that it 
is not easy to know its nature, and some have even dared to say 
that human reasons have convinced us that it would perish with 
the body, and that faith alone could believe the contrary, neverthe- 
less, inasmuch as the Lateran Council held under Leo X (in the 
eighth session) condemns these tenets, and as Leo expressly ordains 
Christian philosophers to refute their arguments and to employ all 
their powers in making known the truth, I have ventured in this 
treatise to undertake the same task. 

More than that, I am aware that the principal reason which 
causes many impious persons not to desire to believe that there is a 
God, and that the human soul is distinct from the body, is that 
they declare that hitherto no one has been able to demonstrate 
these two facts; and although I am not of their opinion but, on 
the contrary, hold that the greater part of the reasons which have 
been brought forward concerning these two questions by so many 
great men are, when they are rightly understood, equal to so many 
demonstrations, and that it is almost impossible to invent new ones, 
it is yet in my opinion the case that nothing more useful can be 
accomplished in philosophy than once for all to seek with care for 
the best of these reasons, and to set them forth in so clear and 
exact a manner, that it will henceforth be evident to everybody 
that they are veritable demonstrations. And, finally, inasmuch as 
it was desired that I should undertake this task by many who were 
aware that I had cultivated a certain Method for the resolution of 


Dedication 135 


difficulties of every kind in the Sciences—a method which it is true 
is not novel, since there is nothing more ancient than the truth, but 
of which they were aware that I had made use successfully enough 
in other matters of difficulty—I have thought that it was my duty 
also to make trial of it in the present matter. 

Now all that I could accomplish in the matter is contained in 
this Treatise. Not that I have here drawn together all the different 
reasons which might be brought forward to serve as proofs of this 
subject: for that never seemed to be necessary excepting when 
there was no one single proof that was certain. But I have treated 
the first and principal ones in such a manner that I can venture to 
bring them forward as very evident and very certain demonstrations. 
And more than that, I will say that these proofs are such that I do 
not think that there is any way open to the human mind by which 
it can ever succeed in discovering better. For the importance of 
the subject, and the glory of God to which all this relates, constrain 
me to speak here somewhat more freely of myself than is my 
habit. Nevertheless, whatever certainty and evidence I find in my 
reasons, | cannot persuade myself that all the world is capable of 
understanding them. Still, just as in Geometry there are many 
demonstrations that have been left to us by Archimedes, by 
Apollonius, by Pappus, and others, which are accepted by everyone 
as perfectly certain and evident (because they clearly contain 
nothing which, considered by itself, is not very easy to understand, 
and as all through that which follows has an exact connection with, 
and dependence on that which precedes), nevertheless, because they 
are somewhat lengthy, and demand a mind wholly devoted to their 
consideration, they are only taken in and understood by a very 
limited number of persons. Similarly, although I judge that those 
of which I here make use are equal to, or even surpass in certainty 
and evidence, the demonstrations of Geometry, I yet apprehend that 
they cannot be adequately understood by many, both because they 
are also a little lengthy and dependent the one on the other, and 
principally because they demand a mind wholly free of prejudices, 
and one which can be easily detached from the affairs of the senses. 
And, truth to say, there are not so many in the world who are fitted 
for metaphysical speculations as there are for those of Geometry. 
And more than that; there is still this difference, that in Geometry, 
since each one is persuaded that nothing must be advanced of which 
there is not a certain demonstration, those who are not entirely 
adepts more frequently err in approving what is false, in order to 


136 Dedication 


give the impression that they understand it, than in refuting the 
true. But the case is different in philosophy where everyone 
believes that all is problematical, and few give themselves to the 
search after truth; and the greater number, in their desire to 
acquire a reputation for boldness of thought, arrogantly combat the 
most important of truths’. 

That is why, whatever force there may be in my reasonings, 
seeing they belong to philosophy, I cannot hope that they will 
have much effect on the minds of men, unless you extend to them 
your protection. But the estimation in which your Company is 
universally held is so great, and the name of SorBoNNE carries with 
it so much authority, that, next to the Sacred Councils, never has 
such deference been paid to the judgment of any Body, not only in 
what concerns the faith, but also in what regards human philo- 
sophy as well: everyone indeed believes that it is not possible to 
discover elsewhere more perspicacity and solidity, or more integrity 
and wisdom in pronouncing judgment. For this reason I have no 
doubt that if you deign to take the trouble in the first place of 
correcting this work (for being conscious not only of my infirmity, 
but also of my ignorance, I should not dare to state that it was free 
from errors), and then, after adding to it these things that are 
lacking to it, completing those which are imperfect, and yourselves 
taking the trouble to give a more ample explanation of those things 
which have need of it, or at least making me aware of the defects 
so that I may apply myself to remedy them'—when this is done 
and when finally the reasonings by which I prove that there is 
a God, and that the human soul differs from the body, shall be 
carried to that point of perspicuity to which I am sure they can be 
carried in order that they may be esteemed as perfectly exact 
demonstrations, if you deign to authorise your approbation and to 
render public testimony to their truth and certainty, I do not doubt, 
I say, that henceforward all the errors and false opinions which 
have ever existed regarding these two questions will soon be effaced 
from the minds of men. For the truth itself will easily cause all 
men of mind and learning to subscribe to your judgment ; and your 
authority will cause the atheists, who are usually more arrogant 
than learned or judicious, to rid themselves of their spirit of contra- 
diction or lead them possibly themselves to defend the reasonings 
which they find being received as demonstrations by all persons of 


1 The French version is followed here. 


Preface to the Reader 137 


consideration, lest they appear not to understand them. And, 
finally, all others will easily yield to such a mass of evidence, and 
there will be none who dares to doubt the existence of God and the 
real and true distinction between the human soul and the body. It 
is for you now in your singular wisdom to judge of the importance of 
the establishment of such beliefs [you who see the disorders produced 
by the doubt of them], But it would not become me to say more 
in consideration of the cause of God and religion to those who have 
always been the most worthy supports of the Catholic Church. 


PREFACE TO THE READER. 


I have already slightly touched on these two questions of God 
and the human soul in the Discourse on the Method of rightly 
conducting the Reason and seeking truth in the Sciences, published 
in French in the year 1637. Not that I had the design of treating 
these with any thoroughness, but only so to speak in passing, and in 
order to ascertain by the judgment of the readers how I should treat 
them later on. For these questions have always appeared to me to 
be of such importance that I judged it suitable to speak of them 
more than once; and the road which I follow in the explanation of 
them is so little trodden, and so far removed from the ordinary 
path, that I did not judge it to be expedient to set it forth at length 
in French and in a Discourse which might be read by everyone, in 
case the feebler minds should believe that it was permitted to them 
to attempt to follow the same path. 

But, having in this Discourse on Method begged all those who 
have found in my writings somewhat deserving of censure to do me 
the favour of acquainting me with the grounds of it, nothing worthy 
of remark has been objected to in them beyond two matters: to these 
two I wish here to reply in a few words before undertaking their more 
detailed discussion. 

The first objection is that it does not follow from the 1 fae 
‘other than a thing that thinks, that its nature or a essence 
consists only in its being a thing that thinks, in the sense that that this 
Sa ohig eeclade dlLotliarthings which 1 might also be supposed to 
rai othe uate of the soul. To ths objection I reply that 
it was not my intention in that place to exclude these in accordance 
with the order that looks to the truth of the matter (as to which 


1 When it is thought desirable to insert additional readings from the French 
yersion this will be indicated by the use of square brackets. 


138 Preface to the Reader 


I was not then dealing), but only in accordance with the order of 
my thought [perception]; thus my meaning was that so far as_ 
_ I was aware, I knew nothing clearly as belonging to my essence, 
excepting a thin ¢ thinks, or a thing that has in 
itself the faculty of thinking. But I shall show hereafter how from 
“the fact that I know no other thing which pertains to my essence, it 
follows that there is no other thing which really does belong to it. 
The second objection is that it does not follow from the fact__ 
_that [have in myself the idea of something more perfect thanTam, 
that this idea is more perfect than I, and much less that what is 
~_represented by this idea exists. But reply that in this term idea 
there is here something equivocal, for it may either be taken 
materially, as an act of my understanding, and in this sense it 
cannot be said that it is more perfect than I; or it may be taken 
objectively, as the thing which is represented by this act, which, 
although we do not suppose it to exist outside of my understanding, 
may, none the less, be more perfect than I, because of its essence. 
And in following out this Treatise I shall show more fully how, 
_ from the sole fact that I have in myself the idea of a thing more 
perfect than myself, it follows that this thing truly exists. 
_ In addition to these two objections I have also seen two fairly 
| lengthy works on this subject, which, however, did not so much im- 
pugn my reasonings as my conclusions, and this by arguments drawn 
from the ordinary atheistic sources. But, because such arguments 
cannot make any impression on the minds of those who really 
understand my reasonings, and as the judgments of many are so 
feeble and irrational that they very often allow themselves to be 
persuaded by the opinions which they have first formed, however 
false and far removed from reason they may be, rather than by a 
true and solid but subsequently received refutation of these opinions, 
I do not desire to reply here to their criticisms in case of being first 
of all obliged to state them. I shall only say in general that all 
that is said by the atheist against the existence of God, always 
depends either on the fact that we ascribe to God affections which 
are human, or that we attribute so much strength and wisdom to 
our minds that we even have the presumption to desire to determine 
and understand that which God can and ought to do. In this 
way all that they allege will cause us no difficulty, provided only 
we remember that we must-consider.our minds as things which are 
finite and limited, ace as a Being Tho is incomprehensible and 


infinite. 


omtaeatase 


Preface to the Reader 139 


Now that I have once for all recognised and acknowledged the 
opinions of men, I at once begin to treat of God and the human 
soul, and at the same time to treat of the whole of the First 
Philosophy, without however expecting any praise from the vulgar 
and without the hope that my book will have many readers. On 
the contrary, I should never advise anyone to read it excepting 
those who desire to meditate seriously with me, and who can detach 
LEG RT ORC Sree ae themselves entirely 
from every sort of prejudice. I know too well that such men exist 
in a very small number. But for those who, without caring to 
comprehend the order and connections of my reasonings, form their 
criticisms on detached portions arbitrarily selected, as is the custom 
with many, these, I say, will not obtain much profit from reading 
this Treatise. And although they perhaps in several parts find 
occasion of cavilling, they can for all their pains make no objection 
which is urgent or deserving of reply. 

And inasmuch as I make no promise to others to satisfy them 
at once, and as I do not presume so much on my own powers as to 
believe myself capable of foreseeing all that can cause difficulty to 
anyone, I shall first of all set forth in these Meditations the very 
considerations by which I persuade myself that I have reached a 
certain and evident knowledge of the truth, in order to see if, by 
the same reasons which persuaded me, I can also persuade others. 
And, after that, I shall reply to the objections which have been 
made to me by persons of genius and learning to whom I have sent 
my Meditations for examination, before submitting them to the press. 
For they have made so many objections and these so different, that 
I venture to promise that it will be difficult for anyone to bring 
to mind criticisms of any consequence which have not been already 
touched upon. This is why I beg those who read these Meditations 
to form no judgment upon them unless they have given themselves 
the trouble to read all the objections as well as the replies which 
I have made to them’. 


1 Between the Prefatio ad Lectorem and the Synopsis, the Paris Edition 
1st Edition) interpolates an Index which is not found in the Amsterdam 
Gatticn (2nd Edition), Since Descartes did not reproduce it, he was doubtless 
not its author. Mersenne probably composed it himself, adjusting it to the 
paging of the first Edition. , ie 
(Note in Adam and Tannery’s Edition, ) 


140 Synopsis 


SYNOPSIS OF THE SIX FOLLOWING MEDITATIONS. 


In the first Meditation I set forth the reasons for which we may, 
generally speaking, doubt about all things and especially about 
material things, at least so long as we have no other foundations for 
the sciences than those which we have hitherto possessed. QBut 
although the utility of a Doubt which is so general does not at first 
appear, it is at the same time very great, inasmuch as tt delivers us 
from every kind of prejudice, and sets out for us a very simple way 
by which the mind may detach itself from the senses ; and finally tt 
makes it impossible for us ever to doubt those things which we have 
once discovered to be tr, 

In the second Meditation, mind, which making use of the liberty 
which pertains to it, takes for granted that all those things of whose 
existence it has the least doubt, are non-existent, recognises that it is 
y+ however absolutely impossible that it does not itself exist. This point 
0% is likewise of the greatest moment, inasmuch as by this means a 
x distinction is easily drawn between the things which pertain to mind 
ww) —that is to say to the intellectual nature—and those which pertain to 

body. 

But because it may be that some expect from me in this place a 
statement of the reasons establishing the immortality of the soul, I feel 
that I should here make known to them that having aimed at writing 
nothing in all this Treatise of which I do not possess very exact 
demonstrations, I am obliged to follow a similar order to that made 
use of by the geometers, which is to begin by putting forward as 
premises all those things upon which the proposition that we seek 
depends, before coming to any conclusion regarding it. Now the 
Jirst and principal matter which is requisite for thoroughly under- 
standing the immortality of the soul is to form the clearest possible 
conception of it, and one which will be entirely distinct from all 
the conceptions which we may have of body; and in this Medita- 
tion this has been done. In addition to this it is requisite that we 
may be assured that all the things which we conceive clearly and 
distinctly are true in the very way in which we think them; and 
this could not be proved previously to the Fourth Meditation. 
Further we must have a distinct conception of corporeal nature, 
which is given partly in this Second, and partly in the Fifth and 
Sixth Meditations. And finally we should conclude from all this, 
that those things which we conceive clearly and distinctly as being 


«go 


of the six following Meditations 141 


diverse substances, as we regard mind and body to be, are really 
substances essentially distinct one from the other; and this is the 
conclusion of the Sixth Meditation. This is further confirmed in this 
same Meditation by the fact that we cannot conceive of body excepting 
in so far as it is divisible, while the mind cannot be conceived of 
excepting as indivisible. For we are not able to conceive of the half 
of a mind as we can do of the smallest of ail bodies ; so that we see 
that not only are their natures different but even in some respects 
contrary to one another. I have not however dealt further with this 
matter in this treatise, both because what I have said is sufficient to 
show clearly enough that the extinction of the mind does not follow 
From the corruption of the body, and also to give men the hope of 
another life after death, as also because the premises from which the 
immortality of the soul may be deduced depend on an elucidation of 
a complete system of Physics. This would mean to establish in the 
Jirst place that all substances generally—that is to say all things 
which cannot exist without being created by God—are in their nature 
incorruptible, and that they can never cease to exist unless God, in 
denying to them his concurrence, reduce them to nought; and secondly 
that body, regarded generally, is a substance, which is the reason why 
it also cannot perish, but that the human body, inasmuch as it differs 
JSrom other bodies, is composed only of a certain configuration of 
members and of other similar accidents, while the human mind ts not 
similarly composed of any accidents, but is a pure substance. For 
although all the accidents of mind be changed, although, for instance, 
it think certain things, will others, perceive others, etc., despite all 
this it does not emerge from these changes another mind: the human 
body on the other hand becomes a different thing from the sole fact 
that the figure or form of any of its portions is found to be changed. 
From this it follows that the human body may indeed easily enough 
perish, but the mind [or soul of man (I make no distinction between 
them)| is owing to its nature immortal. 

In the third Meditation it seems to me that I have explained at 
sufficient length the principal argument of which I make use in order 
to prove the existence of God. But none the less, because I did not 
wish in that place to make use of any comparisons derived from 
corporeal things, so as to withdraw as much as I could the minds of 
readers from the senses, there may perhaps have remained many 
obscurities which, however, will, I hope, be entirely removed by the 
Replies which I have made to the Objections which have been set before 
me. Amongst others there is, for example, this one, ‘ How the idea in 


142 Synopsis 


us of a being supremely perfect possesses so much objective reality 
[that ts to say participates by representation in so many degrees of 
being and perfection] that it necessarily proceeds Strom a cause which 
is absolutely perfect. This is illustrated in these Replies by the 
comparison of a very perfect machine, the idea of which is found in 
the mind of some workman. For as the objective contrivance of this 
idea must have some cause, 2.€. either the science of the workman or 
that of some other from whom he has received the idea, it is similarly 
impossible that the idea of God which is in us should not have God 
himself as its cause. 

In the fourth Meditation it is shown that all these things which 
we very clearly and distinctly perceive are true, and at the same time 
it is explained in what the nature of error or falsity consists. This 
must of necessity be known both for the confirmation of the pre- 

- x ceding truths and for the better comprehension of those that follow. 

"(But it must meanwhile be remarked that I do not in any way there 
treat of sin—that is to say of the error which is committed in the 
pursuit of good and evil, but only of that which arises in the deciding 
between the true and the false. And I do not intend to speak of 
matters pertaining to the Faith or the conduct of life, but only of 
those which concern speculative truths, and which may be known by 
the sole aid of the light of nature. ) 


In the fifth Meditation {corporeal nature generally is explained. 


and in addition to this\the existence of God is demonstrated by as 
{new proof fn which there may possibly be certain difficulties also, but 

the solution of these will be seen in the Replies to the Objections. 

And further I show in what sense it is true to say that the certainty 

of geometrical demonstrations is itself dependent on the knowledge 

of God. 

Finally in the Siath : 
rom that of the imagination®,) the marks by which this 
distinction ts made are described. I here show that the mind of man 
is really distinct from the body, and at the same time that the two 
are so closely joined together that they form, so to speak, a single 
thing. All the errors which proceed from the senses are then 
surveyed, while the means of avoiding them are demonstrated, and 
finally all the reasons from which we may deduce the existence of 
material things ure set forth. Not that I judge them to be very 
useful in establishing that which they prove, to wit, that there is in 


u intellectio, 2 imaginatio, 
BS 


of the six following Meditations 143 


truth a world, that men possess bodies, and other such things which 
never have been doubted by anyone of sense; but because in 
considering these closely we come to sce that they are neither so 
strong nor so evident as those arguments which lead us to the 
knowledge of our mind and of God; so that these last must be the 
most certain and most evident facts which can fall within the 
cognizance of the human mind. And this is the whole matter that 
L have tried to prove in these Meditations, for which reason I here 
omit to speak of many other questions with which I deult incidentally 
in this discussion. 


MEDITATIONS ON THE FIRST PHILOSOPHY 
IN WHICH THE EXISTENCE OF GOD 
AND THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN MIND 
AND BODY ARE DEMONSTRATED’. 


Mepiration I. 


Of the things which may be brought within the sphere of the 
doubtful. 


It is now some years since I detected how many were the false 
beliefs that I had from my earliest youth admitted as true, and 
how doubtful was everything I had since constructed on this basis ; 
and from that time I was convinced that I must once for all 
seriously undertake to rid myself of all the opinions which I had 
formerly accepted, and commence to build anew from the foundation, 
if I wanted to establish any firm and permanent structure in the 
sciences. But as this enterprise appeared to be a very great one, 
I waited until I had attained an age so mature that I could not 
hope that at any later date I should be better fitted to execute my 
design. This reason caused me to delay so long that I should feel 
that I was doing wrong were I to occupy in deliberation the time 
that yet remains to me for action. ‘To-day, then, since very 
opportunely for the plan I have in view I have delivered my mind 
from every care [and am happily agitated by no passions] and 
since I have procured for myself an assured leisure in a peaceable 
retirement, I shall at last seriously and freely address myself to the 
general upheaval of all my former opinions. 

Scientia semi 0 So is) ote eS 


1 In place of this long title at the head of the page the first Edition had 


immediately after the Synopsis, and on the same page 7, simply ‘First Medi- 
tation.’ (Adam’s Edition.) 


Of the things as to which we may doubt 145 


Now for this object it is not necessary that I should 1d show that 


_all of these are false—I shall perhaps never arrive at this end. 
But inasmuch as reason already persuades me that I ought no less 
carefully to withhold my assent from matters which are not entirely 
certain and indubitable than from those which appear to me 
manifestly to be false, if I if I am able to find in each one some reason _ 
to doubt, this will suffice to justify my rejecting the whole. And 
for that end it will not be requisite that I should examine each in 
particular, which would be an endless undertaking; for owing to 
the fact that the destruction of the foundations of necessity brings 
with it the downfall of the rest of the edifice, I shall only in the 
first place attack those principles upon which all my ormer 
opinions reste 


All that up ne the present time I have accepted as most true and 
certain | have learned eithef from the senses or through the se senses} 
but it is sometimes proved to me that these senses are deceptive, 


and it is wiser not to trust entirely to any thing by which we have 
once been deceived. 

But it may be that although the senses sometimes deceive us 
concerning things which are hardly perceptible, or very far away, 
there are yet many others to be met with as to which we cannot 
reasonably have any doubt, although we recognise them by their 
means. For example, there is the fact that I am here, seated by 
the fire, attired in a dressing gown, having this paper in my hands 
and other similar matters. And how could I deny that these hands 
and this body are mine, were it not perhaps that I compare myself 
to certain persons, devoid of sense, whose cerebella are so troubled 
and clouded by the violent vapours of black bile, that they 
constantly assure us that they think they are kings when they are 
really quite poor, or that they are clothed in purple when they are 
really without covering, or who imagine that they have an earthen- 
ware head or are nothing but pumpkins or are made of glass. But 
they are mad, and I should not be any the less insane were I to 
follow examples so extravagant. 

At the same time I must remember that I am a man, and 
that consequently I am in the habit of sleeping, and in my dreams 
representing to myself the same things or sometimes even less 
probable things, than do those who are insane in their waking 
moments. How often has it happened to me that in the night I 
dreamt that I found myself in this particular place, that I was 
dressed and seated near the fire, whilst in reality I was lying 


146 Meditation I 


undressed in bed! At this moment it does indeed seem to me that 
it is with eyes awake that I am looking at this paper; that this 
head which I move is not asleep, that it is deliberately and of set 
purpose that I extend my hand and perceive it; what happens in 
sleep does not appear so clear nor so distinct as does all this. But 
in thinking over this I remind myself that on many occasions I have 
in sleep been deceived by similar illusions, and in dwellingsarefully 
on this reflection I see so manifestly that there are no certain 
indications by which we may clearly distinguish wakefulness from 
sleep that I am lost in astonishment. And my astonishment is 
such that it is almost capable of persuading me that I now dream. 
Now let us assume that we are asleep and that all these 
particulars, e.g. that we open our eyes, shake our head, extend our 
hands, and so on, are but false delusions; and let us reflect that 
possibly neither our hands nor our whole body are such as they 
appear to us to be.(“At the same time we must at least confess that 
the things which are represented to us in sleep are like painted 
representations which can only have been formed as the counter- 
Faris of something rea! and true and that in this way those general 
things at least, i.e. eyes, a head, hands, and a whole body, are not 
imaginary things, but things really existent. For, as a matter of 
fact, painters, even when they study with the greatest skill to 
represent sirens and satyrs by forms the most strange and extra- 
ordinary, cannot give them natures which are entirely new, but 
merely make a certain medley of the members of different animals; 
‘or if their imagination is extravagant enough to invent something 
so novel that nothing similar has ever before been seen, and that 
then their work represents a thing purely fictitious and absolutely 
3 4% false, it is certain all the same that the colours of which this is 
¢ 6 vomposed are necessarily real. And for the same reason, although 
these general things, to wit, [a body], eyes, a head, hands, and such 
ry ‘like, may be imaginary, we are bound at the same time to contess 
+ _ that there are at least some other objects yet more simple and more 
, ©} universal, which are real and true; and of these just in the same 
q i way as with certain real colours, all these images of things which 
| dwell in our thoughts, \ whether true and real or 1alse and fantastic 


: are formed. yee 
sg 


ONS = OP NEG TUN v 


To such a class of things pertains corporeal nature in general, 
and its extension, the figure of extended things, their quantity or 
magnitude and number, as also the place in which they are, the 
time which measures their duration, and so on. 


Of the things as to which we may doubt 147 


That is possibly why our reasoning is not unjust when we 
conclude from this that Physics, Astronomy, Medicine and all other 
sciences which have as their end the consideration of composite 
things, are very dubious and uncertain; but that Arithmetic, — 
Geometry and other sciences of that kind which only treat of things 
that are very simple and very general, without taking great trouble 

a J are_ actually exi -not;s—contain 5 
some measure of certainty and an element of the indubitable. For. A 
whether I am awake oF asleep, two and three together always form ~ 
five, and the square can never have more than four sides, and it 
does not seem possible that truths so clear and apparent can be 
suspected of any falsity [or uncertainty]. 

Nevertheless I have long had fixed in my mind the belief that 
an all-powerful God existed by whom I have been created such as 


Iam. But how do I know that He has not brought it to pass that 
there is no earth, no heaven, no extended body, no magnitude, no 
place, and that nevertheless [I possess the perceptions of all these 
things and that] they seem to me to exist just exactly as I now see 


them? And, besides, as I sometimes imagine that others deceive 
themselves in the things which they think they know best, how do 
I know that I am not deceived every time that I add two and 
three, or count the sides of a square, or judge of things yet 
simpler, if anything simpler can be imagined? But possibly God 
has not desired that I should be thus deceived, for He-is.said_to.be. 
fea 
Supremely good. If, however, it is contrary to His goodness to 
have made me such that I constantly deceive myself, it would also 
appear to be contrary to His goodness to permit me to be sometimes 
deceived, and nevertheless I cannot doubt that He does permit this. 
‘here may indeed be those who would prefer to deny the 
existence of a God so powerful, rather than believe that all other 
things are uncertain. But let us not oppose them for the present, 
and grant that all that is here said of a God is a fable ; nevertheless 
in whatever way they suppose that I have arrived at the state of 
being that I have reached—whether they attribute it to fate or to 
accident, or make out that it is by a continual succession of ante- 
cedents, or by some other method—since to err and deceive oneself 
is a defect, it is clear that the greater will be the probability of my 
being so imperfect as to deceive myself ever, as poe Author to 
‘whom they assign my origin the less powerful. [To these reasons 
I have certainly nothing to reply, but at the end I feel constrained ; 


to confess that there is nothing in all that I formerly believed to be 


148 Meditation I 


true, of which I cannot in some measure doubt, and that not merely 

fhrough want of thought or through levity, but for reasons which 
are very powerful and maturely considered; so that henceforth 
I ought not the less carefully to refrain from giving credence to 
these opinions than to that which is manifestly false, if I desire to 
arrive at any certainty [in the sciences]. 

But it is not sufficient to have made these remarks, we must 
also be careful to keep them in mind. For these ancient and 
commonly held opinions still revert frequently to my mind, long 
and familiar custom having given them the right to occupy my 
mind against my inclination and rendered them almost masters of 
my belief; nor will I ever lose the habit of deferring to them or of 
placing my confidence in them, so long as I consider them as they 
really are, i.e. opinions in some measure doubtful, as I have just 
shown, and at the same time highly probable, so that there is much 
more reason to believe in than to deny them. What is why I 

} consider that I shall not be acting amiss, if, taking of set purpose 
time pretend tha hese opinions are entirely false and imaginary 


until at last, having thus balanced my former prejudices with my 
latter [so that they cannot divert my opinions more to one side 


than to the other |; my judgment will no longer be dominated by 


“bad usage or turned away from the right knowledge of the truth. 
For Iam assured that there can be neither peril nor error in this 


course, and that I cannot at present yield too much to distrust, 
since I am not considering the question of action, but only of 
knowledge. 

I shall then suppose, not that God who is supremely good and 
the fountain of truth, but some evil genius not less powerful 
than deceitful, has employed his whole energies in deceiving me; 
] shall consider that the heavens, the earth, colours, figures, sound, 
and all other external things are nought but the illusions and 
dreams of which this genius has availed himself in order to lay 
traps for my credulity ; I shall consider myself as having no hands, - 
no eyes, no flesh, no blood, nor any senses, yet falsely believing 
myself to possess all these things; J shall remain obstinately 
attached to this idea, and if by this means it is not in my power to 
arrive at the knowledge of any truth, I may at least do what is in 
my power [i.e. suspend my judgment], and with firm purpose avoid ° 
giving credence to any false thing, or being imposed upon by this 
arch deceiver, hewever powerful and deceptive he may be, But this 


Of the things as to which we may doubt 149 


task is a laborious one, and insensibly a certain lassitude leads me 
into the course of my ordinary life. And just asa captive who in 
sleep enjoys an imaginary liberty, when he begins to suspect that 
his liberty is but a dream, fears to awaken, and conspires with these 
agreeable illusions that the deception may be prolonged, so insensibly 
of my own accord I fall back into my former opinions, and I dread 
awakening from this slumber, lest the laborious wakefulness which 
would follow the tranquillity of this repose should have to be spent 
not in daylight, but in the excessive darkness of the difficulties 
which have just been discussed. 


Mepiration II. 


Of the Nature of the Human Mind ; and that it is more easily 
known than the Body. 


The Meditation of yesterday filled my mind with so many doubts 
that it is no longer in my power to forget them. And yet I do not 
see in what manner I can resolve them ; and, just as if I had all of 
a sudden fallen into very deep water, I am so disconcerted that 
I can ‘neither make certain of setting my iteet on the bottom, nor 
can I swim and so support myself on the surface. I shall neverthe-" 
less make an effort and follow anew the same path as that on which 
I yesterday entered, i.e. I shall proceed by setting aside all that in 
which the least doubt could be supposed to exist, just as if I had 
discovered that it was absolutely false; and I shall ever follow in 
this road until I have met with something which is certain, or at 
least, if I can_do nothing else, until I have learned for certain that 
there is nothing in the world that is certain. Archimedes, in order 
that he might draw the terrestrial globe out of its place, and 
transport it elsewhere, demanded only that one point should be 
fixed and immoveable ; in the same way I shall have the right to 
conceive high hopes if I am happy enough to discover one thing 
only which is certain and indubitable. 


_ I suppose, then, that all the things that I see are false; I 
| persuade myself that nothing has ever existed of all that my _ 
fallacious memor Oe eae acre caida isi | eee no 
Pica tin bode Tees, <atensitn, movement and place 


are but the fictions of my mind. What, then, can be esteemed as 
erue? Perhaps nothing at all, unless that there is nothing in the 
world that is certain. 


But how can I know there is not something different from those 


150 Meditation II 


things that I have just considered, of which one cannot have the 
slightest doubt? Is there not some God, or some other being by 
whatever name we call it, who puts these reflections into my mind ? 
hat is not necessary, for is it not possible that I am capable of 
producing them myself? I myself, am I not at least something ? 
But I have already denied that I had senses and body. Yet I 
hesitate, for what follows from that? Am I so dependent on body 
and senses that I cannot exist without these? But I was persuaded 
that there was nothing in all the world, that there was no heaven, 
no earth, that there were no minds, nor any bodies: was I not then 
likewise persuaded that I did not exist? Not at all; of a surety I 
myself did exist since I persuaded myself of something [or merely 
because I thought of something]. But there is some deceiver or other, 
very powerful and very cunning, who ever employs his ingenuity in 
deceiving me. ‘Then without doubt I exist also if he deceives me, 
and let him deceive me as much as he will, he can never cause me 
to be nothing so long as I think that I am something. So that 
after having reflected well and carefully examined all things, we 
must come to the definite conclusion that this proposition: Lam, I 
mentally conceive it. 
“But I do not yet know clearly enough what I am, I who am 
certain that I am; and hence I must be careful to see that I do not 
imprudently take some other object in place of myself, and thus 
that I do not go astray in respect of this knowledge that I hold to 
be the most certain and most evident of all that I have formerly 
learned. That is why I shall now consider anew what I believed 
myself to be before I embarked upon these last reflections ; and of 
my former opinions | shall withdraw all that might even in a small 
degree be invalidated by the reasons which I have just brought 
forward, in order that there may be nothing at all left beyond what 
is absolutely certain and indubitable. 

What then did I formerly believe myself to be? Undoubtedly 
I believed myself to be aman. But whatisa man? Shall I say a 
reasonable animal? Certainly not; for then I should have to 
inquire what an animal is, and what is reasonable; and thus from 
a single question I should insensibly fall into an infinitude of others 
more difficult; and I should not wish to waste the little time and 
leisure remaining to me in trying to unravel subtleties like these. 
But I shall rather stop here to consider the thoughts which of 
themselves spring up in my mind, and which were not inspired by 


Of the Nature of the Human Mind 151 


anything beyond my own nature alone when I applied myself to the 
consideration of my being. In the first place, then, I considered 
myself as having a face, hands, arms, and all that system of members 
composed of bones and flesh as seen in a corpse which I designated 
by the name of body. In addition to this I considered that I was 
nourished, that I walked, that I felt, and that I thought, and I 
referred all these actions to the soul: but I did not stop to consider 
what the soul was, or if I did stop, I imagined that it was something 
extremely rare and subtle like a wind, a flame, or an ether, which 
was spread throughout my grosser parts. As to body I had no 
manner of doubt about its nature, but thought I had a very clear 
knowledge of it; and if I had desired to explain it according to the 
notions that I had then formed of it, I should have described it 
thus: By the body I understand all that which can be defined by a 
certain figure : something which can be confined in a certain place, 
and which can fill a given space in such a way that every other body 
will be excluded from it; which can be perceived either by touch, 
or by sight, or by hearing, or by taste, or by smell: which can be 
moved in many ways not, in truth, by itself, but by something which 
is foreign to it, by which it is touched [and from which it receives 
impressions]: for to have the power of self-movement, as also of 
feeling or of thinking, I did not consider to appertain to the nature 
of body: on the contrary, I was rather astonished to find that 
faculties similar to them existed in some bodies. 

But what am I, now that I suppose that there is a certain genius 
which is extremely powerful, and, if I may say so, malicious, who 
employs all his powers in deceiving me? Can I affirm that I possess 
the least of all those things which I have just said pertain to the 
nature of body? I pause to consider, I revolve all these things in 
my mind, and I find none of which I can say that it pertains to me. 
It would be tedious to stop to enumerate them. Let us pass to the 
attributes of soul and see if there is any one which is in me? 
What of nutrition or walking [the first mentioned]? But if it is so 
that I have no body it is also true that I can neither walk nor take 
nourishment, Another attribute is sensation. But one cannot teel 
without body, and besides I have thought I perceived many things 
during sleep that I recognised in my waking moments as not having 
been experienced at all. What of thinking? I find here that 
thoaght is an attribute that belongs to me; it alone cannot b 
separated from me. I am, I exist, that is certain. But how often? 
Just when I think; for it might possibly be the case if I ceased’ 


152 Meditation II 


entirely to think, that I should likewise cease altogether to exist. 
I do not now admit anything which is not necessarily true: to 
speak accurately I am not more than a thing which thinks, that is 
to say a mind or a soul, or an understanding, or a reason, which are 
terms whose significance was formerly unknown to me. I am, 


however, a real thing and really exist; but what thing? I have | 
answered: a thing which thinks. : 


And what more? I shall exercise my imagination [in order to 
see if I am not something more]. I am not a collection of members 
which we call the human body: I am not a subtle air distributed 
through these members, I am not a wind, a fire, a vapour, a breath, 
nor anything at all which I can imagine or conceive; because 
I have assumed that all these were nothing. Without changing 
that supposition I find that I only leave myself certain of the fact 
that I am somewhat. But perhaps it is true that these same things 
which I supposed were non-existent because they are unknown to 
me, are really not different from the self which I know. I am not 
sure about this, I shall not dispute about it now; I can only give 
judgment on things that are known to me. I know that I exist, 
and I inquire what I am, I whom I know to exist. But it is very 
certain that the knowledge of my existence taken in its precise 
significance does not depend on things whose existence is not yet 
known to me; consequently it does not depend on those which 
I can feign in imagination. And indeed the very term feign in 
imagination’ proves to me my error, for I really do this if I image 
myself a something, since to imagine is nothing else than to con- 
template the figure or image of a corporeal thing. But I already 
kuow for certain that I am, and that it may be that all these images, 
and, speaking generally, all things that relate to the nature of body 
are nothing but dreams [and chimeras]. For this reason I see 
clearly that I have as little reason to say, ‘I shall stimulate my 
imagination in order to know more distinctly what I am,’ than if 
I were to say, ‘I am now awake, and I perceive somewhat that is 
real and true: but because I do not yet perceive it distinctly 
enough, I shall go to sleep of express purpose, so that my dreams 
may represent the perception with greatest truth and evidence.’ 
And, thus, I know for certain that nothing of all that I can antes 
aie haar aes Fee caer belongs to this knowledge which 

; 1s necessary to recall the mind from 


1 Or ‘form an image’ (effingo), 


— 


Of the Nature of the Human Mind 153 


this mode of thought with the utmost diligence in order that it may 
be able to know its own nature with perfect distinctness. 

But what then am I? A thing which thinks. What isa thing 
which thinks? It is a thing which doubts, understands, [conceives], 
affirms, denies, wills, refuses, which also imagines and feels. A 

Certainly it is no small matter if all these things pertain to my 
nature. But why should they not so pertain? Am I not that 
being who now doubts nearly everything, who nevertheless under- 
stands certain things, who affirms that one only is true, who denies 
all the others, who desires to know more, is averse from being 
deceived, who imagines many things, sometimes indeed despite his 
will, and who perceives many likewise, as by the intervention of the 
bodily organs? Is there nothing im all this which is as true as it is 
certain that I exist, even though I should always sleep and though 
he who has given me being employed all his ingenuity in deceiving 
me? Is there likewise any one of these attributes which can be 
distinguished from my thought, or which might be said to be 
separated from myself? For it is so evident of itself that it is 
I who doubts, who understands, and who desires, that there is no 
reason here to add anything to explain it. And I have certainly 
the power of imagining likewise ; for_althoughit—may happen (as 
I formerly supposed) Pint dueot the Vai acti vers imagine are 
true,-nevertheless.this_power_of imagining-does-not.-cease.to-be 
really in.use,-and-it-forms-part-of my thought. Finally, I am the 
‘same who feels, that is to say, who perceives certain things, as by 
the organs of sense, since in truth I see light, I hear noise, I feel 
heat. But it will be said that these phenomena are false and that 
I am dreaming. Let it be so; still it is at least quite certain that 
it seems to me that I see light, that I hear noise and that I feel 
heat. That cannot be false ; properly speaking it is what is in me 
called feeling’; and used in this precise sense that is no other thing 
than thinking. 

From this time I begin to know what I am with a little more 
clearness and distinction than before; but nevertheless it still 
seems to me, and I cannot prevent myself from thinking, that 
corporeal things, whose images are framed by thought, which are 
tested by the senses, are_much more distinctly known than that 
ob ich_does not come under the imagination. 
Although really it is very strange to say that I know and under- 
stand more distinctly these things whose existence seems to me 


1 Sentire. 


=== 


154 Meditation II 


dubious, which are unknown to me, and which do not belong to me, 
than others of the truth of which I am convinced, which are known to 
me and which pertain to my real nature, in a word, than myself. 
But I see clearly how the case stands: my mind loves to wander, 
and cannot yet suffer itself to be retained within the just limits of 
truth. Very good, let us once more give it the freest rein, so that, 
when afterwards we seize the proper occasion for pulling up, it may 
the more easily be regulated and controlled. 

Let us begin by considering the commonest matters, those which 
we believe to be the most distinctly comprehended, to wit, the bodies 
which we touch and see; not indeed bodies in general, for these 
general ideas are usually a little more confused, but let us consider 
one body in particular. Let us take, for example, this piece of 
wax: it has been taken quite freshly from the hive, and it has not 
yet lost the sweetness of the honey which it contains; it still retains 
somewhat of the odour of the flowers from which it has been culled; 
its colour, its figure, its size are apparent; it is hard, cold, easily 
handled, and if you strike it with the finger, it will emit a sound. 
Finally all the things which are requisite to cause us distinctly to 
recognise a body, are met with init. But notice that while I speak 
and approach the fire what remained of the taste is exhaled, the 
smell evaporates, the colour alters, the figure is destroyed, the size 
increases, it becomes liquid, it heats, scarcely can one handle it, 
and when one strikes it, no sound is emitted. Does the same wax 
remain after this change? We must confess that it remains ; none 
would judge otherwise. What then did I know so distinctly in this 
piece of wax? It could certainly be nothing of all that the senses 
brought to my notice, since all these things which fall under taste, 
smell, sight, touch, and hearing, are found to be changed, and yet 
the same wax remains. 

Perhaps it was what I now think, viz. that this wax was not that 
sweetness of honey, nor that agreeable scent of flowers, nor that par- 
ticular whiteness, nor that figure, nor that sound, but simply a body 
which a little while before appeared to me as perceptible under these 
forms, and which is now perceptible under others. But what, pre- 
cisely, is it that 1 imagine when I form such conceptions? Let us 
attentively consider this, and, abstracting from all that does not 
belong to the wax, let us see what remains. Certainly nothing 
remains excepting a certain extended thing which is flexible and 
movable. But what is the meaning of flexible and movable? Is it 
not that I imagine that this piece of wax being round is capable of 


Of the Nature of the Human Mind 155 


becoming square and of passing from a square to a triangular figure? 
No, certainly it is not that, since I imagine it admits of an infinitude 
of similar changes, and I nevertheless do not know how to compass 
the infinitude by my imagination, and consequently this conception 
which I have of the wax is not brought about by the faculty of 
imagination. What now is this extension? Is it not also unknown ? 
For it becomes greater when the wax is melted, greater when it is 
boiled, and greater still when the heat increases ; and I should not 
conceive [clearly] according to truth what wax is, if I did not think 
that even this piece that we are considering is capable of receiving 
more variations in extension than I have ever imagined. We must 
then grant that I could-net-even_understand through the imagina- 
tion what this piece of wax is, and that it is my mind" alone which 
perceives it. I say this piece of wax in particular, for as to wax in 
general it is yet clearer. But what is this piece of wax which 
cannot be understeod—exeepting by the [understar -mind ? 
It is certainly the same that I see, touch, imagine, and finally it.is the 
same which I have always believed itto-be-from.the beginning. But 
what must particularly be observed is that its perception is neither 
nor -of touch; nor of imnginolionsad_hae_nevar 


I ‘of the mind, cen may. be Be and confused 
as it was - ee dutch ett poe according 
as my attention is more or less directed to the elements which are 
found in it; and of which it is composed. 

Yet in the meantime I am greatly astonished when I consider 
[the great feebleness of mind] and its proneness to fall [insensibly] 
into error; for although without giving expression to my thoughts 
I consider all this in my own mind, words often impede me and 
I am almost deceived by the terms of ordinary language. For we 
say that we see the same wax, if it is present, and not that we 
simply judge that it is the same from its having the same colour 
and figure. From this I should conclude that I knew the wax by 
means of vision and not simply by the intuition of the mind ; unless 
by chance I remember that, when looking from a window and saying 
I see men who pass in the street, I really do not see them, but infer 
that what I see is men, just as I say that I see wax. And yet what 
do I see from the window but hats and coats which may cover 
automatic machines? Yet I judge these to be men. And similarly 


1 entendement F., mens L. 2 inspectio. 


-<, 


ra} 


oT ) 


/ 
/ 


156 Meditation II 


solely by the faculty of judgment which rests in my mind, I com- 
prehend that which I believed I saw with my eyes. 

A man who makes it his aim to raise his knowledge above the 
common should be ashamed to derive the occasion for doubting 
from the forms of speech-invented by the vulgar; I prefer to pass 
on and consider whether I had a more evident and perfect concep- 
tion of what the wax was when I first perceived it, and when 
I believed I knew it by means of the external senses or at least by 
the common sense? as it is called, that is to say by the imaginative 
faculty, or whether my present conception is clearer now that I have 
most carefully examined what it is, and in what way it can be 
known. It would certainly be absurd to doubt as to this. For 
what was there in this first perception which was distinct? What 
was there which might not as well have been perceived by any of 
the animals? But when I distinguish the wax from its external 
forms, and when, just as if I had taken from it its vestments, 
I consider it quite naked, it is certain that although some error may 
still be found in my judgment, I can nevertheless not perceive it 
thus without a human mind. 

But finally what shall I say of this mind, that is, of myself, for 
up to this point I do not admit in myself anything but mind? 
What then, I who seem to perceive this piece of wax so distinctly, 
do I not know myself, not only with much more truth and certainty, 
but also with much more distinctness and clearness ? Fer if judge 
that the wax is or exists from the fact that I see it, it certainly 
follows much more clearly that I am or that I exist myself from the 
fact that t I see it. For it may be that what I see is not really w wax 
it may also be that I do not possess eyes with which to see anything; 
but it cannot be that when I see, or (for I no longer take account bs 
the distinction) when I think I see, that I myself who think am 
nought. So if I judge that the wax exists from the fact that I 
touch it, the same thing will follow, to wit, that I am; and if 
I judge that my imagination, or some other cause, whatever it is 
persuades me that the wax exists, I shall still conclude the ae 
And what I have here remarked of wax may be applied to all other 
things which are external to me [and which are met with outside 
of me]. And further, if the [notion or] perception of wax has 
seemed to me clearer and more distinct, not only after the sight or 
the touch, but also after many other causes have rendered it quite 
manifest to me, with how much more [evidence] and distinctness 


1 sensus communis. 


Of the Nature of the Human Mind 157 


must it be said that I now know myself, since all the reasons which 
contribute to the knowledge of wax, or any other body whatever, 
are yet better proofs of the nature of my mind! And there are so 
many other things in the mind itself which may contribute to the 
elucidation of its nature, that those which depend on body such as 
these just mentioned, hardly merit being taken into account. 
But finally here I am, having insensibly reverted to the point 

I desired, for, since it is now manifest to me that even bodies-are 

not _properly_speaking-known by the senses or by the faculty of 
imagination, but_by the understanding only, and since they are not 
known from the fact that they are seen or touched, but only because 
they are understood, I see clearly that there is nothing which is} 
easier for me to know than my mind. But because it is difficult to 
rid oneself so promptly of an opinion to which one was accustomed 
for so long, it will be well that I should halt a little at this point, 
so that by the length of my meditation I may more deeply imprint 
on my memory this new knowledge. 


Meprrtation III. 


Of God: that He exists. 

I shall now close my eyes, I shall stop my ears, I shall call away 
all my senses, I shall efface even from my thoughts all the images of 
corporeal things, or at least (for that is hardly possible) I shall 
esteem them as vain and false; and thus holding converse only with 
myself and considering my own nature, | shall try little by little to 
reach a better knowledge of and a more familiar acquaintanceship 
with myself. J am a thing that thinks, that is to say, that doubts, 
~affirms, denies, that knows a few things, that is ignorant of many 
[that loves, that hates], that wills, that desires, that also imagines 
and perceives ; for as I remarked before, although the things which 
I perceive and imagine are perhaps nothing at all apart from me 
and in themselves, I am nevertheless assured that these modes of 
thought that I call perceptions and imaginations, inasmuch only as 
they are modes of thought, certainly reside [and are met with] 
in me. 

And in the little that I have just said, I think I have summed 
up all that I really know, or at least all that hitherto I was aware 
that I knew. In order to try to extend my knowledge iurther, 
I shall now look around more carefully and see whether I cannot 
still discover in myself some other things which I have not hitherto 


158 Meditation III 


perceived. I am certain that I am a thing which thinks; but do 
I not then likewise know what is requisite to render me certain of 
a truth? Certainly in this first knowledge there is nothing that 
assures me of its truth, excepting the clear and distinct perception 
of that which I state, which would not indeed suffice to assure me 
that what I say is true, if it could ever happen that a thing which 
I conceived so clearly and distinctly could be false ; and accordingly 
it seems to me that already I can establish as a general rule that 
all things which I perceive’ very clearly and very distinctly are true. 

At the same time I have before received and admitted many 
things to be very certain and manifest, which yet I afterwards 
recognised as being dubious. What then were these things? They 
were the earth, sky, stars and all other objects which I apprehended 
by means of the senses. But what did I clearly [and distinctly] 
perceive in them? Nothing more than that the ideas or thoughts 
of these things were presented to my mind. And not even now 
do I deny that these ideas are met with in me. But there was 
yet another thing which I affirmed, and which, owing to the habit 
which I had formed of believing it, I thought I perceived very 
clearly, although in truth I did not perceive it at all, to wit, that 
there were objects outside of me from which these ideas proceeded, 
and to which they were entirely similar. And it was in this that 
I erred, or, if perchance my judgment was correct, this was not due 
to any knowledge arising from my perception. 

But when I took anything very simple and easy in the sphere of 
arithmetic or geometry into consideration, e.g. that two and three 
together made five, and other things of the sort, were not. these 
present to my mind so clearly as to enable me to affirm that they 
were true? Certainly if I judged that since such matters could be 
doubted, this would not have been so for any other reason than that 
it came into my mind that perhaps a God might have endowed 
me with such a nature that I may have been deceived even 
concerning things which seemed to me most manifest. But every 
time that this preconceived opinion of the sovereign power of a God 
presents itself to my thought, I am constrained to confess that it is 
easy to Him, if He wishes it, to cause me to err, even in matters in 
which I believe myself to have the best evidence. And, on the 
other hand, always when I direct my attention to things which 
I believe myself to perceive very clearly, I am so persuaded of their 
truth that I let myself break out into words such as these: Let 


1 Percipio, F. nous concevons, 


Of Gods Existence 159 


who will deceive me, He can never cause _meto—be-nothing-while 
1 think that I am, or some day cause it to be true to say that 
I have never been, it being t true now to. say that I am, or that two 
and three make more or less than five, or any such thing in which 
I see a manifest contradiction. And, certainly, since I have no 
reason to believe that there is a God who is a deceiver, and as 
I have not yet satisfied myself that there is a God at all, the reason 
for doubt which depends on this opinion alone is very slight, and so 
to speak metaphysical. But in order to be able altogether to 
remove it, I must inquire whether there is a God as soon as the 
occasion presents itself; and if I find that there is a God, I must 
also inquire whether He may be a deceiver ; for without a knowledge 
of these two truths I do not see that I can ever be certain of 
anything. 

And in order that I may have an opportunity of inquiring into 
this in an orderly way [without interrupting the order of meditation 
which I have proposed to myself, and which is little by little to 
pass from the notions which I find first of all in my mind to those 
which I shall later on discover in it] it is requisite that I should 
here divide my thoughts into certain kinds, and that I should 
consider in which of these-kinds=there~is, properly speaking, truth 
or error-to~be-found., Of my thoughts some are, so to speak, images 
of the things, and to these alone is the title ‘idea’ properly applied ; 
examples are my thought. of a man or of a chimera, of heaven, of 
an angel, or [even]..of. God. But other thoughts possess other 
forms as well. For example in-willing, fearing, approving, denying, 
though I always perceive something as. the subject..of.the action 


of my mind’, yet by this action I always : add something else to the , 
idea? which I have-of-that-thing-;-and-of-the thoughts of this.kind 


some are called volitions or affections; -and-others judgments. 

Now as to what concerns ideas, if we consider them only in 
themselves and donot relate-them to anything else beyond 
themselves, they cannot properly speaking be false ; for whether 
“T imagine a goat or a chimera, it is not less true that i imagine. the 
one than the other, We must-no?-fear likewise that. falsity can 
enter-mmto wilt-and_into_aftections,—for- although I_may.desire_evil 
things, or even things that never existed, it is not the less true that 
I desire them. Thus there remains no more than the judgments 


1 The French version is followed here as being more explicit. In it ‘action 


de mon esprit’ replaces ‘ mea cogitatio.’ 
2 In the Latin version ‘ similitudinem.’ 


160 Meditation III 


which we make, in which I must take the greatest care not to 
deceive myself. But the principal error and the commonest which 
we may meet with in them, consists in my judging that the ideas 
which are in me are similar or conformable to the things which are 
outside me; for without doubt if I considered the ideas only as 
certain modes of my thoughts, without trying to relate them to 
anything beyond, they could scarcely give me material for error. 

But among these ideas, some appear to me to be innate, some 
adventitious, and others to be formed [or invented] by myself; for, 
as I have the power of understanding what is called a thing, ora 
truth, or a thought, it appears to me that I hold this power from 
no other source than my own nature. But if J now hear some sound, 
if I see the sun, or feel heat, I have hitherto judged that these 
sensations proceeded from certain things that exist outside of me ; 
and finally it appears to me that sirens, hippogryphs, and the like, 
are formed out of my own mind. But again I may possibly 
persuade myself that all these ideas are of the nature of those which 
I term adventitious, or else that they are all innate, or all fictitious: 
for I have not yet clearly discovered their true origin. 

And my principal task in this place is to consider, in respect to 
those ideas which appear to me to proceed from certain objects that 
are outside me, what are the reasons which cause me to think them 
similar to these objects. It seems indeed in the first place that 
I am taught this lesson by nature; and, secondly, I experience in 
myself that these ideas do not depend on my will nor therefore on 
myself—for they often present themselves to my mind in spite of 
my will. Just now, for instance, whether I will or whether I do not 
will, I feel heat, and thus I persuade myself that this feeling, or at 
least this idea of heat, is produced in me by something which is 
different from me, i.e. by the heat of the fire near which I sit. 
And nothing seems to me more obvious than to judge that 
object imprints its likeness rather than anything else upon me. 

Now I must discover whether these proofs are sufficiently strong 
and convincing. When I say that I am so instructed by nature, 
I merely mean a certain spontaneous inclination which impels me 
to believe in this connection, and not a natural light which makes 
me recognise that it is true. But these two things are very 
different ; for I cannot doubt that which the natural light causes . 
me to believe to be true, as, for example, it has shown me that I am i) 
from the fact that I doubt, or other facts of the same kind. And _ 
I possess no other faculty whereby to distinguish truth from falee- | 


Of God's Existence 161 


hood, which can teach me that what this light shows me to be true 
is not really true, and no other faculty that is equally trustworthy. 
But as far as [apparently] natural impulses are concerned, I have 
frequently remarked, when I had to make active choice between 
virtue and vice, that they often enough led me to the part that was 
worse ; and this is why I do not see any reason for following them 
in what regards truth and error. 

And as to the other reason, which is that these ideas must 
proceed from objects outside me, since they do not depend on 
my will, I do not find it any the more convincing. For just as 
these impulses of which I have spoken are found in me, notwith- 
standing that they do not always concur with my will, so perhaps 
there is in me some faculty fitted to produce these ideas without 
the assistance of any external things, even though it is not yet 
known by me; just as, apparently, they have hitherto always been 
found in me during sleep without the aid of any external objects. 

And finally, though they did proceed from objects different 
from myself, it is not a necessary consequence that they shoul 
resemble these. On the contrary, I have noticed that in man \ 
cases there was a great difference between the object and its idea. \| 
I find, for example, two completely diverse ideas of the sun in my 
mind; the one derives its origin from the senses, and should be 
placed in the category of adventitious ideas; according to this 
idea the sun seems to be extremely small; but the other is derived 
from astronomical reasonings, i.e. is elicited from certain notions 
that are innate in me, or else it is formed by me in some other 
manner ; in accordance with it the sun appears to be several times 
greater than the earth. These two ideas cannot, indeed, both 
resemble the same sun, and reason makes me believe that the one 
which seems to have originated directly from the sun itself, is the 
one which is most dissimilar to it. 

All this causes me to believe that until the present time it has 
not been by a judgment that was certain [or premeditated], but 
only by a sort of blind impulse that I believed that things existed 
outside of, and difterent from me, which, by the organs of my 
senses, or by some other method whatever it might be, conveyed 
these ideas or images to me [and imprinted on me their 
similitudes]. 

But there is yet another method of inquiring whether any of 
the objects of which I have ideas within me exist outside of me 
If ideas are only taken as certain modes of thought, I recognise 


“(Qo A 


162 Meditation III 


amongst them no difference or inequality, and all appear to proceed 
from me in the same manner; but when we consider them as 
images, one representing one thing and the other another, it is clear 
that they are very different one from the other. There is no doubt 
that those which represent to me substances are something more, 
aiid contain-so.to-speak-more objective reality within them {that is 
to say, by representation participate in a higher degree of being or 
perfection] than those that simply represent modes or accidents ; 
and that idea again by which I understand a supreme God, eternal, 
infinite, [immutable], omniscient, omnipotent, and Creator of all 
things which are outside of Himself, has certainly more objective 
reality in itself than those ideas by which finite substances are 
represented. 
Now it is manifest by the natural light that there-must_at least 
be as much reality in the efficient and total cause as in its effect. 
'\ For, pray, whence can the effect derive its reality, if not from its 
~}eause? And in what way can this cause communicate this reality 
to it, unless it possessed it in itself? And from this it follows, not 
only that something cannot proceed from nothing, but likewise 
that.what_is more-perfect—that—is.to.say, which has more reality 
within itself—cannot proceed from the less perfect. And this is 
not only evidently true of those effects which possess actual or 
formal reality, but.also of the ideas in which we consider merely 
what is termed objective reality. To take an example, the stone 
which has not yet existed not only cannot now commence to be 
unless it has been produced by something which possesses within 
itself, either formally or eminently, all that enters into the 
composition of the stone [i.e. it must possess the same things or 
other more excellent things than those which exist in the stone] 
and heat can only be produced in a subject in which it did not 
previously exist by a cause that is of an order [degree or kind] at 
least as perfect as heat, and so in all other cases. _But further, 
the idea of heat, or of a stone, cannot exist in me unless it has 
been placed within-me by some cause which possesses within it at 
least as much reality as that which I conceive to exist in the heat 
or the stone. Foralthough this cause does not transmit anything 
of its actual or formal reality to my idea, we must_not for that 
reason imagine that _it is necessari y_@ less real_cause ; we must 
remember that [since every idea is a work of the mind] its nature 
ix-such that it demands o Smands of Reel! no Giher Ioraal neity hae Uae 


which it borrows from my thought, “of which it is only a mode 


Of God’s Existence 163 


3 

[i.e. a manner or way of ee But in aca an en 
Wi 

t 


a 


rother, 1t_ must without di 
there is at least as much. formal reality. as this. idea contains of 


objective reality. For if we imagine that something is found in an 
idea which is not found in the cause, it must then have been 
derived from nought; but however imperfect may be this mode of 
being by which a thing is objectively [or by representation] in the 
understanding by its idea, we cannot certainly say that this mode of 
being is nothing, nor, consequently, that the idea derives its origin 
from nothing. 

Nor must I imagine that, since the reality that I consider in ({ 
hese ideas is only objective, it is not essential that this reality \. 
hould be formally in the causes of my ideas, but that it BQ) 
sufficient that it should be found 1_objectively, For just—as_this 
mode_of fobjective existen to pice ee proper 


nature, so does the mode off formal existence pertain to -the-causes) 


of those ideas (this is at least true of th 1) by the 
nature peculiar to them. And although it may be aN case that 
one idea gives birth to another idea, that cannot continue to be so 
indefinitely ; for in the end we must reach an idea whose cause 
shall be so to speak an archetype, in which the whole reality [or 
perfection] which is so to speak objectively [or by representation] 
in these ideas is contained formally [and d really} Thus the light 
cf nature causes ses_me_to_know-clearly- that—the_ideas_in me are like 
[pictures pictures or} images which can, in truth, easily fall short of the 
perfection of the objects from which they have been derived, but 
which can never contain anything greater_or more perfect. 

‘And the longer and the more carefully that I investigate these 
matters, the more clearly and distinctly do I recognise their truth. 
But what am I to conclude from it all i in the end? It_is this, that 
if the objecti uch a nature as 
clearly to make me reco either formally or 
‘eminently, and that consequently I cannot myself be the cause of it, 
it follows of necessity that I am not alone in the world, but that 
there is another being which exists, or which is the cause-of_this 
‘jex—Owthe other hand, had no such an idea existed in me, 
I should have had no sufficient argument to convince me of the 
existence of any being beyond myself; for I have made very careful 
investigation everywhere and up to the present time have been able 


to find no other ground. 


164 Meditation III 


But of my ideas, beyond that which represents me to myself, as 
to which there can here be no difficulty, there is another which 
represents a God, and there_are_others representing-corporeal and 
inanimate things, others angels, others animals, and others again 
“which represent to me men similar to myself. 

"As regards the ideas which represent to me other men or 
animals, or angels, I can however easily conceive that they might 
be formed by an admixture of the other ideas which I have of 
myself, of corporeal things, and of God, even although there were 
apart from me neither men nor animals, nor angels, in all the 
world. 

And in regard to the ideas of corporeal objects, L-do-not 
recognise in them anything so great or so excellent that they might 
Fat vhavetpossilean celal possibly proceeded from ) myself; for if I consider them 
more closely, and examine them individually, as I yesterday 


examined the idea of wax, I find that there is_verytttlein them 


ae M perceive clearly and distinctly. Magara? or extension in 


pi a ference of Ne extension, the Sars, which bodies of 
different figure preserve in relation to one another, and movement 
or change of situation; to which we may also add substance, 
duration and number. As to other things such as light, colours, 
sounds, scents, tastes, heat, cold and the other tactile qualities, 
He others ey are thought by me with so much obscurity. ybscurity_and confusion 
that_I do not even know if they are true or false, i.e. wheth e 
ideas which I form of these qualities are actually the ideas of real 
objec nt chimeras which 
cannot exist in fact]. For although I have before remarked that 
it-is-only in judgments that falsity, properly speaking, or formal 
falsity, can be met with, a certain material falsity may neve 


be found in ideas, i.e. when these ideas represent-what is nothi 

though + were something. For example, the ideas which I have of 
cold and heat are so far from clear and distinct that by their means 
I cannot tell whether cold is merely a privation of heat, or heat a 
privation of cold, or whether both are real qualities, or are not such. 

And inasmuch as [since ideas resemble images] there cannot be any 
ideas which do not appear to represent some things, if it is correct 
to say that cold is merely a privation of heat, the idea which 
represents it to me as something real and positive will not be 


improperly termed false, and the same holds good of other similar 
ideas. 


Of God's Existence 165 


To these it is certainly not necessary that I should attribute 
any author other than myse Mor-if-they are false, ie, if they 
represent things which do not exist, the light of nature shows me 
that they issue from nought, that is to say, that they are only in 
me in so far as something is lacking to the perfection of my nature, 
But if they are true, nevertheless because they exhibit so little 
reality to me that I cannot even clearly distinguish the thing 
represented from non-being, I do not see any reason why they 
should not be produced by myself. 

As to the clear and distinct idea which I have of corporeal 
things, some of them seem as though I might have derived them 
from tbe idea which I possess of myself, as those which I have of 
substance, duration, number, and such like. For [even] when I 

9) \ think that a stone is a substance, or at least a thing capable of 
iv existing of itself, and that I am a substance also, although I 
) conceive that I am a thing that thinks and not one that is extended, 

and that the stone on the other hand is an extended thing which 
does not think, and that thus there is a notable difference between 
< — the two conceptions—they seem, nevertheless, to agree in this, that 
X\ both represent substances. In the same way, when I perceive that 
‘ J I now exist and further recollect that I have in former times 
AS existed, and when I remember that I have various thoughts of 
yf which I can recognise the number, I acquire ideas of duration and 
number which I can afterwards transfer to any object that I please. 
But as to all the other qualities of which the ideas of corporeal 
things are composed, to wit, extension, figure, situation and motion, 
it is true that they are not formally in me, since I am only a thing 
that thinks; but because they are merely certain modes of substance 
[and so to speak the vestments under which corporeal substance 
appears to us] and because I myself am also a substance, it would 

seem that they might be contained in me eminently. 
- Hence there remains only the idea of God, concerning which 
we must consider whether it is something which cannot have pro- 
ceeded from me myself. By the name God I understand a substance 


that is infinite [eternal, immutable], independent, all-knowing, all- 


owerful, and by which I myself and-everything else, if anything 
Be isch east Taye hoon created, Now-all these characteristics 
are such that the more diligéntly I attend to them, theless 
do they appear capable of proceeding from me alone; hence, 
om_what has been already said, we must conclude that-God 
ecessarily exists, 


Yo 


° 


166 Meditation LII 


For although the idea_of-substance is within me owing to the 
fact that I am substance, stance, nevertheless [ should not-have- the idea of 


~—| an infinite substance—since I am finite—if it_had not proceeded 
S li from_some aubstance wae wa which was veritably infinite. 


Wa 9) “not_perceive the infinite by a 
true idea, br ion_of the finite, just as I perceive 
Tepose and “darkness by the negation -of movement and of ight ; 
for, on the contrary, I see that there is manifestly more reality in in, 

-fifinite substance than in finite, an at In some way 


L-have in-me the notion of the i =—to 


‘| fabs the notion ct Aare reap eae For _how would it 

be possible that I should know that I doubt_and desire, that is to 
say, that something is lacking to me, and that I am not t quite 
perfect, un unless I had within me some idea of a Being more perfect 
than an myself, in_comparison_ with which I should—recognise the 
def ficiencies of my nature? 

And we cannot say that this idea of God is perhaps materially false 
and that consequently I can derive it from nought [i.e. that possibly 
it exists in me because I am imperfect], as I have just said is the 
case with ideas of heat, cold and other such things; for, on the 


contrary, pctthist dente ceay clea diets one within 
it more objective reality than un_any other, there can_be none- which is 
of itself more true, nor any in which there can be less suspicion of 
PR Aalsehood. “The idea, _I-say,of this Being who is absolutely perfect 
and infinite, is entirely true ; for although, perhaps, we. can imagine 
that: such a Being does not exist, we cannot nevertheless imagine 
that His idea represents nothing real-to-me,as _I-have-said-of the 
idea_of cold. This idea is also_very—clear_and_distinct;—since_all 
_that I conceive clearly and distinctly of th the real and the true, and 


of what conveys some perfection, is in its entirety-contained in this 

ea, And this does not cease to be true although I do not com- 
prehend the infinite, or though in God there is an infinitude of 
things which I cannot _comprehend, nor possibly even reach in any 
way by thought ; for it is of the nature of the infinite that my 
nature, ANtAiys is ‘finite and limited, should not comprehend it ; and 
It is sufficient that I should understand this, -and that [oehentd 
judge that all things which I clearly perceive and in which I know 
that there is some perfection, and possibly likewise an i infinitude of 
properties of which I am ignorant, are in God formally or eminently, 
so that the idea which I have of Him may become the most true, 


most clear, and most distinct of all the ideas that are in me mind. 


C/ve 


Of God's Existence 167 


But possibly I am something more than I suppose myself to be, 
and perhaps all those perfections which I attribute to God are in 
some way potentially in me, although they do not yet disclose 
themselves, or issue in action. As a matter of fact I am already 
sensible that my knowledge increases [and perfects itself] little by 
little, and I see nothing which can prevent it from increasing more 
and more into infinitude; nor do I see, after it has thus been 
increased [or perfected], anything to prevent my being able to 
acquire by its means all the other perfections of the Divine nature ; 
nor finally why the power I have of acquiring these perfections, if it 
really exists in me, shall not suffice to produce the ideas of them. 

At the same time I recognise that this cannot be. For, in the 
first place, although it were true that every day my knowledge 
acquired new degrees of perfection, and that there were in my 
nature many things potentially which are not yet there actually, 
nevertheless these excellences do not pertain to [or make the 
smallest approach to] the idea which I have of God in whom there 
is nothing merely potential [but in whom all is present really and 
actually]; for it is an infallible token of imperfection in my 
knowledge that it increases little by little. And further, although 
my knowledge grows more and more, nevertheless I do not for that 
reason believe that it can ever be actually infinite, since it can 
never reach a point so high that it will be unable to attain to any 
greater increase. But I understand God to be actually infinite, so 
that He can add nothing to His supreme perfection. And finally 
I perceive that the objective being of an idea cannot be produced 
by a being that exists potentially only, which properly speaking is 
nothing, but only by a being which is formal or actual. 

To speak the truth, I see nothing in all that I have just said 
which by the light of nature is not manifest to anyone who desires 
to think attentively on the subject; but when I slightly relax my 
attention, my mind, finding its vision somewhat obscured and so to 
speak blinded by the images of sensible objects, I do not easily re- 
collect the reason why the idea that I possess of a being more perfect 
than I, must necessarily have been placed in me by a being which is 
really more perfect; and this is why I wish here to go on to inquire 
whether I, who have this idea, can exist if no such being exists. 

And I ask, from whom do I then derive my existence? Perhaps 
from myself or from my parents, or from some other source less 
perfect than God ; for we can imagine nothing more perfect than 
God, or even as perfect as He is. 


168 Meditation III 


author of my being, I should doubt nothing an 
nothing, and finally no perfection would be lacking to me; for 
I should have bestowed on myself—every—perfection—of which I 
possessed any idea and should thus be God. And it must not be 
imagined that those things that are lacking to me are perhaps more 
difficult of attainment than those which I already possess; for, on 
the contrary, it is quite evident that it was a matter of much 
greater difficulty to bring to pass that I, that is to say, a thing or 
a substance that thinks, should emerge out of nothing, than it 
would be to attain to the knowledge of many things of which I am 
ignorant, and which are only the accidents of this thinking sub- 
stance. But it is clear that if I had of myself possessed this greater 
perfection of which I have just spoken [that is to say, if I had been 
the author of my own existence], I should not at least have denied 
myself the things which are the more easy to acquire [to wit, many 
branches of knowledge of which my nature is destitute]; nor 
should I have deprived myself of any of the things contained in the 
idea which I form of God, because there are none of them which 
seem to me specially difficult to acquire: and if there were any that 
were more difficult to acquire, they would certainly appear to me to 
be such (supposing I myself were the origin of the other things 
which I possess) since I should discover in them that my powers 
were limited. 

But though I assume that perhaps I have always existed just as 
I am at present, neither can I escape the force of this reasoning, 
and imagine that the conclusion to be drawn from this is, that 
I need not seek for any author of my existence. For all the course 
of my life may be divided into an infinite number of parts, none of 
which is in any way dependent on the other; and thus from the 
fact that I was in existence a short time ago it does not follow that 
I must be in existence now, unless some cause at this instant, so to 
speak, produces me anew, that is to say, conserves me. It is as a 
matter of fact perfectly clear and evident to all those who consider 
with attention the nature of time, that, in order to be conserved in 
each moment in which it endures, a substance has need of the same 
power and action as would be necessary to produce and create it 
anew, supposing it did not yet exist, so that the light of nature 
shows us clearly that the distinction between creation and con- 
servation is solely a distinction of the reason. 

All that I thus require here is that I should interrogate myself, 


Of God's Existence 169 


if I wish to know whether I possess a power which is capable of 
bringing it to pass that I who now am shall still be in the future; 
for since I am nothing but a thinking thing, or at least since thus 
far it is only this portion of myself which is precisely in question at 
present, if such a power did reside in me, I should certainly be 
conscious of it. But I am conscious of nothing of the kind, and by 
this I know clearly that I depend on some being different from 
myself. 

Possibly, however, this being on which I depend is not that 
which I call God, and I am created either by my parents or by some 
other cause less perfect than God. This cannot be, because, as 
I have just said, it is perfectly evident that there must be at least 
as much reality in the cause as in the effect; and thus since I am 
a thinking thing, and possess an idea of God within me, whatever 
in the end be the cause assigned to my existence, it must be allowed 
that it is likewise a thinking thing and that it possesses in itself 
the idea of all the perfections which I attribute to God. We may 
again inquire whether this cause derives its origin from itself or 
from some other thing. For if from itself, it follows by the reasons 
before brought forward, that this cause must itself be God; for 
since it possesses the virtue of self-existence, it must also without 
doubt have the power of actually possessing all the perfections of 
which it has the idea, that is, all those which I conceive as existing 
in God. But if it derives its existence from some other cause than 
itself, we shall again ask, for the same reason, whether this second 
cause exists by itself or through another, until from one step to 
another, we finally arrive at an ultimate cause, which will be God. 

And it is perfectly manifest that in this there can be no regression 
into infinity, since what is in question is not so much the cause 
which formerly created me, as that which conserves me at the 
present time. 

Nor can we suppose that several causes may have concurred in 
my production, and that from one I have received the idea of one of 
the perfections which I attribute to God, and from another the idea 
of some other, so that all these perfections indeed exist somewhere 
in the universe, but not as complete in one unity which is God. 
On the contrary, the unity, the simplicity or the inseparability of all 
things which are in God is one of the principal perfections which 
I conceive to be in Him. And certainly the idea of this unity of 
all Divine perfections cannot have been placed in me by any cause 
from which I have not likewise received the ideas of all the other 


170 Meditation III 


perfections ; for this cause could not make me able to comprehend 
them as joined together in an inseparable unity without having at 
the same time caused me in some measure to know what they are 
[and in some way to recognise each one of them]. 

Finally, so far as my parents [from whom it appears I have 
sprung] are concerned, although all that I have ever been able to 
believe of them were true, that does not make it follow that it is 
they who conserve me, nor are they even the authors of my being 
in any sense, in so far as I am a thinking being; since what they 
did was merely to implant certain dispositions in that matter in 
which the self—i.e. the mind, which alone I at present identify with 
myself—is by me deemed to exist. And thus there can be no 
difficulty in their regard, but we must of necessity conclude from 
the fact alone that I exist, or that the idea of a Being supremely 
perfect—that is of God—is in me, that the proof of God’s existence 
is grounded on the highest evidence. 

It only remains to me to examine into the manner in which 
I have acquired this idea from God; for I have not received it 
through the senses, and it is never presented to me unexpectedly, as 
is usual with the ideas of sensible things when these things present 
themselves, or seem to present themselves, to the external organs of 
my senses; nor is it likewise a fiction of my mind, for it is not in 
my power to take from or to add anything to it; and consequently 
the only alternative is that it is innate in me, just as the idea of 
myself is innate in me. 

And one certainly ought not to find it strange that God, in 
creating me, placed this idea within me to be like the mark of the 
workman imprinted on his work; and it is likewise not essential 
that the mark shall be something different from the work itself. 
For from the sole fact that God created me it is most probable that 
in some way he has placed his image and similitude upon me, and 
that I perceive this similitude (in which the idea of God is contained) 
by means of the same faculty by which I perceive myself—that is 
to say, when I reflect on myself I not only know that I am some- 
thing [imperfect], incomplete and dependent on another, which 
incessantly aspires after something which is better and greater than 
myself, but I also know that He on whom I depend possesses in 
Himself all the great things towards which I aspire [and the ideas 
of which I find within myself], and that not indefinitely or 
potentially alone, but really, actually and infinitely ; and that thus 
He is God. And the whole strength of the argument which I have 


Of God's Existence 171 


here made use of to prove the existence of God consists in this, 
that I recognise that it is not possible that my nature should be 
what it is, and indeed that I should have in myself the idea of a 
God, if God did not veritably exist—a God, I say, whose idea is in 
me, i.e. who possesses all those supreme perfections of which our 
mind may indeed have some idea but without understanding them 
all, who is liable to no errors or defect [and who has none of all 
those marks which denote imperfection]. From this it is manifest 
that He cannot be a deceiver, since the light of nature teaches us 
that fraud and deception necessarily proceed from some defect. 

But before I examine this matter with more care, and pass on to 
the consideration of other truths which may be derived from it, it 
seems to me right to pause for a while in order to contemplate God 
Himself, to ponder at leisure His marvellous attributes, to consider, 
and admire, and adore, the beauty of this light so resplendent, at 
least as far as the strength of my mind, which is in some measure 
dazzled by the sight, will allow me to do so. For just as faith 
teaches us that the supreme felicity of the other life consists only 
in this contemplation of the Divine Majesty, so we continue to 
learn by experience that a similar meditation, though incomparably 
less perfect, causes us to enjoy the greatest satisfaction of which we 
are capable in this life. 


Mepitation IV. 


Of the True and the False. 


I have been well accustomed these past days to detach my mind 
from my senses, and I have accurately observed that there are very 
few things that one knows with certainty respecting corporeal objects, 
that there are many more which are known to us respecting the 
human mind, and yet more still regarding God Himself ; so that I shall 
now without any difficulty abstract my thoughts from the considera- 
tion of [sensible or] imaginable objects, and carry them to those 
which, being withdrawn from all contact with matter, are purely 
intelligible. And certainly the idea which I possess of the human 
mind inasmuch as it is a thinking thing, and not extended in 
length, width and depth, nor participating in anything pertaining 
to body, is incomparably more distinct than is the idea of any 
corporeal thing. And when I consider that I doubt, that is to say, 
that I am an incomplete and dependent being, the idea of a being 
that is complete and independent, that is of God, presents itself to 


172 Neditation IV 


my mind with so much distinctness and clearness—and from the 
fact alone that this idea is found in me, or that I who possess this 
idea exist, I conclude so certainly that God exists, and that my 
existence depends entirely on Him in every moment of my life— 
that I do not think that the human mind is capable of knowing 
anything with more evidence and certitude. And it seems to me 
that I now have before me a road which will lead us from the 
contemplation of the true God (in whom all the treasures of science 
and wisdom are contained) to the knowledge of the other objects of 
the universe, 

For, first of all, I recognise it to be impossible that He should 
ever deceive me; for in all fraud and deception some imperfection 
is to be found, and although it may appear that the power of 
deception is a mark of subtilty or power, yet the desire to deceive 
without doubt testifies to malice or feebleness, and accordingly 
cannot be found in God. 

In the next place I experienced in myself a certain capacity for 
judging which I have doubtless received from God, like all the 
other things that I possess; and as He could not desire to deceive 
me, it is clear that He has not given me a faculty that will lead me 
to err if I use it aright. 

And no doubt respecting this matter could remain, if it were 
not that the consequence would seem to follow that I can thus 
never be deceived ; for if I hold all that I possess from God, and if 
He has not placed in me the capacity for error, it seems as though 
I could never fall into error. And it is true that when I think only 
of God [and direct my mind wholly to Him], I discover [in myself] 
no cause of error, or falsity; yet directly afterwards, when recurring 
to myself, experience shows me that I am nevertheless subject to an 
infinitude of errors, as to which, when we come to investigate them 
more closely, I notice that not only is there a real and positive idea 
of God or of a Being of supreme perfection present to my mind, but 
also, so to speak, a certain negative idea of nothing, that is, of that 
which is infinitely removed from any kind of perfection; and that 
I am in a sense something intermediate between God and nought, 
i.e. placed in such a manner between the supreme Being and non- 
being, that there is in truth nothing in me that can lead to error in 
so far as a sovereign Being has formed me; but that, as I in some 
degree participate likewise in nought or in non-being, ice. in so far 
as I am not myself the supreme Being, and as I find myself subject 


1 Not in the French version. 


Of the True and the False 173 


to an infinitude of imperfections, I ought not to be astonished if 
I should fall into error. Thus do I recognise that error, in so far 
as it is such, is not a real thing depending on God, but simply a 
defect ; and therefore, in order to fall into it, that I have no need 
to possess a special faculty given me by God for this very purpose, 
but that I fall into error from the fact that the power given me 
by God for the purpose of distinguishing truth from error is not 
infinite. 

Nevertheless this does not quite satisfy me; for error is not a pure 
negation [i.e. is not the simple defect or want of some perfection 
which ought not to be mine], but it is a lack of some knowledge 
which it seems that I ought to possess. And on considering the 
nature of God it does not appear to me possible that He should 
have given me a faculty which is not perfect of its kind, that is, 
which is wanting in some perfection due to it. For if it is true 
that the more skilful the artizan, the more perfect is the work of his 
hands, what can have been produced by this supreme Creator of all 
things that is not in all its parts perfect? And certainly there is 
no doubt that God could have created me so that I could never 
have been subject to error; it is also certain that He ever wills 
what is best; is it then better that I should be subject to err than 
that I should not ? 

In considering this more attentively, it occurs to me in the first 
place that I should not be astonished if my intelligence is not 
capable of comprehending why God acts as He does; and that there 
is thus no reason to doubt of His existence from the fact that I may 
perhaps find many other things besides this as to which I am able 
to understand neither for what reason nor how God has produced 
them. For, in the first place, knowing that my nature is extremely 
feeble and limited, and that the nature of God is on the contrary 
immense, incomprehensible, and infinite, I have no further difficulty 
in recognising that there is an infinitude of matters in His power, 
the causes of which transcend my knowledge; and this reason 
suffices to convince me that the species of cause termed final, finds 
no useful employment in physical [or natural] things; for it does 
not appear to me that I can without temerity seek to investigate 
the [inscrutable] ends of God. 

It further occurs to me that we should not consider one single 
creature separately, when we inquire as to whether the works of God 
are perfect, but should regard all his creations together. For the 
same thing which might possibly seem very imperfect with some 


174 Meditation IV 


semblance of reason if regarded by itself, is found to be very perfect 
if regarded as part of the whole universe; and although, since 
I resolved to doubt all things, I as yet have only known certainly 
my own existence and that of God, nevertheless since I have 
recognised the infinite power of God, I cannot deny that He may 
have produced many other things, or at least that He has the power 
of producing them, so that I may obtain a place as a part of a great 
universe. 

Whereupon, regarding myself more closely, and considering what 
are my errors (for they alone testify to there being any imperfection 
in me), I answer that they depend on a combination of two causes, 
to wit, on the faculty of knowledge that rests in me, and on the 
power of choice or of free will—that is to say, of the understanding 
and at the same time of the will. For by the understanding alone 
I [neither assert nor deny anything, but] apprehend’ the ideas of 
things as to which I can form a judgment. But no error is properly 
speaking found in it, provided the word error is taken in its proper 
signification ; and though there is possibly an infinitude of things 
in the world of which I have no idea in my understanding, we cannot 
for all that say that it is deprived of these ideas [as we might say 
of something which is required by its nature], but simply it does 
not possess these ; because in truth there is no reason to prove that 
God should have given me a greater faculty of knowledge than He 
has given me; and however skilful a workman I represent Him to 
be, I should not for all that consider that He was bound to have 
placed in each of His works all the perfections which He may have 
been able to place in some. I likewise cannot complain that God 
has not given me a free choice or a will which is sufficient, ample 
and perfect, since as a matter of fact I am conscious of a will so 
extended as to be subject to no limits. And what seems to me very 
remarkable in this regard is that of all the qualities which I possess 
there is no one so perfect and so comprehensive that I do not very 
clearly recognise that it might be yet greater and more perfect. 
For, to take an example, if I consider the faculty of comprehension 
which I possess, I find that it is of very small extent and extremely 
limited, and at the same time I find the idea of another faculty 
much more ample and even infinite, and seeing that I can form the 
idea of it, I recognise from this very fact that it pertains to the 
nature of God. If in the same way I examine the memory, the 
imagination, or some other faculty, I do not find any which is not 


1 percipio. 


Of the True and the False 175 


small and circumscribed, while in God it is immense [or infinite]. 
It is free-will alone or liberty of choice which I find to be so great 
in me that I can conceive no other idea to be more great ; it is indeed 
the case that it is for the most part this will that causes me to 
know that in some manner I bear the image and similitude of God. 
For although the power of will is incomparably greater in God than 
in me, both by reason of the knowledge and the power which, 
conjoined with it, render it stronger and more efficacious, and by 
reason of its object, inasmuch as in God it extends to a great many 
things ; it nevertheless does not seem to me greater if I consider it 
formally and precisely in itself: for the faculty of will consists 
alone in our having the power of choosing to do a thing or choosing 
not to do it (that is, to affirm or deny, to pursue or to shun it), or 
rather it consists alone in the fact that in order to affirm or deny, 
pursue or shun those things placed before us by the understanding, 
we act so that we are unconscious that any outside force constrains 
us in doing so. For in order that I should be free it is not necessary 
that I should be indifferent as to the choice of one or the other 
of two contraries; but contrariwise the more I lean to the one— 
whether I recognise clearly that the reasons of the good and 
true are to be found in it, or whether God so disposes my inward 
thought—the more freely do I choose and embrace it. And 
undoubtedly both divine grace and natural knowledge, far from 
diminishing my liberty, rather increase it and strengthen it. Hence 
this indifference which I feel, when I am not swayed to one side 
rather than to the other by lack of reason, is the lowest grade of 
liberty, and rather evinces a lack or negation in knowledge than a 
perfection of will: for if I always recognised clearly what was true 
and good, I should never have trouble in deliberating as to what 
judgment or choice I should make, and then I should be entirely 
free without ever being indifferent. 

From all this I recognise that the power of will which I have 
received from God is not of itself the source of my errors—for it is 
very ample and very perfect of its kind—any more than is the power 
of understanding ; for since I understand nothing but by the power 
which God has given me for understanding, there is no doubt that 
all that I understand, I understand as I ought, and it is not possible 
that I err in this. Whence then c errors? They come 
from the sole fact thatsattee the) will de?aach wider in its range 
and compass than the understanding, I do not restrain it within the 
game bounds, but extend it also to things which I do not under- 


176 Meditation IV 


stand: and as the will is of itself indifferent to these, it easily falls 
into error and sin, and chooses the evil for the good, or the false for 
the true. 

For example, when I lately examined whether anything existed 
in the world, and found that from the very fact that I considered this 
question it followed very clearly that I myself existed, I could not 
prevent myself from believing that a thing I so clearly conceived was 
true: not that I found myself compelled to do so by some external 
cause, but simply because from great clearness in my mind there 
followeda great inclination of my will; and I believed this with so much 
the greater freedom or spontaneity as I possessed the less indifference 
towards it. Now, on the contrary, I not only know that I exist, 
inasmuch as I am a thinking thing, but a certain representation of 
corporeal nature is also presented to my mind; and it comes to pass 
that I doubt whether this thinking nature which is in me, or rather 
by which I am what I am, differs from this corporeal nature, or 
whether both are not simply the same thing; and I here suppose 
that I do not yet know any reason to persuade me to adopt the one 
belief rather than the other. From this it follows that I am entirely 
indifferent as to which of the two I affirm or deny, or even whether 
I abstain from forming any judgment in the matter. 

And this indifference does not only extend to matters as to 
which the understanding has no knowledge, but also in general to 
all those which are not apprehended with perfect clearness at the 
moment when the will is deliberating upon them: for, however 
probable are the conjectures which render me disposed to form a 
judgment respecting anything, the simple knowledge that I have 
that those are conjectures alone and not certain and indubitable 
reasons, suffices to occasion me to judge the contrary. Of this 
I have had great experience of late when I set aside as false all 
that I had formerly held to be absolutely true, for the sole reason 
that I remarked that it might in some measure be doubted. 

But if I abstain from giving my judgment on any thing when 
I do not perceive it with sufficient clearness and distinctness, it 
is plain that I act rightly and am not deceived. But if I determine 
to deny or affirm, I no longer make use as I should of my iree will, 
and if I affirm what is not true, it is evident that I deceive myself ; 
even though I judge according to truth, this comes about only by 
chance, and I do not escape the blame of misusing my freedom ; for 
the light of nature teaches us that the knowledge of the under- 
standing should always precede the determination of the will. 


Of the True and the False 177 


And it is in the misuse of the free will that the privation which 
constitutes the characteristic nature of error is met with. Privation, 
I say, is found in the act, in so far as it proceeds from me, but it is 
not found in the faculty which I have received from God, nor even 
in the act in so far as it depends on Him. 

For I have certainly no cause to complain that God has not 
given me an intelligence which is more powerful, or a natural light 
which is stronger than that which I have received from Him, 
since it is proper to the finite understanding not to comprehend a 
multitude of things, and it is proper to a created understanding to 
be finite ; on the contrary, I have every reason to render thanks to 
God who owes me nothing and who has given me all the perfections 
I possess, and I should be far from charging Him with injustice, and 
with having deprived me of, or wrongfully withheld from me, these 
perfections which He has not bestowed upon me. 

I have further no reason to complain that He has given me a will 
more ample than my understanding, for since the will consists only 
of one single element, and is so to speak indivisible, it appears that 
its nature is such that nothing can be abstracted from it [without 
destroying it]; and certainly the more comprehensive it is found to 
be, the more reason I have to render gratitude to the giver. 

And, finally, I must also not complain that God concurs with me 
in forming the acts of the will, that is the judgment in which I go 
astray, because these acts are entirely true and good, inasmuch as 
they depend on God; and in a certain sense more perfection accrues 
to my nature from the fact that I can form them, than if I could 
not do so. As to the privation in which alone the formal reason of 
error or sin consists, it has no need of any concurrence from God, 
since it is not a thing [or an existence], and since it is not related 
to God as to a cause, but should be termed merely a negation 
[according to the significance given to these words in the Schools]. 
For in fact it is not an imperfection in God that He has given me 
the liberty to give or withhold my assent from certain things as to 
which He has not placed a clear and distinct knowledge in my 
understanding ; but it is without doubt an imperfection in me not 
to make a good use of my freedom, and to give my judgment 
readily on matters which I only understand obscurely. I neverthe- 
less perceive that God could easily have created me so that I never 
should err, although I still remained free, and endowed with a 
limited knowledge, viz. by giving to my understanding a clear and 
distinct intelligence of all things as to which I should ever have to 


178 Meditation IV 


deliberate; or simply by His engraving deeply in my memory the 
resolution never to form a judgment on anything without having a 
clear and distinct understanding of it, so that I could never forget 
it. And it is easy for me to understand that, in so far as I consider 
myself alone, and as if there were only myself in the world, I should 
have been much more perfect than I am, if God had created me so 
that I could never err. Nevertheless I cannot deny that in some 
sense it is a greater perfection in the whole universe that certain 
parts should not be exempt from error as others are than that all 
parts should be exactly similar. And I have no right to-complain 
if God, having placed me in the world, has not called upon me to 
play a part that excels all others in distinction and perfection. 

And further I have reason to be glad on the ground that if He 
has not given me the power of never going astray by the first means 
pointed out above, which depends on a clear and evident knowledge 
of all the things regarding which I can deliberate, He has at least left 
within my power the other means, which is firmly to adhere to the 
resolution never to give judgment on matters whose truth is not 
clearly known to me; for although I notice a certain weakness in 
my nature in that I cannot continually concentrate my mind on 
one single thought, I can yet, by attentive and frequently repeated 
meditation, impress it so forcibly on my memory that I shall never 
fail to recollect it whenever I have need of it, and thus acquire the 
habit of never going astray. 

And inasmuch as it is in this that the greatest and principal 
perfection of man consists, it seems to me that I have not gained 
little by this day’s Meditation, since I have discovered the source of 
falsity and error. And certainly there can be no other source than that 
which I have explained ; for as often as I so restrain my will within 
the limits of my knowledge that it forms no judgment except on 
matters which are clearly and distinctly represented to it by the 
understanding, I can never be deceived; for every clear and distinct 
conception? is without doubt something, and hence cannot derive 
its origin from what is nought, but must of necessity have God as 
its author—God, I say, who being supremely perfect, cannot be the 
cause of any error; and consequently we must conclude that such 
a conception [or such a judgment] is true. Nor have I only 
learned to-day what I should avoid in order that I may not err, 
but also how I should act in order to arrive at a knowledge of the 


1 perceptio, 


Of the True and the False 179 


truth ; for without doubt I shall arrive at this end if I devote my 

attention sufticiently to those things which I perfectly understand ; 

and if I separate from these that which I only understand confusedly 

ie obscurity. To these I shall henceforth diligently give 
eed. 


Mepiration V. 


Of the essence of material things, and, again, of God, that He 
evists. 

Many other matters respecting the attributes of God and my 
own nature or mind remain for consideration ; but I shall possibly 
on another occasion resume the investigation of these. Now (after 
first noting what must be done or avoided, in order to arrive at a 
knowledge of the truth) my principal task is to endeavour to emerge 
from the state of doubt into which I have these last days fallen, 
and to see whether nothing certain can be known regarding material 
things. 

But before examining whether any such objects as I conceive 
exist outside of me, I must consider the ideas of them in so far as 
they are in my thought, and see which of them are distinct and 
which confused. 

In the first place, I am able distinctly to imagine that quantity 
which philosophers commonly call continuous, or the extension in 
length, breadth, or depth, that is in this quantity, or rather in the 
object to which it is attributed. Further, I can number in it many 
different parts, and attribute to each of its parts many sorts of size, 
figure, situation and local movement, and, finally, I can assign to 
each of these movements all degrees of duration. 

And not only do I know these things with distinctness when 
I consider them in general, but, likewise [however little I apply my 
attention to the matter], I discover an infinitude of particulars 
respecting numbers, figures, movements, and other such things, 
whose truth is so manifest, and so well accords with my nature, 
that when I begin to discover them, it seems to me that I learn 
nothing new, or recollect what I formerly knew—that is to say, that 
I for the first time perceive things which were already present to 
my mind, although I had not as yet applied my mind to them. 

And what I here find to be most important is that I discover in 
myself an infinitude of ideas of certain things which cannot be 
esteemed as pure negations, although they may possibly have no 


180 Meditation V 


existence outside of my thought, and which are not framed by me, 
although it is within my power either to think or not to think 
them, but which possess natures which are true and immutable. 
For example, when I imagine a triangle, although there may 
nowhere in the world be such a figure outside my thought, or ever 
have been, there is nevertheless in this figure a certain determinate 
nature, form, or essence, which is immutable and eternal, which 
I have not invented, and which in no wise depends on my mind, as 
appears from the fact that diverse properties of that triangle can be 
demonstrated, viz. that its three angles are equal to two right 
angles, that the greatest side is subtended by the greatest angle, 
and the like, which now, whether I wish it or do not wish it, 
I recognise very clearly as pertaining to it, although I never thought 
of the matter at all when I imagined a triangle for the first time, 
and which therefore cannot be said to have been invented by me. 
Nor does the objection hold good that possibly this idea of a 
triangle has reached my mind through the medium of my senses, 
since I have sometimes seen bodies triangular in shape ; because I can 
form in my mind an infinitude of other figures regarding which we 
cannot have the least conception of their ever having been objects 
of sense, and I can nevertheless demonstrate various properties 
pertaining to their nature as well as to that of the triangle, and 
these must certainly all be true since I conceive them clearly. 
Hence they are something, and not pure negation; for it is perfectly 
clear that all that is true is something, and I have already fully 
demonstrated that all that I know clearly is true. And even 
uthough I had not demonstrated this, the nature of my mind is 
such that I could not prevent myself from holding them to be true 
so long as I conceive them clearly ; and I recollect that even when 
I was still strongly attached to the objects of sense, I counted as 
the most certain those truths which I conceived clearly as regards 
figures, numbers, and the other matters which pertain to arithmetic 
and geometry, and, in general, to pure and abstract mathematics. 
But now, if just because I can draw the idea of something from 
my thought, it follows that all which I know clearly and distinctly 
as pertaining to this object does really belong to it, may I not 
derive from this an argument demonstrating the existence of God? 
It is certain that I no less find the idea of God, that is to say, the 
idea of a supremely perfect Being, in me, than that of any figure 
or number whatever it is; and I do not know any less clearly 
and distinctly that an [actual and] eternal existence pertains to 


Of God, that He exists 181 


this nature than I know that all that which I am able to demonstrate 
of some figure or number truly pertains to the nature of this figure 
or number, and therefore, although all that I concluded in the 
preceding Meditations were found to be false, the existence of God 
would pass with me as at least as certain as I have ever held the 
truths of mathematics (which concern only numbers and figures) 
to be. 

This indeed is not at first manifest, since it would seem to 
present some appearance of being a sophism. For being accustomed 
in all other things to make a distinction between existence and 
essence, | easily persuade myself that the existence can be separated 
from the essence of God, and that we can thus conceive God as not 
actually existing. But, nevertheless, when I think of it with more 
attention, I clearly see that existence can no more be separated 
from the essence of God than can its having its three angles equal 
to two right angles be separated from the essence of a [rectilinear] 
triangle, or the idea of a mountain from the idea of a valley ; and 
so there is not any less repugnance to our conceiving a God (that 
is, a Being supremely perfect) to whom existence is lacking (that 
is to say, to whom a certain perfection is lacking), than to conceive 
of a mountain which has no valley. 

But although I cannot really conceive of a God without existence 

re than a mountain without a valley, still from the fact that 
a taiaih avally i dow not follow that there 
is such a mountain in the world; similarly although I conceive of 
God as possessing existence, it would seem that it does not follow 
that there is a God which exists; for my thought does not impose 
any necessity upon things, and just as I may imagine a winged 
horse, although no horse with wings exists, so I could perbaps 
attribute existence to God, although no God existed. 

But a sophism is concealed in this objection ; for from the fact 
that I cannot conceive a mountain without a valley, it does not 
follow that there is any mountain or any valley in existence, but 
only that the mountain and the valley, whether they exist or do 
not exist, cannot in any way be separated one from the other. 
While from the fact that I cannot conceive God without existence, 
it follows that existence is inseparable from Him, and hence that 
He really exists; not that my thought can bring this to pass, or 
impose any necessity on things, but, on the contrary, because the 
necessity which lies in the thing itself, i.e. the necessity of the 
existence of God determines me to think in this way. For it is 


182 Meditation V 


not within my power to think of God without existence (that is of a 
supremely perfect Being devoid of a supreme perfection) though it is 
in my power to imagine a horse either with wings or without wings. 

And we must not here object that it is in truth necessary for me 
to assert that God exists after having presupposed that He possesses 
every sort of perfection, since existence is one of these, but that as 
a matter of fact my original supposition was not necessary, just as 
it is not necessary to consider that all quadrilateral figures can 
be inscribed in the circle ; for supposing I thought this, I should 
be constrained to admit that the rhombus might be inscribed in the 
circle since it is a quadrilateral figure, which, however, is manifestly 
false. [We must not, I say, make any such allegations because] 
although it is not necessary that I should at any time entertain the 
notion of God, nevertheless whenever it happens that I think of a 
first and a sovereign Being, and, so to speak, derive the idea of 
Him from the storehouse of my mind, it is necessary that I should 
attribute to Him every sort of perfection, although I do not get so 
far as to enumerate them all, or to apply my mind to each one in 
particular. And this necessity suffices to make me conclude (after 
having recognised that existence is a perfection) that this first and 
sovereign Being really exists ; just as though it is not necessary for 
me ever to imagine any triangle, yet, whenever I wish to consider 
a rectilinear figure composed only of three angles, it is absolutely 
essential that I should attribute to it all those properties which 
serve to bring about the conclusion that its three angles are not 
greater than two right angles, even although I may not then be 
considering this point in particular. But when I consider which 
figures are capable of being inscribed in the circle, it is in no wise 
necessary that I should think that all quadrilateral figures are of 
this number; on the contrary, I cannot even pretend that this is 
the case, so long as I do not desire to accept anything which I cannot 
conceive clearly and distinctly. And in consequence there is a 
great difference between the false suppositions such as this, and the 
true ideas born within me, the first and principal of which is that 
of God. For really I discern in many ways that this idea is not 
something factitious, and depending solely on my thought, but that 
it is the image of a true and immutable nature ; first of all, because 
I cannot conceive anything but God himself to whose essence 
existence [necessarily] pertains; in the second place because it is 
not possible for me to conceive two or more Gods in this same 
position ; and, granted that there is one such God who now exists, 


Of God, that He exists 183 


I see clearly that it is necessary that He should have existed from 
all eternity, and that He must exist eternally ; and finally, because 
I know an infinitude of other properties in God, none of which 
I can either diminish or change. 

For the rest, whatever proof or argument I avail myself of, we 
must always return to the point that it is only those things which 
we conceive clearly and distinctly that have the power of persuading 
me entirely. And although amongst the matters which I conceive of 
in this way, some indeed are manifestly obvious to all, while others 
only manifest themselves to those who consider them closely and 
examine them attentively ; still, after they have once been discovered, 
the latter are not esteemed as any less certain than the former. For 
example, in the case of every right-angled triangle, although it does 
not so manifestly appear that the square of the base is equal to the 
squares of the two other sides as that this base is opposite to the 
greatest angle ; still, when this has once been apprehended, we are 
just as certain of its truth as of the truth of the other. And as 
regards God, if my mind were not pre-occupied with prejudices, and 
if my thought did not find itself on all hands diverted by the 
continual pressure of sensible things, there would be nothing which 
I could know more immediately and more easily than Him. For is 
there anything more manifest than that there is a God, that is to 
say, a Supreme Being, to whose essence alone existence pertains’? 

And although for a firm grasp of this truth I have need of a 
strenuous application of mind, at present I not only feel myself to 
be as assured of it as of all that I hold as most certain, but I also 
remark that the certainty of all other things depends on it so 
absolutely, that without this knowledge it is impossible ever to 
know anything perfectly. 

For although I am of such a nature that as long as? I under- 
stand anything very clearly and distinctly, I am naturally impelled 
to believe it to be true, yet because I am also of such a nature that 
I cannot have my mind constantly fixed on the same object in 
order to perceive it clearly, and as I often recollect having formed 
a past judgment without at the same time properly recollecting the 
reasons that led me to make it, it may happen meanwhile that 
other reasons present themselves to me, which would easily cause me 
to change my opinion, if I were ignorant of the facts of the existence 


1 «In the idea of whom alone necessary or eternal existence is comprised.’ 
French version. : 
2 «From the moment that.” French version. 


Reh fC 


184 Meditation V 


of God, and thus I should have no true and certain knowledge, but 
only vague and vacillating opinions. Thus, for example, when I 
consider the nature of a [rectilinear] triangle, 1 who have some 
little knowledge of the principles of geometry recognise quite 
clearly that the three angles are equal to two right angles, and it 
is not possible for me not to believe this so long as I apply my mind 
to its demonstration; but so soon as I abstain from attending to 
the proof, although I still recollect having clearly comprehended it, 
it may easily occur that I come to doubt its truth, if I am 
ignorant of there being a God. For I can persuade myself of 
having been so constituted by nature that I can easily deceive 
myself even in those matters which I believe myself to apprehend 
with the greatest evidence and certainty, especially when I recollect 
that I have frequently judged matters to be true and certain which 
other reasons have afterwards impelled me to judge to be altogether 
false. 

But after I have recognised that there is a God—because at the 
same time I have also recognised that all things depend upon Him, 
and that He is not a deceiver, and from that have imferr a 
what I perceive clearly and distinctly cannot fail to be true— 
although I no longer pay attention to the reasons for which I 
have judged this to be true, provided that I recollect having clearly 
and distinctly perceived it no contrary reason can be brought 
forward which could ever cause me to doubt of its truth ; and thus 
I have a true and certain knowledge of it. And this same know- 
ledge extends likewise to all other things which I recollect having 
formerly demonstrated, such as the truths of geometry and the 
like ; for what can be alleged against them to cause me to place 
them in doubt? Will it be said that my nature is such as to 
cause me to be frequently deceived? But I already know that 
I cannot be deceived in the judgment whose grounds I know clearly. 
Will it be said that I formerly held many things to be true and 
certain which I have afterwards recognised to be false? But I had 
not had any clear and distinct knowledge of these things, and not 
as yet knowing the rule whereby I assure myself of the truth, I had 
been impelled to give my assent from reasons which I have since 
recognised to be less strong than I had at the time imagined them 
to be. What further objection can then be raised? That possibly 
I am dreaming (an objection I myself made a little while ago), or 
that all the thoughts which I now have are no more true than the 
phantasies of my dreams? But even though I slept the case would 


Of God, that He exists 185 


be the same, for all that is clearly present to my mind is absolutely 
true. 

And so I very clearly recognise that the certainty and truth of 
all knowledge depends alone on the knowledge of the true God, in 
so much that, before I knew Him, I could not have a perfect 
knowledge of any other thing. And now that I know Him I have 
the means of acquiring a perfect knowledge of an infinitude of 
things, not only of those which relate to God Himself and other 
intellectual matters, but also of those which pertain to corporeal 
nature in so far as it is the object of pure mathematics [which have 
no concern with whether it exists or not]. 


Meprration VI. 


Of the Existence of Material Things, and of the real distinction 
between the Soul and Body of Man. 


Nothing further now remains but to inquire whether material 
things exist. And certainly I at least know that these may exist 
in so far as they are considered as the objects of pure mathematics, 
since in this aspect I perceive them clearly and distinctly. For there 
is no doubt that God possesses the power to produce everything 
that I am capable of perceiving with distinctness, and I have never 
deemed that anything was impossible for Him, unless I found a 
contradiction in attempting to conceive it clearly. Further, the 
faculty of imagination which I possess, and of which, experience 
tells me, I make use when I apply myself to the consideration of 
material things, is capable of persuading me of their existence ; for 
when I attentively consider what imagination is, I find that it is 
nothing but a certain application of the faculty of knowledge to the 
body which is immediately present to it, and which therefore exists. 

And to render this quite clear, I remark in the first place the 
difference that exists between the imagination and pure intellection 
[or conception’]. For example, when I imagine a triangle, I do not 
conceive it only as a figure comprehended by three lines, but I also 
apprehend? these three lines as present by the power and inward 
vision of my mind’, and this is what I call imagining. But if 
I desire to think of a chiliagon, I certainly conceive truly that it is 
a figure composed of a thousand sides, just as easily as I conceive 


4 ‘Conception,’ French version, ‘intellectionem,’ Latin version, 
2 intueor, 8 acie mentis. 


186 Meditation VI 


of a triangle that it is a figure of three sides only; but I cannot in 
any way imagine the thousand sides of a chiliagon [as I do the 
three sides of a triangle], nor do I, so to speak, regard them as 
present [with the eyes of my mind]. And although in accordance 
with the habit I have formed of always employing the aid of my 
imagination when I think of corporeal things, it may happen that 
in imagining a chiliagon I confusedly represent to myself some 
figure, yet it is very evident that this figure is not a chiliagon, 
since it in no way differs from that which I represent to myself 
when [| think of a myriagon or any other many-sided figure; nor 
does it serve my purpose in discovering the properties which go to 
form the distinction between a chiliagon and other polygons. But 
if the question turns upon a pentagon, it is quite true that I can 
conceive its figure as well as that of a chiliagon without the help 
of my imagination; but I can also imagine it by applying the 
attention of my mind to each of its five sides, and at the same time 
to the space which they enclose. And thus I clearly recognise that 
I have need of a particular effort of mind in order to effect the act 
of imagination, such as I do not require in order to understand, 
and this particular effort of mind clearly manifests the difference 
which exists between imagination and pure intellection?. 

I remark besides that this power of imagination which is 
in one, inasmuch as it differs from the power of understanding, 
is in no wise @ necessary element in my nature, or in [my 
essence, that is to say, in] the essence of my mind; for although 
I did not possess it I should doubtless ever remain the same 
as I now am, from which it appears that we might conclude 
that it depends on something which differs from me. And I easily 
conceive that if some body exists with which my mind is conjoined 
and united in such a way that it can apply itself to consider it 
when it pleases, it may be that by this means it can imagine 
corporeal objects ; so that this mode of thinking differs from pure 
intellection only inasmuch as mind in its intellectual activity in 
some manner turns on itself, and considers some of the ideas which 
it possesses in itself; while in imagining it turns towards the body, 
and there beholds in it something conformable to the idea which it 
has either conceived of itself or perceived by the senses. I easily 
understand, I say, that the imagination could be thus constituted 
if it is true that body exists; and because I can discover no other 


1 intellectionem. 


Of the Existence of Material Things, ete. 187 


convenient mode of explaining it, I conjecture with probability that 
body does exist; but this is only with probability, and although 
I examine all things with care, I nevertheless do not find that from 
this distinct idea of corporeal nature, which I have in my imagina- 
tion, I can derive any argument from which there will necessarily 
be deduced the existence of body. 

But I am in the habit of imagining many other things besides 
this corporeal nature which is the object of pure mathematics, to 
wit, the colours, sounds, scents, pain, and other such things, 
although less distinctly. And inasmuch as I perceive these things 
much better through the senses, by the medium of which, and 
by the memory, they seem to have reached my imagination, I 
believe that, in order to examine them more conveniently, it is 
right that I should at the same time investigate the nature of 
sense perception, and that I should see if from the ideas which 
I apprehend by this mode of thought, which I call feeling, I cannot 
derive some certain proof of the existence of corporeal objects. 

And first of all I shall recall to my memory those matters which 
I hitherto held to be true, as having perceived them through the 
senses, and the foundations on which my belief has rested ; in the 
next place I shall examine the reasons which have since obliged 
me to place them in doubt; in the last place I shall consider 
which of them I must now believe. 

First of all, then, I perceived that I had a head, hands, feet, 
and all other members of which this body—which I considered as 
a part, or possibly even as the whole, of myself—is composed. 
Further I was sensible that this body was placed amidst many 
others, from which it was capable of being affected in many different 
ways, beneficial and hurtful, and I remarked that a certain feeling 
of pleasure accompanied those that were beneficial, and pain those 
which were harmful. And in addition to this pleasure and pain, 
I also experienced hunger, thirst, and other similar appetites, as 
also certain corporeal inclinations towards joy, sadness, anger, and 
other similar passions. And outside myself, in addition to extension, 
figure, and motions of bodies, I remarked in them hardness, heat, 
and all other tactile qualities, and, further, light and colour, and 
scents and sounds, the variety of which gave me the means of 
distinguishing the sky, the earth, the sea, and generally all the 
other bodies, one from the other. And certainly, considering the 
ideas of all these qualities which presented themselves to my mind, 
and which alone I perceived properly or immediately, it was not 


188 Meditation VI 


without reason that I believed myself to perceive objects quite 
different from my thought, to wit, bodies from which those ideas 
proceeded ; for I found by experience that these ideas presented 
themselves to me without my consent being requisite, so that 
I could not perceive any object, however desirous I might be, unless 
it were present to the organs of sense ; and it was not in my power 
not to perceive it, when it was present. And because the ideas 
which I received through the senses were much more lively, more 
clear, and even, in their own way, more distinct than any of those 
which I could of myself frame in meditation, or than those I found 
impressed on my memory, it appeared as though they could not have 
proceeded from my mind, so that they must necessarily have been 
produced in me by some other things. And having no knowledge 
of those objects excepting the knowledge which the ideas themselves 
gave me, nothing was more likely to occur to my mind than that 
the objects were similar to the ideas which were caused. And 
because I likewise remembered that I had formerly made use of my 
senses rather than my reason, and recognised that the ideas which 
I formed of myself were not so distinct as those which I perceived 
through the senses, and that they were most frequently even 
composed of portions of these last, I persuaded myself easily that 
I had no idea in my mind which had not formerly come to me 
throngh the senses. Nor was it without some reason that I believed 
that this body (which by a certain special right I call my own) 
belonged to me more properly and more strictly than any other; 
for in fact I could never be separated from it as from other bodies ; 
I experienced in it and on account of it all my appetites and 
affections, and finally I was touched by the feeling of pain and the 
titillation of pleasure in its parts, and not in the parts of other bodies 
which were separated from it. But when I inquired, why, from 
some, I know not what, painful sensation, there follows sadness of 
mind, and from the pleasurable sensation there arises joy, or 
why this mysterious pinching of the stomach which I call hunger 
causes me to desire to eat, and dryness of throat causes a desire to 
drink, and so on, I could give no reason excepting that nature 
taught me so; for there is certainly no affinity (that I at least can 
understand) between the craving of the stomach and the desire to 
eat, any more than between the perception of whatever causes pain 
and the thought of sadness which arises from this perception. And 
in the same way it appeared to me that I had learned from nature 
all the other judgments which I formed regarding the objects of my 


Of the Existence of Material Things, etc. 189 


senses, since I remarked that these judgments were formed in me 
before I had the leisure to weigh and consider any reasons which 
might oblige me to make them. 

But afterwards many experiences little by little destroyed all 
the faith which I had rested in my senses ; for I from time to time 
observed that those towers which from afar appeared to me to be 
round, more closely observed seemed square, and that colossal 
statues raised on the summit of these towers, appeared as quite 
tiny statues when viewed from the bottom; and so in an infinitude 
of other cases I found error in judgments founded on the external 
senses. And not only in those founded on the external senses, but 
even in those founded on the internal as well; for is there anything 
more intimate or more internal than pain? And yet I have learned 
from some persons whose arms or legs have been cut off, that they 
sometimes seemed to feel pain in the part which had been amputated, 
which made me think that I could not be quite certain that it was 
a certain member which pained me, even although I felt pain in it. 
And to those grounds of doubt I have lately added two others, 
which are very general; the first is that I never have believed 
myself to feel anything in waking moments which I cannot also 
sometimes believe myself to feel when I sleep, and as I do not 
think that these things which I seem to feel in sleep, proceed from 
objects outside of me, I do not see any reason why I should have 
this belief regarding objects which I seem to perceive while awake. 
The other was that being still ignorant, or rather supposing myself 
to be ignorant, of the author of my being, I saw nothing to prevent 
me from having been so constituted by nature that I might be 
deceived even in matters which seemed to me to be most certain. 
And as to the grounds on which I was formerly persuaded of the 
truth of sensible objects, I had not much trouble in replying to them. 
For since nature seemed to cause me to lean towards many things 
from which reason repelled me, I did not believe that I should trust 
much to the teachings of nature. And although the ideas which 
I receive by the senses do not depend on my will, I did not think 
that one should for that reason conclude that they proceeded from 
things different from myself, since possibly some faculty might be 
discovered in me—though hitherto unknown to me—which produced 
them. 

But now that I begin to know myself better, and to discover 
more clearly the author of my being, I do not in truth think that 
I should rashly admit all the matters which the senses seem to 


190 Meditation VI 


teach us, but, on the other hand, I do not think that I should 
doubt them all universally. 

And first of all, because I know that all things which I apprehend 
clearly and distinctly can be created by God as I apprehend them, 
it suffices that I am able to apprehend one thing apart from another 
clearly and distinctly in order to be certain that the one is different 
from the other, since they may be made to exist in separation at 
least by the omnipotence of God; and it does not signify by what 
power this separation is made in order to compel me to judge them 
to be different: and, therefore, just because I know certainly that 
I exist, and that meanwhile I do not remark that any other thing 
necessarily pertains to my nature or essence, excepting that I am a 
thinking thing, I rightly conclude that my essence consists solely 
in the fact that I am a thinking thing [or a substance whose whole 
essence or nature is to think]. And although possibly (or rather 
certainly, as I shall say in a moment) I possess a body with which 
I am very intimately conjoined, yet because, on the one side, I have 
a clear and distinct idea of myself inasmuch as I am only a thinking 
and unextended thing, and as, on the other, I possess a distinct 
idea of body, inasmuch as it is only an extended and unthinking 
thing, it is certain that this I [that is to say, my soul by which 
I am what I am], is entirely and absolutely distinct from my body, 
and can exist without it. 

I further find in myself faculties employing modes of thinking 
peculiar to themselves, to wit, the faculties of imagination and 
feeling, without which I can easily conceive myself clearly and dis- 
tinctly as a complete being; while, on the other hand, they cannot 
be so conceived apart from me, that is without an intelligent 
substance in which they reside, for [in the notion we have of these 
faculties, or, to use the language of the Schools] in their formal 
concept, some kind of intellection is comprised, from which I infer 
that they are distinct from me as its modes are from a thing. 
I observe also in me some other faculties such as that of change 
of position, the assumption of different figures and such like, 
which cannot be conceived, any more than can the preceding, 
apart from some substance to which they are attached, and con- 
sequently cannot exist without it; but it is very clear that these 
faculties, if it be true that they exist, must be attached to some 
corporeal or extended substance, and not to an intelligent sub- 
stance, since in the clear and distinct conception of these there is 
some sort of extension found to be present, but no intellection at all. 


Of the Ewistence of Material Things, etc. 191 


There is certainly further in me a certain passive faculty of per- 
ception, that is, of receiving and recognising the ideas of sensible 
things, but this would be useless to me [and I could in no way 
avail myself of it], if there were not either in me or in some other 
thing another active faculty capable of forming and producing 
these ideas. But this active faculty cannot exist in me [inasmuch 
as I am a thing that thinks] seeing that it does not presuppose 
thought, and also that those ideas are often produced in me without 
my contributing in any way to the same, and often even against my 
will; it is thus necessarily the case that the faculty resides in some 
substance different from me in which all the reality which is 
objectively in the ideas that are produced by this faculty is formally 
or eminently contained, as I remarked before. And this substance 
is either a body, that is, a corporeal nature in which there is 
contained formally [and really] all that which is objectively [and 
by representation] in those ideas, or it is God Himself, or some 
other creature more noble than body in which that same is contained 
eminently. But, since God is no deceiver, it is very manifest that 
He does not communicate to me these ideas immediately and by 
Himself, nor yet by the intervention of some creature in which 
their reality is not formally, but only eminently, contained. For 
since He has given me no faculty to recognise that this is the case, 
but, on the other hand, a very great inclination to believe [that 
they are sent to me or] that they are conveyed to me by corporeal 
objects, I do not see how He could be defended from the accusation 
of deceit if these ideas were produced by causes other than corporeal 
objects. Hence we must allow that corporeal things exist. How- 
ever, they are perhaps not exactly what we perceive by the senses, 
since this comprehension by the senses is in many instances very 
obscure and confused ; but we must at least admit that all things 
which I conceive in them clearly and distinctly, that is to say, all 
things which, speaking generally, are comprehended in the object of 
pure mathematics, are truly to be recognised as external objects. 
As to other things, however, which are either particular only, 
as, for example, that the sun is of such and such a figure, etc., or 
which are less clearly and distinctly conceived, such as light, sound, 
pain and the like, it is certain that although they are very dubious 
and uncertain, yet on the sole ground that God is not a deceiver, 
and that consequently He has not permitted any falsity to exist in 
my opinion which He has not likewise given me the faculty of 
correcting, I may assuredly hope to conclude that I have within 


192 Meditation VI 


me the means of arriving at the truth even here. And first of all 
there is no doubt that in all things which nature teaches me there 
is some truth contained; for by nature, considered in general, 
I now understand no other thing than either God Himself or else 
the order and disposition which God has established in created 
things; and by my nature in particular I understand no other thing 
than the complexus of all the things which God has given me. 

But there is nothing which this nature teaches me more expressly 
[nor more sensibly] than that I have a body which is adversely 
affected when I feel pain, which has need of food or driuk when 
I experience the feelings of hunger and thirst, and so on; nor can 
I doubt there being some truth in all this. 

Nature also teaches me by these sensations of pain, hunger, 
thirst, etc., that I am not only lodged in my body as a pilot in a 
vessel, but that I am very closely united to it, and so to speak so 
intermingled with it that I seem to compose with it one whole. 
For if that were not the case, when my body is hurt, I, who am 
merely a thinking thing, should not feel pain, for I should perceive 
this wound by the understanding only, just as the sailor perceives 
by sight when something is damaged in his vessel; and when my 
body has need of drink or food, I should clearly understand the 
fact without being warned of it by confused feelings of hunger and 
thirst. For all these sensations of hunger, thirst, pain, etc. are in 
truth none other than certain confused modes of thought which 
are produced by the union and apparent intermingling of mind 
and body. 

Moreover, nature teaches me that many other bodies exist 
around mine, of which some are to be avoided, and others sought 
after. And certainly from the fact that I am sensible of different 
sorts of colours, sounds, scents, tastes, heat, hardness, etc., I very 
easily conclude that there are in the bodies from which all 
these diverse sense-perceptions proceed certain variations which 
answer to them, although possibly these are not really at all similar 
to them. And also from the fact that amongst these different sense- 
perceptions some are very agreeable to me and others disagreeable, 
it is quite certain that my body (or rather myself in my entirety, 
inasmuch as I am formed of body and soul) may receive different 
impressions agreeable and disagreeable from the other bodies which 
surround it. 

But there are many other things which nature seems to have 
taught me, but which at the same time I have never really received 


Of the Existence of Material Things, ete. 193 


from her, but which have been brought about in my mind by a 
certain habit which I have of forming inconsiderate judgments on 
things; and thus it may easily happen that these judgments contain 
some error. ‘Take, for example, the opinion which I hold that 
all space in which there is nothing that affects [or makes an 
impression on] my senses is void; that in a body which is warm 
there is something entirely similar to the idea of heat which is in 
me; that in a white or green body there is the same whiteness or 
greenness that I perceive; that in a bitter or sweet body there is 
the same taste, and so on in other instances; that the stars, the 
towers, and all other distant bodies are of the same figure and size 
as they appear from far off to our eyes, etc. But in order that in 
this there should be nothing which I do not conceive distinctly, 
I should define exactly what I really understand when I say that 
I am taught somewhat by nature. For here I take nature in a 
more limited signification than when I term it the sum of all the 
things given me by God, since in this sum many things are com- 
prehended which only pertain to mind (and to these I do not refer 
in speaking of nature) such as the notion which I have of the fact 
that what has once been done cannot ever be undone and an 
infinitude of such things which I know by the light of nature 
[without the help of the body]; and seeing that it comprehends 
many other matters besides which only pertain to body, and are no 
longer here contained under the name of nature, such as the quality 
of weight which it possesses and the like, with which I also do 
not deal ; for in talking of nature I only treat of those things given 
by God to me as a being composed of mind and body. But the 
nature here described truly teaches me to flee from things which 
cause the sensation of pain, and seek after the things which 
communicate to me the sentiment of pleasure and so forth; but 
I do not see that beyond this it teaches me that from those diverse 
sense-perceptions we should ever form any conclusion regarding 
things outside of us, without having [carefully and maturely] 
mentally examined them beforehand. For it seems to me that 
it is mind alone, and not mind and body in conjunction, that is 
requisite to a knowledge of the truth in regard to such things. 
Thus, although a star makes no larger an impression on my eye 
than the flame of a little candle there is yet in me no real or 
positive propensity impelling me to believe that it is not greater 
than that flame; but I have judged it to be so from my earliest 
years, without any rational foundation. And although in approach- 


194 Meditation VI 


ing fire I feel heat, and in approaching it a little too near I even 
feel pain, there is at the same time no reason in this which could 
persuade me that there is in the fire something resembling this heat 
any more than there is in it something resembling the pain; all 
that I have any reason to believe from this is, that there is some- 
thing in it, whatever it may be, which excites in me these sensations 
of heat or of pain. So also, although there are spaces in which 
I find nothing which excites my senses, I must not from that 
conclude that these spaces contain no body; for I see in this, as in 
other similar things, that I have been in the habit of perverting the 
order of nature, because these perceptions of sense having been 
placed within me by nature merely for the purpose of signifying to 
my mind what things are beneficial or hurtful to the composite 
whole of which it forms a part, and being up to that point sufficiently 
clear and distinct, I yet avail myself of them as though they were 
absolute rules by which I might immediately determine the essence 
of the bodies which are outside me, as to which, in fact, they can 
teach me nothing but what is most obscure and confused. 

But I have already sufficiently considered how, notwithstanding 
the supreme goodness of God, falsity enters into the judgments 
I make. Only here a new difficulty is presented—one respecting 
those things the pursuit or avoidance of which is taught me by 
nature, and also respecting the internal sensations which I possess, 
and in which I seem to have sometimes detected error [and thus to 
be directly deceived by my own nature]. To take an example, 
the agreeable taste of some food in which poison has been inter- 
mingled may induce me to partake of the poison, and thus 
deceive me. It is true, at the same time, that in this case nature 
may be excused, for it only induces me to desire food in which 
I find a pleasant taste, and not to desire the poison which is 
unknown to it; and thus I can infer nothing from this fact, 
except that my nature is not omniscient, at which there is cer- 
tainly no reason to be astonished, since man, being finite in nature, 
can only have knowledge the perfectness of which is limited. 

But we not unfrequently deceive ourselves even in those things 
to which we are directly impelled by nature, as happens with those 
who when they are sick desire to drink or eat things hurtful to 
them. It will perhaps be said here that the cause of their decep- 
tiveness is that their nature is corrupt, but that does not remove the 
difficulty, because a sick man is none the less truly God’s creature 
than he who is in health; and it is therefore as repugnant to God’s 


Of the Existence of Material Things, ete. 195 


goodness for the one to have a deceitful nature as it is for the other. 
And as a clock composed of wheels and counter-weights no less 
exactly observes the laws of nature when it is badly made, and 
does not show the time properly, than when it entirely satisfies the 
wishes of its maker, and as, if I consider the body of a man as 
being a sort of machine so built up and composed of nerves, muscles, 
veins, blood and skin, that though there were no mind in it at all, 
it would not cease to have the same motions as at present, exception 
being made of those movements which are due to the direction of 
the will, and in consequence depend upon the mind [as opposed to 
those which operate by the disposition of its organs], I easily 
recognise that it would be as natural to this body, supposing it to 
be, for example, dropsical, to suffer the parchedness of the throat 
which usually signifies to the mind the feeling of thirst, and to be 
disposed by this parched feeling to move the nerves and other parts 
in the way requisite for drinking, and thus to augment its malady 
and do harm to itself, as it is natural to it, when it has no indis- 
position, to be impelled to drink for its good by a similar cause. 
And although, considering the use to which the clock has been 
destined by its maker, I may say that it deflects from the order of 
its nature when it does not indicate the hours correctly; and as, in 
the same way, considering the machine of the human body as 
having been formed by God in order to have in itself all the move- 
ments usually manifested there, I have reason for thinking that it 
does not follow the order of nature when, if the throat is dry, 
drinking does harm to the conservation of health, nevertheless I 
recognise at the same time that this last mode of explaining nature 
is very different from the other. For this is but a purely verbal 
characterisation depending entirely on my thought, which compares 
a sick man and a badly constructed clock with the idea which 
I have of a healthy man and a well made clock, and it is hence 
extrinsic to the things to which it is applied ; but according to the 
other interpretation of the term nature I understand something 
which is truly found in things and which is therefore not without 
some truth. 

But certainly although in regard to the dropsical body it is only 
so to speak to apply an extrinsic term when we say that its nature is 
corrupted, inasmuch as apart from the need to drink, the throat 
is parched ; yet in regard to the composite whole, that is to say, to 
the mind or soul united to this body, it is not a purely verbal 
predicate, but a real error of nature, for it to have thirst when 


196 Meditation VI 


drinking would be hurtful to it. And thus it still remains to 
inquire how the goodness of God does not prevent the nature of 
man so regarded from being fallacious. 

In order to begin this examination, then, I here say, in the first 
place, that there is a great difference between mind and body, 
inasmuch as body is by nature always divisible, and the mind is 
entirely indivisible. For, as a matter of fact, when I consider the 
mind, that is to say, myself inasmuch as I am only a thinking thing, 
I cannot distinguish in myself any parts, but apprehend myself to 
be clearly one and entire; and although the whole mind seems to 
be united to the whole body, yet if a foot, or an arm, or some other 
part, ts separated from my body, I am aware that nothing has been 
taken away from my mind. And the faculties of willing, feeling, 
conceiving, etc. cannot be properly speaking said to be its parts, for 
it is one and the same mind which employs itself in willing and in 
feeling and understanding. But it is quite otherwise with corporeal 
or extended objects, for there is not one of these imaginable by me 
which my mind cannot easily divide into parts, and which conse- 
quently I do not recognise as being divisible ; this would be sufficient 
to teach me that the mind or soul of man is entirely different from 
the body, if 1 had not already learned it from other sources. 

I further notice that the mind does not receive the impressions 
from all parts of the body immediately, but only from the brain, or 
perhaps even from one of its smallest parts, to wit, from that in which 
the common sense? is said to reside, which, whenever it is disposed 
in the same particular way, conveys the same thing to the mind, 
although meanwhile the other portions of the body may be differently 
disposed, as is testified by innumerable experiments which it is 
unnecessary here to recount. 

I notice, also, that the nature of body is such that none of its 
parts can be moved by another part a little way off which cannot 
also be moved in the same way by each one of the parts which are 
between the two, although this more remote part does not act at 
all, As, for example, in the cord ABCD [which is in tension] if 
we pull the last part D, the first part A will not be moved in any 
way differently from what would be the case if one of the intervening 
parts B or C were pulled, and the last part D were to remain 
unmoved. And in the same way, when I feel pain in my foot, my 
knowledge of physics teaches me that this sensation is communi- 
cated by means of nerves dispersed through the foot, which, being 


+ sensus communis, 


Of the Existence of Material Things, ete. 197 


extended like cords from there to the brain, when they are contracted 
in the foot, at the same time contract the inmost portions of the 
brain which is their extremity and place of origin, and then excite 
a certain movement which nature has established in order to cause 
the mind to be affected by a sensation of pain represented as existing 
in the foot. But because these nerves must pass through the tibia, 
the thigh, the loins, the back and the neck, in order to reach from 
the leg to the brain, it may happen that although their extremities 
which are in the foot are not affected, but only certain ones of their 
intervening parts [which pass by the loins or the neck], this action 
will excite the same movement in the brain that might have been 
excited there by a hurt received in the foot, in consequence of 
which the mind will necessarily feel in the foot the same pain as if 
it had received a hurt. And the same holds good of all the other 
perceptions of our senses. 

I notice finally that since each of the movements which are in 
the portion of the brain by which the mind is immediately affected 
brings about one particular sensation only, we cannot under the cir- 
cumstances imagine anything more likely than that this movement, 
amongst all the sensations which it is capable of impressing on it, 
causes mind to be affected by that one which is best fitted and 
most generally useful for the conservation of the human body when 
it is in health. But experience makes us aware that all the feelings 
with which nature inspires us are such as I have just spoken of; 
and there is therefore nothing in them which does not give testimony 
to the power and goodness of the God [who has produced them?]. 
Thus, for example, when the nerves which are in the feet are 
violently or more than usually moved, their movement, passing 
through the medulla of the spine? to the inmost parts of the brain, 
gives a sign to the mind which makes it feel somewhat, to wit, pain, 
as though in the foot, by which the mind is excited to do its utmost 
to remove the cause of the evil as dangerous and hurtful to the 
foot. It is true that God could have constituted the nature of man 
in such a way that this same movement in the brain would have 
conveyed something quite different to the mind; for example, it 
might have produced consciousness of itself either in so far as it is 
in the brain, or as it is in the foot, or as it is in some other place 
between the foot and the brain, or it might finally have produced 
consciousness of anything else whatsoever; but none of all this would 
have contributed so well to the conservation of the body. Similarly, 


1 Laiin version only, 2 gpini dorsae medullam, 


198 Meditation VI 


when we desire to drink, a certain dryness of the throat is pro- 
duced which moves its nerves, and by their means the internal 
portions of the brain; and this movement causes in the mind the 
sensation of thirst, because in this case there is nothing more 
useful to us than to become aware that we have need to drink for 
the conservation of our health; and the same holds good in other 
instances. 

From this it is quite clear that, notwithstanding the supreme 
goodness of God, the nature of man, inasmuch as it is composed of 
mind and body, cannot be otherwise than sometimes a source of 
deception. For if there is any cause which excites, not in the foot 
but in some part of the nerves which are extended between the 
foot and the brain, or even in the brain itself, the same movement 
which usually is produced when the foot is detrimentally affected, 
pain will be experienced as though it were in the foot, and the 
sense will thus naturally be deceived ; for since the same movement 
in the brain is capable of causing but one sensation in the mind, 
and this sensation is much more frequently excited by a cause 
which hurts the foot than by another existing in some other quarter, 
it is reasonable that it should convey to the mind pain in the foot 
rather than in any other part of the body. And although the 
parchedness of the throat does not always proceed, as it usually 
does, from the fact that drinking is necessary for the health of the 
body, but sometimes comes from quite a different cause, as is the 
case with dropsical patients, it is yet much better that it should 
mislead on this occasion than if, on the other hand, it were always to 
deceive us when the body is in good health; and so on in similar 
cases. 

And certainly this consideration is of great service to me, not 
only in enabling me to recognise all the errors to which my nature is 
subject, but also in enabling me to avoid them or to correct them 
more easily. For knowing that all my senses more frequently 
indicate to me truth than falsehood respecting the things which 
concern that which is beneficial to the body, and being able almost 
always to avail myself of many of them in order to examine one 
particular thing, and, besides that, being able to make use of my 
memory in order to connect the present with the past, and of 
my understanding which already has discovered all the causes of 
my errors, | ought no longer to fear that falsity may be found in 
matters every day presented to me by my senses And I ought 
to set aside all the doubts of these past days as hyperbolical and 


Of the Existence of Material Things, ete. 199 


ridiculous, particularly that very common uncertainty respecting 
sleep, which I could not distinguish from the waking state ; for at 
present I find a very notable difference between the two, inasmuch 
as our memory can never connect our dreams one with the other, or 
with the whole course of our lives, as it unites events which happen 
to us while we are awake. And, as a matter of fact, if someone, 
while I was awake, quite suddenly appeared to me and disappeared 
as fast as do the images which I see in sleep, so that I could not 
know from whence the form came nor whither it went, it would 
not be without reason that I should deem it a spectre or a phantom 
formed by my brain [and similar to those which I form in sleep], 
rather than a real man. But when I perceive things as to which 
I know distinctly both the place from which they proceed, and that 
in which they are, and the time at which they appeared to me; and 
when, without any interruption, I can connect the perceptions 
which I have of them with the whole course of my life, I am 
perfectly assured that these perceptions occur while I am waking 
and not during sleep. And I ought in no wise to doubt the truth 
of such matters, if, after having called up all my senses, my memory, 
and my understanding, to examine them, nothing is brought to 
evidence by any one of them which is repugnant to what is set 
forth by the others. For because God is in no wise a deceiver, it 
follows that I am not deceived in this. But because the exigencies 
of action often oblige us to make up our minds before having 
leisure to examine matters carefully, we must confess that the life 
of man is very frequently subject to error in respect to individual 
objects, and we must in the end acknowledge the infirmity of our 
nature. 


THE PRINCIPLES OF PHILOSOPHY 


PREFATORY NOTE TO THE PRINCIPLES. 


The Principles of Philosophy was published on six occasions by 
the Elzevirs in Holland. The first edition was brought out in 
1644 in Latin, and it was the only one that appeared during 
Descartes’ lifetime. His publisher indeed complained of the small- 
ness of its sale. A visit to France was made just before the 
publication of the book, which he hoped would have taken place 
before he started, so that he might have taken with him copies for 
presenting to his friends. After paying visits of a business sort to 
his family, he found, on arriving at Paris, his friends Mersenne and 
Picot busy with the distribution of his book, which had appeared in 
excellent form as might have been expected from the reputation of the 
publishers. During a return journey to Holland, Descartes occupied 
himself with reading Picot’s translation of his Principles into French 
—a translation which Baillet says he found much to his taste. It 
cannot, however, have been completed for some years later since 
Descartes wrote a preface on its completion in 1647. This trans- 
lation is made from the Latia version collated with the French. 
The French version frequently difters considerably from the Latin, 
and when it seems desirable to indicate the difference this is done 
by means of square brackets. Only a part of the work is here 
translated, but the titles of the untranslated paragraphs have been 
given, and from these the nature of their contents can be gathered. 


Bisa 


SELECTIONS FROM THE PRINCIPLES OF 
PHILOSOPHY OF RENE DESCARTES. 


Author’s Letter to the Translator! of the book, which may here 
serve as Preface. 


Sir, 

The version of my Principles which you have taken the 
trouble to make is so polished and well-finished that it causes me 
to hope that the work may be read by more persons in French than 
in Latin, and that it will be better understood. My only appre- 
hension is that the title may repel certain people who have not been 
nourished upon letters, or else who hold philosophy in evil esteem, 
because that which has been taught them has not satisfied them ; 
and this makes me think that it would be a good thing to add 
a preface which would expound the subject-matter of the book, the 
design I had in writing it, and the use to be derived from it. But 
although it should be my business to write this preface because 
I ought to know these things better than any one else, I can on 
my own account promise nothing but a summary of the principal 
points which seem to me as though they ought to be treated of in 
it; and I leave it to your discretion to communicate to the public 
whatever you deem desirable. 

I should have first of all desired to explain in it what philosophy 
is, beginning with the most ordinary matters, such as that this 
word philosophy signifies the study of wisdom, and that by wisdom 
we not only understand prudence in atftuirs, but also a perfect 
knowledge of all things that man can know, both for the conduct 
of his life and tor the conservation of his health and the invention 


1 i.e, the translator into French, the Abbé Claude Picot. 


204 Principles of Philosophy 


of all the arts; and that in order that this knowledge should 
subserve these ends, it is essential that it should be derived 
from first causes, so that in order to study to acquire it (which is 
properly termed philosophising), we must begin with the investiga- 
tion of these first causes, i.e. of the Principles. It is also necessary 
that these Principles should have two conditions attached to them ; 
first of all they should be so clear and evident that the mind of 
man cannot doubt their truth when it attentively applies itself to 
consider them: in the second place it is on them that the know- 
ledge of other things depends, so that the Principles can be known 
without these last, but the other things cannot reciprocally be 
known without the Principles. We must accordingly try to so 
deduce from these Principles the knowledge of the things that 
depend on them, that there shall be nothing in the whole series 
of the deductions made from them which shall not be perfectly 
manifest. It is really only God alone who has Perfect Wisdom, 
that is to say, who has a complete knowledge of the truth of all 
things; but it may be said that men have more wisdom or less 
according as they have more or less knowledge of the most important 
truths. And IJ think that in this there is nothing regarding which 
all the learned do not concur. 

I should in the next place have caused the utility of this 
philosophy to be considered, and shown that since it extends over 
the whole range of human knowledge, we are entitled to hold that 
it alone is what distinguishes us from savages and barbarians, and 
that the civilisation and refinement of each nation is proportionate 
to the superiority of its philosophy. In this way a state can have 
no greater good than the possession of true philosophy. And, in 
addition, it would have been pointed out that as regards the 
individual, it is not only useful to live with those who apply them- 
selves to this study, but it is incomparably better to set about it 
oneself ; just as it is doubtless much better to avail oneself of one’s 
own eyes for the direction of one’s steps, and by the same means 
to enjoy the beauty of colour and light, than to close these 
eyes and trust to the guidance of another. But this last is 
better than to hold them closed, and not have any but oneself to 
act as guide. Speaking accurately, living without philosophy is 
just having the eyes closed without trying to open them; and the 
pleasure of seeing everything that is revealed to our sight, is not 
comparable to the satisfaction which is given by the knowledge of 
those things which are opened up to us by philosophy. And finally, 


Author's Letter 205 


this study is more necessary for the regulation of our manners and 
for our conduct in life, than is the use of our eyes in the guidance 
of our steps. The brute beasts who have only their bodies to 
preserve, devote their constant attention to the search for the 
sources of their nourishment ; but men, in whom the principal part 
is the mind, ought to make their principal care the search after 
wisdom, which is its true source of nutriment. And I am likewise 
able to assure myself that there are many who would not fail to 
make the search if they had any hope of success in so doing, and 
knew to what an extent they were capable of it. There does not 
exist the soul so ignoble, so firmly attached to objects of sense, 
that it does not sometimes turn away from these to aspire after 
some other greater good, even although it is frequently ignorant as 
to wherein that good consists. Those most favoured by fortune, 
those who have abundance of health, honour and riches, are not 
exempt from this desire any more than others; on the contrary, 
I am persuaded that it is those very people who yearn most ardently 
after another good more perfect and supreme than all those that 
they possess already. And this sovereign good, considered by the 
natural reason without the light of faith, is none other than the 
knowledge of the truth through its first causes, i.e. the wisdom 
whose study is philosophy. And because all these things are 
absolutely true, it would not be difficult to persuade men of them, 
were they well argued and expressed. 

But since we are prevented from believing these doctrines by 
experience, which shows us that those who profess to be philo- 
sophers are frequently less wise and reasonable than others who 
have never applied themselves to the study, I should here have 
succinctly explained in what all the knowledge we now possess 
consists, and to what degrees of wisdom we have attained. The 
first of these contains only notions which are of themselves so clear 
that they may be acquired without any meditation. 'The second 
comprehends all that which the experience of the senses shows us. 
The third, what the conversation of other men teaches us. And 
for the fourth we may add to this the reading, not of all books, but 
especially of those which have been written by persons who are 
capable of conveying good instruction to us, for this is a species of 
conversation held with their authors. And it seems to me that all 
the wisdom that we usually possess is acquired by these four means 
only; for I do not place divine revelation in the same rank, because 
it does not lead us by degrees, but raises us at a stroke to an 


206 Principles of Philosophy 


infallible belief. ‘There have indeed from all time been great men 
who have tried to find a fifth road by which to arrive at wisdom, 
incomparably more elevated and assured than these other four. 
That road is to seek out the first causes and the true principles 
from which reasons may be deduced for all that which we are 
capable of knowing; and it is those who have made this their 
special work who have been called philosophers. At the same time 
I do not know that up to the present day there have been any in 
whose case this plan has succeeded. The first and principal whose 
writings we possess, are Plato and Aristotle, between whom the 
only difference that exists is that the former, following the steps of 
his master Socrates, ingenuously confessed that he had never yet 
been able to discover anything for certain, and was content to set 
down the things that seemed to him to be probable, for this end 
adopting certain principles whereby he tried to account for other 
things. Aristotle, on the other hand, had less candour, and although 
he had been Plato’s disciple for twenty years, and possessed no 
other principles than his master’s, he entirely changed the method 
of stating them, and proposed them as true and certain although 
there was no appearance of his having ever held them to be such. 
But these two men had great minds and much wisdom acquired 
by the four methods mentioned before, and this gave them great 
authority, so that those who succeeded them were more bent on 
following their opinions than in forming better ones of their own. 
The main dispute between their disciples was as to whether every 
thing should be doubted, or whether there were some things 
which were certain. And this carried them, both on the one side 
and on the other, into extravagant errors ; for certain of those who 
argued for doubt, extended it even to the actions of life, so that 
they omitted to exercise ordinary prudence in its conduct; and 
those who supported the doctrine of certainty, supposing it to 
depend on the senses, trusted to them entirely. To such a point 
was this carried that it is said that Epicurus ventured to affirm, 
contrary to all the reasonings of the astronomers, that the sun is 
no larger than it appears. A fault which may be observed in most 
disputes is that since the truth is a mean between the two opinions 
which are maintained, each disputant removes himself so much the 
farther from it the greater his desire to contradict. But the error 
of those who tended too much to the side of doubt, was not followed 
for long, and that of the others has been in some degree corrected 
by the recognition of the fact that in many instances the senses 


Author's Letter 207 


deceive us. At the same time I do not know that it has been 
entirely removed by showing that certainty is not in the senses, but 
only in the understanding, when it has evident perceptions; and 
that while we only possess the knowledge which is acquired by the 
first four degrees of wisdom, we should not doubt those things that 
appear to be true in what concerns the conduct of life, while yet we 
should not hold them to be so certain that we may not change our 
minds regarding them when obliged to do so by the evidence of 
reason. From lack of having known this truth, or else, if there be 
those who have known it, from neglecting it, the greater part of 
those in later times who aspired to be philosophers, have blindly 
followed Aristotle, so that frequently they have corrupted the sense 
of his writings, attributing diverse opinions to him which he would 
not recognise as his, were he to return to this world; and those 
who have not followed him (amongst whom many of the best minds 
are to be found) have yet been imbued with his teaching in their 
youth, for it forms the sole teaching in the Schools; and these 
minds were so much occupied with this, that they were incapable 
of attaining to a knowledge of true Principles. And although 
I respect them all and would never wish to incur the odium of 
denouncing them, I can give a proof of my assertion which I do not 
think any one of them will gainsay, and this is that all have taken 
for granted some particular principle which they have not perfectly 
understood. For example I have known none of them who did not 
presuppose weight in terrestrial bodies, but although experiment 
proves to us very clearly that the bodies we call weighty descend 
towards the centre of the earth, we do not for all that know the 
nature of what is called gravity, that is, the reason or principle 
which causes bodies to descend thus, and we must derive it from 
elsewhere. The same may be said of the vacuum and of atoms, of 
heat and cold, of dryness and damp, and of salt, sulphur, mercury, 
and all other similar things which have been adopted as their 
principles by some. And none of the conclusions deduced from a 
principle which is not evident can be evident even though they are 
deduced from them in a manner which is evident and valid, and 
from this it follows that none of the reasonings which they rested 
on principles such as these could give them any certain knowledge 
of anything, nor in consequence cause them to advance one step in 
the search after wisdom. And if they have discovered any truth 
this has only come to pass by means of certain of the four methods 
above mentioned. All the same I do not desire one whit to detract 


208 Principles of Philosophy 


from the honour to which each of them may aspire, I am only 
obliged to say for the consolation of those who have never studied, 
that just as in travelling while we turn our backs on the place to 
which we desire to go, the longer and quicker we walk the further 
we recede from the place-we are making for, so that though we are 
afterwards put back into the right way, we cannot arrive at our 
destination as soon as if we had not walked in the wrong direction 
before ; so when our principles are bad, the more we cultivate them 
and the more carefully we apply ourselves to derive from them 
various consequences, thinking that we are philosophising very well, 
the further we are moving from the knowledge of the truth and 
from wisdom. From this we must conclude that those who have 
learnt least about all that which has hitherto been named philo- 
sophy, are the most capable of apprehending the truth. 

After having made these matters very clear, I should have 
desired to set forth the reasons which serve to prove that the true 
principles by which we may arrive at that highest point of wisdom 
in which the sovereign good of the life of man consists, are those 
which I have put forward in this book. And only two are requisite 
for that, the first that the principles must be very clear, and the 
second that from them we may deduce all other things; for there 
are but these two conditions that are essential in true principles. 
And I can easily prove that they are very clear, first of ail by the 
manner in which I have found them, ie. by rejecting all those 
propositions in respect to which I could find the slightest occasion 
for doubt ; for it is certain that those which could not be rejected 
in this way when application was made to their consideration, are 
the most evident and clear of all that the human mind can know. 
Thus in considering that he who would doubt all things cannot yet 
doubt that he exists while he doubts, and that what reasons so in 
being unable to doubt of itself and yet doubting all else, is 
not what we call our body but what we call our soul or thought, 
I have taken the being or existence of this thought as the first 
principle from which | have very clearly deduced the following : viz. 
that there is a God who is the author of all that is in the world, or 
who, being the source of all truth, has not created in us an under- 
standing liable to be deceived in the judgments that it forms on 
matters of which it has a very clear and distinct perception. These 
comprise the whole of the principles of which | make use respecting 
immaterial or metaphysical things, from which I very clearly deduce 
those of corporeal or physical things, to wit, that there are bodies 


Author's Letter 209 


extended in length, breadth and depth, which have diverse figures 
and move in diverse ways. ‘I'hese, in sum, are all the principles 
from which I deduce the truth of other things. The other reason 
which proves the clearness of the principles is that they have been 
known from all time, and even received as true and indubitable by 
all men, with the sole exception of the existence of God, which has 
been placed in doubt by certain people because they have ascribed 
too much to the perceptions of the senses, and because God can 
neither be seen nor touched. But although all the truths which 
I place in my Principles have been known from all time and by all 
men, nevertheless there has never yet been any one, as far as I know, 
who has recognised them as the principles of philosophy, that is to 
say, as principles from which may be derived a knowledge of all 
things that are in the world: that is why it here remains to me to 
prove that they are such. And it appears to me that I cannot do 
better than cause this to be established by experience, that is to say, 
by inviting my readers to peruse this book. For although I have 
not treated of every thing, and although this is impossible, I consider 
that I have so explained all those matters with which I have had 
occasion to deal, that those who read them with attention will have 
reason to persuade themselves that there is no need to seek other 
principles than those I have brought forward, in order to arrive at 
all the most exalted knowledge of which the human mind is capable. 
And this will more especially be the case if, after having read my 
works, they take the trouble to consider how many diverse questions 
are therein explained, and if, perusing also the works of others, 
they observe how few are the probable reasons that can be given to 
explain the same questions by principles differing from mine. And 
in order that they may undertake this with greater ease, I should 
have been able to say to them that those who are imbued with my 
doctrines have much less trouble in understanding the works of 
others and in recognising their true value than those who are not 
so imbued ; and this is diametrically opposite to what I have just 
said of those who commenced with the ancient philosophy, i.e. that 
the more they have studied it the less are they fitted rightly to 
apprehend the truth. 

I should also have here added a word of advice as regards the 
method of reading this book, which is that I should desire that it 
may first of all be run through in its entirety like a novel, without 
forcing the attention unduly upon it, or stopping at difficulties 
which may be met with, so that a general knowledge may be arrived 


210 Principles of Philosophy 


at of the matters of which I have treated; and after that, if it is 
found that they deserve to be examined more carefully, and if the 
reader has the curiosity to inquire about their causes, it may be 
read a second time in order to notice the sequence of my reasoning. 
But though the reader cannot follow the argument adequately 
throughout, or understand the whole of its bearing, he must not 
therefore immediately cast it aside. It is only necessary to mark 
with a pen the places where difficulty is found, and continue to 
read without interruption to the end. Then if the book is taken 
up for a third time, I venture to say that he will discover the 
solution of the greater part of the difficulties which have formerly 
been marked, and that if certain still remain, their solution will be 
discovered on a further perusal. 

I have noticed on examining the nature of many different minds, 
that there are almost none of them so dull or slow of understanding 
that they are incapable of high feelings, and even of attaining to all 
the profoundest sciences, were they trained in the right way. And 
that may also be proved by reason. For since the principles are 
clear and nothing must be deduced from them but by very evident 
reasoning, we have all sufficient intelligence to comprehend the 
conclusions that depend on them. But in addition to the draw- 
backs of prejudice from which no one is entirely exempt, although 
it is those who have studied the false sciences most deeply whom 
they harm the most, it almost always happens that those of 
moderate intelligence neglect to study because they do not consider 
themselves capable of doing so, and that the others who are more 
eager, hasten on too quickly. And from this it comes that they 
often accept principles which are not really evident, and from them 
derive consequences which are uncertain. That is why I desire to 
assure those who too greatly disparage their powers, that there is 
nothing in my writings which they are not capable of completely 
understanding if they take the trouble to examine them; while 
I also warn the others that even the most superior understanding 
will require much time and attention to comprehend all the matters 
which I have designed to embrace in them. 

Following on this, and in order to make very clear the end 
I have had in view in publishing them, I would like to explain 
here what seems to me to be the order which should be fol- 
lowed in our self-instruction. To begin with, a man who as yet 
has merely the common and imperfect knowledge which may be 
acquired by the four methods before mentioned. should ahova all 


Author's Letter 211 


try to form for himself a code of morals sufficient to regulate the 
actions of his life, because this does not brook any delay, and we 
ought above all other things to endeavour to live well. After that 
he should likewise study logic—not that of the Schools, because it 
properly speaking is only a dialectic which teaches how to make 
the things that we know understood by others, or even to repeat, 
without forming any judgment on them, many words respecting 
those that we do not know, thus corrupting rather than increasing 
good sense—but the logic that teaches us how best to direct our 
reason in order to discover those truths of which we are ignorant. 
And since this is very dependent on custom, it is good for him to 
practise the rules for a long time on easy and simple questions such 
as those of mathematics. Then when he has acquired a certain 
skill in discovering the truth in these questions he should begin 
seriously to apply himself to the true philosophy, the first part of 
which is metaphysics, which contains the principles of knowledge, 
amongst which is the explanation of the principal attributes of God, 
of the immateriality of our souls, and of all the clear and simple 
notions which are in us. The second is physics in which, after 
having found the true principles of material things, we examine 
generally how the whole universe is composed, and then in particular 
what is the nature of this earth and of all the bodies which are 
most commonly found in connection with it, like air, water and fire, 
the loadstone and other minerals. It is thereafter necessary to 
inquire individually into the nature of plants, animals, and above 
all of man, so that we may afterwards be able to discover the other 
sciences which are useful to man. Thus philosophy as a whole is 
like a tree whose roots are metaphysics, whose trunk is physics, and 
whose branches, which issue from this trunk, are all the other 
sciences. These reduce themselves to three principal ones, viz 
medicine, mechanics and morals—I mean the highest and most 
perfect moral science which, presupposing a complete knowledge 
of the other sciences, is the last degree of wisdom. 

But just as it is not from the roots or the trunk of the trees 
that one culls the fruit, but only from the extremities of their 
branches, so the main use of philosophy is dependent on those of 
its parts that we cannot learn till the end. Although, however, I 
am ignorant of almost all of these, the zeal which I have always 
shown in trying to render service to the public is the reason 
of my causing to be printed ten or twelve years ago certain essays 
on things which I appeared to have learned. The first part of these 


212 Principles of Philosophy 


essays was a Discourse on the Method of rightly conducting one’s 
Reason and seeking Truth in the Sciences, where I summarised the 
principal rules of logic and of an imperfect system of morals which 
may be followed provisionally while we still know none better. 
The other parts were three Treatises: the first Of the Dioptric ; 
the second Of Meteors, and the last Of Geometry. In the Dioptric 
I intended it to be shown that we could make sufficient progress in 
philosophy to attain by its means a knowledge of those arts which 
are useful to life, because the invention of the telescope, which 
I there described, is one of the most difficult ever attempted. 
In the treatise on Meteors I endeavoured to make clear the differ- 
ence which exists between the philosophy which I cultivate and 
that taught in the Schools, where the same subject is usually 
treated. Finally in the Geometry I professed to show that I had 
found certain matters of which men were previously ignorant, and 
thus to afford occasion for believing that many more may yet be dis- 
covered, in order by this means to incite all men to the search after 
truth. From this time onwards, foreseeing the difficulty which would 
be felt by many in understanding the foundations of metaphysics, 
I tried to explain the principal points in a book of Meditations 
which is not very large, but whose volume has been increased, and 
whose matter has been much illuminated, by the Objections which 
many very learned persons have sent me in their regard, and by 
the replies which I have made to them. Then, finally, when it 
appeared to me that these preceding treatises had sufficiently 
prepared the mind of readers to accept the Principles of Philo- 
sophy, I likewise published them, and I divided the book containing 
them into four parts, the first of which contains the principles of 
knowledge, which is what may be called the First Philosophy or 
Metaphysics. That is why it is better to read beforehand the 
Meditations which I have written on the same subject, in order 
that it may be properly understood. The other three parts contain 
all that is most general in Physics, i.e. an explanation of the first 
laws or principles of nature, the manner in which the heavens and 
fixed stars, the planets, the comets, and generally all the universe 
is composed. Then the nature of this earth, and of the air, water, 
fire, and the loadstone, is dealt with more particularly, for these 
are the bodies which may most commonly be found everywhere 
about it, as also all the qualities observed in these bodies, such 
as light, heat, weight, and such like. By this means I believe 
myself to have commenced to expound the whole of philosophy in 


Author's Letter 213 


its order without having omitted anything which ought to precede 
the last of which I have written. But in order to carry this plan 
to a conclusion, I should afterwards in the same way explain in 
further detail the nature of each of the other bodies which are on 
the earth, i.e. minerals, plants, animals, and above all man; then 
finally treat exactly of medicine, morals and mechanics. All this 
I should have to do in order to give to mankind a body of philo- 
sophy which is complete; and I do not feel myself to be so old, 
I do not so much despair of my strength, I do not find myself so 
far removed from a knowledge of what remains, that I should 
not venture to endeavour to achieve this design, were I possessed 
of the means of making all the experiments necessary to me in 
order to support and justify my reasoning. But seeing that for 
this end great expense is requisite to which the resources of an 
individual like myself could not attain were he not given assistance 
by the public, and not seeing that I can expect that aid, I conceive 
it to be henceforward my duty to content myself with studying for 
my own private instruction, trusting that posterity will pardon me 
if I fail henceforward to work for its good. 

In order, however, to show in how far I believe myself to have 
already been of service to my fellowmen, I shall here state what are 
the fruits which I believe may be culled from my Principles. The 
first is the satisfaction which we must derive from discovering in 
them certain truths of which we have hitherto been ignorant; for 
although frequently the truth does not so much affect our imagina- 
tion as does falsity and pretence, because it seems less wonderful 
and more simple, yet the satisfaction which it brings is always more 
lasting and solid. The second fruit is that in studying these 
Principles, we shall little by little accustom ourselves to judge 
better of all things with which we come in contact, and thus to 
become wiser. In this regard they will have an effect contrary to 
that of the ordinary philosophy, for it may easily be observed in 
those who are known as pedants, that it renders them less capable 
of reasoning than they would have been had they never learned it 
at all. The third fruit is that the truths which they contain, being 
perfectly clear and certain, will remove all subjects of dispute, and 
thus dispose men’s minds to gentleness and concord. On the other 
hand the controversies of the Schools, by insensibly making those 
who practise themselves in them more captious and self-sufficient, 
are possibly the chief causes of the heresies and dissensions which 
now exercise the world. ‘The last and principal fruit of these 


214 Principles of Philosophy 


Principles is that by cultivating them we may discover many truths 
which I have not expounded, and thus, passing little by little from 
one to the other, acquire in time a perfect knowledge of the whole 
of philosophy and attain to the highest degree of wisdom. For in 
all the arts we perceive how although at the first they are rude and 
imperfect, yet because they contain something that is true and 
whose effect is revealed by experience, they come little by little to 
perfection through practice. So, when we have true principles in 
philosophy we cannot fail, by following them, occasionally to meet 
with other truths; and there is no way in which we can better 
prove the falsity of those of Aristotle, than by pointing out that no 
progress has been attained by their means in all the centuries in 
which they have been followed. 

I know very well that those who make such haste use so little 
circumspection in what they do, that even with quite solid founda- 
tions they cannot build anything that is firm and secure; and 
because it is commonly such men who are most ready to write books, 
they may in a short time spoil all that I have done, and if their 
writings are accepted as mine, or as representing my opinions, intro- 
duce uncertainty and doubt into my mode of philosophising, from 
which I have carefully tried to banish them. I have lately had 
experience as to this regarding one of them who might have been 
expected to have followed me most closely, and of whom I had even 
written ‘that I was so assured of his intelligence that I did not 
believe him to have any opinion which I should not gladly have 
avowed as my own’’; for he published a year ago a book entitled 
Fundamenta Physicae*? in which, although he had apparently said 
nothing regarding physics and medicine which he had not derived 
from my writings—from those published as well as from another still 
imperfect regarding the nature of animals which fell into his hands 
—yet because he had transcribed badly, changed the order, and 
denied certain truths of metaphysics upon which the whole of 
physics ought to rest, I am obliged entirely to disavow his work, 
and here to beg readers never to attribute to me any opinion 
unless they find it expressly stated in my works, and never to 
accept anything as true in my writings or elsewhere, unless they 
see it to be very clearly deduced from true Principles. 


1 Epistola Renati Des-Cartes ad celeberrimum Virum D. Gisbertum Voetium 
1643: ‘...acutissimo et perspicacissimo ingenio Regii tantum tribuo, ut vix 
quicquam ab illo scriptum putem quod pro meo non libenter agnoscam.” 
(Page 232, edit. princeps.) 

* Henri Regii Ultrajectini, Fundamenta Physices. (Amstelodami, apud 
Ludovicum Elzivirium. A° 1646, in 8.) 


Author's Letter 215 


I well know likewise that many centuries may pass until all the 
truths which may be deduced from these principles are so deduced, 
because the greater part of those which remain to be discovered 
depend on certain particular experiments which chance circum- 
stances will never bring about, but which should be investigated 
with care and expense by the most intelligent of men, and because 
it will be unlikely that the same people who have the capacity of 
availing themselves of them will have the means of contriving them, 
and also because the majority of the best minds have formed such a 
bad conception of philosophy as a whole, owing to the defects which 
they have observed in that which has hitherto been in vogue, that 
they will not be able to discover a better. But finally, if the 
difference which is observable between these principles and those of 
all other men, and the great array of truths which may be deduced 
from them, causes them to perceive how important it is to continue 
in the search after these truths, and to observe to what a degree of 
wisdom, to what perfection of life, to what happiness they may lead 
us, I am convinced that no one will be found who will not attempt 
to occupy himself with so profitable a study, or at least will not 
favour and endeavour to assist with all his might those who employ 
themselves in this way with success. I trust that posterity may 
behold its happy issue. 


To THE Most SERENE PRINCESS 
ELIZABETH, 
Evpest Dav@HTeR oF FREDERICK, Kine oF BoHeEmIA, 
Count PaLaTINE AND ELECTOR OF THE 
Hoty Roman Empire. 


Mapam, 


The great result which has accrued to me from the works 
which I have already published, has been that through them I have 
had the honour of coming under the notice of your Highness, 
and of being able occasionally to have converse with one whose 
qualities are so estimable that I conceive it to be a public service 
to set them before posterity for its example. It would ill become 
me to flatter, or even to write things as to which I have no 
certain knowledge, above all in this place in which I shall try to set 
down the Principles of truth. And the generous modesty which is 
seen in all the actions of your Highness suffices to assure me that 
the simple and unaffected judgment of one who writes but what he 
believes, will be more agreeable to you than the ornate praises of 
those who have studied the art of compliment. That is why I shall 
put nothing in this letter of which experience and reason has not 
rendered me certain, and here in the exordium, I shall write philo- 
sophically, just as in the rest of the book. 

Great is the distinction between the apparent virtues and the 
true ; there is also a distinction between those true virtues which 
proceed from an exact knowledge of the truth and others that are 
accompanied by ignorance. The virtues which I call apparent, are 
properly speaking but vices, which not being so frequent as other 
vices which are contrary to them, and being further removed from 


Dedication O17 


them than the virtues which occupy an intermediate position, are 
usually held in greater esteem than they. Thus since there are 
many more people who fear danger too much than those who fear 
it too little, temerity is often opposed to timidity as a virtue to a 
vice, and is more esteemed than true fortitude. Thus likewise the 
prodigal is much more frequently praised than the liberal, and 
nothing is more easy than for the superstitious and hypocritical to 
acquire a reputation for great piety. 

Many of the true virtues do not proceed from true knowledge, 
but there are some which likewise proceed from a sort of error: 
thus it is frequently the case that simplicity is the cause of kindness, 
fear of devotion, and despair of courage. And the virtues which 
are thus accompanied by some imperfection differ from one another 
and have likewise been given different names. But those pure 
and perfect virtues which proceed from the knowledge of good alone, 
are all of the same nature, and may be comprised under the name 
of wisdom. For whoever forms a firm and constant resolve always 
to make use of reason to the best of his power, and in all his actions 
to do what he believes to be best, is truly wise, so far as his nature 
allows him to be so; and by this alone he is just, courageous, 
moderate, and possesses all the other virtues; but these are so 
united together that none take the predominance over others ; and 
this is why, although they are much more perfect than the virtues 
that the admixture of some defect causes to shine forth, yet because 
the ordinary man remarks them less, they are not accorded the 
same praise. 

Further, of two things requisite to the wisdom thus described, 
i.e. the perception of the understanding and the disposition of the 
will, it is only that which consists in the will that all men may alike 
possess, inasmuch as the understanding of some is not as good as 
that of others. But although those who are inferior in mind may 
be as wise as their nature permits, and may render themselves 
acceptable to God by their virtue, if they only form a firm and 
constant resolution to do what they judge to be right, and spare no 
effort in learning that of which they are ignorant, yet those who 
while possessing a constant desire to do well, and taking very 
special care in reference to their self-instruction, are endowed with 
a highly perspicacious intellect, will doubtless attain to a higher 
point of wisdom than the others. 

And these three things are found perfectly in your Royal 
Highness, since in your case no diversions of the Court nor that 


218 Principles of Philosophy 


mode of education which ordinarily condemns princesses to ignorance, 
have been capable of preventing your study of all that is best in 
the arts and sciences. And the incomparable excellence of your 
intellect is evident in the fact that in a very short time you have 
mastered the secrets of the sciences, and obtained a perfect know- 
ledge of them all. But I have yet another proof very special to 
myself, inasmuch as I have never met any one who understood so 
generally and thoroughly all that is contained in my writings. For 
there are many who find them most obscure, even amongst the most 
learned and intelligent ; and I notice in almost all that those who 
grasp things which pertain to metaphysics with ease have a dislike 
to geometry, while those who cultivate geometry have no propensity 
for the study of First Philosophy: and so true is this that I know 
of no mind but yours to which both studies are equally congenial, 
and which therefore merits to be termed incomparable. But what 
enhances my admiration most, is that so varied and perfect a 
knowledge of all the sciences does not reside in some ancient doctor 
who has for many years been given over to contemplation, but in 
a young Princess whose countenance and years would more fitly 
represent one of the Graces than a Muse or the sage Minerva. 

Finally I not only remark in your Highness all that is requisite 
for a mind to attain to the highest and supremest wisdom, but also 
all that is requisite on the part of the will or the life. Benignity 
and gentleness are there so conjoined with majesty, that though 
fortune has perpetually attempted to injure you unjustly, it has 
failed to embitter you or cast you down. And this constrains me 
to accord such veneration that I consider this work not only due 
to you, since it treats of Philosophy (which is just the study of 
wisdom), but I also have no greater pride in my reputation as 
a philosopher, than I have in subscribing myself as 


The devoted servant 
Of your most Serene Highness, 


Des-CaRTES. 


THE PRINCIPLES OF PHILOSOPHY. 


FIRST PART. 


OF THE PRINCIPLES OF HUMAN KNOWLEDGE. 


PrincrPte I. 


That in order to examine into the truth, it is necessary once in 
one’s life to doubt of all things, so far as this is possible. 

As we have once on a time been children and have judged of 
the things presented to our senses in various ways, while as yet we 
had not the entire use of our reason, many judgments thus pre- 
cipitately formed prevent us from arriving at the knowledge of the 
truth, and apparently there seems no way in which we can deliver 
ourselves from these, unless we undertake once in our lives to doubt 
all things in which the slightest trace of incertitude can be found. 


Prinorpte II, 
That we ought to consider as false all these things of which we 
may doubt. 


It will even be useful to reject as false all these things as to 
which we can imagine the least doubt to exist, so that we may 
discover with greater clearness which are absolutely true, and most 
easy to know. 


Princrece III. 
That we ought not to make use of this doubt for the conduct of 
our life meantime. 


But in the meantime it is to be observed that we are to make 
use of this doubt only when we are engaged in contemplating the 


220 Principles of Philosophy 


truth. For, as regards the conduct of our life, we are frequently 
obliged to follow opinions which are merely probable, because the 
opportunities for action would in most cases pass away before we 
could deliver ourselves from our doubts. And when, as frequently 
happens with two courses of action, we do not perceive the proba- 
bility of the one more than the other, we must yet select one of 
them. 


PrRINcIPLE IV. 


Why we may doubt of sensible things. 


But because we desire to apply ourselves only to the search 
after truth, we shall in the first place doubt if, of all sensible things, 
or things which we have imagined, there are any that really exist: in 
the first place because we know that our senses have before deceived 
us, and that prudence directs us not to trust too much in what has 
even once deceived us: in the second place because in sleep we 
continually seem to feel or imagine innumerable things which have 
no existence. ‘T'o those who thus resolve to doubt all, there is 
apparently no mark by which they can with certainty distinguish 
sleep from the waking state? 


PRINCIPLE VY. 


Why we may likewise doubt of the demonstration of mathematics. 


We shall also doubt of all the other things which have formerly 
seemed to us quite certain, even of the demonstrations of mathe- 
matics and of its principles which we formerly thought quite self- 
evident. One reason is that those who have fallen into error in 
reasoning on such matters, have held as perfectly certain and 
self-evident what we see to be false, but a yet more important 
reason is that we have been told that God who created us can do 
all that He desires. For we are still ignorant of whether He may 
not have desired to create us in such a way that we shall always be 
deceived, even in the things that we believe ourselves to know best ; 
since this does not seem less possible than our being occasionally 
deceived, which experience tells us is the case. And if we think 
that an omnipotent God is not the author of our being, and that 
we subsist of ourselves, or through some other, yet the less perfect 
we suppose the author to be, the more reason have we to believe that 
we are not so perfect that we cannot be continually deceived. 


1 ‘Whether the thoughts that come to us in sleep are as false as are the 
others,’ French version. 


Part I 221 


Princrete VI. 


That we possess a F'ree-Will which causes us to abstain from 
giving assent to dubious things, and thus prevents our falling into 
error. 


But meanwhile whoever turns out to have created us, and even 
should he prove to be all-powerful and deceitful, we still experience 
a freedom through which we may abstain from accepting as true 
and indisputable those things of which we have not certain know- 
ledge, and thus obviate our ever being deceived. 


Prinorpte VII. 


That we cannot doubt our existence without existing while we 
doubt; and this is the first knowledge that we obtuin when we 
philosophise in an orderly way. 

While we thus reject all that of which we can possibly doubt, 
and feign that it is false, it is easy to suppose that there is no God, 
nor heaven, nor bodies, and that we possess neither hands, nor feet, 
nor indeed any body ; but we cannot in the same way conceive that 
we who doubt these things are not; for there is a contradiction in 
conceiving that what thinks does not at the same time as it thinks, 
exist. And hence this conclusion J think, therefore I am, is the first 
and most certain of all that occurs to one who philosophises in an 
orderly way. 


Princrete VIII. 


This furnishes us with the distinction which exists between the 
soul and the body, or between that which thinks and that which is 
corporeal. 

This, then, is the best way to discover the nature of mind and 
the distinction between it and the body. For, in considering what 
we are who suppose that all things apart from ourselves [our 
thought] are false, we observe very clearly that there is no extension, 
figure, local motion, or any such thing which may be attributed to 
body, which pertains to our nature, but only thought alone; and 
consequently this notion of thought precedes that of all corporeal 
things and is the most certain; since we still doubt whether there 
are any other things in the world, while we already perceive that 
we think, 


222 Principles of Philosophy 


PrincreLe IX. 


What thought? ts. 


By the word thought I understand all that of which we are con- 
scious as operating in us. And that is why not alone understanding, 
willing, imagining, but also feeling, are here the same thing as 
thought. For if I say I see, or I walk, I therefore am, and if by 
seeing and walking I mean the action of my eyes or my legs, which 
is the work of my body, my conclusion is not absolutely certain ; 
because it may be that, as often happens in sleep, I think I see or 
I walk, although I never open my eyes or move from my place, and 
the same thing perhaps might occur if I had not a body at all. 
But if I mean only to talk of my sensation®, or my consciously 
seeming to see or to walk, it becomes quite true because my 
assertion now refers only to my mind, which alone is concerned 
with my feeling or thinking that I see and I walk. 


PRINCIPLE X. 


That conceptions which are perfectly simple and clear of them- 
selves are obscured by the definitions of the Schools, and that they are 
not to be numbered as amongst those capable of being acquired by 
study [but are inborn in us}. 


I do not here explain various other terms of which I have 
availed myself or will afterwards avail myself, because they seem 
to me perfectly clear of themselves. And I have often noticed 
that philosophers err in trying to explain by definitions logically 
constructed, things which were perfectly simple in themselves; they 
thereby render them but more obscure. And when I stated that 
this proposition I think, therefore I am is the first and most certain 
which presents itself to those who philosophise in orderly fashion, 
I did not for all that deny that we must first of all know what és 
knowledge, what is existence, and what is certainty, and that in 
order to think we must be, and such like; but because these are 
notions of the simplest possible kind, which of themselves give us 


no knowledge of anything that exists, I did not think them worthy 
of being put on record. 


1 cogitatio, 2 sensu, 


Part I 223 


Princrete XI. 


How we may know our mind better than our body. 


But in order to understand how the knowledge which we possess 
of our mind not only precedes that which we have of our body, 
but is also more evident, it must be observed that it is very manifest 
by the natural light which is in our souls, that no qualities or 
properties pertain to nothing; and that where some are perceived 
there must necessarily be some thing or substance on which they 
depend. And the same light shows us that we know a thing or 
substance sc much the better the more properties we observe in it. 
And we certainly observe many more qualities in our mind than in 
any other thing, inasmuch as there is nothing that excites us to 
knowledge of whatever kind, which does not even much more 
certainly compel us to a consciousness of our thought. To take an 
example, if I persuade myself that there is an earth because I touch 
or see it, by that very same fact, and by a yet stronger reason, 
I should be persuaded that my thought exists ; because it may be 
that I think I touch the earth even though there is possibly no 
earth existing at all, but it is not possible that I who form this 
judgment and my mind which judges thus, should be non-existent ; 
and so in other cases. 


Prinorte XII. 


The reason why everyone does not comprehend this in the same 
way. 

Those who have not studied philosophy in an orderly way have 
held other opinions on this subject because they never distinguished 
their mind from their body with enough care. For although they 
had no difficulty in believing that they themselves existed, and that 
they had a greater assurance of this than of any other thing, yet 
because they did not observe that by themselves! they ought merely 
to understand their minds [when metaphysical certainty was in 
question], and since on the contrary they rather meant that it was 
their bodies which they saw with their eyes, touched with their 
hands, and to which they wrongly attributed the power of percep- 
tion, they did not distinctly comprehend the nature of the mind. 


2 Per se ipsos. 


224 Principles of Philosophy 


PrincrpLe XIII. 


In what sense the knowledge of all other things depends on the 
knowledge of God. 


But when the mind which thus knows itself but still doubts all 
other things, looks around in order to try to extend its knowledge 
further, it first of all finds in itself the ideas of a multitude of 
things, and while it contemplates these simply and neither affirms 
nor denies that there is anything outside itself which corresponds 
to these ideas, it is beyond any danger of falling into error. The 
mind likewise discovers certain common ideas out of which it frames 
various demonstrations which absolutely convince us of their truth 
if we give attention to them. For example the mind has within itself 
the ideas of number and figure; it has also, amongst its ordinary 
conceptions this, that ‘7f eguals are added to equals, the result is 
equal,’ and so on. From this it is easy to demonstrate that the 
three angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles, etc. Now 
mind perceives these and other facts to be true so long as the 
premises from which they are derived’ are attended to. But since 
it cannot always devote this attention to them [when it remembers 
the conclusion and yet cannot recollect the order of its deduction], 
and conceives that it may have been created of such a nature that 
it has been deceived even in what is most evident, it sees clearly 
that it has great cause to doubt the truth of such conclusions, 
and to realise that it can have no certain knowledge until it is 
acquainted with its creator. 


PRINCIPLE XIV. 


That the existence of God may be rightly demonstrated from 
the fact that the necessity of His existence is comprehended in the 
conception which we have of Him. 


When mind afterwards considers the diverse conceptions which 
it has and when it there discovers the idea of a Being who is 
omniscient, omnipotent and absolutely perfect, which is far the 
most important of all; in it it recognises not merely a possible and 
contingent existence, as in all the other ideas it has of things which 
it clearly perceives, but one which is absolutely necessary and 
eternal, And just as it perceives that it is necessarily involved 


1 Praemissas ex quibus, 


Part I 225 


in the idea of the triangle that it should have three angles which 
are equal to two right angles, it is absolutely persuaded that the 
triangle has three angles equal to two right angles. In the same 
way from the fact that it perceives that necessary and eternal 
existence 1s comprised in the idea which it has of an absolutely 
perfect Being, it has clearly to conclude that this absolutely perfect 
Being exists. 


PRINCIPLE XV. 


That necessary existence is not similarly included in the notion 
we have of other things, but merely contingent existence. 


The mind will be the better assured of the truth of this con- 
clusion if it observes that it does not possess the idea of any other 
thing wherein existence is necessarily contained. And from this it 
realises that the idea of an absolutely perfect Being is not framed 
in it by means of itself, nor does it represent a chimera, but that it 
is a true and immutable nature, which cannot be non-existent, since 
in it existence is necessarily contained. 


Principle XVI. 


That prejudice prevents many from knowing clearly the necessity 
Sor the existence of God. 


Our mind would have no trouble in persuading itself of this 
truth if it were wholly free from prejudice to begin with; but 
inasmuch as we are accustomed to distinguish essence from existence 
in all other things, and as we can at will imagine many ideas of 
things which neither are nor have been, it may easily occur that 
when we do not steadily contemplate this absolutely perfect Being, 
we shall doubt whether the idea which we form of Him is not one 
of those which we frame at pleasure, or one to the essence of which 
existence does not pertain. 


Princrete XVII. 


That the more objective perfection there is in our ideas, the more 
should its cause also be more perfect. 
Further, when we reflect on the various ideas that are in us, it 


is easy to perceive that there is not much difference between them 
when they are considered only as modes of thinking, but they are 


226 Principles of Philosophy 


widely different in another way, since the one represents one thing, 
and the other another; and their cause must be more perfect as 
what they represent of their objects is more perfect. For this is 
just the same as in the case of someone said to have the idea of a 
machine in the construction of which there is much skill displayed, 
we have reason to ask how he obtained the idea, e.g. whether 
he saw somewhere a similar machine made by another, or whether 
he had a thorough knowledge of the science of mechanics, or 
whether he were endowed with such force of mind that he was able 
of himself to invent the machine without having seen anything 
similar anywhere else. For the whole of the ingenuity involved in 
the idea which is possessed by this man objectively, as in a picture, 
must exist in its first and principal cause whatever that may be, not 
only objectively or representatively, but also formally or eminently. 


PrinorpLte XVIII. 
That we may thus demonstrate that there is a God, 


So, because we find within ourselves the idea of a God, or a 
supremely perfect Being, we are able to investigate the cause which 
produces this idea in us; but after, on considering the immensity 
of the perfection it possesses, we are constrained to admit that we 
can consider it only as emanating from an all-perfect Being, that is, 
from a God who truly exists. For it is not only made manifest by 
the natural light that nothing can be the cause of nothing whatever, 
and that the more perfect cannot proceed from the less perfect so as 
to be thus produced as by its efficient and total cause, but also that 
it is impossible for us to have any idea of anything whatever, if 
there is not within us or outside of us, an original, which as a matter 
of fact comprehends all the perfections. But as we do not in any 
way possess all those absolute perfections of which we have the 
idea, we must conclude that they reside in some other nature 
different from ours, and that is, in God; or at least that they were 
once in Him; and it follows from this most manifestly that they 
are there still. 


PrincipLe XIX, 


That although we do not comprehend the whole Nature of God, 
there is yet nothing which we know so clearly as His per fections. 

This is quite certain and manifest to those who have accustomed 
themselves to the contemplation of God and to turn their attention 


Part I 907 


to His infinite perfections. For, though we do not comprehend 
them because the Nature of the Infinite is such that we, being 
finite, cannot comprehend them, we yet conceive them more clearly 
and distinctly than any material thing, because, being more simple 
and not being limited by anything that may obscure them, they 
occupy our mind more fully’. 


PRINCIPLE XX. 


That we are not the cause of ourselves, but that God is, and 
that consequently there is a God. 


But since everyone does not observe this, and because, when 
we have a notion of some machine in which there is much skill 
displayed, we sufficiently well know the manner in which we have 
acquired this knowledge, and because we cannot even recollect 
when the idea which we have of a God has been communicated to 
us by God, since it has always been present in us, we must yet 
inquire who then is the author of our Being, possessing as we do the 
idea of the infinite perfections which are in God. Because the light 
of nature makes it very clear that whoever knows something more 
perfect than himself cannot be the author of his being, because then 
he would have given himself all the perfections of which he had 
cognisance ; and consequently he could not subsist by any other than 
by Him who possesses all these perfections in Himself, that is, by God. 


PrIncIPLeE XXI, 


That the mere duration of our life suffices to prove the existence 
of God. 


We cannot doubt the truth of this demonstration so long as we 
observe the nature of time or of the duration of things; for this 
is of such a kind that its parts do not depend one upon the other, 
and never co-exist ; and from the fact that we now are, it does not 
follow that we shall be a moment afterwards, if some cause—the 
same that first produced us—does not continue so to produce us; 
chat is to say, to conserve us. And we can easily recognise that 

1 Quia cogitationem nostram magis implent,L. The French version is 
different, viz. ‘being more simple and not being limited, what we do conceive of 
them is much less confused.’ A sentence is added ‘There is also no specula- 
tion which can better aid in perfecting our understanding, and which is more 


important, than this, inasmuch as the consideration of an object unlimited in 
its perfections fills us with satisfaction and assurance,’ 


228 Principles of Philosophy 


there is no strength in us whereby we may conserve ourselves, but 
that He who has so much power that He can conserve us out of 
Himself must by so much the greater reason conserve Himself, or 
rather not require to be conserved by any other, for, in fine, He 
is God. 


PRINCIPLE XXII. 


That in recognising the existence of God in the manner here 
explained, we also recognise all His attributes, in so far as they may 
be known by the light of nature alone. 


We possess the great advantage in proving the existence of God 
in this way by His idea’, that we recognise at the same time what 
He is in so far as the weakness of our nature permits. For when 
we reflect on the idea of Him which is implanted in us, we perceive 
that He is eternal, omniscient, omnipotent, the source of all good- 
ness and truth, creator of all things, and that in fine he has in 
Himself all that in which we can clearly recognise any infinite 
perfection or good that is not limited by some imperfection. 


PrincreLtE XXIII. 


That God is not corporeal, and does not perceive by means of the 
senses as we do, nor is He the originator of sin. 


For there are many things in the world which are in some 
respects imperfect, although we remark in them certain perfections ; 
it is accordingly not possible that any of these exist in God. 
Thus in corporeal nature since divisibility is included in local 
extension, and divisibility indicates imperfection, it is certain 
that God is not body. And although it is of some advantage 
for us to have senses, yet because in all sensations there is 
passivity? and that indicates dependence, we conclude that God 
is possessed of no senses, but that He understands and wills—not 
indeed as we do, by operations which are in some way distinct one 
from another, but ever by one identical and very simple action, and 
that He understands and wills and effects everything: that is, every- 
thing that really exists ; for he does not will the evil of sin because 
that evil is nothing real. 

1 Per ejus scilicet ideam. 

2 Latin ‘quia tamen in omni sensu passio est.’ Fr. ‘yet because the 


sensations that are in us are there through impressions which proceed from 
elsewhere.’ 


Part I 229 


PRINCIPLE XXIV, 


That in passing from the knowledge that God ewists, to the 
knowledge of his creatures, we must recollect that our understanding 
is finite, and the power of God infinite. 


Being thus aware that God alone is the true cause of all 
that is or can be, we shall doubtless follow the best method of 
philosophising, if, from the knowledge which we possess of His 
nature, we pass to an explanation of the things which He has 
created, and if we try from the notions which exist naturally in our 
minds to deduce it, for in this way we shall obtain a perfect science, 
that is, a knowledge of the effects through their causes. But in 
order that we may undertake this task with most security from 
error, we must recollect that God, the creator of all things, is 
infinite and that we are altogether finite. 


PRINCIPLE XXYV. 


And that we must believe all that God has revealed, even though 
at is above the range of our capacities. 


Thus if God reveals to us or to others certain things concerning 
Himself which surpass the range of our natural power of intelligence, 
such as the mysteries of the incarnation and the Trinity, we shall 
have no difficulty in believing them, although we may not clearly 
uaderstand them. For we should not think it strange that in the 
immensity of His nature, as also in the objects of His creation, there 
are many things beyond the range of our comprehension. 


Principle XXVI. 


That we must not try to dispute about the infinite, but just 
consider that all that in which we find no limits is indefinite, such 
as the extension of the world, the divisibility of its parts, the number 
f the stars, ete. 

We will thus never hamper ourselves with disputes about the 
infinite, since it would be absurd that we who are finite should 
undertake to decide anything regarding it, and by this means in 
trying to comprehend it, so to speak regard it as finite. That is 
why we do not care to reply to those who demand whether the half 
of an infinite line is infinite, and whether an infinite number is even 
or odd and so on, because it is only those who imagine their mind 


230 Principles of Philosophy 


to be infinite who appear to find it necessary to investigate such 
questions. And for our part, while we regard things in which, in 
a certain sense, we observe no limits, we shall not for all that state 
that they are infinite, but merely hold them to be indefinite. Thus 
because we cannot imagine an extension so great that we cannot at 
the same time conceive that there may be one yet greater, we shall 
say that the magnitude of possible things is indefinite. And 
because we cannot divide a body into parts which are so small 
that each part cannot be divided into others yet smaller, we shall 
consider that the quantity may be divided into parts whose number 
is indefinite. And because we cannot imagine so many stars that it 
is impossible for God to create more, we shall suppose the number 
to be indefinite, and so in other cases. 


PrincrpLE XXVII. 
What is the difference between the indefinite and the infinite ? 


And we shall name these things indefinite rather than infinite 
in order to reserve to God alone the name of infinite, first of all 
because in Him alone we observe no limitation whatever, and 
because we are quite certain that He can have none, and in the 
second place in regard to other things, because we do not in the 
same way positively understand them to be in every part unlimited, 
but merely negatively admit that their limits, if they exist, cannot 
be discovered by us’. 


Principle XXVIII, 


That we must not inquire into the final, but only into the efficient 
causes of created things. 


Finally we shall not seek for the reason of natural things from 
the end which God or nature has set before him in their creation? ; 
for we should not take so much upon ourselves as to believe that 
God could take us into His counsels. But regarding Him as the 
efficient cause of all things, we shall merely try to discover by the 


1 ‘As regards other things we know that they are not thus absolutely 
perfect because although we observe in them certain properties which appear 
to have no limit, we yet know that this proceeds from our lack of understanding 
and not from their natures.’ (This, the French, translation is to obviate the use 
of the terms positive and negative.) 

2 “We shall not stop to consider the ends which God has set before Himself 
in the creation of the world and we shall entirely set aside from our philosophy 
the search for final causes,’ French version, 


Part I 231 


light of nature that He has placed in us, applied to those attributes 
of which He has been willing we should have some knowledge, what 
must be concluded regarding the effects that we perceive by the 
senses ; but we must keep in mind what has been said, that we 
must trust to this natural light only so long as nothing contrary to 
it is revealed by God Himself’. 


PRINCIPLE XXIX. 
That God is not the cause of our errors. 


The first of God’s attributes which falls to be considered here is 
that He is absolutely true and the source of all light, so that it 
is evidently a contradiction that He should deceive us, that is to say 
that He should be properly and positively? the cause of the errors to 
which we are conscious of being subject. For although the capacity 
for deceit would seem to be a mark of subtlety of mind amongst 
men, yet the will to deceive proceeds only from malice, or fear, or 
weakness, and it cannot consequently be attributed to God. 


PRINCIPLE XXX. 


And consequently all that we perceive clearly 1s true, and this 
delivers us from the doubts put forward above. 

Whence it follows that the light of nature, or the faculty of 
knowledge which God has given us, can never disclose to us* any 
object which is not true, inasmuch as it comprehends it, that is, 
inasmuch as it apprehends it clearly and distinctly. Because we 
should have had reason to think God a deceiver if He had given us 
this faculty perverted, or such that we should take the false for the 
true [when using the faculty aright]. And this should deliver us 
from the supreme doubt which encompassed us when we did not know 
whether our nature had been such that we had been deceived in things 
that seemed most clear. It should also protect us against all the 
other reasons already mentioned which we had for doubting. The 
truths of mathematics should now be above suspicion, for they are 
of the clearest. And if we perceive anything by our senses, either 
waking or sleeping, if it is clear and distinct, and if we separate it 
from what is obscure and confused, we shall easily assure ourselves 

1 This clause is not ia the French version, which is incomplete. 


2 Lat. Proprie ac positive. 
3 attingere Lat.; n’appercoit, Fr. ‘compass,’ Veitch’s Trans, 


232 Principles of Philosophy 


of what is the truth. Ido not require to say more on this particular 
subject here, since I have treated of it fully in the Meditations on 
Metaphysics, and what I intend to say later will serve to explain it 
more accurately. 


~PrincrpLte XXXI. 


That our errors in respect of God are but negations, while in 
respect of ourselves they are privations or defects. 


But as it happens that although God is not a deceiver we 
frequently fall into error, if we desire to investigate the origin and 
cause of our errors in order to guard against them, we must take 
care to observe that they do not depend so much on our intellect 
as on our will, and that they are not such as to require the actual 
assistance of God in order that they may be produced. In this 
way so far as He is concerned they are but negations, while in 
respect to us they are defects or privations. 


PrincieteE XXXII. 


That in us there are but two modes of thought, the perception of 
the understanding and the action of the will. 


For all the modes of thinking that we observed in ourselves 
may be related to two general modes, the one of which consists in 
perception, or in the operation of the understanding, and the other 
in volition, or the operation of the will. Thus sense-perception’, 
imagining, and conceiving things that are purely intelligible, are 
just different methods of perceiving?; but desiring, holding in 
aversion, affirming, denying, doubting, all these are the different 
modes of willing. 


PRINCIPLE XXXIII. 


That we deceive ourselves only when we form judgments about 
anything insufficiently known to us. 

When we perceive anything, we are in no danger of misappre- 
hending it, if we do not judge of it one way or the other; and even 
when we judge of it we should not fall into error, provided that 
we do not give our assent to what we do not know clearly and 
distinctly ; but what usually misleads us is that we very frequently 
form a judgment although we have no very exact knowledge 
regarding that of which we judge. 


1 sentire. » percipiendi. 


Part I 2933 


PRINCIPLE XXXIV. 


That the will is requisite for judgment as well as the under- 
standing. 

I admit that we can judge of nothing unless our understanding 
is made use of, because there is no reason to suppose we can judge of 
what we in no wise apprehend ; but the will is absolutely essential 
for our giving our assent to what we have in some manner perceived. 
Nor, in order to form any judgment whatever, is it necessary that 
we should have a perfect and entire knowledge of a thing; for we 
often give our assent to things of which we have never had any but 
a very obscure and confused knowledge. 


PRINCIPLE XXXV. 


That the will is more extended than the understanding, and that 
our errors proceed from this cause. 

Further, the perception of the understanding only extends to 
the few objects which present themselves to it, and is always very 
limited. The will, on the other hand, may in some measure be 
said to be the infinite, because we perceive nothing which may 
be the object of some other will, even of the immensity of the will 
that is in God, to which our will cannot also extend, so that we 
easily extend it beyond that which we apprehend clearly. And 
when we do this there is no wonder if it happens that we are 
deceived. 


PrincrpLtE XXXVI. 


Our errors cannot be imputed to God. 

And although God has not given us an understanding which is 
omnipotent, we must not for that reason consider that He is the 
originator of our errors. For all created understanding is finite, 
and it is of the nature of finite understanding not to embrace all 


things. 
PrincipLeE XXXVII. 
That the principal perfection of mun is to have the power of 
acting freely or by will, and that this is what renders him deserving 


of either praise or blame. a3 
That will should extend widely is in accordance with its nature, 
and it is the greatest perfection in man to be able to act by its 


234 Principles of Philosophy 


means, that is freely, and by so doing we are in a peculiar way 
masters of our actions and thereby merit praise or blame. For we 
do not praise automatic machines although they respond exactly 
to the movements which they were destined to produce, since their 
actions are performed necessarily. We praise the workman who has 
made the machines because he has formed them with accuracy and 
has done so freely and not of necessity. And for the same reason 
when we choose what is true, much more credit is due to us when 
the choice is made freely, than when it is made of necessity. 


PrincipLE X XXVIII. 


That our errors are the defects of our mode of action, but not of 
our nature ; and that the faults of subordinates may often be attributed 
to other masters, but never to God. 


It is very true that whenever we err there is some fault in our 
method of action, or in the manner in which we use our freedom ; 
but for all that there is no defect in our nature, because it is ever 
the same whether our judgment be true or false. And even though 
God could have given us so incisive an intellect that we should 
never have fallen into error, we have no right for all that to demand 
this of Him. For although amongst us men, he who could prevent 
an impending evil and yet who does not so do, is judged to be its 
cause, the case is not the same with regard to God, who is not to be 
regarded as responsible for our errors though endowed with the 
power to prevent them. For the power which some men possess 
over others has been instituted for the purpose of their hindering 
evil from being done by others, while the power held over the 
universe by God is altogether absolute and free. This is why we 
should be grateful for the good things He has granted us and not 
complain that He does not bestow irom His bounty all that we 
knew He might have dispensed. 


PRINCIPLE XX XIX. 
That freedom of the will is self-evident. 


Finally it is so evident that we are possessed of a free will that 
can give or withhold its assent, that this may be counted as one of 
the first and most ordinary notions that are found innately in us. 
We had before a very clear proof of this, for at the same time as 
we tried to doubt all things and even supposed that He who created 


Part I 235 


us employed His unlimited powers in deceiving us in every way, we 
perceived in ourselves a liberty such that we were able to abstain 
from believing what was not perfectly certain and indubitable. But 
that of which we could not doubt at such a time is as self-evident 
and clear as anything we can ever know. 


Princrete XL. 


That we likewise know certainly that everything is pre-ordained 
of God. 

But because that which we have already learnt about God 
proves to us that His power is so immense that it would be a crime 
for us to think ourselves ever capable of doing anything which He 
had not already pre-ordained, we should soon be involved in great 
difficulties if we undertook to make His pre-ordinances harmonise 
with the freedom of our will, and if we tried to comprehend them 
both at one time. 


PRINCIPLE XLI. 


How the freedom of the will may be reconciled with Divine 
pre-ordination. 

Instead of this, we shall have no trouble at all if we recollect 
that our thought is finite, and that the omnipotence of God, whereby 
He has not only known from all eternity that which is or can be, 
but also willed and pre-ordained it, is infinite. In this way we 
may have intelligence enough to come clearly and distinctly to know 
that this power is in God, but not enough to comprehend how He 
leaves the free action of man indeterminate; and, on the other 
hand, we are so conscious of the liberty and indifference which 
exists in us, that there is nothing that we comprehend more clearly 
and perfectly. For it would be absurd to doubt that of which we 
inwardly experience and perceive as existing within ourselves, just 
because we do not comprehend a matter which from its nature we 
know to be incomprehensible. 


Prinorte XLII. 


How, although we do not will to err, we yet err by our will, 

But inasmuch as we know that all our errors depend on our 
will, and as no one desires to deceive himself we may wonder that 
we err at all. We must, however, observe that there is a great 


236 Principles of Philosophy 


deal of difference between willing to be deceived and willing to give 
one’s assent to opinions in which error is sometimes found. For 
although there is no one who expressly desires to err, there is 
hardly one who is not willing to give his assent to things in which 
unsuspected error is to be found. And it even frequently happens 
that it is the very desire for knowing the truth which causes those 
who are not fully aware of the order in which it should be sought 
for, to give judgment on things of which they have no real know- 
ledge and thereby to fall into error. 


PrInocrpLeE XLII. 


That we cannot err if we give our assent only to things that we 
know clearly and distinctly. 

But it is certain that we shall never take the false as the true 
if we only give our assent to things that we perceive clearly and 
distinctly. Because since God is no deceiver, the faculty of know- 
ledge that He has given us cannot be fallacious, nor can the faculty 
of will, so long at least as we do not extend it beyond those things 
that we clearly perceive. And even if this truth could not be 
rationally demonstrated, we are by nature so disposed to give our 
assent to things that we clearly perceive, that we cannot possibly 
doubt of their truth. 


Principle XLIV. 


That we shall always judge ill when we assent to what we do not 
clearly perceive, although our judgment may be true; and that it 
Frequently is our memory that deceives us by leading us to believe 
that certain things had been satisfactorily established by us. 

It is also quite certain that whenever we give our assent to some 
reason which we do not exactly understand, we either deceive 
ourselves, or, if we arrive at the truth, it is only by chance, and 
thus we cannot be certain that we are not in error. It is true that 
it happens but rarely that we judge of a matter at the same time as 
we observe that we do not apprehend it, because the light of nature 
teaches us that we must not judge of anything that we do not 
understand. But we frequently err when we presume we have 
known certain things as being stored up in our memory, to which 
on recollection we give our assent, and of which we have never 
possessed any knowledge at all. 


Pari I 237 
PrIncrPLte XLV. 


What a clear and distinct perception ts. 


There are even a number of people who throughout all their 
lives perceive nothing so correctly as to be capable of judging of it 
properly. For the knowledge upon which a certain and incontro- 
vertible judgment can be formed, should not alone be clear but also 
distinct. I term that clear which is present and apparent to an 
attentive mind, in the same way as we assert that we see objects 
clearly when, being present to the regarding eye, they operate upon 
it with sufficient strength. But the distinct is that which is so 
precise and different from all other objects that it contains within 
itself nothing but what is clear. 


PrinoreteE XLVI. 


It is shown from the example of pain that a perception may be 
clear without being distinct, but it cannot be distinct unless it is 
clear. 


When, for instance, a severe pain is felt, the perception of this 
pain may be very clear, and yet for all that not distinct, because it 
is usually confused by the sufferers with the obscure’ judgment 
that they form upon its nature, assuming as they do that something 
exists in the part affected, similar to the sensation of pain of which 
they are alone clearly conscious. In this way perception may be 
clear without being distinct, and cannot be distinct without being 
also clear. 


PrincieLte XLVII. 


That in order to remove the prejudices of our youth, it must be 
considered what there is that is clear in each of our simple? notions. 


Indeed in our early years, our mind was so immersed in the 
body, that it knew nothing distinctly, although it perceived much 
sufficiently clearly ; and because it even then formed many judg- 
ments, numerous prejudices were contracted from which the majority 
of us can hardly ever hope to become free. But in order that we 
may now free ourselves from them I shall here enumerate all these 
simple notions which constitute our reflections, and distinguish 
whatever is clear in each of them from what is obscure, or likely 
to cause us to err. 


1 ‘false,’ French version. 3 ‘first,’ French. 


238 Principles of Philosophy 
Princrpte XLVIII. 


That all the objects of our perceptions are to be considered either 
as things or the affections of things, or else as eternal truths; and 
the enumeration of things. 

I distinguish all the objects of our knowledge either into things 
or the affections of things’, or as eternal truths having no existence 
outside our thought. Of the things we consider as real, the most 
general are substance, duration, order, number, and possibly such 
other similar matters as range through all the classes of real things. 
I do not however observe more than two ultimate classes of real 
things—the one is intellectual things, or those of the intelligence, 
that is, pertaining to the mind or to thinking substance, the other 
is material things, or that pertaining to extended substance, i.e. to 
body. Perception, volition, and every mode of knowing and willing, 
pertain to thinking substance; while to extended substance pertain 
magnitude or extension in length, breadth and depth, figure, movement, 
situation, divisibility into parts themselves divisible, and such like. 
Besides these, there are, however, certain things which we experience 
in ourselves and which should be attributed neither to mind nor 
body alone, but to the close and intimate union that exists between 
the body and mind as I shall later on explain in the proper place’. 
Such are the appetites of hunger, thirst, etc., and also the emotions 
or passions of the mind which do not subsist in mind or thought 
alone, as the emotions of anger, joy, sadness, love, etc.; and, finally 
all the sensations such as pain, pleasure, light and colour, sounds, 
odours, tastes, heat, hardness, and all other tactile qualities. 


PrIncrPLE XLIX. 


That eternal truths cannot be enumerated thus, and that this is 
not requisite. 

What I have hitherto enumerated are regarded either as the 
qualities of things or their modes. 

[We must now talk of what we know as eternal truths. ] 

When we apprehend that it is impossible that anything can 


1 “Je premier contient toutes les choses qui ont quelque existence ; et l’autre 
toutes les veritez qui ne sont rien hors de notre pensée,’ French version. ‘I 
distinguish all the objects of our knowledge into two species; the first contains 
all things which have an existence; the second all the truths which have no 
existence outside our thought.’ 

2 Part rv. art. 189, 190 and 191. 


Part I 239 


be formed of nothing, the proposition ex nihilo nihil fit is not to be 
considered as an existing thing, or the mode of a thing, but as a 
certain eternal truth which has its seat in our mind, and is a 
common notion or axiom. Of the same nature are the following : 
“Tt is impossible that the same thing can be and not be at the same 
time,’ and that ‘what has been done cannot be undone,’ ‘that he who 
thinks must exist while he thinks,’ and very many other propositions 
the whole of which it would not be easy to enumerate. But [this 
is not necessary since] we cannot fail to recognise them when the 
occasion presents itself for us to do so, and if we have no prejudices 
to blind us. 


PRINCIPLE L. 


That these eternal truths are clearly perceived, but not by all, by 
reason of prejudice. 

As regards the common notions, indeed, there is no doubt that 
they may be clearly and distinctly perceived, for otherwise they 
would not deserve to bear this name; but it is also true that there 
are some that do not in regard to all men deserve the name equally 
with others, because they are not equally perceived by all. Not, 
however, that I believe the faculty of knowledge to extend further 
with some men than with others; it is rather that these common 
opinions are opposed to the prejudices of some who are thereby 
prevented from easily perceiving them, although they are perfectly 
manifest to those who are free from these prejudices, 


Prinoreze LI. 


What substance is, and that it isa name which we cannot attribute 
an the same sense to God and to His creatures. 


As regards these matters which we consider as being things or 
modes of things, it is necessary that we should examine them here 
one by one. By substance, we can understand nothing else than a 
thing which so exists that it needs no other thing in order to exist. 
And in fact only one single substance can be understood which 
clearly needs nothing else, namely, God. We perceive that all 
other things can exist only by the help of the concourse of God. 
That is why the word substance does not pertain wnivoce to God and 
to other things, as they say in the Schools, that is, no common 


240 Principles of Philosophy 


signification for this appellation which will apply equally to God and 
to them can be distinctly understood. 


Principle LIT. 


That it may be attributed univocally to the soul and to body, and 
how we know substance. 


Created substances, however, whether corporeal or thinking, 
may be conceived under this common concept ; for they are things 
which need only the concurrence of God in order to exist. But yet 
substance cannot be first discovered merely from the fact that it 
is a thing that exists, for that fact alone is not observed by us. 
We may, however, easily discover it by means of any one of its 
attributes because it is a common notion that nothing is possessed 
of no attributes, properties, or qualities. For this reason, when we 
perceive any attribute, we therefore conclude that some existing 
thing or substance to which it may be attributed, is necessarily 
present 


PrinoreLe LIII. 


That each substance has a principal attribute, and that the 
attribute of the mind is thought, while that of body is extension. 


But although any one attribute is sufficient to give us a 
knowledge of substance, there is always one principal property of 
substance which constitutes its nature and essence, and on which 
all the others depend. Thus extension in length, breadth and 
depth, constitutes the nature of corporeal substance ; and thought 
constitutes the nature of thinking substance. For all else that 
may be attributed to body presupposes extension, and is but 
a mode of this extended thing; as everything that we find 
in mind is but so many diverse forms of thinking. Thus, for 
example, we cannot conceive figure but as an extended thing, nor 
movement but as in an extended space; so imagination, feeling, 
and will, only exist in a thinking thing. But, on the other hand, we 
can conceive extension without figure or action, and thinking 
without imagination or sensation, and so on with the rest 3 as is 
quite clear to anyone who attends to the matter. 


Part I 241 


Prinorpte LIV. 


How we may have clear and distinct notions of thinking substance, 
of corporeal substance, and of God. 


We may thus easily have two clear and distinct notions or ideas, 
the one of created substance which thinks, the other of corporeal 
substance, provided we carefully separate all the attributes of 
thought from those of extension. We can also have a clear and 
distinct idea of an uncreated and independent thinking substance, 
that is to say, of God, provided that we do not suppose that this 
idea represents to us all that is exhibited in God, and that we do 
not mingle anything fictitious with it, but simply attend to what is 
evidently contained in the notion, and which we are aware pertains 
to the nature of an absolutely perfect Being. For no one can deny 
that such an idea of God exists in us, unless he groundlessly asserts 
that the mind of man cannot attain to a knowledge of God. 


Princrete LY. 


How we can also have a distinct understanding of duration, order, 
and number 


We shall likewise have a very distinct understanding of dura- 
tion, order and number, if, in place of mingling with the idea that 
we have of them what properly speaking pertains to the conception 
of substance, we merely consider that the duration of each thing is 
a mode under which we shall consider this thing in so far as it 
continues to exist; and if in the same way we think that order 
and number are not really different from the things that are ordered 
and numbered, but that they are only the modes under which we 
consider these things. 


PrinorpeLeE LVI. 


What are modes, qualities, and attributes. 

And, indeed, when we here speak of modes we mean nothing 
more than what elsewhere is termed attribute or quality. But 
when we consider substance as modified or diversified by them, 
I avail myself of the word mode; and when from the disposition or 
variation it can be named as of such and such a kind, we shall use 
the word qualities [to designate the different modes which cause it 
to be so termed]; and finally when we more generally consider that 


242 Principles of Philosophy 


these modes or qualities are in substance we term them attributes. 
And because in God any variableness is incomprehensible, we cannot 
ascribe to Him modes or qualities; but simply attributes. And 
even in created things that which never exists in them in any 
diverse way, like existence and duration in the existing and 
enduring thing, should be called not qualities or modes, but 
attributes. 


Prinorete LVII. 


That there are attributes which pertain to things and others to 
thought ; and what duration and time are. 


Some of the attributes are in things themselves and others are 
only in our thought. Thus time, for example, which we distinguish 
from duration taken in its general sense and which we describe as 
the measure of movement, is only a mode of thinking!; for we do 
not indeed apprehend that the duration of things which are moved 
is different from that of the things which are not moved, as is 
evident from the fact that if two bodies are moved for the space of 
an hour, the one quickly, the other slowly, we do not count the 
time longer in one case than in the other, although there is much 
more movement in one of the two bodies than in the other. But in 
order to comprehend the duration of all things under the same 
measure, we usually compare their duration with the duration of 
the greatest and most regular motions, which are those that create 
years and days, and these we term time. Hence this adds nothing 
to the notion of duration, generally taken, but a mode of thinking. 


Princriete LVIII. 


That number and all universals are simply modes of thought. 


Similarly number when we consider it abstractly or generally 
and not in created things, is but a mode of thinking ; and the same 
is true of all that which [in the schools] is named wniversals, 


Prinorwte LIX. 


How Universals are formed and what are the five common ones :— 
genus, species, difference, property and accident. 

Universals arise solely from the fact that we avail ourselves of 
one and the same idea in order to think of all individual things 


1 ‘is only a mode of thinking that duration,’ French version, 


Part I 243 


which have a certain similitude; and when we comprehend under 
the same name all the objects represented by this idea, that name 
is universal. For example, when we see two stones, and without 
thinking further of their nature than to remark that there are two, 
we form in ourselves an idea of a certain number which we term 
the number of two; and when afterwards we see two birds or two 
trees, and we observe without further thinking about their nature, 
that there are two of them, we again take up the same idea which 
we had before, which idea is universal ; and we give to this number 
the universal name ‘two.’ And in the same way when we consider 
a three-sided figure we form a certain idea which we call the idea 
of a triangle ; and we afterwards make use of it as a universal in 
representing to ourselves all the figures having three sides. But 
when we notice more particularly that of three-sided figures some 
have a right angle and others have not, we form the universal idea 
of a rectangular triangle, which being related to the preceding as to 
a more general, may be termed species; and the right angle is the 
universal difference by which right-angled triangles are distinguished 
from all others. If we further observe that the square of the side 
which subtends the right angle is equal to the squares of the two 
other sides, and that this property belongs only to this species of 
triangle, we may term it a [universal] property of the species. Finally 
if we suppose that certain of the triangles are moved, and others 
are not moved we should take that to be a universal accident of 
the same; and it is thus that we commonly enumerate the five 
universals, viz. genus, species, difference, property, accident. 


Princrete LX 


Of distinctions, and firstly of real distinction. 

But as to the number in things themselves, this proceeds from 
the distinction which exists between them; and distinction is of 
three sorts, viz. real, modal, and of reason. The real is properly 
speaking found between two or more substances; and we can 
conclude that two substances are really distinct one from the other 
from the sole fact that we can conceive the one clearly and distinctly 
without the other. For in accordance with the knowledge which 
we have of God, we are certain that He can carry into effect all that 
of which we have a distinct idea. That is why from the fact that 
we now have, e.g. the idea of an extended or corporeal substance, 


244 Principles of Philosophy 


although we do not yet know certainly whether such really exists at 
all, we may yet conclude that it may exist ; and if it does exist, any 
one portion of it which we can demarcate in our thought must be 
distinct from every other part of the same substance. Similarly 
because each one of us is conscious that he thinks, and that in 
thinking he can shut off from himself all other substance, either 
thinking or extended, we may conclude that each of us, similarly 
regarded, is really distinct from every other thinking substance and 
from every corporeal substance. And even if we suppose that God 
had united a body to a soul so closely that it was impossible to 
bring them together more closely, and made a single thing out of 
the two, they would yet remain really distinct one from the other 
notwithstanding the union ; because however closely God connected 
them He could not set aside the power which He possessed of 
separating them, or conserving them one apart from the other, and 
those things which God can separate, or conceive in separation, are 
really distinct. 


PrincreLte LXI. 
Of the modal distinction. 


There are two sorts of modal distinctions, i.e. the one between 
the mode properly speaking, and the substance of which it is the 
mode, and the other between two modes of the same substance. 
The former we recognise by the fact that we can clearly conceive 
substance without the mode which we say differs from it, while we 
cannot reciprocally have a perception of this mode without per- 
ceiving the substance. There is, for example, a modal distinction 
between figure or movement and the corporeal substance in which 
both exist: there is also a distinction between affirming or recol- 
lecting and the mind. As to the other kind of distinction, its 
characteristic is that we are able to recognise the one mode without 
the other and vice versd, but we can conceive neither the one 
nor the other without recognising that both subsist in one common 
substance. If, for example, a stone is moved and along with that 
is square, we are able to conceive the square figure without knowing 
that it is moved, and reciprocally, we may be aware that it is moved 
without knowing that it is square; but we cannot have a conception 
of this movement and figure unless we have a conception of the 
substance of the stone. As for the distinction whereby the mode 
of one substance is different from another substance, or from the 


Part I 245 


mode of another substance, as the movement of one body is different 
from another body or from mind, or else as movement is different 
from duration’; it appears to me that we should call it real rather 
than modal ; because we cannot clearly conceive these modes apart 
from the substances of which they are the modes and which are 
really distinct, 


Princrete LXII. 


Of the distinction created by thought. 


Finally the distinction of reason is between substance and some 
one of its attributes without which it is not possible that we should 
have a distinct knowledge of it, or between two such attributes of 
the same substance. This distinction is made manifest from the 
fact that we cannot have a clear and distinct idea of such a sub- 
stance if we exclude from it such an attribute; or we cannot have 
a clear idea of the one of the two attributes if we separate from it 
the other. For example, because there is no substance which does 
not cease to exist when it ceases to endure, duration is only distinct 
from substance by thought?; and all the modes of thinking which 
we consider as though they existed in the objects, differ only in 
thought? both from the objects of which they are the thought and 
from each other in a common object’. I recollect having elsewhere 
conjoined this sort of distinction with modal distinction (near the 
end of the Reply made to the First Objection to the Meditations 
on the First Philosophy), but then it was not necessary to treat 
accurately of these distinctions, and it was sufficient for my purpose 
at the time simply to distinguish them both from the real. 


PrinoreLe LXIII. 


How we may have distinct conceptions of thought and extension, 
inasmuch as the one constitutes the nature of mind, and the other 
that of body. 

We may likewise consider thought and extension as constituting 
the natures of intelligence and corporeal substance ; and then they 


1 «doute’ in French version. In the Latin edition dubitatione is corrected 
to duratio. 

2 ratione. 3 ratione. 

4 ‘and generally all the attributes which cause us to have diverse thoughts 
of the same thing, such as the extension of body and its property of divisibility, 
do not differ from the body which is to us the object of them, or the one from 
the other, excepting so far as we sometimes think confusedly of the one without 


the other,’ French version. 


246 Principles of Philosophy 


must not be considered otherwise than as the very substances that 
think and are extended, i.e. as mind and body; for we know them 
in this way very clearly and distinctly. It is moreover more easy 
to know a substance that thinks, or an extended substance, than 
substance alone, without regarding whether it thinks or is extended. 
For we experience some difficulty in abstracting the notions that 
we have of substance from those of thought or extension, for they 
in truth do not differ but in thought’, and our conception is not 
more distinct because it comprehends fewer properties, but because 
we distinguish accurately that which it does comprehend from all 
other notions. 


Princrete LXIV. 


How we may also conceive them as modes of substance. 

We may likewise consider thought and extension as the modes 
which are found in substance ; that is, in as far as we consider that 
one and the same mind may have many different thoughts, and 
that one body, retaining the same size, may be extended in many 
different ways, sometimes being greater in length and less in breadth 
or depth, and sometimes on the contrary greater in breadth and 
less in length. We then distinguish them modally from substance, 
and they may be conceived not less clearly and distinctly, provided 
that we do not think of them as substance or things separate from 
others, but simply as modes of things. Because when we regard 
them as in the substances of which they are the modes, we dis- 
tinguish them from these substances, and take them for what they 
actually are; while, on the contrary, if we wish to consider them 
apart from the substances in which they are, that will have the effect 
of our taking them as self-subsisting things and thus confounding 
the ideas of mode and substance. 


PrinorPLe LXV. 
How we may likewise know their diverse modes. 


We shall similarly best apprehend the diverse modes of thought 
such as understanding, imagining, recollecting, willing, etc., and 
the diverse modes of extension, or which pertain to extension, such 
as all figures, the situation of parts, and their movements, provided 
that we consider them simply as modes of the things in which they 
are ; and as for motion we shall best understand it, if we inquire 


1 ratione, 


Part I 247 


only about locomotion, without taking into account the force that 
produces it, which I shall nevertheless endeavour to set forth in 
its own place, 


Princrete LXVI. 


That we also have a clear knowledge of our sensations, affections, 
and appetites, although we frequently err in the judgments we form 
of them. 


There remain our sensations, affections and appetites, as to 
which we may likewise have a clear knowledge, if we take care 
to include in the judgments we form of them that only which we 
know to be precisely contained in our perception of them, and of 
which we are intimately conscious. It is, however, most difficult 
to observe this condition, in regard to our senses at least, because 
we, everyone of us, have judged from our youth up that all things 
of which we have been accustomed to have sensation have had an 
existence outside our thoughts, and that they have been entirely 
similar to the sensation, that is the idea which we have formed of 
them. Thus, when, for example, we perceived a certain colour, we 
thought that we saw something which existed outside of us and which 
clearly resembled the idea of colour which we then experienced in 
ourselves, and from the habit of judging in this way we seemed to 
see this so clearly and distinctly as to be convinced that it is certain 
and indubitable. 


PrinoreLteE LXVII 


That we frequently deceive ourselves in judging of pain itself. 


The same is true in regard to all our other sensations, even 
those which have to do with agreeable sensation and pain. For 
although we do not believe that these feelings exist outside of us, 
we are not wont to regard them as existing merely in our mind or 
our perception, but as being in our hands, feet, or some other part 
of our body. But there is no reason that we should be obliged to 
believe that the pain, for example, which we feel in our foot, is 
anything beyond our mind which exists in our foot, nor that the 
light which we imagine ourselves to see in the sun really is in the 
sun [as it is in us]; for both these are prejudices of our youth, as 
will clearly appear in what follows. 


248 Principles of Philosophy 


Principe LXVIII. 


How we may distinguish in such matters that which we know 
clearly from that in which we may err. 


But in order that we may here distinguish that which is clear 
from that which is obscure we ought to observe that we have a clear 
or distinct knowledge of pain, colour, and other things of the sort 
when we consider them simply as sensations or thoughts. But 
when we desire to judge of such matters as existing outside of our 
mind, we can in no wise conceive what sort of things they are. 
And when anyone says that he sees colour in a body or feels pain 
in one of his limbs, it is the same as if he told us that he there saw 
or felt something but was absolutely ignorant of its nature, or else 
that he did not know what he saw or felt. For although when 
he examines his thoughts with less attention he perhaps easily 
persuades himself that he has some knowledge of it, because he 
supposes that there is something resembling the sensation of colour 
or pain which he experiences, yet if he investigates what is repre- 
sented to him by this sensation of colour or pain appearing as they 
do to exist in a coloured body or suffering part, he will find that he 
is really ignorant of it. 


PrincreLtE LXIX. 


That we know magnitude, figure, etc. quite differently from 
colour and pain, etc. 


This will be more especially evident if we consider that size in 
the body which is seen, or figure or movement (local movement 
at least, for philosophers by imagining other sorts of motion than 
this, have rendered its nature less intelligible to themselves), or 
situation, or duration, or number, and the like, which we clearly 
perceive in all bodies, as has been already described, are known 
by us in a quite different way from that in which colour is 
known in the same body, or pain, odour, taste, or any of the 
properties which, as hitherto mentioned, should be attributed to 
the senses. For although in observing a body we are not less 
assured of its existence from the colour which we perceive in its 
regard than from the figure which bounds it, we yet know this 
property in it which causes us to call it figured, with much greater 
clearness than what causes us to say that it is coloured. 


Part I 249 


PrincipLeE LXX, 


That we may judge in two ways of sensible things, by one of 
which we shall avoid error, while by the other we shail fall into error. 


It is thus evident when we say that we perceive colours in 
objects, that it is the same as though we said that we perceive 
something in the objects of whose nature we were ignorant, but 
which yet caused a very clear and vivid sensation in us, and which 
is termed the sensation of colours. But there is a great deal of 
difference in our manner of judging, for, so long as we believe that 
there is something in objects of which we have no knowledge (that 
is in things, such as they are, from which sensation comes to us), 
so far are we from falling into error that, on the contrary, we rather 
provide against it, for we are less likely to judge rashly of a thing 
which we have been forewarned we do not know. But when we 
think we perceive a certain colour in objects although we have no 
real knowledge of what the name colour signifies, and we can find 
no intelligible resemblance between the colour which we suppose to 
exist in objects and what we are conscious of in our senses, yet, 
because we do not observe this, or remark in these objects certain 
other qualities like magnitude, figure, number, etc., which we clearly 
know are or may be in objects, as our senses or understanding show 
us, it is easy to allow ourselves to fall into the error of holding that 
what we call colour in objects is something entirely resembling 
the colour we perceive, and then supposing that we have a clear 
perception of what we do not perceive at all. 


Princrete LXXI. 


That the principal cause of error is found in the prejudices of 
childhood. 


It is here that the first and principal of our errors is to be 
found. For in the first years of life the mind was so closely allied 
to body that it applied itself to nothing but those thoughts alone 
by which it was aware of the things which affected the body; nor 
were these as yet referred to anything existing outside itself, but 
the fact was merely that pain was felt when the body was burt, or 
pleasure experienced when the body received some good, or else if 
the body was so [slightly] affected that no great good nor evil was 
experienced, such sensations were encountered as we call tastes, 


250 Principles of Philosophy 


smells, sound, heat, cold, light, colours, etc., which in truth repre- 
sent nothing to us outside of our mind, but which vary in accordance 
with the diversities of the parts and modes in which the body is 
affected’: The mind at the same time also perceived magnitudes, 
figures, movements and the like, which were exhibited to it not as 
sensations but as things or the modes of things existing, or at 
least capable of existing, outside thought, although it did not yet 
observe this distinction between the two. And afterwards when 
the machine of the body which has been so constituted by nature 
that it can of its own inherent power turn here and there, by 
turning fortuitously this way and the other, followed after what 
was useful and avoided what was harmful, the mind which was 
closely allied to it, reflecting on the things which it followed after 
or avoided, remarked first of all that they existed outside itself, 
and attributed to them not alone magnitudes, figures, movements, 
and other such properties which it apprehended as things or modes 
of things, but also tastes, smells, and the like, the sensations of 
which it perceived that these things caused in it. And as all other 
things were only considered in as far as they served for the use of 
the body in which it was immersed, mind judged that there was 
more or less reality in each body, according as the impressions 
made on body were more or less strong. Hence came the belief 
that there was much more substance or corporeal reality in rocks 
or metals than in air or water, because the sensations of hardness 
and weight were much more strongly felt. And thus it was that air 
was only regarded as anything when it was agitated by some wind, 
and we experienced it to be either hot or cold. And because the 
stars did not give more light than tiny lighted candles, it did not 
hold them to be larger than such flames. Moreover because it did 
not as yet remark that the earth turned on its own axis, and that 
the superficies was curved like a sphere, it was more ready to 
apprehend that it was immovable and that the surface was flat. 
And we have in this way been imbued with a thousand other such 
prejudices from infancy, which in later youth we quite forgot we 
had accepted without sufficient examination, admitting them as 
though they were of perfect truth and certainty, and as if they had 
been known by means of our senses or implanted in us by nature. 


1 ‘which vary according to the movements which pass from all parts of our 
body to the part of the brain to which it is closely united.’ French version. 


Part I 251 


PrinciPLE LXXII. - 


That the second cause of our errors is that we cannot forget these 
prejudices. 

Though in coming to years of maturity, when the mind, being 
no longer wholly subject to the body, does not refer everything to it, 
but also inquires into the truth of things as they are in themselves, 
we find that much of the judgment that we before had formed is 
false, yet it is not easy to eradicate the false from our memory, and 
so long as it remains there it may be the cause of many errors. 
Thus, for example, since from our earliest years we imagined stars 
to be minute bodies, we have great difficulty in imagining anything 
different from this first conception, although astronomical reason 
tells us that they are amongst the largest—so greatly does prejudiced 
opinion affect our beliefs. 


Principe LXXIII. 


The third cause is that our mind fatigues itself when it applies 
ats attention to the objects which are not present to the senses; and 
that we are therefore in the habit of judging of these not from present 
perceptions, but from preconceived opinions. 

Further, since our mind cannot pause to consider any one thing 
with attention without difficulty and fatigue, and since of all 
sbjects it applies itself with the greatest difficulty to those which 
are present neither to the senses nor to the imagination, whether 
because it derives this nature from its union with the body, or 
because in the first years of our life we are so much occupied with 
feeling and imagining that we have acquired a greater facility for 
thinking in this way than in any other, besides acquiring the 
habit of so-doing, it comes about that many men are unable to 
believe that there is any substance unless it is imaginable and 
corporeal and even sensible. For they are ignorant that the only 
things that are imaginable are those that exist in extension, motion 
and figure, while there are many others that are intelligible; and 
they persuade themselves that there is nothing that can subsist but 
body, and finally, that there is no body which is not sensible. And 
since in truth we do not perceive any object as it is in itself by 
sense alone, as will be clearly shown later on, it comes to pass that 
most men in life perceive nothing but in a confused way. 


252 Principles of Philosophy 
Principe LXXIV. 


The fourth cause is that we attach our concepts to words which 
do not accurately answer to the reality. 


And finally, because we attach all our conceptions to words for 
the expression of them by speech, and as we commit to memory our 
thought in connection with these words; and as we more easily 
recall to memory words than things, we can scarcely conceive of 
anything so distinctly as to be able to separate completely that 
which we conceive from the words chosen to express the same. In 
this way most men apply their attention to words rather than 
things, and this is the cause of their frequently giving their assent 
to terms which they do not understand, either because they believe 
that they formerly understood them, or because they think that 
those who informed them correctly understood their signification. 
And although this is not the place in which to treat particularly of 
this matter, inasmuch as I have not yet dealt with the nature of 
the human body, nor even shown that any body exists at all, it yet 
appears to me that what I have already said may serve to enable us 
to distinguish those of our conceptions that are clear and distinct 
from those in which there is obscurity and confusion. 


PrincrpLeE LXXV. 


A summary of all that has to be observed in order to philosophise 
correctly. 


That is why, if we desire to philosophise seriously, and apply 
ourselves to the research of all the truths we are capable of knowing, 
we must, in the first place, rid ourselves of our prejudices, and 
must take great care sedulously to set aside all the opinions which 
we formerly accepted, until, on applying to them further examina- 
tion, we discover them to be true. We should afterwards hold an 
orderly review of the conceptions which we have within us, and 
accept as true those and only those which present themselves to 
our apprehension as clear and distinct. In this way we shall know, 
first of all that we exist, inasmuch as our nature is to think, and at 
the same time that there is a God on whom we depend; and after 
having considered His attributes we shall be in a position to inquire 
into the truth of all other things, since God is their cause. In 
addition to the notions we have of God and our thoughts, we shall 
likewise find within us a knowledge of many propositions which are 


Part I 253 


eternally true, as, for example, that nothing cannot be the cause of 
anything, etc. We shall also find there the idea of a corporeal or 
extended nature which may be moved, divided, etc., and also of the 
sensations which affect us, such as those of pain, colour, taste, etc., 
although we do not as yet know the cause of our being so affected. 
And comparing this [what we now know by examining those things 
in their order] with our former confused knowledge, we shall 
acquire the custom of forming clear and distinct conceptions of all 
that we can know. And in these few precepts it appears to me that 
the principles of human knowledge are contained. 


PrincrpLteE LXXVI. 


That we ought to prefer the Divine authority to our perceptions’, 
but, excluding this, we should not assent to anything which we do not 
clearly perceive. 


Above all we should impress on our memory as an infallible 
rule that what God has revealed to us is incomparably more certain 
than anything else; and that we ought to submit to the Divine 
authority rather than to our own judgment even though the light 
of reason may seem to us to suggest, with the utmost clearness and 
evidence, something opposite. But in things in regard to which 
Divine authority reveals nothing to us, it would be unworthy of a 
philosopher to accept anything as true which he has not ascertained 
te be such, and to trust more to the senses, that is to judgments 
formed without consideration in childhood, than to the reasoning of 
maturity. 


1 ‘reasonings.’ French version. 


SECOND PART. 


OF THE PRINCIPLES OF MATERIAL THINGS. 


PRINCIPLE I. 


What are the reasons for our having a certain knowledge of 
material things ? 


Although we are all persuaded that material things exist. yet 
because we have doubted this before and have placed it in the rank 
of the prejudices of our childhood, it is now requisite that we should 
inquire into the reasons through which we may accept this truth 
with certainty. T’o begin with we feel that without doubt all our 
perceptions proceed from some thing which is different from our 
mind. For it is not in our power to have one perception rather 
than another, since each one is clearly dependent on the object which 
affects our senses. It is true that we may inquire whether that 
object is God, or some other different from God. But inasmuch as 
we perceive, or rather are stimulated by sense to apprehend clearly 
and distinctly a matter which is extended in length, breadth, and 
depth, the various parts of which have various figures and motions, 
and give rise to the sensations we have of colours, smells, pains, etc., 
if God immediately and of Himself presented to our mind the idea 
of this extended matter, or merely permitted it to be caused in 
us by some other object which possessed no extension, figure, or 
motion, there would be nothing to prevent Him from being regarded 
as a deceiver. For we clearly apprehend this matter as different 
from God, or ourselves, or our mind, and appear to discern very 
plainly that the idea of it is due to objects outside of ourselves to 
which it is absolutely similar. But God cannot deceive us, because 
deception is repugnant to His nature, as has been explained. And 


Part IT 255 


hence we must conclude that there is an object extended in length, 
breadth, and depth, and possessing all those properties which we 
clearly perceive to pertain to extended objects. And this extended 
object is called by us either body or matter. 


PRINCIPLE II, 


How we likewise know that the body of man is closely united to 
the mind. 


It may be concluded also that a certain body is more closely 
united to our mind than any other, from the fact that pain and 
other of our sensations occur without our foreseeing them; and 
that mind is conscious that these do not arise from itself alone, nor 
pertain to it in so far as it is a thinking thing, but only in so far as 
it is united to another thing, extended and mobile, which is called 
the human body. But this is not the place to explain the matter 
further. 


Princrece III. 


That the perceptions of the senses do not teach us what is really 
in things, but merely that whereby they are useful or hurtful to man’s 
composite nature. 


It will be sufficient for us to observe that the perceptions of the 
senses are related simply to the intimate union which exists between 
body and mind, and that while by their means we are made aware 
of what in external bodies can profit or hurt this union, they do not 
present them to us as they are in themselves unless occasionally 
and accidentally. For [after this observation] we shall without 
difficulty set aside all the prejudices of the senses and in this regard 
rely upon our understanding alone, by reflecting carefully on the 
ideas implanted therein by nature. 


Principe IV. 


That the nature of body consists not in weight, nor in hardness, 
nor colour and so on, but in extension alone. 

In this way we shall ascertain that the nature of matter or of 
body in its universal aspect, does not consist in its being hard, or 
heavy, or coloured, or one that affects our senses in some other way, 


256 Principles of Philosophy 


but solely in the fact that it is a substance extended in length, 
breadth and depth. For as regards hardness we do not know 
anything of it by sense, excepting that the portions of the hard 
bodies resist the motion of our hands when they come in contact 
with them ; but if, whenever we moved our hands in some direction, 
all the bodies in that part retreated with the same velocity as our 
hands approached them, we should never feel hardness; and yet we 
have no reason to believe that the bodies which recede in this way 
would on this account lose what makes them bodies. It follows from 
this that the nature of body does not consist in hardness. The same 
reason shows us that weight, colour, and all the other qualities of the 
kind that is perceived in corporeal matter, may be taken from it, it 
remaining meanwhile entire: it thus follows that the nature of body 
depends on none of these. 


PRINCIPLE V. 


That this truth regarding the nature of body is obscured by 
prejudices regarding rarefaction and the vacuum. 


There still remain two reasons which may cause us to doubt 
whether the true nature of body consists solely in extension. The 
first is that prevalent opinion that most bodies are capable of being 
rarefied and condensed, so that when rarefied they have greater 
extension than when condensed ; and some have even subtilized to 
such an extent that they desire to distinguish the substance of a 
body from its quantity, and its quantity from its extension. The 
second reason is that when we conceive that there is extension in 
length, breadth and depth only, we are not in the habit of saying 
that there is a body, but only space and further empty space, which 
most people persuade themselves is a mere negation. 


Prinorpte VI. 
In what way rarefaction takes place. 


But as regards rarefaction and condensation, whoever will 
examine his own thoughts and refuse to admit anything which he 
does not clearly perceive, will not allow that there is anything in 
these processes but a change of figure [in the body rarefied or 
condensed]: that is to say, rare bodies are those between whose 
parts there are many interstices filled with other bodies ; and those 


Part IT 257 


are called dense bodies, on the other hand, whose parts, by approach- 
ing one another, either render these distances less than they were, 
or remove them altogether, in which case the body is rendered so 
dense that it cannot be denser. And yet it does not possess less 
extension than when the parts occupied a greater space, owing to 
their being further removed from one another. For we ought not 
to attribute to a body the extension of the pores or the interstices 
which its parts do not occupy [when it is rarefied], but to the 
other bodies which occupy these interstices. Just as when we see 
a sponge filled with water or some other liquid, we do not suppose 
that for this reason each part of the sponge is more extended than 
when it is compressed and dry, but only that its pores are wider, 
and that it is therefore distributed over a larger space. 


Principte VII. 


That rarefaction cannot be intelligibly explained in any other 
way. 

I am indeed unable to say why this rarefaction of bodies has 
been explained by some as the result of augmentation of quantity 
rather than by the example of the sponge. For although when air 
or water are rarefied we do not see any of the pores which are 
rendered large, nor any new body that is added to occupy then, it 
is yet less consonant with reason to suppose something that is 
unintelligible in order to give a merely verbal explanation of how 
bodies are rarefied, than to conclude in consequence of that rare- 
faction, that there are pores or interstices which become greater, 
and which are filled with some new body, although we do not 
perceive this new body with the senses. For there is no reason 
which obliges us to believe that we should perceive by our senses 
all the bodies which exist around us. And we perceive that it is 
very easy to explain rarefaction in this manner though not in any 
other. And finally it would be undoubtedly contradictory to suppose 
that any body should be increased by a fresh quantity or fresh 
extension, without the addition to it of a new extended substance, 
i.e. a new body. Because it is impossible to conceive any addition 
of extension or quantity, without the addition of a substance having 
quantity or extension, as will be more clearly shown below. 


258 Principles of Philosophy 
PrincrpLe VIII. 


That quantity and number differ only in thought from what has 
quantity and is numbered. 


For quantity differs from extended substance, or number from 
what is numbered, not in reality but only in our conception. Thus, 
to take an example, we may consider the whole nature of corporeal 
substance which is comprised within a space of ten feet, although 
we do not attend to this measure of ten feet; because it is clear 
that the thing conceived is the same in any one part of that space 
as in the whole. And ace versd, we can comprehend the number 
ten, as also a continuous quantity of ten feet, without attending to 
any particular determinate substance, because the conception of the 
number of ten is plainly the same, whether considered in reference 
to the measure of ten feet, or to any other ten; and we cannot 
conceive a continuous quantity of ten feet without thinking of some 
extended substance of which it is the quantity, but yet we can 
conceive it without thinking of that determinate substance. In 
reality it is however impossible that even the least part of such 
quantity or extension can be taken away without taking away 
likewise an equal amount of substance; on the other hand, not the 
least part of the substance can be removed without our diminishing 
its quantity and extension by the same amount. 


PrRIncIPLE IX. 


That corporeal substance, when distinguished from its quantity, 
is confusedly conceived as something incorporeal. 


Although however, some express themselves otherwise on this 
subject, I cannot think that they regard it otherwise than as I have 
just said; for when they distinguish substance from extension or 
quantity, they either mean nothing by the word substance, or they 
merely form in their minds a confused idea of incorporeal substance 
which they falsely attribute to corporeal, and leave to extension 
which they nevertheless call an accident, that true idea of ine 
corporeal substance, and thus it is easy to see that their words are 
not in harmony with their thoughts. 


1 ratione. 


Part II 259 


PRINCIPLE X. 
What space or internal place is. 


Space or internal place and the corporeal substance which is 
contained in it, are not different otherwise than in the mode in 
which they are conceived of by us. For, in truth, the same extension 
in length, breadth, and depth, which constitutes space, constitutes 
body; and the difference between them consists only in the fact 
that in body we consider extension as particular and conceive it to 
change just as body changes; in space, on the contrary, we attribute 
to extension a generic unity, so that after having removed from a 
certain space the body which occupied it, we do not suppose that 
we have also removed the extension of that space, because it appears 
to us that the same extension remains so long as it is of the same 
magnitude and figure, and preserves the same position in relation 
to certain other bodies, whereby we determine this space. 


Princrete XI. 


In what sense it may be said that space is not different from 
corporeal substance. 


And it will be easy for us to recognise that the same extension 
which constitutes the nature of body likewise constitutes the nature 
of space, nor do the two mutually differ, excepting as the nature 
of the genus or species differs from the nature of the individual, 
provided that, in order to discern the idea that we have of any 
body, such as stone, we reject from it all that is not essential to the 
nature of body. In the first place, then, we may reject hardness, 
because if the stone were liquefied or reduced to powder, it would 
no longer possess hardness, and yet would not cease to be a body; 
let us in the next place reject colour, because we have often seen 
stones so transparent that they had no colour; again we reject 
weight, because we see that fire although very light is yet body; and 
finally we may reject cold, heat, and all the other qualities of the 
kind either because they are not considered as in the stone, or else 
because with the change of their qualities the stone is not for that 
reason considered to have lost its nature as body. After examina- 
tion we shall find that there is nothing remaining in the idea of body 
excepting that it is extended in length, breadth, and depth; and 
this is comprised in our idea of space, not only of that which is full 
of body, but also of that which is called a vacuum. 


260 Principles of Philosophy 


PrincreLe XII. 

How space is different from body in our mode of conceiving tt. 

There is, however, some difference in our mode of conceiving 
them ; for if we remove a stone from the space or place where it 
was, we conceive that the extension of this stone has also been 
removed from it, because we consider this to be singular, and 
inseparable from the stone itself. But meantime we suppose that 
the same extension of place occupied by the stone remains, though 
the place which it formerly occupied has been taken up with 
wood, water, air, and any other bodies, or even has been supposed 
to be empty, because we now consider extension in general, and it 
appears to us that the same is common to stones, wood, water, air, 
and all other bodies, and even to a vacuum, if there be such a thing, 
provided that it is of the same magnitude and figure as before, and 
preserves the same situation in regard to the external bodies which 
determine this space. 


Princrete XIII. 

What external place is. 

The reason of this is that the words place and space signify 
nothing different from the body which is said to be in a place, and 
merely designate its magnitude, figure, and situation as regards 
other bodies. For it is necessary in order to determine this situation 
to observe certain others which we consider to be immovable; and 
according as we regard different bodies we may find that the same 
thing at the same time changes its place, and does not change it. 
For example, if we consider a man seated at the stern of a vessel 
when it is carried out to sea, he may be said to be in one place if 
we regard the parts of the vessel with which he preserves the same 
situation: and yet he will be found continually to change his 
position, if regard be paid to the neighbouring shores in relation to 
which he is constantly receding from one, and approaching another. 
And further, if we suppose that the earth moves, and that it makes 
precisely the same way from west to east as the vessel does from 
east to west, it will again appear to us that he who is seated at the 
stern does not change his position, because that place is determined 
by certain immovable points which we imagine to be in the heavens. 
But if at length we are persuaded that there are no points in the 
universe that are really immovable, as will presently be shown to 
be probable, we shail conclude that there is nothing that has a 
permanent place except in so far as it is fixed by our thought. 


Part IT 261 


PrincreLE XIV, 
Wherein place and space differ. 


The terms place and space are however different, because place 
indicates situation more expressly than magnitude or figure; while, 
on the contrary, we more often think of the latter when we speak of 
space. For we frequently say that a thing has succeeded to the 
place of another, although it does not possess exactly either its 
magnitude or its figure; but we do not for all that mean that it 
occupies the same space as the other; and when the situation is 
changed, we say that the place also is changed, although the same 
magnitude and figure exist as before. And hence if we say that 
a thing is in a particular place, we simply mean that it is situated 
in a certain manner in reference to certain other things; and when 
we add that it occupies a certain space or place, we likewise mean 
that it is of a definite magnitude or figure [so as exactly to fill the 
space]. 


PRINCIPLE XV. 


How external place is rightly taken to be the superficies of the 
surrounding body. 

And thus we never distinguish space from extension in length, 
breadth and depth; but we sometimes consider place as in the thing 
placed, and sometimes as outside of it. Internal place is indeed in 
no way distinguished from space; but we sometimes regard external 
place as the superficies which immediately surrounds the thing 
placed in it. And it is to be observed that by superficies we do 
not here mean any portion of the surrounding body, but merely 
the extremity which is between the surrounding body and that 
surrounded, which is but a mode; or that we mean the common 
surface which is a surface that is not a part of one body rather 
than of the other, and that it is always considered the same, so long 
as it retains the same magnitude and figure. For although all the 
surrounding body with its superficies is changed, we should not 
imagine that the body which was surrounded by it had for all that 
changed its place, if it meanwhile preserved the same situation in 
regard to other bodies that are regarded as immovable. ‘Thus if we 
suppose that a ship is carried along in one direction by the current 
of a stream, and is impelled by a contrary wind in another direction 


262 Principles of Philosophy 


in an equal degree, so that its situation is not changed with regard 
to the banks, we are ready to admit that it remains in the same 
place although we see that the whole surrounding superficies is in a 
state of change. 


PrincipteE XVI. 


That it is contrary to reason to say that there is a@ vacuum or 
space in which there is absolutely nothing. 


As regards a vacuum in the philosophic sense of the word, i.e. a 
space in which there is no substance, it is evident that such cannot 
exist, because the extension of space or internal place, is not 
different from that of body. For, from the mere fact that a body is 
extended in length, breadth, or depth, we have reason to conclude 
that it is a substance, because it is absolutely inconceivable that 
nothing should possess extension, we ought to conclude also that 
the same is true of the space which is supposed to be void, i.e. that 
since there is in it extension, there is necessarily also substance. 


PrincreLe XVII. 


That a vacuum, in the ordinary sense, does not exclude all body. 


And when we take this word vacuum in its ordinary sense, we 
do not mean a place or space in which there is absolutely nothing, 
but only a place in which there are none of those things which we 
expected to find there. Thus because a pitcher is made to hold 
water, we say that it is empty when it contains nothing but air; or 
if there are no fish in a fish-pond, we say that there is nothing in it, 
even though it be full of water ; similarly we say a vessel is empty, 
when, in place of the merchandise which it was designed to carry, 
it is loaded only with sand, so that it may resist the impetuous 
violence of the wind; and finally we say in the same way that a 
space is empty when it contains nothing sensible, even though it 
contain created matter and self-existent substance ; for we are not 
wont to consider things excepting those with which our senses 
succeed in presenting us’. And if, in place of keeping in mind 
what we should comprehend by these words—vacuum and nothing— 
we afterwards suppose that in the space which is termed vacuum 

1 «gonsider bodies near to us excepting in so far as they cause in our organs 


of sense impressions strong enough to enable us to perceive them.’ French 
version, 


Part IT 263 


there is not only nothing sensible, but nothing at all, we shall fall 
into the same error as if, because a pitcher is usually termed empty 
since it contains nothing but air, we were therefore to judge that 
the air contained in it is not a substantive thing. 


PRINCIPLE XVIII. 


How the prejudice concerning the absolute vacuum is to be 
corrected. 


We have almost all lapsed into this error from the beginning of 
our lives, for, seeing that there is no necessary connection between 
the vessel and the body it contains, we thought that God at least 
could remove all the body contained in the vessel without its being 
necessary that any other body should take its place. But in order 
that we may be able to correct this error, it is necessary to remark 
that while there is no connection between the vessel and that 
particular body which it contains, there is an absolutely necessary 
one between the concave figure of the vessel and the extension 
considered generally which must be comprised in this cavity; so 
that there is not more contradiction in conceiving a mountain 
without a valley, than such a cavity without the extension which it 
contains, or this extension without the substance which is extended, 
because nothing, as has already been frequently remarked, cannot 
have extension. And therefore, if it is asked what would happen if 
God removed all the body contained in a vessel without permitting 
its place being occupied by another body, we shall answer that 
the sides of the vessel will thereby come into immediate contiguity 
with one another. For two bodies must touch when there is nothing 
between them, because it is manifestly contradictory for these two 
bodies to be apart from one another, or that there should be a 
distance between them, and yet that this distance should be nothing; 
for distance is a mode of extension, and without extended substance 
it cannot therefore exist. 


PrincreteE XIX. 


That this confirms what was said of rarefaction. 


After we have thus remarked that the nature of material sub- 
stance consists only in its being an extended thing, or that its 
extension is not different from what has been attributed to space 
however empty, it is easy to discover that it is impossible that any 


264 Principles of Philosophy 


one of these parts should in any way occupy more space at one time 
than another, and thus that it may be rarefied otherwise than in 
the manner explained above; or again it is easy to perceive that 
there cannot be more matter or corporeal substance in a vessel when 
it is filled with gold or lead, or any other body that is heavy and 
hard, than when it only contains air and appears to be empty; for 
the quantity of the parts of matter does not depend on their weight 
or hardness, but only on the extension which is always equal in the 
same vessel. 


PRINCIPLE XX. 
That from this may be demonstrated the non-existence of atoms. 


We also know that there cannot be any atoms or parts of matter 
which are indivisible of their own nature [as certain philosophers 
have imagined]. For however small the parts are supposed to be, 
yet because they are necessarily extended we are always able in 
thought to divide any one of them into two or more parts; and thus 
we know that they are divisible. For there is nothing which we 
can divide in thought, which we do not thereby recognise to be 
divisible ; and therefore if we judged it to be indivisible, our judg- 
ment would be contrary to the knowledge we have of the matter. 
And even should we suppose that God had reduced some portion of 
matter to a smallness so extreme that it could not be divided into 
smaller, it would not for all that be properly termed indivisible. 
For though God had rendered the particle so small that it was 
beyond the power of any creature to divide it, He could not deprive 
Himself of His power of division, because it is absolutely impossible 
that He should lessen His own omnipotence as was said before. 
And therefore, absolutely speaking, its divisibility remains [to the 
smallest extended particle] because trom its nature it is such. 


PRINCIPLE XXI. 

That extension of the world is likewise indefinite. 

We likewise recognise that this world, or the totality of corporeal 
substance, is extended without limit, because wherever we imagine 
a limit we are not only still able to imagine beyond that 
limit spaces indefinitely extended, but we perceive these to be in 
reality such as we imagine them, that is to say that they contain in 


Part IT 265 


them corporeal substance indefinitely extended. For, as has been 
already shown very fully, the idea of extension that we perceive 
in any space whatever is quite evidently the same as the idea of 
corporeal substance. 


PRINCIPLE XXII. 


Thus the matter of the heavens and of the earth is one and the 
same, and there cannot be a plurality of worlds. 

It is thus not difficult to infer from all this, that the earth and 
heavens are formed of the same matter, and that even were there 
an infinitude of worlds, they would all be formed of this matter ; 
from which it follows that there cannot be a plurality of worlds, 
because we clearly perceive that the matter whose nature consists 
in its being an extended substance only, now occupies all the 
imaginable spaces where these other worlds could alone be, and we 
cannot find in ourselves the idea of any other matter. 


PRINCIPLE XXIII. 


That all the variety in matter, or all the diversity of its forms, 
depends on motion. 

There is therefore but one matter in the whole universe, and we 
knov this by the simple fact of its being extended. All the 
properties which we clearly perceive in it may be reduced to the 
one, viz. that it can be divided, or moved according to its parts, 
and consequently is capable of all these affections which we perceive 
can arise from the motion of its parts. For its partition by thought 
alone makes no difterence to it; but all the variation in matter, or 
diversity in its forms, depends on motion. This the philosophers 
have doubtless observed, inasmuch as they have said that nature 
was the principle of motion and rest, and by nature they under- 
stood that by which all corporeal things become such as they are 
experienced to be. 


PRINCIPLE XXIV. 


What motion isin common parlance. 

But motion (i.e. local motion, for I can conceive no other kind, 
and do not consider that we ought to conceive any other in nature), 
in the vulgar sense, is nothing more than the action by which any 
body pusses from one place to another. And just as we have remarked 


266 Principles of Philosophy 


above that the same thing may be said to change and not to change 
its place at the same time, we can say that it moves and does not 
move at the same time. For he who is seated in a ship setting 
sail, thinks he is moving when he looks at the shore he has left, 
and considers it as fixed, but not if he regards the vessel he is on, 
because he does not change his position in reference to its parts. 
Likewise, because we are accustomed to think that there is no 
motion without action and that in rest there is cessation of action, 
the person thus seated may more properly be said to be in repose 
than in motion, since he is not conscious of any action in himself. 


PRINCIPLE XXV. 


What movement properly speaking is. 


But if, looking not to popular usage, but to the truth of the 
matter, let us consider what ought to be understood by motion 
according to the truth of the thing; we may say, in order to attribute 
a determinate nature to it, that it is the transference of one part of 
matter or one body from the vicinity of those bodies that are in 
immediate contact with it, and which we regard as in repose, into 
the vicinity of others. By one body or by a part of matter I under- 
stand all that which is transported together, although it may be 
composed of many parts which in themselves have other motions. 
And I say that it is the transportation and not either the force or the 
action which transports, in order to show that the motion is always 
in the mobile thing, not in that which moves; for these two do 
not seem to me to be accurately enoug’. distinguished. Further, 
I understand that it is a mode of th) mobile thing and not a 
substance, just as figure is a mode of the figured thing, and repose 
of that which is at rest. 


[The following are the titles of the subsequent propositions which 
have not been translated. ] 


PrincipLE XXVI. That more action is not required for move- 
ment than for rest. 


XXVII. That movement and rest are merely two diverse modes 
of a body in motion. 


XXVIII. That movement properly understood may be said only 
to relate to the bodies contiguous to that in motion. 


Part II 267 


XXIX. Nor does it relate to any but those contiguous bodies 
which we consider as at rest. 


XXX. Why it comes about that the movement which separates 
two mutually contiguous bodies ts attributed to the one rather than to 
the other. 


XXXI. How there may be innumerable different movements in 
the same body. 


XXXII. How the movement which is properly speaking peculiar 
to every body can be regarded as many. 


XXXIII. How in each movement there is a complete circle of 
bodies moving together. 


XXXIV. From this it follows that the division of matter is 
in fact into an indefinite number of particles, although these are 
beyond observation. 


XXXV. The manner in which this division takes place; and 
that we must not doubt of its existence, although we do not com- 
prehend tt. 


XXXVI. That God is the First Cause of movement and that He 
always preserves an equal amount of movement in the universe. 


XXXVII. The first law of nature: that each thing as far as in 
at lies, continues always in the same state; and that which is once 
moved always continues so to move. 


XXXVIII. Of the movement of projectiles. 


XXXIX. The second law of nature: that all motion ts of itself 
in a straight line; and thus things which move in a circle always 
tend to recede from the centre of the circle that they describe. 


XL. The third law: that a body that comes in contact with 
another stronger than itself, loses nothing of its movement; of tt 
meets one less strong, it loses as much as it passes over to that body. 


XLI. The proof of the first part of this rule. 
XLII. The proof of the second part. 


XLII. Ln what consists the power of each body to drive or to 
resist. 


968 Principles of Philosophy 


XLIV. Movement is not contrary to movement, but to repose; 
and determination of a movement in one direction, to its determin- 
ation on the other. 


XLV. How it may be determined how much the movement of any 
bodies is altered by the impact of other bodies, and that by the following 
rules, 


XLVI. = The first. 
XLVII. _,,_ second. 
XLVIII. ,, third. 
XLIX. = ,, fourth. 
L. » Juth. 
LI. »»  stath. 
LII. »» seventh. 


LI. That the application of these rules is difficult, because 
each body is affected by many others at the same time. 


LIV. What are hard bodies, and what fluid bodies. 


LV. That there is nothing that joins the parts of hard bodies 
excepting that they are in repose. 


LVI. That the particles of fluid bodies are moved with equal 
force in all directions. And the slightest force suffices to move the 
hard bodies that exist in the fluid. 


LVII. The proof of the above. 


LVIII. That ¢f any particles of a uid move more slowly than a 
hard body existing in it, the fluid does not behave as a fluid in that 
part. 


LIX. That a hard body, pushed by another hard one, does not 


receive all its motion from it, but a part also from the surrounding 
fluid. 


LX. That yet it cannot receive a greater velocity from that fluid 
than it has from the hard body by which it is struck. 


LXI. When a fluid body moves as a whole in any direction 
vw necessarily bears with it a hard body which it contains in itself. 


Part II 269 


LXII. That we cannot say that a hard body moves, when it is 
carried along by a fluid. 


LXUI. Why there are bodies so hard that although they are 
so small they are not easily divided by our hands. 


LXIV. That I do not accept or desire any other principle in 
Physics than in Geometry or abstract Mathematics, because all 
the phenomena of nature may be explained by their means, and 
sure demonstration can be given of them, 


THIRD PART. 


OF THE VISIBLE WORLD. 


PRINCIPLE I. 


That we cannot think too highly of the works of God. 

Having now ascertained certain principles of material things 
which were derived, not from the prejudices of the senses, but from 
the light of reason, so that we cannot doubt of their truth, it is for 
us to examine whether from these alone we can explain all the 
phenomena of nature. And we shall commence with those which 
are the most general, and on which the others depend, such as the 
general structure of the visible world. But in order that we may 
philosophise correctly in this matter, two things are to be observed. 
The first is that we must ever keep before our minds the infinitude 
of the power and goodness of God, and not fear to fall into error by 
imagining His works to be too great, too beautiful, and too perfect, 
but that, on the contrary, we must take care lest, if we suppose any 
limits to exist in them of which we have no certain knowledge, we 
may seem to be insufficiently sensible of the greatness and power of 
the Creator. : 


Princrete II. 


That we ought to beware lest we presume too much in supposing 
ourselees to understand the ends which God set before Himself in 
creating the world. 


The second is that we ought to beware lest we think too highly 
of ourselves. This we should appear to do if we supposed the 
universe to have certain limits not presented to our knowledge 
without at the same time being assured of the fact by divine 
revelation, which would be making our knowledge extend beyond 


Part III 271 


that which God has made; but this would be even more so if we 
persuaded ourselves that it was only for us that all things were 
created by God, or even were we to suppose that by the powers 
of our mind we could comprehend the ends which He set before 
Himself in creating the universe. 


Princrete III. 


In what sense it can be said that all things were created for man, 

For although it may be a pious thought, as far as Morals are 
concerned, to believe that God has created all things for us in as far 
as that incites us to a greater gratitude and affection toward Him, 
and although it is in some respect true, because there is nothing 
created from which we cannot derive some use, if it be but the 
exercise of our minds in considering it and the being incited to 
worship God by its means, it is yet not at all probable that all 
things have been created for us in such a manner that God has had 
no other end in creating them. And it seems to me that such a 
supposition would be certainly ridiculous and inept in reference to 
questions of Physics, for we cannot doubt that an infinitude of things 
exist, or did exist, though now they have ceased to exist, which 
have never been beheld or comprehended by man and which have 
never been of any use to him. 


[The following are the titles of the subsequent propositions which 
have not been translated. } 

PrinoreLE IV. Of phenomena or experiments and what is their 
use in philosophy. 

V. What is the ratio between the distances and magnitudes of sun, 
earth, and moon ? 

VI. What is the distance between the other planets and the sun? 

VII. That we may suppose the fixed stars to be as remote as we 
like. 

VIII. That the earth viewed from the heavens would not appear 
otherwise than as a planet less than Jupiter or Saturn. 

IX. That the sun and fixed stars shine by their own light. 


X. That the moon and the other planets derive light from 
the sun. 


272 Principles of Philosophy 

XI. That the reason of the light of the earth and that of the 
planets is the same. 

XII. That the moon, when it is new, is illuminated by the earth. 


XIII. That the sun may be placed in the number of fixed stars, 
and the earth in the number of the planets. 


XIV. That the fixed stars remain always in the same position 
relatively to one another, but not so the planets. 


XV. That these same phenomena of the planets may be explained 
by various hypotheses. 


XVI. That the hypothesis of Ptolemy does not satisfactorily 
explain the phenomena. 


XVII. That the hypotheses of Copernicus and Tycho do not differ 
if they are regarded simply as hypotheses. 


XVIII. That in words Tycho ascribes less, but in reality more, 
motion to the earth than does Copernicus. 


XIX. That I deny the movement of the earth more carefully 
than Copernicus, and more truthfully than Tycho. 


XX. That we must suppose the fixed stars to be extremely far 
Srom Saturn. 


XXI. That the sun, like flame, consists of a material which is 
very mobile, but for all that it does not pass from one place to another. 


XXII. That the sun differs from the flame inasmuch as it has 
mo need of aliment. 


XXII. That all the fixed stars do not turn in the same sphere, 
but each one has a vast space around it void of other fixed stars. 


XXIV. That the heavens are fluid. 


XXV. That the heavens carry with them all the bodies that they 
contain. 


XXVI. That the earth rests in its own heaven, but that it is 
still carried along by it. 


XXVII. That the same may be considered true of all the planets. 


XXVIII. The earth, properly speaking, does not move, nor do 
any planets, although they are carried along. 


Part III 273 


XXIX. That movement must not be attributed to the earth, even 
in speaking improperly and according to vulgar usage ; but we may 
correctly say that other planets are moved. 


XXX. All the planets are carried rownd the sun by the heaven 
containing them. 


XXXI. How the planets are carried along. 
XXXII. How also are the spots on the sun. 


XXXIII. How the earth also revolves round its own centre, and 
the moon round the earth. 

XXXIV. The movement of the heavens is not perfectly circular. 

XXXV. Of the aberrations of the planets latitudinally. 

XXXVI. Of the longitudinal motion. 


XXXVII. That all phenomena can be explained very easily by 
this hypothesis. 


XXXVIII. According to the hypothesis of Tycho it ought to be 
said that the earth is moved round its own centre. 


X¥YXIX. And it also is moved annually round the sun. 


XL. That no change of position in the earth affects a change 
of aspect in regard to the fixed stars, on account of the greatness of 
their distance. 

XLI. That this distance of the fixed stars is requisite for the 
motion of the comets which, it is now agreed, are celestial bodies. 

XLII. All things that are seen in the earth may be counted as 
phenomena, but it is not necessary to consider them as a whole to 
begin with. 

XLIII. That it can hardly be otherwise than that the causes 

Srom which all phenomena are clearly deduced are true. 


XLIV. That I yet merely desire to assert that those which I set 
Jorth are to be regarded as hypotheses. 


XLV. That I shall also here assume some propositions which 
are agreed to be false. 


XLVI. The propositions which I here assume as explaining all 
phenomena. 


274 Principles of Philosophy 


XLVII. That the falsity of these propositions does not prevent 
what may be deduced from them from being true and certain. 


XLVIII. How all particles of celestial matter become spherical. 


XLIX. That around these spherical particles there must be another 
more subtle matter. 


L. That the particles of this more subtle matter can be divided 
very easily. 


LI. That these same particles are moved very quickly. 
LII. That there are three elements of this visible world. 
LUI. That three heavens can also be distinguished in tt. 
LIV. How the sun and the fixed stars are formed. 

LV. What light is. 


LVI. What ought to be said of the striving after motion by 
inanimate bodies. 


LVII. How in the same body tendencies towards different motion 
can exist at the same time. 


LVIII. How the bodies that move in a circle attempt to recede 
Jrom the centre round which they move. 


LIX. How great is the force of this attempt. 
LX. That this striving is found in the material of the heavens. 


LXI. That this is the cause of the sun and fixed stars being 
round. 


LXII. Jt is for the same reason that the celestial matter tends to 
recede from all points of the circumference of each star or sun. 


LXUI. That the globules of this celestial matter do not mutually 
impede one another in this tendency. 


LXIV. That this tendency serves to explain all the properties of 
light, so that light may be seen from this cause as though coming 
Jrom stars, even though there was no force to produce it in these stars. 


LXV That the poles of each vortex of the heavens touch the parts 
of other vortices remote from their poles. 


Part TIT 275 


LXVI. That the movement of these vortices must be somewhat 
deflected, in such a way that they work in harmony. 


LXVII. That the poles of two vortices cannot touch one another. 
LXVIII. That these vortices are of unequal magnitudes. 


LXIX. That the matter of the first element flows from the poles 
of each vortex towards the centre, and from the centre toward the 
other parts. 


LXX. That the same thing cannot be understood regarding the 
matter of the second element. 
LXXI. What is the reason of this difference ? 


LXXII. How the matter which composes the sun is moved. 


LXXIII. That there are various inequalities in the position of 
the body of the sun. 


LXXIV. That there are various inequalities in the motion of its 
matter. 


LXXV. That these inequalities do not prevent its figure being 
round. 


LXXVI. Of the movements of the first element while it moves 
between the globules of the second. 


LXXVII. How the light of the sun diffuses itself not only towards 
the ecliptic, but also towards the poles. 


LXXVIII. How it diffuses itself towards the ecliptic. 


LXXIX. How easily, on the motion of one small body, others as 
Sar remote as possible from it are moved. 


LXXX. How the light of the sun tends towards the poles. 


LXXXI. Whether its force is equal at the poles and at the 
ecliptic. 

LXXXII. That the globules of the second element near the sun 
are smaller and are moved more quickly than those more remote up 
to a certain distance, beyond which all are of equal magnitude and 
for that reason are moved more quickly as they are farther from 
the sun. 


LXXXIII. Why those farthest away are moved more quickly 
than those somewhat less far off. 


276 Principles of Philosophy 

LXXXIV. Why also those nearest to the sun are borne along 
more quickly than those slightly further off. 

LXXXV. Why the same nearest to the sun are smaller than 
those more remote. 


LXXXVI. Whence it is that the globules of the second element 
are moved in different ways at once, from which it follows that they 
are made clearly spherical. 


LXXXVII. That there are various degrees of speed amongst the 
various particles of the first element. 


LXXXVIII. That these minute particles of it that have the 
smallest velocity easily transfer what they have to others, and adhere 
one to another. 


LXXXIX. That such minute particles adhering to one another 
are chiefly found in that matter of the first element which is borne 
Jrom the poles to the centres of the vortices. 


XC. What is the form of those minute particles which will 
henceforward be called striated particles ? 


XOI. That these particles coming from opposite poles are twisted 
contrariwise. 


XCII. That there are only three stripes) in them. 


XCHI. Among these striated particles and among the smallest 
of all there are various ones of diferent magnitudes in the case of 
the first element. 


XCIV. How from these particles spots are generated on the 
surface of the sun or the stars, 


XCV. From this the special properties of the spots may be 
learned. 


XCVI. Why these spots are dissolved and new ones generated. 


XCVII. How in the extremities of certain ones the colours of the 
rainbow appear. 


XCVIII. How the spots are turned into faculae? or contrariwise. 
XCIX. Into what kind of particles spots are dissolved. 


1 ‘strias’ Latin. ® ‘faculas’ Latin; ‘flames’ French version. 


Part III 277 


C. How from these the ether round the sun and stars is generated. 
And that this ether and these spots are referred to the third element. 


Cl. That the production and dissolution of spots depend on very 
uncertain causes. 


CII. How the same spot can cover some one whole star. 


CUI. Why the sun sometimes appears more obscure, and why 
the apparent magnitudes of certain stars change. 


CIV. Why some fixed stars disappear or suddenly appear 
without warning. 


CV. That there are many passages in the spots through which 
the striated particles easily pass. 


CVI. What is the disposition of these passages, or why the 
striated particles cannot come back through them. 


CVII. Why also those which come from one pole do not pass 
through the same passages as those which come from another. 


CVIII. How the matter of the first element flows through those 
passages. 


CIX. That other passages also intersect these crosswise. 

OX. That the light of a star can hardly pass through a spot. 
CXI. Description of a star unexpectedly appearing. 

CXII. Description of a star slowly disappearing. 


CXIII. That in all spots many of these passages are excavated 
by striated particles. 


CXIV. That the same star can alternately appear and disappear. 


OXV. That sometimes the whole vortex, in whose centre a star is, 
can be destroyed. 

CXVI. How it can be destroyed before many spots have gathered 
around its star. 

CXVII. How there can be very many spots around a star before 
its vortex is destroyed. 


CXVIII. How these many spots are generated. 


278 Principles of Philosophy 


CXIX. How a fixed star is changed into a comet, or into 
a planet. 


CXX. Whither such a star is moved when it first ceases to 
be fixed. 


CXXI. What we are to understand by solidity of bodies, and 
what by their disturbance. 


CXXII. That solidity does not depend on the material alone, but 
also on its magnitude and form. 


CXXIII. How the celestial globules can be more solid than some 
whole star. 


CXXIV. How also they can be less solid. 
CXXV. How some are more solid than any star, and some less. 
CXXVI. Of the beginning of the motion of comets. 


CXXVII. Of the continuation of the motion of a comet through 
different vortices. 


CXXVIII. Phenomena of comets. 
CXXIX. Explanation of these phenomena. 
CXXX. How the light of a fixed star reaches as far as the earth. 


CXXXI. Whether fixed stars are seen in their true position, 
and what the firmament is. 


CXXXII. Why comets are not seen by us when they are outside 
our heaven, and incidentally why coals are black, and ashes white. 


CXXXIII. Of the tail of a comet and various of its phenomena. 
OXXXIV. Ofa certain refraction from which this tail depends. 
CXXXV. Explanation of this refraction. 

CXXXVI. xplanation of the appearance of the tail. 
CXXXVII. How rays also appear. 


CXXXVIII. Why the tail of a comet does not always appear in 
a direction directly opposite the sun, nor always directly towards it. 


1 trabes, Latin; chevrons de feu, French, 


Part IIL 279 


CXXXIX. Why such comets’ tails do not appear round fixed 
stars or planets. 


CXL. Of the beginning of the motion of a planet. 

CXLI. The causes on which its duration depends. First. 
CXLII. Second. 

CXLII. Third. 

CXLIV. Fourth. 

CXLV. Fifth. 

CXLVI. Of the first origin of all the planets. 


CXLVII. Why certain planets are more remote from the sun 
than others, and that this does not depend on their magnitude ulone. 


CXLVIII. Why those nearer to the sun move quicker than the 
others; and yet their spots move slowest. 


CXLIX. Why the moon revolves round the earth. 
CL. Why the earth turns on its own axis. 
CLI. Why the moon moves faster than the earth. 


CLIL Why very nearly the same face of the moon is always 
turned towards the earth. 


CLII. Why the moon advances quicker, and diverges less from 
its mean motion in conjunction than in quadrature, and why its 
heaven is not round. 


CLIV. Why the secondary planets which are round Jupiter 
move so quickly ; and those which are round Saturn move so slowly, 
or not at all, 


CLV. Why the poles of the equator and the ecliptic are greatly 
distant from one another. 


CLVI. Why they gradually approach one to another 


CLVII. The ultimate and most general cause of all inequalities 
which are found in the motion of mundane bodies, 


PART IV. 


OF THE EARTH. 


[The titles only are given of the first CLXXXVII propositions. ] 


Princrete I. That a false hypothesis which we have already 
used should be retained to explain the true nature of things. 


II. What is the generation of the earth according to that 
hypothesis. 


III. The division of the earth into three regions and the descrip- 
tion of the first. 


IV. Description of the second. 
V. Description of the third. 


VI. That the particles of the third element which are in this 
third region ought to be somewhat large. 


VII. That these can be changed by the first and second element. 


VIII. That they are greater than the globules of the second 
element, but less solid and less agitated than they. 


IX. That from the beginning they have lain upon one another 
round the earth. 


X. That various interstices of matter of the first and second 
element have been left around them. 


XI. That the globules of the second element were originally the 
smaller, the nearer they were to the centre of the earth. 


XII. That they have had narrower passages between them. 
XIII. That the thicker were not always below the thinner. 


Part IV 281 
XIV. Of the first formation of various bodies in the third region 
of the earth. 


XV. Of the actions by whose agency these bodies were produced, 
and first of the general motion of the celestial globules. 


XVI. Of the first effect of this first action, that it makes bodies 
transparent. 


XVII. How the solid and hard body can have enough passages 
to transmit rays of light. 


XVIII. Of the second effect of this first action, viz. that tt 
separates some bodies from others and purifies liquids. 


XIX. Of the third effect, that it makes drops of liquids round. 
XX. zxplanation of the second action which is called gravity. 


XXI. That all parts of the earth, of they are considered singly, 
are not heavy, but light. 
XXII. In what the lightness of heavenly matter consists. 


XXIII. How all parts of the earth are drawn downwards by 
that heavenly matter, and thus become heavy. 


XXIV. How much gravity there is in each body. 


XXV. That this quantity does not answer to the quantity of 
matter in each body. 

XXVI. Why it is not in their natural places that bodies 
gravitate. 

XXVII. That gravity depresses bodies towards the centre of the 
earth. 

XXVIII. Of the third action, which is light ; how it moves the 
particles of the air. 

XXIX. Of the fourth, which is heat; what it is, and how it 
continues when light is taken away. 

XXX. Why it penetrates further than light. 

XXXI. Why tt rarefies almost all bodies. 


XXXII. Why the highest region of the earth was first divided 
into two different bodies. 


282 Principles of Philosophy 

XXXIII. Distinction of the terrestrial particles into three 
principal genera. 

XXXIV. How a third body has been made between the two first. 


XXXV. That only particles of one sort are contained in that 
body. 


XXXVI. That there are only two species of these particles in it. 


XXXVII. How the lowest part of body C* has been divided into 
several others. 


XXXVIII. Of the formation of another fourth body above the 
third. 


XXXIX. Of the accretion of this fourth body and purification 
of the third. 


XL. How this third body has been diminished in mass, and has 
left some space between tt and the fourth. 


XLI. How many fissures were made in the fourth. 
XLII. How it has broken into various parts. 


XLII. How the third body has partly ascended above the fourth, 
and partly remained below. 


XLIV. Hence that mountains, plains, seas, &c. have arisen on 
the surface of the earth. 


XLV. What is the nature of air. 
XLVI. Why tt is easily rarefied and compressed. 
XLVII. Ofits violent compression in certain machines. 


XLVIII. Of the nature of water, and why it is easily turned 
now into air, now into ice. 


XLIX. Of the flow and ebb of the sea. 


L. Why the water ascends for 6% hours and descends for 
64 hours. 


LI, Why the tides are greater when the moon is full or new. 
LII. Why they are greatest at equinozes. 
LIU. Why air and water always flow from east to west. 


1 Diagram is shown here, 


Part IV 283 
LIV. Why in the same latitude regions which have the sea to 
the east are more temperate than others. 


LV. Why there is no flow or ebb in lakes or swamps; or why 
at occurs on different shores at different hours. 


LVI. How the particulars of this cause should be investigated in 
individual shores. 


LVII. Of the nature of the interior of the earth. 
LVIIL. Of the nature of quicksilver. 


LIX. Of the inequality of the heat pervading the interior of 
the earth. 


LX. Of the action of this heat. 


LXI. Of sour juices and acids from which are formed shoe- 
makers’ blacking’, alum &c. 


LXII. Of the oleaginous matter of bitumen, sulphur &e. 


LXIII. Of the principles of the chemists, and how metals ascend 
into mines. 


LXIV. Of the exterior of the earth, and of the origin of springs. 

LXV. Why the sea is not increased by the fact that rivers flow 
into it. 

LXVI. Why springs are not salt, nor does the sea become sweet. 

LXVII. Why in certain wells the water is salt, 

LXVIII. Why also salt is dug out of certain mountains. 

LXIX. Of nitre and other salts different from sea salt. 


LXX. Of vapours, spirits and exhalations ascending from the 
interior of the earth to the exterior. 


LXXI. How from their various mixtures, various kinds of stones 
and other sorts of minerals are produced. 


LXXII. How metals are brought from the interior of the earth 
to the exterior, and how minium is made. 

LXXIII. Why metals are not found in all parts of the earth. 

LXXIV. Why they are especially found in the roots of mountains 
towards the south and east. 


1 Made from vitriol. 


284 Principles of Philosophy 


LXXV. That all mines are in the exterior of the earth and the 
interior can never be reached by digging. 


LXXVI. Of sulphur, bitumen, clay, and oil. 
LXXVII. How an earthquake occurs. 
LXXVIII. Why fire breaks from certain mountains. 


LXXIX. Why there are usually several concussions in an earth- 
quake, and thus it lasts through several hours or days. 


LXXX. Of} the nature of fire, and its diversity from air. 
LXXXI. How it ts first excited. 

LXXXII. How tt ts conserved. 

LXXXIII. Why it needs aliment. 

LXXXIV. How it ts struck out of flinis. 

LXXXV. How from dry woods, 

LXXXVI. How from the collection of the sun’s rays. 
LXXXVII. How from a single very violent movement. 
LXXXVIII. How by the mixture of different bodies. 
LXXXIX. In lightning and in shooting stars. 

XC. In bodies which shine and do not burn, as in falling stars. 


XCI. In drops of sea water, in putrid woods, and similar 
things. 


XCII. In things which grow hot and do not shine, as in hay 
shut up. 


XCIII. Jn lime sprinkled with water, and other cases. 
XCIV. How fire is lighted in cavities of the earth. 

XCV. How a candle burns. 

XCVI. How fire is conserved in it. 

XOVH. Why its fame is pointed and smoke comes out of it. 
XCVIII. How air and other bodies nourish the flame, 
XCIX. Of the motion of air towards the fire. 

C. Of those bodies which extinguish fire. 


CI. What is required in order that a body may be fit for 
nourishing fire. 


Part IV 285 


Cll. Why the fame from spirits of wine does not burn the wick. 
CII. Why spirits of wine burns most easily. 
CIV. Why water with the greatest difficulty. 


CV. Why the force of great fires is increased by water or salt 
thrown on them. 


CVI. What sort of bodies are those which are easily burned. 
CVII. Why certain bodies may take fire, others not. 
CVIII. Why fire remains for some time in red hot coals. 


CIX. Of gunpowder made from sulphur, nitre, and charcoal, 
and first of sulphur. 


CX. Of nitre. 
CXI. Of the combination of sulphur and nitre. 
CXII. Of the motion of the particles of nitre. 


CXIII. Why the fame of this powder is greatly dilated, and 
especially acts towards objects above. 


CXIV. Of charcoal. 


CXV. Of the grains of this powder in which its special force 
consists, 


CXVI. Of lanterns burning for a very long time. 

CXVII. Of the other effects of fire. 

CXVIII. What bodies brought near it melt and boil. 

CXIX. What bodies dry up and become hard. 

CXX. Of waters burning, insipid, and acid. 

CXXI. Of sublimates and oils. 

CXXII. That when the degree of fire is altered, its effect ts 
altered. 

CXXIII. Of lime. 

CXXIV. Of glass, how it is made. 

CXXV. How its particles are joined together. 


CXXVI. Why it is liquid when it is white-hot and easily assumes 
all shapes. 
CXXVII. Why when it is cold it is very hard, 


286 Principles of Philosophy 


CXXVIII. Why very brittle. 

OXXIX. Why its brittleness diminishes if it is cooled slowly. 
CXXX. Why it ts transparent. 

CXXXI. How tt becomes coloured. 


CXXXII. Why it is rigid like a bow, and in general why rigid 
bodies, when they are bent, of their own accord return to their former 
shape. 


CXXXIII. Of the magnet. Repetition of those things said 
before which are required for its explanation. 


CXXXIV. That there are no passages in air or in water fit for 
receiving striated particles. 


CXXXV. That there are also none in any bodies of the exterior 
of the earth, except in iron. 


CXXXVI. Why there are these passages in tron. 
CXXXVII. Why they are also in single filings of it. 


CXXXVIII. How these passages are made fit to admit striated 
particles coming from either direction. 


CXXXIX. What is the nature of a magnet. 

CXL. How steel? and any sort of iron is made by melting. 
CXLI. Why steel is very hard, rigid, and brittle. 

CXL. What is the difference between steel and other iron. 
CXLIII. How steel is tempered. 


CXLIV. What is the difference between the passages of a magnet, 
steel, and iron. 


CXLV. Enumeration of the properties of magnetic virtue. 


CXLVI. How striated particles ow through the passages of the 
earth, 


CXLVII. That they flow with greater difficulty through air, 
water and the exterior of the earth than through the interior. 


CXLVII. That they go more easily through a magnet than 
through other bodies of the exterior of the earth. 


CXLIX. What the poles of a magnet are. 


1 ramentis. 2 chalybs. 


Part IV 287 


CL. Why these poles turn towards the earth’s poles. 
CLI. Why also they slope at a certain angle towards its centre. 


CLI. Why one magnet turns and inclines itself towards another 
magnet in the same way as towards the earth. 


CLIII. Why two magnets approach one another, and what is 
the sphere of activity of each. 
CLIV. Why they sometimes retreat from one another. 


CLV. Why parts of the segments of a magnet, which before 
being cut were joined, also retreat from one another. 

CLVI. Why two points which formerly were contiguous in the 
same magnet are poles of a different virtue. 

CLVII. Why there is the same force in each part of a magnet 
and in the whole. 

CLVIIl. Why a magnet communicates its force to iron brought 
near tt. 

CLIX. Why iron according to the various ways in which it is 
brought near to the magnet receives the force in different ways. 

CLX. Why an oblong piece of iron does not receive it except 
along its length. 

CLXI. Why a magnet loses nothing of its force, although it 
communicates its power to tron. 

CLXII. Why this force is communicated very quickly to tron, 
but is fixed in it by length of time. 

CLXIII. Why steel is fitter to receive it than baser tron. 


CLXIV. Why more is communicated to it by a more perfect 
magnet than by a less perfect. 

CLXV. Why even the earth itself gives magnetic force to iron. 

CLXVI. Why the magnetic force is weaker in the earth than in 
small magnets. 

CLXVII. Why needles touched by a magnet always have the 
poles of their virtue in their extremities. 


CLXVIII. Why poles of magnetic virtue do not always point 
accurately to the poles of the earth, but decline from them variously. 


CLXIX. Why even sometimes this declination alters with time. 


288 Principles of Philosophy 

CLXX. Why in a magnet set up upon one of its poles, it can be 
smaller than when its poles are equidistant from the earth. 

CLXXI. Why a magnet attracts iron. 


CLXXII. Why an armed magnet sustains much more iron than 
a naked one. 


CLXXIII. Why its poles, although contrary, help each other to 
sustain tron. 

CLXXIV. Why the spinning of a wheel of iron is not hindered 
by the force of a magnet from which it is hung. 


CLXXV. How and why the force of one magnet increases or 
diminishes the force of another. 


CLXXVI. Why a magnet, however strong, cannot attract iron 
not near to it from a weaker magnet. 


CLXXVIT. Why a weak magnet or iron can drag away iron 
near to it from a@ stronger magnet. 


CLXXVIII. Why in these northern regions the south pole of the 
magnet is stronger than the north. 


CLXXIX. Of the things which can be observed in iron filings 
scattered round a magnet. 


CLXXX. Why an iron plate joined to the pole of the magnet 
hinders its force of attracting or turning iron. 


CLXXXI. Why the interposition of no other body hinders this. 


CLXXXII. Why the unsuitable position of a magnet gradually 
diminishes its strength. 


CLXXXIII. Why rust, dampness and mouldiness also diminish 
it, and a strong fire entirely removes them. 


CLXXXIV. Of the force of attraction in amber, waz, resin and 
similar things. 


CLXXXV. What is the cause of this attraction in glass. 
CLXXXVI. The same cause of this is seen in the other bodies also. 


CLXXXVII. From what has been said we see what may be the 
causes of all other remarkable results which are usually referred to 
occult qualities. 


Part IV 289 
PrincipteE CLXXXVIII. 


Of what is to be borrowed from disquisitions on animals and 
man in order to advance the knowledge of material things. 

I should add no more to this Fourth Part of the Principles of 
Philosophy, did I (as I had formerly in my mind) purpose writing 
other sections, viz. a Fifth and a Sixth Part, the fifth treating of 
living things, that is of animals and plants, and the sixth of man. 
But because I am not yet quite clear about all of the matters of 
which I should like to treat in these two last parts, and do not 
know whether I am likely to have sufficient leisure [or be able to 
make the experiments necessary] to complete them, I shall here 
add a little about the objects of the senses in order not to delay the 
earlier part too long to prevent [their lacking completeness or] 
anything being amissing which I should have reserved for the latter. 
For up to this point I have described the earth, and all the visible 
world, as if it were simply a machine in which there was nothing to 
consider but [the] figure and movements [of its parts], and yet our 
senses cause other things to be presented to us, such as colours, 
smells, sounds, and other such things, of which, if I did not speak, 
it might be thought that I had omitted the main part of the 
explanation of the objects of nature. 


PrIncIPLE CLXXXIX. 


What sensation’ is, and how it operates. 


We must know, therefore, that although the mind of man 
informs? the whole body, it yet has its principal seat in the brain, 
and it is there that it not only understands and imagines, but also 
perceives ; and this by means of the nerves which are extended like 
filaments from the brain to all the other members, with which they 
are so connected that we can hardly touch any part of the human 
body without causing the extremities of some of the nerves spread 
over it to be moved; and this motion passes to the other extremities 
of those nerves which are collected in the brain round the seat of 
the soul, as I have just explained quite fully enough in the fourth 
chapter of the Dioptrics. But the movements which are thus 
excited in the brain by the nerves, affect in diverse ways the soul 
or mind, which is intimately connected with the brain, according 
to the diversity of the motions themselves. And the diverse 


1 gensus. 2 ‘is united with,’ French version. 


290 Principles of Philosophy 


affections of our mind, or thoughts that immediately arise from 
these motions, are called perceptions of the senses’, or, in common 
language, sensations’. 


Princrpte CXC. 


The different kinds of sensation ; and firstly of the internal, that is, 
of the passions or affections® of the mind and of the natural appetites. 


The diversities of these sensations depend firstly on the diversity 
in the nerves themselves, and then on the diversities of the motions 
which occur in the individual nerves. We have not, however, so 
many individual senses as individual nerves; it is enough merely 
to distinguish seven chief different kinds, two of which belong to 
internal senses, and five to the external. The nerves which extend 
to the stomach, esophagus, the fauces, and the other interior parts 
that serve for the satisfaction of our natural wants, constitute one 
of our internal senses, which is called the natural appetite‘. The 
minute nerves, which extend to the heart and the neighbourhood of 
the heart, operate in the other internal sense which embraces all 
the emotions® of the mind or passions, and affections such as joy, 
sadness, love, hate and the like. For, to take an example, when 
the blood is pure and well-tempered, so that it dilates in the heart 
more readily and strongly than usual, this so enlarges and moves 
the little nerves scattered around the orifices, that there is thence a 
corresponding movement in the brain which affects the mind with 
a certain natural sense of cheerfulness ; and as often as these same 
nerves are moved in the same way, even although it be from other 
causes, they excite in us this same feeling’, Thus the imagination 
of the fruition of some good does not contain in itself the sensation 
of joy, but it causes the animal spirits to pass from the brain to the 
muscles in which these nerves are inserted ; and thus dilating the 
orifices of the heart, it causes these small nerves to move in the 
manner which necessarily produces the sensation of joy. Thus, 
when we are given news the mind first judges of it, and if it is good 
it rejoices with that intellectual joy which is independent of any 
emotion’ of the body, and which the Stoics did not deny to their 
wise man [although they wished to regard him as free from all 
passion]. But as soon as this spiritual joy proceeds [from the 


1 sensuum perceptiones, 2 sensus, 3 affectibus. 


4 appetitus naturalis, 5 commotiones. § sensus, sentiment de joye. 
7 commotio. 


Part IV 291 


understanding] to the imagination, the spirits flow from the brain 
to the muscles about the heart and these excite a movement in the 
small nerves by which another motion is excited in the brain which 
gives the soul the sensation of animal joy. In the same way when 
the blood is so thick that it flows badly into the ventricles of the 
heart, and is not there sufficiently dilated, it excites in the same 
nerves a movement quite different from the preceding, which, 
communicated to the brain, gives a sensation of sadness to the 
mind, although it is itself perhaps ignorant of the cause of the 
sadness. And the other causes [which move these little nerves in 
the same way] may likewise give the same sensation to the soul. 
But the other movements of the same small nerves produce other 
affections, such as those of love, hate, fear, anger, &c. in as far as 
they are merely affections or passions of the mind, that is, in as far 
as they are confused thoughts which the mind does not have from 
itself alone, but because it is intimately united to the body, receiving 
its impressions therefrom. For there is the greatest difference 
between these passions and the distinct thoughts which we have of 
what ought to be loved, chosen, or shunned [although they are 
often found together]. The natural appetites such as hunger, thirst, 
&c., are likewise sensations excited in the mind by means of the 
nerves of the stomach, fauces, &c. and are entirely different from 
the will which we have to eat, drink, &c. [and to do all that we 
think proper for the conservation of the body]; but because this 
will or appetition nearly always accompanies them, they are called 
appetites. 


Princrete CXCI. 


Of the external senses and first of all of the sense of touch. 


As regards the external senses, everyone acknowledges five, 
because there are five different kinds of objects that stimulate the 
nerves which are their organs, and because there is the same number 
of kinds of confused thoughts excited in the soul by these motions 
in the nerves. In the first place there are nerves terminating in 
the skin all over the body. The skin serves as a medium by which 
the nerves can come in contact with any material body whatever, 
and be moved by these wholes, in one way by their hardness, in 
another by their gravity, in another by their heat, in another by 
their humidity &c.; and these nerves excite as many different 


1 Jaetitia animalis, 


292 Principles of Philosophy 


sensations in the mind as there are different modes by which they 
are moved, or their ordinary motion is prevented, and from this 
a corresponding number of tactile qualities derive their names. 
Besides this, when these nerves are moved a little more vehemently 
than usual, and yet in such a way that our body is in nowise 
injured, this causes a sense of gratification which is naturally 
agreeable to the mind, inasmuch as it gives evidence of the powers 
of the body to which it is closely joined. But if this action [be 
strong enough to] cause our body to be in some way hurt, that gives 
us the sensation of pain. And in this way we see why corporeal 
pleasure and pain, though absolutely contrary sensations, are almost 
similar in the objects causing them. 


PrincreLteE CXCII. 
Of Taste. 


In the next place the other nerves spread over the tongue and 
the neighbouring parts, are diversely moved by the particles of the 
bodies which are separated from one another and float in the saliva 
in the mouth, and thus cause the diverse tastes to be felt according 
to the diversity of their own figures. 


PrincipLe CXOCIII. 
Of Smell. 


In the third place two nerves or appendages to the brain, for 
they do not go beyond the skull, are moved by the corporeal 
particles separated and flying in the air—not indeed by any particles 
whatsoever, but only by those which, when drawn into the nostrils, 
are subtle and lively enough to enter the pores of the bones we call 
the spongy, and thus to reach the nerves. And from the diverse 
motions of these particles, the diverse sensations of smell arise. 


PRINCIPLE OXCIV. 
Of Hearing. 


Fourthly, two other nerves hidden in the inward cavities of the 
ears receive the tremors and vibrations of the whole circumjacent 
air, for the air agitating the small membranes of the tympanum at 
the same time disturbs a chain of little bones which are attached 
and to which these nerves adhere, and from the diversity of these 
movements the sensations of different sounds arise. 


Part IV 293 


PrincreLE CXCV, 
Of Sight. 


Finally the extremities of the optic nerves, composing the 
covering of the eyes called the retina, are not moved by the air, 
nor by any other material object, but only by the globules of the 
second element, from which we derive the sense of light and 
colours, as I have already sufficiently explained in the Dioptrics 
and Meteors. 


PrincretE CXOVI. 


That the soul does not perceive excepting in as far as it is in the 
brain. 


It is however easily proved that the soul feels those things that 
affect the body not in so far as it is in each member of the body, 
but only in so far as it is in the brain, where the nerves by their 
movements convey to it the diverse actions of the external objects 
which touch the parts of the body [in which they are inserted]. 
For, in the first place, there are many maladies which, though they 
affect the brain alone, yet either disorder or altogether take away 
from us the use of our senses ; just like sleep itself which affects the 
brain alone, and yet every day takes from us during a great part of 
our time the faculty of perception, which is afterwards restored to 
us on awakening. Secondly, from the fact that though the brain 
be healthy [as well as the members in which the organs of the 
external senses are to be found], if the paths by which the nerves 
pass from the external parts to the brain are obstructed, that 
sensation is lost in these external parts of the body. And finally 
we sometimes feel pain as though it were in certain of our members, 
and yet its cause is not in these members where it is felt, but in 
others through which the nerves pass that extend to the brain from 
the parts where the pain is felt. And this I could prove by 
innumerable experiments ; here, however, one will suffice. When 
a girl suffering from a serious affection of the hand was visited by 
the surgeon, her eyes were usually bandaged lest seeing the dressing 
should have a bad effect upon her. After some days, as gangrene set 
in, her arm had to be cut off from the elbow and several linen cloths 
tied together were substituted in place of the amputated limb, in 
such a way that she was quite ignorant of what had been done ; mean- 
while, however, she had various pains, sometimes in one of the 


294 Principles of Philosophy 


fingers of the hand which was cut off, and sometimes in another. This 
could clearly only happen because the nerves which previously had 
been carried all the way from the brain to the hand, and afterwards 
terminated in the arm near the elbow, were there affected in the 
same way as it was their function to be stimulated for the purpose 
of impressing on the mind residing in the brain the sensation of 
pain in this and that finger. [And this shows clearly that pain in 
the hand is not felt by the mind inasmuch as it is in the hand, but 
as it is in the brain. ] 


PrinoreLe CXCVII. 


That mind is of such a nature that from the motion of the body 
alone the various sensations can be excited in tt. 


It may, in the next place, be [easily] proved that our mind is of 
such a nature that the motions which are in the body are alone 
sufficient to cause it to have all sorts of thoughts, which do not give 
us any image of any of the motions which give rise to them; and 
specially that there may be excited in it those confused thoughts 
called feelings or sensations’. For [first of all] we observe that 
words, whether uttered by the voice or merely written, excite 
in our minds all sorts of thoughts and emotions. On the same 
paper, with the same pen and ink, by moving the point of the pen 
ever so little over the paper in a certain way, we can trace letters 
which bring to the minds of our readers thoughts of battles, 
tempests or furies, and the emotions of indignation and sadness ; 
while if the pen be moved in another way, hardly different, thoughts 
may be given of quite a different kind, viz. those of quietude, peace, 
pleasantness, and the quite opposite passions of love and joy. 
Someone will perhaps reply that writing and speech do not im- 
mediately excite any passions in the mind, or imaginations of things 
different from the letters and sounds, but simply so to speak various 
acts of the understanding ; and from these the mind, making them 
the occasion’, then forms for itself the imaginations of a variety of 
things. But what shall we say of the sensations of what is painful 
and pleasurable? If a sword moved towards our body cuts it, 
from this alone pain results which is certainly not less different 
from the local movement of the sword or of the part of the body 


4 sensus, sive sensationes. 
2 ‘understanding the meaning of these words.’ French version. 


Parti ry. 995 


which is cut, than are colour or sound or smell or taste. And 
therefore, as we see clearly that the sensation of pain is easily 
excited in us from the fact alone that certain parts of our body are 
locally disturbed by the contact with certain other bodies, we may 
conclude that our mind is of such a nature that certain local 
motions can excite in it all the affections belonging to all the other 
senses. 


PrincrpteE CXCVIII. 


That there is nothing known of external objects by the senses but 
their figure, magnitude or motion. 


Besides this, we observe in the nerves no difference which may 
cause us to judge that some convey to the brain from the organs of 
the external sense any one thing rather than another, nor again 
that anything is conveyed there excepting the local motion of the 
nerves themselves. And we see that this local motion excites in us 
not alone the sensations of pleasure or pain, but also the sensations 
of sound and light. For if we receive a blow in the eye hard 
enough to cause the vibration to reach the retina, we see myriads 
of sparks which are yet not outside our eye; and when we place our 
finger on our ear to stop it, we hear a murmuring sound whose 
cause cannot be attributed to anything but the agitation of the air 
which is shut up within it. Finally we can likewise frequently 
observe that heat and the other sensible qualities, inasmuch as they 
are in objects, and also the forms of these bodies which are purely 
material, such as e.g. the forms of fire, are produced in them by the 
motions of certain other bodies, and that these again also produce 
other motions in other bodies. And we can very well conceive how 
the movement of one body can be caused by that of another, and 
diversified by the size, figure, and situation of its parts, but we can 
in nowise understand how these same things (viz. size, figure and 
motion) can produce something entirely different in nature from 
themselves, such as are those substantial forms and real qualities which 
many suppose to exist in bodies ; nor likewise can we understand how 
these forms or qualities possess the force adequate to cause motion 
in other bodies. But since we know that our mind is of such a 
nature that the diverse motions of body suffice to produce in it all 
the diverse sensations that it has, and as we sée by experience that 
some of the sensations are really caused by such motions, though 
we do not find anything but these movements to pass through the 


296 Principles of Philosophy 


organs of the external senses to the brain, we may conclude that we 
in no way likewise apprehend that in external objects like light, 
colour, smell, taste, sound, heat, cold, and the other tactile qualities, 
or what we call their substantial forms, there is anything but the 
various dispositions of these objects which have the power of moving 
our nerves in various ways. 


PRINCIPLE CXCIX. 


That there is no phenomenon in nature which has not been dealt 
with in this treatise. 


And thus by a simple enumeration it may be deduced that there 
is no phenomenon in nature whose treatment has been omitted in 
this treatise. For there is nothing that can be counted as a pheno- 
menon of nature, excepting what we are able to perceive by the 
senses. And with the exception of motion, magnitude and figure 
[or the situation of the parts of each body], which things I have 
explained as they exist in every body, we perceive nothing outside 
us by means of our senses, but light, colours, smells, tastes, sounds 
and the tactile qualities ; and of all these I have just proved that 
they are nothing more, as far as is known to us, tnan certain 
dispositions of objects consisting of magnitude, figure, and motion 
[so well have I demonstrated that there is nothing in all the visible 
world, in as far as it is merely visible or sensible, but the things 
I have there explained]. 


PRINCIPLE CC. 


That there are no principles in this treatise which are not accepted 
by all men; and that this philosophy is not new, but is the most 
ancient and most common of all. 


But I likewise desire that it should be observed that although 
I have here tried to give an explanation of the whole nature of 
material things, I have nevertheless made use of no principle which 
has not been approved by Aristotle and by all the other philosophers 
of every time; so that this philosophy, instead of being new, is the 
most ancient and common of all. For I have only considered the 
figure, motion and magnitude of each body, and examined what 
must follow from their mutual concourse according to the laws of 
mechanics, confirmed as they are by certain and daily experience. 
But no one ever doubted that bodies were mixed and have diverse 


Part IV 297 


magnitudes and figures, according to the diversity of which their 
motions also vary, and that from mutual collision those that are 
larger are divided into many smaller, and thus change their figure. 
We have experience of this not alone by one single sense, but by 
several, e.g. by touch, sight and hearing; we also distinctly imagine 
and understand this. This cannot be said of other things that come 
under our senses, such as colours, sounds, and the like, which are 
perceived not by means of several senses, but by single ones; for 
their images are always confused in our minds, nor do we know what 
they are. 


PRINCIPLE CCI. 


That certain sensible bodies are composed of insensible particles. 


I consider that there are many particles in each body which 
cannot be perceived by our senses, and this will perhaps not be 
approved by those who take their senses as a measure of the things 
they can know. [But it seems to me to be doing great wrong to 
human reason if we do not consider that knowledge goes beyond 
the seen]; for no one can doubt that there are bodies so small that 
they cannot. be perceived by any of our senses, if only we consider 
what is being added each moment to those bodies which increase 
little by little, and what is removed from those which diminish in 
the same fashion. We day by day see a tree grow, and it is 
impossible to comprehend how it becomes larger than it was 
before, unless by conceiving that some body is added to it. But 
who has ever observed by means of the senses what are the 
small bodies which are each day added to the plant that grows? 
Those at least who hold quantity to be finitely divisible should 
acknowledge that the particles may become so small as to be 
absolutely imperceptible. And indeed it should not be wondered 
at that we are unable to perceive very minute bodies, for the nerves, 
which must be moved by objects in order to cause us to perceive, 
are not very minute, but are like small cords which consist of a 
quantity of yet smaller fibres, and thus they cannot be moved by 
the minutest of bodies. Nor do I think that anyone who uses his 
reason will deny that we do much better to judge of what takes 
place in small bodies which their minuteness alone prevents us from 
perceiving, by what we see occurring in those that we do perceive 
[and thus explain all that is in nature, as I have tried to do in this 
treatise], than, in order to explain certain given things, to invent all 


298 Principles of Philosophy 


sorts of novelties, that have no relation to those that we perceive 
[such as are first matter, substantial forms, and all the great array 
of qualities which many are in the habit of assuming, any of which 
it ig more difficult to understand than all the things which we 
profess to explain by their means]. 


PrincreteE CCII. 


That the philosophy of Democritus is not less different from ours 
than from the vulgar’. 


But Democritus also imagined that there were certain corpuscles 
that had various figures, sizes and motions, from the heaping together 
and mutual concourse of which all sensible bodies took their origin ; 
and nevertheless his philosophy is by common consent universally 
rejected. To this I reply that it never was rejected by anyone 
because in it he considered bodies smaller than those that can be 
perceived by the senses, and attributed to them various sizes, 
figures and motions, for no one can doubt that there are in reality 
many such, as has been already shown. But this philosophy was 
rejected in the first place, because it presupposed certain indivisible 
corpuscles, which hypothesis I also completely reject; in the second 
place it was rejected because Democritus imagined a void about 
them, which I demonstrate to be an impossibility ; in the third place 
because he attributed to them gravity, the existence of which I deny 
in any body in so far as it is considered by itself, because this is a 
quality depending on the relationship in respect of situation and 
motion which bodies bear to one another; and finally because he 
had not explained in detail how all things arose from the concourse 
of the corpuscles alone, or, if he explained it in regard to certain 
cases, his reasoning was not in all cases by any means coherent 
[or such as was capable of proving fo us that all nature can be 
explained in the same way]. If we are to judge of his opinions 
from what has been preserved regarding his opinions, this at least 
is the verdict we must give on his philosophy. I leave it to others 
to judge as to whether what I have written in philosophy possesses 
sufficient coherence in itself [and whether it is fertile enough in 
yielding us conclusions. And inasmuch as because the considera- 
tion of figure, magnitude and motion has been admitted by Aristotle 
and all others, as well as by Democritus, and as I reject all that the 


1 ‘from that of Aristotle and others.’ French version. 


Part IV 299 


latter has supposed with this one exception, while I reject practically 
all that has been supposed by the others, it is clear that this method 
of philosophising has no more affinity with that of Democritus than 
with any of the other particular sects.] 


PrincieLe CCIII. 


How we may arrive at a knowledge of the figures [magnitudes] 
and motions of the insensible particles of bodies. 


But since I assign determinate figures, magnitudes and motions 
to the insensible particles of bodies, as if I had seen them, whereas 
I admit that they do not fall under the senses, someone will perhaps 
demand how I have come to my knowledge of them. To! this I 
reply that I first considered generally the most simple and best 
understood principles implanted in our understanding by nature, 
and examined the principal differences that could be found between 
the magnitudes, figures and situations of bodies insensible on 
account of their smallness alone, and what sensible effects could be 
produced by the various ways in which they impinge on one another. 
And finally, when I found like effects in the bodies perceived by our 
senses, I considered that they might have been produced from a 
similar concourse of such bodies, especially as no other mode of 
explaining them could be suggested. And for this end the example 
of certain bodies made by art was of service to me, for I can 
see no difference between these and natural bodies, excepting that 
the effects of machines depend for the most part on the operation 
of certain instruments, which, since men necessarily make them, must 
always be large enough to be capable of being easily perceived 
by the senses. The effects of natural causes, on the other hand, 
almost always depend on certain organs minute enough to escape 
every sense. And it is certain that there are no rules in mechanics 
which do not hold good in physics, of which mechanics forms a part 
or species [so that all that is artificial is also natural] ; for it is not 
less natural for a clock, made of the requisite number of wheels, to 

1 The first clause of this sentence is amplified in the French version as 
follows: ‘To this I reply that I first considered generally all the most clear and 
distinct notions of material things to be found in our understanding, and that 
finding none but those we possess of figures, magnitudes and motions, and the 
rules whereby these three things can be diversified by one another, which rules 
are the principles of Geometry and Mechanics, I judged that all the knowledge 
man can have of nature must be derived from this source alone, because all the 
notions that we have of sensible things, being confused and obscure, cannot 


serve to give us any acquaintanceship with anything outside ourselves, but may 
on the other hand serve to impede it.’ 


300 Principles of Philosophy 


indicate the hours, than for a tree which has sprung from this or 
that seed, to produce a particular fruit. Accordingly, just as those 
who apply themselves to the consideration of automata, when they 
know the use of a certain machine and see some of its parts, easily 
infer from these the manner in which others which they have not 
seen are made, so from considering the sensible effects and parts of 
natural bodies, I have endeavoured to discover the nature of the 
imperceptible causes and insensible parts contained in them. 


PrincreLte CCIV. 


That touching the things which our senses do not perceive, it is 
sufficient to explain what the possibilities are about the nature of 
their existence, though perhaps they are not what we describe them to 
be [and this is all that Aristotle has tried to do]. 


But here it may be said that although I have shown how all 
natural things can be formed, we have no right to conclude on this 
account that they were produced by these causes. For just as 
there may be two clocks made by the same workman, which though 
they indicate the time equally well and are externally in all respects 
similar, yet in nowise resemble one another in the composition of their 
wheels, so doubtless there is an infinity of different ways in which 
all things that we see could be.formed by the great Artificer 
[without it being possible for the mind of man to be aware of which 
of these means he has chosen to employ]. This I most freely 
admit ; and I believe that I have done all that is required of me if 
the causes I have assigned are such that they correspond to all the 
phenomena manifested by nature [without inquiring whether it is 
by their means or by others that they are produced]. And it will 
be sufficient for the usages of life to know such causes, for medicine 
and mechanics and in general all these arts to which the knowledge 
of physics subserves, have for their end only those effects which are 
sensible, and which are accordingly to be reckoned among the 
phenomena of nature’. And lest it be supposed that Aristotle did, 
or desired to do, more than this, it must be recollected that he 
expressly says in the first book of the Meteorologics, in the beginning 


1 ‘have for their end merely the application of certain sensible bodies to 
one another, so that by the operation of natural causes certain sensible effects 
are produced; and one will be able to accomplish this quite as well by consider- 
ing the succession of cerfain causes thus imagined, although false, as if they 


were true, since this succession is supposed to be similar so far as sensible 
effects are concerned.’ French version, 


Part IV 801 


of the seventh chapter, that with regard to things not manifest to 
the senses, he considers that he supplies sufficient explanations and 
demonstrations of them, if he merely shows that they may be such 
as he explains them to be. 


PRINCIPLE CCV. 


That nevertheless there is a moral certainty that everything is 
such as tt has been shown to be. 


But nevertheless, that I may not injure the truth, we must 
consider [two kinds of uncertainty and] first of all what has moral 
certainty ; that is, a certainty which suffices for the conduct of life, 
though if we regard the absolute power of God, what is morally 
certain may be uncertain. [So those who have never visited Rome 
do not doubt its being a city in Italy, although it may very well be 
that all those from whom they have heard about it have deceived 
them. Again,] if, for instance, anyone wishing to read a letter 
written in Latin characters that are not placed in their proper 
order, takes it into his head to read B wherever he finds A and C 
where he finds B, thus substituting for each letter the one following 
it in the alphabet, and if he in this way finds that there are certain 
Latin words composed of these, he will not doubt that the true 
meaning of the writing is contained in these words, though he may 
discover this by conjecture, and although it is possible that the 
writer did not arrange the letters in this order of succession, but on 
some other, and thus concealed another meaning in it: for this is so 
unlikely to occur [especially when the cipher contains many words] 
that it seems incredible. But they who observe how many things 
regarding the magnet, fire, and the fabric of the whole world, are 
here deduced from a very small number of principles, although they 
considered that I had taken up these principles at random and 
without good grounds, they will yet acknowledge that it could hardly 
happen that so much would be coherent if they were false. 


PrinoreLE COVI. 


That we possess even more than a moral certainty. 


And further there are some, even among natural things, which 
we judge to be absolutely, and more than morally, certain’, This 


1 ‘of which we judge that it is impossible that the thing should be other 
than as we think it.’ French version, 


302 Principles of Philosophy 


certainty is founded on the metaphysical ground that as God is 
supremely good and cannot err, the faculty which He has given us 
of distinguishing truth from falsehood, cannot be fallacious so long 
as we use it aright, and distinctly perceive anything by it. Of 
this nature are mathematical demonstrations’, the knowledge that 
material things exist, and the evidence of all clear reasoning that is 
carried on about them. Amongst these truths it seems to me that 
there should be counted those conclusions which have been arrived 
at in this treatise, if it be considered that they are derived in a 
continual series from the first and most simple principles of human 
knowledge. And this is specially so, if it be sufficiently understood 
that we can perceive no external objects unless some local motion 
be excited by them in our nerves; and that such motion cannot be 
excited by the fixed stars, owing to their immense distance from us, 
unless a motion be also produced in them, and in the whole inter- 
vening heavens”; for these facts being admitted, all the others, at 
least the more general doctrines which I have advanced about the 
world and earth, appear to be the only possible explanations of 
the phenomena they present. 


PrincieLteE CCVII. 


Nevertheless all my opinions are submitted to the authority of the 
church. 


At the same time, recalling my insignificance, I affirm nothing, 
but submit all these opinions to the authority of the Catholic 
Church, and to the judgment of the more sage; and I wish no one 
to believe anything I have written, unless he is personally persuaded 
by the force and evidence of reason. 


1 “for we see clearly that it is impossible that two or three should together 
form less than five or that a square should not have four sides &.’ French 
version. 

2 The French version states that the fluidity of the heavens follows from this 
as explained in Part 11, § xlvi. 


THe Enp, 


THE SEARCH AFTER TRUTH 


PREFATORY NOTE TO ‘THE SEARCH 
AFTER TRUTH.’ 


This unfinished Dialogue, Descartes’ biographer Baillet tells us, 
was intended to form two volumes written in French. A Latin 
translation appeared in an edition of 1701 published at Amsterdam. 
Leibniz was known to have ‘a Dialogue in French’ amongst the 
unpublished papers of Descartes, and this French text was sought 
for in vain by MM. Adam and Tannery at the Royal Library of 
Hanover where it was likely to be found. A young student named 
Jules Sire was, however, fortunate enough to discover, not Leibniz’s 
original copy but another. Leibniz was in Paris with Tschirnhaus, 
and he took T'schirnhaus to see Clerselier, who had what remained 
of Descartes’ papers. ‘I'schirnhaus copied ‘The Search after Truth’ 
and sent it to Leibniz, and this was the copy discovered by Sire. 
We do not know whether Clerselier’s copy was incomplete, or 
Tschirnhaus’ transcription of it, but it does not give more than 
half of the Latin version of 1701. Leibniz himself added at the 
end, ‘I have the rest elsewhere. MM. Adam and Tannery thus 
published Tschirnhaus’s copy of the original in French, completing 
it from the Latin, and this is the edition here used. The date of 
the work is unknown, 


Besa: 


THE SEARCH AFTER TRUTH BY THE 
LIGHT OF NATURE. 


The Search after Truth by means of the Light of Nature which 
alone, and without the assistance of Religion or Philosophy, determines 
what are the opinions which a good man should hold on all matters 
which may occupy his thoughts, and which penetrate into the secrets 
of the must curious of the sciences. 

A good man has no need to have read every book, nor to have 
carefully learned all that which is taught in the Schools; it would 
even be a defect in his education were he to have devoted too much 
of his time to the study of letters. There are many other things to 
do in life, and he has to direct that life in such a manner that the 
greater part of it shall remain to him for the performance of good 
actions which his own reason ought to teach him, even supposing 
that he were to receive his lessons from it alone. But he comes 
into the world in ignorance, and as the knowledge of his earliest 
years rests only on the weakness of the senses and the authority of 
masters, he can scarcely avoid his imagination being filled with an 
infinite number of false ideas, before his reason has the power of 
taking his conduct into its own hands; in consequence he requires 
to have good natural endowments or else instruction from a wise 
man, both in order to rid himself of the false doctrines with which 
his mind is filled, and for building the first foundations of a solid 
knowledge, and discovering all the means by which he may carry 
his knowledge to the highest point to which it can possibly attain. 

In this work I propose to show what these means are, and to 
bring to light the true riches of our souls, by opening to each one 
the road by which he can find in himself, and without borrowing 
from any, the whole knowledge which is essential to him in the 
direction of his life, and then by his study succeed in acquiring 
the most curious forms of knowledge that the human reason is 


capable of possessing. 


306 The Search after Truth 


But in order that the greatness of my scheme may not to begin 
with seize your minds with an astonishment so great that confidence 
in my words can no longer find therein a place, I warn you that 
what I undertake is not as difficult as might be imagined. ‘Those 
branches of knowledge which do not extend beyond the capacities 
of the human mind are, as a matter of fact, united by a bond so 
marvellous, they are capable of being deduced from one another by 
sequences so necessary, that it is not essential to possess much art 
or address in order to discover them, provided that by commencing 
with those that are most simple we learn gradually to raise ourselves 
to the most sublime. That is what I shall try to show you here by 
a system of reasoning so clear and yet so simple, that every one will 
be able to judge for himself that if he has not observed the same 
things, it is solely because he has not cast his eyes in the right 
direction, nor fixed his thoughts on the same considerations as I, 
and that no more glory is due to me for having discovered them, 
than is due to a casual passer-by for having accidentally discovered 
under his feet a rich treasure which had yor long successfully eluded 
the searches of many. 

And certainly I am surprised that amongst so many distin- 
guished minds which in a matter of this description should have 
succeeded much better than I, none have had the patience to find 
their way out of their difficulties ; and that nearly all have followed 
in the footsteps of these travellers who, abandoning the main route 
in favour of a cross-road, find themselves lost amongst briars and 
precipices. 

But I do not desire to examine into what others have known or 
have been ignorant of. It will suffice for me to note that even if 
all the knowledge which we can desire is to be found in books, that 
which they contain of good is mingled with so many futilities, and 
confusedly dispersed in such a mass of great volumes, that, in order 
to read them, more time would be requisite than human life can 
supply us with, and more talent in discovering the useful than 
would be required in ascertaining it for ourselves. 

That is what makes me hope that the reader will not be vexed 
by here finding an easier path, and that the facts which I shall 
advance will not be the less well received, even although | do not 
borrow them from Plato or Aristotle, but show that they have 
current value in the world, just as has money which is in nowise 
of less value when it proceeds from the purse of a peasant than 
when it comes from the treasury. I have even made it my business 


The Search after Truth 307 


to make them equally useful to all men; and I have not been 
able to discover a style better adapted to this end than that of 
genuine conversation, wherein each one familiarly explains to his 
friends the best of his thoughts. And under the names Eudoxus, 
Polyander, and Epistemon, I assume that a man endowed with 
ordinary mental gifts, but whose judgment is not spoiled by any 
false ideas, and who is in possession of his whole reason in all the 
purity of its nature, receives as his guests in the country house 
which he inhabits, two men the most distinguished and interesting 
of their time, one of whom has studied not at all, while the other is 
well acquainted with all that can be learnt in the Schools And 
there (in the midst of other discourse which each one can imagine 
for himself, as well as the local conditions and particular sur- 
roundings from which I shall frequently cause them to take examples 
in order to make their conceptions more clear), they thus introduce 
the subject of which they will afterwards treat to the end of these 
two books. 


Polyander, Epistemon, Eudoxus. 


Polyander. I consider you are so fortunate in having discovered 
all these wonderful things in the Greek and Latin books, that it 
seems to me that if I had studied as much as you, I should be as 
different from what I now am, as angels are from you. And I 
cannot excuse the folly of my parents who, being persuaded that 
the study of letters would enfeeble the mind, sent me to the court 
and camps at so early an age, that I should all my life have had 
to bewail my ignorance, had I not learned something from my 
association with you. 

Epistemon. The best thing that you could be taught on this 
subject is that the desire for knowledge, which is common to all 
men, is an evil which cannot be cured, for curiosity increases with 
knowledge ; and as the deficiencies that are present in our soul 
only trouble us in so far as we recognise them, you have a certain 
advantage over us, in that you do not see as we do, that many 
things are lacking to you. 

Eudoxus. Can it be, Epistemon, that you who are so well 
instructed, can believe that there is in nature any evil so universal 
that there is no remedy to be applied to it? As for me, I consider 
that just as there are in each country sufficient fruits and rivers to 
appease the hunger and thirst of all men, so there are truths that 
can be known in every matter sufficient to satisfy fully the curiosity 


308 The Search after Truth 


of healthy minds ; and I think that the body of a dropsical patient 
is not further removed from its normal condition than the mind of 
those who are perpetually worked upon by an insatiable curiosity. 

Epistemon. I have, it is true, heard in former times that our 
desires could not extend naturally to things that seemed to us 
impossible, and that it ought not to do so to those that are vicious 
or useless ; but so many things can be known which appear possible 
to us, and which are not only good and agreeable, but also very 
necessary in the conduct of life, that I cannot believe that anyone 
ever knew enough of them not to have legitimate reasons always to 
desire to know more. 

Eudoxus. What, then, would you say of me, if I tell you that 
I no longer feel any desire to learn anything at all, and that I am 
as happy with my small knowledge as Diogenes used to be with his 
tub, and all this without my having any need of his philosophy ? 
For the knowledge of my neighbours is not the limit of my own, as 
are their fields which here surrouad the small piece of ground that 
I possess ; and my mind at its own will disposing of all the truths 
which it comes across, does not dream that there are others to 
discover. For it enjoys the same repose that the king of an isolated 
country would have were he so separated from all others as to 
imagine that beyond his frontiers there was nothing but unfertile 
deserts and uninhabitable mountains. 

Epistemon. If any other but you spoke to me thus, I should 
regard him as one whose mind was either very vain or else too little 
given to curiosity; but the retreat which you have chosen in this 
solitude, and the small amount of pains that you take to become 
knewn, removes from you the charge of vanity; and the time you 
have hitherto consecrated to journeyings, visiting learned men, and 
examining everything that is most difficult in each science, suffices 
to assure us that you are not lacking in curiosity. I can hence say 
nothing but that I consider you very happy and that I am convinced 
that you must be in the possession of a knowledge much more 
perfect than that of others. 

Eudoxus. 1 thank you for the good opinion in which you hold 
me, but I do not desire to abuse your courtesy to the point of 
desiring that you should believe what I have just said, solely on the 
faith of my words. We must not advance opinions so far removed 
from vulgar beliefs, without at the same time being able to demon- 
strate certain effects from so doing; that is why I beg you both to 
be good enough to spend this delightful season here, so that I may 


The Search after Truth 309 


have the opportunity of openly showing you some part of the things 
that I know. For I venture to flatter myself that not alone will 
you recognise that I have some reason for being happy in this 
knowledge, but, in addition, that you yourselves will have much 
happiness from the things that you will have learned. 

Epistemon. 1 would not wish to refuse a favour that already 
I so ardently desired of you. 

Polyander. And J shall have great pleasure in being present at 
this discussion, not that I believe myself capable of deriving any 
good from it. 

Hudoxus. On the contrary, Polyander, believe me it will be 
you who will derive advantage from it, because you are quite 
unprejudiced, and it will be easier for me to guide aright any one 
with an open mind than Epistemon, whom we shall often find in 
opposition to us. But in order to make you more easily understand 
the nature of the knowledge of which I am going to treat, I beg you 
to observe a difference which exists between the sciences and those 
simple forms of knowledge which can be acquired without the aid 
of reasoning, such as languages, history, geography, &c., or to speak 
generally, everything that depends on experience alone. I am 
ready to grant that the life of a man would not suffice to acquire 
a knowledge of all that the world contains; but I am also persuaded 
that it would be folly to desire that it should be so, and that it 
is no more the duty of an ordinary well-disposed man to know 
Greek and Latin than it is to know the languages of Switzerland or 
Brittany; or that the history of the Empire should be known any 
more than that of the smallest state in Europe. And.I consider 
that such a one should consecrate his leisure to good and useful 
things alone, and occupy his memory only with those that are most 
necessary. As to those sciences which are nothing but the judg- 
ments which we base on some knowledge previously acquired, some 
are deduced from common objects of which every one is cognisant, 
and others from rare and well thought out experiments. And I 
confess likewise that it would be impossible for us to treat in 
detail each one of these last; for we should first of all have 
to examine all the herbs and stones brought to us from the 
Indies; we should have to have beheld the phcenix, and in a 
word to be ignorant of none of the marvellous secrets of nature. 
But I shall believe myself to have sufficiently fulfilled my promise 
if, in explaining to you the truths which may be deduced from 
common things known to each one of us, I make you capable of 


310 The Search after Truth 


discovering all the others when it pleases you to take the trouble 
to seek them. 

Polyander. For my part I believe that this is likewise all that 
it is possible to desire, and I would have been satisfied if you had 
merely taught me a certain number of propositions which are so 
celebrated that no one can be ignorant of them, such as those that 
concern the Deity, the rational soul, the virtues, their reward, &c., 
propositions which I compare with those ancient families which 
every one recognises as the most illustrious, although the titles of 
their nobility are concealed under the ruins of antiquity. For I do 
not really doubt that those who first of all induced the human race 
to believe in all these things had excellent reasons for proving them ; 
but their arguments have been so rarely repeated since, that no one 
knows them any longer: and yet they are truths so important, that 
the dictates of prudence tell us that we should believe them blindly 
at the risk of being deceived, rather than that we should await a 
future life in order to be further instructed in them. 

Epistemon. As far as I am concerned | am a little more curious, 
and I should like you to explain to me certain particular difficulties 
which suggest themselves to me in each branch of knowledge, and 
principally in what concerns the secrets of the human arts, appari- 
tions, illusions, and in a word all the wonderful effects attributed to 
magic. For I believe it to be useful to know all that, not in order 
to make use of the knowledge, but in order that one should not 
allow one’s judgment to be beguiled by wonder at an unknown 
thing. 

Eudoxvus. I shall try to satisfy you in regard to both; and, in 
order to adopt an order which we may make use of to the end, 
I wish first of all, Polyander, to talk with you of all things that the 
world contains, considering them in themselves, on the under- 
standing that Epistemon shall interrupt our talk as little as possible, 
because his observations would often force us to leave our subject. 
We shall finally consider all these things anew, though under 
another aspect, in so far as they are in relation with us, and as 
they may be termed true or false, good or evil; and it is here that 
Epistemon will find occasion to set forth all the difficulties which 
will remain to him from the preceding discourses. 

Polyander, Tell us, then, the order that you will follow in 
your explanations. 

Eudoxus. We must commence with the human soul because 
all our knowledge depends on it; and after having considered its 


The Search after Truth 311 


nature and effects, we shall reach its author; and when we come to 
know who He is and how He has created all things in the world, 
we shall observe what is most certain regarding other creatures; 
and we shall inquire how our senses perceive things, and how our 
reflections become false or true. Then I shall place before your 
eyes the works of man upon corporeal objects, and after having 
struck wonder into you by the sight of machines the most powerful, 
and automata the most rare, visions the most specious, and tricks 
the most subtle that artifice can invent, I shall reveal to you secrets 
which are so simple that you will henceforward wonder at nothing 
in the works of our hands. After that I shall reach the works of 
nature, and, after having shown you the cause of all its changes, 
the diversity of its qualities, and the reason why the soul of plants 
and animals differs from ours, I shall place under your consideration 
the whole building up of sensible things. The phenomena of the 
heavens, and those certain conclusions which we may derive from 
them being observed, I shall pass on to most sane conjectures 
regarding what man cannot determine positively, in order to try 
to give an account of the relation sensible things bear to intel- 
lectual, and both to the Creator, of the immortality of the creatures, 
and of their state after the end of ime. Then we shall come 
to the second part of this discourse in which we shall treat in 
detail of all the sciences, selecting in each that which is most solid, 
and we shall support a method whereby they may be carried on 
much further, and find of ourselves, with a mind of ordinary ability, 
what those most subtle can discover. After having thus prepared 
our minds for judging perfectly of the truth, we must also apply 
ourselves to the direction of our wills in respect of distinguishing 
good from evil, and observing the true difference between virtue 
and vice. That being done, I trust that your desire for knowledge 
will not be so violent, and that all that I shall have said to you will 
seem so well established that you will come to believe that a man 
with a healthy mind, had he been brought up in a desert and never 
received more than the light of nature to illumine him, could not if 
he carefully weighed all the same reasons, adopt an opinion different 
from ours. In order to begin this discourse we must inquire as to 
what is the first knowledge man arrives at, in what part of the soul 
it is to be found, and why it is so imperfect to begin with. 
Epistemon. All that seems to me to explain itself very clearly 
if we compare the imagination of children to a tabula rasa on 
which our ideas, which resemble portraits of each object taken from 


312 The Search after Truth 


nature, should depict themselves. The senses, the inclinations, our 
masters and our intelligence, are the various painters who have the 
power of executing this work; and amongst them, those who are 
least adapted to succeed in it, ie. the imperfect senses, blind 
instinct, and foolish nurses, are the first to mingle themselves with 
it. There finally comes the best of all, intelligence, and yet it is 
still requisite for it to have an apprenticeship of several years, and 
to follow the example of its masters for long, before daring to rectify 
a single one of their errors. In my opinion this is one of the 
principal causes of the difficulty we experience in attaining to true 
knowledge. For our senses really perceive that alone which is most 
coarse and common; our natural instinct is entirely corrupted ; 
and as to our masters, although there may no doubt be very perfect 
ones found amongst them, they yet cannot force our minds to accept 
their reasoning before our understanding has examined it, for the 
accomplishment of this end pertains to it alone. But it is like a 
clever painter who might have been called upon to put the last 
touches on a bad picture sketched out by prentice hands, and who 
would find it vain to employ all the rules of his art in correcting 
little by little first a trait here, then a trait there, and finally be 
required to add to it from his own hand all that was lacking, and 
who yet could not prevent great faults from remaining in it, because 
from the beginning the picture would have been badly conceived, 
the figures badly placed, and the proportions badly observed. 

Eudoxus. Your comparison places perfectly under our eyes the 
first obstacle which stands in our way; but you do not show the 
means of which we must avail ourselves if we wish to avoid it. 
And according to me it is this, that just as your artist would have 
done much better, after having effaced by drawing over it a sponge 
all the features of the picture, to begin it entirely over again rather 
than lose his time in correcting it, so each one who has reached a 
certain term of years known as the age of knowledge, should set 
himself once for all to remove from his imagination all the inexact 
ideas which have hitherto succeeded in engraving themselves upon 
it, and seriously begin to form new ones, applying thereto all the 
strength of his intelligence with such zeal that if he does not bring 
them to perfection, the fault will not at least be laid on the 
weakness of the senses, or on the errors of nature. 

Epistemon. ‘That would be an excellent remedy if we could 
easily employ it; but you are not ignorant that the opinions first 
received by our imagination remain so deeply imprinted there, that 


The Search after Truth 313 


our will alone, if it did not employ the aid of certain strong reasons, 
could not arrive at effacing them. 

Eudoxus. It is certain of these reasons that I hope to teach 
you ; and if you wish to derive some fruit from this our intercourse, 
you must give me your whole attention, and allow me to converse 
a little with Polyander in order that I may begin by upsetting all 
the knowledge he has hitherto acquired. And as it is not sufficient 
to satisfy him, and it cannot but be bad, I may compare it to a 
badly constructed edifice whose foundations are not solid. I know 
no better remedy than absolutely to rase it to the ground, in order 
to raise a new one in its stead. For I do not wish to be placed 
amongst the number of these insignificant artisans, who apply 
themselves only to the restoration of old works, because they feel 
themselves incapable of achieving new. We can, however, Polyander, 
while we are busy destroying this edifice, at the same time form the 
foundations which may serve our purpose, and prepare the best and 
most solid materials that are necessary in order to succeed in our 
task ; provided you are in any degree willing to examine with me 
which of all the truths men can know, are those that are most 
certain and easy of knowledge. 

Polyander. Is there anyone who can doubt that sensible things 
(I mean thereby those that can be seen and touched) are much 
more certain than the others? As for me I should be very much 
astonished if you would show me as clearly some of those things 
that are said of God and our soul. 

Eudoxrus. That, however, is what I hope to do, and it seems to 
me surprising that men are credulous enough to base their knowledge 
on the certitude of the senses, when there is no one who is unaware 
that they frequently deceive us, and that we have good reason for 
always mistrusting those that have once betrayed us. 

Polyander. Iam well aware that the senses sometimes deceive 
us when they are ill affected, just as a sick person thinks that all 
food is bitter ; when they are too far from the object this is also so, 
just as when we look at the stars they never appear to us as large as 
they really are; and in general when they do not act freely according 
to the constitution of their nature. But all their errors are easily 
known, and do not prevent my being now perfectly persuaded that 
I see you, that we walk in a garden, that the sun gives light, and, 
in a word, that all that my senses usually offer to me is true. 

Eudozus. Since it is not sufficient for me to tell you that the 
genses deceive us in certain cases where you perceive it, in order to 


314 The Search after Truth 


make you fear being deceived by them on other occasions when you 
are not aware of it, I shall go further and ask if you have ever seen 
a melancholic man of the nature of those who believe themselves 
to be vases, or who think some part of their body is of enormous 
size; they would swear that they see and touch that which they 
imagine they do, And it is true that any ordinary man would be 
indignant if anyone were to say to him that he could not have any 
more reason than they to be certain of his opinion, since it rests 
equally with theirs on what the senses and his imagination represent 
to him. But you cannot be annoyed if I ask you whether you are 
not like other men subject to sleep, and if you cannot think when 
you sleep that you see me, that you walk in this garden, that the 
sun gives light, in a word all these other things that you imagine 
yourself now to be certain of. Have you never heard in comedies 
this expression for astonishment, ‘‘ Am I awake or asleep?” How 
can you be certain that your life is not a perpetual dream and that 
all that you imagine you learn by means of your senses is not as 
false now as it is when you sleep? More particularly as you have 
learned that you have been created by a superior Being to whom as 
omnipotent it would not have been more difficult to make us such 
as I have described, than such as you believe yourself to be? 

Polyander. Certainly these are reasons sufficient to upset all 
the knowledge of Epistemon if he is contemplative enough to give 
his attention to it; as for me, I should fear becoming in some 
degree crazy, if, never having applied my mind to study, or 
accustomed myself to turn my mind away from the things of the 
senses, I was going to apply myself to meditations which, as far as 
I am concerned, a little exceed my capacities. 

Epistemon. I think it very dangerous to proceed too far in this 
mode of reasoning. General doubts of this kind lead us straight to 
the ignorance of Socrates, or the uncertainty of the Pyrrhonists, 
which resembles water so deep that one cannot find any footing 
in it. 

Eudoxus. I confess that it is not without great danger that 
one ventures without a guide when one does not know the ford, 
and many have lost their way in doing so; but you have no 
reason to fear if you follow after me. It is such fears, indeed, 
that have prevented many learned men from attaining to the 
knowledge of a doctrine which is solid and certain enough to 
deserve the name of science; when, imagining that there was 
nothing on which they could rest their faith more firm and solid 


The Search after Truth 315 


than the things that we perceive by the senses, they built on this 
foundation of sand rather than by digging down further finding a 
firm substratum of rock or clay. It is not here that we must stop. 
There is more; even if you did not wish further to examine the 
reasons which I have just stated, they would yet already in their 
principal effect have attained to the goal I wished to reach, so long 
as they had so affected your imagination as to place you on your 
guard against them. ‘That is an indication to show you that your 
knowledge is not so infallible that you may not fear to see its 
foundations shattered since they make you doubt all; and con- 
sequently you are made to doubt your very knowledge itself, and 
this proves that I have accomplished my end, which was to upset 
your knowledge by showing you its uncertainty. From fear, how- 
ever, that you may lack more courage and refuse to follow me 
further, I declare to you that those doubts which alarmed you to 
begin with, are like those phantoms and vain images which appear 
in the night by the uncertain glimmer of a feeble light. Fear 
pursues you if you flee, but if you approach and touch them, you 
will find nought but wind and shadow, and you will ever after be 
better able to meet whatever may arrive. 

Polyander, Convinced by your reasoning I desire then to set 
before myself all these difficulties in the strongest manner possible, 
and to apply myself to doubt whether I have not been dreaming all 
my life, and whether even all these ideas that I thought could only 
enter into my mind by the door of the senses, might not have been 
formed of themselves, just as similar ideas are formed when I sleep, 
or when I am certain that my eyes are shut, my ears closed, and, in 
a word, that none of my senses are in operation. In this way 
I shall be uncertain not only as to whether you are in the world, if 
a world exists, if there be a sun, but also whether I have eyes, ears, 
a body, even whether I talk with you, whether you address me, in 
short I shall doubt all things’. 

Eudoxus. There you are, well prepared, and this is the very 
point I wished to bring you to; but this is the very moment for 
your giving your attention to the consequences which I wish to 
derive from your argument. You see very well that you can reason- 
ably doubt all things, the knowledge of which comes to you by the 
senses alone; but can you doubt of your doubt and remain 
uncertain whether you doubt or not? 


1 This completes the original French manuscript. The rest is taken from 
the Latin translation of the original. 


316 The Search after Truth 


Polyander. I confess that this astonishes me, and the little 
sagacity which a sufficiently small amount of common sense gives 
me brings it to pass that I do not without stupefaction find myself 
forced to confess that I know nothing with certainty, but that 
I doubt all things and am certain of nothing. But what conclusions 
do you wish to derive from this? I do not see to what use this 
universal astonishment can serve, nor by what reason a doubt 
of this kind can be a principle which is able to carry us very far. 
Quite on the contrary, you have made the end of this our converse 
relief from all our doubts, and the discovery of truths of which 
Epistemon, wise as he is, may very well have been ignorant. 

Eudoxus. Just give me your attention; I am going to conduct 
you further than you think. For it is really from this universal 
doubt which is like a fixed and unchangeable point, that I have 
resolved to derive the knowledge of God, of yourself, and of all that 
the world contains. 

Polyander. You certainly make great promises and provided 
you carry them out it would certainly be worth our while to grant 
what you ask for. Keep, then, your promises and we will keep 
those we made to you. 

Eudoxus. Since, then, you cannot deny that you doubt, and 
that it is on the other hand certain that you doubt, and so certaiu 
that you cannot even doubt of that, it is likewise true that you are, 
you who doubt; and that is so true that you can no longer doubt 
of it any more. 

Polyander. I agree with you, for if I did not exist I could not 
doubt. 

Eudoxus. You are, then, and you know that you are, and you 
know it because you doubt. 

Polyander, All that is very true. 

Eudoxus. But in order that you may not be turned aside from 
your plan, go on little by little, and as I have said to you, you will 
feel yourself drawn on further than you think. You are, and you 
know that you are, and you know that because you know that you 
doubt. But you, who doubt all and who cannot doubt of yourself, 
what are you? 

Polyander. The reply is not difficult and I see very well that 
you have chosen me in place of Epistemon so that I may respond 
to your questions. You had no mind to put any question to which 


it is not quite easy to reply. I shall then tell you that I am 
@ man. 


The Search after Truth 317 


Hudoxus. You pay no attention to my question, and the reply 
that you make to me, simple as it may appear to you, will bring us 
into a labyrinth of difficulties, if I try ever so little to press you. 
Were I for example to ask Epistemon himself what a man is, and 
were he to reply, as is done in the Schools, that a man is a rational 
animal; and if, in addition, in order to explain these two terms 
which are not less obscure than the first, he were to conduct us 
by all the steps which are termed metaphysical, we should be 
dragged into a maze from which it would be impossible for us to 
emerge. As a matter of fact, from this question two others arise, 
the first is what is an animal? The second, what is reasonable 
And further, if, to explain what an animal is he were to reply that 
it is a living thing possessed of sensations, that a living thing is an 
animate body, that a body is a corporeal substance, you see that 
the question, like the branches of a genealogical tree, would go on 
increasing and multiplying; and finally all these wonderful questions 
would finish in pure tautology, which would clear up nothing, and 
would leave us in our original ignorance. 

Epistemon. I am sorry to see that you despise this tree of 
Porphyry which has always excited the admiration of the learned, 
and I am vexed that you wish to show Polyander what he is by 
another method than the one which for so long has been admitted 
by the Schools. In fact until now no better means has been found, 
nor a means more calculated to teach us what we are, than that of 
placing in sequence under our eyes all the successive items which 
constitute the totality of our nature, so that by this means, by 
ascending and descending all the steps, we may be made aware of 
what we have in common with other beings, and of that in which 
we differ. That is the highest point to which our knowledge can 
attain. 

Eudoxus. I neither have nor should I ever have any intention 
of condemning the method employed in the Schools ; it is to it that 
I am indebted for the little that I know, and it is of its assistance 
that I have availed myself, in order to become aware of the un- 
certainty of all that I have learned there. Therefore although my 
teachers taught me nothing that was certain, I yet owe to them my 
thanks for having been taught by them to acknowledge this; and 
I now owe them all the greater thanks in that the things they 
taught me were doubtful, than had they been more in conformity 
with reason; for in that latter case I might possibly have contented 
myself with the small amount of reason that I should have dis- 


318 The Search after Truth 


covered there, and that would have rendered me less zealous in the 
search after truth. The admonition that I gave to Polyander serves 
less to dissipate the obscurity into which his reply cast you than to 
make him more attentive to my question. I return then to my 
subject, and in order that we may not digress further I ask him 
a second time what he is, he who can doubt all things and cannot 
doubt of himself. 

Polyander. 1 thought I had satisfied you by saying to you that 
I was a man, but I now see that I did not calculate well. I see 
very well that this answer does not satisfy you, and, truth to say, 
I confess that it does not now satisfy myself, more especially since 
you have shown me the embarrassment and uncertainty into which 
it can throw us if we wish to get light upon it and understand it. 
Asa matter of fact, whatever Epistemon may say, I observe great 
obscurity in all these metaphysical steps. If, for instance, we say 
that a body is a corporeal substance without saying what a corporeal 
substance is, these two words will not teach us more than the word 
body. In the same way if we say that what lives is an animate 
body without having first explained what body is, and what animate 
is, and if we likewise enquire into all the other metaphysical degrees, 
it may be to put forward words in a certain order, but it is to 
express nothing ; for it indicates nothing that can be conceived or 
that can form a clear and distinct idea in our mind. Even when, in 
order to reply to your question, I said that I was a man, I did not 
think of all the scholastic entities of which I was ignorant, and of 
which I had never even heard, and which, as far as I am concerned, 
exist only in the imagination of those who have invented them. 
But I spoke of the things that we see, that we touch, that we feel, 
that we experience in ourselves, in a word, of the things that the 
simplest of men know as well as the greatest philosopher in the 
world, that is to say that I am a certain whole composed of two 
arms, two legs, a head, and all the parts which constitute what we 
call the human body, and which in addition is nourished, walks, 
feels, and thinks. 

Eudozus. I saw at once by your reply that you had not quite 
understood my question, and that you replied to more things than 
I asked of you. But as you have just numbered in the things of 
which you doubt, the arms, legs, head, and all the other parts 
composing the human body, I did not wish to interrogate you 
on any of these things of whose existence you are not sure. Tell 
me, then, what you really are inasmuch as you doubt. It is on this 


The Search after Truth 319 


point alone, the only one which you can know with certainty, that 
I desired to question you. 

Polyander. I now see that I have been mistaken in my reply 
and that I have gone further than I should, inasmuch as I did not 
properly understand your idea. ‘That will render me more circum- 
spect in future and at the same time it causes me to marvel at the 
exactitude of your method, whereby you conduct us little by little 
by simple and easy paths to the knowledge of the things that you 
wish to teach us. I have however reason to call the error that 
I have committed happy, since, thanks to it, I know very well that 
what I am inasmuch as I doubt, is in no wise what I call my body. 
And more than that, I do not even know that I have a body, since 
you have shown me that I might doubt of it. In addition to this 
I may add that I cannot even absolutely deny that I have a body. 
Yet, while entirely setting aside all these suppositions, this will not 
prevent my being certain that I exist. On the contrary, they 
confirm me yet more in the certainty that I exist and that I am not 
a body ; otherwise, doubting of my body I should at the same time 
doubt of myself, and this I cannot do; for I am absolutely con- 
vinced that I exist, and I am so much convinced of it, that I can in 
no wise doubt of it. 

Eudoxus. That is beautifully expressed and you bring out the 
matter so well that I should not do better myself. I see very well 
that all that now remains is to leave you entirely to yourself, merely 
taking care to set you on the right road. Nay, further: I think 
that in order to find the most difficult truths, provided we are well 
guided, the only necessity is to have common sense, to put it 
vulgarly ; and, as I find you very well provided with that, as I had 
hoped, all I have to do is to show you the road you should hence- 
forward follow. Continue then to deduce by yourself the con- 
sequences which flow from this first principle. 

Polyander. This principle seems to me so fertile, and it offers 
me so many things at once, that it seems as though I should want 
a great deal of work to reduce them to order. This one admonition 
that you have given me to consider who I who doubt am, and not 
to confound myself with what I formerly believed to be me, has 
thrown such a flood of light upon my mind, and so dissipated the 
mists, that by the light of this torch I see more accurately in 
myself what is not visible to the eyes, and that I am more 
persuaded that I possess what cannot be touched, than I ever have 


been of possessing a body. 


320 The Search after Truth 


Eudoxus. This warmth pleases me infinitely well although it 
may displease Epistemon who, because you have not shewn him his 
error, or placed under his eyes a part of the things that you say are 
contained in this principle, will always believe, or will at least fear, 
that the torch offered to you is similar to those wandering fires that 
are extinguished and vanish away when they are approached, and 
that so you may fall into your original darkness, i.e. into your former 
ignorance. And it certainly would be marvellous if you who have 
never studied nor opened books of philosophy, should all at once 
gain wisdom at such a small cost. So we should not be astonished 
that Epistemon judges in this way. 

Epistemon. Yes, I confess I took that to be the result of mere 
enthusiasm, and I thought that Polyander who has never meditated 
on the great truths which philosophy teaches, was so transported by 
the discovery of the least of them that he could not prevent himself 
from letting you know of it by his shouts of joy. But those who 
like you? have travelled this road for long, have expended much oil 
and trouble in reading and re-reading the writings of the ancients, 
and in unravelling and expounding all that is most complicated in 
the philosophers, are no longer astonished by this enthusiasm, and 
make no more of it than they do of the vain hopes which frequently 
lay hold of one in commencing mathematics, when the threshold of 
the temple alone has so far been saluted. These novices have 
scarcely been given the line and the circle, and shown what is 
a straight line and a curved, when they believe that they are going 
to square the circle and duplicate the cube. But we have so 
frequently refuted the opinion of the Pyrrhonists, and they them- 
selves have derived so little fruit from this method of philosophizing, 
that they have been in error all their lives, and have not been able 
to get free of the doubts which they have introduced into philosophy. 
They thus seem never to have worked for anything but learning to 
doubt: that is why, with Polyander’s permission, I shall doubt 
whether he himself can derive anything better from it. 

Eudoxus. I see very clearly that you speak to Polyander in 
order to spare me; your pleasantries are all the same evidently 
directed against me; but let Polyander speak and after that we 
shall see which of us will laugh last. 

Polyander. 1 will do so willingly ; nay, I fear that this dispute 
will become hot between you two and that if you plunge into the 
matter too deeply, I shall end by understanding nothing at all. 


1 The French editors conjecture ‘like me.’ 


The Search after Truth 321 


Thus shall I lose the fruit which I promise myself in returning to 
to my original studies. I pray then that Epistemon may permit me 
to nourish this hope for so long as it pleases Eudoxus to lead me 
by the hand in the path in which he has placed me. 

judoxus. You have already clearly recognized in considering 
yourself simply as doubting, that you are not body, and that as 
such you would not find within you any of the parts which con- 
stitute the human machine: that is to say, that you have neither 
arms, nor legs, nor head, nor eyes, nor ears, nor any organ which 
may serve for a sense of any kind. But notice whether in the same 
way you cannot reject all the things that you formerly understood 
by the description which you gave of the idea which in former 
times you had of man. For, as you judiciously remarked, that was 
a fortunate error that you committed in passing beyond the limits 
of my question. Thanks really to it, you can arrive at a knowledge 
of what you are by removing from you and rejecting all that you 
perceive clearly does not belong to you, and by simply admitting 
what so necessarily pertains to you that you are as certain of it as 
of your existence and doubt. 

Polyander. J thank you for thus setting me on my way ; I did 
not know any longer where I was. I said first of all that I was 
a whole formed of arms, legs, a head, and all the parts which form 
the human body, besides which I walk, am nourished, feel and 
think. It has been necessary for me, in order to consider myself 
simply as I know myself to be, to set aside all these parts or all 
these members which constitute the human machine; that is to say, 
I must consider myself as without arms, legs, head, and, in a word, 
without body. But it is true that what in me doubts is not what 
we call our body; so then it is also true that I, inasmuch as 
I doubt, do not eat or walk, for neither of these two things can be 
done without body. Further, I cannot even state that I, inasmuch 
as I doubt, can feel. As feet really serve for walking, so do eyes 
for seeing, and ears for hearing. But as I have none of these 
organs because I have not body, I cannot say that I feel. In 
addition to that, I have often in dreaming thought | felt many 
things that I did not really feel at all, and as I resolved to admit 
nothing here but what was so true that I could not doubt of it, 
I cannot say that I am a perceiving thing, that is, one that sees with 
eyes and hears with ears. It might indeed be that I thought 
I perceived although none of these things happened. 

Eudoxus. I cannot prevent myself from stopping you here, not 


322 The Search after Truth 


to turn you aside, but to encourage you, and make you consider 
what common sense can do if it is well directed. As a matter 
of fact, is there anything in all this which is not exact, which is not 
legitimately argued, and well deduced from what precedes? And 
all that is said and done without logic, or rule, or a formula for the 
argument, but with the simple light of reason and with a just sense 
which, acting alone and of itself, is less exposed to error than when 
it anxiously tries to follow a thousand diverse routes which art and 
human idleness have discovered, less to bring it to perfection than 
to corrupt it. Epistemon even seems to be in this matter of our 
opinion ; for while saying nothing of the matter, he gives us to 
understand that he approves what we have said. Go on, then, 
Polyander, and show him how far good sense can carry us, and 
at the same time what consequences can be derived from our 
principle. 

Polyander. Of all the attributes which I bestowed upon 
myself, only one remains for me to examine and that is thought; 
and I see that it is the only one that I cannot separate from 
myself. For if it is true that I doubt just because I cannot doubt 
that I do so, it is also equally true that I think; for what is 
doubting but thinking in a certain way? And in fact if I did not 
think, I could not know whether I doubt or exist. Yet I am, and 
I know that I am, and I know it because I doubt, that is to say 
because I think. And better, it might be that if I ceased for an 
instant to think I should cease at the same time to be. Likewise 
the sole thing that I cannot separate from me, that I know certainly 
to be me and that I can now affirm without fear of deception—that 
one thing, I repeat, is that I am a thinking thing. 

Ludozus, What, Epistemon, do you think of what Polyander 
has just said? Do you find his argument to be halting or in- 
consequent? Should you have thought that an unlettered man, 
and one who had not studied, would have reasoned so well and 
followed out his ideas so rigorously? Here, if I do not mistake, 
you must begin to see that he who knows how properly to avail 
himself of doubt can deduce from it absolutely certain knowledge, 
better, more certain, and more useful than that derived from this 
great principle which we usually establish as the basis or centre to 
which all other principles are referred and from which they start 
forth, viz. 7¢ ts tmpossible that one and the same thing should both 
be and not be. I shall perhaps have occasion to demonstrate the 
utility of it to you. But let us not interrupt Polyander’s discourse, 


The Search after Truth 323 


or remove ourselves from our subject; as to you, see if you have 
anything to say or any objection to make. 

Epistemon. Since you lay the blame on me and even exasperate 
me, I shall show you what logic can do when it is roused, and 
at the same time I shall raise difficulties and obstacles of such 
a nature that not only Polyander but you yourself will have much 
difficulty in getting free of them. Let us then go no further, but 
stop here and severely examine your principles and deductions. 
As a matter of fact with the aid of true logic, and after your own 
principles, I shall show that nothing of what Polyander has said 
rests on a legitimate foundation or brings about any conclusion. 
You say that you are and that you know that you are, that you 
know it because you doubt and because you think. But do you 
know what doubting or what thinking is? And as you do not 
desire to admit anything of which you are not certain and do not 
know perfectly, how can you be certain that you are by means 
of attributes so obscure and consequently so uncertain? It would 
have been better first of all to have taught Polyander what doubt 
is, what thought is, what existence is, so that his reasoning might 
have the strength of a demonstration, and that he might first of 
all understand himself before applying himself to make others 
comprehend. 

Polyander. That is beyond me, so I give it up leaving you to 
unravel this knot with Epistemon. 

Eudozxus. For this occasion I undertake it with pleasure, but 
on the condition that you will be judge of our differences; for 
I dare not hope that Epistemon will give way to my reasoning. 
He who is like him, full of opinions and prepossessed with a hundred 
prejudices, finds it difficult to hand himself over to the light of 
nature alone ; for long he has been accustomed to yield to authority 
rather than to lend his ear to the dictates of his own reason. He 
likes better to interrogate others, to weigh what the ancients have 
written, than to consult himself on the judgment which he should 
form; and as from his childhood he has taken as reason what rested 
only on the authority of preceptors, now he gives his authority 
as a reason and desires that others should pay to him the tribute 
which he formerly paid them. But I shall have reason to be content 
and I shall believe myself to have sufficiently answered the 
objections which have been proposed to you by Epistemon, if you 
give your assent to what I shall say, and if your reason convinces 
you of it. 


324 The Search after Truth 


Epistemon. 1 am not so rebellious nor so difficult to persuade, 
nor is it so difficult to satisfy me as you think. And further, 
although I had reasons for mistrusting Polyander, I would willingly 
submit our case to his arbitration ; and as soon as he favours you 
I promise you to confess myself vanquished. But he must guard 
himself from being deceived and falling into the error for which he 
reproaches others, that is to say, from taking as a motive for 
persuasion the esteem which he has formed for you. 

Eudoxus. If he allowed himself to rest on so feeble a support 
he would look badly after his own interests and I presume that 
he will attend to them. But let us return to our subject matter. 
I am quite of your opinion, Epistemon, that we must know what 
doubt is, what thought is, before being fully convinced of the truth 
of this reasoning I doubt therefore I am; or, what comes to the 
same, I think therefore Tam. But do not go and imagine that in 
order to know this we must do violence to our mind and put it to 
torture in order to ascertain the proximate species and the essential 
difference, and form from it a definition by rule. All that must 
be left to him who is going to be a professor or to dispute in 
the Schools. But whoever desires to examine things by himself 
and judge of them as he conceives them, cannot be so devoid of 
mental power not to see clearly whenever he is willing to give 
attention to it, what doubt is, or thought or existence, and to be 
required to learn their distinctions. Further I declare that there 
are certain things which we render more obscure by trying to define 
them, because, since they are very simple and clear, we cannot know 
and perceive them better than by themselves. Nay, we must place 
in the number of those chief errors that can be committed in the 
sciences, the mistakes committed by those who would try to define 
what ought only to be conceived, and who cannot distinguish the 
clear from the obscure, nor discriminate between what, in order to 
be known, requires and deserves to be defined, from what can be 
best known by itself. And in the number of the things which are 
clear in the way above explained and which can be known by them- 
selves, we must place doubt, thought, and existence. 

I do not think that anyone has ever existed who is stupid 
enough to have required to learn what existence is before being 
able to conclude and affirm that he is; the same holds true 
of thought and doubt. Indeed I add that one learns those 
things in no other way than by one’s self and that nothing 
else persuades us of them except our own experience and this 


The Search after Truth 325 


knowledge and internal testimony that each one finds within 
himself when he examines things. In vain shall we define what 
white is in order to make it comprehensible to him who sees 
absolutely nothing, while in order to know it, it is only requisite to 
open one’s eyes and see the white; in the same way in order to 
know what doubt is, or thought, it is only requisite to doubt and 
think. That teaches us all that we can know of it, and explains 
more respecting it than even the most exact definitions. It is thus 
true that Polyander ought to have known these things, before being 
able to draw the conclusions which he has advanced ; but since we 
have chosen him as judge, ask him if he has ever been ignorant of 
what is. 

Polyander. I certainly confess that it is with the greatest 
pleasure that I have heard you disputing regarding a thing which 
you have not been able to know but from me, and it is not without 
some joy that I see, at least on this occasion, that it is necessary 
for me to be recognised as your master and for you to recognise 
yourselves as my pupils. Therefore in order to put both of you 
out of pain and quickly to resolve your difficulty (as a matter 
of fact we say that a thing is promptly done when it is done beyond 
all hope and expectation), I can state for certain that I never 
doubted what doubt is, although I never began to know it, or rather 
to think of it until the time when Epistemon desired to place it in 
doubt. You no sooner showed me the small amount of certainty 
which we have as to the existence of things which are only known 
to us by the evidence of the senses, than I commenced to doubt of 
them, and that sufficed to make me know doubt and at the same 
time my certainty of it, in such a way that I can affirm that 
as soon as I commenced to doubt I commenced to know with 
certainty. But my doubt and my certainty did not relate to the 
same object ; my doubt regarded things only which existed outside 
me, my certainty concerned me and my doubt. EHudoxus then 
spoke truly when he asserted that there are things that we cannot 
know without seeing them ; therefore to learn what doubt is, what 
thought is, it is necessary only that we ourselves should think and 
doubt. The same holds good of existence; it is only necessary to 
know what we understand by this word ; we know at the very same 
moment what the thing is, at least in so far as we can know it, and 
there is no necessity here for a definition, which will more confuse 
than clear up the matter. 

Enpistemon. Since Polyander is satisfied I likewise give my 


326 The Search after Truth 


assent, and I shall not push the dispute further. However I do 
not see that during the two hours that we have been here and that 
we have been arguing, he has advanced much. All that Polyander 
has learnt by the help of this wonderful method of which you so 
boast, consists solely of the fact that he doubts that he thinks and 
that he is a thinking thing. A wonderful knowledge in truth! 
Many words for small results! as much could be said in four words 
and we should have all given our assent. As for me if I had to 
employ as many words and as much time in learning something of 
so small an importance, I confess I should not resign myself to it 
without regret. Those who are our instructors tell us much more 
about the matter; they are much more confident; nothing stops 
them; they take everything upon them and decide about all. 
Nothing turns them aside from their plan, nothing astonishes them, 
whatever happens ; when they feel themselves pressed too hard, an 
equivocation or the distinguo saves them from all embarrassment. 
And more, be certain that their method will always be preferred to 
that of one like you who doubts all and who fears so much to trip 
that he keeps treading the same spot and thus makes no advance. 
Eudozus. I never intended to prescribe to anyone the method 
he ought to follow in the search after truth, but merely to expound 
that of which I have availed myself, so that if it were found bad it 
would be set aside; if it were found good and useful others would 
avail themselves of it in turn; and I always left full liberty to all 
to set it aside or to admit it. Ifit is now said that it has advanced 
me little, it is for experience to decide as to that ; and I am certain, 
provided that you continue to lend me your attention, you will 
yourself confess that we cannot take too many precautions in the 
establishment of our bases, and that once they are well established 
we shall push the consequences further and with much more facility 
than we had dared to promise ourselves ; so that I believe that all 
the errors which are found in the sciences come from the fact that 
we have in the beginning formed our judgments too precipitately by 
admitting as principles obscure things of which we had no clear and 
distinct notion. The truth of this is shown by the modicum of 
progress that we have made in the sciences whose principles are 
certain and known by all; for, on the other hand, in the others, 
whose principles are obscure or uncertain, those who desire sincerely 
to express their thought will be forced to confess that after having 
employed much time, and having read many great volumes, they 
have to recognise that they know nothing and have learnt nothing. 


The Search after Truth 327 


It must not then appear astonishing to you, my dear Epistemon, if, 
desiring to lead Polyander in the way that is surer than that in 
which I was trained to walk, I am so careful and exact that I hold 
that only to be true of which I have a certainty equal to that with 
which I am aware that I am, I think, I am a thinking thing. 

Epistemon. You seem to me to resemble these tumblers who 
always fall back on their feet, so ceaselessly do you return to your 
principle. Yet if you proceed by this path you will go neither far 
nor quickly. How, as a matter of fact, shall you always find truths 
of which you are as certain as of your existence? 

Eudoxus. That is not as difficult as you think; for all the 
truths succeed one another and are united by a common bond; the 
whole secret consists simply in beginning with the first and most 
simple, and in rising little by little, and so to speak by gradations, 
to those more remote and complicated. Who now will doubt that 
what I have set forth as first principle is the first of the things 
which we might come to know with the help of a method? It is 
certain that we cannot doubt it, even were we to doubt of all things 
in the world. As then we are certain of having begun well, we 
must take pains not to deceive ourselves in what follows, we must 
apply our whole care not to admit that to be true which is liable to 
the smallest doubt. Pursuing this plan we must in my opinion 
allow Polyander to speak ; for as he follows no guidance but that of 
his common sense, and as his reason is corrupted by no prejudices, 
it is difficult for him to be deceived, or at any rate he would easily 
perceive that this was so, and he would without any trouble return 
to the right road. Let him then speak, and set forth what he 
himself alleges he has seen in your principle. 

Polyander. So many things are contained in the idea of a 
thinking thing that whole days would be required to develope them. 
We shall only treat of the principal ones and those that can make 
the notion clearer and hinder our confounding it with what bears 
no relationship to it. I mean by a thinking being’... 


1 The Amsterdam Latin Version here inserts ‘The rest is wanting.’ 


eh ae 

ul d 7c Fag tae 

¥ yet >> Jog CD Maia ot oe 
Geib al thie oat, Sid nl D> ; 

Le Melton lw? (ie cig re eae ae ee ee 

“ehT ie Cerny + Veale & De Sead Ep 


* 
> Oar re. 
iM>oe 


* 7 
moe 


wh. oye yi de we Gigwee ieee res 7 
v4 s, or ate Wier TRG be: "ing ry" 
—s ona ir) wes 
He Mi: ; fas = 


7 

, 

zz 
7 
i 


we ry - - ad s 
F ~ 
, a 5 > 
= 
: SS 
. a 
‘4 
ae : <7" = 
\ 
i = — * ¢ 
i Fhe § 
ca - v - 
Amy's 
~ fs 
+ 
ae 
~ 
7 = 
— 
y 
= 2 ~ 7 
a — 
“™ ° 
7 
“7 
7G — 
——_ - 
= A . 
. 
~ 
e 


THE PASSIONS OF THE SOUL 


PREFATORY NOTE TO ‘THE PASSIONS 
OF THE SOUL.’ 


Tue work entitled ‘The Passions of the Soul’ was written in 
French during the winter of 1645-6, four years before its author’s 
death. It was the last work published by Descartes, who, indeed, 
expressed himself as very unwilling to appear again in print; the 
publication of the work was probably due to the urgent entreaties 
of Clerselier, Chanut, and other friends. Baillet, his biographer, 
says Descartes never published without regretting it, and certainly 
his publishers did not encourage him to do so, for complaints were 
constant as to the small sale of his books. The ‘Passions’ was 
sent to Queen Christina of Sweden, with whom Descartes had carried 
on a correspondence on the subjects allied to those discussed in this 
book. The first sketch had been sent to his other royal friend, 
Princess Elizabeth of Palatine in April, 1646, and she suggested 
some slight alterations upon it. The manuscript was placed in 
Clerselier’s hands! in August, 1649 and was printed in Amsterdam 
in the end of November by Louis Elzevir, while Henry le Gras 
issued it at the same time in Paris. The author was at this period 
in Sweden, where he died, but he had probably revised the proofs 
before leaving Holland. He received copies of the book before 
his death, which was accelerated by the early morning lessons given 
in the depth of winter to Queen Christina at Stockholm. 


BSSicu, 


1 Baillet says Clerselier, but M. Adam thinks it is more likely t 
the Abbé Picot. ; ikely to have been 


THE PASSIONS? OF THE SOUL. 


PART FIRST. 


OF THE PASSIONS IN GENERAL, AND INCIDENTALLY 
OF THE WHOLE NATURE OF MAN. 


ARTICLE I, 


That what in respect of a subject is passion, is in some other 
regard always action. 

There is nothing in which the defective nature of the sciences 
which we have received from the ancients appears more clearly than 
in what they have written on the passions; for, although this is 
a matter which has at all times been the object of much investi- 
gation, and though it would not appear to be one of the most 
difficult, inasmuch as since every one has experience of the passions 
within himself, there is no necessity to borrow one’s observations 
from elsewhere in order to discover their nature; yet that which the 
ancients have taught regarding them is both so slight, and for the 
most part so far from credible, that I am unable to entertain any 
hope of approximating to the truth excepting by shunning the 
paths which they have followed. his is why [ shall be here 
obliged to write just as though I were treating of a matter which 
no one had ever touched on before me ; and, to begin with, I consider 
that all that which occurs or that happens anew, is by the philo- 
sophers, generelly speaking, termed a passion, in as far as the 
subject to which it occurs is concerned, and an action in respect of 
him who causes it to occur. Thus although the agent and the 
recipient [patient] are frequently very different, the action and the 


1 The expression ‘Passions’ is in this ‘l'reatise of course used in its etymo- 
logical significance. 


332 The Passions of the Soul 


passion are always one and the same thing, although having different 
names, because of the two diverse subjects to which it may be 
related. 


Articte II. 


That in order to understand the passions of the soul its functions 
must be distinguished from those of body. 


Next I note also that we do not observe the existence of any 
subject which more immediately acts upon our soul than the body 
to which it is joined, and that we must consequently consider that 
what in the soul is a passion is in the body commonly speaking an 
action; so that there is no better means of arriving at a knowledge 
of our passions than to examine the difference which exists between 
soul and body in order to know to which of the two we must 
attribute each one of the functions which are within us. 


Articte III. 


What rule we must follow to bring about this result. 


As to this we shall not find much difficulty if we realise that all 
that we experience as being in us, and that to observation may 
exist in wholly inanimate bodies, must be attributed to our body 
alone; and, on the other hand, that all that which is in us and 
which we cannot in any way conceive as possibly pertaining to 
a body, must be attributed to our soul. 


ARTICLE IV, 


That the heat and movement of the members proceed from the 
body, the thoughts from the soul. 


Thus because we have no conception of the body as thinking in 
any way, we have reason to believe that every kind of thought 
which exists in us belongs to the soul; and because we do not 
doubt there being inanimate bodies which can move in as many as or 
in more diverse modes than can ours, and which have as much heat 
or more (experience demonstrates this to us in flame, which of itself 
has much more heat and movement than any of our members), we 
must believe that all the heat and all the movements which are in 
us pertain only to body, inasmuch as they do not depend on thought 
at all. 


Part First 333 


ARTICLE V. 


That it is an error to believe that the soul supplies the movement 
and heat to body. 


By this means we shall avoid a very considerable error into 
which many have fallen ; so much so that I am of opinion that this 
is the primary cause which has prevented our being able hitherto 
satisfactorily to explain the passions and the other properties of the 
soul. It arises from the fact that from observing that all dead 
bodies are devoid of heat and consequently of movement, it has 
been thought that it was the absence of soul which caused these 
movements and this heat to cease; and thus, without any reason, it 
was thought that our natural heat and all the movements of our 
body depend on the soul: while in fact we ought on the contrary to 
believe that the soul quits us on death only because this heat 
ceases, and the organs which serve to move the body disintegrate. 


ARTICLE VI. 


The difference that exists between a living body and a dead 
body. 

In order, then, that we may avoid this error, let us consider 
that death never comes to pass by reason of the soul, but only 
because some one of the principal parts of the body decays; and 
we may judge that the body of a living man differs from that of 
a dead man just as does a watch or other automaton (i.e. a machine 
that moves of itself), when it is wound up and contains in itself the 
corporeal principle of those movements for which it is designed 
along with all that is requisite for its action, from the same watch 
or other machine when it is broken and when the principle of its 
movement ceases to act. 


ArticLe VII, 


A brief explanation of the parts of the body and some of tts 
Junctions. 

In order to render this more intelligible, I shall here 
explain in a few words the whole method in which the bodily 
machine is composed. There is no one who does not already 
know that there are in us a heart, a brain, a stomach, muscles, 
nerves, arteries, veins, and such things. We also know that 
the food that we eat descends into the stomach and bowels where 
its juice, passing into the liver and into all the veins, mingles 


334 The Passions of the Soul 


with, and thereby increases the quantity of the blood which they 
contain. Those who have acquired even the minimum of medical 
knowledge further know how the heart is composed, and how all 
the blood in the veins can easily flow from the vena cava into its 
_ right side and from thence pass into the lung by the vessel which 
we term the arterial vein, and then return from the lung into the 
left side of the heart, by the vessel called the venous artery, and 
finally pass from there into the great artery, whose branches spread 
throughout all the body. Likewise all those whom the authority of 
the ancients has not entirely blinded, and who have chosen to open 
their eyes for the purpose of investigating the opinion of Harvey 
regarding the circulation of the blood, do not doubt that all the 
veins and arteries of the body are like streams by which the blood 
ceaselessly Hows with great swiftness, taking its course from the 
right cavity of the heart by the arterial vein whose branches are 
spread over the whole of the lung, and joined to that of the venous 
artery by which it passes from the lung into the left side of the 
heart; from these, again, it goes into the great artery whose 
branches, spread throughout all the rest of the body, are united to 
the branches of the vein, which branches once more carry the same 
blood into the right cavity of the heart. Thus these two cavities 
are like sluices through each of which all the blood passes in the 
course of each circuit which it makes in the body. We further 
know that all the movements of the members depend on the muscles, 
and that these muscles are so mutually related one to another that 
when the one is contracted it draws toward itself the part of the 
body to which it is attached, which causes the opposite muscle 
at the same time to become elongated; then if at another time 
it happens that this last contracts, it causes the former to become 
elongated and it draws back to itself the part to which they are 
attached. We know finally that all these movements of the muscles, 
as also all the senses, depend on the nerves, which resemble small 
filaments, or little tubes, which all proceed from the brain, and thus 
contain like it a certain very subtle air or wind which is called the 
animal spirits. 


ARTICLE VIII. 


What is the principle of all these functions ? 


But it is not usually known in what way these animal spirits 
and these nerves contribute to the movements and to the senses, 
nor what is the corporeal principle which causes them to act. That 


Part First 335 


is why, although I have already made some mention of them in my 
other writings, I shall not here omit to say shortly that so long as 
we live there is a continual heat in our heart, which is a species of 
fire which the blood of the veins there maintains, and that this fire 
is the corporeal principle of all the movements of our members. 


ArticLe IX. 


How the movement of the heart is carried on. 


Its first effect is to dilate the blood with which the cavities 
of the heart are filled; that causes this blood, which requires 
a greater space for its occupation, to pass impetuously from the 
right cavity into the arterial vein, and from the left into the great 
artery; then when this dilation ceases, new blood immediately 
enters from the vena cava into the right cavity of the heart, and 
from the venous artery into the left ; for there are little membranes 
at the entrances of these four vessels, disposed in such a manner that 
they do not allow the blood to enter the heart but by the two last, 
nor to issue from it but by the two others. The new blood which 
has entered into the heart is then immediately afterwards rarefied, 
in the same manner as that which preceded it; and it is just this 
which causes the pulse, or beating of the heart and arteries ; so that 
this beating repeats itself as often as the new blood enters the 
heart. Itis also just this which gives its motion to the blood, and 
causes it to flow ceaselessly and very quickly in all the arteries and 
veins, whereby it carries the heat which it acquires in the heart 
to every part of the body, and supplies them with nourishment. 


ARTICLE X. 


How the animal spirits are produced in the brain. 


But what is here most worthy of remark is that all the most 
animated and subtle portions of the blood which the heat has 
rarefied in the heart, enter ceaselessly in large quantities into the 
cavities of the brain. And the reason which causes them to go 
there rather than elsewhere, is that all the blood which issues from 
the heart by the great artery takes its course in a straight line 
towards that place, and not being able to enter it in its entirety, 
because there are only very narrow passages there, those of its parts 
which are the most agitated and the most subtle alone pass through, 
while the rest spreads abroad in all the other portions of the body. 
But these very subtle parts of the blood form the animal spirits ; 


336 The Passions of the Soul 


and for this end they have no need to experience any other change 
in the brain, unless it be that they are separated from the other less 
subtle portions of the blood; for what I here name spirits are 
nothing but material bodies and their one peculiarity is that they are 
bodies of extreme minuteness and that they move very quickly like 
the particles of the flame which issues from a torch. Thus it 
is that they never remain at rest in any spot, and just as some 
of them enter into the cavities of the brain, others issue forth 
by the pores which are in its substance, which pores conduct them 
into the nerves, and from there into the muscles, by means of which 
they move the body in all the different ways in which it can be 
moved. 


ArtTIcLe XI. 


How the movements of the muscles take place. 


For the sole cause of all the movements of the members is that 
certain muscles contract, and that those opposite to them elongate, 
as has already been said; and the sole cause of one muscle con- 
tracting rather than that set against it, is that there comes from the 
brain some additional amount of animal spirits, however little 
it may be, to it rather than to the other. Not that the spirits 
which proceed immediately from the brain suffice in themselves 
to move the muscles, but they determine the other spirits which 
are already in these two muscles, all to issue very quickly from the 
one of them and to pass into the other. By this means that from 
which they issue becomes longer and more flaccid, and that into 
which they enter, being rapidly distended by them, contracts, and 
pulls the member to which it is attached. This is easy to under- 
stand provided that we know that there are but very few animal 
spirits which continually proceed from the brain to each muscle, 
but that there are always a quantity of others enclosed in the same 
muscle, which move there very quickly, sometimes by only turning 
about in the place where they are,—that is, when they do not find any 
passage open from which to issue forth from it—and sometimes 
by flowing into the opposite muscle; and inasmuch as there are 
little openings in each of these muscles by which the spirits can flow 
from one to the other, and which are so arranged that when the 
spirits that come from the brain to one of them have ever so little 
more strength than those that proceed to the other, they open all 
the entrances by which the spirits of the other muscle can pass into 


Part First 337 


this one, and at the same time close all those by which the spirits of 
this last can pass into the other. By this means all the spirits 
formerly contained in these two muscles very quickly collect in one 
of them and then distend and shorten it, while the other becomes 
elongated and flaccid. 


ARTICLE XII. 


How outside objects act upon the organs of the senses. 

We have still to understand the reasons why the spirits do not 
flow always from the brain into the muscles in the same fashion, 
and why occasionally more flow towards some than towards others. 
For in addition to the action of the soul which is truly in our case 
one of these causes, as I shall subsequently explain, there are two 
others which depend only on the body, and of these we must speak. 
The first consists in the diversity of movements which are excited 
in the organs of sense by their objects, and this I have already 
explained fully enough in the Dioptric; but in order that those 
who see this work may not be necessitated to read others, I shall 
here repeat that there are three things to consider in respect of the 
nerves, i.e. first of all their marrow or interior substance, which 
extends in the form of little filaments from the brain, from which it 
originates, to the extremities of the other members to which these 
filaments are attached; secondly the membranes which surround 
them, and which, being conterminous with those which envelope 
the brain, form the little tubes in which these little filaments are 
enclosed ; and finally the animal spirits which, being ,carried by 
these same tubes from the brain to the muscles, are the reason of 
these filaments remaining there perfectly free and extended, so that, 
the least thing that moves the part of the body to which the 
extremity of any one of them is attached, causes by that same 
means the part of the brain from which it proceeds to move, just ag 
when one draws one end of a cord the other end is made to move, 


ARTICLE XIII. 


That this action of outside objects may lead the spirits into the 
muscles in diverse ways. 

And I have explained in the Dioptric how all the objects of 
sight communicate themselves to us only through the fact that they 
move locally by the intermission of transparent bodies which are 
between them and us, the little filaments of the optic nerves which 


338 The Passions of the Soul 


are at the back of our eyes, and then the parts of the brain from 
which these nerves proceed ; I explained, I repeat, how they move 
them in as many diverse ways as the diversities which they cause us to 
see in things, and that it is not immediately the movements which 
occur in the eye, but those that occur in the brain which represent 
these objects to the soul. To follow this example, it is easy to 
conceive how sounds, scents, tastes, heat, pain, hunger, thirst and 
generally speaking all objects of our other external senses as well as 
of our internal appetites, also excite some movement in our nerves 
which by their means pass to the brain; and in addition to the fact 
that these diverse movements of the brain cause diverse perceptions 
to become evident to our soul, they can also without it cause the 
spirits to take their course towards certain muscles rather than 
towards others, and thus to move our limbs, which I shall prove 
here by one example only. If someone quickly thrusts his hand 
against our eyes as if to strike us, even though we know him to be 
our friend, that he only does it in fun, and that he will take great 
care not to hurt us, we have all the same trouble in preventing 
ourselves from closing them; and this shows that it is not by the 
intervention of our soul that they close, seeing that it is against our 
will, which is its only, or at least its principal activity; but it is 
because the machine of our body is so formed that the movement of 
this hand towards our eyes excites another movement in our brain, 
which conducts the animal spirits into the muscles which cause the 
eyelids to close. 


ARTICLE XIV. 


That the diversity which exists between the animal spirits may 
also cause a diversity in the course they take. 

The other cause which serves to conduct the animal spirits 
differently into the muscles, is the unequal agitation of these spirits 
and the diversity of their parts. For when some of their parts are 
more coarse and more agitated than others, they pass further 
forward in a straight line into the cavities and pores of the brain, 


and by this means are conducted into other muscles than those 
they would enter if they had less force. 


ARTICLE XV. 
The causes of their diversity. 


And this inequality may proceed from the diverse matters of 
which they are composed, as we see in the case of those who have 


Part First 339 


drunk much wine—that the vapours of this wine entering quickly 
into the blood, rise from the heart to the brain, where they become 
converted into animal spirits, which, being stronger and more 
abundant than those ordinarily there, are capable of moving the 
body in many strange fashions. This inequality of spirits may also 
proceed from diverse dispositions of the heart, liver, stomach, spleen, 
and all other parts which contribute to their production; for we 
must here notice principally certain little nerves inserted in the 
base of the heart, which serve to enlarge and diminish the entrances 
of its cavities, whereby the blood dilating there more or less forcibly, 
produces spirits disposed in diverse ways. We must also notice 
that although the blood which enters the heart comes there from 
all other parts of the body, it nevertheless often happens that it is 
more forcibly driven from some parts than from others, because the 
nerves and muscles which lead to these particular parts press or 
agitate it to a greater extent; and that, according to the diversity 
of the parts from which it comes the most, it dilates variously in 
the heart and then produces spirits which have different qualities. 
Thus, for example, that which comes from the lower part of the 
liver where is the gall, dilates in another fashion in the heart than 
that which comes from the spleen, and this one again differently 
from what comes from the veins of the arms or legs, and this finally 
quite otherwise than the juice of the food when, having newly 
issued from the stomach and bowels, it at once passes by the liver 
to the heart. 


ArticLE XVI. 


How all the members may be moved by the objects of the senses 
and by the animal spirits without the aid of the soul. 

We must finally remark that the machine of our body is so 
formed that all the changes undergone by the movement of the 
spirits may cause them to open certain pores in the brain more than 
others, and reciprocally that when some one of the pores is opened 
more or less than usual (to however small a degree it may be) by 
the action of the nerves which are employed by the senses, that 
changes something in the movement of the spirits and causes them 
to be conducted into the muscles which serve to move the body in 
the way in which it is usually moved when such an action takes 
place. In this way all the movements which we make without our 
will contributing thereto (as frequently happens when we breathe, 
walk, eat, and in fact perform all those actions which are common 


340 The Passions of the Soul 


to us and to the brutes), only depend on the conformation of 
our members, and on the course which the spirits, excited by the 
heat of the heart, follow naturally in the brain, nerves, and muscles, 
just as the movements-of a watch are produced simply by the 
strength of the springs and the form of the wheels. 


Articte XVII. 


What the functions of the soul are. 

After having thus considered all the functions which pertain to 
the body alone, it is easy to recognise that there is nothing in us 
which we ought to attribute to our soul excepting our thoughts, 
which are mainly of two sorts, the one being the actions of the 
soul, and the other its passions. Those which I call its actions are 
all our desires, because we find by experience that they proceed 
directly from our soul, and appear to depend on it alone: while, on 
the other hand, we may usually term one’s passions all those kinds 
of perception or forms of knowledge which are found in us, because 
it is often not our soul which makes them what they are, and because 
it always receives them from the things which are represented by 
them. 


Articte XVIII. 
Of the Will. 


Our desires, again, are of two sorts, of which the one consists of the 
actions of the soul which terminate in the soul itself, as when we desire 
to love God, or generally speaking, apply our thoughts to some object 
which is not material ; and the other of the actions which terminate 
in our body, as when from the simple fact that we have the desire 
to take a walk, it follows that our legs move and that we walk. 


ArtIcLE XIX. 
Of the Perceptions. 


Our perceptions are also of two sorts, and the one have the soul 
as a cause and the other the body. Those which have the soul as 
a cause are the perceptions of our desires, and of all the imagina- 
tions or other thoughts which depend on them. For it is certain 
that we cannot desire anything without perceiving by the same 
means that we desire it ; and, although in regard to our soul it is 
an action to desire something, we may say that it is also one of its 
passions to perceive that it desires. Yet because this perception 


Part First 341 


and this will are really one and the same thing, the more noble 
always supplies the denomination, and thus we are not in the habit 
of calling it a passion, but only an action. 


ARTICLE XX, 


Of the imaginations and other thoughts which are formed by the 
soul. 


When our soul applies itself to imagine something which does 
not exist, as when it represents to itself an enchanted palace or 
a chimera, and also when it applies itself to consider something 
which is only intelligible and not imaginable, e.g. to consider its 
own nature, the perceptions which it has of these things depend 
principally on the act of will which causes it to perceive them. 
That is why we usually consider them as actions rather than 
passions. 


ARTICLE XXI. 


Of the imaginations which have the body only as a cause, 


Amongst the perceptions which are caused by the body, the 
most part depend on the nerves; but there are also some which do 
not depend on them, and which we name imaginations, such as 
those of which I have just spoken, from which they yet differ 
inasmuch as our will has no part in forming them; and this brings it 
to pass that they cannot be placed in the number of the actions of 
the soul. And they only proceed from the fact that the spirits being 
agitated in diverse ways and meeting with traces of diverse preceding 
impressions which have been effected in the brain, take their course 
there fortuitously by certain pores rather than by others. Such are 
the illusions of our dreams, and also the day-dreams which we often 
have when awake, and when our thought wanders aimlessly without 
applying itself to anything of its own accord. But, although some 
of these imaginations are the passions of the soul, taking this word 
in its most correct and perfect significance, and since they may all 
be thus termed if we take it in a more general significance, yet, 
because they have not a cause of so notable and determinate a 
description as the perceptions which the soul receives by the inter- 
mission of the nerves, and because they appear to be only a shadow 
and a picture, we must, before we can distinguish them very well, 
consider the difference prevailing among these others. 


342 The Passions of the Soul 


ArtTIcLE XXII. 


Of the difference which exists among the other perceptions. 


All the perceptions which I have not yet explained come to the 
soul by the intermission of the nerves, and there is between them 
this difference, that we relate them in the one case to objects outside 
which strike our senses, in the other to our soul. 


ARTICLE XXIII. 


Of the perceptions which we relate to objects which are without us. 

Those which we relate to the things which are without us, to 
wit to the objects of our senses, are caused, at least when our 
opinion is not false, by these objects which, exciting certain move- 
ments in the organs of the external senses, excite them also in the 
brain by the intermission of the nerves, which cause the soul to 
perceive them. Thus when we see the light of a torch, and hear the 
sound of a bell, this sound and this light are two different actions 
which, simply by the fact that they excite two different movements 
in certain of our nerves, and by these means in the brain, give two 
different sensations to the soul, which sensations we relate to the 
subjects which we suppose to be their causes in such a way that we 
think we see the torch itself and hear the bell, and do not perceive 
just the movements which proceed from them. 


ARTICLE XXIV. 
Of the perceptions which we relate to our body. 


‘The perceptions which we relate to our body, or to some of its 
parts, are those which we have of hunger, thirst, and other natural 
appetites, to which we may unite pain, heat, and the other affections 
which we perceive as though they were in our members, and not as 
in objects which are outside us; we may thus perceive at the same 
time and by the intermission of the same nerves, the cold of our 
hand and the heat of the flame to which it approaches ; or, on the 
other hand, the heat of the hand and the cold of the air to which it 
is exposed, without there being any difference between the actions 
which cause us to feel the heat or the cold which is in our hand, 
and those which make us perceive that which is without us, excepting 
that from the one of these actions following upon the other, we 
judge that the first is already in us, and what supervenes is not 
so yet, but is in the object which causes it. 


Part First 343 
ARTICLE XXV. 


Of the perceptions which we relate to our soul. 


The perceptions which we relate solely to the soul are those 
whose effects we feel as though they were in the soul itself, and as 
to which we do not usually know any proximate cause to which we 
may relate them: such are the feelings of joy, anger, and other 
such sensations, which are sometimes excited in us by the objects 
which move our nerves and sometimes also by other causes. But, 
although ali our perceptions, both those which we relate to objects 
which are outside us, and those which we relate to the diverse 
affections of our body, are truly passions in respect of our soul, 
when we use this word in its most general significance, yet we are in 
the habit of restricting it to the signification of those alone which 
are related to soul itself; and it is only these last which I have 
here undertaken to explain under the name of the passions of the 
soul, 


ARTICLE XXVI. 


That the imaginations which only depend on the fortuitous move- 
ments of the spirits, may be passions just as truly as the perceptions 
which depend on the nerves. 


It remains for us to notice here that all the same things which 
the soul perceives by the intermission of the nerves, may also be 
represented by the fortuitous course of the animal spirits, without 
there being any other difference excepting that the impressions 
which come into the brain by the nerves are usually more lively or 
definite than those excited there by the spirits, which caused me to say 
in Article XXI that the former resemble the shadow or picture of the 
latter. We must also notice that it sometimes happens that this 
picture is so similar to the thing which it represents that we may 
be mistaken therein regarding the perceptions which relate to objects 
which are outside us, or at least those which relate to certain parts 
of our body, bnt that we cannot be so deceived regarding the 
passions, inasmuch as they are so close to, and so entirely within 
our soul, that it is impossible for it to feel them without their being 
actually such as it feels them to be. ‘Thus often when we sleep, 
and sometimes even when we are awake, we imagine certain things 
so forcibly, that we think we see them before us, or feel them in our 
body, although they do not exist at all; but although we may be 
asleep, or dream, we cannot feel sad or moved by any other passion 


344 The Passions of the Soul 


without its being very true that the soul actually has this passion 
within it. 
ArticLE XXVII. 
The definition of the passions of the soul. 


After having considered in what the passions of the soul differ 
from all its other thoughts, it seems to me that we may define them 
generally as the perceptions, feelings, or emotions of the soul which 
we relate specially to it, and which are caused, maintained, and 
fortified by some movement of the spirits. 


ArticLE XXVIII. 
Explanation of the first part of this definition. 


We may call them perceptions when we make use of this word 
generally to signify all the thoughts which are not actions of the 
soul, or desires, but not when the term is used only to signify clear 
cognition; for experience shows us that those who are the most 
agitated by their passions, are not those who know them best; 
and that they are of the number of perceptions which the close 
alliance which exists between the soul and the body, renders con- 
fused and obscure. We may also call them feelings because they 
are received into the soul in the same way as are the objects of our 
outside senses, and are not otherwise known by it; but we can yet 
more accurately call them emotions of the soul, not only because 
the name may be attributed to all the changes which occur in it— 
that is, in all the diverse thoughts which come to it, but more 
especially because of all the kinds of thought which it may have, 
there are no others which so powerfully agitate and disturb it as do 
these passions. 


ArticLeE XXIX. 
Explanation of the second part. 


I add that they particularly relate to the soul, in order to 
distinguish them from the other feelings which are related, the one 
to outside objects such as scents, sounds, and colours; the others 
to our body such as hunger, thirst, and pain. I also add that they 
are caused, maintained, and fortified by some movement of the 
spirits, in order to distinguish them from our desires, which we may 
call emotions of the soul which relate to it, but which are caused 


Part First 345 


by itself ; and also in order to explain their ultimate and most 
proximate cause, which plainly distinguishes them from the other 
feelings. 


ARTICLE XXX. 
That the soul is united to all the portions of the body conjointly. 


But in order to understand all these things more perfectly, we 
must know that the soul is really joined to the whole body, and 
that we cannot, properly speaking, say that it exists in any one of 
its parts to the exclusion of the others, because it is one and in 
some manner indivisible, owing to the disposition of its organs, 
which are so related to one another that when any one of them is 
removed, that renders the whole body defective ; and because it is 
of a nature which has no relation to extension, nor dimensions, nor 
other properties of the matter of which the body is composed, but 
only to the whole conglomerate of its organs, as appears from the 
fact that we could not in any way conceive of the half or the third 
of a soul, nor of the space it occupies, and because it does not 
become smaller owing to the cutting off of some portion of the body, 
but separates itself from it entirely when the union of its assembled 
organs is dissolved. 


ARTICLE XXXI. 


That there is a small gland in the brain in which the soul exercises 
its functions more particularly than in the other parts. 


It is likewise necessary to know that although the soul is joined 
to the whole body, there is yet in that a certain part in which it 
exercises its functions more particularly than in all the others ; and 
it is usually believed that this part is the brain, or possibly the 
heart: the brain, because it is with it that the organs of sense are 
connected, and the heart because it is apparently in it that we 
experience the passions. But, in examining the matter with care, 
it seems as though I had clearly ascertained that the part of the 
body in which the soul exercises its functions immediately is in 
nowise the heart, nor the whole of the brain, but merely the most 
inward of all its parts, to wit, a certain very small gland which is 
situated in-the middle of its substance and so suspended above the 
duct whereby the animal spirits in its anterior cavities have com- 
munication with those in the posterior, that the slightest movements 
which take place in it may alter very greatly the course of these 


346 The Passions of the Soul 


spirits; and reciprocally that the smallest changes which occur in 
the course of the spirits may do much to change the movements of 
this gland. 


ArticLe XXXII. 
How we know that this gland 1s the main seat of the soul. 


The reason which persuades me that the soul cannot have any 
other seat in all the body than this gland wherein to exercise its 
functions immediately, is that I reflect that the other parts of 
our brain are all of them double, just as we have two eyes, two 
hands, two ears, and finally all the organs of our outside senses are 
double; and inasmuch as we have but one solitary and simple 
thought of one particular thing at one and the same moment, it 
must necessarily be the case that there must somewhere be a place 
where the two images which come to us by the two eyes, where the 
two other impressions which proceed from a single object by means 
of the double organs of the other senses, can unite before arriving 
at the soul, in order that they may not represent to it two objects 
instead of one. And it is easy to apprehend how these images or 
other impressions might unite in this gland by the intermission of 
the spirits which fill the cavities of the brain; but there is no other 
place in the body where they can be thus united unless they are so 
iu this gland. 


ArticLE XXXIII. 
That the seat of the passions ts not in the heart. 


As to the opinion of those who think that the soul receives its 
passions in the heart, it is not of much consideration, for it is only 
founded on the fact that the passions cause us to feel some change 
taking place there ; and it is easy to see that this change is not felt 
in the heart excepting through the medium of a small nerve which 
descends from the brain towards it, just as pain is felt as in the foot 
by means of the nerves of the foot, and the stars are perceived as 
in the heavens by means of their light and of the optic nerves; so 
that it is not more necessary that our soul should exercise its 
functions immediately in the heart, in order to feel its passions 
there, than it is necessary for the soul to be in the heavens in order 
to see the stars there, 


Part First 347 


ARTICLE XXXIV. 
How the soul and the body act on one another. 


Let us then conceive here that the soul has its principal seat in 
the little gland which exists in the middle of the brain, from whence 
it radiates forth throngh all the remainder of the body by means of 
the animal spirits, nerves, and even the blood, which, participating 
in the impressions of the spirits, can carry them by the arteries into 
all the members. And recollecting what has been said above about 
the machine of our body, i.e. that the little filaments of our nerves 
are so distributed in all its parts, that on the occasion of the diverse 
movements which are there excited by sensible objects, they open 
in diverse ways the pores of the brain, which causes the animal 
spirits contained in these cavities to enter in diverse ways into the 
muscles, by which means they can move the members in all the 
different ways in which they are capable of being moved; and also 
that all the other causes which are capable of moving the spirits in 
diverse ways suffice to conduct them into diverse muscles; let us 
here add that the small gland which is the main seat of the soul is 
so suspended between the cavities which contain the spirits that 
it can be moved by them in as many different ways as there are 
sensible diversities in the object, but that it may also be moved in 
diverse ways by the soul, whose nature is such that it receives in 
itself as many diverse impressions, that is to say, that it possesses 
as many diverse perceptions as there are diverse movements in this 
gland. Reciprocally, likewise, the machine of the body is so formed 
that from the simple fact that this gland is diversely moved by the 
soul, or by such other cause, whatever it is, it thrusts the spirits 
which surround it towards the pores of the brain, which conduct 
them by the nerves into the muscles, by which means it causes them 
to move the limbs. 


ARTICLE XXXYV. 


Example of the mode in which the impressions of the objects unite 
in the glard which is in the middle of the brain. 


Thus, for example, if we see some animal approach us, the light 
reflected from its body depicts two images of it, one in each ot our 
eyes, and these two images form two others, by means of the optic 
nerves, in the interior surface of the brain which faces its cavities ; 
then from there, by means of the animal spirits with which its 
cavities are filled, these images so radiate towards the little gland 


348 The Passions of the Soul 


which is surrounded by these spirits, that the movement which 
forms each point of one of the images tends towards the same point 
of the gland towards which tends the movement which forms the 
point of the other image, which represents the same part of this 
animal. By this means the two images which are in the brain form 
but one upon the gland, which, acting immediately upon the soul, 
causes it to see the form of this animal. 


ARTICLE XXXVI 


Example of the way in which the passions are excited in the soul. 


And, besides that, if this figure is very strange and frightful— 
that is, if it has a close relationship with the things which have 
been formerly hurtful to the body, that excites the passion of 
apprehension in the soul and then that of courage, or else that of 
fear and consternation according to the particular temperament 
of the body or the strength of the soul, and according as we have 
to begin with been secured by defence or by flight against the 
hurtful things to which the present impression is related. For in 
certain persons that disposes the brain in such a way that the spirits 
reflected from the image thus formed on the gland, proceed thence 
to take their places partly in the nerves which serve to turn the 
back and dispose the legs for flight, and partly in those which so 
increase or diminish the orifices of the heart, or at least which so 
agitate the other parts from whence the blood is sent to it, that this 
blood being there rarefied in a different manner from usual, sends 
to the ‘brain the spirits which are adapted for the maintenance and 
strengthening of the passion of fear, i.e. which are adapted to the 
holding open, or at least reopening, of the pores of the brain which 
conduct them into the same nerves. For from the fact alone that 
these spirits enter into these pores, they excite a particular move- 
ment in this gland which is instituted by nature in order to cause 
the soul to be sensible of this passion ; and because these pores are 
principally in relation with the little nerves which serve to contract 
or enlarge the orifices of the heart, that causes the soul to be sensible 
of it for the most part as in the heart. 


ARTICLE XXXVII. 


How it seems as though they are all caused by some movement of 
the spirits. 

And because the same occurs in all the other passions, to wit, 
that they are principally caused by the spirits which are contained 


Part First 349 


in the cavities of the brain, inasmuch as they take their course 
towards the nerves which serve to enlarge or contract the orifices of 
the heart, or to drive in various ways to it the blood which is in 
the other parts, or, in whatever other fashion it may be, to carry on 
the same passion, we may from this clearly understand why I have 
placed in my definition of them above, that they are caused by some 
particular movement of the animal spirits. 


ARTICLE XXXVIII. 


Example of the movements of the body which accompany the 
passions and do not depend on the soul. 

For the rest, in the same way as the course which these spirits 
take towards the nerves of the heart suffices to give the movement 
to the gland by which fear is placed in the soul, so, too, by the 
simple fact that certain spirits at the same time proceed towards 
the nerves which serve to move the legs in order to take flight, they 
cause another movement in the same gland, by means of which the 
soul is sensible of and perceives this flight, which in this way may 
be excited in the body by the disposition of the organs alone, and 
without the soul’s contributing thereto. 


ARTICLE XXXIX. 


How one and the same cause may excite different passions in 
different men. 

The same impression which a terrifying object makes on the 
gland, and which causes fear in certain men, may excite in others 
courage and confidence ; the reason of this is that all brains are 
not constituted in the same way, and that the same movement of 
the gland which in some excites fear, in others causes the spirits to 
enter into the pores of the brain which conduct them partly into 
the nerves which serve to move the hands for purposes of self- 
defence, and partly into those which agitate and drive the blood 
towards the heart in the manner requisite to produce the spirits 
proper for the continuance of this defence, and to retain the desire 
of it. 


ARTICLE XL. 


The principal effect of the passions. 
For it is requisite to notice that the principal effect of all the 
passions in men is that they incite and dispose their soul to desire 


350 The Passions of the Soul 


those things for which they prepare their body, so that the feeling 
of fear incites it to desire to fly, that of courage to desire to fight, 
and so on. 


ARTICLE XLI. 


The power of the soul in regard to the body. 

But the will is so free in its nature, that it can never be con- 
strained ; and of the two sorts of thoughts which I have distinguished 
in the soul (of which the first are its actions, i.e. its desires, the 
others its passions, taking this word in its most general significance, 
which comprises all kinds of perceptions), the former are absolutely 
in its power, and can only be indirectly changed by the body, while 
on the other hand the latter depend absolutely on the actions which 
govern and direct them, and they can only indirectly be altered by 
the soul, excepting when it is itself their cause. And the whole 
action of the soul consists in this, that solely because it desires 
something, it causes the little gland to which it is closely united to 
move in the way requisite to produce the effect which relates to 
this desire. 


Articte XLII. 


How we find in the memory the things which we desire to remember. 


Thus when the soul desires to recollect something, this desire 
causes the gland, by inclining successively to different sides, to 
thrust the spirits towards different parts of the brain until they 
come across that part where the traces left there by the object 
which we wish to recollect are found; for these traces are none 
other than the fact that the pores of the brain, by which the spirits 
have formerly followed their course because of the presence of this 
object, have by that means acquired a greater facility than the 
others in being once more opened by the animal spirits which come 
towards them in the same way. Thus these spirits in coming in 
contact with these pores, enter into them more easily than into the 
others, by which means they excite a special movement in the gland 
which represents the same object to the soul, and causes it to know 
that it is this which it desired to remember. 


Articte XLIII. 


How the soul can imagine, be attentive, and move the body. 


Thus when we desire to imagine something we have never seen, 
this desire has the power of causing the gland to move in the manner 


Part First 351 


requisite to drive the spirits towards the pores of the brain by the 
opening of which pores this particular thing may be represented ; thus 
when we wish to apply our attention for some time to the considera- 
tion of one particular object, this desire holds the gland for the 
time being inclined to the same side. Thus, finally, when we desire 
to walk or to move our body in some special way, this desire causes 
the gland to thrust the spirits towards the muscles which serve to 
bring about this result. 


ARTICLE XLIV. 


That each desire is naturally united to some movement of the 
gland ; but that, by intentional effort or by custom, it may be united 
to others. 

At the same time it is not always the desire to excite in us some 
movement, or bring about some result which is able so to excite it, 
for this changes according as nature or custom have diversely united 
each movement of the giand to each particular thought. Thus, for 
example, if we wish to adjust our eyes so that they may look at an 
object very far off, this desire causes their pupils to enlarge; and if 
we wish to set them to look at an object very near, this desire causes 
them to contract; but if we think only of enlarging the pupil of 
the eye we may have the desire indeed, but we cannot for all that 
enlarge it, because nature has not joined the movement of the gland 
which serves to thrust forth the spirits towards the optic nerve, in 
the manner requisite for enlarging or diminishing the pupil, with 
the desire to enlarge or diminish it, but with that of looking at 
objects which are far away or near. And when in speaking we 
think only of the sense of what we desire to say, that causes us to 
move the tongue and lips much more quickly and much better than 
if we thought of moving them in all the many ways requisite to 
utter the same words, inasmuch as the custom which we have 
acquired in learning to speak, caused us to join the action of the 
soul (which, by the intermission of the gland can move the tongue 
and lips), with the significance of words which follow these move- 
ments, ratner than with the movements themselves. 


ArticLte XLV. 


What is the power of the soul in reference to its passions. 

Our passions cannot likewise be directly excited or removed by 
the action of our will, but they can be so indirectly by the repre- 
sentation of things which are usually united to the passions which 


352 The Passions of the Soul 


we desire to have, and which are contrary to those which we desire 
to set aside. Thus, in order to excite courage in oneself and remove 
fear, it is not sufficient to have the will to do so, but we must also 
apply ourselves to consider the reasons, the objects or examples 
which persuade us that the peril is not great ; that there is always 
more security in defence than in flight; that we should have the 
glory and joy of having vanquished, while we could expect nothing 
but regret and shame for having fled, and so on. 


ArticLeE XLVI. 


The reason which prevents the soul from being able wholly to 
control its passion. 

And there is a special reason which prevents the soul from being 
able at once to change or arrest its passions, which has caused me 
to say in defining them that they are not only caused, but are also 
maintained and strengthened by some particular movement of the 
spirits. This reason is that they are nearly all accompanied by 
some commotion which takes place in the heart, and in consequence 
also in the whole of the blood and the animal spirits, so that until 
this commotion has subsided, they remain present to our thought in 
the same manner as sensible objects are present there while they 
act upon the organs of our senses. And as the soul, in rendering 
itself very attentive to some other thing, may prevent itself from 
hearing a slight noise or feeling a slight pain, but cannot prevent 
itself in the same way from hearing thunder or feeling the fire which 
burns the hand, it may similarly easily get the better of the lesser 
passions, but not the most violent and strongest, excepting after the 
commotion of the blood and spirits is appeased. The most that 
the will can do while this commotion is in its full strength is not to 
yield to its effects and to restrain many of the movements to which 
it disposes the body. For example, if anger causes us to lift our 
hand to strike, the will can usually hold it back ; if fear incites our 


legs to flee, the will can arrest them, and so on in other similar 
cases. 


ARTICLE XLVII. 


In what the strife consists which we imagine to exist between the 
lower and higher part of the soul. 


And it is only in the repugnance which exists between the 
movements which the body by its animal spirits, and the soul by its 
will, tend to excite in the gland at the same time, that all the strife 


Part First 353 


which we are in the habit of conceiving to exist between the inferior 
part of the soul, which we call the sensuous, and the superior which 
is rational, or as we may say, between the natural appetites and the 
will, consists. For there is within us but one soul, and this soul 
has not in itself any diversity of parts; the same part that is 
subject to sense impressions is rational, and all the soul’s appetites 
are acts of will. The error which has been committed in making it 
play the part of various personages, usually in opposition one to 
another, only proceeds from the fact that we have not properly 
distinguished its functions from those of the body, to which alone 
we must attribute every thing which can be observed in us that is 
opposed to our reason; so that there is here no strife, excepting 
that the small gland which exists in the middle of the brain, being 
capable of being thrust to one side by the soul, and to the other by 
the animal spirits, which are mere bodies, as I have said above, it 
often happens that these two impulses are contrary, and that the 
stronger prevents the other from taking effect. We may, however, 
distinguish two sorts of movement excited by the animal spirits in 
the gland—the one sort represents to the soul the objects which 
move the senses, or the impressions which are met with in the brain, 
and makes no attempt to affect its will; the others do make an 
effort to do so—i.e. those which cause the passions or the movements 
of the body which accompany the passions. And as to the first, 
although they often hinder the actions of the soul, or else are. 
hindered by them, yet, because they are not directly contrary to 
them, we do not notice any strife between them. We only notice 
the strife between the latter and the acts of will which conflict with 
them: e.g. between the effort with which the spirits impel the 
gland in order to cause a desire for something in the soul, and that 
with which the soul repels it again by the desire which it has to 
avoid the very same thing. And what causes this strife to come 
into evidence for the most part is that the will, not having the 
power to excite the passions directly, as has just been said, is con- 
strained to use its best endeavours, and to apply itself to consider 
successively several things as to which, though it happens that one 
has the power to change for a moment the course taken by the 
spirits, it may come to pass that that which succeeds does not have 
it, and that they immediately afterwards revert to that same course 
because the disposition which has before held its place in the nerves, 
heart, and blood has not changed, and thus it comes about that the 
soul feels itself almost at the same time impelled to desire and 


354 The Passions of the Soul 


not to desire the same thing. It is from this that occasion has 
been taken to imagine in the soul two powers which strive one with 
the other. At the same time we may still conceive a sort of strife 
to exist, inasmuch as often the same cause which excites some 
passion in the soul, also excites certain movements in the body to 
which the soul does not contribute, and which it stops, or tries to 
stop, directly it perceives them; as we see when what excites fear 
also causes the spirits to enter into the muscles which serve to move 
the legs with the object of flight, and when the wish which we have 
to be brave stops them from doing so 


ArticLE XLVIII. 


How we recognise the strength or infirmity of souls, and what is 
lacking in those that are most feeble. 


And it is by success in these combats that each individual can 
discover the strength or the weakness of his soul; for those in whom 
by nature the will can most easily conquer the passions and arrest 
the movements of the body which accompany them, without doubt 
possess the strongest souls. But there are those people who cannot 
bring their strength to the test, because they never cause their will 
to do battle with its proper arms, but only with those with which 
certain passions furnish it in order to resist certain others. That 
which I call its proper arms consists of the firm and determinate 
judgments respecting the knowledge of good and evil, in pursuance 
of which it has resolved to conduct the actions of its life; and the 
most feeble souls of all are those whose will does not thus determine 
itself to follow certain judgments, but allows itself continually to be 
carried away by present passions, which, being frequently contrary 
to one another, draw the will first to one side, then to the other, 
and, by employing it in striving against itself, place the soul in the 
most deplorable possible condition. Thus when fear represents 
death as an extreme evil, and one which can only be avoided by 
flight, ambition on the other hand sets forth the infamy of this 
flight as an evil worse than death. These two passions agitate the 
will in diverse ways ; and in first obeying one and then the other, it is 
in continual opposition to itself, and thus renders the soul enslaved 
and unhappy. 


Part First 355 


ArticLtE XLIX. 


That the strength of the soul does not suffice without the knowledge 
of the truth. 

It is true that there are very few men so weak and irresolute 
that they desire nothing except what their passion dictates to them. 
The most part have determinate judgments, in pursuance of which 
they regulate a part of their actions; and although often their 
judgments are false or even founded on certain passions by which 
the will formerly allowed itself to be vanquished or led astray, yet, 
because it continues to follow them when the passion which has 
caused them is absent, they may be considered as its proper arms, 
and we may reflect that souls are stronger or weaker by reason of 
the fact that they are able to follow these judgments more or less 
closely, and resist the present passions which are contrary to them. 
Yet there is a great difference between the resolutions which proceed 
from a false opinion, and those which are founded only on the 
knowledge of the truth, inasmuch as if we follow the latter we are 
assured that we shall never regret nor repent it, whereas we do so 
always when we have followed the first-mentioned, and hence dis- 
covered our error in doing so, 


ARTICLE L. 


That there is no soul so feeble that it cannot, if well directed, 
acquire an absolute power over its passions. 

And it is useful here to know that, as has already been said 
above, although each movement of the gland seems to have been 
joined by nature to each one of our thoughts from the beginning of 
our life, we may at the same time join them to others by means of 
custom, as experience shows us in the case of words which excite 
movements in the gland, which, so far as the institution of nature is 
concerned, do not represent to the soul more than their sound when 
they are uttered by the voice, or the form of their letters when 
they are written, and which, nevertheless, by the custom which has 
been acquired in thinking of what they signify when their sound 
has been heard or their letters have been seen, usually make this 
signification to be understood rather than the form of their letters 
or the sound of their syllables. It is also useful to know that 
although the movements both of the gland and of the spirits of the 
brain, which represent certain objects to the soul, are naturally 
joined to those which excite in it certain passions, they can at the 


356 The Passions of the Soul 


same time be separated from these by custom, and joined to others 
which are very different ; and also that this custom can be acquired 
by a solitary action, and does not require long usage. Thus when 
we unexpectedly meet with something very foul in food that we are 
eating with relish, the surprise that this event gives us may so 
change the disposition of our brain, that we can no longer see any 
such food without horror, while we formerly ate it with pleasure. 
And the same thing is to be noticed in brutes, for although they 
have no reason, nor perhaps any thought, all the movements of the 
spirits and of the gland which excite the passions in us, are none 
the less in them, and in them serve in maintaining and strengthening 
not, as in our case, the passions, but the movements of the nerves 
and muscles which usually accompany them. So when a dog sees a 
partridge he is naturally disposed to run towards it, and when he 
hears a gun fired, this sound naturally incites him to flight. But 
nevertheless setters are usually so trained that the sight of a 
partridge causes them to stop, and the sound which they afterwards 
hear when a shot is fired over them, causes them to run up to us. 
And these things are useful in inciting each one of us to study to 
regard our passions ; for since we can with a little industry change 
the movement of the brain in animals deprived of reason, it is 
evident that we can do so yet more in the case of men, and that 
even those who have the feeblest souls can acquire a very absolute 
dominion over all their passions if sufficient industry is applied in 
training and guiding them. 


PART SECOND. 


OF THE NUMBER AND ORDER OF THE PASSIONS AND 
AN EXPOSITION OF THE SIX PRIMITIVE PASSIONS 


Articte LI. 


What are the first causes of the passions. 

We know from what has been said above that the ultimate and 
most proximate cause of the passions of the soul is none other than 
the agitation with which the spirits move the little gland which is 
in the middle of the brain. But that does not suffice to distinguish 
one from another ; it is necessary to investigate their sources, and 
to examine their first causes: and, although they may sometimes 
be caused by the action of the soul which determines itself to 
conceive of this or that object, and also simply by the temperament 
of the body or by the impressions which are fortuitously met with 
in the brain, as happens when we feel sad or joyous without being 
able to give a reason, it yet appears by what has been said, that in 
all cases the same passions can also be excited by the objects which 
move the senses, and that these objects are their most ordinary and 
principal causes; from which it follows that in order to find them 
all, it is sufficient to consider all the effects of these objects. 


ArticLe LI. 


What is their mode of operation and how they may be enumerated. 
I notice besides, that the objects which move the senses do not 
excite diverse passions in us because of all the diversities which are 
in them, but only because of the diverse ways in which they may 
harm or help us, or in general be of some importance to us; and 


358 The Passions of the Soul 


that the customary mode of action of all the passions is simply this, 
that they dispose the soul to desire those things which nature tells 
us are of use, and to persist in this desire, and also bring about that 
same agitation of spirits which customarily causes them to dispose 
the body to the movement which serves for the carrying into effect 
of these things ; that is why, in order to enumerate them, we must 
merely examine in their order in how many diverse ways which are 
significant for us, our senses can be moved by their objects ; and 
I shall here make an enumeration of all the principal passions 
according to the order in which they may thus be found. 


THE ORDER AND ENUMERATION OF THE PASSIONS. 


Articte LIII. 
Wonder. 


When the first encounter with some object surprises us, and we 
judge it to be new or very different from what we formerly knew, 
or from what we supposed that it ought to be, that causes us to 
wonder and be surprised ; and because that may happen before we 
in any way know whether this object is agreeable to us or is not so, 
it appears to me that wonder is the first of all the passions ; and it 
has no opposite, because if the object which presents itself has 
nothing in it that surprises us, we are in nowise moved regarding 
it, and we consider it without passion 


ARTICLE LIV. 


Esteem and disdain, generosity or pride and humility or poor- 
spiritedness. 


To wonder is united esteem or disdain according as it is at the 
greatness of an object or its smallness that we wonder. And we 
may thus esteem or despise ourselves, from which come the passions, 
and then the habitudes, of magnanimity or pride, and of humility or 
poor-spirit. 


Articte LY, 
Veneration and disdain. 


But when we esteem or think little of other objects which we 
consider as free causes capable of doing good or evil, from esteem 
proceeds veneration and from simple absence of esteem, disdain. 


Part Second 359 


ArticLte LVI. 

Love and hatred, 

And all the preceding passions may be excited in us without 
our in any way perceiving if the object which causes them is good 
or evil. But when a matter is presented as relatively to us good, 
1e. as agreeable to us, that causes us to have love for it, and when 
it is represented as evil or hurtful to us, that excites hatred in us, 


ArticLte LVII. 

Desire. 

From the same consideration of good and evil all the other 
passions originate; but in order to place them in order I make 
distinctions as to time, and considering that they lead us to regard 
much more the future than the present or the past, I commence 
with desire. For not only when we desire to acquire a good which 
we do not yet have, or avoid an evil which we judge may occur; 
but also when we only anticipate the conservation of a good or 
absence of an evil, which is as far as this passion may extend, it is 
evident that it ever regards the future. 


Articte LVIII. 


Hope, fear, jealousy, confidence and despair. 

It suffices to reflect that the acquisition of a good or removal of 
an evil is possible in order to be incited to desire it. But when 
besides that we consider whether there is much or little prospect 
that we shall obtain what we desire, that which represents to us 
that there is much probability of this excites in us hope, and that 
which represents to us that there is little, excites fear, of which 
jealousy is a species. When hope is excessive it changes its nature 
and is called confidence or assurance. Just as on the other hand 
extreme fear becomes despair. 


ArticLte LIX. 


Trresolution, courage, bravery, emulation, cowardice, and terror. 

And we can thus hope and fear although the issue of what we 
expect in no way depends on us; but when it is represented to us as 
dependent there may be a difficulty in the selection of the means or 
in carrying them into execution. From the first proceeds the irre- 
solution which disposes us to deliberate and take council. To the 
latter courage or bravery is opposed, of which emulation is a species, 
And cowardice is contrary to courage, as fear or terror is to bravery. 


360 The Passions of the Soul 


Arrticte LX. 
Remorse. 


And if one is moved to act before irresolution has passed 
away, that causes remorse of conscience to arise, which does not 
concern the time to come like the preceding passions, but the 
present or the past, 


Articte LXI. 
Joy and sadness. 


And the consideration of the present good excites joy in us, and 
that of evil, sadness, when it is a good or an evil which is repre- 
sented as belonging to us, 


ArticLteE LXII. 
Mockery, envy, pity. 


But when it is represented to us as pertaining to other men, we 
may esteem them either as worthy or unworthy of it; and when 
we esteem them worthy, that does not excite in us any other passion 
but joy, inasmuch as it is some satisfaction to us to see that things 
happen as they should. There is only this difference, that the joy 
that comes from what is good is serious, while what comes from evil 
is accompanied by laughter and mockery. But if we esteem them 
unworthy of it, the good excites envy and the evil pity, which are 
species of sadness. And we must notice that the same passions 
which relate to present good or evil things may often likewise be 
related to those which are to come, since our belief that they will 
come represents them as if they were present. 


Articte LXIII. 


Selj-satisfaction and repentance. 


We may also consider the cause of the good or evil, present as 
well as past. And the good which has been done by ourselves gives 
us an internal satisfaction which is the sweetest of all the passions ; 
while the evil excites repentance, which is the most bitter. 


Part Second 361 


ArtTIcLE LXIV. 
Favour and gratitude. 


But the good which has been done by others causes us to regard 
them with favour although it is not to us that it has been done, and 
if it is to us, we join to the favour gratitude. 


ARTICLE LXV. 


Indignation and anger. 

In the same way the evil done by others and not having any 
relation to us, only causes us to be indignant with them; and when 
it is so related it likewise arouses anger. 


ArticteE LXVI. 
Pride’ and shame. 
Further, the good which is or has been in us, being referred to 
the opinion which others may have of it, excites a feeling of glory 
or pride in us, and the evil, shame. 


Articte LXVII. 


Disgust, regret, and gaiety’. 

And sometimes the duration of the good brings about tedium or 
disgust, while that of evil diminishes sadness. And finally from 
past good, regret proceeds, and this is a species of sadness; and 
from past evil comes gaiety’, which is a species of joy. 


Argticte LXVIII. 


Why this enumeration of the passions is diferent from that which 
is commonly received. 

Here we have the order which seems to me to be the best for 
the enumeration of the passions. In this I know well that I am 
parting company with all those who have written on this subject 
before, but it is not without great reason that I do so. For these 
derive their enumeration from the fact that they distinguish in the 
sensitive part of the soul two appetites which they name the con- 
cupiscent and irascible respectively. And because in the soul I 
recognise no distinction of parts, as I have said above, this seems to 
me to signify nothing but that it has two faculties, the one of desire, 


1 ‘La gloire.’ 2 gllégresse F. 


362 The Passions of the Soul 


and the other of anger, and because in the same way it has the 
faculties of wondering, loving, hoping, fearing, and thus of receiving in 
itself every other passion, or else bringing about actions to which these 
passions urge it, I do not see why they have desired to refer them 
all to concupiscence or anger. And besides their enumeration does 
not comprehend all the principal passions, as I believe this one does. 
I speak only of the principal, because we may further distinguish 
many other more particular ones, and their number is indefinite. 


Articte LXIX. 

That there are only sia primitive passions. 

But the number of those which are simple and primitive is not 
very large. For, in making a review of all those which I have 
enumerated, we may easily notice that there are but six which are 
such, i.e. wonder, love, hatred, desire, joy and sadness; and that all 
the others are composed of some of these six, or are species of them. 
That is why, in order that their multitude may not embarrass my 
readers, I shall here treat the six primitive passions separately ; 
and afterwards I shall show in what way all the others derive from 
them their origin. 


ArticLe LXX. 

Of wonder ; its definition and cause. 

Wonder is a sudden surprise of the soul which causes it to apply 
itself to consider with attention the objects which seem to it rare 
and extraordinary. It is thus primarily caused by the impression 
we have in the brain which represents the object as rare, and as 
consequently worthy of much consideration; then afterwards by the 
movement of the spirits, which are disposed by this impression to 
tend with great force towards the part of the brain where it is, in 
order to fortify and conserve it there ; as they are also disposed by 
it to pass thence into the muscles which serve to retain the organs 
of the senses in the same situation in which they are, so that it is 
still maintained by them, if it is by them that it has been formed. 


Articte LXXI. 


That in this passion no change occurs in the heart or in the blood. 


And this passion has this particular characteristic, that in it we 
do not notice that it is accompanied by any change which occurs in 


Part Second 863 


the heart and blood like the other passions. The reason of this is 
that not having good or evil as its object, but only the knowledge 
of the thing that we wonder at, it has no relation with the heart 
and blood on which all the good of the body depends, but only with 
the brain where are the organs of the senses which are the instru- 
ments of this knowledge. 


Articte LXXII. 


In what the strength of wonder consists. 


That does not prevent its having much strength because of the 
surprise, i.e, the sudden and unexpected arrival of this impression 
which changes the movement of the spirits, which surprise is proper 
and peculiar to this passion ; so that when surprise is met with in 
other passions as it is usually met with in almost all, thus increasing 
them, what happens is that wonder is united to them. And the 
strength depends on two things, i.e. on the novelty, and on the fact 
that the movement which it causes possesses its entire strength 
from its commencement. For it is certain that such a movement 
has more effect than those which, being feeble to begin with, and 
only increasing little by little, can easily be turned aside. It is 
likewise certain that the objects of sense which are new, affect the 
brain in certain parts in which it is not usually affected, and that 
the fact that these parts are more tender or less firm than those 
which a frequent agitation has solidified, increases the effect of the 
movements which they there excite. And we shall not find this 
incredible if we consider that it is a similar reason which brings it 
about that, the soles of our feet being accustomed to a contact 
which is rough enough owing to the weight of the body which they 
bear, we feel this contact but little when we walk, while another 
much slighter and more gentle touch, when they are tickled, is 
almost insupportable because it is unusual to us. 


ArticLte LXXIII. 


What astonishment is. 

And this surprise has so much power in causing the spirits 
which are in the cavities of the brain to take their way from thence 
to the place where is the impression of the object which we wonder 
at, that it sometimes thrusts them all there, and causes them to be 
so much occupied in preserving this impression that there are none 


364 The Passions of the Soul 


which pass from thence into the muscles, nor even which in any 
way turn themselves away from the tracks which they originally 
pursued in the brain: and this causes the whole body to remain as 
immobile as a statue, and prevents our perceiving more of the object 
than the first face which is presented, or consequently of acquiring 
a more particular knowledge of it. That is what we commonly call 
being astonished, and astonishment is an excess of wonder which 
can never be otherwise than bad. 


ArticLe LXXIV. 


The end which the passions serve, and to what they are detrimental. 


And it is easy to understand from what has been said above, 
that the utility of all the passions consists alone in their fortifying 
and perpetuating in the soul thoughts which it is good it should 
preserve, and which without that might easily be effaced from it. 
And again, all the harm which they can cause consists in the fact 
that they fortify and conserve these thoughts more than necessary, 
or that they fortify and conserve others on which it is not good to 
dwell. 


ArticLtE LXXYV. 


In what wonder particularly consists. 


And we may say more particularly of wonder that it is useful, 
inasmuch as it causes us to learn and retain in our memory things 
of which we were formerly ignorant; for we shall only wonder at 
that which appears rare and extraordinary to us, and nothing can 
80 appear excepting because we have been ignorant of it, or also 
because it is different from the things which we have known; for it 
is this difference which causes it to be called extraordinary. Now 
although a thing which was unknown to us, presents itself anew to 
our understanding or our senses, we do not for all that retain it in 
our memory, unless the idea which we have of it is strengthened in 
our brain by some passion or else by the application of our under- 
standing which our will determines to a particular attention and 
reflection. And the other passions may serve to make us remark 
things which seem good or evil; but we have only wonder for those 
which appear but seldom. We also see that those who have no 
natural inclination towards this passion are usually very ignorant. 


Part Second 365 


ArticteE LXXVI. 


In what a may do harm, and how we may make good its deficiency 
and correct its excess. 

But it much more frequently occurs that we wonder too much, 
and that we are astonished in perceiving things which deserve little 
or no consideration, than that we wonder too little. And this may 
entirely prevent or pervert the use of the reason. That is why, 
although it is good to be born with some inclination towards this 
passion, because that disposes us for the acquisition of the sciences, 
we must at the same time afterwards try to free ourselves from it 
as much as possible. For it is easy to supplement its defects by 
special reflection and attention which our will can always oblige 
our understanding to give on these occasions when we judge that 
the matter which presents itself is worth the trouble. But there is 
no other remedy to prevent our wondering to excess than that of 
acquiring a knowledge of various matters and exercising ourselves 
in the consideration of all those which may appear the most rare 
and stiange. 


Articte LXXVII. 


That it is neither the most stupid nor the most clever who are 
most carried away by wonder. 

For the rest, although it is only those who are dull and stupid 
who are in nowise impelled by their nature to wonder, that is not to 
say that those who are best supplied with wits are always those 
who are most disposed to it. As a matter of fact it is principally 
those who, although they have a fairly good supply of common 
sense, have at the same time no high opinion as to their sufficiency. 


Articte LXXVIII. 


That its excess may pass into a matter of habit when we fail to 
correct it. 

And although this passion seems to diminish with use, because 
the more we meet with rare things which we wonder at, the more 
we accustom ourselves to cease to wonder at them, and to think 
that all those which may afterwards present themselves are common, 
still, when it is excessive, and causes us to arrest our attention 
solely on the first image of the objects which are presented, without 
acquiring any other knowledge of them, it leaves behind it a custom 


366 The Passions of the Soul 


which disposes the soul in the same way to pause over all the other 
objects which present themselves, provided that they appear to it to 
be ever so little new. And this is what causes the continuance of 
the malady of those who suffer from a blind curiosity—that is, who 
seek out things that are rare solely to wonder at them, and not for 
the purpose of really knowing them : for little by little they become 
so given over to wonder, that things of no importance are no less 
capable of arresting their attention than those whose investigation 
is more useful. 


ArticLe LXXIX. 
The definition of love and hate. 


Love is an emotion of the soul caused by the movement of the 
spirits which incites it to join itself willingly to objects which appear 
to it to be agreeable. And hatred is an emotion caused by the 
spirits which incite the soul to desire to be separated from the 
objects which present themselves to it as hurtful. I say that these 
emotions are caused by the spirits in order to distinguish love and 
hate, which are passions and depend on the body, both from the 
judgments which also induce the soul by its free will to unite itself 
with the things which it esteems to be good, and to separate itself 
from those it holds to be evil, and from the emotions which these 
judgments excite of themselves in the soul. 


ArticLeE LXXX. 


What it ts to join or separate oneself by one’s free will. 

For the rest, by the word will I do not here intend to talk of 
desire, which is a passion apart, and one which relates to the future, 
but of the consent by which we consider ourselves from this time 
forward as united with what we love, so that we imagine a whole of 
which we conceive ourselves as only constituting one part, while the 
thing loved constitutes another part. In the case of hatred, on 
the other hand, we consider ourselves only and as a whole, entirely 
separated from the matter for which we possess an aversion. 


ARTICLE LXXXI. 


Of the distinction usually made between the love belonging to 
concupiscence and that of benevolence. 

And two sorts of love are usually distinguished, the one of which 
is named the love of benevolence, that is to say the love which 


Part Second 367 


incites us to wish well to what we love ; the other is named the love 
of concupiscence, that is to say the love that causes us to desire 
the thing that is loved. But it appears to me that this distinction 
concerns the effects of love alone, and not its essence ; for as soon 
as we are willingly joined to some object, of whatever nature it may 
be, we have for it a feeling of benevolence, i.e. we also join to it 
willingly the things which we believe to be agreeable to it: and this 
is one of the principal effects of love. And if we judge that it is a 
desirable thing to possess it, or to be associated with it in some 
other manner than through the will, we desire it: and this is 
likewise one of the most ordinary effects of love. 


ArticLteE LXXXII. 


How very different passions agree, inasmuch as they participate 
in love. 

There is also no need to distinguish as many kinds of love as 
there are diverse objects which we may love; for, to take an example, 
although the passions which an ambitious man has for glory, a miser 
for money, a drunkard for wine, a brutal man for a woman whom he 
desires to violate, a man of honour for his friend or mistress, and 
a good father for his children, may be very different, still, inasmuch 
as they participate in love, they are similar. But the four first only 
have love for the possession of the objects to which their passion 
relates, and do not have any for the objects themselves, for which 
they only have desire mingled with other particular passions. But 
the love which a good father has for his children is so pure that he 
desires to have nothing from them, and does not wish to possess 
them otherwise than he does, nor to be united with them more 
closely than he already is. For, considering them as replicas of 
himself, he seeks their good as his own, or even with greater care, 
because, in setting before himself that he or they form a whole of 
which he is not the best part, he often prefers their interests to his, 
and does not ear losing himself in order to save them. The affection 
which honourable men have for their friends is of this nature even 
though it is rarely so perfect ; and that which they have for their 
mistress participates largely in it, but it also participates a little in 
the others. 


368 The Passions of the Soul 


ArticteE LXXXIII. 


Of the difference which exists between simple affection, Sriendship, 
and devotion. 

We may, it seems to me, find differences in love according to 
the esteem which we bear to the object loved as compared with 
oneself: for when we esteem the object of love less than ourselves, 
we have only a simple affection for it; when we esteem it equally 
with ourselves, that is called friendship; and when we esteem it 
more, the passion which we have may be called devotion. Thus we 
may have affection for a flower, a bird, a horse ; but unless we have 
a very ill-regulated mind, we can have friendship for men alone. 
And they are so truly the object of this passion, that there is no 
man so imperfect that we cannot have for him a very perfect friend- 
ship, when we are loved by him, and when we have a truly noble 
and generous soul, in accordance with what will be afterwards 
explained in Articles CLIV and CLVI. As to the meaning of devo- 
tion, its principal object is no doubt the supreme Divinity to whom 
we cannot fail to be devoted when we know Him as we should; but 
we may also have devotion for our prince, country, town, and even 
for a particular man, when we esteem him much more than ourselves. 
Now the difference which exists between these three sorts of love is 
shown principally by their effects ; for inasmuch as in all of them 
we consider ourselves as joined and united to the thing loved, we are 
always ready to abandon the lesser portion of the whole into which 
we both enter, in order to preserve the other portion. This brings 
it to pass that in simple affection we always prefer ourselves to the 
object loved ; and, on the other hand, in devotion the thing loved 
is so much preferred to the self, that we do not fear death in order 
to preserve it. We have frequently seen examples of this in the 
case of those who have exposed themselves to a certain death in the 
defence of their prince or their town, and in some cases even for 
the private persons to. whom they were devoted. 


Article LXXXIV. 
That there are not as many kinds of hate as of love. 
For the rest, although hatred is directly opposed to love, we do 
not always divide it into so many species because we do not to the 
same extent notice the difference which exists between the evils 


from which we are separated by our will, as we do that which exists 
between the good things to which we are joined. 


Part Second 369 


ArticLe LXXXV 
Of delight and revulsion}. 


And I only find one distinct characteristic of any note which is 
alike in both. It consists in the fact that the objects both of love 
and hatred may be represented to the soul by the external senses, 
or else by the internal, and by its own reason: for we commonly 
denominate good or evil that which our interior senses or our reason 
make us judge to be agreeable or the contrary to our nature; but 
we term beautiful or ugly that which is so represented to us by our 
outward senses, principally by that of sight, which alone is more 
considered than the others; hence two sorts of love originate, 
i.e, that which we have for good things, and that which we have for 
beautiful things, to which we may give the name of attraction or 
delight in order not to confound it with the other, nor yet with 
desire, to which we often attribute the name of love. And from 
thence also, two kinds of hatred in the same way take their rise, the 
one of which relates to evil things, the other to ugly things; and 
this last may be called horror or aversion in order to distinguish it. 
But what is most remarkable here is that these passions of delight 
and detestation or horror are usually more violent than the other 
sorts of love or hate, because what comes to the soul by the senses 
touches it more forcibly than what is represented to it by its reason, 
and that even though these first passions have usually less truth ; 
so that of all the passions it is these which deceive the most, and 
against which we should guard ourselves most carefully. 


Articte LXXXVI. 

The definition of Desire. 

The passion of desire is an agitation of the soul caused by the 
spirits which dispose it to wish for the future the things which it 
represents to itself as agreeable. Thus we do not only desire the 
presence of the absent good, but also the conservation of the present, 
and further, the absence of evil, both of that which we already have, 
and of that which we believe we might experience in time to come. 


ArticLE LXXXVII. 


That it is a passion which has no opposite. 
I know very well that usually in the Schools the passion which 
makes for the search after the good which alone is called desire is 


1 De l’agrément et de l’horreur. 


370 The Passions of the Soul 


opposed to that which makes for the avoidance of evil, which is 
called aversion. But inasmuch as there is no good whose privation 
is not an evil, nor any evil considered in a positive sense, whose 
privation is not a good, and that in investigating riches, for example, 
we necessarily shun poverty, in fleeing from sickness we make for 
health, and so on with other things, it seems to me that it is always 
an identical movement which makes for the search after good, and 
at the same time for the avoidance of the evil which is contrary to 
it. I merely remark this difference in it, that the desire which we 
have when we make for some good is accompanied by love, and then 
by hope and joy; while the same desire, when it tends to remove 
itself from evil contrary to this good, is accompanied by hate, fear 
and sadness ; which is the cause of our judging it to be contrary to 
itself. But if we wish to consider it when at the same time it 
relates equally to some good with the view of seeking it, and to an 
opposed evil in order to avoid it, we may very clearly see that it is 
but one passion which brings about both the one and the other. 


ArticLE LXXXVIII. 
Its different species. 


There would be more reason in distinguishing desire into as 
many different species as there are different objects sought after ; 
since, for example, curiosity, which is none other than a desire for 
knowledge, differs much from desire for glory, and this again from 
desire for vengeance, and so on in the case of other objects. But it 
is here sufficient to know that there are as many species of the 
passions as there are of love and hatred, and that the most important 
and strongest are those which take their rise from the emotions of 
delight and revulsion. 


Articte LXXXIX, 
The desire which springs from revulsion. 


Now, although it is only one and the same desire which makes 
for the search after a good and the escape from an evil which is 
contrary to it, as has been said, the desire which originates from 
delight cannot fail to be very different from that which springs from 
revulsion ; for this delight and revulsion which are truly contrary 
to one another, are not the good and the evil which serve as 
objects for those desires, but only two emotions of the soul, which 
dispose it to seek after two very different things. That is, revulsion 


Part Second 371 


is instituted by nature to represent to the soul a sudden and 
unexpected death, so that although it is sometimes but the touch 
of a grub, or the sound of a trembling leaf, or one’s own shadow, 
which causes us to be seized with horror, we at once feel as much 
emotion as though a very evident peril of death offered itself to 
the senses ; and this is what suddenly produces the agitation which 
causes the soul to employ all its forces in order to avoid an evil 
so present ; and it is this kind of desire which we commonly call 
avoidance and aversion. 


ARTICLE XO. 

That which springs from delight. 

On the other hand, delight is specially instituted by nature to 
represent the enjoyment of that which gives pleasure as the greatest 
of all the good things which pertain to man, which causes us to 
desire this enjoyment very ardently. It is true that there are 
various sorts of delight and that the desires which take their origin 
in these diverse varieties are not all equally powerful. For, to take 
an example, the beauty of flowers incites us only to look at them, 
and that of fruits to eat them. But the principal one is that which 
proceeds from the perfections which we imagine in a person whom 
we think may become another self; for with the difference of sex 
which nature has placed in men, as in the animals without reason, 
it has also placed certain impressions in the brain which bring it to 
pass that at a certain age, and in a certain time, they consider 
themselves defective, and as though they were but the half of a 
whole, of which an individual of the other sex should be the other 
half. In this way the acquisition of this half is confusedly repre- 
sented by nature as the greatest of all imaginable goods. And 
although we see many persons of this other sex, we do not for all 
that desire several at the same time, inasmuch as nature does not 
cause us to imagine that we have need of more than one half. But 
when we observe something in one which is more agreeable than 
what we at the same time observe in others, that determines the soul 
to feel only for the first all the inclination which nature gives it to 
seek for the good which that nature represents to it as the greatest 
that can be possessed; and this inclination or desire which thus 
springs from delight more usually receives the name of love than 
the passion of love which has above been described. It has likewise 
stranger effects and it is what provides the principal material for the 
writers of romances and for poets. 


372 The Passions of the Soul 


Articte XCI. 

The definition of Joy. 

Joy is an agreeable emotion of the soul in which consists the 
enjoyment that the soul possesses in the good which the impressions 
of the brain represent to it as it own. I say that it is in this 
emotion that the enjoyment of the good consists; for as a matter of 
fact the soul receives no other fruits from all the good things that 
it possesses; and while it has no joy in these, it may be said that it 
does not enjoy them more than if it did not possess them at all. 
I add also that it is of the good which the impressions of the brain 
represent to it as its own, in order not to confound this joy, which 
is a passion, with the joy that is purely intellectual, and which 
comes into the soul by the action of the soul alone, and which we 
may call an agreeable emotion excited in it, in which the enjoyment 
consists which it has in the good which its understanding represents 
to it as its own. It is true that while the soul is united to the 
body this intellectual joy can hardly fail to be accompanied by that 
which is @ passion ; for as soon as our understanding perceives that 
we possess some good thing, even although this good may be so 
different from all that pertains to body that it is not in the least 
capable ot being imagined, imagination does not fail immediately to 
make some impression in the brain from which proceeds the move- 
ment or the spirits which excites the passion of joy. 


ARTICLE XOII 
The definition of Sadness. 


Sadness is a disagreeable languor in which consists the dis- 
comfort and unrest which the soul receives from evil, or from the 
defect which the impressions ot the brain set before it as pertaining 
to it. And there also is an intellectual sadness which is not passion, 
but which hardly ever fails to be accompanied by it. 


Articte XCIII. 
The causes of these two passions. 
But when intellectual joy or sadness thus excites that which is 
& passion their cause is evident enough; and we see from their 
definitions that joy proceeds from the belief that we have of 
possessing some good, and sadness from the belief that we have 


Part Second 373 


of possessing some evil or defect. It often, however, happens that 
we feel sad or joyful without being thus able distinctly to observe 
the good or evil which are the causes of it; e.g. when this good or 
this evil form their impressions in the brain without the inter- 
mission of the soul, sometimes because they only pertain to the 
body, and sometimes, too, although they pertain to the soul, because 
it does not consider them as good and evil, but under some other 
form the impression of which is joined to that of good and of evil in 
the brain, 


ARTICLE XCIV. 


How these passions are excited by things good and evil which 
only concern the body, and in what pleasurable stimulation and 
pain consists. 

Thus when we are in full health and the weather is more serene 
than usual, we feel a gaiety within us which proceeds from no 
function of the understanding, but only from the impressions which 
the movement of the spirits causes in the brain; and we never feel 
sad in the same way except when the body is indisposed, even 
although we do not know that it is so. Thus the titillation of the 
senses is so nearly followed by joy, and pain by sadness, that the 
greater part of mankind does not distinguish the two. And yet 
they differ so much that pains may sometimes be suffered with joy, 
or pleasurable sensations received which cause displeasure. But 
the cause which brings it to pass that in a general way joy follows 
pleasurable sensation, is the fact that all that we call pleasurable 
sensation or agreeable sentiment is simply due to the fact that the 
objects of sense excite some movement in the nerves which would 
be capable of harming them had they not strength sufficient to 
resist the movement, or were the body not well disposed ; and this 
produces in the brain an impression which, being instituted by 
nature to give evidence to this good disposition and this strength, 
represents that to the soul as a good pertaining to it, inasmuch as 
it is united to body and thus excites in it joy. It is almost the 
same reason which brings it about that we naturally take pleasure 
in being moved by all sorts of passions, even by sadness and hatred, 
when these passions are only caused by the strange adventures 
which we see represented in a theatre, or by other similar means 
which, not being able to harm us in any way, seem pleasurably to 
excite our soul in affecting it. And the cause which brings it to 


374 The Passions of the Soul 


pass that pain usually produces sadness, is that the feeling which 
we call pain always proceeds from some action which is so violent 
that it hurts our nerves; in this way, being instituted by nature 
to signify to the soul the injury which the body receives by this 
action, and its weakness in not being able to resist it, it represents 
both to it as evils, which are always disagreeable to it, excepting 
when they bring about certain good results which it esteems more 
than these. 


ARTICLE XCV. 


How they may also be eacited by the things good and evil which 
the soul does not notice even although they belong to it, such as the 
pleasure taken in encountering risk or in the recollection of a past 
evil. 

Thus the pleasure which young people often take in undertaking 
difficult tasks and in exposing themselves to great perils, even 
although they hope for no profit or glory by doing so, proceeds in 
their case from the fact that the reflection which they make that 
what they undertake is difficult, makes an impression in their brain 
which, being united to that which they might form were they to 
think that it is a good thing to feel sufficiently courageous, happy, 
skilful, or strong to dare to risk themselves to such an extent, is 
the cause of their taking pleasure in so-doing. And the happiness 
which old people have when they recollect the evils which they have 
suffered, proceeds from the fact that they represent to themselves 
that it is a good thing to survive in spite of them all. 


ARTICLE XCVI. 


The movements of the blood and the spirits to which the five 
preceding passions are due. 

The five passions which I have here commenced to explain are 
so united or opposed the one to the other, that it is easier to 
consider them all together than to treat each of them separately, as 
wonder has been treated ; and their cause is not, as is that of the 
latter, in the brain alone, but also in the heart, the spleen, the liver, 
and in all the other portions of the body in as far as they serve for the 
production of the blood and consequently of the spirits. For, although 
all the veins conduct the blood which they contain towards the heart, 
yet it sometimes happens that the blood of certain of them is driven 
there with greater strength than that of others; it also happens 


Part Second 375 


that the openings by which it enters into the heart, or else those 
by which it issues out, are more enlarged or contracted on one 
occasion than on the other. 


ArticteE XOVII. 


The chief experiences that furnish us with the knowledge of these 
movements in Love. 

Now in considering the various alterations which experience 
causes us to observe in our body while our soul is agitated by 
various passions, I notice in love that when it occurs alone, that is, 
when it is unaccompanied by any strong joy, desire, or sadness, the 
beating of the pulse is equal and much fuller and stronger than is 
usually the case, that we feel a gentle heat in the breast, and that 
the digestion of food is accomplished very quickly in the stomach. 
In this way this passion is useful to health. 


Articte XCVIII. 

In Hatred. 

I notice, on the other hand, that in hatred the pulse is unequal, 
feebler, and often quicker; that we have fits of cold interspersed 
with a severe and biting heat in the breast difficult to describe ; that 
the stomach ceases to fulfil its functions and is inclined to vomit 
and reject the food that has been eaten, or at least to corrupt them 
and convert them into evil humours. 


ArticLe XCIX. 

In Joy. 

In joy, that the pulse is equal and quicker than usual, but that 
it is not so strong or full as in love, and that we feel an agreeable 
heat which is not only in the breast, but also spreads throughout 
all the other exterior parts of the body with the blood which we see 
present there in abundance; and yet that we sometimes lose our 
appetite because the digestion is not so active as usual. 


ARTICLE OC, 
In Sadness. 
In sadness, that the pulse is feeble and slow, and that we feel as 
it were constrictions round the heart which press upon it, and icy 
chills which congeal it and communicate their cold to the rest of 


376 The Passions of the Soul 


the body; and that nevertheless we continue in certain cases to 
have a good appetite and to feel that the stomach does not fail 
to do its duty, provided that there is no hatred mingled with the 
sadness. 


ArticLe Cl. 

In Desire. 

I finally notice this peculiarity about desire, that it agitates the 
heart more violently than any of the other passions, and furnishes 
more spirits to the brain, which, passing from thence into the 
muscles, render all the senses more acute, and all the parts of the 
body more mobile. 


ArticLe CII. 
The movement of the blood and spirits in Love. 


These observations, and many others which would be too lengthy 
to transcribe, have caused me to judge that when the understanding 
represents to itself some object of love, the impression which this 
reflection makes in the brain leads the animal spirits, by the nerves 
of the sixth part, towards the muscles which are around the intestines 
and stomach in the manner requisite to cause the juice of the food, 
which converts itself into new blood, to pass quickly towards the 
heart without stopping in the liver; and that being driven thither 
with more strength than any that is in the other parts of the 
body, it enters in greater abundance and excites there a stronger 
heat because it is coarser than that which has already been several 
times rarefied in passing and repassing through the heart. And 
this causes the spirits also to be sent to the brain, whose parts are 
coarser and more agitated than usual. And these spirits, fortifying 
the impression which the first thought of the agreeable object there 
makes, oblige the soul to pause over this reflection; and it is in 
this that the passion of love consists. 


ArtIcLE CIII. 

In Hatred. 

In hatred, on the other hand, the first thought of the object 
which brings about aversion so conducts the animal spirits which 
are in the brain towards the muscles of the stomach and intestines, 
that they prevent the juice of the food from mingling with the 
blood by closing up all the openings by which it usually flows there; 


Part Second 377 


and it also conducts them in such a way toward the little nerves 
of the spleen and of the lower portion of the liver, where is the 
receptacle of the bile, that the portions of the blood which are 
usually thrown back towards these parts issue from them and flow 
with that which is in the branches of the vena cava towards the 
heart ; and this causes many inequalities in its heat, insomuch that 
the blood which comes from the spleen hardly heats and rarefies 
itself at all, while on the contrary that which comes from the lower 
part of the liver, where the gall always is, enflames and dilates very 
quickly. In consequence of this the animal spirits which go to the 
brain also have very unequal parts and very extraordinary move- 
ments, from whence it comes about that they strengthen the ideas 
of hatred which are found to be already imprinted there, and dispose 
the soul to reflections which are full of sharpness and bitterness. 


ArtIcLE CIV. 

In Joy. 

In joy it is not so much the nerves of the spleen, the liver, or 
the stomach, or the intestines, which are active, as those which are 
in the whole of the rest of the body, and particularly that which is 
round the orifices of the heart, which, opening and enlarging these 
orifices, supplies the means whereby the blood which the other 
nerves drive from the veins to the heart may enter there and issue 
forth in a larger quantity than usual. And because the blood 
which then enters the heart has already passed and repassed there 
several times, having come from the arteries to the veins, it dilates 
very easily and produces spirits whose parts, being very equal and 
subtle, are proper for the formation and fortification of the im- 
pressions of the brain which give to the soul thoughts which are 
gay and peaceful. 


ArticLE CV, 

In Sadness. 

In sadness, on the contrary, the openings of the heart are much 
contracted by the small nerve which surrounds them, and the blood 
of the veins is in nowise agitated, which brings it to pass that very 
little of it goes towards the heart and yet the passages by which the 
juice of the food flows from the stomach and the intestines towards 
the liver remain open, which causes the appetite not to diminish at 
all, excepting when hatred, which is often united to sadness, closes 
them. 


378 The Passions of the Sow 


ArticLe OVI. 
_ In Desire. 


Finally, to the passion of desire the following fact is proper, 
namely, that the wish which we have to obtain some good, or to 
avoid some evil, promptly sends the animal spirits from the brain to 
all the portions of the body which may be of service in the actions 
requisite for this effect, and particularly to the heart and the parts 
which furnish it with most blood, so that in receiving greater 
abundance than usual, it sends a greater quantity of spirits towards 
the brain, both in order to maintain and fortify there the idea of 
this wish, and to pass from thence into all the organs of the senses 
and all the muscles which may be employed in obtaining that which 
we desire. 


Articte CVII. 


What is the cause of its movements in Love. 

And I deduce the reasons for all this from what has been said 
above, that there is a connection between our soul and our body 
such that when we have once joined some corporeal action with 
some thought, the one of the two never after presents itself to 
us without the other presenting itself at the same time. We see 
in the case of those who have in illness taken some concoction 
with great aversion, that they can neither drink nor eat afterwards 
any thing approaching it in taste without the same aversion coming 
back to them; and similarly they cannot think of the aversion in 
which the medicines are held, without the same taste coming back 
to them in thought. For it seems to me that the earliest passions 
that our soul had had when first it was joined to our body must be 
due to the fact that sometimes the blood or other juice which 
entered into the heart was a more suitable nutriment than usual 
for the maintenance there of heat, which is the principle of life, and 
that was the cause of the soul uniting itself to this nutriment of its 
own free will, that is to say liking it, and at the same time the 
animal spirits flowed from the brain to the muscles which might 
press or agitate the parts from which it had come to the heart, in 
order to cause them to send it yet more; and these parts were the 
stomach and the intestines, the agitation of which increases our 
appetite, or else the liver and lung likewise, which the muscles of 
the diaphragm may compress. That is why this same movement 
of animal spirits has always since accompanied the passion of love. 


Part Second 379 


Articte CVIII. 
In Hatred. 


Sometimes, on the other hand, there comes to the heart some 
juice of a foreign nature which was not qualified to maintain heat, 
or which even was capable of extinguishing it, and this was the 
reason that the spirits which rose from the heart to the brain 
excited in the soul the passion of hatred; and at the same time also 
these spirits went from the brain to the nerves which were able to 
drive the blood of the spleen and of the small veins of the liver 
towards the heart in order to prevent this hurtful juice from entering 
therein ; and further they went towards these nerves which could 
drive back this juice to the intestines and stomach, or sometimes 
likewise oblige the stomach to vomit: and from this it results that 
these same movements usually accompany the passion of hatred. 
And our eye shows us that there are in the liver numbers of veins 
or ducts of sufficient width by which the juice of the food could 
pass from the portal vein into the vena cava and from thence to the 
heart without delaying at all in the liver. But there is also an 
infinitude of others that are smaller, where it might stop, and which 
always contains blood in reserve as does the spleen also; which 
blood being coarser than that which is in the other portions of the 
body is capable of serving better as nourishment to the fire which is 
in the heart, when the stomach and intestines fail to supply it with 
nutriment. 


ArtIcLE CIX. 

In Joy. 

It has also sometimes happened in the beginning of our life that 
the blood contained in the veins was a nourishment sufficiently well 
suited to maintain the heat of the heart, and that they contained it 
in such a quantity that there was no need to derive any nourish- 
ment from elsewhere. And this has excited in the soul the passion 
of joy, and has at the same time caused the orifices of the heart to 
be more open than usual; it has also brought it to pass that the 
animal spirits (flowing abundantly from the brain, not alone into 
the nerves which serve for opening these orifices, but also generally 
speaking into all the others which drive the blood of the veins to 
the heart) prevent any fresh blood trom coming from the liver, 
spleen, intestines and stomach. That is why these same movements 


accompany joy. 


380 The Passions of the Soul 


ARTICLE CX 
In Sadness. 


Sometimes on the contrary it has happened that the body has 
lack of nourishment, and it is this that must give the soul its first 
experience of sadness—that sadness at least which is as yet free 
from intermixture with hatred. The same reason has also caused the 
orifices of the heart to be contracted, because they receive only a 
small quantity of blood; and a sufficiently notable proportion of 
the blood from the spleen is present because it is so to speak the 
ultimate reservoir which serves to furnish blood to the heart when 
enough does not come to it from elsewhere. That is why the 
movements of the spirits and of the nerves which serve to contract 
thus the cavities of the heart and to conduct there the blood of the 
spleen, invariably accompany sadness. 


ArticLE CXI. 

Of Desire. 

To conclude, all the first desires which the soul can have had 
when it was newly joined to the body have been desires of receiving 
the things that were suitable to it, and of repelling those which were 
hurtful ; and it has been to bring about these same effects that the 
spirits have henceforth commenced to produce movements in all 
the muscles and all the organs ot the senses, in every method in 
which they can move them. And this is the cause that now, when 
the soul desires something, the whole body becomes more agile and 
more disposed towards movement than it customarily is apart from 
desire. And when it further happens that the body is so disposed, 
that renders the desires of the soul stronger and more ardent. 


ArticLe CXII. 
The external signs of these Passions. 


That which I have set down here makes sufficiently clear the 
cause of the differences in the pulse and of all the other properties 
which I have above attributed to these passions, without there being 
any necessity for me to pause in order to explain them further. 
But because I have only remarked in each that which may be 
observed to accompany it when it is alone, and which serves for 
a knowledge of the movements of the blood and the spirits which 
produce them, it still remains for me to treat of the several exterior 


Part Second 381 


signs which usually accompany them, and which are much better 
observed when several are mingled with one another as they usually 
are, than when they are separated. ‘he principal of these signs 
are the actions of the eyes and face, changes of colour, tremors, 
languor, swooning, laughter, tears, groans and sighs. 


ArticLe CXIII. 


Of the actions of the Eyes and Face. 


There is no passion that is not evidenced by some particular 
action of the eyes. And that is so manifest in certain emotions 
that even the stupidest servants can remark by the eye of their 
master if he is or is not angry with them. But although these 
actions of the eyes are easily perceived, and that which they signify 
is known, it is not, for all that, easy to describe them, since each is 
composed of many changes which take place in the movement and 
shape of the eye which are so unique and so slight that we cannot 
perceive each one separately, although the result of their conjunction 
is very easily observed. We may say almost the same of the actions 
of the face which also accompany the passions, for although they 
are of greater extent than those of the eyes, it is at the same time 
hard to distinguish them ; and they are so little different that there 
are men who present almost the same mien when they weep as when 
they laugh. It is true that there are some which are remarkable 
enough, as are the seams in the forehead which come in anger, and 
certain movements of nose and lips in indignation and scorn ; but 
they do not so much appear to be natural as voluntary. And 
generally speaking all actions, whether of face or eyes, may be 
changed by the soul when, desiring to hide a passion, it vigorously 
calls up the image of a contrary one: so that we may make use of 
these actions as well in dissimulating our passions as in evidencing 
them, 


ARTICLE CXIV. 


Of changes of Colour. 

We cannot so easily prevent ourselves from flushing or becoming 
pale when some passion disposes us to do so, because these changes 
do not depend on the nerves and muscles, as do the preceding, and 
because they proceed more immediately from the heart, which may 
be called the source of the passions, inasmuch as it prepares the 
blood and the spirits for producing them. It is, however, certain 


382 The Passions of the Soul 


that the colour of the face only proceeds from the blood which, 
continually flowing from the heart by the arteries into all the veins, 
and from all the veins into the heart, produces more or less colour 
in the face, according as it to a larger or less extent fills the small 
veins which are towards its surface. 


ARTICLE CXY. 
How Joy causes us to flush. 


Joy thus makes the colour more vivid and more ruddy, because 
in opening the sluices of the heart it causes the blood to flow more 
quickly in all the veins, and because, becoming warmer and more 
subtle, it moderately distends all the parts of the face, and thus 
gives it a more cheerful and lively expression. 


Articte CXVI. 
How Sadness causes paleness. 


Sadness, on the contrary, in contracting the orifices of the heart, 
causes the blood to flow more slowly in the veins, and, becoming 
colder and thicker, the blood requires less space there, so that, 
retreating into those that are widest and which are nearest to the 
heart, it leaves the more remote; and since the most conspicuous 
of these are in the face, this causes it to become pale and sunk, more 
especially when the sadness is great, or when it supervenes quickly, 
as we see in sudden fright when the surprise increases the action 
which constricts the heart. 


ARTICLE CXVII. 
How we often flush though we are sad. 


But it often happens that we do not become pale in sadness, 
but on the contrary become red, which must be attributed to other 
passions which unite themselves to sadness, to wit, possibly desire, 
and sometimes also hatred. These passions, heating or agitating 
the blood which proceeds from the liver, intestines and other in- 
terior parts, drive it towards the heart, and from thence by the 
great artery to the veins of the face, without the sadness which 
closes more or less the orifices of the heart being able to prevent it, 
excepting when it is an extreme sadness. But although it be only 
moderate, it easily prevents the blood thus come into the veins of 
the face from descending towards the heart, while love, desire, or 


Part Second 383 


hatred, force into it other portions of the blood coming from the 
internal parts. That is why this blood, being arrested around the 
face, renders it red and even redder than during joy, because 
the colour of the blood appears so much the more as it flows less 
quickly, and also because it can thus better collect in the veins of 
the face than whe. the orifices of the heart are more open. This 
is principally seen in shame, which is made up of self-love and a 
pressing desire to avoid present disgrace which causes the blood 
of the interior parts to come towards the heart and then from 
thence by the arteries to the face, and there is also present a mode- 
rate amount of sadness which prevents this blood from returning 
to the heart. The same thing usually appears when we weep, for, 
as I shall afterwards maintain, it is love joined to sadness which 
most frequently causes tears; and the same thing is evidenced in 
anger, where frequently a prompt desire for vengeance is mingled 
with love, hatred and sadness. 


ArticLE CXVIII. 
Of Tremors. 


Tremors have two different causes; the one is that sometimes 
too little of the spirits in the brain passes into the nerves, and the 
other is that sometimes there comes too much to permit of the 
exact closing of the small passages of the muscle, which, in pur- 
suance of what has been said in Article XI, ought to be closed in 
order to determine the movements of the members. The first cause 
is evidenced in sadness and fear, as also when we tremble with 
cold ; for these passions may, just as well as the coldness of the 
air, so thicken the blood that it does not furnish enough spirits 
to the brain to permit of the despatch of some of them into the 
nerves. The other cause often appears in those who ardently 
desire something, and in those who are strongly moved by prayer, 
as also in those who are drunken. For these two passions, as well 
as wine, sometimes cause so many animal spirits to proceed to the 
brain that they cannot be conducted in a properly regulated way 
from thence to the muscles. 


ArtTICLE OXIX. 
Of Languor. 
Languor is a tendency to relax and be motionless, and this is 
experienced in all the members ; like tremors, it proceeds from the 
fact that sufficient animal spirits do not go into the nerves, but in 


384 The Passions of the Soul 


a different way. For the cause of tremors is that there are not 
sufficient spirits in the brain in order to carry out the determina- 
tions of the gland when it drives them towards some muscle, while 
langour proceeds from the fact that the gland does not determine 
them to go towards any particular muscle more than to others. 


ARTICLE CXX. 


How it is caused by love and by desire. 


And the passion which most usually causes this effect is love 
joined to the desire for a thing whose acquisition is not imagined 
to be at the time possible; for love so occupies the soul in con- 
sidering the object loved that it employs all the spirits which are 
in the brain in representing to it its image, and it checks all the 
movements of the glands which do not contribute to this result. 
And we must notice regarding desire that the property which I 
have attributed to it of rendering the body the more mobile, only 
belongs to it when we imagine the object desired to be such that 
we can from this time forth do something which serves towards 
its acquisition. For if we imagine, on the other hand, that it is 
impossible at this time to do anything which is useful for that 
end, all the agitation of desire remains in the brain, without in 
any way passing into the nerves: and, being entirely employed in 
there strengthening the idea of the desired object, it leaves the 
rest of the body languid 


Article OXXI 
That it may also be caused by other passions. 


It is true that hatred, sadness, and even joy, may also cause 
some languor when they are very violent, because they occupy the 
soul entirely in considering their object, principally when the desire 
of a thing to whose acquisition we cannot contribute anything at the 
present time is united to it. But because we pause much longer 
over the consideration of the objects to which we ally ourselves by 
our own free-will than those which we dissociate therefrom, and than 
any others, and as languor does not rest on a sudden surprise but 
requires some time in its formation, it is to be met with much 
more in love than in all the other passions. 


Part Second 385 


ArticLte CXXII. 

Of Swooning. 

A swoon is not far removed from death, for death results when 
the fire which is in our heart is extinguished altogether, and we 
only fall into a faint when it is stifled in such a way that there 
still remain some traces of heat which may afterwards rekindle it. 
There are, however, several indispositions of the body which cause 
us thus to fall into a faint, but amongst the passions it is only 
extreme joy which we observe as having the power to do so. And 
the manner in which [ believe it to bring about this effect is that, 
by opening the orifices of the heart to an unusual extent, the blood 
of the veins enters so suddenly, and in so large a quantity, that it 
cannot be rarefied there by the heat promptly enough to raise the 
little membranes which close the entrances of these veins, and thus 
it quenches the fire which it usually maintains when it only enters 
the heart in moderation. 


ARTICLE CXXIII. 

Why grief does not cause us to swoon. 

It would seem that a great grief falling on us suddenly ought 
so to close the orifices of the heart as to be able also to extinguish 
its fire, but nevertheless we do not observe that to happen, or if 
it does happen it is very rarely the case. From this I argue that 
the reason is that there can scarcely be so little blood in the heart 
as to be insufficient to maintain heat when its orifices are almost 
closed. 


ARTICLE CXXIV. 

Of Laughter. 

Laughter consists in the fact that the blood, which proceeds 
from the right orifice in the heart by the arterial vein, inflating the 
lungs suddenly and repeatedly, causes the air which they contain to 
be constrained to pass out from them with an impetus by the wind- 
pipe, where it forms an inarticulate and explosive utterance ; and 
the lungs in expanding eyually with the air as it rushes out, set in 
motion all the muscles of the diaphragm from the chest to the neck, 
by which means they cause motion in the facial muscles, which 
have a certain connection with them. And it is just this action of 
the face with this inarticulate and explosive voice that we call 
laughter. 


386 The Passions of the Soul 


ARTICLE CXXV. 

Why it does not accompany the greatest joys. 

But although it seems as though laughter were one of the 
principal signs of joy, nevertheless joy cannot cause it except when 
it is moderate and has some wonder or hate mingled with it. For 
we find by experience that when we are extraordinarily joyous the 
subject of this joy never causes us to burst into laughter, and we 
cannot even be so easily induced to do so by some other cause as 
when we are sad. And the reason of this is that in great joys the 
lung is always so full of blood that it cannot be further inflated by 
repeated gushes. 


ArticLeE CXXVI. 


What are its principal causes. 

And I can only observe two causes which make the lung thus 
inflate suddenly. ‘The first is the surprise of admiration or wonder, 
which, being united to joy, may open the orifices of the heart so 
quickly that a great abundance of blood suddenly entering on its 
right side by the vena cava, rarefies there, and, passing from thence 
by the arterial vein, inflates the lung. The other is the admixture 
of some liquor which increases the rarefaction of the blood, and 
I can find nothing which could do that but the most liquid part of 
that which proceeds from the spleen, which part of the blood being 
driven to the heart by some slight emotion of hatred, assisted by 
the surprise of wonder, and mingling itself there with the blood 
which proceeds from the other parts of the body which joy causes 
to enter there in abundance, may cause this blood to dilate there 
much more than usual. We observe the same thing in many other 
liquids which, when on the fire, suddenly dilate when we throw 
a little vinegar into the vessel where they are ; for the most liquid 
portion of the blood which comes from the spleen is in nature 
similar to vinegar. Experience also causes us to see that in all the 
possible occurrences which can produce this explosive laughter 
which proceeds from the lung, there is always some little element 
of hatred, or at least of wonder. And those whose spleen is not in 
a very healthy condition are subject to being not alone more sad, 
but also at intervals more gay and more disposed to laughter than 
the others, inasmuch as the spleen sends two sorts of blood to the 
heart, the one thick and coarse, which causes sadness, the other 
very fluid and subtle, which causes joy. And often, after having 


Part Second 387 


laughed much, we feel ourselves naturally inclined to sadness 
because the more fluid portion of the blood of the spleen being 
exhausted, the other, more coarse, follows it towards the heart. 


ArtIcLE CXXVII. 


Its cause in indignation. 


As to the laughter which sometimes accompanies indignation, it 
is usually artificial and feigned ; but when it is natural, it appears 
to proceed from the joy that we have in observing the fact that we 
cannot be hurt by the evil at which we are indignant, and, along 
with that, from the fact that we find ourselves surprised by the 
novelty or by the unexpected encountering of this evil. In this 
way joy, hatred and wonder contribute to it. At the same time 
I would fain believe that it may also be produced without any joy, 
by the movement of aversion alone, which sends blood from the 
spleen to the heart, where it is rarefied and driven from thence to 
the lung ; and this it easily inflates when it finds it almost empty. 
And speaking generally, all that can suddenly inflate the lung in 
this way causes the outward action laughter, excepting when sadness 
changes it into that of groans, and the cries which accompany 
tears. In reference to which Vives? writes of himself regarding a 
time when he had been long without eating, that the first pieces of 
food which he placed in his mouth caused him to laugh ; and this 
might proceed from the fact that his lung, emptied of blood by lack 
of nourishment, was promptly inflated by the first juice which 
passed from his stomach to his heart, and which the mere imagina- 
tion of eating could conduct there, even before the arrival of the 
food he was eating. 


ArTICLE OXXVIII. 


Of the origin of Tears. 

As laughter is never caused by the greatest joys, so tears do not 
proceed from an extreme sadness but only from that which is 
moderate and accompanied or followed by some feeling of love or 
likewise of joy. And in order to understand their origin properly, 
we must remark that although a mass of vapours continually escapes 
from all the portions of our body, there are at the same time none 
from which so much issues as the eyes, because of the size of the 

1 In the margin of the first edition: “I. L. Vives, 3. de Anima. cap. de 


Risu.” 


388 The Passions of the Soul 


optic nerves and the multitude of little arteries by which the vapours 
reach them; and as the sweat is simply composed of vapours which, 
issuing from the other parts of the body, are converted into water 
on their surface, so tears are formed from the vapours which issue 
from the eyes. 


ArticLe OXXIX. 


Of the manner in which vapours change into water. 

Now, as I have said in the Meteors, in explaining the manner in 
which the vapours of the air are converted into rain, that this 
proceeds from the fact that they are less agitated or more abundant 
than usual, so I believe that when those that issue from the body 
are much less agitated than usual, although they are not 30 
abundant, they do not any the less convert themselves into water, 
which causes the cold sweats which sometimes come from weakness 
when we are ill. And I believe that when they are much more 
abundant, provided that they are not also more agitated, they also 
convert themselves into water, which is the cause of the sweat 
which comes when we perform a certain amount of exercise. But 
then the eyes do not perspire, because during the exercise of the 
body, since the greater part of the animal spirits go into the muscles 
which serve to move it, less goes by the optic nerve to the eyes. 
And it is one and the same matter which forms blood when found 
in the veins or arteries, and spirits, when it is in the brain, nerves, 
or muscles, and vapours when it issues forth in the form of air, and 
finally sweat or tears when it condenses into water on the surface 
of the body or the eyes. 


ARTICLE CXXX. 
How that which causes pain in the eye excites it to tears. 


And I can only observe two causes which make the vapours 
which issue from the eyes change into tears. The first is when 
the figure of the pores by which they pass is changed by some 
accident or other; for that, retarding the movement of these 
vapours and changing their order, may cause them to be converted 
into water. ‘Thus the falling into the eyes of the tiniest mite 
suffices to draw some tears from them, because in exciting pain in 
them it changes the disposition of their pores in such a manner 
that when some become more contracted, the small portion of the 
vapours pass by less quickly ; and instead of their issuing forth as 


Part Second 389 


before at equal distances the one from the other, and thus remaining 
separate, they come into contact with one another, because the 
order of these pores is put out, and by this means they join one 
another and thus become converted into tears. 


ArtTIcLE CXXXI. 
How we weep owing to sadness. 


The other cause is sadness followed by love or joy, or generally 
speaking by some cause which makes the heart to drive forth much 
blood through the arteries. Sadness is requisite in weeping, because 
by chilling all the blood, it contracts the pores of the eyes; but 
since in proportion as it contracts them, it also diminishes the 
quantity of the vapours which they should allow to pass, that does 
not suffice to produce tears if the quantity of these vapours is not 
at the same time increased by some other cause. And there is 
nothing which increases it more than the blood which is sent to the 
heart in the passion of love ; we see likewise that those who are sad 
do not continually shed tears, but only at intervals, when they 
make some new reflection on the objects of their affection. 


ArticLe CXXXII. 


Of the groans which accompany tears. 

And then the lungs are also sometimes inflated suddenly by the 
abundance of the blood which enters them, and which drives out 
from them the air which they contained, which, issuing by the 
windpipe, begets the groans and cries which usually accompany 
tears. And these cries are as a rule shriller than those which 
accompany laughter, although they are produced almost in the same 
way. ‘The reason of this is that the nerves which serve to enlarge 
or contract the organs of the voice in order to make it louder or 
sharper, being united to those which open the orifices of the heart 
in joy, and contract them in sadness, cause these organs to enlarge 
or contract at the same time. 


ArticLE CXXXIII. 


Why children and old people easily weep. 

; Children and old people are more disposed to weep than those 
of middle age, but for different reasons. Old people often weep 
from affection and joy ; for these two passions united together send 
much blood to the heart and hence much vapour to the eyes: and 


390 The Passions of the Soul 


the agitation of these vapours is so much retarded by the coldness 
of their bodily disposition’, that they easily convert themselves into 
tears, even although no sadness has preceded. And if some old 
people also weep very easily from vexation, it is not so much the 
temperament of their body as that of their mind that disposes them 
to do so, and it only happens to those who are so feeble that 
they allow themselves to be entirely overcome by small causes of 
sorrow, fear or pity. The same occurs with children who never cry 
with joy, but much more frequently owing to sadness, even when it 
is not accompanied with love; for they have always enough blood 
to produce much vapour, the movement of which, being retarded by 
sadness, is converted into tears. 


ARTICLE CX XXIV. 


Why some children become pale instead of crying. 


At the same time there are some who become pale instead of 
weeping, when they are angry, which may demonstrate in them 
an extraordinary judgment and courage, that is to say, when it 
proceeds from their considering the greatness of the evil and pre- 
paring themselves for a stout resistance, in the same way as do 
older people. But more usually it is a mark of an evil disposition, 
at least when it proceeds from a tendency towards hatred or fear, 
for these are passions which diminish the material of tears. And, 
on the contrary, we see that those who weep very easily are inclined 
to love and pity. 


ARTICLE CXXXV. 

Of Sighs. 

The cause of sighing is very different from that of tears, even 
though like the latter it presupposes sadness. For, our tendency to 
weep when the lungs are full of blood is replaced by a tendency 
to sigh when they are almost empty, and when some imagination of 
hope or joy opens the orifices of the venous artery which sadness had 
contracted ; because then the small amount of blood which remains 
in the lungs, suddenly falling into the left side of the heart by this 
venous artery and being driven thence by the desire of arriving at 
this joy, which agitates all the muscles of the diaphragm and chest 
at the same time, the air is promptly driven through the mouth 
iato the lungs, in order there to fill the place left by this blood 
and that is what we call sighing. 


1 leur naturel Fr, 


Part Second 391 


ARTICLE CXXXVI. 


From whence proceed the effects of the passions which are peculiar 
to certain men. 

For the rest, in order in a few words to supply all that can 
be added regarding the diverse effects or diverse causes of the 
passions, I shall content myself with repeating the principle on 
which all that I have written about them rests, ¢.e. that there is 
a connection between our soul and our body of such a nature that 
when we have once connected some corporeal action with some 
thought, the one of the two does not present itself to us afterwards 
without the other presenting itself also; and that it is not always 
the same actions which are connected with the same thoughts. 
For that suffices to provide a reason for the whole of that which each 
of us can observe as peculiar to himself or to others regarding this 
matter, and which has not been here explained. And, for example, 
it is easy to reflect that the strange aversions of certain people 
which prevent their being able to endure the scent of roses or 
the presence of a cat, or things of that sort, only proceed from the 
fact that at the beginning of their lives they have suffered much 
unpleasantness through some such objects, or else have shared in 
the feelings of their mother who has so suffered before they were 
born. For it is certain that there is a relation between all the 
movements of the mother and those of the child in her womb, 
inasmuch as what is harmful to the one is hurtful to the other. 
And the scent of roses may have caused a severe headache to a 
child while still in the cradle, or a cat may have terrified him 
without anyone having been aware of it, or of any memory remaining 
of it afterwards, although the idea of aversion which he then had 
for these roses or for this cat remain imprinted on his brain to the 
end of his life. 


ARTICLE CXX XVII. 


Of the function of the five passions here explained inasfar as 
they relate to the body. 

After having given definitions of love, of hatred, of desire, of joy, 
and of sadness, and having treated of all the corporeal movements, 
which cause or accompany them, we only have here to consider their 
function. And regarding this it must be observed that, in accord- 
ance with the institutions of nature they all relate to body, and are 
only bestowed on the soul in so far as it is united to body. In this 


392 The Passions of the Soul 


way their natural use is to incite the soul to consent and contribute 
to the actions which may serve to maintain the body, or to render 
it in some manner more perfect. And from this point of view sad- 
ness and joy are the two foremost that are employed. For those 
things that are hurtful to the body are immediately made known to 
the soul only by the feeling of pain which it experiences, and which 
first of all produces in it the passion of sadness, then the hatred 
of what causes this pain, and, in the third place, the desire to 
rid oneself of it. Similarly, likewise, the soul is only immediately 
notified of things useful to the body by some sort of pleasant 
stimulation which causes joy within it, then causes the love of 
that which is believed to be its cause to arise, and finally brings 
about the desire to acquire what is capable of causing a continuance 
of that joy, or else causes us to rejoice again in the future after a 
similar sensation. And this shows us that they are all five very 
useful relatively to the body, and even that sadness in some way 
ranks higher and is more essential than joy, and hatred than love, 
because it is of more importance to repel the things which injure 
and may destroy, than to acquire those which add some perfection 
without which we may subsist. 


ArticteE CXXXVIII. 


Of their faults and the means of correcting them. 


But, although this use of the passions is the most natural which 
they can have, and though all the animals devoid of reason direct 
their lives simply by bodily movements similar to those which in 
our case usually follow these passions, and to which they incite 
our soul to consent, it is nevertheless not always good, inasmuch 
as there are many things hurtful to the body which cause no sad- 
ness at the first, or which even produce joy, and others which are 
useful to it although at first they are distasteful. And, in addition 
to that, they almost always cause the good things, as well as the 
evil, to seem much greater and more important than they are; so 
that they incite us to seek after the one and flee from the others 
with more ardour and care than is desirable, just as we also see 
that the brutes are often deceived by baits, and that, in order to 
evade small evils, they precipitate themselves into greater evils. 
That is why we should make use of experience and reason in order 
to distinguish good from evil, and to recognize their just value, so 
that we may not take the one for the other, or rush into anything 
too violently. 


Part Second 393 


ARTICLE CXXXIX. 


Of the function of the same passions inasfar as they pertain to 
the soul, and to begin with, of love. 


This would be sufficient if we had in us body only, or did it 
form the better part of us, but inasmuch as it is only the lesser 
part, we should chiefly consider the passions in so far as they per- 
tain to the soul, with respect to which love and hatred proceed 
from knowledge and precede joy and sadness, excepting when these 
last two hold the place of the knowledge of which they are species. 
And when this knowledge is true, that is to say when the things 
which it constrains us to love are truly good, and those which it 
constrains us to hate are truly evil, love is incomparably better 
than hatred ; it can never be too great, and it never fails to produce 
joy. I assert that this love is extremely good, because, uniting to 
us what is truly good, it in so far adds perfection to us. I also 
assert that it cannot be too great, for all that which the most 
excessive love can do is to unite us so perfectly to these good 
things, that the love which we have in particular for ourselves, 
places no distinction therein; this I believe can never be bad. 
And it is necessarily followed by joy, because it represents to us 
what we love as a good which pertains to us. 


ARTICLE OXL. 
Of Hatred. 


Hatred, on the contrary, cannot be so small that it does not 
hurt ; and it is never devoid of sadness. I assert that it cannot 
be too small because we are not incited to any action by the hatred 
of evil to which we cannot be yet more stimulated by the love of 
good to which it is opposed, at least when this good and this evil 
are sufficiently known. For I confess that the hatred of evil 
which pain alone calls forth, is necessary in respect to body; but I 
speak here only of that which proceeds from a clearer knowledge, 
and I only relate it to the soul. I assert also that it is never 
without sadness, because evil, being merely a privation, cannot be 
conceived without some real subject in which it subsists; and 
there is nothing real which has not some goodness in it, and so 
the hatred which removes us from some evil, by the same means 
removes us from the good to which it is united, and the priva- 
tion of this good being represented to our soul as a defect which 


394 The Passions of the Soul 


pertains to it, excites sadness therein. For example, the hatred 
which removes from us the evil habits of someone, by the same 
means removes us from his company in which we might inde- 
pendently of that find some good of which we are vexed at being 
deprived. And similarly in all the other hatreds we may observe 
some element of sadness. 


ArticLe CXLI. 
Of Desire, Joy, and Sadness. 


As to desire, it is evident that, when it proceeds from a true 
knowledge, it cannot be bad, provided that it is not excessive, and 
that this knowledge rules it. It is also evident that joy cannot 
fail to be good, nor sadness to be bad when we view them in their 
relation to the soul, because it is in the latter that consists all 
the inconveniences and embarrassments which the soul obtains from 
evil, and in the former that consists all the enjoyment of good 
which pertains to it. And thus, if we had no body, I should 
venture to say that we could not too greatly abandon ourselves 
to love, joy, nor too much avoid hatred and sadness ; but the cor- 
poreal movements which accompany them may all be hurtful to 
health when they are very violent, and, on the contrary, be useful 
to it when they are only moderate. 


ArticLE CXLII. 


Of Joy and Love, compared with Sadness and Hatred. 


For the rest, since hatred and sadness should be rejected by the 
soul, even when they proceed from a true knowledge, this should 
with greater reason be the case when they proceed from some false 
opinion. But people may doubt whether love and joy are good or 
not, when they are thus established on a bad foundation ; and it 
appears to me that if they are only considered precisely as they are 
in themselves in reference to the soul, it may be said that, although 
joy is less solid, and love less advantageous, than when they have 
a better foundation, they do not cease to be preferable to sadness 
and hatred equally badly founded. In this way, in the vicissitudes 
of life where we cannot avoid the risk of being deceived, we always 
do much better to incline towards the passions which make for 
good, rather than towards those which relate to evil, even if it be 
only to avoid it; and even a false joy is often of more value than 


Part Second 395 


a sadness whose cause is true. But I dare not say the same of love 
in respect of hate; for when hatred is just, it only removes us 
from the subject which contains the evil from which it is good to 
be separated, while the love which is unjust unites us to things 
which may hurt, or at least which do not deserve to be so much 
considered by us as they are, which demeans and degrades us. 


Articte CXLITI. 


Of the same passions inasmuch as they relate to Desire. 


And we must be very careful to remark that what I have just 
said of these four passions takes place only when they are con- 
sidered precisely in themselves, and do not incite us to any action. 
For in so far as they excite in us desire by means of which they 
regulate our habits, it is certain that all those whose cause is false 
may harm, and that on the contrary all those whose cause is just 
may be of use, and, even when they are equally badly founded, joy 
is usually more hurtful than sadness, since the latter, by providing 
restraint and fear, disposes in a certain degree to prudence, while 
the other makes those who abandon themselves to it rash and 
imprudent. 


ARTICLE CXLIV. 


Of Desires whose accomplishment depends only on us. 


But because these passions can only bring us to any kind of 
action by the intervention of the desire which they excite, it is 
this desire particularly which we should be careful to regulate, and 
it is in this that the principal use of morality consists. And, as 
I have just said that desire is always good when it follows a true 
knowledge, so it cannot fail to be bad when it is founded on some 
error. And it seems to me that the error which we most ordinarily 
commit in respect to desires is that of not sufficiently distinguishing 
the things which entirely depend on us from those which do not 
so depend. For as to those which only depend on us, 7.¢. on our 
free will, it is sufficient to know that they are good, not to have it 
in our power to desire them with too much ardour, because it is 
following after virtue to perform good actions which depend on 
ourselves, and it is certain that we cannot have a too ardent desire 
for virtue. Besides which, since that which we in this way desire 
is incapable of failing to succeed with us, as it is on ourselves 


396 The Passions of the Soul 


alone that it depends, we shall always receive from it all the 
satisfaction that we have expected from it. But the fault which 
is usually committed in this is never in desiring too much, but 
only in desiring too little; and the sovereign remedy against 
that is to free the mind as much as possible from all kinds of 
other less useful desires, and then to try to know very clearly 
and to consider with attention the goodness of that which is to 
be desired. 


ArtTIcLE CXLV 


Of those Desires which depend only on other things, and what 
is the meaning of chance. 


As to the things which in nowise depend on us, good as 
they may be, we should never desire them with passion, not only 
because they may not happen and thus may vex us so much the 
more in proportion to the strength of our desire for them, but 
principally because, in occupying our thought, they turn us away 
from applying our affection to other things, the acquisition of 
which depends on us. And there are two general remedies for 
these vain desires: the first is generosity, of which I shall speak 
later: the second is that we ought frequently to cause ourselves 
to reflect on divine Providence and represent to ourselves that it 
is impossible that anything should happen in any other way than 
as it has been determined by this Providence from all eternity. In 
this way it is, so to speak, a fatality or an immutable necessity, 
which must be opposed to chance, in order to destroy it by treating 
it as a chimera which only proceeds from the error of our under- 
standing. For we can desire nothing but that which we hold to 
be in some manner possible, and we can only hold to be possible 
those things that do not depend on us, in so far as we reflect that 
they depend on chance, ¢.e. that we judge that they may happen, 
and that similar things have formerly happened. And this opinion 
is founded only on the fact that we do not know all the facts that 
contribute to each effect ; for when a thing that we have judged 
to depend on chance does not come to pass, that shows that some 
one of the causes that were necessary in order to produce it has 
failed, and in consequence that it was absolutely impossible, and 
that no such thing has ever happened—that is, a thing in the 
production of which a similar cause was also lacking—so that if 
we had not been ignorant of that beforehand, we should not have 
ever judged it possible, nor consequently have desired it. 


Part Second 397 


ArticLE CXLVI. 
Of those that depend on us and on others. 


We must, then, entirely set aside the vulgar opinion that there 
is outside of us a Fortune which causes things to happen or not to 
happen in accordance with its pleasure, and we must recognize that 
all is conducted by divine Providence, whose eternal decree is so 
infallible and immutable, that, excepting the things that this 
same decree has willed to leave dependent on our free will, we 
ought to reflect that in relation to us nothing happens which is 
not necessary, and so to speak decreed by fate, and that thus we 
cannot without error desire that it should happen otherwise. But 
because the greater part of our desires extends to things which do 
not depend entirely on us, nor entirely on others, we ought to 
distinguish exactly in them what depends only on us, in order to 
extend our desire to that alone; and as to what remains, although 
we ought in this to hold success to be absolutely decreed by fate 
and immutable, in order that our desire may not occupy itself 
therewith, we should not omit to consider the reasons which make 
it more or less to be hoped for, in order that they may serve to 
regulate our actions. Thus, to take an example, if we have busi- 
ness in some particular place to which we may go by two different 
roads, the one of which is usually much safer than the other, 
although the decree of Providence is perhaps such that, if we go 
by the road which we judge to be safest, we shall not escape being 
robbed by so doing, while, on the other hand, we might pass by 
the other without danger, we should not for all that be indifferent 
as to which one we choose, nor rest on the immutable fatality of 
the said decree. But reason desires us to choose the road which is 
usually most safe, and our desire should be accomplished in respect 
to that when we have followed it, whatever evil may thus befall 
us, because this evil, having been relatively to us inevitable, we have 
had no reason to expect exemption from it, but merely claim to 
have done the best that our understanding has been able to point 
out, as I suppose to have been the case. And it is certain that 
when we exercise ourselves in thus distinguishing fatality from 
fortune, we easily accustom ourselves so to regulate our desires, 
that, in as far as their accomplishment depends only on us, they 
may always provide us with complete satisfaction. 


398 The Passions of the Soul 


ArticLe CXLVII. 


Of the interior emotions of the soul. 

I shall only add here a consideration which, it seems to me, 
we shall find of much service in preventing us from suffering any 
inconvenience from the passions; and that is that our good and 
our harm depend mainly on the interior emotions which are only 
excited in the soul by the soul itself, in which respect they differ 
from its passions, which always depend on some movement of the 
spirits. And, although these emotions of the soul are frequently 
united to the passions which are similar to them, they may like- 
wise often be met with along with others, and even take their 
origin from those which are contrary to them. For example, when 
a husband laments his dead wife whom (as sometimes happens) 
he would be sorry to see brought to life again, it may be that his 
heart is oppressed by the sadness that the appurtenances of woe 
and the absence of one to whose conversation he was used excite 
in him; and it may be that some remnants of love or pity which 
present themselves to his imagination draw sincere tears from his 
eyes, notwithstanding that he yet feels a secret joy in the inmost 
parts of his heart, the emotion of which possesses so much power 
that the sadness and the tears which accompany it can do nothing 
to diminish its force. And when we read of strange adventures 
in a book, or see them represented in a theatre, which sometimes 
excite sadness in us, sometimes joy, or love, or hatred, and gene- 
rally speaking all the passions, according to the diversity of the 
objects which are offered to our imagination; but along with that 
we have pleasure in feeling them excited in us, and this pleasure 
is an intellectual joy which may as easily take its origin from 
sadness as from any of the other passions. 


ArtTicLE CXLVIII. 


That the exercise of virtue is a sovereign remedy against the 
passions. 

And, inasmuch as these inward emotions touch us most nearly, 
and in consequence have much more power over us than the pas- 
sions from which they differ, and which are met with in conjunction 
with them, it is certain that, provided our soul is always possessed of 
something to content itself with inwardly, none of the troubles that 
come from elsewhere have any power to harm it, but rather serve 


Part Second 399 


to increase its joy, inasmuch as, seeing that it cannot be harmed 
by them, it is made sensible of its perfection. And in order that our 
soul may thus have something with which to be content, it has no 
need but to follow exactly after virtue. For whoever has lived in 
such a way that his conscience cannot reproach him for ever having 
failed to perform those things which he has judged to be the best 
(which is what I here call following after virtue) receives from 
this a satisfaction which is so powerful in rendering him happy that 
the most violent efforts of the passions never have sufficient power 
to disturb the tranquillity of his soul 


PART THIRD. 


OF PARTICULAR PASSIONS. 


ARTICLE CXLIX. 
Of Esteem and Disdain. 


After having explained the six primitive passions which are so 
to speak the genera of which all the others are species, I shall here 
observe succinctly what in particular there is in each of these others, 
and I shall keep to the same order in which I have before enumerated 
them. The two first are esteem and disdain; for although their 
names usually signify only passionless opinions on our part as to 
the value of a particular thing, still, at the same time, because there 
often arises from these opinions passions to which we have not given 
particular names, it seems to me that such may be attributed to 
them. And esteem, in so far as it is a passion, is an inclination 
which the soul possesses to represent to itself the value of the thing 
esteemed, which inclination is caused by a particular movement of 
the animal spirits conducted into the brain in such a way that they 
there fortify the impression which serve for this end. The passion of 
disdain, on the contrary, is an inclination possessed by the soul to 
consider the baseness or smallness of that which it disdains, caused 


by the movement of the spirits which fortify the idea of this 
smallness. 


ArtIcLE CL. 


That these two passions wre only species of wonder or admiration. 
These two passions are thus only species of wonder ; for when 
we do not wonder at the greatness or smallness of an object, we do 
not make more or less of it than reason tells us that we ought to 
do in its regard, so that we then esteem or disdain it without passion. 


Part Third 401 


And, although often the esteem is excited in us by love, and the 
disdain by hate, that is not universally so, and only proceeds from 
the fact that we are more or less inclined to consider the greatness 
or smallness of an object because of our having more or less affection 
for it. 


Articte CLI. 
That we may esteem or disdain ourselves. 


Now these two passions may generally speaking relate to all 
sorts of objects; but they are chiefly remarkable when we relate 
them to ourselves, i.e. when it is our own merit that we esteem or 
despise. And the movement of the spirits which causes them is 
then so manifest, that it even changes the mien, the gestures, the 
gait, and generally speaking all the actions of those who have a 
better or a worse opinion of themselves than usual. 


ArticLe CLII. 
For what reasons we may esteem ourselves. 


And because one of the principal parts of wisdom is to know in 
what way and for what cause each person ought to esteem or despise 
himself, I shall here try to place on record my opinion on the 
matter. I only remark in us one thing which might give us good 
reason to esteem ourselves, to wit, the use of our free will, and the 
empire which we possess over our wishes. Because it is for those 
actions alone which depend on this free will that we may with 
reason be praised or blamed ; and this in a certain measure renders 
us like God in making us masters of ourselves, provided that we do 
not through remissness lose the rights which He gives us. 


ArtictE CLIII. 


In what Generosity consists. 


Thus I think that true generosity which causes a man to esteem 
himself as highly as he legitimately can, consists alone partly in 
the fact that he knows that there is nothing that truly pertains 
to him but this free disposition of his will, and that there is no 
reason why he should be praised or blamed unless it is because he 
uses it well or ill; and partly in the fact that he is sensible in 


402 The Passions of the Soul 


himself of a firm and constant resolution to use it well, that is to 
say, never to fail of his own will to undertake and execute all the 
things which he judges to be the best—which is to follow perfectly 
after virtue. : 


ArticLe CLIV. 

That Generosity prevents our despising others. 

Those who have this knowledge and feeling about themselves 
easily persuade themselves that every other man can also have them 
in his own case, because there is nothing in this that depends on 
another. That is why they never despise anyone; and, although 
they often see that others commit faults which make their feebleness 
apparent, they are at the same time more inclined to excuse than to 
blame them, and to believe that it is rather by lack of knowledge 
than by lack of good-will that they commit them. And, as they do 
not think of themselves as being much inferior to those who have 
more goods or honours, or even who have more mental gifts, more 
knowledge, more beauty, or, generally speaking, who surpass them 
in some other perfections, they do not at the same time esteem 
themselves much above those whom they surpass, because all these 
things seem to them to be of very small account as compared with 
the good-will for which alone they esteem themselves, and which 
they also suppose to exist, or at least to be capable of, existing in 
all other men. 


Articte CLV. 
In what consists a virtuous humility. 


The most high-minded are thus usually the most humble; and 
virtuous humility simply consists in the fact that the reflection 
which we make on the infirmity of our nature and on the faults 
which we may formerly have committed, or are capable of com- 
mitting, which are not less than those which may be committed by 
others, is the reason that we do not prefer ourselves to any one else, 
and that we think that others, having their free-will as well as we, 
can likewise use it as well as we. 


ArtTIoLE CLVI. 


What are the properties of generosity, and how it serves as a 
remedy against the disorders of the passions. 

Those who are generous in this way are naturally impelled 
to do great things and at the same time to undertake nothing of 


Part Third 403 


which they do not feel themselves capable. And because they do 
not hold anything more important than to do good to other men 
and to disdain their individual interests, they are for this reason 
always perfectly courteous, affable and obliging towards everyone. 
And along with that, they are entirely masters of their passions, 
particularly of the desires, of jealousy and envy, because there is 
nothing the acquisition of which does not depend on them, which 
they think of sufficient worth to merit being much sought after ; 
they are likewise free of hatred to other men because they hold all 
in esteem ; and of fear, because the confidence which they have in 
their virtue assures them ; and finally of anger, because, esteeming 
very little all those things that depend on others, they never give 
so much advantage to their enemies as to recognise that they are 
hurt by them. 


ArticLe CLVII. 

Of Pride. 

All those who form a good opinion of themselves for some other 
reason, whatever it may be, have not a true generosity, but merely 
a pride which .is always very vicious, although it is all the more 
so, the more the cause for which we esteem ourselves is unjust. 
And the most unjust cause of all is when we are proud without any 
reason, that is to say, without our thinking so far as this goes that 
there is in us any merit for which we ought to be esteemed, simply 
taking the view that merit is not taken into consideration at all, 
and that as glory is regarded as nothing but usurpation, those who 
ascribe most of it to themselves really possess the greatest amount 
of it. This vice is so unreasonable and absurd, that I should scarcely 
have believed that there were men who could allow themselves to 
give way to it, if no one were ever unjustly praised ; but flattery is 
everywhere so common that there is no man so defective that he 
does not often see himself esteemed for things that do not merit 
any praise, or even that merit blame; and this gives occasion to the 
most ignorant and stupid to fall into this species of pride. 


ArtioLe CLVIII. 


That its effects are contrary to those of generosity. 

But whatever may be the reason for which we esteem ourselves, 
if it is other than the will which we feel in ourselves always to make 
good use of our free-will, from which I have stated that generosity 


404 The Passions of the Soul 


proceeds, it always produces a very reprehensible pride, which is so 
different from this true generosity that it has effects entirely con- 
trary to it. For all those other gifts such as cleverness, beauty, 
riches, honours, &c. usually being esteemed so much the more 
highly as they are found in the smaller number of persons, and 
being even for the most part of such a nature that they cannot 
be communicated to many persons, that causes the proud to try 
to depreciate all other men, and, being slaves to their desires, they 
have a soul incessantly agitated by hatred, envy, jealousy or anger. 


ArticLe CLIX. 

Of vicious humility. 

As to abjectness or a vicious humility, it consists principally in 
the fact that men are feeble or have a lack of resolution, and that, 
as though they had not the entire use of their free-will, they cannot 
prevent themselves doing things of which they know that they will 
afterwards repent; it also consists in their considering that they 
cannot subsist by themselves nor do without many things the 
acquisition of which depends on others. It is thus directly opposed 
to noble-mindedness, and it often happens that those who have the 
most abject minds are the most arrogant and haughty, just as the 
most noble-minded are the most modest and humble. But while 
it is the case that those whose minds are strong and noble do 
not change in disposition in respect of the prosperity or adversity 
that comes to them, those whose minds are feeble and abject are 
led simply by Fortune, and prosperity does not puff them up less 
than adversity makes them humble. Frequently we even observe 
that they abase themselves with every mark of shame in the presence 
of those from whom they expect some profit or fear some ill, and, at 
the same time, that they insolently place themselves above those 
from whom they neither hope nor fear anything. 


ArTICLE CLX. 


What ts the movement of the animal spirits in these passions. 


For the rest, it is easy to recognise that pride and poor spirit are 
not only vices, but also passions, because the emotions attached to 
them readily appear outwardly in those who are suddenly puffed 
up or cast down by some new occasion that produces them ; but we 
may doubt whether generosity and humility, which are virtues, may 
likewise be passions, because their movements appear to be less, 


Part Third 405 


and because it seems that virtue has not so much in common with 
passion as has vice’. At the same time I see no reason preventing 
the same movement of the spirits which serves to strengthen a 
thought when it has a foundation which is bad, from also fortifying 
it when it has one which is just. And, since pride and generosity 
consist only in the good opinion which we have of ourselves, and 
only differ inasmuch as this opinion is unjust in the one case and 
just in the other, it appears to me that we may relate them to one 
and the same passion, which is excited by a movement composed of 
the passions of wonder, of joy and of love, both of that which 
we have for ourselves, and of that which we have for the thing 
which causes us to hold ourselves in estimation. On the other 
hand, the movement which excites humility, whether virtuous or 
vicious, is composed of the passions of wonder, sadness, and of the 
love which we have for ourselves, mingled with the hatred which 
we have for the faults which cause us to disdain ourselves. And 
the whole difference which I observe in these movements is that the 
passion of wonder has two properties—the first being that surprise 
renders it strong from its commencement, and the other that it is 
equal in its continuance, ie. that the spirits continue to move 
according to the same tenor in the brain. Of these properties the 
first is met with much more in pride and poor spiritedness than in 
generosity and virtuous humility; and, on the other hand, the second 
is better seen in the latter than in the other two. The reason of 
this is that vice usually proceeds from ignorance, and that it is those 
who know themselves the least who are the most subject to become 
proud and to humiliate themselves more than they ought to do; 
because all that happens to them anew surprises them, and brings it 
to pass that in attributing it to themselves they wonder at them- 
selves, and esteem or despise themselves according as they judge 
that what happens to them is to their advantage or is not so. But 
because often after a thing which has made them proud, another 
follows which humiliates them, the movement of their passions is 
variable. ‘There is, on the contrary, nothing in generosity which 
is not consistent with virtuous humility or anything else which 
might change them, and this causes their movements to be firm, 
constant, and always very similar to themselves. But they are 
not due so much to surprise because those who esteem themselves 
in this way are sufficiently aware what are the causes which make 

1 «Ne symbolise par tant aveo la Passion, que fait le vice’ ¥. V. Latin: 
‘nec videtur ita virtuti cum Passionibus conyenire ao vitio.’ 


406 The Passions of the Soul 


them esteem themselves; at the same time we may say that these 
things are so wonderful (i.e. the power of making use of one’s free- 
will, which causes us to value ourselves, and the infirmities of the 
subject in whom this power rests, which cause us not to place 
too high a regard on ourselves) that on every occasion on which 
we present them to ourselves anew, they always supply a new cause 
for wonder. 


Articte CLXI. 


How Generosity may be acquired. 


And it must be observed that what we commonly name virtues 
are habitudes in the soul, which dispose it to certain thoughts in 
such a way that they are different from these thoughts, but can 
produce them, and reciprocally can be produced by them. It must 
also be observed that these thoughts may be produced by the soul 
alone, but that it often happens that some movement of the spirits 
fortifies them, and that then they are actions of virtue, and at the 
same time passions of the soul. Thus, while there is no virtue to 
which it appears as though good native qualities contribute so much 
as to that which causes us only to esteem ourselves at a just value, 
and as it is easy to believe that all the souls that God places in 
human bodies are not equally noble and strong (which is the reason 
for my having called this virtue generosity, following the usage of 
our language, rather than magnanimity, following the usage of the 
Schools where it is not much known) it is yet certain that good 
instruction serves much in correcting the faults of birth, and that, 
if we frequently occupy ourselves in the consideration of what free- 
will is, and how great are the advantages which proceed from a 
firm resolution to make a good use of it, as also, on the other hand, 
how vain and useless are all the cares which exercise the ambitions, 
we may excite in ourselves the passion, and then acquire the virtue 
of generosity, which, being so to speak the key of all other virtues, 
and a general remedy for all the disorders of the passions, it ap- 
pears to me that this consideration is well worthy of notice. 


ArTICLE CLXII. 
Of Veneration. 


Veneration, or respect, is an inclination of the soul not only to 
esteem the object which it reveres, but also to submit itself thereto 
with some fear, in order to try to render it favourably inclined. In 
this way we possess veneration only for free causes which we judge 


Part Third 407 


to be capable of doing good or evil to us, without our knowing 
which of the two they may do. For we have love and devotion 
rather than a simple veneration for those from whom we expect 
nothing but good, and we have hatred for those from whom we expect 
only evil. And, if we do not believe that the cause of this good 
or evil is free, we do not submit ourselves to it in order to 
render it favourable to us. Thus when the pagans had vene- 
ration for woods, fountains, or mountains, it was not properly 
speaking these dead things which they revered, but the divinities 
which they believed to preside over these. And the movement 
of the animal spirits which excites veneration is composed of that 
which excites wonder and that which excites fear, of which I shall 
speak later. 


ArtTicLE CLXIII. 

Of Disdain. 

At the same time what I call disdain is the inclination which 
the soul has to despise a free cause, in judging that, although in 
its nature it is capable of doing good or evil, it is nevertheless so 
much below us that to us it can do neither. And the movement 
of the spirits which excites it is composed of those which excite 
wonder and security or assurance. 


ArtTIcLeE CLXIV. 


Of the functions of these two passions. 

And it is the noble-mindedness and feebleness of soul or poor 
spirit, which determine the good and the evil employment of these 
two passions; for the more noble and generous our soul is, the 
more inclination we have to render to each man what pertains to 
him; and thus we have not only a very profound humility in 
regard to God, but we also render without any repugnance all the 
honour and respect which is due to each man according to the rank 
and authority which he has in the world, and we disdain nothing 
but vices. Those who have a low and feeble mind, on the contrary, 
are subject to sin by excess, sometimes inasmuch as they revere 
and fear things which are worthy of disdain alone, and some- 
times inasmuch as they insolently despise those which most merit 
reverence; and they often pass very quickly from extreme im- 
piety to superstition, and then from superstition to impiety, so 
that there is no vice nor disorder of the mind of which they are 
not capable. 


408 The Passions of the Soul 


ArticLE CLXV. 
Of Hope and Fear. 


Hope is a disposition of the soul to persuade itself that what 
it desires will come to pass: and this is caused by a particular 
movement of the spirits, ie. by that of joy and that of desire 
mingled together ; and fear is another disposition of the soul which 
persuades it that the thing hoped for will not come to pass; and 
it must be observed that, although these two passions are contrary, 
we can nevertheless have them both at the same time, that is to 
say, when we represent to ourselves different reasons at the same 
time, some of which cause us to judge that the accomplishment of 
desire is easy, while the others make it seem difficult. 


ArticLE CLXVI. 
Of Confidence and Despair. 


And no one of these passions ever accompanies desire without 
its giving place in some way to the other; for when hope is so 
strong that it entirely drives away fear, it changes its nature and 
is called security or confidence; and when we are assured that 
what we desire will come to pass, though we continue to desire 
that it shall come to pass, we nevertheless cease to be agitated by 
the passion of desire, which made its accomplishment be regarded 
with anxiety. In the same way, when fear is so extreme that it 
removes all place for hope, it converts itself into despair ; and this 
despair, representing the matter as impossible, entirely extinguishes 
desire, which only relates to things that are possible, 


ArticteE CLXVIL. 
Of Jealousy. 


Jealousy is a species of fear which is related to the desire we 
have to preserve to ourselves the possession of some thing ; and it 
does not so much proceed from the strength of the reasons that 
suggest the possibility of our losing that good, as from the high 
estimation in which we hold it, and which is the cause of our 
examining even the minutest subjects of suspicion, and taking 
them to be very considerable reasons for anxiety. 


Part Third 409 


ArticLE CLXVIII. 


In how far this passion is right. 


And because we ought to have more care in preserving these 
good possessions that are very great than those which are less, this 
passion may be just and right in some circumstances. Thus, for 
example, a captain who is defending a position of great importance 
has the right to be jealous of it, that is to say, to be mistrustful 
of all the means by which it might be surprised ; and a good woman 
is not blamed for being jealous of her honour, that is, when she is 
not only guarding herself against acting wrongly, but also avoiding 
even the slightest reason for scandal. 


ArticLE CLXIX. 


In what it is blameworthy. 


But we scorn a miser when he is jealous of his treasure, that is, 
when he gloats over it, and desires never to be away from it for 
fear he may be robbed of it ; for money is not worthy of being guarded 
with so much care. And we despise a man who is jealous of his 
wife, because it shows that he does not love her in the right way, 
and that he has a bad opinion of himself or of her. I repeat that 
he does not love her in the right way, since if he had a true love 
for her, he would not have any inclination to distrust her; but it is 
not properly speaking she whom he loves, but just the good which 
he conceives as consisting in having sole possession of her, and he 
would not fear to lose this good did he not judge himself to be 
unworthy of it, or else conceive that his wife is unfaithful. For 
the rest this passion only relates to suspicions and distrust, since it 
is not properly speaking being jealous to try to avoid some evil 
when we have just cause for fearing it. 


ARTICLE CLXX. 


Of Lrresolution. 


Irresolution is likewise a species of fear, which, holding the 
soul so to speak in a state of suspension between the many 
actions which it may perform, is the cause for its executing none, 
and thus for its having time for choosing before deciding, and this 
function is truly of a certain value. But when it lasts longer 
than it ought to do, and causes the time requisite for action to 


410 The Passions of the Soul 


be employed in deliberation, it is very bad. And I assert that it 
is a species of fear, notwithstanding that it may happen, when we 
have a choice of several things the excellence of which seems to be 
very equal, that we remain uncertain and irresolute without our 
having for all that any fear ; for this kind of irresolution proceeds 
only from the object presented, and not from any movement of the 
animal spirits; chat is why this is not a passion unless it be that 
the fear we have of choosing wrongly augments our uncertainty. 
But this fear is so common and so strong in some people that 
often, although they have nothing to choose, and see only one 
thing which they may take or leave, it keeps them back and 
causes them to stop futilely and seek for something else; and 
then it is an excess of irresolution which proceeds from a too great 
desire to do right and from a feebleness of understanding, which, 
having no clear and distinct conceptions, simply has many confused 
ones. That is why the remedy against this excess is to accustom 
oneself to form certain and determinate judgments concerning all 
things that present themselves, and to believe that we always do 
our duty when we do what we judge to be best, although we may 
possibly judge very badly. 


ArticLE CLXX1 
Of Courage and Bravery. 


Courage, when it is a passion and not a custom or natural 
inclination, is a certain heat or agitation which disposes the soul 
forcibly to bend itself powerfully to the execution of the things 
which it desires to do, of whatever nature they may be; and 
bravery is a species of courage which disposes the soul to the 
execution of the things that are the most dangerous. 


ArticLE OLXXII. 
Of Emulation. 


And emulation is also a species of courage, but in another sense; 
for we may consider courage as a genus which divides into as many 
species as there are different objects, and into as many others as it 
has causes; in the first aspect bravery is a species, and in the 
second, emulation. And this last is none other than a heat which 
disposes the soul to undertake things which it hopes to be able on 
its own account to succeed in, because it sees them succeed with 


Part Third 4ll 


others; and thus it is a species of courage of which the external 
cause is example. I repeat the external cause, because it must 
ever have in addition to that an inward cause, which consists in 
the fact that the body is so constituted that desire and hope have 
more power in causing a quantity of blood to pass to the heart than 
has fear or despair to prevent it. 


ArticLE CLXXIII. 


How Bravery depends on hope. 


For it must be remarked that although the object of bravery is 
dithculty, from which there usually follows fear, or even despair, so 
that it is in matters the most dangerous and desperate that we 
employ most bravery or courage, it is yet essential that we should 
hope, or even that we should be assured, that the end which is 
proposed will succeed, in order to oppose with vigour the difficulties 
that we meet with But this end is different from this object of 
bravery ; for we could not be assured of and hopeless of the same 
thing at the same time. Thus when the Decii threw themselves 
against their enemies and rushed to certain death, the object of 
their bravery was the difficulty of preserving their life during this 
action, for which difficulty they had only despair, for they were 
certain of perishing ; but their end was to animate their soldiers by 
their example, and to cause them to win the victory, for which they 
had hope; or again their end also was to obtain after their death a 
glory of which they were assured. 


ArtTICcLE CLXXIV. 


Of Cowardice and Fear. 

Cowardice is directly opposed to courage, and it is a languor or 
coldness which prevents the soul from proceeding to the execution 
of things which it would do were it exempt from this passion ; and 
fear or terror, which is contrary to bravery, is not only a coldness, 
but also a perturbation and astonishment of the soul, which takes 
from it the power of resisting the evils which it thinks lie at hand. 


ArtIcLE CLXXV. 


Of the uses of Cowardice. 
And, although I cannot persuade myself that nature has given 
to men any passion which is always vicious and has no good and 


412 The Passions of the Soul 


praiseworthy use, I have yet much trouble in guessing what end 
these two can serve. It merely seems to me that cowardice has 
some use when it exempts us from taking the pains which we 
might be incited to take by probable reasons, if other more 
certain reasons, which have caused them to be judged useless, 
had not excited this passion; for besides the fact that it exempts 
the soul from these pains, it is secondly useful also for the body, 
inasmuch as, in restraining the movement of the spirits, it prevents 
us from dissipating our forces. But usually it is very hurtful, 
because it turns away the will from useful actions; and because it 
only proceeds from the fact that we have not enough hope or desire, 
we only need to augment within us these two passions in order to 
correct it. 


ArticLE CLXXVI. 
Of the uses of Fear. 


As to the significance of fear or terror, I do not see that it can 
ever be praiseworthy or useful ; it likewise is not a special passion, 
but merely an excess of cowardice, astonishment and fear, which is 
always vicious, just as bravery is an excess of courage which is 
always good, provided that the end proposed is good; and because 
the principal cause of fear is surprise, there is nothing better for 
getting rid of it than to use premeditation and to prepare oneself 
for all eventualities, the fear of which may cause it. 


ArticLE CLXXVII. 
Of Remorse. 


Remorse of conscience is a species of sadness which comes from 
the doubt which we have that a thing which we are doing or have 
done is good; and it necessarily presupposes doubt. For if we 
were entirely assured that what we are doing was bad, we should 
abstain from doing it, inasmuch as the will only tends towards 
things which have some appearance of goodness; and if we were 
assured that what we have already done was bad, we should 
experience repentance for it, not simply remorse, And the use of 
this passion is to make us examine whether that of which we doubt 
is good or not, or to prevent our doing it another time so long as 
we are not certain that it is good. But because it presupposes evil, 
the better part would be never to have occasion to feel it; and we 
may prevent it by the same means as those whereby we may exempt 
ourselves from irresolution. 


Part Third 413 


Articte CLXXVIII. 

Of Scorn. 

Derision or scorn is a sort of joy mingled with hatred, which 
proceeds from our perceiving some small evil in a person whom we 
consider to be deserving of it; we have hatred for this evil, we have 
joy in seeing it in him who is deserving of it ; and when that comes 
upon us unexpectedly, the surprise of wonder is the cause of our 
bursting into laughter, in accordance with what has been said above 
of the nature of laughter’. But this evil must be small, for if it is 
great we cannot believe that he who has it is deserving of it, unless 
when we are of a very evil nature or bear much hatred towards him. 


ArticLeE CLXXIX. 

Why the least perfect are usually most given to mockery. 

And we notice that people with very obvious defects such as 
those who are lame, blind of an eye, hunched-backed, or who have 
received some public insult, are specially given to mockery ; for, 
desiring to see all others held in as low estimation as themselves, 
they are truly rejoiced at the evils which befall them, and they hold 
them deserving of these. 


ARTICLE CLXXX. 

Of the function of ridicule. 

As regards the modest bantering which is useful in reproving 
vices by making them appear ridiculous, so long as we do not laugh 
at them ourselves or bear any hatred towards the individuals con- 
cerned, it is not a passion, but a quality pertaining to the well 
disposed man which gives evidence of the gaiety of his temper and 
the tranquillity of his soul, which are characteristic marks of virtue ; 
it often also shows the ingenuity of his mind in knowing how to 
present an agreeable appearance to the things which he ridicules. 


Article CLXXXI. 

Of the function of laughter in ridicule. 

And it is not wrong to laugh when we hear the jests of another ; 
these jests may even be such that it would be difficult not to laugh 
at them; but when we ourselves jest, it is more fitting to abstain 
from laughter, in order not to seem to be surprised by the things 
that are said, nor to wonder at the ingenuity we show in inventing 
them. And that makes those who hear them all the more surprised. 

1 p. 386. 


414 The Passions of the Soul 


ArticLE CLXXXII. 

Of Envy. 

What we usually call envy is a vice which consists in a perver- 
sion of nature which causes certain people to be annoyed with the 
good which they see coming to others, but I here use the word to 
signify a passion which is not always vicious. Envy, then, in so far 
as it is a passion, is a kind of sadness mingled with hatred, which 
proceeds from our seeing good coming to those whom we consider 
unworthy of it; and we cannot think this with any reason excepting 
in relation to the good things of fortune. For as regards those of 
the soul, or even of the body, inasmuch as we possess them from 
birth, it is sufficient so far as worthiness is concerned that we have 
received them from God before being capable of committing any 
evil. 


Anrticte CLXXXIII. 


How it may be either just or unjust. 


But when fortune sends good things to some one who is truly 
unworthy of them, and envy is only excited in us because, naturally 
loving justice, we are vexed that it is not observed in the distribu- 
tion of these good things, our sentiments may be excusable, more 
especially when the good which we envy in others is of such a kind 
that it may be converted into evil in their hands, as when it is some 
charge or office in whose exercise they may comport themselves ill. 
When we desire the same good for ourselves and are prevented from 
having it because others who are less worthy possess it, this passion 
is rendered more violent; and it does not cease to be excusable 
provided that the hatred which it contains relates solely to the bad 
distribution of the good which we envy, and not to the persons who 
possess it or distribute it. But there are few who are sufficiently 
generous and just not to bear hatred to those who get the better of 
them in the acquisition of a good which is not communicable to 
many, and which they had desired for themselves, although those 
who acquired it are as worthy or even more so. And what is usually 
most envied is glory; for although the glory of others does not 
prevent our being able to aspire to it, it yet renders access to it 
more difficult, and heightens the price we must pay for it. 


Part Third 415 


ArTIOLE CLXXXIV. 


From whence it comes that the envious are subject to have a leaden 
compleaion. 


For the rest, there is no vice which so detracts from the happiness 
of men as that of envy ; for, in addition to the fact that those who 
are tainted with it distress themselves, they also disturb to the 
utmost of their power the pleasure of others; and usually they have 
a leaden hue, that is to say, one of mingled yellow and black like 
battered blood, whence envy is in Latin called liver, which accords 
very well with what has been said above regarding the movements 
of the blood in sadness and hatred. For the former causes the 
yellow bile which proceeds from the lower portion of the liver, and 
the black which proceeds from the spleen, to expand from the heart 
by the arteries into all the veins, and the latter causes the blood in 
the veins to have less heat, and to flow more slowly than usual, 
which suffices to render the colour livid. But because the bile, 
yellow as well as black, may also be sent into the veins by many 
other causes, and because envy does not send them there in 
sufficiently great quantity to change the shade of the colour, except 
when it is great and of long duration, we must not think that all 
those in whom we observe this colour are inclined thereto. 


ARTICLE CLXXXV. 

Of Pity. 

Pity is a species of sadness, mingled with love or good-will 
towards those whom we see suffering some evil of which we consider 
them undeserving. It is thus contrary to envy by reason of its 
object, and to scorn because it considers its objects in another way. 


ArticLeE CLXXXVI. 


Those who are the most given to pity. 


Those who feel themselves very feeble and subject to the 
adversities of fortune appear to be more disposed to this passion 
than others, because they represent the evil of others as possibly 
occurring to themselves; and then they are moved to pity more by 
the love that they bear to themselves than by that which they bear 
to others. 


416 The Passions of the Soul 


ArticLe CLXXXVII. 


How the most noble-minded are touched by this passion. 


Nevertheless those who are most generous and strongest in 
mind, inasmuch as they fear no ill for themselves and hold them- 
selves to be beyond the powers of fortune, are not exempt from 
compassion when they see the infirmity of other men and hear 
their plaints; for it is a part of generosity to wish well to one 
and all. But the sadness of this pity is no longer bitter, and, like 
that caused by the tragic actions which we see represented in a 
theatre, it is more external and in the senses than in the interior of 
the soul, which has yet the satisfaction of thinking that it does its 
duty in compassionating the afflicted. And there is this difference 
here that while the ordinary man has compassion on those who 
lament their lot because he thinks that the evils from which 
they suffer are very vexatious, the principal object of the pity of 
the greatest men is the weakness of those whom they see bemoaning 
their fate, because they do not consider that any accident which 
might possibly happen would be so great an ill as is the cowardice 
of those who cannot endure it with constancy ; and although they 
hate vices, they do not for all that hate those whom they see subject 
to them, but only pity them. 


ArticLE CLXXXVUL 
Who are those who are not touched by it. 


But it is only the evilly disposed and envious, who naturally 
hate all men, or those who are so brutal and blinded by good 
fortune, or rendered so desperate by evil fortune that they do not 
consider that any evil can happen to them, who are insensible to 
pity. 


Article CLXXXIX. 
Why this passion moves us to weep. 


For the rest we weep very easily in this passion because love, 
sending much blood towards the heart, causes many vapours to issue 
from the eyes, and the coldness of sadness, retarding the agitation of 


these vapours, causes them to change into tears, in accordance with 
what has been said above. 


Part Third 417 


ARTICLE CXC, 
Of Self-Satisfaction. 


The satisfaction which those who pursue virtue constantly 
have, is a habitude of their soul which is called tranquillity and 
repose of conscience; but that which is newly acquired, when we 
have just done some action which we think good, is a passion, i.e. 
a species of joy which I consider to be the sweetest of all joys, 
because its cause depends only on ourselves. At the same time 
when this cause is not just, i.e. when the actions from which we 
derive much satisfaction are not of great importance or are even 
vicious, it is absurd, and only serves to produce pride and an im- 
pertinent arrogance ; and this we observe particularly in those who, 
believing themselves to be pious, are merely bigoted and given over 
to superstitions. That is to say they are those who, under the 
pretence that they go frequently to church, that they recite many 
prayers, that they wear their hair short, that they fast, that they 
give alms, think themselves to be absolutely perfect, and imagine 
themselves to be such close friends of God that they can do nothing 
to displease Him, and that all that their passion presents is well- 
directed zeal, although it sometimes guides them into the greatest 
crimes that can be committed by men, such as the betrayal of towns, 
the assassination of princes, the extermination of entire peoples, for 
the sole reason that they do not follow their opinions. 


ArgticLe CXCI. 
Of Repentance. 


Repentance is directly opposed to self-satisfaction and is a 
species of sadness which comes from our believing ourselves to 
have committed some evil action; and it is very bitter because its 
cause proceeds from ourselves alone, though this does not prevent 
its being very useful when it is the case that the action of which 
we repent is evil, and when we have a certain knowledge of it, 
because it incites us to do better another time. But it often 
happens that feeble minds repent of the things they have done 
without knowing assuredly that they are evil; they only persuade 
themselves because they fear it is so, and if they had done the 
opposite, they would have repented in the same way; and this is 
an imperfection in them deserving of pity. ‘I'he remedies for this 
fault are the same as those which serve to remove irresolution. 


418 The Passions of the Soul 


ArticLE CXCII. 
Of Favour. 


Favour is, properly speaking, a desire to see good coming to 
some one for whom one has good will: but here I make use of 
this word to signify this will inasmuch as it is excited in us by 
some good action on the part of him for whom we have it. For 
we are naturally impelled to love those who do the things which 
we esteem to be good, even though no good comes to us by so 
doing. In this sense favour is a species of love, not of desire, 
although the desire to see good come to him whom one favours 
always accompanies it; and it is usually united to pity because 
the tribulations which we see falling upon the unfortunate are the 
cause of our reflecting all the more on their merits. 


ARTICLE CXCIII. 
Of Gratitude. 


Gratitude is also a species of love excited in us by some action 
on the part of him for whom we have it, by which also we believe 
that he has done us some good or at least had that intention. It 
has thus the same content as favour, and so much the more in that it 
is founded on an action which affects us, and of which we have the 
desire to make a return. ‘That is why it has much more strength, 
especially in the minds of those who are, to however small a degree, 
noble and generous. 


ARTICLE CXCIV. 
Of Ingratitude. 


As to ingratitude it is not a passion, for nature has not placed 
in us any movement of the spirits which excites it; it is merely 
a vice directly opposed to gratitude, inasmuch as the former is 
always virtuous and one of the principal bonds that bind together 
human society. That is why this vice is found only in men who 
are brutal and very arrogant, and who think that all things are their 
due; or in stupid people, who never reflect on the benefits that 
they receive; or feeble and abject persons who, being sensible of 
their infirmity and need, basely seek the help of others, and after 
they have received it, hate their benefactors because, not having 
the will to render them the like, or despairing to be able to do 


Part Third 419 


80, and imagining that every one is as mercenary as they, and that 
no good thing is accomplished without the hope of recompense, they 
think they have deceived them. 


ARTICLE CXCV. 

Of Indignation. 

Indignation is a species of hatred or aversion which we have 
by nature against those who do some evil of whatever sort it be; 
and it is often mingled with envy or pity, but yet it has a very 
different object. For we are indignant only with those who do 
good or evil to persons who are undeserving of it; but we are 
envious of those who receive this good, and we pity those who 
receive the evil. It is true that it is in some ways doing evil to 
possess a good of which we are not worthy [digne]; and this may 
be the reason why Aristotle and his successors, supposing envy to 
be always a vice, have termed by the name indignation that passion 
which is not vicious. 


ARTICLE CXOVI. 


Why it is sometimes united to pity, and sometimes to scorn. 

It is likewise in some way receiving evil to do evil, from 
whence it comes that some unite pity to their indignation, and 
others scorn, according as they are disposed to good will or evil 
towards those whom they observe committing faults; and it is 
thus that the laughter of Democritus and the tears of Heraclitus 
have proceeded from the same cause. 


ARTICLE CXOVII. 


That it is often accompanied by wonder and is not incompatible 
with joy. 

Indignation is often likewise accompanied by wonder ; for we 
usually suppose that all things will be done in the manner we 
judge they ought to be done, that is, in the way we esteem to be 
good ; that is why, when it happens otherwise, it surprises us, and 
we wonder at it. Itis also not incompatible with joy, although it 
is more usually united to sadness; for when the evil as to which 
we are indignant cannot hurt us, and we consider that we would 
not desire to do the same, that gives us some pleasure ; and it is 
possibly one of the causes of the laughter which sometimes accom- 
panies this passion. 


420 The Passions of the Soul 


Articte CXCVIII. 
Of its Use. 


For the rest, indignation is noticed much more in those who 
wish to appear virtuous than in those who really are so; for, 
although those who love virtue cannot without aversion see the 
vices of others, they do not become impassioned excepting against 
those that are greatest and most extraordinary. It is being ill- 
tempered! and fretful to have much indignation for things of 
slight importance; it is being unjust, to have it for things not 
blameworthy at all; and it is being impertinent and absurd not to 
restrict this passion to the actions of men and to extend them to 
the works of God or nature, as do those who, never being content 
with their condition or fortune, dare to find subject for criticism in 
the conduct of the world and in the secrets of Providence. 


ARTICLE CXCIX. 
Of Anger. 


Anger is also a species of hatred or aversion which we have 
towards those who have done some evil to or have tried to injure not 
any chance person but more particularly ourselves. Thus it has the 
same content as indignation, and all the more so in that it is founded 
on an action which affects us, and for which we desire to avenge 
ourselves, for this desire almost always accompanies it; and it is 
directly opposed to gratitude, as indignation is to favour. But it is 
incomparably more violent than these three other passions, because 
the desire to repel harmful things and to revenge oneself, is the 
most persistent of all desires. It is desire, united to self-love, 
which furnishes to anger the agitation of the blood that courage 
and bravery can cause; and hatred brings it to pass that it is 
mainly the bilious blood coming from the spleen and the small veins 
of the liver that experiences this agitation and enters into the heart, 
where, because of its abundance and of the nature of the bile with 
which it is mingled, it excites a heat which is more severe and 
ardent than is that which may be excited by love or by joy. 


1 difficile Fr. 


Part Third 421 


ARTICLE CC. 


Why those whom it makes flush are less to be feared than those 
whom it makes blanch. 


And the external signs of this passion are different according to 
the difference of personal temperaments and the diversity of the 
other passions which compose it or unite themselves with it. We 
thus see people who become pale or who tremble when they become 
angry, and we see others who become flushed or who even weep ; 
and we usually judge that the anger of those who grow pale is more 
to be feared than the anger of those who become red. And the reason 
of this is that when we do not desire to, or are unable to revenge our- 
selves otherwise than by our expression and words, we employ all our 
heat and all our strength from the commencement of our emotion, and 
this is the reason that we become red, besides which sometimes the 
regret and self-pity that we have, since we cannot avenge ourselves 
otherwise, is the reason why we weep. And, on the other hand, 
those who hold themselves in and make up their minds to a greater 
vengeance, become sad from thinking themselves obliged to behave 
so by the action which angers them ; and they are sometimes also 
afraid by reason of the evils which may follow on the resolution 
which they have taken, which renders them pale, cold and trembling 
to begin with, But when they afterwards come to execute their 
vengeance, they become warm again in proportion as they had been 
cold to begin with, just as we notice that fevers which commence 
with chill usually become the most severe. 


ARTICLE CCI. 


That there are two sorts of anger, and that those who have the 
most goodness are most subject to the former. 

This shows us that we can distinguish two kinds of anger: the 
one which is very hasty and manifests itself very much on the 
surface, but which yet has little effect and can be easily appeased ; 
the other which does not show itself so much to begin with, but 
which all the more powerfully gnaws the heart and has more dangerous 
effects. Those who have much goodness and much love are most 
subject to the first, for it does not proceed from a profound hatred, 
but from an instant aversion, which surprises them, because, being 
impelled to imagine that all things should go in the way which they 
judge to be best, so soon as it happens otherwise, they wonder and 


422 The Passions of the Soul 


frequently are displeased, even although the matter does not affect 
them personally, because, having much affection, they interest 
themselves for those whom they love in the same way as for them- 
selves. ‘Thus what would only be cause for indignation in the case 
of another, is for them a cause of anger; and because the inclination 
which they have to love causes them to have much heat and much 
blood in their heart, the aversion which surprises them cannot send 
there bile in so small a quantity that it does not cause at first a great 
commotion in this blood. But this commotion does not last, because 
the strength of the surprise does not continue, and because, as soon 
as they perceive that the subject which has vexed them ought not 
to affect them so much, they repent of it. 


ArticteE CCII. 


That it is weak and base spirits which most permit themselves to 
give way to the latter. 


The other kind of anger in which hatred and sadness pre- 
dominate, is not so apparent at first if it be not perhaps that it 
causes the face to grow pale; but its strength is little by little 
increased by the agitation of an ardent desire to avenge oneself 
excited in the blood, which, being mingled with the bile which is 
sent towards the heart from the lower part of the liver and spleen, 
excites there a very keen and ardent heat. And as it is the most 
generous souls who have most gratitude, it is those who have most 
pride, and who are most base and infirm, who most allow themselves 
to be carried away by this kind of anger; for the injuries appear so 
much the greater as pride causes us to esteem ourselves more, and 
likewise the more we esteem the good things which they remove; 
which last we value so much the more, as our soul is the more 
feeble and base, because they depend on others. 


ArticLE CCIII. 


That noble-mindedness serves as a remedy against its excesses. 

For the rest, although this passion is useful in giving us 
strength in repelling injuries, there is yet no passion an excess of 
which we should more carefully avoid, because, in disturbing our 
judgment, they often cause us to commit faults of which we have 
afterwards to repent, and they even sometimes prevent our repelling 
these injuries as well as we might have done had we sufiered less 


Part Third 423 


emotion. But as there is nothing which makes it excessive so much 
as pride, so I think that noble spirit is the best remedy which can be 
found against its excesses, because, causing us to esteem very little 
all the good things which may be taken away, and on the other 
hand to esteem highly the liberty and absolute dominion over self 
that we cease to have when we allow ourselves to be offended by 
some one, it brings it to pass that we have nothing but disdain, or 
at the most indignation, for those injuries which others are wont to 
resent angrily. 


ARTICLE CCIV. 

Of Glory. 

What I here call by the name glory is a species of joy founded 
on self-love, which proceeds from the belief or hope we have of being 
praised by certain others. It is thus different from the internal 
satisfaction that comes from our belief that we have performed 
some good action; for we are sometimes praised for things which 
we do not believe to be good, and blamed for those we believe to be 
better. But both are species of self-esteem as well as species of 
joy; for seeing that we are esteemed by otheis is a reason for 
esteeming ourselves. 


ARTICLE CCV. 

Of Shame. 

Shame, on the contrary, is a species of sadness, also founded on 
self-love, which proceeds from the apprehension or the fear which 
we possess of being blamed ; besides that it is a species of modesty 
or humility and mistrust of self. For when we esteem ourselves so 
highly that we cannot imagine ourselves to be disdained by any, we 
cannot easily be ashamed. 


ArticLte COVI, 


Of the uses of these two passions. 

Glory and shame have the same functions in so far as they incite 
us to virtue, the one by hope, and the other by fear. It is only 
necessary to inform one’s judgment as to what is truly worthy of 
being blamed or praised in order that we may not be ashamed of 
doing well or make our vices a source of vanity, as happens in the 
case of many. But it is not good to rid oneself entirely of these 
passions as the Cynics used to do; for although common people 


424 The Passions of the Soul 


judge very ill, yet because we cannot live without others and it is 
important to us to be esteemed by them, we ought frequently to 
follow their opinions rather than ours respecting the external aspect 
of our actions. 


Articte CCVII. 
Of Impudence 


Impudence or effrontery, which is a disdain of shame and 
frequently of glory also, is not a passion, because there is not in us 
any special movement of the spirits which excites it; but it is a 
vice opposed to shame and also to glory, inasmuch as both are good, 
just as ingratitude is opposed to gratitude and cruelty to pity. 
And the principal cause of effrontery proceeds from a man’s having 
frequently received great affronts ; for there is no one who does not 
in his youth imagine that praise is a good, and infamy an evil, 
much more important to life than it is found by experience to be, 
when, on receiving some signal affronts, he sees himself to be entirely 
deprived of honour and disdained by all men. That is why such 
men become shameless who, only estimating good or evil by their 
bodily well-being, see that after these affronts they flourish just as 
much as before or even sometimes much more, because they are free 
from many trammels imposed upon them by honour, and because 
they discover that if the loss of their goods is united to their 
disgrace, charitable people are always found who give to them. 


ARTICLE COVIII. 
Of Disgust. 


Disgust is a species of sadness which proceeds from the same 
cause as that from which joy earlier proceeded. For we are so 
constituted that the greater part of the things as to which we rejoice 
are only good in our regard for a time, and afterwards become tire- 
some. This is specially true in respect of eating and drinking which 
are useful only so long as we have an appetite, and are hurtrul when 
we have it no longer ; and because they then cease to be agreeable 
to the taste’ this passion is termed disgust}, 


1 gofit and dégoat, Fr, 


Part Third 425 


ARTICLE CCIX. 
Of Regret. 


Regret is also a kind of sadness which has a particular bitterness 
inasmuch as it is always united to a certain despair and to the 
memory of the pleasure which gave us joy, for we regret nothing 
but the good things regarding which we rejoiced and which are so 
lost that we have no hope of recovering them at the time and in the 
guise in which we regret them. 


ARTICLE CCX 
Of Cheerfulness. 


Finally, what I call cheerfulness is a species of joy in which 
there is this peculiarity, that its sweetness is increased by the 
recollection of the evils which we have suffered, and of which we 
are relieved, in the same way as we feel freed of some heavy 
burden which we have for a long time borne on our shoulders. 
And I observe nothing very remarkable in these three passions, 
nor have I placed them here but in order to follow the enu- 
meration which I made above; yet it seems to me that this 
enumeration has been useful in order to show that we have 
omitted none which were worthy of particular consideration. 


ARTICLE CCXI. 
A general remedy against the Passions. 


And now that we are acquainted with them all, we have much 
less reason to fear them than we formerly had. For we see that 
they are all good in their nature and that we have nothing to 
avoid but their evil uses or their excesses, against which the 
remedies which I explained might suffice, if each one of us took 
sufficient heed to practise them. But because I have placed 
amongst these remedies the forethought and diligence whereby 
we can correct our natural faults in exercising ourselves in 
separating within us the movements of the blood and spirits 
from the thoughts to which they are usually united. I confess 
that there are few people who are sufficiently prepared in this 
way to meet all the accidents of life, and that these movements 
excited in the blood by the objects of the passions follow so 
promptly from these single impressions that are made in the brain 


426 The Passions of the Soul 


and from the disposition of the organs, although the soul contri- 
butes in no wise to them, that there is no human wisdom capable 
of resisting them when sufficient preparation is not made for doing 
so. Thus many people cannot prevent themselves from laughing 
on being tickled, even though they have no pleasure in it; for 
the impression of joy and surprise which caused them formerly to 
laugh for the same reason, being once more awakened in their 
imagination, causes their lung to be suddenly inflated in spite of 
themselves by the blood which the heart sends to it. In this way 
those who are naturally much carried away by their disposition 
towards emotions of joy or pity, or fear or anger, cannot prevent 
themselves from fainting, weeping, or trembling, or from having 
their blood agitated just as though they had a fever, when their 
imagination is violently affected by the object of some one of these 
passions. But what we can always do on such occasions, and what 
I think I can here put forward as the most general remedy and 
that most easy to practise against all excesses of the passions, is 
that, when we feel our blood to be thus agitated, we should be 
warned of the fact, and recollect that all that presents itself before 
the imagination tends to delude the soul and causes the reasons 
which serve to urge it to accomplish the object of its passion to 
appear much stronger than they are, and those which serve to 
dissuade it to be much weaker. And when the passions urge 
us only towards things the execution of which necessitates some 
delay, we ought to abstain from pronouncing any judgment on the 
spot, and to divert ourselves by other thoughts until time and rest 
shall have entirely calmed the emotion which is in the blood. 
And finally, when it incites us to actions regarding which it is 
requisite that an immediate resolution should be taken, the will 
must make it its main business to consider and follow up the 
reasons which are contrary to those set up by the passions, 
although they appear to be less strong; just as when we are 
suddenly attacked by some enemy, the occasion does not permit 
of our taking time to deliberate. But it seems to me that what 
those who are accustomed to reflect on their actions can always 
do when they feel themselves to be seized with fear, is to try to 
turn their thoughts away from the consideration of danger by 
representing to themselves the reasons which prove that there is 
much more certainty and honour in resistance than in flight. And 
on the other hand, when they feel that the desire of vengeance 
and anger incites them to run thoughtlessly towards those who 


Part Third 427 


attack them, they will recollect that it is imprudence to lose their 
lives when they can without dishonour save themselves, and that, 
if the match is very unequal, it is better to beat an honourable 
retreat or ask quarter, than to expose oneself doggedly to certain 
death. 


ARTICLE CCXII. 


That it is on them alone that all the good and evil of this 
life depends. 


For the rest, the soul may have pleasures of its own, but as 
to those which are common to it and the body, they depend 
entirely on the passions, so that the men whom they can most 
move are capable of partaking most of enjoyment in this life. It 
is true that such men may also find most bitterness when they 
do not know how to employ them well, or fortune is contrary to 
them. But the principal use of prudence or self-control is that it 
teaches us to be masters of our passions, and to so control and 
guide them that the evils which they cause are quite bearable, and 
that we even derive joy from them all. 


NOTES DIRECTED AGAINST A 
CERTAIN PROGRAMME 


PREFATORY NOTE TO THE 
NOTAE IN PROGRAMMA. 


Tue former friend and now opponent of Descartes, Regius or 
Le Roy, had issued from Utrecht in anonymous form a sort of poster 
or manifesto on the nature of the human mind. Descartes undertook 
a refutation written in Latin which is here translated. It was 
printed, apparently without his knowledge, in December 1647, and 
was accompanied by Verses and a Preface which had not his appro- 
bation. Neither the Verses nor the Preface are reproduced here. 
This is the last writing on Descartes’ part which concerns the re- 
lationship between him and his former disciple at Utrecht. The 
latter, however, did not confess himself defeated but returned later 
to the charge. 


ISS Ek 


RENE DESCARTES: NOTES DIRECTED 
AGAINST A CERTAIN PROGRAMME 
PUBLISHED IN BELGIUM AT THE END 
OF THE YEAR 1647 UNDER THIS TITLE 


An Explanation of the Human Mind or Rational Soul: What 
at 1s and what it may be. 


A few days ago I received two pamphlets attacking me, one 
openly and directly, the other only covertly and by implication. 
Of the first I make no account; indeed I am indebted to the 
author, for by the very fact that with all his inordinate labour he 
has succeeded in collecting nothing but groundless revilings and 
calumnies that none could credit, he has borne me witness that he 
could find nothing in my writings to which he could reasonably take 
exception, and thus has corroborated their truth better than he 
would have done by praising them, and moreover has effected this 
at the expense of his own reputation. The other pamphlet troubles 
me more, though I am not mentioned openly in the discussion, and 
it is published without the name of author or printer; for it contains 
opinions which I deem pernicious and erroneous and is issued in the 
shape of a Programme which may be affixed to Church doors, and 
exposed to the view of any chance reader. It is said, however, that 
it was previously printed in another form, with the name appended 
(purporting to be the author’s)’, of one whose doctrine is believed by 
many to be identical with my own. I am constrained to expose his 
errors, lest, perchance, they be attributed to me myself by those 
who happen to come across these papers, and have not read my 
writings. 

1 Regius, 


432 Notes against a Programme 


The following is the Programme in the form in which it finally 
saw the light :— 


AN EXPLANATION of the Human Mind or Rational Soul: 
What it is, and what it may be. 


I. The Human Mind is that wherein the processes of thought' 
are first accomplished by man; and it consists of the faculty of 
thinking alone, and the inward principle. 


II. So far as the laws of nature are concerned, they seem to 
allow that the mind may be either a substance, or a mode of a 
corporeal substance, or, if we follow some other philosophers who 
state that extension and thought are attributes inherent in certain 
substances, as in subjects, then, as these attributes are not mutually 
opposed but diverse, there is no reason why mind should not be an 
attribute co-existing in the same subject with extension, though the 
one attribute is not comprised in the concept of the other. Whatever 
we can conceive can exist. But mind can be conceived, so that it can 
be any one of the aforesaid, for none of them involves a contradiction. 
Therefore it may be any one of these things. 


Ill. Hence they are in error who assert that we conceive the 
human mind clearly and distinctly, as though it were necessarily? 
and really distinct from the body. 


IV. The fact that mind is in truth nothing other than a 
substance, or an entity really distinct from body, in actuality 
separable from it, and capable of existing apart and independently’, 
as revealed to us in Holy Scripture, in many places. And thus what 
in the view of some, the study of nature leaves doubtful‘ is already 
placed beyond all doubt for us through divine revelation in Scripture. 


V. Nor is it any objection that we may have doubts about the 
body, but in nowise about the mind. For this only proves that, 


so long as we doubt about body, we cannot say that mind is a mode 
of body. 


VI. The human mind, though it is a substance really distinct 
Jrom body, is nevertheless, so long as it is in the body, organic in all 
its activities. And therefore as there are diverse dispositions of the 
body, so there are correspondingly diverse processes® of the mind. 

1 actiones cogitativae. 


® Sive actu (note in the first edition). 3 per se, 


* Si accuratam et non moralem rerum veritatem et cognitionem queramus 
(note in first edition). 5 cogitationes, 


Notes against a Programme 433 


VII. As mind is of a nature diverse from body, and from the 
disposition of body, and cannot arise from this disposition, therefore 
at is incorruptible, 


VIII. As tt has no parts and no extension in its concept, it is 
idle to speculate whether it exists as a whole in the whole, and is 
present as a whole in each individual part. 


IX. As mind can be affected in equal degree by things imaginary 
and by things real, hence’ the study of Nature leaves us doubtful 
whether any material things are really perceived by us. But even 
this doubt is banished by divine revelation in Holy Writ, whereby it 
as beyond all doubt that God created heaven and earth, and all that 
in them is, and even now conserves them. 


X. The bond which maintains body and soul in union is the law 
of the unchangeableness of Nature whereby every individuul thing 
persists in the state in which it is, until it is thrown out of that state 
by some other thing. 


XI. As mind is a substance and is first brought into ewxistence 
at the moment of generation, the most accurate opinion seems to be that 
of those who hold that the rational soul is brought into existence by 
God, at generation, by an immediate act of creation. 


XII. The mind has no need of innate ideas, or notions, or axioms, 
but of itself the faculty of thinking suffices for the accomplishment 
of its processes”. 


XIII. Therefore all common notions, engraven on the mind, owe 
their origin to the observation of things or to tradition. 


XIV. In fact the very idea of God which is implanted in the 
mind, is the outcome of divine revelation, or of tradition, or of 
observation. 


XV. Our concept of God, or the idea of God which exists in our 
mind, is not an argument strong enough to prove the existence of 
God, since all things do not exist of which concepts are observed 
within us; and this idea, as conceived by us, and that imperfectly, 
does not, more than the concept of any other thing, transcend our 
proper powers of thought. 


1 Non moraliter, sed exquisitam et accuratam rerum veritatem querenti 


(note in first edition). 
2 actiones. 


434 Notes against a Programme 


XVI. The thought of the mind is twofold : intellect and will. 
XVIL Intellect is perception and judgment. 
XVIII. Perception is sense, memory, and imagination. 


XIX. All sensation is the perception of some corporeal movement, 
which requires no intentional images’ and it is effected, not in the 
outward channels of sense, but in the brain alone. 


XX. The will is free, and inclines indifferently to opposites in 
nature, as our self-consciousness bears us witness. 


XXI. Will is self-determined, and is to be termed blind no more 
than vision is to be termed deaf. 


‘No men more easily attain a great reputation for piety than 
the superstitious and the hypocrites?,’ 


The following is an examination of the programme. 


Notes to the Title. 


I observe in the title® a promise is made, not of bare assertions 
regarding the rational soul, but of an explanation of it, so that we 
must needs believe that in this programme are contained all, or at 
least, the principal arguments‘, which the author had, not only for 
proving his propositions, but also for unfolding them, and that no 
other arguments are to be expected from him. In that he terms 
the rational soul ‘the human mind’, he has my approbation, for 
thus he avoids the ambiguity of the word sowd® and in this point 
follows me. 


Notes to the Individual Articles. 


In the first article’ he seems to aim at a definition of the rational 
soul, with imperfect success, for he omits the genus (i.e. that it is 
a substance, or a mode, or something else) and he expounds only 
the differentia, which he has borrowed from me, for no one before 
me, so far as I know, asserted that mind consisted in one thing 
alone, namely the faculty of thinking and the inward source (sc. of 
thinking). 

In the second article* he begins to speculate about its genus, and 


1 species intentionales, 
? vide ‘ Principles,’ Vol. 1, p. 217. This aphorism reproduced at the end of 
Regins’ poster is a saying of Descartes, 
p. 432, 4 rationes, 5 p. 433, ® ani 
7 p, 432, 8 p, 432, fi ae 


Notes against a Programme 435 


says that ‘the laws of nature seem to allow that the human mind 
may be either a substance, or a mode of a corporeal substance.’ 
This assertion involves a contradiction, no less than if he had 
said, ‘The laws of nature allow that a mountain can exist with or 
without a valley.’ For a distinction must be drawn between things 
which from their nature can change, like the facts that I am at 
present either writing or not writing, that one man is prudent, 
another imprudent ; and things which never change, such as are all 
the things that pertain to the essence of anything, as is generally 
acknowledged by philosophers. Of course there is no doubt that 
it can be said of contingent things that the laws of nature permit 
these things to be either one way or another—for instance, the fact 
that I am at present either writing or not writing. But when the 
point at issue is the essence of something, it is manifestly foolish 
and contradictory to say that the laws of nature allow that it may 
be after any fashion save the fashion after which it really is. Nor 
does it more pertain to the nature of a mountain that it cannot 
exist without a valley, than to the nature of the human mind that 
it is what it is, namely, that it is a substance, if substance it be, or, 
indeed, that it is a mode of a corporeal substance, if in truth it be 
such a mode. Of this owr friend endeavours at this point to 
convince us, and to prove it throws in these words, ‘or ¢f we are to 
follow some other philosophers etc.’,’ while by ‘ other philosophers’ he 
obviously means myself, for I was the first to consider thought the 
predominant attribute of immaterial substance, and extension the 
predominant attribute of material substance. But I did not say 
that these attributes were inherent in the substances, as in subjects 
diverse from themselves. Here we must beware of understanding 
by the word ‘attribute’ nothing other than ‘mode.’ Whenever we 
see a quality assigned to anything by nature, whether it be a mode 
that can suffer change, or the very essence of that thing, manifestly 
unchangeable, we term that quality its attribute. Thus in God 
there are many attributes, but no modes. Thus too one of the 
attributes of any substance is this, that it exists per se. Thus the 
extension of any body can, within itself, admit diverse modes, for it 
is one mode of its extension, if that body be spherical, another if 
it be square; but extension itself, which is the subject of these 
modes, is not in itself a mode of material substance, but an attribute, 
because it constitutes the essence and nature of material substance. 


Lp, 432, 


436 Notes against a Programme 


Thus, finally, the modes of thought are diverse, for affirmation is a 
different mode of thought from negation, and so on; but thought 
itself, being the inward source! from which these modes arise, and 
in which they are inherent, is not conceived as a mode, but as an 
attribute which constitutes the nature of a substance. Whether 
thought be material, or immaterial, is the question at present 
before us. 

He adds that ‘these attributes are not mutually opposed, but 
diverse.’ In these words again there is a contradiction, for when 
the question concerns attributes that constitute the essence of 
substances, there can be no greater opposition between them than 
the fact that they are different. Once it is admitted that ‘this is 
different from that,’ it is equivalent to saying that ‘this is not 
that’; but fo be and not to be are contraries. ‘Since they are not 
mutually opposed,’ he says, ‘but different, there ts no reason why 
mind should not be an attribute co-existing in the same subject with 
extension, though the one attribute is not comprised in the concept of 
the other. In these words there is an obvious fallacy, for he comes 
to a conclusion with regard to every possible attribute, which can 
be valid only in the case of modes properly so called ; and yet he 
nowhere proves that the mind, or inward principle of thought, is 
such a mode. On the contrary, from his own words in Articl V 
I will soon demonstrate that it is not so. Of the other attributes 
which constitute the natures of things, it cannot be said that those 
which are different, and of which neither is contained in the concept 
of the other, are co-existent in one and the same subject, for that is 
equivalent to saying that one and the same subject has two different 
natures, and this involves a contradiction, at least so long as the 
subject in question is simple and not composite—as in the present 
case. 

Three points are to be noted here, a sufficient grasp of which 
would have prevented this writer from falling into such obvious 
errors. 

First : It belongs to the theory of modes that, though we can 
easily comprehend a substance apart from a mode, we cannot, 
conversely, clearly comprehend a mode unless at the same time we 
conceive the substance of which it is a mode (as I have explained 
in the first part of the Principles, Article LXI*), and on this point 
all philosophers are agreed. That owr /riend however paid no respect 


1 Principium. 2 p. 432, 3 Vol. 1, pp. 239, 240, 


Notes against a Programme 437 


to this rule, is manifest from his 5th Article. In that passage he 
admits that ‘we can doubt about the ewistence of the body, while, at 
the same time, we do not doubt about the existence of the mind.’ 
Hence it follows that the mind can be comprehended by us apart 
from the body, and, accordingly, is not a mode of the body. 

The second point which I would note here is the difference 
between simple and composite entities» A composite entity is one 
in which are found two or more attributes, any one of which can be 
comprehended distinctly apart from the other, for it is from the 
fact that one can be thus cognised without the other, that each of 
these constituent elements is seen to be, not a mode of the others, 
but a thing, or the attribute of a thing which can exist without that 
attribute. A simple entity is one in which such attributes are not 
found. Hence it is clear that that subject in which we understand 
extension only, with the various modes of extension, is a simple entity. 
So, too, is a subject in which we comprehend thought only, with the 
various modes of thought. But that in which we observe extension 
and thought co-existent is a composite entity, to wit, a Man, who 
consists of soul and body. Our author seems to assume that man 
is body alone and that mind is but a mode of body. 

Finally, we must note here that in subjects compounded of 
several substances there is frequently one substance predominant. 
This we contemplate in such a way as to treat any of the remaining 
substances which we connect with it as nothing more than a mode. 
Thus a man clad may be contemplated as a compound of man and 
clothes, but the being clad, in comparison with the man, is only a 
mode, although garments are substances. In the same way our 
author might, in the case of man, who is a compound of soul and 
body, consider body the predominant element, in relation to which 
the being animate, or the possession of thought, is nothing other 
than a mode. But it is foolish to infer from that, that the mind 
itself, or that through which the body thinks, is not a substance 
different from the body. 

This dictum he endeavours to corroborate by means of the 
following syllogism: ‘Whatever we can conceive can exist. But 
the mind can be conceived as one of the aforesaid (viz. a substance, 
or a mode of a corporeal substance); for none of these things 
involves a contradiction. Therefore etc.’ Here it must be noted 
that though the rule, ‘whatever we can conceive can ewist,’ 


1 Vol. 1, p. 432. ® entia. 


438 Notes against a Programme 


is mine, and true, so long as the question concerns a clear and 
distinct concept, in which is contained the possibility of the thing 
to be realised? (because God can bring into being everything which 
we clearly perceive to be possible), nevertheless we must not make 
rash use of it. A man-might quite easily imagine that he rightly 
understood something which in reality he did not understand, being 
utterly blinded by some sort of prejudice. ‘This is the case of our 
author when he maintains that there is no contradiction involved in 
the statement that one and the same thing possesses either of two 
natures which are utterly incompatible, to wit, that it is a substance, 
or a mode. If he had only said that he perceived no reasons for 
believing the human. mind to be an immaterial substance rather 
than a mode of a material substance, his ignorance might have been 
excused. If he had said that no reasons could be found by the 
brain of man to prove either alternative, his arrogance would 
certainly have been reprehensible, but his statement would have 
evinced no contradiction. But when he says that the ‘laws of 
nature allow that the same thing may be a substance, or a mode,’ his 
words are altogether self-contradictory and betray the irrationality 
of his brain. 

In the third article he makes known his judgment concerning 
me. Jor it was J who wrote that ‘the human mind can be clearly 
and distinctly perceived as a substance different from corporeal 
substance.’ Our friend, however, though he relies on no other 
arguments than those self-contradictory ones which he has unfolded 
in the preceding article, proclaims that I am in error. Of that 
I make no account. Nor do I examine the words ‘of necessity’ 
or ‘in actuality,’ which contain a certain ambiguity; for they are 
not of great moment. 

Moreover, I scruple to examine tne statements regarding Holy 
Writ in the fourth article’, lest I should appear to assume the right 
of investigating another man’s religion. Thus much I will say - 
Here one must distinguish between three types of questions. 
Certain things are believed through faith alone. Such are the 
mystery of the Incarnation, the Trinity, and the like. Others, how- 
ever, though they have a certain bearing on taith, can meretheee: 
be investigated by the natural reason’, Among these are generally 
tanked by the orthodox theologians the existence of God, and the 
distinction of mind from body. Finally, there are others which 


1 rei. 2 p, 482. § ratio naturalis, 


Notes against a Programme 439 


belong in no wise to the sphere of faith, but only to the sphere of 
human reason, e.g. the question of the squaring of the circle or of 
making gold by the art of alchemy. And even as these men abuse 
the words of Holy Scripture, who, from a distorted interpretation of 
it presume to elicit these last questions, so do those others diminish 
its authority who undertake to solve the first type of question by 
arguments sought from philosophy alone. Nevertheless all theo- 
logians contend that these questions should be shown to be in 
nowise incompatible with the light of nature’, and to this end they 
direct their most zealous endeavours. As for questions of the second 
class, not only do they deem them in no way incompatible with the 
light of nature, but they even exhort philosophers to solve these 
questions, so far as in them lies, by theories evolved from the mind 
of man. But never have I seen any one who would aftirm that the 
laws of nature allow that anything should be otherwise than Holy 
Scripture teaches, unless he wished to show indirectly that he had 
no faith in Scripture. For as we were born men before we became 
Christians, it is beyond belief that any man should seriously embrace 
opinions which he thinks contrary to that right reason that con- 
stitutes a man, in order that he may cling to the faith through 
which he is a Christian. 

But perhaps owr author does not imply this, for his words are, 
‘Through study of nature some may find doubtful that which is 
already placed beyond all doubt for us by the Divine Revelation 
in Holy Writ.’ In these words I find a two-fold contradiction. In 
the first place, in that he assumes the doctrine that the essence of one 
and the same thing, which must be assumed always to remain the 
same (because, if it be supposed to become different, it will be by 
this very fact a different thing, to be indicated by a different name), 
is nevertheless, so far as the study of Nature goes, doubtful, and 
accordingly changeable. The second contradiction is in the word 
‘some, because, as Nature is the same for all men*® a thing 
that can be doubtful only to ‘some’ is not doubtful according to 
Nature’s showing*. 

The fifth article is to be related to the second rather than to the 
fourth, for in it the author is concerned, not with Divine Revelation, 
but with the nature of mind—the question as to whether it is 
a substance or a mode. To prove the defensibility of the view that 
mind is nothing other than a mode, he attempts to refute an 


1 Jumen naturale, 2 omnium eadem. 8 per naturam. 


440 Notes against a Programme 


objection taken from my writings. 1 wrote that we could not doubt 
that our mind existed, because, from the very fact that we doubted, 
it followed that our mind existed, but that meantime we might 
doubt whether any material things existed ; whence I deduced and 
demonstrated that mind was clearly perceived by us as an existence, 
or substance, even supposing we had no concept whatever of the 
body, and denied that any material things had existence; and, 
accordingly, that the concept of mind did not involve any concept 
of body. This argument he thinks to explode by saying that ‘it 
only proves that, so long as we doubt about the body, we cannot term 
mind a mode of body}.’ Here he shows that he is utterly ignorant 
of what it is that philosophers term a ‘mode’; for the nature of a 
mode consists in this, that it can by no means be comprehended, 
except it involve in its own concept the concept of the thing of 
which it is a mode—as I have explained above. Our friend, how- 
ever, admits that mind can sometimes be cognized apart from body, 
to wit, when there are doubts about the body ; whence it assuredly 
follows that mind cannot be termed a mode of body. And what is 
sometimes true about the essence or nature of a thing is always true. 
Nevertheless he affirms that the laws of nature allow that mind may 
be only a mode of body*®, These two statements are manifestly ir- 
reconcilable. 

In the sixth article‘ I fail to apprehend his meaning. Certainly 
I remember hearing in the Schools that the mind is an activity® of 
the organic body, but till this day I never heard the mind itself 
termed ‘organic.’ For this reason I crave owr author's indulgence, 
to the end that, as I have nothing certain to base my remarks on at 
this point, I may expound my conjectures, not as though they were 
true to fact, but simply as conjectures. I seem to observe two 
irreconcilable statements. One of these is to the effect that the 
human mind is a substance really distinct from the body. This the 
author openly states, but, so far as he can, waives argument on the 
point, and contends that it can be proved only by the authority of 
Holy Scripture. The other statement is that that same human 
mind, in all its activities, is organic or instrumental, that is to say, 
such that it does not act® of itself, but is used by the body as 
though it were something that strengthened its members’ and other 
corporeal modes, and so he affirms in effect, if not in so many words, 
that the mind is nothing other than a mode of body, as though he 


* p, 432, 2 p. 436. 3 p. 432. 4 p, 432, 
actus. § nihil agat. 7 membrorum suorum confirmatione. 


Notes against a Programme 441 


had drawn up his whole artillery of argument to prove this point 
and this alone. These two statements are so manifestly contraries 
that I do not think the author wished them both, at one and the 
same time, to find credence with readers, but deliberately coupled 
them together, so that he might in some sort give satisfaction to the 
more simple-minded, and to his friends the theologians, by his 
citation of Scriptural authority, and that, meantime, his more 
keen-witted readers might realize that, when he said ‘mind 
distinct from body,’ he was speaking in irony, and that he was heart 
and soul of the opinion that mind is nothing but a mode. 

In the seventh article again, and the eighth}, he seems to be 
speaking merely in irony. And he retains the same Socratic figure 
of speech in the latter part of article IX*. But in the first part 
he appends a reason to his assertion, and thus, it would seem, is to 
be taken seriously in this passage. He teaches that, so far as 
nature shows, it is doubtful whether any material things are really 
perceived by us, and submits as his reason the statement that ‘ the 
mind can be affected in the same degree by things imaginary as 
by things real.’ If this theory is to be received as true, it must be 
granted that we have use of no understanding* properly so called, 
but only of that faculty which is usually termed the ‘common sense*’ 
whereby impressions are received of things imaginary as much as of 
things real, so that they affect the mind—a faculty which philosophers 
commonly allow even to the brute creation. But surely those who 
have understanding, and are not fashioned like the horse or mule, even 
although they are affected not only by images of real things but 
also by those which occur in the brain from other causes (as happens 
in sleep), can distinguish the one kind of image from the other with 
the utmost clearness, by the light of reason. The method in which 
this happens, surely and infallibly, I have explained in my writings, 
so accurately that I am convinced that no one who has read them 
throughout, and is capable of understanding them, can be a sceptic. 

In the tenth and eleventh articles® it is still possible to suspect 
him of irony. If the soul be believed to be a substance, it is foolish 
and ridiculous to say ‘the bond which maintains body and soul 
in union is the law of the unchangeableness of nature, whereby every 
individual thing persists in the state in which it is*” For it is 
equally true of things disunited as of things united that they 
persist in the same state so long as nothing changes that state. 


1 p. 433. aD: a 3 intellectus. + sensus communis. 
5 p. 433. Sep; P 
P- P 


449 Notes against a Programme 


This is not at present the point at issue. The question is, how 
it happens that the mind is united with the body, and not dis- 
severed from it. But if soul be supposed to be a mode of body, it 
is rightly said that no bond of union need be sought other than the 
fact that it persists in the state in which it is, since modes have no 
other state than that present to the things of which they are 
modes. 

In article twelve’ he appears to dissent from me only in words, 
for when he says that the mind has no need of innate ideas, or 
notions, or axioms, and at the same time allows it the faculty of 
thinking (to be considered natural cr innate), he makes an affirmation 
in effect identical with mine, but denies it in words. For I never 
wrote or concluded that the mind required innate ideas which were 
in some sort different from its faculty of thinking; but when I 
observed the existence in me of certain thoughts which proceeded, 
not from extraneous objects nor from the determination of my will, 
but solely from the faculty of thinking which is within me, then, 
that I might distinguish the ideas or notions (which are the forms 
of these thoughts) from other thoughts adventitious or factitious, 
I termed the former ‘innate.’ In the same sense we say that 
in some families generosity is innate, in others certain diseases like 
gout or gravel, not that on this account the babes of these families 
suffer from these diseases in their mother’s womb, but because they 
are born with a certain disposition or propensity for contracting 
them. 

The conclusion which he deduces in article XIII? from the pre- 
ceding article is indeed wonderful. ‘For this reason,’ he says (i.e. 
because the mind has no need of innate ideas, but the faculty of 
thinking of itself is sufficient), ‘all common notions, engraven on the 
mind, owe their origin to the observation of things or to tradition’— 
as though the faculty of thinking could of itself execute nothing, 
nor perceive nor think anything save what it received from observa- 
tion or tradition, that is, from the senses. So far is this from being 
true, that, on the contrary, any man who rightly observes the 
limitations of the senses, and what precisely it is that can penetrate 
through this medium to our faculty of thinking must needs admit 
that no ideas of things, in the shape in which we envisage them by 
thought, are presented to us by the senses. So much so that in 
our ideas there is nothing which was not innate in the mind, or 


lp, 482, 2 p, 432, 


Notes against a Programme 443 


faculty of thinking, except only these circumstances which point to 
experience—the fact, for instance, that we judge that this or that 
idea, which we now have present to our thought, is to be referred 
to a certain extraneous thing, not that these extraneous things 
transmitted the ideas themselves to our minds through the organs 
of sense, but because they transmitted something which gave the 
mind occasion to form these ideas, by means of an innate faculty, 
at this time rather than at another. For nothing reaches our mind 
from external objects through the organs of sense beyond certain 
corporeal movements, as our author himself affirms, in article XIX}, 
taking the doctrine from my Principles; but even these movements, 
and the figures which arise from them, are not conceived by us in 
the shape they assume in the organs of sense, as I have explained 
at great length in my Dioptrics. Hence it follows that the ideas 
of the movements and figures are themselves innate in us. So 
much the more must the ideas of pain, colour, sound and the like 
be innate, that our mind may, on occasion of certain corporeal 
movements, envisage these ideas, for they have no likeness to the 
corporeal movements. Could anything be imagined more pre- 
posterous than that all common notions which are inherent in our 
mind should arise from these movements, and should be incapable of 
existing without them? I should like our friend to instruct me as 
to what corporeal movement it is which can form in our mind any 
common notion, e.g. the notion that ‘things which are equal to the 
same thing are equal to one another, or any other he pleases ; for 
all these movements are particular, but notions are universal having 
no affinity with movements and no relation to them. 

He goes on to affirm, in article XIV’, that even the idea of God 
which is in us is the outcome, not of our faculty of thinking, as 
being native to it, but of Divine Revelation or tradition, or observa- 
tion. The error of this assertion we shall the more readily realise 
if we reflect that anything can be said to be the outcome of another, 
either because this other is its proximate and primary cause, without 
which it could not exist, or only because it is a remote and acci- 
dental cause, which, certainly, gives the primary cause occasion to 
produce its effect at one time rather than at another. Thus all 
workmen are the primary and proximate causes of their works, but 
those who give them orders, or promise them reward, that they may 
perform these works, are accidental and remote causes, because, 


1 p, 434, 2 p, 433. 


444 Notes against a Programme 


probably, they would not have performed the tasks unbidden. 
There is no doubt that tradition or observation is a remote cause, 
inviting us to bethink ourselves of the idea which we may have of 
God, and to present it vividly to our thought. But no one can 
maintain that this is the proximate and efficient’ cause, except the 
man who thinks that we can apprehend nothing regarding God 
save this name ‘God,’ and the corporeal figure which painters 
exhibit to us as a representation of God. For observation, if it 
takes place through the medium of sight, can of its own proper 
power present nothing to the mind beyond pictures, and pictures 
consisting only of a permutation of corporeal movements, as our 
author himself instructs us. If it takes place through the medinm 
of hearing, it presents nothing beyond words and voices ; if through 
the other senses, it has nothing in it which can have reference to 
God. And surely it is manifest to every man that sight, of itself 
and by its proper function, presents nothing beyond pictures, and 
hearing nothing beyond voices or sounds, so that all these things 
that we think of, beyond these voices or pictures, as being symbolised 
by them, are presented to us by means of ideas which come from no 
other source than our faculty of thinking, and are accordingly 
together with that faculty innate in us, that is, always existing in 
us potentially; for existence in any faculty is not actual but merely 
potential existence, since the very word ‘faculty’ designates nothing 
more or less than a potentiality. But that with regard to God we 
can comprehend nothing beyond a name or a bodily effigy, no one 
can affirm, save a man who openly professes himself an atheist, and 
moreover destitute of all intellect. 

After expounding his opinion concerning God, our author?, in 
article XV, thinks to refute all the arguments by which I have 
proved God’s existence. At this point it occurs to one to marvel 
at the man’s self-confidence, in that he imagines that he can so 
easily and in so few words overturn all that I have built up by dint 
of long and concentrated meditation, and to the explanation of 
which I have devoted a whole volume. But all the arguments 
which I have adduced in this matter can be subordinated to two. 
In the first place I have shown that we have a notion or idea of 
God such that, when we sufficiently attend to it and ponder the 
matter in the manner I have expounded’, we realise from this 
contemplation alone, that it cannot be but that God exists, since 


} effectrix. 2 p. 433. % ¢Medit.’ Vol. 1, p. 179. 


Notes against a Programme 445 


existence, not merely possible or contingent as in the ideas of all 
other things, but altogether necessary and actual, is contained in 
this concept. This argument, which is held as certainly and 
obviously proved, not only by myself but by several others, and 
these men pre-eminent in learning and genius who have sedulously 
investigated the matter—this argument, I say, the author of the 
Programme thinks to refute in this fashion : ‘Our concept of God, 
or the idea of God which exists in our mind, is not an argument 
suffictently strong to prove the existence of God, since all things do 
not exist of which concepts are observed within us,’ By these words 
he shows that he has read my writings, but has in nowise had either 
the power or the will to understand them. For the point of my 
argument is, not the idea in general, but its peculiar property, a 
property which is evident in the highest degree in the idea we have 
of God, and which can be found in the concept of no other thing, 
namely, the necessity of existence, which is required as that crown 
of perfections without which we cannot comprehend God. The other 
argument by which I proved the existence of God, I deduced from 
my clear proof of the fact that we should not have had the faculty 
for conceiving all the perfections which we recognise in God, had it 
not been true that God existed, and that we were created by Him?. 
This argument our friend thinks he has more than exploded by 
saying that the idea we have of God does not, more than the concept 
of any other thing, transcend our proper powers of thinking®. If by 
these words he only means that the concept which we have of God 
without the aid of supernatural grace is no less natural than all the 
concepts we have of other things, he is at one with me; but on that 
basis nothing can be concluded against me. If, however, he thinks 
that that concept does not involve more objective perfections than all 
the others taken together, he is obviously wrong. I myself, on the 
other hand, have founded my argument entirely on this preponder- 
ance of perfections, in which our concept of God transcends other 
concepts. 

In the six remaining articles‘ there is nothing worthy of note 
except the fact that, when he wishes to distinguish the properties of 
the soul, he speaks of them confusedly and inappropriately. I have 
said® that these are all to be subordinated to two predominant 
properties, one of which is the perception of the understanding, the 
other the determination of the will. ‘These two our friend calls 


1 p, 438. 2 ‘Medit.’ Vol.1, p.157.  * p, 433. * p. 434, 5 p. 434. 


446 Notes against a Programme 


‘understanding’ and ‘will’.’ Then he subdivides what he calls 
‘understanding’ into ‘ perception’ and ‘judgment.’ In this point he 
differs from me, for when I saw that, over and above perception, 
which is required as a basis for judgment, there must needs be 
affirmation, or negation, to constitute the form of the judgment, 
and that it is frequently open to us to withhold our assent, even if 
we perceive a thing, I referred the act of judging, which consists in 
nothing but assent, i.e. affirmation or negation, not to the percep- 
tion of the understanding, but to the determination of the will. 
Thereafter he enumerates, among the species of perception, nothing 
but sense, memory, and imagination? ; from which one may gather 
that he admits no pure intellection (i.e. intellection which deals with 
no corporeal images), and, accordingly, that he himself believes that 
no cognition is possessed of God, or of the human mind, or of other 
immaterial things. Of this I can imagine but one cause, namely, 
that the thoughts he has concerning these things are so confused 
that he never observes in himself a pure thought, different from 
every corporeal image, 

Finally, in closing’, he adds these words, taken from some 
portion of my writings: ‘Vo men more easily attain a great reputa- 
tion for piety, than the superstitious and the hypocrites.’ What he 
means by these words I fail to see, unless perhaps he ascribes to 
hypocrisy the use he has made of irony, in many places, but I do not 
think that by that means he can attain a great reputation for piety. 

For the rest, I am constrained to admit here, that I am covered 
with shame to think that in time past I lauded this author as a man 
of most penetrative genius, and wrote somewhere or other that 
‘I did not think he taught any doctrines which I should be unwilling 
to acknowledge as my own‘. But in truth when I wrote these 
words I had as yet seen no specimen of his work in which he was 
not a faithful copyist, except only on one occasion in one little 
phrase’, which brought such ill results to him, that I hoped he 
would make no further venture in that line; and, as I saw him in 
other matters embrace with a great show of zeal the opinions that 
I deemed nearest the truth, I attributed this to his genius and 
penetration. But now a manifold experience compels me to con- 
clude that he is swayed not so much by love of truth as by love of 
novelty. As he holds all he has learned from others to be old- 
world and out-worn, thinking nothing sufficiently novel except what 


1 p. 434, 2p, 434. 3p, 434, 
* Letter to Voetius. > Hominem esse ens per accidens, 


Notes against a Programme 447 


he has hammered out of his own brain; and, at the same time, is 
so unhappy in his inventions, that I have never noted a single word 
in his writings (excluding what he transcribed from other men), 
which I did not condemn as containing some error, I must therefore 
warn all those who are convinced that he is a champion of my 
opinions, that of these opinions—I speak, not only of those in the 
Metaphysics, on which he openly opposes me, but also of those in 
the Physics, for he treats of this subject somewhere in his writings 
—there is none which he does not state awry and distort. Hence 
it causes me more indignation that such a Doctor should handle 
my writings and undertake to interpret, or in other words, to falsify 
them, than that other men should attack them with the utmost 
bitterness. 

For I never yet saw one of these bitter critics who did not 
father on me opinions different from mine by a whole heaven, 
and so maundering and preposterous, that I had no fear that 
any man of intelligence could be persuaded that they were mine. 
Thus, even as I write these words, two new pamphlets are brought 
me—productions of an adversary of this type’. In the first of these 
it is stated that ‘There are some Neoterics who deny all credibility 
to the senses, who contend that the Philosophers deny God, and dare 
to doubt His existence, and who, meantime, admit that there are 
implanted by Nature in the human mind actual notions, species, and 
ideas of God.’ In the second it is said that ‘these Neoterics bare- 
Jjacedly proclaim that God is, not only negatively, but positively, the 
efficient cause of Himself” In either pamphlet the only thing 
effected is the conglomeration of numerous arguments to prove, 
first, that we have no actual knowledge (cognitio) of God in our 
mother’s womb, and accordingly that ‘no actual species or idea 
of God is inborn in our mind’ ; secondly, that ‘we must not deny 
God’ and that ‘they are atheists and punishable by law who deny 
Him’, and thirdly and finally that ‘God is not the efficient cause 
of Himself.’ 

I might well suppose that all these dicta were not directed 
against me, because my name is not mentioned in the pamphlets, 
and of the opinions attucked in them there is none which I do 
not think absurd and erroneous. Nevertheless, as they are not 
dissimilar to those which have often ere now been slanderously 
imputed to me by men of that kidney, and as there are no other 


1 Pamphlets by Jacques de Rives (Jacobus Revius). 


448 Notes against a Programme 


persons recognizable to whom these opinions could be attributed ; 
as, finally, there are many who do not doubt that I am the object 
of attack in these pamphlets, I take this occasion to admonish their 
author to this effect : 

First :—By innate ideas I never understood anything other 
than that which he himself, on page 6 of his second pamphlet, 
affirms in so many words to be true, viz. that ‘there is innate 
in us by nature a potentiality whereby we know God’; but that 
these ideas are actual, or that they are some kind of species 
different from the faculty of thought I never wrote nor concluded. 
On the contrary, I, more than any other man, am utterly averse 
to that empty stock of scholastic entities—so much so, that I 
cannot refrain from laughter when I see that mighty heap which 
our hero—a very inoffensive fellow no doubt—has laboriously 
brought together to prove that infants have no notion of God so 
long as they are in their mother’s womb—as though in this fashion 
he was bringing a magnificent charge against me. 

Secondly :—I have never taught that God is to be denied, or 
that He can deceive us, or that one must doubt about everything, 
or that all credibility is to be denied to the senses, or that sleep 
cannot be distinguished from waking, or the like—doctrines which 
are sometimes thrown in my teeth by ignorant detractors. I have 
repudiated all these doctrines expressly and with the strongest 
arguments—stronger, I make bold to say, than any that have by 
any man before me been brought to the refutation of these doc- 
trines. ‘That I might the more fittingly and effectively compass 
this end, I proposed, at the beginning of my Meditations, to regard 
as doubtful all the doctrines which did not owe their original dis- 
covery to me, but had been for long denounced by the sceptics’, 
What could be more unjust than to attribute to a writer opinions 
which he states only to the end that he may refute them? What 
more foolish than to imagine that, at least for the time being, while 
these false opinions are being propounded previous to their refu- 
tation, the author commits himself to them, and that, accordingly, 
the man who states the arguments of the Atheists is an Atheist for 
the time? What more childish than to say that, if he were to die 
meantime, before writing or evolving the hoped for refutation he 
would die an Atheist—that he taught pernicious doctrine merely 
as a preliminary, but that ‘evil should not be done that good may 


1 Vol. 1, pp. 144—149. 


Notes against a Programme 449 


come of it’ and so forth? Some one will say, perhaps, that I 
related these false opinions, not as the opinions of others, but as 
my own. But what of that? In the self-same book in which I 
related them I refuted them all. From the very title of the book 
it might be understood that I was altogether hostile to these 
beliefs, for it purports to give ‘proofs of the existence of God.’ 
Is there anyone obtuse enough to think that the man who com- 
piled such a book was ignorant, so long as he was penning its 
first pages, of what he had undertaken to prove in the following ? 
I enunciated the objections as though they were my own, to suit 
the exigencies of the style of ‘meditations,’ which I judged the 
style best fitted for unfolding arguments. If this explanation does 
not satisfy our captious critics, I should like to know what they 
say of Holy Scripture—with which no human documents are to 
be compared—when they see in it some things that cannot be 
rightly understood unless they be supposed to be the utterance 
of impious men, or, at least, of others than the Holy Ghost and 
the Prophets? Such are Ecclesiastes, chap. ii., these words ‘ There 
as nothing better for a man than that he should eat and drink, and 
that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labour. This also 
I saw that it was from the hand of God. For who can eat or 
who else can hasten thereunto more than I?’ and, in the following 
chapter, ‘I said in mine heart concerning the estate of the sons 
of men, that God might manifest them, and that they might see 
that they themselves are beasts; for that which befulleth the sons 
of men befalleth beasts; even one thing befalleth them: as the one 
dieth so dieth the other: yea they have all one breath: so that a 
man hath no pre-eminence above a beast,’ etc. Do they believe 
that here the Holy Spirit teaches us that we should indulge the 
belly, and have abundance of delights, and that our souls are no 
more immortal than the souls of beasts? I do not think they are 
so mad. Neither should they calumniate me because in writing 
I have not made use of the precautions which are observed by 
some other writers, but not by the Holy Spirit. 

In the third place, and finally, I warn the author of these 
pamphlets that I never wrote that ‘God should be said to be, not 
only negatively, but positively, the efficient cause of Himself, as he 
affirms in a very rash and ill-considered manner in page 8 of his 
second pamphlet. Let him turn over, read, and thoroughly search 
my writings, he will find in them nothing like this, but the very 
reverse. The fact that I am far indeed from accepting such mon- 


450 Notes against a Programme 


strous opinions is well known to all who have read my writings, 
or have any knowledge of myself, or, at any rate, do not think 
me utterly fatuous. On this account I am only moved to wonder 
what is the aim of these detractors; for if they wish to convince 
any one that I wrote things of which the very contrary is found 
in my writings, they should have taken the preliminary precaution 
of suppressing all my publications, and should even have wiped 
out the memory of them from the minds of those who had already 
read them; for so long as they fail to effect this they do them- 
selves more harm than me. Moreover, I marvel that they should 
inveigh with such bitterness and such zeal against me, who have 
never troubled them, nor done them any hurt, though, perhaps, 
possessing the power to hurt them if they provoked me; and 
meantime should take no action against many other men who 
devote whole books to the refutation of their doctrine, and ridi- 
cule them as simpletons and blindfold gladiators. But I am 
unwilling to add any word here that might make them renounce 
their habit of impugning me in their pamphlets. I am glad to 
see that they think me of so much importance. Meantime I pray 
Heaven to grant them sanity. 


Written at Egmond, in Holland, 
towards the end of December 1647, 


1 «Simplicios et Andabatas.? Andabatae were Roman gladiators whose 


masks had no opening for the eyes and who fought blind in order to amuse 
the spectators, 


INDEX TO VOLUME I 


Adam, C. v1, x 

Algebra, 10 sq., 68, 91 

Analysis 10, 19 

Anger, passion of 361, 420 

Apollonius 135 

Archimedes 135 

Aristotle 206, 207, 296, 298, 300 

Arithmetic 4, 5, 10 sq., 31, 57, 60, 
94, 147, 158 

Arnauld x, 51 note 

Astrologers 14 

Astronomy 147 

Atheists 448 

Atoms, the non-existence of 264 


Baillet x, 304, 330 

Blood, circulation of 290, 334 sqq., 
374, 376 

Body, nature of 109 sqq., 255 

Buchenau, A. Iv 


Catholic Church, the 302 
Cause, God’s, of Himself 439 sqq. 
Cheerfulness, of 425 

Chemists 9 

Christina, Queen 330 

Clerselier x, 132, 304, 330 
Common sense, the 38 sqq., 433 
Confidence, of 408 

Copernicus 272 

Courage, of 410 

Courcelles, E. de 80 

Cousin 72 note 

Cowardice, of 411 

Curve, the anaclastic 23 


Deduction 8, 33, 46 

Democritus 298 

Desire, passion of 359, 369 sqq., 380, 
395 

Despair, of 359, 408 

Dialectic, Dialectician 10, 32, 49 

Diophantus 12 

Dioptrics, the 128, 212, 337, 443 

Disdain, passion of 358, 400, 407 

Disgust, passion of 361, 424 

Distinctions, the nature of 243 sqq. 

Doubt, its value 144 sq., 219 sq., 324 


Ecclesiastes 449 


Elizabeth, Princess 216, 330 
Elzevirs, the 132, 202, 330 
Emulation, of 410 

Enumeration 20 sqq., 33 

Envy, of 414 

Epicurus 206 

Epistemon 307 sqq. 

Error, source of 231 sq., 249 sqq. 
Eudoxus 307 sq. 

ee of bodies 54 sqq., 164 sqq., 


Favour, of 418 

Fear, of 412 sq. 

Freewill 174 sq., 234 sq. 
French language, the 129 


Galileo 80 

share etaek passion of 358, 401 sqq., 

Geometry 4, 5, 10 sq., 36, 57 sqq., 138, 
147, 212 

Germany, Descartes’ visit te 87 

Gibson, W. R. Boyce v1 

Gilbert, W. 49 

Gland, the, in brain 345 sqq. 

Glory, of 423 

God, existence and nature of 102 sqq., 
157 sq., 224 sq., 438, 444 sq. 

Gras, le H. 330 

Gratitude, passion of 361, 418 


Harvey 112 note, 334 

Hatred, passion of 359, 375, 393 sq. 
Hearing, faculty of 292 

Hope, of 359 

Humility, of 358, 402, 404 


Imagination 147, 183, 438 
Impudence, of 424 

Indignation, passion of 361, 387 
Induction 20 sqq. 

Infinite, the nature of 229 8qq. 
Ingratitude, of 418 

Innate ideas 434, 436 sq. 
Intuition 7, 33 

Irresolution, of 359, 409 


Jealousy, of 408 
Joy, of 360, 372, 379, 382, 394 


452 


Judgment 438 


Languor 383 

Lateran Council 134 

Laughter, of 385, 413 

Leibniz x, 304 

Leiden, 132 

Le Monde, Treatise on 107 note 
Logic 91 

Love, passion of 359, 366 sq., 394 
Lully 91 

Luynes, duc de 132 


Material things, nature of 179 sq., 254 

Mathematics 11 sq., 17, 23 sq., 62, 
84, 93, 220 

Measurement, relations of 64 sq. 

Mechanical theory, 115, 116 

Medicine 120, 130, 147 

Memory 34 sq., 438 

Mersenne 80, 132, 202 

Meteors, Treatise on 128, 212, 388 

Method of learning 9, 10, 81 sq. 

Mind, nature of 294 

Mockery, of 360 

Morals 81 

Motion, nature of 265 sq. 


Nature 425 

Natures (simple) 16, 27, 41 sq. 
Nerve system, the 290 sq. 
Nicole x. 

Number 59 sq. 


Opuscula Posthuma x 


Pappus 12, 135 

Perceptions, nature of 340 sq., 438 
Philosophy, what it is 84sq., 204, 211 
Physics 23, 62, 123, 147 

Picot 202, 203 note 

Pity, of 415 

Place, nature of 259 sq. 

Plato 206 

Poetry 84 

Polyander 307 sq. 

Pride, passion of 361, 403 
Ptolemy 272 


Rarefaction, nature of 256 sq. 
Regius, H. 214, 430 sqq. 

Regret, of 425 

Religion 88 

Tumorse, passion of 360, 412, 417 


Index 


Rives, Jacques de, 447 note 


Sadness, passion of 360, 372 sq., 380, 
382 

Sceptics, 99 

Science, study of 2 sq. 

Schools, scholastics, the 4, 84, 124, 
211, 222, 317, 440 

Scorn, of 413 

Scriptures, Holy 439 sq. 

Self-satisfaction, passion of 360, 417 

Sensation, nature of 289 sq., 295 

Sense 140, 145 sq., 184, 245 

Shame, of 423 

Sighing, nature of 390 

Sight, nature of 293 

Simple natures 16, 27, 36, 41 sqq. 

Sire, J. 304 

Smell, sense of 292 

Socrates 43, 314 

Sorbonne, the 136 

Soul, nature of the 151, 185 sq., 221, 
339 

Space, nature of 259 

Sparta 88 

Spirits, animal; nature of the 335 
sqq., 404 sqq. 

Stars, nature of the 271 sq, 

Stoics, the 290 

Swooning 385 

Syllogisms 4 


Tannery, M. v1, x 
Tantalus, fountain of 53 
Taste, of 292 

Tears, of 387 sq. 
Theology 84 

Thought, nature of 222 
Time, nature of 242 
Tremors, of 383 

Truth, nature of 171 sq., 238 
Tschirnhaus 304 

Tycho 272, 273 


Understanding 485, 441 
Universals, nature of the 242 


Vacuum 262 


Veneration, passion of 358 
Vives I. L. 387 at 


Wax, nature of 154 sq. 
Will, nature of 340, 437 
Wonder, passion of 358, 362 sq., 400 


( ¥*Se=-es 


4° 


Me 


. 


ga Works of 
_ Descartes 


- Rendered into English by 


_ ELIZABETH S. HALDANE, LL.D. a 
‘ and G. R. T. ROSS, M.A., D.Phil. : 
_ VOLUME I 


_ English edition in print of the important philosophical works 
Sos _ of Descartes. Thesé two volumes contain all his revolutionary _ 
¥ ce propositions and conclusions: from his famous exposition of , 
ie “Cogito, ergo sum’ in the Discourse on Method to his detailed Y 
account i in Principles of Philosophy of the natural phenomena 

under investigation in his day. 


- The definitive English translation and the only comprehensive | 
: 


» When the book was originally published the Inquirer wrote: ae 
~ ‘The Cambridge University Press is conferring a boon upon : e 
philosophical students by the publication of an English trans- 
lation of the Philosophical Works of Descartes. The more bee ay 
__ writings of the few great thinkers of the world are made avail- 
~ able this way, the better.’ 


_ Also issued in cloth 


‘ 


CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 


Bentley House, 200 Euston Road, London, N.W.1 
American Branch: 32 East 57th Street, New York, N.Y.10022 


Cover design by Peter Branfield 


7 : 


