THE PHILOSOPHICAL WORKS 

OF 

DESCARTES 

VOLUME tl 



CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 

itnntion: FETTER LANE, E.G. 

0. F. CLAY, MANAGER 



l 



infcuts*) : 100, PRINCES STREET 
afotlm: A. ASHER AND CO. 
ILetpjtg: F. A. BROCKHAUS 
fe: G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS 



ISombap, atttj Calcutta: MACMILLAN AND CO. 



THE PHILOSOPHICAL WORKS 

OF 

DESCARTES 

RENDERED INTO .ENGLISH BY 

ELIZABETH S. HALDANE, LL.D. 

AND 

G. R. T. ROSS, M.A., D.PHIL. 



IN TWO VOLUMES 



VOLUME 



Cambridge 

at the University Press 

1912 



PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A. 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 



CONTENTS 

PAGE 

Introduction vii 

First Objections urged against the Meditations . . 1 

Reply to the First Objections 9 

Second Set of Objections 24 

Reply to Second Objections 30 

Arguments Demonstrating the Existence of God . . 52 

Third Set of Objections with Author's Reply ... 60 

Fourth Set of Objections 79 

Reply to Fourth Objections 96 

Announcement relative to Fifth Set of Objections . . 123 

Letter from Descartes to Clerselier 125 

Fifth Set of Objections 135 

Reply to Fifth Objections 204 

Sixth Set of Objections . 234 

Reply to Sixth Objections 241 

Seventh Set of Objections with the Author's Annotations 

thereon 259 

Letter to Dinet 345 



INTRODUCTION 

THE 'OBJECTIONS AND REPLIES/ 

DESCARTES' friend, the Rev. Father Merseime, circulated the 
Meditations in manuscript among various theologians and 
men of philosophic bent. Their criticisms (in Latin) were forwarded 
to Descartes, who in turn commented on them (in Latin), and 
published the whole discussion along with his Meditations. The 
first edition of the Meditations that of 1641 had the first six 
sets of these Objections and Replies appended to them, viz. the 
objections by (i) the theologian Caterus, (ii) a group of theologians 
and philosophers, (iii) Hobbes, (iv) Arnauld, (v) Gassendi, and 
(vi) another group of theologians and philosophers, together with 
Descartes' replies. 

The second edition of the Meditations (also in Latin) contained 
in addition the seventh set of objections written by the Jesuit 
Bourdin and Descartes' answer thereto, as well as Descartes' letter 
to Dinet, in which he complains of Bourdin's attack on him. 

When the time came to prepare a French version of the 
Objections and Replies, Descartes wished to omit the discussion 
with Gassendi for the reasons set out on pp. 123-4. Clerselier, the 
translator, did actually publish a French version of the fifth set 
of Objections and Replies, but as this did not receive Descartes' 
sanction it has not -been possible to use it in preparing the present 
English rendering of the whole of the Objections and Replies. A 
contemporaneous French version of Objections and Replies (vii) and 
of the letter to Dinet are lacking. Clerselier's version of sets (i iv) 
and (vi) has therefore alone been used. 

It will be found that in these discussions there are numerous 
and often long quotations from the Meditations. The reader will 
notice also that sometimes the rendering of these passages differs 
slightly from that given in Vol. I of the present work. This 
divergence of versions is inevitable, because the translation in 
Vol. I has been founded upon both the Latin and the French text 
of the Meditations no doubt thus best representing Descartes' 
final thoughts on the subject. But Descartes' critics had before 
them only the original Latin text. It was but right therefore to 
translate directly from the Latin the excerpts they criticised, though 



viii Introduction 

an attempt has been made to keep the rendering here as uniform as 
possible with that in Vol. I. Besides the variations that are ex- 
plained by the above cause there are others due to abridged quotation 
or paraphrase of the original passage both by Descartes and by his 
critics. 

The works contained in this volume vary in importance. Thus 
the criticisms of Bourdin (Objections VII} are most tiresome and 
almost wholly worthless, while those by Hobbes, Arnauld, and 
Gassendi give us insight into the minds of those eminent thinkers, 
Gassendi's seeming materialism especially being of a most robust 
and interesting nature. In Descartes' replies there are several 
passages that are of importance in enabling us to understand his 
maturer doctrine. Thus in the Reply to Objections I we find an 
interesting discussion of efficient causality and ' causi sui ' (pp. 
13 sqq.), of the distinction between the infinite and the indefinite 
(pp. 17, 18), of the ontological proof of God's existence (see especially 
p. 21), and of the difference between a real and a formal distinction 
(pp. 22, 23). In the Reply to Objections //perhaps the passage on 
the difference between Synthesis and Analysis in proof is most 
noteworthy. The elucidation of the real distinction between body 
and mind is continued in the Reply to Objections IV (pp. 98 sqq.); 
that of efficient causality (on pp. 107 sqq.) ; while the question of 
the relation of Descartes' theory to the Roman doctrine of the 
Sacrament of the Eucharist comes up on pp. 116 sqq. 

The Reply to Objections V (pp. 208-9) will yield some insight 
into Descartes' views about the dependence of mind on body. The 
derivation of ideas from sense is discussed on pp. 226 sqq. 

The subject of the souls of brutes appears once more in the 
Reply to Objections F/(pp. 243 sqq.); the liberty and the indiffer- 
ence of the will in God and in man are discussed on pp. 247-9 ; 
Descartes' theory of matter is once more clearly stated on pp. 253 sqq. 

In the Reply to Objections VII perhaps the most interesting 
passage is the illustration of the ' method of doubt ' by the homely 
illustration of turning out all the apples in a basket and then 
picking out all that are not rotten for the purpose of putting them 
back once more (p. 282). 

For the rest one feels that only Descartes' excessive desire to 
stand well with the Jesuits could have led him to reply in detail 
to the stupid misunderstandings of Bourdin. 

G. E. T. ROSS. 



OBJECTIONS UEGED BY CEETAIN MEN OF 
LEAENING AGAINST THE PRECEDING 
MEDITATIONS; WITH THE AUTHOR'S 
EEPLIES. 

THE FIRST SET OF OBJECTIONS 1 . 
Gentlemen, 

As soon as I recognized that you were so anxious that 1 
should make a thorough examination of the writings o/M. Descartes, 
it seemed impossible for me, in duty, to disoblige in this matter 
friends so dear to me. My reason in complying was both that you 
might witness the extent of my esteem for y<m, and also that I might 
meal my lad of power and intellectual endowment; hence, Hoped, 
you might in future allow me the more indulgence, if I require it, or, 
if I came short, be less exacting. 

In my estimation if. Descartes is in truth a man who combines 
the higkst intellectual endowments with an extreme modesty one oj 
whom em Momus, had he come to life, would approve. ' I think,' he 
says, 'hence 1 exist; my, I am that wry thinking, or the mind! 
True, 'However, in thinking I have within me ideas of things, and 
firstly an idea of a king of extreme perfection and infinite! I grant 
this. 'Moreover, I, not equalling the objective reality of this idea, am 
not its cause; hence it has some cause more perfect than I, and this 
immediately shows that there is something else besides me in existence, 
something more perfect than I am. This is a being who is an entity 
not in any indeterminate sense, but one which absolutely and with- 

1 The Author of these objections of the first group, is Caterus, a priest of 
Alkmaar, who sent them to Bannius and Bloemaert, two friends of Descartes, 
Cf. Omm, Vol. m. p. 242, U- p. 265, L 20; p. 267, 1. 9; p. 272, 1. 27. 

B. n. H. 1 



2 Objections I 

out limitations embraces its whole reality wholly in itself, and is, as 
it were, an anticipatory cause 1 , as Dionysius 2 says (de divin. nom. 
cap. 8 3 ).' 

But here I am forced to stop a little, to avoid excessive exhaustion; 
for already my mind fluctuates like the Euripus with its changing 
tides. Now I consent, now I deny; I approve and once more dis- 
approve. To disagree with the champion of this theory I do not care, 
agree with him I cannot. But, pray, what sort of cause must an 
idea have ? or, tell me, what is an idea ? It is the thing thought of 
itself in so far as that is 'objectively' in the understanding. But ex- 
plain what 'to be objectively in the understanding' is. As I was 
taught, it is the determination of an act of mind by a modification due 
to an object ; but this is a merely external attribute of the thing and 
nothing belonging to its reality. For, as ' being seen ' is merely the 
direction of the act of vision towards the percipient so 'being thought' 
or 'being objectively in the understanding' is merely a standing still 
of our thought within itself and ending there, which can occur whether 
the thing is active or passive, indeed though it is even non-existent. 
Hence, why should I ask for a cause of that which is nothing actual, 
which is a mere name, a nonentity ? 

Nevertheless, says our great philosopher, 'because a certain idea 
lias such and such an objective reality rather than another, it must 
owe this to some cause 4 .' Nay it needs no cavse, for its 'objective 
reality 3 is a mere name and nothing actual. Further a cause exerts 
some real and actual influence; but the objective existence which is 
nothing actual can be the recipient of nothing, and hence cannot be 
passively affected by the real activity of a cause, so far is it from 
requiring a cause. My conclusion is that, though I have ideas, there 
is no cause for their existence, so far from there being a cause for 
them greater than me and infinite. 

'But, if you do not assign some cause for ideas, you must, at least, 
give some reason why this particular idea contains this particular 
objective reality rather than that.' Quite right ; it is not my way 
to be niggardly with my friend* but to be open-handed. I affirm 
universally of all ideas what M Descartes says at other times of the 
t) iangle. He says : c Though possibly no such figure exists any- 
where outside my thought or has at any time existed, yet is its 

1 The French, phrase paraphrases this : ' One in which all things are in- 
cluded as in a universal and tiist cause.' 

3 The reference is to the writing- attributed in mediaeval times to Dio- 
n) r sins Dion\sius the Areopagite. 

a Chapitre cimjuiesme. F. V. 4 Of. Med. m. Vol. i. p. 168, 11. 14. 



Objections I 3 

nature something unconditionally determinate, an essence, or form 
that is immutable and eternal V It is hence an eternal verity which 
requires no cause. A boat is a boat, as Davus is Davus and not 
(Edipus. If, however, you drive me to assign a reason, I shall say it 
is the imperfection of the mind, which is not infinite ; for, not clasping 
in a single embrace the whole which exists simultaneously and all 
together, it parcels out and divides the omni-present good. Thus, 
because it cannot bring forth the whole, it conceives it in a series of 
acts or, in technical language 'inadequately. 3 

M. Descartes further asserts, ' Yet, however imperfect be the 
manner of the existence in which a thing is, by means of an idea, 
objectively in the understanding, nevertheless it is not merely 
nothing, nor, consequently, can it proceed from nothing/ 

But this is equivocation; for, if 'nothing' is the same as 'an 
entity not actually existing,' it is entirely non-existent, because it does 
not actually exist, and hence It proceeds from nothing, i.e. from no 
cause. But if by 'nothing' something imaginary is meant, something 
vulgarly styled an 'ens rationis/ it is not 'nothing 3 but something real 
which is distinctly conceived. But since it is merely conceived and is 
nothing actual, though it may be conceived, yet it cannot be caused 
[or banished from the mind 2 ~\. 

But he proceeds,.' Further, I should like to ask, whether "I" who 
have this idea could exist, if no such being existed 3 ,' i.e. if none 
existed, 'from which the idea of a being more perfect than I pro- 
ceeds/ as he says immediately before. * For/ says he, l from what 
should I proceed'? From myself, from my parents, or from some 
other beings I.. But, if I were self-originated, neither should I doubt, 
nor should I wish for anything, nor should I suffer lack of anything 
whatsoever, for I should have given myself all the perfections of which 
I have any idea, and should thus myself be God 4 / 'But, if I am 
derived from something else, the end of the series of beings from which 
I come will ultimately be one which is self-originated, and hence what 
would have held good for myself (if self -originated) will be true of 
this 5 .' This is an argument that pursues the same path as that taken 
by St Thomas 6 , and which he calls the proof from 'the causality of an 
efficient cause/ It is derived from Aristotle. But Aristotle and 

1 Cf. Med. v. Vol. i. p. 180, 11. 47. 2 French version. 

3 Cf. Vol. i. p. 167, sub fin. 4 cf. loc. cit. infra. 

5 Vol. i. p. 168, par. 2, sub fin. 

6 Thomas Aquinas, Summa totras Theologiae, Pars. i. Quaestio ii. De Deo, 
an Dens sit? Art. 3: Utrura Deus sit? p. 7, col. 2, Secunda via est ex ratione 
causae etticientis. 

12 



6 Objections I 

raises a question here. Yet I am sure that owing to what I here 
bring forward^ merely for discussion's sake, he will call to mind the 
doctrine of Boethius; That there are certain common mental concep- 
tions which are only known 'per se ' by the wise 1 . Hence no one should 
marvel if those who desire to Jcnow more (than others) ask many 
questions, and for a long time linger over those topics which they 
know to have been laid down as the first principks of the whole subject, 
and in spite of this do not master it without strenuous intellectual 
effort. 

Let us then concede that someone has a clear and distinct idea of 
a highest and most perfect being ; what further conclusion do you 
draw ? That this infinite being exists, and that so certainly that the 
existence of God should have certitude, at least for my mind, as great 
as that which mathematical truths have hitherto enjoyed 2 . Hence 
there is no less 3 contradiction in thinking of a God (that is of a 
being of the highest perfection) who lacks existence (a particular 
perfection) than in thinking of a hill which is not relative to a 
valley 4 . The whole dispute .hinges on this; he who gives way here 
must admit defeat. Since my opponent is the stronger combatant I 
should like for a little to avoid engaging him at close quarters in 
order that > fated as I am to lose, I may yet postpone what 1 cannot 
avoid. 

Firstly then, though reason only and not authority is the arbiter 
in our discussion, yet, lest I be judged impertinent in gainsaying the 
contentions of such an illustrious philosopher , let me quote you what 
St Thomas says; it is an objection he urges against his own doctrine: 
As soon as the intellect grasps the signification of the name God, 
it knows that God exists ; for the meaning of His name is an object 
nothing greater than which can be conceived 5 . Now that which 
exists in fact 'as well as in the mind is greater than what exists in 
the inind alone. Hence, since the name 'God' being understood, 
God consequently exists in the mind, it follows that He really 
exists. This argument formally expressed becomes God is a being, 
a greater than which cannot be conceived; but that, a greater than 
which cannot be conceived, includes its existence; hence God by His 
very name or notion includes His existence, and as a direct consequence 
can neither be conceived as being, nor can be, devoid of existence. But 
now, kindly tell me is not this M. Descartes' own proof? St Thomas 

1 Quotation in Thomas, loc. cit. p. 6, col. 2. 

2 Vol. i. p. 179, par. 1, sub fin. 3 'More,' Latin version. 
4 Ibid. par. 2. 5 Sigmfioarj* 



Objections I 7 

defines God thus: A being than which nothing greater can be con- 
ceived. M. Descartes calls Him a being of extreme perfection; 
certainly nothing greater than this can be conceived. St Thomas goes 
on to argue That than which nothing greater can be conceived 
includes its existence ; otherwise a greater than it could be conceived, 
namely that which is conceived to contain its existence. Now does not 
M. Descartes bring up the same proposition as minor premise*! c God 
is the most perfect being, the most perfect being comprises within itself 
its existence, for otherwise it would not have the highest perfection.' 
Si Thomas s conclusion is: Therefore since God, His name being 
understood, exists in the understanding, He exists in reality. That 
is to say, owing to the very fact that in the very concept of the essence 
of an entity, nothing greater than which can be conceived, existence is 
involved, it follows that that very entity exists. M. Descartes draws the 
same inference: Yet, says he, owing to the fact that we cannot think 
of God as not existing, it follows that His existence is inseparable 
from Him, and hence that He in truth exists 1 . But now let St Thomas 
reply both to himself and to M. Descartes. Granted that everyone 
and anyone knows that by the name God is understood that which 
has been asserted, to wit, a being than which nothing greater can be 
thought, yet it does not follow that he understands that the thing 
signified by the name exists in reality, but only that it exists in the 
apprehension of the understanding. Nor can it be proved that it 
really exists, unless it be conceded that something really exists than 
which nothing greater can be thought a proposition not granted by 
those who deny the existence of God. This furnishes me with my 
reply, which will be brief Though it be conceded that an entity of the 
highest perfection implies its existence by its very name, yet it does 
not follow that that very existence is anything actual in the real 
world, but merely that the concept of existence is inseparably united 
with the concept of highest being. Hence you cannot infer that the 
existence of God is anything actual, unless you assume that that 
highest being actually exists; for then it will actually contain all its 
perfections, together with this perfection of real existence. 

Pardon me, gentlemen, if now I plead fatigue; but here is some- 
thing in a lighter vein. This complex existent Lion includes both 
lion and the mode existence; and includes them essentially, for if you 
take away either it will not be the same complex. But now, has not 
God from all eternity had clear and distinct knowledge of this com- 
posite object ? Does not also the idea of this composite, in so far as 
1 Cf. Med. v. Vol. i. p. 181 sub fin. 



8 Objections ,1 

it is composite, involve loth its elements essentially ? That is to say, 
does not its existence flow from the essence of this composite, existent 
Lion? Yet, I affirm, the distinct cognition of it which God possesses, 
that which he has from all eternity does not constrain either part of 
the complex to exist, unless you assume that the complex does exist; for 
then, indeed, it will imply all its essential perfections and hence also 
that of actual existence. Therefore, also, even though you have a 
distinct knowledge of a highest being, and granted that a being of 
supreme perfection includes existence in the concept of its essence, yet 
it does not follow that its existence is anything actual, unless on the 
hypothesis that that highest being does exist; for then indeed along 
with its other perfections it will in actuality include this, its existence, 
also. Hence the proof of the existence of this highest being must be 
drawn from some other source. 

I shall add but fe^o words about the essence of the soul and the 
distinction between soul and body; for I confess that the speculations 
of this wonderful genius have so exhausted me that I can add but 
little more. It appears th&t the distinction between soul and body, if 
real, is proved by the fact that they can be conceived as distinct and 
as isolated from each other. Here I leave my opponent to contend 
with (Duns) Scotus, who says that In so far as one thing can be 
conceived as distinct and separate from another, the adequate dis- 
tinction to draw between them is what he calls a formal and objective 
one, which is intermediate between a real distinction and a distinc- 
tion of reason. It is thus that he distinguishes between the Divine 
justice and the Divine pity. They have, he says, concepts formally 
diverse prior to any operation of the understanding, so that, even 
then, the one is not the other: yet it does not follow that, because 
God's justice can be conceived apart from his pity, they can also 
exist apart. 

But I see that I have far exceeded the bounds of a letter. *l'hese 
an the criticisms for which, to my mind, the s-ulject calls. Heave it 
to you, gentlemen, to pick out any that may seem to you to have 
merit. If you take my part, it will be easy to prevail upon 
M. Descartes kindly not to bear me ill will in future for having 
in a few points contradicted him. If you uphold him, I yield, and 
ow,n myself vanquished, the more eagerly from anxiety not to be over- 
come a second time. I send you greetings. 



A REPLY BY THE AUTHOR TO THE 
FIRST SET OF OBJECTIONS, 

GENTLEMEN, 

You have certainly stirred up a stout .antagonist 
against me, one whose ability and learning might have caused me 
serious perplexity, unless like a pious and Christian theologian he 
had preferred to befriend the cause of God and of its unworthy 
champion, rather than to make a serious attack on it. But, though 
this insincerity redounds only to his credit, to act in collusion with 
it would tend to draw down censure on me ; and thus I prefer 
to unmask his device for rendering me assistance, rather than to 
answer him as an opponent. 

To begin with, he has put in brief compass my chief argument 
for proving the existence of God, so that it should the more readily 
abide in the readers memory; having briefly indicated his assent' 
to what he thinks clearly enough demonstrated, and having thus 
strengthened that with his authority, he finally comes to the crux 
of the difficulty, and raises a question only as to what is to be here 
understood by the term idea, and what sort of cause this aforesaid 
idea demands. 

Now I have written somewhere an idea is the thing thought of 
itself, in so far as it is objectively in the understanding. But these 
words he evidently prefers to understand in a sense quite different 
from that in which I use them, meaning to furnish me with an oppor- 
tunity of explaining them more clearly. i Objective existence in the 
mind w, J he says, 'the determination of the act .of mind by a modifi- 
cation due to an object, which is merely an extrinsic appellation and 
nothing belonging to the object' etc. 1 Now, here it must be noticed 
firstly that he refers to the thing itself, which is as it were placed out- 
side the understanding and respecting which it is certainly an extrinsic 

1 Of. above p. 2, par. 2. 



10 Reply to Objections I 

attribute to "be objectively in the understanding, and secondly, that 
what I speak of is the idea, which at no time exists outside the mind, 
and in the case of which ' objective existence ' is indistinguishable 
from being in the understanding in that way in which objects are wont 
to be there. Thus, for example, if someone asks what feature in the 
sun's existence it is to exist in my mind, it will be quite right to 
reply that this is a merely extrinsic attribute which affects it, and 
to wit, one which determines an operation of the mind in the mode 
due to the object. But if the question be, what the idea of the 
sun is, and the reply is given, that it is the object thought of in 
so far as that exists objectively in the understanding, he will not 
understand that it is the sun itself, in so far as that extrinsic 
attribute is in it ; neither will objective existence in the understanding 
here signify that the mind's operation is here determined in the mode 
due to an object, but that it is in the mind -in the way in which 
objects are wont to exist there. Hence the idea of the sun will 
be the sun itself existing in the mind, not indeed formally, as it 
exists in the sky, but objectively, i.e. in the way in which objects 
are wont to exist in the mind ; and this mode of being is truly 
much less perfect than that in which things exist outside the 
mind, but it is not on that account mere nothing, as I have 
already said. 

When this learned theologian talks of equivocation, I think that 
by this he means to warn me, and prevent me from forgetting that 
which I have this moment mentioned. For, firstly, he says that a 
thing existing in the mind through an idea, is not an actual entity, 
i.e. is nothing situated outside the intellect; and this is true. 
Secondly he says that it is not anything fictitious or an entity of 
reason^ but something real which is distinctly conceived ; by which 
words lie admits all I have assumed. Yet he adds, because it is 
merely conceived and is nothing actual (i.e. because it is merely an 
idea, and nothing situated outside the mind), it may be indeed 
conceived, but by no means caused 1 ; i.e. it does not require a cause 
in order to exist outside the mind. Agreed ; but it does require 
a cause to make it be conceived, and it is of this cause alone that 
the question here is raised. Thus, if anyone has in his mind the 
idea of any machine showing high skill in its construction, it is 
certainly quite reasonable to ask what is the cause of that idea ; 
and it is not sufficient to answer that the idea is nothing outside 
the mind, and hence can have no cause, but can merely be con- 

1 Cf. p. 3, par. 3. 



Reply to Objections I 11 



ceived ; for here the whole question is what is that which 
it to be conceived ? Nor will it suffice to say that the mind itself 
is its cause, being the cause of its own acts ; for this is not dis- 
puted, the question being the cause of the objective artifice which 
is in the idea. For there must be some definite cause of the fact 
that this idea of a machine displays this objective artifice rather 
than another, and its objective artifice bears to this cause the 
same relation that the objective reality of the idea of God bears 
to its cause. Various causes of such a contrivance might be assigned. 
It will be either a similar real machine already seen, the features 
of which are reproduced in the idea, or it will be great knowledge 
of mechanical science in the mind of him who thinks of it, or 
perchance a great intellectual acuteness, which has enabled the 
man to invent this device without previous scientific knowledge. 
We must note that every contrivance which in the idea has only 
objective existence, must necessarily exist in its cause, whatever 
that cause be, either formally or eminently. And we must apply 
the same rule to the objective reality which is in the idea of God. 
But in what will this exist unless in a God who really exists ? 
My clear-sighted opponent, however, sees all this, and hence admits 
that we may ask why this particular idea contains this particular 
objective reality rather than that, and to this question he replies 
firstly: that the same as what I haw written about the idea of 
the triangle holds good of all ideas, viz. that though perchance 
the triangle nowhere exists, yet there does exist some determinate 
nature, or essence, or immutable and eternal form which belongs 
to it 1 . Further he says that this demands no cause. But he sees 
well enough that this reply is nevertheless not satisfactory; for, 
although the nature of the triangle be immutable and eternal, that 
does not disallow the question why the idea exists in us. Hence 
he adds 'If, however, you drive me to assign a reason, I shall say 
it is the imperfection of the mind,' etc. But this reply seems to 
show merely that those who have desired to take exception to my 
views have no rejoinder to make that at all approaches the truth. 
For, sooth to say, there is no more probability that the imperfec- 
tion of the human intellect is the cause of our possessing the idea 
of God, than that ignorance of mechanical science should be the 
cause of our imagining some machine showing highly intricate con- 
trivance, rather than another less perfect one. On .the contrary, 
clearly, if one possesses the idea of a machine which involves every 
1 Cf. pp. 2, 3. 



12 Reply to Objections I 

contrivance that ingenuity can devise, it will be absolutely right 
to infer that it is the product of some cause, in which that extreme 
pitch of mechanical ingenuity was actually embodied, although in 
the idea it existed only objectively. By the same reasoning, when 
we have in us the idea of God, in which all thinkable perfection is 
contained, the evident conclusion is, that that idea depends. upon 
some cause in which all that perfection also exists, to wit in the 
God who really exists. It is true that both cases would seem 
to be on the same footing, and that, just as all are not expert 
mechanicians, and hence cannot form the notion of a highly intri- 
cate machine, so all men might not have the same power of 
conceiving the idea of God ; but since that idea is implanted in 
the same manner in the minds of all, and we perceive no source 
other than ourselves from which it comes, we suppose that it per- 
tains to the nature of our mind. This indeed is not wrong, but 
we omit something else which principally merits consideration and 
on which the whole force and evidence of this argument depends, 
namely, that this power of having in one's self the idea of God 
could not belong to. our intellect, . if this intellect were merely a 
finite entity, as in fact it is, and did it not have God as the cause 
of its existence. Hence I have undertaken the further enquiry 
whether I could exist if God did not exist l not for the purpose of 
adducing a proof distinct from the preceding one, but rather in 
order to give a more thorough-going explanation of it. 

At this point my opponent, through excess of courtesy, has put 
me in an awkward position, for he compares my argument with 
another drawn from 8t Thomas and from Aristotle, and thus he 
seems to compel me to explain why, having started with them on 
the same road, I have not kept to it at all points. But I beg him 
to excuse me from speaking of others, and to allow me to give an 
account only of what I have myself written. 

Firstly then, I have not drawn my arguments from observing 
an order or succession of efficient causes in the realm of sensible 
things, partly because I deemed the existence of God to be 
much more evident than that of any sensible things, partly also 
because this succession of causes seemed to conduct merely to 
an acknowledgement of the imperfection of my intellect, because 
I could not understand how an infinity of such causes could have 
succeeded one another from all eternity in such a way that none of 
them have been absolutely first. For certainly, because I could 
1 Of. Med. in. Vol. ,i. p. 167 sub fin. 



Reply to Objections I 13 

not understand that, it does not follow that there must be a first 
cause, just as it does not follow that, because I cannot understand 
an infinity of divisions in a finite quantity, an ultimate atom can 
be arrived at, beyond which no further division is possible. The 
only consequence is that my intellect, which is finite, cannot com- 
prehend the infinite. Therefore I prefer to use as the foundation 
of my proof my own existence, which is not dependent on any series 
of causes, and is so plain to my intelligence that nothing can be 
plainer ; and about myself I do not so much ask, what was the 
original cause that produced me, as what it is that at present 
preserves me, the object of this being to disentangle myself from 
all question of the succession of causes. 

Further, I have not asked what is the cause of my existence 
in so far as I consist of mind and body, but have limited myself 
definitely to my position in so far as I am merely a thing that 
thinks. And I think that this furthers my project in no small 
degree ; for thus I have been able far better to free myself from 
prejudiced conclusions, to follow the dictates of the light of nature, 
to set questions, to myself, and to affirm with certainty that there 
is nothing in me of which I am not in some way conscious. This 
clearly is quite different from judging that, because I was begotten 
by my father, he was the progeny of my grandfather, and, because 
in seeking out the parents of my parents I could not carry the process 
to infinity, deciding, in order to bring my quest to a conclusion, that 
hence there was some first cause of the series. 

Moreover, I have not only asked what is the cause of my being 
in so far as I am a thinking thing, but chiefly in so far as I perceive 
that there exists in me, among other thoughts, the idea of a being 
of the highest' perfection. For it is on this that the whole force 
of my demonstration depends ; firstly because in that idea is con- 
tained the notion of what God is, at least in so far as I can 
comprehend Him, and according to the laws of true Logic, the 
question ' does a thing exist ? : must never be asked unless we " 
already understand wMt the thing is ; secondly, because it is this 
same idea that gives me the opportunity of enquiring whether 
I proceed from myself or from something else, and of recognising 
my defects ; finally it is that which shows me not only that there 
is some cause of my existence, but that further in this cause all 
perfections are contained, and that hence it is God. 

Finally, I have not said that it is impossible for anything to be 
its own efficient cause ; for, although that statement is manifestly 



14 Reply to Objections I 

true when the meaning of efficient cause is restricted to those causes 
that are prior in time to their effects or different from them, yet 
it does not seem necessary to confine the term to this meaning in 
the present investigation. In the first place the question 1 would 
in such a case be unmeaning, for who does not know that the same 
thing can neither be prior to nor different from itself \ Secondly, 
the light of nature does not require that the notion of an efficient 
cause should compel it to be prior to its effect; on the contrary, 
a thing does not properly conform to the notion of cause except 
during the time that it produces its effect, and hence is not prior 
to it. Moreover, the light of nature certainly tells us that nothing 
exists about which the question, why it exists, cannot be asked, 
whether we enquire for its efficient cause, or, if it' does not possess 
one, demand why it does not have one. Hence, if I did not believe 
that anything could in some way be related to itself exactly as 
an efficient cause is related to its effect, so far should I be 
from concluding that any first cause existed, that, on the contrary, 
I should once more ask for the cause of that which had been called 
first, and so should never arrive at the first of all. But I frankly 
allow that something may exist in which there is such a great and 
inexhaustible power that it has needed no assistance in order to 
exist, and requires none for its preservation, and hence is in a 
certain way the cause of its own existence ; such a cause I under- 
stand God to be. For, even though I had existed from all eternity 
and hence nothing had preceded niy existence, none the less, seeing 
that I deem the various parts of time to be separable from eacli 
other, and hence that it does not follow that, because I now exist, 
I shall in future do so, unless some cause were so to speak to 
re-create me at each single moment, I should not hesitate to call 
that cause which preserves me an efficient cause. Thus, even 
though God has never been non-existent, yet because He is the 
very Being who actually preserves Himself in existence, it seems 
possible to call Him without undue impropriety the cause of His 
own existence. But it must be noted that here I do not mean 
a preservation which is effected by any positive operation of causal 
efficiency but one due merely to this fact, that the essential nature 
of God is such that He cannot be otherwise than always existent. 

From these remarks it is easy for me to make my reply to the 
distinction in the use of the term l self-originated ' or per se z , which, 

1 The question 'Can a thing be its own efficient cause?' 

2 Cf. above p. 4. 



Reply to Objections I 15 

according to the counsel of my learned theological adversary, requires 
explanation. For, although those who, confining themselves to the 
peculiar and restricted meaning of efficient cause, think it impossible 
for a thing to be its own efficient cause, and do not discern here 
another species of cause analogous to an efficient cause, are accus- 
tomed to understand merely, when they say a thing exists per se, that 
it has no cause \ yet, if those people would look to the facts rather 
than the words, they would easily see that the negative meaning of 
the term ' self-originated ' proceeds merely from the imperfection of 
the human intellect, and has no foundation in reality, and that there 
is a certain other positive signification which is drawn from the truth 
of things and from which alone my argument issues. For if, e.g. 
anyone should imagine that some body was something per se, he 
can only mean that it has no cause, and he affirms this for no 
positive reason, but merely in a negative manner, because he knows 
no cause for it. But this shows some imperfection in his judg- 
ment 1 , as he will easily recognize if he remembers that the several 
parts of time are not derived from one another, and that hence, 
though that body be supposed to have existed up to the present 
time per se, i.e. without any cause, that will not suffice to make it 
exist in future, unless there be some power contained in it which 
continually, as it were, re-creates it ; for then, when he sees that 
no such power is comprised in the idea of body, he will at once 
conclude that that body does not exist per se, taking the expres- 
sion per se positively. Similarly when we say that God exists per 
se, we can indeed understand that negatively, our whole meaning 
being really that He has no cause. But, if we have previously 
enquired why He is or why He continues in being, and having 
regard to the immense and incomprehensible power which exists 
in the idea of Him we recognise that it is so exceedingly great 
that it is clearly the cause of His continuing to be, and that there 
can be nothing else besides it, we say that God exists per se, no 
longer negatively but in the highest positive sense. For, although 
we need not say that God is the efficient cause of His own self, 
lest, if we do so, we should be involved in a verbal dispute, yet, 
because we see that the fact of His existing per se, or having no 
cause other than Himself, issues, not from nothing, but from the 
real immensity of His power, it is quite permissible for us to think 
that in a certain sense He stands to Himself in the same way, as an 

1 French version. Latin version, in eo. 



16 Reply to Objections I 

efficient cause does to its effect, and ' that hence He exists per se 
in a positive sense. Each one may also ask himself whether he 
exists per se in the same sense, and, having found no power in 
himself sufficient to preserve him through even a moment of time, 
he will rightly conclude that he depends on something else, and 
indeed on something else which exists per se, because since the 
matter here concerns the present, not the past or the future, 
there is no room for an infinite regress. Nay, here I will add 
a statement I have not hitherto made in writing that we cannot 
arrive merely at a secondary cause, hut that the cause which has 
power sufficient to conserve a thing external to it must with all 
the more reason conserve itself by its own proper power, and so 
exist per se 1 . 

Moreover when it is said that all limitation is due to a cause 2 , 
while I hold that to be a real fact, I maintain that it is hardly 
expressed in proper terms, and that the difficulty is not solved ; for, 
properly speaking, limitation is only the negation of a greater per- 
fection, and this negation does not come from a cause but is the 
very thing so limited. But though it be true that every limited 
thing depends on a cause, yet that is not self-evident, but must be 
deduced from something else ; for, as this subtle theologian well 
replies, a thing can be limited in two ways 3 , either by that which 
produced it not having given it more perfection, or because its 
nature is such that it can only receive a certain amount, as e.g. in 
the case of the triangle, which by its nature can only have three 
sides. But it seems to me to be self-evident that everything that 
exists springs either from a cause or from itself considered as a 
cause ; for, since we understand not only what existence is, but also 

1 The French translation of 1661 inserts after this point a paragraph which 
exists neither in the Latin nor in the French edition of 1647. Though pro- 
bably not original (Descartes died in 1650) but due to Clerselier, it is judged by 
the surviving editor of the standard modern French edition (M. Adam) to be 
important, and is inserted by him in a footnote {Vol. ix. Premieres Beponses, 
p. 88). It is as follows : 

"And, in order to anticipate here an objection which could be made, to wit 
that perhaps fre who thus questions himself has the power of preserving himself 
without noticing it, I maintain that this cannot be, and that if he had this 
power, he would necessarily know it ; for as he considers himself at this 
moment only as a being that thinks, nothing can exist in him of which he does 
not have cognizance, because every action of a spirit (such as would be the 
act of self-preservation, if proceeding from him), being a thought and hence 
being present and known by the spirit, that particular action would, like the 
others, be present and be known, and by it he would come necessarily to know 
the powers which produced it, since every action points necessarily to the power 
which produces it." 

2 Cf. p. 4, par. 3. 3 F. V. The Latin is more condensed. 



Eeply to Objections I 17 

what negation of existence is, we cannot feign that anything exists 
per se as to which no reason can be given regarding why it exists 
rather than does not exist; hence there is no reason for not in- 
terpreting self-orignated in the sense in which it implies causal power, 
that power, to wit, which passes all bounds, and which, as we can 
easily prove, can be found in God alone. 

As to what my opponent finally grants ' me, it is a principle which, 
though admitting no question, is yet commonly so little taken into 
consideration and is so effective in rescuing all Philosophy from 
the obscurity of darkness, that by confirming it by his authority 
the learned Doctor does much to further my endeavour. 

But prudently he here enquires wJiether / know ths infinite 
distinctly and clearly* ; and although I have tried to anticipate this 
objection, yet it occurs so spontaneously to each one, that it is 
worth while to give it a detailed reply. Therefore here, to start 
with, I shall say that the infinite qua infinite is in nowise compre- 
hended, but that nevertheless it is understood, in so far as clearly 
and distinctly to understand a thing to be such that no limits can 
be found in it is to understand clearly that it is infinite. 

Here indeed I distinguish between the indefinite and the infinite, 
and that alone do I properly speaking call infinite in which nowhere 
are limits to be found ; in this sense God alone is infinite. That 
moreover in which only in a certain aspect do I recognize no limit, 
as e.g. the extension of imaginary space, the many in number, or 
the divisibility of the parts of quantity, and other similar things, I 
call indeed indefinite but not infinite, because such things are not 
limitless in every respect. 

Besides that, I distinguish between the formal notion 3 of the 
infinite or infinity and the thing which is infinite ; for as for infinity, 
even though we understand it to have as much positive reality as 
may be, yet we understand it only in a certain negative fashion, 
from the fact, namely, that we perceive no limitation in the thing ; 
but the thing itself which is infinite is indeed positively understood, 
though not adequately, i.e. we do not comprehend the whole of 
what is intelligible in it. But it is just as when gazing at the sea, 
we are said to behold it, though our sight does not cover it all nor 
measures its immensity ; if indeed we view it from a distance in 
such a way as to take in the whole with a single glance, we see it 
only confusedly, as we have a confused image of a chiliagon, when 

1 p. 4, sub fin. 2 p. 5, par. 2. 3 Eationem. 

R H. II. 2 



18 Reply to Objections I 

taking in all its sides at the same time ; but if from near at hand 
we fix our glance on one portion of the sea, this act of vision can be 
clear and distinct, just as the image of a chiliagon may be, if it 
takes in only one or two of the figure's sides. By similar reasoning 
I admit along with all theologians that God cannot be comprehended 
by the human mind, and also that he cannot be distinctly known by 
those who try mentally to grasp Him at once in His entirety, and 
view Him, as it were, from a distance. This was the sense in which, 
in the words of St Thomas in the passage quoted 1 , the knowledge of 
God was said to be found in us only in a certain confused way. But 
those who try to attend to His perfections singly, and intend not so 
much to comprehend them as to admire them and to employ all the 
power of their mind in contemplating them 2 , will assuredly find in 
Him a much ampler and readier supply of the material for clear 
and distinct cognition than in any created things. 

Neither does St Thomas here deny this contention, as is clear 
from his affirming in the following article that the existence of God 
is demonstrable. Moreover, wherever I have said that God can be 
clearly and distinctly known, I have understood this to apply only 
to this finite cognition of ours, which is proportionate to the diminu- 
tive capacity of our minds. Besides, there was no reason for under- 
standing otherwise in order to prove the truth of the propositions I 
have maintained, as will easily be noticed if people take heed that 
I have affirmed the doctrine in dispute only in two places, to wit 
where the question was asked whether, in the idea we form of God, 
there is anything real or only the negation of reality 3 , (as for 
example in the idea of cold nothing else is found than the negation 
of heat) a point which gives rise to no dispute [although we do not 
comprehend the infinite] 4 ; and again this doctrine appeared in the 
passage where I asserted that existence appertained to the notion of 
a being of the highest perfection, just as much as three sides to the 
notion of a triangle, a fact which can be understood without our 
having an adequate knowledge of God. 

My opponent here compares one 5 of my arguments with another 

1 Of. Objections i. p. 5. 

2 Instead of this last phrase the French version has 'and to recognize how 
far they are from all comprehension. 

3 Kei. 

4 This clause occurs only in the French version. The round brackets 
above are also found only in F. V. Taken together these two indications make 
it clear that the ' point which gives rise to no dispute ' is that ' there is reality in 
the idea of God, whereas in the idea of cold there is none.' 

5 Above p. 6, par. 2. 



Reply to Objections I 19 

of St Thomas's, so, as it were to force me to show which of the two 
has the more force. This I seem to be able to do with a good 
enough grace, because neither did St Thomas use that argument as 
his own, nor does he draw the same conclusion from it; consequently 
there is nothing here in which I am at variance with the Angelic 
Doctor. He himself asked whether the existence of God is in 
itself 1 known to man, i.e. whether it is obvious to each single indi- 
vidual ; he denies this, and I along with him 2 . Now the argument 
to which he puts himself in opposition can be thus propounded. When 
we understand what it is the word God signifies, we understand 
that it is that, than which nothing greater can be conceived 3 ; but to 
exist in reality as well as in the mind is greater than to exist in the 
mind alone; hence, when the meaning of the word God is understood, 
it is understood that God exists in fact as well as in the understanding. 
Here there is a manifest error in the form of the argument ; for the 
only conclusion to be drawn is hence, when we understand what the 
word God means, we understand that it means that God exists in 
fact as well as in the mind: but because a word implies something, 
that is no reason for this being true. My argument, however, was 
of the following kind That which we clearly and distinctly under- 
stand to belong to the true and immutable nature of anything, its 
essence, or form, can be truly affirmed of that thing ; but, after we 
have with sufficient accuracy investigated the nature of God, we 
clearly and distinctly understand that to exist belongs to His true 
and immutable nature ; therefore we can with truth affirm of God 
that He exists. This is at least a legitimate conclusion. But 
besides this the major premise cannot be denied, because it was 
previously 4 conceded that whatever we clearly and distinctly perceive 
is true. The minor alone remains, and in it there is, I confess, no 
little difficulty. This is firstly because we are so much accustomed 
to distinguish existence from essence in the case of other things, 
that we do not with sufficient readiness notice how existence belongs 
to the essence of God in a greater degree than in the case of other 
things. Further, because we do not distinguish that which belongs 
to the true and immutable nature of a thing from that which we by 
a mental fiction assign to it, even if we do fairly clearly perceive 
that existence belongs to God's essence, we nevertheless do not 
conclude that God exists, because we do not know whether His 
essence is true and immutable or only a fiction we invent. 

1 So as not to need proof, F. V. 2 F. V. merito, L. V. 

3 Significari, L. V. 4 Of. above p. 17, par. 2. 

22 



20 Reply to Objections I 

But, in order to remove the first part of this difficulty we must 
distinguish between possible and necessary existence, and note that 
in the concept or idea of everything that is clearly and distinctly 
conceived, possible existence is contained, but necessary existence 
never, except in the idea of God alone. For I am sure that all who 
diligently attend to this diversity between the idea of God and that 
of all other things, will perceive that, even though other things are 
indeed conceived 1 only as existing, yet it does not thence follow 
that they do exist, but only that they may exist, because we do not 
conceive that there is any necessity for actual existence being con- 
joined with their other properties ; but, because we understand that 
actual existence is necessarily and at all times linked to God's other 
attributes, it follows certainly that God exists. 

Further, to clear away the rest of the difficulty, we must observe 
that those ideas which do not contain a true and immutable nature, 
but only a fictitious one due to a mental synthesis, can be by that 
same mind analysed, not merely by abstraction (or restriction of the 
thought) 2 but by a clear and distinct mental operation ; hence it will 
be clear that those things which the understanding cannot so analyse 
have not been put together by it. For example, when I think of a 
winged horse, or of a lion actually existing, or of a triangle inscribed 
in a square, I easily understand that I can on the contrary think of 
a horse without wings, of a lion as not existing and of a triangle 
apart from a square, and so forth, and that hence these things have 
no true and immutable nature. But if I think of the triangle or 
the square (I pass by for the present the lion and the horse, because 
their natures are not wholly intelligible to us), then certainly what- 
ever I recognise as being contained in the idea of the triangle, as 
that its angles are equal to right, etc., I shall truly affirm of the 
triangle ; and similarly I shall affirm of the square whatsoever 
I find in the idea of it. For though I can think of the triangle, 
though stripping from it the equality of its angles to two right, yet 
I cannot deny that attribute of it by any clear and distinct mental 
operation, i.e. when I myself rightly understand what I say. Besides, 
if I think of a triangle inscribed in a square, not meaning to ascribe 
to the square that which belongs to the triangle alone, or to assign 
to the triangle the properties of the square, but for the purpose only 
of examining that which arises from the conjunction of the two, the 
nature of that composite will be not less true and immutable than 

1 intelligamus. 

2 This phrase occurs only in the French version. 



Reply to Objections I 21 

that of the square or triangle alone ; and hence it will be right to 
affirm that the square cannot be less than double the inscribed 
triangle, together with the similar properties which belong to the 
nature of this composite figure. 

But if I think that existence is contained in the idea of a body 
of the highest perfection, because it is a greater perfection to exist 
in reality as well as in the mind than to exist in the intellect alone, 
I cannot then conclude that this utterly perfect body exists, but 
merely that it may exist ; for I can well enough recognize that that 
idea has been put together by my rnind uniting together all corporeal 
perfections, and that existence does not arise out of its other cor- 
poreal perfections, because it (existence) can be equally well affirmed 
and denied of them. Nay, because when I examine this idea of 
body I see in it no force by means of which it may produce or pre- 
serve itself, I rightly conclude that necessary existence, which alone 
is here in question, does not belong to the nature of a body, how- 
soever perfect it may be, any more than it belongs to the nature of 
a mountain not to have a valley, or any more than it pertains to the 
nature of a triangle to have its angles greater than two right angles. 
But now, if we ask not about a body but about a thing (of whatever 
sort this thing may turn out to be) which has all those perfections 
which can exist together, whether existence must be included in the 
number of these perfections we shall at first be in doubt, because 
our mind, being finite, and not accustomed to consider them unless 
separately, will perchance not at first see how necessary is the bond 
between them. But yet if we attentively consider whether existence 
is congruous with a being of the highest perfection, and what sort of 
existence is so, we shall be able clearly and distinctly to perceive 
in the first place that possible existence is at least predicable of it, 
as it is of all other things of which we have a distinct idea, even of 
those things which are composed by a fiction of the mind. Further, 
because we cannot think of God's existence as being possible, without 
at the same time, and by taking heed of His immeasurable power, 
acknowledging that He can exist by His own might, we hence con- 
clude that He really exists and has existed from all eternity ; for 
the light of nature makes it most plain that what can' exist by its 
own power always exists. And thus we shall understand that neces- 
sary existence is comprised in the idea of a being of the highest 
power, not by any intellectual fiction, but because it belongs to the 
true and immutable nature of that being to exist. We shall at the 
same time easily perceive that that all-powerful being must comprise 



22 Reply to Objections I 

in himself all the other perfections that are contained in the idea of 
God, and hence these by their own nature and without any mental 
fiction are conjoined together and exist in God. 

All this is manifest to one who considers the matter attentively, 
-and it differs from what I have already written only in the method 
of explanation adopted, which I have intentionally altered in order to 
suit a diversity of intelligences. But I shall not deny that this argu- 
ment is such that those who do not bethink themselves of all those 
considerations that go to prove it, will very readily take it for a 
sophism ; hence at the outset I had much doubt as to whether I 
should use it, fearing that those who did not attain to it might be 
given an opportunity of cavilling about the rest. But since there 
are two ways only of proving the existence of God, one by means of 
the effects due to him, the other by his essence or nature, and as I 
gave the former explanation in the third Meditation as well as I 
could, I considered that I should not afterwards omit the other proof. 

In the matter of the formal distinction which the learned Theo- 
logian claims to draw from Scotus 1 , my reply is briefly to the effect 
that this distinction in no way differs from a modal one, and applies 
only to incomplete entities, which I have accurately demarcated 
from complete beings. This is sufficient to cause one thing to be 
conceived separately and as distinct from another by the abstracting 
action of a mind when it conceives the thing inadequately, without 
sufficing to cause two things to be thought of so distinctly and 
separately that we understand each to be an entity in itself and 
diverse from every other; in order that we may do this a real 
distinction is absolutely necessary. Thus, for example, there is a 
formal distinction between the motion and the figure of the same 
body, and I can quite well think of the motion without the figure 
and of the figure apart from the motion and of either apart from the 
body ; but nevertheless I cannot think of the motion in a complete 
manner apart from the thing in which the motion exists nor of the 
figure in isolation from the object which has the figure ; nor finally 
can I feign that anything incapable of having figure can possess 
motion, or that what is incapable of movement has figure. So it is 
also that neither can I understand justice apart from a just being, 
or compassion apart from the compassionate ; nor may I imagine 
that the same being as is just cannot be compassionate. But yet I 
understand in a complete manner what body is [that is to say I 
conceive of body as a complete thing 2 ], merely by thinking that 

1 Cf. p. 8. a This clause is found only in the French version. 



Eeply to Objections I 23 

it is extended, has figure, can move, etc., and by denying 1 of it 
everything which belongs to the nature of mind. Conversely also 
I understand that mind is something complete which doubts, 
knows, wishes, etc., although I deny that anything belongs to 
it which is contained in the idea of body. But this could not 
be unless there were a real distinction between mind and body. 

This is my answer, gentlemen, to your friend's subtle and most 
serviceable criticisms. If it still is defective, I ask to be informed 
about the omissions or the blunders it contains. To secure this 
from my critic through your good offices, would be to have a great 
kindness conferred upon me. 

1 L. V. Encore que je nie, F. V. 



THE SECOND SET OF OBJECTIONS 1 . 



Your endeavour to maintain the cause of the Author -of all 
things against a new race of rebellious giants has sped so well, that 
henceforth men of worth may hope that in future there will be none 
who, after attentive study of your Meditations, will not confess that 
an eternal divine Being does exist, on whom all things depend. 
Hence we haw decided to draw your attention to certain passages 
noted beneath and to request you to shed such light upon them that 
nothing will remain in your work which, if at all demonstrable, is 
not clearly proved. For, since you have for so many years so 
exercised your mind by continual meditation, that matters which to 

I/ tj i 

others seem doubtful and obscure are to you most evident, and you 
perhaps kno^v them by a simple intuitive act of mind, without* 
noticing the indistinctness that the same facts have for others, it will 
be well to bring be/ore your notice those things which need to be 
more clearly and fully explained and demonstrated. This done, 
there will scarce remain anyone to deny that those arguments of 
yours, entered upon for the purpose of promoting the greater 
glory of God and vast benefit to all mankind, have the force of 
demonstrations. 

In the first place, pray remember that it was not as an actual 
fact and in reality, but merely by a mental fiction, that ym so 
stoutly resisted the claim of all bodies to be more than phantasms, 
in order, that you might draw the conclusion that you were merely 
a thinking being; Jor otherwise there is perhaps a risk you might 
believe that you could draw the conclusion that you were in truth 
nothing other than mind, or thought, or a thinking being. This we 
find worthy of -mention only in connection with the first two 

1 The title of the French translation is ' The Second Objections collected 
by the Eev. Father Mersenne from the utterances of divers Theologians and 
Philosophers. 3 

2 1 follow the French version here, the Latin is not so pointed. 



Objections II 25 

Meditations, in which you shoiv dearly that it is at least certain that 
you, ivho think, exist. But let us pause a little here. Up to this 
point you know that you are a being that thinks ; but you do not 
know wliat this thinking thing is. What if that were a body which 
by its various motions and encounters produces that which we call 
thought ? For, granted that you rejected the claim of every sort of 
body, you may haw been deceived in this, because you did not rule out 
yourself, who are a body. For how will you prove that a body cannot 
think, or that its bodily motions are not thought itself! Possibly 
even, the whole bodily system, which you imagine you have rejected, or 
some of its parts, say the parts composing the brain, can unite to 
produce those motions ivhich ive call thoughts. 'I am a thinking 
thing,' you say ; but who knoivs but you are a corporeal motion, or a 
body in motion ? 

Secondly, from the idea of a supreme being, which, you contend, 
<cannot be by you produced, you are bold enough to infer the necessary 
existence of the supreme being from which alone can come that idea 
that your mind perceives 1 . Yet we find in our own selves a sufficient 
basis on which alone to erect that said idea, even though that supreme 
being did not exist, or we were ignorant of its existence and did not 
even think of it though it did exist. Do I not see tJiat I, in 
thinking, have some degree of perfection? And therefore I conclude 
that others besides me have a similar degree, and hence I have a basis 
on which to construct the thought of any number of degrees and so to 
add one degree of perfection to another to infinity, just as, given the 
existence of a single degree of light or heat, I can add and imagine 
fresh degrees up to infinity. Why, on similar reasoning, can I not 
add, to any degree of being' that I perceive in myself any other 
degree I please, and out of the whole number capable of addition 
construct the idea of a perfect being ? 'But,' you say, ( an effect can 
have no degree of perfection or reality which has not previously 
existed in its cause.' In reply we urge (passing by the fact that 
experience shows us that flies and other animals, or even plants are 
produced by the sun, rain and the earth, in which life, a nobler thing 
than any merely corporeal grade of being, does not exist, and that 
hence an effect can derive from its cause some reality which yet is not 
found in the cause] that that idea is nothing but an entity of reason, 
which has no more nobility than your mind that thinks it. Besides 
this, how do you knoiv that that idea would have come before your 

1 Of. Med. m. Vol. i. p. 165, sub fin. 2 Entis, L. V. 



26 Objections II 

mind if you had not been nurtured among men of culture, but had 
passed all your life in some desert spot ? Have you not derived it 
from reflections previously entertained, from books, from interchange 
of converse with your friends ; etc., not from your own mind alone or 
from a supreme being who exists 1 You must therefwe prove more 
clearly that that idea could not present itself to you unless a supreme 
being did exist ; though when you show this we shall all confess 
ourselves vanquished. But it seems to be shown clearly that that idea 
springs from previous notions by the fact that the natives of Canada, 
the Hurons, and other savages, have no idea in their minds such as 
this, which is one that you can form from a previous survey of cor- 
poreal things, in such a way that your idea refers only to this corporeal 
world, which embraces all the perfections that you can imagine; hence 
you would have up to this point no grounds as yet for inferring more 
than an entirely perfect corporeal Entity, unless you were to add 
something else conducting us to the {knowledge of the] incorporeal or 
spiritual. Let us add that you can construct the idea of an angel (just 
as you can form the notion of a supremely perfect being) without that 
idea being caused in you by a [really existing] angel; though the 
angel has more perfection than you have. But you do not possess the 
idea of God any more than that of an infinite number or of an infinite 
line ; and though you did possess this, yet there could be no such 
number. Put along with this the contention that the idea of the 
unity and simplicity of a sole perfection which embraces all other 
perfections, is merely the product of the reasoning mind, and is 
formed in the same way as other universal unities, which do not exist 
in fact but merely in the understanding, as is illustrated by the cases 
of generic, transcendental and other unities. 

Thirdly, since you are not yet certain of the aforesaid existence 
of God, and yet according to your statement, cannot be certain of 
anything w know anything clearly and distinctly unless previously 
you knoiv certainly and clearly that God exists, it folkios that you 
cannot clearly and distinctly know that you are a thinking thing, 
since, according to you, that knowledge depends on the clear knowledge 
of the existence of God, the proof of which you have not yet reached 
at that point where you draw the conclusion that you have a clear 
knowledge of what you are. 

Take this also, that while an Atheist knoivs clearly and distinctly 
that the three angles of a triangle are equal to two right, yet he is 
far from believing in the existence of God ; in fact he denies it, 
because if God existed there would be a supreme existence, a highest 



Objections II 27 

good, i.e. an infinite Being. But the infinite in every type of perfec- 
tion precludes the existence of anything else whatsoever it be, e.g. of 
every variety of entity and good, nay even every sort of non-entity 
and evil; whereas there are in existence many entities, many good 
things, as well as many non-entities and many evil things. We con- 
sider that you should give a solution of this objection, lest the impious 
should still have some case left them. 

Fourthly, you deny that God lies or deceives; whereas some 
schoolmen may be found who affirm this. Thus Gabriel 1 , Ariminensis 2 , 
and others think that in the absolute sense of the expression God does 
utter falsehoods, i.e. what is the opposite of His intention and con- 
trary to that which He has decreed; as when He unconditionally 
announced to the people of Nineveh through the Prophet, Yet forty 
days and Nineveh shall be destroyed; and ivhen in many other 
cases He declared things that by no means came to pass, became His 
words were not meant to correspond with His intention or His decree. 
But, if God could harden the heart of Pharaoh and blind his eyes, if 
He communicated to His Prophets a spirit of lying, whence do you 
conclude that we cannot be deceived by Him? May not God so 
deal with men as a physician treats his patients, or as a father his 
children, dissimulation being employed in both cases, and that wisely 
and with profit ? For if God shoioed to us His truth undimmed, 
what eyes, what mental vision could endure it? 

Yet it is true that it is not necessary for God to contrive deception 
in order for you to be deceived in the things which you think you 
clearly and distinctly perceive, if the cause of the illusion may reside 
in you yourself, provided only that you are unaware of the fact. 
What if your nature be such as to be continually, or at least very 
frequently, deceived? But what evidence is there that you are not 
deceived and cannot be deceived in those matters whereof you have 
dear and distinct knoivledge ? How often have we not experienced 
the fact that a man has been deceived in those matters of which he 
believed that he alone had clear knowledge? Hence we think that 
this principle of clear and distinct knowledge should be explained so 
clearly and distinctly that no one of sound mind may ever be deceived 
in matters that he believes himself to knoiv clearly and distinctly ; 
apart from this condition we cannot yet make out that there is a 
possibility of certitude in any degree attaching to your thinking or to 
the thoughts of the human race. 

1 Gabriel Biel, 15th century, ' the last of the Scholastics.' 

2 Gregory of Eimini, 14th century. 



28 Objections II 

Fifthly, if the will never goes astray or errs, so long as it follows 
the clear and distinct knowledge of the mind that governs it 1 , but 
exposes itself to danger if guided by a mental conception which is not 
clear and distinct, note that the following consequences ensue: 
a Turk or any other infidel does not only not err because he does not 
embrace the Christian [and Catholic] Religion, but in addition to this 
he does err if he does embrace it, since he does not apprehend its truth 
either clearly or distinctly. Nay, if this canon of yours is true, 
there will be practically nothing which the will may permissibly 
embrace, since there is hardly anything 'known to us with that clear- 
ness and distinctness that you want for a certitude that no doubt can 
shake. Beware then lest, in your desire to befriend the truth you do 
not prove too much, and, instead of establishing it, overthrow it. 

Sixthly, in your reply to the preceding* set of objections you 
appear to haw gone astray in the drawing of your conclusion. This 
was how you propounded your argument We may truly affirm of 
anything, that which we clearly and distinctly perceive to belong to 
its true and immutable nature ; but (after we have investigated 
with sufficient accuracy what God is) we clearly and distinctly 
understand that to exist belongs to the nature of God 3 . The 
proper conclusion would Jiave been : therefore (after we have inves- 
gated with sufficient accuracy what God is) we can truly affirm that 
to exist belongs to God's nature. Whence it does not follow that 
God actually exists, but only that He ought to exist if His nature 
were anything possible or not contradictory ; that is to say, that the 
nature or essence of God cannot be conceived apart from His existence 
and hence, as a consequence, if that essence is real, God exists as an 
actual fact. All this may be reduced to that argument which is 
stated by others in the following terms : If it is not a contradiction 
that God exists, it is certain that He exists ; but His existence is 
not a contradiction; hence, etc. But a difficulty occurs in the 
minor premise, which states that God's existence is not a contradiction, 
since our critics either profess to doubt the truth of this or deny it 
Moreover that little clause in your argument (' after we have suffi- 
ciently investigated the nature of God ') assumes as true something 
that all do not believe ; and you know that you yourself confess that 
you can apprehend the infinite only inadequately. The same thing 
must be said in the case of each and any of God's attributes; for, 
since everything in God is utterly infinite, what mind can com- 

1 F. V. -mentis suae, L. V. 2 F. V. Theologo (i.e. Catero), L. Y. 

3 Of. above p. 19,11. 14sqq. 



Objections II 29 

prehend the smallest fragment of what exists in God except in a 
manner that is utterly inadequate ? How then can you haw e inves- 
tigated with sufficient clearness and distinctness what God is' ? 

Seventhly, you say not one word {in your Meditations'] about the 
immortality of the human soul, which nevertheless you should above 
all things have proved and demonstrated as against those men 
themselves unworthy of immortality who completely deny it and 
perchance have an enmity against it. But over and above this you 
do not seem to have sufficiently proved the distinctness of the soul 
from every species of body, as we have already said in our first 
criticism ; to which we now add that it does not seem to follow from 
the distinction you draw between it and the body that it is incor- 
ruptible or immortal. What if its nature be limited by the duration 
of the life of the body, and God has granted it only such a supply of 
force and has so measured out its existence that, in the cessation of 
the corporeal life, it must come to an end ? 

These, Sir, are the difficulties on which we request you to shed 
light, in order that it may be profitable for each and all to read your 
Meditations, containing as they do so much subtlety and, in our 
opinion, so much truth. This is why it would be well worth the 
doing if, hard upon your solution of the difficulties, you advanced as 
premises certain definitions, postulates and axioms, and thence drew 
conclusions, conducting the whole proof by the geometrical method, 
in the use of which you are so highly expert. Thus would you cause 
each reader to have everything in his mind, as it were at a single 
glance, and to be penetrated throughout with a sense of the Divine 
being. 



REPLY TO THE SECOND SET OF 
OBJECTIONS. 

GENTLEMEN, 

I had much pleasure in reading the criticisms you have 
passed on my little book dealing with First Philosophy ; and I 
recognise the friendly disposition towards me that you display, 
united as it is with piety towards God and a zeal to promote His 
glory. I cannot he otherwise than glad not only that you should 
think my arguments worthy of your scrutiny, but also that you 
bring forward nothing in opposition to them to which I do not seem 
to be able quite easily to reply. 

Firstly, you warn me to remember that it was not actually but 
merely by a mental fiction that I rejected the clairii of bodies to be 
more than phantasms, in order to draw the conclusion that I was 
merely a thinking being, so as to awid thinking that it was a conse- 
quence of this that I was really nothing more than mind 1 . But in the 
Second Meditation I have already shown that I bore this in mind 
sufficiently; here are the words: But perhaps it is the case that 
these wry things, which I thus suppose to be non-existent because they 
are unknown to me, do not in very truth differ from that seJf which I 
know. I cannot tell; this is not the subject lam now discussing, etc? 
By these words I meant expressly to warn the reader that in that 
passage I did not as yet ask whether the mind was distinct from the 
body, but was merely investigating these properties of mind of which 
I am able to attain to sure and evident knowledge, And, since I 
discovered many such properties, I can only in a qualified sense 
admit what you subjoin, namely, That lam yet ignorant as to what 
a thinking thing is\ For though I confess that as yet I have not 
discovered whether that thinking thing is the same as the body 
or something diverse from it, I do not, on that account, admit 

1 p. 21 2 Cf. Med, n. Vol. i. p. 152. 8 p. 24. 



Reply to Objections II 31 

that I have no knowledge of the mind. Who has ever had 
such an acquaintance with anything as to know that there was 
absolutely nothing in it of which he was not aware? But in 
proportion as we perceive more in anything, the "better do we 
say we know it; thus we have more knowledge of those men 
with whom we have lived a long time, than of those whose face 
merely we have seen or whose name we have heard, even though 
they too are not said to be absolutely unknown. It is in this sense 
that I think I have demonstrated that the mind, considered apart 
from what is customarily attributed to the body, is better known 
than the body viewed as separate from the mind ; and this alone 
was what I intended to maintain. 

But I see what you hint at, namely, that since I have written 
only six Meditations on First Philosophy my readers will marvel 
that in the first two no further conclusion is reached than that I 
have just now mentioned, and that hence they will think the 
meditations to be too meagre, and unworthy of publication. To 
this I reply merely that I have no fear that anyone who reads with 
"idginent what I have written should have occasion to suspect that 
iy matter gave out; and moreover it appeared highly reasonable to 
Confine to separate Meditations matters which demand a particular 
attention and must be considered apart from others. 

Nothing conduces more to the obtaining of a secure knowledge 
of reality than a previous accustoming of ourselves to entertain 
doubts especially about corporeal things ; and although I had long 
ago seen several books written by the Academics and Sceptics about 
this subject and felt some disgust in serving up again this stale dish, 
I could not for the above reasons refuse to allot to this subject one 
whole Meditation. I should be pleased also if my readers would 
expend not merely the little time which is required for reading it, 
in thinking over the matter of which the Meditation treats, but 
would give months, or at least weeks, to this, before going on 
further; for in this way the rest of the work will yield them a 
much richer harvest. 

Further, since our previous ideas of what belongs to the mind 
have been wholly confused and mixed up with the ideas of sensible 
objects, and this was the first and chief reason why none of the 
propositions asserted of God and the soul could be understood with 
sufficient clearness, I thought I should perform something worth the 
doing if I showed how the properties or qualities of the soul are to 
be distinguished from those of the body. For although many have 



32 Reply to Objections II 

already maintained that, in order to understand the facts 1 of 
metaphysics, the mind must be abstracted from the senses, no one 
hitherto, so far as I know, has shown how this is to be done. The 
true, and in my judgment, the only way to do this is found in my 
Second Meditation, but such is its nature that it is not enough to 
have once seen how it goes ; much time and many repetitions are 
required if we would, by forming the contrary habit of distinguish- 
ing intellectual from corporeal matters, for at least a few days, 
obliterate the life-long custom of confounding them. This appeared 
to me to be a very sound reason for treating of nothing further in 
the said Meditation. 

But besides this you here ask how I prove that a body cannot 
think 2 . Pardon me if I reply that I have not yet given ground 
for the raising of this question, for I first treat of it in the 
Sixth Meditation. Here are the words : In order that I may be 
sure that one thing is diverse from another, it is sufficient that I 
should be able to conceive* the one apart from the other, etc., and 
shortly afterwards I say: Although 1 haw a body very closely con- 
joined with me, yet since, on tlie one hand, I have a clear and 
distinct idea of myself, in so far as I am a thinking thing and not 
extended,- and, on the other hand, I have a distinct idea of the body 
in so far as it is an extended, not a thinking thing, it is certain that 
I (that is the mind [or soul, by which I am what I am]) am really 
distinct from my body and can exist without it\ It is easy from this 
to pass to the following : everything that can think is mind or is 
called mind, but, since mind and body are really distinct, no body is 
a mind ; hence no body can think. 

I do not here see what you are able to deny. Do you deny 
that in order to recognise a real distinctness between objects it 
is sufficient for us to conceive one of them clearly apart from the 
other? If so, offer us some surer token of real distinction. I 
believe that none such can be found. What will you say 1 ? That 
those things are really distinct each of which can exist apart from 
the other. But once more I ask how you will know that one thing 
can be apart from the other; this, in order to be a sign of the 
distinctness, should be known. Perhaps you will say that it is given 
to you by the senses, since you can see, touch, etc., the one thing 
while the other is absent. But the trustworthiness of the senses is 
inferior to that of the intellect, and it is in many ways possible for 

1 L. V. (Choses immaterielles ou metaphysiques, F. V.) 2 Of. p. 24. 

s F. V. intelligere, L. V. 4 Vol. i. p. 190, par. 2. 



Reply to Objections II 33 

one and the same thing to appear under various guises or in several 
places or in different manners, and so to be taken to be two things. 
And finally if you bear in mind what was said at the end of the 
Second Meditation 1 about wax, you will see that properly speaking 
not even are bodies themselves perceived by sense, but that they 
are perceived by the intellect alone, so that there is no difference 
between perceiving by sense one thing apart from another, and 
having an idea of one thing and understanding that that idea is 
not the same as an idea of something else. Moreover, this know- 
ledge can be drawn from no other source than the fact that the one 
thing is perceived apart from the other; nor can this be known with 
certainty unless the ideas in each case are clear and distinct. Hence 
that sign you offer of real distinctness must be reduced to my 
criterion in order to be infallible. 

But if any people deny that they have distinct ideas of mind and 
body, I can do nothing further than ask them to give sufficient 
attention to what is said in the Second Meditation. I beg them to 
note that the opinion they perchance hold, namely, that the parts of 
the brain join their forces 2 with the soul 3 to form thoughts, has not 
arisen from any positive ground, but only from the fact that they 
have never had experience of separation from the body, and have 
not seldom been hindered by it in their operations, and that 
similarly if anyone had from infancy continually worn irons on 
his legs, he would think that those irons were part of his own 
body and that he needed them in order to walk. 

Secondly, when you say that in ourselves there is a sufficient 
foundation on which to construct the idea of God, your assertion in 
no way conflicts with my opinion. I myself at the end of the Third 
Meditation have expressly said that this idea is innate in me*, or 
alternatively that it comes to me from no other source than myself. 
I admit that we could form this very idea, though we did not faww 
that a supreme being existed 5 , but not that we could do so if it were 
in fact non-existent, for on the contrary I have notified that the whole 
force of my argument lies in the fact that the capacity for constructing 
such an idea could not exist in me, unless I were created by God Q . 

Neither does what you say about flies, plants, etc., tend to prove 
that there can be any degree of perfection in the effect which has 
not antecedently existed in the cause. For it is certain that either 

1 Cf. Med. ii. Vol. i. pp. 154 sqq[. 2 Concurrant. 

3 This phrase is only in the French version. 4 Vol. i. p. 170, par. 3. 

5 p. 25. 6 Vol. i. p. 170, foot. 

R. n. H. 3 



34 Reply to Objections II 

there is no perfection in animals that lack reason, which does not 
exist also in inanimate bodies ; or that, if such do exist, it comes to 
them from elsewhere, and that sun, rain and earth are not their 
adequate causes. It would also be highly irrational for anyone, 
simply because he did not notice any cause co-operating in the 
production of a fly, which had as many degrees of perfection as the 
fly, though meanwhile he was not sure that no cause beyond those he 
has noticed is at work, to make this an occasion for doubting a truth 
which, as I shall directly explain in greater detail, the light of 
Nature itself makes manifest. 

To this I add that what you say by way of objection about flies, 
being drawn from a consideration of material things, could not occur 
to people who, following my Meditations, withdraw their thoughts 
from the things of sense with a view to making a start with philo- 
sophical thinking. 

There is also no more force in the objection you make in calling 
our idea of God an entity formed by thinking 1 . For, firstly, it is 
not true that it is an ens rationis in the sense in which that means 
something non-existent, but only in the sense in which every mental 
operation is an ens rationis, meaning by this something that issues 
from thought; this entire world also could be called an entity 
formed by the divine thought, i.e. an entity created by a simple 
act of the divine mind. Secondly, I have already sufficiently 
insisted in various places that what I am concerned with is only 
the perfection of the idea or its objective reality which, not less 
than the objective 2 artifice in the idea of a machine of highly 
ingenious device, requires a cause in which is actually contained 
everything that it, though only objectively, comprises. 

I really do not see what can be added to make it clearer that 
that idea 3 could not be present in my consciousness unless a supreme 
being existed, except that the reader might by attending more 
diligently to what I have written, free himself of the prejudices 
that perchance overwhelm his natural light, and might accustom 
his mind to put trust in ultimate principles 4 , than which nothing 
can be more true or more evident, rather than in the obscure and 
false opinions which, however, long usage has fixed in his mind. 

That there is nothing in the effect, that has not existed in a 
similar or in some higher 5 form in the cause, is a first principle than 
which none clearer can be entertained. The common truth 'from 

1 ens rationis. 2 Objectif ou represent^, F. V. 

8 The idea of God. 4 primis notionibus. 5 eminentiori modo. 



Reply to Objections II 35 

nothing, nothing comes ' is identical with it. For, if we allow that 
there is something in the effect which did not exist in the cause, we 
must grant also that this something has been created by nothing ; 
again the only reason why nothing cannot be the cause of a thing, 
is that in such a cause there would not be the same thing as existed 
in the effect. 

It is a first principle that the whole of the reality or perfection 
that exists only objectively in ideas must exist in them formally or in 
a superior manner 1 in their causes. It is on this alone we wholly 
rely, when believing that things situated outside the mind have real 
existence ; for what should have led us to suspect their existence 
except the fact that the ideas of them were borne in on the mind by 
means of the senses ? 

But it will become clear to those who give sufficient attention 
to the matter and accompany me far in my reflections, that we 
possess the idea of a supreme and perfect being, and also that the 
objective reality of this idea exists in us neither formally nor emi- 
nently 1 . A truth, however, which depends solely on being grasped 
by another's thought, cannot be forced on a listless mind 2 . 

Now, from these arguments we derive it as a most evident 
conclusion that God exists. But for the sake of those whose 
natural light is so exceeding small that they do not see this first 
principle, viz. that every perfection existing objectively in an idea 
must exist actually in something that causes that idea, I have 
demonstrated in a way more easily grasped an identical conclusion, 
from the fact that the mind possessing that idea cannot be self- 
derived ; and I cannot in consequence see what more is wanted to 
secure your admission that I have prevailed. 

Moreover there is no force in your plea, that perchance the idea 
that conveys to me my knowledge of God has come from notions 
previously entertained, from books, from conversations with friends, 
etc., not from my own mind alone 2 . For the argument takes the 
same course as it follows in niy own case, if I raise the question 
whether those from whom I am said to have acquired the idea have 
derived it from themselves or from any one else ; the conclusion 
will be always the same, that it is God from whom it first originated. 



1 eminenter. 

2 The French version makes Descartes say he cannot force truths on those 
who give his Meditations just as little serious thought as they give a novel read 
to pass the time. 

3 Of. Obj. ii. p. 26. Descartes' quotation is not quite literal. 

32 



36 Reply to Objections II 

The objection you subjoin, that the idea of God can be constructed 
out of a previous survey of corporeal things \ seems to be no nearer 
the truth than if you should say that we have no faculty of hearing, 
but have attained to a knowledge of sound from seeing colours 
alone; you can imagine a greater analogy and parity between 
colours and sounds than between corporeal things and God. "When 
you ask me to add something conducting us to [the knowledge of] 
an incorporeal and spiritual entity*, I can do nothing better than 
refer you back to my Second Meditation, so that you may at least 
see that it is not wholly useless. For what could I achieve here in 
one or two paragraphs, if the longer discourse to be found there, 
designed as it were with this very matter in view, and one on which 
I think I have expended as much care as on anything that I have 
ever written, has been wholly unsuccessful? 

There is no drawback 8 in the fact that in that Meditation I 
dealt only with the human mind ; most readily and gladly do I 
admit that the idea we have, e.g. of the Divine intellect, does not 
- differ from that we have of our own, except merely as the idea of an 
infinite number differs from that of a number of the second or third 
power ; and the same holds good of the various attributes of God, 
of which we find some trace in ourselves. 

But, besides this, we have in the notion of God absolute im- 
mensity, simplicity, and a unity that embraces all other attributes ; 
and of this idea we find no example in us : it is, as I have said 
before 4 , like the mark of the workman imprinted on his work. By 
means of this, too, we recognise that none of the particular attri- 
butes which we, owing to the limitations of our minds, assign 
piecemeal to God, just as we find them in ourselves, belong to 
Him and to us in precisely the same sense. Also we recognise 
that of various particular indefinite 5 attributes of which we have 
ideas, as e.g. knowledge whether indefinite or infinite, likewise 
power, number, length, etc., and of various infinite attributes also, 
some are contained formally in the idea of God, e.g. knowledge and 
power, others only eminently, as number and length; and this 
would certainly not be so if that idea were nothing else than a 
figment in our minds. 

If that were so it would not be so constantly conceived by all in 

1 Of. Obj. n. p. 26, 1. 13. 2 Cf. Obj. n. p. 26, 1. 18. 

3 Sc. to using Med. n, to establish, the difference between God and matter. 
Cf. F. V. 

4 Cf. Med. m. Vol. i. p. 170, sub fin. 

5 The F. Y. drops the distinction between indefinite and infinite. 



Eeply to Objections II 37 

the same way. It is most worthy of note that all metaphysicians 
are unanimous in their description of the attributes of God (those 
at least which can be grasped by the human mind unaided) ; and 
hence there is no physical or sensible object, nothing of which we 
have the most concrete and comprehensible idea, about the nature 
of which there is not more dispute among philosophers. 

No man could go astray and fail to conceive that idea of God 
correctly if only he cared to attend to the nature of an all-perfect 
being. But those who confuse one thing with another, owing to 
this very fact utter contradictions; and constructing in their 
imagination a chimerical idea of God, not unreasonably afterwards 
deny that a God, who is represented by such an idea, exists. So 
here, when you talk of a corporeal being of the highest perfection^ if 
you take the term 'of the highest perfection 3 absolutely, meaning 
that the corporeal thing is one in which all perfections are found, 
you utter a contradiction. For its very bodily nature involves 
many imperfections, as that a body is divisible into parts, that each 
of its parts is not the other, and other similar defects. For it is 
self-evident that it is a greater perfection not to be divided than to 
be divided, etc. But if you merely understand what is most perfect 
in the way of body, this will not be God. 

I readily grant your further point, that in the case of the idea of 
an angel, than which we are less perfect, there is certainly no need 
for that idea to be produced in us by an angel ; I myself have already 
in the third Meditation 1 said that the idea can be constructed out of 
those that we possess of God and of man. There is no point against 
me here. 

Further, those who maintain that they do not possess the idea 
of God, but in place of it form some image, etc., while they refuse 
the name concede the fact. I certainly do not think that that idea 
is of a nature akin to the images of material things depicted in the 
imagination, but that it is something that we are aware of by an 
apprehension or judgment or inference of the understanding alone. 
And I maintain that there is a necessary conclusion from the fact 
alone that, howsoever it come about, by thought or understanding, 
I attain to the notion of a perfection that is higher than I ; a result 
that may follow merely from the fact that in counting I cannot reach 
a highest of all numbers, and hence recognise that in enumeration 
there is something that exceeds my powers. And this conclusion is, 

1 Cf. Med. m. Vol. i. p. 164. 



38 Reply to Objections II 

not indeed to the effect that an infinite number does exist, nor yet 
that it implies a contradiction as you say 1 , but that I have received 
the power of conceiving that a number is thinkable, that is higher 
than any that can ever be thought by me, and have received it not 
from myself but from some other entity more perfect than I. 

It is of no account whether or not one gives the name idea to 
this concept of an indefinitely great number. But in order to under- 
stand what is that entity more perfect than I am, and to discover 
whether it is this very infinite number as an actually existing fact, 
or whether it is something else, we must take into account all the 
other attributes that can exist in the being from which the idea 
originates, over and above the power of giving me that idea ; and 
the result is that it is found to be God. 

Finally, when God is said to be unthinkable 2 , that applies to the 
thought that grasps him adequately, and does not hold good of that 
inadequate thought which we possess and which suffices to let us 
know that he exists. It likewise does not matter though the idea 
of the unity of all God's perfections is formed in the same way as 
' Porphyriari*' universal. Though there is this important differ- 
ence, that it designates a peculiar and positive perfection in God, 
while generic unity adds nothing real to the nature of the single 
individuals it unites. 

Thirdly, when I said that we could know nothing with certainty 
unless we were first aware that God existed, I announced in express 
terms that I referred only to the science apprehending such con- 
clusions as can recur in memory without attending further to the 
proofs which led me to make them*. Further, knowledge of first 
principles is not usually called science by dialecticians. But when 
we become aware that we are thinking beings, this is a primitive act 
of knowledge derived from no syllogistic reasoning. He who says, 
l l think, hence I am, or exist* does not deduce existence from 
thought by a syllogism, but, by a simple act of mental vision, 
recognises it as if it were a thing that is known per se. This is 
evident from the fact that if it were syllogistically deduced, the 
major premise, that everything that thinks is, or exists, would have 
to be known previously ; but yet that has rather been learned from 
the experience of the individual that unless he exists he cannot 
think. For our mind is so constituted by nature that general 
propositions are formed out of the knowledge of particulars. 

1 Of. p. 26, par. 1, sub fin. 2 inconcevable, F. V. 

8 E.g. generic unity, cf. Obj. n. loc. cit. 4 Of. Med. v. Vol. i. pp. 183, 184. 



Reply to Objections II 39 

That an atheist can know clearly that the three angles of a, 
triangle are equal to two right angles, I do not deny, I merely affirm 
that, on the other hand, such knowledge on his part cannot consti- 
tute true science, because no knowledge that can be rendered 
doubtful should be called science. Since he is, as supposed, an 
Atheist, he cannot be sure that he is not deceived in the things 
that seem most evident to him, as has been sufficiently shown ; and 
though perchance the doubt does not occur to him, nevertheless it 
may come up, if he examine the matter, or if another suggests it ; 
he can never be safe from it unless he first recognises the existence 
of a God. 

And it does not matter though he think he has demonstrations 
proving that there is no God. Since they are by no means true, 
the errors in them can always be pointed out to him, and when this 
takes place he will be driven from his opinion. 

This would certainly not be difficult to do, if to represent all his 
proofs he were to bring into play only that principle you here append, 
viz. that what is infinite in every kind of perfection excludes every 
other entity whatsoever, etc. \ For, in the first place, if he is asked 
whence comes his knowledge that that exclusion of all other entities 
is a characteristic of the infinite, there is nothing he can reasonably 
say in reply ; for by the word infinite neither is he wont to under- 
stand that which excludes the existence of finite things, nor can he 
know anything of the characteristic 2 of that which he deems to be 
nothing, and to have hence no characteristics at all, except what is 
contained merely in the meaning he has learned from others to 
attach to the word. Next, what could be the power of this imaginary 
infinite if it could never create anything ? Finally, because we are 
aware of some power of thinking within us, we easily conceive that 
the power of thinking can reside in some other being, and that it 
is greater than in us. But though we think of it as increased to 
infinity, we do not on that account fear that the power we have 
should become less. And the same holds good of all the other 
attributes we ascribe to God, even that of His might 3 , provided that 
we assume that no such power exists in us except as subject to the 
Divine will. Hence evidently He can be known as infinite without 
any prejudice to the existence of created things. 

Fourthly 4 , in denying that God lies, or is a deceiver, I fancy 

1 Of. Obj. IL p. 27, ad init. 2 naturam. 

3 His power of producing effects external to himself, F. V. 

4 Cf. Obj. p. 27. 



40 Reply to Objections II 

that I am in agreement with all metaphysicians and theologians 
past and future. What you allege to the contrary refutes my 
position no more than, if I denied that anger existed in God, or 
that He was subject to other passions, you should hring forward in 
objection passages in Scripture where human attributes are ascribed 
to Him. Everyone knows the distinction between those modes of 
speaking of God that are suited to the vulgar understanding and do 
indeed contain some truth, a truth, however, relative to the human 
point of view, modes of speaking which Holy Writ usually em- 
ploys, and those other expressions that give us the more bare and 
rigorous truth, though not that accommodated to the human mind. 
It is these latter that everyone should employ in philosophy, and it 
was my duty to use them specially in my Meditations, since not even 
there did I assume that there were as yet any men known to me, 
neither did I consider myself as consisting of mind and body, but as 
mind only. Hence, it is clear that I did not then speak of the lie 
that is expressed in words, but only of the internal formal ill-will 
which is contained in deception. 

Therefore, though the words of the Prophet you bring forward 
' Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed,' did not constitute 
even a verbal lie but only a threat, the fulfilment of which depended 
on a condition; and again though when it is said that ' God hardened 
Pharaoh's heart' or something to the same effect, it must not be 
thought that this was a positive act, but only a negative one, viz. 
in not granting Pharaoh the grace necessary to make him repent ; I 
should be loath to censure those who say that God can utter verbal 
deceptions through His prophets (deceptions which, like those that 
doctors use for the benefit of their patients, are lies in which there 
is no evil intention). 

Nay, over and above this, there is the fact that sometimes we 
are really misled by the very natural instinct which God has given 
us, as in the case of the thirst of the dropsical patient. A man is 
moved to drink by a natural disposition 1 that is given him by God 
in order to preserve his body; but one afflicted with dropsy is 
deceived by this natural disposition, for drink is hurtful to him. 
But how this is compatible with the benevolence and truthfulness 
of God, I have explained in the sixth Meditation. 

In cases, however, that cannot be thus explained, viz. in the 
case of our clearest and most accurate judgments which, if false, 

1 a natura. 



Reply to Objections II 41 

could not be corrected by any that are clearer, or by any other 
natural faculty, I clearly affirm that we -cannot be deceived. For, 
since God is the highest being He cannot be otherwise than the 
highest good and highest truth, and hence it is contradictory that 
anything should proceed from Him that positively tends towards 
falsity. But yet since there is nothing real in us that is not given 
by God (as was proved along with His existence) and we have, as 
well, a real faculty of recognising truth, and distinguishing it from 
falsehood (as the mere existence in us of true and false ideas makes 
manifest), unless this faculty tended towards truth, at least when 
properly employed (i.e. when we give assent to none but clear and 
distinct perceptions, for no other correct use of this faculty can be 
imagined), God, who has given it to us, must justly be held to be a 
deceiver. 

Thus you see that, after becoming aware of the existence of God, 
it is incumbent on us to imagine that he is a deceiver if we wish to 
cast doubt upon our clear and distinct perceptions ; and since we 
cannot imagine that he is a deceiver, we must admit them all as 
true and certain. 

But since I here perceive that you are still entangled in the 
difficulties which I brought forward in the first Meditation, and 
which 1 thought I had in the succeeding Meditations removed with 
sufficient care, I shall here a second time expound what seems to 
me the only basis on which human certitude can rest. 

To begin with, directly we think that we rightly perceive some- 
thing 1 , we spontaneously persuade ourselves that it is true. Further, 
if this conviction is so strong that we have no reason to doubt con- 
cerning that of the truth of which we have persuaded ourselves, 
there is nothing more to enquire about ; we have here all the 
certainty that can reasonably be desired. What is it to us, though 
perchance some one feigns that that, of the truth of which we are 
so firmly persuaded, appears false to God or to an Angel, and hence 
is, absolutely speaking, false ? What heed do we pay to that absolute 
falsity, when we by no means believe that it exists or even suspect 
its existence ? We have assumed a conviction so strong that nothing 
can remove it, and this persuasion is clearly the same as perfect 
certitude. 

But it may be doubted whether there is any such certitude, 
whether such firm and immutable conviction exists. 

1 concevoir clairement quelque verit, F. V. 



42 Reply to Objections II 

It is indeed clear that no one possesses such certainty in those 
cases where there is the very least confusion and obscurity in our 
perception ; for this obscurity, of whatsoever sort it be, is sufficient 
to make us doubt here. In matters perceived by sense alone, how- 
ever clearly, certainty does not exist, because we have often noted 
that error can occur in sensation, as in the instance of the thirst of 
the dropsical man, or when one who is jaundiced sees snow as yellow; 
for he sees it thus with no less clearness and distinctness than we 
see it as white. If, then, any certitude does exist, it remains that 
it must be found only in the clear perceptions of the intellect. 

But of these there are some so evident and at the same time so 
simple, that in their case we never doubt about believing them true : 
e.g. that I, while I think, exist ; that what is once done cannot be 
undone, and other similar truths, about which clearly we can possess 
this certainty. For we cannot doubt them unless we think of them ; 
but we cannot think of them without at the same time believing 
them to be true, the position taken up 1 . Hence we can never doubt 
them without at the same time believing them to be true; i.e. we 
can never doubt them. 

No difficulty is caused by the objection that we have often found 
that others have been deceived in matters which they believed they 
alone knew clearly*. For we have never noticed that this has 
occurred, nor could anyone find it to occur with these persons who 
have sought to draw the clearness of their vision from the intellect 
alone, but only with those who have made either the senses or some 
erroneous preconception the source from which they derived that 
evidence. 

Again there is no difficulty though some one feign that the trutu 
appear false to God or to an Angel, because the evidence of our 
perception does not allow us to pay any attention to such a fiction. 

There are other matters that are indeed perceived very clearly 
by our intellect, when we attend sufficiently closely to the reasons 
on which our knowledge of them depends, and hence we cannot then 
be in doubt about them; but since we can forget those reasons, and 
yet remember the conclusions deduced from them, the question is 
. raised whether we can entertain the same firm and immutable 
certainty as to these conclusions, during the time that we recollect 
that they have been deduced from first principles that are evident ; 
for this remembrance must be assumed in order that they may be 

1 Ut assumptum est, L. V., comme je viens de dire, F. V. 

2 Of. Obj.n. p. 27, par. 3. 



Reply to Objections II 43 

called conclusions. My answer is that those possess it who, in 
virtue of their knowledge of God, are aware that the faculty of 
understanding given by Him must tend towards truth ; but that 
this certainty is not shared by others. But the subject has been so 
clearly explained at the end of the fifth Meditation that there seems 
to be nothing to add here. 

Fifthly, I marvel that you deny that the will runs into danger 
if guided by a mental conception that lacks clearness and distinctness 1 . 
For what can give it certainty, if what guides it has not been clearly 
perceived? And whoever, whether philosopher, theologian or merely 
man employing reason, fails to admit that there is the less risk of 
error in our actions in proportion to the greater clearness with which 
we understand anything before giving our assent to it; while error 
occurs with those who pass judgment in ignorance of its grounds? 
Moreover no concept is said to be obscure or confused, except for 
the reason that it contains something of which we are in ignorance. 

Consequently your objection about the faith one should embrace 1 
affects me no more than it does any others who have at any time 
cultivated the human power of reason; and in truth it has no force 
against anyone. For although the things are dark of which our 
faith is said to treat, yet the grounds on which we embrace it are 
not obscure, but clearer than any natural light. Nay, we must 
distinguish between the matter or fact to which we assent, and the 
formal reason that constrains our will to assent to that. For it is 
in this reason alone that we require clearness. And as to the matter,, 
no one has ever denied that it may be obscure, indeed obscurity 
itself; for when I affirm that our concepts must be divested of 
obscurity in order th'at we may give credence to them without any 
danger of going astray, it is concerning this very obscurity that I 
form a clear judgment. Further it should be noted that the clear- 
ness or evidence by which our will can be constrained to assent, is 
twofold, one sort proceeding frc-m our natural light, the other from 
divine grace. But though the matters be obscure with which our 
faith is said to deal, nevertheless this is understood to hold only of 
the fact or matter of which it treats, and it is not meant that the 
formal reason on account of which we assent to matters of faith is 
obscure; for, on the other hand, this formal reason consists in a 
certain internal light, and it is when God supernaturally fills us 
with .this illumination that we are confident that what is proposed 
for our belief has been revealed by Him, Himself, and that it is 
1 Cf. Obj. ii. p. 28. 



44 Reply to Objections II 

clearly impossible that He should lie: a fact more certain than any 
natural light and often indeed more evident than it on account of 
the light of grace. 

But certainly the sin that Turks and other infidels commit in 
not embracing the Christian religion is not due to their refusal to 
assent to obscure doctrines as being obscure, but arises either 
because they strive against the divine grace that moves them 
internally, or because by other sins they make themselves unworthy 
of grace. I boldly affirm that an infidel who, destitute of all super- 
natural grace, and plainly ignoring all that we Christians believe 
to have been revealed by God, embraces the faith to him obscure, 
impelled thereto by certain fallacious reasonings, will not be a true 
believer, but will the rather commit a sin in not using his reason 
properly. I believe that no orthodox Theologian has ever had any 
other opinion than this, nor will those who read my works be able 
to imagine that I have not recognised this supernatural light, since 
in the fourth Meditation, in which I have investigated the cause of 
falsity, I expressly said that 'it inclines our inmost thought to will 
without yet diminishing our liberty 1 ' 

But I should like you to remember here that, in matters that 
may be embraced by the will, I made a very strict distinction 
between the practical life and the contemplation of truth. For to 
the extent to which the practical life is involved, so far am I from 
thinking that assent must be given only to what is clearly seen, that 
on the contrary I believe that we need not always expect to find 
even probable truths there ; rather it is often the case that we must 
choose one out of a number of alternatives about which we are quite 
ignorant, and cleave to this none the less firmly after we have 
decided for it, as long as no arguments hostile to it can be enter- 
tained, than if it had been selected for reasons of the highest 
evidence, as I have explained on p. 26 of nay Discourse on Method 2 . 
But where only the contemplation of truth is involved, who has 
ever denied that assent must be refused when the matter is obscure 
and cannot be perceived with sufficient distinctness ? But that this 
latter question alone is the subject of discussion in my Meditations 
is proved both by the very passages in debate, and by the fact that 
at the end of the first Meditation I made a statement in express 
terms to the following effect 'that I could not at this point yield too 
much to distrust, since my object was not action, but knowledge*? 

1 Cf. Med. iv. Vol. i. p. 175. 2 Of. Discourse, Part m. Vol. i. p. 96. 

3 Vol. i. p. 148, par. 2, sub fin. 



Reply to Objections II 45 

Sixthly, at the point where you criticise the conclusion of a 
syllogism constructed by me, you yourselves seem to make a blunder 
in the -form of the argument. In order to derive the conclusion you 
desire, you should have worded the major premise thus : that which 
we clearly understand to belong to the nature of anything, can truth- 
fully be asserted to belong to its nature ; and consequently nothing 
but an unprofitable tautology will be contained in it. But my 
major premise was as follows that which we clearly understand to 
belong to the nature of anything can truly be affirmed of that thing. 
Thus, if to be an animal belongs to the nature of man it can be 
asserted that man is animal: if to have its three angles equal to 
two right angles belongs to the nature of the triangle, it can be 
asserted that the triangle has its three angles equal to two right 
angles : if existence belongs to the nature of God, it can be affirmed 
that God exists, etc. But my minor premise was yet existence does 
belong to the nature of God. Whence it is evident that the con- 
clusion must be drawn as I drew it : hence it can be truly affirmed 
of God that He exists ; but not as you wish : hence we can truthfully 
affirm that existence belongs to the nature of God. 

Thus, in order to make use of the exception that you append, 
you should have denied the major and said : that which we dearly 
understand to belong to the nature of anything, cannot on that account 
be ascribed to it, unless the nature of that thing be possible, or not 
contradictory. But notice, kindly, how little value this exception 
has. By possible either you mean, as all commonly do, whatever 
does not disagree with human thought ; and in this sense it is 
manifest that the nature of God, as I have described it, is possible, 
because I have assigned nothing to it that we did not clearly and 
distinctly perceive ought to belong to it, and consequently it cannot 
be in disagreement with our thought. Or surely you imagine some 
other kind of possibility, one proceeding from the object itself, but 
which, unless it agrees with the preceding variety can never be 
known by the human mind. But on this account it tells quite as 
much against everything else that man may know as against the 
nature or existence of God. For that which entitles us to deny that 
God's nature is possible though there is no impossibility on the part 
of its concept, (but on the contrary all the things included in that 
concept of the divine nature are so connected that there seems to be 
a contradiction 1 in saying that any one of them does not belong to 

1 nt implicare nobis videatur. 



46 Reply to Objections II 

God), will permit us to deny that it is possible for the three angles 
of a triangle to be equal to two right angles, or that he, who actually 
thinks, exists. Much more right will there be to deny that anything 
we apprehend by our senses is true, and thus the whole of human 
knowledge will be overturned, though for no good reason. 

To take the argument you compare with mine : if there is no 
contradiction in God's existence, it is certain that He exists ; hit 
there is no contradiction; therefore, etc., it is true materially though 
formally a sophism. For in the major premise the expression 
1 there is contradiction* stands in relation to the concept of the 
cause by virtue of which God's existence is possible ; but in the 
minor it applies merely to the concept of the divine nature and 
existence itself. As is evident ; for if the major be denied the proof 
will have to go thus : if God has not yet existed, His existence is 
a contradiction, because no sufficient cause for bringing Him into 
existence can be assigned : but, as was assumed, His existence is not 
contradictory, hence, etc. If, on the other hand, the minor be denied, 
the proof must thus be stated : that is not contradictory in the 
formal concept of which there is nothing involving contradiction ; but 
in the formal concept of the divine existence or nature there is nothing 
involving contradiction; therefore, etc. Now these two proofs are very 
diverse. For it is possible that in a certain thing nothing may be 
conceived that prevents the existence of that thing, though mean- 
while on the side of the cause there is known to be something that 
opposes its coming into being. 

But though we conceive God only inadequately, or, if you prefer 
to put it thus, in an utterly inadequate manner 1 , this does not pre- 
vent its being certain that His nature is possible, or not contradictory ; 
nor does it prevent our affirming truly that we have examined it 
with sufficient precision (i.e. with as much as is required in order 
to attain to this knowledge, and in order to know that necessary 
existence appertains to this same Divine nature). For all contra- 
dictoriness 2 or impossibility is constituted by our thought, which 
cannot join together ideas that disagree with each other ; it cannot 
reside in anything external to the mind, because by the very fact 
that a thing is outside the mind it is clear that it is not contradictory, 
but is possible. Moreover, contradictoriness in our concepts arises 
merely from their obscurity and confusion ; there can be none in 
the case of clear and distinct ideas. Hence it suffices us to under- 

1 Cf. Obj. ii. p. 29. 

2 Implicantia, a 'mot d'cole 3 according to F. Y. 



Reply to Objections II 47 

stand clearly and distinctly those few things that we perceive about 
God, though they form a quite inadequate knowledge, and to note 
that among the other constituents of this idea, however inadequate 
it he, necessary existence is found, in order to be able to affirm that 
we have examined the nature of God with sufficient precision, and 
to maintain that it contains no contradiction. 

Seventhly, in the synopsis of my Meditations 1 I stated the 
reason why I have said nothing about the immortality of the soul. 
That I have sufficiently proved its distinctness from any body, I 
have shown above. But I admit that I cannot refute your further 
contention, viz. that the immortality of the soul does not follow from 
its distinctness from the body, because that does not prevent its being 
said that God in creating it has given the soid a nature such that its 
period of existence must terminate simultaneously with that of the 
corporeal life*. For I do not presume so far as to attempt to settle 
by the power of human reason any of the questions that depend 
upon the free-will of God. Natural knowledge shows that the mind 
is different from the body, and that it is likewise a substance ; but 
that the human body, in so far as it differs from other bodies, is 
constituted entirely by the configuration of its parts and other 
similar accidents, and finally that the death of the body depends 
wholly on some division or change of figure. But we know no argu- 
ment or example such as to convince us that the death or the 
annihilation of a substance such as the mind is, should follow from 
so light a cause as is a change in figure, which is no more than a 
mode, and indeed not a mode of mind, but of body that is really 
distinct from mind. Nor indeed is there any argument or example 
calculated to convince us that any substance can perish. But this 
is sufficient to let us conclude that the mind, so far as it can be 
known by aid of a natural philosophy, is immortal. 

But if the question, which asks whether human souls cease to 
exist at the same time as the bodies which God has united to them 
are destroyed, is one affecting the Divine power, it is for God alone 
to reply. And since He has revealed to us that this will not happen, 
there should be not even the slightest doubt remaining. 

It remains for me to thank you for your courtesy and candour 
in deigning to bring to my notice not only the difficulties that have 
occurred to you, but also those that can be brought forward by 
Atheists and people of hostile intent. I see nothing in what you 

i Cf. Vol. i p. 141, 11. 9 sqq. 2 Of. Obj. n. p. 29. 



48 Reply to Objections II 

have brought forward of which I have not already in my Meditations 
given a solution and ruled out of court. (For those objections about 
insects bred by the sun, about the natives of Canada, the people of 
Nineveh, the Turks, etc., cannot occur to those who follow the way I 
have pointed out, and abstract for a time from everything due to 
the senses, in order to pay heed to the dictates of the pure and un- 
corrupted reason, and consequently I thought that I had adequately 
barred them out.) But though this is so, I consider that these 
objections of yours will aid my purpose. For I scarce expect to 
have any readers who will care to attend so accurately to all that I 
have written as to bear in memory all that has gone before, when 
they have come to the end ; and those who do not do so will easily 
fall into certain perplexities, which they will either find to be 
satisfactorily explained in this reply of mine, or which will occasion 
them to examine into the truth still further. 

Further, in the matter of the counsel you give me about pro- 
pounding my arguments in geometrical fashion, in order that the 
reader may perceive them as it were with a single glance 1 , it is worth 
while setting forth here the extent to which I have followed this 
method and that to which I intend in future to follow it. Now there 
are two things that I distinguish in the geometrical mode of writing, 
viz. the order and the method of proof. 

The order consists merely in putting forward those things first 
that should be known without the aid of what conies subsequently, 
and arranging all other matters so that their proof depends solely 
on what precedes them. I certainly tried to follow this order as 
accurately as possible in my Meditations; and it was through keep- 
ing to this that I treated of the distinction between the mind and 
the body, not in the second Meditation, but finally in the sixth, and 
deliberately and consciously omitted much, because it required an 
explanation of much else besides. 

Further, the method of proof is two-fold, one being analytic, the 
other synthetic. 

Analysis shows the true way by which a thing was methodically 
discovered and derived, as it were effect from cause 3 , so that, if the 
reader care to follow it and give sufficient attention to everything, 
he understands the matter no less perfectly and makes it as much 
his own as if he had himself discovered it. But it contains nothing 
to incite belief in an inattentive or hostile reader ; for if the very 

Cf. Obj, ii. sub fin, 2 tanquam a priori. 



Reply to Objections II 49 

least thing brought forward escapes his notice, the necessity of the 
conclusions is lost; and on many matters which, nevertheless, should 
he specially noted, it often scarcely touches, because they are clear 
to anyone who gives sufficient attention to them. 

Synthesis contrariwise employs an opposite procedure, one in 
which the search goes as it were from effect to cause 1 (though 
often here the proof itself is from cause to effect to a greater extent 
than in the former case). It does indeed clearly demonstrate its 
conclusions, and it employs a long series of definitions, postulates, 
axioms, theorems and problems, so that if one of the conclusions 
that follow is denied, it may at once be shown to be contained in 
what has gone before. Thus the reader, however hostile and 
obstinate, is compelled to render his assent, Yet this method is 
not so satisfactory as the other and does not equally well content 
the eager learner, because it does not show the way in which the 
matter taught was discovered. 

It was this synthesis alone that the ancient Geometers employed 
in their writings, not because they were wholly ignorant of the 
analytic method, but, in my opinion, because they set so high." 
a value on it that they wished to keep it to themselves as an 
important secret. 

But I have used in my Meditations only analysis, which is the 
best and truest method of teaching. On the other hand synthesis, 
doubtless the method you here ask me to use, though it very 
suitably finds a place after analysis in the domain of geometry, 
nevertheless cannot so conveniently be applied to these metaphysical 
matters we are discussing. 

For there is this difference between the two cases, viz. that the 
primary notions that are the presuppositions of geometrical proofs 
harmonize with the use of our senses, and are readily granted by all. 
Hence, no difficulty is involved in this case, except in the proper 
deduction of the consequences. But this may be performed by people 
of all sorts, even by the inattentive, if only they remember what has 
gone before; and the minute subdivisions of propositions is designed 
for the purpose of rendering citation easy and thus making people 
recollect even against their will. 

On the contrary, nothing in metaphysics causes more trouble 
than the making the perception of its primary notions clear and 
distinct. For, though in their own nature they are as intelligible as, 

1 tanquam a posteriori quaesitam. 
R. II. II. 4 



50 Reply to Objections II 

or even more intelligible than those the geometricians study, yet 
being contradicted by the many preconceptions of our senses to 
which we have since our earliest years been accustomed, they cannot 
be perfectly apprehended except by those who give strenuous atten- 
tion and study to them, and withdraw their minds as far as possible 
from matters corporeal. Hence if they alone were brought forward 
it would be easy for anyone with a zeal for contradiction to deny 
them. 

This is why my writing took the form of Meditations rather than 
that of Philosophical Disputations or the theorems and problems of 
a geometer; so that hence I might by this very fact testify that I 
had no dealings except with those who will not shrink from joining 
me in giving the matter attentive care and meditation. For from 
the very fact that anyone girds himself up for an attack upon the 
truth, he makes himself less capable of perceiving the truth itself, 
since he withdraws his mind from the consideration of those reasons 
that tend to convince him of it, in order to discover others that have 
the opposite effect. 

But 1 perhaps some one will here raise the objection, that, while 
indeed a man ought not to seek for hostile arguments when he 
knows that it is the truth that is set before him, yet, so long as this 
is in doubt, it is right that he should fully explore all the arguments 
on either side, in order to find out which are the stronger. Accord- 
ing to this objection it is unfair of me to want to have the truth of 
my contentions admitted before they have been fully scrutinised, 
while prohibiting any consideration of those reasonings that oppose 
them. 

This would certainly be a just criticism if any of the matters in 
which I desire attention and absence of hostility in my reader were 
capable of withdrawing him from the consideration of any others in 
which there was the least hope of finding greater truth than in mine. 
But consider that in what I bring forward you find the most extreme 
doubt about all matters, and that there is nothing I more strongly 
urge than that every single thing should be most carefully examined 
and that nothing should be admitted but what has been rendered so 
clear and distinct to our scrutiny that we cannot withhold our assent 
from it. Consider too that, on the other hand, there is nothing else 
from which I wish to divert the minds of my readers, save beliefs 
which they have never properly examined and which are derived from 

1 The French version here comes to an end, adding only a short paragraph 
of seven lines by way of formal conclusion. 



Reply to Objections II 51 

no sound reasoning, but from the senses alone. Therefore I hardly 
think that anyone will believe that there is much risk in confining 
his attention to my statement of the case; the danger will be 
precisely that of turning his gaze away from preconceptions in order 
to behold new truths that in some measure conflict with them, and 
dissipate the darkness of the prejudices 1 due to our senses. 

Hence, in the first place, I rightly require singular attention on 
the part of my readers and have specially selected the style of writing 
which I thought would best secure it and which, I am convinced, will 
bring my readers more profit than they would acquire if I had- used 
the synthetic method, one which would have made them appear to 
have learned more than they really had. But besides this I deem it 
quite fair to ignore wholly and to despise as of no account the 
criticisms of those who refuse to accompany me in my Meditations 
and cling to their preconceived opinions. 

But 1 know how difficult it will be, even for one who does 
attend and seriously attempt to discover the truth, to have before 
his mind the entire bulk of what is contained in my Meditations, 
and at the same time to have distinct knowledge of each part of the 
argument; and yet, in my opinion, one who is to reap the full 
benefit from my work must know it both as a whole and in detail. 
Consequently I append here something in the synthetic style that 
may I hope be somewhat to my readers 3 profit. I should, how- 
ever, like them kindly to notice that I have not cared to include 
here so much as comes into my Meditations, for that would have 
caused me to be much more prolix than in the Meditations 
themselves, nor shall I explain in such accurate detail that which I 
do include ; this is partly for brevity and partly to prevent anyone, 
helieving that what is here written is sufficient, examining without 
adequate care the actual Meditations, a work from which, I am 
convinced, much more profit will be derived. 

1 The Latin reads tenebrasque offundunt (hoc est ad praejudicia sensuum). 
I propose to omit ad. 



42 



ARGUMENTS DEMONSTRATING THE EXIST- 
ENCE OF GOD AND THE DISTINCTION 
BETWEEN SOUL AND BODY, DRAWN 
UP IN GEOMETRICAL FASHION. 

DEFINITIONS, 

I. Thought is a word that covers everything that exists in us 
in such a way that we are immediately conscious of it. Thus all 
the operations of will, intellect, imagination, and of the senses 
are thoughts. But I have added immediately, for the purpose of 
excluding that which is a consequence of our thought ; for example, 
voluntary movement, which, though indeed depending on thought 
as on a causal principle 1 , is yet itself not thought. 

II. Idea is a word by which I understand the form of any 
thought, that form by the immediate awareness of which I am 
conscious of that said thought ; in such a way that, when under- 
standing what I say, I can express nothing in words, without 
that very fact making it certain that I possess the idea of that 
which these words signify. And thus it is not only images de- 
picted in the imagination that I call ideas ; nay, to such images 
I here decidedly refuse the title of ideas, in so far as they are 
pictures in the corporeal imagination, i.e. in some part of the brain. 
They are ideas only in so far as they constitute the form of the 
mind itself that is directed towards 2 that part of the brain. 

III. By the objective reality of an idea I mean that in respect 
of which the thing represented in the idea is an entity 8 , in so far 
as that exists in the idea ; and in the same way we can talk of 

1 cogitationem qnidem pro principio habet, { volont pour son principe,* 
F. V., which is not so pointed. 

2 conversam in. 3 entitatem rei representatae per ideara. 



Arguments 53 

objective perfection, objective device, etc. For whatever we per- 
ceive as being as it were in the objects of our ideas, exists in the 
ideas themselves objectively. 

IV. To exist formally is the term applied where the same 
thing exists in the object of an idea in such a manner that the 
way in which it exists in the object is exactly like what we know 
of it when aware of it ; it exists eminently when, though not indeed 
of identical quality, it is yet of such amount as to be able to fulfil 
the function of an exact counterpart. 

V. Everything in which there resides immediately, as in a 
subject, or by means of which there exists anything that we per- 
ceive, i.e. any property, quality, or attribute, of which we have 
a real idea, is called a Substance ; neither do we have any idea of 
substance itself, precisely taken, than that it is a thing in which 
this something that we perceive or which is present objectively in 
some of our ideas, exists formally or eminently. For by means 
of our natural light we know that a real attribute cannot be an 
attribute of nothing. 

VI. That substance in which thought immediately resides, 
I call Mind 1 . I use the term 'mind' here rather than 'spirit,' 
as 'spirit' is equivocal and is frequently applied to what is 
corporeal. 

VII. That substance, which is the immediate subject of ex- 
tension in space 2 and of the accidents that presuppose extension, 
e.g. figure, situation, movement in space etc., is called Body. But 
we must postpone till later on the inquiry as to whether it is one 
and the same substance or whether there are two diverse substances 
to which the names Mind and Body apply. 

VIII. That substance which we understand to be supremely 
perfect and in which we conceive absolutely nothing involving 
defect or limitation of its perfection, is called God. 

IX. When we say that any attribute 3 is contained in the 
nature or concept of anything, that is precisely the same as 
saying that it is true of that thing or can be affirmed of it. 

X. Two substances are said to be really distinct, when each 
of them can exist apart from the other. V 

1 The French cannot convey the distinction between Mens and Anima. 
Hence esprit has to do duty for both. F. V. simply -points out the ambiguity 
of the term. 

2 extensionis localis. 3 F. Y. quid, L. V. 



54 Arguments draivn up 

POSTULATES. 

The First request I press upon my readers is a recognition of 
the weakness of the reasons on account of which they have hitherto 
trusted their senses, and the insecurity of all the judgments they 
have based upon them, I beg them to revolve this in their minds 
so long and so frequently that at length they will acquire the habit 
of no longer reposing too much trust in them. For I deem that 
this is necessary in order to attain to a perception of the certainty 
of metaphysical truths [not dependent on the senses]. 

Secondly, I ask them to make an object of study of their own 
mind and all the attributes attaching to it, of which they find they 
cannot doubt, notwithstanding it be supposed that whatever they 
have at any time derived from their senses is false ; and I beg 
them not to desist from attending to it, until they have acquired 
the habit of perceiving it distinctly and of believing that it can be 
more readily known than any corporeal thing. 

Thirdly, I bid them carefully rehearse those propositions, in- 
telligible per se, which they find they possess, e.g. that the same 
thing cannot at the same time both be and not be; that nothing 
cannot be the efficient cause of anything, and so forth ; and thus- 
employ in its purity, and in freedom from the interference of the 
senses, that clarity of understanding that nature has implanted in 
them, but which sensuous objects are wont to disturb and obscure. 
For by this means the truth of the following Axioms will easily 
become evident to them. 

Fourthly, I postulate an examination of the ideas of those 
natures in which there is a complex of many coexistent attri- 
butes, such as e.g. the nature of the triangle or of the square, or 
of any other figure ; and so too the nature of Mind, the nature of 
Body, and above all the nature of God, or of a supremely perfect 
entity. My readers must also notice that everything which we 
perceive to be contained in these natures can be truly predicated 
of the things themselves. For example, because the equality of 
its three angles to two right angles is contained in the idea of the 
Triangle, and divisibility is contained -in the nature of Body or of 
extended thing (for we can conceive nothing that is extended as 
being so small as not to be capable of being divided in thought 
at least), we constantly assert that in every Triangle the angles are 
equal to two right angles, and that every Body is divisible. 



in geometrical fashion 55 

Fifthly, I require my readers to dwell long and much in contem- 
plation of the nature of the supremely perfect Being. Among other 
things they must reflect that while possible existence indeed attaches 
to the ideas of all other natures, in the case of the idea of God 
that existence is not possible but wholly necessary. For from this 
alone and without any train of reasoning they will learn that 
God exists, and it will be not less self evident to them than the 
fact that number two is even and number three odd, and similar 
truths. For there are certain truths evident to some people, 
without proof, that can be made intelligible to others only by 
a train of reasoning. 

Sixthly, I ask people to go carefully over all the examples of 
clear and distinct perception, and likewise those that illustrate 
that which is obscure and confused, mentioned in my Meditations, 
and so accustom themselves to distinguish what is clearly known 
from what is obscure. For examples teach us better than rules 
how to do this ; and I think that I have there either explained 
or at least to some extent touched upon all the instances of this 
subject. 

Seventhly and finally, I require them, in virtue of their con- 
sciousness that falsity has never been found in matters of clear 
perception, while, on the contrary, amidst what is only obscurely 
comprehended they have never come upon the truth, except acci- 
dentally, to consider it wholly irrational to regard as doubtful 
matters that are perceived clearly and distinctly by the under- 
standing in its purity, on account of mere prejudices of the senses 
and hypotheses in which there is an element of the unknown. By 
doing so they will readily admit the truth and certainty of the 
following axioms. Yet I admit that several of them might have 
been much better explained and should have been brought forward 
as theorems if I had wished to be more exact. 

AXIOMS OR COMMON PRINCIPLES*. 

I. Nothing exists concerning which the question may not be 
raised l what is the cause of its existence?' For this question may 
be asked even concerning God. Not that He requires any cause in 
order to exist, but because in the very immensity of His being 2 lies 
the cause or reason why He needs no cause in order to exist. 

1 notiones. 2 naturae. 



56 Arguments drawn up 

II. The present time lias no causal dependence on the time 
immediately preceding it. Hence, in order to secure the continued 
existence 1 of a thing, no less a cause is required than that needed 
to produce it at the first. 

III. A thing, and likewise an actually existing perfection 
belonging to anything, can never have nothing, or a non-existent 
thing, as the cause of its existence. 

IV. Whatever reality or perfection exists in a thing, exists 
formally or else eminently in its first and adequate 2 cause. 

V. Whence it follows also that the objective reality of our 
ideas requires a cause in which the same reality is contained not 
indeed objectively, but formally or else eminently. We have to 
note that the admission of this axiom is highly necessary for the 
reason that we must account for our knowledge of all things, both 
of sensuous and of non-sensuous objects, and do so by means of 
it alone. For whence, e.g., comes our knowledge that there is 
a heaven'? Because we behold it 1 ? But that vision does not 
reach the mind, except in so far as it is an idea, an idea, I say, 
inhering in the mind itself, and not an image depicted in the 
phantasy. But neither can we, in virtue of this idea, assert that 
there is a heaven, except because every idea needs to have some 
really existing cause of its objective reality ; and this cause we 
judge to be the heaven itself, and so in other cases. 

VI. There are diverse degrees of reality or (the quality of 
being an) entity. For substance has more reality than accident 
or mode; and infinite substance has more than finite substance. 
Hence there is more objective reality in the idea of substance than 
in that of accident ; more in the idea of an infinite than in that of 
a finite substance. 

VII. The will of a thinking being is borne, willingly indeed 
and freely (for that is of the essence of will), but none the less 
infallibly, towards the good that it clearly knows. Hence, if it 
knows certain perfections that it lacks, it will immediately give 
them to itself if they are in its power [for it will know that 
it is a greater good for it to possess them, than not to possess 
them]. 

VIII. That which can effect what is greater or more difficult, 
can also accomplish what is less. 

1 ad rem conservandam. 2 totale, F. V. 



in geometrical fashion 57 

IX. It is a greater thing to create or conserve substance than 
the attributes or properties of substance; it is not, moreover, a 
greater thing to create that than to conserve its existence, as I have 
.already said. 

X. Existence is contained in the idea or concept of every- 
thing, because we can conceive nothing except as existent 1 , with 
this difference, that possible or contingent existence is contained 
in the concept of a limited thing, but necessary and perfect 
existence in the concept of a supremely perfect being. 

PROPOSITION I. 

THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE EXISTENCE OP GOD PROCEEDS FROM 
THE MERE CONSIDERATION OF His NATURE. 

Demonstration. 

To say that something 2 is contained in the nature or concept of 
anything is the same as to say that it is true of that thing (Def. IX). 
But necessary existence is contained in the concept of God (Ax. X). 
Hence it is true to affirm of God that necessary existence exists in 
Him, or that God Himself exists. 

And this is the syllogism of which I made use above, in replying 
to the sixth objection 3 . Its conclusion is self-evident to those who 
.are free from prejudices, as was said in the fifth postulate. But, 
because it is not easy to arrive at such clearness of mind, we seek 
to establish it by other methods. 

PROPOSITION II 

A POSTERIORI 4 DEMONSTRATION OF GOD'S EXISTENCE FROM THE MERE 

FACT THAT THE IDEA OF GoD EXISTS IN TJS. 

Demonstration. 

The objective reality of any of our ideas must have a cause, in 
which the very same reality is contained, not merely objectively but 
formally, or else eminently (Ax. V). But we do possess the idea of 
{Jod (Deff. II and VIII), and the objective reality of this idea is 
contained in us neither formally nor eminently (Ax. VI), nor can 
it be contained in anything other than God Himself (Def. VIII). 
Hence this idea of God, which exists in us, must have God as its 
cause, and hence God exists (Ax. III). 

1 nisi sub ratione existentis. 2 quelque attribut, F. V. 

8 Cf. supra, p. 45. 4 par ses effets, F. V. 



58 Arguments drawn up 

PROPOSITION III. 

THE EXISTENCE OF GOD is PROVED BY THE FACT THAT WE, WHO 
POSSESS THIS IDEA, OURSELVES EXIST. 

Demonstration. 

If I had the power of conserving my own existence, I should 
have bad a proportionately greater power of giving myself the 
perfections that I lack (Axx. VIII and IX); for they are only 
attributes of substance, whereas I am a substance. But I do not 
have the power of giving myself these perfections ; otherwise 1 should 
already possess them (Ax. VII). Therefore I do not have the power 
of conserving myself. 

Further, I cannot exist without being conserved, whilst I exist, 
either by myself, if I have that power, or by some other one who 
has that power (Axx. I and II) ; yet, though I do exist, I have not 
the power of conserving myself, as has just been proved. Con- 
sequently it is another being that conserves my existence. 

Besides, He to whom my conservation is due contains within 
Himself formally or eminently everything that is in me (Ax. IV). 
But there exists in me the perception of many perfections that I do 
not possess, as well as of the idea of God (Deff. II and VIII). 
Therefore the perception of the same perfections exists in Him by 
whom I am conserved. 

Finally this same Being cannot possess the perception of any 
perfections of which He is lacking, or which He does not possess 
within Himself either formally or eminently (Ax. VII). For, since 
He has the power of conserving me, as has been already said, He 
would have the power of bestowing these upon Himself, if He lacked 
them (Axx. VIII and IX). But He possesses the perception of all 
those that I lack, and which I conceive can exist in God alone, as 
has been lately proved. Therefore He possesses those formally or 
eminently within Himself, and hence is God. 

COROLLARY. 

GOD HAS CREATED THE HEAVEN AND THE EARTH AND AlL THAT 

IN THEM is. MOREOVER HE CAN BRING TO PASS WHATEVER 
WE CLEARLY CONCEIVE, EXACTLY AS WE CONCEIVE IT. 

Demonstration. 

This all follows clearly from the previous proposition. For in it 
we prove that God exists, from the fact that some one must exist in 
whom are formally or eminently all the perfections of which we 



in geometrical fashion 59 

have any idea. But we possess the idea of a power so great that 
by Him and Him alone, in whom this power is found, must heaven 
and earth be created, and a power such that likewise whatever else 
is apprehended by me as possible must be created by Him too. 
Hence concurrently with God's existence we have proved all this 
likewise about him. 

PROPOSITION IV. 

THERE is A REAL DISTINCTION BETWEEN MIND AND BODY. 
Demonstration. 

God can effect whatever we clearly perceive just as we perceive 
it (preceding Corollary). But we clearly perceive the mind, i.e. 
a thinking substance, apart from the body, i.e. apart from any 
extended substance (Post. II) ; and vice versa we can (as all admit) 
perceive body apart from mind. Hence, at least through the instru- 
mentality of the Divine power, mind can exist apart from body, and 
body apart from mind. 

But now, substances that can exist apart from each other, are 
really distinct (Def. X). But mind and body are substances (Deff. V, 
VI and VII), that can exist apart from each other (just proved). 
Hence there is a real distinction between mind and body. 

Here it must be noted that I employed the Divine power as 
a means 1 , not because any extraordinary power was needed to effect 
the separation of mind and body, but because, treating as I did of 
God alone in what precedes, there was nothing else for me to use 1 . 
But our knowledge of the real distinctness of two things is unaffected 
by any question as to the power that disunites them. 

1 As a means for proving my point, F. Y. 



THE THIRD SET OF OBJECTIONS 1 
WITH THE AUTHOR'S REPLY. 

FIRST OBJECTION. 



(In reference to Meditation I, Concerning those matters that may 
be brought within the sphere of the doubtful)* 

It is sufficiently obvious from ivhat is said in this Meditation, 
that we have no criterion 21 for distinguishing dreaming from waking 
mid from what the senses truly tell us; and that hence the images 
present to us when we are awake and using our senses are not 
accidents inhering in external objects, and fail to prove that such 
external objects do as a fact emt. And therefore, if we follow our 
senses without using any train of reasoning, we shall be justified in 
doubting whether or not anything exists. Hence we acknowledge 
the truth of this Meditation. But, since Plato and other ancient 
Philosophers haw talked about this want of certitude in the matters 
of sense, and since the difficulty in distinguishing the waking state 
from dreams is a matUr of common observation, I should haw 
been glad if our author, so distinguished in the handling of modern 
speculations, had refrained from publishing those matters of ancient 
lore. 

REPLY. 

The reasons for doubt here admitted as true by this Philosopher 
were propounded by me only as possessing verisimilitude, and my 
reason for employing them was not that I might retail them as new, 
but partly that I might prepare my readers' minds for the study of 
intellectual matters and for distinguishing them from matters 
corporeal, a purpose for which such arguments seem wholly 
necessary ; in part also because I intended to reply to these very 

1 F. V. adds ' urged by a Celebrated English Philosopher,' i.e. Hobbes. 

2 What I have here enclosed within brackets is a marginal title in both the 
Latin and the French text of the standard French edition. 

:} L. V. uses the Greek word 



Objections HI with Replies 61 

arguments in the subsequent Meditations ; and partly in order to 
show the strength of the truths I afterwards propound, by the fact 
that such metaphysical doubts cannot shake them. Hence, while 
I have sought no praise from their rehearsal, I believe that it was 
impossible for me to omit them, as impossible as it would be for 
a medical writer to omit the description of a disease when trying- 
to teach the method of curing it. 

OBJECTION II. 

(In opposition to the Second Meditation, Concerning the nature 
of the Human Mind.} 

I am a thing that thinks ; quite correct. From the fact that 
I think, or have an image 1 , whether sleeping or waking, it is inferred 
that I am exercising thought' 2 ] for I think and I am exercising 
thought mean the same thing. From the fact that I am exercising 
thought it -follows that I am, since that which thinks is not nothing. 
But, where it is added, this is the mind, the spirit, the under- 
standing, the, reason, a doubt arises. For it does not seem to be 
good reasoning to say : I am exercising thought, hence I am thought; 
or I am using my intellect, hence I am intellect. For in the same 
way I might say, I am walking ; hence I am the walking 3 . It is 
hence an assumption on the part of M. Descartes that that which 
understands is the same as the exercise of understanding 41 which is 
an act of that which understands, or, at least, that that which under- 
stands is the same as the understanding, which is a power possessed 
by that which thinh. Yet all Philosophers distinguish a subject 
from its faculties and activities, i.e. from its properties and essences; 
for the entity itself is one thing, its essence another. Hence it is 
possible for a thing that thinks to be the subject of the mind, reason, 
or understanding, and hence to be something corporeal; and the 
opposite of this has been assumed, not proved. Yet this inference 
is the basis of the conclusion that M. Descartes seems to wish to 
establish. 

In the same place he says, I know that I exist ; the question is, 
who am I the being that I know? It is certain that the 
knowledge of this being thus accurately determined does not 
depend on those things which I do not yet know to exist 5 . 

1 phantasma, L. V. une id6e, F. V. 2 quod sum cogitans. 

3 sum ambulans, ergo sum ambulatio. 4 intellectionem. 

fi Cf. Med. n. vol. i. p. 152. 



62 Objections III with Replies 

It is quite certain that the knowledge of this proposition, I exist, 
depends upon that other one, I think, as he has himself correctly 
shown us. But whence comes our knowledge of this proposition, 
I think ? Certainly from that fact alone, that we can conceive no 
activity whatsoever apart from its subject, e.g. we cannot think of 
leaping 1 apart from that which leaps, of knowing apart from a 
knower, or of thinking without a thinker. 

And hence it seems to follow that that which thinks is something 
corporeal; for, as it appears, the subjects of all activities can be 
conceived only after a corporeal fashion, or as in material guise, 
as M. Descartes himself afterwards shows, when he illustrates by 
means of wax-, this wax teas understood to be always the same thing, 
i.e. the identical matter underlying the many successive changes, 
though its colour, consistency, figure and other activities were 
altered. Moreover it is not by another thought that I infer that 
I think ; far though anyone may think that he has thought (to think 
so is precisely the same as remembering), yet we cannot think that 
we are thinking, nor similarly know that -ive know. For this would 
entail the repetition of the question an infinite number of times ; 
whence do you know, that you know, that you knoio, that you know ? 

Hence, since the knoivledge of this proposition, I exist, depends 
upon the knowledge of that other, I think, and the knowledge of it 
upon the fact that we cannot separate thought from a matter that 
thinks, the proper inference seems to be that that which thinks is 
material rather than immaterial. 

EEPLY. 

Where I have said, this is the mind, the spirit, the intellect, or 
the reason, I understood by these names not merely faculties, 
but rather what is endowed with the faculty of thinking ; and this 
sense the two former terms commonly, the latter frequently bear. 
But I used them in this sense so expressly and in so many places 
that I cannot see what occasion there was for any doubt about their 
meaning. 

Further, there is here no parity between walking 3 and thinking ; 
for walking is usually held to refer only to that action itself, while 
thinking 4 applies now to the action, now to the faculty of thinking, 
and again to that in which the faculty exists. 

1 walking, in F. V., cf. Reply also. 2 Cf. vol. i. p. 154. 

3 ambulatio. 4 cogitatio. 



Objections III with Replies 63 

Again I do not assert that that which understands and the 
activity of understanding are the same thing, nor indeed do I mean 
that the thing that understands and the understanding are the 
same, if the term understanding be taken to refer to the faculty 
of understanding ; they are identical only when the understanding 
means the thing itself that understands. I admit also quite gladly 
that, in order to designate that thing or substance, which I wished 
to strip of everything that did not belong to it, I employed the most 
highly abstract terms I could ; just as, on the contrary this Philo- 
sopher uses terms that are as concrete as possible, e.g. subject, 
matter, body, to signify that which thinks, fearing to let it be 
sundered from the body. 

But I have no fear of anyone thinking that his method of 
coupling diverse things together is better adapted to the discovery 
of the truth than mine, that gives the greatest possible distinctness 
to every single thing. But, dropping the verbal controversy, let us 
look to the facts in dispute. 

A thing that thinks, he says, may be something corporeal; and 
the opposite of this has been assumed ; not proved. But really I did 
not assume the opposite, neither did I use it as a basis for my 
argument; I left it wholly undetermined until Meditation VI, in 
which its proof is given. 

Next he quite correctly says, that we cannot conceive any 
activity apart from its subject, e.g. thought apart from that which 
thinks, since that which thinks is not nothing. But, wholly without 
any reason, and in opposition to the ordinary use of language and 
good Logic, he adds, hence it seems to follow that that which thinks 
is something corporeal; for the subjects 1 - of all activities are indeed 
understood as falling within the sphere of substance (or even, if you 
care, as wearing the guise of matter, viz. metaphysical matter), but 
not on that account are they to be defined as bodies. 

On the other hand both logicians and as a rale all men are wont 
to say that substances are of two kinds, spiritual and corporeal. 
And all that I proved, when I took wax as an example, was that its 
colour, hardness, and figure did not belong to the formal nature 2 of 
the wax itself [i.e. that we can comprehend everything that exists 
necessarily in the wax, without thinking of these]. I did not 
there treat either of the formal nature 3 of the mind, or even of the 
formal nature of body. 

1 L. Y. italicizes too many of the words in the rest of the sentence ; F. Y. 
none at all. I have effected a compromise. 

2 rationem. 3 ratione. 



64 Objections III with Replies 

Again it is irrelevant to say, as this Philosopher here does,, 
that one thought cannot be the subject of another thought. Who r 
except my antagonist himself, ever imagined that it could ? But 
now, for a brief explanation of the matter, it is certain that no- 
thought can exist apart from a thing that thinks; no activity ^ 
no accident can be without a substance in which to exist. 
Moreover, since we do not apprehend the substance itself immediately 
through itself, but by means only of the fact that it is the subject 
of certain activities, it is highly rational, and a requirement forced 
on us by custom, to give diverse names to those substances that we 
recognize to be the subjects of clearly diverse activities or accidents, 
and afterwards to inquire whether those diverse names refer to one 
and the same or to diverse things. But there are certain activities 1 , 
which we call corporeal, e.g. magnitude, figure, motion, and all those 
that cannot be thought of apart from extension in space 2 ; and the 
substance in which they exist is called body. It cannot be pretended 
that the substance that is the subject of figure is different from that 
which is the subject of spatial motion, etc., since all these activities, 
agree in presupposing extension 3 . Further, there are other activities,, 
which we call thinking 4 ' activities, e.g. understanding, willing,, 
imagining, feeling, etc., which agree in falling under the description 
of thought, perception, or consciousness. The substance in which 
they reside we call a thinking thing or the mind, or any other name 
we care, provided only we do not confound it with corporeal 
substance, since thinking activities have no affinity with corporeal 
activities, and thought, which is the common nature 5 in which the 
former agree, is totally different from extension, the common term 5 
for describing the latter. 

But after we have formed two distinct concepts of those two- 
substances, it is easy, from what has been said in the sixth 
Meditation, to determine whether they are one and the same or 
distinct. 

OBJECTION III. 

"What 6 then is there distinct from my thought? "What can be 
said to be separate from me myself? 

Perchance some one will answer the question thus /, the very 
self that thinks, am held to be distinct from my own thought; and, 
though it is not really separate from me, my thought is held to be 

1 actus, 2 absque extensione locali. 

3 F. Y. conveniunt sub una communi ratione extensionis, L. V. 

4 cogitativos. 5 ratio communis, 
6 Quotation from Med. 11. vol. i. p. 153, par. 3. 



Objections III with Replies 65 

dicersefrom me, just in the way (as has been said before) that leaping 1 
is distinguished from the leaper. But if M. Descartes shows that 
he who understands and the understanding are identical we shall 
lapse back into the scholastic mode of speaking. The understanding 
understands, the vision sees, will wills, and by exact analogy, 
walking, or at least the faculty of 'walking will walk. Now all this 
is obscure, incorrect, and quite unworthy of M. Descartes' wonted 
clearness. 

EEPLY. 

I do not deny that I, the thinker, am distinct from my own 
thought, in the way in which a thing is distinct from its mode. 
But when I ask, what then is there distinct from my thought, this is 
to be taken to refer to the various modes of thought there recounted, 
not to my substance; and when I add, what can be said to be 
separate from me myself, I mean only that these modes of thinking 
exist entirely in me. I cannot see on what pretext the imputation 
here of doubt and obscurity rests. t 

OBJECTION IV. 

Hence it is left for me to concede that I do not even understand 
by the imagination what this wax is, but conceive 2 it by the mind 
alone 3 . 

There is a great difference between imagining, i.e. having some 
idea, and conceiving with the mind, i.e. inferring, as the result of a 
train of reasoning, that something is, or exists. But M. Descartes 
has not explained to us the sense in which they differ. The ancient 
peripatetics also have taught clearly enough that substance is not 
perceived by the senses, but is known as a result of reasoning. 

But what shall we now say, if reasoning chance to be nothing 
more than the uniting and stringing together of names or designations 
by the word is ? It will be a consequence of this that reason gives us 
no conclusion about the nature of things, but only about the terms 
that designate them, whether, indeed, or not there is a convention 
(arbitrarily made about their meanings) according to lohich ive join 
these names together. If this be so, as is possible, reasoning will 
depend on names, names on the imagination, and imagination, 
perchance, as I think, on the motion of the corporeal organs. Thus 
mind will be nothing but the motions in certain parts of an organic 
body. 

1 walking, F. V. 2 concipere. In Med. n. it is percipere. 

3 Of. Med. n, vol. i. p. 155, 1. 11. 

B. H. II. 5 



66 Objections III with Replies 

REPLY, 

I have here explained the difference between imagination and a 
pure mental concept, as when in my illustration I enumerated the 
features in wax that were given by the imagination and those solely 
due to a conception of the mind. But elsewhere also I have 
explained how it is that one and the same thing, e.g. a pentagon, is 
in one way an object of the understanding, in another way of the 
imagination [for example how in order to imagine a pentagon a 
particular mental act is required which gives us this figure (i.e. its 
five sides and the space they enclose) which we dispense with 
wholly in our conception]. Moreover, in reasoning we unite not 
names but the things signified by the names ; and I marvel that 
the opposite can occur to anyone. For who doubts whether a 
Frenchman and a German are able to reason in exactly the same 
way about the same things, though they yet conceive the words in 
an entirely diverse way ? And has not my opponent condemned 
himself in talking of conventions arbitrarily made about the 
meanings of words ? For, if he admits that words signify anything, 
why will he not allow our reasonings to refer to this something that 
is signified, rather than to the words alone ? But, really, it will be 
as correct to infer that earth is heaven or anything else that is 
desired, as to conclude that mind is motion [for there are no other 
two things in the world between which there is not as much 
agreement as there is between motion and spirit, which are of two 
entirely different natures]. 

OBJECTION V. 

In reference to the third Meditation concerning God some of 
these (thoughts of man) are, so to speak, images of things, and to 
these alone is the title ' idea ' properly applied ; examples are my 
thought of a man, or of a Chimera, of Heavens, of an Angel, or 
[even] of God 1 . 

When I think of a man, 1 recognize an idea, or image, with 
figure and colour as its constituents ; and concerning this I can raise 
the question whether or not it is the likeness of a man. So it is also 
when I think of the heavens. When I think of the chimera, I 
recognize an idea or image, being able at the same time to doubt 
whether or not it is the likeness of an animal, which, though it does 
not exist, may yet exist or has at some other time existed. 

1 Cf . Med. m. vol. i. p. 159, par. 2. 



Objections III with Replies 67 

But, when one thinks of an Angel, what is noticed in the mind is 
now the image of a flame, now that of a fair winged child, and this, 
I may be sure, has no likeness to an Angel, and hence is not the idea 
of an Angel. But believing 1 that created beings exist that are the 
ministers of God, invisible and immaterial, we give 1 the name of 
Angel to this object of belief, this supposed being, though the idea used 
in imagining an Angel is, nevertheless, constructed out of the ideas of 
visible things. 

It is the same way with the most holy name of God ; we have no 
image, no idea corresponding to it. Hence we are forbidden to 
worship God in the form of an image, lest we should think we could 
conceive Him who is inconceivable. 

Hence it appears that we have no idea of God. But just as one 
born blind who has frequently been brought close to a fire and has 
felt himself growing warm, recognizes that there is something which 
made him warm, and, if he hears it called fire, concludes that fire 
exists, though he has no acquaintance with its shape or colour, and 
has no idea of fire nor image that he" can discover in his mind ; so * a 
man, recognizing that there must be some cause of his images and 
ideas, and another previous cause of this cause and so on continuously, 
is finally carried on to a conclusion, or to the supposition of some 
eternal cause, which, never having begun to be, can have no cause 
prior to it : and hence he necessarily concludes that something eternal 
exists. But nevertheless he has no idea that he can assert to be that 
of this eternal being, and he merely gives a name to the object of his 
faith or reasoning and calls it God. 

Since now it is from this portion, viz. that there is an idea of 
God in our soul, that M. Descartes proceeds to prove the theorem that 
God (an all-powerful, all-wise Being, the create of the world) exists, 
he should have explained this idea of God better, and he should have 
deduced from it not only Gods existence, but also the creation of the 
world. 

EEPLY. 

Here the meaning assigned to tlie term idea is merely that of 
images depicted in the corporeal imagination 5 ; and, that being 
agreed on, it is easy for my critic to prove that there is no proper 
idea of Angel or of God. But I have, everywhere, from time to time, 
and principally in this place, shown that I take the term idea to 



1 credens (sic)...in)ponimus. 

2 itaque (sic), L. V. de mesme, F. V. - pbantasia. 



52 



68 Objections III with Replies 

stand for whatever the mind directly perceives; and so when I 
will or when I fear, since at the same time I perceive that I will 
and fear, that very volition and apprehension are ranked among my 
ideas. I employed this term because it was the term currently used 
by Philosophers for the forms of perception of the Divine mind,, 
though we can discover no imagery in God ; besides I had no other 
more suitable term. But I think I have sufficiently well explained 
what the idea of God is for those who care to follow my meaning ; 
those who prefer to wrest my words from the sense I give them, I 
can never satisfy. The objection that here follows, relative to the 
creation of the world, is plainly irrelevant [for I proved that God 
exists, before asking whether there is a world created by him, and 
from the mere fact that God, i.e. a supremely perfect being exists, 
it follows that if there be a world it must have been created by 
him]. 

OBJECTION VI. 

But other (thoughts) possess other forms as well. For example, 
in willing, fearing, affirming, denying, though I always perceive 
something as the subject of my thought, yet in my thought I 
embrace something more than the similitude 1 of that thing; and, 
of the thoughts of this kind, some are called volitions or affections, 
and others judgments 2 . 

When a man wills or fears, he has indeed an image of the thing- 
he fears or of the action he wills ; but no explanation is given of what 
is further embraced in the thought of him who wills or fears. If 
indeed fearing be thinking, I fail to see how it can be anything other 
than the thought of the thing feared. In what respect does the fear 
produced by the onrush of a lion differ from the idea of the lion as it 
rushes on us, together with its effect (produced by such an idea in the 
heart), which impels the fearful man towards that animal motion we 
call flight ? Now this motion of flight is not thought ; whence we are 
left to infer that in fearing there is no thinking save that which 
consists in the representation* of the thing feared. The same account 
holds true of volition. 

Further you do not haw affirmation and negation without words 
and names ; consequently brute creatures cannot affirm or deny, not 
even in thought, and hence are likewise unable to judge. Yet a man 
and a beast may have similar thoughts. For, when we assert that 

1 add to the idea, P. V. * Of. vol. i. p. 159, par. 2. 

3 similitodine translated 'idea' in previous note. 



Objections III with Replies 69 

<a man runs, our thought does not differ from that which a dog has 
when it sees its master running. Hence neither affirmation nor 
negation add anything to the bare thought, unless that increment be 
our thinking that the names of which the affirmation consists are the 
names of the same thing in [the mind of] him ivko affirms. But this 
does not mean that anything more is contained in our thought than 
the representation oj the thing, but merely that that representation is 
there twice over. 

EEPLY. 

It is self-evident that seeing a lion and fearing it at the same 
time is different from merely seeing it. So, too, it is one thing to 
see a man running, another thing to affirm to oneself that one sees 
it, an act that needs no language 1 . I can see nothing here that 
needs an answer. 

OBJECTION VII. 

It remains for me to examine in what way I have received that 
idea from God. I have neither derived it from the senses ; nor has 
it ever come to me contrary to my expectation 2 , as the ideas of 
sensible things are wont to do, when these very things present 
themselves to the external organs of sense or seem to do so. 
Neither also has it been constructed as a fictitious idea by me, for I 
can take nothing from it and am quite unable to add to it. Hence 
the conclusion is left that it is innate in me, just as the idea of my 
own self is innate in me 3 . 

If there is no idea of God (now it has not been proved that it 
exists), as seems to be the case, the whole of this argument collapses. 
Further (if it is my body that is being considered) the idea of my own 
self proceeds [principally] from sight ; but (if it is a question of the 
soul) there is no idea of the soul. We only infer by means of the 
reason that there is something internal in the human body, which 
imparts to it its animal motion, and by means of which it feels and 
moves ; and this, whatever it be } we name the soul, without employing 
any idea. 

EEPLY. 

If there is an idea of God (as it is manifest there is), the whole 
of this objection collapses. When it is said further that we have no 

1 This clause does not appear in P. V. 

2 nee unquam expectant! mini advenit, L.Y., non omitted, A. and T. vol. vn. 
p. 183. 

3 Cf. Med. ii. vol. i. p. 170, par. 3. 



70 Objections III with Replies 

idea of the soul but that we arrive at it by an inference of reason, 
that is the same as saying that there is no image of the soul depicted 
in the imagination, but that that which I have called its idea does, 
nevertheless, exist. 

OBJECTION VIII. 

But the other idea of the sun is derived from astronomical 
reasonings, i.e. is elicited from certain notions that are innate 
in me 1 . 

It seems that at one and the same time the idea of the sun must 
be single whether it is beheld by the eyes, or is given by our intelligence 
as many times larger than it appears. For this latter thought is not 
an idea of the sun, but an inference by argument that the idea of the 
sun would be many times larger if we viewed the sun from a much 
nearer distance. 

But at different times the ideas of the sun may differ, e.g. when 
one looks at it with the naked eye and through a telescope. But 
astronomical reasonings do not increase or decrease the idea of the 
sun; rather they show that the sensible idea is misleading. 

REPLY. 

Here too what is said not to be an idea of the sun, but is, 
nevertheless, described, is exactly what I call an idea. [But as 
long as my critic refuses to come to terms with me about the 
meaning of words, none of his objections can be other than 
frivolous.] 

OBJECTION IX. 

For without doubt those ideas, which reveal substance to me,, 
are something greater, and, so to speak, contain within them more 
objective reality than those which represent only modes or accidents. 
And again, that by means of which I apprehend a supreme God who 
is eternal, infinite, omniscient, all-powerful, and the creator of all 
else there is besides, assuredly possesses more objective reality than 
those ideas that reveal to us finite substances 2 . 

/ have frequently remarked above that there is no idea either of 
God or of the soul ; I now add that there is no idea of substance. 
For substance (the substance that is a material, subject to accidents. 

1 Of. Med. in. vol. i. p. 161, par. 8. 

2 Ibid. p. 162, par. 1. 



Objections III with Replies 71 

and changes) is perceived 1 and demonstrated by the reason alone, 
without yet being conceived by us, or furnishing us with any idea 2 . 
If that is true, how can it be maintained that the ideas which reveal 
substance to me are anything greater or possess more objective reality 
than those revealing accidents to us ? Further I pray If. Descartes 
to investigate the meaning of more reality. Does reality admit of 
more and less I Or, if he thinks that one thing can be more a thing 
than another, let him see hoiv he is to explain it to our intelligence 
with the clearness called for in demonstration, and such as he himself 
has at other times employed. 

EEPLY. 

I have frequently remarked that I give the name idea to that 
with which reason makes us acquainted just as I also do to anything 
else that is in any way perceived 3 by us. I have likewise explained 
how reality admits of more and less : viz. in the way in which 
substance is greater than mode ; and if there be real qualities or 
incomplete substances, they are things to a greater extent than 
modes are, but less than complete substances. Finally, if there 
be an infinite and independent substance, it is more a thing than 
a substance that is finite and dependent. Now all this is quite 
self-evident [and so needs no further explanation]. 

OBJECTION X. 

Hence there remains alone the idea of God, concerning which 
we must consider whether it is not something that is capable of 
proceeding from me myself. By the name God I understand a 
substance that is infinite [eternal, immutable], independent, all- 
knowing, all-powerful, and by which both I myself and everything 
else, if anything else does exist, have been created. Now all these 
characteristics are such that, the more diligently I attend to them, 
the less do they appear capable of proceeding from me alone ; hence, 
from what has been already said, we must conclude that God 
necessarily exists 4 . 

When I consider the attributes of God, in order to gather thence 
the idea of God, and see lohether there is anything contained in it 
that cannot proceed from ourselves, I find, unless I am mistaken, 
that what we assign in thought to the name of God neither proceeds 

1 F. Y. evincitur, L. V. 2 without our having any idea of it, F. V. 
3 conceived, F. V. * of. Med. in. vol. i. p. 165, par. 3. 



72 Objections III with Replies 

from ourselves nor needs to come from any other source than external 
objects. For by the word God I mean a substance, i.e. I understand 
that God exists (not by means of an idea but by reasoning). This 
substance is infinite (i.e. I can neither conceive nor imagine its 
boundaries or extreme parts, without imagining further parts 
beyond them) ; whence it follows that corresponding to the term 
infinite there arises an idea not of the Divine infinity, but of my 
own bounds or limitations. It is also independent, i.e. I have no 
conception of a cause from which God originates ; whence it is evident 
that I have no idea corresponding to the term independent, save the 
memory of my own ideas with their commencement at divers times 
and their consequent dependence. 

Wherefore to say that God is independent, is merely to say that 
God is to be reckoned among the number of those things, of the origin 
of which we have no image. Similarly to say that God is infinite, 
is identical with saying that He is among those objects of the limits 
of ivhich we have no conception. Thus any idea of God is ruled out ; 
for what sort of idea is that which has neither origin nor termination 1 

Take the term all-knowing. Here I ask: ivhat idea does 
M. Descartes employ in apprehending the intellectual activity 
of God I 

All-powerful. So too, what is the idea by ivhich we apprehend 
power, which is relative to that which lies in the future, i.e. does not 
exist ? 1 certainly understand ivhat power is by means of an image, 
or memory of past events, inferring it in this wise Thus did He, 
hence thus ivas He able to do; therefore as long as the same agent 
exists He will be able to act so again, i.e. He has the power of acting. 
Now these are all ideas that can arise from external objects. 

Creator of everything that exists. Of creation some image can 
be constructed by me out of the objects I behold, e.g. the birth of a 
human being or its growth from something small as a point to the 
siz^and figure it now possesses. We have no other idea than this 
corresponding to the term creator. But in order to prove creation 
it is not enough to be able to imagine the creation of the world. 
Hence although it had been demonstrated that an infinite, inde- 
pendent, all-powerful, etc. being exists, nevertheless it does not follow 
that a creator exists. Unless anyone thinks that it is correct to infer, 
from the fact that there is a being ivhich we believe to haw created 
everything, that hence the world was at some time created by him. 

Further, when M. Descartes says that the idea of God and that 
of the soul are innate in us, I should like to know whether the minds 



Objections III with Readies 73 

'Of those who are in a profound and dreamless sleep yet think. If not, 
they haw at tliat time no ideas. Whence no idea is innate, for what 
is innate is always present. 

REPLY. 

Nothing that we attribute to God can come from external objects 
as a copy proceeds from its exemplar, because in God there is 
nothing similar to what is found in external things, i.e. in corporeal 
objects. But whatever is unlike them in our thought [of God], 
must come manifestly not from them, but from the cause of that 
diversity existing in our thought [of God]. 

Further I ask how my critic derives the intellectual compre- 
hension of God from external things. But I can easily explain the 
idea which I have of it, by saying that by idea I mean whatever is 
the form of any perception. For does anyone who understands 
something not perceive that he does so? and hence does he not 
possess that form or idea of mental action ? It is by extending this 
indefinitely that we form the idea of the intellectual activity of 
God ; similarly also with God's other attributes. 

But, since we have employed the idea of God existing in us for 
the purpose of proving His existence, and such mighty power is 
comprised in this idea, that we comprehend that it would be con- 
tradictory, if God exists, for anything besides Him to exist, unless 
it were created by Him ; it clearly follows, from the fact that His 
existence has been demonstrated, that it has been also proved that 
the whole world, or whatever things other than God exist, have 
been created by Him. 

Finally when I say that an idea is innate in us [or imprinted in 
our souls by nature], I do not mean that it is always present to 
us. This would make no idea innate. I mean merely that we 
possess the faculty of summoning up this idea. 

OBJECTION XL 

The whole force o the argument lies in this that I know I 
could not exist, and possess the nature I have, that nature which 
puts me in possession of the idea of God, unless God did really 
exist, the God, I repeat, the idea of whom is found in me 1 . 

Since, then, it has not been proved that we possess an idea of 
God, and the Christian religion obliges us to believe that God is 

1 Cf. Med. in. vol. i. pp. 170, 171. 



74 Objections III with Replies 

inconceivable, which amounts, in my opinion, to saying that we 

no idea of Him, it follows that no proof of His existence .has been 

effected^ much less of His work of creation. 

REPLY. 

When it is said that we cannot conceive God, to conceive means 
to comprehend adequately. For the rest, I am tired of rep eating- 
how it is that we can have an idea of God. There is nothing in 
these objections that invalidates my demonstrations. 

OBJECTION XII. 

(Directed against the fourth Meditation, Concerning the true and 
the false.} 

And thus I am quite sure that error, in so far as it is error, is, 
nothing real, but merely defect. Hence in order to go astray, it is, 
not necessary for me to have a faculty specially assigned to me by 
God for this purpose 1 . 

It is true that ignorance is merely a defect^ and tliat we stand' 
in need of no special positive faculty in order to be ignorant ; but 
about error the case is not so clear. For it appears that stones and' 
inanimate things are unable to err solely because tJiey haw no faculty 
of reasoning, or imagining. Hence it is a wry direct inference that, 
"in order to err, a faculty of reasoning, or at least of imagination is- 
required; now both of these are positive faculties with which all beings- 
that err, and only beings tJiat err, ham been endowed. 

Further, M. Descartes says I perceive that they (viz. my 
mistakes) depend upon the cooperation of two causes, viz. my 
faculty of cognition, and my faculty of choice, or the freedom 
of my will 2 . But this seems to be contradictory to what went before* 
And we must note here also that the freedom of the will has been 
assumed without proof, and in opposition to the opinion of the- 
Calvinists. 

REPLY. 

Although in order to err the faculty of reasoning (or rather of 
judging, or affirming and denying) is required, because error is a. 
lack of this power it does not hence follow that this defect is^ 
anything real, just as it does not follow that blindness is anything 
real, although stones are not said to be blind merely because they 

1 Med. iv. vol. i. p. 178, 1. 2. 2 Of. Med. iv. vol. i. p. 174, 1. 11.. 



Objections III with Replies 75 

are incapable of vision. I marvel that in these objections I have as 
yet found nothing that is properly argued out. Further I made no 
assumption concerning freedom which is not a matter of universal 
experience ; our natural light makes this most evident and I 
cannot make out why it is said to be contradictory to previous 
statements. 

Eut though there are many who, looking to the Divine fore- 
ordination, cannot conceive how that is compatible with liberty on 
our part, nevertheless no one, when he considers himself alone, fails 
to experience the fact that to will and to be free are the same thing 
[or rather that there is no difference between what is voluntary and 
what is free]. But this is no place for examining other people's 1 
opinions about this matter. 

OBJECTION XIII. 

For example, whilst I, during these days, sought to discuss 
whether anything at all existed, and noted that, from the very fact 
that I raised this question, it was an evident consequence that I 
myself existed, I could not indeed refrain from judging that what I 
understood so clearly was true ; this was not owing to compulsion 
by some external force, but because the consequence of the great 
mental illumination was a strong inclination of the will, and I 
believed the above truth the more willingly and freely, the less 
indifferent I was towards it 2 . 

This term, great mental illumination, is metaphorical, and 
consequently is not adapted to t/ie purposes of argument. Moreover 
everyone who is free from doubt claims to possess a similar illumina- 
tion, and in his will there is the same inclination to believe that of 
which he does not doubt, as in that of one who truly knows. Hence 
while this illumination may be the cause that makes a man obstinately 
defend or hold some opinion, it is not the cause of his knowing it 
to be true. 

Further, not only to know a thing to be true, but also to believe it 
or give assent to it, have nothing to do with the will. For, what is 
proved by valid argument or is recounted as credible, is believed by 
us whether we will or no. It is true that affirming and denying, 
maintaining or refuting propositions, are acts of will; but it does 
not follow on that account that internal assent depends upon the will. 

Therefore the demonstration of the truth that follows is not 

1 The Calvinists', F. V. 2 Cf. Med. iv. vol. i. p. 176, par. 2. 



76 Objections III with Replies 

adequate and it is in this misuse of our free-will, that this privation 
consists that constitutes the form of error 1 . 

KEPLY. 

It does not at all matter whether or not the term great 
illumination is proper to argument, so long as it is serviceable for 
explanation, as in fact it is. For no one can he unaware that hy 
mental illumination is meant clearness of cognition, which perhaps 
is not possessed by everyone who thinks he possesses it. But this 
does not prevent it from being very different from a bigoted 
opinion, to the formation of which there goes no perceptual 
-evidence. 

Moreover when it is here said that when a thing is clearly 
perceived 2 we give our assent whether we will or no, that is the 
.same as saying that we desire what we clearly know to be good 
whether willing or unwilling ; for the word unwilling finds no 
entrance in such circumstances, implying as it does that we will 
and do not will the same thing. 

OBJECTION XIV. 
(To the fifth Meditation, On the essence of material things.} 

As, for example, when I imagine a triangle, though perhaps such a 
figure does not exist at all outside my thought, or never has existed, 
it has nevertheless a determinate nature, or essence, or immutable 
and eternal form, which is not a fiction of my construction, and does 
not depend on my mind, as is evident from the fact that various 
properties of that triangle may be demonstrated' 3 . 

If the triangle exists nowhere at all, I do not understand how it 
can have any nature; for that which exists nowhere does not exist. 
Hence it has no existence or nature. The triangle* in the mind 
comes from the triangle 5 we have seen, or from one imaginatively 
constructed out of triangles ice haw beheld. Now when we have 
once called the thing (from which we think tJiat the idea of triangle 
originates) by ih& name triangle, although the triangle itself perishes, 
yet the name remains. In the same way if, in our thought, we haw 
once conceived that the angles of a triangle are together all equal to 
two right angles, and haw given this other name to the triangle 
possessed of three angles equal to two right angles although there 

1 Vol. i. p. 177, 1. 1. 2 perspectis: conceived, F. V. 

3 Yol. i. p. 180, 11. 4 saq. 

4 idea that the mind conceives of triangle, F. V. 

5 un autre triangle, F. V. 



Objections III with Replies 77 

were no angle 1 at all in existence, yet the name would remain ; and 
the truth of this proposition will be of eternal duration a triangle is 
possessed of three angles equal to two right angles. But the nature 
of the triangle will not be of eternal duration, if it should chance that 
triangle perished 2 . 

In like manner the proposition, man is animal, will be eternally 
true, because the names it employs are eternal, but if the human race 
were to perish there would no longer be a human nature. 

Whence it is evident that essence in so far as it is distinguislied 
from existence is nothing else than a union of names by means of the 
verb is. And thus essence without existence is a fiction of our mind.. 
And it appears that as the image of a man in the mind is to the man 
so is essence to existence ; or that the essence of Socrates bears to his 
existence the relation that this proposition, Socrates is a man, to this 
other, Socrates is or exists. Now the proposition, Socrates is a man, 
means, when Socrates does not exist, merely the connection of its- 
terms; and is, or to be, has underlying it the image of the unity of a 
thing designated by two names. 

REPLY, 

The distinction between essence and existence is known to all ; 
and all that is here said about eternal names in place of concepts or 
ideas of an eternal truth, has been already satisfactorily refuted. 

OBJECTION XV. 

(Directed against the sixth Meditation Concerning the existence 
of material things.} 

For since God has evidently given me no faculty by which to- 
know this (whether or not our ideas proceed from bodies*}, but on the 
contrary has given me a strong propensity towards the belief that, 
they do proceed from corporeal things, I fail to see how it could be- 
made out that He is not a deceiver, if our ideas proceeded from 
some other source than corporeal things. Consequently corporeal 
objects must exist 4 . 

It is the common belief 'that no fault is committed by medical men 
who deceive sick people for their health's sake, nor by parents who 
mislead their children for their good ; and that the evil in deception 

1 triangle, F. V. 

2 for if every triangle whatsoever perished, it also would cease fco be, F. V. 

a L. V,, that G-od by himself or by the intermediation of some created, 
thing more noble than body, conveys to us the ideas of bodies, F. V. 
* Vol. i. p. 191, middle. 



78 Objections III with Replies 

lies not in the falsity of what is said, but in tJie lad intent of those 
tuho practise it. M. Descai^tes must therefore look to this proposition, 
God can in no case deceive us, taken universally, and see whether it 
is true ; for 'If it is not true, thus universally taken, the conclusion, 
hence corporeal things exist, does not follow. 

REPLY. 

For the security of my conclusion we do not need to assume 
that we can never be deceived (for I have gladly admitted that we 
are often deceived), but that we are not deceived when that error 
of ours would argue an intention to deceive on the part of God, an 
intention it is contradictory to impute to Him. Once more this 
is bad reasoning on my critic's part. 

FINAL OBJECTION. 

For now I perceive how great the difference is between the two 
(i.e. between waking and dreaming) from the fact that our dreams 
are never conjoined by our memory [with each other and] with the 
whole of the rest of our life's action [as happens with the things 
which occur in waking moments] 1 . 

/ ask -whether it is really the ease that one, who dreams lie doubts 
whether he dreams 01* no, is unable to dream that his dream is 
connected ivith the idea of a long series of past events. If he can, 
those things which to the dreamer appear to be the actions of his past 
life may be regarded as true just as though he had been awake. 
Besides, since, as M. Descartes himself asserts, all certitude and 
truth in knowledge depend alone upon our knowing the true God, 
either it will be impossible for an Atheist to infer from the memory of 
his previous life that he wakes, or it 'will be possible for a man to 
know that he is awake, apart from knowledge of the true God. 

BEPLY. 

One who dreams cannot effect a real connection between what 
he dreams and the ideas of past events, though he can dream that 
he does connect them. For who denies that in his sleep a man 
may be deceived 1 But yet when he has awakened he will easily 
detect his error. 

But an Atheist is able to infer from the memory of his past life 
that he is awake ; still he cannot know that this sign is sufficient to 
give him the certainty that he is not in error, unless he knows that 
it has been created by a God who does not deceive. 

1 Yol. i. p. 199, 11. 2 sqq. 



FOURTH SET OF OBJECTIONS 1 , 

LETTER id A MAN OP NOTE*. 
fiSr', 

The jawur you haw done m# 4 1 acknowledge, though I note 
that you expect a return for: it. Kind though your action was, yet 
to let me share in the enjoyment of reading that most acute work only 
on condition I should disclose what I think of it : was to demand a 
requital, and surely a heavy } one. Truly a hard condition, compliance 
with which the desire to acquaint myself with a fine piece of work has 
wrung from me, but one against which I should gladly protest if an 
exception could be claimed ftp one who 'has committed a deed through 
the urgency of pleasure,' and added to the concessions recognized by 
the Praetor of old, who excused acts 'done under the influence of 
violence or fear! 

What would you have ? It js not my estimate of the mtJior that 
you look for; you already how how much I appreciate the force of 
his genius and his distinguished learning. Likewise you are not 
unaware of the troublesome' mattm that at present tab up my time 
md, if you haw too exalted^i opinion of me, it does not follow that 
I am unaware of my own i m $equacy. And yet what you submit to 
me for examination demanj iS i>oth intellectual powers of no ordinary 
nature and above all a mina set free from can, in order that it may, 
by its disengagement from all external turmoil, 1mm leisure for self- 
contemplation; and as you see, this is impossible without intent 
meditation and complete mental self-absorption. Nevertheless, 'if it 
is your bidding, I obey. The blame for my shortcomings will fall 

* Fourth set of Objections brought forward by M. Arnauld, Doctor in 
Theology. F,V. 

2 Letter of the said M, Arnauld written to the Bev. Father Mersenne. F. V. 

J M<m I^verend P4re, F. V. , vir clarissime, L. V, 

4 In sending to him the ' Meditations' of Descartes, cf. F, V. 



80 Objections IV 

upon you, who compel me to take up my pen. But though Philosophy 
could arrogate to Itself the whole of this wort, yet since its author 
with great modesty of Jus oicn accord appears before the tribunal of 
the Theologians, I shall here play a double role. I shall first pro- 
pound the chief objections that, in my opinion, philosophers can adduce 
in connection with the outstanding problems as to the nature of the 
human mind and [the existence] of God; secondly, I shall unfold 
certain difficulties ichich a theologian can detect in the whole work. 

The Nature of the Human Mind. 

The first thing that here occurs to me to be worthy of remark is- 
that our distinguished author should hace taken as the foundation of 
the whole of his philosophy the doctrine laid down [before him] by 
St Augustine, a man of most penetrating intellect and of such note,, 
not only in the sphere of theology, but m that of philosophy as welL 
In ( De Libero arbitrio' Book II, chap. 3., Alipius, when disputing 
with Euodius, setting about a proof of tJie existence of God, says: 
Firstly, to start with tlie things that are most evident, I ask you 
whether you yourself exist, or are you apprehensive lest in [answer- 
ing] this question you are in error, when in any case, if you did 
not exist you could never be in error? Similar to this are the 
words of our author: But perhaps there exists an all-powerful being* 
extremely cunning, who deceives me, who intentionally at all times, 
deceives me. There is then no doubt that I exist, if he deceives, 
me. But let us proceed, and, to pursue something more relevant to 
our pwrpft$& let us discover how, from this principle, -we can demon- 
strate the fad that our mind is [disti^t and} separate from our 
body. 

I am able to doubt wlietfcer I fare a body, iiay, whether any body 
exists at all; yet I haw no right to dolih whether I am, or exist, so 
long as I doubt or think. 

Hence J, who doubt and think, am not [a body; otherwise in enter- 
taining doubt concerning body, I should^OiOubt about myself. 

Nay, even though I obstinately maintain that no body at all 
exists, the position taken up is unshaken; I am something, hence I 
am not a body. 

This is really very acute, but someone could bring up the objection 
which our author urges against himself; .the fact that I doubt about 
body or deny that body exists, does not bring it about that no bodf 
exists. Hence perhaps it happens th* these very things which 
I suppose to be nothing, because they are unknown to me, yet do. 



Objections IV 81 

not in truth differ from that self which I do know. I know nothing 
about it, he says, I do not dispute this matter; [I can judge only 
about things that are known to me.] I know that I exist; I enquire 
who I, the known self, am ; it is quite certain that the knowledge of 
this self thus precisely taken, does not depend on those things of 
the existence of which I am not yet acquainted 1 . 

But he, admits in consonance with the argument laid down in the 
Method, that the proof has proceeded only so far as to exclude from 
the nature of the human mind whatsoever is corporeal, not from the 
point of view of the ultimate truth, but relatively only to his 
consciousness 2 (the meaning being that nothing at all was known to 
him to belong to his essential nature, beyond the fact that he was a 
thinking 1 being)' 1 . I fence it is evident from this reply that the argu- 
ment is exactly where it was, and that therefore the problem which he 
promises to solce remains entirely untouched. The problem is: how 
it follows, from the fact that one is unaware that anything else 
[(except the fact of being a thinking thing)] belongs to one's essence, 
that nothing else really belongs to one's essence I But, not to 
conceal my dullness, I have been unahie to discover in the whole of 
Meditation II where he has shown this. Yet so far as I can con- 
jecture, he attempts this proof in Meditation VI, became he believes 
that it is dependent on the possession of the dear knowledge of God to 
which in Aled/tat'ion II he has not yet attained. Here is his proof: 

Because I know that all the things I clearly and distinctly 
understand can be created by God just as I conceive them to exist, 
it is sufficient for me to be able to comprehend one thing clearly 
and distinctly apart from another, in order to be sure that the one 
is diverse from the other, because at least God can isolate them ; 
and it does not matter by what power that isolation is effected, in 
order that I may be obliged to think them different from one 
another. Hence because, on the one hand, I have a clear and 
distinct idea of myself in so far as I am a thinking being, and not- 
extended, and on the other hand, a distinct idea of body, in so far 
as it is only an extended thing, not one that thinks, it is certain 
that I am in reality distinct from my body and can exist apart 
from it 4 . 

Here we must halt awhile; for on these few words the whole of 
tlw difficulty seems to hinge. 

Firstly, in order to be true, t/te major premiss of that syllogism 

1 Of. Mod. n. vol. i. p. 152. 2 Perceptionem. 

8 Of. Preface, vol. i. pp. IBS, 139. 4 Cf. Med. vi. vol. i. p. 190. 

E. H. II. 6 



82 Objections IV 

must be held to refer to the adequate notion of a thing [(i.e. the notion 
which comprises everything which may be known of the thing)], not to 
any notion, even a clear and distinct one. For M. Descartes in his 
reply to his theological critic 1 admits that it is sufficient to haw a 
formal distinction and that a real one is not required, to cause one 
thing to be conceived separately and as distinct from another by 
the abstracting action of the mind when it conceives a thing 
inadequately 3 . Whence in the same passage he draws the conclusion 
which he adds : But still I understand in a complete manner what 
body is [(i.e. I conceive body as a complete thing)], merely by 
thinking that it is extended, has figure, can move, etc., and by 
denying of it everything which belongs to the nature of mind. 
Conversely also, I understand that mind is something complete, 
which doubts, knows, wishes, etc., although I deny that anything 
belongs to it which is contained in the idea of body. Hence 3 there 
is a real distinction between mind and body 4 . 

But, if anyone casts doubt on the (minor) premiss here assumed, 
and contends that it is merely that your conception is inadequate 
w/ien you conceive yourself [(i.e. your mind)] as being a thinking but 
not an extended thing, and similarly when you conceive yourself 
[(i.e. your body)] as being an extended and not a thinking thing, we 
must look to its proof in the previous part of the argument. For 
1 do not reckon a matter like this to be so clear as to warrant us in 
assuming it as an indemonstrable first principle and in dispensing 
with proof. 

Now as to the first part of the statement, namely, that you com- 
pletely understand what body is, merely by thinking that it is 
extended, has figure, can move, etc., and by denying of it every- 
thing which belongs to the nature of mind, this is of little value. 
For one who contends that the human mind is corporeal does not on 
that account believe that every body is a mind. Hence body would be 
so related to mind as genus is to species. But the genus can be con- 
ceived without the species, even although one deny of it whatsoever is 
proper and peculiar to the species; 'whence comes the common dictum 
of Logicians, 'the negation of the species does not negate the genus.' 
Thus, I can conceive figure without conceiving any of the attributes 
proper to the circle. Therefore, we must prove over and above this 
that the mind can be completely and adequately conceived apart from 
the body. 

1 Beply to Objections i. 2 Above, p. 22, par. 3. 

3 This slightly abridges the passage quoted. 4 pp. 22, 23. 



Objections IV 83 

/ can discover no passage in the whole work capable of effecting 
this proof, saw the proposition laid down at the outset : I can deny 
that there is any body or that any extended thing exists, but yet it 
is certain that I exist, so long as I make this denial, or think ; 
hence I am a thing that thinks and not a body, and the body does 
not pertain to the knowledge of myself, 

But the only result that I can see this to give, is that a certain 
knoivledge of myself be obtained without a knowledge of the body. 
But it is not yet quite clear to me that this knowledge is complete 
and adequate, so as to make me sure that I am not in error in 
excluding the body from my essence. I shall explain by means of an 
example : 

Let us assume that a certain man is quite sure tlmt the angle in 
a semicircle is a right angle and that hence the triangle made by this 
angle and the diameter is right-angled; but suppose he questions and 
has not yet firmly apprehended, nay, let its imagine that, misled by some 
fallacy, he denies that the square on its base is equal to the squares on 
the sides of the right-angled triangle. Now, according to our autJior's 
reasoning, he will see himself confirmed in Ms false belief. For, he 
will argue, while I clearly and distinctly perceive that this triangle 
is right-angled, I yet doubt whether the square on its -base is equal 
to the square on its sides. Hence the equality of the square on the 
base to those on the sides does not belong to its essence, 

Further, even though I deny that the square on its base is equal 
to the squares on its sides, I yet remain certain that it is right-angled, 
and the knowledge that one of its angles is a right angle remains 
dear and distinct in my mind ; and this remaining so, not God> 
himself could cause it not to be right-angled. 

Hence, that of which I doubt, or the removal of which leaves me 
with the idea still, cannot belong to its essence. 

Besides, since I know that all things I clearly and distinctly 
understand can be created by God just as I conceive them to exist, 
it is sufficient for me, in order to be sure that one thing is distinct 
from another, to be able to comprehend the one clearly and distinctly 
apart from the other, because it can be isolated by God. But / 
dearly and distinctly understand that this triangle is right-angled, 
without comprehending that the square on its base is equal to the 
squares on its sides. Hence God at least can create a right-angled 
triangle, the square on the base of which is not equal to the squares on 
its sides. 

I do not see what reply can here be made, except that the man in 

62 



84 Objections TV 

question does not perceive clearly that the triangle is right-angled. 
But whence do I obtain any perception of the nature of my mind 
clearer than that which he has of the nature of the triangle ? He is 
as sure that the triangle in a semicircle has one right angle (ivhich is 
the notion of a right-angled triangle] as I am in believing that I 
exist because I think. 

Hence, just as a man errs in not believing that the equality of the 
square on its base to the squares on its sides belongs to the nature oj 
that triangle, which he clearly and distinctly knows to be right-angled, 
so why am I not perhaps in the wrong in thinking that nothing else 
belongs to my nature, which 1 clearly and distinctly know to be 
something that thinks, except the fact that I am this thinking being 1 
Perhaps it also belongs to my essence to be something extended. 

And certainly, some one will say it is no marvel if, in deducing 
my existence from the fact that I think, the idea that I form of the 
self, which is in this way an object of thought, represent me to my 
mind as merely a thinking being, since it has been derived from my 
thinking alone. And hence from this idea, no argument can be 
drawn to prow that nothing more belongs to my essence than what the 
idea contains. 

In addition, it can be maintained that the argument proves too 
much and conducts us to the Platonic doctrine (refuted nevertheless 
by our author] that nothing corporeal belongs to the essence of man, 
who is hence entirely spirit, while his body is merely the vehicle of 
spirit ; wlience follows the definition of man as a spirit that makes 
use of a body. 

But if you reply that body is not absolutely excluded from my 
essence, but merely in so far precisely as I am a thinking being, the 
fear seems likely to arise that some one will entertain a suspicion that 
the knowledge of myself, in so far as I am a thinking being, is not the 
knowledge of anything fully and adequately conceived, but is known 
only inadequately and by a certain intellectual abstraction. 

Hence, just as geometers conceive of a line as length without 
breadth, and of a surface as length and breadth together without 
depth, although there is no length apart from breadth, no breadth 
without depth, some one may perhaps doubt whether everything 
that thinks is not likewise something extended; a thing in which, 
nevertheless, over and above the attributes common to other extended 
things, e.g. the possession of figure, motion, etc., is found this unique 1 
"iculty of thinking. Whence it follows that while by an intellectual 
1 peculiar! s cogitandi virtus. 



Objections IV 85 

abstraction, it can be apprehended by means of this character alone 
and unaided as a thing that thinks, it is quite possible that in reality 
corporeal attributes are compatible with a thinking being ; just as 
quantity can be mentally conceived by means of length alone, while it 
is possible that in reality breadth and depth go along with length in 
every quantity. 

The difficulty is increased by the fact that this power of thinking 
seems to be attached to corporeal organs, since we can believe it to be 
asleep in infants, extinguished in the case of lunatics ; and this is an 
objection strongly urged by those impious men ivhose aim is the soul's 
slaughter. 

Thus far I have dealt with the distinction between mind and 
body in real existence. But since M. Descartes has undertaken to 
prove the immortality of souls, it is right to ask whether thatfolloivs 
evidently from this separateness of existence. According to the 
principles of the vulgar philosophy that conclusion by no means can 
be drawn, for the common opinion is that the souls of animals are 
distinct from their bodies, but nevertheless perish with them. 

I had carried my criticism to this point and was intending to 
show how, accwdinq to our author's principles, which I believed I 
had gathered from his method of philosophical enquiry, the immortality 
of the soul 1 could be easily inferred from its distinctness from the 
body, when a new work 2 , a little treatise bearing the fruit of our 
author's reflections, came into my hands; and this work not only 
throws much light on the whole, but in connection with this passage 
brings forward exactly what I was to adduce ivith a mew to the 
solution of the above problem. 

For in the matter of the sozils of animals, in other passages he lets 
us know sufficiently well that they have no soul, but merely a bod>y 
disposed in a certain manner and so compounded of various organs 
that all the actions we see them perform can be effected in it and by 
its means. 

Bat I fear that this belief will not carry persuasion into men's 
minds, unless supported by the strongest evidence. For at the first 
blush, it seems incredible that there is any way by which, without any 
intervention of the soul, it can come to pass that the light reflected 
from the body of a wolf into the eyes of a sheep should excite into 
motion the minute fibres of the optic nerves and by t/ie penetration of 

1 Mentis. 

2 The Synopsis of the Meditations (cf. vol. i. pp. 140143) sent by Descartes 
to Mersenne, Dec. 31, 1640, fifty days after the Meditations (A. et T.). 



86 Objections IV 

this movement to the brain, discharge the animal spirits into the 
nerves in the manner requisite to make the sheep run off. 

One thing which I here shall add is, that I wholly approve of 
M. Descartes' teaching, relative to the distinction between the 
imagination and thought or intelligence, and of the greater certainty 
attaching to that which we grasp by the reason than to what is 
perceived by the senses. For long ago, I learned from St Augustine, 
De Animae Quantitate, ch. 15, that we must give no countenance 
to those who would persuade us that what we discern by the 
intellect is less certain than what comes by the bodily eyes, vexed 
as they ever are with rheum. Whence also, in Solil, bk. I, ch. 4, he 
says that he has found that in the matter of geometry the senses are 
like a ship. For, he says, when they had brought me to the 
destination I was making for, after I had quitted them and had 
begun on firm laud to repeat all that they had taught me, for a long 
time my footsteps tottered 1 . Wherefore, I believe that one could 
more readily learn navigation on land than understand geometry by 
the use of the senses (alone) 2 although they seem to give some help 
to us when first we begin to learn. 

Concerning God. 

The first proof of the existence of God, that unfolded by our 
author in Meditation III, falls into two parts. The former is, that 
God exists, if the idea of Him exists in me ; the second shows that 
J, in possessing this idea, can derive my existence only from God. 

In the earlier part there is only one thing that does not secure my 
approval, and that is, that though M. Descartes had asserted that 
strictly speaking falsity was to be found in judgments only, he yet 
admits shortly afterwards that ideas may be false, not formally 
indeed, but materially 3 . Now this seems to me to disagree with his 
first principles. 

But I fear I may not be able to explain my thought with 
sufficient lucidity in a matter of such obscurity ; an example will 
make it clearer. If, he says, cold is merely privation of heat, the 
idea of cold which represents it as though it were something 
positive, is false materially 3 . 

Nay, if cold is merely the privation of heat, there can be no 

1 F. V. adds ' as do the steps of those who set foot on land after a long 
voyage.' 

2 This appears in the F. V. and is not in the original Latin of St Augustine. 

3 Of. Med. in. vol. i. p. 164, par. 3. 



Objections IV 87 

idea of cold which represents it as a positive thing, and our author 
here confuses idea with judgment. 

For what is the idea of cold? It is cold itself in so far as it is 
objectively .in the understanding. But if cold is a privation, it 
cannot exist objectively in the mind by the instrumentality of an 
idea, the objective existence of which is a positive entity. Hence, 
if cold is merely privation, there can be no positive idea of it, and 
hence no idea materially false. 

This is confirmed by the argument by which M. Descartes proves 
that the idea of an infinite being cannot be otherwise than true ; 
for, although it can be pretended that such a being does not 
exist, it cannot be pretended that the idea of it displays nothing 
real to me. 

Obviously, the same may be affirmed of every positive idea. For, 
although it can be imagined that the cold, which I believe to be 
represented by a positive idea, is not positive, yet I cannot pretend 
that a positive idea represents to me nothing real and positive; since 
a positive idea is not so styled by reason of the existence it has as a 
mode of thinking (in that sense all ideas would be positive), but from 
the objective existence which it contains and displays to our intellect. 
Hence, though that idea is possibly not the idea of cold, it cannot be a 
false idea. 

But, you rejoin, its falsity consists in the very fact that it is not 
the idea of cold. Nay, it is your judgment tliat is false, if you deem 
it to be the idea of cold; but it, itself, is in itself 1 most true. 
Similarly, the idea of God should not be called false, even materially, 
though some one transfer it to something which is not God, as idolaters 



Finally, what does that idea of cold, which you say is false 
materially, represent to your mind? Privation? In that case it 
is true. A positive entity? Then it is not the idea of cold. 
Further, what is the cause of that positive objective being, which 
makes you conclude that that idea is materially false ? It is, you 
reply, myself, in so far as I participate 2 in non-existence. Therefore 
tJw positive objective existence of a certain idea may proceed from 
nothing, a conclusion which upsets the most important fundamental 
principles of M. Descartes. 

But kt us proceed now to the second part of the argument where 

1 In te A. et T. misprint for in se ? Mais pour elle, il est ce )tain qu'elle est 
tres vraye! F. V. 

2 F. V. a nihilo sum, L. V. 



SS Objections IV 

he asks, whether I myself, who possess the idea of an infinite being, 
can proceed from anything other than an infinite being, and 
especially whether I can be self-caused. M. Descartes contends 
that I cannot be self-caused owing to the fact that, if I myself had 
given myself existence, I should have given myself also all those 
perfections, the ideas of which I perceive in myself 1 . But his 
theological critic acutely replies : ' self-originated ' should be taken 
not in a positive but in a negative sense which identifies it with 
* not derived from anything else 2 .' But now, he says, if anything is 
self-derived, i.e. not due to something else, how can I prove that it 
embraces all things and is infinite ? I shall pay no heed to the 
reply that, if it is self-derived it will have given itself everything ; 
for it does not depend on itself as on a cause, nor did it anticipate 
its existence and so at a prior time choose what it should 
afterwards be 3 . 

To refute this argument, M. Descartes contends that existence 
per se should be taken not negatively but positively 4 , especially 
in so far as it refers to God. So that God in a certain sense 
stands to Himself in the same way as an efficient cause does to 
its effect. No-iv this seems to me to be a strong 5 assertion and to 
be untrue. 

Hence, while in part I agree with M. Descartes, I partly differ 
from him. I admit that I cannot be self-derived except in a positive 
sense, but I deny that the same should be said of God. Nay, I think 
that it is a manifest contradiction that anything should be positively 
self -derived in the sense of proceeding from itself as a cause. Hence 
I come to the same conclusion as our author, but by quite another 
route, as I shall here set forth : 

In order to be self-derived, I should have to proceed from myselj 
positively and in the sense of coming from myself as a cause : hence 
I cannot be self-derived. 

To prove the major premiss of this syllogism, I rely on the grounds 
of my antagonist drawn from the doctrine that, since the various 
parts of time can all be dissevered from each other, from the fact that 
I exist it does not follow that I shall in future exist, unless some 
cause, as it were, re-creates me at every single moment 6 . 

In the matter of the minor, [viz. that I cannot proceed from 
myself positively and as it were from a cause] I deem it to be so 

1 Med. in. vol. i. pp. 167, 168 (not accurately quoted). 

2 Objj. i. p. 4, par. 2. s objj. i. loc. cit. infra. 
4 pp. 15, 16 above. 5 Durum; hardy, F. V. 
6 Med. in. vol. i. p. 168. 



Objections IV 89 

evident to the light of nature that its proof would be vain, a proving 
of the known by the less hioivn. Indeed, our authw seems to -have 
acknowledged its truth, since he has not dared openly to deny it. 
Consider, I pray, those words in his reply to his theological opponent. 

I have not, so run his words, said that it is impossible for any- 
thing to be its own efficient cause : for, although that statement is 
manifestly true when the meaning of efficient cause is restricted to 
those causes that are prior to their effects or different from them, 
yet it does not seem necessary to confine the term to this meaning 
in the present investigation, for the light of nature does not require 
that the notion of an efficient cause should compel it to be prior to 
its effect 1 . 

This is excellent so far as the first part goes, but why has he 
omitted the second? Has he not omitted to add that the same light 
of nature does not require that the notion of an efficient cause should 
compel it to be different from its effect, only because the light of 
nature does not permit him to assert that ? 

Now surely, if every effect depends upon a cause and receives its 
existence from a cause, is it not clear that the same thing cannot 
depend upon itself, cannot receive its existence from itself? 

Further, every cause is the cause of an effect, every effect the effect 
of a cause; hence there is a mutual relation bet-ween cause and effect. 
But a mutual relation can be possessed only by two things. 

Again, it is merely absurd to conceive of a thing as receiving 
existence and yet possessing that wry existence before the time at 
which we conceive that it received it ; but that would be the result if 
we attributed the notions of cause and effect to the same thing in 
respect of itself. What is the notion of cause 1 The conferring of 
existence. What is the notion of effect ? The receiving of existence. 
Moreover, the notion of cause is prior in nature to that of effect. 

But we cannot conceive a thing by means of the notion of cause as 
giving existence, unless we conceive it as possessing existence. Hence 
we should have to conceive that a tiling possessed existence before 
conceiving it to receive existence; yet when anything receives, the 
receiving precedes the possessing. 

This reasoning may be otherwise couched thus: no one gives 
what he does not possess ; hence no one can give himself existence 
unless he already possess it, but, if he already possess it, why should 
he give it to himself? 

Finally, M. Descartes asserts that the light of nature lets us 



90 Objections IV 

know that the distinction between creation and conservation is 
solely a distinction of the reason 1 . But this self-same light of 
nature lets us know that nothing can create itself, and that hence 
nothing can conserve itself. 

But to pass down from the general thesis to the particular one* 
concerning God, it will now, in my opinion, be more evident that God 
can be self-derived not in the positive sense, but only negatively, 
i.e., in the sense of not proceeding from anything else. 

And firstly, it clearly follows from the premiss that M. Descartes 
advances in order to prove that if a body exists per se, it must be per 
se in the positive sense. For, he says, the several parts of time are 
not derived from one another, and hence, though that body be 
supposed to have existed up to the present time per se, i.e. without 
any cause, that will not suffice to make it exist in future, unless 
there be some power contained in it which, as it were, re-creates it 
continually 3 . 

But, far from this argument being applicable to the case of a 
supremely perfect and infinite being, the opposite rather can clearly 
be inferred, and for opposite reasons. For the idea of an infinite 
being contains within it that of infinite duration, i.e. a duration 
bounded by no limits, and hence indivisible, unchanging, and existing 
all at once ; one in which it is only erroneously and by reason of the 
imperfection of our intellect that the conception of prior and posterior 
can be applied. 

Whence it manifestly follows that the infinite Being cannot be 
thought to exist even for one moment without our conceiving at the 
same time that it always has and always will exist (a fact that our 
author himself elsewhere proves); hence it is idle to ask why it con- 
tinues in existence. 

Nay, as Augustine frequently shows (an authoi' whom none since 
the time of the sacred writers have surpassed in the worthiness and 
sublimity of ivhat they say concerning God), in God there is no past 
or future, but ahaays present existence [which clearly shows that we 
cannot without absurdity ask why God continues to exist 41 "}. 

Further, God cannot be thought to be self-derived in the positive 
sense, as if He originally brought Himself into existence, for in that 
case He would haw existed before He existed. He is said to be self- 
derived merely because, as our author frequently declares, as a fact 
He maintains Himself in existence. 

1 Med. in. vol. i. p. 168 sub Jin. 2 hypothesim, L. Y. 

3 p. 15 above. 4 Abridgement of a long clause added in F. V. 



Objections IV 91 

Yet, in the case of an infinite being, conservation must be denied 
no less than creation. Far what, pray, is conservation but the con- 
tinual reproduction of some things 1 Hence, all conservation implies 
some initial production. Another reason is that the very term 
continuation, just like that of conservation, implies something of 
potentiality. But an infinite being is pure actuality without any 



Hence, let us conclude that God cannot be conceived to be self- 
originated in the positive sense, except by reason of the imperfection 
of our intellect, that thinks of God as existing after the fashion of 
created things. This conclusion will be rendered more evident by the 
following argument. 

We seek to discover the efficient cause oj a thing only with respect 
to its existence, not with respect to its essence. For example, if I see 
a triangle, I may enquire about the efficient cause that brought this 
triangle into existence, but it will be absurd for me to ask what is the 
efficient cause by reason of which the triangle has its three angles 
equal to two right angles. The correct reply to such a question would 
not be to assign an efficient cause, but to say merely, 'because such is 
the nature of the triangle.' This is why the mathematicians, not 
concerning themselves with the existence of their objects, do not employ 
efficient and final causes in their proofs. But existence, nay, if you 
like, continuance in existence, is inwlved in the essence of an infinite 
being, no less than the equality of its three angles to two right angles 
is inwlved in that of a triangle. Therefore, just as the reply to the 
question why the triangle has its three angles equal to two right 
angles should not be in terms of an efficient cause, but the reason 
assigned should be the eternal and immutable nature of the triangle ; 
so when we ask ivhy God exists, or continues in existence, we must 
seek for no efficient cause, either within God or without Him, and for 
nothing similar to an efficient came (for my contention touches the 
thing not the name for it) : we sJwuld state as our reason this alone, 
'because such is the nature of a supremely perfect being. 7 

Hence in opposition to what M. Descartes says: the light of 
nature tells us that nothing exists about which the question, why 
it exists, cannot be asked, whether we enquire for its efficient cause, 
or, if it does not possess one, demand why it does not have one 1 , 
I reply that the answer to the question why God exists should not be 
in terms of efficient causality, but merely 'because He is God, y i.e. an 

1 Above, p. 14, 11. 11 sqq. 



92 Objections IV 

infinite Being. And when we are asked for the efficient cause of 
God, we must reply that He needs no efficient cause. And if our 
interrogate plies us with the question 'why no efficient cause is 
required, we must answer 'because He is an infinite Being, and in 
such a case existence and essence are identical' ; for wily those things, 
the actual existence of which can be distinguished from their essence, 
require an efficient cause. 

There/we the doctrine collapses that is contained in the immediately 
subsequent passage, ivhich here I quote : Hence if I did not believe 
that anything could in some way be related to itself exactly as an 
efficient cause is related to its effect, so far should I be from con- 
cluding that any first cause existed, that, on the contrary, I should 
once more ask for the cause of that which had been called first, and 
so should never arrive at the first cause of all. 

By no means ; if I thought that I must enquire for the efficient 
cause of anything whatsoever, or for something analogous to the 
efficient cause, I should seek for a cause of that given thing what- 
soever it was, different from it, because to me it is most manifest that 
nothing can in any way be so related to itself as is an efficient cause 
towards its effect. 

I think I am right in bringing this to the notice of M. Descartes 
in order that he may give careful and attentive consideration to these 
matters, because I am sure that theologians, almost 'without exception, 
must take offence at the doctrine that God is self-originated in a 
positive sense, and proceeds, as it were, from a cause. 

The only remaining scruple I have is an uncertainty as to how a 
circular reasoning is to be, awided in saying : the only secure reason 
we have for believing that what we clearly and distinctly perceive 
is true, is the fact that God exists 1 . 

But ive can be sure that God exists, only because we dearly and 
evidently perceive that ; therefore prior to being certain that God 
exists, ^ve should be certain that whatever ive clearly and evidently 
perceive is true. 

Something which had escaped me I now add, viz., that I believe 
that M. Descartes is in error, though he affirms it as certain, when 
he makes the statement that nothing can exist in him, in so far as he 
is a thinking being, of which he is not conscious 2 . By the self in so 
far as it is a thinking being, nothing more is meant than the mind, 
in so far as it is distinct from the body. But -who does not see that 

1 Med. v. vol. i. p. 183, par. 3. 

2 Med. in. vol. i. p. 169 ad init. (paraphrased). 



Objections IV 93 

muck may be in the mind, of the existence of which the mind is not 
conscious? The mind of an infant in its mother's womb possesses the 
faculty of thought without being conscious of it. There are innumer- 
able similar instances that I pass by in silence. 

Matters likely to cause difficulty to Theologians. 

Here, in order to curtail a discussion that has already grown 
wearisome, I prefer to aim at brevity and to indicate my points 
rather than to debate them in detail. 

First I am apprehensive lest offence may be caused by our 
author s free method of speculation, which renders everything 
doubtful. He does, in fact, admit in the Method 1 that this style 
of thinking is dangerous for a mediocre intelligence; I confess, 
however, that in _ the Synopsis this cause of alarm is somewhat 
mitigated. 

Nevertheless, this Meditation should appear equipped with a 
slight preface in which it is pointed out that the doubt entertained 
about these matters is not really serious, and that the intention is 
merely to set on one side for a little those matters which give rise 
to the very least and most hyperbolical 2 doubt, as our author in 
another place phrases it, in order to discover something so firm 
and steadfast that no one, however perverse in his opinions, can 
haw any doubt about it. Consequently, when it comes to the place 
at which these words appear: that since I was ignorant of the 
author of my being 3 , / deem that it would be better to write 
instead: I feigned that I was ignorant. 

In Meditation IV, which treats of the True and the False, / 
greatly desire, for reasons that it would be tedious to recount, that 
he would explain, and that, either in this Meditation itself or in 
the Synopsis, two particular matters. 

The first is why in enquiring into the cause of error, while 
treating copiously of the mistakes made in distinguishing between 
the true and the false, he does not also treat of the error that 
occurs in the pursuit of good and evil. 

For, since that former enquiry sufficiently promotes our authors 
design and object, and iv/tat is here said of tJie source of error may 
arouse the gravest objections, if it is extended to the pursuit of good 
and evil, prudence, to my mind, requires, nay, the correct order 

1 Cf. Method, vol. i. p. 90. 2 Vol. i. p. 198 subfm. 

3 Vol. i. p. 189, middle. 



94 Objections IV 

of exposition, about which our author is so careful, demands the 
omission of certain irrelevancies that may give rise to contention, 
lest the reader quarrel over inessentials and be prevented from 
perceiving what is important. 

The second point I wish to bring to our author's notice is that 
he, when he maintains that we should assent only to what we clearly 
and distinctly know, deals only with such matters as pertain to the 
sciences and fall in within the province of theory 1 ^ and not with 
those things that concern our faith, and the conduct of life ; and this 
is why he censures the rashness of the opinionative [i.e. of those who 
think they understand matters of ivhich they have no knowledge], 
but not the just persuasion of those who accept with caution what 
they beUeve. 

For there are three things in the soul of man, as &t Augustine, 
in De Utilit. Credendi, ch. 15, with great sagacity reminds -us, 
that seem to stand in close proximity to each other [and appear to 
be virtually the same thing], but which are well worthy of being 
distinguished: viz. knowing, believing, opining. 

He knows, whose comprehension of anything is based on sure 
grounds. He believes who, influenced by some strong authority, 
thinks something to be true without having sure grounds on which 
to base his comprehension. The opinionative man is he who thinks 
he understands that of which he has no knowledge. 

To be opinionative is moreover a grave fault, and that for two 
reasons : firstly, he who is convinced that he already knows is 
thereby debarred from being able to learn, if indeed the matter is 
one that can be comprehended : further, his presumption is in 
itself a sign of an ill-disposed mind. 

Hence, what we know we owe to reason ; what we believe, to 
authority ; while our mere opinions are born of error. All this 
has been said in order that we may understand how, while clinging 
to our faith in matters we do not as yet comprehend, we are 
exempt from the charge of opinionative presumption. 

For those who say that we should believe nothing that we do 
not know to be true, stand in dread only of the imputation of 
opinionativeness, for it is disgraceful and calamitous to fall into 
this error. But anyone who after serious consideration sees the 
great difference between one who fancies that he knows [what he 
does not know] and one who, understanding that he does not 

1 sub intelligentiam cadunt. 



Objections IV 95 

understand a certain matter, yet believes it owing to the influence 
of some authority, will at once feel himself freed from, the peril of 
error, the charge of an inhuman lack of assurance and the 
imputation of arrogance. 

A little later 1 St Augustine in ck. 12, adds : many arguments 
could be brought to show that nothing at all in human society 
will remain secure, if we make up our minds to believe nothing that 
we cannot regard as fully comprehended. So far St Augustine. 

M. Descartes can well enough judge how important it is to point 
out this distinction; but the many people who in these days are prone 
to impiety may make a bad use of his words, for the purpose of 
shattering the faith. 

But the chief ground of offence to theologians that I anticipate 
is that, according to M. Descartes' doctrines, the teachings of the 
Church relative to the sacred mysteries of the Eucharist cannot 
remain unaffected and intact. 

For it is an article of our faith that the substance of the bread 
passes out of the bread of the Eucharist, and that only its accidents 
remain. Now these are extension, figure, colour, odour, savour and 
the other sensible qualities. 

But M. Descartes recognizes no sense-qualities, but only certain 
motions of the minute bodies that surround us, by means of ivhich we 
perceive the different impressions to which we afterwards give the 
names of colour, savour, and odour. Hence there remain figure, 
extension and mobility. But M. Descartes denies that those powers 
can be comprehended apart from the substance in which they inhere 
and that hence they cannot exist apart from it ; and this is repeated 
in the reply to his theological critic 2 . 

Likewise he acknowledges only a formal 3 distinction between these 
affections and substance, but a formal difference seems not to allow 
things so distinguished to be sundered from each other even by the 
Divine power. 

I am confident that M. Descartes, ivhose piety is so well known to 
us, will wdgh this with diligence and attention and will judge that 
he must take the greatest pains, lest, while meaning to maintain the 
cause of God against the attacks of the impious, he appears to have 
at all endangered that faith, ivhich God's own authority has founded, 
and by the grace of which he hopes to obtain that eternal life, of 
which he has undertaken to convince the world. 

1 This must be wrong, as the previous citation refers to ch. 15. 

2 Of. above, p. 22. 3 



EEPLY TO THE FOURTH SET 
OF OBJECTIONS 1 . 

I could not possibly desire any one to examine my writings who 
could show more insight and courtesy than the opponent whose 
criticisms you have forwarded. The gentleness with which he has 
treated me lets me see that he is well-disposed both to me and to 
the cause I maintain, Yet so accurately has he reconnoitred the 
positions he attacks, so thoroughly has he scrutinized them, that I 
am confident that nothing in the rest of the field has escaped his 
keen gaze. Further so acutely has he contested the points from 
which he has decided to withhold his approval, that I have no 
apprehension lest it be thought that complaisance has made him 
conceal anything, The result is, that instead of my being disturbed 
by his objections, my feeling is rather one of gratification at not 
meeting with opposition in a greater number of places. 

REPLY TO THE FIRST- PART. 
The Nature of the Human Mind. 

I shall not take up time here by thanking my distinguished 
critic for bringing to my aid the authority of St Augustine, and 
for expounding my arguments in a way which betokened a fear 
that others might not deem them strong enough. 

I come first of all to the passage where my demonstration 
commences of how, from the fact that I knew that nothing belongs to 
my essence (i.e. to the essence of the mind alone) beyond the fact 
that I am a thinking being, it follows that in actual truth nothing 
else does belong to it 2 . That was, to be sure, the place where I 
proved that God exists, that God, to wit, who can accomplish 
whatever I clearly and distinctly know to be possible. 

1 F, V. adds 'urged by M. Arnauld, Doctor of Theology.' Then beneath is 
the title * Letter from the author to the Kev. Father Mersenne.' 

2 Above, p. 81. 



Reply to Objections IV 97 

For although much exists In me of which I am not yet conscious 
(for example in that passage I did, as a fact, assume that I was not 
yet aware that my mind had the power of moving the body, and 
that it was substantially united with it), yet since that which I do 
perceive is adequate to allow of my existing with it as my sole 
possession, I am certain that God could have created me without 
putting me in possession of those other attributes of which I am 
unaware. Hence it was that those additional attributes were 
judged not to belong to the essence of the mind. 

For in my opinion nothing without which a thing can still exist 
is comprised in its essence, and although mind belongs to the 
essence of man, to be united to a human body is in the proper 
sense no part of the essence of mind. 

I must also explain what my meaning was in saying that a real 
distinction cannot be inferred from the fact that one thing^is conceived 
apart from another by means of the abstracting action of the mind 
when it conceives a thing inadequately, but only from tJie fact that 
each of them is comprehended apart from the other in a complete 
manner, or as a complete thing 1 . 

For I do not think that an adequate knowledge of the thing is, 
in this case, required, as M. Arnauld assumes ; nay, we have here 
the difference that if any knowledge is to be adequate, it must 
embrace all the properties which exist in the thing known. Hence, 
there is none but God who knows that He has adequate cognition 
of all things. 

But a created mind actually possessed of adequate knowledge 
in many cases can never know that this is in its possession unless 
God give it a private revelation of the fact. But in order to have 
adequate knowledge of anything, it requires merely to have in 
itself a power of knowing what is adequate for that thing. And 
this can easily occur. But in order to know that he has this 
knowledge, or that God has put nothing in the thing in question 
over and above what he has knowledge of, a man's power of 
knowing would need to equal the infinite capacity of God an 
obvious absurdity. 

But now, in order to apprehend a real distinction between two 
things, we do not need to have adequate knowledge of them, unless 
we can be aware that it is adequate ; but this being unattainable, 
as has just been said, it follows that an adequate knowledge is not 
required. 

1 Above, p. 82. 
E, H. H. 7 



98 Reply to Objections IV 

Hence, when I said that to apprehend one thing apart from 
another by means of an act of abstraction on the part of the intellect 
ivhen its conceptions are inadequate^ is not sufficient, I did not think 
that it would be thence inferred that an adequate cognition was 
required for the purpose of inferring a real distinction, but merely 
a cognition which we had not, by an intellectual abstraction, 
rendered inadequate. 

It is one thing for a cognition to be entirely adequate, of which 
iact we could never be sure unless it were revealed by God ; it is 
quite another for our knowledge to have sufficient adequacy to let 
us see that we have not rendered it inadequate by an intellectual 
abstraction. 

Similarly, when I said that a thing must be comprehended in a 
complete manner, I meant not that the intellectual operation must 
be adequate, but merely that we must have a knowledge of the 
thing sufficient to let us know that it is complete. 

I thought this had been sufficiently plain from previous and 
subsequent passages alike ; for, shortly before I had distinguished 
incomplete from complete entities and had said that each single thing 
that has a really distinct existence, must be understood to be an 
entity in itself and diverse from every other 1 . 

But afterwards, preserving the same meaning as when I said 
that / understood in a complete manner what body is, I immediately 
added that / understood also that mind is something complete* ; I 
thus took 'to understand in a complete manner 3 and 'to understand 
that a thing is something complete' in one and the same sense. 

But at this point a question may justly be raised as to what I 
understand by a complete thing, and how I prove that, understanding 
tivo things to be complete in isolation from one another is sufficient to 
establish a real distinction between them. 

Therefore, to the first query I reply that by a complete thing I 
mean merely a substance endowed with those forms or attributes 
which suffice to let me recognise that it is a substance. 

For we do not have immediate cognition of substances, as has 
been elsewhere noted ; rather from the mere fact that we perceive 
certain forms or attributes which must inhere in something in 
order to have existence, we name the thing in which they exist a 
substance. 

But if, afterwards, we desired to strip that substance of those 
attributes by which we apprehend it, we should utterly destroy our 

1 Of. Eeply to Objections r. sub fin. 2 Hid. infra. 



Reply to Objections IV 99 

knowledge of it; and thus, while we might indeed apply words to it, 
they would not be words of the meaning of which we had a clear 
and distinct perception. 

I do not ignore the fact that certain suhstances are popularly 
called incomplete substances. But if they are said to be incomplete, 
because they cannot exist by themselves [and unsupported by other 
things], I confess it seems to me to be a contradiction for them to 
be substances ; i.e. for them to be things subsisting by themselves 
and at the same time incomplete, i.e. not capable of subsisting by 
themselves. But it is true that in another sense they can be called 
incomplete substances ; viz. in a sense which allows that, in so far 
.as they are substances, they have no lack of completeness, and 
merely asserts that they are incomplete in so far as they are referred 
to some other substance, in unison with which they form a single 
;self-subsistent thing [distinct from everything else]. 

Thus, the hand is an incomplete substance, when taken in 
relation with the body, of which it is a part ; but, regarded alone, 
it is a complete substance. Quite in the same way mind and body 
.are incomplete substances viewed in relation to the man who is 
the unity which together they form; but, taken alone, they are 
complete. 

For, as to be extended, divisible, possessed of figure, etc. are the 
forms or attributes by which I recognise that substance called body ; 
so, to be a knowing, willing, doubting being, etc. are the forms by 
which I recognize the substance called mind", and I know that 
thinking substance is a complete thing, no less than that which 
is extended. 

But it can nowise be maintained that, in the words of M. Arnauld, 
body is related to mind as genus is to species 1 ; for, although the 
genus can be apprehended apart from this or that specific difference, 
the species can by no means be thought apart from the genus. 

For, to illustrate, we easily apprehend figure, without thinking 
at all of a circle (although that mental act is not distinct unless we 
refer to some specific figure, and it does not give us a complete 
thing, unless it embraces the nature of the body) ; but we are 
cognisant of no specific difference belonging to the circle, unless 
.at the same time we think of figure. 

But mind can be perceived clearly and distinctly, or sufficiently 
so to let it be considered to be a complete thing without any of 
those forms or attributes by which we recognize that body is a 

1 Above, p. 82. 

72 



100 Reply to Objections IV 

substance, as I think I have sufficiently shown in the Second 
Meditation ; and body is understood distinctly and as a complete 
thing apart from the attributes attaching to the mind. 

Nevertheless M. Arnauld here urges that although a certain 
notion of myself can be obtained without a knowledge of the body, 
it yet does not thence result that this 'knowledge is complete and 
adequate, so as to make me sure that I am not in error in excluding 
the body from my essence 1 . He elucidates his meaning by taking as 
an illustration the triangle inscribed in a semicircle, which we can 
clearly and distinctly know to be right-angled, though we do not 
know, or even deny, that the square on its base is equal to the 
squares on its sides ; and nevertheless we cannot thence infer that 
we can have a [right-angled] triangle, the square on the base of 
which is not equal to the squares on the sides. 

But, as to this illustration, the example differs in many respects 
from the case in hand. 

For firstly, although perhaps a triangle may be taken in the 
concrete as a substance possessing triangular shape, certainly the 
property of having the square on the base equal to the squares on 
the sides is not a substance ; so too, neither can either of these two 
things be understood to be a complete thing in the sense in which 
Mind and Body are ; - indeed, they cannot be called things in the 
sense in which I used the word when I said that I might comprehend 
one thing (i.e. one complete thing) apart from the other, etc. 2 as is 
evident from the succeeding words Besides, I discover in myself 
faculties, etc? For I did not assert these faculties to be things, but 
distinguished them accurately from things or substances 4 . 

Secondly, although we can clearly and distinctly understand 
that the triangle in the semicircle is right-angled, without noting 
that the square on its base equals those on its sides, we yet cannot 
clearly apprehend a triangle in which the square on the base is 
equal to those on the sides, without at the same time perceiving 
that it is right-angled. But we do clearly and distinctly perceive 
mind without body and body without mind. 

Thirdly, although our concept of the triangle inscribed in the 
semicircle may be such as not to comprise the equality between the 
square on its base and those on its sides, it cannot be such that no 
ratio between the square on the base and those on the sides is held 

1 Of. above, p. 83. 2 Of. Med. vi. vol. i. p. 190, ad init. 3 Ibid, infra. 

4 For this last clause F. V. has * rather I wished to make a distinction 
between things, i.e. between substances, and the modes of these things, i.e. the 
faculties of these substances.' 



Reply to Objections IV 101 

to prevail in the triangle in question; and hence, so long as we 
remain ignorant of what the ratio is, nothing can be denied of the 
triangle other than what we clearly know not to belong to it : but 
to know this in the case of the equality of the ratio is entirely 
impossible. Now, on the other hand, there is nothing included in 
the concept of body that belongs to the mind ; and nothing in that 
of mind that belongs to the body. 

Therefore, though I said that it was sufficient to be able to 
apprehend one thing clearly and distinctly apart from another , etc., 
we cannot go on to complete the argument thus : but I clearly and 
distinctly apprehend this triangle 1 , etc. Firstly, because the ratio 
between the square on the base and those on the sides is not a 
complete thing. Secondly, because that ratio is clearly understood 
only in the case of the right-angled triangle. Thirdly, because the 
triangle itself cannot be distinctly apprehended if the ratio between 
the squares on the base and on the sides is denied. 

But now I must explain how it is that, from the mere fact that 
I apprehend one substance clearly and distinctly apart from another, 
I am sure that the one excludes the other*. 

Eeally the notion of substance is just this that which can exist 
by itself, without the aid of any other substance. No one who 
perceives two substances by means of two diverse concepts ever 
doubts that they are really distinct. 

Consequently, if I had not been in search of a certitude greater 
than the vulgar, I should have been satisfied with showing in the 
Second Meditation that Mind was apprehended as a thing that 
subsists, although nothing belonging to the body be ascribed to it, 
and conversely that Body was understood to be something sub- 
sistent without anything being attributed to it that pertains to the 
mind. And I should have added nothing more in order to prove 
that there was a real distinction between mind and body : because 
commonly we judge that all things stand to each other in respect to 
their actual relations in the same way as they are related in our 
consciousness 3 . But, since one of those hyperbolical doubts adduced 
in the First Meditation went so far as to prevent me from being sure 
of this very fact (viz. that things are in their true nature 4 exactly 
as we perceive them to be), so long as I supposed that I had no 
knowledge of the author of my being, all that I have said about 
God and about truth in the Third, Fourth and Fifth Meditations 

1 Of. above, p. 83, sub fin. 2 Of. Med. vi. vol. i, p. 190. 

3 perceptionem, L. V., pens6e, F. V. 4 juxta veritatem. 



102 Reply to Objection IV 

serves to further the conclusion as to the real distinction between 
mind and body, which is finally completed in Meditation VI. 

My opponent, however, says, / apprehend the triangle inscribed 
in the semicircle without knowing that tlie square on its base is equal 
to the squares on the sides 1 . Trne, that triangle may indeed be 
apprehended although there is no thought of the ratio prevailing 
between the squares on the base and sides ; but we can never think 
that this ratio must be denied. It is quite otherwise in the case of 
the mind where, not only do we understand that it exists apart 
from the body, but also that all the attributes of body may be 
denied of it ; for reciprocal exclusion of one another belongs to the 
nature of substances. 

There is no conflict between m^ theory and the point M. Arnauld 
next brings up, that it is no marvel if, in deducing my existence 
from the fact that I think, the idea I thus form of myself represents 
me merely a$ a thinking being 2 . For, similarly when I examine the 
nature of body I find nothing at all in it that savours of thought ; 
and there is no better proof of the distinctness of two things than ' 
if, when we study each separately, we find nothing in the one that 
does not differ from what we find in the other. 

Further, I fail to see how this argument proves too much 3 . For, 
in order to prove that one thing is really distinct from another, 
nothing less can be said, than that the divine power is able to 
separate one from the other. I thought I took sufficient care to 
prevent anyone thence inferring that man was merely a spirit that 
makes -use of a body for in this very Sixth Meditation in which I 
have dealt with the distinction between mind and body, I have at 
the same time proved that mind was substantially united with 
body; and I employed arguments, the efficacy of which in estab- 
lishing this proof I cannot remember to have seen in any other case 
surpassed. Likewise, just as one who said that a man's arm was a 
substance really distinct from the rest of his body, would not there- 
fore deny that it belonged to the nature of the complete man, and 
as in saying that the arm belongs to the nature of the complete 
man no suspicion is raised that it cannot subsist by itself, so I think 
that I have neither proved too much in showing that mind can 
exist apart from body, nor yet too little in saying that it is sub- 
stantially united to the body, because that substantial union does 
DjDt prevent the formation of a clear and distinct concept of the 

1 Of. above, p. 83, sub fin. 2 p. 84, par. 3. 

3 Objj. iv., ibid, infra. 



Reply to Objections IV 103 

mind alone as of a complete thing. Hence this differs greatly from 
the concept of a superficies or of a line, which cannot be appre- 
hended as complete things unless, in addition to length and breadth, 
depth be ascribed to them. 

Finally, the fact that the power of thinking is asleep in infants 
and in 'maniacs though not indeed extinct 1 , yet troubled should 
not make us believe that it is conjoined with the corporeal organs in 
such a way as to be incapable of existing apart from them. The 
fact that our thought is often in our experience impeded by them, 
does not allow us to infer that it is produced by them; for this 
there is not even the slightest proof. 

I do not, however, deny that the close conjunction between soul 
and body of which our senses constantly give us experience, is the 
cause of our not perceiving their real distinction without attentive 
reflection. But, in my judgment, those who frequently revolve in 
their thought what was said in the Second Meditation, will easily 
persuade themselves that mind is distinguished from body not by a 
mere fiction or intellectual abstraction, but is known as a distinct 
thing because it is really distinct. 

I make no reply to M. Arnauld's additions 2 about the immor- 
tality of the soul, because they are not in conflict with my doctrine, 
As for the matter of the souls of brutes 3 , this is not the place to 
treat the subject, and I could not, without taking in the whole of 
Physics, say more about them than in the explanations given in the 
fifth part of the discourse on Method 4 . Yet, not to pass over the 
matter altogether, I should point out that the chief thing to note 
appears to me to be that motion is impossible alike in our own 
bodies and in those of the brutes, unless all the organs or instru- 
ments are present, by means of which it can be effected in a machine. 
Hence in our very selves the mind [(or the soul)] by no means moves 
the external limbs immediately, but merely directs the subtle fluid 
styled the animal spirits 5 , that passes from the heart through the 
brain towards the muscles, and determines this fluid to perform 
definite motions, these animal spirits being in their own nature 
capable of being utilized with equal facility for many distinct actions. 
But the greater part of our motions do not depend on the mind at 
all. Such are the beating of the heart, the digestion of our food, 
nutrition, respiration when we are asleep, and even walking, singing 

1 p. 85, par. 2. 2 Il)'id. infra. * Ibid, infra, 

4 Meth. v. vol. i. pp. 115 sqq.. 5 F. V., spiritus, L. V. 



104 Reply to Objections IV 

and similar acts when we are awake, if performed without the mind 
attending to them. When a man in falling thrusts out his hand to 
save his head he does that without his reason counselling him so to 
act, but merely because the sight of the impending fall penetrating 
to his brain, drives the animal spirits into the nerves in the manner 
necessary for this motion, and for producing it without the mind's 
desiring it, and as though it were the working of a machine. Now, 
when we experience this as a fact in ourselves, why should we marvel 
so greatly if the light reflected from the body of a wolf into the eyes 
of a sheep 1 should be equally capable of exciting in it the motion 
of flight ? 

But if we wish by reasoning to determine whether any of the 
motions of brutes are similar to those which we accomplish with the 
aid of the mind, or whether they resemble those that depend alone 
upon the influxm of the animal spirits and the disposition of the 
organs, we must pay heed to the differences that prevail between 
the two classes : viz. those differences explained in the fifth part of 
the Discourse on Method, for I have been able to discover no others. 
Then it will be seen that all the actions of brutes resemble only 
those of ours that occur without the aid of the mind. Whence we 
are driven to conclude that we can recognize no principle of motion 
in them beyond the disposition of their organs and the continual 
discharge 2 of the animal spirits that are produced by the beat of 
the heart as it rarefies the blood. At the same time we shall 
perceive that we have had no cause for ascribing anything more 
to them, beyond that, not distinguishing these two principles of 
. motion, when previously we have noted that the principle depending 
solely on the animal spirits and organs exists in ourselves and in 
the brutes alike, we have inadvisedly believed that the other prin- 
ciple, that consisting wholly of mind and thought, also existed in 
them. And it is true that a persuasion held from our earliest 
years, though afterwards shown by argument to be false, is not easily 
and only by long and frequent attention to these arguments expelled 
from our belief 3 . 

Reply to the second part, concerning God. 
Up to this point I have attempted to refute M. Arnauld's argu- 
ments and to withstand his attack ; for the rest, as they are wont 
who combat with a stronger antagonist, I shall not oppose myself 
directly to his onslaught, but rather avoid the blow. 
1 Of. p. 85, sub fin. 2 a ffl uxus . 

* The F. V. paraphrases this last sentence at considerable length. 



Reply to Objections IV 105 

In this section only three points are raised ; and thcsdN 
readily admitted in the sense in which he understands them." 
I attached a different meaning to what I wrote, a meaning that 
appears to me to be also correct. 

The first assertion is that certain ideas are false mdtmnlly 1 , i.e. 
according to my interpretation, that they supply the judgment with 
material for error. But my critic, taking ideas in their formal aspect, 
contends that falsity never resides in them. 

The second is, that God is self-originated in a posit iw aeuse^ 
the sense implying as it were derivation from it cause". Here I had 
in mind merely that the reason why God requires no eilicient cause 
in order to exist, is based on something positive, to wit, the very 
immensity of God, than which nothing can bo more positive. 
M. Arnauld, however, shows that God is neither self-produced nor 
conserved by Himself by any positive activity belonging to an 
efficient cause; and this I likewise clearly aflirm. 

The third controverted statement is that nothing can- exist in 
the mind of which we are not conscious* ; which 1 in affirming held 
to refer to the acts of the mind, while it is of the mental faculties 
that he denies it. 

.But, to trace things out one by one, when lie says, //' cold he, 
merely a pr'mttion^ there- can he> no 'idea which represents that as 
something positiw, it is clear that he treats of this idea only in its 
formal aspect. For, since ideas themselves are forms, and are never 
composed of any matter, when we take them as representing some- 
thing, we regard them not In a material tjiuse \)\it formally \ but if 
we were to consider them not in so far as they represent this or that 
other thing, but in the respect in which they are operations of the 
intellect, it might be said that they were taken materially, but then 
they would have no reference to the truth or falsity of objects. 
Hence it seems to me that ideas cannot be said to be materially 
false in any other sense than that which .1 have just explained. 
Thus, whether cold be something positive or a privation, my idea of 
it does not differ ; it remains in me exactly the same as I have 
always had it. And I say that it furnishes me with material for error, 
if as a fact cold is a privation and does not possess so much reality 
as heat, because in considering either of the ideas of heat and cold 
just as I received them both from my senses, I am unable to perceive 
that more reality is revealed to me by one than by the other. 

i Of. above, p. 8G. s Of. p. 88. * Of. p, 9*2. 



106 Reply to Objections IV 

But it is not the case that I have confused judgment and idea 1 ; 
for I have stated that in the latter the falsity we find is material, 
while in the former it can only be formal. 

Moreover, when my critic asserts that the idea of cold is cold itself 
in so far as that is objectively present in the understanding*; I think 
that his distinction is of value. For, in the case of obscure and 
confused ideas, among which those of heat and cold must be enume- 
rated, it often happens that they are referred to something other 
than that of which they are in truth the ideas. Thus, if cold is 
really a privation, the idea of cold is not cold itself in so far as that 
is objectively present in the understanding, but something else which 
I wrongly take for that privation, to wit, some sensation 3 that has 
no existence outside the understanding. 

But the same does not hold of the idea of God, at least of the 
idea of Him that is clear and distinct, because it cannot be said 
that this refers to something with which it is not in conformity. 
Touching the confused ideas of the gods that idolaters fashion, 
I do not see why they cannot be said to be materially false, in 
so far as they furnish those who employ them with false judgments. 
Though indeed ideas that give the judgment little or no occasion 
for error cannot, it seems, be said with equal reason to be materi- 
ally false as those that give it much opportunity ; moreover, it is 
easy by example to show that some ideas do give much more 
occasion for error than others. For this does not exist to such 
an extent in the confused ideas fashioned by the caprice of the 
mind (such as those of false gods) as in those that the senses give 
us in a confused way, such as the ideas of heat and cold ; if indeed, 
as I said, it is true that they reveal to us nothing real. But oppor- 
tunity for error is greatest in ideas that come from the appetites of 
sense ; e.g. does not the thirst of the dropsical patient give him 
much material for error, in occasioning him to judge that the drink, 
that really will be harmful to him, will do him good ? 

But M. Arnauld asks what that idea of cold reveals to me, that 
I said was materially false. For, he says, if it reveals privation, it 
^s thereby true; if it display to him some positive entity it is not the 
idea of cold*. Quite right ; but the only reason why I call that 
idea materially false is because, since it is obscure and confused, 
I cannot decide whether it displays to me something outside my 

* Of. above p. 87, par. 5. 2 Cf . loCt eiL ar> 2 

3 a_ B Pt v< sentiment 4 CL ?oc> P 



Reply to Objections IV 107 

sensation or not ; and this is why I have an opportunity for judging 
that it is something positive, although perchance it is only a privation. 

Hence it must not be asked, what the cause is of that positive 
objective entity, from which I say it results that this idea is fake 
materially 1 ; because I do not assert that its material falsity 
proceeds from any positive entity, but merely from its obscurity, 
which, to be sure, does have something positive as its underlying 
subject, viz. the sensation itself. 

In very truth, that positive entity exists in me in so far as I am 
something real ; but the obscurity which alone causes me to think 
that that idea of the sensation of cold represents an object external 
to me, called cold, has no real cause, but arises merely from the 
fact that my nature is not in every respect perfect. 

My chief principles are in no way shaken by this objection. 
But I should have more dread lest, not having spent much time in 
reading the writings of philosophers, I might not have followed 
sufficiently their fashion of speaking, in calling ideas that give the 
judgment occasion for error materially false, unless in the first 
author on whom I have chanced, I had found the term materially 
used with the same meaning : viz. Fr. Suarez, Metaphysical Dispu- 
tations, 9, section 2, no. 4. 

Let us now turn to the chief charge my distinguished critic 
brings against me. To me, indeed, there seems to be nothing 
worthy of censure in the passage mentioned, viz. where I said that 
it is quite permissible for us to think that God in a certain sense 
stands to Himself in the same way as an efficient cause does to its 
effect 2 . For by this very statement I have denied that doctrine 
which M. Arnaukl thinks bold and untrue, viz. that God is His own 
efficient cause. In saying that in a certain sense God stood so to 
Himself] I showed that I did not think the relation to be identical 
in both cases ; and in introducing what I said with these words 
it is quite permissible for us to think, I showed that the matter could 
only be explained by the imperfection of the human understanding. 
But in the rest of what I wrote I have confirmed this at every 
point ; for at the very beginning, where I said that nothing existed 
as to the efficient cause of which we might not inquire, I added, or, if 
it does not possess an efficient cause, demand why that is awantinrf. 
The words sufficiently show that I believed something did exist 
which does not require an efficient cause. Moreover, what else 

1 Cf loe. cit, par. 6. - Of. above, p. 88, par. 2. 

3 Above, p. 14, 11. 1014. 



108 Reply to Objections IV 

could that be than God ? Shortly afterwards I said that in God 
there is such a great and inexhaustible power, that He has needed no 
assistance in order to esoist, and requires none for His preservation, 
and hence He is in a certain way the cause of His own existence 1 . 
Here the expression cause of His own existence can by no means be 
understood as efficient cause ; it merely means that the inexhaustible 
power of God is the cause or reason why He needs no cause. It 
was because that inexhaustible power, or immensity of His essence, 
is as highly positive as is possible, that I said that the reason or 
cause why God does not require a cause was a positive one. This 
I could not have affirmed of any finite thing however perfect in its 
own kind ; if it were alleged to be self-derived, this could be under- 
stood only in a negative sense, since no reason could be derived 
from its positive nature on account of which we could understand 
that it did not require an efficient cause. 

In the same way I have at all points compared the formal cause 
or reason derived from God's essential nature, which explains why 
He Himself does not need any cause in order to exist, with the 
efficient cause, without which finite things cannot exist ; consequently 
the difference between the two may be learned from my very words. 
Nor have I anywhere said that God conserves Himself by any 
positive transeunt action 2 , in the way in which created beings are 
preserved in existence by Him ; I have said merely that the im- 
mensity of the power, or essence, on account of which He needs no 
one to preserve Him in existence, is something positive. 

Therefore I can readily admit everything M. Arnauld brings 
forward in order to prove that God is not His own efficient cause, 
and that He does not conserve Himself by any transeunt action, or 
any continual reproduction of Himself; and this is the sole con- 
clusion of his argument. But, as I hope, even he will not deny 
that that immensity of power, on account of which God needs no 
cause in order to exist, is in Him something positive, and that 
nothing positive of this type could be conceived in any other thing, 
on account of which it should require no cause in order to exist ; 
and this alone was what I meant to express in saying that nothing 
could be understood to be self-derived unless in a negative sense, 
except God alone. I had no need to assume more than this, in 
order to resolve the difficulty that had been brought forward. 

But since my critic warns me with such seriousness that Theo- 

1 Above, p. 14, 11. 1014. 2 Influxus ; influence, P. V. 



Reply to Objections IV 109 

logians, almost without exception, must take offence at the doctrine 
that God is self-originated in a positive sense, and proceeds, as it 
were, from a cause, I shall explain in more detail why this fashion 
of speech is in this question exceedingly useful, and even necessary, 
and why it seems to me to be quite free from any suspicion of being 
likely to cause offence. 

I am aware that the Theologians of the Latin 1 church do not 
employ the word 'cause' in matters- of divinity, where they treat of 
the procession of persons in the Holy Trinity, and that where the 
Greeks used alnov and apx?) indifferently, they have preferred to 
employ the word prlndplum alone taken in its most general sense, 
lest from the usage anyone might infer that the Son was not so 
great as the Father. But where no such danger of error can come 
in, and the question relates to God not as a trinity but as a unity, 
I see no reason why the word cause should be so much shunned, 
especially when we have come to the point when it seems very 
useful and almost necessary to employ the term. 

No term can have a higher utility than to prove the existence 
of God ; and none can be more necessary than this if, without it, 
God's existence cannot be clearly demonstrated. 

But I think that it is manifest to all, that to consider the 
efficient cause is the primary and principal, not to say the only 
means of proving the existence of God. We shall not be able to 
pursue this proof with accuracy, if we do not grant our mind the 
liberty of asking for -an efficient cause in every case, even in that of 
God ; for with what right should we exclude God, before we have 
proved that He exists? Hence in every single case we must 
inquire whether it is derived from itself or from something else', and 
indeed by this means the existence of God may be inferred, although 
it be not expressly explained what is the meaning of anything being 
self-derived. For those who follow the guidance of the light of 
nature alone, spontaneously form here a concept common to efficient 
and formal cause alike. Hence, when a thing is derived from some- 
thing else it is derived from that as from an efficient cause; but 
what is self-derived comes as it were from a formal cause ; it results 
from having an essential nature which renders it independent of an 
efficient cause. On this account I did not explain that matter in 
my Meditations, assuming that it was self-evident. 

But when those who are accustomed to judge in accordance 

1 Latinos Theologos ; nos Theologiens, F. V. 



110 Reply to Objections IV 

with the notion that nothing can he its own efficient cause, and are 
familiar with the accurate distinction hetween formal and efficient 
cause, see the question raised whether anything is self-derived, it 
easily follows that, taking that to apply only to the efficient cause 
properly so styled, they think that the expression self-derived should 
not be held to mean derived from itself as from a cause, hut merely 
in a negative sense and as not having a cause ; and so consequently 
it results that the existence of something is implied, into the cause 
of the existence of which we ought not to inquire. But if this 
interpretation of self -derived were admitted, there would be no 
reason by which to prove God's existence from His effects, as was 
shown correctly by the author of the first Objections ; hence we 
must on no account sanction it. 

But in order to reply expressly to this, let me say that I think 
we must show that, intermediate between efficient cause, in the 
proper sense, and no cause, there is something else, viz. the positive 
essence of a thing, to which the concept of efficient cause can be 
extended in the way in which in Geometry we are wont to extend 
the concept of a circular line, that is as long as possible, to that of 
a straight line ; or the concept of a rectilinear polygon with an 
indefinite number of sides to that of a circle. I see no better way 
of explaining this than in saying, as I did, that the meaning of 
efficient cause was in the present investigation not to be confined to 
those causes which are prior in time to their effects, or different from 
them ; in the first place because the question (whether a thing can be 
its own efficient cause) would be unmeaning, since no one is unaware 
that the same thing cannot be prior to or different from itself; 
secondly because the former of these two conditions can be omitted 
from the concept without impairing the integrity of the notion of 
efficient cause 1 . 

For the fact that the cause need not be prior in time is evident 
from its not having the character 2 of a cause except while it 
produces its effect, as I have said. 

But from the fact that the second condition cannot also be 
annulled, we may only infer that it is not an efficient cause in the 
proper sense of the term, which I admit. We cannot, however, 
conclude that it is in no sense a positive cause, which may be held 
to be analogous to an efficient cause and this is all that my argu- 
ment requires. For by the very light of nature by which I perceive 

1 Cf. above, pp. 14, 89. 2 rationem ; le noin et la nature, F. V. 



Reply to Objections IV 111 

that I should have given myself all the perfections of which I have 
any idea, if I had indeed given myself existence, I am aware also 
that nothing can give itself existence in that way which is implied 
by the meaning to which we restrict the term efficient cause, viz. in 
a way such that the same thing, in so far as it gives itself being, is 
different from itself in so far as it receives being ; for to be the 
same thing and not the same thing, i.e. a different thing, is a 
contradiction. 

Thus it comes that when the question is raised whether anything 
can give itself existence, this must be understood merely to mean 
whether anything has a nature or essence such that it does not 
need to have any efficient cause in order to exist. 

When the statement is added that if anything w such it will 
gire itself all the perfections of -which it has any idea^ if indeed it 
does not as yet pomss them\ the meaning is that it cannot fail to 
have in actuality all the perfections that it knows, because by the 
light of nature we perceive that a thing, the essence of which is so 
limitless that it does not stand in need of an efficient cause in order 
that it may exist, does not require an efficient cause either, in order 
to possess all the perfections of which it is aware, and that its own 
essential nature gives to it eminently 2 whatever we can tlriuk that 
an efficient cause is able to bestow on anything else. 

These words also, -it will (fwe them to itself] if it dt#s not as yet 
jMAsm- them, are merely explanatory. For the same light of nature 
lets us know that the tiling does not at the present moment have 
the power and desire to give itself anything new, but that its 
essential nature is such that from all eternity it is in possession of 
everything which we can imagine it would bestow on itself if it did 
not already possess it. 

Nevertheless, all the above forms of expression which are derived 
from the analogy of efficient causation are highly necessary in order 
to guide the light of nature so as to give us a clear comprehension 
of those matters ; they are exactly parallel to the way in which 
Archimedes, by comparing the sphere and other curvilinear figures 
with rectilinear figures, demonstrates of the former properties that 
could hardly otherwise be understood. And, just as no exception 
is taken to such proofs, though they make UK regard the sphere as 
similar to a polyhedron, so, in my opinion, I cannot here be blamed 
for using the analogy of efficient causality in order to explain 

1 p. 88, par. 1 (not quoted exactly). a Eminentcr. 



112 Reply to Objections IV 

matters that appertain to the formal cause, i.e. to the very essence 
of God. 

Nor can any danger of error be apprehended at this point, since 
that single feature peculiar to an efficient cause and incapable of 
being extended to the formal cause involves a manifest contra- 
diction, and hence such a thought can be entertained by no one, 
viz. that anything should be different from itself, i.e. the same 
thing and not the same thing. 

We must mark here, too, that my language ascribes to God the 
dignity implied by the word cause in a way that does not require 
that He should have the imperfection * attached to being an effect. 
For, exactly as Theologians, though styling the Father the origi- 
nating principle 2 of the Son, do not on that account admit that the 
Son is something originated' 3 , so, though admitting that God is, in 
a sense, His own cause, I have nevertheless nowhere called him 
similarly His own effect; for, in truth, effect is used chiefly when 
speaking of an efficient cause and is regarded as of inferior 4 nature 
to it, though often higher than other causes. 

Moreover, in taking the entire essence of a thing as its formal 
cause here, I merely follow the footsteps of Aristotle. For in Post. 
Anal. Bk n. ch. 11, after passing over the material cause, he names 
as a Ma 5 primarily TO ri yv elvat 6 , or, as it is rendered in philosophical 
Latin, the formal cause ; and he extends this to all the essential 
natures of all things, since at that point he is not treating of the 
causes of a physical compound (as neither do I in this place), but 
generally of the causes from which knowledge of any kind may be 
derived. 

But it can be shown that it was hardly possible for me to refrain 
in this inquiry from ascribing to God the character of a cause, from 
the fact that, though my distinguished critic has tried to perform 
in another way the same task as I undertook, he has quite failed in 
his attempt, at least, as it appears to me. For after taking many 
words to show that God is not His own efficient cause, because the 
concept of an efficient cause requires diversity between it and its 
effect, after showing that God is not self-originated in the positive 
sense (where positive is taken to imply the positive transeunt action 
of a cause), after likewise maintaining that God does not conserve 
Himself in the sense in which conservation means the continuous 



* indignitas, V. L. 2 principium, 



principiatum. 4 ignobilior. 

cause. 6 a thing's essential nature. 



Eeply to Objections IV 113 

production of a tiling, all of which contentions I gladly admit; after 
all this he once more hastens to prove that God should not be called 
the efficient cause of Himself, because we seek to discover the efficient 
cause of a thing only with respect to its existence and not at all with 
respect to its essence. But existence is involved in the essence of an 
infinite being, no less than the equality of its angles to two right 
angles is involved in that of a triangle. Therefore when we asJc why 
God exists, we must not attempt to reply by assigning an efficient 
cause any more than we should do if asked why the triangle has its 
three angles equal to two right angles 1 . But this syllogism can easily 
be manipulated so as to tell against its author ; thus, although we 
do not enquire for an efficient cause with respect to a thing's essence, 
nevertheless we can do so with regard to its existence ; but in God 
essence and existence are not distinguished ; hence we may enquire 
about the efficient cause of God. 

But in order to reconcile those two matters, we should reply to 
the question as to why God exists, not indeed by assigning an 
efficient cause in the proper sense, but only by giving the essence ; 
of the thing or formal cause, which, owing to the very fact that 
in God existence is not distinguished from essence, has a strong 
analogy with the efficient cause, and may on this ground be called 
similar to an efficient cause. 

Finally, M. Arnauld adds that when we are asked for the efficient 
cause of God, we must reply that He needs no efficient cause. And 
if our interrogator plies us with the question why no efficient cause is 
required, ive must ansiver, 'because He is an infinite Being, and in 
such a case existence and essence are identical*, for only those things^ 
the existence of which can be distinguished from their essence require 
an efficient cause! He thinks that this overthrows my contention 
that if I did not believe that anything could in some way be related 
to itself exactly as an efficient cause is related towards its affect, in 
enquiring into the causes of things I should never arrive at a jirst 
came of all 9 . But to me it seems that this reasoning is neither 
overthrown nor in any way shaken or enfeebled. The main force 
not only of my argument but of all demonstrations that may be 
brought up to prove the existence of God from the effects that flow 
from Him, depends on this. Moreover, there is no argument ad- 
vanced by practically any theologian that is not based on the effects 
of God's causality. 

1 Of. above, p. 91 (abridged). 2 Cf. p. 92, par. 1. 
8 Cf. ibid, infra (abridged). 

E. H. II. 8 



114 Reply to Objections IV 

Therefore, far from making intelligible the proof of God's existence, 
when he does not permit us to assign to the relation He has towards 
Himself the analogy of efficient causation, it is rather the case that 
M. Arnauld prevents his reader from understanding it, especially at 
the end, where he draws the conclusion -.that if he thought he must 
enquire for the efficient cause of anything whatsoever, or for something 
analogous to the efficient cause, he would seek for as cause of that given 
thing ^ whatsoever it was, something that was different from it. For 
how could those who have not as yet known God enquire into 
the efficient cause of other things, in order thus to arrive at the 
knowledge of God, unless they believed that it was possible to 
enquire for the efficient cause of everything whatsoever ? And how 
could they make God, as being the first cause, the end of their 
investigation if they thought that things must in all cases have 
a cause distinct from themselves? 

My opponent here seems to act as if (following Archimedes, who, 
in speaking about the properties he has demonstrated of the sphere, 
taking it as analogous to rectilinear figures inscribed within it, had 
said : ' If 1 imagined that the sphere could not be taken for a recti- 
linear figure or as after the fashion of a rectilinear figure with an 
infinite number of sides, I should attach no force to this proof, 
because properly it holds not of the sphere as a curvilinear figure, 
bub applies to it merely as a rectilinear figure with an infinite 
number of sides'); it seems, I repeat, as if, at once unwilling to 
take the sphere in this way, but at the same time desirous of 
retaining the proof of Archimedes, he said : ' If I thought that the 
conclusion here drawn must be judged to be true of a rectilinear 
figure with an infinite number of sides, I should not admit that it 
holds good of the sphere, because I know quite certainly that the 
sphere is by no means a rectilinear figure. 3 But so saying he could 
not arrive at the same result as Archimedes, but on the contrary, 
would quite prevent himself and others from properly understanding 
the proof. 

I have pursued this topic at somewhat greater length than the 
subject demanded, in order to prove that it is a matter of great 
anxiety to me to prevent anything from appearing in my writings 
capable of giving just offence to theologians. 

Finally, to prove that I have not argued in a circle in saying, 
that the only secure reason we have for believing that what we clearly 
and distinctly perceive is true, is the fact that God exists; but that 
clearly we can be sivre that G-od exists only because we perceive that 1 , 

1 p. 92, parr. 6 and 7. 



Reply to Objections IV 115 

I may cite the explanations that I have already given at sufficient 
length in my reply to the second set of Objections, numbers 3 and 4. 
There I distinguished those matters that in actual truth we clearly 
perceive from those we remember to have formerly perceived. For 
first, we are sure that God exists because we have attended to the 
proofs that established this fact ; but afterwards it is enough for us 
to remember that we have perceived something clearly, in order to 
be sure that it is true ; but this would not suffice, unless we knew 
that God existed and that he did not deceive us. 

The fact that nothing can exist in the mind, in so far as it is 
a thinking thing, of which it is not conscious 1 , seems to me self- 
evident, because we conceive nothing to exist in it, viewed in this 
light, that is not thought, and something dependent on thought; 
for otherwise it would not belong to the mind, in so far as it is 
a thinking thing. But there can exist in us no thought of which, 
at the very moment that it is present in us, we are not conscious. 
Wherefore I have no doubt that the mind begins to think at the 
same time as it is infused into the body of an infant, and is at the 
same time conscious of its own thought, though afterwards it does 
not remember that, because the specific forms of these thoughts do 
not live in the memory. 

But it has to be noted that, while indeed we are always in 
actuality conscious of acts or operations of the mind, that is not 
the case with the faculties or powers of mind, except potentially. 
So that when we dispose ourselves to the exercise of any faculty, if 
the faculty reside in us, we are immediately actually conscious of 
it ; and hence we can deny that it exists in the mind, if we can 
form no consciousness of it. 

Reply relative to those matters likely to cause difficulty 
to Theologians. 

Whilst I have combated M. Arnanld's first objections and have 
avoided any collision with his second, I am quite willing to agree to 
the next set of criticisms, except in the case of the final one ; and 
here I hope without great difficulty to get him himself to yield his 
assent to me. 

Hence I quite admit that what is found in the first Meditation 
and even in the others is not suited to the capacity of every under- 
standing, and this I have avouched on every possible occasion and 

1 Of. p. 93, tub fin. 

82 



116 Reply to Objections IV 

always shall proclaim. This was the reason why I did not discuss 
the same matters in the Discourse on Method, which was written 
in French, hut reserved them for the Meditations which, I announced,, 
should be read only by intellectual and educated persons. No one 
should say that I had better, have refrained from penning matters, 
the reading of which many people ought to avoid ; for I believe 
these things to be necessary to such an extent, that nothing stable or 
firm in philosophy can, I am convinced, be ever established without 
them. And though fire and steel may not be handled without 
danger by children or careless people, yet they are so important for 
life that no one thinks that we should for the above reason do 
without them. 

Now, as to the fact that in the fourth Meditation I treated only 
ojf the mistakes made in distinguishing between the true and the false, 
but not of the error that occurs in the pursuit of good and evil 1 , and 
touching the fact tJiat I always excluded those things that concern our 
faith and the conduct of life, when I asserted that we should assent 
only to what we clearly and distinctly know; with these two facts. 
the whole context of my works manifests agreement. I explained 
this also expressly in my reply to the second set of Objections, 
no. 5 3 j and I set it forth also in the Synopsis. I make this 
statement in order to show how much value I attach to M. Arnauld's- 
judgment and how much I esteem his advice. 

The remaining matter is the Sacrament of the Eucharist. 
M. Arnauld believes that my doctrines are in conflict with this, 
because it is an article of our faith that the substance of the bread 
passes out of the bread of the Eucharist, and that only its accidents' 
remain* ; further he believes that I recognise no real accidents, but 
only modes which cannot be comprehended apart from the substance 
in ivhich they inhere, and hence cannot exist apart from it*. 

But I have no difficulty in parrying this objection when I say 
that I have never as yet denied the existence of real accidents. 
For, though in the Dioptric and the work on Meteors I did not 
employ them in explaining the matters of which I treated, never- 
theless, in the Meteors, p. 164, I expressly said that I did not deny 
their reality. But in these Meditations, while I assumed indeed 
that I was as yet unaware of their existence, I did not on that 
account deny their reality. For the analytic style of composition 
which I adopted allows us sometimes to make certain assumptions 

1 Gf. above, p. 93. a Of. above, pp. 48, 44. 

3 p. 95, par. 5. , f Ibid, infra, (abridged). 



Reply to Objections IV 117 

without their being as yet sufficiently investigated, as was evident 
in the first Meditation, in which I provisionally assumed many 
doctrines that I afterwards refuted. Further, it was not my purpose 
at this point to formulate any doctrine about the nature of acci- 
dents ; I simply brought forward what seemed at a preliminary 
.survey to be true of them. Finally, from the fact that I alleged 
that modes could not be conceived apart from some substance in 
which they inhered, it should not be inferred that I deny that they 
can be held apart from it by the divine power, because I firmly hold 
and believe that God is able to accomplish many things that we are 
incapable of comprehending. 

But I shall here express myself more frankly and shall not 
conceal the fact that I am convinced that the only thing by which 
our senses are stimulated is that superficies which forms the boundary 
of the dimensions of the perceived body. For contact takes place 
only at the surface. Likewise, not I alone, but practically all 
philosophers along with Aristotle himself, affirm that no sense is 
.stimulated otherwise than by contact. Thus, for example, bread or 
wine cannot be perceived except in so far as its surface is in contact 
with the organ of sense, either immediately or by the mediation of 
air or other bodies, as I believe, or as many philosophers allege, by 
the intervention of c intentional forms V 

But we must note that we should not form our idea of that 
surface merely from the external figure of bodies that is felt by the 
fingers ; we should take into account also those tiny crevices that 
are found between the minute grains of the flour of which the bread 
is composed, as well as between the particles of spirit, water, vinegar 
and lees or tartar that combine or constitute the wine, and so in 
the case of the particles of other bodies also. For, as a fact, these 
particles, possessing diverse figures and motions are never so closely 
united with each other as not to leave many interstices between 
them, which are not vacant, but filled with air or some other 
material. Thus in bread we can see with the naked eye fairly large 
spaces, which may be filled not merely with air, but with water, 
wine and other liquids. But since the bread remains always self- 
identical, although the air or other material contained in its pores 
changes, it is clear that these things do not belong to its substance ; 
hence we see that its surface is not that superficies that traces the 

1 mediantibus speciebus inteutionalibus the theory that the * form ' or 
sensible character of the object propagated copies of itself through the medium 
and that those alone were directly perceived. 



118 Reply to Objections IV 

briefest outline round it, but that which immediately envelopes its 
separate particles. 

We must likewise observe that not only does the whole of this 
superficies move when the whole piece of bread is transferred from 
one place to another, but that it also has a partial movement, as 
happens when some of the particles of bread are set in motion by 
the entrance of air or other bodies into its pores. Hence, if there 
are any bodies such that any or all of their parts are in continual 
motion (which I think holds of many of the constituent parts of 
bread and in the case of all the particles in wine), we must believe 
that the superficies of these things are continually in some sort of 
motion. 

Finally, we must note that, by the superficies of bread or of 
wine or of any other body, is meant not any part of their substance, 
nor indeed any part of the quantity of the body, nor even a part of 
the circumjacent bodies, but merely that limit which is conceived 
to lie between the single particles of a body and the bodies that 
surround it, a boundary which has absolutely none but a modal 
reality 1 . 

But now, since contact is effected at this boundary alone and 
nothing is perceived unless by contact, it is clear that from the 
single statement that the substance of the bread and wine is changed 
into the substance of some other body in such a way that this new 
substance is entirely contained within the same limits as those 
within which the other substances previously were, or in precisely 
the same place as that in which the bread and wine previously 
existed, or rather (since these boundaries are continually moving) 
in that in which they would exist if they were present, it necessarily 
follows that that new substance would act on our senses in entirely 
the same way as that in which the bread and wine would act, if no 
transubstantiatiou had occurred. 

Moreover, it is the teaching of the Church in the Council of 
Trent, session 13, canons 2 and 4, that the whole substance of the 
bread is changed into the substance of the body of Christ our Lord, 
while only the semblance of the bread remains unaltered. Here I do 
not see what can be meant by the appearance of the bread, except 
that superficies which intervenes between its single particles and 
the bodies surrounding them. 

For, as has already been said, it is at this superficies alone that 
contact occurs ; and Aristotle himself supports us in saying that 
1 entitatem. 



Reply to Objections IV 119 

not only that sense which is in special called touch, but the other 
senses also perceive by touching : De Anima, Book in. chap. 13 : 

KCLL rd aAAa. aio-@Y)TijpLa dc/)rj aicrOoLveraL. 

Further, there is no one who thinks that here by species is 
meant anything else than exactly what is required for acting on the 
senses. There is no one, too, who believes in the conversion of the 
bread into the body of Christ, that does not at the same time 
believe that this body of Christ is accurately comprised within that 
superficies beneath which the bread, if it were present, would be 
found ; and this even though it is not there in the proper sense of 
being in a place, but sacramentally and with that form of existence 
'which, though we have a difficulty in expressing it in words, yet when 
our thought is illumined by faith, we can still believe to be possible with 
God, and ought always firmly so to believe. Now, all these matters 
are so conveniently and correctly explained by my principles that 
not only have I nothing here to fear in the way of giving the 
slightest cause of offence to orthodox theologians, but on the con- 
trary I confidently anticipate reaping gratitude from them, because 
in my Physics I propound those doctrines which agree with Theology 
much better than the common opinions. As a matter of fact, never, 
to my knowledge at least, has the Church in any passage taught 
that the semblances 1 of the wine and bread that remain in the 
Sacrament of the Eucharist are real accidents of any sort which, 
when the substance in which they inhered is removed, miraculously 
subsist by themselves. 

But 2 perhaps because the theologians who first tried to explain 
this matter in a philosophical way were so firmly convinced that 
the accidents that stimulate our senses are something real and 
distinct from substance, that they did not even remark that doubt 
might in conceivable circumstances be cast on their opinion; the 
semblances 1 manifested by the bread were likewise believed by 
them without any scrutiny or valid reason to be real accidents of 
this kind. Thenceforward, they were wholly taken up with explain- 
ing how the accidents could exist without their subject. But here 
they found such difficulty that (like wayfarers who have arrived 
among thickets that seem to offer no clear thoroughfare) from the 
difficulty of the situation alone they were bound to infer that they 
had wandered from the straight road. 

1 Species. 

8 The whole of what follows up to p. 122 appeared only in the second 
edition of the Objections. 



120 Reply to Objections IV 

For, firstly they seem to contradict themselves ; at least those 
.do who admit that all sense-perception is effected by contact, when 
they suppose that in objects something other than the various 
disposition of their superficies is required for the purpose of stimu- 
lating the senses ; for it is self-evident that in order to effect 
contact surface alone is necessary. Those, on the other hand, who 
do not make the above admission are unable to describe what 
happens with any appearance of verisimilitude. 

Further, the human mind is unable to think that the accidents 
,of bread are realities and yet exist apart from the substance of the 
bread, without thinking of them after the fashion of a substance. 
Hence there seems to be a contradiction in believing with the 
Church that the whole substance of the bread is changed, and 
meanwhile thinking that something real remains, which previously 
was in the bread, for nothing real can be conceived to remain, 
, except what subsists, and though it is called an accident, we never- 
theless conceive it as a substance. Hence, in reality, it is the same 
as to say that while indeed the whole of the substance of the bread 
is changed, there yet remains that part of its substance that is 
called a real accident, and this, if not verbally, is at any rate in 
thought a contradiction. 

, And this seems to be the chief reason why certain people have 
at this point disagreed with the Roman Church. Does anyone not 
believe that when we are free to choose, and there is no reason, 
either theological or indeed philosophical, compelling us to embrace 
: certain particular opinions, we should most readily select those 
beliefs that can give others no opportunity or pretext for turning 
aside from the truth of the faith ? But I think I have here shown 
with sufficient clearness that the doctrine that assumes the existence 
of real accidents does not harmonize with theological reasoning; 
that it is wholly in conflict with philosophical thought I hope 
.clearly to demonstrate in a treatise on the principles 1 of philosophy 
on which I am now engaged. Then I shall show how colour, savour, 
.weight and whatever else stimulates the sense, depend wholly upon 
the exterior surface of bodies. 

Finally, if we assume the existence of real accidents, it follows 
that by the. miracle of transubstantiation, which alone can be 
inferred from the words of consecration, something new and indeed 
incomprehensible is gratuitously added, something that permits 

1 in summ& philosopMae. 



Reply to Objections IV 121 

those real accidents to exist apart from the substance of the bread, 
without themselves in the meantime being substances. But this 
not only conflicts with human reason, but also with the theological 
axiom that says that the words of consecration effect nothing 
beyond what they signify; the theologians refuse to assign to 
miraculous causes what can be explained by the natural reason. 
But my explanation of the matter removes all their difficulties. 
For, far from its postulating some miraculous agency in order to 
explain the conservation of the accidents after the substance is 
removed, it refuses to admit that without a new miracle (such as 
might alter the dimensions in question) could they be annulled. 
History tells us that such an event has happened and that at such 
times the priest has found in his hand flesh or a tiny child. But 
this confirms my contention, for it has never been believed that 
what happened was due to a cessation of the miracle ; it has always 
been ascribed to a new miracle. 

Besides this, there is nothing incomprehensible or difficult in 
the idea of God, the creator of all things, being able to change one 
substance into another, and the second substance remaining com- 
prised within the same superficies as that which bounded the 
former. For nothing can be more consonant with reason, no state- 
ment better received in the general ranks of the philosophers, than 
the assertion that not only all sensation, but generally all action of 
body on body, is effected by contact, and that this contact can 
occur only at the surface. Whence it evidently follows that the 
.same substance, whatever be the change in the substance that lies 
beneath it, must always act and be acted on in the same way. 

Wherefore, if I here may speak the truth freely and without 
offence, I avow that I venture to hope that a time will some day 
come when the doctrine that postulates the existence of real acci- 
dents will be banished by theologians as being foreign to rational 
thought, incomprehensible, and causing uncertainty in the faith ; 
and mine will be accepted in its place as being certain and indubit- 
able. I have purposely made no concealment here, in order that 
I may combat to the best of my ability the calumnies of those who, 
wishing to be thought more learned than others, are never so much 
enraged as when some new scientific doctrine, of which they cannot 
pretend they previously had knowledge, is brought forward. Fre- 
quently, their opposition is more bitter in proportion as they believe 
that the doctrine is true and important, and when unable to refute 
it by argument, they maintain without a shadow of reason that it 



122 Reply to Objections IV 

is contrary to Holy Scripture and the verities of the faith '. This- 
truly is impiety to attempt to employ the authority of the Church 
in order to overthrow the truth 2 . But I appeal from such people 
to the judgment of pious and orthodox theologians, to whose: 
opinion and decision I willingly submit myself. 

1 This is abridged in the F. V. 

2 This sentence is not in the F. V. 



ANNOUNCEMENT BY THE AUTHOR 
RELATIVE TO THE FIFTH SET OF 
OBJECTIONS 1 . 

BEFORE the appearance of the first edition of these Meditations" 
I wished to have them examined not only by the learned Doctors* 
of the Sorbonne, but also by all other men of science who should 
care to take the trouble of reading them. I thus hoped that by 
causing these objections and my replies to be printed as a con- 
tinuation of the Meditations, each in the order in which they were 
composed, I should thereby render the truth much more evident. 
And though the objections that were sent to me fifth in order did 
not appear to me to be the most important and are very lengthy, I 
did not fail to have them printed in their proper order, so as not to 
disoblige their author. I likewise caused him to be furnished with 
a proof of the impression lest anything should be set down as his, of 
which he did not approve. But as he has since composed a work 
of great size 3 , containing these same objections, together with several 
new counter-arguments or answers to my replies, and since he there 
complains of me for having published them, as if I had done so 
against his wishes, and says that he sent them to me only for my 
private instruction, I shall henceforth gladly comply with his desire 
and so relieve this volume of their presence. This was the reason 
why, on learning that M. Clerselier was taking the trouble to 
translate the other Objections, I begged him to omit these latter 
ones. And in order that he may have no cause to regret their 
absence, I have to inform the reader at this place that I have lately 
read them a second time, and that I have read also all the new 
counter-arguments in the huge volume containing them, with the 

1 In the first French edition of the Meditations with Objections and Beplies, 

2 i.e. the Latin edition of 1641, 

3 Petri Gassendi, Disquisitio metaphytica, Amsterdam, 1641 



124 Announcement 

purpose of extracting thence all the points I should judge to stand 
in need of a reply ; but I have heen unable to discover one, to 
which, in my opinion, those who have at all understood the meaning 
of my Meditations will not be able to reply without any aid from 
me. As to those who judge books only by their size or by their 
title, I have no ambition to secure praise from them. 



LETTER FROM M. DESCARTES 
TO M. CLERSELIER 

TO SEKVE AS A REPLY TO A SOLUTION OP THE 
PRINCIPAL OBJECTIONS TAKEN BY M. GASSENDI 
TO THE PRECEDING REPLIES 1 . 



January, 1646.] 

Sin, 

I owe you a deep debt of gratitude for noticing that I have 
neglected to reply to the huge volume of hostile arguments which 
the Author of the fifth set of Objections has composed in answer to 
my Replies, and for having asked some of your friends to extract 
the strongest arguments from this book, as well as for sending me 
the selection 2 which they have made. In this you have shown 
more anxiety for my reputation than I myself possess ; for I assure 
you that to me it is a matter of indifference whether I am esteemed 
or contemned by the people with whom such arguments have weight, 
Those of my friends who have read his book, and the best heads 
among them, have declared to me that they have found nothing 
in it to arrest their attention ; now I am content to have satisfied 
them alone. I know that the greater part of mankind seize on 
appearance more readily than on the truth, judge wrongly more 
frequently than aright. This is why I hold that their approval 
is not worth the trouble I should incur in doing all that might 
be required in order to secure it But none the less I am pleased 
with the selection you have sent me, and I feel myself obliged 
to reply to it, more in order to express my gratitude to your friends 
for their trouble, than because I need to defend myself. For I 
believe that those who have taken the trouble to make it must 

1 i.e. to the Replies to Objections V, 

3 This 1 selection is not extant. MM, Adam et Tannery refer their readers 
to the index (which they print) of Gassendi's Di^mitlo metaphysics 



126 Letter from Descartes 

now believe, as I do, that all the objections that this book contains 
are founded solely on the misunderstanding of certain terms or 
on certain false suppositions. But though all the objections they 
have remarked on are of that sort, yet they have been so diligent as 
even to have added certain ones which I do not remember to have 
previously read. 

They notice three criticisms directed against the first Medi- 
tation : 1. That I demand an impossibility in desiring the abandon- 
ment of every kind of prejudice. 2. That in thinking one has given 
up every prejudice one acquires other beliefs of a still mwe prejudiced 
kind. 3. That the method I have proposed of doubting everything 
does not promote the discovery of any single truth. 

The first of these criticisms is due to the author of this book 
not having reflected that the word prejudice does not apply to all 
the notions in our mind, of which it is impossible for us to divest 
ourselves, but only to all those opinions our belief in which is 
a result of previous judgments. And since judging or refraining 
from judgment is an act of the will, as I have explained in the 
appropriate place, it is evident that it is under our control ; for in 
order to rid one's self of all prejudice, nothing needs to be done 
except to resolve to affirm or deny none of the matters we have 
previously affirmed or denied, unless after a fresh examination. 
But yet we do not on that account cease to retain all these same 
notions in the memory. Nevertheless I have said that there was 
a difficulty in expelling from our belief everything that had been 
put there previously, partly because we need to have some reason 
for doubting before determining to do so ; it was for this cause that 
I propounded the chief reasons for doubting in my first Meditation. 
Another source also of the difficulty is that whatever be the 
resolution we have formed of denying or affirming nothing, it is 
easy to forget, if we have not impressed it firmly on the memory ; 
and this was why I recommended that this should be thought of 
earnestly. 

The second objection is nothing but a manifest falsity; for 
though I said that we must even compel ourselves to deny the 
things we had previously affirmed with too great assurance, I 
expressly limited the period during which we should so behave 
to the time in which we bend our thought to the discovery of 
something more certain than what we had been able thus to deny: 
and during this time it is evident that we could not entertain any 
belief of a prejudicial character. 



to Clerselier 127 

The third criticism is mere cavilling. True, mere doubt alone 
does not suffice to establish any truth ; but that does not prevent 
it from being useful in preparing the mind for the subsequent 
establishment of truth. This is the sole purpose for which I have 
-employed it. 

Your friends mark six objections to Meditation II. The first is 
that in the statement, / think, hence I exist, the author of these 
criticisms will have it that I imply the assumption of this major 
premiss, he who thinks, exists, and that I have thus already espoused 
A prejudice. Here he once more mishandles the word prejudice : 
for though we may apply this term to that proposition when it is 
brought forward without scrutiny, and we believe it merely because 
we remember we have made this same judgment previously, we 
cannot maintain on every occasion that it is a prejudice, i.e. when 
we subject it to examination, the cause being that it appears to be 
so evident to the understanding that we should fail to disbelieve it 
even on the first occasion in our life on which it occurred to us, on 
which occasion it would not be a prejudice, But the greater error 
here is our critic's assumption that the knowledge of particular 
truths is always deduced from universal propositions in consonance 
with the order of the sequence observed in the syllogism of dialectic. 
This shows that he is but little acquainted with the method by 
which truth should be investigated. For it is certain that in order 
to discover the truth we should always start with particular notions, 
in order to arrive at general conceptions subsequently, though we 
may also in the reverse way, after having discovered the universals, 
deduce other particulars from them. Thus in teaching a child the 
elements of geometry we shall certainly not make him understand 
the general truth that 'when equals are taken from equals the 
remainders are equal] or that c the whole is greater than its parts,' 
unless by showing him examples in particular cases. For want of 
^Xjrding against this error our author has been led astray into the 
manyjSrfJfligjpus reasonings which have gone to swell his book. He 
has merely constructed false major premisses according to his whim, 
as though I had deuced from these the truths I have explained. 

The second objection which your friends remark is : that, in 
order to know that I 'think, I must know what thought is; which 
I certainly do not know\ they say, because I have denied everything. 
But I have denied nothW but prejudices, and by no means notions 
like these, which are knowK^ without any affirmation or denial. 
Thirdly : Thought cannon-Jack an object, for example the body. 



128 Letter from Descartes 

Here we must keep clear of the ambiguity in the word thought it 
can be taken either for the thing that thinks or for that thing's- 
activity. Now I deny that the thing that thinks needs any object 
other than itself in order to exercise its activity, though it can also* 
reach out to material things when it examines them. 

Fourthly : Even though I have a thought of myself, I do not 
Mow whether that thought is a corporeal action or a self-moved 
atom, rather than an immaterial substance. Here we have once 
more the ambiguity in the word thought, and, apart from this,. 
I see nothing but a baseless question somewhat of this kind you 
esteem that you are a man, because you perceive in yourself all the 
things on account of which you bestow the name of men on all 
who possess them; but how do you know that you are not an 
elephant rather than a man, owing to some other causes which you 
cannot perceive 1 After the -substance which thinks has judged 
that it is an intelligence because it has remarked in itself all the 
properties of thinking substances, and has been unable to recognise 
any of those belonging to body, once more it is asked how it knows, 
that it is not a body, rather than an immaterial substance. 

Similar to this is the fifth objection : That though I find nothing 
extended in my thought, it does not follow that it is really not 
extended, because my thought is not the rule of the truth of things. 
Likewise the sixth : That, possibly the distinction draivn by my 
thought betiveen thought and body, is false. But here we must par- 
ticularly notice the equivocation in the words : my thought is not 
the rule of the truth of things. For, if anyone care to allege that 
my thought ought not to be the rule for others, so as to make them 
believe something because I think it true, I entirely agree. But 
that is not at all to the point here. For I have never wished to 
force anyone to follow my authority ; on the contrary I have 
announced in divers places that one should never let one's self be 
persuaded except by received proofs. Further, if the word thougL 
be taken indifferently for every psychical operation, i^%~certain 
that we can have many thoughts, from which we carvdnfer nothing 
relative to the truth of matters outside of us. Bfift that also is not 
to the point here, where the question concerns only those thoughts 
that form clear and distinct perceptions, and the judgments which 
everyone can make on his own account in the train of these per- 
ceptions. This is why, in the sense in which these words should be 
here understood, I say that each individual's thought, i.e. the- 
perception or knowledge which he has of a thing, ought to be for 



to Cler setter 129 

him the rule for the truth of that thing ; that is to say, that all the 
judgments he makes should be conformable with that perception in 
order to be correct. Even in the matter of the truths of the faith, 
we should perceive some reason persuading us that they have been 
revealed by God, before determining ourselves to believe them 
and though those who are ignorant do well to follow the judgment 
of the more capable, touching those matters that are difficult of 
apprehension, it must nevertheless be their own perception that 
tells them that they are ignorant and that those whose judgments 
they wish to follow are less ignorant, otherwise they would do ill to 
follow them, and would act as automata or as mere animals rather 
than as men. Hence it is the most absurd and extravagant error 
that a philosopher can commit, to wish to make judgments which 
have no relation to his perception of things. Yet I fail to see how 
my critic can avoid the censure of having fallen into this error, in 
the greater part of his objections ; for he does not wish each 
individual to stand firmly by his own perceptions, but claims that 
we should rather believe the opinions or fancies he pleases to set 
before us, though we wholly fail to grasp them as perceptions. 

In opposition to the third Meditation your friends have re- 
marked : 1. That not everyone has experience of the presence of 
the idea of God within him. 2. That if I had this idea I should 
comprehend it. 3. That several people have read my arguments, 
whom they have failed to persuade. 4. That it does not follow 
from the fact that I know myself to be imperfect, that God exists. 
But, if we take the word idea in the way in which I expressly said 
I took it, without getting out of the difficulty by the equivocation 
practised by those who restrict it to the images of material things, 
likenesses formed in the imagination, we shall be unable to deny 
that we have some idea of God, except by saying that we do not 
understand the words that thwg which is the most perfect that we 
can conceive ; for that is what all men call God. But to go so far 
as to assert that they do not understand the words which are the 
commonest in the mouths of men, is to have recourse to strange 
extremes in order to find objections. Besides, it is the most 
impious confession one can make, to say of one's own accord, in the 
sense in which I have taken the word idea, that one has no idea of 
God : for this is not merely to say that one does not know it by 
means of the natural reason, but also that neither by faith nor by 
any other means could one have any knowledge of it, because if one 
has no idea, i.e. no perception corresponding to the signification of 
B. n. n. 9 



130 Letter from Descartes 

the word God, it is vain to say one believes that God exists ; it 
would "be the same as saying that one believes that nothing exists, 
and thus one would remain plunged in the abyss of impiety and 
the extremity of ignorance. 

What they add that if I had this idea I should comprehend 
it i s alleged without grounds. For, because the word comprehend 
conveys a sense of limitation, a finite spirit cannot comprehend 
God, who is infinite. But that does not prevent him from appre- 
hending 1 Him, just as one can touch a mountain without being 
able to embrace it. 

Their statement about my arguments that several people have 
read them without being persuaded by them can easily be refuted ; 
for there are others who have understood them and have been 
satisfied with them. For more credence should be attached to 
what one man (who does not mean to lie) says, if he alleges that he 
has seen or learned something, than one should give to a thousand 
others who deny it, for the mere reason that it was impossible for 
them to see it or become aware of it. Thus at the discovery of the 
Antipodes the report of a few sailors who had circumnavigated the 
earth was believed rather than the thousands of philosophers who 
had not believed the earth to be round. Further, though they 
here cite as confirmation the Elements of Euclid, saying that 
everyone finds them easy to apprehend, I beg my critics to con- 
sider that among those men who are counted the most learned in 
the Philosophy of the Schools, there is not one in a hundred who 
understands them, and that there is not one in ten thousand who 
understands all' the demonstrations of Apollonius or Archimedes, 
though they are as evident and as certain as those of Euclid. 

Finally, when they say that it does not follow from the fact that 
I recognise some imperfections in myself that God exists, they prove 
nothing. For I do not deduce this conclusion from that premiss 
alone, without adding something else ; they merely remind me of 
the artifice of my critic who has the habit of mutilating my argu- 
ments and reporting only parts of them, in order to make them 
appear to be imperfect. 

I see nothing in these remarks touching the three other medita- 
tions to which I have not elsewhere given an ample reply, e.g. to 
their objection : 1. That I haw reasoned in a circle in drawing 
my proofs of the existence of God from certain notions that exist in 



to Clerselier 131 

us, and afterwards saying that we can be certain of nothing unless 
we already know that God exists. 2. That the knowledge of God's 
existence contributes nothing to the acquisition of a knowledge of the 
truths of mathematics. 3. That God may deceive us. On this 
subject consult my reply to the second set of objections, numbers 
3 and 4, and the end of part 2 of the reply to the fourth set of 
objections 1 . 

But at the end my critics add a reflection which is not, to my 
knowledge, to be found in the book of counterarguments 2 written 
by this Author, though it is very similar to his criticisms. Many 
people of great acumen, they say, believe that they clearly see that 
the mathematical extension, which I take as the basal principle of 
my Physics, is nothing but my thought, and that it has and can haw 
no subsistence outside of my mind, being merely an abstraction that 
I form from a physical body; that consequently the whole of my 
Physics is but imaginary and fictitious, as is likewise all pure 
mathematics : and that the physical nature of the real things that 
God has created requires a matter that is real, solid, and not 
imaginary. Here we have the objection of objections, and the sum 
of the whole doctrine of these men of great acumen who are here 
brought into evidence. Everything that we are able to understand 
and conceive, is, according to their story, but imagination the 
fictitious creation of our mind, and can have no real subsistence : 
whence it follows that nothing exists which we can comprehend, 
conceive, or imagine, or admit as true, and that we must close the 
door against reason, and content ourselves with being Monkeys or 
Parrots, and no longer be Men, if we wish to place ourselves on a 
level with these acute intelligences. For, if the things which we 
conceive must be esteemed to be false merely because we can con- 
ceive them, what is there left for us but to accept as true the 
things we do not conceive, and to make our system of belief out of 
them, imitating others without knowing why we do so, like the 
Monkeys, and uttering only those words which we do not under- 
stand, like Parrots ? But I have something substantial wherewith 
to console myself, inasmuch as my critics here conjoin my Physics 
with pure Mathematics, which it is my deepest wish my Physics 
should resemble. 

As for the two questions added at the end, viz. how the soul 
moves the body if it is not material ? and how it can receive the specific 

1 Of. pp. 3843 and p. 115. 2 Instances. 

92 



132 Letter from Descartes 

Jwms 1 of corporeal objects! these give me here merely the opportunity 
of declaring that our Author had no right, under pretext of criticising 
me, to propound a mass of questions like this, the solution of which 
was not necessary for -the proof of what I have written, questions of 
which the most ignorant man might raise more in a quarter of an hour 
than the wisest could solve in a lifetime. Thus I do not feel called 
upon to answer any of them. Likewise these objections, among 
other things, presuppose an explanation of the nature of the union 
"between soul and body, a matter of which I have not yet treated. 
But to you, for your own benefit, I declare that the whole of the 
perplexity involved in these questions arises entirely from a false 
supposition that can by no manner of means be proved, viz. that if 
the soul and the body are two substances of diverse nature, that 
prevents them from being capable of acting on one another ; for, on 
the contrary, those who admit the existence of real accidents, like 
heat, weight, and so forth, do not doubt that these accidents have 
the power of acting on the body, and nevertheless there is more- 
difference between them arid it, i.e. between accidents and a 
substance, than there is between two substances. 

For the rest, since I have my pen in my hand, I may call 
attention here to two of the ambiguities which I have found in 
this book of counter-arguments, because they are such as to my 
mind, might most easily entrap an inattentive reader, and I desire- 
in this way to testify to you that if I had found anything else- 
worthy of a reply I should not have passed it over. 

The first is on page 63 2 , where because I have said in one 

1 especes. 

2 Metaphysical Disquisitions etc., pp. 62 64, i.e. the third part of the 
Counter-argument which follows 'Doubt 4' directed against Meditation n and 
the Reply. (For these two passages of. Objj. v, pp. 140142 and pp. 147, 148): 
' and especially since it has been shewn that you have either assumed your con- 
clusion or failed to prove it when you draw this inference: I am then strictly taken 
only a thing that thinks. It would be better to make a frank confession, and, as, 
close upon my "Doubt," I urge you once more to do, remember that after you 
have said, I am then strictly taken only a thing that thinks, you have declared 
that you do not know, and do not at this point dispute, whether you are that 
complex system of members, styled the human body, or a subtle air infused into 
those members, or fire, or vapour, or breath, etc. For thence two conclusions 
follow. One is that when we arrive at your demonstration in Meditation vi, 
you will be convicted of having failed to prove at any point that you are not a 
complex system of members, or a subtle air, or vapour, etc., and that you will 
not be able to take that as granted or proved. Secondly it will follow that it 
was unjustifiable to draw the conclusion : I am then strictly taken only a thing 
that thinks. What does that word only mean? Is it not restriction (so to 
speak) to something thinking solely, and exclusive of all other things, among 
which we find a system of members, a subtle air, fire, vapour, breatb, and other 
bodies ? Since you are a thinking thing, do you know that you are none of 
these as well? You reply clearly that you do not know. I do not know, you 



to Clerselier 133 

place 1 , that while the soul is in doubt of the existence of all material 
things it knows itself precisely, in the strict sense, mly 2 , as an 
immaterial substance; and seven or eight lines lower down, in order 
to show that, by using the words in the strict sense, only I do not 
mean an entire exclusion or negation, but only an abstraction from 
material things, I said that, in spite of that, I was not sure that 
there was nothing corporeal in the soul, although nothing of such 
a nature was known to exist in it ; my opponents are so unjust to 
me as to wish to persuade the reader that in saying in the strict 
sense, only I wished to exclude the body, and have thus contradicted 
myself afterwards in saying that I did not wish to exclude it. 
I make no reply to the subsequent accusation of having assumed 
something in the Sixth Meditation that I had not previously proved, 
and of having thus committed a fallacy. It is easy to detect the 
falsity of this charge, which is only too common in the whole of this 
book, and might make me suspect that its Author had not acted in 
good faith, if I had not known his character and did not believe 
he has been the first to be entrapped by so false a belief. 

say, I do not now dispute it. Why then do you say that you are only a thing 
that thinks ? Are you not asserting something of winch you are not certain ? 
Is it not an inference that you do not prove ? Have you not destroyed some- 
thing you imagined you had established ? Look, here is your reasoning : 

He ivho knows that he is a thinking thing and is unaware whether he is any- 
thing else as well, whether a syste7n of members, a subtle air, etc., ift, in the strict 
sense, only a thing that thinks. 

But I know that I am a thing that thinks, and am unaware whether I am 
anything else as well, whether a system of members, a subtle air, etc. 

Therefore I am, in the strict sense, only a thing that thinks. 

There is nothing added in my presentation of the matter ; nay, it is enough 
to propound your argument as it stands. I merely append the remark that, 
since as propounded it is evidently so absurd, it was not without reason that I 
urged you above to be cautious, not only lest you should assume something 
unadvisedly in place of yourself, but lest you should not assume enough, and 
knowing something about yourself, should think that this was the whole of your 
nature. Whence I now also declare that you could have argued correctly provided 
you had reasoned in this way : 

He who knows that he is a thing that thinks, and is unaware whether he is 
anything else, whether a system of members, a subtle air, etc., knows in the strict 
seme only that he is a thinking thing : 

Sut I know that I am a thing that thinks, and am unaware whether I am 
anything else as well, whether a system of members, a subtle air, etc. 

Therefore I know in the strict sense only that I am a thinking thing. 

This indeed would have been a true and legitimate conclusion and no one 
would have been indignant with you ; we should have attended only to the 
conclusions you were able to draw. But now since there is such a difference 
between these two conclusions I am, in the strict sense, only a thing that 
thinks, and I know in the strict sense only that I am a thing that thinks can 
anyone tolerate the fallacy you commit in passing from that which you know to 
that which you are ? ' 

1 Med. n, Vol. i. p. 152. 

2 praecise tantum. 



134 'Letter from Descartes 

The other ambiguity is on p. 84 1 , where he wishes to make 
to abstract and to distinguish have the same meaning, though all 
the time there is a great difference between them : for in distinguish- 
ing a substance from its accidents, we must consider both one and 
the other, and this helps greatly in becoming acquainted with 
substance; whereas if instead one only separates by abstraction 
this substance from these accidents, i.e. if one considers it quite 
alone without thinking of them, that prevents one from knowing it 
well, because it is by its accidents that substance is manifested, 

Here, my dear Sir, is the whole of the reply for which this great 
book of counter-arguments calls; for, though perhaps I should 
better content my critic's friends if I reported every hostile argu- 
ment one after the other, I believe I should not please my own friends, 
who would have cause to reprove me for having occupied time with 
a task for which there was little need, and of thus putting my 
leisure at the disposal of all those who might care to squander theirs 
in plying me with useless questions. But I give you my thanks for 
your kind attentions. Adieu. 

1 Metaphysical Disquisitions, p. 84, i.e. the first part of the counter-argu- 
ment following * Doubt 8' directed against Med. n, and the Beply (cf. Objj. v, 
pp. 147, 148) : ' If now any reader be so patient as to read over my " Doubt " 
again, I ask him to judge of it and of the Reply at the same time. You say 
that you have not abstracted the concept of wax from the concept of its accidents. 
I concede your good faith in the matter ! Are not these your very words I 
distinguish wax from its external forms, and consider it in naked isolation, as it 
were divested of the garments that cover it ? What else is the abstraction of the 
concept of one thing from the concept of others but the considering of it apart 
from them ? what else but to consider it in naked isolation, with the covering 
vestments stripped of ? Is there any other way of abstracting the concept of 
human nature from the concepts of individual men, than by distinguishing it 
from the so-called individuating differences, and considering it in isolation and 
stripped of that which invests it? But it is a task I little relish to argue about 
a point, ignorance of which would ensure a boy disputant a beating from his 
master. lou say that you rather wished to show how the substance of wax u 
manifested by its accidents. It was that you wished to point out, that which 
you clearly announced. Is not this a neat way of getting out of the difficulty? 
And when you wished to point it out, what means did you employ for doing so, 
or how did you make the wax manifest, if not by looking to its accidents, first 
as to its garments, and then stripping these off and considering it in isolation T 



THE FIFTH SET OF OBJECTIONS 1 . 

LETTER PROM P. GASSENDI TO M. DESCARTES 2 . 

Sir 3 , 

Our friend Mersenne did me a great kindness in communi- 
cating to me your magnificent work your Meditations on First 
Philosophy. The excellence of your arguments, the perspicuity of 
your intellect, and the brilliance of your expression haw caused me 
extraordinary delight. It gives me great pleasure to compliment you 
on the sublimity and felicity with which your mind assails the task 
of extending the boundaries of tJie sciences and bringing to light 
those matters that preceding ages have found most difficult to drag 
from their obscurity. To me it has proved hard to comply, as 
friendship obliged me to do, with the request M. Mersenne also made, 
and let you know if I took any exception to your doctrine and had 
any scruple unsatisfied. Especially I foresaw that, if I did not 
agree with your arguments, I should merely display my own lack oj ' 
acuteness, or rather should merely manifest rashness, if I dared to 
utter my dissent in the smallest matter, and appear to oppose you. 
Nevertheless I have yielded to my friend, thinking besides that you 
would approve of his plan rather than of mine; since indeed your 
candour will easily let you see that my intention is solely to display 
to you without disguise the reasons I have for doubting. I testify 
that this will be amply confirmed if you have patience to scrutinize 
them thoroughly; for as to any influence they may have in causing 
you the slightest sense of insecurity in your reasonings, or in causing 
you to consume, in replying, any time destined for more valuable 

1 The French translation by Clerselier was published contrary to the advice 
of Descartes in the edition sanctioned by him, consequently MM. Adam and 
Tannery do not include it in their edition of the works of Descartes. The 
translation was not revised by Descartes, Instead of this is substituted the 
brief letter translated above (pp. 125-134), 

2 Eximio viro Benato Cartesio P. Gassendus S, 
8 Vir eximie. 



136 Objections V 

studies, I declare myself not responsible for this. Nay, I cannot 
without shame-facedness expose my difficulties to your gaze, sure as 
I am that there is none of them that has not often suggested, itself to 
you in your reflections, and which you haw not with full conscious- 
ness dismissed as of no account, or determined to hep out of sight. 
Consequently, though I bring forward certain hypotheses, I bring 
them forward merely as hypotheses, and they are hypotheses that 
affect not the truths themselves of which you haw undertaken the 
proof, but the method and the cogency of your proof. I unaffectedly 
acknowledge the existence of Almighty God and the immortality of 
our souls ; my doubts concern merely the validity 1 of the reasoning 
by which you prove those matters, as well as other things involved in 
the scheme of Metaphysical science. 

RELATIVE TO MEDITATION I. 

Of the things which may be brought within the sphere of the 
doubtfuL 

In the matter of the first Meditation, there is really little for me 
to linger over; I agree with your plan of freeing your mind from 
every prejudice. On one point only I am not clear ; that is, why 
you should not have preferred to indicate simply and with few words 
that what you previously knew was uncertain, in order subsequently 
to choose what might be found to be true, rather than by regarding 
everything as false, not so much to dismiss an old prejudice, as to 
take up with a new one. Thus, for example, it became necessary to 
feign that God was a deceiver, or some evil spirit that mocks us, in 
order to convince yourself; whereas it would have seemed to be suffi- 
cient to ascribe that to the obscurity of the human mind and the 
weakness of its nature alone. Further, you feign that you are 
dreaming in order to cast doubt on everything, and consider that 
everything that happens is done to make sport of us. But will that 
compel you to believe that you are not aivake and to deem uncertain 
and false the events that occur before your eyes 1 Say what you will, 
no one will be convinced that you have convinced yourself that none 
of the things you have learned are trite, and that your senses, or a 
dream, or God, or an evil spirit have imposed on you. Would it 
not have been better and more consonant with philosophic candour 
and the love of the truth to state the actual facts in a straightforward 
and simple manner, rather than to incur the possible objection of 
* Bnergiam. 



Objections V 137 

having recourse to an artifice, of eagerness /or verbal trickery and 
-seeking evasions ? Yet, since you 1mm been pleased to take this way, 
I shall make no further criticism on it. 

EELATIVE TO MEDITATION II. 

Qf the Nature of the Human Mind ; and that it is more easily 
known than the Body. 

1. When it comes to the second Meditation, I see that you still 
persist in keeping up the game of pretence, and /ail utterly to notice 
that you, the author of the pretence, exist ; which thus establishes the 
conclusion that this proposition : I am, I exist, is true each time 
that you pronounce it, or that you mentally conceive it 1 . But I 
don't see that you needed all this mechanism, when you had other 
grounds for being sure, and it was true, that you existed. You 
might have inferred that from any other activity, since our natural 
light informs us that whatever acts also exists. 

You addth&i this does not yet let you know clearly enough what 
you are 2 . But this is admitted, and in quite a serious spirit ; we 
grant it quite willingly: to know this requires toil and exertion. 
But surely this knowledge might have been sought for without all 
that circumlocution and all those suppositions. 

You next wish to contemplate yourself as what you have helieved 
yourself to be, in such a way that, when every doubtful element is 
withdrawn, nothing may be left beyond what is absolutely certain 
and indubitable 8 . But you will do this with the approval of everyone. 
You tackle the matter ; and believing that you are a man, you ask, 
what is man ? Purposely dismissing the common definition you 
select those characteristics which at the first glance presented them- 
selves to you, e.g. that you had a face, hands, and "other members 
which you designated by the name body ; and likewise that you 
were nourished, that you walked, that you felt, that you thought, 
features which 1 you referred to the soul 4 . So far, so good, only what 
becomes of the distinction you draw between the so-iil and the body ? 
You mij that you did not then perceive what the soul was, but 
imagined merely that it was like a wind, a flame, or an ether, which 
was spread throughout your grosser parts 5 . That is worth noting. 
But body you did not doubt to have a nature identical with what- 
ever can be defined by figure, or can be confined in a certain place, 
can fill a space from which it can exclude every other body, can be 

i Vol. i. p. 150, par. 1. 2 Ibid, par. 2. a Ibid. 

Ibid. p. 151, par. 1. r > Ibid. 



138 Objections V 

perceived by touch, sight, hearing, smell or taste, and can be 
moved in many ways 1 . But these things you can even at present 
attribute to bodies, provided you do not attribute all of them to every 
corporeal thing ; inasmuch as wind is a body, and yet is not per- 
ceived by sight. And you cannot exclude the other attributes which 
you mention next in order > for wind, fire, also move many things. 
Moreover, what you subjoin, viz. that you denied to body the power 
oj- moving itself, cannot, so far as it appears, be successfully main- 
tained; for this implies that every body must by its own nature be 
without motion, and that all its motions must proceed from an incor- 
poreal principle ; and it must be thought that neither can water flow 
nor an animal move, unless through the agency of some incorporeal 
mover. 

2. Next you investigate whether, the existence of a deceiving 
agent being up to this point supposed, you can affirm that any of 
the things which you judged to belong to the nature of body exist in 
you. You say that after the most careful scrutiny nothing of such 
a sort can be found in you 2 . Already at this point you consider 
yourself not as a complete human being, but as that inner and more 
hidden part, such as you deemed the soul to be. Wherefore I ask 
thee, soul, or whatever the name be by ivhich you choose to be 
addressed, have you, by this time corrected that notion in virtue of 
which you previously imagined that you were something similar to 
wind, or a like substance, diffused throughout the members of the 
body ? You certainly have not. Why then, cannot you be a wind, 
or rather a very subtle spirit, which, by means oj the heat of the 
heart you distil from the purest of the blood or from some other 
source; or may there not be some otJier cause by which you are evoked 
and preserved; and may you not, being diffused throughout the 
members, attribute life to others, and see with the eye, hear with the 
ear, think by means of the brain and discharge the other functions 
which by common consent are ascribed to you ? If that be so, why 
may you not have the same figure as the whole of this body has, just 
as the air takes the shape of the vessel which contains it i Why may 
you not believe that you are bounded too by the same circumambient 
medium as surrounds the body, or by the bodily epidermis? May 
you not occupy space, or those parts of space which the solid body or 
its parts do not completely fill? In truth, the solid body possesses 
pores through which you yourself may be diffused, in such a way that, 
where the parts of which you consist are found none of its parts 
1 Vol. i. p. 151. 2 IUdt par< 2 . 



Objections V 139 

exist; just as in a mixture of wine and water, where the particles 
of the former are, the parts of the second are not found, howsoever 
much sight be -unable to distinguish between the two. Why will it 
be impossible for you to exclude another body from the same space as 
you occupy, ivhen the parts composing the solid body are incapable of 
existing in the same tiny portions of space in which you are found ? 
Why cannot you participate in many motions! For when you 
assign many motions to the members themselves, how can you move 
them unless you yourself are moved? Certainly you must not be 
unmoved if you are to cause movement, where exertion is called for ; 
nor can you rest immoveable when the body itself is moved. If this 
be so, why do you say that none of those things exist in you which 
are relative to the nature of the body ? 

3. You proceed to say that, of the things ascribed to soul, 
neither nourishment nor walking belong to you 1 . But, in the first 
place, a thing may be a body and yet not be nourished. Secondly ', if 
you are such a body as we have described breath to be, why, if your 
more solid members are nourished by more solid substance, may you 
a more rarefied one not be also nourished by a rarer substance? 
Further, are you not young and vigorous wlmi that body, of which 
these are t/ie parts, is in the vigour of youth ? And ivhen it is weak> 
are you not yourself weal', ? In the matter of moving, when it is 
owing to you that your members move and never pass into any position 
except you move and transpot^t them thither, how can tJiat be possible 
without movement on your part ? But, you say., if now I do not 
possess a body, these are nothing but figments 1 . But whether you 
are making game of us or playing with yourself, there is no reason 
for our delaying here. If, however, you are speaking seriously, you 
must prove that you neither have any body ivhich you inform, nor are 
of such a nature as to be nourished and to move along with it. 

You proceed, saying that you are without sensation 1 . But your- 
self assuredly are such as to see colour, hear sounds, etc. This, you 
say, cannot occur apart from the body. / grant you that ; but, in- 
the first place, a body is present to you and you yourself reside within 
the eye, which certainly does not see without you ; and secondly you 
may be a rarefied body operating by means of the sense-organs. You 
say I have thought I perceived many things during sleep that 
subsequently I recognised as not having been experienced at all 
But though you go wrong if, without using the eye, you seemed to 
have experiences which do not occur without t/ie eye coming into play^ 
1 Vol.i. p. 151, par. 2. 



140 Objections V 

nevertheless so to err is not your universal experience, nor have you 
not employed your eye, by which you perceive and by which you take 
in the images, which now you can use without employing the eye. 

At length you come to the conclusion that thought belongs to you. 
True, that ?> not to be denied ; but you still have to prove tJiat the 
power of thinking is so much superior to the nature of body, that 
neither breath nor any other mobile, pure, and rarefied body, can by 
any means be so adapted as to be capable of exercising thought. You 
will have to prove at the same time that the souls of the brutes are 
incorporeal, viz. those which think, or, over and above the functioning 
of the external senses, are aivare of something internal, not only while 
awalce^ but when dreaming. Again, you must prove that this solid 
body contributes absolutely nothing to your thinking (though you have 
never existed ivithout it nor haw ever hitherto had any thought in 
isolation from it\ and that your thinking is hence independent of it ; 
so that you can neither be impeded nor distitrbed by the foul and 
dense vapours or fumes, which sometimes so afflict the brain. 

4. Your conclusion is: I am, to speak accurately, a Thing 
which thinks, that is to say, a mind or a soul, or an understanding, 
or a reason 1 . Here I confess that I have been suffering from a 
deception. For I believed that I ivas addressing the human soul, 
or that internal principle, by which a man lives, feels, moves from 
place to place and understands, and after all I was only speaking to 
a mind, which has divested itself not only of the body but of the soul 
itself. Have you, my ivorthy sir, in attaining to this result, followed 
the example of those ancients, who, though they thought that the soul 
was diffused throughout the whole body, believed that its principal 
part the dominating part 2 was located in a determinate region of 
the body, e.g. in the brain, or in the heart ? Not that they judged 
that the soul teas not also to be found there, but that they believed 
that the mind ivas, as it were, added to the soul existing there, was 
linked to it, and along with it informed that region. I ought really 
to have remembered that from the discussion in your Discourse on 
Method. There you appeared to decide that all those offices, ascribed 
both to the vegetative and to the sensitive soul, do not depend on the 
rational soul and can be exercised without it before it is introduced 
into the body, as does happen in the case of the brutes, in whom your 
contention is that no reason is found. I do not know Iiow I managed 
to forget this, except for the reason that I remained in doubt as to 
ivhether that principle by means of ivhich we and the brutes alike 

1 Vol. i. p. 152, par 1. 



Objections V 141 

exercise the vegetative function and feel, was not according to your 
nomenclature to be styled soul, soul being exclusively reserved for the 
human mind. Yet since it is that principle that is, properly said to 
animate us, mind is capable of no other function than to make us 
think, as you indeed assert. And, since this is so, call it now Mind, 
and let it be, taken precisely, a Thing which thinks. 

You add that it is thought alone which cannot be separated 
from you. Truly it is impossible to deny this of you, if you are 
primarily Mind alone and refuse to allow that your substance can be- 
distinguished from the substance of the soul except in thought; though 
here I pause and ask whether, when you say that thought cannot be 
separated from you, you mean that you, as long as you exist, think to 
an indefinite extent. This is indeed in conformity with the pronounce- 
ment of those celebrated philosophers who, in order to prove your 
immortality, assumed that you were in perpetual motion, or, as I 
interpret it, thought continuously. But this will not gain the ad- 
hesion of those who cannot comprehend how you can think (Liirmcf 
a lethargic sleep, or while in the womb. Besides, I have a difficulty 
here as to whether you think that you have been infused into the body 
or one of its parts during the uterine stage of existence or at birth. 
But I should be loth to be troublesome with my enquiries, or to reflect 
whether you remember what your thoughts were when in the womb, or 
in the days, months, and years succeeding your birth; or, if you 
replied that you had forgotten, to ask why this was so. Yet I suggest 
that you should remember how obscure, how meagre, how nearly non- 
existent your thought must have been during those periods of life. 

Proceeding, you maintain that you are not the complex of 
members which we call the human body 1 . But tlmt must be ad- 
mitted because you are considering yourself solely as a thing which 
thinks, as a part of the concrete human whole, distinct from this 
exterior and more solid part. ' I am not/ you say, ' a subtle air 
distributee! through these members, I am not a wind, a fire, a vapour, 
nor a breath, nor anything which I can construct in imagination. 
For I have assumed that all these were nothing ; and let that 
supposition be unchanged. 3 But halt here, Mind, and let t/iose 
suppositions or rather those fictions take themselves off. You say, 
' I am not air or anything of such a nature.' But, if the total soul 
be something of the kind, wherefore may not you who are thought 
to be the noblest part of the soul, be deemed to be, as it were, t/ie 
flower, or the subtlest, purest, and most active part of it. You say 
1 Vol. i. p. 152, par. 2. 



142 Objections V 

'perhaps those same things which I supposed were non-existent, 
are real things and are not different from the self which I know ? 
I do not know ahout this, I shall not dispute about it now/ But 
if you do not know, if you do not dispute the matter, why do you 
assume that you are none of these things ? ' I know, 3 you say, ' that 
I exist; "but the knowledge of my existence taken in its precise 
significance cannot depend on that which I do not know.' Granted, 
but remember that you have not proved that you are not air, or 
a vapour, or many other things. 

5. In sequence to this you describe that which you call the 
imagination. You say that to imagine is nothing else than to 
contemplate the figure or image of a corporeal thing, obviously for 
the purpose of inferring that you are aware of your own nature by 
means of some other species of thought than imagination. But, 
though it is permissible for you to define imagination in accordance 
with your own opinions, I ask you why, if you are corporeal (the 
contradictory of which you haw not proved), you cannot contemplate 
yourself in the guise of some corporeal figure or image ? And I 
ash you, when you so regard yourself, if you are conscious of or 
observe anything other than a pure, transparent, and rarefied substance 
like wind 1 , which pervades the whole body or at least the brain or 
a part of it, animating you, and discharging your vital functions 
through the body. I know/ you say, 'that nothing at all that I 
can understand by means of the imagination belongs to this know- 
ledge which I have of myself.' But you do not state how you know 
this ; and since a short time ago you had decided that you did not 
know whether or not these things belonged to you, I ask you whence 
you now derive your conclusiotit 

6. Your next point is : that it is necessary to recall the mind 
from these modes of thought with the utmost diligence, in order 
that it maybe able to know its own nature with perfect distinctness 3 . 
Very sound advice ; but, after having thus with the utmost diligence 
recalled yourself, give up, I beg, that extreme distinctness with which 
you perceive your own nature, for all that you record is that you 
are a Thing which thinks, a truth we all previously believed; but 
you do not reveal to us what the nature of this operative substance is, 
how it coheres, and how it adapts itself for discharging such various 
functions in such various ways, and many other such things about 
which we have hitherto been in ignorance. 

You allege that intellect can perceive that which imagination is 
1 aurae instar. 2 Vol. i. p. 153 ad init. 



Objections V 143 

incapable of discerning (the imagination which you identify with the 
i common sense '). But, my worthy Mind., can you prow that there 
are many internal faculties and not a single, simple faculty by means 
of ivhich we are conscious of everything whatsoever it be ? When 
I behold the sun with open eyes, sensation most manifestly occurs. 
When, subsequently, I bethink myself of the sun, keeping my eyes 
closed, internal cognition manifestly occurs. But how, in fine, shall 
I be Me to discern that I perceive the sun with the common sense, or 
faculty of imagination, and not really with the mind, or understand- 
ing, and so at pleasure apprehend the sun, now by the activity of 
the understanding, which is other than the imagination, now by the 
act of the imagination which is different from that of the under- 
standing ? True, if it were possible for an understanding to exist 
after cerebral trouble had set in, and injury to the imagination, an 
understanding which discharged all its peculiar and incommunicable 1 
functions, then understanding could be said to be as easily distinguish- 
able from imagination as imagination from external sense. But 
since the reverse of this is true, we have certainly no ready means of 
setting up this distinction. 

When it is said, as you will have it, that imagination occurs 
when we contemplate the image of a corporeal object, you see that, 
since there is no other way of contemplating corporeal things, bodies 
must be appreMnded by the imagination alone, or, at least that no 
other faculty of knowing can be discerned. 

You mention that you still cannot prevent yourself thinking 
that corporeal things, the images of which .are framed by thought, 
which are made known by the activity of the senses, are more 
distinctly known than that obscure and unknown part of you which 
does not come under the imagination : so that it seems strange to 
you that you should know and understand more distinctly things 
the existence of which is dubious and which seem foreign to you 2 . 
To begin with, that is an excellent saying 'that unknown part of you.' 
For in truth you do not know what it is nor what is its nature ; nor 
hence can you come to know that it is of such a sort as to be incapable 
of entering the imagination. Further, all our knowledge seems to 
find its source in the senses ; and although you deny that whatever is 
in the understanding must have existed previously in the sense, my 
contention seems to be none the less true, since unless knowledge enters 
by a sort of invasion alone, at a stroke*, as it were, it must yet be 
elaborated and perfected by analogy, by composition, by division, by 

1 puras. 2 Yol. I. p. 153, sub fan. 3 /card Tre 



144 Objections V 

amplification, by attenuation (of the things of sense 1 } and other similar 
devices which it is unnecessary to recount. Hence it is by no means- 
strange that those things which of themselves rush in and excite the 
sense make a more lively impression on the mind than that made by 
objects which the mind itself constructs out of the material that chances 
to meet its senses and which it grasps, being receptive in so far only 
as it is given the opportunity of so acting. Also you indeed call 
material things doubtful ; but if you cared to confess the truth, you 
would acknowledge that you are not less certain of the existence of the 
body which you inhabit, and of all the things that surround you, than 
of your own existence. And if you manifest yourself to yourself by 
that operation alone which is called thought, how does that compare- 
with the manifestations of things of this sort? They indeed are 
made manifest not only by various operations, but also by many- 
other highly convincing circumstances, by their magnitude, figure^ 
solidity, colour, savour, etc., so that, though they are external to you f 
it is by no means strange that you should knoiv and comprehend them 
more distinctly than yourself. But you ask how ~it is possible to* 
understand something foreign to you better than yourself. I reply 
that the case of the eye, which sees other things but does not see itself > 
illustrates how this is possible. 

7. ' But/ you ask, l what then am I ? A thing which thinks. 
What is a thing which thinks ? It is a thing which doubts, under- 
stands, affirms, denies, wills, refuses, which also imagines and feels/ 
You mention many things here which in themselves cause me no 
difficulty. This alone makes me pause, your saying that you are a 
thing which feels. It is indeed strange, for you had previously 
maintained the opposite; or perchance did you mean that in addition 
to yourself there is a corporeal faculty residing in the eye, in the 
ear, and in the other organs, which receiving the semblance of things, 
gives rise to the act of sensation in a way that allows you thereupon 
to complete it, and brings it to pass that you are really the very self 
which sees, liears and perceives other things ? It is for this reason, in 
my opinion, that you make sensation as well as imagination a species- 
of thought. So be it ; but look to it, nevertheless, that that sensation 
which exists in the brutes^ since it is not dissimilar to your sensation^ 
be not capable of earning the title of thought also, and that thus the 
brutes themselves may have a mind not dissimilar to your own. 

You will say, I, holding the citadel in the brain, receive what- 
soever is sent me by the (animal 2 ) spirits which permeate the 

1 Tr. 2 Tr. 



Objections V 145 

nerves, and thus the act of sense which is said to be effected by the 
whole body is transacted in my presence. Good ; but in the brutes 
there are nerves, (animal) spirits, a brain, and a conscious principle 
residing therein, which in a similar manner receives the messages 
sent by the animal spirits and accomplishes the act of sensation. 
You will say that that principle in the brain of brutes is nothing, 
other than the Fancy 1 or faculty of imagination. But kindly show 
that the principle in the human brain is other than the Fancy or 
imaginative faculty. I asked you a little ivhile back for a criterion 
by means of which you could prow that it was different, a criterion 
which, in my opinion, you are not likely to offer me. True, you 
assert that the operations of the human principle far surpass those 
which are to be obtained in brutes. But, in the same way as man 
may be the most outstanding of all the animals, yet without being 
detached from his place in the number of the animals, so, though you 
are for the above reasons proved to be the most excellent of imagina- 
tive faculties or Fancies, you do not lose your pldce in the ranks of 
such faculties. For even that self which you specially style the mind, 
though it may very well imply a higher 2 nature, cannot be anything 
of a diverse type. Indeed, in order to prove that you are of a 
diverse (i.e. as you contend of an incorporeal} nature, you ought to 
display some operation in a way different from tJmt in which the 
brutes act, and to carry this on, if not without the brain, at least 
in independence of it; but this is not complied with. (Indeed the 
reverse happens*), if, as a matter of fact, you are troubled when the 
brain is troubled, are overwJielmed when it is overcome, and if you 
yourself are unable to retain any trace of the semblances of things 
which it has lost. You say that in the brutes everything takes 
place through a blind impulsion of the (animal) spirits and the 
other organs 3 just in the same way as motion is achieved in a clock or 
any other machine. But however true this be in the case of the other 
functions, like nutrition, the pulsation of the arteries, and so forth* 
which wry functions take place in man in precisely the same way a$ 
in brutes, can it be said that either the operations of sense, or what 
are called the emotions* of the soul are effected in brutes by means of 
a blind impulse, and not in our case also? A morsel of food dis- 
charges a semblance of itself into the eye of the dog, and this btiny 
transferred to the brain, attaches itself to the soul, as it were, by 
means of hooks ; and the soul itself tJienceforth and the whole body, 
which coheres with it, is haled to that food, as it were, by chains of 
1 Phantasiam. 2 Dignioris, 3 Tr. 4 passiones. 

E. H. II. 10 



146 Objections V 

the most delicate contriving. The stone also which someone picks up 
threateningly sends forth a semblance of itself, which, acting like a 
lever, gives a propulsion to the soul and reverses the course of the body 
and compels it to take flight. But does not the very same thing 
happen in man 1 Perhaps you know of some other way in which this 
can take place; if so, I should be much indebted if you would ex-plain 
it to me. 

You say 1 1 (the soul) 1 am free and there is a power within me 
by means of which I can turn a man equally from fleeing and from 
going forward.' But the imaginative principle does as much in a 
brute ; a dog may for the time disregard blows and threats and rush 
at the food it sees (and man often does much the same thing /). You 
say that the dog barks by mere impulsion and not owing to resolve, 
as in the case of men speaking. But in the case of man there are 
causes at work too, and hence we might deem that his speaking loas 
due to impulsion ; for that also which we attribute to choice is due to 
the stronger impulse, and the brute also exercises his own choice when 
one impulse is greater than the others. I haw indeed witnessed a 
dog attuning its barks to the sound of a trumpet in such a way as to 
imitate all the changes in its notes, sharp or flat, skio and quick, 
however much more frequent and prolonged the sounds were made, 
capriciously and suddenly. You say brutes lack reason. But while 
doubtless they are without human reason, they do haw a reason of 
their own. Hence evidently they cannot be called irrational 2 except 
in comparison with us, or relatively to our species of reason, since in 
any case Xoyos or ratio 3 seems to be as general in its significance, and 
can be as easily ascribed to them, as the term cognitive faculty or 
internal sense. You say that they do not reason to conclusions 4 . 
But though they do not reason so perfectly and about so many things 
as man, they still do reason; and the difference seems to be merely 
one of more or less. You say that they do not speak. But though 
they do not utter human expressions (as is natural seeing they are not 
man) yet they emit their own peculiar cries, and employ them just as 
we do our vocal sounds. You say that a man in delirium can weave 
together a number of cries in order to signify something ; while the 
cleverest of the animals cannot do so. But consider whether it is 
fair of you to demand human sounds in the brute, and not to attend 
to its own proper cries. But this discussion would take too much 
time if pursued further. 

1 Tr. _ 2 ao?a . 

3 Greek and Latin terms for Beason. 4 ratiociuari. 



Objections V 147 

8. Next you adduce the instance of a piece of wax, and con- 
cerning it you haw much to say, in order to show that what are 
sailed the accidents of the wax are one thing, the wax itself or the 
.substance of the wax another, and that we require only the mind or 
understanding, but not sense or imagination in order to perceive 
distinctly the wax itself, and its substance 1 . But firstly that itself 
is what everyone commonly allows, namely, that the concept of wax or 
of its substance can be abstracted from the concept of its accidents. 
But is it the case that this secures a distinct perception of the sub- 
stance or nature of the wax ? We indeed conceive that besides the 
colour, the figure, the capacity far being liquefied, etc., there is some- 
thing ivhich is the subject of the accidents and the observed changes of 
the ivax ; but as to what that is or lohat is its nature, we are 
ignorant. Nay, it always eludes our apprehension and it is only by 
conjecture that we think that there must be some substratum. Hence 
I marvel how you can maintain that, after you have finished stripping 
off those forms, as it were the vestures, of the wax, you perceive per- 
fectly and very clearly what the wax is. For you do indeed perceive 
that the wax or its substance is something over and above such forms; 
but what that is you do not perceive, unless you are deceiving us. It 
is not revealed to you, as a man can be revealed to sight whose 
clothing and hat alone we have previously beheld, if we strip him of 
these in order to discover toho and what he is. Further, when you 
think you perceive that in some way or other, how, I pray, do you 
perceive it ? Is it not as something continuous 2 and extended ? For 
you do not conceive it as a point, though it is of such a nature as to 
be now more widely, now less extended. And since extension of this 
kind is not infinite, but has a limit, do you not conceive it as in some 
wa y possessing figure ? Further, when you seem as it were to see it, 
do you not attach some colour to it, albeit confused? You certainly 
take it to be something more of a bodily nature, and so equally more 
visible than the mere void. Whence even the activity of your under- 
standing is imagination of a kind. Tell us in good faith whether 
you maintain that you conceive it apart from any extension, figure 
and colour ? If so, then what is it ? 

What you have to say about seeing men, or perceiving them by 
the mind, men, however, whose hats and cloaks we alone behold 8 
-does not prove that the mind is anything more than a faculty of 
imagination which is capable of passing judgment. For certainly 



Of. Med. ii. Vol. i. pp. 154, 155. 

fusum. 3 Of. Vol. i. p. 155 sub Jin. 



102 



148 Objections V 

the dog, in which you do not admit the presence of a mind similar to 
yours, judges in a similar manner, when it sees, not its master, but 
his hat or clothes [and yet recognises him] 1 . Nay more. Although 
his master stand or sit, lie down, recline, draw himself together or 
stretch himself out, it yet recognises him always as its master, who 
can exist under all time forms, though nevertheless he does not 
[preserve the same proportions and] 2 exist under one form rather 
than another, as wax does. And when it chases the hare that runs 
from it, do you not believe it Chinks that it is throughout the same 
hare which it sees both intact and dead, and subsequently skinned 
and chopped into pieces ? Your next point, that the perception of 
colour, hardness, and so forth, is not an act of vision or of touch, 
but only an intuition of the mind, may be granted, as long as mind 
is not taken to be something different from the imaginative faculty 
itself. But when you add, that that act of intuition may he imper- 
fect and confused, or perfect and distinct in proportion as we attend 
more or less closely to the elements of which the wax is composed ; 
this certainly shows, not that the mental intuition of this we know not 
what over and above all the forms of the wax, is a clear and distinct 
knowledge of the wax, but that it is a survey effected by the senses, of 
all, so far as that is possible, the accidents and mutations which the 
wax can sustain. From these we shall assuredly be able to conceive 
and explain what it is we mean by the term wax ; but we shall not 
be able either to conceive by itself or explain to others that naked, or 
rather that inscrutable substance. 

9. You next add : But what should I say of this mind, that is 
of myself, for up to this point I do not admit in myself anything 
hut mind? What then am I who seem to perceive this wax so 
distinctly, do I not know myself not only with much more truth, 
and certainty, but also with much more distinctness and clearness ? 
For, if I judged that the wax is or exists from the fact that I see 
it, how much more clearly does it follow that I exist ? For it may 
be that what I see is not really wax. It may also happen that I do 
not even possess eyes with which to see anything. But it cannot 
be that when I see, or (for I do not now take account of the dis- 
tinction), when I think I see, that I myself who think am nought. 
So if I judge that wax exists from the fact that I touch it, the 
same thing will follow, to wit, that I am ; and so if I judge from 
the fact that I imagine it, or from any other cause, the same result 

1 Added in Cler seller's French version. 

2 Omitted in Clerselier's French version. 



Objections V 149 

will follow. But what I have here remarked of wax may be applied 
to all other things which are external to me 1 . These are your own 
words ; and I here repeat them in order to let you see that while they 
indeed prow that you distinctly perceive that you exist, from the fact 
that you distinctly see and are a ware of the existence of wax and those 
accidents of it, they yet do not prove that you for this reason know 
what or of what nature you are, either distinctly or indistinctly. 
Yet to do so had been worth your while, for of your existence there is 
no doubt. Notice meanwhile, though I do not mean to dwell on the 
point, that neither have I previously raised the objection that, since 
you do not admit the existence in you of anything beyond mind alone, 
and therefore rule out eyes, hands and the rest of the organs, it is 
vain to talk of wax and its accidents, which you see, touch, etc.; you 
certainly cannot see them without using your eyes, touch them without 
employing the hands (or, to adopt your mode of expression, think that 
you see and touch them}. 

You proceed: If the perception of wax has seemed to me clearer 
and more distinct not only after the sight and touch, but also after 
many other causes have rendered it quite manifest to me, with how 
much more distinctness must it be said that I now know myself, since 
all the reasons which contribute to the knowledge of wax, or to any 
other body whatever, are yet better proof of the nature of my mind ? 2 
But, just as your conclusions about wax prow only the perception of 
the existence of mind, and fail to reveal its nature, so will all other 
examples fail to prove anything more. But, if you wish to deduce 
something more from the perception of the substance of wax and other 
things, the only conclusion you can arrive at will be that just as we 
conceive that substance confusedly only and as an unknown somewhat, 
so we must also conceive of tJie mind. Hence you may well repeat 
that phrase of yours that obscure and unknown part of me. 

Yoivr conclusion is: And finally, behold I have without pre- 
meditation reverted to the point I desired. For, since it is now 
manifest tha.t the mind 3 itself and bodies are not, properly speaking, 
known by the senses or by the faculty of imagination, but by the 
understanding only; and since they are not known owing to the 
fact that they are seen and touched, I see clearly that there is 
nothing which is easier for me to know than my mind. So you 
have it ; but I do not see how you deduce or are clearly aware, that 

1 Vol. i. p. 158, par. 3. 2 Vol. i. p. 153 nib fin. 

3 Gassendi inserted Mentem, reading ipsam et corpora instead of D.'s ipsamet 
corpora, cf. Med. n. p. 157, where the trans, occurs 'that even bodies are 
not, ' etc. 



150 Objections V 

anything else can be known of your Mind than that it exists. 
Whence that also which was promised by the very title of the Medi- 
tation, viz. that the human mind considered by itself would be shown 
to be better known than the body, cannot in my estimation be com- 
plied with. For it loas not your project to prow that the human 
mind existed and that its existence was better known than that of the 
body, when really no one disputed its existence; rather you doubtless 
wished to make its nature better known than that of the body and 
this is what you, however, haw not achieved. Truly, Mind, you 
ham recounted of corporeal nature the very things, the list of which 
we know, viz. extension, figure, occupation of space, etc. But what 
about yourself? You are not a material complex, not air, not wind, 
not afire, or one of many other things. To grant you these results 
(though some of them you yourself refuted}, they are not however 
what we expected. They are forsooth negatives and we want to 
know, not what you are not, but what you really are. Hence, you 
refer us to your main conclusion, viz. that you are a Thing which 
thinks, i.e. doubts, affirms, etc. But first, to say that you are a 
Thing is to say nothing which is known. For "thing" is a general 
term, undifferentiated and vague and not applying to you more than 
to anything else in the entire world, to anything which is not wholly 
non-existent. You are a Thing 1 ! That is to say, you are not 
nothing ; or, what is precisely the same, you are something. But a 
stone is not nothing, i.e. is something ; and so is a fly, and so on 
with everything else. Next, in saying that you are a Thinking 
being, though you do assign a predicate known to us, yet it was not 
previously unknown and was not the object of your enquiry. Who 
doubts your thinking 1 That which baffles us, that which we seek to 
discover is that inner substance belonging to you, the property of 
which is to think. Wherefore, your conclusion should correspond 
with your quest, and that is to discover, not that you are a Thinking 
thing, but of what nature you, the thing which thinks, are. Is it 
not the case that it will not be sufficient for you to say, when a know- 
ledge of wine superior to the vulgar is soiight for : wine is a thing 
which is liquid, extracted from grapes, is white or red, is sweet t 
intoxicating and so on ? Rather you will try to discover and to 
declare how that internal substance, in accordance with what you 
haw observed of its fabrication, has been compounded out of a 
mixture of spirits, humour 1 , tartar and other elements, in some or 
other particular quantity and proportion. Hence, similarly, since a 
1 Phlegmate. 



Objections V 151 

knowledge of yourself superior to the vulgar, i.e. to what you pre- 
viously possessed^ is called for, you see quite dearly that it is not 
enough to inform us that you are a thing ichlch thinks, doubts, under- 
stands, etc., but that you ought to scrutinise yourself, as it were, by 
a chemical method of procedure in order to be able to reveal and 
demonstrate to us your internal substance. If you accomplish this, 
we shall certainly ourselves discover by investigation whether you are 
better known than the body itself, of which anatomy, chemistry and 
many other sciences, many senses and numbers of experiments of all 
kinds tell us so much. 

RELATIVE TO MEDITATION III. 

Of God: That He exists. 

1. In your Third Meditation, from the fact that your clear and 
distinct knowledge of the proposition, I am a thing which thinks, was 
recognized by you to be the cause of your certainty of its truth, you 
infer that you are able to set up this general Rule : that all things 
which I perceive very clearly and very distinctly are true 1 . But 
though amid the obscurity that surrounds us, there may very well be 
no better Rule obtainable, yet when we see that many minds of the 
first rank, which seem to have perceived many things so clearly and 
distinctly, haw judged that the truth of things is hidden either in 
God or in a well, may it not be open to us to suspect that the Rule is 
perhaps fallacious ? And really, since you are not ignorant of the 
argument of the Sceptics, tell me what else can we infer to be true as 
being clearly and distinctly perceived, except tkat that which appears 
to anyone does appear ? Thus it is true that the taste of a melon 
appears to me to be of this precise kind. But how shall I persuade 
myself that therefore it is true that such a savour exists in the melon ? 
When as a boy and in enjoyment of good health, I thought otherwise, 
indeed, preceiving clearly and distinctly that -the melon had another 
taste. Likewise, I see that many men think otherwise also, as well as 
many animals that are well equipped in respect of the sense of taste 
and are quite health). Does then one truth conflict with another ? 
Or is it rather the case that it its not because a thing is clearly and 
distinctly perceived that it is of itself true, but that that only is true 
which is clearly and distinctly perceived to be so. Practically the 
same account must be given of time things that are relative to the 
mind. I could haw sworn at other times that we cannot pass from 
a lesser to a greater quantity without passing through the stage of 
1 Vol. i. p. 158, par. 1, sulfin. 



152 Objections V 

equality (to a fixed quantity) 1 : that two lines which continually 
approach one another cannot fail to meet if produced to infinity. 
I seemed to myself to perceive those truths so clearly and distinctly 
that I took them for the truest and most indubitable of axioms : 
nevertheless arguments subsequently presented themselves which con- 
vinced me of the opposite, seeming to make me perceive that more 
clearly and more distinctly. But when I now again consider the 
nature of Mathematical assumptions I once more waver. Whence it 
may indeed be said that it is true that I acknowledge the truth of 
such and such propositions, in so far as I assume or conceive that 
quantity, lines and so forth are constituted in this way ; but that 
they are for this reason of themselves true, cannot be safely advanced. 
But whatever may be the case in mathematical matters, I ask you, as 
regards the other matters which we are now investigating, what is 
the reason that men's opinions about them are so many and so various ? 
Each person thinks that he clearly and distinctly perceives that 
proposition which he defends. To prevent you from saying that many 
people either imitate or feign belief, 1 direct your attention to those 
people who face even death for the sake of the opinions they hold, even 
though they see others facing it for the sake of the opposite cause : 
surely, you do not believe that at that point the cries they utter are 
not authentic. You yourself indeed experience this difficulty, because 
previously you admitted many things to be altogether certain and 
manifest, which you afterwards discovered to be dubious 2 . In this 
passage, however, you neither refute nor confirm your Rule, but 
merely snatch the opportunity of expatiating about the Ideas by which 
you may be deceived, in so far as they represent something as being 
external to you, which is, nevertheless, perhaps not external to you ; 
and once mo?*e you treat of a God who may deceive, and by w/iom you 
may be led into error respecting these propositions : " two and three 
are five," "the square has not more than four sides 3 ." Evidently you 
thus suggest that the proof of the rule is to be expected, waiting until 
you have shown that a God exists who cannot be a deceiver. Yet to 
throw out this warning hint, you ought not so much to take pains to 
substantiate this Rule, following which we so. readily mistake the false 
for the true, as to propound a method which will direct us and show 
us when we are in error and when not, so often as we think that we 
dearly and distinctly perceive anything. 

2. You next distinguish Ideas (by ivhich you mean thoughts in 
so far as they resemble images] as innate, adventitious and factitious. 

1 Tr. 2 y ol< It p> 158> ar< 



Objections V 153 

In the first class you put, your understanding of what a thing, what 
truth, what thought is; in the second, your hearing of a noise, 
seeing the sun, feeling (the heat of) 1 the fire ; in the third, the 
Sirens and Hippogryphs you construct imaginatively. You add 
also that perhaps these may be all adventitious or all innate or all 
made by yourself, inasmuch as you have not yet clearly grasped 
their origin. Further, lest meanwhile, before you have grasped this, 
some fallacy creep in, it is well to note that all Ideas seem to be 
adventitious, and proceed from things existing outside the mind and 
falling under some sense faculty. Thus the mind has a power (or 
rather is itself the power} not only of perceiving the adventitious 
Ideas themselves or of perceiving those which things convey to it by 
means of the senses, I repeat, bare and distinct, and wholly such as it 
receives them within itself '; but also of uniting, dividing, diminishing, 
enlarging, arranging, and of performing other operations of this 
description. 

Hence the third class of Ideas at least is not distinct from the 
second ; for the Idea of a chimaera is nothing else than the idea of 
th& head of a lion, the belly of a goat and the tail of a serpent, out of 
which the mind forms a single Idea, though apart or singly they are 
adventitious. So the Idea of a Giant or a man conceived as being 
like a mountain or the whole world, is merely adventitious. It is the 
idea of a man of the common stature, amplified at pleasure by the 
mind, though presented with greater confusedness in proportion as it 
is amplified in thought. So', too, the Idea of a Pyramid, of a city, 
or of anything else which one has not seen, is merely the Idea of 
a Pyramid, city or another thing previously seen, somewhat altered 
in form and consequently multiplied and arranged in some confused 
way. 

As for the forms which you say are innate, they certainly seem to 
be non-existent, and any that are said to be of such character appear 
also to have an adventitious origin. You say, my nature is the 
source of my power of understanding what a thing is 2 . But I do not 
think that you mean to speak of the power of understanding itself, 
which is not in doubt, and is not the subject of investigation here ; but 
rather of the Idea of a Thing. Neither do you mean the Idea of any 
particular Thing ; for the Sun, this stone and all single things are 
Things, the Ideas of which you say are not innate. Hence you speak 
of the Idea of Thing taken universally and as practically synonymous 
with "entity" and extending as widely as it. But I ask you, how 

i Tr. 2 Vol. i. p. 160, par. 2. 



154 Objections V 

can this Idea be in the mind, without all the single things being there 
also, together with their genera, from ivhich it abstracts and forms a 
conception which is proper to none of the particulars and yet agrees 
with them all 1 If the Idea, of Thing is innate, the Idea of animal, 
of plant, stone, of all universals will have to be innate also. There 
will be no need for -us to give ourselves the labour of discriminating 
from each other the many particulars, which enables us, after again 
making a number of distinctions, to retain that alone which is 
common to all, or, what amounts to the same thing, frame the Idea of 
a genus. 

You say also that it is your nature which enables you to under- 
stand what truth is, or, as I interpret, gives you the Idea of truth. 
But if truth is merely the conformity of a judgment ivith the thing- 
about which the judgment is passed, truth is a certain relation, and 
hence not to be distinguished from that wry thing and that Idea 
as related to each other, or what is the same thing, from the very 
Idea of the thing ; for the Idea represents both itself and the thing in 
so far as it has such and such a character. Whence the Idea of 
Truth is merely the Idea of a thing in so far as it is conformable to 
that thing, en- represents it as having the nature it possesses. The 
consequence is that if the Idea of the thing is not innate but adven- 
titious, the Idea of truth is also adventitious, and not innate. If 
this holds of each particular truth, it must also hold of truth 
universally, the notion of which, or Idea (as has already been 
maintained in the case of the idea of thing) is constructed out of 
particular notions or Ideas. 

You allege that it is to your nature you owe your comprehension 
of what thought is (/ continue to interpret once more the Idea of 
thought). But, just as the mind can, out of the Idea of one city,, 
construct in imagination the Idea of another, so can it, out of the Idea 
of one operation, say, seeing or tasting, construct the Idea of another, 
e.g. of thought. Surely, there is a recognised analogy betiveen the 
cognitive faculties, and each readily conduces to a knowledge of the 
other. TlwugJi there is no need for much expenditure of labour m 
connection with the Idea of thought ; it should rather be reserved 
for that of mind, and to the same extent for that of the soul; for 
if that is acknowledged to be innate, there will be no harm in- 
admitting that the Idea of thought is also innate. Hence we must 
wait until you have proud your thesis in the case of the mind or the 
soul. 

3. You seem afterwards to make it doubtful not only whether any 



Objections V 155 

Ideas proceed from external things, but also whether there are any 
external objects at all. And you, seem thence to infer that although 
there exist in you the Ideas of things said to be external, those 
Ideas nevertheless prove that the things exist, since they do not 
necessarily proceed from them, but may be due to yourself or to* 
some other cause, I know not what. It was for this reason I fancy ,. 
that you previously continued to say : That you had not previously 
perceived earth, sky, or stars, but the Ideas of earth, sky and stars, 
which might possibly be a source of delusion. Therefore, if you are 
not yet convinced of the existence of earth, sky, stars, and other objects, 
why, pray, do you walk about on the earth or alter the position of 
your body in order to behold the sun ? Why do you approach the fire- 
in order to feel its heat ? Why sit down at table to a meal, in order- 
to satisfy your hunger ? Why move your tongue in order to speak, or 
your hand in order to send this writing to us ? Certainly the doubts- 
you express may be asserted or subtly derived from our thought, but 
they do not advance the matter in hand, and since you are not really 
in doubt about the existence of things external to you, let us act 
seriously and in good faith and talk about things just as they really 
are. But if, assuming the existence of external objects, you- think 
that it has been properly proved that the Ideas we have oftliem cannot 
be derived from them themselves, you will have to dispose not only 
of the objections you yourself bring, but of additional difficulties- 
which can be raised. 

Thus you do recognise that ideas appear admittedly to proceed 
from objects, because we seem to be taught this lesson by nature 
and because we are sensible that those ideas do not depend on us, 
or on our will 1 . But, not to mention either these arguments or their 
solution, you ought also among other things to have brought up and 
solved the objection in which, it is asked: why one born blind has 
no idea of colour or one born deaf of sound, if it is not because 
external things have not been able to convey from themselves any 
semblance of themselves into the mind of the afflicted individual ? 
For the inlets have been closed since birth, and obstacles placed there 
for all time, ivhich prevent anything from passing through them. 

Aftenvards you press the example of the Sun, of which you 
have two ideas, one derived from the senses, viz. that in accordance 
with which the sun seems to be extremely small ; while the other 
is derived from astronomical reasonings, and represents the sun to- 
be of great size. That idea is true and more similar (to its object)* 
1 Vol. i. p. 160, par. 3. 2 Tr. 



156 Objections V 

which, is not drawn from the senses, but is elicited from your innate 
notions, or achieved by some other means. But each of that pair 
of ideas of the Sun is true, similar to, and in conformity with the 
Sun ; only one is less, the other more so. In precisely the same way 
the two ideas we haw of a man, the one proceeding from Mm at ten 
yards' distance, the other at a hundred or a thousand, are similar 
to him, true, and in confwmity with him. But the one has these 
qualities in a greater degree than the others, in respect that the idea 
which we haw when the man is near is to a slight degree impaired, 
while that which proceeds from a distance suffers to a greater extent. 
All this might be explained in a few wwds if it ivere permitted, or 
if you did not grasp it sufficiently yourself. 

Moreover, though it is by the mind alone that we are aware of 
that vast idea of the sun, the idea is not on that account elicited 
from any innate notion. Rather what occurs is, that in so far as 
experience proves and reason, supporting it, confirms the belief that 
things at a distance appear smaller than when they are near, the 
idea which finds entrance by the channels of sense is merely amplified 
by the mind's own power, and so much the more in proportion to what 
is known to be the sun's distance from us and the precise number 
of semi-diameters of the earth to which its diameter is equal. 

Do you wish to infer that no part of this idea is implanted in 
us by nature ? AsJc what it is in one born blind. You will find, in 
the first place that in his mind it has neither colour nor brilliance ; 
secondly, that neither is it round 2 , unless someone has told him that it 
is round and he himself ha,s previously handled round bodies. Finally 
you will discover that it is not of such great magnitude unless the 
blind person has either by reasoning or owing to the influence of 
authority amplified his previously received notion. 

Yet allow me to interpose this reflection / ask you : haw we 
ourselves, we who haw seen the Sun so often, who have so many times 
beheld its apparent diameter, and have as frequently reasoned as to 
its true diameter, have we, I say, any other than the common image 
of the sun 2 It is true that by reason we infer that the sun exceeds 
the earth in size more than a hundred and sixty times; but do we 
on that account possess the idea of a body of such a vast extent ? 
It is true we amplify this idea which we receive from the senses as 
much as possible, we exert our mind as much as we can; yet we 

1 Vol. i. p. 161, par. 3. 

2 It seems absurd to. us to talk of an 'idea' being round, but we must 
remember that by ' idea ' Gassendi means the shape and sensible qualities of a 
thing as presented to us in imagination. 



Objections V 157 

manage to present ourselves with nothing but mere obscurity, and as 
often as we wish to haw a distinct thought of the Sun, the mind 
must return to that sensible appearance which it has received through 
the medium of the eye. It is sufficient for the mind not to deny that 
the Sun is really greater than it appears, and that if the eye 
approached nearer to it, it would haw an idea of greater extent; 
but meanwhile it is to the idea in its presented magnitude that the 
mind attends. 

4. Next, recognising the inequality and diversity between ideas, 
you say: There is no doubt that those which represent to me 
substances are something more, arid contain so to speak more 
objective reality within them, than those that simply represent 
modes or accidents; and that idea again by which I understand 
a supreme God, eternal, infinite, omnipotent, the Creator of all 
things which are outside of Himself, has certainly more objective 
reality in itself than those by which finite substances are repre- 
sented 1 . Here you go at such a great pace that we must arrest your 
course for a little. I do not indeed haw any difficulty about that 
which you call objective reality. It is enough if you in conformity 
with the common expression, according to which external things exist 
subjectively and formally in themselves, but objectively or ideally in 
the understanding, mean (as is evident} merely that an idea should 
agree with the thing of ivhich it is the idea; and that it hence 
contains nothing of a representative nature which is not really in the 
thing itself, and represents more reality in proportion as the thing 
it represents contains moi'e reality in itself. True, you immediately 
afterwards distinguish objective from formal reality which, as I 
interpret, is the idea itself, not as representative, but as an actual 
entity. But it is agreed that whether it be the idea or the objective 
reality of the idea, it must not be measured by the total formal 
reality of the thing , or that which the thing has in itself, but merely 
by that part (of the thing) 2 of which the understanding has acquired 
knowledge, or (what is the wry same) according to the acquaintance 
with the thing ivhich the understanding possesses. Thus, for example, 
you will b& said to possess a perfect idea of a man, if you haw 
surveyed him attentively and frequently and in many aspects ; while 
the idea of him whom you have but seen in passing and on one 
occasion, and partially only, will certainly be imperfect. But if you 
have beheld not the man himself but a mask covering his face and his 
garments clothing his body compktely, we must say either that you 
1 Vol. i. p. 162, par. 1. 2 Tr. 



158 Objections V 

have no idea of Mm, or that if you do possess one it is extremely 
imperfect and confused. 

These are my grounds for maintaining that, though we have 
indeed a distinct idea of accidents and one that is true 1 of them, 
that of the substance which underlies them is only confused and quite 
fictitious. Hence, though you say that there is more objective reality 
in the idea of substance than in the idea of accidents, it must first 
be denied that there is a true idea or representation of substance, 
-and hence that it possesses any objective reality. Secondly, ewn 
though it should haw been admitted that it does possess some, we 
must deny that it has more than the ideas of accidents possess, since 
everything that owns a reality of this sort, holds it from the ideas of 
those accidents, under which, or after the fashion of ivhich we have 
said substance is conceived, ivhen we declare that it could be conceived 
only as something extended and possessing figure and colour. 

Concerning what you add about the idea of God, / ask you how, 
when you are not yet sure whether a God exists, you know that God 
is represented by the idea of Him, as supreme, eternal, infinite, 
omnipotent and as creator of all things'? Do you not take this from 
your previously received knowledge of God, in so far as you ftave 
heard these attributes ascribed to him ? If you had not heard so 
much before, would you describe God so ? You will reply that this 
is brought forward merely as an example and without implying any 
definition as yet. So be it : but take care lest afterwards you take 
it as a matter already decided. 

You allege that there is more objective reality in the idea of an 
infinite God than in the idea of a finite thing. But, firstly, since the 
human understanding is not capable of conceiving infinity, neither, 
consequently, does it possess or have cognisance of an idea which is 
representative of an infinite thing. Wherefore also he who says that 
a thing is infinite, attributes to a thing which he does not comprehend 
a name which he does not understand, since, just as the thing extends 
beyond his widest grasp, so the negation of limit ascribed to its 
extension is not understood by him, whose comprehension is always 
confined within some bounds. 

Next, though every highest perfection is wont to be ascribed to 
God, all such seem to be derived from the things which we customarily 
admire in oursekes, e.g. length of existence, power, knowledge, kind- 
ness, blessedness, etc. ; we amplify these as much as possible, and then 
pronounce God to be everlasting, all-powerful, all-knowing, most 



Objections V 159 

most blessed, etc., but the idea which represents all tJiese 
attributes does not contain more objective reality on that account 
than the finite things taken together have, out of the ideas of which 
that idea is compounded, afterwards being magnified in the aforesaid 
way. For neither does he who says eternal, thereby embrace in his 
mind the total extent of the duration of that which has never begun 
to be and never will cease to exist ; nor does he who says omnipotent 
envisage the whole multitude of possible effects ; and so in the case of 
the others. 

Lastly, can anyone affirm that he possesses an idea of God which 
is true, or which represents God as He is ? How slight a thing 
would God be, unless He were other and had other attributes than 
this feeble idea of ours contains ! Must we not believe that man 
relatively to God has a smaller proportion of perfection than that 
which the tiniest creature, a tick, burrowing in its skin, possesses 
relatively to an elephant ? Hence, if the man who from observation 
of the perfections of the tick should construct in his mind an idea 
which he maintained was that of an elephant, would be held to be 
very silly, how can he be satisfied with himself, who out of human 
perfections that he beholds shapes an idea which is, he contends, that 
of God, and resembles Him ? Tell me also how we recognise in God 
those perfections ivhich in ourselves we find to be so tiny ? And when 
we have detected them, what sort of essence must -we there/ore imagine 
is that of God ? God is most certainly infinitely beyond the widest 
grasp, and when our mind addresses itself to the contemplation of 
God, it not only gets befogged but comes to a standstill. Hence it 
follows both that we haw no reason to assert that we possess any 
cognate idea- which represents God, and it is enough if, on the 
analogy of our human qualities, we derive and construct an idea of 
some sort or other for our use an idea which does not transcend 
human comprehension, and contains no reality which we do not perceive 
in other things or by means of other things. 

5. You assume, next, that it is manifest by the natural light 
that there must be at least as much reality in the efficient and total 
cause as in its effect \ You do so in order that you may infer that 
there must be at least as much formal reality in the cause of the 
idea as this idea contains of objective reality 2 . But this is a huge 
stride forward and we must arrest your progress for a little. 

First, that common spying there is nothing in the effect which 
is not in the cause seems to be understood of the material, rather 

1 Vol. i. p. 162, par. 2, ad init. 2 Ibid. p. 163, par. 1. 



160 Objections V 

than of efficient causality. For the efficient cause is something- 
external and frequently of a diverse nature from the effect. And 
although the effect may be said to hold its reality from the efficient 
cause, yet it does not acquire that which the efficient cause has 
necessarily in itself, but that which can be communicated from 
another source. The thing is quite clear in effects due to art For 
although the house owes all its reality to the builder, the latter 
transfers to it a reality which he has derived not from himself but 
from some other source. So, likewise the sun acts, in variously- 
transforming a lower material and generating animals of various- 
kinds. Nay, even the parent from whom, we grant, his offspring* 
derives something material, acquires that, not from an efficient, but 
from a material principle. Your objection, that tlie effect must 
be contained in its cause either formally or eminently, prove? 
nothing more than that the form which the effect possesses is some- 
times similar to the form of its cause, sometimes indeed dissimilar 
and less perfect, to such an extent that the form of its cause towers- 
high above it. But it does not follow that for this reason even an 
eminent cause gives any of its being or, in respect of what it contains- 
formally, shares its form with its effect. For although that seems- 
to be the case in the generation of living creatures, nevertheless you 
will not say that a father, in begetting a son, divides up and gives to- 
him part of his rational soul In a single word, an efficient cause 
contains its effect only in the sense that it is able to form it out of a 
given material and bring it into actual existence. 

Further, touching what you infer about objective reality, J 
employ the example of my own image, which I can behold either in a 
mirror which I hold up in front of me, or in a painting. For, as- 
I myself am the cause of my image in the mirror in so far as I 
dispatch from myself and convey into the mirror some semblance of 
myself, and as the painter is the cause of the image which appears in 
the picture ; so, when the idea or image of me exists in you or in any 
other mind, it may be asked whether I myself am its cause, in so* 
far as I transmit the semblance of myself into the eye, and by the 
medium of tJie eye into the mind itself Or is there some other cause 
which delineates it in the mind as with a stile or pencil? But 
evidently no cause beyond myself is required; for although afterwards- 
my understanding may amplify, diminish, compound, and handle it 
in other ways, I nevertheless am myself the primary cause of the 
whole of the reality which it contains within it. What is here said 
of me is to be understood also of all external objects. 



Objections V 161 

Now the reality attacking to an idea is distinguished as two-fold 
by you. Its formal reality cannot indeed be anything other than the 
fine substance ivhich has issued out of me, and has been received into 
the understanding and has' been fashioned into an idea. (But if you 
will not allow that the semblance proceeding from an object is a 
substantial effluence, adopt wJiatever theory you mil, as long as you 
decrease the images reality.) But its objective reality can only be 
the representation of or likeness to me which the idea carries, or 
indeed only that proportion in the disposition of its parts in virtue of 
which they recall me. Whichever way you take it, there seems to be 
nothing real there ; since all that exists is the mere relation of the 
parts of the idea to each other and to me, i.e. a mode of its formal 
existence, in respect of which it is constructed in this particular 
way. But this is no matter ; call it, if you like, the objective reality 
of an idea. 

Arguing from this position, it seems that you ought to compare 
the formal reality of an idea with my formal reality or with my 
substance, and the objective reality of an idea with the proportion 
prevailing between my members or my external figure and form. 
You, Jwwever, prefer to compare the objective reality of an idea with 
my formal reality. 

Further, whatever be the explanation of the axiom discussed above, 
it is clear not only that as much formal reality must exist in me as 
there is of objective reality in the idea of me, but that even the formal 
reality of my idea is, as nearly as possible, nothing when compared 
with my formal reality and my entire substance. Hence we must 
indeed concede to you that there must be as much formal reality in 
the cause of an idea as there is of objective reality in its idea, 
when the whole of the reality in the idea is practically nothing as 
compared ivitk that of its cause. 

6. You add: that if you possessed an idea the objective reality 
of which was so great that you could contain it neither eminently 
nor formally, and thus could not yourself be the cause of it then, 
at length, it followed of necessity that some other being besides 
yourself existed in the world. For, otherwise, you would have had 
no sufficient argument to convince you of the existence of anything 
else 1 . True, according to what you have already maintained, you 
are not the cause of the reality of your ideas; rather t/ie thint/s 
themselves represented by the ideas are the cause, in so far as they 
convey into you as into a mirror the images of themselves, even though 
1 Vol. i. p. 163, par. 3. 

E, n. ii. 11 



162 Objections V 

you can derive from those ideas the opportunity at times of manu- 
facturing th$ notion of chimaeras. But whether you are their cause 
or not, is it because of this that you are uncertain about the existence 
of anything else besides yourself in the ivorld? Ansiver sincerely, 
I pray, for there is no need for us, whatever the truth turn out to be 
about ideas, to search for arguments to decide this matter. 

Next you run over the list of the ideas you possess, and besides 
the idea of yourself you enumerate the ideas of God, of corporeal 
and inanimate things, of angels, animals and men; this is in 
order that, since you say there is no difficulty about the idea of 
yourself, you may infer that the ideas of men, of animals and of 
angels are composed of those which you have of yourself and of 
God, and that the ideas of corporeal things might have proceeded 
from you also \ But here it occurs to me to wonder how you can be 
said to haw an idea of yourself (and one so fertile as to furnish 
you with such a supply of other ideas) and hoiv it can be maintained 
that the matter presents no difficulties ; when, nevertheless, you haw 
really either no idea of yourself, or one which is very confused and 
imperfect, as we liave already observed in passing judgment on the 
previous Meditation. In it you even inferred that nothing could be 
more easily and more dearly perceived by you than yourself. What 
if it be the case that, as you do not and cannot possess an idea of 
yourself, it may be said that anything else is more capable of being 
easily and clearly perceived by you than yourself ? 

In my reflections as to the reason why it is the case that neither 
does sight see itself, nor t/ie understanding understand itself, the 
thought presents itself to me that nothing acts on itself. Thus neither 
does the hand (or the tip of the finger) strike itself nor does the foot 
kick itself. But since in other cases, in order for us to acquire 
hnoivledge of a thing, that thing must act on the faculty that 
discerns it and must convey into it the semblance of itself, or inform 
it with its sensible appearance ; it is quite clear that the faculty 
itself, since it is not outside itself, cannot convey a similar semblance 
of itself into itself, and cannot consequently acquire knowledge of 
itself, or, what is the same thing, perceive itself. And why, do you 
think, does the eye, though incapable of seeing itself in itself, yet see 
itself in the mirror ? Why, because there is a space between the eye 
and the mirror, and the eye so acts on the mirror, conveying thither 
its sensible appearance, that the mirror re-acts on it again, conveying 
back to the eye that sensible appearance's own appearance. Give me 
1 Vol. i. p. 164. 



Objections V 163 

then a mirror in which you yourself may in similar jashion act ; 
I promise you that the result will be that this will reflect back your 
semblance into yourself, and that you then will at length perceive 
yourself, not indeed by a direct, but a reflected cognition. But, if 
you do not give this, there is no hope of your knowing yourself. 

I could here also press the point : how can you be said to haw 
.an idea of God, except one such as, and acquired in the way that, 
we have said? Whence comes your idea of the Angels? Unless 
you had been told of them you would never haw thought of them. 
Of the animals? and of other things? I am practically certain 
that of these you could haw had no idea unless they had entered your 
.senses ; just as you have no idea of many other things, of which 
neither the appearance nor the report has reached you. But, dis- 
missing this, I do admit that the ideas existing in the mind of diverse 
things can so be compounded, as to give rise to many of the forms of 
other things, although those which you enumerate do not seem to 
account sufficiently for the great diversity of form you mention, and 
indeed do not suffice for the distinct and determinate idea of any 
definite 1 thing. 

Moreover I have doubt only about the ideas of corporeal things, 
and this is due to the fact that there is no small difficulty in seeing 
how you are able to deduce them from yourself, and out of the 
idea of yourself alone 2 , as long as you pose as incorporeal and 
consider yourself as such. For, if you have known only incorporeal 
substance, how can you grasp tJie notion o/ corporeal substance as 
well ? Is there any analogy between the latter and the former ? You 
my that they both agree in this, in being capable of existing ; but 
that agreement cannot be comprehended unless first both the two 
things which agree are compreliended. What you do is to make a 
common notion which implies an understanding of the particulars 
before it is formed. Certainly if the mind can, out of that in- 
corporeal substance, form the idea of corporeal substance, there is no 
reason wliy we should doubt that a blind man, even one wJio has been 
completely enshrouded in darkness from his birth, can form in his 
own mind the ideas of light and of the colours. You say that 
consequently the ideas of extension, figure and motion, and of other 
common sensibles can be derived ; but doubtless it is easy for you to 
say this. What I marvel at is, why you do not deduce light, colour 
and other similar things with a like facility. But we must not 
linger over these matters. 

i certae. 2 Vol. i. p. 165, par. 2, 

112 



164 Objections V 

7. You conclude : Hence there remains alone the idea of God, 
concerning which we must discover whether it is not something that 
is capahle of proceeding from me myself. By the name God I under- 
stand a substance that is infinite, independent, all-knowing, all- 
powerful, and by which I myself and everything else, if anything 
else does exist, have been created. Now all these characteristics 
are such that the more diligently I attend to them, the less do 
they appear capable of proceeding from me alone ; hence, from 
what has been already said, we must conclude that God necessarily 
exists 1 . This is, of course, the conclusion for which you were making, 
But, as I grasp the inference, I do not see how you get this result. 
You say that those characteristics which you understand to exist in 
God are of such a nature as to be incapable of proceeding from you 
alone : your intention in so doing is to show that they must proceed 
from God. Bu^ firstly, nothing is more true than that they have 
not proceeded from you alone, so that you have had no knowledge of 
them derived from yourself and merely by means of your own efforts ; 
for they haw proceeded and are derived from objects, from parents^ 
from masters, from teachers, and from the society in which you have 
.moved. But you will say: '/ am mind alone: I admit nothing 
outside of myself, not even the ears by which I hear nor the people 
who converse mith me! You may assert this : but would you assert 
it, unless you heard us with your ears, and there were men from 
whom you learned words. Let us talk in earnest, and tell me 
sincerely: do you not derive those word-sounds which you utter in 
speaking of God, from the society in which you have lived? And 
since the sounds you use are due to intercourse witli other men, is 
it not from the, same source tJiat you derive the notions underlying 
and designated by those sounds ? Hence though not due to you alone, 
they do not seem on th-at account to proceed from God, but to come 
from some other quarter. Further, what is there in those things 
which, on the opportunity first being furnished by the objects, you 
could not henceforth derive from yourself 1 Do you, for that reason, 
apprehend something which is beyond human grasp ? It is true that 
if you comprehended the nature of God there would be reason for 
your thinking that it ivas from God you derived this knowledge. 
But all those terms which you apply to God are merely certain 
perfections observed to exist in human beings and other things, which 
the human mind is able to understand, collect and amplify, as has, 
already been said several times. 

i Vol. i, p. 165, par. 3. 



Objections V 165 

You say : that although the idea of substance might come 
from yourself, because you are a substance, the idea of an infinite 
substance could not be so derived, because you are not infinite 1 . 
But you do not possess for that reason any idea of an infinite 
substance, except in a verbal sense, and in the way in which men 
are said to comprehend (which is really not to comprehend) the 
infinite. Hence there is no necessity in this, for such an idea to 
proceed from an infinite substance ; for it can be made, in the way 
already specified, by composition and amplification. Unless, wlien 
the early Philosophers, from the comprehension of the visible space, 
the single world, and limited principles which they understood, 
derived the ideas of those wry things, and held them in such a way 
that by enlarging them they formed the idea of an infinite universe, 
of infinite worlds and of infinite principles ; you would say that 
those ideas had not been formed by the exertions of their own minds 
but had issued into the mind from the infinite universe, the infinite 
worlds, and infinite principles. Moreover, consider your defences : 
that you perceive the infinite by a true idea 2 : swrdy if that idea 
were true it would reveal the nature of the infinite and consequently 
you loould apprehend what is its leading feature, i.e. infinity. But 
your thought always stops short at something finite, and you talk of 
the infinite only because you do not perceive what is beyond your 
perceptions ; consequently there is not much error in saying that you 
perceive the infinite by negation of the finite. Nor does it suffice to 
say that you perceive more reality in an infinite substance 8 than in a 
finite. For you ought to perceive an infinite reality, which, nevertheless 
you do not do. Nay also, you do not really perceive more when you 
merely amplify the finite and thereupon imagine that there is more 
reality in that which has been enlarged than exists in it, tlw very 
same thing, while it remains within narrow bounds. Unless you also 
mean that those Philosophers, wJio conceived many worlds to exist, 
perceived a greater actually existing reality ivhen doing so, than 
while they entertained the thought of a single world. Incidentally 
this suggests to me that the reason why the human mind becomes 
more confused in proportion to the extent to which it amplifies some 
form and Idea, seems to lie in the fact that the mind wrests such a 
form from its setting, annuls tJie distinctness of its parts, and so 
attenuates the ivJwle, that at length it vanishes away. I might 
remember also that mental confusion will result from the opposite 
cause, as e.g. when an Idea is too muck condensed. 

1 Vol. i, p. 1.66, par. 1. 2 j^. par. 2. 3 Ibid. 



166 Objections V 

You say : that there is no obstacle in the fact that you do not 
comprehend the infinite or all that is in it, and that it is sufficient 
for you to understand a few particulars in order to he said to have 
a true idea of it, and one that has the maximum clearness and 
distinctness 1 . But nay, you do not haw a true idea of the infinite, 
your idea is only of the finite, if you do not comprehend the infinite, 
but merely the finite. You can at most be said to know part of the 
infinite, but not, on that account, the infinite itself ; just as a man 
who had never gone outside an underground caw, might indeed be 
said to know part of the world but not, for that reason, the world 
itself. Hence, because of this, he will turn out to be foolish if he 
thinks that the idea of such a limited portion of the world is the 
true and genuine- idea of the whole. But, you say, it is of the 
nature of the infinite not to be comprehended by you, who are 
finite. / believe you ; but neither is it of the nature of a true idea 
of an infinite thing to represent merely a tiny part of it ; or what 
is rather no part of it, on account of its bearing no proportion to the 
whole. You say, that it is sufficient for you to have knowledge of 
those few things, things you perceive clearly. This forsooth, is as 
though it were sufficient to perceive the tip of a hair belonging to 
the man of whom you want to have an idea which resembles the 
reality. Would it not be a fine likeness of me if the painter were to 
depict a single hair of mine or the tip of it merely ? But ivhat we 
may know of an infinite God is in proportion less not only by much, 
or by very much, but is even infinitely less than one of my hairs, or 
the tip of it, relatively to my whole self. In one word, these known 
facts prove nothing of God which they do not likewise prove of that 
infinite series of worlds mentioned before ; and this is all the more 
true in proportion as these could be more clearly understood from our 
clear knowledge of this one world, than God, or an infinite entity 
can be derived in thought from your substance, as to the nature of 
which you are not yet agreed. 

8. Elsewhere you argue thus : For how would it be possible 
that I should know that I doubt and desire, that is to say, that 
something is lacking to me, and that I am not wholly perfect, 
unless I had within me some idea of a Being more perfect than 
myself, m comparing myself with which I recognized my deficiencies 3 ? 
But if you are in doubt about any matter, if you desire something 
and recognize that something is lacking to you, what is there 
wonderful in that, when you do not know everything, are not every- 

1 Vol. i. p. 166, par. 3. 2 germanam. 3 j^. par. 2, sub fin. 



Objections V 167 

tiling, do not have everything ? Do you acknowledge that hence you 
are not wholly perfect ? Even this is certainly quite true and can be 
said without disparagement. Is it hence you gather that something 
more perfect than you exists ? What ? As if whatever you desire 
were not in some way or other more perfect than you. Thus when 
you desire bread the bread is not in every sense more perfect than you 
or than your body ; it is more perfect only than that emptiness 
ivhich exists in your stomach. How then do you gather that there 
is something more perfect than you ? It is vis. in so far as you 
behold the totality of things which embrace both you and the bread 
and the rest of things ; and in so doing, noticing that the separate 
parts of the whole haw some perfection and are serviceable to one 
another and are able to reinforce each other, you easily come to under- 
stand that there is more perfection in the whole than in the part ; and 
that, since you are only a part, you must acknowledge, that there is 
something more perfect than you. It is, then, in this way that you 
can haw the idea of a being that is more perfect than you, by com- 
paring yourself with ivhich you recognize your defects. I pass by 
the fact that other parts also may be more perfect, that you may 
desire what they possess and, by comparing yourself with them, 
acknowledge your defects. Thus you might know a man who was 
healthier, stronger, more handsome, more learned, calmer, and hence 
more perfect than yourself ; and it would not be difficult for you to 
conceive the idea of him, and by comparing yourself with that, learn 
that you did not possess that degree of health, strength, and of the 
other perfections which existed in him. 

Shortly afterwards you propose to yourself the objection: But 
possibly I am something more than I suppose myself to be, and 
perhaps all those perfections which I attribute to God are in some 
way potentially in me, although they do not yet issue in action ; as 
may be the case, if my knowledge tends more and more to grow to 
infinity 1 . But you reply : that though it were true that my know- 
ledge gradually increased and that there were in me potentially 
many things which were not yet there actually, nevertheless none 
of these excellencies pertain to the idea of God, in which there is 
nothing potential, for the fact that it increases little by little is an 
absolutely certain token of the imperfection of my knowledge. But 
though it is indeed true that what you perceive in the idea is actually 
in the idea, yet that is not a reason why it sJwuld exist in the thing 
of which you have the idea. Thus the architect constructs for himself 
1 Vol. i. p. 167, ad init. 



168 Objections V 

the idea of a house, which Idea is actually a complex of the walls, 
floors, roof, and windows, etc., he has traced ; nevertheless that house 
and its component parts do not yet exist in actuality, but only 
potentially. Thus the above idea of the Philosophers contains in 
actuality an infinity of worlds ; yet you cannot say that therefore 
there is actually an infinity of worlds. Hence, whether something 
exist in you, or whether it do not exist in you potentially, it is sufficient 
that your idea or knowledge be capable of being gradually increased 
and expanded ; and it cannot be thence inferred that what is repre- 
sented and apprehended by means of the idea does actually exist, 
I gladly accept what you next recognize, viz. that your knowledge 
never will become infinite. But you ought to acknowledge that 
you will never possess a true and faithful idea of God ; for there is 
always more, nay infinitely more to know about God, than about that 
man, the tip of whose hair merely you haw seen. As a matter of 
fact even if you haw not seen the whole of that man, you have yet 
seen another, by comparison with whom you are able to make some 
conjecture about him. But nothing is ever presented to our know- 
ledge similar to God and His immensity. 

You say that you understand God to be actually infinite, so 
that He can add nothing to His perfection. But this judgment is 
about a matter of which you are in igno?*ance and is drawn merely 
from a presumption, in the way that our Philosophers derived their 
opinion about an infinity of worlds, infinite principles, and an 
infinite universe, to the immensity of which nothing could be added. 
But how can there be any truth in ivhat you subjoin, viz. : that the 
objective being of an idea cannot be due to a potential but only to 
an actual being, if what we haw just said about the Architect's idea 
or that of the ancient Philosophers be correct ? I ask you especially 
how this can be so, wh-en, as you remember, ideas of this sort are 
composed of others which the mind has previously acquired, having 
derived them from actually existing causes. 

9. You next ask, whether, possessing now as you do the idea 
of a being more perfect than yourself, you yourself could exist, if 
no such being existed ? Your reply is : ' From whom then could I 
derive my existence \ Perhaps from myself or from my parents, or 
from some other source less perfect than God 1 ? ' Then you go on to 
prove that you do not derive your existence from yourself. But 
this is not at all necessary. You also state the reason why you have 
not always existed. But that also is superfluous, except in so far as 
1 Vol. i, p. 167, par. 3 and par. 4. 



Objections V 169 

you wish at the same time to infer that you depend upon a cause 
which not only produces you, but also conserves you. Thus from the 
fact that your lifetime falls into many parts, you infer that you 
must be created in each one of them, on account of the mutual 
independence that exists among them 1 . But consider if this can be 
so understood. There are indeed certain effects which, in order to 
continue in existence and never at any moment to fail, require the 
continuous and efficient presence of the cause which started them. An 
example of such an effect is the light of the sun (though effects of this 
kind are not so much actually identical, but rather equivalent, as 
in the case of a river its water is said to be). But there are other 
things ivhich we see continue, not merely ivhen the cause ivhich they 
acknowledge is no longer active, but, if you care, even wJien it is 
destroyed and reduced to nothing. Of such a sort are things ivhich 
are procreated or manufactured, so many in number as to make it 
distasteful to recount them ; but it suffices that you are one of these, 
whatsoever the cause of your existence turn out to be. But, you* 
maintain, the different parts of the time in which you exist do nob 
depend on one another. Here we may object and ask, what thing 
there is of which we can think, the parts of which are more inseparable 
from one another ? What thing has parts, the order and connection 
of wMch is more inviolable ? Is there anything in ivhich there is less 
power of detaching the prior from the posterior of its parts, in which 
they cohere mare closely and depend more on one another ? But not to 
press this point, I ask 'what difference this dependence or independence 
of the parts of time, which are external, successive and non-active, 
makes to your production or reproduction ? Certainly nothing more 
than the flow or passage by of the particles of water makes to the 
production and reproduction of a rock past which the river flows. 
But, you say, from the fact that you existed a little while ago it 
does not follow that you must now exist. I quite agree : but this is 
not because a cause is required to create you anew, but wring to the 
fact that the cause is not held to be absent which might destroy you, or 
because t/ou ought not to have within you that weakness owing to 
which you will finally cease to exist 

You allege that it is hence manifest by means of the light of 
nature, that the distinction between creation and conservation is 
solely a distinction of the reason 2 . But how is it manifest, except 
perhaps in the case of light itself and similar effects ? You add that 
you do not possess a power which is capable of bringing it to pass 
1 Vol. r. p. 168, par. 2. s Ibid. 



170 Objections V 

that you shall exist shortly afterwards, because you are not conscious 
of it, and are yet a thinking thing l . But you do possess a power by 
means of which you may judge that you will in future exist: though 
this does not follow necessarily or indubitably, because that power of 
yours, or natural constitution, does not go so far as to guard against 
every destructive came whether internal or external. Hence also you 
will exist because you have a power, not of producing yourself anew, 
but one which suffices to enable you to continue to eccist, unless some 
destructive cause supervenes. Moreover your conclusion, that you 
depend upon a being distinct from yourself, is correct ; but not in 
the sense of your being produced anew by it, but in the sense of your 
being originally produced by it. You go on to say that such a being- 
cannot be your parents or any other cause whatsoever. But why 
not your parents, by whom you seem so manifestly produced, along 
with your body ? Not to speak of the sun and the other co-operative 
causes. ' Ah,' you say, ' I am a thing which thinks, and have within 
me the idea of God.' But were not your parents or their minds also 1 
thinking things, also possessing the idea of God ? Hence you should 
not here urge that dictum of which we haw already talked, viz. that, 
there must be at least as much reality in the cause as in the effect. 
You say, if there be another cause besides God, we may again 
enquire whether this cause derives its origin from God or from some 
other thing. For, if from itself, it will be God ; if from some other 
cause, we can ask the question over and over again, until we arrive 
at that which is self-derived, and is God, since an infinite regress is- 
not permitted 2 . But if your parents were the cause of your existence^ 
that cause might have been not self -derived, but dependent on something 
else ; and that again might have been due to something else and so on 
to infinity. Nor can you prow that that regress to infinity is absurd? 
unless you at the same time show that the world has a definite 
beginning in time, and that hence there was a first parent, who had 
no parent. An infinite regress seems certainly to be absurd only in 
the case of causes which are so connected and subordinated to one 
another, t/iat no action on the part of the lower is possible without the 
activity of the higher ; e.g. in the case where something is moved by a 
stone, itself impelled by a stick, which the hand moves, or when the 
last link in a chain lifts a iveight, while this link itself is moved by 
the one above it and that by another : for in these circumstances we 
must go on until we come to one thing in motion which a first moves. 
But in those causes which are so arranged that, though the former is 
1 Yol. i. p. 169, par. 1. 2 Ibid. p. 169, par. 2. 



Objection V 171 

taken away, that which depends upon it survives and may continue to 
act, it does not seem equally absurd. Hence when you say : that it 
is sufficiently manifest that here there can be no infinite regress 1 , see 
if it was so manifest to Aristotle, who ivas so strongly persuaded that 
there had never been a first parent. You proceed : nor can several 
partial causes have concurred in your production, from which you 
have received the idea of the various perfections attributed to God> 
since they can only be found in a God who is one and single, whose 
unity or simplicity is a perfection of a very high order 2 . But whether 
the cause of your existence is to be found in one thing or in many, it 
is not, therefore, necessary that such things should impress in you the 
idea of their perfections^ which you have been able to unite. Mean- 
ivhile, however, you give us the opportunity of asking why, ij there 
are not many causes of your existence^ it has been possible at least for 
many things to exist, by admiring the perfections of which you have 
concluded that the Being must be a blessed one in which they all exist 
together. You know how the Poets describe Pandora. Nay, have 
not you, admiring in various men some outstanding knowledge, 
wisdom, justice, constancy, power, health, beauty, blessedness, length 
of existence, etc., been able to unite all these and consider how sublime 
he would be who possessed them all at the same time ? Why can you 
not then increase all these perfections in various degrees until he 
would be all the more to be admired were it so that nothing was- 
lacking to his knowledge, power, duration, etc., or could be added to- 
it ; for in these circumstances he would be all powerful, all knowing, 
eternal and so on ? A nd when you found that such perfections could 
not coincide with human nature, might you not think that that would 
be a blissful nature, in which such a conjunction of attributes was- 
possible ? Might it not be worthy of your investigation to discover 
whether there is such a being in existence or no ? Why might it not 
be possible for various arguments to induce you to believe that it was 
more reasonable that such a being should exist rather than not exist ? 
Would it not be possible next to divest this of corporeity, limitation 
and all the remaining qualities, which imply a certain imperfection ? 
Most people seem certainly to ham proceeded in this way ; although^ 
as there are nevertheless various modes and degrees of reasoning, some 
haw let God remain corporeal, some haw allowed Him human 
members, and others haw made Him not one but many, not to speak 
of other and too popular descriptions. In connection with that 
perfection of unity there is no contradiction in the conception of alt 
1 Vol. i. p. 169, par. 3. 2 Ibid. par. 4. 



172 Objections V 

the perfections ascribed to God as being intimately joined together 
and inseparable. But yet the idea by which you embrace them has 

-I t/ */ / 

not been placed in you by Him, but has been drawn by you from the 
things which you haw seen, and has been amplified in the manner 
described. Thus certainly do we have the description, not only of 
Pandora, the goddess dowered with all gifts and perfections, but also 
of the perfect State, the perfect Orator, etc. Finally, from the fact 
that you exist and possess the idea of a supremely perfect being, 
you conclude, that you have a highly evident demonstration of the 
existence of God. But though your conclusion, viz. that God exists 
is true, it is not clear from what you have said, tJmt you have demon- 
strated it in the most evident manner. 

10. You say, ' it remains for me to examine into the manner 
in which I have acquired this idea from God ; for neither have 
I derived it from the senses, nor is it a fictitious idea made by me 
(for it is not in my power to take from or add anything to it) ; and 
consequently the only alternative left is that it is innate in me, just 
as the idea of myself is 1 / But I haw frequently already said that 
you may haw partly derived it from the senses, partly made it up. 
Moreover, as to your contention that you can add nothing to and 
take away nothing from it, consider that, to begin with, it was not 
equally perfect. Reflect that there may be men, or Angels, or other 
natures more instructed than your own, from whom you may receive 
some information about God, which you haw not yet known. Reflect 
that God at least could so instruct you and give you finally such a 
degree of illumination, whether in this life or in another, that you 
would esteem as nought anything which you now knoio of Him. 
Whatever that kwwledge finally be, consider that as the ascent can 
be made from the perfections of created things to the knowledge of the 
perfections of God, and that as they are not all known at a single 
moment, but can be discovered in increasing numbers from day to day, 
so it will be possible for the idea of God not to be possessed in its 
perfection at a single moment, but to become more perfect from day to 
day. You proceed : And one certainly ought not to find it strange 
that God, in creating ine, placed this idea within me, to serve as 
the mark of the workman imprinted on his work. It is likewise not 
essential that this mark should be something different from the 
work itself. For, from the sole fact that God created me, it is most 
probable that in some way He has placed His image and similitude 
upon me, and that I perceive this similitude (in which the idea of 
1 Vol. i. p. 170, par. 3. 



Objections V 173 

God is contained) by means of the same faculty by which I perceive 
myself: that is to say, when I reflect on myself, I not only know 
that I am something incomplete and dependent on another, some- 
thing also which incessantly aspires after what is greater and better 
than myself ; but I also know that He on whom I depend possesses 
in Himself all the great things to which I aspire, and that riot 
indefinitely or potentially alone, but really, actually, and infinitely, 
and that thus He is God l . There is indeed muck appearance of truth 
in all this, and my objection is not that it is not true. But, I ask 
you, where do you get your proof?- Passing by ivhat has been already 
said let us ask : If the idea of God exists in you like the mark of the 
workman imprinted on his work, what is the mode in which it is 
impressed ? WJiat is the form of that mark ? How do you detect it ? 
If it is not other than the work or thing itself, are you then an idea ? 
Are you yourself nothing else than a mode of thought ? Are you both 
the mark impressed and the subject on which it is impressed ? You 
say that it is to be believed that you have been fashioned after the 
image and similitude of God. To religious faith this is indeed 
credible, but how can it be understood by the natural reason^ unless 
you make God to have a human form ? And in what can this 
similitude to this Eternal Being consist ? Can you, who are dust 
and ashes, presume to be similar to Him, who is of an incorporeal, 
boundless, entirely perfect, most glorious and, what is the principal 
matter, an entirely invisible and, incomprehensible nature ? Have you 
known that face to face, so as to he able, by comparing yourself with 
it, to affirm that you resemble it 1 You say that it is to be believed 
owing to the fact that He created you. On the contrary that fact 
makes it incredible; inasmuch as the work, does not resemble- the 
workman, unless when it is generated by him by a communication of 
his nature. But you haw not been begotten by God in this way ; nor 
are you His offspring or a participator in His nature. You hare 
merely been created by Him, i.e. made by Him according to an idea : 
and hence you cannot say that you resemble Him more than the house 
resembles the workman who builds its walls. And this is true even 
though we grant, what yon haw not yet proved, your creation by God. 
You say that you perceive a likeness, while at the same time you 
understand that you are a thing which is incomplete, dependent 
and aspiring towards what is- better. But is not this rather a proof 
of God's dissimilitude, since He on the contrary is most complete, most 
independent and entirely self-sufficient, being greatest and best of all ? 
1 Vol. i. p. 170, par. 5. 



174 Objections V 

I pass by the fact that when you know yourself to be dependent, you 
-do not therefore immediately understand that that on which you 
depend is other than your parents ; while if you do understand it to 
be something eke, no reason offers why you should think that you 
resemble it. I pass by the fact also that it is strange that the rest of 
mankind or of minds do not understand the same thing as you do ; 
and especially since there is no reason why we should refuse to think 
that God has impressed the idea of Himself on them as on you. 
Assuredly this one thing especially proves that there is no such idea 
which has been impressed on us by God ; since if there had been, it 
would have been imprinted on all and, likewise, as one and the same, 
and all men would conceive God by means of a similar form and 
semblance, would ascribe the same qualities to him, and think the 
same thing about Him. And the opposite is most notorious. These 
discussions, hoioever, have now taken up too much time. 

RELATIVE TO MEDITATION IV. 
Of the True and the False. 

L In the fourth Meditation you recount at the beginning what you 
think you haw proved in the previous ones, and by means of which you 
presume you have opened a way for further progress. Not to interpose 
delay / shall cease from continually insisting that you ought to have 
demonstrated your results more cogently ; it will be sufficient if you 
bear in mind ivhat has been conceded and what has not ; in order that 
our argument may avoid being affected with prejudice. 

You reason consequently that it is impossible that God should 
deceive you l ; and, in order to free from blame that faculty which 
misleads you and is exposed to error, and which you have received 
from Him, you conjecture that the fault resides in non-being, of which 
you say you have some idea, and in which according to your account 
you participate, and between which and God you are, according to 
your belief, a mean 2 . This is indeed a capital argument. But to 
pass by the contention that it cannot be explained /mo one can have, 
or what is the idea of, non-being; Jwiv we can participate in non- 
being, etc., I merely observe that by this distinction we do not 
obviate the fact that God might have given man a faculty of judgment 
immune from error. For without giving him an infinite capacity, 
He might have given him one of such a kind as not to assent to error, 
so that man would have had a clear perception of what he knew ; and 
1 Vol. i. p. 172, par. 2. 2 Ibid, sub fin. 



Objections V 175 

in regard to what he did not know he -would not haw committed 
himself in one direction rather t/ian in another. 

On your presenting to yourself this objection, you pronounce the 
opinion that you ought not to be astonished if certain things are 
-done by God, the reason of which you do not understand 1 . That is 
indeed quite correct ; but still it is surprising that you possess a true 
idea which represents God as all-hioiving, all-powerful and wholly 
good, while you nevertheless see that certain of his works are not 
absolutely perfect and complete. So that since He at least might have 
made them more perfect, but yet did not do so, that seems to argue 
that He either did not know how, or could not, or did not wish to do 
so. A t least it would be an imperfection in Him, if, possessing both 
the knowledge and the power to do so, He had refused, and had 
preferred imperfection to perfection. 

In refusing to employ final causes in an investigation into 
Physical things 2 , you act in a way which perhaps in another situation 
would have been quite correct. But in treating of God, it is really to 
be feared that you have rejected the principal argument whereby the 
Divine wisdom, foreknowledge, power and existence as well, may be 
established by our natural light. Thus, to omit the world as a whole, 
the Iieavens, and other outstanding parts of it, whence or how loillyou 
derive better arguments than from the function of the parts in plants, 
in animals, in men, and in your own self (or in your body] who bear 
the similitude of God ? It is a fact we can witness that many great 
men not only rise to a knowledge of God from the anatomical study of 
the human body, but also hymn His praises in that He has given such 
a conformation to all the members, and assigned to them their employ- 
ment, so that He is to be extolled on account of His incomparable care 
and foresight. 

You will say that there are physical causes of such a form and 
arrangement ivhich ought to be investigated, and that those people 
-are foolish who have recourse to the end, rather than to the active 
cause or the material. But no mortal can comprehend, much less 
explain, what agent it is which forms and disposes in the way we 
observe, those valves which are constituted to serve as the orifices of the 
vessels in the cavities of the heart. Nor can we tell of what con- 
formation the matter is out of which it elaborates them, or whence 
that matter is derived ; nor Iww the cause applies itself to its work, 
what instrument it employs, nor how it secures them; nor what it 
stands in need of in order to render these valves of the proper temper, 
1 Vol. i. p. 173, par. 3. 2 Hid. 



176 Objections V 

consistency, coherence^ flexibility, size, figure and disposition in space* 
Since, then, I say, no Physical scientist is able to comprehend and 
declare them and other matters, ivhat prevents him from at least 
admiring that most excellent contrivance and the marvellous providence 
which has given us valves accurately adapted to that design ? Why 
should we not praise Mm, if he thereupon acknowledge, that some First 
Cause must necessarily be admitted, which has disposed those and 
other matters in the ivisest possible manner, and in a way most con- 
sonant with His own purposes ? 

You say that it is rash to investigate God's purposes. But 
though this may be true, if those purposes are meant which God 
Himself wished hidden or of which He has prohibited the investigation, 
it is, nevertheless, certainly not so, in the case of those -which he has, as 
it were, placed publicly before us, which with little labour come to- 
light , and are besides such as to procure great praise for God Himself > 
as for their author. 

You will say perhaps that the idea of God existing in everyone, 
suffices to give a true and genuine 1 knowledge of God and of His 
providence, and apart from any reference either to the purposes of 
things or to anything else ivhatsoever. But not every one is so happily 
situated as you, so as to have that idea in all its perfection from birth 
upicardS) and to behold it so clearly when offered to them. Wherefore 
you should not grudge those to whom God has not granted such a 
degree of insight^ permission to acknowledge and glorify the Doer of 
those works from the inspection of His works. I need not recall the 
fact that there is no objection to using that idea which also seems to be 
so constructed out of our consciousness of things, that you, if you were 
to speak frankly, would admit you owe not indeed little but practically 
everything to this consciousness, for tell me, I pray, how much progress 
do you suppose you would haw made, if from the time at which you 
were infused into the body, you had dwelled in it up till now with 
closed eyes and sealed ears, and in short had had no perception by 
external sense of anything outside us or of this whole universe of 
objects ? What if meanwhile you the whole of you had passed the 
whole time in inward meditation and in revolving thoughts round and 
round ? Tell me in good faith, and describe the ideas of God and of 
yourself which you think you would have acquired. 

2. The solution you next offer is, that the creature, recognised 
as imperfect, should be considered not as a whole, but rather as a 
part of the universe, from which point of view it will be perfect 2 . 

1 G-ennauam. 2 Vol. i. p. 173, sub Jin. 



Objections V 177 

Your distinction is certainly to be commended, but at the present 
point we are not treating of the imperfection of a part in so far as it 
is a part and is compared with the integrity of the whole, but in so 
far as it is something complete in itself and performs a special 
function. And when you relate this again to the universe the difficulty 
ahvays remains, whether in truth the universe would haw been more 
perfect, if all its parts had been perfect, than as tlw case actually 
holds, ivhen many of its parts are imperfect. Thus that State will be 
more perfect in which all the citizens are good, than another in which 
many or some are bad. 

Whence, also, when a little later you say : that the perfection of 
the universe is in some sense greater, in that certain of its parts are 
not exempt from error, than if they all had been alike 1 , it is exactly 
as if you were to say that the perfection of a state is greater in that 
some of its citizens are evil tJian in the case when they are all good. 
This lets us see that just as it ought evidently to be the desire of a 
good prince that all his subjects should be good, so it seems it should 
have been the resolution of the Author of the universe to create and 
keep all its parts free from defect. And though you are able to allege 
that the perfection of those parts which are free from defect, appears 
. greater ivhen contrasted with those which are not exempt from it, that 
nevertheless is merely accidental ; just as the virtue of good men, if 
more striking owing to the contrast between the good and the evil, is 
so only by accident. Consequently, just as we should not want any of 
the citizens to be evil, in order that the good might thereby become more- 
distinguished, so, it seems, it ought never to have come to pass that 
any part of the universe should be subject to error, in order that the 
parts that ivere free from it might thus be rendered more conspicuous. 

You say : that you have no right to complain, if God has not 
called upon you to play a part in the world that excels all others in 
distinction and perfection 2 . But this does not remove the question 
why it has not been sufficient for Him to give you the smallest of 
perfect parts to play, and not to have given you one that was imperfect. 
For though, likewise, it would not be considered culpable on the part of 
a prince to refuse to assign offices of the highest dignity to the tvlwle 
of his subjects, but to call some people to the discharge of duties of 
intermediate importance, others to the fulfilling of the humblest 
functions, nevertheless he would be blamed if over and above destining 
some to the execution of the most insignificant offices, he had also 
assigned to some a function that ivas base. 

1 Vol. i. p. 178, par. 1. a Ibid. 

B. H. n. 12 



178 Objections V 

You declare: that you can bring no reason to show why God 
ought to have given you a greater faculty of knowledge than He 
has given you ; and however skilful a workman you represent Him 
to be, you should not, for all that, consider that He was bound to 
have placed in each and all of his works the perfections which He 
has been able to place in some 1 . But the objection I only now stated 
remains undiminisJied. You must see that the difficulty is not so 
muck, why God has not given you a greater faculty of Mowing, as 
why He has given you one tliat falls into error ; no controversy is 
raised as to ivhy the supreme artificer has willed not to give every 
thing every perfection, but why He has chosen to allot to some things 
imperfections as well. 

You allege: that though you cannot be free from error by 
means of possessing a clear knowledge of all things, you may yet 
avoid it by express resolve, the resolve by which you firmly make 
up your mind to assent to nothing which you do not clearly 
perceive 2 . But however much you may be able to bear this in mind 
attentively, is it not an imperfection not to have clear perception of 
that which we need to distinguish and appraise, and to be perpetually 
exposed to the risk of error. 

You maintain : that error resides in the act itself, in so far as it 
proceeds frona you and is a sort of privation, not in the faculty 
which you have received from God, nor even in the act in so far as 
it depends on Him 3 . But, though the error does not attach directly 
to the faculty received from God, nevertheless it does attach to it 
indirectly, inasmuch as in its creation there is that imperfection which 
makes error possible. Wherefore, though, as you say, you have 
certainly no cause to complain of God, who in truth owes you 
nothing, and yet has conferred those boons upon you, for which 
you should render thanks to Him, we must yet continue to wonder 
why He has not given us more perfect faculties, if He really knew, if 
He had the power, and if not inspired with malice. 

You add: that neither must you complain that God concurs 
with you in the act of erring ; because all these acts are true and 
good in so far as they depend upon God, and in a certain sense 
more perfection accrues to you from the fact that you can form 
such acts than if you could not do so ; while the privation in 
which alone the formal reason of falsity or error consists, does not 
require any concurrence on the part of God, since it is not a real 
1 Yol. i. p. 174, par. 2. 2 y j t It p 178j par _ % 

8 Yol. i. p. 177, par. 1. 



Objections V 179 

thing nor is related to Him 1 . Put subtle though that distinction be, 
it is nevertheless not quite satisfactory. If indeed God does not 
concur in the, privation which is present in the act and is its falsity 
and error, He yet concurs in the act ; and unless He. concurred with 
it there would be no privation. Besides, He Himself is the AutJior 
of that power ivhich is deceived or falls into error, and consequently is 
the source of a power which, so to speak, lacks power. Thus the defect 
in the act is, it seems, to be referred not so much to tJiat power ivhich 
lacks power as to its Author loho created it ivith this lack of power 
and, though Jie was able to do so, declined to make it effective, or more 
effective than it is. It is certainly counted no fault in a workman if 
he does not take the trouble of making a very large key to open a little 
casket, but if, after making it so small, he shapes it so that it fails to 
open the box, or does so with difficulty. Thus also, though God is 
indeed not to be blamed for giving to a mannikin a faculty of judging 
not so great as he thought would be necessary for either all or most or 
the greatest of creatures, it is still strange ivhy he has assigned to us 
a faculty ivhich is so uncertain, so confused, and so unequal to the 
task of deciding those f&w things on which He has willed that man 
should pass judgment. 

3. You next ask : what is the cause of the existence of falsity 
or error in you 2 . In the first place I do not question your right of 
calling understanding only the faculty of being aware of ideas, or of 
apprehending things themselves simply and ivithout any affirmation 
or denial, ivhile you make the will and the power of free choice the 
faculty of judgment, to which it belongs to affirm or deny, to assent 
or dissent The sole question I propound is why the ivill and liberty 
of choice is circumscribed by no limits in your account, while the range 
of the understanding is circumscribed. The truth is that these two 
faculties seem to have domains of equal extent and that the under- 
standing lias at least no narrower a range than the will, since will is 
never directed towards anything of which the understanding has not 
previously had cognizance. 

I said ' at least no narrower a range ' ; for really the under- 
standing seems to extend even further than the will. This is so if, as 
a fact, will or decision, and judgment, never arise, and consequently 
neither do the choice of, the striving after, and aversion from a thing 
which we have not apprehended, nor unless the idea of tJiat thing is 
perceived and set before us by the understanding. But besides this 
we understand in a confused fashion many things which lead to w 
1 Vol. i, p. 178, par. 4. 2 Vol. i. p. 175, sub fin. 

122 



180 Otyectiwis V 

judgment, no striving after or avoidance of them. Likewise, the 
faculty of judgment is often uncertain, so that, ivhen reasons of equal 
weight are present, or ivhen no reason exists, no judgment follows, 
while meanwhile the understanding apprehends the matters that still 
continue unaffected by judgment. 

Your statement, that you can always understand more and 
more ; to take an example, you can more and more comprehend the 
faculty of understanding itself, of which you can form even an 
infinite idea 1 , of its own self proves that your understanding is not 
more limited than your will, ivhen it is able to extend even to an 
infinite object. But when you take into account the fact that you 
acknowledge that your will equals the Divine will, not indeed in 
actual extent hut formally, consider whether the same may not be 
asserted of the understanding also, since you have defined the formal 
notion of the understanding in just the same way as you have that of 
the will. But tell us briefly to what the will may extend which 
escapes the understanding ? Hence it seems that the cause of error 
is not, as you say, due to the will extending more widely than the 
understanding, and going on to judge of matters of which the 
understanding is not aware 2 . It is rather due to the fact that, both 
ranging as they do over an equally wide domain, the understanding 
fails to discern something well, and the will fails to judge correctly. 

Wherefore there is no reason for extending the will beyond the 
hounds of the intellect, since it is not the case that it judges of things 
ivhich the understanding does not perceive, and judges ill for the sole 
reason that the understanding perceives badly. 

In the example about your non-existence 3 , when you bring up the 
argument you have constructed relative to the existence of objects, you 
proceed correctly in so far as the reasoning refers to your own exist- 
ence. But, in so far as it concerns other things, you seem to have 
proceeded on a false assumption ; for, whatever you say, or rather 
pretend to say, your doubt is not genuine, and your judgment entirely 
allows that something else exists beyond yourself, distinct from you : 
it is a matter of which you are already aware that something else 
distinct from yourself exists. It is possible for you to suppose as you 
do that there is no reason to persuade you to adopt the one belief 
rather than the other. But at the same time you ought to suppose 
that no judgment will follow, and that your will will always be 
indifferent, and will not determine itself to come to a decision, until 

1 Yol. i. p. 174. 2 IMdt 

3 Vol. i. p. 176, par. 2. 



Objections V 181 

the time that a greater probability on the one side rather than the 
other presents itself to the understanding. 

Your next statement: that this indifference extends to those 
matters which are not apprehended with perfect clearness, in such 
a way that, however probable be the conjectures which render you 
disposed to form a judgment on one particular side, the simple 
knowledge you possess, that they are conjectures, may occasion you 
to judge the contrary 1 : seems to be in no way true. For that know- 
ledge which tells you that they are merely conjectures will indeed cause 
you to pass judgment in fa/vow qf that conclusion to which they point ', 
with a certain amount of insecurity and hesitation ; but it will never 
make you decide for the opposite belief, unless conjectures subsequently 
present themselves, which are not equally but even more probable than 
the others. 

Though you add, that you had experience of this lately, when 
setting aside as false what you had formerly supposed to be 
absolutely true, remember that this has not been conceded to you. 
For you cannot really have felt persuaded yourse!/ that you have not 
seen the sun, the earth, men, and other objects, that you have not heard 
sounds, have not walked, eaten, or written, have not spoken (Jiave not, 
i.e. used your body or its organs), and so forth. 

Finally therefore the form of error does not seem to consist in the 
incorrect use of the free will 2 , as you maintain, so much as in the 
dissonance between the judgment and the thing whereof we judge ; it 
seems to arise indeed from the fact that the understanding appre fiends 
that thing otherwise than as it is. Whence it seems to be not so much 
the blame of the free will, which judges wrong, as of the understanding 
which does not give the correct reason. Thus the dependence of the 
power of choice upon the understanding seems to be such that, if the 
intellect indeed perceives something clearly or seems to do so, the will 
passes a judgment lohich is agreed on and determinate, whether that 
be really true, or whether it be thought to be true; if, on the other 
hand the perception on the part of the understanding be obscure, tlien 
our will passes a judgment which is doubtful and hesitating, though 
taken for the time to be more true than its opposite, and this whether 
the matter is really true or false. The result is that it is not so much 
in our power to guard against error 9 as to refrain from persisting in 
error, and that the appropriate exercise of judgment is not so much the 
reinforcing of the strength of the will, as the application of the under- 

1 Vol. i. p. 176, par. 3. 2 Ibid. par. 4. 



182 Objections V 

standing to the discovery of dearer knowledge than that which our 
judgment is always likely to follow. 

4. In your conclusion you exaggerate the profit to be derived 
from this Meditation; you also prescribe how you should act in 
order to arrive at a knowledge of the truth ; for, you say, you will 
arrive at this if you only devote your attention sufficiently to those 
things which you perfectly understand, and if you separate them 
from that which you apprehend more confusedly and obscurely 1 . 

Now this is not only true but it is a truth which could be grasped 
altogether apart from the previous Meditation, which thus seems to 
have been superfluous. Nevertheless, my good Sir, note that the 
difficulty appears not to affect the question ivhether, in order to avoid 
error, we ought to understand a thing clearly and distinctly, but 
concerns the art or method by which it is possible to discern that our 
knowledge is so clear and distinct that it must be true and cannot 
possibly mislead us. Nay, at the outset I made the objection that not 
infrequently we are deceived even though we seem to have a knowledge 
of the matter which nothing can excel in respect of clearness and 
distinctness. You yourself also brought up this objection against 
yourself, and nevertheless we still await the revelation of that art or 
method, to the exposition of which your energies should be chiefly directed. 

RELATIVE TO MEDITATION V. 

Of the essence of material things ; and, again, of God, 
that He exists. 

1. In the Fifth Meditation you first say that you distinctly 
imagine quantity, i.e. extension in length, breadth and depth ; 
likewise number, figure, situation, motion and duration a . Out of all 
these, the ideas of which you say you possess, you select figure and, 
from among the figures, the triangle, of which you write as follows : 
although there may nowhere in the world be such a figure outside 
my thought, or ever have been, there is nevertheless in this figure a 
determinate nature, which I have not invented, and which does not 
depend upon my mind, as appears from the fact that divers pro- 
perties can be demonstrated of that triangle, viz, that its three 
angles are equal to two right angles, that the -greatest side is sub- 
tended by the greatest angle, and the like, which now, whether 
I wish it or do not wish it, I recognise very clearly, even though I 
have never thought of them at all before when I imagined a triangle, 

1 Vol. i. p. 179 ad init. 2 Vol. i. p. 179, par. 4. 



Objections V 183 

and wliicli therefore have not been invented by me 1 . So muck only 
do you have respecting the essence of material things ; for the Jew 
remarks you add refer to the same matter. I have, indeed, no desire 
to raise difficulties here ; I suggest only that it seems to be a serious 
matter to set up some immutable and eternal nature in addition to 
God the all-powerful. 

You will say that you merely bring forward a proposition of the 
schools, which states that the natures or essences of things are eternal, 
and that propositions can be asserted about them ivhich have an eternal 
truth. But this is equally difficult, and besides, we cannot conceive 
how the nature of man can exist, wJien there is no human being, or 
how it can be said that the rose is a flower when not a single rose exists. 

They say that it is one thing to talk of the essence, another thing 
to talk of the existence of things, and that though indeed things do not 
exist from all eternity, their essence is still eternal But since the 
chief thing in objects is their essence, does God do anything of much 
moment when He produces existence on their part ? It is clear that to 
Him it is no more than for a tailor to try a coat on his customer. 
Yet how can people maintain that the essence of man in Plato 
is eternal and independent of God 1 In virtue of being a universal, 
do they say? But in Plato nothing but what is individual 
has real existence. Though the mind, from seeing Plato, Socrates, 
and the resembling natures of other men, is wont to form a certain 
common concept in which they all agree, and ivhich can hence be 
reckoned the universal nature or essence of man, in so far as it is 
understood to be applicable to every man ; yet it can by no means be 
shown tJmt the universal existed before Plato and the others existed 
and the mind performed the abstraction. 

You will reply ; is not that proposition man is animal true even 
before man exists, and hence from all eternity ? I say no, it seems 
not to be true, except in the seme that whensoever man comes into 
existence he will be animal. This is so, even though we allow the 
seeming distinction between time two statements: man exists and 
man is animal, owing to the fact that existence is more expressly 
signified by the former, essence by the latter. Nevertheless, from the 
former, essence is not excluded, nor existence from the latter. When 
we say man exists," we mean the man that is animal ; when we assert 
that man is an animal, we mean man while he exists. ut besides, 
since this proposition, man is animal, is not of greater necessity than 

1 Vol. i. p. 180, par. 1. 



184 Objections V 

that other, Plato is a man, it will therefore possess an eternal truth, 
and the individual essence of Plato mil be not less independent of 
God than the universal essence of man is ; so likewise other similar 
results will ensue, which it would be tedious to pursue. Yet I add 
that since man is said to be of such a nature that he cannot exist 
without being animal, we must not therefore imagine that such a 
nature is anything or exists anywhere outside the mind ; but that the 
meaning is merely this, that if anything is a human being it must 
itself resemble these other objects, to which, on account of their 
mutual resemblance, the same appellation c man ' is given. This is a 
resemblance, I repeat, between individual natures, from which the 
understanding derives the opportunity of forming a concept or the 
idea or form of a common nature, from which anything that will be 
human ought not to deviate. 

Hence I say tlie same of that triangle of yours and its nature. 
For the triangle is indeed a sort of mental rule which you employ in 
discovering whether something deserves to be called a triangle. But 
there is no necessity for us on that account to say that such a triangle 
is something real and a true nature over and above the understanding, 
which alone, from beholding material triangles, has formed it and has 
elaborated it as a common notion exactly in the way we Jiave described 
in the case of the nature of man. 

Hence also we ought not to think that the properties demonstrated 
of material triangles, agree with them because they derive those 



themselves, and the ideal triangle does not possess them except in so far 
as the understanding, after observing the material ones, assigns them 
to it, with a view to restoring them again in the process of demon- 
stration. This is in the same way as the properties of human nature 
do not exist in Plato and Socrates in the sense that they receive them 
from the universal nature of man, the facts being rather that the mind 
ascribes those properties to it after discerning them in Plato, Socrates 
and others, with the intention of restoring them to those individual 
cases, when reasoning is called for. 

It is Mown that the understanding, after seeing Plato, Socrates 
and others, all of whom are rational beings, has put together this 
universal proposition : every man is rational ; -and then when it 
wishes to prove that Plato is rational, it uses that as a premiss in its 
syllogism. Likeivise, Mind, you indeed, say that you have the 
idea of a triangle, and would have possessed it, even though you 
had never seen any triangular shape among bodies, just as you have 



Objections V 185 

Ideas of many other figures wliich have never presented themselves 
to your senses 1 . 

But, if, as I have said above, you had been deprived of all sense- 
junctions in such a way that you had never either seen or toucJied the 
various surfaces or extremities of bodies, do you think you would have 
'been able to possess or elaborate ivithin you the idea of a triangle or 
of any other figure 1 You have many ideas which have not entered 
into you hy way of the senses. So you say ; but it is easy for you to 
have them, because you construct them out of those wliich have so 
entered and you elaborate them into various others, in the ways I 
above expounded. 

Besides this we should have spoken here of that false nature of the 
triangle, ivhich is supposed to consist of lines ivhich are devoid of 
breadth, to contain an area which has no depth, and to terminate at 
three points which are wholly without parts. But this would involve 
too wide a digression,* 

2. You next attempt the proof of Gods existence and the vital 
part of your argument lies in these words : When I think attentively 
I clearly see that the existence can no more be separated from the 
essence- of God than can there be separated from the essence of a 
triangle the equality in magnitude of its three angles to two right 
angles, or the idea of a mountain from the idea of a valley ; so that 
there, is no less incongruity in our conceiving a God (i.e. a Being 
who is supremely perfect) to Whom existence is lacking (i.e. in 
Whom a certain perfection is missing), than to think of a mountain 
which is not accompanied by a valley 2 . But we must note that a 
comparison of this Mnd is not sufficiently accurate. 

For though you properly enough compare essence with essence, in 
your next step it is neither existence with essence, nor property with 
property that you compare, but existence with property. Hence it 
seems that you either ought to have said that *GocFs omnipotence can 
no more be separated from His essence than can that equality in 
magnitude of the angles of a triangle from its essence; or at least, tJrnt 
God's existence can no more be separated from His essence t/ian the 
existence from the essence of a triangle. Thus taken, each comparison 
would haw proceeded on correct lines, and the truth would have been 
conceded, not only of the former but of the latter, although this would 
not be evidence that you had established your conclusion tlmt God 
necessarily exists, because neither does the triangle necessarily exist, 
although its essence and its existence cannot in reality be severed, 
1 Vol. i. p. 180, par. 2. * YoL i. p. 181, par. 2. 



186 Objections V 

howsoever muck the mind separates them or thinks of them apart, in 
the same way as the Divine essence and existence may be thought of 
separately. 

Next we must note that you place existence among the Divine per- 
fections, without, however, putting it among the perfections of a 
triangle or of a mountain, though in exactly similar fashion, and in 
its own way, it may be said to be a perfection of each. But, sooth to 
say, existence is a perfection neither in God nor in anything else ; it 
is rather that in the absence of which there is no perfection. 

This must be so if, indeed, that which does not exist has neither 
perfection nor imperfection, and that which exists and has various- 
perfections, does not have its existence as a particular perfection and 
as one of the number of its perfections, but as that by means of 
ivhich the thing itself equally ivith its perfections is in existence, and 
without' which neither can it be said to possess perfections, nor can 
perfections be said to be possessed by it. Hence neither is existence 
held to exist in a thing in the -way that perfections do, nor if the 
thing lacks existence is it said to be imperfect (or deprived of a 
perfection), so much as to be nothing. 

Wherefore, as in enumerating the perfections of a triangle you 
do not mention existence, nor hence .conclude that the triangle exists, 
so, in enumerating the perfections of God, you ought not to have put 
existence among them, in order to draw the conclusion that God 
exists, unless you wanted to beg the question. 

You say : in everything else I have distinguished existence from- 
essence but not in God. But how, I pray, is the existence of Plato 
distinguished from the essence of Plato, unless by thought? For, 
supposing now that Plato no longer exists where is Ms essence ? 1$ 
it not in the same way that essence and existence are distinguished by- 
thought in God ? 

You yourself raise the objection: Perhaps, just as from 1117 
thinking of a mountain with a valley, or of a winged horse, it 
does not follow that therefore either the mountain or such a horse 
exists ; so from the fact that I think of God as existing it does not 
follow that He exists : but you go on to argue that a sophism is 
latent Jiere. But it would not be difficult to expose the fallacy ivhich 
you haw yourself constructed, especially by assuming something 
that is so manifest a contradiction as that an existing God does not 
exist, and not assuming the same thing about man, or horse. 

But if you had drawn a parallel between the mountain with its 
valley, or the horse with its wings, and God as possessing knowledge, 



Objections V 187 

power and other attributes, tJien the difficulty would haw been carried 
forward and you would have had to explain hoiv it is possible for a 
sloping mountain or a winged horse to be thought of without their 
existing, while a God who has knowledge and power cannot be con- 
ceived of without His existence being involved. 

You say: that it is not in your power to think of God 
without existence (that is of a supremely perfect Being devoid 
of a supreme perfection) as it is within your power to imagine 
a horse either with wings or without wings 1 . But nothing is to be 
added to this, except that, as you are free to think of a horse that 
does not haw ivings without thinking ojf its existence, that existence 
which, if added, will be a perfection in it due to you ; so you are free 
to think of a God that has knowledge, power and the other perfec- 
tions, without thinking of His existence, which, if possessed by Him 
would render His perfection complete. Whence, just as 'from the 
/act that a horse is thought of as possessing the perfection of being 
winged, it is not therefore inferred that it has existence, the chief of 
perfections, through your instrumentality ; so neither from the fact 
that God is considered as possessing knowledge and other perfections 
is His existence deduced from that : rather it finally remains to be 
proved. Although you say: that existence quite as much as other 
perfections is included in the idea of a Being of the highest per- 
fection, you affirm what has to be proved, and assume your conclusion 
as a premiss. For I might also, on the other part, say that in the 
idea of a perfect Pegasus, there was contained not only tlw perfection 
of having wings, but also that of existing. For as God is thought 
to be perfect in every kind of perfection, so is Pegasus thought to be 
perfect in its own kind, and you can bring forward in criticism 
nothing which cannot, if the parallel between the two be duly 
observed, be taken to hold of both alike. 

You say: as in thinking of a triangle it is not necessary for 
me to think that its three angles are equal to two right angles, 
though that is none the less true, as is afterwards clear when we 
attend to the matter; so we may indeed think of the other per- 
fections of God without thinking of His existence, though that is 
none the less true when we note that it is a perfection. But you 
see what may be said, viz. that as that property is discovered after- 
wards to exist in the triangle, because a demonstration proves it, so 
we must employ a demonstration in order to discover existence in 

1 Vol. i. p. 182, ad init. 



188 Objections V 

God. Otherwise it will certainly be easy for me to show that any- 
thing is in anything. 

You say that when yon attribute all perfections to God, you 
do not act as if you imagined that all quadrilateral figures were 
inscribed in the circle ; since, as herein you would err, and this 
is borne out by your knowledge that the rhombus cannot be in- 
scribed in it, you do not in the other case go astray, because you 
afterwards find that existence .is congruent with God 1 . But this 
apparently, is inevitably to act in the same way ; or, ij that is not 
so, you. must show that existence is not incompatible with God, in the 
same way as you prove that being inscribed in a circle is incompatible 
with the rhombus. I pass by your remaining assertions, which are 
either unexplained or unproved by you, or are solved by considerations 
you have already adduced as, for example : that nothing can be 
conceived, to the essence of which existence belongs, save God 
alone; that we cannot frame the thought of two or more such 
Gods ; that such a God has from all eternity existed and will 
continue to all eternity ; that you perceive many other things in 
God, which can suffer neither diminution nor change 2 . To this is 
added the necessity for inspecting these matters more nearly and 
investigating them more diligently, in order that their truth may be 
revealed and that they may be acknowledged as certain, etc. 

You declare finally that the certainty and truth of all know- 
ledge so depends upon our apprehension of the true God alone, 
that, if we do not possess this, we can have no true certainty or 
knowledge 3 . You bring forward the following example, saying : 
When I consider the nature of a triangle, I who have some little 
knowledge of the principles of geometry, recognise quite clearly 
that the three angles are equal to two right angles; and it is not 
possible for me not to believe this so long as I apply my mind to 
its demonstration. But as soon as I divert my attention from its 
proof, howsoever well I recollect having clearly comprehended it, 
I may easily come to doubt about its truth, if I am ignorant of 
there being a God. For I might 4 persuade myself of having been 
so constituted by nature as sometimes to be deceived in those 
matters which I believe myself to apprehend with the greatest 
evidence : especially when I recollect that I have frequently judged 
matters to be true and certain which other reasons have afterwards 
impelled me to judge to be altogether false. But after I have 

1 Vol. i. p. 182. 2 xbid. 

3 Vol. i. p. 183, par. 3. 4 Possem, in Med. v. possum. 



Objections V 189 

recognised that there is a God because at the same time I have 
recognised that all things depend upon Him and that He is not 
a deceiver, and from that I have inferred, that what I clearly and 
distinctly perceive cannot fail to he true : even though I no longer 
pay attention to the reason for which I believe that thing to 
be true: provided that I recollect having clearly and distinctly 
perceived it, no contrary reason can be brought forward which 
could cause me to doubt of its truth. On the contrary I have a 
true and certain knowledge of it. And this same knowledge 
extends likewise to all other things which I recollect having 
formerly demonstrated, such as the truths of geometry and 
the like 1 . 

In reply to this, my good Sir., since I admit that you are speaking 
seriously, there is nothing to say, but that it seems that you will have 
difficulty in getting anyone to believe that you were less certain of 
those geometrical proofs before the time when you established by 
reasoning the above conclusion about God, than after you had done 
so. For really t/iose demonstrations seem to have an evidence and 
certainty, of such a kind as by themselves to extort our assent to 
them, and when once recognised they do not allow the mind to have 
any further doubt. So true is this t/unt the mind will as likely as 
not bid that evil Genius go to perdition ; just as you might have done 
when you (although the existence of God was not yet known) asserted 
with much emphasis that you could not be imposed on about that 
proposition and inference: I think, hence I exist. Nay, even, 
however true it be, as nothing can be truer, that God exists, that 
He is the Author of everything, and that He is not a, deceiver, since, 
nevertheless, these facts seem to be less eirident than those geometrical 
proofs (of which the only proof required is that many controvert 
God's existence, His creation of the world, and many other truths], 
while no one denies the demonstrations of Geometry, is there anyone 
wJurni you can persuade that the evidence and certainty of the latter* 
is communicated^ to them from the former ? Likewise who fancier 
that Diagoras, Thevdorus, or any similar atheist, cannot be rendered 
certain of the truth of t/iose mathematical demonstrations 1 Again, 
how often among believers do you come across one who, if asked why 
he is sure that in a (right angled*) triangle the square on its base is 
equal to t/ie square on its sides, will reply : c because I know that 

1 Vol. i. p. 184. 2 i.e. the theorems of Geometry. 

: * Added in Disquisitio Metaphysica. 



190 Objections V 

God exists, and that God cannot deceive, and that He is the cause 
of this fact as likewise as of all others.' Will he not rather reply : 
4 because I know it, and it has been shown to me by an indubitable 
demonstration : 1 How much the more likely is this to be the reply of 
Pythagoras, Plato, Archimedes, Euclid, and other mathematicians, 
none of whom seems to bring up the thought of God in order to be 
quite certain of his demonstrations ! Yet, because you do not pledge 
your word for others, but only for yourself, and your attitude is also 
pious, there is really no reason for my objecting to it. 

RELATIVE TO MEDITATION VI. 

Of the existence of Material Things, and of the real distinction 
between the Soul and the Body of Man. 

I. In the Sixth Meditation I do not object to what you say at 
the beginning: that material things may exist in so far as they 
are the object of pure mathematics 1 ; since, nevertheless, material 
things are the object of mixed, not of pure mathematics ; and the 
objects of pure mathematics, e.g. the point, the line, the superficies, 
and the indivisible things consisting of these and functioning as 
indivisible, are incapable of actual existence. I haw difficulty only 
because here a second time you distinguish imagination from in- 
tellection. Nay, Mind, these two appear to be the action of one 
and the same faculty, as we have indicated above ; and, if there is 
any distinction between them, it does not seem to be more than one 
of greater and less. Consider Jww these conclusions may thence be 
now proved. 

You said above : to imagine is merely to contemplate the figure 
or image of something corporeal But here you do not deny that 
to understand is to contemplate the Triangle, the Pentagon, the 
Chiliagon, the Myriagon, and the other things of this kind, which 
are the figures of corporeal things. You now indeed set up the 
distinction that the imagination involves a certain application of the 
cognitive faculty to a body, while intellection does not involve 
any such application or effort. 80 that, when you simply and 
without trouble perceive the triangle as a figure consisting of three 
angles, you say that that is an act of understanding. But when, 
not without some effort on your part, you have that figure, as it 
were, present, and investigate it, examine it, and recognise and 
discern its three angles distinctly and severally 2 , then, you say, you 

1 Vol. i. p. 185, par. 3. 

3 SigiUatim is printed in A* and T.'s edition. I emena to smgillatim. Tr. 



Objections V 191 

imagine. And hence, since you indeed perceive without any trouble 
that the Chiliagon is a figure with a thousand angles, but yet 
cannot by application or an effort of attention, discover it, and 
have it, as it were, present before you and discern all its angles 
individually 1 , but are as confused about it as about the Myriagon, 
or any other figure of this description, you therefore deem that you 
employ Intellection in the case of the Chiliagon or the Myriagon, 
and not Imagination. 

But, nevertheless 1 j there is no reason why you sJiould not extend 
your imagination, as well as your intellection, to the Chiliagon, as 
you do to the Triangle. For you do try to some extent to imagine 
tliat figure with its host of angles in some fashion, though the number 
of its angles is so great that you cannot conceive it clearly. Besides, 
though you do perceive that a figure of a thousand angles is signified 
by the word Chiliagon, that is merely the force of the name ; for this 
will not cause you to understand a thousand angles better than you 
imagine them. 

But we must note that the loss of distinctness and increase of 
confusedness is gradual. For you will perceive and imagine (or 
understand) the quadrilateral more confusedly than the triangle, yet 
more distinctly than the Pentagon. Again this is more confused 
than the quadrilateral, but more distinct than the Hexagon, and so 
on in order, until you haw nothing explicit to put before yourself ; 
and because you now are not able to haw an explicit conception, you 
make an effort in order to omit as much as possible. 

Wherefore if you indeed wish to call it imagination and intel- 
lection at the same time, when you are aware of the figure distinctly 
and with some sensible effort, but intellection alone, when you view it 
confusedly merely and without or with but slight effort, you haw my 
consent. But that will furnish no reason why you should set up 
more than one type of internal cognition, since it is accidental only 
whether you contemplate a figure in ways that differ in terms of 
more and less, distinct or confused, attentiveness or carelessness. 
Assuredly, when we wish to run over the Heptagon, the Octagon^ 
and the other figures up to the Chiliagon, or the Myriagon, and 
continuously and all through attend to the greater or less degree of 
distinctness or remissness of attention, shall we be able to say where 
or in what figure imagination ceases and intellection alone remains ? 
Does it not rather turn out to be the case that there is a continuous 
scale and progression in one sort of knowledge, the distinctness and 

\ Vol. I. pp. 1856. 



192 Objections V 

toil of which decreases continuously and insensibly, while its con- 
fusedness and effortlessness increases. Independently of this, note 
that you depreciate intellection, while lauding imagination. For do 
you not merely heap scorn on the former in allotting to it remissness- 
and confusion, but commend the latter, in ascribing to it diligent 
care and perspicuity ? 

Afterwards you assert: that the power of imagination in so far 
as it is distinguished from the power of understanding is not a 
necessary part of your essence 1 . But how can that be, if they are 
one and the same power, the functions of tvhich differ merely in 
respect of greater and less ? 

You add: that the mind, in imagining, turns towards the body,, 
but, in its intellectual activity, turns towards itself or the idea it 
possesses. But what if the mind is unable to turn towards itself or 
towards any idea without at the same time turning itself towards some- 
thing corponal, or represented by a corporeal idea ? For indeed the 
Triangle,, the Pentagon, the Ohiliagon, the Myriagon and the other 
figures or their ideas are altogether corporeal, and the mind cannot 
in its intellectual activity attend to them except as to something 
corporeal or similar to the corporeal. In so far as the ideas of things- 
reputed to be immaterial are concerned, such as the idea of God, of 
an Angel, or of the human soul or mind, it is certain also that the 
ideas we do possess about these things are either corporeal or after the- 
fashion of the corporeal, and drawn from the human form and, at 
other times, from the most subtle, the simplest and most imperceptible 
objects such as air or ether, as we mentioned above. Moreover your 
statement, that it is only with probability that you conjecture that 
any body exists, cannot be uttered by you seriously, and hence need 
cause us no delay. 

2. Next you have a discussion about Sense, and first you very 
rightly mak-e an enumeration of those matters which had become 
known to you by means of the senses and had been believed by you 
to be true, taking nature alone as your judge and guide. Immediately 
afterwards you relate the experiences, ivhich so sJwok the beliefs you, 
had derived from your senses, as to drive you to that position at 
which we found you in the First Meditation. 

At this point I haw no desire to begin a controversy about the- 

trustworthiness of the senses ; for, if there is deception or falsity, it 

is not in sense, which is merely passive and has to do only with 

things that appear and must appear in the way they do owing to 

1 Yol. i. p. 186, par. 2. 



Objections V 193 

their own appropriate causes ; it resides in the judgment or in the 
mind, ivhich does not act with sufficient circumspection, and does not 
notice that things at a distance, owing to this and that cause appear 
more confused and smaller than they really are when they are near at 
hand, and so in other cases. Nevertheless, wherever deception does 
occur, we must not deny that some error exists ; only the difficulty is, 
whether the error is always such that we can never be sure of the 
truth in the case of anything perceived by the senses. 

But there is really no need to search for obvious examples. To 
take only the instances which you adduce, or rather cite as objections, 
I maintain that in these cases the truth of our belief seems to be amply 
confirmed; when we behold a tower close at hand and touch it we are 
sure that it is square, though, when further off, we had occasion to 
pronounce it to be round, or at least were able to doubt whether it was 
round or square or of some other figure. 

Similarly that feeling of pain, which appears still to exist in the 
foot or in the hand after these members have been cut off, may on 
occasion cause deception in those indeed who have had these limbs cut 
off; and that is because the sensorial spirits have been accustomed to 
pass downwards into them and express sensation in them. Never- 
theless those who are whole are so certain that they feel the pain in 
the foot or in the hand which they see pricked, that they cannot doubt 
about it. 

Similarly also, since we wake and dream alternately as long as 
we are alive, deception may occur owing to a dream, because things 
appear in the dream to be present which are not present. Never- 
theless, neither do we always dream, nor, when we are really awake, 
can we doubt whether we are awake or dreaming. 

So too, since we can think that we are of a nature exposed to 
deceptions, even in things that seem most sure, we none the less think 
that we are naturally capable of apprehending truth. And just as 
we sometimes err, as when we do not detect a sophism, or when we look 
at a stick plunged to half its length in water, so also we sometimes 
apprehend the truth, as in a geometrical demonstration, or when the 
stick is taken out of the water, the circumstances being such that in 
neither of these cases can we doubt at all about the truth. And just 
as in other cases we may be in doubt, so at least in this case no doubt 
is permitted, namely that these things appear as they do ; indeed it 
cannot be other than absolutely true that such things appear. 

Moreover as to the fact that reason counsels us not to believe much 
to which we are impelled by nature, it cannot at least remove the 

B. H. II. 13 



194 Objections V 

truth of that which appears of the phenomenon 1 . Yet there is no 
need for us here to discuss the question whether reason conflicts with 
sensuous impulsion, and opposes it merely as the right hand opposes 
the left when holding it up as it droops from weariness, or whether 
their opposition is oj another sort. 

3. You next address yourself to your purpose, but in a light and 
as it were skirmishing fashion. For you proceed to say : But now 
that I begin to be better acquainted with myself and with the 
author of my being, I do not in truth think that I should rashly 
admit all the matters which my senses seem to teach me ; neither, 
on the other hand, do I think that I should doubt them all 2 . Quite 
right : though doubtless you had thought the very same thing already. 

The next passage is : And first of all, because I know that all 
the things which I apprehend clearly and distinctly can be created 
by God as I apprehend them, it suffices that I am able to apprehend 
one thing apart from another clearly and distinctly in order to be 
certain that the one is different from the other, since they may be 
made to exist in isolation by God at least ; and it does not matter 
by what power their separation is made, in order to compel me to 
judge them to be different 3 . In reply to this there is nothing to be 
said, save that you employ what is obscure to demonstrate something 
that is clear, not that I allege that there is any obscurity in the infer- 
ence. I do not raise a difficulty indeed about the jf act that you should 
previously haw proved that God exists, nor, as to the matters to which 
His power extends, about the proof that He can effect what even you 
are able to comprehend. I should ask merely whether you clearly and 
distinctly apprehend in a triangle that property, that the greater 
side subtends the greater angle, separately from that other, according 
to which the three angles taken together are held to be equal to two 
right angles. Do you admit that God can therefore separate and 
isolate the latter property jrom t/ie former, so that the triangle 
possesses the one and not the other, or that the latter also may be 
disjoined /rom the triangle? 

But, not to delay you here, inasmuch as this separation is but 
little to the point, you add: And hence from this very thing, because 
I know that I exist, and that meanwhile I do not remark that any 
other thing pertains to my nature or essence, excepting this alone, 
that I am a thinking thing, I rightly conclude that my essence 
consists solely in the fact that I am a thinking thing. H&re I 

1 roO Qawotitvov. 2 Yol. i. p. 189, sul) fin, 

3 Vol. i. p. 190, par. 2. 



Objections V 195 

should arrest your progress ; but either it is enough to repeat what 
I said in connection with the second Meditation, or we must await 
your inference. 

For finally you say : And although possibly (or rather certainly, 
as I shall say in a moment) I possess a body with which I am very 
intimately conjoined, yet because on the one side I have a clear 
and distinct idea of myself, inasmuch as I am only a thinking and 
not an extended thing, and on the other I possess a distinct idea of 
body, inasmuch as it is only an extended and not a thinking thing ; 
it is certain that I am really distinct from my body, and can exist 
without ifc. 

$9 this was your objective, was it ? Hence, since the whole of the 
difficulty hinges on this, we must halt awhile, in order to see how you 
manage to make this position good. The principal matter here in 
question is the distinction between you and body. But what body do 
you here mean? Plainly this solid body composed of members, the 
body to which, without doubt, the following words refer : I possess a 
body connected with myself and it is certain that I am distinct 
from my body, etc. 

But how, Mind, is there no difficulty about this body ? There 
would be a difficulty, if with the greater part oj philosophers I were 
to object that you were the realisation 1 , the perfection, the activity, 
the form, the appearance, or, to use a popular fashion of speech, a 
mode of the body. They, forsooth, do not acknowledge that you are 
more distinct and separable from your body than figure, or any other 
mode. This, too, they maintain, whether you are the entire soul, or 
are besides also vous Swa/m, vov? Tra^rtKos, the potential intellect, or 
passive intellect, as they style it. But it pleases me to deal somewhat 
liberally with you and consider you as though you were the vovs 
TTot^riKos, the active intellect, nay, even as XO>/HO-TO? ? i.e. capable of 
separate existence, though separable in another sense than they 
imagined. 

For since those philosophers assigned it to all men (if not rather 
to all things) as something common to them and as being the source of 
intellectual activity on the part of the potential intellect, exactly in 
the same way and with the same necessity as light supplies the eye 
with the opportunity of seeing (whence they were wont to compare it to 
the light of the sun, and hence to regard it as coming from witJtouf), 
I myself rat/ier consider you (as you also are quite willing I should) 
as a certain special intellect exercising domination in the body. 

1 tvT\x6La.V . 

132 



196 Objections V 

Moreover I repeat that the difficulty is not as to whether you are 
separable or not from this body (whence, shortly before, I hinted that 
it was not necessary to recur to the power of God in order to secure 
the separability of those things which you apprehend as separate}, but 
from the body which you yourself are : seeing that possibly you really 
are a subtle body diffused within tJiat solid one, or occupying some 
seat within it. But you have not yet convinced us that you are 
anything absolutely incorporeal. Likewise, though in the second 
Meditation you proclaimed that you are not a wind, nor a fire, nor a 
vapour, nor a breath, do be advised of the warning I give you, that 
the statement thus announced has not been proved. 

You said that you did not at that point dispute ahout those 
matters ; but you haw not subsequently discussed them, nor have you 
in any way proved that you are not a body of this kind. I had hoped 
that here you would make the matter good ; but if you do discuss 
anything, if you do prow anything, your discussion and proof merely 
show that you are not the solid body, about which, as I haw already 
said, there is no difficulty. 

4. But, you say, I have on the one hand a clear and distinct 
idea of myself, in so far as I am merely a thinking thing and not 
extended, and on the other a distinct idea of body, in so far as it is 
an extended thing, but not one that thinks. Firstly, Jwwever, in so 
far as the idea of body is concerned, there appears to be no need for 
spending much pains over it. For, if you indeed make this pronounce- 
ment about the idea of body universally, we must repeat our previous 
objection, namely that you have to prove that it is incompatible with 
the nature of body to be capable of thinking. Thus it would be a 
begging of the question when the problem was raised by you as to 
whether you are a subtle body or not, in a way that implied that 
thought is incompatible with body. 

But since you make that assertion and certainly treat only of that 
solid body, from which you maintain that you are separable and 
distinct, I do not on that account so much deny that you have an idea 
of yourself, as maintain that you could not possess it if you were 
really an unextended thing. For } I ask you, how do you think that 
you, an unesctended subject, could receive into yourself the semblance 
or idea of a body which is extended? For, if such a semblance 
proceeds from the body, it is certainly corporeal and has parts outside 
of other parts, and consequently is corporeal. Or alternatively, 
whether or not its impression is due to some other source, since 
necessarily it always represents an extended body, it must still have 



Objections V 197 

parts and, consequently, be extended. Otherwise, if it has no parts, 
kow will it represent parts? If it has no extension how will it 
represent extension ? If devoid of figure, how represent an object 
possessing figure ? If it has no position, how can it represent a thing 
which has upper and lower, right and left, and intermediate 1 parts ? 
If without variation, how represent the various colours, etc. ? There- 
fore an idea appears not to lack extension utterly. But unless it is 
devoid of extension how can you, if unesctended, be its subject ? How 
will you unite it to you ? How lay hold of it 1 How will you be able 
to feel it gradually Jade and finally vanish away? 

Next, relatively to your idea of yourself nothing is to be added to 
what has been already said, and especially in the second Meditation. 
For thence it is proved that, far from having a clear and distinct 
idea of yourself, you seem to be wholly without one. This is because, 
even though you recognise that you think, you do not know of what 
nature you, who think, are. Hence, since this operation alone is 
known to you, the chief matter is, nevertheless, hidden from you, 
namely, the substance which so operates. This brings up the com- 
parison in which you may be likened to a blind man, who, on feeling 
heat, and being told that it proceeds from the sun, should think that 
he has a clear and distinct idea of the sun, inasmuch as, if anyone 
ask him what the sun is, he can reply : it is something which produces 
heat. 

But, you will say, I here add not only that I am a thinking 
thing, but that I am & thing which is riot extended. But not to 
mention that this is asserted without proof , since it is still in question, 
I ask firstly : is that why you haw a clear and distinct idea of your- 
self ? You say that you are not extended; but in so doing you say 
what you are not, not what you are. In order to have a clear and 
distinct idea, or, what is the same thing, a true and genuine 2 idea of 
anything, is it not necessary to know the thing itself positively, and so 
to speak affirmatively, or does it suffice to know that it is not any 
other thing? Would it not then be a clear and distinct idea of 
Bucephalus, if one knew of him that he was not afly? 

But, not to urge this, my question is rather: are you not an 
extended thing, or are you not diffused throughout the body ? I cannot 
tell what you will reply; for, though from the outset I recognised that 
you existed only in the brain, I formed that belief rat/ier by conjecture 

1 obliquas, i.e. inclined between, e.g. up and to the side, and hence inter- 
mediate. 

2 Germanam. 



198 Objections V 

than by directly following your opinion. I derived my conjecture 
from the statement which ensues, in ivhich you assert, that you are 
not affected by all parts of the body, but only by the brain, or even 
by one of its smallest parts 1 . But I ivas not quite certain whether 
you were found therefore only in the brain or in a part of it, since 
you might be found in the whole body, but be acted on at only one part. 
Thus it would be according to the popular belief, which takes the 
soul to be diffused throughout the entire body, while yet it is in the eye 
alone that it has vision. 

Similarly the following words moved one to doubt : ' and, although 
the whole mind seems to be united to the whole body 2 / etc. You 
indeed do not there assert that you are united with the whole of the 
body, but you do not deny it. Howsoever it be, with your leave let me 
consider you firstly as diffused throughout the whole body. Whether 
you are the same as the soul, or something diverse from it, I ask you, 
unextended thing, what you are that are spread from head to heel, 
or that are coextensive with the body, that haw a like number of parts 
corresponding to its parts ? Will you say that you are therefore 
unextended, because you are a whole in a whole, and are wholly in 
every part ? I pray you tell me, if you maintain this, how you con- 
ceive it. Can a single thing thus be at tlie same time wholly in several 
parts ? Faith assures us of this in the case of the sacred mystery (of 
the Eucharist}*. But the question here is relative to you, a natural 
object, and is indeed one relative to our natural light. Can we grasp 
how there can be a plurality of places without there being a plurality 
of objects located in them ? Is not a hundred more than one 1 Like- 
wise, if a thing is wholly in one place, can it be in others, unless it is 
itself outside itself, as place is outside place ? Say what you will, it 
will at least be obscure and uncertain whether you are wholly in any 
part and not rather in the various parts of the body by means of your 
several parts. And since it is much more evident that nothing can 
exist as a whole in different places, it will turn out to be still more 
clear that you are not wholly in the single parts of your body but 
merely in the whole as a whole, and that you are so by means of your 
parts diffused through the whole and consequently that you have 
extension. 

Secondly let us suppose that you are in the brain alone, or merely 
in some minute part of it. You perceive that the same thing is 
clearly an objection, since, however small that part be, it is nevertheless 
extended, and you are coextensive with it, and consequently are extended 

1 Vol. i. p. 196, par. 3. 2 lUd. par. 2. 3 Xr. 



Objections V 199 

and have particular parts corresponding to its particular parts. 
Will you say that you take that part of the brain to be a point ? 
That is surely incredible, but suppose it is a point. If it is indeed 
something Physical, the same difficulty remains., because such a point 
is extended and is certainly not devoid of parts. If it is a Mathe- 
matical point you know that it is given only by the imagination. 
But let it be given or let rather us feign that in the brain there is 
given a Mathematical point, to which you are united, and in which 
you exist. Now, see how useless a fiction this will turn out to be. 
For, if it is to be assumed, we must feign it to exist in such a way 
that you are at the meeting place of the nerves by which all the regions 
informed by the soul transmit to the brain the ideas or semblances of 
the things perceived by the senses. But firstly, the nerves do not all 
meet at one point, whether for the reason that, as the brain is continued 
into the spinal marrow, many nerves all over the back pass into that, 
or because those which extend to the middle of the head are not found 
to terminate in the same part of the brain. But let us assume that 
they all do meet; none the less they cannot all unite in a mathematical 
point, since they are bodies, not mathematical lines, and so able to 
meet in a mathematical point. And supposing we grant that they do 
so unite, it will be impossible for the spirits 1 which pass through these 
to pass out of the nerves or to enter them, as being bodies; since body 
cannot be in or pass through what is not a place, as the mathematical 
point is. But though we should allow that the animal spirits do 
exist in or pass through what is not a place, nevertheless you, existing 
as you do in a point, in which there are neither right hand parts nor 
left hand, neither higher nor lower, nor anything similar, cannot 
judge as to whence they come nor what they report. 

Moreover I say the same thing of those spirits which you must 
transmit in order to have feeling or to report tidings-, and in order to 
move. I omit that we cannot grasp how you impress a motion upon 
them, you who are yourself in a point, unless you are really a body, or 
unless you haw a body by which you are in contact with them and at 
the same time propel them. For, if you say that they are moved by 
themselves, and that you only direct their motion, remember that you 
somewhere else denied that the body is moved by itself 3 ; so that we 

1 The * animal spirits' correspond to the * nervous impulses' of modern 
psychology. D. and his contemporaries believed that an actual substance 
passed along the nerve when it was stimulated. 

2 of the external world? Clerselier translates this passage 'proclaim or 
communicate feeling or movement. 5 

3 Vol. I. p. 151, par. 1. 



200 Objections V 

must thence infer that you are the cause of that movement. Necct, 
explain to us how such a direction can take place without some effort 
and so some motion on your part ? How can there be effort directed 
towards anything, and motion on its part, without mutual contact 
of what mows and what is moved ? How can there be contact apart 
from body, when (as is so clear to the natural light} 

'Apart from body, naught touches or is touched 1 ?' 

Yet why do 1 delay here when it is on you that the onus rests of 
proving that you are unextended and hence incorporeal ? But neither 
do I think that you will find an argument in the fact that man is 
popularly said to consist of soul and body, inferring that if one part 
is said to be body, the other must be declared not to be body. For, if 
you did so, you would give us an opportunity of drawing the dis- 
tinction in such a way that man should be held to consist of a double 
body, wz. the solid one and the subtle one ; and according to this 
scheme while the former retained the name body, the common term, the 
other would be given the name souL I pass by the fact that the same 
thing would be said about the other animals, to which you have not 
granted a mind similar to your own ; lucky they, if by your sanction 
they possess even a soul ! Hence, therefore, when you conclude that 
you are certain that you are really distinct from your body, you see 
that that would be admitted, but that it would not therefore be con- 
ceded that you were incorporeal, and not rather a species of very subtle 
body distinct from your grosser body. 

You add that hence you can exist apart from it 2 . But after 
being conceded the point that you can exist apart from that grosser 
body in the same way as an odoriferous vapour does while passing out 
of an apple and dispersing into the air, what do you think you haw 
gained ? Something more certainly than the above mentioned Philo- 
sophers 3 wish to prove, who believe that you wholly perish at death 
itself ; being as it were like a figure which on the alteration of tJw 
superficies so disappears, that it may be said to be non-existent or 
wholly nothing. Indeed, since you were something corporeal as well, 
or a fine substance, you will not be said to vanish wholly at death, or 
wholly to pass into nothing, but to exist by means of your dispersed 
parts, howsoever much, on account of being thus drawn asunder, you 
are not likely to think any more, and will be said to be neither a 

1 Tangere nee tangi sine corpore nulla potest res a misquotation of Lucre- 
tius (De Rerum natura r. 305): Tangere enim et tangi, nisi corpus nulla 
potest res. 

2 "Vol. i. p. 190, par. 1, nib fin. Cf. above, p. 189. 



Objections V 201 

thinking thing, nor a mind, nor a soul. Yet all these objections I 
bring, not in order to cast doubt on the conclusion you intend to prove, 
but merely by way of expressing my disagreement as to the cogency of 
the argument set forth by you. 

5. In connection with this, you interpose several things tending 
to the same conclusion, on all of which we need not insist. One thing 
I note, and that is that you say that nature teaches you by the 
sensation of pain, hunger, thirst, etc., that you are not lodged in the 
body as a sailor in a ship, but that you are very closely united with 
it and, so to speak, intermingled with it so as to compose one whole 
along with it. For if that were not the case, you say, "when my 
body is hurt, I who am merely a thinking thing would not feel pain, 
but should perceive the wound with the mere understanding, just 
as the sailor perceives by sight when something is damaged in his 
vessel, and when my body has need of food or drink, I should 
clearly understand this fact, and not have the confused feelings of 
hunger and thirst. For all these sensations of hunger, thirst, pain, 
etc. are in truth none other than certain confused modes of thought 
which are produced by the union and apparent intermingling of 
mind and body 1 ." 

This is indeed quite right ; but it still remains to be explained, 
how that union and apparent intermingling, or confusion, can be 
found in you, if you are incorporeal, unextended and indivisible. For 
if you are not greater than a point, how can you be united with the 
entire body, which is of such great magnitude ? How, at least, can you 
be united with the brain, or some minute part in it, which (as has been 
said} must yet haw some magnitude or extension, however small it be ? 
If you are wholly without parts, how can you mix or appear to mix 
with its minute subdivisions ? For there is no mixture unless each oj 
the things to be mixed has parts that can mix with one another. 
Further, if you are discrete, how could you be involved with and form 
one thing along with matter itself? Again since conjunction or union 
exists between certain parts, ought there not to be a relation oj- 
similarity* between parts of this sort ? But what must the union of 
the corporeal with the incorporeal be tliought to be ? Do we conceive 
how stone and air are fused together, as in pumice stone, so as to 
become a fusion of uniform character* ? Yet the similarity between 
stone and air which itself is also a body, is greater than that 
between body and soul, or a wholly incorporeal mind. Further, ought 

1 Vol. i. p. 192, par. 3. 2 Proportio. 

3 ut germana inde fiat compositio ? 



202 Objections V 

not that union to take place by means of the closest contact ? But 
how, as I said before, can that take place, apart jrom body ? How 
will that which is corporeal seize upon that which is incorporeal, so to 
hold it conjoined with itself, or hoiv will the incorporeal grasp the 
corporeal, so as reciprocally to keep it bound to itself, if in it, the 
incorporeal, there is nothing which it can use to grasp the other, or by 
which it can be grasped. 

Hence, since you admit that you feel pain, I ask you how you 
think that you, if you are incorporeal and unextended, are capable of 
experiencing the sensation of pain. Thus the affection pain can only 
be understood as arising from some pulling asunder of bodily parts 
ivhen something interferes and annuls their continuity. For example 
a state of pain is an unnatural state, but how can that be in an 
unnatural state or be affected contrary to nature, which by nature is of 
one sort, simple, indivisible and immutable? Again since pain is 
either alteration, or cannot occur without it, how can that be altered, 
which, being more devoid -of parts than a point, cannot be altered nor 
can cease to be just as it is, unless it turns into nothing ? I add also : 
since pain comes from the foot, the arm, and from other regions at the 
same time, ought there not to be in you various parts, in ivhich you 
receive it in various ways, in order not to be confused and to regard it 
as being the pain of merely one part. But, in a word, the general 
difficulty always remains, viz. hoio the corporeal can have anything 
in common with the incorporeal, or what relationship may be established 
between the one and the other. 

6. / pass by the other passages in which, in a very copious and 
neat argument, you strive to show that something else is in existence 
besides yourself and God. For you deduce the conclusion that your 
body and its corporeal faculties exist ; and likewise other bodies which 
despatch into your senses and into yourself the semblances of themselves, 
and produce the experiences of pleasure and pain, which beget in you 
desire and aversion. 

And from this you at length derive the following conclusion, which 
is, as it were, the fruit of your reasoning, in order that since all the 
sensations relative to the things which have to do with the welfare 
of the body more frequently indicate to you truth than falsehood, 
you may thence infer that you ought no longer to fear that falsity 
may be found in matters every day represented to you by the senses 1 . 
You say the same, consequently, about dreams, for since they are not 
connected with the whole of our actions and course of life in the 

1 Vol. i. p. 198, par. 3. 



Objections V 203 

same way as what we experience when awake, you thence establish 
the conclusion that real things are presented to you, not in sleep, but 
when you are awake 1 . Hence, you say next, since God is not a 
deceiver, it follows that you are not deceived in such matters. This 
is an extremely pious statement ; and so, too, you are assuredly quite 
in the right when you finally conclude: that the life of man is 
subject to error, and that we must acknowledge the infirmity of 
our nature. 

These, my good Sir, are the observations that occurred to me in 
connection with your Meditations. I repeat that you ought not to 
give yourself any thought about them, since my judgment is not of 
such moment as to deserve to have any weight with you. For as, 
when some food is pleasant to my palate, I do not defend my taste, 
which I see is offensive to others, as being more perfect than anyone 
else's ; so, when my mind welcomes an opinion ivhich does not please 
others, I am far from holding that I have hit upon the truer theory. 
I think that the truth is rather this that each enjoys his own sensation; 
and I hold that it is almost as unjust to wish everyone to have the 
same belief, as to want all people to be alike in the sense of taste : I 
say so, in order that you may hold yourself free to dismiss everything 
that I have said as not worth a straw, and to omit it altogether. It 
will be enough if you acknowledge my strong affection for you, and do 
not esteem as nought my admiration for your personal worth. Perhaps 
some matter has been advanced somewhat inconsiderately, as is only 
too likely to happen when one is expressing dissent. Any such passage 
which may occur I wholly disavow and sacrifice ; pray blot it out, 
and be assured, that I have desired nothing more tJian to deserve well 
of you and to keep my friendship with you quite intact. 

With kind regards*. 

Paris, Ibth May, 1641. 

1 Vol. i. p. 199. 2 vale. 



THE AUTHOR'S KEPLY TO THE FIFTH 
SET OF OBJECTIONS. 

Sra 1 , 

The essay in which you criticize my meditations is exceed- 
ingly well-written and carefully executed, and to me it appears 
that ifc will do much to set them in a clear light. Consequently 
I consider that I am greatly beholden to you for writing it, as well 
as to the Rev. Father Mersenne for inciting you to do so. Our 
friend, who is such an eager enquirer into all things, and who 
more especially promotes unweariedly everything that tends to the 
glory of God, knows that the best way of determining whether my 
arguments are to be treated as accurate demonstrations, is that 
some men of outstanding eminence in scholarship and ability, 
should subject them to a rigorous criticism, so as finally to make 
trial of my powers of giving a satisfactory answer to their objections. 
This is why he has challenged so many to attempt the task, and 
has prevailed upon some to do so, among whom I am glad to see you. 
For, though in order to refute my opinions you have not so much 
employed philosophical reasoning as made use of certain oratorical 
devices so as to elude my argument, this is in itself a matter of 
gratification to me, since I shall for this reason infer that it will not 
be easy to bring up in opposition to me arguments which differ 
from those which you have read in the preceding criticisms urged 
by other people, Further, if such had existed, they would not 
have escaped your penetration and industry, and I hold that here 
your only purpose has been to bring to my notice those conceptions 
which might be used to avoid the force of my arguments by those 
whose minds are so immersed in matters of sense as to shrink 
from all metaphysical reflections, and that you thus gave me an 
opportunity for meeting these. Wherefore here I shall reply to 
you not as a keen-eyed philosopher, but as to one of these fleshly 
individuals whom you impersonate. 

1 Yir praestantissime. 



.Reply to Objections V 205 

OF THE OBJECTIONS URGED AGAINST THS* 
FIRST MEDITATION. 

You say that you approve of my determination to rid my mind 
of prejudices, especially since no one can pretend that there is any 
fault to find with this; but you would prefer me to proceed 
simply and with few words 1 , i.e. to carry out my resolve only in a 
perfunctory manner. This is forsooth to assume that it is very 
easy for all to free themselves from the errors in which, since 
infancy, they have been steeped, and that too much care may be 
employed in carrying this out, a contention which no one maintains. 
I suppose you wished to show that many men, though verbally 
admitting that prejudices should be avoided, nevertheless com- 
pletely fail to avoid them, because they expend no toil and pains 
upon the attempt, and never think that anything which they have 
once admitted to be true should be regarded as a prejudice. You 
certainly play the r61e of such people excellently here, and omit 
none of their possible arguments, but there is nothing in this 
action which seems to suggest the Philosopher. For when you 
say that there is no need to imagine that God is a deceiver or that 
we are dreaming, or anything of the kind, a Philosopher would 
have considered that there was some necessity for showing the 
reason why such matters could not be considered as doubtful, or, 
if he had no reason, as in truth there is none, he would not have 
made the said assertion. Neither would he have added that in 
this place it was sufficient to plead the obscurity of the human mind 
or the feebleness of our nature. The elimination of our errors is 
in no way furthered by alleging that we err owing to the dimness 
of our thought or the feebleness of our nature; for that is the 
same as merely saying that we err because we are exposed to 
errors, and clearly it is more useful to attend, as I have done, to all 
those cases in which error may chance to arise, lest we readily give 
the error our assent. Likewise a Philosopher would not have said 
that /, in considering everything doubtful as fake, did not so 
much dismiss an old prejudice as take up with a new one ; or he 
would first have tried to show that out of this supposition there 
arose some danger of deception. But you, on the contrary, shortly 
afterwards affirm that I cannot force myself to treat as doubtful or 
false the things that I supposed to be false, i.e. that I cannot adopt 
the prejudice which you feared I might adopt. This would cause 
1 Of. above, p. 136. 



206 Reply to Objections V 

no more surprise to a Philosopher than that at some time a stick 
which has been straightened out should be similarly bent back 
again into the opposite, i.e. crooked, shape. For he knows that 
falsities are often assumed instead of truths for the purpose of 
throwing light on the truth: for example, Astronomers imagine the 
existence of the equator, the zodiac, and other circles in the 
heaven, while Geometricians attach new lines to given figures, and 
Philosophers frequently act in similar fashion. But the man who 
describes this as having recourse to an artifice, eagerness jor verbal 
trickery, and seeking evasions, and declares that it is unworthy of 
philosophical candour and the love of truth, manifests that he at 
least has no desire to make use of philosophical candour or to 
employ any argument other than rhetorical humbug. 

CONCEENING THE OBJECTIONS BROUGHT AGAINST 
THE SECOND MEDITATION. 

1. Here you proceed to employ rhetorical wiles in place of 
reasoning ; for you pretend that I speak in jest when I am quite 
serious, and take as serious, and as uttered and asserted as true, 
what I propounded only as a question and as arising out of common 
opinion for the purpose of enquiring further into it. 'My statement 
that the entire testimony of the senses must be considered to be 
uncertain, nay, even false, is quite serious and so necessary for the 
comprehension of my meditations, that he who will not or cannot 
admit that, is unfit to urge any objection to them that merits a 
reply. But we must note the distinction emphasized by me in 
various passages, between the practical activities 1 of our life and 
an enquiry into truth; for, when it is a case of regulating our 
life, it would assuredly be stupid not to trust the senses, and those 
sceptics were quite ridiculous who so neglected human affairs that 
they had to be preserved by their friends from tumbling down 
precipices. It was for this reason that somewhere I announced 
that no one in his sound mind seriously doubted about such matters* ; 
but when we raise an enquiry into what is the surest knowledge 
which the human mind can obtain, it is clearly unreasonable to 
refuse to treat them as doubtful, nay even to reject them as false, 
so as to allow us to become aware that certain other things, which 
cannot be thus rejected, are for this very reason more certain, and 
in actual truth better known by us. 

1 actiones. 2 Meditations, Synopsis, Vol. i. p. 143. 



Reply to Objections V 207 

Moreover you do not accept in good faith, and as seriously 
meant, my statement that I did not yet sufficiently understand 
who the thinker was, though I had explained that very assertion. 
You also fail to allow my statement that I did not doubt about 
that in which the nature of the body consisted, and had assigned 
no power of self-movement to it, and had imagined myself to be 
a soul after the fashion of wind or flame or something of the 
kind, assertions that I then made, deriving them from common 
opinion, only in order that I might show them to be false in their 
appropriate place. 

What warrant have you for saying that nutrition, motion, 
feeling etc. are referred by me to the soul, in order that you may 
immediately add : / grant this, but what becomes of the distinction 
you draw between the soul and the body 1 ? The fact is, that shortly 
before, I, in express terms, referred nutrition to the body alone, while 
motion and sensibility I refer for the most part also to the body, 
and ascribe nothing that belongs to them to the soul, save only as 
much as consists in thinking. 

Next, what grounds have you for saying that there was no need 
of such an elaborate mechanism in order to prove that I exist 2 ? 
Really these very words of yours give me the best grounds for 
believing that my labours have not yet been sufficiently great, 
since I have as yet failed to make you understand the matter 
rightly. When you say that / could have inferred the same 
conclusion from any of my other actions, you wander far from the 
truth, because there is none of my activities of which I am wholly 
certain (in the sense of having metaphysical certitude, which alone 
is here involved), save thinking alone. For example you have no 
right to make the inference : / walk, hence I exist, except in so far 
as our awareness of walking is a thought ; it is of this alone that 
the inference holds good, not of the motion of the body, which 
sometimes does not exist, as in dreams, when nevertheless I appear 
to walk. Hence from the fact that I think that I walk I can very 
well infer the existence of the mind which so thinks, but not that 
of the body which walks. So it is also in all other cases. 

2. Next, with a not infelicitous comedy, you proceed to 
question me, no longer as a complete man, but as a soul in 
separation from the body; and in so doing you seem to remind 
me that these objections proceed not from the mind of an acute 



1 Of. above, p. 137, par. 4. 

2 Ibid. par. 2. 



208 Reply to Objections V 

philosopher but from the flesh alone. I ask you therefore, flesh, 
or whatever the name be by which you prefer to be known, have 
you so little intercourse with the mind, that you have not been 
able to note when I corrected that popular notion, by which it is 
imagined that that which thinks is like wind or some similar body? 
I corrected it then, surely, when I showed that it could be 
supposed that no wind or other body existed, and that nevertheless 
everything by means of which I recognize myself as a thinking 
being remains. Hence your subsequent questions as to why I 
cannot therefore be still a wind, and why I cannot occupy space, 
and why 1 cannot be subject to many motions 1 , etc., are so devoid of 
sense as to require no reply. 

3. The next objections have no more force : if I am a sort 
of attenuated body, why can I not be nourished?, and the rest. I 
deny that I am a body. Also, once and for all, to bring the matter 
to completeness, since you almost always employ the same style, 
and do not attack my arguments but disingenuously suppress them, 
as if they were of no account, or quote them only imperfectly and 
in a mutilated form, and thus bring together a number of difficulties 
which would in a popular way and by unskilled persons be urged 
against my conclusions, or others akin to them or even unlike 
them, difficulties which either are irrelevant, or have been refuted 
or solved by me in their appropriate places ; since this is, so I 
declare that it is not worth while replying to each single question, 
for I should have to repeat a hundred times what I have already 
written. I shall only deal shortly with those which seem likely to 
cause difficulty to readers not wholly incompetent. As for those 
who look not so much to the force of the argument as to the 
multitude of the words employed, I do not value their approval 
so highly as to wish to become more wordy for the sake of 
meriting it. 

Therefore I will first note, that I do not accept your statement 
that the mind grows and waxes faint along with the body, and you 
have no argument to prove it; for from the fact that it does not 
work with equal perfection in the body of an infant and in that of 
an adult, and that its activities are frequently impeded by wine 
and other corporeal bodies, this alone follows, that as long as it 
is united with the body, it uses it as its instrument in those 
operations in which it is principally engaged, but not that it is 

1 Of. above, p. 138, par. 2, and p. 139, par. 1. 

2 Ibid. par. 2. 



Reply to Objections V 209 

rendered more or less perfect by the body; your contention will 
have no more force than were we to argue from the fact that a 
workman does not get good results as long as he uses a bad 
instrument, that he had acquired his skill in bis art from the 
excellence of his instrument. 

It is to be noticed also that you seem wholly to fail to under- 
stand, flesh, what it is to employ reason, when in your argument 
to show that the trustworthiness of the senses ought not to be 
impugned by me, you say that although at times, when not using 
the eye> I appeared to haw experiences that do not occur without 
the eye coming into play, yet so to err was not my universal ex- 
perience 1 -. You seem to imagine that we have not a sufficient cause 
for doubt if at any one time we detect an error; and again you 
seem to think that we might always note the error each time that 
we fall into it, when, on the contrary, the error consists in the 
very fact that it is not recognized by us as an error. 

Finally, since you often demand an argument from me, when 
you, flesh, possess none yourself, and since the c onus ' of the 
proof presses on you, we must note that, in philosophizing correctly, 
there is no need for us to prove the falsity of all those things 
which we do not admit because we do not know whether they 
are true. We have merely to take the greatest care not to admit 
as true what we cannot prove to be true. Thus when I find that 
I am a thinking substance, and form a clear and distinct concept 
of that substance, in which there is none of those attributes which 
belong to the concept of corporeal substance, this is quite sufficient 
to let me affirm that I, in so far as I know myself, am nothing but 
a thing which thinks, which statement alone I have affirmed in 
the second meditation that with which we are at present occupied. 
Neither was I bound to admit that this thinking substance was 
some mobile, simple, and rarified body, when I had found no reason 
inducing me to believe that. But it is for you, it is your duty, to 
expound the reason, if you have one; you have no right to demand 
that I shall prove that false which I refused to entertain only for 
the reason that I had no knowledge about it. You act as if, when 
I asserted that I now lived in Holland, you were to deny that that 
was to be believed, unless I proved that I was neither in China nor 
in any other part of the world, because it is perchance possible that 
the same body should, owing to the action of the divine power, 
exist in two different places. But when you add that I must also 

1 Cf. above, p. 139, sub fin., p. 140 ad init. 
B. H. II. 14 



210 IRepty to Objections V 

prove that the souk of brutes are incorporeal, and that solid matter 
contributes nothing to thinking 1 , you not only show that you do 
not know on whom the onus of proof lies, but also of what 
should be proved by each person; for neither do I think that 
the souls of brutes are incorporeal, nor do I believe that solid 
matter contributes nothing to their thinking: I merely say that 
this is by no means the place for the consideration of those 
matters. 

4. You here pursue the question of the obscurity arising out 
of the ambiguity of the word soul, an obscurity which I took such 
pains to remove that it is wearisome to repeat here what I have 
said. Therefore I shall declare only, that names have been con- 
ferred on things for the most part by the inexpert, and that for 
this reason they do not always fit the things with sufficient 
accuracy; that it is not our part to change them after custom 
has accepted them, but only to permit the emendation of their 
meanings, when we perceive that others do not understand them 
aright. Thus because probably men in the earliest times did 
not distinguish in us that principle in virtue of which we are 
nourished, grow, and perform all those operations which are common 
to us with the brutes apart from any thought, from that by which we 
think they called both by the single name soul ; then, perceiving the 
distinction between nutrition and thinking, they called that which 
thinks mind, believing also that this was the chief part of the 
soul. But I, perceiving that the principle by which we are nourished 
is wholly distinct from that by means of which we think, have 
declared that the name soul when used for both is equivocal ; and 
I say that, when soul is taken to mean the primary actuality or 
chief essence of man*, it must be understood to apply only to the 
principle by which we think, and I have called it by the name 
mind as often as possible in order to avoid ambiguity ; for I consider 
the mind not as part of the soul but as the whole of that soul which 
thinks. 

You have a difficulty, however, you say, as to whether I think 
that the soul always thinks 3 . But why should it not always think, 
when it is a thinking substance ? Why is it strange that we do 
not remember the thoughts it has had when in the womb or in a 
stupor, when we do not even remember the most of those we know 
we have had when grown up, in good health, and awake ? For the 

1 Of. above, p. 140, par. 2. 2 actu primo sive praecipua hominis forma. 

3 Of. above, p. 141, par. 2. 



Eeply to Objections V 211 

recollection of the thoughts which the mind has had during the 
period of its union with the body, it is necessary for certain traces 
of them to be impressed on the brain ; and turning and applying 
itself to these the mind remembers. Is it remarkable if the brain 
of an infant or of one in a stupor is unfit to receive these residual 
impressions 1 

Finally when I said perhaps it is the case that what I haw not 
yet known (to wit, my body) is not diverse from that ivhich I do 
know (my mind), / do not know, I do not discuss this matter, etc. ; 
you object: if you are ignorant, if you do not dispute the matter, 
why do you assume that you are none of those things 1 ? But here it 
is false that I have assumed something of which I was ignorant; 
for plainly, on the contrary, because I did not know whether body 
was the same as mind or not, I made no assumption about the 
matter, but treated of the mind alone, until afterwards in the sixth 
meditation, not assuming but demonstrating the matter, I showed 
that mind was really distinct from the body. But you, flesh, 
are to the highest degree involved in error, since though you have 
no reason or the very slightest by which to show that mind is not 
distinct from body, you none the less assume it. 

5. To one who gives close attention to my words what I have 
said of the imagination is sufficiently clear; but there is no reason 
for wonder if to the unreflective it is quite obscure. Moreover I 
warn those people that my statements as to what I have asserted 
to be no part of the knowledge which I have of myself do not 
conflict with what I said before about those matters, as to which 
I was ignorant whether or not they appertained to me; for it is 
plainly one thing to appertain to me, another to belong to the 
knowledge which I have of myself. 

6. What you say here, my admired flesh, seems to me not to 
consist of objections so much as of carpings that require no answer. 

7. Here also you find much to carp at, but your complaints 
seem to require a reply no more than the preceding ones. For 
your queries about the brutes are not relevant here, since the 
mind when communing with itself can experience the fact that it 
thinks, but has no evidence of this kind as to whether or not the 
brutes think; it can only come to a conclusion afterwards about 
this matter by reasoning a posteriori from, their actions. I have no 
difficulty in disowning those inept statements which you put into 
my mouth, for it is enough for me to have pointed out once that 

1 Cf. above, p. 142, ad init. 

142 



212 Reply to Objections V 

you do not reproduce faithfully everything I have said. But I have 
often adduced the criterion by which the difference between mind 
and body is detected; viz. that the whole nature of the mind 
consists in thinking, while the whole nature of the body consists 
in being an extended thing, and that there is nothing at all 
common to thought and extension. I have often also shown 
distinctly that mind can act independently of the brain ; for 
certainly the brain can be of no use in pure thought: its only use 
is for imagining and perceiving. And although, when imagination 
or sensation is intense (as occurs when the brain is troubled or 
disturbed), the mind does not readily find room for thinking of 
other matters, yet we experience the fact that, when imagination 
is not so strong, we often understand something entirely diverse 
from it: for example, when we sleep we perceive that we. are 
dreaming, while in having the dream we must employ the imagi- 
nation; yet our awareness of the fact that we are dreaming is an 
act of the intellect alone. 

8. Here, as frequently elsewhere, you merely show that you 
do not properly understand what you attempt to criticize. For,, 
neither have I abstracted the concept of wax from that of its 
accidents; rather have I tried to show how its substance was 
manifested by means of accidents, and how the reflective 1 and 
distinct perception of it, one such as you, flesh, seem never 
to have had, differs from the vulgar and confused idea. Nor can 
I see what argument you rely on to prove your confident affirmation 
that a dog can discriminate in the same way as we do, unless- 
that, since you see that it is made of flesh, you believe that 
everything which exists in you is also in it. But I, failing to 
detect mind in it, think that nothing similar to that which I 
recognize in mind is found in it. 

9. I am surprised that while here you confess that all those 
matters which I am aware of in wax, show indeed that I distinctly 
know that I escist, you maintain that they do not demonstrate ivhat 
I am 2 , since the one thing cannot be proved without the other. Nor 
do I see what else you expect the matter to yield, unless it be some 
revelation about the colour, odour or taste of the human mind, or 
the nature of the salt, sulphur, or mercury that go to its compo- 
sition; for you wish us to examine it, as though it were a wine,. 
by a sort of chemical analysis*. That is really worthy of you,. 

1 Beflexa. Clerselier's F. Y. has ' clear and distinct.' 

2 Cf. above, p. 149, ad init. 3 p 151, 1. 5. 



Reply to Objections V 213 

flesh, and of all those who, conceiving nothing except what is 
wholly confused, are ignorant of the proper object of investigation 
in each inquiry. As for me, my belief has always been that 
nothing else is required in order to manifest the nature of substance 
except its various attributes, so that our comprehension of its 
nature is more perfect in proportion to the number of its attributes 
which we discern. Just as in wax we are able to distinguish many 
attributes, one that it is white, another that it is hard, a third 
that it can be liquefied, etc., so also in mind we can recognize as 
many one that it has the power of being aware of the whiteness of 
wax, another that it possess the power of recognizing its hardness, 
a third of knowing that it can be liquefied, i.e. that it can lose its 
hardness, etc. ; for he can perceive its hardness who is not aware 
of its whiteness, viz. a man born blind; and so in the other cases. 
Whence it can be clearly inferred that nothing yields the know- 
ledge of so many attributes as our mind, because as many can be 
enumerated in its case as there are attributes in everything else, 
owing to the fact that it knows these ; and hence its nature is best 
known of all. Finally, you here incidentally urge the objection 
that, while not admitting the existence in myself of anything save 
mind, I none the less speak of the wax tlmt I see and touch, which 

1 could not do except by using my hands and eyes 1 . But you ought 
to have noticed that I had carefully pointed out that I did not 
then deal with the sight and touch which are effected by means 
of organs, but solely with the thought of seeing and touching ; 
and that this does not imply the use of these organs is testified to 
us every recurring night in dreams. True you have not really 
failed to note this ; you have only wished to show how absurd and 
unjust are the cavillings of those whose design is not so much to 
understand as to raise objections. 

CONCERNING THE OBJECTIONS TO THE 
THIRD MEDITATION. 

1. Splendid ! Here at length you do bring up an argument 
against me, a feat which, so far as I can make out,* you have 
hitherto failed to accomplish. In order to prove that it is not a 
sure rule that what we very dearly and distinctly perceive is true, 
you allege that to great intellects, which it appears ought to have 
had the most numerous clear and distinct perceptions, it has 
seemed nevertheless that the truth of things was hidden either in 
1 Cf. above, p. 149, par. 1. 



214 Reply to Objections V 

God or at the bottom of a well. Here I admit that your argument 
as drawn from authority is quite right. But, flesh, you should 
have remembered that you here were addressing a mind so far 
withdrawn from corporeal things that it does not even know that 
anyone has existed before it, and hence cannot be influenced by 
the authority of others. Your passage referring to the sceptics 
is a good enough commonplace, but proves nothing, as neither 
does your point about people facing death on behalf of false 
opinions, because it can never be proved that they clearly and 
distinctly perceive what they pertinaciously affirm. I do not 
question what you next say, viz. that it is not so much a question 
of taking pains to establish the truth of the rule, as of finding a 
method for deciding whether we err or not when we think that 
we perceive something clearly. But I contend that this has been 
carefully attended to in its proper place where I first laid aside all 
prejudices, and afterwards enumerated all the chief ideas, dis- 
tinguishing the clear from the obscure and confused. 

2. I marvel indeed at the train of reasoning by which you 
try to prove that all our ideas are adventitious and none of them 
constructed by us, saying because the mind has tJie power not only 
of perceiving these very adventitious ideas, but, besides this, of 
bringing together, dividing, reducing, enlarging, arranging, and 
everything similar to this 1 : whence you conclude that the ideas of 
chimaeras which the mind makes by uniting, dividing, etc., are 
not made by it itself but are adventitious. In the same way you 
will be able to prove that Praxiteles never made any statues, 
because he did not produce from himself the marble used in their 
sculpture ; and again that you cannot have made these objections, 
because to their composition have gone words which have not been 
invented by you bat have been communicated to you from others. 
But, as a matter of fact, the form of a chimaera does not reside in 
the parts of goat or lion, nor does the form of your objections lie 
in the single words which you have used but consists solely in the 
putting of them together. 

I am also surprised that you maintain the thesis that the idea 
of Thing cannot exist in the rnind unless at the same time the ideas 
of animal, plant, stone, and of all unwersals are found there*. This 
is as though, in order to acknowledge that I am a thinking thing, 
I ought to acknowledge animals and plants, since I ought to 
acknowledge Thing, i.e. what Thing is. You have nothing truer 
1 Above, p. 153, par. 1. 2 Above, p. 154, par. 1. 



Reply to Objections V 215 

than this to urge here when dealing with the truth ; and finally, 
since you attack only matters about which I have made no assertion, 
you merely wage warfare with the winds. 

3. Here, in order to break down the reasons on account of 
which I thought that we must doubt the existence of material 
things, you ask why I walk about on the, earth etc. 1 But this 
manifestly involves a begging of the question; for you assume 
what has to be proved, viz. that it is so certain that I walk on the 
earth that I can have no doubt on the matter. 

In adding to my own objections those I urged against myself 
and myself refuted the following one, viz. why one born blind has 
no idea oj colour, m* one born deaf, of sound 2 , you quite clearly 
show that you have not a single criticism of moment to make. How 
do you know that one born blind has no idea of colour, when often 
enough in our case even when the eyes are closed the sense of light 
and colour is stimulated ? And, though your contention be conceded^ 
has not the man who denies the existence of material things as 
much ground for saying that one congenitally blind is destitute of 
ideas of colour because his mind lacks the faculty of forming them, 
as you have for asserting that their absence is due to his being 
without eyes to see ? 

Your next point regarding the twofold idea of the sun proves 
nothing; but, in taking both ideas as one because they refer to 
the single thing, the sun, your action amounts to saying that the 
true and the false do not differ when affirmed of the same subject. 
Further, in denying that the notion derived from astronomical 
reasoning is an idea, you restrict the term idea to the images alone 
which are depicted in the imagination, contrary to my express 
assumption. 

4. You do exactly the same thing when you deny that 
substance is a true idea, because, forsooth, substance is perceived 
not by the imagination but by the intellect alone. Yet you know 
that long ago, flesh, I protested that I had nothing to do with 
those whose wish it is to employ their imagination only and not 
the intellect. 

Really when you say that the idea of substance has no more 
reality than it holds from the ideas of those accidents under which, 
or after the fashion of ivhich, it is conceived*, you show that you 
have in truth no distinct idea of it at all ; for substance can never 

1 p. 155, par. 1. " Ibid. par. 2. 

3 Cf. above, p. 158, par. 2. 



216 Reply to Objections V 

be conceived after the fashion of accidents, nor can it derive its 
reality from them. On the contrary accidents are commonly 
conceived by Philosophers after the fashion of substance, viz. as 
often as they are said to be real accidents ; for no reality (i.e. no 
kind of being 1 other than modal) can be ascribed to them, which is 
not taken from the idea of substance. 

Nay, when you say that the idea of God possesses reality only 
owing to the fact that ive have heard certain attributes predicated of 
Him 2 , 1 should like you to tell us whence men at the beginning, 
the men from whom we have learned them, drew this very idea of 
God. If it was from themselves, why may we not derive this same 
idea from ourselves? If from a revelation by God, this proves that 
God exists. 

Moreover in your next statement, that he who says that any- 
thing is infinite attributes to a thing which he does not comprehend 
a name which he does not understand*, you fail to distinguish an 
exercise of intellect conformable to the scale of our understanding, 
such as each one of us experiences himself to employ in thinking 
about the infinite, with a concept adequate to the things, such as 
no one possesses not only in the matter of the infinite but perhaps 
not even in connection with auy thing else however small. Neither 
is it true that the infinite is apprehended by a negation of boundary 
or limitation, since on the contrary all limitation contains a negation 
of the infinite. 

Further it is not the case that the idea which represents all those 
perfections ivhich we ascribe to God contains no more objective reality 
than finite things have''. You yourself confess that these perfections 
are amplified by our understanding in order to be ascribed to God. 
Do you, then, not think that the things which are so augmented 
are not greater than those that have not been so dealt with? 
Again, what can account for the power of amplifying all created 
perfections, i.e. of conceiving something greater or more ample than 
they, unless the fact that the idea of something greater, viz. of God, 
exists in us ? Finally, neither is it true that God will mean some- 
thing very little, unless He be greater than as conceived by us ; for 
He is conceived as infinite and nothing can be greater than the 
infinite. You, however, confuse intellectual activity with imagina- 
tion, and feign that we imagine God after the fashion of some huge 
man, in the same way as if one who had never seen an elephant 

1 entitas. 2 Of. above, p. 158, par. 3. 

3 Ibid. par. 4. 4 Above, p. 159, par. 1. 



Reply to Objections V 217 

were to imagine that it was like a very huge insect, e.g. a tick ; which, 
I agree with you, would be excessively foolish. 

5. Here, though you make a great display so as to appear to 
contradict me, yet you do not conflict with me at all, since clearly 
you come to the same conclusion as I do. Nevertheless you inter- 
sperse a number of statements drawn from here and there, from 
which I strongly dissent, as e.g. that the axiom, nothing exists in 
the effect which has not previously existed in the cause, is to be 
understood of the material rather than of the efficient cause 1 ; for 
the perfection of the form can never be understood to pre-exist in 
the material but only in the efficient cause. So too with your 
doctrine that the formal reality of an idea is a substance, and so 
forth. 

6. If you had anything to say in proof of the existence of 
material things, without doubt you would have advanced it here. 
But when you only ask whether my mind is uncertain as to whether 
anything else besides itself exists in the wwld 2 , and feign that there 
is no need to search for arguments to decide this, thus making an 
appeal merely to prejudiced beliefs, you show much more clearly 
that you can give no reason for what you affirm, than if you had 
refrained from saying anything. 

No point that you raise here in disputing about ideas requires 
any reply, since you restrict the term idea solely to the images 
depicted in the fancy, while I extend it to whatever is thought. 

But by the way I should like to ask what the argument is by 
which you prove that nothing acts on itself*. It is, forsooth, not 
your wont to employ argument. But here you have used as an 
illustration the finger which does not strike itself and the eye 
which does not see itself in itself but in a mirror, to prove your 
case. To this we have an easy reply ; it is not the eye which sees 
the mirror rather than itself, but the mind which alone recognizes 
both mirror, and eye, and itself as well. Likewise other examples 
can be given in the domain of corporeal things : e.g. when a top 
draws itself round in a circle, is not that rotation an action which 
it exerts on itself? 

Finally it must be noted that I did not assert that I deduced 
the ideas of material things from the mind*, as you rather insincerely 
here pretend I do. For afterwards 1 showed in express terms that 
they often come from bodies, and that it was owing to tins that 

1 Above, p. 15 J, par. 1, sub fin. 2 Above, p. 162, ad init. 

3 Ibid. par. 3, ad init, 4 Above, p. 163, par. 3, ad init. 



218 Reply to Objections V 

the existence of corporeal things was demonstrated. But in this 
passage I only explained that no such reality was found in them 
as to make us conclude, from the fact that nothing exists in the 
effect which has not formally or eminently pre-existed in the cause, 
that they cannot have originated solely from the mind; and this 
contention you do not attack at all. 

7. In this passage you have nothing to say which you have not 
mentioned already and which has not been refuted by me. I shall 
make one observation about the idea of the infinite, which, you 
say, cannot be true, unless I comprehend the infinite ; your opinion 
is that at most I could be said to know part of the -infinite, but 
indeed a wry small part of it, which bears no more proportion to 
the infinite than the representation of a tiny hair does to the entirety 
of the man to whom t/ie hair belongs 1 . I announce, I say, that it is a 
manifest contradiction that, when I comprehend anything, that thing 
should be infinite ; for the idea of the infinite, in order to be true, 
cannot by any means be comprehended, since this very incompre- 
hensibility is comprised within the formal concept 2 of the infinite. 
Likewise it is none the less manifest that the idea we possess of the 
infinite does not represent merely a part of it, but really the whole 
infinite, in that fashion in which it has to be represented through the 
instrumentality of a human idea, although doubtless another much 
more perfect, i.e. more accurate and more distinct idea, can be 
framed by God, or by any other intelligent nature more perfect 
than a human being. This is parallel to the case of one ignorant 
of geometry who, we do not doubt, has the idea of a complete 
triangle when he understands that it is a figure comprised within 
three lines, although Geometricians can learn many other things 
about the said triangle and discover them in its idea, of which the 
beginner is unaware. Thus, just as it suffices to understand a 
figure bounded by three lines in order to have am idea of a complete 
triangle, so also it is enough to understand a thing bounded by no 
limits in order to have a true and complete idea of the whole of 
infinity. 

8. Here you repeat the same error when you deny that we 
can have a true idea of God. For, although we are not aware of 
everything which is in God, yet everything we do cognize in Him 
is truly there. The remarks you interpose here and there, such as, 
that bread is not more perfect than him who desires it* that though 
I perceive something actually to exist in idea, that is no reason why 

1 Of. above, p. 166. 2 ratione. 3 Above, p. 167, ad init. 



Reply to Objections V 219 

it should exist actually in the thing oj which it is the idea 1 ; that I 
pass judgment on matters of which I am ignorant", and the like, 
show only that you, flesh, wish rashly to attack matters which 
in many cases you have failed to understand. For it is not to be 
inferred from tJie fact that a man desires bread, that the bread is 
more perfect than the man, but only that he who is in want of bread 
is less perfect than he himself is when he has no lack. Again 
from the fact that something exists in idea, I do not infer that it 
exists in the actual world, except when no other cause for that idea 
can be given but the thing which it represents as actually existing; 
and this I have shown to be true not of many worlds, nor of any 
other thing, save God alone. Nor, once more, do I pass judgment 
on matters of which I am ignorant, for I have adduced reasons for 
my judgment, reasons so convincing that none of them has been at 
all impugned by you. 

9. When you deny that we continually require the activity 3 
of the primal cause in order that we may continue to exist, you 
dispute a matter which all Metaphysicians affirm to be manifest, 
but one about which the unlearned often do not reflect, attending 
as they do only to causes of coming into being, but not to those 
of being 4 . Thus an architect is the cause of a house and a father 
of his son in respect of coming into being merely, and for this 
reason, when it is an absolute production, an effect can remain in 
existence without any cause of this kind ; but the sun is the cause 
of the light proceeding from it, and God is the cause of created 
things, not only in respect of their coming into existence, but also 
in respect of their continuing to exist, and must always expend His 
" activity on the effect in the same way in order to make it stay the 
same thing. 

This can be plainly demonstrated from what I explained about 
the independence of the parts of time, which you in vain attempt 
to elude by propounding th& necessary character of the connection 
between the parts of time considered in the abstract 5 . Here it is not 
a question of abstract time, but of the time or duration of some- 
thing which endures; and you will not deny that the single 
moments of this time can be separated from their neighbours, 
i.e. that a thing which endures through individual moments may 
cease to exist. 

1 Above, p. 167, par. 2. 2 Above, p. 168, par. 2. influxu. 

4 causas secundumjieri, non autem secundum esse. 

5 Cf. above, p. 169, par. 1, 



220 Reply to Objections V 

When you allege that we possess a power which suffices- to 
guarantee our preservation, unless some destructive cause supervene 1 , 
you do not notice that you ascribe to the creature a perfection of 
the Creator, if the creature is to be able to continue in existence in 
independence of anything else ; while you assign to the Creator the 
imperfection of a creature, because He must aim at non-existence 2 
by means of a positive act, whenever he wishes to cause a cessation 
of our existence. 

Your subsequent statement that the possibility of a regress to 
the infinite is not absurd, is invalidated by what you yourself after- 
wards say. For you allow that it is absurd in the case of causes 
which are so connected loith one another that no action on the part of 
the lower is possible without the higher'' ; now it is with such a cause 
alone that we are concerned here, viz. with causes in being, not 
with causes in bringing into existence, like parents. Hence I am 
not in conflict with the authority of Aristotle; nor does your 
argument about Pandora bear against me. You allow that all the 
perfections I see in man can be in varying degrees so augmented 
that afterwards I behold them to be such as cannot fall within 
human nature ; but this is all I want in order to prove the existence 
of God. For it is that very power of amplifying all human per- 
fections to such an extent that they are apprehended as more than 
human ; and this, I maintain, could not have come about unless we 
had been created by God. Yet I am by no means surprised that 
the evidence of my demonstration of this position is not clear to 
you, for I have not up to this point noticed that you have correctly 
grasped any of my arguments. 

10. In attacking my statement, that nothing can be added, 
nothing taken away from the idea of God*, you appear not to have 
attendee! to that common saying among Philosophers -that the 
essences of things are indivisible. For the idea represents the essence 
of the thing, and if something is added to it or subtracted from it, 
it is forthwith the idea of something else : it is thus that Pandora, 
thus that all false gods are portrayed by people who do not conceive 
the true God aright. But after the idea of the true God is once 
conceived, although new perfections can be detected in it which had 
not previously been noticed, this does not cause any increase in that 
idea, but merely renders it more distinct and explicit, because they 
must all have been contained in the very same idea, since it is 

1 Of. above, p. 169, par. 2. 2 tendere in non ens. 

* Above, p. 170. * Above, p. 172. 



Reply to Objections V 221 

assumed to have been true. The idea of the triangle is similarly not 
increased when we have remarked in it certain properties previously 
ignored. Further I should inform you that the idea of God is not 
farmed by us seriatim by amplifying the perfections of created 
beings, but is constituted as a whole at one time by the fact that 
mentally we apprehend an infinite being that, is incapable of any 
amplification. 

When you ask whence 1 get my proof that the idea of God is, as 
it were, the mark of a 'ivorkman imprinted on Ms ivork, and what i$ 
the mode in which it is impressed, what is the form of that mark 1 , it 
is very much as if I, coming across a picture which showed a 
technique that pointed to Apelles alone as the painter, were to say 
that that inimitable technique was, so to speak, a mark impressed 
by Apelles on all his pictures in order to distinguish them from 
others, but you replied with the questions : what is the form of 
that mark?' and 'what is its mode of impression?' Such an 
enquiry would seem to merit laughter rather than any reply. 

What answer do you deserve when you go on to say : if it is not 
other than the work or thing itself, you yourself then are an idea, 
you are nothing but a mode of thought, you are yourself both the mark 
impressed and the subject on which it is impressed' 2 ? Would it not 
be an equally clever thing to urge, when I said that the technique 
of Apelles was that by which his pictures were distinguished from 
others, that it was nothing other than the pictures themselves : 
that therefore those pictures were nothing but the technique, and 
did not consist of matter at all, and that hence they were merely a 
mode of painting, etc. ? 

When, in order to disprove that we are made after the image of 
God, you state its consequence, that God will therefore haw a human 
form, and go on to recount all the particulars in which human 
nature differs from the divine, is there anything cleverer in this 
than if, in order to show that certain pictures by Apelles were not 
made after the likeness of Alexander, you were to allege that this 
implied that Alexander was like a picture, whereas pictures were 
composed of wood and paint, not of bones and flesh as Alexander is? 
Now the nature of an image is not such that it is identical with 
that of which it is an image in all particulars, but only that it 
copies it in certain respects ; and it is clear that that perfect power 
of thought which we understand to be in God, is represented by 
that less perfect faculty which we possess. 

1 Above, p. 172. 2 Above, p. 173. 



222 Reply to Objections V 

In preferring to compare God's act of creation to the operation 
of a workman rather than to generation by a parent, your action 
has no warrant. For, although these three modes of action are 
wholly distinct, yet there is less distance to traverse in arguing 
from natural production to the divine, than in proceeding from 
artificial production. But, neither did I say that there was as 
much resemblance between us and God as prevails between children 
and parent ; nor likewise is there never any likeness between the 
work of a workman and himself: take for example the sculptor who 
chisels a likeness of himself. 

With how bad faith do you report my words when you pretend 
that I said that I perceived a likeness to God in the fact that I am 
an incomplete and dependent being, when on the contrary I brought 
that into the argument to prove our dissimilarity from God, lest it 
should be thought that I wished to make men equal with God. For 
I said that not only did I perceive that I was inferior to God in 
these very matters though nevertheless I aspired to greater things, 
but that also those very qualities were greater in God those qualities 
to which, though they were so great, I found something comparable 
in myself ; and this was shown by the fact that I dared to aspire to 
them, 

Finally when you say how strange it is that other men do not 
think about God in the same way as I do, w/ien He has impressed the 
idea of Himself on them exactly as on me, it is precisely as if you 
were to marvel that since all are acquainted with the idea of a 
triangle, they do .not all perceive an equal number of truths about 
it, and some probably reason about this very figure incorrectly. 

CONCERNING THE OBJECTIONS TO THE FOURTH 
MEDITATION. 

I have sufficiently explained our idea of nothing, and the way in 
which we participate in non-existence, by calling it a negative idea 
and saying that it means merely that we are not the supreme Being, 
and that we lack many things. But you are always discovering 
imaginary difficulties. 

When you say that I see that certain of God } s works are not 
absolutely perfect and complete 1 you openly invent something which 
I have neither stated there nor thought ; all that I said being that 
if certain things were considered not in the light of being but part 

1 Above, p. 175, par. 2. 



Reply to Objections V 223 

of the world, as they really are, but' as complete wholes, then they 
might seem to he imperfect. 

The arguments you adduce on behalf of final causality are to 
be referred to the efficient cause; thus it is open to us, from 
beholding the uses of the various parts in plants and animals to 
regard with admiration the God who brings these into existence, 
and from a survey of His works to learn to know and glorify the 
author of these works, but that does not imply that we can divine 
the purpose for which He made each thing. And although in 
Ethics, where it is often allowable to employ conjecture, it is at 
times pious to consider the end which we may conjecture God set 
before Himself in ruling the universe, certainly in Physics, where 
everything should rest upon the securest arguments, it is futile to 
do so. We cannot pretend that certain of God's purposes rather 
than others are openly displayed ; all seems to be equally hidden in 
the abyss of His inscrutable wisdom. Likewise you ought not to 
pretend that mortals can understand no other sort of cause ; for 
there is nothing else which is not much easier to comprehend than 
one of God's purposes, while, as to those which you have brought 
forward in illustrating the difficulty in question, there is no one 
who does not think that he is acquainted with them. 

Finally, as you here ask me in such a straightforward manner, 
what sort of an idea I think my mind, would have possessed either of 
God or of myself, if, from the time at which it was infused into the 
body, it had remained there with dosed eyes and without employing 
any of the other senses 1 , I shall give you my answer ingenuously and 
candidly. I do not doubt that the mind under such circumstances 
(provided only that we suppose that it is not impeded by the body 
in its thinking, as equally at the same time that it is not aided by 
it) would have exactly the same idea of God and of itself as it now 
possesses, save only that these ideas would be much purer and 
clearer. For the senses hamper the mind in many things and in 
nowise aid the perception of these ideas, and there is nothing to 
prevent all men noticing equally well that they have these ideas, 
except the fact that they are too much occupied with the perception 
of the images of corporeal things. 

2. Here you are everywhere guilty of a false assumption in 
taking as a positive imperfection the fact that we are liable to err, 
since this is really (except with respect to God) the negation of a 
greater perfection. Again the comparison between the citizens of a 

i Above, p. 176, par. 3. 



224 Reply to Objections V 

State and the parts of the universe is not strictly accurate ; for 
a bad disposition on the part of citizens is, relatively to the State, 
something positive, but this does not apply to a man's being liable 
to err, or not possessing all perfections, when that is taken relatively 
to the good of the universe. A better comparison could be drawn 
between the man who would like to have the whole of the human 
body covered with eyes, in order that it might appear more 
beautiful, because no bodily part is more beautiful than the eye> 
and him who thinks that no existing creatures ought to be liable to 
err, i.e. should not be wholly perfect. 

It is plainly a false supposition on your part that God has 
assigned to some a function which is base 1 , and has allotted imper- 
fections to tis, and so forth. Plainly likewise it is false that God has- 
assigned to man a faculty of judgment which is so uncertain, so- 
confused, and so unequal to the task of deciding those few things on 
which He has willed that man should pass judgment". 

3. You desire me here briefly to state to what the will may 
extend, which escapes the understanding*. Precisely to everything in 
which we happen to err. Thus when you judge that the mind is 
a certain attenuated body, you are indeed able to understand that 
the mind is itself, i.e. a thinking thing, and likewise that an 
attenuated body is an extended thing ; but assuredly you do not 
understand that the thing which thinks and the extended thing are 
one and the same thing, you only wish to believe it because you 
have already believed it and do not willingly change your mind. 
Thus when you judge that an apple which has been poisoned will 
suit you as food, you indeed understand that its odour, colour, and 1 
similar qualities are pleasant, but not that the apple is therefore 
good for you as food ; it is because you wish to believe it that you 
pass that judgment. So while I confess that there is nothing that 
we wish about which we do not understand something, I deny that 
what we understand equals what we will ; for we may wish many 
things about the same matter of which we understand very little. 
Moreover when we judge wrongly, we do not therefore will wrongly, 
but perchance something wrong ; neither do we understand anything 
wrongly, we are only said to understand awrong when we judge that 
we understand something better than we really understand it. 

You next deny certain truths about the indetenninateness of 
the will; and although they are in themselves quite evident, 

1 Above, p. 177, par. 3. 2 Above, p. 178, par. 1. 

3 Above, p. 180, par. 2. 



Reply to Objections V 225 

I refuse to undertake to prove them before your eyes. For these 
matters are such that anyone ought to experience them in himself, 
rather than he convinced of them by ratiocination; but you, 
flesh, appear not to pay heed to what the mind transacts within 
itself. Refuse then to be free, if freedom does not please you ; I at 
least shall rejoice in my liberty, since I experience it in myself and 
you have assailed it not with proof but with bare negations merely. 
Perchance I shall receive more credence from others, because I 
affirm that which I have experienced and anyone may experience in 
himself, than you who make your denial merely because you chance 
not to have experienced it. 

Yet it can be shown conclusively from your words that you 
yourself have had that experience. For in denying that we can 
guard against error, because you will not have it that the will can 
be borne towards anything to which it is not determined by the 
understanding, you at the same time allow that we can refrain from 
persisting in error 1 . But to do so is wholly impossible unless the 
will has the power of directing itself towards one side or the other 
apart from any determination by the understanding, the fact which 
you denied. For, if the understanding has once determined the 
will to propound some false judgment, I ask you : when first it 
(the will) begins to take heed lest it continue in error, what is it 
that determines it to do so ? If that determination is due to itself 
then it can be moved in a certain direction without impulsion by 
the understanding, which you denied, and about which alone the 
dispute has been raised. If, on the other hand, it is the under- 
standing which is responsible, it is not the will itself which takes 
heed ; and what happens is merely that, just as it was formerly 
impelled towards the falsity which the understanding set before it, 
so now it accidentally happens to be directed towards the truth, 
because the understanding has set the truth before it. But besides 
this I should like to know what conception you have of the nature 
of falsity, and how you think that it can be an object of the under- 
standing. I, who by falsity understand only the privation of truth, 
am convinced that it is an absolute contradiction that the under- 
standing should apprehend the false under the guise of the truth ; 
but this would be a necessary consequence if understanding could 
determine the will to embrace the false. 

4. As to the profit to be derived from these Meditations I have 
given sufficient warning in the brief preface, which I think you have 

1 Above, p. 181, sub fin. 
B. H. II. 15 



226 Reply to Objections V 

read, that those will not gain much who, not taking care to compre- 
hend the sequence and connection of my argument s, devote themselves 
only to controverting isolated passages 1 . Further, as to the method 
by which we are able to distinguish those things which we really 
perceive clearly, from that which we only think we so perceive, 
although I believe that I have expounded it with sufficient care, as 
has been already said, I nevertheless am by no means confident 
that people who make too little effort to divest themselves of their 
prejudices, and so complain that I have not spoken of these simply 
and in few words, will easily grasp this method. 

CONCERNING THE OBJECTIONS TO THE FIFTH 

MEDITATION. 

1. Here, after quoting one or two of my words, you add that 
they are all that I have to say about the question in hand* ; and this 
compels me to warn you that you have not paid enough attention 
to the mutual connection between my statements. For I believe it 
to be such that, to the proof of any one matter, everything which 
has gone before contributes, as well as much of what follows. Hence 
it is impossible for you in good faith to report what I have to say 
about any one topic, unless you take into account the whole of 
what I have said about the others. 

You say that it seems to you to be a gerious matter to set up some 
immutable and eternal being in addition to God ; and you would be 
quite right if it were a question of existence, or merely if I had set 
up something with an immutability not dependent on God. But in 
the same way as the poets feign that, while the fates were indeed 
established by Jove, yet once established, he was restricted in his 
action by his maintenance of them ; similarly I do not think that 
the essence of things, and those mathematical truths which may be 
known about them, are independent of God; yet I think that 
because God so wished it and brought it to pass, they are immutable 
and eternal. Now whether you think this to have serious conse- 
quences or the reverse, to me it is sufficient if it is true. 

Your attack upon the universals of the dialecticians, which you 
next undertake, does not touch me, since I do not conceive of 
universals in the same way as they do. But as to the essences 
which are clearly and distinctly conceived, such as that of the 
triangle or of any other geometrical figure, I shall easily compel you 

1 Yol. i. p. 139, par. 2. 2 Above, p. 183, par. 1. 



Reply to Objections V 227 

to acknowledge that the ideas existing in us of those things, are not 
derived from particulars ; for here you say that they are false, 
evidently because they do not agree with your preconceived notions 
about the nature of things. 

Shortly afterwards also you say that the objects of pure mathe- 
matics, e.g. the point, the line, the superficies, and the indivisible things 
consisting of these, and functioning as indivisibles, are incapable of 
actual existence 1 : whence it follows that no triangle and none at all 
of the things which are understood to belong to the essence of the 
triangle or any of the other geometrical figures, has existed at any 
time ; hence it follows that these essences are not derived from any 
existing things. But, say you, they are false. That is forsooth in 
your opinion, because you suppose the nature of things to be such 
that these essences cannot be conformable to it. But, unless you 
also maintain that the whole of geometry is a fiction, you cannot 
deny that many truths are demonstrated of them, which, being 
always the same, are rightly styled immutable and eternal. But 
though they happen riot to be conformable to the nature of things 
as it exists in your conception, as they likewise fail to agree with 
the atomic theory constructed by Democritus and Epicurus, this is 
merely an external attribute relatively to them and makes no differ- 
ence to them ; they are, nevertheless, conformable certainly with 
the real nature of things which has been established by the true 
God. But this does not imply that there are substances in existence 
which possess length without breadth, or breadth without depth, 
but merely that the figures of geometry are considered not as 
substances but as the boundaries within which substance is con- 
tained. 

Meanwhile, moreover I do not admit that the ideas of these 
figures have at any time entered our minds through the senses 2 , as is 
the common persuasion. For though, doubtless, figures such as 
the Geometers consider can exist in reality, I deny that any can be 
presented to us except such minute ones that they fail altogether to 
affect our senses. For, let us suppose that these figures consist as 
far as possible of straight lines ; yet it will be quite impossible for 
any really straight part of the line to affect our senses, because 
when we examine with a magnifying glass those lines that appear to 
us to be most straight, we find them to be irregular and bending 
everywhere in an undulating manner. Hence when first in infancy 
we see a triangular figure depicted on paper, this figure cannot show 
1 Of. above, p. 190, par. 2. 2 Cf. above, p. 185, par. 2. 

152 



228 Reply to Objections V 

us how a real triangle ought to be conceived, in the way in which 
geometricians consider it, because the true triangle is contained in 
this figure, just as the statue of Mercury is contained in a rough 
block of wood. But because we already possess within us the idea of 
a true triangle, and it can be more easily conceived by our mind than 
the more complex figure of the triangle drawn on paper, we, there- 
fore, when we see that composite figure, apprehend not it itself, but 
rather the authentic triangle. This is exactly the same as when we 
look at a piece of paper on which little strokes have been drawn 
with ink to represent a man's face ; for the idea produced in us in 
this way is not so much that of the lines of the sketch as of the 
man. But this could not have happened unless the human face had 
been known to us by other means, and we had been more accustomed 
to think of it than of those minute lines, which indeed we often fail 
to distinguish from each other when they are moved to a slightly 
greater distance away from us. So certainly we should not be able 
to recognize the Geometrical triangle by looking at that which is 
drawn on paper, unless our mind possessed an idea of it derived 
from other sources. 

2. Here I do not see to what class of reality you wish to assign 
existence, nor do I see why it may not be said to be a property as 
well as omnipotence, taking the word property as equivalent to any 
attribute or anything which can be predicated of a thing, as in the 
present case it should be by all means regarded. Nay, necessary 
existence in the case of God is also a true property in the strictest 
sense of the word, because it belongs to Him and forms part of His 
essence alone. Hence the existence of a triangle cannot be com- 
pared with the existence of God, because existence manifestly has 
a different relation to essence in the case of God and in the case of 
a triangle. 

Nor is it more a begging of the question 1 , to enumerate existence 
among the things belonging to the essence oj God, than to reckon the 
equality of the three angles of a triangle to two right angles among 
the properties of the triangle. 

Nor is it true that essence and existence can be thought, the one 
apart from the other in God*, as in a triangle, because God is His 
existence, while a triangle is not its own existence. I do not, 
nevertheless, deny that existence is a possible perfection in the idea 
of a triangle, as it is a necessary one in the idea of God ; for this 
fact makes the idea of the triangle one of higher rank than the 

1 Cf. above, p. 186, par. 4. 2 Cf. above, p. 186, par. 5. 



Reply to Objections V 229 

ideas of those chimerical things whose existence can never be 
supposed. Hence you have not diminished the force of this 
argument of mine in the slightest, and you still remain deluded 
by that fallacy ) which you say I could have exposed so easily 1 . 

I have elsewhere given a sufficient answer to your next objections. 
You are plainly in error when you say that existence is not demon- 
strated of God, as it is demonstrated of the triangle that its three 
angles are equal to two right angles 2 ; for the way in which both are 
proved is alike, except that the demonstration proving existence in 
God is much simpler and clearer. I pass over the rest, because, 
though saying that I explain nothing f , you yourself explain nothing 
and prove nothing, save only that you are able to prove nothing. 

3. Against these criticisms in which you point to Diogenes, 
Theodorus, Pythagoras and others, and adduce the case of the 
Sceptics, who had doubts about these very geometrical demon- 
strations, I affirm that they would not have done so, if, as they 
might have done, they had known God. Further, one thing is not 
proved to be better known than another, because it appears to be 
true to more people, but only because to those who know both, 
as they may, it appears to be prior in knowledge, and more evident 
and certain. 

CONCERNING THE OBJECTIONS TO THE 
SIXTH MEDITATION. 

1. - 1 have already dealt with the objection that material things 
as the objects of pure mathematics do not exist. 

Moreover it is false that the thinking of a Chiliagon is con- 
fused ; for many deductions can be drawn from it most clearly and 
distinctly, which would not occur if it were perceived only in a 
confused manner or, as you say, merely in respect of the J wee of the 
name. But as a matter of fact we perceive the whole figure at the 
same time clearly although we are not able to imagine it as a wbole 
at the "same time; which proves that the two powers of under- 
standing and imagining differ, not so much in respect of more and 
less, but as two wholly diverse modes of operation. Thus, in 
thinking, the mind employs itself alone, but in imagining it con- 
templates a corporeal form. And though geometrical figures are 
wholly corporeal, nevertheless the ideas by which they are under- 
stood, when they do not fall under the imagination, are not on that 
account to be reckoned corporeal. 

1 Of. above, p. 186, par. 6. 2 Of. above, p. 187, sub fin. 



230 Reply to Objections V 

Finally it is -worthy of you alone, flesh, to think that the idea 
of God, of an Angel, and of ths human mind, are corporeal, or after 
the fashion of the corporeal, derived forsooth from the human form, 
and from oth#r very subtle, simple, and imperceptible objects, such as 
air or aether 1 . For whosoever thus represents God or the mind to 
himself', tries to imagine a thing which is not imageable, and con- 
structs nothing but a corporeal idea to which he falsely assigns the 
name God or mind. For, in the true idea of mind, nothing is con- 
tained but thought and its attributes, of which none is corporeal. 

2. In this passage you show very clearly that you rely on 
prejudices merely and never divest yourself of them, when you wish 
to make out that we suspect no falsity in matters in which we have 
never detected falsity ; it is thus that, when we behold a tower close 
at hand and touch it, we are sure that it is square 2 , if it appear to be 
square ; so too when we are really awake we cannot doubt whether 
we are awake or d/r earning* ' } and so forth. Now you have no reason 
to think that all the things in which error can reside have been 
noticed by you, and it could easily he proved that you sometimes 
are wrong about those things which you accept as certain. But 
when you come round to the position at which you state, that at 
least we cannot doubt that things appear as they do\ you have returned 
to the true path ; your statement is one that I have myself made in 
the second Meditation. But here the question raised concerned 
the reality 5 of external objects, and in what you have contributed 
to this there is nothing correct. 

3. I shall not here delay to notice your tedious and frequent 
repetitions of such statements as, e.g. that I haw failed to prove 
certain matters, which nevertheless I have demonstrated; that I 
have treated only of the solid body, though I have dealt with every 
kind of matter, even of the subtlest ; etc. What opposition other 
than a plain denial is merited by affirmations of this kind, which are 
not supported by reasons ? Yet incidentally I should like to dis- 
cover what argument you use to prove that I have treated of solid 
matter rather than of that which is subtle. Have I not said : ' I 
possess (a body) united with myself, and it is certain that I am 
distinct from my body ' ? And I cannot see why these words are 
not equally applicable to an impalpable and to a solid body ; nor do 
I think that anyone but you could fail to see this. Apart from 
this, in the second Meditation I made it evident that mind could 

1 Cf. above, p. 192, par. 3. 2 p. 193, par. 2. 3 Ibid. par. 4. 

4 p. 193, par. 5, sub fin. * veritate. 



Reply to Objections V 231 

be? understood as an existing substance, though we did not under- 
stand anything to exist that was wind, or fire, or vapour, or breath, 
or anything else of a bodily nature however impalpable and refined. 
I said however that at that point 1 1 did not discuss whether it was 
in truth distinct from every kind of body; but in the present 
passage 2 I did discuss the matter and proved my assertion. But 
you show that you have wholly failed to comprehend the controversy 
by your confusion of the issue as to what may be known of the soul 
with the question as to that which the soul really is. 

4. Here you ask, how I think that 1, an unextended subject^ can 
receive into myself the resemblance or idea of a thing which is 
extended*. I reply that no corporeal resemblance can be received in 
the mind, but that what occurs there is the pure thinking of a 
thing, whether it be corporeal or equally whether it be one that is 
incorporeal and lacking any corporeal semblance. But as to 
imagination, which can only be exercised in reference to corporeal 
things, my opinion is that it requires the presence of a semblance 
which is truly corporeal, and to which the mind applies itself, 
without, however, its being received in the mind. 

Your statement about the idea of the sun, which a blind man 
can derive merely from the sun's warmth 4 , is easily refuted. For 
the blind man can have a clear and distinct idea of the sun as a 
source of heat although he does not possess the idea of it as a 
source of light. Nor is your comparison of me to that blind man 
just: firstly, because the act of knowledge which apprehends a 
thing that thinks is much more extensive than our apprehension 
of a thing which warms, as it is much more than that of anything 
else, as was shown in its proper place; secondly, because no one 
can prove that that idea of the sun which the blind man forms, 
does not contain everything which can be learned of the sun, save 
those who, being endowed with sight, are aware in addition of its 
light and figure. You, however, not only know nothing more than 
I do of mind, but do not even have knowledge of the very thing 
I recognize in it; so that in this comparison it is rather you who 
play the part of blind man, while I, along with the whole human 
race, could at most be said to be one-eyed. 

In adding that the mind is not extended 5 , my intention was 
not thereby to explain what mind is, but merely to proclaim that 
those people are wrong who think that it is extended. In the 

1 Med. ii. Vol. i. p. 152. 2 Med. vi. Vol. i. p. 190. 

3 Above, p. 196, par. 4. 4 p. 197, par. 2. 5 Above, p. 197, par. 3. 



232 Reply to Objections V 

same way if any people affirmed that Bucephalus was Music 1 , 'it 
would not be idle of others to deny the statement. In good truth 
your subsequent attempts to pro Ye that mind is extended because 
it makes use of a body which is extended, seem to employ no better 
reasoning than if you were to argue that because Bucephalus 
neighs and whinnies, and so utters sounds that are comparable 
with Music, it followed that Bucephalus is Music. For, though 
mind is united with the whole body, it does not follow that it itself 
is extended throughout the body, because it is not part of its notion 
to be extended, but merely to think. Neither does it apprehend 
extension by means of an extended semblance existing in it, 
although it images it by applying itself to 2 a corporeal semblance 
which is extended, as has already been said. Finally there is no 
necessity for it itself to be a body although it has the power of 
moving body. 

5. What you say at this point relatively to the union of mind 
and body* is similar to what precedes. At no place do you bring 
an objection to my arguments ; you only set forth the doubts 
which you think follow from my conclusions, though they arise 
merely from your wishing to subject to the scrutiny of the 
imagination matters which, by their own nature, do not fall under 
it. Thus when you wish to compare the union of mind and body 
with the mixture of two bodies, it is enough for me to reply that 
no such comparison ought to be set up, because the two things are 
wholly diverse, and we must not imagine that there are parts in 
mind because it is aware of parts in body. Whence do you derive 
the conclusion that everything which mind knows must exist in 
mind? If that were so, then, when it was aware of the magnitude 
of the earth, it would be obliged to have that object within it, and 
consequently would not only be extended but greater in extent 
than the whole world. 

6. Here though you do not contradict me at all, you have 
nevertheless much to say; and hence the reader may discover 
that the number of your arguments is not to be inferred from any 
proportion between them and the prolixity of your words. 

1 Descartes misread Gassendi's musea (fly) as musica. Cf. above, p. 197, 
par. 3. The mistake must have occurred when he saw G-assendi's work in MS. 
But in spite of the fact that musva appeared in the printed version when the 
work was published, so that Descartes had the opportunity of rectifying his 
error, he refrained from doing so. This provoked an attack by an opponent, 
Eevius, in Statera Phiksophiae Cartesianae, a pamphlet published at Amsterdam 
in 1650. 

2 convertendo se. 3 Cf. above, p. 201, par. 3. 



Reply to Objections V 233 

Up to this point we have had a discussion between mind and 
flesh, and, as was but natural, in many things they disagreed. But 
now, at the end, I catch sight of the real Gassendi, and have 
grounds for suspecting that he is a man of great philosophical 
eminence. I salute him as a man noted for his intellectual candour 
and integrity of life, and shall endeavour, by employing all the 
courtesies which I can muster, to merit his friendship at all times. 
I therefore ask him not to take it amiss if, in replying to his 
objections I have used a Philosophical freedom, since their entire 
contents caused me very great pleasure. Among other things 
I rejoiced that such a long and carefully composed dissertation 
contained nothing in opposition to my reasoning, nothing opposed 
even to my conclusions, to which I was not able very easily to 
reply. 



THE SIXTH SET OF OBJECTIONS 1 . 

Though we have read through your Meditations with wry great 
attention, as well as your previous replies to objections, there are 
still some slight difficulties left, which it is right you should remove. 

The first is that it does not appear altogether certain that we 
exist, from the fact that we think'. For in order to be sure that yon 
think, you ought to how what to think, or what thinking, is, and what 
your existence is; but since you do not yet how what these things 
are, how can you how that you think or exist? Since, then, in 
saying I think, ytm do not know what you are saying, and since in 
adding therefore I exist, you are equally ignorant of the meaning of 
what you say, and indeed do not how that you are saying or 
thinking anything, since in order to do so it seems to be necessary 
for y<w to how that you how what you are saying, and once more 
to how that you how that you how what you say, and so on to 
infinity, it is clear that you cannot how whether you exist, or even 
wkther you think. 

But to point mi a second difficulty, whn you say that you think 
and exist 3 , someone will maintain that you deceive yourself, and that 
ytw do not think, but are only moved, and that you are nothing other 
than a corporeal motion, since no one meanwhile has been able to 
grasp the demonstration by means of which ym think that you have 
proved tht no corporeal motion can be what ym call thought. Have 
you, then, by means of tht Analysis which you empty, so subdivided 

v ' ' v * %/ 7 JL v' 

all the motions of your subtle matter, that you are sure that you can 
show us, who give our utmost attention and are, we think, sufficiently 
clear sighted, that the reduction of our thoughts to those corporeal 
motions is self-contradictory ? 

1 urged by divers Theologians and Philosophers, F. V, 

2 Of. Med. n. Vol. L p. 150, par. L 
3 Cf.Med. vi. Vol. i p. 190, par. 2. 



Objections VI 235 

'Our third difficulty is very muck of the same kind. For though 
some of the Church Fathers haw, along with the Platonists, believed 
that the Angels are corporeal (which led to the Later an Councils 
conclusion that they could be depicted), and entertained the same 
belief with regard to the rational soul, which some of them indeed 
thought ivas conveyed to each man from his progenitor ; they never- 
theless maintained that Angels and the soul alike thought; hence 
they seem to have believed that this could be effected by corporeal 
motions, or even was identical with those very corpweal motions, 
from which they in no way distinguished thinking. The thinking of 
monkeys, dogs, and other animals seems to confirm this ; for dogs 
bark in their sleep, as if they were chasing hares or rushing at 
robbers ; and they are aware when awake that they run, and when 
dreaming, that they bark : though, with you, we recognize that there is 
nothing in them distinct from their bodies. But if you deny that 
the dog knows that it is running or thinking, besides the fact that 
this is an unproved assertion, the dog himself might perhaps pass a 
similar judgment with respect to us, that we forsooth are unaware 
that we run and think, when we run or when we think. For 
firstly you do not behold the dog's internal mode of operation, just 
as he is not directly aware of yours, and secondly there is no lack of 
men of great attainments who at the present day concede reason to 
the animals or haw in previous ages done so. So far are we from 
believing that all these operations can be satisfactorily explained by 
mechanism, without imputing to them sensation., life, and soul, that 
we are ready to stake anything in proving that that is both an 
impossibility 1 and an absurdity. Finally there are not lacking those 
who are likely to assert that man himself also is without sensation 
and understanding, and that all his actions can be effected by means 
of dynamical mechanisms and do not imply mind at all, if apes, dogs, 
and elephants can discharge all their Junctions in virtue of this 
mechanism; since, if the limited reasoning power oj the brutes 
differs from human reason, it does so only in degree, and this implies 
no difference in essence. 

Our fourth difficulty tenders the knowledge of the Atheist 2 , which 
he asserts to be absolutely certain and, judged according to your 
canon, most evident, when he makes the statements: if equals be 
taken from equals, the remainders are equal ; the three angles of a 
rectilinear triangle are equal to two right angles, and thousands 
similar ; Jor he cannot frame those statements mentally ivithout 
1 &MVCLTOV, L. Y. 2 Of. Reply to Objj. n. above, p. 29, ad init. 



236 Objections VI 

believing them to be absolutely certain. TJie Atheist contends that 
this is so true that even if God does not exist and is not even 
possible, as he believes, lie is no less certain of these matters than if 
God did really exist. He denies that any reason for doubting can 
be admnced, to disturb him in the slightest or make him hesitate. 
For, what will you advance ? That God, if He exists, can deceive 
him ? The Atheist will reply that he could wt be deceived in these 
matters even though God were to put forth all the force of His 
omnipotence in the attempt. 

Hence arises the fifth difficulty whose root is found in that 
deception which you wholly deny of God Himselj 1 . For, since many 
Theologians believe that the damned, both angels and men, are 
continuously deceived by Gods having implanted in them the idea 
of afire that is torturing them, so that they firmly believe and think 
that they clearly see and perceive that they are really being tortured 
by the fire, though no such fire exists, is it not possible that God 
deceives us with similar ideas and continually makes sport oj us by 
despatching similar phantasms or ideas into our minds ? Hence we 
should imagine that we clearly saw, and perceived by each of our 
senses things that nevertheless are not outside us, so that sky and 
earth are not real and we do not really possess arms and feet and 
eyes etc. This can happen without any wrongfulness or injustice, 
since the Lord is supreme over everything and has the absolute poiver 
of disposing what belongs to him ; especially since such action avails 
to repress the pride of men, and punish their sins, whether the punish- 
ment inflicted be on account of original sin or of other causes obscure 
to us. These contentions seem to be confirmed by those passages of 
Scripture which show that we can knoiv nothing, e.g. the words of 
Paul in 1st Corinthians, chapter 8, verse 2 : If any man thinketh, 
he says, that he knoweth anything, he knows not yet as he ought 
to know ; and the passage in Ecclesiastes, c. 8, v. 17 : I beheld that 
of all the works of God man can find out no reason of those that 
are done under the sun ; and so much the more as a man labours 
to seek it out, the less shall he discover ; nay even though a wise 
man says that he knows, he shall not be able to find it out. And 
that the wise man in saying this, has employed deliberate reason, and 
not spoken in haste, or thoughtlessly and violently, the whole of Ms 
book makes clear, especially tvhen the question of the mind comes up, 
which, you contend, is immortal. For in verse 19, c. 3, he says that 
the death of man is as the death of beasts. And lest you should 

1 Cf. Med. in. Vol. i. p. 171, par. 1, and Med. iv. p. 172, par. 2. 



Objections VI 237 

reply that this is to be understood of the body alone, he adds that 
man has no preeminence over the beasts. Further, speaking of the 
spirit of man itself, he denies that there is anyone who knoweth 
whether it goeth upward, i.e. whether it is immortal, or whether it 
goeth downwards with the spirits of the beasts, i.e. perishes. 
Neither may you allege that these words are said in the character 
oj an unbeliever ; in such a case the writer ought to haw made that 
quite clear and provided a refutation of these statements. Again 
you must not contend that no reply on your part is called for, since 
Scripture is a matter for the Theologians ; for since you are a 
Christian it is proper for you to be ready to reply to everything 
that can be objected to the faith, especially against the positions you 
desire to establish, and to use all your powers to make your results 
satisfactory. 

The sixth difficulty arises from the indifference of the judgment 1 
or liberty which you refuse to allow to the perfection of choice, but 
ascribe to an imperfect will alone, thus removing the indifference as 
often as the mind clearly perceives what ought to be believed or 
performed or left undone. But do you not see that by positing this 
you destroy the liberty of God, from Whom you remove that in- 
difference as to whether He will create this world rather than another 
or any world at all ? Though yet it belongs to the faith to believe 
that God has from eternity been indifferent as to whether He would 
create one, or many, worlds, or no world. But who doubts that God 
has at all times had the clearest vision of all things that were to be 
done or left undone ? Therefore the clearest vision and perception of 
things does not annul the indifference of choice ; and if it cannot 
harmonize with human liberty, neither will it be compatible with the 
divine, since the essences of things are, like numbers, indivisible and 
unchanging. Wherefore indifference is included no less in the divine 
than in human freedom of choice. 

The seventh difficulty will affect the superficies 2 in which or by 
means of which you say that all sensations take place. For we do 
not understand how it can happen that it is neither part of the 
sentient bodies, nor part of the air itself and its vapours, of which 
you say that it is no part, not even the exterior*. Nor at the same 
time do we comprehend that no body whatsoever nvr substance, as you 
assert, possesses real accidents which by the divine poioer may exist 
apart from any subject and, as a matter of fact, do exist, in the 

1 Of. Med. iv. Vol. i. p. 175. 

2 Of. Keply to Objj. iv. above, p. 119, par. 2. 8 extremum. 



238 Objections VI 

Sacrament of the Altar. There is however no reason for our Doctors 
to be perturbed until they hare seen whether you are going to prove 
that in your Physics, for which you make us hope, and which they 
scarcely believe will propound the matter so dearly that your con- 
clusions will be capable of acceptance, or will merit acceptance, to 
the exclusion of the former doctrine. 

The eighth difficulty arises out of your reply to the fifth set of 
objections. Sow can the truths of Geometry or Metaphysics such 
as you mention be immutable and eternal, and yet not be independent 
of God 1 ? What is the species of causality by lohich they are related 
to Him or dependent on Him ? What possible action of God's could 
annul the nature of the triangle ? And how could He from all 
eternity bring it to pass that it was untrue that twice four was 
eight ? or that a triangle had not three angles ? Hence either these 
truths depend upon the understanding alone while it thinks them*, 
or upon existing things, or they are independent, since God evidently 
could not have brought it to pass that any of these essences or verities 
was not from all eternity. 

Finally the ninth difficulty seems to us very important, when you 
say that we ought to distrust the operation of the senses, and that 
the certitude of the understanding far exceeds that of the senses*. 
But what if the understanding can enjoy no certitude, which it has 
not first received from a good disposition of the senses ? Or again 
if it cannot correct the error of any sense, unless another sense first 
correct the said error? Refraction makes a stick thrust into the 
water appear broken, though nevertheless it is straight ; what corrects 
the error? The understanding? Not at all; it is the sense of 
touch. So, too, in other cases. Hence if you bring in all the senses 
properly disposed, which always give the same report, you will obtain 
the greatest possible certainty of which man is capable; but this 
certitude will often escape you if you trust to the operations of your 
mind, which often goes astray in matters about which it believed 
there was no possibility of doubt. 

These are the principal matters which caused us trouble. And 
we pray you to add some sure rule and certain infallible tokens by 
which we may be quite sure, when we apprehend one thing thus 
perfectly apart from another, that it is certain that the one is so 
distinct from the other, that the two can, by the divine power at 
least, exist apart ; i.e. we wish to know surely, clearly, and distinctly 

3 Cf. Reply to Objj. v. above, p. 226, par. 3. 2 haec. No objection, F. V. 
3 Cf. Medd. i. and vi. Vol. r. pp. 145 and 189. 



Objections VI 239 

that that distinction of the understanding is not due to the under- 
standing itself but proceeds from the very things distinguished. For 
when we contemplate the immensity of God, not thinking of His 
justice; or when we new His immensity, not thinking of the Son 
or of the Holy Spirit ; do we haw a complete perception of that 
immensity, or of God as existing, apart from those other Persons, 
whose existence an infidel could deny with as much right as you 
deny mind or thought of the body ? Therefore just as it will be a 
false conclusion for anyone to argue that the Son and the Holy 
Spirit are in essence distinct from God the Father, or can be 
separated from Him, so neither will anyone grant that thought or 
the human mind can be distinguished from the body, though you may 
conceive the one apart from the other, and deny the one of the other ; 
nor may you think that this can be proved by means of any mental 
abstraction on your part. If you can manage to reply to these 
objections, there seems to be certainly nothing at all left to which 
our Theologians can take exception. 

APPENDIX. 

A few questions derived from other people will here be added 
in order that your reply to them" may be conjoined to your answer 
to the previous objections, since they belong to the same argument. 
Certain very learned and clear-sighted men wish to have a careful 
explanation of the three following points. 

1. How I know with certainty that I haw a clear idea of 
my soul. 

2. How I know with certainty that that idea is wholly diverse 
from anything else. 

3. How I know with certainty that that contains no element 
of corporeity. 

Certain others have propounded the following argument. 

CERTAIN PHILOSOPHERS AND GEOMETRICIANS 
TO MONSIEUR DESCARTES. 

With howsoever great an effort we bethink ourselves as to whether 
the idea 1 of our mind or that of a human being, i.e. our knowledge 
and perception of it, contains anything corporeal, we do not venture 
to assert that what we call thought can in no wise attach to* any 

1 Idola. A. and T. suspect the correctness of the word, as Clerselier's 
P. V. leads us to suppose that Idea is intended. 

2 convenire. 



240 Objections VI 

body, whatsoever be the motions 1 which characterize it. For since 
we discern that while there are certain bodies which do not think, 
there are others, e.g. human bodies and perchance those of the brutes 
which do think, will you not regard us as being guilty of sophistry 
and undue boldness, if we therefore conclude that there are no bodies 
which think? We can scarce retrain from believing that we 
would deserve to be for all time derided by you, if we had first 
forged that argument derived from ideas on behalf of the mind as well 
as of God, and you had then by your analytical method* condemned 
it. But you seem to be so much preoccupied and prepossessed by 
this method that you have apparently now so obscured 3 your 
mental vision that you are no longer free to see that the several 
mental properties or operations which you discover within you depend 
upon Gorpweal motions. 

If not, unloose the bond which, you say, confines us with adaman- 
tine chains and prevents our minds from raising their flight above 
the body. The bond consists in this We perceive very well that 
two and three make five, that if equals be taken from equals the 
remainders are equal ; we are convinced of the truth of these and 
a thousand other propositions, just as you find you also are. Why 
are we not similarly convinced by "your ideas or our own, that the 
human soul is distinct from the body and that God exists? You 
will say that you are not able to put this truth into our minds 
unless we think along with you. But lo ! we have read what you 
have written seven times and have, so far as in us lay, given an 
attention to it equal to that of the Angels, and have nevertheless not 
yet been convinced. We do not, hoioever, think that you will prefer 
to say that our minds are all steeped in brutish ignorance and 
wholly unfit for Metaphysical investigation, though for thirty years 
accustomed to deal with that science; we believe that you will not 
rather do this than confess that your arguments derived from the 
idea of the mind and that of God are not of such weight and power 
as to be able to master and in due right bring into subjection the 
intelligence of men of learning who have tried with all their power 
to detach themselves from solid matter. On the contrary we think 
that you will make that confession if you re-read your Meditations 
in the spirit of critical analysis with which you would treat them 
if- they had been brought forward by an opponent. 



1 agitated by some secret motions, F. V. 

2 Analysi. 3 tuae menti callum obduxisse. 



Reply to Objections VI 241 

Finally, as long as we do not know lohat can be achieved by 
bodies and their motions, and since you admit that no one can know 
everything which God has implanted in any body and can implant, 
apart from a revelation by God Himself, how can you be sure that 
God has not implanted in certain bodies a power and property of 
such a kind that they can doubt, think, etc. ? 

These are our arguments or, if you so prefer it, our prejudices. 
If you can cure us of them, we call God to witness that great will be 
the thanks with which all of us will reward you for freeing us from 
the tangle of thorns which is suffocating in us the truth you have 
sown. May the all-good God bring this to pass, the God towards 
whose glory alone we knoiv all your efforts have been directed. 

REPLY TO THE SIXTH SET OF OBJECTIONS. 

1. It is indeed true that' no one can be sure that he knows or 
tJmt he exists, unless he knows what thought is and ivhat existence 1 . 
Not that this requires a cognition formed by reflection or one 
acquired by demonstration ; much less does it require a cognition 
of a reflective cognition, by which we know that we know, and 
again know that we know that we know and so ad infinitum. Such 
knowledge could never be obtained about anything. It is altogether 
enough for one to know it by means of that internal cognition 
which always precedes reflective knowledge, and which, when the 
object is thought and existence, is innate in all men ; so that, how- 
ever overwhelmed by prejudice and attentive to the words rathef 
than their signification, though we may feign that we do not possess 
that knowledge, we cannot nevertheless really be without it. When ? 
therefore, anyone perceives that he thinks and that it thence follows 
that he exists, although he chance never previously to have asked 
what thought is, nor what existence, he cannot nevertheless fail to 
have a knowledge of each sufficient to give him assurance on this 
score. 

2. Nor can it occur that, when one perceives that he thinks, 
understanding at the same time what it is to move, he should 
think that he is deceived, and that he does not think but only moves' 2 . 
For since plainly the idea or notion he has of thought is quite, 
different from that of corporeal movement, he must necessarily 
understand the one as quite different from the other. Yet on 
account of his habit of ascribing many diverse properties, between 

1 Cf. above, p. 233, par. 2. 2 of. iu &. par . 3, 

R H. II. 16 



242 Reply to Olgeetions VI 

which he discerns no connection, to one and the same subject, he 
may doubt, he may even affirm that he is one and the same thing 
which thinks and moves in space. But it must be noted that there 
are two ways ia which things of which we have diverse ideas can be 
taken to be one and the same thing ; to wit, either in respect of 
unity and identity of nature, or merely by unity of composition. 
Thus, for example, our ideas of figure and motion are not the same, 
neither those of understanding and willing, nor of bones and flesh, 
nor of thought and of an extended thing. Nevertheless we clearly 
perceive that to the same substance to which the possibility of 
having figure belongs, the possibility of moving also belongs, so that 
what is figured and mobile is one by unity of nature ; similarly we 
see that a thing which is intelligent and wills is one and the same 
by unity of nature. But we do not perceive the same in the case 
of the thing which we regard under the form of bone, and of that 
which we view as flesh ; hence we cannot take these to be one and 
the same thing by unity of nature, but only by unity of composition, 
viz. in so far as the animal possessing bone and flesh is one and the 
same. But now the question is, whether we perceive a thinking 
thing and an extended thing to be one and the same by unity of 
nature, a unity such that we find that between thought and 
extension there is the same affinity and connection as we notice to 
prevail between figure and motion, or between understanding and 
willing. Or whether sball we rather say that they are one and the 
same only by unity of composition, in so far as they are found in 
the same man, in the way in which bones and flesh exist in the 
same animal. Now this latter alternative is that which I affirm, 
because I find a total diversity between the nature of an extended 
and that of a thinking thing, a diversity not less than that between 
bones and flesh. 

But since at this point an appeal to authority enters into the 
dispute, I am compelled, lest this should imperil the truth, to reply 
to what you add, viz. that no one hitherto has been able mentally to 
grasp my demonstration, by saying that though not many people 
have as yet examined my argument, quite a number affirm that 
they understand it. And just as the witness of one man who, 
having made a voyage to America, declares that he has seen the 
Antipodes, merits more credence than that of a thousand others 
who deny their existence merely because they have no knowledge of 
them ; so likewise in the case of those who properly examine the 
validity of arguments, greater weight attaches to the authority of 



Reply to Objections VI 243 

qne man who says that he understands a certain argument aright, 
than of a thousand others who, without appending any reason, 
maintain that it cannot he understood. For though they do not 
understand it, that does not prevent its being understood by others ; 
and, since, in inferring this conclusion, they show that they do not 
have an accurate apprehension of what it is to reason, very little 
faith should be reposed in them. 

Lastly to the question : whether by my Analysis I have sub- 
divided all the motions of my subtle matter so as to be sure that I can 
show men who have given their best attention and are, as they think, 
sufficiently clear-sighted ', that the reduction of our thoughts to corporeal 
motions, i.e. as I interpret, that thoughts and corporeal motions are 
one and the same, is self-contradictory, I reply that, though to me 
it is very certain, I do not promise that others can be convinced of 
the same truth however attentive they are and, in their own judg- 
ment, clear-sighted. At least I cannot promise it so long as they 
fasten their attention not on the objects of pure intelligence but on 
those of the imagination, as apparently those have done, who have 
pretended that the dissection of some subtle matter will give us 
the distinction between thought and motion. For the distinction 
can only be grasped by observing that the motions of a thing that 
thinks and that of a thing that is extended or mobile are wholly 
diverse and mutually independent of each other, and that it is self- 
contradictory 1 that those things which are clearly understood by us 
to be diverse and independent, cannot be sundered, at least by God. 
So that however often we find them in one and the same subject as, 
e.g., thought and corporeal motions in the same man, we ought not 
on that account to believe that they are one and the same thing by 
unity of nature but only in virtue of unity of composition. 

3. What is here advanced about the Platonists and their 
partisans, has now been rejected by the whole Catholic Church and 
commonly by all Philosophers. Moreover the Lateran Council, 
though concluding that Angels could be depicted, did not at the 
same time agree that they were corporeal. But even though they 
were in truth believed to be corporeal we should certainly not even 
in their case have reason to believe that their minds are more 
inseparable from, their bodies than men's are, neither also, though 
it were imagined that the human soul were derived from the pro- 
creator, could it be concluded that the soul is corporeal, but only 
that as the body arises from the body of the parents so the soul 

1 repugnet. 

162 



244 Reply to Objection VI 

itself proceeded from the parents' soul. As for dogs and apes, even 
though I were to grant that thought existed in them, it would in 
nowise follow that the human mind was not to be distinguished 
from the body, but on the contrary rather that in other animals 
also there was a mind distinct from their body. This is a doctrine 
that these very Platonists, whose authority you lately lauded, held, 
following the Pythagoreans in this, as is clear from their belief in 
Metempsychosis. However, not only have I asserted that plainly 
the brutes do not possess thought, as is here assumed, but I have 
given a most stringent proof of this, a proof which no one has 
hitherto refuted. Yet the people who affirm that dogs when awake 
know that they run, and even when dreaming, that they are barking 1 , 
as if they could take up their station in the animals' hearts, really 
assert this merely and do not prove it. For although they add that 
they do not believe that the operations of the beasts can be explained 
by mechanism, apart from sensation, life, and soul (i.e. as I interpret, 
without thought ; for I have neither denied to the brutes what is 
vulgarly called life, nor a corporeal soul, nor organic sense), and 
that they are ready to stake anything in proving that that is both an 
impossibility and an absurdity, this should not be taken to be a 
reason. The like can be asserted about any other proposition how- 
ever true ; nay people are not wont to offer pledges, except where 
their proof lacks reasons ; and since once upon a time men scouted 
the existence of the Antipodes in almost exactly the same way, 
I fancy that a matter should not be straightway held to be false 
because certain people scout it. 

You conclude by adding that those are not lacking who are likely 



and that all his actions can be effected by means of dynamical 
mechanisms and do not imply mind at all, if apes, dogs, and elephants 
can discharge all their functions in virtue of this mechanism. But, 
this argument surely proves nothing at all except that there ara 
some men who conceive all things so confusedly, and who stick so- 
tenaciously to the opinions that they have taken up in a prejudiced 
manner and understand only in a verbal way, that, rather than 
change them, they deny of themselves facts that they can at no, 
moment fail to experience within them. For surely we cannot help 
at every moment experiencing within us that we think ; nor can 
anyone infer from the fact that it has been shown that the animate, 
brutes can discharge all these operations entirely without thought,, 

1 Of. p. 285. 



Reply to Objections VI 245 

that he therefore does not think ; unless it be that having previously 
persuaded himself that his actions are entirely like those of the 
brutes, just because he has ascribed thought to them, he were to 
adhere so pertinaciously to these very words, c men and brutes operate 
in the same way,' that when it was shown to him that the brutes did 
not think, he preferred to divest himself of that thought of his of 
which he could not fail to have an inner consciousness, rather than 
to alter his opinion that he acted in the same way as the brutes. 
But I cannot easily persuade myself that there are many people of 
this kind. Far more will be found who, if it is conceded that thought 
is not to be distinguished from bodily motion, will with much better 
reason conclude that it is the same thing in us and in them, since 
they notice in them all corporeal movements as in us : they will add 
that a difference merely of greater and less makes no difference to the 
essence, and will infer that, though perchance they think that there 
is less reason in the beasts than in us, our minds are exactly of the 
ssame species ; and such a conclusion will be justly drawn. 

4. As to the Atheist's knowledge, it is easy to prove that it is 
not immutable and certain. For, as I have already in a former 
place said, in proportion to the impotence assigned to the author of 
his being, the greater will be his reason for doubting whether he 
may not be of such an imperfect nature as to be deceived in matters 
which appear most evident to him ; and he cannot be set free from 
that doubt unless he first acknowledges that he has been created by 
the true God, a God who has no intention to deceive 1 . 

5. Moreover that it is self-contradictory that men should be 
deceived by God is clearly demonstrated from the fact that the form 
of deception is non-existence, towards which the supreme existent 
cannot incline. In this all theologians are agreed, and all the 
certainty of the Christian faith depends upon this doctrine. For 
why should we trust God's revelations, if we thought that we were 
sometimes deceived by Him ? And though Theologians commonly 
affirm that the damned are tortured by hell fire, they do not 
therefore believe that they are deceived by a false idea of a 
tormenting fire which God has implanted in them y but rather that 
they are tortured by real fire, for the reason that, just as the 
incorporeal spirit of tJie living man is naturally confined in the body, 
so by the divine power it is easily after death confined in corporeal 
fire. Cf. The Master of the Sentences*, Book iv, Distinction 44. 

1 a vero et nescio fallere Deo. F. V. principe de toute v&rite. 

2 L. V. Mag. lib. 



246 Reply to Objections VI 

As to the passages of Scripture, I do not think that it is my 
part to reply to them, unless when they appear to contradict some 
opinion that is peculiar to me. For when my doctrine merely con- 
tains things that are common to all Christians, such as are the 
object of attack here, e.g. that something can be known and that 
human souls are not like those of animals, I should stand in dread of 
the charge of arrogance, if I did not -prefer to content myself with 
the replies that have already been discovered by others, rather than 
devise new arguments ; for I have never intermeddled with 
theological studies, except in so far as they contributed to my 
private instruction, nor do I find within me so much of the divine 
grace as to feel called to this sacred occupation. But I shall not 
on the present occasion avail myself of this resource, for fear that I 
may give some people an opportunity of thinking that I keep silence 
because I cannot give a satisfactory explanation of the passages 
adduced. 

Firstly therefore I maintain that the passage from St Paul, 
I Corinth, chap. 8. ver. 2 1 , ought only to be understood of the 
knowledge which is not conjoined with love, i.e. of the knowledge of 
the Atheists, because whoever knows God as he ought, cannot avoid 
loving Him or fail to have love. And this is confirmed by the 
preceding words: 'Knowledge puffetk up, but love edifietk,' and 
those which immediately follow : ' Moreover if anyone love God, He 
(i.e. God) is known by him.' Thus the Apostle does not mean that 
we can possess no knowledge at all, because he admits that those 
who love God know him, i.e. have knowledge about him. He says 
merely that those who have not love and hence do not know God 
sufficiently, although they imagine that in other matters they know 
something, nevertheless do not know as they ought to know, just 
because they ought to begin with the knowledge of God, and sub- 
sequently range the knowledge of all other things under this single 
cognition, as I have explained in my Meditations. Thus this very 
passage, which was adduced against me, so openly confirms my 
opinion about this matter, that I disbelieve that it can be properly 
explained by those who differ from me. But if anyone contends 
that the pronoun ' He 9 does not refer to God 2 but to the man who 
is known of God and approved by Him, another Apostle, to wit 
St John in his first Epistle, chap. 2, wholly favours my explanation. 

1 Above, p. 236. 

2 Cf . the interpretation in the English authorised and revised versions. 



Reply to Objections VI 247 

For in verse 2 1 he says as follows : and hereby we know that we 
know Him, if we keep His commandments; in chap. 4. verse 7, 
everyone that loveth is begotten of God and knoweth God. 

The same conclusion must be derived from the passages in 
Ecclesiastes. For it has to be noted that Solomon in that book, 
while indeed not acting the part of an unbeliever but in his own 
character, in so far as he was previously a sinner and had turned 
away from God, there repenting of his sins says that, in so far as he 
employed human wisdom and did not relate that wisdom to God, he 
could find nothing which wholly satisfied or in which there was not 
vanity. Hence on this account he says in many places that we 
ought to turn towards God, as expressly in chap. 11. verse 9 : And 
know thou that for all these things God will call thee into judgment, 
and in what follows up to the end of the book. Specially also 
those words in chap. 8. verse 17 : ' And I understood that of all the 
works of God man can find out no rea-son of those that are done under 
the sun ' etc. should not be understood to hold good of any man, 
but of him whom he has described in the previous verse : There is 
that neither by day nor night seeth sleep with his eyes. It appears 
that thus the Prophet meant to announce there that those who are 
too assiduous in their studies are not fitted to lay hold of the 
truth ; and certainly those who know me will not readily say that 
this saying applies to me. But we should attend especially to those 
words : ' the things which are done under the sun.' For the words 
recur frequently in the book, and always refer to natural things to 
the exclusion of their subordination to God, just because God, being 
above all things cannot be comprised among those which are under 
the sun. Hence the sense of the words cited is, that man cannot 
know natural objects properly, so long as he does not know God, 
which is just my own contention. Finally in chap. 3. 2 verse 19, it 
is clearly not said that l the death of man is as the death of beasts ' 
nor that l man has no preeminence over the beasts J except in so far as 
this refers to the body, for in the passage there is mention only of 
those things that pertain to the body. Immediately afterwards also 
he adds something separately about the soul : who knoweth if the 
spirit of the sons of Adam ascends upwards and if the spirit of the 
beasts descends downwards ? That means, if human spirits are to 
enjoy celestial bliss, what man knows this by human reasonings and 
as long as he does not turn himself toward God ? Certainly I have 

1 Verse 3 in the English N. T. 

2 5 in F. V., a typographical error. 



248 Reply to Objections VI 

tried to prove by natural reason that the soul is not corporeal ; bu,t 
I admit that it can only be known through faith whether it is to 
ascend above. 

6. As to the freedom of the will, a very different account must 
be given of it as it exists in God and as it exists in us. For it is 
.self-contradictory that the will of God should not have been from 
eternity indifferent to all that has come to pass or that ever will 
occur, because we can form no conception of anything good or true, 
of anything to be believed or to be performed or to be omitted, the 
idea of which existed in the divine understanding before God's will 
"determined Him so to act as to bring it to pass. Nor do I here 
speak of priority of time; I mean that it was not even prior in 
order, or in nature, or in reasoned relation 1 , as they say [in the 
schools], so that that idea of good impelled God to choose one 
thing rather than another. Thus, to illustrate, God did not will to 
create the world in time because he saw that it would be better 
thus than if he created it from all eternity ; nor did he will the 
three angles of a triangle to be equal to two right angles because he 
knew that they could not be otherwise. On the contrary, because 
he worked to create the world in time it is for that reason better 
than if he had created it from all eternity ; and it is because he 
willed the three angles of a triangle to be necessarily equal to two 
right angles that this is true and cannot be otherwise ; and so in 
other cases. And though it may be said that it is the merit of the 
saints which is the cause of their obtaining eternal life, this causes 
no difficulty ; for their merits are not causes of their obtaining this 
in the sense that they determine God to will anything they are 
merely the cause of an effect of which God wished them from all 
eternity to be the cause. Thus that supreme indifference in God is 
the supreme proof of his omnipotence. But as to man, since he 
finds the nature of all goodness and truth already determined by 
God, and his will cannot bear upon anything else, it is evident that 
he embraces the true and the good the more willingly and hence 
the more freely in proportion as he sees the true and the good the 
more clearly, and that he is never indifferent save when he does not 
know what is the more true or the better, or at least when he does 
not see clearly enough to prevent him from doubting about it. 
Thus the indifference which attaches to human liberty is very 
different from that which belongs to the divine. Neither does it 
here matter that the essences of things are said to be indivisible : 
1 ratione ratiocinata. 



Reply to Objections VI 249 

for, firstly no essence can belong in a univocal sense both to God 
and His creature ; and finally indifference does not belong to the 
essence of human liberty, since we are free not only when our 
ignorance of the right renders us indifferent, but also, and chiefly, 
when a clear perception impels us to prosecute some definite 
course. 

7. My conception of the superficies by which I believe our 
senses are affected, is not different from that employed (or which 
ought to be employed) by all mathematicians and philosophers ; 
they distinguish it from body and assume it to be wholly devoid of 
depth. But the term superficies is taken in two ways by mathe- 
maticians : viz. in the sense of a body, to the length and breadth of 
which they attend and which is viewed altogether apart from its 
depth, although depth be not denied of it ; or only as a mode of 
body, when straightway all depth is denied of it. Consequently for 
the sake of avoiding ambiguity I said that I spoke of that superficies 
which, being only a mode, can be no part of body ; for a body is a 
substance, and a mode cannot be a part of substance. Yet I did not 
deny that it was the extremity of a body ; nay, on the contrary, I 
said tnat it could with the greatest propriety be called the extremity 
of the contained body as much as of the containing, in the sense in 
which one says that bodies are contiguous when their extremities 
are together. For certainly when two bodies touch each other, the 
extremity of each is one and the same, and this is part of neither 
but the same mode of both, and can even remain although these 
bodies are removed, provided only tbat others of accurately the 
same size and figure succeed to their place. Nay that space which 
the Aristotelians call the superficies of the surrounding body can be 
understood to be no other superficies than that which is no substance 
but a mode. For neither is the place of a town changed, although 
the surrounding air be changed or some other substance be substi- 
tuted for it, nor consequently does the superficies which is here taken 
for a place form any part of the surrounding air or of the town. 

In order to refute the doctrine of the reality of accidents it 
seems to me that there is no need to produce other arguments tha-n 
those which I have already employed. For firstly, since all sensation 
is effected through contact, it is of a corporeal superficies alone that 
we can have sensation ; and yet if there are real accidents they 
must be different from that superficies, which is merely a mode ; 
therefore if there are any such, we cannot have sensation of them. 
Eut who ever believed that they existed unless he thought he 



250 Reply to Objections VI 

experienced them by sensation ? Secondly it is contradictory that 
real accidents should exist, because whatever is real can exist 
separately apart from any other subject; but whatever can exist- 
separately is substance not accident. And it makes no difference 
whether it be said that real accidents can be disjoined from their 
subject, not naturally, but merely by the divine power \ for coming- 
to pass naturally is nowise different from coming to pass by the 
ordinary power of God, which does not differ at all from his extra- 
ordinary power, and does not make any further contribution to 
things, so that if everything which can exist naturally apart from a- 
subject is substance, so whatever by the power of God, however 
extraordinary it may be, is capable of existing without a subject, 
must likewise be termed substance. I do indeed admit that one 
substance can be the accident of another ; but yet when this happens- 
it is not the substance itself which has the form of an accident, but 
only the mode in which it is accidental. For example when his- 
clothing is an accident of a man, it is not the clothing itself but 
merely his being clothed which is an accident. But because the 
principal reason which moved Philosophers to posit real accidents- 
was that they thought that the perceptions of the senses could not 
be explained without assuming them, I have promised that I will 
explain these facts minutely with reference to each sense in my 
Physics. Not that I wish that any of my opinions should be taken 
on trust, but that I thought that those who have judged correctly 
in the matter of those accidents which I have already explained 
in the case of vision in my Dioptrics, will easily guess what I am 
able to make good in the case of the others. 

8. To one who pays attention to God's immensity, it is clear 
that nothing at all can exist which does not depend on Him. This 
is true not only of everything that subsists, but of all order, of 
every law, and of every reason of truth and goodness ; for otherwise 
God, as has been said jusfc before, would not have been wholly 
indifferent to the creation of what he has created. For if any 
reason for what is good had preceded His preordination, it would 
have determined Him towards that which it was best to bring 
about ; but on the contrary because He determined Himself towards 
those things which ought to be accomplished, for that reason, as it 
stands in Genesis, they are very good ; that is to say, the reason for 
their goodness is the fact that He wished to create them so. Nor is- 
it worth while asking in what class of cause fall that goodness or 
those other truths, mathematical as well as metaphysical, which 



Reply to Objections VI 251 

depend upon God ; for since those who enumerated the classes of 
cause did not pay sufficient attention to causality of this type, it 
would have been hy no means strange if they had given it no name. 
Nevertheless they did give it a name; for it can be styled efficient 
causality in the same sense as the king is the efficient cause of the 
laws, although a law is not a thing which exists physically, but is 
merely as they say [in the Schools] a moral entity. Again it is 
useless to inquire how God could from all eternity bring it about 
that it should be untrue that twice four is eight, etc. ; for I admit 
that that cannot be understood by us. Yet since on the other hand 
I correctly understand that nothing in any category of causation 
can exist which does not depend upon God, and that it would have 
been easy for Him so to appoint that we human beings should not 
understand how these very things could be otherwise than they are, 
it would be irrational to doubt concerning that which we correctly 
understand, because of that which we do not understand and per- 
ceive no need to understand. Hence neither should we think that 
eternal truths depend upon the human understanding or on other 
existing things] they must depend on God alone, who, as the 
supreme legislator, ordained them from all eternity. 

9. In order rightly to see what amount of certainty belongs to 
sense we must distinguish three grades as falling within it. To the 
first belongs the immediate affection of the bodily organ by external 
objects ; and this can be nothing else than the motion of the particles 
of the sensory organs and the change of figure and position due to 
that motion. The second comprises the immediate mental result, 
due to the mind's union with the corporeal organ affected ; such 
are the perceptions of pain, of pleasurable stimulation, of thirst, of 
hunger, of colours, of sound, savour, odour, cold, heat, and the like, 
which in the Sixth Meditation are stated to arise from the union 
and, as it were, the intermixture of mind and body. Finally the 
third contains all those judgments which, on the occasion of motions 
occurring in the corporeal organ, we have from our earliest years 
been accustomed to pass about things external to us. 

For example, when I see a staff, it is not to be thought that 
intentional species 1 fly off from it and reach the eye, but merely that 
rays of light reflected from the staff excite certain motions in the 
optic nerve and, by its mediation, in the brain as well, as I have 
explained at sufficient length in the Dioptrics. It is in this cerebral 

1 F. V. minute images flying through, the air commonly called intentional 
species. 



252 Reply to Objections VI 

motion, which is common to us and to the brutes, that the jirst 
grade of perception consists. But from this the second grade of 
perception results ; and that merely extends to the perception of 
the colour or light reflected from the stick, and is due to the fact 
that the mind is so intimately conjoined with the brain as to be 
affected by the motions arising in it. Nothing more than this 
should be assigned to sense, if we wish to distinguish it accurately 
from the intellect. For though my judgment that there is a staff 
situated without me, which judgment results from the sensation of 
colour by which I am affected, and likewise my reasoning from the 
extension of that colour, its boundaries, and its position relatively 
to the parts of my brain, to the size, the shape, and the distance of 
the said staff, are vulgarly assigned to sense, and are consequently 
here referred to the third grade of sensation, they clearly depend 
upon the understanding alone. That magnitude, distance and figure 
can be perceived by reasoning alone, which deduces them one from 
another, I have proved in the Dioptrics. The difference lies in this 
alone, that those judgments which now for the first time arise on 
account of some new apprehension, are assigned to the under- 
standing ; but those which have been made from our earliest years 
in exactly the same manner as at present, about the things that 
have been wont to affect our senses, as similarly the conclusions of 
our reasonings, are referred by us to sense. And the reason for 
this is just that in these matters custom makes us reason and judge 
so quickly, or rather we recall the judgments previously made about 
similar things ; and thus we fail to distinguish the difference between 
these operations and a simple sense perception. 

From this it is clear that when we say that the certitude obtain- 
able by the understanding is much greater than that attaching to the 
senses the meaning of those words is, that those judgments which 
when we are in full maturity new observations have led us to make, 
are surer than those we have formed in early infancy and apart 
from all reflection ; and this is certainly true. For it is clear that 
here there is no question of the first or second grade of sense- 
perception 1 , because in them no falsity can reside. When, there- 
fore, it is alleged that refraction makes a staff appear broken in 
the water, it is the same as if it were said that it appears to us in 
the same way as it would to an infant who judged that it was 
broken, and as it does even to us who, owing to the prejudices to 
which we from our earliest years have grown accustomed, judge in 

1 sentiendi. 



Reply to Objection VI 253 

the same way. But I cannot grant what you here add, viz. that 
that error Is corrected not by the understanding but by the touch. 
For, although it is owing to touch that we judge that the staff is 
straight, and that by the mode of judging to which from infancy we 
are accustomed, and which is hence called seme, this, nevertheless, 
does not suffice to correct the error. Over and ahove this we need 
to have some reason to show us why in this matter we ought to 
believe the tactual judgment rather than that derived from vision ; 
and this reason, not having been possessed by us from the times of 
infancy, must be attributed not to sense but to the understanding. 
Hence in this instance it is the understanding solely which corrects 
the error of sense ; and no case can ever be adduced in which error 
results from our trusting the operation of the mind more than sense. 

10. Since the remainder of what you bring forward consists of 
doubts rather than of objections, I do not take so much upon me as 
to dare to promise that I shall be able to give a satisfactory account 
of matters concerning which I see that so many learned and clever 
men have hitherto had difficulties. Nevertheless, in order to do my 
best and not prove wanting in my cause, I shall relate in good faith 
the means by which I had the fortune to free myself wholly from 
these same doubts. For thus, if they chance to be of use to 
others, I shall be highly pleased ; if not, I shall feel guilty of no 
rashness. 

When first the reasons expounded in these Meditations had led 
me to infer that the human mind was really distinct from the body 
and was more easily known 1 than it, and so on, what compelled me 
to assent to this was that I found nothing in these arguments which 
was not coherent nor derived from highly evident principles according 
to the rules of Logic. But I confess that I was not thereby wholly 
persuaded, and that I had almost the same experience as the 
Astronomers, who, after many proofs had convinced them that the 
Sun was many times larger than the Earth, could not prevail upon 
themselves to forego judging that it was smaller than the Earth 
when they viewed it with their eyes. But when I proceeded farther, 
and, relying on the same fundamental principles, paused in the 
consideration of Physical things, first of all by attending to the 
ideas or notions of each separate thing which I found within me, 
and by distinguishing the one carefully from the other, in order 
that all my judgments might harmonize with them, I observed that 
nothing at all belonged to the nature or essen'ce 2 of body, except 
1 F. V. notiorem, L. V. - F. V. rationem, L. V. 



254? Reply to Objections VI 

that it was a thing with length, breadth, and depth, admitting of 
various shapes and various motions. I found also that its- shapes 
and motions were only modes, which no power could make to exist 
apart from it ; and on the other hand that colours, odours, savours, 
and the rest of such things, were merely sensations existing in my 
thought, and differing no less from bodies than pain differs from the 
shape and motion of the instrument which inflicts it. Finally I 
saw that gravity, hardness, the power of heating, of attracting, 
and of purging, and all other qualities which we experience in 
bodies, consisted solely in motion or its absence, and in the con- 
figuration and situation of their parts. 

But since these opinions differed very greatly from the beliefs 
which I had previously possessed respecting the same things, I 
began to reflect as to what had caused me to believe otherwise 
before ; and the chief reason I noticed to be that from infancy I had 
passed various judgments about physical things, for example, judg- 
ments 1 which contributed much to the preservation of the life which 
I was then entering; and I had afterwards retained the same 
opinions which I had before conceived touching these things. But 
since at that age the mind did not employ the corporeal organs 
properly and, remaining firmly attached to these, had no thoughts 
apart from them, it perceived things only confusedly ; and although 
it was conscious of its own proper nature, and possessed an idea of 
thought as well as of extension, nevertheless, having no intellectual 
knowledge, though at the same time it had an imagination of some- 
thing, it took them both to be one and the same, and referred all its 
notions of intellectual matters to the body. Finally, since during 
the rest of my life I had never freed myself from these prejudices, 
there was nothing which I knew with sufficient distinctness, and 
nothing which I did not assume to be corporeal ; even though the 
ideas of those things which I supposed to be corporeal were formed 
and conceived in such a way as to refer to minds rather than to 
bodies. 

For since I conceived gravity, for example, in the fashion of a 
real quality of a certain order, which inhered in solid bodies, 
although I called it a quality, in so far as I referred it to the bodies 
in which it inhered, yet because I added the epithet real, I thought 
in truth that it was a substance ; just as clothing regarded by itself 
is a substance, although when referred to the man whom it clothes 
it is a quality. Similarly the mind, though as a matter of fact a 
1 Or 'about things,' so F. V. 



Reply to Objections VI 255 

substance, can be styled the quality of the body to which it is 
conjoined. And although I imagined that gravity was diffused 
throughout the whole of the body possessing weight, nevertheless I 
did not ascribe to it that very extension which constituted the 
nature of the body ; for true bodily extension is of such a nature 
as to prevent any interpenetration of parts. At the same time I 
believed that there was as much gravity in a man of gold or of some 
other metal a foot long, as in a piece of wood ten feet long ; nay 
I believed that it was all contracted within a mathematical point. 
In fact I also saw that while it remained coextensive with the 
heavy body, it could exercise its force at any point of the body, 
because whatever the part might be to which a rope was attached, 
it pulled the rope with all its weight, exactly as if the gravity 
resided in the part alone which the rope touched and was not 
diffused through the others. Indeed it is in no other way that I 
now understand mind to be coextensive with the body, the whole 
in the whole, and the whole in any of its parts. But the chief sign 
that my idea of gravity was derived from that which I had of the 
mind, is that I thought that gravity carried bodies toward the 
centre of the earth as if it contained some knowledge of this 
centre within it. For it could not act as it did without knowledge, 
nor can there be any knowledge except in the mind. At the same 
time I attributed also to gravity certain things which cannot be 
understood to apply to mind in the same sense ; as e.g. that it was 
divisible, measurable, etc. 

But after I had noted these things with sufficient care, and had 
accurately distinguished the idea of mind from the ideas of body and 
corporeal movement, and had discovered that all my previous ideas 
of real qualities or substantial forms had been composed or manu- 
factured by me out of the former set of ideas, I easily released 
myself from all the doubts that are here advanced. For firstly 
I had no doubt that I possessed a clear idea of my own mind 1 , 
of which naturally I had the most intimate knowledge 2 , nor could 
I doubt that that idea was wholly diverse from the idea of other 
things, and contained within it no element of corporeity. For since 
I had sought to find out the true ideas of all other things as well 
and seemed to have a general acquaintance with all of them, I 
found nothing in them which was not wholly different from the 
idea of the mind. And I saw that there was a much greater 

1 Soul in Appendix (!), above, p. 239. 

2 F. V. adds ' since it was constantly present to and bound up with me. 



256 Reply to Objectiom VI 

distinction between those which, though I thought of each atten- 
tively 1 , appeared none the less distinct on that account, such* as 
mind and body, than between those, in the case of which, though 
we can understand the one without thinking of the other, we do 
not see that the one can exist without the other, when we think of 
each. Thus certainly God's immensity can be understood, though 
we do not attend to His justice ; but it is wholly contradictory 
that when we attend to either we should think that God is great. 
without being just. It is possible also rightly to apprehend 
God's existence, without having knowledge of the persons of the 
holy Trinity, which indeed a mind illumined by faith can alone- 
perceive; yet when they are once recognized, I deny that there can 
be discerned between them a real distinction in respect of the 
divine essence, whatever be admitted to prevail in respect of their 
relation to one another. 

Finally I had no fear lest, preoccupied with my Analysis, I 
might perhaps have been led astray when, seeing that there are 
certain bodies which do not think', or rather clearly understanding 
that certain bodies can exist without thought, I preferred to 
conclude that thought did not belong to the nature of the body,, 
rather than to infer from my observing that certain other bodies, 
e.g. human bodies, do think, that thought was a mode of body. 
For, in truth, I have never seen or perceived that human bodies, 
think, but only that they are the same men who possess both, 
thought and a body. And I clearly saw that this fact must be= 
due to the compounding of a thinking with a corporeal thing,, 
because when I examined the thinking thing separately I found 
nothing in it belonging to the body, just as neither could I discover 
anything of the nature of thought in corporeal nature separately 
considered. But, on the other hand, when I examined all th& 
modes of body and of mind alike, I perceived none at all the 
concept of which did not depend on the concept of the thing of 
which it was a mode. Likewise, from the fact that we often 
perceive two things conjoined, it is not permissible to conclude- 
that they are one and the same thing ; but from the fact that we 
sometimes notice one of them apart from the other, it is highly 
proper to infer that they are diverse. Neither should the power 
of God deter us from drawing this conclusion, because it is not less* 
conceptually repugnant that those things which we clearly perceive 
to be twain and diverse should be intrinsically and apart from all 
1 * at the same time,' F. V. 2 p. 240, ad wit. 



Reply to Objections VI 257 

composition one and the same, than that those which are in no 
way distinct should be dissevered. Consequently if God has im- 
planted in certain bodies the power 6f thinking (as He really has 
in the case of human bodies), this very power can be separated 
from them, and thus it is none the less really distinct from them. 

Neither do I marvel that formerly, before I had liberated myself 
from the prejudices of the senses, I rightly perceived that two and 
three make five, that if equals be taken from equals the remainders 
are equal 1 , and many similar things, when nevertheless I did not 
think that the soul of man was distinct from his body. For it is 
easy to see that the reason why, when a mere infant, I made no 
mistake respecting these propositions which all equally admit, was 
that I, like all other children, was not accustomed to count two 
and three, before the capacity for judging that they make five had 
developed. On the other hand from my earliest years I conceived 
mind and body as a sort of unity (noticing in a confused way that 
I was compounded out of them) ; and this occurs practically in all 
imperfect knowledge, viz. that many things are apprehended as a 
unity, which afterwards a more careful scrutiny shows to be 
distinct. 

But I do marvel greatly that learned men, accustomed to the 
study of Metaphysics for thirty years 2 , after reading my Meditations 
seven times over, should think that if I re-read tJiem in the same 
spirit of critical analysis with which I should treat them if they had 
been brought forward by an opponent, I should not believe that the 
arguments therein contained were of such weight and power, as to 
compel assent on the part of all, though meanwhile they them- 
selves can point to no flaw in my reasonings. Indeed they do me 
more honour than I deserve or than should be paid to any man, 
in thinking that I employ an Analysis by the aid of which either 
true demonstrations are overthrown, or false ones so cloaked and 
embellished as to be incapable of refutation by anyone. On the 
contrary I announce that I have only sought to discover a method 
for detecting the certitude of true and the error of false arguments. 
Hence it is not the fact that men of learning do not yet assent to 
my conclusions which moves me, so much as that after attentive 
and frequent reading of my arguments, they can point to nothing 
in them that is either wrongly assumed or incorrectly reasoned. 
For their difficulty in admitting the conclusions can be ascribed to 
their inveterate habit of thinking otherwise about these matters ; 

1 Above, p. 240, par. 2. 2 Ibid. 

R. H. II. 17 



258 Reply to Objections VI 

tlius their case would be similar to that of the Astronomers above 
mentioned, who had a difficulty in imagining that the Sun was 
greater than the Earth, although that fact was proved by the 
strictest reasoning. But I do not see that there can be any reason 
why neither they nor any others, to my knowledge, have up to this 
time found no error in my reasonings, except that these are wholly 
true and certain ; especially since they are derived from no obscure 
or unknown principles, but are deduced step by step from, to begin 
with, a complete doubt as to all things, and next from those truths 
which, to a mind set free from prejudice, seem most evident and 
most certain of all. For hence it follows that no flaws at all can 
exist in them that would not be easily noticed by anyone of average 
ability. Hence I think that I have a right to conclude not so 
much that my doctrines are invalidated by the authority of these 
men of great learning, though after a repeated perusal of my 
writings they have not yet succeeded in gaining their assent, as 
that on the contrary, their authority strengthens my position, since 
after so much accurate scrutiny they have noted no errors or 
fallacies in my proofs. 

THE END. 



THE SEVENTH SET OF OBJECTIONS WITH 
THE AUTHOE'S ANNOTATIONS THEREON, 
OTHERWISE A DISSERTATION CONCERN- 
ING FIRST PHILOSOPHY. 

My dear Sir\ 

You set me many questions concerning the new method of in- 
vestigating the truth, and you not only require me to answer but 
insistently urge me to reply. Nevertheless I shall keep my awn 
counsel and decline to do you this favour, unless you first concede 
me something. In this dissertation let me wholly leave out of sight 
those who have written or said aught about this subject. To this 
I join the request that you would so construct your interrogations as 
not to seem to ask about what others have thought and with what 
mind and what issue they conceived their opinions, or whether these 

were true or not Let us imagine that no one has had anything to 

/ / t/ 

say, write, or think about those matters, and investigate only the 
things that your meditations and inquiry into a new method of 
philosophizing, will show you to be subjects of difficulty. This will 
enable us both to discuss the truth and to discuss it in a way that 
will allow us to observe the laws of that friendship and respect 
which ought to be shown towards learned men. Since you consent 
and promise to observe this, I also shall respond to your compliance. 



ANNOTATIONS. 

You set me many questions. Since I received this dissertation 
from its author after I had imperatively demanded that the 
comments I heard he had written on my Meditations concerning 
First Philosophy 'should either be openly published or at least sent 
to me, in order that I might put them along with the remaining 

1 vir clarissime. 

17-2 



260 Objections VII 

objections to the same Meditations that others had made,' I could 
not do otherwise than put it along with them here. No* also 
could I doubt that I am the person whom he here addresses, 
though really I do not remember of ever having asked him what 
he thought of my method of investigating the truth. On the 
contrary, having a year and a half ago seen a certain Attack of 
his upon me, wherein I judged there was no attempt to discover 
the truth, while things which I had neither written nor thought were 
fathered upon me, I made no concealment of the fact that in 
future I should regard anything that came from him alone as 
unworthy of a reply. But because this writer is a member of a 
Society 1 famous on account of its learning and piety, and all who 
belong to it are in such close union with one another that it is 
unusual for one member to do anything of which all the others 
do not approve, I admit that I not only demanded but urgently 
insisted, that some members of that Society should examine my 
writings and should think fit to point out to me whatever in them 
was alien to the truth. I appended many reasons on account of 
which I hoped that they would not refuse me this request. I said 
that, hoping for this, ' I should value very highly anything written 
in future either by this author or by any other member of the 
same Society, concerning my opinions. I likewise should not doubt 
that, whatsoever was the name of the man credited with its 
composition, this work would come from the hands not of that 
one man alone, but of several of the most learned and most 
sagacious members of the Society, and that consequently it would 
contain no cavilling, no sophistry, no abuse, and no empty verbiage, 
but only the strongest and most irrefutable reasoning. I doubted 
not that no argument which could legitimately be brought against me 
would be omitted ; so that thus their efforts alone would, I trusted,, 
free me from all my errors, and if anything I had published was 
not refuted in their reply, I should believe that it was incapable of 
being refuted by anyone, but was wholly true and certain/ There- 
fore I should hold the above opinions about the present disserta- 
tion, and should believe that it was written by order of the whole 
Society, if I was sure that it contained no cavilling, no sophistry,, 
no abuse, and no empty verbiage. But if the opposite is the case,, 
I certainly believe it to be a crime to attribute it to men of such 
sanctity. And since I do not trust my own judgment in this 
matter I shall state iny opinion here with frankness and candour,, 
1 The Jesuits. 



Objections VII 261 

nyt expecting the reader by any means to believe what I say, but 
merely to give him an opportunity of investigating the truth. 

Nevertheless I shall keep my own counsel etc. Here my critic 
declares that he will assail no one's writing, but will merely reply 
to my questions. But the truth is that I have never asked him 
any question ; indeed I have never spoken to the man nor even 
seen him. The questions which he pretends I asked, he has 
constructed for the most part out of expressions which occur in 
my Meditations ; and thus it is quite evident that it is precisely 
those Meditations which he attacks. Now it is possible that he 
has reputable and pious motives for pretending that the opposite 
is the case ; but if that is not so I cannot help suspecting that 
he hopes by this means to be freer to impute things to me, because 
nothing in what I have written can convict him of falsehood if he 
professes that it is not these he attacks. Besides it looks as if he 
wishes to avoid giving his readers an opportunity of reading my 
work ; for to talk of my book would be to put them in the way 
of reading it. Again it appears that he wishes to describe me 
as being so futile and ignorant that the reader will turn away from 
anything which at any time comes from my pen. He thus tries to 
make a mask for me clumsily pieced together out of fragments of 
my Meditations, not for the purpose of hiding my features but of 
rendering them uncomely. I, however, now strip it off and cast it 
from me, both because I am not accustomed to dramatic acting 
with its masks 1 , and because the methods of the play-house are 
hardly in keeping here, where I am engaged on discussing a very 
serious question with a man who follows the religious life. 

QUESTION FIRST. 

WHETHER AND HOW DOUBTFUL MATTERS ARE TO BE 
TREATED AS THOUGH THEY WERE FALSE. 

You ask me first whether that law for investigating the truth is 
valid 2 ; that everything in which there is the minimum of dubiety 
is to be treated as though it were false. 

If I am to reply , I must first put several questions to you: 

1. What is that minimum of dubiety you mention ? 

2. What is to treat a thing as though it were false? 

3. In what respect is it to be treated as though it were false ? 

1 Histrioniae. D. refers to the classical drama. 

2 legitima. 



262 Objections VII 

1. WHAT is THE MINIMUM OF DOUBT? 

In respect of doubt, what is that Minimum you mention ? You 
say, ' I will not detain you long. That is to some extent doubtful, 
about which I may doubt whether it is so or otherwise, not rashly 
indeed, but for valid reasons. Besides that is to some extent doubtful, 
concerning which, in spite of its seeming clear to me, I may be 
deceived by some evil Spirit 1 , who wishes to make sport of m,e, 
employing his devices and sleight of hand to make that which is 
really false appear to be true and dear. The degree of doubtfulness 
in the first class of dubious matters is not slight ; while the second 
does contain some dubiety, and though it is the minimum of doubt, 
it is enough not only to allow us to call the matter doubtful but to 
make it really so. Do you wish for an illustration ? That earth, 
sky, and colour exist ; that you have head, or eyes, or body or mind, 
are matters of dubiety falling within the first class of the doubtful. 
To the second belong such statements as : 2 and 3 make 5 ; the -whole 
is greater than its part ; and the like.' 

All very well. But if this is the case, tell me, pray, what there 
is wholly exempt from doubt ? What is immune from the fear with 
which that subtle rascally Spirit threatens us ? 'Nothing,' you say, 
1 absolutely nothing, until we have proved with certainty and from 
the most impregnable metaphysical principles that God exists and 
cannot deceive us. Consequently we get this unique law: if I do 
not know whether God exists, and, if he exists, whether he may be 
a deceiver, I clearly am incapable of ever being sure about anything 
else. But, to show you thoroughly what I mean, I should point out 
that unless I have first known that God exists, and is a veracious 
God who will restrain that evil spirit, I shall have occasion and 
indeed will be bound always to fear that it is making sport of me 
and is imposing the false upon me, in the guise of the truth, as clear 
and certain. But when I thoroughly understand that God exists 
and can neither be deceived nor deceive, and so must of necessity 
prevent that Spirit imposing on me in matters that I understand 
clearly and distinctly, then if there are any such, if I perceive 
anything clearly and distinctly, I shall say that these are true, are 
certain, so that then the following will be the law of truth and 
certainty: Everything is true which I perceive very clearly and 
distinctly. 3 / have no further question to ask here, but pass to the 
second point, viz. 

1 malo Genio. 



Objectiom VII 263 

2. WHAT is MEANT BY TREATING A THING AS THOUGH 
IT WERE FALSE? 

Now since it is doubtful whether you possess eyes, head, or body, 
and consequently must treat those beliefs as though they were false, 
I should like to know what you mean by that. Does it consist in 
saying and believing l it is false that I haw eyes, head, or body, 1 
or in believing and with a general reversal of all my opinions, 
saying, ' I do not have either eyes or head or body ? ' To be succinct, 
does it consist in believing, saying, and affirming the opposite of 
what is doubtful? l Exactly so 3 you reply. All very well. But 
kindly reply further. It is not certain that 2 and 3 make 5. Shall 
I then believe and affirm ' 2 and 3 do not make 5 ? ' ' Believe it and 
affirm it,' you reply. I go further. It is not certain that while 
I speak I am waking and not dreaming. Shall I then believe and 
affirm : ' thus while I speak I am not awake but am dreaming 2 ? 
'Believe it and say it,' is your response. Not to weary you, I shall 
conclude by bringing up the following question. It is not certain 
that what appears clear and certain to the man who doubts whether 
he is waking or dreaming, is really clear and certain. Shall I 
therefore believe and say: ' that which appears clear and certain to 
a man who doubts whether he is waking or dreaming, is not clear 
and certain but obscure and false ? ' Why do you hesitate ? You 
cannot indulge your diffidence more than is fair. Have you mvet 
had the experience which many have had, viz. of seeming to see many 
things while asleep that appeared clear and certain, but which 
afterwards are discovered to be doubtful, nay false ? It is indeed 
prudent never at all to trust those who have even once deceived 
you. But you say, 'it is altogether different with matters of the 
highest certainty. They are such that they cannot appear doubtful 
either to one who dreams or to a madman.' But, my dear sir, are 
you speaking seriously when you give out that matters of the highest 
certainty cannot appear doubtful even to dreamers or to madmen? 
What sort of things can they be ? If people when asleep, or the 
insane sometimes think things to be certain which are ridiculous and 
extravagant, may they not believe matters of certainty, even of the 
highest certainty, to be false and doubtful? I knew a man who 
once, when falling asleep, heard the dock strike four, and counted 
the strokes thus one, one, one, one. Then because he fancied in 
his mind that this was absurd he shouted out 'Ho! Ho I the clock 
is going mad. It has struck one o'clock four times] 3 Really is 



264 Objections VII 

there anything too absurd and irrational to come into the mind f of f 
one who is dreaming or in a delirium ? What will a dreamer not 
believe 2 Of what will he not approve, and plume himself about it 
as though it were a magnificent discovery of his own ? But not to 
carry our conflict into other matters, let us take your statement : 
What appears certain to a man who is in doubt whether he is 
dreaming or awake, is certain, and so certain that it can be laid 
down as the basis of a science and a metaphysic of the highest 
certainty and accuracy. Now you haw certainly failed to persuade 
me that this dictum is as certain as that other : 1 2 and 3 make 5,' 
and at least not so certain that no one can doubt it at all, nor can 
be deceived in it by some evil Spirit ; nor do I fear that if I persist 
in thinking so, anyone will think my conduct obstinate. Therefore 
one of two alternative conclusions results. Either in accordance 
with your principle it is not certain that what appears to be certain 
to a man who doubts whether he is awake or dreaming, is certain ; 
and consequently what appears to be certain to a man who doubts 
whether he is awake or dreaming, may and ought to be considered as 
false and as wholly false. Or else, if you haw any other principle 
peculiar to yourself you will communicate it to me. I now come to 
my third question, and 

3. To WHAT EXTENT is A THING TO BE TREATED AS FALSE ? 

I ask, since it seems not to be certain that 2 and 3 make 5, and 
since the principle previously quoted obliges us to believe and say 
2 and 3 do not make 5, ought I to believe this continuously to the 
extent of persuading my self that it cannot be otherwise than so, and 
that that is certain ? You are astonished at my question. It does 
not seem strange to me, since I myself am astonished. Yet reply you 
must, if you are to get an answer from me. Do you wish to have it 
a certainty that 2 and 3 do not make 5 ? Nay do you wish that to 
be, and to seem to all, so certain as to be safe from the wiles of an 
evil spirit ? 

You laugh, and say : i How did that ever come into a sane man's 
head?' 

What then ? Is it to be doubtful and uncertain, just in the same 
way as the statement 2 and 3 make 5? If this is so, and the state- 
ment 2 and 3 do not make 5, is doubtful, I shall believe, and in 
accordance with your principle assert, that it is false. Consequently 
I shall affirm the apposite and assert : 2 and 3 do make 5. / shall 
accord the same treatment to the remaining objects of doubt and, since 



Objections VII 265 

* it $oes not seem to be certain that any body exists -, I shall say : no body 
exists*. Then because that statement, no body exists, 'is not certain, 
I shall state, my attitude being completely reversed, some body does 
exist. Thus body will at the same time exist and not exist. 

That is so, you say. This is what it is to doubt, viz. to move in a 
circle, to advance and retire, to affirm a thing and to deny it, to 
screw up and unscrew the peg. 

That is quite splendid. But what am I to do in the matter 
of using those statements that are dubious 1 Take the case, 2 and 3 
make 5 ; or that other, some body exists. Shall I affirm them or 
deny them ? 

You say you will neither affirm them nor deny them. You will 
employ neither, and -will regard both their affirmation and their 
denial as false ; you will look for nothing from those who so assent, 
except an assent to this also as a matter of doubt and uncertainty. 

Since there is nothing more for me to ask, I shall reply in my 
turn, employing however a short epitome of your doctrine, which is as 
follows. 

1. It is possible for us to be in doubt about all things, and 
especially about material things, so long as we have no other founda- 
tion for the sciences than those on which we have hitherto relied. 

2. To treat anything as false is to withhold your assent from it 
as though it were openly false and, altering our attitude to its direct 
opposite, to assume an opinion which represents it as false and 
imaginary. 

3. That which is doubtful is to be treated as though it were false 
in such a way that its opposite also is doubtful, and we haw to 
consider it too as false. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

I should be ashamed to be too diligent and spend many words 
in commenting on all the things which, though here expressed in 
words almost identical with mine, I nevertheless do not recognize as 
mine. I merely ask my readers to recall what I said in Meditation I, 
and at the beginning of II and III, and in the synopsis of these 
Meditations. For they will acknowledge that almost everything 
here set down, though drawn from these sources, is so perverted, 
distorted and wrongly interpreted that, although in their right place 
they contain nothing that is not highly rational, here, nevertheless 
they seem to be extremely absurd. 



266 Oljectwm VII 

For wild reasons 1 . I said at the end of Meditation I tljatr 
everything which I had not yet comprehended with sufficient "clear- 
ness could he douhted hy us, provided we did so for c reasons that 
were very powerful and maturely considered.' But I did so because 
there the question was about only that supreme kind of doubt which, 
I have insisted, is metaphysical, hyperbolical and not to be trans- 
ferred to the sphere of the practical needs of life by any means. It 
was of this doubt also that I said the very least ground of suspicion 
was a sufficient reason for causing it. But my critic in his friendly 
and frank way brings forward as an example of the things of which I 
said we might doubt ' for valid reasons ' the questions whether the 
earth exists, or whether I have a body, in order that the readers, 
who know nothing of this metaphysical doubt, referring it to the 
practical life, may think that I am out of my mind. 

Nothing you say, absolutely nothing*. I have sufficiently ex- 
plained in various places the sense in which that nothing ought to 
be understood. So, for example, that as long as we attend to some 
truth which we perceive very clearly, we cannot indeed doubt it. 
But when, as often happens, we do not attend to any truth in this 
way, although we remember that we have often known such truths 
quite well, there is none, nevertheless, of which we may not rightly 
doubt if we are unaware of the fact that everything we perceive 
clearly is true. Here, however, my friend with great accuracy 
interprets my nothing in such a way that, from the fact that once, 
to wit in Meditation I, I said there was nothing of which we might 
not doubt, assuming there that I was not attending to anything 
which I clearly perceived, he infers that in the following Meditations 
also I can be sure of nothing. This is to imply that the arguments 
which for a time cause us to doubt any matter, have no legitimacy 
or validity unless they prove that the matter must always be in 
doubt. 

To believe, to say, to affirm the opposite oj what is doubtful*. 
When I said that doubtful matters should sometimes be treated as 
though they were false, or rejected as if they were false, I clearly 
explained that I merely meant that, for the purpose of investigating 
the truths that are metaphysically certain, we should pay no more 
credence to doubtful matters than to what is plainly false. Thus 
surely no sane man can interpret my words otherwise, or attribute 
to me the opinion of wishing to believe the opposite of what is 
doubtful, especially, as the matter is subsequently put, of believing 
1 Cf. above, p. 262, 1. 4. 2 Cf. p. 262, par. 2. Cp. p. 263, 1. 8. 



Objections VII 267 

it to the extent of persuading myself that it cannot be otherwise than 
thus, Und that that is certain 1 . At least only a man who is not 
ashamed of being a caviller could do such a thing. And although 
my critic does not actually affirm this interpretation of my words, 
but merely puts it forward tentatively, I am surprised that a man 
of his holiness should in this respect copy the basest detractors, 
who often take this method of giving utterance to the opinion which 
they wish to be entertained about others, adding that they them- 
selves do not believe it, so that, having stated the calumny, they 
may get off scot free. 

It is altogether different with matters of the highest certainty. 
They are such that they cannot appear doubtful either to one who 
dreams or to a madman*. I cannot tell by what Analysis my 
subtlest of critics is able to extract this from my words. It would 
indeed have been possible to infer from what I have said that every- 
thing which anyone clearly and distinctly perceives is true, although 
that person in the meantime may doubt whether he is dreaming or 
awake, nay, if you want it so, even though he is really dreaming or 
is delirious. This is for the reason that nothing whatsoever can be 
clearly and distinctly perceived, whoever be the person perceiving 
it, that it is not perceived to be such as it is, i.e. which is not true. 
But because it is the wise 3 alone who know how to distinguish 
rightly between what is so perceived, and what merely seems or 
appears to be clear and distinct, I am not surprised that our good 
friend mistakes the one for the other. 

This is what it is to doubt, mz. to mow in a circle etc. 41 I said 
that we ought to pay no more credence to things that are doubtful 
than if they were false, in order that we may wholly dismiss them 
from mind, and not in order to affirm now one thing, now its opposite. 
My critic, however, leaves no opportunity for cavilling untried. 
But meanwhile it is worth noting that he himself at the end, where 
he says he makes a brief epitome of nay doctrine, attributes to me 
none of those opinions which either previously or in the sequel he 
attacks and holds up to scorn. Doubtless this is to let us know 
that he was only jesting when he concocted them and ascribed them 
to me, and did not seriously believe that I entertained them. 

1 Cf. p. 264, par. 2. 2 Of. p. 263. 

3 prudentes. 4 Cf. p. 265, par. 2. 



268 Objections VII 

REPLY. 

Reply 1. Assume the meaning of the law, c in the investigation 
of the truth that which is to the slightest extent doubtful is to be 
treated as though it were false, 1 to be : when we are investigating 
matters that are certain, ice ought not to rely on anything which, is 
not certain <yr is to the slightest extent doubtful. 3 In this case your 
laic is quite sound, is of established usage, and one of the best known 
truths common to all Philosophers. 

Reply 2. If the said law is 'understood to mean the following : 
'ivhen we investigate matters that are certain, ice ought to reject 
everything that is not certain, or is in any way doubtful, and make 
no use of such matters at all, to the extent of treating them as though 
they were non-existent, or rather not taking them into account at all, 
but rather dismissing them wholly from mind } : in this case again 
your law is quite sound, valid and a commonplace with beginners. 
It is, in fact, so Me the preceding version of it as to be hardly 
distinguishable from it. 

Reply 3. Suppose the law next to be taken in the following way : 
''when we investigate matters that are certain, we ought to reject 
everything that is doubtful and affirm that the asserted fact does not 
exist, but that its opposite really holds; and we ought to take this 
latter statement as a secure foundation for our argument, or to put it 
otherwise, make use of the assumption- that the matters doubted do not 
exist, or base our argument upon their _ non-existence! Now in this 
case the law is invalid, fallacious, and in conflict with sound 
Philosophy. For it assumes something doubtful and uncertain for 
the purpose of investigating what is true and certain. To express 
the matter differently, it assumes as certain something that may be 
wholly otherwise than as we suppose it to be ; to wit, we treat doubtful 
things as though they did not exist, whereas it is quite possible that 
they do exist. 

Reply 4. If a man were to understand that law as last wxpnssed 
and employ it in his investigation of matters that are^Jrue and 
certain, he would expend all his toil and trouble and labour to ,no profit 
since, like anyone else who did so, he would achieve the opposite )fhis 
quest quite as much as his object itself. Do you want an illustration ? 
Suppose a man were to enquire whether he were a body or were 
corporeal, and to that intent made use of the following statements : 
' it is not certain that any body exists ; therefore in accordance with 
the law just approved-, I shall affirm and say no body exists! Thm 



Objections VII 269 

<%& will resume : ' no body exists ; but I am, and exist, as I have 
quite properly ascertained from other sources : therefore I cannot be 
a body! Very fine indeed ; but look and see how the same beginning 
will lead to the opposite conclusion. ' It is not certain,' he says, ' that 
any body exists ; therefore^ in accordance with the law, I shall affirm 
and assert that no body exists! But ivhat sort of a statement is 
that ? No body exists 1 That is certainly doubtful and uncertain. 
Who can make it good ? Whence will he draw his proof? His 
proof is merely fictitious. ' No body exists ' is really a doubtful 
statement ; therefore in accordance with your law I shall say : 'some 
body does exist! But I am and exist ; therefore possibly I am a 
body y if t/iere is no reason for believing otherwise. Look at our 
result .-possibly I am body and it is impossible for me to be a 
body. Is that enough for you ? But I fear that I have done quite 
as much as I obtain in the following questions. Therefore 1 

ANNOTATIONS. 

Here in his first two replies my critic has approved of everything 
which I laid down concerning the subject under discussion, or that 
can be elicited from my writings. But he adds that it is quite 
common property, a common place of philosophers. Yet in his two 
latter replies he censures the opinion which he wishes people to 
believe held, though that is so absurd as to be incapable of 
entering the mind of a sane man. But it is very astute of him to 
do so, meaning as he does to influence by his authority those who 
have not read my Meditations or not read them attentively 

enough to understand properly what is in them, Thus they will 
think that my opinions are ridiculous, while others who do not 
believe this will at least be persuaded that I have adduced nothing 
that is not quite common property and a common place of beginners. 
True I do not dispute this last statement. I have never sought to 
derive any praise from the novelty of my opinions. For, on the 
contrary, I believe them to be the most ancient of all beliefs, as 
being the truest. Further, it is my habit to study nothing so much 
as the scrutiny of certain very simple truths, which, being innate in 
our minds, are such that, when they are laid before anyone else, he 
believes that he has never been ignorant of them. But certainly it 
may easily be understood that my critic impugns my theories 
merely because he thinks them good and new. For if he believed 
them to be so absurd as he makes them out to be, he would surely 
1 Cf. Second Question, p. 271. 



270 Objections VII 

judge them worthy of contempt and silence, rather than of a long 
and factitious refutation. 

Therefore in accordance with the law just approved, I shall affirm 
and say the opposite 1 . I should like to know where he has ever 
found this law promulgated. He has already laid quite enough 
stress upon it, but in the same passage I have already given a 
sufficient denial to my authorship of it, viz. in my annotations on 
the words : To believe, say, and affirm the opposite of what is doubtful. 
Nor do I believe that he will go on maintaining that it is mine if 
he is questioned about the matter. He introduced me above in 
paragraph 3, as speaking about doubtful matters in the following 
terms : You will neither affirm iwr deny them, you will employ neither, 
and will regard both their affirmation and denial as Jake. Shortly 
afterwards in his epitome of my doctrine his version is that we 
ought to withhold our assent from the doubtful as though it were 
openly false, and, altering our attitude to its direct opposite, assume 
an opinion which represents it as being false and imaginary*. Now 
this is plainly something quite different from affirming and saying 
the opposite, in such a way as to treat that opposite as true in the 
way he here supposes I do. Further when I, in Meditation I, said 
that I sometimes tried to convince myself of the opposite of the 
belief that I had formerly rashly held, I immediately added that I 
wished to do so in order to balance the weight of my prejudices 
equally on both sides and not be inclined towards one rather than 
the other. But I made it clear that it was not my intention to 
regard either as true or to set that up as the foundation of our most 
certain knowledge, as is unfairly represented elsewhere by my critic. 
Therefore I should like to know what his intention was in bringing 
up this law of his framing. If it is for the purpose of ascribing it 
fictitiously to me, I mark a lack of candour on his part ; for it is 
clear from what he has said that he knows well enough that it is not 
any law of mine, because no one could believe that both alternatives 
ought to be considered false, as he said was my opinion, and at the 
same time affirm and allege that the opposite of one of them was 
true, as his version of the law has it. But if he adduced this law 
merely to show animus, in order that he might have some means of 
attacking me, I nevertheless wonder at the acumen of his intellect, 
that has been able to excogitate nothing more plausible or subtle. 
I marvel that he has had leisure to expend so many words in refuting 
an opinion of an absurdity that would hardly impose even on a 
1 Of. p. 268, sub fin. 2 Cf. p. 265, par. 8. 



Objections VII 271 

^ehild of seven years of age. For we must observe that up to the 
present time he has attacked nothing at all hut this perfectly inept 
law of his own framing. Finally I marvel at the strength of his 
imagination, seeing that, waging war as he does merely upon 
that most unreal of chimaeras which he has evolved from his own 
brain, he has nevertheless adopted the same attitude and employed 
the same words, as if he had really had me as his opponent, and 
been face to face with me in the conflict. 



SECOND QUESTION. 

WHETHER IT is A GOOD METHOD OF PHILOSOPHIZING TO SET ASIDE 
EVERYTHING THAT is DOUBTFUL. 

You ask, 2 : whether it is a good method of philosophizing to set 
aside all matters that involve any doubt. Unless you disclose this 
method in some detail you need not expect an answer from me. How- 
ever, you do this. 

1 In order to philosophize,' you say, 'in order to discover whether 
there be anything certain, and of the highest certainty, and what that 
is, this is my procedure. Since all is doubtful and uncertain I 
treat everything which I have ever believed, or which I have previously 
known, as false, and I set all such things aside completely, and con- 
vince myself that neither earth nor sky nor any of the things I 
previously believed to be in the world exist ; nay, not even the world 
itself, nor my body, nor mind, in a word nothing, I affirm, exists. 
Then having made this general renunciation, and Jiaving protested 
that nothing exists, I plunge into my own philosophy and, led by its 
counsels I track out the true and certain cautiously and prudently, 
just as if there existed some very powerful and cunning Spirit ivho 
wanted to lead me into error. Wherefore, not to be deceived, I look 
around attentively and have quite determined on the plan of admitting 
nothing that is not of such a nature that, however much that scoundrelly 
Spirit strives to deceive me, he is quite unable to do so in this case, 
and even I myself cannot compel myself to conceal my knowledge of 
the fact or deny it. I reflect therefore, I revolve and revolve things 
in my thought until something of the kind sought may arrive, and 
when I have struck upon it, I use it (as Archimedes used his fulcrum) 
for eliciting other facts, and in this wise I derive one fact from 
another in a way that shows, them to be wholly certain and well 



272 Objectiom VII 

That is very fine indeed, and so far as appearances go, I should* 
have no difficulty in replying that this method appears to me to be 
both brilliant and distinguished. But because you expect a careful 
reply, and 1 cannot give you that without first employing and 
practising your method and so testing it, let us enter that well beaten 
and safe road, and ourselves find out where it really leads to ; and 
Mowing as yow do its meanderings, its defiles, and detours, and 
having long exercised yourself in tracing them, I beg you to conduct 
me through them yourself. Come, express your mind; you have either 
a comrade or a pupil with you to whom to show the way. What do- 
you bid me do? Though it is new to me and, since I am not 
accustomed to its obscurity, to be dreaded, 1 am quite willing to enter 
that route, such a powerful attraction does the appearance of the 
truth exercise over me. I hear your reply ; you bid me do what I 
see yon do, plant my steps where you put yours. That is certainly 
an excellent way of commanding and leading me ! How well you let 
me think of you I I am ready. 

1. THE DISCLOSING OF THE ENTRY INTO THE METHOD. 

' Firstly,' you say, l as I revolved previous truths in my mind* 
I feel constrained to confess that there is nothing in all that I 
formerly believed to be true of which I cannot in some measure 
doubt, and that, not just through want of thought or through levity,, 
but for reasons which are very powerful and maturely considered ; 
so that henceforth I ought not the less carefully to refrain from 
giving credence to these opinions than to that which is manifestly 
false, if I desire to arrive at any certainty 1 . Wherefore, I shall not be 
acting amiss, if, taking of set purpose a contrary belief, I outwit my 
own self and pretend for a time that all those old opinions are entirely 
false and imaginary, until at last, having thus balanced my former 
prejudices with my latter, my judgment will no longer be dominated 
by bad usage or turned away from the right knowledge of the truth 2 . 
Therefore let me suppose that some evil genius not less powerful 
than deceitful has employed his whole energies in deceiving me. 
I shall consider that the heavens, the earth, colours, figures, sounds- 
and all other material things are nothing but the illusions and 
dreams of which this genius has availed himself in order to lay 
traps for my credulity 3 . I shall persuade myself that nothing at all 
exists in the world, that there is no sky, no earth, that there are no- 

1 Gf. Med. pp. 147, sub fin., 148, ad init. 2 Cf. Med. p. 148, par. 2. 

3 Cf. Med. p. 148, par. 3. 



Objections VII 273 

rinds, no bodies ; (remember I say no minds, no bodies}. This is the 
goal, tind the principal goal. I shall consider myself as having 
no hands, no eyes, no flesh, no Wood, nor any sense, yet as falsely 
believing myself to possess all these things. I shall remain 
obstinately attached to this idea 1 . 7 

Here kindly pause a little, in order that we may collect a fresh 
supply of energy. The novelty of your proposal has not failed to 
move me somewhat. Do you bid me renounce every old belief? 

You say, ' / bid you set aside everything' 

Everything ? He who says ' everything' leaves no room for 



You repeat, 'everything.' 

Really I can with difficulty bring myself to do so, yet I shall 
'obey. But it is exceedingly hard and, to speak frankly, I have a 
scruple in complying, a scruple which, if you do not relieve me from 
it, will I fear prevent our entry into the method from being so 
successful as we wish. You confess that you doubt all your old 
beliefs and, as you say, you are compelled to confess this. Why not 
permit the same force to bear on me that I also may be forced to 
admit it? Tell me what it is that compels you. True you have 
just now said that the reasons influencing you were valid and well 
considered. But what are they then? If they are valid, why set 
them aside? Why not retain them? If they are doubtful and 
replete with suspicion how can they have brought any force to bear 
upon you? 

But you say, ( they are a mere preliminary ; look and see. It 
is my wont to send them in front, like sling ers, to begin the battle. 
For example, our senses sometimes deceive us ; we sometimes dream ; 
sometimes people go delirious and believe they see things which they 
do not see, and which exist nowhere' 

Have you finished speaking ? When you promised me valid and 
well-considered reasons, / expected them to be certain and free from 
all doubt, such as are demanded by your tract which we are 
now employing, and rising to such a pitch of accuracy as to dispel 
the least suspicion of dubiety. But are the reasons you allege of 
this nature ? Not mere doubts and nought but suspicious surmises ? 
1 Our senses sometimes deceive us.' { We sometimes dream.' 'People 
sometimes go delirious.' But whence do you derive all that with 
certainty and complete infallibility, and in accordance with that rule 
of yours which you have always in evidence ? ' We must take the 

1 Of. Med. p. 148, par. 3. 
B. H. II. 18 



274 Objectiom VII 

utmost pains not to admit anything as true which we cannot prove* 
to be true?' Has there been any time when you said to yfiurself 
with certainty : ' Now without doubt my senses are deceiving me, 
and of this I am quite aware ' ; ' Now I am dreaming ' ; c / was 
dreaming a little time ago' ; ' This man is suffering from a frenzy, 
and believes he sees things which he does not see, but yet is not lying ' ? 
If you say there ever was such a time, be sure you prove that ; nay, 
satisfy yourself lest that evil Spirit you spoke of may perhaps haw 
given you an illusion. It is greatly to be feared that when you 
now make the statement as something valid and well-considered, that 
rascal is making a mock of you, and is winking at the man he has 
hoodwinked. But, if you say that there was no such time, why so 
confidently assert : ' Sometimes we dream ' ? Why not in accordance 
with your first law determine to say : ' It is not quite certain that ' 
OUT senses sometimes deceive us, that we have sometimes dreamed, 
that men have sometimes gone delirious ; therefore I shall assert and 
resolve upon the following : " Our senses never deceive us, we never 
dream, people never go delirious " ' ? 

But, you say, * I suspect it' Now this is my scruple. So far 
as I have proceeded I have found your arguments to be feeble, and 
like fleeting suspicions. Consequently I fear to press on. It is I 
now who am suspicious. 

You reply : c Suspect away. It is enough if you are suspicious. 
It is enough if you say : " I don't know whether I am awake or 
dreaming. I don't know whether my senses deceive me, or do not." } 

I beg your pardon, but for me it is not enough. Nor do I at all 
see Iww you make the following inference : 1 1 don't know whether 
I am awake or dreaming* : ' therefore I sometimes dream' What if 
I never do I What if always ? What if you cannot even dream, 
and that Spirit is convulsed with laughter because he has at length 
persuaded you that you sometimes dream and are deceived, while 
that is far from being the case ? Trust me, from the tim$ when you 
brought that Spirit on the stage, from the time when you subjected 
your valid and well-considered reasons to that 'perhaps] you have 
raised an evil that has brought you no advantage. What if the sly 
fellow presents all these matters as doubtful and unstable, when they 
really are quite reliable, meaning thereby, after you have turned 
aside from them all, to lead you into the abyss? Would it not be 
more prudent, before you turn aside from them all, to propound some 
reliable law which will enable you to set aside what you do set aside 
without fear of error ? The matter is certainly important, nay of 



Objections VII 275 

the highest moment, that general renunciation of our old opinions 
which^you propose ; and if you comply with my suggestions, you will 
call your thoughts into council and seriously deliberate them. 

Nay, you say, C I cannot yield too much to distrust/ and 
1 1 know that there can be neither peril nor error in this course 1 / 

What ? ' / know ' ? Is that certain and beyond all doubt ? 
And has our great shipwreck of truth left at least this driftwood 
floating ? Or is it the case that because you are opening a new 
Philosophy and are thinking of the whole school, this has to be written 
in golden Utters on your portal: C I cannot indulge my incredulity 
too much/ Is it the consequence that the entrants into your temple 
are bidden to lay aside their ancient belief that '2 and 3 make 5/ 
but to retain this, ' / cannot indulge my incredulity too much ' ? But 
what will you say if a disciple chance, to murmur at this ; if he 
cannot swallow the fact that lie is bidden abandon the old belief 
which everyone accepts, that '2 and 3 make 5' because an evil 
Spirit may deceive him, while he is instructed to retain that doubtful 
principle, full of flaws 1 1 cannot indulge my incredulity too much* 
as if in this case the evil Spirit could not impose upon him ? But 
will you substantiate this for me, so that I shall not be in fear, shall 
have no apprehensions about that evil Spirit ? Certainly though you 
may try to strengthen my confidence in any way you please, it is not 
without extreme fear of too great incredulity that I renounce all my 
ancient and practically innate beliefs, and forswear as false ' an 
argument in Barbara has a valid conclusion' And to judge by your 
demeanour, not even you who offer yourself as a guide to others are 
free from fear. Be frank and ingenuous as is your wont ; do you 
feel no scruple in giving up that ancient belief 1 1 have a clear and 
distinct idea of God ' $ Do you readily renounce ' Everything which 
I perceive very clearly and distinctly is true ' or ' To think, to 
grow, to feel, do not appertain at all to the body but to the mind ' ? 
But why should I go through the whole series of such statements ? 
My question regarding them is serious and I ask you kindly to reply. 
Can you in thus parting with the old Philosophy and entering the 
new, reject, divest yourself of, forswear these as false. I mean from 
the heart ? Do you assert and affirm the opposite : ' now I do not 
have a clear and distinct idea of God' ; 'up to the present I have 
been mistaken in believing that growth, thought and sensation did 
not appertain to the body at all, but to the mind ' 1 But what have 
I done ? I have been forgetful of what I promised to do. I had 
i Of. Med. i. p. 148, par. 2. 

182 



276 Objections VII 

committed myself entirely to you at the beginning, had wived myself* 
your ally and disciple, and here I am hesitating at the very 'outset, 
timid and obstinate. Pray forgive me ! I have sinned greatly and 
have merely shown tJie smallness of my intellectual capacity. It 
ivas my duty to have laid aside all fear and to plunge boldly into 
the fog of renunciation ; but I have been unwilling and have resisted. 
If you spare me I shall make amends and quite wipe out my ill- 
deeds by a full and generous enfranchisement and remission of all 
my old beliefs. I renounce, I forswear everything ivhich I once 
held true. Do not mind though I do not protest my belief in that 
sky or earth which you ivish to do away with. Nothing exists, 
absolutely nothing. Go on and lead the way ; I shall follow. You 
are certainly easy to follow ! So dont refuse to lead on. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

And it is all doubtful, everything I have previously known 1 . 
Here my critic has written known for thought I knew. For there is 
an opposition between the words / knew and is doubtful which 
doubtless he has nevertheless failed to perceive. Nor must we set 
his action down as malicious. If that were so he would not have 
treated the matter so cursorily but would have pretended that the 
contradiction was one of my creating and would have made a long- 
story of it. 

Remember I say no minds, no bodies 2 . This is advanced in order 
to give an opportunity for much pettifogging argument afterwards, 
because at the outset, since I assumed that I did not yet fully 
comprehend the nature of the mind, I put it in the list of dubious 
matters. But afterwards perceiving that the thing which thinks 
cannot fail to exist, and applying to that thinking thing the term 
mindj I said that mind exists. Now this looks as though I had 
forgotten that I had first denied the same, when I too^ the mind 
to be something unknown to me. It looks too as if I had thought 
that we must always deny the things which I then denied because 
they seemed to me doubtful, and that it was impossible I should ever 
compass the restoration of their certainty and evidence. We must 
note too that throughout he treats doubtfulness and certainty not 
as relations of our thought to objects, but as properties of the 
objects and as inhering in them eternally. The consequence is that ' 
nothing we have cmce learned to be doubtful can ever be rendered 

1 Of. above, p. 271, par. 3. 2 Of. above, p. 273, ad init. 



Objections VII 277 

-certain. But this must be attributed merely to his goodness of 
heart* not to spite. 

Everything 1 ? Here he is making play with the meaning of the 
word everything just as above he did with the word nothing. The 
argument is quite futile. 

You are compelled to confess this 2 . Here again is an empty 
trifling with the word compelled. For we may well enough be 
compelled to doubt by arguments that are in themselves doubtful, 
and not to be afterwards retained, as we above noted. They are 
indeed valid so long as we do not possess any others to remove our 
doubt and introduce certainty. It was because I found none such 
during the course of Meditation I, however much I looked around 
and reflected, that I therefore said that my reasons for doubting 
were valid and well considered. But this exceeds my critic's com- 
prehension. For he adds : When you promised valid reasons I 
expected them to be certain and free from all doubt, such as are 
demanded by your tract*, as if the imaginary brochure which he 
has invented would be referred to the statements of the first 
Meditation. Shortly afterwards he says : Has there been any time 
when you said to yourself with certainty : ' Now without doubt my 
senses are deceiving me, and of this I am quite aware,' etc. 4 ? But 
he does not see that here again there is a contradiction, because 
something is held to be true without doubt, and at the same time 
the very same thing is doubted. What a man he is ! 

Why so confidently assert, f sometimes we dream'? Here again 
he errs, but without evil intent. For I asserted nothing at all 
confidently in the first Meditation, which is full of doubt, and 
from which alone all these statements are drawn. He could in it 
find equally well: c we never dream/ and 'we sometimes dream.' 
When shortly afterwards he adds : Nor do 1 at all see how you 
make the following inference. ' I dent know whether I am awake 
or dreaming ; therefore I sometimes dream*' ; he ascribes to me 
a style of reasoning worthy only of himself, because he is so 
good-natured. 

What if that sly fellow (the evil Spirit) presents all these 
matters as doubtful and unstable when they really are quite reliable*? 
Here it is clear, as I pointed out above, that he treats doubt and 
certainty as though they existed in the objects, not in our thought. 
Otherwise how could he pretend that I propounded something as 

1 Of. p. 273. 2 Of. p. 273, middle. * Of. Hid. last par. 

4 Cf. p. 274, ad init. 5 Cf. p. 274, par. 3. 6 Cf. ibid, sub Jin. 



278 Objections VII 

dubious which was not dubious but certain ? Seeing that the 
cause that makes a thing dubious is that it is propounded as 
dubious. But perhaps it was the evil Spirit that prevented him 
from seeing the contradiction in his words. It is to be regretted 
that this Spirit so often causes difficulties in our critic's thinking. 

The matter is certainly important, nay of the highest moment, 
that general renunciation of our old opinions which you propose 1 . 
I pointed this out with quite enough emphasis at the end of my reply 
to the fourth set of objections, and in my preface to these Medita- 
tions, which I therefore presented only to those of robuster mental 
powers to read 2 . I already pointed the same thing out also in very 
express terms in my discourse on Method which appeared in French 
in 1637, pp. 16 and 17. Since I there described two kinds of mind, 
by both of which such a renunciation is to be strenuously avoided, 
my critic ought not to father his own errors on me if he chance to 
be included in either of these two classes. 

What ? ( I know' etc. 3 When I said that I knew that I ran no risk 
in making that Denunciation, I added : because then, on that occasion, 
I was not considering the question of action, but only of fawwledge*. 
From this it is clearly evident that when I said ' I know ' I spoke 
only of the moral mode of knowing, which suffices for the regulation 
of life, and which I have often insisted is so vastly different from 
that Metaphysical mode of knowing which is here in question, that 
apparently no one but our critic could fail to recognize that. 

That doubtful principle, full of flaws / cannot indulge my 
incredulity too far 5 . Here again there is a contradiction in his 
words. For no one fails to recognize that a person who is in- 
credulous and hence neither affirms nor denies anything, cannot be 
led into error even by any evil Spirit. But the example my critic 
adduces above, about the man who counted one o'clock four times, 
shows that a person adding 2 and 3 together can be deceived. 

But it is not without extreme fear of too great incredulity that 
I renounce these old beliefs 6 . Though he is at great pains to prove 
that we ought not to distrust ourselves too much, it is nevertheless 
worthy of note that he does not bring the least scrap of argument 
to prove that, except that he fears or distrusts our need of dis- 
trusting ourselves. Here again then is a contradiction. For 
because he is fearful, but does not know for certainty that he 



1 Cf. p. 275, ad init. 2 Med. vol. I. p. 139. 3 Of. above, p. 275. 

4 Cf. Med. p. 149. 5 Cf. p. 275, middle. 6 Cf. ibid. 



Objections VII 279 

ought riot to distrust himself, it follows that he ought to distrust 
himsSlf. 

Do you feel no scruple in giving up that ancient belief, ' / haw 
a dear and distinct idea of God } 1 Do you readily renounce, 
' Everything which I very clearly perceive is true 1 ' ? He calls these 
ancient beliefs because he fears lest they may be regarded as new 
and as first perceived by me. But so far as I arn concerned he 
may do so. He also wishes to suggest a scruple concerning God, 
though he does so only casually ; perchance lest those who know 
how studiously I have excepted everything which pertains to piety 
and generally to morals from this renunciation, may think he is 
calumniating me. Finally he does not see that the renunciation 
affects only those who do not yet perceive anything clearly and 
distinctly. Thus for example the Sceptics with whom he is 
familiar, have never, in so far as they are Sceptics, perceived any- 
thing clearly. For owing to the mere fact of having perceived 
anything clearly they would have ceased to doubt and to be Sceptics. 
Further, because before making this renunciation scarcely any 
others perceive anything clearly, at least with that clearness 
required for metaphysical certainty, the renunciation is therefore 
very advantageous for those who are capable of such clear know- 
ledge and who do not yet possess that. But as things show, it 
would not be thus beneficial to our -author ; indeed I believe that 
he ought carefully to refrain from it. 

Whether ' To think, to grow, to feel do not belong to the body but 
to the mind* is not to be set aside without hesitation' ? My critic 
reports these words as though they were mine, and at the same 
time as though they were so certain as to be incapable of being 
doubted by anyone. But nothing is more noteworthy than that 
in my Meditations I ascribe nutrition wholly to the body, not to 
the mind or that part of man which thinks. Thus it is proved 
by this fact alone, firstly that he wholly fails to understand my 
Meditations though he has undertaken to refute them, and that 
he falsifies matters, because it was when I was quoting popular 
opinion that I referred growth and nutrition to the soul. Next he 
shows that he himself holds many beliefs as indubitable which are 
not to be admitted without examination. But finally he comes to 
the complete truth of the matter, when he concludes that in these 
things he has merely shown the smallness of his intellectual capacity*. 

1 Of. p. 275. 2 Of. ibid, sub fin. 3 Of. p. 276. 



280 Objections VII 

THE ACTUAL ENTRY I1N T TO THE METHOI 

You say, 'after setting aside everything old I begin to philoso- 
phize thus. I am, I think ; I am, as long as I think. This 
assertion, " I exist," is necessarily true each time that I pronounce 
it, or that I mentally conceive it 1 .' 

Splendid, my good friend ! You ham found the point which 
Archimedes icanted to discover; there is no doubt that, if you so 
please, you will be able to move the world ; look, now it all begins 
to sway and tremble. But I beg you (for I have no doubt you wish 
to prune things down, so that there shall be nothing in your Method 
which is not apt, coherent and necessary) say why you have 
mentioned the mind, when you say it is mentally conceived 2 ? Did 
you not order the banishment ojf mind and body ? But perhaps it 
was by chance that you let this pass : it is so difficult even for an 
expert to forget altogether the things to which we haw been 
accustomed since childhood, that it may be easily thought that a 
slip on the part of a raw hand like me if it chance to occur, is 
hardly likely to be thought ill of. But go on, I entreat you. 

You say, C I shall consider what I am, and what I formerly 
believed myself to be, before I embarked upon these last reflections. 
I shall withdraw all that might even in the slightest extent be 
invalidated by the reasons which I have just brought forward, in 
order that there may be nothing at all left beyond what is absolutely 
certain and indubitable 3 . 

Shall I dare, before you push inwards, to ask why you, the man 
who has abandoned with such solemn declarations all your old beliefs 
as dubious and false, want to inspect them again, as if you hoped to 
get something good out of these rags and tatters. What if once you 
thought ill of yourself 2 Nay, since everything you forsivore a little 
time ago was dubious and uncertain (otherwise why did you set it 
aside ?), how does it come about that the same things are now not 
dubious and uncertain ? Unless, perchance, that renunciation you 
made was like Circe's drug, to call a potion of forgetfulness by 
another name. Yet it is an evil thing both to suspect your counsel 
and to regard it as sound. It is often the case that people who 
bring their friends into palaces and public halls to show them the 
sights enter by a private side-door not by the official and public 
entrance. I shall follow even by subterranean passages if I have 
hopes of arriving some time at the truth. 

1 Of. Med. n. vol. i. p. 150, par. 1. 2 Ibid. ? Cf. ibid. par. 2. 



Objections VII 281 

You say, ' What then did I formerly believe myself to be 1 
A* nmn undoubtedly 1 . 3 

Here again suffer me to admire the devices you employ, you who, 
in order to investigate the certain, employ the doubtful ; wlw in order 
to bring us into that light bid us plunge into darkness. Do you 
want me to take heed of what I formerly believed myself to be ? Do 
you wish me to pick up again that clouted coat, old and worn as it 
is and long since set aside, i I am a man' ? Suppose that we were 
to have among us here Pythagoras or one of his disciples. He might 
tell you that he had been a barn-door fowl. I don't need to accentuate 
this objection by instancing madmen, fanatics, or delirious and 
frenzied people. But you are experienced^ an expert guide. You 
know all the twists and turnings of the argument and I shall keep 
up heart. 

Your next words are, ( What is man ? J 

If you want me to reply, permit me first to ask : which man is 
it about whom you are enquiring? What do you enquire about 
when you ask what is man ? Do you mean that man which once 
I falsely fancied I was, which I believed myself to be, and whom, 
ever since, thanks to you, I made my renunciation, I haw affirmed 
I am not ? If it is this man, the man of whom I formed such an 
erroneous conception, lie is a certain compound of soul and body. 
Have I done enough ? I believe so, because you continue as follows. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

/ thus begin philosophizing : I am, I think. I am, so long as 
I think. Note that my critic here admits that the beginning of 
philosophizing or of the firm establishment of any proposition has 
been based by me on my knowledge of my own existence. This 
lets us see that, when in other places he has pretended that I based 
it on the positive or affirmative renunciation of all doubtful beliefs, 
he has asserted the contrary of what he really believed. I need 
not mention further how subtly he introduces me at the com- 
mencement of my philosophical labours, with I am, I think 7 etc. 
For even though I say nothing his candour will be in all cases 
quite apparent. 

Why did you mention the mind, when saying 'is mentally 

conceived 7 1 Did you not order the banishment of mind and body ? 

I have already said that it is the word mind which supplies him 

with this puzzle. But is mentally conceived means merely is thought ; 

1 Cf. M.ed. p. 150, par. 3. 



282 Objections VII 

hence he is quite wrong in assuming that mind is mentioned in so - 
far as it is part of man. Besides, though I had already rejected 
body and mind with all other things, as heing doubtful or not yet 
clearly perceived by me, this does not prevent me from picking 
them up again, if I chance to perceive them clearly. But of 
course my critic eamiot grasp this because he thinks that doubt 
is something inseparable from the objects doubted. For shortly 
afterwards he asks : How does it come about that the same things 
are iu>w not dubious and uncertain ? (meaning the things which 
formerly were doubtful). He wants me likewise to forswear them 
with every solemnity, and wonders at my devices, saying I employ 
the doubtful in order to investigate what is certain ; as if I had 
taken as the foundation of my Philosophy the principle that every- 
thing doubtful must be taken to be falsehood. 

Do you want me to take heed of what I formerly believed myself 
to be ? Do yon wish me to pick up again that clouted coat etc. 1 ? 
Here I shall make use of a very homely example for the purpose 
of explaining to him the rationale of my procedure, in order that 
in future he may not misunderstand it or dare to pretend that he 
does not understand it. Supposing he had a basket of apples and, 
fearing that some of them were rotten, wanted to take those out 
lest they might make the rest go wrong, how could he do that ? 
Would he not first turn the whole of the apples out of the basket 
and look them over one by one, and then having selected those 
which he saw not to be rotten, place them again in the basket and 
leave out the others 1 It is therefore just in the same way that 
those who have never rightly philosophized have in their mind a 
variety of opinions some of which they justly fear not to be true, 
seeing that it was in their earliest years that they began to amass 
those beliefs. They then try to separate the false from the true 
lest the presence of the former should produce a general uncertainty 
about all. Now there is no better way of doing this than to 
reject all at once together as uncertain or false, and then having 
inspected each singly and in order, to reinstate only those which 
they know to be true and indubitable. Thus it was no bad course 
to reject everything at the outset, and then, noticing that I knew 
nothing more certainly and evidently than that in virtue of my 
thinking I existed, it was not wrong to assert this first. Finally 
it was not wrong for me afterwards to ask, who was the person 
I formerly believed myself to be, not meaning now to adopt exactly 

1 Cf. above, p. 281. 



Objections VII 283 

the same beliefs, but in order to reinstate any among them that 
w^ere* true, and reject those that were false and reserve such as 
were doubtful for examination at a future time. Whence it is 
evident that it is quite silly of our critic to call this the art of 
eliciting certainties out of uncertainties or, as below, a method of 
dreaming 1 . Again all his trivialities here about Pythagoras's 
barn-door fowls, and what follows in the next two paragraphs about 
the opinion of others is quite irrelevant. For there was no need, 
nor was it my wish to recount all the opinions that others have 
held, but merely to set forth what had naturally and spontaneously 
occurred to myself or what the popular opinion had been, whether 
that were true or false, since my purpose in repeating those beliefs 
was not directed towards securing belief in them but merely 
concerned their examination. 

3. WHAT is BODY 1 

You say, c what is body ? [ ' what did I formerly understand 
by body? 9 

Do not be vexed if I keep a sharp look-out, if everywhere I am 
fearful of falling into a snare. Wherefore pray tell me, lohat body 
is it about which you ask ? That which I once represented in my 
mind, consisting of definite properties, but of which, I am forced by 
the law of renunciation to suppose, my conception was erroneous ? 
Or do you haw some other sort of body in view, supposing that any 
other such can exist 1 How do I know ? I am in doubt as to which 
it is. But if you mean the former kind it is easy for me to reply : 
By body I understood all that which can be defined by a certain 
figure, something which can be confined in a certain place, which 
can fill a given space in such a way that every other body will be 
excluded from it ; which can be perceived by sense, and moved by 
any other body that comes in contact with it 2 . This was my belief 
about body of the former kind. Consequently I gave ihe name of 
body to everything possessing the properties I have recounted in this 
list. Nevertheless I did not go on to believe that nothing different 
from that could either be or be called body, especially since it is one 
thing to say, ' I understood by body, this or that,' and quite another 
1 1 understood nothing but this or that to be body.' If it is the 
second kind of body about ivhicJi you are enquiring, I shall quote in 
my reply the opinion of more recent philosophers (since it is not so 

1 Cf. above, p. 281, 1. 4, and below, p. 285, 1. 10, also p. 293. 
- Cf. Med. p. 151. 



284 Objections VII 

much my individual opinion you seek to discover as what anyone may 
chance to believe). By body I understand everything admitting 9 of 
being circumscribed by a place like a stone. Another property is 
the capacity of being defined by its place in such a way that the 
whole of it is in the whole of the place, and the whole is in every 
part, as is the case of the indivisible parts of quantity, or of a stone, 
or of similar things, which some of our more recent writers introduce 
and pourtray as being indivisible after the fashion of the Angels or 
of indivisible souls, securing in this a certain amount of applause 
at least among themselves, as we may see in Oviedo 1 . A further 
quality is to be extended actually, like a stme, or virtually like 
the above-mentioned indivisibles. Another is to be divisible into a 
number of parts, Ufa the stone, or to be incapable of such partition, 
like the said indivisibles. Yet again a body may be moved by another, 
as a stone that is forced uptvards, or by itself, like a stone falling 
downwards. Once more it can feel,. as a dog does, think, as monkeys 
can, or imagine, like a mule. Anything that I haw formerly come 
across, which -was moved either by something else or by itself, which 
felt, imagined or thought, I have called a body, unless there was 
some reason for not doing so, and such things I even now call body. 

But this, you my, was wrong and quite erroneous. For I judged 
that to have the power of self-movement, as also of feeling or thinking, 
by no means pertained to the nature of body' 2 . 

You judged ? Since you say so, I believe it ; thought is free. 
But while you so thought, you allowed each individual to retain his 
own opinion freely ; and I shall not believe you to be, as you would 
like, the arbiter of all thoughts, rejecting some and approving others, 
unless you possess some canon that is certain and handy. But since 
you have made no mention of this, when you bade us renounce all our 
former beliefs, I shall take advantage of the liberty that nature has 
granted tis. You formerly judged, and I formerly judged. I judged 
one thing, you another, and perhaps both of us were wrong. Certainly 
our judging was not free from doubt, if both of us had at the 
very outset to divest ourselves of those previous opinions. Where- 
fore, not to prolong the strife too far, if you wish to define body in 
your own peculiar way, as in the way first given, I have no objections. 
I go so far as to admit, as long as I remember your definition, that 
you have defined not body universally but a certain kind of body 

1 Oviedo was a Catholic writer on philosophy who published his works in 
France. The work here referred to appears to be that termed Integer Gursus 
Philosophicus by E. P. Franeiscus de Oviedo, 1640. 

2 Of. Med. p. 151. 



Objections VII 285 

ivhich you have grasped in a single conception. But I contend that 
you flfave omitted the rest of the things known as body, which according 
to the opinion of the learned are subject to dispute, or about which 
nothing certain, at least nothing so certain as you require has been 
determined, so as to enable- us to say 'whether they are bodies or not. 
Thus it is doubtful and 'uncertain ivhether up to the present ive have 
secured a correct definition of all body. I ask you therefore kindly 
to proceed and I shall follow with a gladness that is gladness itself; 
such a power over me does the new and unwonted hope of deriving 
the certain from the uncertain exercise. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

Feel as a dog does ; think as monkeys can; or imagine like a 
mule. This is designed to introduce a verbal dispute. Desiring to 
be able to show that I have been wrong' in assigning as the 
differentia between inind and body the fact that the former 
thought, while the other did not, but is extended, he sa'ys that 
everything which feels, imagines and thinks receives from him the 
title body. Well, let him call such objects mules or monkeys if he 
likes. If he ever succeeds in establishing their acceptation in this 
sense I shall not refuse to employ the terms. But meanwhile he 
has no reason for blaming me for using the recognized expressions. 

4. WHAT SOUL is. 

You say, ' What is soul ? ' c What did I understand by the 
soul? 7 And here is your reply. Either I did not perceive what 
this was or I imagined it to be something extremely rare like a 
wind, a flame, or an ether, which was spread through my grosser 
parts. To it, however, I referred nutrition, locomotion, feeling 
and thought 1 . 

That is quite enough. But you will surely allow me to put a 
question here. When you enquire about the soul 2 , do you ask us to 
produce our old opinions, the beliefs we formerly field ? 

You say, ' Yes.' 

But do you think that our opinions were correct, so that this 
would render your method of no use ? Do you think that no one 
has wandered so very far in the dark ? The truth is that the beliefs 
of Philosophers about the soul have been so various and so discordant, 
that I cannot sufficiently admire the skill by which you hope so con- 
fidently to extract a wholesome drug of assured use out of such a 
1 Of. Med. p. 151. 2 de animo. 



286 Objections VII 

worthless sediment. Yet we knoiv that the poison of adders will 
yield 'us a medicine. Do you then wish me to add to your beliefs 
about the mind the opinions actual or possible that certain other 
people may have ? You dont want to enquire of me ivJiether these 
opinions are right or wrong ; it is enough if an opinion is such as to 
entail the holders thinking that it can be driven out of their mind 
by no force of reasoning. Now certain of them will say that the 
soul is a certain kind of body so-called. Why be astonished ? This 
is their opinion and, as they believe, it does not lack some colour of 
truth. Thus they call it body; but that consists in whatever is 
extended^ has three dimensions, is divisible into determinate parts. 
Again, to take a particular illustration, they find in, say, a horse, 
something extended, and divisible, such as flesh, bones, and all that 
external bodily structure that invades our senses: they therefore 
conclude, constrained to do so by weight of reasoning, that besides 
that external structure there is something internal, and that that is 
indeed of a fine texture, dissolved and extended throughout the bodily 
frame, tri-dimensional and divisible, so that when the foot is cut off 
some part of that internal thing also is lost. They believe that the 
horse is a compound of two extended things, which are tri-dimensional, 
and divisible. Thus it is a union of two bodies which, as differing 
from one another, receive distinct names, the one the external 
structure retaining the name of Body, while the other the in- 
ternalis called Soul. Further as regarding sense, imagination, 
and thought, they think that the capacity for exercising these 
functions resides in the soul, or internal body, though they involve 
a certain relation to the external frame, apart from which there is no 
sensation. The account varies from writer to writer ; so why should 
I go over them one by one ? Among them will be found some who 
think that all souls are as we have just described them. 

You reply c what impiety ! no more of that ! ' 

Yes, it is impious. But why do you ask about it? What do 
you make of atheists? Of fleshly minded men whose thoughts are 
always riveted on the dregs of creation, so that they are aware of 
nothing but body and flesh ? Nay, since you wish by your method to 
establish and demonstrate the incorporeal and spiritual nature of 
man's soul 1 , you should by no means take that as granted, but rather 
persuade yourself that you will have opponents who will deny this, or 
who at least jor purposes of disputation will maintain the opinions 
which I have expounded to you. Wherefore, pretend that one of these 

1 animus. 



Objections VII 287 

^people is present, ready to reply to your question 'what is the soul 1 ?' 
as^yon yourself replied before : The soul is something corporeal, of a 
fine structure and subtle, spread throughout the external body, and 
the principle of all sensation, imagination, and thought. Thus there 
are three grades of being, Body, the Corporeal or soul 1 , and Mind or 
spirit, as to the nature of which we are enquiring. Wherefore let us 
henceforth express these three grades by the three terms Body, Soul, 
and Mind. I repeat, let there be some one to make this reply to your 
question. Has he given a sufficient answer ? However, I don't want 
to anticipate anything belonging to your method ; I shall rather 
follow. Then you go on to say 

ANNOTATIONS. 

You say, 'yes\ : Here and almost everywhere else my opponent 
introduces me as making replies which are quite different from my 
real beliefs. But it would be too tedious to recount all his fabri- 
cations. 

Nay, since you wish by your method to establish and demonstrate 
the incorporeal and spiritual nature of man's soul, you should by no 
means take that as granted*. This is false to pretend that I took 
for granted what I ought to have proved. To such fabrications, 
which are so freely spread abroad and have absolutely nothing to 
rest on, there is nothing to be replied save that they are false. 
Nothing at all about what is to be called body, or soul, or rnind 
appeared in my discussion. "What I did on the other hand was to 
explain two things, viz. that which thinks and that which is 
extended, to which two I proved that everything else could be 
referred. I established also by reasoning the fact that these two 
things are substances really distinct from one another. One of 
these substances I called mind, the other body ; and if my critic 
doesn't like these names he can invent others, and I shall not 
mind. 

5. A TEST APPLIED TO OUR ENTRY INTO THE METHOD. 

You say, 'all is ivell; the foundations have been auspiciously 
laid ; I am, so long as I think. This is certain, this is unshaken. 
But next I must erect something upon this and take great care lest the 
evil Spirit impose upon me. I am. But what am I? Doubtless some 
one of the opinions I previously held about myself is true. I believed 
myself to be a man, and that man possesses body and soul. Am I 

1 animus. 2 Cf. p. 285. 3 Cf. p. 286, sub fin. 



288 Objections VII 

then a body? Or am -I a mind? Body is extended, bounded in* 
place, impenetrable and capable of being seen. Have I any oj* t/fete 
qualities? Extension? How could it exist in me, seeing there 
is no such thing to be found? I dismissed it at the outset. Shall I 
ascribe to myself the capacity for being touched or being seen I But 
the facts are that though I believe I am visible or can be touched by 
myself, I am not really seen, not really touched. This was fixed for 
me from the time when I made my renunciation. What then ? 
I attend, I think, I turn my thoughts round and round, but nothing 
turns up. I am tired of going over the same old round. I find 
within myself none of the attributes that attach to body. I am not a 
body. I am nevertheless and know that I am ; and, tvkile I know 
that I am, I know nothing belonging to the body. Am I then a 
mind ? What did I formerly believe to belong to the mind? Is any 
attribute of that kind to be found in me ? I thought that it belonged 
to the mind to think. But after all, after all I think. Eureka ! 
Eureka ! I have found it. I am, I think. I am, so long as I 
think; I am a thinking thing : I am mind, understanding, reason. 
This is my method, which has enabled me happily to proceed. Follow 
comrade ! 3 

lucky man I to emerge from such darkness practically at one 
bound into the light. . But, I beg you, give me your hand and steady 
my tottering steps, while I stumble along in your footprints. I should 
like to follow them exactly but, in proportion to my capacity, rather 
more slowly. I am, I think. But what am I? Any of the things 
that I formerly believed myself to be ? But were my opinions true ? 
That is not certain. I have abandoned all my old beliefs and treat 
them as false. I was wrong to trust them. 

l Nay, but,' you exclaim, 'plant yourself firmly here I J Plant 
myself firmly ? Everything totters ! What if I am something else ? 
1 You are too captious,' you say ; ' you are either a body or a mind.' 

Be it so, thus ! Though, as a fact, I waver. Kindly take my 
hand, I scarcely dare to go on. What, pray, if I am a soul 1 ? 
What if something else ? I cannot tell. 

But, you reply, ' exactly ; either body or mind.' 

Be it so, then. I am either a body or a mind. Am I not rather 
a body? Certainly 1 must be a body, if I find anything in myself 
which I formerly believed to belong to body. Yet I fear I was wrong 
to hold that belief. 

Come on,' you reply, ^fear nothing I ' 



Objections VII 289 

/ shall venture, therefore, since you so raise my spirits. I had 
fo't^netly believed that to think was something pertaining to body. 
But after all, after all, I think. Eureka ! Eureka ! I have found 
it ! I am, I think, I am a thinking thing, I am something corporeal, 
I am extension, something divisible, terms previously devoid of 
meaning for me. What I do you get angry and let me go on ahead 
and spurn me with your hand ? I haw gained the bank and stand 
on the same shore as you, thanks to you and the renunciation you 
made. 

L But you have no business to be here,' you reply. 

Why ? what have I done wrong ? 

1 It is quite wrong of you to bring up the assertion that you had 
formerly believed yourself to be something corporeal What you 
ought to have believed was that you were something mental! 

But why had you not given me warning about this principle ? 
Why, when you, saw me all braced up and ready for the complete 
renunciation of my old beliefs, did you not bid me retain this at least, 
nay take it from you as a sort of fare, viz. l to think is something. 
mental' ? But to me is wholly due the credit of getting you to 
emphasize this declaration in future for your beginners, and carefully 
to instruct them not to forswear that along with their other principles, 
with e.g. l Two and three make five! Yet I cannot be at all con- 
fident that they will manage to follow you. Each man has his own 
notions and you will find few people, to agree with you in that if ipse 
dixit ' of yours, as his silent disciples bowed to Pythagoras '-v opinion. 
What if some are unwilling? What if some people refuse? if they 
are recalcitrant? if they remain obstinately attached to their old 
opinions ? what will you do ? But not to invoke the aid of your other 
disciples, I want you to do one thing. When you 'promise that you 
will establish by weight of argument that the human soul is not cor- 
poreal but wholly spiritual, and if you have proposed as the foundation 
of your demonstrations, ' to think is a property of the mind, or of a 
thing that is wholly spiritual and incorporeal' will it not look as if 
your postulate expressed in new words tJie very statement which ivas 
originally the subject of enquiry ? As if any person were so stupid, 
that, believing that ' to think is a property of a thing that is spiritual 
and incorporeal,' and knowing at the same time and being conscious 
that he thought, he could doubt of the existence in Mm of something 
spiritual and quite immaterial. (Is there really anyone who needs 
some person to prompt him to discover that rich vein of thought 
within himself?} Now, that you may not think that all this is idle 
R. H. II. 19 



290 Objections VII 

assertion- on my part, how many people are there, and those serious, 
philosophers, who hold that brutes think and ivho therefore suppose 
that thought, while not being an attribute common to all bodies, is an 
attribute common to extended soul, such as belongs to brutes, and con- 
sequently that it is not a property (in the fourth sense 1 ) of mind or what 
is spiritual. What will such philosophers say, pray tell me, ivhen they 
are asked to set aside this opinion of theirs in order so lightly to 
assume yours ? You yourself, in craving this from us as a postulate, 
do you ask us to oblige you by conceding this or do you wish us to 
make a fresh start again ? But what is the need for my going on 
with this discussion ? If I have done wrong in going on so far, do 
you wish me to retrace my steps ? 

ANNOTATIONS. 

But iclmt am I? Doubtless some one of the opinions I previously 
held about myself is t?*ue' 2 . Here as in countless other places lie 
ascribes a certain opinion to me without the slightest shadow of 
excuse for doing so. 

This was fixed for me from the time when I made my renunciation* '. 
Here again he falsely assigns an opinion to me which I do not hold. 
For. I never drew any conclusion from the fact that I had renounced 
my former belief. On the other hand I expressed exactly the 
contrary when I said, 'But perhaps it is true that these same 
things which I supposed were non-existent because they are unknown 
to rae, are really not different from the self which I know 4 .' 

Am I then a mind 5 ? It is likewise false that I asked whether 
I was a mind. For I had not yet explained what I understood by 
mind. But I enquired whether there existed in me any of the 
features I was in the practice of attributing to the soul as I had 
formerly described it. And since I did not find in myself everything 
which I had referred to it, but thought alone, on that account I did 
not say that I was a soul, but merely a thinking thing. To this 
thinking thing I gave the name of mind, .or understanding, or 
reason, and in doing this I had no intention of signifying by the 
term mind anything more than by the term thinking thing. It was 
not with that purpose that I exclaimed ' Eureka ! Eureka ! I have 
found it ' ; as he so unfairly and sophistically represents. On the 

1 The Schoolmen distinguished four. senses of the term property: in the 
fourth it means id quod pertinet omni et soli et semper (what belongs to the 
whole of a species, to it alone, and at all times). 

2 Of. p. 287, sub fin. s Cf. p. 288, 1. 7. 
4 Ci Med. ii. p. 152, par. 2. 5 Cf. p. 288, 1. 13. 



Objections VII 291 

contrary I added f that the significance of these terms was formerly 
urhjmjwn to me 1 / Thus it cannot be doubted that I meant pre- 
cisely the same thing by these terms and by the expression 
' thinking thing.' 

/ was wrong to trust my old beliefs. c Nay, you exclaim. This 
again is absolutely false. For there I never assumed that my 
previous beliefs were true. I merely examined them to see if they 
were true. 

/ am either body or mind. It is false once more that I ever 
affirmed this. 

It is quite wrong of you to bring up the assertion that you had 
formerly believed yourself to be something corporeal. What you ought 
to haw believed was that you were something mental. It is false that 
I bring forward this assertion. My critic may say if he cares that 
the thing which thinks is better termed body than mind ; I shan't 
gainsay him. But that is a question which he must discuss not 
with me but with students of language. If however he pretends 
that I have used the term mind to imply anything more than is 
meant by the term thinking thing, I have my denial ready. As I 
have again where shortly afterwards he adds : If you haw pre- 
supposed the assertion ' to think is a property of the mind or of a 
thing that is wholly spiritual ' etc. do you ivish me to oblige you by con- 
ceding this, or do you ivish me to make a fresh start again ? Now 
I deny that I ever presupposed in any way that the mind was 
incorporeal. I finally proved this in the sixth Meditation. 

But it is very wearisome for me to have to convict my opponent 
so often of falsification. In future I shall pass it over without 
notice and shall be a silent spectator right up to the end, while he 
plays his little game. But surely it is shameful to see a reverend 
Father so given to the love of quibbling as to make a buffoon of 
himself, and present himself as captious, dull and small-witted. 
Here it is not the Epidicus or Parmeno, the clowns of the ancient 
comedy, that he tries to imitate, but their modern representative, 
that very cheap fool who affects to produce laughter by his own 
betises. 

6. THE ENTRY ATTEMPTED ANEW. 

'All right,' you say, 'so long as you follow closely in my steps.' 
Resume then, I implore you; my feet shall not deviate from your 
tracks a hair's breadth. 

1 Med. p. 147. 

19-2 



292 Objections VII 

1 1 thinkS you say. 

So do L 

' I am,' you add, 'so long a* 1 think. 3 

So it is equally with me. 

Your next question is, ' But what am I? ' 

Sagely uttered! For this is what I want to know, and gladly 
do I say along with you : ' But what am I? ' 

You go on : ' Am I -what I formerly believed myself to be I What 
was my previous belief about myself'?' 

Now dont go on repeating the same words. I have heard them 
often enough. But, I entreat you, help me. When there is muck 
darkness round my feet I cannot see where to set them. 

1 Say the words along with me,' you reply ; 'put your footsteps 
alongside of mine. What did I formerly believe myself to be I ' 

Formerly? Was there ever a former time? Did I formerly 
believe ? 

1 Wrong ! ' you reply. 

But you, yourself, kindly excuse me, have gone wrong in talking 
away about 'formerly! I renounced all my former beliefs. Even 
'formerly' has become nothing, is nothing. But what a kind guide 
you are ! You take my hand and lead me I 

You say, ' I think, I amJ 

Just so ! I think, I am. I have got hold of this securely and 
this alone. Beyond this one fact there is nothing, has been nothing. 

But hurrah ! you add ; i -what did you formerly believe yourself 
to be?' 

You want me, I think, to make certain whether I have allotted a 
fortnight or a whole month to this apprenticeship in reminciation. 
Really I haw given only this brief hour of discussion with you, and 
with such contention of spirit that the shortness of the time is counter- 
balanced by the effort required. But I give you a month, a year, if 
you iiish it. Just so ! I think, I am. There is nought besides this. 
I have renounced all 

But you urge me to recollect, to remember. 
What is this l recollection ' ? 

True, I now think that formerly I thought. But does the fact 
that now I think, that formerly I thought, imply that formerly all the 
time I did think ? 

Your ansiver is 'Faint heart! you are afraid of a shadow. 
Pluck up courage. I think! 

Poor luckless creature that I am ! The darkness gathers round 



Objections VII 293 

'z^ and now I am not certain of that ' I think J which previously was 
so clear. I dream I think, I don't think it. 

'Nay,' you reply, c /ie who dreams thinks' 

I see light. To dream is to think, and to think is to dream. 

' Not at all, 3 you say. f To think extends more widely than to 
dream. He who dreams thinks ; but he who thinks, does not therefore 
dream, but thinks in the waking state? 

But is that so ? Do you dream that or do you think it ? What! 
if you are dreaming when you say that thought is a wider term than 
dreaming, will it therefore be wider ? If you care I shall have no 
trouble in dreaming that dreaming is wider than thinking. Whence 
do you have your knowledge that thought is the wider term, if thought 
does not exist but only dreaming ? What will happen if, so often as 
you thought that you were awake and thinking, you were not awake 
and thinking, but you dreamed that you were aivake and thinking, 
and consequently the operation is merely the single one of dreaming, 
which you employ on the one occasion when dreaming that you dream, 
and on the other, in dreaming that you are awake and thinking. 
What will you do now ? You are silent. Do you want to take my 
advice ? Let us find another ford. This is doubtful and untrust- 
worthy ; so much so that I am really surprised that you tried to 
show me the way across without having made trial of it before. 
Don't there/ore ask me who it was I formerly believed myself to be, 
but whom I now dream that I formerly dreamed myself to be. This 
done, I shall reply to you. But lest our discourse be impeded by 
the use of words proper to people who dream, I shall employ the lan- 
guage of our waking state, provided .you remember that l to think ' 
means henceforth merely 'to dream 3 and that nothing more is 
affirmed in your thoughts than by a dreamer in his dreams. Nay 
you must designate your method a Method of Dreaming, and this 
must be the culmination of your art, viz. : He who reasons well 
dreams. I think this doctrine will go down well, because you proceed 
as follows. 

1 What therefore did Ijwmerly believe myself to be?' 

Noiv here is the stone on which I previously stumbled. We must 
both take care. Wherefwe suffer me to ask why you did not premise 
the statement ' I am one of the things that I formerly had believed 
myself to be,' or ' lam that which I formerly believed myself to be. 9 

You say there is no need to do so. 

Nay, pardon me, there is the greatest need. Otherwise your 
labour is all in vain in discovering what you formerly believed 



294 Objections VII 

yourself to be. Indeed suppose it possible for you not to be ivhat you 
formerly believed yourself to be, as in Pythagoras' s case, but something 
else. Witt it then not be useless for you to ask what you believed 
yourself formerly to be? 

But you say the above statement is one of my old beliefs and has 
been set aside. 

Very true, if indeed everything has been set aside. But what 
can you do I You must either come to a halt here or make use 
of it. 

i Nay,' you say, ' we must try again and take another way. So ! 
I am either body vr mind. Am I body ? ' 

Pardon me, that is going too far. Whence do you derive that 
statement C I am either body or mind,' now that you haw set aside 
your belief in both body and mind ? Nay, what happens if you are 
neither body nor mind, but soul 1 , or something else ? What do I 
&noiv about it ? This is the very question we are investigating, and 
if I knew the answer, if I were acquainted with it, I should not 
distress myself so much. Again I should not like you to think that it 
was merely the low of trudging around this land of renunciation 
that brought me here into the midst of its gloom and peril. It is 
the hope of attaining certainty that alone either attracts me or 
compels me. 

'Let us resume then, 3 you answer. l l am either a body, or some- 
thing not a body, i.e. incorporeal! 

Now you are on another, quite a new track. But are you sure 
that it is going to lead you aright ? 

You say it is most trustworthy and entirely necessary. 

Why then did you set it aside ? Did I not rightly fear that 
something ought to be retained, and that it was possible yon did 
indulge your incredulity too far 1 However, so be it. Let this be 
certain. What next ? 

6 Am la body 1 !' you go on. 'Do I find within myself any 
of that which I formerly judged to belong to the body ? ' 

But here is another rock of offence. Without any doubt we shall 
hit against it unless you first grant as a premiss this paragon of 
beliefs f / was right in my former judgment about what pertains to 
the body ' ; or ' nothing belongs to the body saw what I formerly 
understood to belong to it.' 

6 Wherefore so ? ' you say. 

Precisely because if you omitted anything in your former list of 
1 animus. 



Objections VII 295 

'attributes, if your judgment was wrong and, ' being human, -you 
repudiate nothing that may well happen to human nature 1 ' all your 
trouble will be superfluous, and you will inevitably be exposed to the 
dread of being left in the plight of the rustic in the story. For he, 
on seeing a wolf for the first time and at a great distance, stopped 
and thus addressed his master, a raw youth whom he was accom- 
panying. * What do I see ? ' he said, * Without doubt it is an 
animal ; it moves and runs forward. But what sort of animal? 
Surely one of those that I haw seen already. Now what are they ? 
The ox, the Jwrse, the goat and the ass. Is it an ox ? No; it doesn't 
have horns. A horse 1 No ; you could hardly say it has a horse's 
tail. A goat 1 But the goat has a beard, this beast none ; it isn't 
a goat. Therefore it must be an ass, since it is neither ox, horse, 
nor goat.' Now don't laugh, but wait for the end of the story. * But 
come,' said his young master, l why don't you make out that it is a 
horse with as much reason as that it is an ass ? See I Is it an ox 1 
No; it doesn't haw horns. An ass ? Not a bit ; I don't see the ears. 
A goat? No; it has no beard. Then it is a horse.' The rustic, 
somewhat perturbed by this novel analysis, exclaimed : c But it is not 
an animal at all. Here are the animals I know, the ox, the horse, 
the goat and the ass. It is not an ox, nor a horse, nor a goat, nor 
an ass. Therefore' (with great triumph) 'it is not an animal, and 
hence it is non-animal.' Here is a stout Philosopher for you, bred 
not in the Lyceum but in the coio-house ! Do you want to err in his 
company ? 

1 Enough,' you say, ' I see your point. But the rustic's error lay 
in thinking (though he did not openly mention it) that he had seen all 
the animals, or that there was no animal besides those he knew. But 
what lias this to do with the matter we haw in hand ? ' 

Well the two cases are as similar as a couple of glasses of milL 
Don't pretend. You too keep something suppressed in your mind. 
Is it not this : ' / know everything which has anything to do with 
or can possibly haw anything to do with the body' Or this : 'Nothing 
belongs to the body except what I understood belonged to it formerly' ? 
But if you did not know everything, if you have omitted even one 
thing ; if you haw ascribed to the mind anything that really belongs 
to the body or to something corporeal, e.g. the soul*; if you were 
wrong in separating thought, sense, and imagination from tJie body 
or the corporeal soul; if you suspect, I add, that you haw erred in 

1 Cf. Terence, Heautontimoroumenos, Act i, Scene 1, v. 25. 

2 anixnae. 



296 Objections VII 

one of these points., ought you not to fear the same -issue to your' 
argument, and that any conclusion you get may be wrong? Certainly 
though you drag me, I shall stick here obstinately and shant stir^a 
step farther, 'unless you remove this obstacle. 

i Let us go back,' you answer, l and try a third avenue of abroach. 
Let us attempt all the entrances, paths, twists and turnings of the 
method! 

Very good, but on the understanding that you will not merely 
brush by, but remove any doubtful matter that may occur. Come, 
lead away. I am for complete precision in everything. Proceed. 

7. THIRD ATTEMPT TO EFFECT AN ENTRANCE. 

You say, i 1 think* 

I deny it. You dream that you are thinking. 

But you say that this is what you call thinking. 

But you are wrong to do so. I call a fig a fig. You are 
dreaming. This is all you'll get. Go on. 

^ I am, so long as I think," is your next word. 

All right. Since you want to put it so, I shan't object. 

But you say this is certain and evident. 

I deny it. You merely dream that it is certain and evident . 

But you persist, saying that it is at least certain and evident to 
one who dreams. 

I deny it. It merely seems, or appears to be so, it is not really 
certain. 

Against this you urge, : l But I dorit doubt it. I am conscious of 
it in myself, and an evil Spirit can't deceive me here ecen though he 
tries hard! 

I deny this. You dream that you are conscious in yourself of 
it, that you dorit doubt, and that this is evident. Those two things 
are very different ; viz. ' to a dreamer ' (and you may add c to one 
awake' also) 'something appears certain and evident,' and 'to a 
dreamer' (just as to me who is aivake) 'something is certain and 
evident.' This is the end of the matter; there is no going beyond it. 
Hence let us try another approach, so that ive may not waste our 
lives here dreaming. Though something must be granted; to reap 
you must sow. But you are quite confident. Proceed. You are 
getting on. 

What you say is : ' Whom did I formerly believe myself to be?' 

Have you done with tJmt 'fwmerly.' There is no road that way. 
How often have I told you that you were shut off from all your old 



Objections VII 297 

^possessions ? You are, so long as you think, and you are certain that 
you dre so long as you think. I enforce the point i so long as you 
tltink' ;. all the past is doubtful and uncertain, the present alone is 
left you. Yet you persevere. I admire a man whom ill-fortune 
cannot break. 

'There is nothing, 3 you say, : m me who think, who am a 
thinking thing, nothing, I repeat, belonging to the body or to 
anything corporeal' 

I deny this. Prove it. 

You answer : ( From the time that I renounced everything, no 
body, no soul 1 , no mind, in a word, nothing exists. Therefore if 
I am, as I am certain that I am, I am not a body nor anything 



How I admire your warmth and the way you syllogize, referring 
at each step in the argument to our form of reasoning ! Gome here, 
I will show you a quicker way out of these labyrinths, and seeing 
that you are generous I shall be more so. I deny both your antecedent, 
your consequent and the necessary connection between the two. Do 
not be annoyed, pray I My notion is not -without warrant. Here 
are my grounds. I deny the necessary connection, because you might 
as well prove the opposite, thus ' Since I renounced all, neither mind, 
nor soul, nor body, in a word, nothing exists. Therefore if I am, as 
I am, I am not a mind! Now here is the flaw, which the sequel 
will show you plainly. Meanwhile, bethink, yourself as to ivliether 
it is better to derive the following conclusion henceforth from your 
antecedent : ' Therefore if I am, as I am, I am nothing! Certainly, 
either the assertion of the antecedent ivas wrong, or, if it -is asserted, 
it is annulled by the condition brought forward, viz. ' If I am.' 
Wherefore I deny that antecedent ; ' From the time that I renounced 
all, no body exists, nor soul 1 , nor mind, nor anything else ' : and I 
am, quite right in doing so. For while renouncing everything you 
a/re either wrong in doing so, or you do not wholly renounce every- 
thing ; nw can you do the latter, since you yourself who make the 
renunciation necessarily are. Therefore to make an accurate reply 
I must say : when you assert Nothing is, no body, no soul, no mind, 
etc., the alternatives are (1) that you either exclude yourself from 
that proposition Nothing is, etc., and really mean : Nothing is 
except myself; which you must necessarily do, in order that your 
proposition may come into existence and may remain in existence. 
This is just what the ordinary Logic teaches about such propositions 



298 Objections VII 

as : l Every proposition written in this book is false ' ; ' 7 am not"" 
telling the truth,' with a crowd of similar judgments which ahvays- 
except themselves from the condemnation they pass. Or, again 
(2) according to the other alternative, you include yourself also,, 
and desire to be non-existent ichile you renounce your old possessions- 
and Bay: Nothing exists etc. On the former alternative it is- 
impossible to maintain the proposition: i Since I renounced every thing y 
nothing exists etc.' For you exist and are something; and necessarily 
you are either body, or soul 1 , or mind or something else; and so either 
body or soul or mind or something else exists. On the second alterna- 
tive you are wrong, and indeed commit a double error. To begin 
with you attempt the impossible and, though existing, want to cancel 
your existence ; and next you upset that assertion in the consequent 
when you add : ' Therefore if / am, as I am, etc.' For how can it 
come about that you are, if nothing is ? And so long as you affirm 
that nothing is, how can you affirm that you are ? Again if you 
affirm that you are, dont you destroy the proposition asserted shortly 
before, viz. l Nothing is etc. ' ? Therefore the antecedent is false, and 
false also the consequent. But now you renew the -conflict. 

' While I maintain,' you say, c that nothing exists, I am not 
certain that I am body, soul 1 , mind, or anything else. Nay I am 
not sure that any other body, soul or mind exists. Therefore by th& 
law of renunciation ivhich relegates the doubtful to the realm of the 
false, I shall say and affirm that there is no body, nor soul, nor- 
mind, nor anything else. Therefore if I am, as I am, I am not 
a body! 

That is splendid. But, pray, suffer me to straighten out your 
statements singly, to weigh them, and balance them. In saying 
' Nothing is, etc., I am not certain that I am body, soul, mind or 
anything else! I distinguish the antecedent: ' You are not certain 
that you are determinately a body, determinately a mind, or any- 
thing else determinately.' Let this antecedent be granted, for it- 
is about this question that you are enquiring. But again we may- 
say you are not certain that you are indeterminately either body,, 
soul, or mind, or anything else ; now I deny this antecedent. For 
you are, and are something and are necessarily either body, or soul, 
or mind or something else ; and you cannot seriously place this in th& 
realm of the doubtful, however much an evil Spirit tempt you to do* 
so. I come now to the consequent : Therefore by the law of r enun- 
ciation I shall say that there is no body, no soul, no mind, nor 



Objections VII 299 

Anything else.' I make a distinction as to the consequent this. 
I shaft say : f No body, soul, or mind, or anything else exists deter- 
mmately? Let the connection between antecedent and consequent 
be granted. But I may also say : ' Neither body, nor soul, nor 
mind, nor anything else exists indeterminately.' Now I deny this 
consequent. In the same way I draw a distinction as to your 
ultimate consequent : ' Therefore if I am, as I am, I am not a body.' 
Determinately I concede it ; indeterminately I deny it. Behold my 
generosity! I haw augmented your statements by adding this 
triumph of reasoning to their number. But don't despond! Array 
your line of battle anew ! You delight me ! 

Your next words are : i I know I exist. I asJc who that " /" is- 
whom I know. It is quite certain that the knowledge of this, taken 
precisely so, does not depend on those things which I do not yet know- 
to exist! 

What more ? Have you said all you intend to say ? I expected 
you to state a consequence, as shortly before. Perhaps you feared 
you would get no better results. This is highly prudent, according 
to your way of doing things; but I take up the separate points- 
again. You know t/iat you exist. All right. You ask who the 
you is whom you know. Just so, and I ask the same question along 
with you, and we have been asking this question for a long time. 
Knowledge of that which you seek does not depend on those things 
which you haw not yet known to exist. What am I to say ? The 
answer is not yet sufficiently clear ; and I don't se$ quite well where 
your old dictum comes in. As a matter of fact, if you ask who that 
you is whom you know, I shall raise the same question too. But why 
do you ask, if you already know ? 

You reply: l But I knew that I existed; I don't know who 
I am! 

Excellent ! But whence will you discover who that you which 
exists is, save from what you either knew formerly or some time will 
know ? You will not discover the answer from what you formerly 
knew. That is teeming with obscurity and has been given up. 
Therefore your knowledge will come from what you don } t yet know, 
but will know afterwards ; and I can j t see why you are here so muck 



' I do not yet know, 3 you reply, * that what you mention exists.' 

Keep up hope ; some day you will find out. 

But you ask next what you are to do meanwhile. 

You will await its discovery, though I shall not allow you to- 



300 Objections VII 

remain long hi doubt. / make a distinction as formerly. You dor 
not know who you are determinately and clearly: this I deny. r ' for 
you bio ic that you are something and necessarily either body or sM 
or mind or something else. But what then ? You will know yourself 
afterwards clearly and determinately. What will you do now ? 
That single dilemma, Determinately or Indeterminately, will keep 
you at a stand-still a whole century long. Cry fa* another way, if 
there is any left. But be daring and don't yet give up the contest. 
Great and novel enterprises are beset by great and novel difficulties. 

You reply that there is one -way left, but that if it is blocked by 
any obstacle or stone of stumbling, your cause is lost. You will 
retrace your steps and th#se shores of renunciation will see you 
wandering thereon no more. You want to knoiv if I wish to explore 
this route also. 

Right, but on the understanding that, since it is the farthest, you 
may be very sure that it is my last attempt. Go on ahead. 

S. THE FOURTH ATTEMPT TO EFFECT AN ENTRANCE- 
TEE PROBLEM GIVEN UP IN DESPAIR. 

You say, ' / am! 

I deny it. 

You proceed: 'I think.' 

I deny it. 

You add : What do you deny ? 

I deny that you exist, that you think. Well do I know what 
I did, when I said: i nothing is! It is quite a notable exploit; at 
one blow I haw cut myself adrift from everything. Nothing exists ; 
you do not exist, you do not think. 

'But my good sir,' you say, ' I am certain, I am conscious in 
myself] this is my consciousness, that I am, that I think.' 

Even though you put your hand upon your heart, even though you 
swear and protest, I shall deny it. Nothing is, you are not, you do 
not think, you are not conscious in yourself. Here is the obstacle ; 
and I set it before your eyes that you may knoiv it and avoid it. If 
the proposition, ' nothing is,' is true, the following also, i you do not 
<exist,yau do not think,' is necessary. But, as you wish, i Nothing is, 1 
is true. Therefore the other, i You do not exist, you do not think,' 
is also true. 

That is being too strict, 1 you contend, you must relax somewhat. 

Since you request me to do so, I shall grant your petition, and 
with great good-will. Yon are: I allow it. You think: I grant 



Objections VII 301 

You are a thinking thing, you add^ ' a thinking substance,' so 
re you given to grandiloquent language. I rejoice, I con- 
gratulate you : but no further. Yet you want to go on and you 
summon up your spirits for the last time. 

' I am,' you say, 'a thinking substance, and know that /, a 
thinking substance exist, and I ham a dear and distinct conception 
of this thinking substance. Yet I do not know that body exists, nor 
any of those things which pertain to the concept of corporeal substance. 
Nay, body does not exist, nor any corporeal thing. I hace renounced 
all that Therefore the knowledge of the existence of a thinking thing 
or of an existing thinking thing, does not depend on the knowledge of 
the existence of body, or of an existing body. Therefore since I exist, 
and exist as a thinking body, and body does not exist, I am not a 
body. Therefore I am a mind. These are the things that compel 
my assent, since there is nothing in them that is not coherent 
and reasoned to form evident principles according to the latvs of 
Logic! 

swan-like strain I But why didn't you talk like this before ? 
Why did you not clearly and intelligibly remove afar off that former 
renunciation of yours 1 I have reason to complain of you, seeing you 
allowed us to wander long here, nay you led me by pathless and 
impassable places, when you could have brought me to the goal with 
a single step. I have reason to be ivroth and, unless you were my 
friend, to vent all my spleen upon you, for you have not been so 
candid and handsome as you used to be ; nay you are keeping some- 
thing entirely to yourself and not going shares in it with me. You 
are amazed ? I shan't detain you long. Here is the source of my 
complaint. Shortly before, just afeio steps back, you asked who that 
you was whom you knew. Now not only do you know who you are 
but you haw a clear and distinct concept of that. Either you were 
concealing something, and were pretending ignorance, because you 
were very cunning ; or you ham some subterranean code of truth 
and certainty which you are keeping out of view. Though I prefer, 
if you point to this hidden source, to be curious rather than cross. 
Whence, pray tell me, comes that clear and distinct concept of 
thinking substance 1 If it is owing to the words employed, to the 
facts themselves, that it is so clear and evident, I shall ask you again 
and again to show me that concept, so clear and distinct as it is, if 
only once, in order that I may fashion myself aneivfrom one glimpse 
of it, especially since it is practically from it alone that we expect to- 
find out the truth, which is costing us such toil to discover. 



302 Objections VII 

' Look, you say, ' I knev: with certainty that I am, that 1 think^ 
and that I exist as a thinking substance.' 

Kindly wait a little till I get myself ready to frame suck* a 
difficult concept. I also know and am quite well aware that I exist, 
that I think and that I, a thinking substance, exist. Proceed now 
at last, if you please. 

' Nay,' you say, c the matter is finished. When I thought that 
I, a thinking substance, existed, I formed a clear and distinct concept 
of thinking substance.' 

Goodness, gracious ! What a subtle and acute fellow you are ! 
How in a moment yon penetrate and traverse everything which is, 
and everything which is not, which can, and which cannot be ! You 
form a clear and distinct conception of thinking substance, while 
conceiving clearly and distinctly the existence of thinking substance. 
Therefore if you know it clearly, as you know it at once (so happy 
is your talent), that no mountain exists without its valley, will you 
straightway possess a clear and distinct concept of a mountain 
without a valley ? But, because I am not acquainted with the device 
by which you achieve this, the new achievement itself does not impress 
me. Disclose your method, I beg you, and show how it is possible for 
that concept to be clear and distinct. 

Without hesitation you say : ' / clearly and distinctly conceive a 
thinking substance to exist, and I conceive nothing corpweal, nothing 
spiritual l , nothing else besides, but merely a thinking substance. There- 
fore that concept of mine of a thinking substance is clear and distinct' 

At last I have your answer, and I believe I understand it. That 
concept of yours is clear because you are quite certain in your 
knowledge; it is distinct, because you are aware of nothing else. 
Have I hit the nail on the head? I believe so, for you add: 

1 That wholly suffices to let me affirm that I, in so far as I know 
myself, am nothing other than a thinking thing! 

Indeed it is quite sufficient; and if I have grasped your meaning 
clearly, the clear and distinct concept of a thinking substance which 
you form is due to the fact that it represents to you that a thinking 
substance exists, no attention being paid to the body, the soul, the 
mind, or to anything else, but merely to the fact that it exists. Thus 
you say that you, in so far as you know yourself, are nothing but 
a thinking substance, but not a body, not a soul, not a mind, nor 
anything else. Consequently if you existed precisely to the extent to 
which you have knoivledge of yourself, you would be merely a thinking 
1 spirituals. 



Objections VII 303 

substance and nothing besides. I fancy you are chuckling and con- 
granulating yourself , and think this unusually long spun out argument 
*> mine is meant to secure delay, to postpone the issue and let me 
off without attempting to pierce your yet unbroken array. But really 
I mean something quite different. Do you want me with a single 
word to shatter all your massed battalions and rend even your 
reserves, dense and serried as may be their formation I I shall employ 
not one word but three, and conquer so completely that no survivor 
will be left to tell the tale. 

Here is my first. The argument which reasons from knowledge 
to existence is not valid. Reflect on this for a fortnight at least, and 
it will bear fruit. You will have no reason to regret it if you thus 
cast your eyes on the following table. Thinking substance is that 
ivhich either understands, or wills, or doubts, or dreams, or imagines, 
or feels. Thus cognitive acts, like understanding, willing, imagining 
and feeling, all come under the common notion of thought or per- 
ception, or consciousness, and we say that the substance in which they 
inhere is a thinking thing. 

Thinking substance 

_________ i _____ 

corporeal, or having a body incorporeal, or not possessing a 

and using it body, nor using it 



extended and inextended and God angel 

divisible indivisible 



i -- --- 1 

soul 1 of soul of mind of mind of 
horse dog Socrates Plato 

Now for the second, Take those terms determinate^, inde- 
terminately ; distinctly, confusedly; explicitly, implicitly. Eevolve 
those too in your mind for a few days. It will be worth your 
while to apply them one by one, as is proper, to your various pro- 
nouncements, to separate and distinguish those opposites from one 
another. I should not shirk doing this now unless I feared it would 
jorove wearisome. Here is my third objection. The argument that 
wants too much in its conclusion gets nothing at all. Here then is 
no time left for meditation. The emergency presses. Come, bethink 
yourself of your words and see if I come on in the same way. I 
am a. thinking thing, I know that I am a thinking substance, tJiat 
thinking substance exists and that, nevertheless, I do not yet know 
that mind exists, nay, no mind exists. Nothing exists, everything 
has been set aside. Therefore knowledge of the existence of, or of 
existing thinking substance does not depend on the knowledge of the 



304 Objections VII 

existence of, or of an existing mind. Therefore since I exist, and f 
exist as a thinking thing, and the mind does not exist, I 
mind ; therefore I am body. Well why do you say nothing ? 
do you retreat? I have not yet given up all hope. Follow me now. 
Hurrah! Courage! I bring forward the old formula and method 
for regulating the reason familiar to all the ancients and (shall I 
miture .?), thoroughly icell known to all mankind. Pray bear with 
me and do not be vexed; I hace borne with you. Perhaps that will 
open a way, as is usual in a situation that is intricate and of 'which 
we have despaired. Or certainly \ if that does not come off we shall 
at least, in extricating ourselves, have pointed out the error of your 
method, if such exists. Here, then, is your matter put inform. 

9. THE MATTER SAFELY RECAST IN THE OLD FORM. 

Nothing which is such that I can doubt whether it exists, actually 
exists. 

Every body is such that I can doubt whether it exists. 

Therefore no body actually exists. 

Not to raise old issues again, I ask if you do not acknowledge 
the major premiss as your own proposition. The minor must also 
be yours, if you are to get the conclusion. I resume therefore 

No body actually exists. 

Therefore nothing actually existing is a body. 

I proceed: Nothing actually existing is a body. 

I (I a thinking substance) actually exist. 

Therefore I (I a thinking substance) am not a body. 

Now your face beams / A new springtime of hope opens in it. 
My formula favours you,, and so does the result which the formula 
creates. But note my sardonic laughter. Put mind in the place of 
body and then draw the conclusion with formal correctness, viz* 
Therefore I (I a thinking substance) am not a mind. Thus 

Nothing which is such that I can doubt whether it actually exists 
does actually exist. 

All mind is such that I can doubt whether it actually exists. 

Therefore no mind actually exists. 

Nothing actually existing is mind. 

I (I a thinking substance) actually exist. 

Therefore I (I a thinking substance) am not mind. 
What then? The form is correct and valid; it never errs, it 
never brings a false conclusion unless the premiss chance to be fake* 
There/ore, of necessity, any flaw that we judge to exist in the 



Objections VII 305 

Consequent, is not due, to the form but to something erro 
in $h& premisses. Now really do you think that the ass&. 
wUch are due all your subsequent wanderings is properly stated^ 
viz. Nothing which is such that I can doubt whether it exists or not 
or is true, actually exists or is true.' Is that certain ? Are you so 
familiar with it as to be able to insist upon it confidently and with 
unembarrassed mind ? Tell me, pray, why you deny the statement 
' I have a body } ? Doubtless because it seems to you doubtful. But 
is this also not doubtful, viz. 1 1 do not haw a body'? Is there 
anyone likely to take as the foundation oj his whole science and 
doctrine and especially of a doctrine which he wishes to impose on 
others as the controlling power of their thought, a statement which 
he would be prudent to deem false ? But enough. This is the end 
at last, the term of our wanderings ; I hope for nothing in the 
future. Therefore to your question ' Whether the renunciation of 
everything doubtful is a good method of philosophizing,' I reply as 
you expect, frankly and openly, and without mincing matters. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

Up to the present our Reverend Father has been jesting. And 
because in the sequel he seems to be in earnest and to want to 
assume a quite different character, I shall in the meantime briefly 
jot down anything among his jests that has struck me. 

These words of his : Formerly ? Was there ever a former time ? 
I dream I think, I don't think it 1 , and the like are humorous sallies, 
worthy of the character he has assumed. So too with the serious 
question : Can to think extend more widely than to dream*? and the 
said argument About the method of dreaming, and the consequence 
that, He who reasons well dreams*. But I don't think that I 
ever gave the least provocation for these jibes, because I expressly 
pointed out when talking of the things I renounced, that I did 
not affirm that they existed, but that they seemed. Consequently 
in asking what I had thought myself formerly to be, my question 
was directed to discover merely what it then seemed to me I had 
formerly thought. And when I said that I thought, I did not 
inquire whether I was awake or asleep when I thought I am 
surprised that he calls my method a Method of Dreaming when it 
seems to have roused him into a sufficiently wide awake condition. 

Likewise the reasoning suits his assumed character well enough 
when, in order that I may discover what I previously thought I was, 
1 Of. p. 292. 2 Of. p. 293. 3 Ibid. 

E. H. II. 20 



306 Objections VII 

he wishes me to state the following premiss : / am some one of th: 
things which I formerly believed myself to be, or : I am thafri?hich 
I formerly believed myself to be 1 . Shortly afterwards, for <ihe 
purpose of inquiring whether I am a body, he wants me to premise 
this wonderful proposition : / was right formerly in my judgment 
about what pertains to the body, or : Nothing belongs to the body save 
what I formerly understood to belong to it 2 . For statements which 
are manifestly contrary to reason, are designed to provoke laughter. 
It is manifest that I could have asked with quite useful results 
what I had formerly believed myself to be, and whether I was a 
body, although I did not know whether I was any of the things 
that I had formerly believed myself to be, and although my opinion 
had not been correct, in order that I might examine that very 
question by the help of what I was then going to perceive for the 
first time ; and, if nothing else, I should at least discover that in 
that direction no further progress was possible. 

My critic again plays his part excellently in his tale about the 
rustic. But in this there is nothing more ridiculous than the fact 
that, when he thinks that it is an application of my words, it applies 
only to his own position. For directly afterwards he finds fault 
with me for not presupposing this dictum : / was right formerly 
in my judgment about what pertains to the body, or : Nothing 
pertains to the body save what I formerly understood to belong to it. 
But now he takes this very statement about the omission of which 
by me he complains, and which is wholly evolved from his own 
imagination, and criticizes it as though it were mine, likening it to 
the absurd reasoning of the rustic in his fable. But nowhere, 
because I presuppose that my former judgment about the nature of 
body was correct, have I denied that the thing which thinks is a 
body ; it was because I used the term body to signify only a thing 
of which I had sufficient knowledge, to wit, extended substance, 
and I recognised that what thinks is distinct from this. 

Thejeux d' esprit which have already appeared rather often and are 
found here, e.g. you say, { I think! I deny it, you are dreaming*, etc. 
*It is certain,' you add, 'and evident. 7 I deny it, you are dreaming; 
it merely seems, or appears to be so, it is not really certain 4 ', etc., 
are in this respect at least funny, that if the arguments were 
intended to be serious, they would be so silly. But lest beginners 
should chance to go wrong here, and think that to one who doubts 
whether he is awake or dreaming nothing else can be certain and 
1 Cf. p. 294. 2 Ibid. 3 Cl p. 296. * Hid. 



Objections VII 307 

^vident, but that everything must only seem or appear to be, 
I sbouid like them to recall what was above remarked (at F) 1 , viz. 
that what is clearly perceived, no matter by whom it is perceived, 
is true and does not merely seem or appear to be true. Yet there 
are very few who rightly distinguish between that which is really 
perceived and that which they fancy they perceive, because but few 
are accustomed to clear and distinct perceptions. 

Up to this point our Actor has displayed to us no memorable 
spectacle of battle ; he has merely interposed some slight barriers 
and after brandishing his weapons there for a time he speedily 
sounds the retreat and betakes himself to some other part of the 
field. But here 2 for the first time he begins a mighty conflict 
with an enemy quite worthy of his stage, viz. with a shade of me, 
visible indeed to none else, but educed from his own brain. Lest it 
should not appear sufficiently unreal, he has actually gone to the 
fountain head of the Non-existent 3 itself in order to derive matter 
for its composition. But he takes the combat seriously ; he argues, 
gets warm, makes truce, calls in Logic to his help, renews the fight, 
scrutinizes my statements one by one, weighs them, balances them. 
But fearing to take the blows of his valiant assailant on his 
shield, he shuns them also with his body. Soon he begins 
to make distinctions and, creating a diversion by means of his 
Determinately and Indeterminately*, he escapes by flight. Really 
that makes a most entertaining spectacle ; especially if the cause 
of such a mighty quarrel is known. Well, here it is : He chanced 
to read in my writings that any true opinions we have before we 
philosophize seriously are mixed up with so many others that are 
either false or at least doubtful, that hence in order to separate 
them from the rest it is best to reject all alike to begin with, or to 
refuse not to renounce them all, so that it may be possible after- 
wards more conveniently to distinguish those that were true all the 
time, or to discover new truths, and to admit nothing but what is 
true. Now this is just the same as if I had said that in order to 
prevent there being any rotten apples among those of which our 
tub or basket is full, we should begin by turning them all out, and 
then fill up once more either by putting back again those in which 
there is no flaw or getting similarly sound ones from elsewhere. 
But my critic, not grasping such a profound speculation, or at any 
rate pretending that he does not grasp it, expresses astonishment 

1 Cf. p. 267. F is a section mark in the Latin edition not reproduced in 
this translation. 2 Cf. p. 297. 3 ex ipso Nihilo. 4 Cf. p. 298. 

202 



308 Objections VII 

especially because I said ' Nothing is not to be renounced ' ; an$ 
after meditating long and deeply on that Nothing he has se~ got it 
on the brain that, though now his arguments tell against himselffhe 
cannot easily shake himself free of the notion. 

After this successful combat, elated with his belief in his 
victory he assails a new enemy, and once more believes that this is 
some shade of me, for what he opposes is always of that self-same 
phantasy. Now however he constructs it out of new materials, 
viz. out of the words : / know that I exist ; I ask who I am, etc. l 
And because he is not so familiar with this semblance of me as 
with the preceding, he attacks more cautiously and merely skirmishes. 
The first missile he directs against me is : Why do you ask, if you 
already know-? Eut because he imagines that his opponent will 
ward it off with the reply, / know that I am, not who I am 9 , he 
immediately hurls this more potent weapon : Whence do you derive 
the knowledge who you are unless from what you either formerly 
knew, or some time will know ? But not from what you formerly 
knew ; that is teeming with obscurity and has been given up. There- 
fore your knowledge will come from what you dor^t yet know but will 
know afterward^. Believing that the luckless shade is much put 
out and almost brought to earth by this blow, he imagines he hears 
it exclaim : / do not yet know tliat what you mention exists. Then, 
changing his wrath to pity he consoles it with these words : Keep 
up hope; some day you will find out 5 . Next he makes the 
shade reply to this in a querulous and supplicating tone with : 
What shall I do meanwhile ? But in an imperious voice as becomes 
a conqueror he cries, ' You will await its discovery.' Howsoever, 
being pitiful, he does not allow me to be long in doubt, but flying 
once more to the side issue : Determinate^ ', Indeterminately ; 
clearly, confusedly, and seeing no one following him there secures a 
lonely triumph. Now certainly all these jests are excellent examples 
of that fooling which depends upon the unlocked for simulation of 
stupidity on the part of a man whose looks and garb gave promise 
of wisdom and seriousness. But, to let this appear more clearly, 
we ought to consider our Actor friend as a serious and learned 
man, who, in order to attack our Method of investigating truth, 
which bids us reject everything as uncertain and, beginning with 
the knowledge of our own existence, thence proceeds to the exami- 
nation of our nature, i.e. of that thing which we already know to 

i Of. p. 299, par. 2. 2 Cf. Ibid. par. 3. * Of. Ibid. par. 4. 

4 Cf. Ibid. par. 5. 5 Of. Ibid, sub fin. 



Objections VII 309 

>xist, tries to prove that there is no approach this way to that 
furtket knowledge, and employs the following argument : Since you 
knftw only that you eocist, but not who you are, you cannot learn this 
from what you formerly knew, since you haw renounced everything ; 
then what you learn must come from what you do not yet know. But 
to this even a three years' child could reply that nothing prevents 
him learning from what he once knew, hecause though he has set 
that aside on account of its being doubtful, he may afterwards adopt 
it again, when he has had proof of its truth ; and besides, though 
it were conceded that nothing can be learned from former knowledge, 
yet at least another way lies perfectly open, viz. that with which 
he is not yet familiar, but which study and observation will make 
plain. But here my friend constructs for himself a pretended 
opponent, who not only admits that the former road is closed, but 
himself shuts the second with the dictum : I do not know that the 
things you mention exist. This is as if no new knowledge of 
existence could be acquired and the absence of this precluded all 
acquaintance with the essential nature of things. But this is surely 
the stupidest notion possible. Still it contains an allusion to my 
words, for I wrote that the knowledge I have of a thing which 
I know to exist cannot depend on the knowledge of what I do not 
yet know to exist 1 . He, however, ridiculously transfers this, which 
I enunciated merely about the present, to the future, in the same 
way as if he were to conclude that because we cannot yet behold 
those who are not yet born, but will be born this year, we shall 
never be able to see them. For surely it is highly evident that 
the knowledge we now possess of a thing which is known as 
existing, does not depend upon the knowledge of that which is 
not yet known as existing. For the very reason that if anything 
is perceived as belonging to something that exists, of necessity it 
also is perceived to exist. But with the future the case is quite 
different, because nothing prevents my knowledge of a thing which 
I know to exist being increased by other facts which I do not yet 
know to exist, but shall finally learn just when I perceive them to 
pertain to that thing. My critic however proceeds to say, Keep up 
hope ; some day you will find out ; and next, / shan't allow you to 
remain long in doubt. Now by these words he bids us expect 
either that by the way proposed it is impossible to arrive at any 
further knowledge ; or certainly, if he suppose that his opponent 
has closed that route against him (which, however, would be 

1 Cf. Med. ii, vol. i, p. 152. 



310 Objections VII 

foolish), that he will open another. But all that he adds is : Yotf 
know who you are indeterminately and confusedly, not deterv&tfately 
and dearly. Now the most natural inference to draw from tKese 
words is that there is a way to further knowledge open to us, 
because by meditation and observation we are able to bring about 
a change from mere indeterminateness and confusedness in our 
knowledge to clearness and deteraiinateness. Nevertheless he thus 
concludes, the words Determinately, Indeterminately furnish adilemma 
that will hep us at a standstill a whole century long 1 , and conse- 
quently we must look out for some new route. To me it seems 
that he could have devised nothing better calculated to simulate 
an appearance of foolishness and weakness on the part of his own 
understanding. 

You say, 1 1 am,' / deny it You proceed : ' I think. ' / deny it, 
etc. Here he returns once more to do battle with the former shade, 
and thinking that he has felled it to the ground at the first assault, 
he boastfully exclaims : It is quite a notable exploit, at one blow I 
have cut myself adrift from everything. But seeing that this shadow 
takes its origin from his own brain and cannot perish unless he die 
along with it, even though felled to the ground, it revives. It puts 
its hand to its heart, and swears that it is, that it exists. My critic, 
softened by this new style of entreaty, graciously permits it to live, 
to collect its spirits for the last time and give vent to much futile 
babble. This he does not refute, but on the contrary gets on 
friendly terms with it and passes on to other pleasantries. 

He begins by scolding it in the following words : Shortly before, 
just a few steps back, you asked what you were : Now not only do 
you Jcnoio who you are, but you ham a clear and distinct concept of 
that^. Next he asks to be shown that concept, so clear and distinct 
as it is, in order that he may fashion himself anew from one glimpse 
of it. Then he pretends that it is disclosed to him in the following 
words : I certainly Jcnow that I am, that I think, that I exist as a 
thinking substance. The -matter is finished*. That this is not 
adequate he proves by the following example : you Jcnow also that 
no mountain exists without a valley, therefore you have a dear and 
distinct concept of a mountain without a valley 4 . He interprets 
this in the following way : That concept of yours is clear because 
you are quite certain in your knowledge ; it is distinct because you 
are aware of nothing else. And thus the clear and distinct concept 
that you form is due to the fact that it represents to you that a 
1 Cf. p. 300. 2 Of. p. 301, par. 3. Cf. p. 302, par. 1. 4 Cf: Ibid. par. 4. 



Objections VII 311 

jinking substance exists, no attention being paid to the body, the 
soulfr 4he mind', or to anything else, but merely to the fact that it 
exists. Finally lie resumes the military frame of mind and imagines 
he sees these massed battalions and reserves in dense and serried 
formation, which our new Alexander will shatter with a breath, 
As the winds scatter the leaves or tufts of thatch 1 , 

and so no survivor will be left to tell the tale. With his first breath 
he utters the following words : The argument ivhich reasons from 
knowledge to existence is not valid 2 . At the same time he flourishes 
like a standard a table in which he has given a description of 
thinking substance according to his own pleasure. With his second 
breath the following comes out : Determinately, indeterminately. 
Distinctly, confusedly. Explicitly, implicitly. In the third place 
we have : The argument that wants too much in its conclusion gets 
nothing at all. Finally here in his last' deliverance : / know that 
I exist as a thinking substance, and nevertheless I do not yet know 
that the mind exists. Therefore the knowledge of my existence does 
not depend upon my knowledge of existing mind. Therefore since 
I am, and the mind does not exist, I am not a mind. Therefore I 
am a body*. On hearing this the shade keeps silence, retreats, 
gives up hope and allows him to lead it captive in triumph. Here 
I could point out much that is worthy of undying laughter, but 
I prefer to spare my Actor-friend's cloth ; indeed I believe that it 
hardly becomes me myself to keep up mirth long about such trifles. 
Wherefore here I shall note only such matters as perhaps some 
people might believe I admitted (though they are remote from the 
truth), if I said nothing at all about them. 

First of all I deny that he has any right to complain, alleging 
that I said I had a clear and distinct concept of myself before I 
had sufficiently explained how that is attained, seeing that, to use 
his words, / had asked .who I was just a few steps back. For 
between these two points I recounted all the properties of ,a thing 
which thinks, viz. intelligence, will, imagination, memory, and 
feeling, etc., as well as all the other properties popularly remarked' 
which do not belong to its concept, in order that I might distinguish' 
the one set from the other. Now this could not be hoped for except' 
upon the removal of our prejudices. Yet I admit that people who 
do not divest themselves of their prejudices can, with difficulty ever! 

1 'Cf. Plautus, Mil. i. 1, 17, Quasi ventus folia, aut paniculam tectoriam. 
But D. reads panicula tectoria, 

2 Ct p. 303, par. 2. 3 Cf. p. 304, 



312 Objections VII 

attain to a clear and distinct idea of anything. For it is manifest- 
that those concepts which we possessed in childhood were not? dear 
and distinct ; and that hence, unless they are deposed from thsir 
place, they will render obscure and confused any that we subse- 
quently acquire. Therefore when he wishes to be shown that dear 
and distinct concept in order that he may fashion himself anew by 
seeing it 1 , he is trifling; as also when he introduces me as revealing 
it to him in the words : I certainly know that I am, etc. But when 
he wishes to refute that trifling account of the matter by the 
following example : You also know with certainty that no mountain 
exists without a valley; therejore you haw a clear and distinct 
concept oj a mountain without a valley, he deceives himself with a 
fallacy* For from the preceding words he can only conclude: 
Therefore you clearly and distinctly perceive that no mountain exists 
without a valley, but not : you have a concept oj a mountain without 
a valley. For since no such concept exists we do not need to 
possess it, in order to perceive that there is no mountain without 
a valley. But, forsooth; he has such a happy talent, that he is 
unable to refute the very futilities he has constructed without 
employing fresh ones. 

When afterwards he says that / conceive thinking substance, but 
conceive nothing corporeal, nothing spiritual, etc. I admit this so 
far as corporeal substance is concerned, because I had previously 
explained what I meant by the term body or corporeal; viz. what 
is extended, or in the concept of which extension is contained. 
But it is most stupid of him to say what he does in the next words 
about spiritual substance ; and so it is in many other places, where 
he represents me as saying : / am a thinking thing, but not body, 
not soul, not mind 2 , etc. For I can deny of a thinking thing only 
those matters in whose concept I find no thought contained ; but 
that this holds with the soul 3 or with the mind I have never main- 
tained in my writings or thought. 

Again when afterwards he says that he understands my meaning, 
and that I think my concept is clear because I am quite certain in 
my knowledge, and that it is distinct because I am aware of nothing 
else, he pretends to be very slow of apprehension. For to perceive 
clearly is one thing, to know with certainty another ; for we now 
know many things with certainty not only by means of faith which 
is the gift of God, but also because we have perceived them clearly 
before, and yet we do not at the present clearly perceive them. 

1 Cf. p. 301, par. 3. 2 Of. p. 302 sub fin. . s de animo. 



Objections VII 313 

.Moreover, the knowledge of other things by no means prevents 
ou^ cognition of any particular thing from being distinct. I have 
Bsver given the least occasion in my writings for such absurd 
inferences. 

Besides, his dictum : The argument which reasons from know- 
ledge to existence is not valid 1 , is plainly false. For although from 
the fact that we know the essence of any particular thing, it does 
not follow that it exists ; nor from the fact that we think that we 
know a thing does it follow that that is, if there is a possibility of 
our being deceived : nevertheless the argument from knowledge to 
existence is quite valid, because it is impossible to know anything, 
unless it really is as we know it. We either know it as existent if 
we perceive it to exist, or as of this or that nature, if only its 
nature is known to us. 

It is likewise false, or at least affirmed by him without the least 
reason, that some thinking substance is divisible*, as he has it in 
that table in which he brings forward the diverse species of thinking 
substance, as though instructed by an oracle. For we cannot at all 
understand extension or divisibility on the part of thought, and 
it is quite absurd to affirm as true with a single word what has 
neither been revealed by God, nor is grasped by the intellect. 
Here I cannot conceal my opinion that his doctrine of the divisi- 
bility of thinking substance seems to me very dangerous and quite 
opposed to the Christian religion. For as long as anyone admits it, 
he will never by force of reasoning acknowledge the real distinctness 
between the human soul and the body. 

The words Determinately, indeterminately; Distinctly, confusedly; 
Explicitly, implicitly, standing alone, as they do here, have no 
meaning at all. They seem to be merely pretences employed by 
my Critic when he wishes to persuade his pupils, though he has 
nothing valuable to say, that he has, nevertheless, much that is 
valuable in his thought. 

Likewise his other dictum : The argument which wants too much 
in its conclusion gets nothing at all, ought not to be admitted 
without drawing a distinction. For if by the expression too much 
is meant only something in excess of what was sought, as when 
beneath 3 he objects to the arguments by which I have demonstrated 
the existence of God, because he thinks that their conclusion 
contains more than the laws of prudence require, or any mortal 
demands, his contention is false and absurd; because the more 

1 Of. p. 303, par. 2. 2 cf. Ibid. 3 Cf. Eeply 4, p. 320. 



314 Objections VII 

there is in the conclusion, so long as it is rightly inferred, the better 
is it, and no laws of prudence can ever be opposed to this. <"5ut 
if by the expression too much he means not simply something moie 
than was sought, but something incontrovertibly false, then indeed 
what he says is true. But the Reverend Father makes a great 
mistake in attempting to foist anything like this on me. For when 
I wrote : ' The knowledge of the things which I know to exist, does 
not depend on the knowledge of the things which I do not yet 
know to exist ; and yet I know that a thing which thinks exists, 
and do not as yet know that body exists ; therefore the knowledge 
of a thing which thinks does not depend on the knowledge of the 
body 1 ,' I inferred nothing excessive and nothing incorrect. But 
when he assumes the statement : / know that a thinking thing 
exists, and I do not yet know that mind exists ; nay, no mind exists, 
nothing exists, everything has been renounced, he assumes something 
quite nonsensical and false. For I cannot affirm or deny anything 
of mind, unless I know what I understand by the term mind ; and 
I can understand none of the things which that term customarily 
signifies in which thought is not contained. Thus it is a contra- 
diction for anyone to know that a thinking thing exists and not to 
know that mind or some part at least of what is signified by the 
term mind, exists. The words that my critic puts at the end: 
Nay, no mind exists, nothing exists, everything has been renounced, 
is so absurd as not to deserve any answer. For since subsequently 
to our renunciation we have acknowledged the existence of a thing 
which thinks, the acknowledgment of the existence of mind goes 
along with that (at least in so far as this is the term that stands 
for a thing which thinks) ; consequently we have no longer re^ 
nounced it. 

Finally when he commences his application of formal syllogism 
to the argument and lauds that as a method of regulating the reason* 
opposed to mine, he apparently wishes to prove that I do not favour 
the syllogistic forms, and that hence the Method I possess is highly 
irrational. But this is false, as is clear enough from my writings, 
in which I have nowhere refused to employ syllogisms when the 
situation demanded such treatment 

Here he brings forward a syllogism constructed out of false 

premises, which he asserts to be mine but which I deny time and 

again. For as to the major: nothing which is such that we can 

doubt ichether it exists, actually exists, it is so absurd that I have no 

1 Of. Med. IT. p. 152. 2 Of. p. 304, par. 1. 



Objections VII 315 

^ fear of his being able to persuade others that I am its author, unless 
he^ffnds people whom he can at the same time persuade that I am 
riot of sound mind. Nor can I sufficiently admire the sage counsel, 
the faith, the hope and the confidence with which he has undertaken 
this. Thus in the first Meditation, in which I was concerned not with 
the establishment of any truth, but only with the removal of preju- 
dices, after showing that those opinions in which I had been 
accustomed to place the highest confidence could be considered as 
doubtful, and that hence I must withhold assent from them no 
less than from what was openly false, lest I might meet with any 
impediment in my search for truth, I added these words : c But it 
is not yet sufficient to have noticed this; I must take care to bear 
it in mind. For our customary opinions keep continually coming 
back and, almost against my will, seize on my credulity, which is, as 
it were, enslaved to them by long usage and the law of familiarity. 
Nor shall I ever get out of the habit of assenting to and trusting 
them, so long as I assume them to be such as they really are, viz. 
in some sense indeed doubtful, as has already been shown, but none 
the less very probable, and such that it is much more reasonable to 
believe them than to deny them. Wherefore I imagine I shall not 
act amiss if / change my attitude to its complete contrary and, 
deceiving myself, pretend for a time that they are altogether fake 
and imaginary > until at length I shall as it were equally balance the 
weight of my respective prejudices, and my judgment will no longer 
be dominated by bad usage or turned away from the right knowledge 
of the truth 1 .' Out of this passage our Author has chosen the 
following words, neglecting the others: 'opinions in some sense 
doubtful' 'change my attitude to its complete contrary] and 
' pretend that tJiey are in some sense doubtful! Besides, in place 
of the word pretend he has substituted affirm, believe, and shall so 
believe as to affirm as true the contrary of that which is doubtful. 
He has tried to make out that this is as it were a dictum or an 
absolute rule which I always used, not for the purpose of getting rid 
of prejudices, but for laying the foundation of the most certain and 
accurate metaphysics. Firstly, nevertheless, he has brought this 
forward only with hesitation and surreptitiously, viz. in pars. 2 and 
3 of his first Question 2 . Nay, in that third paragraph, after assuming 
that according to my rule he ought to believe that 2 and 3 do not 
make 5 he asks whether he should therefore so believe that, as to 
persuade himself that it cannot be otherwise 3 . After several feints 
1 Of. Med. i, vol. i, -p. 148. 2 Of. pp. 2635. - 3 Cf. p. 264, par. 2. 



316 Objections VII 

and some superfluous talk he introduces me as thus finally replying 
to this absurdest of all questions : you will neither affirm nor 
you will employ neither, and will treat both as false 1 . Now 
words, attributed to me by himself, show clearly that he knew quite 
well that I did not believe as true the contrary of what is doubtful, 
and that according to my opinion no one could use that as the 
major premise of a syllogism from which a certain conclusion is to 
be expected. For the two things are contradictory, viz. neither to 
affirm nor deny, i.e. to employ neither, and the affirmation and use 
of one of them as true. But gradually he forgets those things that 
he had related as being my assertions, and not only affirms the 
opposite but insists upon it so often, that this forms practically the 
unique object of his attack throughout the whole of his dissertation; 
all the twelve errors which, from this point onwards to the end he 
makes out to have been committed by me, are constructed by him 
out of this alone. 

This forces me to the conclusion that both here where he affirms 
as my belief this major premise : nothing which is such that I can 
doubt whether it exists actually exists , and in all other passages where 
he attributes to me anything of the kind, it is clearly proved that, 
unless I am quite ignorant of the meaning of the verb to lie, he is 
lying without excuse or speaking contrary to his mind and conscience, 
And although I am very unwilling to use such a discourteous word, 
yet the defence of the truth which I have undertaken requires this 
of me, and thus I shall not refuse to call by its proper name what 
he does not blush to do so openly. And since in the whole of this 
treatise he does little else than try and persuade the reader of, and 
enforce upon him, this identical foolish falsehood expressed in an 
immense variety of ways, I fail to see any other excuse for him than 
that perhaps he has so often repeated the same thing, that gradually 
he has persuaded himself that it is true and no longer recognizes it 
as a fabrication of his own. Next as to the minor premise : Every 
body is such that I can doubt whether it easists\ or: Every mind is 
such that I can doubt whether it exists*; if this is understood to 
apply to any time whatsoever indefinitely, as it must be understood 
if it is to yield him his conclusion, it is also false and I decline to 
own it. For immediately after the beginning of the second Medi- 
tation, when I said with certainty that there existed a thinking 
thing, which in popular usage is called mind, I could no longer 
doubt that mind existed. Similarly after the sixth Meditation, in 
1 Cf. p. 265, par. 4. 2 Cf. p. 304 9. s Of. Ibid. 



Objections VII 317 

which I ascertained that the body existed, I could no longer doubt 
its^ existence. What a colossal intellect our author has ! He has 
wth supreme art devised two false premises such that a false 
conclusion follows from them in good form ! But I don't understand 
why he here ascribes sardonic laughter to me, since in his Disserta- 
tion I found merely a source of pleasure, not indeed of an intense 
kind, but quite real and genuine. The reason is that, in criticizing 
so many things for which I am not responsible but which are 
fictitiously ascribed to me, he clearly shows that he has left no 
stone unturned, in order to find something meriting censure in my 
writings and has found nothing at all. 

But certainly it is made sufficiently clear that the humour he has 
shown up to this time has not been heartfelt, both by the serious 
onslaught with which he concludes this section, and especially by the 
succeeding replies, in which he is not only gloomy and severe, but 
even quite cruel. To account for this we must note various things. 
To begin with he has no cause for hatred and has found nothing to 
censure except that single absurdity which with such prudence and 
insight he foisted on me, and which a little before I could only 
characterize as being a lie. Yet he thinks that he has now completely 
convinced the reader that I believe that. (True this cannot be by 
force of reasoning, since reasons he has none. But in the first place 
he relies on his admirable assurance in affirmation, which, in a man 
who makes a peculiar profession of piety and Christian charity, is 
never deemed capable of being exercised in support of a falsehood to 
so colossal, so shameless an extent. Secondly, he employs a pertina- 
cious and reiterated repetition of the same assertion, and this often 
brings it about that the custom of hearing what we know to be false, 
produces the habit of believing those things to be true. These two 
devices then are wont to have more influence than all the weight of 
argument among the vulgar and all who do not examine things 
carefully.) So now he haughtily insults the man he has vanquished 
and scolds me as a solemn pedagogue might lecture his pupil, and 
in the following heated replies holds me guilty of sins more in 
number than the ten commandments. But we must excuse the 
Reverend Father, as he seems to be no longer master of himself. 
Just as people who have drunk too much are wont to see two 
objects instead of one, so he in excess of charitable zeal, finds in a 
single statement of his own fashioned contrary to his mind and 
conscience, twelve charges to make against me. These I ought to 
style nothing but abuse and calumny were I not ashamed here to 



318 Objections VII 

speak openly and without disguising my words. But, believing 
that now it is my .turn to jest, I shall call them hallucinations 
merely, and beg the Eeader to remember that there is not the lea$b 
word in his criticisms of me which follow in which he has not been 
suffering from delusion. 

REPLY 1 . 

Reply 1. The Method is jaulty in its principles. They are 
both non-existent and infinite. Other systems, in order to evolve 
the certain from the certain, do indeed posit, clear, evident and 
innate principles, e.g. The whole is greater than its part; out of 
nothing, nothing comes, and a great variety oj this type, on which 
they rely when mounting upwards and pressing onwards safely to the 
truth. But this method proceeds on other lines and in its attempt to 
get something, not out of something else but out of nothing, cuts off, 
renounces and forswears its principles one and all; it changes our 
attitude towards them completely, but lest in its flight it should seem 
to Iiave no wings to propel it, it assumes new ones, ivhich like Icarus 
it fixes on with wax, and posits novel principles wholly contrary to 
our old beliejs. It drops its old prejudices only to adopt new ones; it 
lays aside certainties in order to assume what is doubtful. Wings it 
has, but waxen; it soars aloft only to fall. It labours to construct 
something out of nothing and ends in achieving nothing at all. 

Reply 2. The Method is jaulty in respect of the means it employs. 
It has none, forsooth, though at the same time it takes away our 
previous instruments; nor does it bring any to occupy their place. 
Other systems have logical formulae and syllogisms and sure methods 
of reasoning, by following which, like Ariadne's clue, they find 
their way out oj labyrinths and easily and safely unravel matters 
that are intricate. But this new method on the contrary disfigures 

/ / y 

the old formula, while at the same time it grows pale at a new danger, 
threatened by an evil Spirit of its invention, dreads that it is dreaming, 
doubts whether it is in a delirium. Offer it a syllogism ; it is scared, 
at the major, whatsoever that may be. 'Perhaps,' it says, i that Spirit 
deceives me.' The minor ? It will grow alarmed and say it is 
doubtful. ' What if I dream ? How often have not things appeared 
certain and clear to a dreamer which, after the dream is over, have 
turned out to be false f What finally will the method say as to the 
conclusion ? It will shun all alike as though they were traps and 
snares. ( Do not delirious people, children, and madmen believe that 
1 Reply to the second Question, cf. p. 271. 



Objections VII 319 

^they reason excellently, though ivanting anything like sense and judg- 
me^l What if the same thing has happened to me ? What if that 
evil Spirit casts dust into my eyes ? He is evil, and I do not yet 
"know that God exists and is able to restrain that deceiver.' What 
will you do here? What is to be done, when that method will declare, 
and obstinately maintain, that the necessity of the conclusion is doubtful, 
unless you first know with certainty that you are neither dreaming 
nor crazy, but that God exists, is truthful, and has put that evil 
Spirit under restraint ? What is to be done when the method will 
repudiate both the matter and the form of this syllogism ? 'It is the 
same thing to say that something is contained in the concept or nature 
of some matter and to say that it is true of that matter. Yet 
existence, etc! What about other things of this kind? If you urge 
them, he will say: ' Wait until I know that God exists and till I see 
that evil Spirit in bonds! But you will reply: 'This has at least 
the advantage that, though it brings forward no syllogisms, it safely 
avoids all fallacies! That is capital; to prevent the child from 
having catarrh we shall remove its nose I Could other mothers have a 
better way of wiping their children's noses ? This leaves me therefore 
just one thing to say, viz. 'If you take away aliform nothing remains 
but the formless, the hideous! 

Reply 3. The Method has a flaw at the finish, for it attains no 
certainty. But certainty it cannot attain, while it itself closes 
against itself all the avenues to truth. You yourself have seen and 
experienced this in those Ulyssean ivanderings in which you have 
wearied both yourself and me your comrade. You contended that 
you were a mind, and possessed a mind. But you were not able to 
prove that at all, and stuck in quagmires and thickets, and indeed 
did so so often that I can scarcely recall the number of times. Yet 
it will be advantageous to tell them over again in order to give its 
proper strength and substance to this reply of mine. Here then are 
the chief heads of the suicidal procedure of the Method, of the way in 
ivhich it cuts itself off from all hope of attaining to the light of truth. 
1. You know not whether you are dreaming or waking, and ought 
not to give more credence to your thoughts and reasonings (if you 
really possess any, and do not merely dream that you possess them) 
than a dreamer puts in his. Hence everything is doubtful and un- 
certain and your very conclusions are insecure. I shall not adduce 
examples; go yourself and review the treasures of your memory and 
produce anything ivhich -is. not infected with that taint. I shall 
congratulate you if you do so. 2. Before I know that God exists to 



320 Objections VII 

restrain the evil Spirit, I ought to doubt everything and hold everything^ 
as altogether suspect. Or certainly, to follow the common philosophy 
and old method of reasoning, befow everything it must be determined 
whether there are and what are these really safe propositions, and we 
must instruct beginners to keep them in -mind. Hence just as in the 
former case, all are doubtful and wholly useless for the purpose of 
investigating the truth. 3. If there is anything that has the least 
doubt, change completely your attitude towards it and believe it to be 
false. Nay, believe the opposite and employ it as a principle. Hence 
I have shut up all avenues to the truth. For what do you hope from 
this: 'I have not a head; there is no body, no mind,' and a thousand 
other such statements ? Do not say that your renunciation has not 
been made in perpetuity, but is like a public vacation which has been 
instituted Jor a particular time, a month, or a fortnight, in order that 
everyone may give the more heed to its observance. For let it be so, 
let the renunciation be only temporary : yet it is at that time that you 
are in quest of the truth, it is then that you use, nay misuse, what 
you renounce, just as though the whole truth depended on that, and 
consisted in that as in something fixed and stable. 'But,' you say, 
'I employ this renunciation in order to make steady pedestal and 
column, as architects are wont to do. Do they not construct a 
temporary scaffolding and use it to hoist the column and establish 
it finally in its place, and then after this has discharged its function 
admirably break it up and take it away ? Why not imitate themf 
Imitate away, so Jar as I am concerned, but look out lest your 
pedestal and column lean so much upon your temporary scaffolding 
that th&y will fall if you remove it. It is this that seems to merit 
censure in your method. It reposes on false foundations, and it leans 
upon them so much that if they are removed it itself Jails to the 
ground. 

Reply 4. The Metlwd errs by going too far. That is to say it 
contrives to accomplish more than the laws of prudence require of it, 
more than any mortal demands. Some people indeed seek for a demon- 
stration of the existence of God and of the immortality of the human 
mind. But certainly no one has hitherto been found who has not thought 
that it is enough, if he knoivs that God exists, and that the world is 
governed by him, and that the souls of men are spiritual and immortal, 
with as much certainty as the statement that 2 and 3 make 5, or 
'/ have a head,' '/ have a body' ; and so have made anxiety about 
seeking for a higher truth superfluous. Besides, just as in the 
practical life there are assured limits of certainty which quite suffice 



Objections VII 321 

to allow everyone to conduct himself with prudence and in safety; so 
*ih thought and speculation there are definite boundaries, such that he 
w^o attains to them is certain. Nay, so certain is he that rightly, 
ivhen anything else in which others wish to attempt to push farther is 
either in a desperate case or wholly lost, lie prudently and safely falls 
in with the maxim: l No further, nothing too much? But you say, 
1 the glory is not a common one, viz. that of moving forivard the 
boundaries of knowledge, and forcing a passage ivhich no one in the 
centuries behind us has attempted! Certainly no praise would be too 
high for you, but to secure it you must effect your journey without 
coming to grief. Wherefore: 

Reply 5. There is an error of defect. That is to say, in 
straining too far it fails altogether. I -wish to take you alone as 
witness, you alone as judge. What haw you accomplished with all 
your magnificent appliances 1 Of what avail has been that pompous 
renunciation, so universal and so liberal, that you haw not spared 
ymr self anything indeed except the well-worn matrim I think, I am, 
I am a thinking thing ? / call it ivell worn, nay so familiar even 
to the common herd, that no one since t/ie beginning of the world 
has been found to doubt it even in the least degree, much less to 
demand seriously of himself a proof that he is, exists, thinks, and 
is a thinking thing. Consequently no one will give you any thanks, 
and quite rightly too, unless perhaps we take into account what I do 
in virtue of my friendship and singular good-will towards y<m, in 
approving of your sustained effort to confer a benefit on the human 
race, and praising your attempt. 

Reply 6. Your Method commits the common errw* of which it 
convicts remaining systems. Thus it is astonished that all mortals 
affirm and assert with such unimpaired confidence : ' / have a head, 
I possess eyes,' etc. Yet it is not astonished at itself saying with 
equal confidence : ' / have not a head, 7 etc. 

Reply 7. It has a vice peculiar to itself. Thus to the belief 
held with a certain amount of assurance (a sufficient amount} by 
other men: '1 Jiave a head, body exists, mind exists,' it with a 
design peculiar to itself opposes the contrary : ' / have not a head, 
there is no body, no mind,' not only as certain but as so certain that it 
can be taken as the foundation of an accurate Metaphysic. In fact 
it rests its weight on this so much that if you remove this prop it 
falls to the ground. 

Reply 8. Imprudence is one of its errors. Thus it does not 
notice that 'doubtful' is like a two-edged sword; while avoiding 
a. H. ii. 21 



322 Objections VII 

the one edge, it is wounded by the other. It is doubtful, according^ 
to the method, ( whether any body exists ' ; and since this is dowbfful 
it does away with it and ^)osits the opposite : ' there is no body? 
But imprudently leaning on this, which is itself doubtful, it comes by 
a wound. 

Reply 9. It errs also wittingly ; for with full consciousness and 
deliberation and though adequately warned, it blinds itself and 
voluntarily abandons things that are necessary fw an investigation 
of the truth. It finishes by deluding itself by its own Analysis, not 
only achieving what it does not intend, but even what it most fears. 

Reply 10. Sins of commission must be ascribed to it; it returns 
to its ancient opinions, though that has been forbidden by solemn 
edict ; and contrary to the laws of renunciation, it resumes what it 
lias renounced. It is enough for you to use your memory to be 
convinced of this. 

Reply 11. Sins of omission also are to be found in it. Fw it 
is not once merely that it transgresses that principle which it lays 
down as the basis of our thinking : The greatest care must be taken 
not to admit anything which we cannot prove to be true. It bare- 
facedly assumes as quite certain and gives no proof of the statements: 
Our senses sometimes deceive us ; we all dream ; some people go 
delirious, and other similar assertions. 

Reply 12. The Method contains either nothing sound, or nothing 
new ; at most it contains what is superfluous. 

For if it alleges that by its renunciation of the doubtful it means 
what is called that Metaphysical abstraction by which, what is 
doubtful is cmisidered only as doubtful and our mind is to that 
extent bidden shun that, (where anything certain is under investi- 
gation,*) and no more credence is given to the doubtful on that occasion 
than to what is false ; in that case what it says will be sound, but 
not at all new, wr will that abstraction be new, but old and common 
to all philosophers up to the last single one. 

If by that renunciation of what is doubtful it is meant that it 
must be set aside in the sense of being supposed and alleged to be 
false, and if the method treats the doubtful as false and its opposite 
as true ; what is said will be something new but not at all good, and 
though that renunciation will be-novel, it will be erroneous. 

If it alleges that by face and weight of reasoning it achieves the 
following result with certainty and clearness: ' I am a thinking 
thing and, in so far as a thinking thing, neither mind, s<wl\ nor 



Objections VII 323 

body, but a thing so much withdrawn from these that I can be com- 
prehmded, though these haw not yet been grasped, exactly as animal 
O'i sentient thing can be grasped, without our blowing what neighs, 
lows, etc., this will be something sound but not new at all. For this 
is a dictum preached everywhere from all the chairs of philosophy : 
it is taught in express ivo?*ds by everyone icho thinks that certain 
animated creatures think ; and, if thought comprise sense as well, 
so that everything which feels, sees and hears also thinks, all who 
believe that the brutes feel, i.e. all to the last man, are in agreement. 

But if the method declare that it has proved by valid and well- 
considered reasons that a thinking thing and substance 1 really exists, 
but that at the time of its existence the mind, the body, and the soul 
do not really exist ; in this case what it says will be new, but by no 
means sound, just as if it said that animals could exist without there 
being lions, foxes, etc. 

Another way to interpret this method is to suggest that the author 
says he thinks, i.e. understands, wills, imagines and feels, and thinks 
in such a way that he beholds and reviews Ms own thought by a 
reflex act. This will imply also that he thinks, or knows, or considers 
that he thinks (which truly is to be conscious and have consciousness 
of any activity}. And if it is maintained tlmt this is a property 
of a faculty or thing which has a position superior to matter, and 
is wholly spiritual, and that it is on this condition that we are mind' 
and spirit ; in this case the doctrine will be something not hitherto 
stated but which ought to haw been stated before. I was waiting for 
this to appear, and when I saw the efforts, futile as they were to 
produce it, I wanted time and time again to suggest it. To say this 
would be to say something sound, but nothing new, for we have been 
told it by our teachers and they by theirs, and one generation by the 
preceding, in my opinion, beginning with the creation of the race. 

If, then, this is tlie upshot, with what a superfluity of matter 
will we not be left ? What redundancy I What vain repetition ! 
What about those devices for securing glory and prestige ? To what 
purpose this talk about the deception of the senses, the illusion of 
dreamers, and the freaks of delirium 1 What an ending for that 
renunciation which was to be of such austerity that we were to be 
alloived to retain nothing but a mere scrap ? Why those journeys so 
.long and continuous to distant, shores, afar from the senses, amidst 
.shades and spectres? Finally, what will they do toivards establishing 

1 Se revera existere rem et substantiam cogitantem. But it is impossible in 
.English to personify the * Method ' to this extent. 

212 



324 Objections VII 

the existence of God, claiming as they do that it cannot stand unless 
everything in the universe is turned upside down? But wJ^fit r ts 
the reason for interpolating new opinions so often and to such %n 
extent in ord-er to lay aside the old, and then, after dismissing the 
new, assuming the old once more ? Perhaps just as the Good Goddess 1 
and Gaums* and others each had their own peculiar rites y so those 
new mysteries require new ceremonies ! But why has not the method, 
dropping all circumlocutions, expressed the truth neatly, clearly and 
briefly in a few words then?' I think, I lime consciousness of 
thought, therefore I am a mind'? 

Finally there is the interpretation that the method alleges that 
understanding, witting, imagining, feeling, i.e. thinking, are 
properties of the mind, in such a way that there are no animals 
at all except man, that think, imagine, feel, see, and hear etc. This 
doctrine will be new, but not sound. It will be indeed gratuitous, 
and thanklessly will it be received unless some chance preserve and 
rescue it (that is its last refuge}, appearing at its own time, like the 
god in the machine, a marvel for the gaping crowd. But how long 
have we given up any hope of that happening ? 

Last reply. Here I think you are fearful for your method, which 
you love so and which you c/ierish and treat as your own child. You 
fear lest, now that I have charged it with many sins, now that it 
shows flaws and threatens everywhere to collapse, I should deem that 
it ought to be thrown into the rubbish-heap. But don't be frightened. 
I am your friend. I shall overcome your apprehension, for I am 
not mistaken ; I shall keep silence and await events. I kww you 
and your keen and clear-sighted mental vision. When you have got 
some time for meditation, and especially when you have thought over 
your faithful Analysis in a secret retreat, you will shake off the 
dust from it, cleanse it anew, and place before our sight a well 
trimmed and refined Method. Meanwhile take this, and listen to me 
while I proceed to reply to your questions. I shall embrace in tliem 
many things which in my zeal for brevity I have lightly drawn 
together, such as, what concerns the mind, the true, the false, and 
similar topics. But you yourself repeat ivhat had escaped the 
prudent, and 

1 Bonae Deae the goddess of Chastity and Fertility. 

2 Descartes' critic has Co/wcii, which must be a mistake for Consi. Consus 
was another ancient Italian divinity. 



Objections VII 325 

THIRD QUESTION. 
WHETHER A METHOD CAN BE DEVISED ANEW. 

You ask, 3, whether** *, (The Reverend Father sent nothing more 
than this. When the rest were asked for, he replied that he had 
now no leisure for writing. But we made it a matter of scrupulous 
observance not to omit the least syllable of what he wrote). 

ANNOTATIONS. 

Whatever may be the nature of my Method of inquiry into 
truth, I should have deemed it sufficient to have reported this 
wonderful pronouncement upon it in order to expose its falsity 
and absurdity, if it had proceeded from an unknown individual. 
But the person who makes this attack holds a position of such 
eminence that it will be difficult for anyone to believe that he is 
either not in his right mind, or is extremely untruthful and 
slanderous and impudent. Consequently, in order to prevent his 
excessive authority prevailing against the manifest truth, I ask my 
readers to remember that above, in what preceded these replies, 
he has proved nothing or next to nothing against me, but has 
employed only silly quibbles in order to make out that my opinions 
were so ridiculous as not to need a reply. I want people to be 
quite clear about the fact that in these replies he does not indeed 
try to prove anything, but falsely assumes that everything which 
he fictitiously ascribes to me has already been proved by him. In 
order to appreciate the better the equity of his judgment they 
should remember that previously in his indictment he put things 
only in a jesting way, but now in his subsequent judgment he is 
at the extreme of seriousness and severity. Again in the first 
eleven replies he condemns me without hesitation and with a high 
hand, but finally in the twelfth he deliberates and distinguishes : 
If this is the interpretation, the method contains nothing new ; if 
that, nothing sound etc. Whereas, nevertheless, in every one of 
them he is treating merely of one and the same thing viewed in 
different ways ; and that is nothing but his own fabrication, a 
fabrication the absurdity and dullness of which I shall here set 
out by means of a simile. 

Everywhere in my writings I made it clear that my procedure 
was like that of Architects planning houses. In order to construct 
stable houses where the ground is sandy, and stone or clay or any 
other durable earthy matter is employed in building, they first 



326 Objections VII 

dig ditches and throw out of them the sand and whatever else Be 
on or is mixed with the sand, so that they may rest the foundations 
on firm soil. For so I, also, at first rejected everything doubtful, 
as they throw out the sand ; then perceiving that it is indubitable 
that a substance which doubted, i.e. which thought, existed, I used 
this as the rock on which I rested the foundations of my philosophy. 
But our critic is like a common mason who, wishing to be taken in 
his town for an expert craftsman, and on that account being very 
jealous of an Architect who was constructing a chapel there, 
eagerly sought for opportunities of criticising his art; but who 
being so poorly educated as not to be able to understand what it 
was to which the Architect trusted, ventured to assail nothing but 
the first and most obvious beginnings. Thus he noted that the 
first step was to dig a trench and remove not only the sand and 
loose earth, but any timber, stones etc. mixed up with the sand, in 
order to arrive at a hard stratum and there lay the foundation of 
the chapel. Besides, he has heard that the Architect, replying to 
questions about the reason for digging trenches, has said that the 
surface earth on which we stand is not stable enough for bearing 
the weight of large edifices; that sand is particularly unstable, 
because not only does it yield when a heavy weight presses on it, 
but also because a flow of water often bears it away, thus producing 
an unexpected collapse, of anything resting on it. Finally the 
Architect has related how when such subsidences occur, as they 
do from time to time, in mines, the miners are in the habit of 
ascribing their cause to spectres or evil spirits inhabiting the 
subterranean places. Our Workman then makes this an opportunity 
for pretending that the Architect takes their trenching operations 
to be equivalent to the construction of the chapel. He alleges 
that the Architect takes either the ditch or the rock uncovered at 
its base, or if anything is reared above this trench, that at least only 
if the trench itself meanwhile remain empty, to be all that requires 
to be done in the construction of the chapel ; and he says that the 
Architect himself is so foolish as to fear lest the earth on which he 
stands will give way under his feet or that ghosts will make it 
subside. Perhaps he manages to persuade a few children of this, 
or others so ignorant of the art of building that it seems to them 
novel and strange to dig trenches in order to lay the foundations of 
houses; and who readily believe a man whom they know and whom 
they Relieve to be well enough skilled in his trade and honest, 
touching an Architect whom they do not know and of whom they 



Objections VII 327 

*kave heard that he has as yet constructed nothing, but has merely 
du^*trenches. Then he becomes so well pleased with this figment 
of his that he becomes hopeful of persuading the whole world of 
its truth. And although the Architect has now had all the trenches 
previously excavated filled with stones, and has erected his chapel 
on the top } and employed the hardest building material, and has 
built most securely and called on everyone to look and see, our 
Workman nevertheless sticks to his old idea and still hopes to get 
people one and all to believe his nonsense. To this end he stands 
daily in the public streets making -sport of the Architect to the 
passing throng. And this is the style of his argument : 

Firstly he introduces his opponent ordering the digging of 
trenches and the removing from them not. only of sand but also 
of everything lying among or resting upon the sand, even though 
it were unhewn boulders, even squared stones ; in a word it appears 
that everything must be removed, nothing whatsoever left. He lays 
great stress upon those words, nothing, everything, even unhewn 
boulders, even stones. At the same time he feigns that he wants to 
learn that art of building from the Architect, and that he would 
like to descend with him into those trenches. / beg you to conduct 
me through them yourself, he says. Come express your mind ; you 
haw either a comrade or a pupil to whom to show the way. What 
do you bid me do ? Though it is new to me and, since I am not 
accustomed to its obscurity, to be dreaded, I am quite willing to enter 

that route I hear you reply ; you bid me do what I see you do, to 

plant my steps where you put yours. That is certainly an excellent 
way of commanding and leading me 1 How well you let me think of 
you. I am ready 1 . 

Next pretending that he is in dread of the spectres that lurk in 
these underground excavations, he tries to provoke the mirth of the 
spectators by the following words : But will you substantiate this 
for me, so that I shall not be in fear, shall have no apprehensions 
about that evil spirit ? Certainly though you may try to strengthen 
me in any way you please, it is not without extreme fear that I 
descend into this darkness*. Again, shortly afterwards, he exclaims: 
But what haw I done ? I have been forgetful of what I promised to 
do. I had committed myself entirely to you at the beginning, had 
wwed myself your ally and disciple, and here I am hesitating at the 
wry outset, timid and obstinate. Pray forgive me 1 I have sinned 

1 Cf, p. 272. 

2 A paraphrase of p. 275, middle. 



328 Objections VII 

greatly and have merely shown the smallness of my intelkctuc r 
capacity. It was my duty to have laid aside all fear and to plfinye 
boldly into that subterranean gloom ; but I haw been unwilling and 
have resisted 1 . 

In the third place lie represents the Architect as showing him 
the stone or rock in the bottom of the ditch on which he wishes his 
whole edifice to repose. He greets them with jeers : Splendid, my 
good friend ! You have found the point that Archimedes wanted to 
discover : there is no doubt that if you so please you will be able to 
move the world ; look now, it all begins to sway and tremble. But, 
I beg you (for I have no doubt you wish to prune things down so that 
there shall be nothing in your science which is not apt, coherent and 
necessary)^ why have you let this stone remain ? Did you not wder 
the removal of all stones along with the sand ? But perhaps it was 
by chance that you let this pass : it is so difficult even for an expert 
to forget altogether the things to which we have been accustomed 
since childhood, that a slip on the part of a raw hand like me if it 
chance to occur is hardly likely to be thought ill of", etc. Further, 
the Architect having collected some broken stones along with the 
sand that had been thrown out of the trenches in order to use these 
materials for building, his critic thus assails him with derision : 
Shall I dare, before you push onwards, to ask why you, the man 
who with such solemn declarations, rejected all broken stones as not 
being sufficiently stable, want to inspect them again as if you hoped 
to get something good out of that rubble*? etc. Nay, since every- 
thing you rejected a little time ago was weak and threatening to 
collapse (otherwise why did you set it aside T) how does it come about 
that the same things are now not weak and on the point of collapsed 
Again shortly afterwards he says : Here again suffer me to admire 
the devices you employ, you who, in order to establish the certain, 
employ the uncertain; who, in order to bring us into the light, bid 
us plunge into darkness 5 , etc. At this point he talks away in a very 
silly fashion about the designations and duties of Architect and 
Workman respectively and he contributes nothing to the discussion, 
except that, by confusing the meaning of the terms, he is less able 
to distinguish the one from the other. 

The fourth episode finds both standing in the bottom of the 



1 An almost literal reproduction of p. 275 sub fin. and p. 276, 1. 6. 

2 A paraphrase of p. 280, 11. 517. 

3 Cf. ibid. par. 4. 4 Ibid, infra. 
5 A variant of p. 281, 11. 36. 



Objections VII 329 

pencil. The Architect thereupon attempts to begin the construction 
of has wall. But in vain ; for at the very outset when he wants to 
lay a squared stone there at the base, the Workman at once reminds 
him that he had ordered the removal of all stones, and that it was 
hence inconsistent with the rules of his art to lay down this one. 
This reminder, then, prevailing with him like an Archimedian 
demonstration forces him to desist from work. And next when lie 
begins to use rough stones or bricks, or slaked lime mixed with 
sand, or any other material, the Workman keeps on inveighing : 
'You have rejected everything; you have retained nothing,' and 
repeating the words Nothing, Everything etc. as though they were 
incantations, he succeeds in destroying all the Architect's handi- 
work, The harangue he made was so like what we find above in 
paragraphs 5 and 9, that there is no need to report his words here. 
- The final and fifth scene shows him, when he sees a large enough 
crowd collected round him, adopting a new tone, and changing his 
comic jocosity for the severity of tragedy ; he wipes the plaster from 
his face and, with a serious countenance and a censorious voice, 
enumerates and condemns all the Architect's errors (those forsooth 
which he supposes he has shown in the previous acts). I shall 
recount the whole of this judgment of his just as he stated it at 
the final incident where he acted his pretty play before the 
crowd ; and this I shall do in order to show how my critic has 
imitated his workman prototype. The latter pretends that the 
Architect has asked him to pronounce judgment on his art, and 
he replies in the following way. 

In t/ie first place, your Art makes a mistake about the founda- 
tions. They are both non-existent and infinite. Other metltods 
indeed of constructing houses lay very stable foundations, e.g. of 
squared stones, bricks, rough rock, and countless similar stibstances, 
reposing on ivhich the walls mount upwards. But your method 
proceeds quite otherwise and, in its attempt to get something > not 
out of something but out of nothing, it tears doivn, digs up, and 
casts away every scrap of the old foundations. It changes its 
attitude completely but, lest in its flight it should seem to haw 
no wings to propel it, like Icarus it assumes new ones and fixes 
them on with wax. It lays down new foundations entirely the 
opposite of the old ones ; but in so doing it avoids the instability of 
the previous basis only by incurring a new weakness. It upsets ichat 
is firm in wder to rely on what is weak ; it employs wings, but 
waxen ones. It rears a mansion to the skies, but only to have it 



330 Objections VII 

fall. Finally it labours to construct something out of nothing 
ends by achieving nothing at all 1 . 

Now the very church alone which the Architect has already 
built proves that all this is the silliest of nonsense. For it is 
quite clear that in it the foundations have heen most firmly laid, 
and that the Architect has destroyed nothing which was not worthy 
of destruction ; and that he has never departed from the precepts 
of others unless he had some better plan ; that the building soars 
to a great height without threatening to fall ; finally that he has 
constructed not out of nothing, but out of the most durable 
material, not nothing, but a stable and well-built church to the 
glory of God. But all this together with the other matters in 
which my critic has suffered from delusions, can be seen clearly 
enough from the Meditations alone which I published. But there is 
no reason to impugn the writer's historical knowledge (from whom 
I took the "Workman's words) because he introduced his popular 
critic as attributing wings to Architecture, as well as much else 
that seems hardly to be in harmony therewith. For probably this 
was intentional and it was meant thereby to show how agitated he 
was when he uttered such things. And certainly all such similes 
are equally out of place when talking of the Method of inquiring 
into truth, though my critic nevertheless employs them. 

The second reply was : The Architect's procedure is wrong in 
respect of the means it employs. It is forsooth possessed of none, 
though at the same time it removes our previous instruments ; and 
it brings none to occupy their place. Other arts of this kind employ 
a rule, a level and a plumb line ; and employing these to extricate 
themselves from a labyrinth of difficulties, they manage with ease and 
exactitude to build together masses of rock however shapeless. But 
this, on the contrary, disfigures the old shape of buildings, though 
at the same time it grows pale with a new fear, pretending that 
subterranean ghosts threaten it, and in terror lest the earth subside 
and the sands disperse. Set up your column; ivhatever that be, 
your art will be apprehensive at the laying of the pedestal and base. 
* Perhaps, it says, 'the ghosts will cast the column down.' It will 
be anxious and say the pillar is weak What if it is only gypsum 
and not marble ? Row often Iiave other things appeared to us to be 
strong and firm which afterwards, when we came to try them, were 
found, to be easily broken ? What then will happen when we come 
to the crown, of the column 1 Your new method will avoid everything 
1 Of. p. 818. 



Objections VII 331 

8ft all times like snares and traps. Have not bad Architects often 
constructed other buildings which, though they thought them strong, 
came down of their own accord ? What if this style is subject to 
the same contingency ? Suppose the spectres disturb the soil ? They 
are evil. Nor have I known any foundation laid on so firm a rock 
that the spectres are unable to do anything to overturn it. What 
. will you do here ? What, when your art will declare and obstinately 
maintain that the durability of the crown of the column is doubtful, 
unless you previously know with certainty, that the column neither 
consists of fragile material nor rests on the sand, but is based on 
solid rock, rock which the underground spirits are unable ever to 
overturn ? What, when it will repudiate both the matter and the 
form of this column ? (Here with a jocular audacity he produced a 
representation of one of these very columns which the Architect had 
set up in his chapel.) What about ot/ier things of this kind? If 
you urge them he will say, * Wait till I know that there is a rock 
beneath me and that no ghosts can ever overturn it.' But you will 
reply, c This has at least the advantage that, though it sets up no new 
pillars, it safely avoids constructing any wrongly.' That is a capital 
preventive of the, child's catarrh etc., as above 1 . I will not continue, 
as the rest is too coarse for repetition. So I ask the reader to 
compare the present replies with the similar versions of which my 
critic is the author. 

Now this reply like the preceding is convicted of the most 
impudent falsehood hy the existence itself of the chapel in question, 
since there were in it many strong columns, among them that very 
one, the picture of which the Workman displayed, making out that 
the Architect had repudiated it. In the same way my writings 
definitely settle the fact that I do not cast aspersions on the 
syllogism and deface its ancient form ; I have used it in my writings 
wherever there was need. Among other syllogistic arguments he 
has extracted from fc my works that very one of which he here 
pretends that I reject both the matter and the form. For it will 
be found at the end of the reply to the First set of Objections, in 
Proposition 1, where I prove the existence of God. Moreover I" 
cannot see what is his purpose in making this fabrication, unless 
perhaps he wishes to hint that everything which I have propounded 
as true and certain is in conflict with that renunciation of doubtful 
beliefs with which alone he wishes to identify my Method. Now 
this is just the same as, and not less childish and silly than, if the 

* Cf. pp. 318, 819. 



332 Objections VII 

Workman were to pretend that the digging out of the trench for tta 
purpose of laying the foundation of houses was the whole cTf the 
architect's art, and if he complained that anything the Architect 
constructed was in disagreement with that excavation. 

The third reply was : Your art Ms a flaw at the finish) for if 
end* by comtructiny nothing stable. But stability "it cannot secure, 
since it itself closes against itself all avenues towards that end. You 
yourself have seen and experienced this in these Ulyssean wandering* 
in which you have wearied both yourself and me your companion. 
You contended that you were an Architect or were possessed of f/ir 
Architect's art. But you -were unable to prove that at all, and #tud" 
in quagmires and thickets, and indeed did so so often that I can 
scarcely recall the number of times. Yet it irill be advantageous to 
fell them, over again noic in order to yice its proper substance and 
strength to this reply of mine. Here then are the chief heads of th* 
suicidal procedure of your art, of the way in which it cuts itself / 
from all hope of securing its end. 1. You hwv: not whether 
beneath the surface there is sand or rock and therefore you ought not 
to trust to rod" more than to sand (if in spite of all you do some 
time come to hare rod' beneath you). Hence everything is doubtful 
and uncertain. I shall not adduce examples. Go yourself and 
review the treasures of your memory and produce anything which /> 
not infected with that taint. I shall congratulate you if you do $>. 
2. Before I have found firm soil beneath which I know there is no 
sand and uith no underground spirits troubling it, I ought to reject 
everything and treat all materials in every way with suspicion. Or 
certainty to follow the old and common style of building, it must be 
determined whether there are and what are those materials which 
really ought not to be rejected, and the diggers ought to be instructed 
to leave those in the trench. Hence, just as in the former cases, every- 
thing is lacking in strength, and quite useless for the construction of 
buildings. 3. If there is anything in the lea$t liable to be upset, 
change completely your attitude towards it and believe it to have 
already fatten, nay believe it ought to be flung out of the trench, and 
use the empty trench, alone as a foundation. Hence I have shut up 
all the avenues leading to the completion of the building. For what 
do you hope from this : f There is no earth here, no sand, no stone, 1 
and a thousand other such statements ? Do not say that this excava- 
tion is not to go mi for ever but, like a public vacation which has been 
instituted for a set time, so this also is fvr a definite petiod and goes 
on until the trench is a certain depth corresponding to the depth of 



Objections VII 333 

the sand at the spot : Let it be so, let the excavation go on for a time 
5% kV et '' lt occurs at th e ti me during which you imagine that you 
we, building, at the time when you employ, nay misemploy the 
emptiness of the trench in your scheme, just as though the whole of 
the building art depended on that art and consisted in that as its 
stable foundation. 'But,' you say, / employ it in order to make 
steady pedestal and column as other Architects are wont to do. Do 
they not construct a temporary scaffolding and use it to hoist the 
column ? l ' 

Now in this none of the Workman's statements are more ridicu- 
lous than what is to be found in our Author's thought. What I 
have subsequently demonstrated proves that my rejection of doubtful 
beliefs no more precludes an attainment of knowledge of the truth, 
than the excavations which the Architect prescribes prevents him 
from constructing his chapel. Surely otherwise he ought to have 
noted something false or uncertain in my conclusions. But since 
he neither does this nor is able to do so, it must be confessed that 
he is suffering from a quite inexcusable delusion. I have not 
laboured more to prove that I, or a thinking thing was mind, 
than my opponent to prove that he was -an Architect. But our 
Author with all his toil and effort has certainly not here proved 
anything except that he has no mind, or at least that his mind is 
not of good quality. Neither from the fact that metaphysical 
doubt proceeds so far as to suppose that a man does not know 
whether he is dreaming or awake, does it follow that he can discover 
no certainty, any more than that because an Architect, when he 
begins digging operations, does not yet know whether he is to find 
rock or clay or sand or anything else beneath the surface, it follows 
that he will not be able to discover rock there, or that when he has 
found it he ought not to trust it. Nor from the fact that, before 
a man knows that God exists, he has an opportunity of doubting 
everything (viz. everything of which he does not have a clear, 
perception present in his mind, as I have a number of times set 
forth) does it follow that nothing is of avail in the pursuit of truth, 
more than it was a consequence of the Architect's getting every- 
thing turned out of the trench before firm soil was reached, that 
there x was no rubble or anything else in the trench which he might 
afterwards deem of use in laying the foundations. It was no stupider 
a mistake on the part of the Workman to say that the common 
and ancient style of Architecture forbade their being thrown out 
1 Of. pp. 319, 320. 



334 Objections VII 

of the trench and instructed the diggers to retain them, than 
it is for our Author both to say that before everything it nytst Ve 
determined whether there are and what are time really safe propojd- 
tions that are free from doubt (for how could they be determined by 
one whom we suppose as yet to know none ?), and in the same breath 
to assert that this is a precept of the common and ancient Philosophy 
(in which no such precept is found). Nor was it more crass stupidity 
on the part of the Workman to pretend that the Architect wanted 
to take an empty ditch as his foundation and that all this building 
depended upon doing so, than it was manifest raving on the part of 
my Critic to say that J employ the opposite of what is doubtful as a 
principle, that I abuse what I renounce ; just as though the whole 
truth depended on that, and consisted in that as in its stable founda- 
tion, unmindful of the words which he had above reported as mine ; 
you will neither affirm nor deny, you will treat both as false. Finally, 
in comparing the digging of a trench in order to lay a foundation 
to the setting up of a scaffolding, the Workman did not show his 
lack of knowledge to any greater extent than our author did in 
likening the renunciation of doubtful beliefs to this also. 

The fourth reply was : Your art errs by going too far. That is 
to say, it strives to accomplish more than the laws of prudence require 
of it, more than any mortal demands. Some people indeed seek to 
construct durable houses for themselves. But certainly no one has 
hitherto been found who has not thought it enough for him, if the 
house in which he lived were as firm as the earth which supports us, 
so that anxiety about seeking for a still greater strength is super- 
fluous. Besides, just as in walking there are certain conditions 
relative to the stability of the ground we tread on, which quite suffice 
to allow everyone to walk an it in safety, so in the building of houses 
there are certain limiting conditions, such that he who attains to them 
is certain, etc., 1 as above. 

Now though here it is unjust of the Workman to blame the 
architect, it is with still greater injustice that my critic blames me 
in the corresponding case. For it is true tbat in the construction 
of houses there are certain conditions implying less than absolute 
firmness of the ground, beyond which it is not worth our while 
proceeding, and these vary in proportion to the size and mass of 
the building we are constructing. For it is safe to build the lowlier 
class of cottages upon sand, the stability of which relative to their 
burden is as great as that of rock relative to high towers. But it 
1 Of. pp. 320, 321. 



Objections VII 335 

1 is utterly false that in laying the foundations of a philosophy there 
3,Ve a^ny such limits not reaching so far as full certainty, in which 
we, may prudently and safely acquiesce. For since truth consists 
in what is indivisible, it is possible that a matter whose complete 
certainty we do not recognize, however probable it appear, is 
wholly false. Certainly it would not be prudent philosophising on 
the part of a man who took as the foundation of his science state- 
ments which he knew to be possibly false. Indeed what answer 
will he make to the sceptics who overpass all the boundaries of 
doubt ? How will he refute them ? Oh, he will reckon them 
among the desperate or the lost ! Very fine indeed ; but meanwhile 
to what class will they assign him'? Neither must we think that" 
the sect of the sceptics is long extinct. It flourishes to-day as 
much as ever, and nearly all who think that they have some ability 
beyond that of the rest of mankind, rinding nothing that satisfies 
them in the common Philosophy, and seeing no other truth, take 
refuge in Scepticism. Those people are especially such as demand 
a proof to be given them of the existence of God and the immor- 
tality of the soul. Hence what our author here states constitutes 
a very bad example, especially as he has a name for great learning. 
It shows that he thinks there is no possibility of refuting the 
errors of the Sceptical Atheists ; and thus all his efforts result in 
strengthening and confirming them. Nay it is true that though 
no contemporary Sceptics have any doubt when it comes to the 
practical life about possessing a head and about 2 and 3 making 5, 
and the like; they say they only employ those statements as 
truths because they have an appearance of being true, but that 
they do not believe them with certainty because there are no 
convincing arguments impelling them to do so. And because to 
them the existence of God and the immortality of the human 
mind do not have the same appearance of truth, they think that 
therefore they ought not to make use of these beliefs even in 
practical life, unless a proof is first given them with sounder 
reasoning than any which secures adherence to beliefs that have 
an appearance of being true. Now since it was those beliefs the 
truth of which I proved and, at least to my knowledge, no one 
before me, I think that no greater slander could be devised than 
that for which our author is responsible when throughout the whole 
of his Dissertation he continually assigns to me, reiterating the 
imputation a countless number of times, that single error which 
constitutes the speciality of Scepticism, viz. excessive doubt. Very 



336 Objections VII 

liberal Is my Critic in recounting the list of my sins. For although 
he says that the glory is not a common one, that of moving fwycaffc 
the boundaries of 'knowledge and forcing a passage which no onejn 
the centuries behind us has attempted, and though he has no reason 
for suspecting that I have not done this in the very matter of which 
he is treating, as I shall show directly, yet he reckons this against 
me as a sin, saying, certainly no praise would be too high for you y 
but to secure it you must effect your journey without coming to grief. 
Evidently he wishes his readers to believe that I have come to grief 
then, or committed some error ; yet he does not believe so himself, 
nor indeed has he any reason to suspect it. For surely if he had 
been able to devise the least reason for suspecting some straying 
from the path on my part at any point in the whole of the 
route by which I conducted the mind from the knowledge of its 
own existence to the knowledge of the existence of God, and its 
distinctness from the body, doubtless in a dissertation of such length, 
such verbosity and such poverty of topics, he would not have failed 
to mention it. He would have far preferred to do this, rather 
than change the question, as he always has done whenever the 
argument required him to treat of that subject, or in such a silly 
fashion represent me as discussing whether a thinking thing was 
Mind. Therefore he had no reason for suspecting that I had made 
any error in what I asserted, and in the Arguments by which I, first 
of all men, upset the doubt of the Sceptics. He confesses that this 
is worthy of the highest praise. Yet he has sufficient audacity to 
censure me on the very same count, and fictitiously ascribes to 
me that doubt which he might with better right have imputed to 
any of the rest of mankind who have never refuted that doubt, 
rather than to me alone. But in his commentary we find 

The fifth reply. There is an error of defect. That is to my y 
in expending too much effort it completes nothing. I wish to take 
you alone as witness, you alone as judge. What have you accom- 
plished with all your magnificent appliances ? Of what avail has 
been that pretentious excavation, so universal and so liberal, that you 
have not spared yourself even the most durable of stones, except this 
one, this one as to the retention of which you quote the painfully 
common statement: l The rock which is discovered lower than any 
sand, is strong and durable? This is a truth, I repeat, so familiar 
to the common herd 1 , etc. as above. 

Now here I expected to find both the Workman in question and 
1 Cf. p. 321. 



Objections VII 337 

my Critic to prove something. But just as the former's only object 
ms J;o ask what was the result of the Architect's excavations, 
except that he had laid bare some rock, and to dissimulate the fact 
that he had reared his chapel upon, this rock; so my Critic asks 
me merely what I have effected by my rejection of doubtful beliefs 
other than that I have found this commonplace : / think I am, 
seeing he holds it of no account that from this I have demonstrated 
the existence of God and many other truths. And he wants to 
take me alone as witness, witness I suppose of his glaring audacity; 
just as elsewhere also and in the matter of other fabrications he 
says that all to the last man believe them, and that they are doctrines 
taught from every chair of philosophy 1 ; that we have been told it by 
our teachers and they by theirs and so on right up to the creation of 
the race, and the like. But we should no more trust these assertions 
than the oaths of certain men, who are wont to use the more 
protestations the greater they believe to be the incredibility and 
falsiby of what they want us to believe. 

The Workman's next reply, No. 6. Tour art commits the 
common error of which it convicts remaining systems. Thus it is 
astonished that all mortals affirm and assert with such unimpaired 
confidence: 'The sand is strong enough on which we stand. This 
ground we tread on does not move, etc.,' yet it is not astonished at 
itself saying with equal confidence : ' We must clear away the sand, 
etc 2 . 7 

Now this is no sillier than what our Author in similar circum- 
stances affirms. 

Reply 7. It has a vice peculiar to itself. Thus to the belief 
held with a certain amount of assurance (a sufficient assurance) by 
other men, to the effect that the earth on which we stand, sand, stones, 
etc. are firm enough, it, with a design peculiar to itself, opposes the 
contrary statement, and takes the trench, forsooth, out of which sand, 
stones, and the rest have been cast, not only as something strong, but 
so strong that it can found upon it tJie solid structure of a chapel. 
In fact it rests its weight on this so much that if you remove these 
props the whole falls to the ground*. 

Here the illusion is no greater than that which besets our 
Author, so long as he is forgetful of the words : You will neither 
affirm nor deny, etc. 

Eeply 8. Imprudence is one of its errors. Thus it does not 
notice that the instability of the ground is like a two-edged sword; 

1 Cf. p. 323, par. 1. 2 Of. p. 321. 3 Cf. ibid. 

B. H. 22 



338 Objections VII 

while avoiding the one edge it is wounded by the other. Sand is not 
a stable enough soil for it; because 1 it does away with thi$ atffi 
posits the opposite, viz. a ditch empty of sand, and imprudently 
relying on this empty ditch as though it were something firm it 
comes by a wound' 2 . 

Here again we have only to remember the words : You will 
neither affirm nor deny. All this talk about a double-edged sword 
is more worthy of the sagacity of our Workman than of my Critic. 

Reply 9. It errs also wittingly ', for with full consciousness and 
deliberation, and though adequately warned, it Hinds itself and 
voluntarily abandons those things that are necessary for the building 
of houses. It finishes by deluding itself with its own rule, not only 
achieving what it does not intend but even what it most fears*. 

But the Architect's success in building his chapel, and the 
truths I have succeeded in demonstrating, show how much truth 
there is in the charge against each of us respectively. 

Eeply 10. Sins of commission must be ascribed to it. It returns 
to its ancient opinions, though that has been forbidden by solemn edict 
and, contrary to its laws about excavation, it resumes what it has 
renounced. It is enough for you to use your memory to be convinced 
of this*. 

In his similar accusation our Author is forgetful of the words : 
You will neither affirm nor deny. Otherwise how could he keep 
countenance in pretending that that had been forbidden by solemn 
edict which he previously said had not even been denied ? 

Eeply 11. Sins of omission also are to be found in it, for it 
is not once merely that it transgresses that principle which it lays 
down as a basis : ' The greatest care must be taken not to admit 
anything which we cannot prove to be true! It barefacedly assumes 
as quite certain and gives no proof of the statements : ' Sandy soil 
is not firm enough on which to build houses, and other similar 
assertions 5 . 

Here it is clear that our Author 6 , like my Critic in the case of 
the rejection of doubtful beliefs, was under a delusion, applying to 
the excavation of a foundation what belongs only to the construction 
alike of buildings and of a philosophy. For it is absolutely true 

1 Quia. It ought to be quapropter= wherefore (cf. p. 322 ad init.) in order 
to make the construction safe ; but in that case the accuracy of the quotation 
would not be exact. 

2 Cf. p. 322. s Ibid. 
4 Ibid. ^ 5 Ibid. 

6 It ought to be Caementarius: the mason or workman. 



Objections VII 339 

that nothing is to be admitted as true, which we cannot prove to be 
Issue^when it is a question of setting it up or affirming it. But 
whe^i it is only a case of casting a thing out of a trench or setting 
aside a belief, it is sufficient to have suspicions about it. 

The twelfth reply was : Your art contains nothing sound or 
nothing new; at most what is superfluous. 

For (I) if it alleges that by its excavation of the sand it means 
that excavation which other architects employ, when they throw out 
the sand only if they think it not strong enough to bear the weight of 
buildings ; in that case what it says is sound, but not at all new ; 
nor will that metJwd of excavation be new, but old, and common to all 
architects up to the last single one 1 . 

(2) If by that digging out of the sand it is meant that the whole 
of the sand must be thrown away, all removed and none retained, 
and none of it or its opposite, viz. the vacuity of the place which it 
formerly filled, must be employed as something firm and stable ; that 
will be something new but not at all good, and though your method of 
excavation will be novel, it will be spurious 2 . 

(3) If it alleges that by force and weight of reasoning it 
achieves the following result with certainty and clearness : i I am 
an expert in Architecture, and practise it ; nevertheless, in so far 
as I am this, I am neither architect, mason, nor hodman, but some- 
thing so much 'withdrawn from these that I can be comprehended 
though these have not yet been grasped, exactly as animal or sentient 
thing can be grasped without our knowing what neighs, lows etc? J ; 
this will be something sound but not new at all. For every cross- 
road resounds with this tale, and it is taught in express words by 
everyone who thinks that there are experts in architecture; and if 
architecture likeivise embraces the construction of walls, so that those 
also are versed in Architecture, who mix lime and sand, who hsw 
stone, and carry up the material in hods, all who think that labourers 
practice this craft, i.e. all to the last man are in agreement*. 

(4) If it declare that it lias proved by valid and well considered 
reasons that its professor really exists and is a man skilled in 
Architecture, but that at the time of Ms existence, no architect really 
exists, nor any mason, nor hodman ; in this case what it says will be 
new, but by no means sound, just as if it said that animal could 
exist without there being lions, foxes, etc 4 . 

(5) Another way to interpret this art is to suggest that the 



1 Of. p. 322. ' 2 lUd. 

Cf. p. 323. . 4 IU'd. 



22- 2 



340 Objections VII 

architect builds, i.e. employs the science of architecture in constructing 
buildings and builds in suck a way that he beholds and revieiqs Mf 
own action by a reflex act. This will imply also that he knotfts or 
considers that he builds (ichich truly is to be conscious and to have 
consciousness of any activity^). And if it is maintained that this is 
a property of architecture, i.e. of an art which holds a place superior 
to the science of hodmen, and that it is mi this condition that he is an 
architect; in this case the doctrine will be something not hitherto 
stated, but ichich ought to haw been stated before. I was waiting 
for this to appear i and when I saw the efforts, futile as they were, to 
produce it, I wanted time and time again to suggest it. To say this 
would be to say something sound, but nothing mew, for we have been 
told it by our teachers and they by theirs and, in my opinion, one 
generation by another beginning with the creation of the race 1 . 

If, then, this is the upshot, with ^chat a superfluity of matter 
will we not be left ? What redundancy ! What vain repetition ! 
What about those devices for securing glory and prestige? To 
what purpose this talk about the instability of the sand, and dis- 
turbance of the earth, and spectres, empty figments to terrify us ? 
What an ending for that excavation which was to be so profound 
that we were to be allowed to retain nothing but a mere scrap I Why 
those journeys so long and continuous to distant sJwres, afar from the 
senses, amidst shades and spectres? Finally what will they do 
towards securing the stability of your chapel, claiming as they do 
that it cannot stand unless every thing is turned upside down ? But 
what is the reason for interpolating new materials so often and to 
such an extent in order to lay aside the old, and then after dismissing 
the new, resume the old once more ? Perhaps just as while we are in 
a temple or in the presence of sovereign spirits we ought to behave 
ourselves otherwise than when in taverns or hovels, so these new 
mysteries require new ceremonies. But why has not your art, 
topping all circumlocutions, expressed the truth neatly, clearly, and 
briefly in a few ivords thus: 'I build, I have consciousness of this 
building, therefore I am an Architect 3 1 

(6) Finally there is the interpretation that your art alleges that 
it constructs houses, that it plans their bedrooms, apartments, porches, 
doors, windows, pillars and the rest, in the mind beforehand, and 
arranges them, and next, in order to get them constructed, gives in- 
structions to those who supply the material, to the quarrymen, masons, 

1 Cf. p. 323. . 



Objections VII 341 

s, hodinen and other workman, and directs their work, and 
thai this is the peculiar function of the Architect in the sense that no 
other workmen can effect that function. This doctrine will be hew 
but not sound. It will indeed be gratuitous and thanklessly mil it 
be received, unless some chance preserve and rescue it (that is its last 
refuge), appearing at its own time, like the god in the machine, a 
marvel for the gaping croivd. But hoiv long have we given up any 
hope of that happening ? 

Last reply. Here I think you are fearful for your art, which 
you love so and which you cherish and treat, pardon me, as your own 
child. You fear lest, now that 1 have charged it with so many sins, 
now that it shows flaws and threatens everywhere to collapse, I should 
deem that it ought to be thrown into the rubbish-heap. But don't be 
frightened. I am your friend. I shall overcome your apprehensions, 
if I am not mistaken ; I shall hep silence and await events. I 
knoiv you and your clear and keen-sighted mental vision. When 
you have got some time for meditation and especially when you have 
thought over your faithful rule in a secret retreat, you will shake off 
the dust from it, cleanse it anew, and place before our sight a well 
balanced and polished A rchitecture. Meanwhile take this and listen 
to me while I proceed to reply to your questions. I shall embrace 
in them many things -which, in my zeal for brevity I have lightly 
drawn together, such as, what concerns the arches, the openings for 
windows, the columns, the porches, and the like 1 . But here we get the 
programme of a new comedy. 

WHETHER ARCHITECTURE CAN BE ESTABLISHED ANEW. 

You ask thirdly. When this point was reached, some of his 
friends seeing that the excessive jealousy and hatred by which he 
was agitated, had now become quite a disease, prevented him from 
going about declaiming in the streets any longer, and forthwith 
carried him to a doctor. 

Now I should certainly not venture to imagine any such similar 
fate for my Critic. I shall here go only so far as to note how 
accurately he has imitated that "Workman in all his actions. It is 
quite in the same way that he acts the judge, the upright judge 
forsooth, who takes great and scrupulous care lest he pronounce any 
rash decision. After condemning me eleven times over on the one 
count of rejecting the doubtful in order to establish the certain, 

1 Cf. p. 324. 



342 Objections VII 

and as it were digging trenches in order to lay the foundations off 
my building, he at length on the twelfth occasion comes to* the 
examination of the point to be discussed and says, 

1. If I have understood it, as he in reality knows I have 
understood it," and as is clear from the words, You will neither affirm 
nor deny, etc., which he himself attributed to me : then indeed my 
doctrine contains something sound, but nothing new. 

2. But if I have understood it in that other way, from which 
he has extracted the eleven preceding errors, and which he yet 
knows is quite remote from my meaning, seeing that above in 
paragraph 3 of his rst question he has introduced me as taking an 
attitude of wonder and mockery towards it and saying : How could 
that come into the mind of any sane manl Then my doctrine, 
forsooth, contains some twvelty, but nothing that is sound. Now in 
the history of abuse has there ever been any person, I don't say so 
impudent, so mendacious, so contemptuous of all truth and veri- 
similitude, but so impudent and of such short memory, that in 
an elaborate dissertation to which much thought has been given, 
he has charged some one with holding an opinion, which in the 
beginning of the same dissertation, he admitted was held in abhor- 
rence by the very man whom he charged with holding it, to such 
an extent that he believed that no sane man could entertain it ? 

As to the questions which follow (numbers 3, 4, and 5), both in 
my Critic's and in the Workman's list of charges, they are quite 
irrelevant, and were never set forward either by me or by the 
Architect. It seems very likely that the Workman first devised 
them, in order that, since he dared not undertake any of the things 
the architect performed, for fear- of showing too evidently his lack 
of skill, he might nevertheless appear to attack something else 
besides his policy of excavation. And it appears that my Critic 
has in this respect followed his methods. 

3. For when he says that a thinking thing can be understood, 
though the mind is not known, nor the soul, nor the body, his 
philosophy is no better than that of the Workman, when he says 
that to be skilled in Architecture belongs no more to an architect 
than to a mason or hodman, and that one so skilled can be under- 
stood apart from any of these. 

4. Just as, also, it is equally inept to say that a thinking thing 
exists though the mind does not exist, as to assert that one skilled 
in architecture can exist though no architect exists (at least if the 
word mind is taken in the sense in which I, following established 



Objections VII 343 

4iage, announced I understood it). And it is no more contradictory 
that* a thinking thing should exist without a body than a man 
sfilled in architecture should exist without there being masons or 
hodmen. 

5. Likewise when my Critic says that it is not sufficient that 
a substance be a thinking one, for it to have a higher position than 
matter, and be wholly spiritual, such as alone he wishes to call 
mind, but that in addition it requires by a reflex act to think it 
thinks or have a consciousness of its own thought, his delusion is 
as great as that of the Workman when he says that one who is 
skilled in architecture ought to consider by a reflex act that he 
possesses that skill before he can be an architect. For although 
no one as a matter of fact is an architect who has not often reflected 
or at least been able to reflect that he possesses the skill required 
in building, yet manifestly he does not require to make that 
reflection in order to become an architect. Nor is there any more 
need for that consideration or reflection in order that thinking 
substance be placed above matter. For the first thought, whatever 
it be, by which we become aware of anything does not differ more 
from the second by which we become aware that we have become 
aware of that, than this second differs from the third by which we 
become aware that we have become aware that we have become 
aware. Again if it be allowed that the first function belongs to 
a corporeal thing, there is not the least reason why the second 
should not be so attributed also. Wherefore we must note that our 
Critic commits a much more dangerous error here than the work- 
man. For he removes the true and highly intelligible differentia 
between corporeal and incorporeal things, viz. that the former think 
but the latter do not, and substitutes in its place another which 
can in no wise be thought essential, viz. that the former reflect that 
they think, while the latter do not. Thus he does all that he can 
towards preventing a true understanding of the distinction between 
the human mind and the body. 

6. He is less to be excused in favouring the cause of the 
brutes and wishing to ascribe thought to them not less than to 
men, than the Workman in attempting to arrogate to himself and 
his like a skill in architecture no less than that possessed by the 
Architect. 

Finally it is in everything sufficiently apparent that both have 
been alike in thinking not of objections that had any truth or veri- 
similitude, but merely of such as might be trumped up for the 



344 Objections VII 

purpose of casting aspersions on an enemy and representing him %& 
quite unskilled and a fool, to those who did not know him or do not 
take pains to inquire more curiously into the truth of the matter. 
Indeed he who reports about the Workman, in order to express his 
mad hatred, relates how he extolled the Architect's excavations as 
a magnificent contrivance, but scorned the uncovering of the stone 
which that excavation revealed and the chapel built upon it as 
matters of no moment. Yet nevertheless out of his friendship and 
singular good will to him he rendered thanks etc. Likewise at the 
end he introduces himself as making these wonderful declarations : 
Jf t then, this is the upshot, with what a superfluity of matter will we 
not be left ? What redundancy ! What vain repetitions ! What 
about those devices for securing glory and prestige 1 ? etc. And shortly 
after : Here I think you are fearful for your art, which you love 
and cherish so, etc. Likewise : But don't be frightened \ I am your 
friend. All this describes the Workman's malady so graphically 
that no poet could draw a more living picture. But it is sur- 
prising that our Author should imitate all the same peculiarities 
with such enthusiasm that he does not notice what he himself is 
doing, and does not employ that reflex act of thought by which, 
according to his recent statement, men are distinguished from the 
brutes. For he surely would not say that there was too great a 
display of words in my writings if he considered how many more he 
employs himself. In what I cannot call his attack since he uses no 
arguments to further it, but (to use a somewhat bitter expression 
since there is none other that so well expresses the truth of the 
matter) in his revilings, he attacks at large length merely the 
subject of the doubt of which I treated. Neither would he have 
talked of vain repetition if he had seen how prolix, how redundant, 
how full of empty loquacity is the whole of his Dissertation, in the 
end of which, he nevertheless says, he has studied brevity. But 
since he there says that he is friendly to me, in order that I may 
deal with him in the friendliest fashion, I shall do as the Workman's 
friends did who carried him off to the doctor and shall commend 
him to his Superior 2 . 

1 Of. p. 323. 

2 These words seem to foreshadow the 'Letter to Father Dinet' which 
follows this work and followed it in the original edition. 



LETTER TO DINET. 



PREFATORY NOTE 

Dinet, who became Confessor to the King of France, was 
Descartes' instructor as a boy at the Jesuit College of La Flche, 
and Descartes ever bore for him the profoundest regard, as is shown 
by the tone in which he writes. 

In the second edition of the 'Meditations, Objections and 
Replies ' this Letter is appended. The Seventh Objections are 
by P&re Bourdin, the Jesuit whose superior was P&re Dinet, and 
Descartes explains to the latter his grievance against Bourdin, 
as also against Gisbert Voet, a Protestant Minister of Utrecht. 
This letter is therefore closely connected with the 'Objections/ 
and is printed at the end of these in the edition of MM. Adam, 
and Tannery. 

E. S, H. 



TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER DINET 
OF THE SOCIETY OF JESUS, HEAD OF 
THE PEOVINCE OF FRANCE. FROM 
RENATUS DES CARTES. 

When recently I indicated to the Reverend Father Mersenne by 
the letter which I wrote to him, that I would have greatly desired 
that the Dissertation which I learned the Reverend Father 1 had 
written concerning me should have been published by him, or else 
that it should have been sent to me in order that I might have it 
published with the rest of the Objections that others had sent me; 
and when I asked that he should try to obtain this either from 
him, or else, because I judged it a most just request, at least 
from your Reverence, he replied that he had placed my letter in 
your Reverence's hands, and that not alone had you favourably 
received it, but that you had even given many indications of singular 
sagacity, kindness, and good-will towards me. And this I have very 
clearly recognised even from the fact that the Dissertation in 
question was sent me. This not only makes me deeply grateful to 
you, but it also impels me here to say freely what I think of that 
Dissertation, and at the same time to ask your advice concerning 
the plan of my studies. 

To tell the truth I no sooner held this Dissertation in my hands, 
than I rejoiced as though I had in my possession a great treasure ; 
since there is nothing more to be desired than either to protest the 
certainty of my opinions, as it may haply be if, after distinguished 
men have examined them, no error is discovered in them, or else 
that I should be shown my errors in order that I may correct 
them. And just as in well constituted bodies there is a union and 
inter-connection of parts so great that no single part employs 
merely its own strength, but, especially, a sort of common strength 

1 i.e. the Rev. Father Bourdin, 



348 Letter 

belonging to the whole supplements the agency of each membej;> 
so, being aware of the intimate connection that ordinarily exists 
between the various members of your Society, I did not judge, 
when I received the Dissertation of the Reverend Father 1 , that I 
received the communication of one individual, but I believed that 
it was an exact and accurate judgment on my opinions formed by 
the whole body of your Society. 

Nevertheless, after having read it, I was very much taken aback, 
and I then began to see that I must judge of it in quite another 
way than I had at first done. For without doubt had the work 
come from one who was imbued with the same spirit as that which 
pervades all your Society, more, or certainly not less, kindness, 
gentleness, and modesty would be observed in it than in the case of 
those private individuals who have written to me on the same sub- 
ject ; but far from that being so, if you could compare it with their 
objections to my Meditations, you will not fail to believe that it is 
the latter which have been composed by men who lead the religious 
life, convinced that the former is conceived in terms so bitter as to 
shame any private person and certainly one bound by special 
vows to practise virtue more than other men. There should 
also be observed in it a love of God and an ardent zeal for the 
advancement of His glory ; but on the contrary it appears as though 
the writer impugned all reason and truth, and, by ill-founded 
authorities and fictions, the principles of which I availed myself in 
proving the existence of God and the real distinction between the 
soul of man and the body. There should in addition be observed 
knowledge, reason and good sense, but short of desiring to place in 
the category of knowledge an acquaintance with the Latin tongue 
such as the riff-raff of Rome had in olden days, I have not observed 
in his writings any trace of these, any more than I have observed 
any reasoning which was not either illegitimate or false, nor finally 
any token of ingenuity of mind, which was not more worthy of an 
artizan than of a Father of the Society. I do not speak of prudence, 
or of other virtues which are so pre-eminent in your Society, and 
which yet do not appear in this Dissertation, nor is there in it 
the slightest trace of such shown. But one might at least expect to 
remark in it a reverence for truth, probity and candour ; on the 
contrary it is very manifestly seen by the notes I have written 2 , 
that nothing can be imagined more removed from every appearance 

1 Bourdin. 

2 Cf. Obj. vir. Vol. n. p. 257. 



to Father Dinet 349 

of truth than all that he imputes to me in this writing. And 
l^rtl^er, just as when one portion of our body is so disposed that it is 
irnpOssible for it to follow the law that is common to the whole 
body, we infer that it is suffering from some disease peculiar to it, 
so the Dissertation of the Reverend Father clearly demonstrates to 
us that he does not enjoy that health which is found in the rest of 
the body of your Society. As however we do not the less esteem 
the head of a man, or the man in his entirety, because there may 
possibly be certain evil humours that have flowed against his will 
and in spite of himself, either into his foot or finger, but rather 
praise the constancy and virtue with which he does not fail to 
endure the pains inflicted by his cure : and as no one has ventured 
to condemn Caius Marias for having varicose veins, and as on the 
contrary he is often more praised by writers for having courageously 
suffered one of his legs to be cut, than for having obtained the 
consulate on seven different occasions and having obtained many 
victories over his enemies; so, not being ignorant of the pious 
and paternal affection that you cherish for all that pertains to 
yourselves, the more unsatisfactory the Dissertation seems to me, 
the more do I esteem your integrity and prudence in having desired 
it to be sent to me, and the more do I honour and reverence your 
whole Society. But inasmuch as the Reverend Father has consented 
to send me his Dissertation, in case it may seem rash in me to 
judge that he did not do it of himself, I will explain why I feel 
impelled to believe this, and so I shall narrate all that has hitherto 
passed between him and me. 

As early as the year 1640 he wrote against me other treatises 
on Optics which I hear that he read out to his pupils, and he even 
gave copies to these pupils for purposes of transcription not 
perhaps to all, as to that I am ignorant, but certainly to some, and 
it may be credited that it was to those who were the most cherished 
and faithful, for on making request of one of them, in whose hands 
it had been, for a copy, he could not be persuaded to give it. 
Subsequently he published theses upon that subject, which were for 
three days sustained in your College of Paris with great display and 
extraordinary publicity ; while it is true that on this occasion he 
touched on some other matters, he was chiefly engaged in disputing 
about my opinions, and obtained many successes at my expense- 
successes not difficult to achieve over an absentee. I further saw 
the Attack on me which served as Preface to these Disputations 
which were read at the beginning, and which the Reverend Father 



350 Letter 

had composed with much toil and study. Here the object was 
clearly none other than to impugn my opinions ; nevertheless tfee 
words objected to and laid to my charge were none that I had'ey^er 
written and thought, and they were all so nonsensical that it was 
impossible that they should occur to any sane man, any more than 
those which he attributed to me in his Dissertation. This I ex- 
plained at the time in the Notes upon it which I sent privately to 
the author, whom I did not then know as belonging to the 
Society. 

And in the theses it is not only that he condemned my opinions 
as false, which would be open to any one to do, especially if he had 
reasons ready to prove his point j but also, with his usual candour, 
he altered the signification of certain terms. Thus, for example, 
the angle which in optics is called the refractive 1 , he calls the angle 
of refraction 2 . The subtlety is much the same as when in his 
Dissertation he says he understands by body 3 that which thinks 4 , 
and by soul 5 , that which is extended 6 , and by this artifice certain 
of my discoveries were expressed in very different language, and 
brought forward as his own, while me he convicted of having a 
different and quite foolish opinion about them. 

Being warned of this, I at once wrote to the Eeverend Rector of 
the College, and begged that ' since my opinions had been judged 
worthy of public refutation, he would not also judge me unworthy 
I who might still be counted amongst his disciples to see the 
arguments which had been used to refute them.' And I added 
many other reasons which seemed to rne to suffice to cause him to 
grant me what I asked for, such as, amongst others, that ' I much 
preferred being instructed by those of your Company than by any 
others whatever, because I excessively honour and respect them 
both as my masters and as the only instructors of my youth ; I 
have further in the Discourse on Method 7 , p. 75, asked all those 
who may read my writings to take the trouble of making me 
acquainted with any errors into which they may have seen me slide, 
telling them that they will ever find me ready to correct them, and 
that I do not think that any one will be found, above all amongst 
those who profess a religious life, who would prefer to convict me 
of error in the presence of others, and in my absence, rather than 
to show me my faults, and that at least I could not doubt that 

1 refractus. 2 dabat nomen anguli refractionis. s corpus. 

4 id quod cogitat. 5 auimam. 6 id quod est extensum. 

7 In this edition, Vol. i. p. 126. 



to Father Dinet 351 

love to his neighbour would be shown by a person such as I 



To this the Reverend Kector made no reply, but the Reverend 
Father 1 wrote to me that he would send me his treatises in a week, 
that is, the reasons which he made use of in order to impugn my 
opinions. A short time thereafter I received letters from certain 
other Fathers of the Society which promised me in his name the 
same thing in about six months, perhaps because, as they did not 
approve of these treatises (for they did not expressly avow that 
they were aware of anything which he had done against me), they 
demanded this time in order to correct them. And finally the 
Reverend Father sent me letters, not only written by his own 
hand, but also sealed with the seal of the Society, which showed me 
that it was by the order of his superiors that he wrote ; what he 
said was (1) That the Reverend Rector, seeing that tlie communica- 
tions I had addressed to him concerned him alone, had ordered him to 
reply to them himself, and to give me his reasons for his action. 
(2) That he had never undertaken, nor would he ever undertake any 
special attack on my opinions. (3) Tlmt if lie, had never responded 
to the request made in the Method, p. 75, this must be attributed to 
Us ignorance, since he had never read the Method through. (4) As 
regards the Notes which I had made on Ms opening discourse he had 
nothing to add to what he had already replied, and would haw 
written if his friends had not counselled him to do otherwise ; that is 
to say, he had nothing whatever to say on my notes because he had 
indicated nothing but that he would send me the reasons he had for 
combating my opinions; and by these words he simply declared 
that he would never send them to me, because his friends had 
dissuaded him from doing so. 

From all these things it was easy to see that he had burned with 
the desire of denouncing me and had undertaken that enterprise on 
his own account and without the consent of the other Fathers of 
the Society ; and consequently that he was actuated by another 
spirit than that of your Society; and finally that there was nothing 
he desired less than that I should see what he had written against 
me. Although it seemed to me to be quite unworthy to see a man 
of his sacred profession, with whom I had never had any con- 
troversy, and who was quite unknown to me, so publicly, so 
openly, and so extraordinarily biassed against me, giving as his 

1 Bourdin, 



352 Letter 

excuse simply that he had never read my Discourse on Method > 
the untruth of which clearly appeared from the fact that 
frequently censured my Analysis, both in his Theses and i 
opening discourse, although I nowhere else treated of it at all 
or even spoke of it under the name Analysis, excepting in that 
Discourse on Method which he declared he had never read. Yet at 
the same time, since he promised in the future to abstain from 
annoying me, I freely overlooked the past. 

And I do not wonder in the least that the Reverend Rector had 
on the first occasion ordered nothing more severe than that he 
himself should give me his reasons for his proceeding, and thus 
confess openly that he could not maintain in my presence one of 
those things that he had arrogantly advanced against me, whether 
in his Theses or during his Disputations, or in his Treatises ; and 
that he had likewise nothing to reply to the notes I had written on 
his Attack. But I am certainly much astonished that the Reverend 
Father has had so great a desire to attack me, that after having seen 
the little success that this first Attack had happily had, and that, after 
the time during which he had promised me to carry on no particular 
warfare against my opinions, nothing that was new passed between 
him and me, or even between me and any one of your members, he 
yet wrote his Dissertation. For if he does not carry on a particular 
warfare against my opinions, I am altogether ignorant of what 
combating the opinions of others means, if perchance he does not 
excuse himself by saying that as a matter of fact he does not impugn 
my opinions, but those of other insane ones, which calumniously he 
has ascribed to me ; or else that he never thought that his Disserta- 
tion would fall into my hands. For it is easy to judge by the style 
in which it is written, that it has never been purposely designed 
to be placed in the number of the Objections made against my 
Meditations ; for this is sufficiently clear from the fact that he did 
not wish me to see his other Treatises (for what could they contain 
worse than what it contains ?) ; it is finally very manifest by the 
wonderfully full licence which he gives himself to attribute to me 
opinions quite different from my own, for he would have shown 
himself a little more restrained than he is, had he thought that 
I should have reproached him publicly. For that reason I feel and 
express my deepest thanks for receiving the Dissertation, certainly 
not to him, but to the Society and to you. 

I should have liked that this opportunity, such as it is, now 
offered me of thanking you, could be conjoined with concealment 



to Father Dinet 353 

of the injuries which he has done me, rather than with some 
Tfesrws to avenge myself, lest I should seem to do this for my own 
sake*; and in fact I should not do so did I not think that it 
would conduce to your honour and that of your Society, and lead 
to the discovery of very useful truths. But, as the Eeverend 
Father teaches mathematics in your College of Paris, which may 
be called one of the most celebrated in the whole world, and as 
the mathematical is the faculty in which I am said principally 
to be engaged, so, just as there is no person in all your Society 
whose authority can more efficaciously impugn my opinions than 
his, there is similarly no one whose errors in this matter could 
more easily be attributed to you all, were I to pass them over in 
silence. For many people would persuade themselves that he alone 
from out of all your Body, had been selected to judge of my opinions, 
and thus that on the above question as much regard ought to be 
paid to him alone as to you all, and in this matter that the same 
judgment should be passed on you as on him. 

And further, though the advice which he has followed in this 
matter is very well suited to impede, or temporarily retard, the 
knowledge of the truth, it is not sufficient to suppress it altogether, 
and you would certainly receive no honour if it came to be dis- 
covered. For he made no effort to refute my opinions by reasoning, 
but contented himself with setting forth as mine, other opinions 
of a very inappropriate and pointless description, conceived in 
terms sufficiently like mine, and simply mocking them as unworthy 
of being refuted. By this artifice he would easily have turned 
away all those who do not know me, or who have never seen 
my writings, from reading them ; and he would perhaps by this 
means have prevented a yet further examination by those who 
having seen them do not sufficiently understand them as yet, that 
is to say, the most part of those who have seen them : for, as a 
matter of fact, they would never have doubted that a man of his 
profession, and especially one belonging to your Society, would have 
dared confidently to set forth opinions as mine, which were not 
mine, and to mock at them. 

And to this end it would have helped greatly that his Disserta- 
tion had not been seen by all, but had merely been communicated 
privately to certain of his friends ; for by this means it would have 
been easy for him to arrange that it would be seen by none of those 
who could have recognized his fictions ; and the others would have 
placed so much the more credence in him, inasmuch as they would 

B. H. II. 23 



354 Letter 

be persuaded that he would not have desired to bring it to light in 
case of its prejudicing my reputation, and that he was rendernfg fo 
me the service of a friend. And yet there would have been o 
danger of its not being read by a sufficient number of persons ; for 
if he had only been able to persuade the friends of your Society, in 
your College of Paris, as he hoped to do, this their opinion would 
have easily passed on to all the other members of your Society who 
are scattered over the world ; and from them it would have passed 
to almost all other men, who had placed their trust in the authority 
of your Society. And if that had happened, I should not have been 
much surprised, for since each of you is incessantly occupied with his 
own particular studies, it is impossible that all can examine all the 
new books which are every day in great numbers published ; I fancy 
however that you would refer a book to the judgment of whoever 
of your Society was the first to read it, and follow his judgment in 
deciding whether the others would read the work, or abstain from so 
doing. It seems to me that this has already been proved in respect 
of the Treatise which I published on Meteors ; for seeing it treats of 
a section of philosophy which is therein explained more accurately, 
if I ain not mistaken, and more probably, than it is by any of the 
authors who have written upon it before me, I do not see that 
there is any reason why these philosophers who year by year teach 
Meteors in your College, should not deal with it, if it be not that 
possibly by believing the wrongful judgments made upon me by the 
Eeverend Father, they have never read it. 

But as long as he never did anything but attack those writings 
of mine which deal with physics or mathematics, I did not concern 
myself greatly. But seeing that in this Dissertation he under- 
took to destroy, not by reasoning, but by abuse, the principles 
of Metaphysics of which I availed myself in demonstrating the 
existence of God and the real distinction between the soul of man 
aud the body, I judged the knowledge of these truths to be so 
important, that I believed no sensible man could object if I under- 
took to defend what I have written with all my strength. And it 
will not be difficult to accomplish this, for, since he has not objected 
to anything in me but that I carried doubt much too far, it is not 
necessary in order to show how unjust he is in blaming me for this, 
that I should here mention all the places in my Meditations in 
which I have diligently, and, if I mistake not, more accurately than 
any other who has written on the subject, successfully refuted that 
doubt; but it is sufficient that I should here make known to you 



to Father Dinet 355 

I have expressly written in the beginning of my reply to the 
thircf Objection ; for I set forth no reasons for doubt with the object 
ofpersuading others thereto, but on the contrary for the purpose 
of refuting them ; in this matter I clearly followed the example of 
doctors who c describe the illness in regard to which they wish to 
teach the cure. 3 And tell me, pray, who has been so audacious and 
impudent as to blame Hippocrates or Galen for having shown the 
causes which engender illness, and who has concluded therefrom that 
they neither of them taught anything but the Method of falling ill ? 

Certainly those who know that the Reverend Father has had 
this audacity, would have difficulty in persuading themselves that 
in this matter he acted on his own account and following his own 
counsel, if I did not myself bear witness and make known, how it 
came about that his previous writings against me had not been 
approved by your Society, and his last Dissertation has been sent 
to me at your request. And as this could not be more conveniently 
done than in this letter, I think that it is not out of place that 
I cause it to be printed with the Annotations which I have made 
on his Dissertation 1 . 

And in order that I might myself derive some profit therefrom, 
I would like here to say something to you of the Philosophy on 
which I am engaged, and which, if nothing prevents me, I mean to 
bring to light in one or two years 2 . Having in the year 1637 
published some specimens of this Philosophy, I did all in my power to 
protect myself from the ill-will which I well saw, unworthy as I was, 
would be drawn upon me ; this was the reason why I did not wish to 
put my name to them; not as perhaps has appeared to some, because 
I had not confidence in the truth of the reasons contained in them, 
and was in any degree ashamed of having written them it was for 
the same reason that I declared expressly in my Discourse on 
Method that it appeared to me that I should in nowise consent to 
my philosophy being published during my life. And I should still 
be of the same mind if, as I hoped, as reason seemed to promise me, 
this had freed me from at least some measure of ill-will. But the 
result was quite otherwise. For such has been the lot of my 
writings, that although they could not have been understood by 
many, yet because they were comprehended by some, and indeed 
by persons who were very intellectual and learned, who deigned to 

1 The Notae of Descartes, interpolated in the Dissertatio of Father Bourdin, 
appeared, as a matter of fact, under the title of Oljectiones septimae etc. in the 
same volume as this Letter to Father Dinet. 

2 i.e. The Principles of Philosophy, published in 1644. 

232 



356 Letter 

examine them with more care than others, many truths which had" 
not hitherto been discovered were there recognised as heing present, 
and the fame of this becoming bruited abroad, made many persons 
likewise believe that I knew somewhat as certain and incontro- 
vertible in philosophy, which was not subject to dispute. This 
finally caused the greater part not only of those who, being outside 
the Schools, were at liberty to philosophize as they liked, but even 
the greater part of those who teach, more especially of the younger 
teachers, who place their trust more on strength of intellect than on 
a false reputation for knowledge, and, in a word, all those who love 
truth, to beg me to bring my philosophy to the light of day. But 
as to the others, that is to say those who prefer to appear learned 
rather than to be such, and who already imagine themselves to have 
acquired some renown amongst the learned just because they are 
able to dispute with acrimony in all the controversies of the Schools, 
since they feared that if the truth came to be discovered all these 
controversies would cease, and by the same means all their teaching 
would come into contempt ; and further having some idea that if 
I published my philosophy the truth might be discovered ; they 
have not indeed dared to declare openly that they did not desire 
that it should be published, but they have betrayed a great animosity 
towards me. And it has been very easy for me to distinguish the 
one from the others. For those who wish to see my philosophy 
published, recollected very well that I had intended not to publish it 
during my life, and many even complained of me that I preferred to 
leave it to our successors rather than to give it to my contemporaries; 
however all men of intelligence who knew the reason of it, and who 
saw that it was not due to want of will on my part to serve the 
public, did not for all that like me the less. But as for those who 
apprehended that it might never see the light, they have never 
recollected the facts of the case, or at least they have not wished to 
believe them, but on the contrary they supposed that I had merely 
promised its publication : hence according to these I was called the 
famous promiser and compared to those who for many years boasted 
that they were going to publish books, to which they had never 
even put pen. This likewise causes the Reverend Father to say 
that / had been expected to publish for so long that now we must 
despair of publication altogether ; this is truly absurd, as if one 
could expect something of a man not yet old, which no one has 
been able to accomplish during centuries. And it not also bears 
evidence of imprudence, since in thinking to blame me, he yet 



to Father Dinet 357 

confesses that I am such that a few years have sufficed to make the 
aSa^ of a work on my part seem long which I should not expect 
hfco. to finish within a thousand years supposing we both could live 
so long. Men of this type in the full belief that I had resolved to 
publish this philosophy which gave them so much apprehension, as 
soon as it was in a state of readiness, commenced to decry by 
calumnies, concealed as well as open and public, not only the 
opinions expounded in the writings which I had already published, 
but principally also this to them still unknown philosophy, with the 
idea either of preventing me from printing it, or of destroying it so 
soon as it came to light and so to speak strangling it in its cradle. 
At first I did nothing but laugh at the vanity of all their efforts, 
and the more vehemently I found them attacking my writings, the 
higher in my opinion did they rate me. But when I saw that their 
number increased from day to day, and, as generally happens, that 
there were many more who lost no occasion of seeking to injure 
me than there were of those who were desirous of giving me their 
support, I dreaded that they might by their secret practices acquire 
some power, and more disturb my leisure, if I remained constant 
in my design of not printing my philosophy, than were I to oppose 
them openly ; and by producing the whole of that which they do fear 
I shall see to it that they have nothing to fear. I have resolved to 
give to the public all the small amount of my meditations on 
philosophy, and to work to the utmost of my power to bring it to 
pass that if they are found to be true, my opinions may be generally 
accepted. This will cause their not being prepared in the same order 
and style as I have formerly adopted with the greater part of them 
in the Treatise whose argument I expounded in the Discourse on 
Method, but I shall make use of a mode of writing more suited to 
the usages of the Schools, in treating each question in short articles, 
so that each one may depend for its proof only on those that precede, 
and thus all may together form but one single body. And by this 
means I hope that the truth of all things as to which there is dis- 
putation in philosophy will be so clearly seen that all those who 
desire to seek it will find it very easily in my writings. 

In fact all young people seek truth when first they apply them- 
selves to the study of philosophy. All others also, of whatever age, 
seek it when they meditate alone by themselves on the matters of 
Philosophy, and examine them for their own use. Even the princes 
and magistrates and all those who establish academies or colleges, 
and who furnish great sums for the teaching of Philosophy in them, 



358 Letter 

are quite unanimous in desiring that as far as possible, only true 
philosophy shall be taught. And if it be permitted by prince^ tliat 
dubious and controversial questions shall be agitated, it is not c ir 
order that those who are their subjects shall by this custom of dis- 
putation and controversy learn to become more contentious, more 
refractory, and more opinionative, and thus less obedient to their 
superiors and more likely to become seditious, but merely in order 
that, by such disputes, they may be convinced of the truth ; or if a 
long experience has persuaded them that it is rarely discovered by 
such means, they are yet so jealous of it, that they believe that the 
small amount of hope there is of finding it should not be neglected. 
For there has never been a people so savage or barbarous, or one 
which shrinks so much from the right use of the reason which per- 
tains to man alone, as to desire opinions to be taught in its midst 
contrary to the known truth. And there is no doubt that we ought 
to prefer truth to all the opinions opposed to it, however deep-rooted 
and common they may be; and that all those who teach others 
should be obliged to seek it with all their might and when they 
have found it to teach it. 

But perhaps it may not be thought that it will be found in the 
new philosophy which I promise. For it is not likely that I alone 
should have seen more clearly than thousands of the most intelligent 
of men who have accepted the opinions commonly received in the 
Schools ; and roads frequently followed and known are always more 
reliable than new and unknown ones, and this is particularly true of 
our theology, as to which the experience of many years has shown us 
that it agrees with the old and ordinary philosophy very well, and 
this is uncertain with regard to a new one. And it is for that 
reason that some maintain that we must early prevent its publica- 
tion and demolish it, in case, by attracting to itself by the charm of 
novelty a multitude of ignorant persons, it may gradually increase, 
and strengthen itself through time, or else trouble the peace and 
quietude of the Schools or Academies, or even bring new heresies 
into the Church. 

I reply to this that in truth I make claim to nothing, nor do I 
profess to see more than other men ; but this perhaps has been of 
use to me, namely, that, not trusting very much to my own genius, 
I followed only the simplest and easiest roads. For we must not be 
astonished if anyone makes more progress in following these paths 
than others, endowed with much greater talent, make over the 
roqtgh and impenetrable roads which they follow. 



to Father Dinet 359 

I further add that I do not desire that my simple word should 
be Accepted regarding the truth of what I promise, but that judg- 
nfent should be made on the writings which I have already published. 
For I did not there make trial of one question or two, but explained 
more than a thousand which had not so far been expounded by 
any one before ; and although hitherto many had looked at my 
writings askance, and endeavoured in all sorts of ways to refute 
them, no one that I know of has as yet been able to find them 
not true. If an enumeration is made of all the questions that 
have during all the centuries through which the other philosophies 
have flourished, been through their means solved, we shall find 
them neither so numerous nor so celebrated as those of mine. 
But further, I state boldly that the solution of no one question 
has ever been given by the aid of the principles of the philosophy 
of the Peripatetics, that I myself cannot demonstrate to be false and 
illegitimate. And to prove this, let any one set before me, not all, 
for I do not consider that they are worth the trouble of employing 
much time upon, but some of the most striking questions, and 
I promise that I shall stand by what I have said. I simply make 
it known here in order to remove all matter of dispute, that in 
speaking of the particular principles of the Peripatetic philosophy, 
I do not except questions the solution of which are derived either 
entirely from the experience common to all men, or from the 
consideration of figures and movements proper to mathematicians, 
or finally from the notions of metaphysics which are commonly 
received, and which seem to have been admitted by me just as 
much as are the preceding, as appears from my Meditations. 

I go further and say what may seem to be a paradox, viz. that 
there is nothing in all this philosophy in so far as it is termed 
Peripatetic and different from others, that is not new ; and that on 
the other hand there is nothing in mine that is not old. For, as 
regards principles, I accept those alone which have been generally 
accepted by all philosophers, and which for that reason are the most 
ancient of all; and that which I finally deduce from them appears to 
be, as I clearly show, so contained and implied in these principles, 
that it would seem that it is likewise very ancient, since nature 
herself has engraved it upon our minds. But, on the other hand, the 
principles of the ordinary philosophy, at least at the time at which 
they were invented by Aristotle or by others, were new, nor should 
they be esteemed to be better now than they then were; and 
nothing has been as yet deduced from them which. is not contested, 



360 Letter 

and which, according to the custom of the Schools, is not subject, 
to change at the hands of individual philosophers, and Ifoice 
which is not entirely new, since it is every day made afresh. 

As to theology, as one truth can never be contrary to another 
truth, it would be a kind of impiety to fear that the truths dis- 
covered in philosophy were contrary to those of the true Faith. 
And I even assert that our religion teaches us nothing which 
could not be as easily, or even more easily, explained in accordance 
with my principles, than with those commonly received. And it 
seems to me that I have already given a sufficiently full proof of 
that at the end of my Reply to the Fourth Objections, in respect 
of a question in which we usually have the greatest trouble in 
making philosophy accord with theology. And I am still ready to 
do the same in regard to other questions, were there need ; and 
even likewise to show that there are many things in the ordinary 
philosophy which are not really in accordance with these that in 
theology are certain, although this is usually dissimulated by those 
who support that philosophy, or through long habit of acceptance 
of them, the fact is not perceived. 

We must not likewise fear that my opinions may increase too 
much by attracting to them a multitude ignorant and greedy for 
novelty. On the contrary, since experience shows that those who 
approve of them are the more cultivated, whom not novelty but 
truth attracts, they cannot make headway too quickly. 

We must not either apprehend that it may disturb the peace of 
the Schools; but on the other hand, since all the philosophers embroil 
themselves in so many controversies that they can never be in a 
greater warfare than they now are, there is no better method for 
establishing peace amongst them, and refuting the heresies which 
day by day revive their controversies, than by obliging them to 
receive the opinions which, like mine, are proved to be true. For 
the clear conception that we have of them, will remove all matter 
of doubt and disputation. 

And from all this we see clearly that there is in truth no reason 
why some men should be so anxious to turn away others from a 
knowledge of my opinions, except that holding them to be evident 
and certain, they are afraid that they should stand in the way of 
that reputation for learning that they themselves have acquired 
through the knowledge of other less probable reasoning. So that this 
very envy that they bear, is no small proof of the truth and certainty 
of my philosophy. But lest perhaps I may seem to be boasting falsely 



to Father Dinet 361 

of the envy in which I am held, with nothing to call in evidence but 
tne*Dissertation of the Reverend Father, I shall tell you here what 
h%s happened not long since in one of the most recent Academies of 
these Provinces. 

A certain Doctor of Medicine 1 a man of most subtle and per- 
ceptive mind, and of the number of those who, although they are 
well taught in the philosophy of the Schools, yet because they 
disbelieve it and are open minded, are not on that account very 
proud, nor imagine themselves to be wise in the way in which 
others do, who are so to speak drunken with knowledge read my 
Dioptric and Meteors so soon as they saw the light, and at once 
judged that they contained within them the principles of a 
Philosophy more true than any other. And having diligently 
collated them and deduced others from them, he was so skilful and 
diligent as in a few months to compose an entire treatise on Physio- 
logy which, when shown to a few of his own friends, gave them 
such pleasure that they made application to the magistracy and 
obtained for him a professoriate of medicine which was then vacant, 
and which he had hitherto not tried to procure. In this way, having 
become professor, he judged that it was his duty to make it his 
business mainly to teach those things which had procured him the 
office ; and that so much the more that he believed them to be true, 
and held the contrary to be false. But as it came to pass that by 
this means he attracted to himself a large number of auditors who 
deserted the other classes, certain of his colleagues, seeing that he 
was preferred to them, commenced to be envious and frequently 
brought complaints against him to the magistracy, requesting that 
he should be forbidden to teach the new doctrine. And yet for 
three years they could obtain nothing against him excepting that 
he was exhorted to teach the elements of the ordinary philosophy 
and medicine along with his own principles, so that by this means 
he should put it in the power of his audience to read the works of 
others. For the magistracy being prudent, saw very clearly that 
if these new opinions were true, it should not prevent their being 
published ; if, on the other hand, they were false, there was no need 
to prohibit them, because in a short while they would collapse of 
themselves. But seeing that on the contrary they grew from day to 
day, and that they were followed out for the most part by men of 
highest merit and distinction, rather than by the more humble and 

1 Eenricus Eegius or Henry de Eoy, of Utrecht, at one time an ardent 
adherent of Descartes. 



362 Letter 

youthful who were more easily turned aside by the authority or 
advice of the envious, the magistrates gave a new employment to- 
this doctor, which was indeed to explain on certain days of the wee& 
certain extra lessons on Problems of Physics 1 both those suggested 
by Aristotle and by others thus giving to him a better occasion 
for the treatment of all portions of Physics than he could have had 
in merely dealing with his own subject of Medicine. And his other 
colleagues would have thereafter remained quiet and given place 
to the truth, if it had not been that one, the Rector of the Academy 2 , 
resolved to use all the machinery in his power to oust him. And 
in order that you may know something of these my adversaries I 
shall in a few words sketch his character. 

This one is termed a theologian, an orator, and a controversialist; 
and he has acquired great repute amongst the populace from the 
fact that declaring now against the Roman church, now against 
others which are different from his own, and now against the powers 
that be, he betrays an ardent and indomitable zeal for religion, and 
occasionally also mingles in his discourse words of a scurrilous kind 
which gains the ears of the commonalty; but since every day he 
brings out many little books which, however, deserve to be read by 
none, and further cites various authors who yet more frequently tell 
against him than in his favour, and whom he probably knows only by 
their table of contents : and as he speaks very boldly, but also with 
very little skill, of all the sciences, as though he were very learned 
in them, he passes for being very wise before the ignorant. But those 
persons who have greater understanding who know how he has always 
shown himself ready to quarrel with anybody, and how frequently in 
disputes he has brought forward abuse rather than reasons, and basely 
retreated after being vanquished, if they are of a religion different 
from his, openly jeer at and disdain him; and some have even 
so controverted him publicly that it would seem that nothing 
further remained to be said against him; and if they are of the 
same religion, although they excuse and support him as much as 
they can, they yet do not in their hearts approve of him. 

After this individual had been Rector for some time, it came to 
pass that when my medical friend was presiding at the defence of 
certain theses by some of his pupils, they were not given an oppor- 
tunity to reply to the arguments brought before them, but were 

1 Regius was made Professor Extraordinary of Physics on Sept. 6, 1638, and 
an Ordinary Professor on March 18, 1639. 

2 Gisbertus Voetius, Rector of the University of Utrecht 1641-1642. 



to Father Dinet 363 

disturbed all the time by students stamping their feet. I do not 
"*Saythat this stamping was instigated by this theologian through 
Ms friends, for as to this I have no knowledge, but certainly it was 
not done previously; and I heard afterwards from some who are 
worthy of credence, and who were present, that it could not have 
been excited through the fault of the President or his respondents, 
since these noises always began before they had explained their 
views. And yet the report was spread abroad that the new philo- 
sophy was badly defended, in order to make everyone conclude that 
it was not worthy of being publicly taught. 

It happened also that as there were frequently disputes under 
the presidency of this physician, and as the theses were filled with 
questions of a very various and disconnected kind, arranged in 
accordance with the fancy of those who supported them, and not at 
all in a careful way, someone placed in his theses the assertion that 
the union of soul and body produced not a unity which was an 
entity on its own account 1 , but one which was accidental, meaning 
by an accidental entity* whatever is composed of two substances 
altogether different, without at the same time denying the sub- 
stantial unity by which the mind is joined to the body, nor the 
natural aptitude or inclination that every individual part has for 
this union. This we see from the fact that they had added 
immediately afterwards : that these substances were termed incom- 
plete by reason of the compound which resulted from their union ; so 
that nothing remained to reply to either of these propositions, 
excepting perhaps that they were not expressed after the manner of 
the Schools. 

This seemed indeed to the Theologian and Rector to give a 
sufficient opportunity for attacking my medical friend on every 
side, and in order to remove him by this means from his chair 
if the matter succeeded as he hoped, even in spite of the magistracy. 
And it was of no avail to the Physician that as soon as he knew 
that the Rector did not approve of this thesis, he went to see him 
and the other theological professors, and having explained to them 
his meaning, assured them that he had no intention of writing 
anything contrary to their theology, and his. For a few days 
later the Rector caused these theses to be published to which I am 
assured he intended to preface this title: Corollaries propounded 
for the instruction of students by the authority of the sacred faculty 
of Theology; and added that tJie opinion of Taurellus whom the 
1 per se. 2 per accidens. 3 ens per accidens. 



364 Letter 

theologians of Heidelberg termed the Atheist Physician, and that of 
the foolish young Gorlaeus who says that man is an entity by accident* 
is in wry many ways at variance with Physics, Metaphysics, Philo* 
sophy of Spirit 1 and Theology <&c. So that after having made all the 
other theological professors and preachers in the place sign these 
(if they really signed them, for of that I am not informed), 
he might depute certain of his colleagues who were to tell the 
magistracy that the physician had heen condemned for heresy by 
an ecclesiastical council and placed in the company of Taurellus and 
Gorlaeus, authors whom he might possibly never have read, and 
who for my part are absolutely unknown to me ; and that thus the 
magistrate could not with the popular goodwill have him longer 
occupying the chair. But as these theses were still in the press, 
they fell by chance into the hands of certain of the magistrates who 
having called to them the Theologian admonished him of his duty, 
and charged him at least to alter the title and not thus publicly 
abuse the authority of the Faculty of Theology by resting his 
calumnies upon it. 

Notwithstanding this, he went on with the publication of the 
theses, and, in imitation of the Reverend Father 2 , supported them in 
disputation for three days. And because they would have had too 
little matter in them had he not treated of any thing but this verbal 
question: whether or not a composition formed of two substances 
should be called an entity by accident, he added to this certain 
others, the principal of which was concerning the substantial forms 
of material things, all of which had been denied by the physician 
with the exception of the reasonable soul; he, however, on the 
contrary, tried to maintain and defend them by every reason in his 
power, as being the palladium of the Peripatetic School. And in 
order that you may not here think that it is without cause that 
I interest myself in the disputes of others, in addition to the fact 
that in his theses my name was mentioned, as was frequently done 
by the physician in his, he also mentioned me by name in the course 
of his disputation, and demanded of his opponent a man whom 
I had never seen if it were not I who suggested to him his argu- 
ments ; and availing himself of an odious comparison, he added 
that those who were dissatisfied with the ordinary method of 
philosophising expected of me another, as the Jews expected their 
Elias, to lead them into all truth. 

1 Pneumaticam. - 2 Bourdin. 



to Father Dinet 365 

"When he had thus triumphed for three days, the Physician, who 
'fca^fr very clearly that if he were silent many would imagine him 
*o *be vanquished, and if, on the other hand, he defended himself 
by public disputations, people would not cease as formerly to 
prevent his being heard, formed the resolution to reply in writing 
to the theses of the Theologian, in which writing he should refute 
by good and solid reasons all that had been said against him or his 
opinions in these theses; but at the same time he should treat their 
author so gently and respectfully as to try to conciliate, or at least 
not to exasperate him, inflamed as he was against him 1 . And in 
truth his reply was such that many of those who read it, believed it 
to contain nothing of which the Theologian could complain, unless 
it were, perhaps, that he termed him a man of piety and desirous of 
opposing every sort of malevolence. 

But although he had not been maligned by word of mouth, he 
yet held that the Doctor had done him a great injury, because he 
had got the better of him by reasoning, and indeed by reasons that 
clearly showed him to be a calumniator and ignorant of the matter 
in hand. And to remedy this evil, he thought he could do no 
better than make use of his power, and in his own town secure the 
prohibition of the circulation of a reply which was so odious to him. 
He may possibly have heard the assertion some people have made 
about Aristotle, namely, that when he had no good arguments 
wherewith to refute the opinions of the philosophers who preceded 
him, he attributed to them others which were quite absurd, that is 
to say those given in his writings, and, in order to prevent those 
who came after him from discovering his imposture, he caused all 
their books to be diligently sought out and burned. Attempting as 
a faithful Peripatetic to imitate this, our Theologian assembled the 
Senate of his Academy, and complained of the libel which had been 
made upon him by one of his colleagues, and said that he must 
suppress it and at the same time exterminate all this philosophy 
which disturbed the peace of the Academy. The most assented to 
this statement. Three of their number 2 were deputed to go to the 
magistracy and they made to him the same complaints. The 
magistracy, in order to satisfy them, caused a few copies to be 
.taken from the publisher's shop, which caused the rest to be more 
greedily sought after, and read with more interest. But as no one 

1 This reply by Begins was published Feb. 16, 1642, and was partially written 
by Descartes himself. 

2 Mffitsius, Mathseus and Lirffius. 



366 Letter 

found anything therein of which the Theologian could justly 
complain, excepting the strength of reasoning which he could tot 
evade, he was made the laughing-stock of all. 

He yet gave himself no rest, and assembled his Senatus Aca- 
demicus every day, in order to acquaint the members with particulars 
of this infamy. He had a great task in hand : he had to show what 
were the reasons that he desired the reply of the physician and all 
his philosophy to be condemned, and he had none to give. Still a 
judgment finally appeared which was in the name of the Senatus 
Academicus, but which should be rather attributed to the Sector 
alone ; for as in all the assemblages which he convoked he took his 
seat in the capacity of judge and at the same time as the most 
strenuous of accusers, while the Physician was neither heard in his 
defence nor even summoned, who can doubt that he would easily 
have drawn the greater part of his colleagues on the side that 
he desired, and that the large number of votes that he had on his 
part would have prevailed over the small number of the others'? 
This was evidenced principally by the fact that amongst them there 
were certain ones who had the same, and even more reason for 
wishing 111 to the physician; and that others who were peaceable 
men, knowing the ill-temper of their Sector, did not willingly 
contradict him. And there was this that was remarkable, that not 
one of them desired to be nominated as approving of this judgment, 
and there was even one, neither a friend of the physician nor ever 
known to me 1 , who, not desiring to participate in the infamy which 
he foresaw would fall one day on this action, expressly desired that 
his name be given as not approving of it. 

I shall however here append a copy of this judgment, both be- 
cause possibly your Reverence may not be sorry to know what passes 
in these parts between men of letters, and also, so far as I can when 
in some years the fragile leaflets on which it is printed have all been 
dispersed in order to prevent certain calumniators from making use 
of their authority by causing it to be believed that the judgment 
contained reasons sufficiently valid to bring about the condemnation 
of my philosophy. I shall only omit the name of the University, 
in case that which occurred through the imprudence of a turbulent 
Eector just a day or two ago, and which another may perhaps 
change to-morrow, might disgrace it amongst strangers. 

1 Cyprianus Eegneri, professor of Law. 



to Father Dinet 367 

JUDGMENT PUBLISHED UNDER THE NAME OF THE SENATUS 

ACADEMICUS OF *** x . 

The Professors of the Academy of *** not having been able to see 
without grave regret the pamphlet which was published in the month 
of February, 1642, with the title, Eeply about the notes to the 
Theological-Philosophical Corollary &c. 5 and having recognized that 
it tended only to the ruin and shame of the University, and that it 
could only excite sinister suspicions in the minds of others, judged it 
proper to certify to one and all whom it may concern. 

FIEST, that they do not approve of this proceeding whereby a 
colleague publishes books or pamphlets against another of his number, 
especially pamphlets in which he is expressly named; and this merely 
on the occasion of certain theses or corollaries which have been printed 
anonymously, regarding matters of controversy in the University. 

FURTHER, that they do not approve of this mode of vindicating 
a new and assumed philosophy in the said book ; especially since it 
constantly made use of insolent language, opprobrious to those who 
here or elsewJiere teach a philosophy contrary to the above, and uphold 
the ordinary philosophy which is everywhere received in the Academies 
as that which is more true. For example when the author of the 
before mentioned pamphlet says : 

Page 6. For it is a long time since I perceived that the great 
progress my auditors made in a short time under me, has caused 
some people to be jealous. 

Page 7. The terms of which the others usually avail themselves 
in order to resolve difficulties, never fully satisfy those who have 
more clear-sighted intelligence, however little, but merely fill their 
minds with mist and darkness. 

In the same place. From me men learn much more easily and 
quickly to understand the true meaning of a difficulty than is 
commonly done from others ; this is proved by the experience 
of many of my followers who have made an honourable appearance 
in public disputes, without having given more than some months 
of their time to study under me. Nor have I any doubt that 
anyone with any mind at all will allow that there is nothing 
to demur to in all this, but on the contrary that all is worthy 
of praise. 

Page 9. These miserable entities (i.e. the substantial forms 
and real qualities) are clearly not of any use at all, unless to blind 

1 Descartes replaced by asterisks the proper name Ultra jectinse [Utrecht]. 



368 Letter 

the eyes of those who study, and bring it to pass that in place of 
this learned ignorance that you so commend, another and hauf hflf 
sort of ignorance will be obtruded. 

Page 15. On the other hand from the beliefs of those who 
assert the existence of substantial forms, it is easy to fall 
into the views of those who hold that the soul is corporeal and 
mortal. 

Page 20. It may be asked whether this mode of philosophising 
which is in the habit of reducing everything to one active principle, 
i.e. the substantial form, is not merely worthy of being rated as that 
of a Chorsebus 1 . 

Page 25. From this it clearly follows that it is not those who 
deny substantial forms, bat rather those who maintain them, that 
may by good reasoning be driven to such a point that they are 
made to appear atheists or brutes. 

Page 39. Because the reasons that have thus far been estab- 
lished by others for the least important of propositions, are for the 
most part absolutely sterile and untrue, nor do they satisfy a mind 
which is seeking for truth. 

THIRDLY. That they reject this new philosophy, firstly because 
it is contrary to the ancient, which has hitherto with good reason been 
taught in all the Academies of the world \ and that it subverts the 
fundamental principles on which it rests ; secondly, because it turns 
away the young from the study of the old and true philosophy, and 
prevents them from arriving at the fulness of erudition, because, 
being once imbued with the principles of this so-called philosophy, 
they are no longer capable of understanding the terms made use of by 
autJwrs in their books, or those used by professors in their lectures 
and disputes; and finally because not only do many false and absurd 
opinions follow from this philosophy, but an imprudent youth can 
deduce from it certain opinions which are opposed to the other 
disciplines and faculties i , and above all to the orthodox Theology. 

That for these reasons they express the judgment that all who 
teach philosophy in this University shall henceforward abstain from 
the purpose and design of teaching the new philosophy, contenting 
themselves with that modicum of liberty which is practised here after 
the example of other most celebrated academies, without for all that 
destroying the foundations of the old and accepted philosophy, and 
labouring with all their power in every way to preserve the good 

1 A foolish man who tries to count the waves (Suidas). 



name ana 



- And it is 
published somt 
the Rector had 
than reply to it. . 
reasons possible, at , ^ , 
excuse his action, are expru 
run through them all. 

First it is asserted, that the _ 
disgrace the Academy, and to exc,i^ _ 
others. I cannot interpret this otherv, 
might find occasion to suspect, or rathei 
Rector of the University was imprudent in v 
truth, as well as malicious, in that having been t 
he yet tried to conquer by his authority. Bui 
ignominy has waned because he is Rector no loi 
University suffers less dishonour in still having sue. 
professor, than it is honoured in still having the Physicia* 
always that she does not render herself unworthy of him. 

It is said secondly that it is unseemly that a colleague . 
publish books against another colleague especially one in which ^ 
expressly named. But on this account the Rector himself, who in thi. 
judgment was prosecutor and presiding judge, should be the only 
one guilty, and the only one to be condemned. For before this, 
without being provoked to do so, he had caused to be published 
against his colleague two little books in the form of theses, and had 
even tried to rest them on the authority of the Sacred Faculty of 
Theology, in order to assail an innocent man and overthrow him by 
calumny. And it is absurd for him to excuse himself by the fact 
that he had not named him, because he quoted the same words 
that this doctor formerly printed, and so designated him that no 
one could doubt who was being indicted. But the doctor, on 
the contrary, replied so moderately, and spoke of his name with such 
praise, that it might have been believed that it was not against 
him, but as a friend that he wrote to him, and as a person whose 
name was even held in honour; and this was really what would 
have been thought by the world, if the Theologian had availed 
himself of arguments, however little probable they might be, where- 
with to refute the physician. But what is more unjust than to see 

1 Yoetius' tenure of office ceased on March 16, 1642. 
R. H. II. 24 



mother, for 
manifest 

jbtheism wtiflh 
/exited his being 

rove this manner of 
$ &" which the Physician 
^d, since it contains insolent 
jprobrium those who teach the 
jwhere received as that which is 
~*u Derate man does not observe that 
ohe insolence of his words, as to which 
*ed that no (trie could see the slightest 
eiy studies those passages here cited, which 
oeen picked purposely in the book of the 
ng the most insolent and the best suited to raise 
.Dove all is this so if it be likewise observed that 
jig more usual in the schools of philosophy than to see 
xty without any disguise or reserve, that which he thinks, 
jce that all the opinions of others are false, and that his 
are true; for the custom philosophers contract in their dis- 
cations insensibly habituates them to this liberty, which may 
somewhat rude to those whose lives are more urbane and 
polished. So the greater part of the expressions which are here 
cited as having been used in a kind of ill-will against all those who 
in all places profess philosophy, should not be understood as being 
said except of our theologian, as is made manifest from the book of 
the physician ; and he spoke in the plural number and third person 
in order to offend him the less. And finally, as he has made the 
comparison with Choreebus, and spoken of atheists and beasts, etc., 
that has not been done spontaneously by the physician, but subse- 
quently to having had thrown at him those injurious opprobrious 
terms by the theologian, the opprobrium of which he could not repel 
but by showing by good and evident reasoning that they were 
totally inapplicable to him, but that they did apply to his adversary. 
"What can you do with a headstrong man like this who arrogates to 
himself the liberty of calumniating others by calling them atheists 
and beasts, and who yet cannot endure being refuted by convincing 
reasoning 1 But I hasten to matters which concern me more. 

He alleges three reasons by which he condemns my new 
philosophy. The first is that it is opposed to the ancient. I do not 



repeat her<. 

"uthCrs the L 

philosophy wk 

ask whether it 

philosophy which 

so malicious) as to 

being magical, becaus 

object of the disputations Wi 

less, it will be said, by their 

it were once discovered, the disj_ 

as we see in regard to Geometry, 

dispute. But if this evident truth so loi. 

was at length set before us by an angel, 

for the sole reason that it would seem novel to 

the disputations of the Schools ? But it will pc 

the principles which are overturned by the philcx 

are not disputed. But why does he thus suffer . 

easily overturned? And is not their uncertainty suffic 

from the fact that nothing has as yet been built up u 

which is certain and assured? 

The other reason is t/iat youth, once imbued with theprincip 
this so-called philosophy, is no longer capable of understanding 
terminology which is in use by authors in their books. As thougx 
it were a necessity that philosophy, which is only instituted for the 
knowledge of the truth, should teach certain terms of which it itself 
has no need ! Why does he not condemn grammar and rhetoric, 
because it is rather their function to treat of words, while yet 
they are so much opposed to the teaching of those scholastic 
terms that they reject them as barbarous? Were he therefore to 
complain that by them youth is turned away from the study of the 
true 2>hilosophy, and prevented from reaching the fulness of erudition, 
there would be no reason for laughing at him more than when 
he says the same of our philosophy ; for it is not from it, but 
from the writings of those who make use of these terms that we 
should expect their explanation. 

The third and last reason has two parts, the one of which is 
manifestly absurd, and the other insulting and false. For what 
is there so true or so clear as that it is not easy for imprudent 
youth to deduce many false and absurd ideas from it ? But to say 
that anything follows from my philosophy which clashes with the 
orthodox theology, is clearly false and insulting. And I do not 

242 



tot hold Us 

one for'noT 

,ially regarding 

of God. Quite 

jt ans and preachers 

*ave frequently pro- 

j with any theological 

treat in my philosophy of 

of nature. They cannot be 

inless this theology is manifestly 

yhich I know no one will allow of 

nmself. 

it is believed that it is without foundation 

theologian could not refute any of the reasons 

.cian, I shall here bring forward two or three 

.inn the statement. For there are already two or 

.is which have been published on this subject, not in 

-theologian, but for him, and by persons who, if they 

ahed anything that was good, would very gladly have 

.d to him the credit, nor would he in covering himself as he 

with their name, have permitted that these foolish things 

juld have been said, had he had better to say. 

The first of these booklets was published under the title of theses 

by his son who was a professor in the same university 1 . And in it, 

having done no more than repeat the futile argument which his 

father had used to establish the substantial forms or add others yet 

more inane ; and having made no mention at all of the reasoning of 

the Physician, by which he had already refuted all these arguments, 

nothing can be concluded but that its author did not understand 

them, or at least that he was not quick at learning. 

The other booklet which comprehends two, appeared under the 
name of that student who had replied in the seditious dispute which 
lasted three days under the presidency of the Rector 2 . The title of 
it is Prodromus, or a thorough examination of the principles of the 
orthodox Philosophy, etc. And it is true that in this booklet all 
the reasons are placed which could thus far have been collated by 
its author or by its authors, to refute those of the Physician ; for 
a second part was for the first time added, or a new Prodromus, so 
that nothing might be omitted of all that which came into the mind 

1 Paul Voet. 2 Lambert Waterlaet. 



of the authc 
"bee that in tht 
brought forward 
but even with pro-, 
the author has had 
of pure ineptitudes, a 
anticipate another, un 
descending to reply to it; a. 
an ignorant populace, which th. 
they are, and that the loudest 
adjudged the victors. 



But for one who does not look for the g 
populace, and who has no other end in view but to v 
to the honourable and cultured and satisfy his o 
in defending so far as is possible the truth, I hope , 
futile subtleties and all the other things which our adve. 
accustomed to employ, so open and clear that nobody nib 
to use them in future except a man who does not blush at . 
known by everyone as a calumniator, and as one who does not lo 
truth. And to speak the truth, it has so far served not a littk 
to hold in check the more conscientious, that from, the beginning 
I have asked all who find anything to object to in my writings, to 
do me the honour of telling me of it, and at the same time I 
promised that I should not fail to reply to thernj for they have 
seen very clearly that they could say nothing of me before the 
world with which they had not beforehand made me acquainted, 
without putting themselves under suspicion of being thought to be 
calumniators. But it has nevertheless come to pass that many have 
disregarded this request, and have even secretly censured my 
writings, even though they found nothing in them that they could 
convict of falsity, and even sometimes it happened that they had 
never read them : some indeed have gone so far as to compose entire 
books, not with a view of publishing them, but what I think much 
worse, with the view of privately reading them to credulous persons 1 ; 
and they have partially filled them "with false reasoning covered 
with a veil of much ambiguous language, and partially with reasoning 
which was true, but with which they combated only opinions which 
have been falsely attributed to me. Now, however, I beg and 

1 Descartes here refers to Gassendi, cf. pp. 123 sqq. above. 

243 



r experience 

3re to add'e^f 

., so that, if Fdri 

.d not have reason 

ble to boast falsely 

xd even desire this in 

publish may be pre- 

jem aa injury by joining my 

someone said to me lately about 

.s means be deprived of the fruit 

, take pleasure if they had published 

JL wuuid cause them to be read everywhere 

j. thus have the possibility of occupying and 

jids of many persons, before I had time to reply. 

co grudge them that fruit ; nay, I do not promise 

,iiem, unless I find that their reasons are such that 

. they cannot be resolved as they pass from point to 

the readers. For as to those cavillings and revilings, and 

other things said outside the real subject, I shall believe 

u they are more for me than against me. For this reason I do 

.ot think that anyone would employ them in such a cause except 

he who desires to obtain evidence of more than he can prove by 

reasons, and who shall show in this matter that he has not sought 

the truth but is desirous of impugning it and therefore is not a man 

of probity and honour. 

I do not indeed doubt that many good and pious men might hold 
my opinions in suspicion, both because they see that many reject 
them, and also because they are supposed to be new, and because few 
people have so far understood them. And it might even be difficult 
to find any company in which, if one came to deliberate on my 
opinions, many more would not be met with who would judge that 
they should be rejected, than who ventured to approve of them. 
For reason and prudence dictate that having to give our opinion on 
something not quite known to us, we should frequently judge of it 
in accordance with what happens in similar cases : and it has 
so many times happened that men have introduced new opinions 
into philosophy which have afterwards been recognized to be no 
better, but even much more dangerous than those commonly received, 
that it would not be without reason, if those who do not as yet 
sufficiently clearly perceive mine, when asked, judge that they should 
reject them. And so, true as they are, I should yet believe myself 



to Father Dimt 375 

to have reason to apprehend that in accordance with the example of 
"ttA Senate of that Academy of which I have spoken to you above, 
$h5y might be condemned by all your Society, and generally by all 
assemblies of those who profess to teach, had I not promised myself 
that through your goodness and prudence you would take rne under 
your protection. But as you are the head of a Society 1 which can 
read my essays more easily than many others, the greater part of 
them being written in French, I do not doubt that you alone can 
do much in this matter. And I do not ask more of your bounty, 
than that you will be good enough to examine them yourself, or if 
greater business prevents your doing that, that you will not hand 
over the duty to the Reverend Father 2 alone but to others more 
qualified than he ; and as in the judgments of the law courts, when 
two or three witnesses worthy of credence say that they have seen 
something, they are believed rather than a multitude of other men, 
who, carried away perhaps by simple conjectures, imagine the con- 
trary, so I beg you to give credence only to those who shall declare 
- that they understand perfectly those things on which they pass 
judgment; and the last boon I ask is that if you have certain 
reasons whereby you judge that I should change my plan of pro- 
cedure, you will not feel it a burden to tell me of them. 

Further in this small number of meditations which I published, 
all the principles of the philosophy which I am preparing are 
contained ; and in the Dioptric and Meteors I have deduced from 
these principles many particular things which show what is my 
manner of reasoning ; and that is why, although I am not yet 
setting forth all that philosophy, I yet consider that what I 
have already given forth, suffices to make known what it will be. 
Nor do I think that I am without good reason for having preferred 
'to publish first some of my essays, rather than to give my 
system in its entirety before it was expected. For to speak frankly, 
although I do not doubt of the truth of it, yet because I know that 
the truth itself may very easily be condemned by many persons of 
good understanding, through being impugned by a few envious ones 
under the plea of novelty, I am not entirely certain that it is 
desired by all men, nor do I wish to constrain them to receive it. 
That is why I have given long warning to everyone that I am 
preparing it ; many individuals wait for and expect it ; one school 

1 P6re Dinet as Provincial administered 'the Province of Paris' as it was 
denominated by the Society of Jesus. 

2 P&re Bourdin. 



376 Letter to Father Dinet 

alone has judged that it must reject it ; but because I know that it 
only did so on the solicitation of its Rector, turbulent and fooRsi 
as he is, it has not much influence with me. But if perchali(^ 
some others did not desire it, and had juster reasons for not 
desiring it, then I do not doubt that their opinions ought to be pre- 
ferred to those of private individuals. And I even declare sincerely 
that I should never knowingly do anything contrary to the dictates 
of prudence, or the wishes of powers that be. And as I do not 
doubt that the side on which your Society will range itself ought 
to preponderate over the other, it would be to me the greatest boon 
if you would tell me your decision and that of your Society ; so 
that as in other things of life I have always honoured and respected 
you above all others, I now undertake nothing in this affair which 
I think can be of some importance without having your approval. 
Farewell. 



THE END. 



INDEX TO VOLUME II 



Academics 81 

Accidents (see Eeal accidents) 

Active intellect 195 

Actuality, primary 210 

Adam and Tannery 16 n, 1, 125 n. 2, 

135 n, 1, 346 
Adequate cause 56 
Adequately, to conceive 74, 97 
Adventitious ideas 152 sqq., 214 
Alexander 221 
Analysis xi, 48, 234, 243, 256 sqq., 

324 352 
Angels 42, 66, 162 sqq., 192, 230, 235, 

236 

Apelles 221 
Apollonius 130 
Antipodes 130, 244 
Archimedes 111 sqq., 328 
Archimedian demonstration 329 
Architect 325 sqq, 
Aristotelian 249 
Aristotle 3, 12, 112, 117, 118, 171, 

220, 359, 362, 365 
Arnauld ix, x, 79 n. 1, n. 2, 96 n. 1, 

97, 100 sqq., 113 sqq. 
Astronomers 253, 258 
Astronomical reasonings 70, 155 
Atheists 26, 39, 47, 189, 236, 245, 

335 

Atoms 128 

Augustine, St, 80, 86, 90, 94 sqq. 
Axioms 49, 55 

Bannius 1 

Blind man 197 

Blomaert 1 

Body, distinction between soul and 
8, 22, 25, 32, 47, 53, 61 sqq., 80, 
97, 101, 137 sqq,, 195 sqq,, 230 
sqq., 243, 253 sqq., 291 sqq. 
in motion 25 
solid 195, 230 
subtle 196 

Bourdin ix, x, xi, 346 sqq., 347 n. 1, 
348n.l,351n.l 

Brain 145 sqq., 212 

Brutes 140, 145 sqq., 236 

Bucephalus 197 



Caius Marius 349 
Canada, natives of 26, 48 
Caterus ix, 1 n, 1 
Catholic Church 243 

religion 28 
Cause, anticipatory 2 

efficient x, 3, 13, 89 sqq., 110, 160, 
217 

eminent 35, 160 

final 175, 223 

first 176 

material 159, 217 
Chiliagoft 5, 17, 190 
Chimera 66 
China 209 
Choraebus 368, 370 
Christian charity 317 

faith 245 

religion 313 
Church, the 95 

Fathers 235 
Clearness and distinctness 28, 43, 143, 

182, 301 
Clerselier ix, x, 16 n. 1, 125, 135 n. 1, 

239 n. 1 

Cold 18, 86, 105 
College of Paris 349, 353, 354 
Comedy, the ancient 291 
Complete thing, body as 22, 82, 98 
Conserve 57, 112, 169 
Consus 324 n. 2 
Continued existence 57 
Contradictoriness 46 
Corporeal existence 163 

faculties 202 

imagination 66 

things 36, 162 
Create 57, 169 

Damascenus 5 
Damned, the 236, 245 
Deduce 163 
Definitions 49 
Degrees of reality 56 
Democritus 227 
Determinately 300, 307 
Diagoras 189 
Dialectic 127 



378 



Index 



Dialecticians 38 

Dinet is, x, 346 sqq. 

Diogenes 229 

Dionysius the Areopagite 2 

Dioptric 116, 251, 252, 361, 375 

Distinction of body and mind (see 

Body) 

Divine will 39 
Doubt, hyperbolical 93 
Dreams 78, 202, 293 sqq., 305 sqq. 
Dropsical man 42 
Duration 182 

Ecclesiastes 236 

Efficient cause (see Cause) 

Elias 364 

Eminent cause (see Cause) 

Eminently 53 

Entity, accidental 363, 364 

Epicurus 227 

Error 5, 28, 43, 74, 178 sqq., 223 

Essence 3, 61, 77, 81, S3, 97, 113, 

183, 226 

Eucharist xi, 95, 116, 119, 198 
Euclid 130 
Euripus, the 2 

Extension 64, 95, 182, 197, 255 
External objects 155 

Factitious ideas 152 sqq. 

Faith 43 

Father (theol.) 109, 112 

Fictitious 10 

Figure 95, 182, 197 

Formal cause 112 

distinction 95 

reality 161 

Formally 53, 105, 160 
Free will (see Will) 
Frenchman 66 

Gabriel Biel 27 n. 1 

Galen 355 

Gassendi ix, x, 123 n. 3, 125 n. 2, 

135, 373 
Genesis 250 
Genius, evil 189 

Geometers 84, 206, 218, 227, 371 
Geometrical method 29, 48 
Geometry 189 
German 66 
God, attributes of 8, 157 sqq., 256 sqq. 

existence of passim 

definition of 53 

infinitude of 72 
Grammar 371 
Gravity 254 sqq. 
Gregory of Eimini 27 n. 2 

Heart, cavities of 175 
Heat 18, 86, 105 
Heavens 66 



Heidelberg 364 
Heptagon 191 
Hexagon 191 
Hippocrates 355 
Hobbes ix, x, 60 n. 1 
Holland 209 
Holy Trinity 109, 256 

Writ 40, 122 
Hurons 26 

Icarus 329 

Idea 52 

Ignorance 74 

Imagination 65 sqq., 142 sqq., 192, 211 

Immortality of the soul 29, 47, 85, 

103, 200, 320, 325 
Imperfection of the toiiid 11 
Inadequately 46 
Indefinite and infinite 17 
Indeterminately 300, 307 
Indifference of judgment 237, 248 
Infants 85, 103, 115 
Infinite, the 39, 165 sqq., 218 sqq. 

being 5 

regress 170 

substance 165 

Innate ideas 33, 69, 152 sqq., 180 
Intentional species 251 

Jaundice 42 

Jesuits xi, 260 n. 1, 348, 351, 375 

Jove 226 

La Fleche 346 

Lateran Council 235, 243 

Latin Church 109 

tongue 348 
Limitation 171 
Lirffius 365 
Logic 253, 307 
Logicians 82 
Lucretius 200 n. 1 
Lunatics 85 

Machine 10, 11, 34, 145 

Maetsius 365 

Maniacs 103 

Master of the Sentences 245 

Materially false 86, 105 

Mathseus 365 

Mathematical assumptions 152 

point 199 
Mathematicians 91 
Mathematics 131 

pure 190, 227 
Mechanical science 11 
Mechanisms, dynamical 235 
Meditations, the ix, x, 348, 354, 35 
Memory 42, 78 
Mercury 228 

Mersenne ix,. 24 n. 1, 79 n. 2, 96 n. 1, 
135, 204 



Index 



379 



Metaphysical abstraction 322 
^disquisitions 132 n. 2, 134 n. 1 

investigation 240 
"m titter 63 
Metaphysicians 219 
Metaphysics 49, 257, 321, 354 
Metempsychosis 244 
Meteors 116, 354, 361, 375 
Method, discourse on 44, 81, 93, 103, 

104, 116, 140, 350, 355, 357 
Mind 25, 53, 64, 80 sqq., 96 sqq., 101, 
137 sqq., 205 sqq., 255, 291 sqq. 

union of body and 201, 232 
Mobility 95 
Mode 195 
Momus 1 
Monkeys 131 
Motion 22, 182, 208 

cerebral 252 
Myriagon 190 

Natural reason 173 
Nature, light of 169, 200 
Negation of reality 18 
Nerves 104, 145 
Nineveh 27, 40, 48 
Non-being 174 
Non-existence 180 
Notae, the, of Descartes 355 
Number 182 

Objective reality 1, 2, 9 sqq., 52, 157, 

158 sqq. 
Octagon 191 

Opinionative man, the, 94 
Opinion, teaching of 358 
Optics 349 

Pandora 171, 172 

Parents 160, 168 

Parrots 131 

Passive intellect 195 

Pegasus 187 

Pentagon 66, 190 

Perfect (considered as part of whole) 

176 
Perfection of universe 177 

contained in idea of God 22 

degrees of 25 

divine 185 sqq. 
Peripatetics 359, 364, 365 
Per se 5, 6, 14, 15 
Pharaoh 27, 40 
Philosophy 17, 357, 358 

first 30, 259 
Physical causes 175 

scientist 176 

things 175, 199, 253 
Physics 131, 238, 250, 362 
Physiology, treatise on 361 
Plato '60, 183, 184 
Platonic doctrine 84 



Platonists 235, 243, 244 
Porphyrian universals 38 
Possible existence 57 

(God's existence) 21, 45 
Postulates 49, 54 
Primary notions 49 
Problems 49 
Prodromus 372, 373 
Properties 61, 290 
Pythagoras 190, 229, 289 
Pythagoreans 244 

Quantity 182 

Karefied body 142, 209 
Eeal accidents 119 sqq. 

distinction 97 

qualities 367 
Bealisation 195 
Eeflex act of thought 343 
Eefraction 238 

angle of 350 

Eegius, H. 361, 362, 365 
Kegneri, Cyprianus 366 
Eeligious faith 73 
Ehetoric 371 
Eoman Church 120 

Sacrament of the altar 238 
Sailor in ship 201 
Scepticism 336 
Sceptics 31, 229, 335, 336 
Schools 251 

philosophy of 130, 356, 358, 360 sqq. 

proposition of 183 
Scotus, Duns 8 
Scripture 237 

passages in 40, 246 
Self-derived 4, 108, 170 
Self-originated 4, 14, 88 
Sensation, error in 42, 60, 192 sqq., 

230 
Senses, prejudices due to 51, 136, 205, 

270 

Situation 182, 
Socrates 183 
Solomon 247 

Son (theol) 109, 112, 239 
Sorbonne 123 

Soul always thinks 141, 210 
Spirit, Holy 239 
Spirits, animal 103, 144 

mixture of 150 

sensorial 193 
Spiritual entity 36 
St Augustine (see Augustine) 
St John 246 
St Paul 236, 246 
St Thomas B, 6, 7, 12, 18, 19 
Suarez 4, 107 
Subject 61 
Substance 47, 53,. 101, 158, 215, 30 



380 



Index 



Subtle body 196 

Sun, idea of 10, 70 

Syllogism 38, 127, 318, 331 

Syllogistic reasoning 38 

Synopsis of meditations 47, 93, 116 

Synthesis si, 48, 51 

Taurellus 363, 364 

Telescope 70 

Terence 295 n. 1 

Theodorus 189, 229 

Theologians 16, 93 sqq., 115 sqq., 

236 sqq. 

Theological adversary 15 
Theology 358 
Theorems 49 
Theory 94 
Time, parts of 219 
Transeunt action 108 
Trent, Council of 118 
Triangle, idea of 54, 185 
True idea 165 
Trustworthiness of senses 32 (see 

Sensation) 



Truth, idea of 154 
Turks 44, 48 

Ulyssean wanderings 319 

Unity, substantial 363 

Universals (see Porphyrian universals) 

of dialecticians 183, 226 
Universe 176 sqq. 
Unthinkable 38 
Utrecht, University of 367 

Vapour 196, 200 
Voet 346, 362, 369 
Voet, Paul 372 

Walking and thinking 62 
Waterlaet, Lambert 372 
Wax 33, 62, 65, 147 sqq., 212 sqq. 
Will 43, 56, 179, 224 

freedom of 75, 181, 248 
Wind, 142, 196, 208 
Workman 326 sqq. 

mark of 36, 172 sqq., 222 
Worlds, many 166 sqq. 



CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A. AT THE UNIVERSITY PBESS. 



