Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 




/ 



AN ESSAY 

ON THK 

PRINCIPLES OF HUMAN 

ACTION: 



BEING AN ARGUMENT IN FAVOUR OF 

tHE NATURAL DISINTERESTEDNESS 

OF THE HUMAN MIND. 



TO WHICH ARK AX>DB0f 

SOME REMARKS ON THE SYSTEMS OK 
HARTLEY AND HELVETIUS. 



fi. 



",- . 






LONDON: 



^KtKTIO FOK J, JOHNSON, NO. J2, ST. FAOL'I 

Cau&CH>TAftO* 



v^-.,.- 






./ . 






■* 1 J ' ■" 



■-'^''/'/U • ' 



/ 



/ 



"^ 






•■ .r \ 






MWMMi 



trinUd hy £, Hemstedg Great New-Strett, 
Fetter-Lcm* 



AN. ARGUMENT 



IN DEFENCE OF THE 

NATURAL DISINTERESTEDNESS 
OF THE HUMAN MIND, 



At is the design of the following Essay- 
to shew that the human mind is naturally 
disinterested, or that it is naturally inte- 
rested in the welfare of others in the same 
way, and from the same direct motives, by 
which we are impelled to the pursuit of 
our own interest. 

The objects in which the mind is in- 
terested may be either past or present, or 
future. These last alone can be the ob- 
jects of rational or voluntary pursuit ; for 
neither the past, nor present can be al- 
tered for the better, or worse by any ef- 
forts of the wilL It is only from the in- 

B 



terest excited in him by future objects that 
man becomes a moral agent, or is d!eno<* 
minated selfish, or the contrary, according 
to the manner in which he is aflFected by 
what relates to his Own fiUure interest, of 
that of others. I propose then to shew 
that the mind is naturally interested in it*s 
own wfelfate in a peculiar mechanical man- 
ner, only as far as relates to it's past, oi* 
present impressions* I have an interest irl 
my own actual feelings or impressions bjr 
means of consciousness, and in my past 
feelings by means of inemoryj which I 
cannot have in the past, or present feelings 
of others, because these faculties can only 
be exerted upon those things which imme- 
diately and properly affect myself. Ai 
an affair of sensation, or memory, I can 
feel no imefest in any thing but what re* 
lates to myself in the strictest sense* But 
this distinction does not apply to futuris 
objects, or to those impressions, which 
tie t ermine my voluntary actions. I havfe 
not the saixle sort of exclusive, 



I, or meclia* 
^cal self-interest in my future being or 
•welfare, because I have no distinct faculty 
giving me a direct present interest in my 
future sensations, and none at all in those 
t>f others. The imagination, by means 
"of which alone I can anticipate future ob- 
jects, or be interested in them, must carry 
me out of myself into the feelings of others 
•by one and the same process by which I 
am thrown forward as it were into my 
future being, and interested in it. I could 
not love myself, if I were not capable of 
loving others. Self-love, used in this 
sen§e, is in it's fundamental principle the 
same with disinterested benevolence* 

Those who have maintained the doc- 
trine of the natural selfishness of the hu- 
man mind have always taken it for grant- 
ed as a self-evident principle that a man 
must love himself^ or that it is not less 
absurd to ask why a man should be inte- 
fested in his own personal welfare, than 
it would be to ask why a man in a 

B 2 



4 

state of actual enjoyment, or sufFdftng 
likes what gives him pleasure, and dis- 
likes what gives him pain. They say, 
that no such necessity, nor any positive 
reason whatever can be conceived to exist 
for my promoting the welfare of another, 
since I cannot possibly feel the pleasures, or 
pains which another feels without first be* 
coming that other, that our interests must 
be as necessarily distinct as we ourselves 
are, that the good which I do to another, 
in itself and for it's own sake can be no- 
thing to me. Good is a term relative 
only to the being who enjoys it. The 
good which he does not feel must be mat- 
ter of perfect indifference to him. How 
can I be required to make a painful exer- 
tion^ or sacrifice a . present convenience 
to serve another, if I am to be nothing the 
better for it ? I waste my powers out of my- 
self without sharing in the effects which 
they produce. Whereas when I sacri- 
fice my present ease or convenience, for 
the sake of a greater good to myself at 



a future period, the same being who 
suffers afterwards enjoys, both the loss 
and the gain are mine, I am upon the 
whole a gainer in real enjoyment, and 
am therefore justified to myself: I act 
with a view to an end in which I have 
a real, substantial interest. The human 
soul, continue some of these writers, na- 
turally thirsts after happiness; it either 
enjoys, or seeks to enjoy. It constantly 
reaches forward towards the possession of 
happiness, it strives to draw it to itself, 
and to be absorbed in it. But as the 
mind cannot enjoy any good but what it 
possesses within itself, neither can it seek 
to produce any good but what it can en- 
joy : it is just as idle to suppose that the 
love of happiness or good should prompt 
any being to give up his own interest for 
the sake of another, as it would be to at- 
tempt to allay violent thirst by giving water 
to sqgiother to drink. 

Now I can conceive that a man must 
be necessarily interested in his own actual 



feelings, whatever these may be, mere* 
ly because he feels them. He caimot 
help receiving pain from what gives him 
pain, or pleasure from what gives him 
pleasure. But I cannot conceive how 
he can have the same necessary, absolute 
interest in whatever relates to nimself, or 
iu' his own pleasures and pains, gene- 
rally speaking, whether he feels them, or 
not. This kind of reasoning, which in it- 
self is all along founded in a mere play of 
words, could hot have gained the assent 
of thinking men but for the force with 
which the idea of self habitually clings to 
the mind of every man, binding it as 
with a spell, deadening it*s discriminating 
powers, and spreading the confused asso- 
ciations which belong only to past and 
present impressions over the whole of our 
imaginary existence. It therefore be^ 
comes difficult to separate ideas which 
have been thus knit together by custom, 
or "by a long tract of time, by the use 
of language, and waut of reflection^** 



7 

If it were possible for a man's particular 
successive interests to be all bound up in 
one general feeling of self-interest as they 
are all comprehended under the same word^ 
selfi or if a man on the rack really felt no 
more than he must have done from the ap« 
prehension of the same punishment a year 
before, there would be some foundation 
for this reasoning, which supposes die 
mind to have the same absolute interest in 
it's own feelings both past, present, and to 
come. I say the sophism here employed 
consists in comparing the motives by which 
we are interested in the welfare of others 
with the mechanical impulses of self-love, 
as if because we are mechanically affected 
by the actual impression of objects on our 
senses in a manner in which we cannot be 
affected by the feelings of others, all our 
feelings with respect to ourselves must be 
of the same kind, and we could feel no in- 
terest in any thing but what was excited in 
the same way. It is plain we are not in- 
terested in our general, remote welfare in 



8 

the same manner, or by the same necessity 
that we are aflPected by the actual sense of 
pleasure, or pain. We have no instinc- 
tive secret sympathy with our future sen- 
sations by which we are attracted either 
consciously or unconsciously to our great- 
est good; we are for the most part indiffe- 
rent to it, ignorant of it. We certainly do 
not know, and we very often care as little 
what is to happen to ourselves in future : 
it has no more effect upon us in any way, 
than if it were never to happen. Were ill 
not for this shortsightedness, and insensibi- 
lity, where would be the use, or what would 
become of the rules of personal prudence ? 
It will be said, I know, that this is fo- 
reign to the purpose; for that whether he 
feels it, or not, every man has a real inte- 
rest in his own welfare which he cannot 
have in that of another person. First, this 
is to shift the ground of the argimient; for 
it requires to be made out how a man can 
be s^d to have an interest in what he . does 
not feel. There is not evidently the s?ime 



contradiction in supposing him not to be 
particularly interested in feelings which he 
has not, as there is in supposing him not to 
be interested in his actual, sensible plea- 
sures and pains. Secondly, I shall very 
readily grant that to have and to feel an in- 
terest in any thing are not always conver- 
tible terms, that is, an interest may attach 
or belong to an individual in some way or 
other though he does not feel it at the time. 
My having a real interest in any object 
may refer to the matter of fact that such an 
object will some time or other exist: now 
the reality of it's existence does not cer-. 
tainly depend on my feeling an interest in 
it previously. Neither is the reality of 
another's pleasures, or pains affected by 
xny not feeling such an interest in them as 
I ought to do. The feelings of others arc 
evidently as real, or as much matters of 
fact in themselves as my own feelings can 
ever be; This distinction between that 
which is true and what has merely an ima-* 
ginary existence, or none at all, does not 



lO 

therefore so far apply to the question, if 
by a real interest be meant that which re- 
lates to a real objdct, for it is supposed at 
first that this object does not excite any 
immediate or real interest in the mind. 
Another difference that may be insisted on 
is this, that I shall have a real sensible in- 
terest in my own future feelings which I 
cannot possibly have in those of others* I 
must therefore as the same individual have 
the same necessary interest in them at pre- 
sent. This may either proceed on the sup- 
position of the absolute, metaphysical iden- 
tity of my individual being, so that what- 
ever can be affirmed of that principle at any 
time must be strictly and logically true of it 
at all times, which is a wild and absurd no- 
tion; or it may refer to some other less 
strict connection between my present and 
future self, in consequence of which I am 
considered as the same being, the different 
events and impressions of my life consti- 
tuting one regular succession of conscious 
feelings. In this sense, the saying that / 



have 2i general interest in whatevA* concerns 
my future welfare in fact amounts to no 
more than affirming, that / shall have an 
interest in that welfare, or that I am no-r 
minally and in certain other respects the 
same being who will hereafter have a real 
interest in it. The reason why we are so 
ready to attribute a real identity of inte- 
rests to the same person is, that we have 
an indistinct idea of extended conscious- 
ness, and a community of feelings as es- 
sential to the same thinking being; so that 
whatever interests me at one time must 
interest me, or be capable of interesting 
me, at other times. Now this continued 
■consciousness only. serves to connect my 
past with my present impressions. It only 
^ts retrospectively. I have not previ-^ 
ously the same sympathy with my future 
being that I have with my past being, nor 
consequently the same natural or necessary 
interest in my future welfare that I have 
in my past. Lastly, it may be said, that 

there is something in the very idea of plea* 



If 

sure or pwn as affecting myself which na- 
turally excites a lively, unavoidable inte- 
rest in my mind. I cannot conceive how 
the mere idea of self can produce kny such 
effect as is here described, unless we ima- 
gine that self-love literally consists in the 
love of self, or in a proper attachment to 
our own persons instead of referring to the 
feelings of desire and aversion, hope, and 
fear, &c. excited in us by those things 
which either do, or may immediately af- 
fect ourselves. In consequence of the im- 
pression of many such objects on the thinks 
ing being, we shall come no doubt to con- 
nect a sense of self-interest with this very 
being-, with the motions of our blood, and 
with life itself, and shall by degrees trans- 
fer the emotions of interest excited by par- 
ticular positive feelings to the idea of our 
own interest generally speaking. This 
however must be the work of time, the gra- 
dual result of habit, and reflection, and 
cannot be the natural reason why a maa 
pursues his own welfare, or is interested in 



liis own feelings, I think therefore! that in th% 
first instance the idea of personal pleasurie or 
pain can onl)^ affect the mind as a distinct 
idea of that which is in itself the object 
of desire, or aversion, and that the ideal 
of self is nothing more than the first and 
most distinct idea we have of a being ca- 
pable of receiving pleasure and pain. It 
will be the business of the greatest part of 
the following essay to make out these seve- 
ral points more distinctly. 

There is another hypothesis which I 
shall just mention, that holds a sort of 
middle place between the two opposite ones 
already stated. The partisans of this 
more liberal philosophy, who could not 
suppress the consciousness of humane and 
benevolent dispositions in themselves, or 
the proofs of them in others, but yet knew 
not how to reconcile these feelings with the 
supposed selfishness of human nature, have 
endeavoured to account for the different 
impulses of generous affection from habit, 

or the constant connection between tht 



^4 




bjwbkli means we cxmic al latt^m cnoimiBd 
oor <l«ii ixiicictfs with didn. aod to fiod the 



anxiety far tfaeir wd&ic wilKoqt any 
to oar oim advantage. A maift aG« 

to otlicn as he li c c o iu f s aHarimrii to any 
otbcr indiffiEicnt olgect, to a tiee. or a 
Croat £nmHaptT, and the fineqacst 



indiffEicnt idea; and this 
fei iurd, he nmst afibeiwaids be interested 
in their wd&kpe whether he will or bo. 
An example of this may be gnren in hoy^ 
at achooL A boT is confiDed to his ta^lc 
at die sime txme with his school-fdlows ; 
he feels the effects; of d^ good, or ill hu^ 
tnoor of the master in cxHomon with the 
tea; when the school-hoar is orer, they 
«ie all let loose to play tc^cthcr ; he wifl 
in genenl like the same games that others 
do, and be most ddigtecd when they ape 
^^^**^»^st^ when tbey happen to be ia dir 
hctthoawwr, in the hottest pait of die 



is 

^axne^ on the finest days, or in the pleasant- 
est places : they will have the same joyous 
breakings-up for the holidays, and will of- 
ten on some bright morning stroll out in 
search of unknown good, and return home 
tired and disappointed together. Wouldi 
it not be strange if this constant fellow- 
ship of joys and sorrows did not pro- 
duQt in him some sensibility to the good 
or ill fortune of his companions, 
and some real good- will towards them/ 
The greatest part of our pleasures depend 
upon habit : and as those which arise front 
acts of kindness and disinterested attach- 
ment to others are the most common, th^ 
inost lasting, the least mixed with evil of 
all others, as a man devoid of all attach- 
ment to others, whose heart was thorough- 
ly hard and insensible to every thing but 
his own interest would scarcely be able ta 
support his existence, (for in him the spring. 
and active principle of life would be gone) 
it follows that we ought to cultivate sen- 
timents of generosity and kindness for others' 



x6 

out of mere selfishness. The obligation^ 
to the practice of \irtue really depend on 
it's contributing to the original object of 
our nature, our own proper happiness: 
for no man is bound to sacrifice his own 
ultimate welfare to any foreign considera- 
tion whatever. The advantages of virtue 
are however to be derived, like those of any 
liberal art, from the immediate gratifica- 
' tion attending it, from it's necessary eflFect 
on the mind, and not firom a gross calcu- 
lation of self-interest. This eflFect must 
be the greatest, where there is the most 
love of virtue for it's o^vn sake, as we 
become truly disinterested, and genei'ous. 
Therefore as the habit of generous concern 
for others, and readiness to promote their 
welfare cannot be broken in upon at will 
in every particular instance where our im- 
mediate interest thight require it, it becomes 
necessary to disregard all such particular, 
accidental advantages for the sake of the 
general obligation, and thus confirm habit 
into principle. 



17 

Whatever may be the manner in which 
we first acquire disinterested feelings, I do 
not think that much good can be done by 
tracing these feelings back again to a selfish 
origin, and leaving virtue no other basis 
to rest upon than a principle of refined self- 
interest, by setting on foot a sort of game 
at hide-and-seek between the redsoiis and 
Tfidtivcs to virtuei. Without stopping to 
inquire whether the efFect of this theory 
upon the mind would be to produce much 
true generosity, or disinterested simplicity 
of character, there can be no doubt but 
that this end must be attained much more 
eflFectually, asfar as the philosophical theory ^ 
or a belief of certain abstract distinctions 
will ever influence our habitual principles 
of action *, by shewing to man that his na- 

* The question whether abstract or merely intel- 
lectual ideas have ever much influence on the con* 
duct has not been fairly stated. The point is not 
whether an abstract proposition (no matter whe- 
ther true or false) of which I became convinced 

t^-esterday, will be able to overturn all my provi- 

c 



i8 

tare is originally and essentially disinterested; 
that as a voluntary agent, he must be a dis- 
cus habits, and prejudices, but whether ideas of 
this kind may not be made the foundation of inve- 
terate prejudices themselves and the strongest prin« 
ciples of action. The ideas concerning religion are 
of a sufficiently abstract nature : and yet it will n6t 
be disputed that early impressions of this kind have 
«ome influence on a man's future conduct in life* 
Two persons accidentally meeting together, and 
who had never seen one another before shall conceive 
a more violent antipathy to each other in conse. 
quence of a dispute on religion or politics than they 
might have done from having been personally at 
variance half their lives. It is objected that tliis 
proceeds from wounded vanity. But why is our 
vanity more easily irritated upon these subjects than 
upon any other but from the importance attached to 
them by the understanding ? Questions of morality- 
do not always excite the same violent animosity ; and 
this I think is because they do not so properly admit 
of dispute in themselves, also because they are not so 
often made the instruments of cabal, and power^ 
and therefore depend less on opinion, or the number 
of votes, and because every one appealing to his 
own breast for the truth of his opinien attributey 
the continuance of the contest not to any want of 



19 

interested one; that he could neither desire, 
nor will, nor pursue his own happiness but 
for the possession of faculties which neccs- 

force in his own arguments, but to a want of pro- 
per feelings in his opponent. — I will add here a re- 
mark in some measure connected with the last men. 
tioned observation, that the reason why men are ge. 
nerally more anxious about the opinion entertained 
of their understanding than their honeiity is not to 
much that they really think this last of less con. 
sequence as that a man always believes himself to 
be the best judge of what passes in his own breast. 
He therefore thinks very little the better of himself 
for the good opinion of others. Indeed he considers 
their suffrages in this respect as a sort of imper- 
tinence at best, as implying some doubt upon the 
subject : and as to their direct censures, he will al- 
ways find some feelings, or motives in his own 
mind, or some circumstances with which they 
are not acquainted, which will in his opinion make 
a total diflference in the case. With respect to man- 
ners, and those moral qualities which are deno- 
minated pleasingi these again depend on the judg- 
ment of others ; and we find the same jealousy of 
the opinions of others manifested with respect to 
these as with respect to our sense, wit, &:c. 

C 2 



5arily give him an interest out of himself in 
the happiness of others ; that personal iden- 
tity neither does, nor can imply any po- 
sitive communication between a man's 
future, and present self, that it does not 
give him a mechanical interest in his future 
being, that man when he acts is always 
absolutely independent of, uninfluenced 
by the feelings of the being Jbr xi-kam he 
ccts^ whether this be himself, or another r 
lastlv, that all moralitv. all rational^ and 
voluutorv* action, everv thiniz undertaken 
with a distinct reference lo ourselves or 
others must relate to the fiinire, that is, 
must have those things for it's object which 
can only act upon the mind by means of 
the imagination^ and must namrallv oSFect 
it in the same manner, whether thev are 
thought of in connection with our own 
future being, or that of others, 

I have thought upon this subject so long, 
and it has sunk into mv mind I mav sav 
so deeply in the single abstract form which 



appears to me to explain almost every 
Qther view which can be taken of it, that 
I cannot without diflBculty bring myself to 
consider it separately or in detail ; and I 
Skxti sure that many things will appear to 
others very imperfectly and obscurely ex- 
pressed which appear to me evident tru- 
isms from having been accustomed to refer 
a number of particular observations, and 
subordinate trains of feeling, which I have 
forgotten, to that general form of reasoning. 
However I hope that the simplicity of the 
principle itself which must be either logi- 
cally and absolutely true, or not ^t all will 
make it suflBciently intelligible if it be sta- 
ted with tolerable accuracy. 

All voluntary action, that is all action 
proceeding from a will, or effort of the 
piind to produce a certain event must re- 
late to the future, or to those things, the 
existence of which is problematical, un- 
determined, and therefore capable of being 
affected by the means made use of with a 



22 



view to their production, or the contrary. 
But that which is future, which does not 
yet exist can excite no interest in itself, 
nor act upon the mind in any way but by 
means of the imagination. The direct 
primary motive, or impulse which deter- 
mines the mind to the volition of any 
thing must therefore in all cases depend on 
the idea of that thing as conceived of by the 
imagination, and on the idea solely. For 
the thing itself is a non-entity. By the 
very act of it's being willed^ it is supposed 
not to exist. It neither is any thing, nor 
can be the cause of any thing. We are 
never interested in the things themselves 
which are the real, ultimate, practical ob- 
jects of volition : the feelings of desire, 
aversion, &c. connected with voluntary 
action are always excited by the ideas of 
those things before they exist. The true 
impulse to voluntary action can only ex- 
ist in the mind of a being capable of fore- 
seeing the consequences of things, of being 



28 

interested in them from the imaginary im- 
pression thus made upon his mind, and of 
making choice of the means necessary to pro- 
duce, or prevent what he desires or dreads. 
This distinction must be absolute and uni«- 
versally applicable, if it is so at all. The 
motives by which I am impelled to the pur- 
suit of my own welfare can no more be the 
result of a direct impression of the thing 
which is the object of desire, or aversion, of 
any positive communication between my 
present, and future feelings, or of a sort of 
hypostatical union between the interest of 
the being acting, and the being acted upon, 
than the motives by which I am interested 
in the welfare of others can be so. It is true 
I have a real, positive interest in my actual 
feelings which I have not in those of others. 
But actual pleasure, and pain are not thb 
objects of voluntary action. It can be to 
no purpose, it is downright nonsense to 
will that which actually exists, which is 
impressed on my senses to exist, or not to 
exist, since it will exist neither more nor 



«4 

lc>> for my willing it. or not willing it. 
Our shrinking from that which gives us pain 
could not in any respect be considered as an 
act of volition, or reason, if we did not 
know that the same object which gives us 
pain will continue to give us pain while 
we remain in contact with it. The mere 
mechanical movement which generally ac- 
companies much pain does not appear to 
me lo have any thing more to do with self- 
lo\e pioperly so called than the convulsive 
motions or distortions of the muscles caus- 
ed by bodily disease. — In other words the 
obiect of volition is never the cause of vo- 
litioH. The motr\'e, or internal impres- 
sion rnipel-Jing me to the pursuit of any 
object is by the supposition incompatible 
with any such interest as belongs to the ac- 
tual enjoyment of any good, or to the idea 
of possession. The real object of any par- 
ticular volition is always a mere physical- 
consequence of that volition, since it is 
willed for that very reason that otherwise 
it would not exist at all, and since tlie ef- 



«5 

feet which the mind desires to produce by 
any voluntary action must be subsequent 
to that action. It cannot therefore exert 
any power over my present volitions, and 
actions, unless we suppose it to act before 
it exists, which is absurd. For there is no 
faculty in the mind by which future im- 
pressions can excite in it a presentiment 
of themselves in the same way that past 
mipressions act upon it by means of me- 
mory. When we say that future objects 
act upon the mind by means of the imagi- 
nation, it is not meant that such objects 
exercise a real power over the imagination, 
but merely that it is by means of this fa- 
culty that we can foresee the probable or 
necessary consequences of things, and are 
interested in them. 

I hardly know how to insist on a point 
so plain in itself that it cannot be made 
plainer by any kind of reasoning. I only 
wish to define the sense of the general po- 
sition as strictly as I can, and to guard if 
possible against any mistake arising from am- 



s6 

biguity of expression. For nothing but the 
certainty of absolute proof, and of having 
avoided every error of this sort can over- 
come the reluctance of the mind to admit 
fully and in all it's consequences a distinc- 
tion, which however simple in the abstract 
goes to the direct subversion of one of the 
most deeply rooted feelings of the liuman 
mind, namely that of the essential diflFer- 
ence between the interest we have in pro- 
moting our own welfare by all the means 
in our power, and that which we take in 
promoting the welfare of others. Almost 
every one has a feeling that he has a real 
interest in the one, but that his interest in 
the other is merely imaginary; that his in- 
terest in the one is absolute and indepen- 
dent of himself, that it exists with the 
same force whether he feels it, or not, whe- 
ther he pursues, or neglects it, that it is 
a part of himself, a bond from which he 
cannot free himself without changing his 
bfeing, whereas the interest which he takes 
in the welfare of others is a voluntary in* 



27 

tcrest, taken up and dismissed at pleasure, 
and which exists no longer than he feels it ; 
that his interest in his own welfare, how- 
ever distant, must affect him equally at pre- 
sent, since he is really the same being who is 
to enjoy, or suffer hereafter, but that with 
respect to the feelings of pleasure, or pain 
which another is to enjoy or suffer, he 
neither has any direct present interest, nor 
can have an indirect future interest in 
them : they are nothing to him. This is 
the common feeling ; and it is perhaps not 
less common to the most generous than to 
the most narrow and selfish minds : for a 
man of a generous disposition will take 
pleasure in sacrificing his own immediate 
interest considering it as a real sacrifice, 
and will be fond of exulting in his superi- 
ority to the gross influence of selfish mo- 
tives. If however the distinction above 
insisted on with fespect to voluntary ac- 
tion be any thing more than a play of 
words without meaning, the whole of this 
feeling must be utterly false, and ground* 



28 

txs S^'vW dx mind can take, it can have, 
H\> mcctcsi: in any thing, that is an object 
^ ynici:icjd pursuit, but what is strictly 
ifiittgiiKiry : it is absurd to suppose that it 
can have a real interest in any such object 
directly whether relating to ourselves, or. 
<^h«:rs (this has been I trust sufficiently 
shewn already) : neither can the reality of 
my future interest in any object give me a 
leal interest in that object at present, unless 
it could be shewn that in consequence of 
my being the same individual I have a ne- 
cessary sympathy with my future sensations 
of pleasure or pain, by which means they 
produce in me the same mechanical imr 
pulses as if their objects were really present. 
The puncture of a pin causing an irritation 
in the extremity of one of the nerves is sen- 
sibly felt along the whole extent of that 
nen'e ; a violent pain in any of the limbs 
liisorders the whole frame; I feel at the 
same moment the impressions made on op- 
posite parts of my body ; the same consci- 
ous iple pervades every part of me, it 



29 

S is in my hands, my feet, my tyes^ my ears 
; at the same time, or at any rate is immedi- 
ately affected by whatever is impressed on 
^ all these, it is not confitied to this, or that 
organ for a certain time, it has an equal 
interest in the whole sentient system, nb- 
thing that passes in any part of it can bd 
indifferent to me. Here we have a dis- 
tinct idea of a real individuality of per- 
son, and a consequent identity of interests. 
Till some such diffusive conscious princi- 
ple can be shewn to exist, producing a real 
connection between my future sensations 
and present impulses, collecting, and unit- 
ing the different successive moments of my 
being in one general representative feel- 
ing of self-interest as the impressiohs made 
on different parts of my body are all con- 
veyed to one common principle of thought, 
it is in vain to tell me that I have the same 
interest in my future sensations as if they 
were present, because I am the same indi- 
vidual. However nearly allied, however 
similar I may be to my future self, what- 



8« 

for this there could be no desire, no pur-i 
suit of any thing. We cannot strive to 
obtain what we already possess : we cannot 
give to that which already exists a double 
reality. My real interest is not therefore 
something which I can handle, which i^ 
to be felt, or seen, it is not lodged in the 
organs of hearing, or taste, or smell, it is 
not the subject of any of the senses, it is 
not in any respect what is commonly un- 
derstood by a real, substantial interest. 
On the contrary^ it is fundamentally, and 
in it's origin and by it's very nature the crea-^ 
ture of reflection^ and imagination ; and 
whatever, can be made the subject of these^ 
whether relating to ourselves or others, may 
also be the object of an interest powerful 
enough to become the motive of volition 
and action. If it should be asked then, 
what difference it can make to me whether 
I pursue my own welfare, or entirely neg- 
lect it, what reason I can have to be at all 
interested in it, I answer that according to 
the selfish hypothesis I do not see any^ 



83 

But if we admit that there i& something in 
the very idea of good, or evil, which natu- 
rally excites desire or aversion, which is in 
itself the proper motive of action, which 
impels the mind to pursue the one and 
to avoid the other by a true moral neces-^ 
sity, then it cannot be indi£Ferent to me 
whether I believe that any being will be 
made happy or miserable in consequence 
of my actions, whether this be myself or 
another. I naturally desire and pursue 
my own good (in whatever this consists) 
simply from my having an idea of . it suf« 
ficiently warm and vivid to excite in me 
an emotion of interest, Or passion; and I 
love and pursue the good of others, of a 
relative, of a friend, of a family, a com- 
munity, or of mankind for just the sam« 
reason. 

The scheme of which I have here endea- 
voured to trace the general outline differs 
from the common method of accounting 
for the origin of our affections in this, that 
it supposes what is personal or selfish in our 



^^ 



affections to be the growth ctf time and ha-> 
bit, and the principle of a disinterested 
love of good as such, or for it's own saikm 
without any regard to personal distinctions^ 
to be the foundation of all the rest. In 
this sense self-love is in it's origin a perfect* 
ly disinterested, or if I may so say imptr^. 
sonal feeling. The reason why a child 
first distinctly wills or pursues his own good 
is not because it is his^ but because it is 
good. For the same reason he prefers his 
own gratification to that of others not be-i 
cause he likes himself better than others, 
but because he has a more distinct idea of 
his own wants and pleasures than of theirs. 
Independently of habit and association, the 
strength of the affection excited is in pro- 
portion^ to the strength of the idea, and 
does not at all depend on the person to 
whom it relates except indirectly and by 
implication. A child is insensible to the 
good of others not from any want of good- 
will towards them, or an exclusive attach- 
n^nt to self, but for want of knowing bet- 



35 

tcr. Indeed he can neither be attached to 
his own interest nor that of others but in 
consequence of knowing in what it consists. 
It is not on that account the less natural 
for him to seek to obtain personal pleasure, 
or to avoid personal pain after he has felt 
what these are. We are not bom benevo- 
lent| that is we are not bom with a desire 
of we know not what, and good wishes for 
We know not whom : neither in this sense 
are we born with a principle of self-love. 
for the idea of self is also acquired. Whei| 
I say therefore that the human mind is na- 
turally benevolent, this does not refer to 
any izmate abstract idea of good in general, 
^ to an instinctive desire of general in- 
definite unknown good but to the natural 
!(oimectipn between the idea of happiness 
and the desire of it, independently of any 
p^oticular attachment to the person who if 
to feel it. 

There is a great difference between the 
general love of good which implies a know- 
ledge of it| and a general disposition to the 

n H 



Cit jocd. wiica does toe aniv ie 
rich izzzZn !t ii ncccssCT to Lscp i2i 
di-TcriiiCtioc ir rrzT ssE^di, err rfae grfatc 
crjzifztiirjzL vill en^^ic. I: i5 tie gencr 
pT-opertT of iT'xi to be xnncrsd by t! 

place in cocicq^^ejici of lie ! 



l>K2g broazi* cear eTKagh ro it. ccr is as 

fliirjg TEore naeazit br :hr assertior:. Tl 

actoal desire of good :? not ishertct in tl 

n!ii:d of man. becauie it mjuiics to 1 

brought out br cntain accessory objcc 

or ideas, but the disposition itsdf, or pre 

pcrty of the mind which makes him liab! 

tobeso affectedbj certain objects is inherei 

in him and a part of his nature^ as sens 

bility to pleasure and pain vrill not be d< 

nied to be natural to man, though the a< 

^Q3l feelings of pleasure and pain can onl 

^ excited in him bj" the impression of cei 

^^in external objects. The love of m 

^^^u particular good must precede that c 

^^ particular good of others, because 

*«n acquainted with it first : the love c 



37 

particular must precede that of general 
good whether my own, or another's, or the 
general good of mankind for the same rea- 
son. I do not therefore originally love 
my own particular positive good as a por- 
tion of general good, or with a distinct re- 
ference in my nndnd to the good of the 
^ivhole; for I have as yet no idea of nor 
Any concern about the whole. But I lovp 
my own particular good as consisting in 
the first conception I have of some one 
desirable object for the same reason, for 
which I afterwards love any other known 
good whether my own, or another's, whe- 
» ther conceived of as consisting in pne or 
more things, that is because it possesses 
that essential property common to all good, 
without which it would ceasie to be good 
at all, and which has a general tendency 
to excite certain given affections in my 
mind. I conceive that the knowledge of 
many diflFerent sorts of good must lead to 
the love or desire of all these, and that this 
knowledge of various good must be accom^ 



3« 

-«^>tivv^ >.^i2 in mcermcdiate, composite, 
> j^^coice idea of good, itself the object 
.» itf>i:«. because retaining the same gene- 
-A. njLcure: now this is an abstract idea. 
r?iis idea will no doubt admit of endless 
oe'^rees of indefiniteness according to the 
number of things, &om which it is taken, or 
to which it is applied, and will be refined 
at laic into a mere word, or logical defi- 
nition. In this case it will owe all it's 
power as a motive to action to habit, or 
association ; for it is so immediately or ii^ 
itself no longer than while it implies a sen- 
timent, or real feeling representative of 
TOod, and only in proportion to the degree 
^ force and depth which this feeling has.^ 

* Similarity bas been defined to ^ partial same<* 

^ss. CurvQ lines have a general resemblance, or 

analoi^ to on^ another a$ such. Does this resem* 

blance then consist in their being partially the same f 

XhiH may be said \vhere the diiTereiice arises from 

drawing; out the same sort of curve to a greater ex-* 

ti-nc bcciuiSQ by adding to the shorter curve I can 

^iiki^ it etiual to the other. But I cannot by adding 

jiiiy o\)|||Une to an oval convert it into a circle, be* 



39 

The same objection evidently applies to 
the supposition either of an original prin« 

cause these two sorts of curves can never coincide 
even in their smallest conceivable parts. It should 
seem then that their similarity is not to be deduced 
from partial sameness, or their having some one 
thing exactly the same, common to them both. But 
iSiey have the same general nature as curves. True: 
bat in what does this abstract identity consist? Is it 
not the same with similarity ? So that we return to 
the same point from which wc ^t out. J confess no 
light appears to me to be thrown on the subject by 
saying that it is partial identity. The same sort of 
'reasoning is applicable to the question whether all 
good is not to be resolved into one simple principle^ 
m esseuce^joi; whether all that is really good or plea- 
sural^e" in any sensation is not the same identical 
feeling, an infusion of the same leven of good, and 
"that all the rest is perfectly foreign to the nature of 
good and is merely the form or vehicle in which it is 
-^onveyed to the mind. I cannot however persuade 
myself that our sensations differ only as to more, or 
'less ; or that the pleasure derived frona seeing a fine 
picture, or hearing a fine piece of music, that the 
'gratification derived from doing a good action and 
that which accompanies the swallowing of an oyster 
are in reality and at bottom the same pleasure. The 
liquor tastes of the vessel through which it passes. 



40 

ciple of general comprehensive benevolence, 
or of general and comprehensive self-love. 
They both suppose the mind to have at- 
tained an indefinite power of abstraction 

It seems most reiason^ble to suppose that our feelings 
^ii}er in their nature according to the nature of the. 
objects by which they are excited, though not neces- 
sarily in the same proportion, as objects may excite 
very distinct ideas which have little or nothing to dp 
with feeling. Why should there be only two sorts of 
feeling, pleasure and pain? I am convinced that anj 
one who has reflected much on his own feelings musi 
have found it impossible to refer them all to the same 
£xed invariable standard of good or cvil^ or by throw** 
ing away th«mere husk and refuse witho\Lt losing auj 
thing essential to the feeling to arrive at some one sim« 
pie principle, the same in all cases, and which dete^« 
mines by it*s quantity alone the precise degree of 
good or evil in any sensation. Some sensations are 
iike others; this is all we know of the matter, and a]jl 
that is necessary to form a class, or genus. The coo,^ 
tniry method of reasoning appears to proceed on a 
supposition that things difiering at all in kind must 
differ ia totOy. must bo quite different from each other; 
so that a resemblance in kind must imply an absolute 
coincidence in (lart, or in as &r as the things resem* 

• 

l^e one «iiother»— See Usher on the Human Miui|» 



41 

vfhich is not it's natural state. Both the 
one and the other must be made up of 
niany actual pleasures and pains, of many 
forgotten feelings and half-recollections, 
of hopes and fears and insensible desires : 
the one, that is, a sentiment of general 
benevolence can only arise from an habi- 
tual cultivation of the natural disposition 
of the mind to sympathize with the feelings 
of others by constantly taking an interest in 
those which we know, and imagining others 
that we do not know, as the other feeling of 
abstract self-interest, that is in the degree 
in which it generally subsists, must be 
caused by a long narrowing of the mind 
to our own particular feelings and inte- 
rests, and a voluntary insensibility to 
every thing which does not immediately 
concern ourselves. It is this excessive at- 
tachment to our own good because it is 
ours, or for the sake of the abstract idea, 
which has no immediate connection with 
a real imagination of our own pleasures 
and pains, that I consider as a purely arti- 



4* 

ficial feeling and as proper selfishness ; not 
that love of self which first or last is deri- 
ved from a more immediate knowledge of 
our own good and is a natural consequence 
of the general love of good as such. So 
of our attachment to others ; for the gene-^ 
ral principle as exerted with respect to 
others admits of the same modifications 
from habit as when it has a merely selfish 
direction. Our afiFections settle upon 
others as they do upon ourselves : they 
pass from the thing to the person. " I 
hate to fill a book with things that all the 
\>^orld knows ;" or I might here give a very 
elaborate and exact account taken from 
twenty different authors of the manner iti 
which this transition takes place. I do not 

. see how ideas are the better for being often 
repeated. Suffice it to say that in all these 

. cases of haj)itual attachment the motives 

9 

to action do not depend so much on a real 
interest in' the thing which is the object of 
pursuit as on a general disposition to serve 
that particular person occasioned by a pre- 



4S 

vious habit of kind offices and by transfer^, 
ling the feeling of a real interest in a num-? 
ber of things conducive to that person's wel* 
iare totheabstract idea of his good in general, 
I leave it with the reader to apply this tOh 
the cases of friendship, family attachments, 
the effects of neighbourhood &c. and to 
consider the feuds, the partialities, the an- 
tipathie; produced by these attachments, 
taA the consequent unwillingness to attend 
}o the natural feelings of compassion, hu-* 
manity, and the love of justice : and then 
let him ^ee if the same process, that is the 

k 

ingrafting a general, or abstract interest oa 
Un habitual positive feeling will not ac- 
count in the Same way for th^ effects of 
self-love, without supposing this last as an 
exclusive principle to be natural to the 
human mind. For my own part, I be- 
lieve that the cases are exactly parallel* 
Thus we may consider self-love as bearing 
thie samiB relatiofi to family affection as thif 
does to the more general love of our neigH^r 
f^oiir, as the love of onr neighbour does to 



44 

that of our country, or as the love of our 
country does to that of mankind* The 
love of mankind is here to be taken for an 
already given, definite, and to a certain 
degree associated feeling. The comparison 
might be instituted with a slight shade of 
difference bet^y^^en self-love, the love of a 
relative or fiiend, of a neighbour, and of 
an entire stranger. It is in proportioning 
pur anxiety to promote the welfare pf any 
of these to our sense of the use our assis«- 
tance may be of, to use a well knowa 
phrase, -without respect of persons^ that what 
may be called the natural balance of our 
affections seems to consist. By the bye, 
this supposes that our insensibility to the 
feelings of others does nof: arise from an xxnr 
willingness to sympathise with them, or ;% 
habit of being stupidly engrossed by our 
own interests. Whether there may not 
be some higher principle of our general 
nature in conformity to which our senti- 
ments and actions with respect to others 
should be voluntarily regulated, according; 



45 

^^ the same rule by which gross animal 

^t^I)etite is subjected to rational self-interest, 

^^3iy be inade the subject of a fixture in- 

^>iiry. All that is necessary to my pre- 

^Ht purpose is to have made it appear that 

^^c principles of natural self-love and na* 

tiiral benevolence, of refined self-love and 

tefined benevolence are the same ; that if 

ife admit the one, we must admit the other; 

and that whatever other principles may be 

combined with them, they must stand, or 

fall together. 

It is not therefore my intention to puz- 
xle myself or my readers with the intrica- 
cies of a debtor and creditor account be- 
tween nature and habit. Whatever the 
force ofhabit may be, however subtle and 
universal it's influence, it is not every 
thing, not even the principal thing* Be- 
fore we plant, it is proper to know the 
nature of the soil, first that we may know 
whether it is good for any thing, secondly 
that we may know what it is good for. 
Onahese two questions will depend the 



46 

iort of cultivation we bestow upon it. Af^ 
ter this is settled, it is idle to dispute how 
much of the proauce is owing to cultiva* 
tion, and howmtich to the nature of the soil^ 
We should only be sure of having made tbf 
best use of it we can* But wc cannot hi 
sure of this till we know What it is natural* 
ly capable of. I will however lay dowQ 
two general maxims on this subject whic}^ 
will not admit of much controversy. First, 
wheii there is no natural connection be- 
tweeii any two things which yet have bcc4 
supposed inseparable from a confused as<r 
sociation of ideas, it is possible to destroy 
this illusion of the imagination by rational 
distinction, and consequently to weakeii 
ihe force of the habitual feeling which is 
confirmed and rendered permanent by the 
conviction of the understanding, Thus^ 
a principle of general self-interest has been 
supposed inseparable from individuality^ 
because a feeling of immediate conscious*- 
ness does essentially belong to certain in*^ 
dividual impressions^ and this feeling ojjt 





consciousness, of intimate sympathy, or of 
absolute self-interest has been transferred 
by custom and fancy together to the ab- 
stract idea of self« It is therefore of some 
use to separate these ideas, or to shew that 
tbeie is no foundation in reason or the na^ 
tsut of things for a very strong prejudice 
irhidi has been conceived to arise immedi- 
^dy out of them* The mind must be 
^wn together, must be contracted and 
dinuik up within itself by the mere suppo« 
*itum of this perpetual unity with itself and 

• 

^tense concentration of self*interest. Se« 
condly, where this natural connection is 
^^ting, that is, where the habitual con- 
nection of certain feelings with certain 

ideas docs not arise from a predisposition 

• 

^ the mind to be aflFected by certain ob- 

• 

jects more than others, but from the parti- 
lar direction which has been given to the 
mind or a more frequent association be* 
tireen those feelings and ideas, a contrary 
liabit may be produced by giving the mind 
a different direction^ and bestowing a greater 



48 

share of attention on other objects. It can* 
not be a matter of indiflFerence then whether 
the faculty by which I am originally in- 
terested in the welfare of others is the same as 
that by which I am interested in my own 
welfare, or whether I am naturally inca- 
pable of feeling the least interest in the 
welfare of others except from it's indirect 
connection with my own. Habit is by it's 
nature to a certain degree arbitrary, and 
variable, the original disposition of the 
mind, it's tendency to acquire or persevere 
in this or that habit is alone fixed and in- 
variable*. As however the force qf previ- 
ous habit is and always must be on the sidm 

* It is a gross mistake to consider all kabit as 
necessarily dtpcndlng on association of ideas. We 
might as well consider the strength which is given to 
a muscle by habitual exertion as a case of the uss6^ 
ciation of ideas. The strength, delicacy, &c. given 
to any feeling by frequent exercise is owing to habit* 
\Vhen any two feelings, or ideas are often repeated. 
ill connection, and the properties belonging to the 
one are by this means habitually transferred to the i 
v^thcr, this is association« 



{ 



4^ 

<yf selfish feelings, it is some consolation to 
think that the force of the habit we may 
oppi^se to this is seconded by reason, and 
the naturaldispositionof the mind, and that 
we are not obliged at last to establish ge- 
nerosity and virtue, " lean pensioners " on 
seif-intcrest;* 

* ** Ainsi sc forment les premiers liens l[|ui Tunis* 
^nt'' [le jeune homme] '' k son espt^ce. £n diri- 
geant sur elle sa sensibilite naissantc nc craignez pas 
qu'elle embrassera d'abord tous Ics bommes, &c que 
ce mot ^e genre-kumain significra pour lui quelque 
chose. Non, cetlc scnsibilitfe s6 bdrnera premifere- 
itent it ses semblable»,- & sbs semblables tie iseront 
po;nt pbut lui des inconnus, mais ceuk avec lesqucls 
il a des liaisons, ceux que Thabitudc lui a rendus 
clicrs, ou n^cessaires, ceux qu*il voit ^videmmcnt 
avoir avec lui des mani^res de pcnser & de sentir 
communes, ceux qu'il voit exposes aux peines qu'il 
a sbuffertes, & sensibles aux plaisirs qu'il a gout6s ; 
cfeux, en un mot, en qui Tidentite de nature plus 
fliianifestee lui donne une plus grands disposition k 
aimer. Ce ne sera qu'apr^s avoir cultive son nature! 
eh miiles mani6res, apr^s bicn des reflections sur ses 
propret seathncns, & sur ceux qu'il observera dans 



$9 

I have thus £ur attempted to shew by 8^ 
logical deduction that die human mind isi 
naturally disinterested: I shall at present 
try to shew the same thing somewhat dif- 
ferently, and more in detail. 

To suppose that the mind is originally 
determined in it's choice of good and re- 
jection of evil solely by a regard to self is 
to Siuppose a state of indifference to both^ 
which would make the existence of such a 
feeling as self-interest utterly impossible. 
If there were not something in the very 
notion of good, or evil ^hich natural- 
ly made the one an object of inrnpiediatf 
desire and the other of aversion, it is. not 

Ics autres, qu'il pourra parvenir k gSnleraliser ses 

hQtibns iudividuelLes sous Tidee.abstraite d'bumaniti 

.... , , . . ._^ 

& joindre h, ses affections particuli^rirs chiles qui 
pei^vent ridcntifier avec son esp^ce." Emile^ t. ^' 
p» 192. — It is needless to add anj; thtegon tl^is pas.- 
sage. It speaks for Itself. 

L'amour du genre-humain n'est autre chose ep 
nous que I'ampur^de la justice/' Il^id, y, 84$., 



53 

Take the example of a child that has been 
Ibumt by the fire, and consequently con- 
ceives a dread of it. This dread we will 
say does not consist simply in the appre- 
hension of (he pain itself abstractedly con- 
sidered, btU together with this apprehen- 
sion of pain he connects the idea (though 
not a very distinct one) of himself as about 
to feel it. Let us consider in what way 
the intervention of this idea can be sup- 
posed to cause or increase his dread of the 
pain itself. In the first place then it is 
evident that the fire actually burns the 
child, not because he is thinking of him- 
self, or of it's burning him, but because 
it is the nature of fire to bum and of the 
child's hand to feel pain, and his dislike 
of the pain while it actually exists is the 
immediate, necessary and physical con- 
sequence of the sense of pain, surely not 
an indirect and reflex result of the child's 
love to himself, or after^ consideration that 
p^in is an evil as it aflFects himself. Again 
I apprehend that after the actual pain has 



ceased, it continues to be thought of and 
is afterwards recollected as pain, or in 
other words, the feeling or sense of pain 
leaves a correspondent impression in the 
memory which adheres to the recollection 
of the object, and makes the child invo-. 
luntarily shrink from it by the same sort 
9f necessity, that is from the nature of the 
human ^nind and the recollected impres-^ 
sion, and not frpm his referring it historir 
cally to his own past escistence. In like 
planner I conceive that this idea of psun 
when combined by the imagination with 
other circumstance^ and transferred to the 
child's fizture b^ing wUl still retain its ori- 
ginal tendency to give pain, and that the 
njcurrence of the same painftil sensation is 
necessarily regarded with terror and aver-, 
^on by the child, not from it's being con. 
^ived of ,n connection with his own idea, 
but because it is conceived of as paint. It 



55 

Aould alfp ht remembered as the constant 
principle of all our reasonings, that the 
impressibh which the child has of himself 
as the subject of future pain is never any 
thing more than an idea of imagination, 
and that he cannot possibly by any kind 
of anticipation feel that pain as a real sen- 
sation a single moment before it exists. 
How then are we to account for his sup- 
posed exclusive attachment to this ideal 
self so as to make that the real source of 
the dislike and dread which the apprehen- 
jsion of any particular pain to be inflictec) 
on himself causes in the mind ? There are 
two ways in which this may at first sight 
appear to be satisfactorily made out. The 

at the end of this essay. In the mean time I wi§h 
the reader to be apprized, that I do not use the 
word imagination a^ contradistinguished from or op- 
posed to reason, or the faculty by which we 
reflect upon and compare our ideas, but as opposed 
to sensation, or memory. It has been shewn above 
that by the word idea is not meant a merely abstract 
idca^ 



5^. 

• 

first is from the notion qf persons^ identity^ 
this has been considered already and will 
be again considered by and bye. Th^ 
other is something as follows. The child 
having been b.unit by the fire and only 
Ijnciwij^g wh^t the; ps^in ofa J;>um is from 
his recollecting to have felt it himself, as 
soon as he finds himself in danger of it again, 
has a very vivid recollection of the pain it 
forqierly gave him excited in his mind ; 
and by a kind gf sudden transposition 
substituting this ide^^ in ^he place of his 
immediate apprehension, in thinking of 
the danger to which he is exposed he con- 
fput^ds (he pain he is ^o feel with that wh^:]i;i 
he has already actually felt, and in realiity 
shrinks from the latter. I mean that the 
child strongly recollects that particular sor^ 
of paiQ as it h?^s affected himself, and as it is. 
not possible for him to have a recollectioi> 
of it's effect on any one else, he only re- 
gards it as an evil in future in connection 

with the same idea, or as affecting himself, 

^ ■ ■ • 

and is entirely indifferent to it as it is sup- 



57 

posed to aflFect any one else. Or in other 
""^Ords he remembers being burnt himself 
^^ an actual sensation, and he does not 
'^^tnember the actual sensations of any one 
*^Vt himself: therefore being able to trace 
^ack his present feelings to his past impres- 
sions, and struck with the extreme faintness of 
the one conipared with the other, he gives 
vay to his immediate apprehensions and 
imaginary fears only as he is conscious of, 
and dreads, the possibility of their return* 
ing into the same state of actual sensation 
again. 

I do not deny that some such illusion of 
the imagination as I have here attempted to 
^escribe begins to take place very soon 
in the mind, and continues to acquire 
strength ever after from various causes. 
What I would contend for (and this is all 
that my argument requires) is that it is and 
can be nothing more than an illusion of the 
imagination, strengthening a difference in 
subordinate, indirect, collateral circum- 
stances into an essential difference of kind. 




58 

The objection would indeed hold good i^ 
it were true that the child's imaginary synr*.-^ 
pathy with the danger of another must \^^ 
derived as it were in a kind of direct liA^ 
from that other's actual sense of past pair»» 
or its immediate communication to his ow 
senses, which is absurd. It is not suppos 
that the child can ever have felt the actua^ --* 
pains of another as his own actual pains, o 
that his sympathy with others is a real con 
tinuation wd result of tjiis original orga 
nic sympathy in the same way that hi 
dread of personal pain is to be deduced 
firom his previous consciousness of it. Hii 
sympathy with others is necessarily the re-i 
&ult of his own past experience : if he had 
never felt any thing himself, he could not 
posssibly feel for others. I do not know 
that any light would be thrown upon the 
argument by entering into a particular 
analysis of the faculty of imagination ; noy 
shall I pretend to determine at what time 
this faculty acquires sufficient strength to 
enable the child to take a distinct interest 



the feelings of others. I shall content 
^^^^yscif with observing that this faculty is 
^^^ccssarjr to the child's having any appre^ 
*>^nsion or concern about his own future 
^^terest, or that of others ; that but for this 
Acuity of multiplying, varying, extending, 
«H>mbining, and comparing his original pas- 
^ive impressions he must be utterly blind 
to the future and indifFi^rent to iit, insensir 
l>le to every thing beyond the present mo* 
ment, altogether incapable of hope, or fear, 
or exertion ot any kind, unable to avoid or 
remove the most painful impressions, or to 
-Vfish for or even think of their removal, to 
>vithdraw his hand out of the fire, or to 
^ove his lips to quench the most burning 
thirst j that without this faculty of conceiv- 
ing of things which have not been im- 
pressed on his senses and of inferring like 
things from like, he must remain totally 
destitute of foresight, qf self-motion, or 
a sense of self-interest, the passive instru- 
ment of undreaded pain and unsought-for 
pleasure, suflFering and enjoying withput. 



6o 

iresistance and without desire just as long as 
jthe dijBFerent outward objects continued to 
act upon his senses, in a state of more than 
ideot imbecility ; and that with this faculty 
enablipg bim to throw himself forward into 
the future, to antipipatp unre^ events and 
to be affected by his own imaginary in* 
terest, he must necessarily be capable in a 
greater or lt$s degree of entering into the 

feelingly ^nd interests af pth^ips and of feeing 

consequently influenced, by; them,' The 
child (by the time that his perceptions and 
auctions begin to take any thing of a consis- 
tent form so that they Can be made the sub- 
ject of reasoning) being supposed to know 
from experience what the pain of a bum 
is, and seeing himself in danger a second 
time i^ in^nediately filled with terror, and 
strives either by suddenly drawing back his 
hand, catching hold of something, or by 
his cries for assistance to avoid the danger 
to which he is exposed. Here then his 
memory and senses present him with no- 
thing more than certain external objects ii^ 



6i 

ihemselves indiflFerent, and the recollection 
of extreme pain formerly connected tvith 
the same or similar objects. If he had no 
other Acuities than these, he must stop here. 
He would see and feel his own body moved 
rapidly towards the fire, but his apprehen- 
jsions would not outrun it^s actual motion: 
he would not think of his nearer approach 
to the fire as a consequence of the force with 
which he was carried along, nor dream of 
falling into the fire till he found it actually 
burning him. Even if it were possible for 
him to foresee the consequence, it would 
not be an object of dread to him; because 
without a reasoning imagination he would 
AOt and could not connect with the painted 
flame before him the idea of violent pain 
which the same kind of object had formerly 
given him by it's actual contact. But in 
fact he imagines his continued approach to 
the fire till he falls into it; by his imagina- 
tion he attributes to the fire a power to 
bum, he conceives of an ideal self endued 
with a power to feel, and by the force of 



6z 

imagination solely anticipates a repetitidiEl 
of the same sense of pain which he before 
feh. If then he considers this pain which 
is but an ideal sensation impressed on asi 
ideal being as an object of real, present, 
necessary anci irresistible interest to him^ 
and knowing that it cannot be avoided but 
by an immediate exertion of voluntary 
power, makes a sudden and eager effort tof 
avoid it by the first means he can think of, 
why are we to suppose that the apprehen- 
siotl tif the same pain to be inflicted <Hi 
another whom he must believe to be en-^ 
dued with the same feelings, axid with 
whose feelings he must be capable of sym- 
pathizing in the same manner as tvfith his 
own imaginary feelings, should not affect 
him with the same sort of interest, the 
same sort of terrour^ and impel him to th^ 
same exertions for his relief? * 

* I take it for granted that tlie onl}' way to esta- 
blish the selfish hypothesis is by shewing that our 
own interest is in reality brought home to the mind 
as a motive to action by some raeaws or other by 



63 

Because, it is said, in his own case ther^ 

is a natural deception, by which he con- 

founds his future being with his past being 

^nd the idea of a future imaginary pain with 

the recollection of a past conscious pain. 

At any rate, this must be unconsciously : 

if the sense of present danger acts so power* 

fully on his mind as to bring back the re« 

collection of a past sensation, and set that 

before him in the place of the real object of 

his fear, so that, while he is endeavouring 

to avoid an immediate danger, he is in fact 

thi^bng only of past suffering without his 

^ich t}iat of otLers cannot possibly affect it. This 
is unavoidably, unless wc ascribe a particular genius 
of selfishness to each individual which never suilbr^ 
his affections to wander from himself for a moment ; 
or ^all we suppose that a man's attachment to him- 
self is because he has along nose or a short one, 
because his hair is black oc ri^» or from^ an unac- 
countdjble fancy for his own name, for all these 
make a part of the individual, and must be deemed 
very weighty reasons by those who think it self- 
evident that a man must lov« himself because he is 
bimseir? 



66 

ly do not admit of action. * Besides, 
though it is certain that the imagination 
is strengthened in it's operation by the 
indirect assistance of our other facul- 
ties, yet as it is this faculty which must be 
the immediate spring and guide of action, 
unless we attribute to it an inherent, inde- 
pendent power over the will so as to make 
it bend to every change of circumstances 
or probability of advantage, and a powef 
at the same time of controuling the blind 
impulses of associated mechanical feel- 
ings and of making them subservient to 
the accomplishment of some particular 
purpose, in other words without a power 
of willing a given end for itself, and of cm- 
ploying the means immediately necessary to 
the production of that end, because they 
are perceived to be so, there could be nei- 
ther volition, nor action, neither rational 
fear nor steady pursuit of any object, neither 
wisdom nor folly, generosity, or selfishness : 
all would be left to the accidental concur- 

* See the last note but one. 



B7 

rence df some mechanical impulse with the 
immediate desire to obtain some very sim- 
ple object, for iii no other case can either 
accident or habit be supposed likely to 
carry any rational purpose into effect. To 
tetum however to what I have said above in 
answer to this objection, it is evident that all 
persons are more inclined to compassionate 
diose pains and calamities in others by which 
diey have beeii affected themselves, which 
proves that the operation of that principle, 
even supposing it to be the true one, is 
not confined to selfish objects. Our sym- 
pathy is always directly excited in propor- 
tion to our knowledge of the pain, and of 
the disposition and fefelings of the sufferer. 
Thus with respect to ourselves we are little 
afiFected by the apprehenision of physical 
pain which we have never felt and thefc- 
fote can know little of; arid we have 
still less sympathy with others irt this case. 
Our incredulity ind insensibility with 
respect to what others frequently suffer 
from the tooth-ache and other inci- 

F 2 



68 

dental disorders must have been remarked 
by every one, and we even ludicrous froixi 
the excess to which they are carried. Give 
what account you will of it, the eflpect i3 
the same; — our self-love and sympathy 
depend upon the same causes, and con« 
stantly bear a determinate proportion 
to each other, at least in the same indivl« 
dual. The same knowledge of any pain, 
which increases our dread of it, makes ud 
more ready to feel for others who are cxj- 
posed to it. When a boy I had tny arm put 
out of joint, and I feel a kind of nervous 
twitching in it to this day whenever I see 
any one with his arm bound up in conse- 
quence of a similar accident. This part 
of my subject has been so well detailed by- 
Smith and others that it is needless to i^r 
sist on it farther. There are certain disor- 
ders which have a disgusting appear?iixq?y 
that shock and force attention by their no* 
velty ; but they do not properly excite x>vpr 
sympathy, or compassion, as they would do 
if we had ever been subject to them ourselves 



69 

Children seem to sympathize more natu« 
xally with the outward signs of passion in 
others without inquiring into the partial* 
lar causes by which it is excited, whether it 
is that their ideais of pain are more gross and 
athplt, therefore more uniform ^^d more- 
easily sirbstitdted for each other, or that 
grown-up persons, having a greater num- 
ber of ideas .i^nd being oftewr able to sympa- 
thize with others from ki|Owing what they 
fctl; hal!»tuadly make thi^ knowledge the 
fitondatioh of their sympathy . t In gene- 

* The general clue to that asnigma, the charactef 
of the French j seems ^o be that their feelings aro 
very imperfectly modified by the objects exciting 
jlhem. That is, the difference between the several 
degrees and kinds of feeling in them does not cor- 
respond as much as it does in most other people 
with ^he different degrees and kinds of power in the 
external objects. They want neither feeling nor 
ideas in the abstract; but there seems to be no 
connection in their minds between the one and the 
other. Consequently their feelings want compass 
und variety; and whatever else must depend on the 
*^ biiilding up of our feelings through the imagi^ 



7Q 

ral it seems that those physical evils, which 
we have actusJly experienced, and which 

nation." The feelings of a Frenchman seem to be 
all one feeling. The moment any thing produces a 
change in him, he is thrown completely out of hi» 
character, he is quite beside himself. This is pet- 
haps in a great iTiedsure owing to their quickness of 
perception, They do not give the object time \q 
be thoroughly impressed on their minds, their feel- 
ings are roused at the first notice of it's approach, 
and if \ may 50 express myself, fairly run away 
from the object. Their feelings do not grapple 
with the object. The le?i5t stimulus is sufficient tQ 
excite them and more is superfluous, for they do 
not wait for the impression, or stop to inquire what 
degree or kind it is of. There is not resistance 
sufficient in the matter to receive those sharp inci- 
sions, those deep, marked, ^n^l stirongly rooted im- 
pressions, the traces of which remain for ever. From 
>vhatever cause it proceeds, the sensitive pri.nciple 
in them does not seem to be susceptible of the same 
modification and variety of action as it does in 
others ; and certainly the outward forms of things 
do not adhere to, do not wind themselves round 
their feelings in the same manner. For any thing 
that appears to the contrary, objects might be sup- 
posed to have no direct communication with the 



7* 

from tbeir nature must produce nearly the 
same effect upon every one, must excite 

internal sense of pleasure or pain, but to act upon 
it through some intermediate, very .confined organ, 
capable of transmitting little more than the Mmple 
impulse, ^ut the same thing will follow, if we sup- 
pose the principle itself to be this very organ, that 
is^ to want comprehensiveness, elasticity, and plas- 
tic force. (It is difficuU to express this in English ; 
but there is a French word, ressort, which expresses 
it exactly. This is possibly owing to their feeling 
the want of it ; as there is no wprd in any other lan- 
guage to answer to the English word, comforty I 
suppose, because the English are th/s mosjt uncom^ 
fortable of all people). It will rather follow frofa 
what has been hejre said than be inconsistent with it 
that the French must be more sensible of minute 
ii^pressions ^d slight sh9.des of difference in their 
feelings than others, because having, as is here 
supposed, less real variety, a narrower range of feel- 
ing, they will attend more to the differences con- 
t^ned within that narrow circle, and so produce 
an artificial variety. In short their feelings are 
very easily set in motion and by slight causes, but 
tJl^ do not go the whole length of the impression, 
nor are they capable of combining a great variety of 
ifpomplicated actions to correspond with the distinct 



7« 

a. tnoie immediate s^nd natural sympad^^ 
than those which, dep^id on sentiment or 

characters and complex formr of tilings* Hence tlie;^^ 
have no such thing as poetry. This however must 
not he misunderstood. I mean then that I ne^et 
met with any thint^^in French that produces the santko- 
kind- of feeling, in the mind as the following passage^ 
If there is any thing that belongs even to the sfune- 
class with it^ I am rea4y to give the point up* 
Antony-, Eros, thou yet behold'st me. 
Eros, Ay, noble Lord* 
Ant. Sometimes wo see a cloud that's Brage** 
nish, 
A vapour sometimes like a Bear, or Lion, 
A tower'd Citadel, a pendant Rock, 
A forked Mountain, or blue Promontory 
With Trees upon't, that nod unto the World 
And mock our Eyes with Air. Thou hast seen 

these Signs, 
They are Wack Vesper's Pageants, 
Eros, Ay, my Lord. 

Ant, That whigh is now a Horse, even with a 
Thought 
The rack dislimns^ and makes it indistinct 
As Water is in Water. ^ 

Ekos, It does, my Lord. 



73 

tAoral oauses. It is however neither so 
ccmiplete nor durable,, as. these last being 

AiU^ My good Khave, Er^s, now thy Cap* 
tain is 

Even such a body, &c. 

It- is remarkable that the French, who are ar 
Imly people and fond of shew and striking images^ 
shovld be able to read and hear with such delight 
tkeir own dramatic pieces, which abound in nothing* 
but general maxims, and vague declamation, never- 
embodying any thing, and which would appear quite 
tedioof to an Ettglish audience, who are generally 
considered as a. dry, dull, plodding people, mucli 
more likely to be satisfied 'with formal descnptiont 
«nd •grave reflections. Th^s appears to me to como 
to the same thing that I have said before, namely, 
that it is characteristic of the French that their 
feelings let go their hold of things almost as soon as 
the impression is made» Except sensible impres- 
sions therefore (which have on that account more 
force, and carry them away without opposition 
while they last) all their feelings are general ; and 
being general, not being marked by any strong disr 
tinctions, nor built on any deep foundation of in- 
veterate associations, one thing serves to excite 
them as well as another, the name of the genera^ 
chws to which any fooling belongs, the words pita* 



74 

the creatures of imagination appeal more . 
strongly to our sympathy, which is itself 

mrcy charming^ delkions, &c. convey just the same 
meaning, and excite the same kind of emotion in 
the mind of a Frenchman, aud at the same time 4o 
this more jrcadily thaa the most forcible description 
of real feelings, and objects. The English on the 
contrary arc not so easily moved with words, he* 
cause being in the habit of retaining iodividual ima^e» 
and of brooding .m&v.; the'^eelings coi^nected with 



them, the mere names of general classes,, or (which 
Is the same thing) vague and unmeaning descriptions 
or sentiments must appear perfectly indifiereat to 
tl^em. Hence the French are delighted with Ra^ 
cine, the English (I mean some of them) admire . 
Shakespear. Rousseau is the only French writer I 
am acquainted with (though he by the bye was not 
tL Frenchman) who from the depth of his feelings, 
without nuiny distinct images, produces the samd. 
kind of interest in the mind that is excited by the 
events and recollections of our oivn lives. If he had 
not true genius, he had ^t least something which 
was a very good substitute for it» The French ge» 
ncralise perpetually, but seldom comprehensively: 
they make an infinite number of observations, but 
have never discovered any great principle. They 
immediately perceive the analogy between a numbef 



75 

an act of the imagination, than mere phy- 
sical evils can ever do, whether they relate 
to ourselves or others. Our sympathy 
with physical evil is also a more unplea* 
sant feeling, and therefore submitted to 
with more reluctance. So that it is neces- 
sary to tale another circumstance into the 
account in judging of the quantity of our 

of facts of the same class, and make a general in- 
ference, which is done the more easily, the fewer 
particulars you trouble yourself with ; it is in a good 
measure the art of forgetting. The difficult part of 
philosophy is, when a number of particular obserr 
rations and contradictory facts have been stated^ 
to reconcile them together by finding out some 
o^her distinct view of the subject, or collateral cir- 
cumstance, applicable to all the different facts or 
appearances, which is the true principle from which 
when combined with particular circumstances they 
are all derived. Opposite appearances are always 
immediately incompatible with each other, and can« 
pot therefore bo deduced from the same immediate 
cause, but must be accounted for from a combina- 
tion of different causes, the discovery of which is an 
^ffair of comprehension, and not of mere abstraction. 



76 

sympathy, besides the two above mentioned, 
namely, the nature of the pain or it's fit- 
ness to excite our sympathy. This makes 
no diflPerence in the question. 

To say that the^ child recollects the pain 
of being burnt only in connection with his 
own idea, and can therefore conceive of it 
as an evfli only with respect to himself, 15 
in effect to deny the ^^stence of any such 
power as the imagination. By the same 
power of mind which enables him to con-., 
ceive of a past 1 sensation a>3 about to be rcsr- 
e!xcf4edi» the* same being, nxasielyj Immse^j. 
he nrastbte capable of transferriitg the «tme' 
idea of pain to a different person. H6 cre^ 
Mts the object, he pushes his ideas beyond 
tbe.boulK}s^of his memory; and sensesin 4;hQ- 
first :instft»cei' ^^^ ^ ^^^^ ^^ mottr in ^kb* 
second; If his mind were inerel;^p«ssit«iO'» 
the operation, he would not bfe btesy inr* 
anticipating a. new impression, but would ' 
still be dreaming.of the old one. It is of 
the. very oatuare o£theimagi»iatioa to changg^- 
the order in which things have been im* 



i 



77 

pressed on the senses, and to coiuiect the 
53me properties with different objects, and 
^JEEerient properties with the same objects ; 
to combine our original impressions in all 
po$sible forms, and to modify these im- 
pressions themselves to a very great degree. 
Man without this would not be a rational 
agent : he would be below the dullest and 
most stupid brute. It must therefore be 
proved in some other way that the human 
mind cannot conceive of or be interested in 
the pleasures or pains of others because it I 
bsks never felt thenu 

The most subtle way of putting this ob- 
jection is to represent the tendency of the 
child's apprehension of danger to deter him 
from going near the fire as caused not sim« 
ply by the apprehension or idea itself, which 
they say would never have strength enough 
for a motive to action, hut by his being 
sji^U to refer that idea to an actual sensa- 
tion in his own mind, and knowing that 
wiith respect to himself it will pass into the 
^smQ state of serious reality again, if he ex* 



78 

poses himself to the same danger. NoW 
here we have nothing but a reflection oil 
a reflection. It is supposed that the direct 
idea of a terrible and well-known pain hai 
no effect at all upon the mind, but that thd 
idea of this idea as about to be converted 
into, or succeeded by the pain itself in the 
same conscious being will immediately ex- 
cite the strongest efforts to prevent it. Cer- 
tainly the near expectation of the object of 
your dread actually realized to the senses 
strengthens the fear of it ; but it strengthen^ 
it through the imagination* Just as the 
knowing that a person whom you wished 
anxiously to see and had not seen for many 
years was in the next room would make 
you recall the impression of their face or 
figure almost with the same vividness and 
reality as if they were actually present. 
The force then with which the mind anti- 
cipates future pain in connection with the 
idea of continued consciousness can only 
tend to produce voluntary action by mak- 
ing the idea stronger : but it could not have 



^lis eflFect at all if it were not of the na- 
ture of all pain when foreseen by the mind 
to produce a tendency that way, that is to 
«xcite aversion, and a will to prevent it, 
liowevcr slight this may sometimes be* 
The sophism which lurks at the bottom of 
this last objection seems to be the con- 
founding the idea of future pain as the 
cause or motive of action with the after- 
reflection on that idea as a positive thing, 
itself the object of action. Finding in 
many cases that the first apprehension and 
momentary fear of danger was gone by, but 
rfiat the reason for avoiding it still remained 
the same, the mind would be easily led to 
seek for the true cause of action in some- 
thing more fixed and permanent than the 
fleeting ideas of remote objects, and to ro- 
quire that every object whether of desire or 
aversion should have some stronger hold 
on the individual than it's momentary ef- 
fect on his imagination before it became an 
object of serious pursuit, or the contrary. 
But in rejecting the ideas of things as them- 



8o 

ft 

selves the ultimate grounds and proper ob^ 
jects of action, an^ referring the mind to 
the things themselves as the only solid ba* 
sis of a rational and durable interest, what 
do we do but go back to the first -direct 
idea of the object, which as it represents 
that object is as distinct from any secon- 
dary reflection on, or oblique conscious- 
iiess of, itself as an absolute things the ob- 
ject of thought, as a sensation can be di& 
ferent from an idea, or a present impression 
from a future one. There is nothing ia 
the foregoing theory which has any ten-^ 
dency to overturn the fundamental distinc- 
tions between truth and falsehood, or the 
common methods of judging what these aare : 
all the old boundaries and land-marks, re* 
main just where they were. It does «iot 
purely by any means follow because the 
reality of future objects can only be judged 
of by the mind, that therefore it has no 
power of distinguishing between the pro- 
bable consequences of things, and what 
can never happen, that it is to take every 



8i 

impulse of will or fancy for truth, or be- 
cause future objects cannot act upon the 
mind from without, that therefore our ideas 
cannot have any reference to, or properly 
represent those objects, or any thing ex- 
ternal to the mind, but must consist entirely 
in the conscious contemplation of them* 
selves. 

There is another feeling in a great mea- 
sure the same with the former, but distin- 
guishable from it and still more strongly 
connected with a sense of self-interest, 
namely, that of continued personal iden- 
tity. This has been already treated of: 
I shall here resume the question once for 
all, as it is oil this that the chief stress of 
the argument lies. The child seeing him- 
self in danger of the fire does not think of 
his present and future self as two distinct 
beings, but as one and the same being : he 
as it were projects himself fiDrward into the 
future, and identifies himself with his Ai- 
. ture being. He knows that he shall feel 
\m own future pleasures and pains^ and 

G 



82 

that he must therefore be as much mterest- 
ed in them as if they were present. Iii 
thinking of the future, he does not conceive 
of any change as really taking place in him- 
self, or of any thing intermediate between 
his present and future being, but considers 
his future sensations as affecting that very 
same conscious being in which he now 
feels such an anxious and unavoidable in- 
terest. We say that the hand which the 
child snatches back from the fire is the 
same hand which but for his doing so 
would the next moment be exposed to the 
most excessive pain. But this is much more 
true of that inward conscious principle which 
alope connects the successive moments of 
our being together, and of which all our 
outward organs are but instruments, sub- 
ject to perpetual changes both of action 
and suffering. To make the difference of 
time the foundation of an essential distinc- 
tion and complete separation between his 
present and future being as if this were 
the only thing to ^be attended to is to op- 




83 

pose an unmeaning sophism to plain mat- 
ter of fact, since mere distance of time does 
not destroy individuality of consciousness. 
He is the same conscious being now that 
he will be the next moment, or the next 
hour, or a month or a year hence. His 
interests as an individual as well as his be- 
ing must therefore be the same. At least 
this must be the case as long as he retains 
the consciousness of his past impressions 
connecting them together in one uniform 
or regular train of feeling: for the inter- 
ruption of this sense of continued identity 
by sleep, inattention or otherwise seems 
from it's being afterwards renewed to prove 
the point more clearly, as it seems to shew 
that there is some deep inWard principle 
which remains the same in spite of all par- 
ticular accidental changes. 

The child does no doubt consider him- 
self as the same being, or as directly and 
absolutely interested in his own welfare, 
as far as he can distinctly foresee the con*, 
sequences of things to himself. But this 

o 2 



84 

Very circumstance of his identifying him- 
self with his future being, of feeling for 
this imaginary self as if it were incorpo- 
rated with his actual substance, and weighed 
upon the pulses of his blood is itself the 
strongest instance that can be given of the 
force of the imagination, which the advo- 
cates of the selfish hypothesis would re- 
present as a faculty entirely powerless. 

No one, I should think, will be dis- 
posed seriously to maintain that this future 
imaginary self is, by a kind of metaphy- 
sical transubstantiation, virtually embo- 
died in his present being, so that his fu- 
ture impressions are indirectly communi- 
cated to him before -hand. For whatever 
we may imagine,'' or believe concerning the 
substance itself, or elementary principle in 
which thought is supposed to reside, it is 
plain that that principle as acted upon by 
external objects, or modified by particular 
actual thoughts and feelings (which alone 
can be the motives of action, or can im- 
pel the mind in this, or that direction) is 



85 

perpetually changing; and it is also plain 
that the changes which it has to undergo at 
any time can have no possible effect on 
those which it has previously undergone, 
which may be the cause indeed but cannot 
be the effect of subsequent changes. In 
this sense the individual is never the same 
for two moments together. What is true 
of him at one time is never (that we know 
of) exactly and particularly true of him at 
any other tii^ie. It is idle to say that he 
is the same being generally speaking, that 
he has the same general interest. For he 
is also a man in general ; and this argur 
ment would prove that he has a general 
interest in whatever concerns humanity. 
Indeed the terms mean nothing as applied 
to this question. The question is whether 
the indivijdual is the same being in such 
sort or manner as that he has an equal, ab- 
solute interest in every thing relating to 
Jiimself, or that his future impressions affect 
him as much and impel him to action with 
thp same mechanical force as if they werf 



• ■* 



86 

actually present. This is so far from being 
true that his future impressions do not exert 
the smallest influence over his actions, they 
do not affect him mechanically in any de- 
gree. The catechism of this philosophy 
would^run thus. You are necessarily in- 
terested in your future sensations ? Yes, 
And why so ? Because I am the same be- 
ing. What do you mean by the same be- 
ing? The same being is the same indivi- 
dual, that is, one who has the same in- 
terests, the same feelings, the same con- 
sciousness, so that whatever affects him at 
any one time must extend to his whole ex- 
istence. He must therefore be at all times 
interested in it alike. Do you then feel 
your future sensations before they really 
exist? No. How then, if you do not feel 
them, can ypu be affected by them? Be- 
cause as the same individual, &c. That 
is, by the very supposition the pain which 
the child is to suffer does not exist, of 
course he does not feel it, nor can he be 
moved, affected or interested by it as if it 



87 

did: and yet in the same breath, by a 
shrewd turn of logic it is proved that as he 
is the same being, he must feel, be inte- 
rested in and affected by it as much as he 
ever will. But then it will as shrewdly 
follow that withth is implication he is not 
the same being, for he cannot be affecte4 
in the same manner by an object before it 
is impressed on his senses that he is afterr 
wards; and the fear or imaginary appre- 
hension of pain is a differpnf fjiing from 
the actual perception of it. There is 
just the same difference between feeling a 
pain yourself and believing that another 
will feel it. 

I do request the reader to bear it in 
mind throughout the whole of this reason- 
ing that when I say that the child does not 
feel, that he is not interested in his future 
sensations, and consider this as equivalent 
to his having no real or personal interest 
uithem, I mean that he never feels or can 
{(^affected by them before-hand, that he 
is iJways necessarily cut off from ^very 



88 

kind of communication with them, that 
they cannot possibly act upon his mind as 
motives to action; or excite in him any 
kind of impulse in any circumstances or any 
manner : and I conceive that it is no great 
stretch of speculative refinement to insist 
that without some such original faculty of 
being immediately aflFected by his future 
sensations more than by those of others, 
his relation to his future self, whatever that 
may be, cannot be made the foundation of 
his having a teal positive interest in his fu- 
ture welfare which he has not in that of 
others. A general, or abstract, or reflex 
interest in any object implies either a pre- 
vious positive interest in that object, or a 
natural capacity in the mind to be aEFected 
by it in the manner given. Thus I may 
be said to pursue any object from a gene- 
ral interest in it, though it excites no in- 
terest or emotion in my niind at the time, 
when I do this from habit, or when the ij 
pression has been so often repeated as 
have produced a mechanical tendency to the 






89 

pursuit of the object, which has no need of 
any new impulse to excite it. Or the same 
thing may be said with reference to my ge- 
neral nature as a voluntary agent. This 
implies that the object, in which I am sup-? 
posed to be interested without being sensi- 
ble of it, is in itself interesting to me, that 
it is an object in which I can and must ne- 
cessarily be interested, the moment it is 
known to me ; that I am interested gene- 
rally in that whole class of objects, and 
may be said to be interested in this inclu- 
sively. To go farther than this, and say that 
the mind as the representative of truth is or 
ought to be interested in things as they are 
really and truly interesting in themselves, 
without any reference to the manner in 
which they immediately affect the indivi- 
dual, is to destroy at once the foundation 
of every principle of selfishness, which sup- 
poses that all objects are good or bad, de- 
sirable or the contrary solely from their 
connection with self. But I am tired of 
repeating the same thing so often; for *' as 



90 

to those that will not be at the pains of a 
little thought, no multiphcation of words 
will ever suffice to make them understand 
the truth or rightly conceive my mean* 
mg. ♦ 

To return. Even if it were possible to 
establish some such preposterous connec- 
tion between the! same individual, as that, 
by virtue of this connection, his future 
sensations should be capable of transmit- 
ting their whole strength aiwi efficacy to 
his present impulses, and of clothing ideal 
motives with a borrowed reality, yet such 
is the nature of all sensation, or absolute 
existence as to be incompatible with volun- 
tary action. How should the reality of my 
future interest in any object be (by antici- 
pation) the reason erf my having a real iute-* 
lest in the pursuit of that object at present, 
when if it really existed I could no longer 
pursue it. The feelings of desire, aversion, 
&c, connected with voluntary action must 

* Berkeley's Essay on Vision^ 



91 

^l^Tays be excited by the idea of the object 
"^fore it exists, and must be totally incon- 
distent with any such interest as belongs to 
^^tual suffering or enjoyment.* The in- 
^^test belonging to any sensation or real 
object as such, or which arises as one may 
^ay from the final absorption of the idea in 
the object cannot have any relation to an 
active or voluntary interest which necessa- 
rily implies the disjunction of these two 
things : it cannot therefore be the original, 
the parent- stock, the sole and absolute 
foundation of an interest which is de- 
fined by it's connection with voluntary ac- 
tion. — Still it will be said that however dif- 
ficult it may be to explain in what this 
consists, there is a principle of some sort or 
other which constantly connects us with 
ourselves, and makes each individual the 
same person distinct from every one else. 
And certainly if I did not think it possible 
to account satisfactorily for the origin of 

* See page 22, and the following pages* 



92 

the idea of self, and the influence which 
that idea has on our actions without loosen- 
ing the foundation of the foregoing reason- 
ings, I should give them up without a 
question, as there is no reasoning which 
can be safely opposed against a common 
feeling of human nature left unexplained^ 
^nd without shewing in the clearest man- 
ner the grounds from which it may have 
arisen. I shall proceed to state (as far as 
is necessary to the present argument) in 
what the true notion of personal identity 
appears to me to consist ; and this I believe 
it will be easy to shew depends entirely 
on the continued connection which sub- 
sists between a man's past and present feelr 
ings and not, vice versa, on any previous 
connection between his future and his pre- 
sent feelings, which is absurd and impos^ 
sible. 

Every human being is distinguished 
from every other human being, both nu- 
merically, and characteristically. He 
must be numerically distinct by the sup- 



93 

position: otherwise he would not be ano- 
ther individual, but the same. There is 
however no contradiction in supposing 
two individuals to possess the same absolute 
properties: but then these original proper- 
lies must be differently modified aftenvards 
from the necessary difference of their situ- 
ations, or we must suppose them both to 
occupy the same relative situation in two 
distin ^^ systems corresponding exactly 
with each other. In fact every one is 
found to differ essentially from every one 
else, if not in original properties, in the 
circumstances and events of their lives and 
consequent ideas. In thinking of a num- 
ter of individuals, I conceive of them all 
as differing in various ways from one 
another as well as from myself. They dif- 
fer in size, in complexion, in features, in 
the expression of their countenances, in 
age, in the events and actions of their lives, 
in situation, in knowledge, in temper, in 
power. It is this perception or appre- 
hension of their real differences that first 



94 

enables me to distinguish the several in- 
dividuals of the species from each other, 
and that seems to give rise to the most 
general idea of individuality, as repre- 
senting first positive number, and second- 
ly the sum of the differences between 
one being and another as they really 
exist in a greater or less degree in nature, 
or as they would appear to exist to an im- 
partial spectator, or to a perfectly intelli- 
gent being. But / am not in reality xnore 
different from others than any one indivi- 
dual is from any other individual ; neither 
do I in fact suppose myself to differ really 
from them otherwise than as they differ 
from each other. What is it then that 
makes the difference greater to me^ or that 
makes me feel a greater difference in pass- 
ing from my own idea to that of any one 
else than in passing from the idea of an 
indifferent person to that of any one else ? 
Neither my existing as a separate beings 
nor my differing from others is of itself 
sufficient to constitute personality, or give 



95 

^e the idea of self, since I might perceive 
<<others to exist, and compare their actual 
^fferences wirfiout ever having this idea. 

Farther, individuality expresses not mere- 
ly the absolute difference, or distinction be« 
tween one individual and another, but 
jalso a relation, or comparison of that indi-^ 
vidual with itself, whereby we aflSrm that 
k is in iome way or other the same with 
itself or one thing. In one sense it is true 
of all existences whatever that they are the 
^ame with themselves, that is they are what 
they are and not something else. Each 
thing is itself, it is that individual thing 
aiid no other, and each combination of 
things is that combination and no other. 
So also each individual is necessarily 
the same with himself, or in other words 
that tXHnbination of ideas which repre- 
$c:nts 9Xiy individual person is that com- 
bination of ideas and not a different one. 
This is the only true and absolute identity 
which can be affirmed of any being; which 
it is plain: does not arise from a comparison 



96 

of the different parts composing the gene* 
ral idea one with another, but each with 
itself, or all of them taken together with 
the whole. I cannot help thinking that 
some idea of this kind is frequently at the 
bottom of the perplexity which is felt by 
most people who are not metaphysicians 
(not to mention those who are) when they 
are told that the man is not the same with 
himself, their notion of identity being that 
he is the same with hims^f in as far as he 
is positively different from every one else. 
They compare his present existence with 
the present existence of others, and his 
continued existence with the continued 
existence of others. Thus when they say 
that the man is the same being in general, 
they do not mean that he is the same at 
twenty that he is at sixty, but their gene- 
ral idea of him includes both these ex- 
tremes, and therefore the same man, that 
is collective idea, is both the one and the 
other. This however is but a rude logic. 
Not well understanding the process of dis- 



r ifci^iMll— I 



97 

tinguishing the same individual into differ- 
ent metaphysical sections to compare, col- 
late, and set one against the other^ (so awk- 
wardly do we at first apply ourselves to the 
analytic art !) to get rid of the difficulty » 
the nGiind produces a dottble individual part 
real and part imaginary, or repeats the same 
idea twice over, in which case it isacontradic* 
tion to suppose that the one does not corres- 
pond exactly with the other in all it's parts. 
There is no other absolute identity in the 
case. 

All individuals (or all that we name 
such) are aggregates, and aggregates of 
dissimilar things. Here then the question 
is not how we distinguish one individual 
from another, or a number of things from 
a number of other things, which distinction 
is a matter of absolute truth, but how we 
come to confound a number of things to- 
gether, and consider many things as the same, 
which cannot be strictly true. This idea 
must therefore relate to such a connection 
between a number of things as determines 
the ndnd to consider them as one whole, 

H 



9« 

tacfa tiling in tliat whole Iiaving a mach 
neater and more lasting connection with 
the lest than with any thing else not in« 
duded in it, so that the degree of con- 
nection between the parts after all re« 
Ifuties to be determined by annexing the 
name of the thing, that b collective idea^ 
signified. (The same causes that deter- 
mine the mind to consider a number of 
things as the same individual must of course 
imply a correspondent distinction between 
them and other things, not making part of 
that individual. The eye is not the same 
thing as the ear, it is a contradiction to call 
it so. Yet both are parts of the same body^ 
which contains these and infinite other 
distinctions. The reason of this is that all 
the parts of the eye have evidently a distinct 
nature, a separate use, a greater mutual 
dependence on one another than on those 
of the ear, at the same time that the con* 
nection between the eye and ear as well as 
tKc''*test of the body is still very great, 
compared to their d|iifection with any 
other body of ibt samelttnd, which is none 



99 

at all. Similarity is in general but a 
subordinate circumstance in determin- 
ing this relation. For the eye is certainly 
more like the same organ in another indi- 
vidual than the different organs of sight 
and hearing are like one another in the 
same individual. Yet we do not, in ma- 
king up the imaginary individual , associate 
our ideas according to this analogy, which 
of itself would answer no more purpose 
than the things themselves would, so sepa- 
rated and so reunited, but we think of 
them in that order in which they are mecha- 
nically connected together in nature, because 
it is on this order that depends their power 
of mutually acting and reacting on each 
other, of acting conjointly upon other 
things or of being acted upon by them. 
To give an instance which just occurs to 
me. Suppose there are two gold-headed 
canes standing together in the comer of 
the room. I of course consider each of 
them as the same cane. This is not from 
the similarity of the gold to the wood. 
But the two gold-heads together would not 

H t 



lOO 

if taken off at all answer the purpose of a 
cane, and the two canes together would 
be more than I should want. Nor is it 
simply from the contiguity of the parts, 
(for the canes themselves are supposed to 
touch one another) but from their being 
so united that by moving any part of one 
of them, I of necessity move the whole. The 
closest connection between my ideas is 
formed by that relation of things among 
themselves, which is most necessary to be 
attended to in making use of them, the 
common concurrence of many things to 
some given end: for example, my idea of 
the walking-stick is defined by the simpli- 
city of the action necessary to wield it for 
that particular purpose. However, it 
seems hardly possible to define the different 
degrees or kinds of identity in the same 
thing by any general rule. Thus we say 
the same tree, the same forest, the same 
river, the same field, the same country, 
the same world, the same man, &c. The 
nature of the thing will best point out the 



* f 



lOl 

sense in which it is said to be the sapie.* 

• The sum of the matter is this. Individuality 
may relate either to absolute unity, to the identity, 
or similarity of the parts of any thing, or to an ex- 
traordinary degree of conneirtion between things 
neither the same nor similar^ This lafl alone in 
feet determines the positive use of the wofd^ at )e.aA 
with respect to man, and other organized beings. 
(Indeed the term is hardly ever applied to other 
thirigis in common language.) When I speak of the 
difference between one individual and, another, this 
must refer ultimately ta the want of such connec- 
tion between them, or to my perceiving that a 
number of things are so connected as to have 
a mutuafi' and intimate dependence on one an- 
other, making one individual, and that they are so 
disconnected with a number of other things as not to 
Lave the least habitual dependence upon or influr 
ence over them, which makes them two distinct 
individaalsp As to the other distinctions between 
one individual and another, namely those of number 
iaijd properties, the first of these subsists as neces- 
sarily betweci) jthc parts of the individual, as be- 
tween one individual and another, and the second 
frequently subsists in a much greater degree between 
those parts, than between different individuals. 
Two distinct individuals can certainly never be thp 



102 

—I am'nQt thg same thing, but many diSe 
ent things. To insist pn absolute simplicil 
of nature as essential to in^ividi^iUity wou] 
be to destroy all individuality : for \% ^Qv} 

same : tbfit ^s, supposing th^ number of parts 
each individual to be f^ 10, IQ can never make 2 
But neither can 10 ever be made into an unit ; 
that we should have ten individuals instead of 
by insbting on the absolute distinction of numbes 
When I say therefore that one individual difierst fro 
another, I must be understood by impiication 
mean, in some way in which the parts of that indi" 
dual do not differ from each other or not by any mea 
in the sam^ degree. The mind is however extren 
ly apt to fasitcn on the distinctions of number a 
properties where tfiey co-exist with the other d 
;i notion, and ali^ost lose$ sight of those distinctio 
between things that hav^ a veiry close connect! 
with each other. When th^^^f*^''^ ^^ include t 
distinctions of number and properties \n our accou 
of the difference between one Individual and a 
other, this can only be true in ap absolute seni 
^nd not if it be meant to imply thfit the same d 
tinctions do not exist in the same individual. 
This account is altogether very crude and unsat 
ftictofy. 



lesMl to tbe mpposiucn of as many distmcl 
jndividoals, as there are dxMiglits, fcdings, 
actioiis, and properties in the same being. 
Each thoaght would be a separate consci^ 
oasn^s, each oi^gan a different system. 
Each thought b a distinct thing in nature; 
and many of my thoughts must more near* 
ly resemble the thoughts of others than 
tbey do my own sensations^ for instance, 
which nevertheless are considered as a part 
of the same being. As to the continued 
identity of the whole being, that is the 
continued resemblance of my thoughts to 
jay previous thoughts, of my sensations to 
my previous sensations and so on, this 
does not by any means define or circum? 
scribe the individual, for we may say in 
the same maimer that the species also is 
going on at the same time, andccvp^pu^tfae 
same that it was. It is necessary to deter? 
j^;inine what constitutes the same individual 
at some given moment of time before 
we can say that he coiUiwa the san^^ 
Neither does the relation of cause and ef- 



104 
feet determine the p<Mnt: the ^tfaer c 
child is not the child, nor the chil 
father. In this case there is an ot 
reason to the contrary : but we maS 
same distinction where a proper suco 
takes piace and the cau.«,e is entirelj 
in the effect. We- shouM hardJy e; 
the idea of identity to the child bcfi 
has life, nor is the fly the same with tl 
terpilJar. Here we again recur to lil 
as essential to identity. 

But to proceed to a more particuh 
count of the origin of our idea of 
wrhich is this relation of a thinking bei 
Jtsclf. This can only be known ir 
first instance by a consciousness of 
passes in our own minds. I shouli 
then that personality does not arise t 
from tlie being this, or that, from the : 
tity of the thinking being with itself a 
fcrent times or at the same time, or sti] 
from being unlike others, which is n. 
all necessary to it, but f^om the pec 



105 

'■4 

^X)nnection which subsists between the dif- 
Icrenf faculties and perceptions of the same 
conscious being, constituted as man is, so 
that as the subject of his own reflection or 
consciousness the same things impressed on 
any of his faculties produce a quite diffe- 
rent eflFect upon him from what they would 
do if they were impressed in the same way 
on any dthcr being. Personality seems to be 
nothing more than conscious individuality : 
it is the power of perceiving that you arc 
and what you are from the immediate re- 
flection of the mind on it's own operati- 
©ns, sensations, or ideas. It cannot te 
affected in the same direct manner by the 
impressions and ideas existing ill the minds 
of others: otherwise they would not be so 
many distinct minds, but one arid the same 
mind; fot in this sense the same mind will 
be that in which different ideas and facul- 
ties have this immediate communication 
with or power of acting and reacting upon 
each other. If to this we add the relation 
pf such an inward conscious principle to a 



to6 

ontais material substance^ with which it 
has the same peculiar connection and mti**^ 
mate sympathy, this combinalioA will be 
the same person* 

The visible impression of a man's cnm 
fJMrm does not convey to him the idea €i 
persofiality any more than that of any €>ne 
else; because as objects of sight they are 
both equally obvious and make the same 
direct impression on the eye; and the in* 
temal perception is in both cases equally 
incomnumicable to any other being. It is 
the impiiigbig of other objects against 
the different psutts of our bodies, or of 
the body against i^dtf sq as to ^pct the 
sense of touch, ih^^ extends (thougii 
pexhaps somewhat indirecfiy) the f^ing 
€£ personal identity to our e^^tgrn^ form. 
The reason of which is that the wI^qI^ ih^ 
of tangible impressions, or the feelings pf 
heat and cold, of hard and soft, &c. con* 
nected with the application of other mate* 
rial substances to our own bodies can only 
be produced by oxi^r immediate contact with 



107 

them, that is, the body is necessarily the 
instrument by which these sensations are 
conveyed to the mind, for they cannot be 
conveyed to it by any impression made on the 
bodies of others ; whereas, as an object of 
sight or where the body in general acts 
froia without on that particular organ, 
the eye, the impression which it excites in 
the mind can aflPect it no otherwise than any 
similar impression produced by any other 
body n^ust do. Afterwards no doubt the 
visible ima£^ comes in to confirm and give 
distinctness to the injperfect conclusions of 
the other sense*. 



* I remember a story somewhere iu the Arabian 
Nights of a man with a silver thigh. Why may not 
a isble serve for an illustration as well as any thing 
else ? Metaphyiics themselves are but a dry ro- 
inaiice. Now suppose this thigh to have been en^ 
dued with a power of sensation and to have answer- 
ed every other purpose of a real thigh. What dif- 
ference would this make in it's outward appearance 
either to the man himself or to any one else ? Or 
how by means of sight would he know it to be hii 



• 



• 



io8 

It is by comparing the knowledge that 

I have of my own impressions, ideas, feel* 

ings, powers, &c. with my knowledge of 

the same or similar impressions, ideas,. &c^ 

in others, and with the still more im^ 

perfect conception that I form of what 

passes in their minds when this is supposed 

to be essentially different from what passes 

in my own; that I acquire the general 

notion of self. If I had no idea of what 

passes.inthe minds of others, or if my ideas 

of their feelings and perceptions were per-. 

feet representations, i, e. mere conscious 

repetitions of them, all proper personal dis* 

tinction would be lost either in pure self-- 

love, or in perfect universal sympathy i. 

In the one case it would be impossible for 

thigb, more than it was? It \V<mld-strIHodk jast 
iike what it did,, a, silver thigh and nothing more* 
It's impression on the eye would not depend on it's 
being a sensible substance, on it's having life in if,^ 
or being connected with the same conscious princi- 
ple as the eye, but on it's being a visible substance^ 
|hat is having extension^ figure, and colour* 



109 

me to prefer myself to others as I should 
be the sole object of my own conscious- 
ness; and in the other case I must love all 
others as myself, because I should then be 
nothing more than part of a whole, of 
which all others would be equally mem- 
bers with myself. I will here add once 
more that this distinction subsists as neces« 
sarily and completely between myself and 
those who most nearly resemble me as be*- 
tween myself and those whose character and 
properties are the very opposite of mine: be- 
cause k does not relate to the diflPerence be 
tweenone being and another, or between one 
object and another considered absolutely or 
in themselves, but solely to the diflPerence 
of the manner and the diflFerent degrees of 
force and certainty, with which, from the 
imperfect and limited nature of our facul- 
ties, the same or diflFerent things affect us 
as they act immediately upon ourselves,^ or 
are supposed to act upon others. Indeed 
the distinction becomes marked and intelli- 
gible in proportion as the objects or imprcs- 



no 

sions are intrinsically the sauney as then it 
is impossible to mistake the true principle 
on which it is founded, namely the want^ 
of any direct communication between the 
feelings of one being and those 6f another. 
This will shew why the difference between 
ourselves and others must appear greater to 
us than that between other individuals, 
though it is not really so. 

Considering mankind in. this two-fold 
relation, as they are to themselves, or as 
they appear to one another, as the subjects 
of their own thoughts, or the thoughts of 
others, we shall find the origin of that 
wide and absolute distinction which the 
mind feels in comparing itself with others 
to be confined to two faculties, viz. 5^5^- 
tum^ or rather consciousness*, and memory. 
Xhe operation of both these faculties is of 

* To avoid aa iendiess subtlety of distinction I 
Ikave not here given any account of consciousness 
in general: but the same reasoning will apply to 
both. 



Ill 

a perfectly exdudve and individual nature; 
and so fiff as their operation extends (but 
no fiiFther) is man a personal, or if yoa 
wiii, a selfish beings The sensati«n ex« 
cited ia uie by a piece of red-hot iron 
Hr&ing agaisist anj part of my body is 
unple, absolute, temunating in itself, not 
fqpxesentihg any diing beyond itself, nor 
capable of bang represented by any odier 
sensaj^on or communicated to any otlier 
bdng« The same sensation may indeed be 
cxdted in another by the same means, but 
this sensation does not imply any rc&reiioe 
to, or consdoasness of mine: there is no 
communication between my nerves, and 
anothei^s brain, by means of which he can 
be affected with my sensations as I am 
rayseKL The only notice or peroeptUMt 
wliich another can have di this sensatioa 
in me or which I can have of a similar sen- 
sation in another is by means of the imagi- 
nation. I can form an imaginary idea of 
that pain as existing out of myself: bat I 
can only feel it as a sensation when it is ac- 



112 

tiially impressed on myself. Any impres- 
sion made on another can neither be the 
cause nor object of sensation to me. The 
impression or idea left in my mind by this 
sensation, and afterwards excited either by 
seeing iron in the same state, or by any 
other means is properly an idea of memory. 
This idea necessarily refers to some previ- 
ous impression in my own mind, and can 
only exist in consequence of that impressi- 
on : it cannot be derived from any impres- 
sion made on another, I do not remem-- 
bcr the feelings of any one but myself. I 
may remember the objects which must have 
caused such or such feelings in others, or the 
outward signs of passion which accompanied 
them : these however are but the recollectionof 
my own immediate impressions, of what I 
saw or heard ; and I can only form an idea 
of the feelings themselves after thcy<. have 
ceased, as I must do at the time by means 
of the imagination. But though we should 
take away all power of imagination from 
the human mind, my own feelings must 



113 

leave behind thepi certain traces, or re- 
presentations of themselves retaining the 
same propertie», and having the same im- 
mediate connection with the conscious 
principle. On the other hand if 1 wish 
to anticipate my own future feelings, what- 
ever these may be, I must do so by means 
of the same faculty, by which I conceive 
of those of others whether past or future. 
I have no distinct or separate faculty on 
which the events and feelings of my futur« 
being are impressed beforehand, and which 
shews as in an inchanted mirror to me and 
me alone the reversed picture of my fiiture 
life. It is absurd to suppose that the feel- 
ings which I am to have hereafter should 
excite certain correspondent impressions, 
or presentiments of themselves before they 
exist, or act mechanically upon my mind 
by a secret sympathy. Lean only abstract 
myself from my present being and take an 
interest in my future being in the same 
sense and manner, in which I can go out 
of myself entirely and enter into the minds 



mii assiin^ ic 



&^:«* 



gc oc grmni'.i nwn. 
"^laf 3c 3SES vjjIl Sis 
&sar rsSecrs ^r imgRacmzs cf bbteocc 
farrfrygA wjlIl oc sbbc sbbb of 



tA 

ta itfi taobt itfoA an ds vatcr dot h» 
abca^ fjicn solD it. It cannoc idl fad: 
iTi cocmt^ nor can iIk sUcjui nczi dKV 
wmtrjt Ic affected b^ tfac water dnt £db 



into ft afimratdf^ Yet wr call both iStm 
«imtrivcT« Sodi is the natnre of pcnooal 
identity «^ If this accoont be tnie (and 

9t^|NMC S fNMIMT of CKD CJD|NOyVO tO CMt a 

tmmi Unto ihc lei* At Ikr ask las goae^ dtt 
#<»rkmen paM badLfrards and fonraids on It, it 
•Undft ftrm in if^ place^ and thm^h it reccdet 
furthrf and hnhct (torn the slioi^ it is still joined 
fo it« A man'i p€rK>nal identity and self.interesc 
kiVf jiHt the laflse principle and extent, and caai 



^^5 

for my own part t^ie only perplexity that 
crosses my mind in thinking of it arises from 
the utter impossibility of conceiving of the 
contrary supposition) it will follow that 
those faculties which may be s^id to con« 
stitute self, and the operations of which 

reach no farther than his attual existence. But if a 
man of a metaphysical turn^ seeing that the pier \raf 
not yet finished, but was to be continued to a certain 
powx and in a certain direction, should t^kc it into 
\^ feoad to insist d»ajc v^hat was already built and 
what .was to be built were the same pier, that the 
one mqst a^Tord as good footing as the other, and 
should accordingly walk over the pier.head on the 
solid foundation of his metaphysical h3rpothesi8 — he 
Would argue a great 4eal more Ridiculously, hut 
not a whit laote absurdly than those who found a 
principle pf absplttte self-interest on a man's future 
idefitity with his present being. But say you, the 
comparison does not hold in this, th^t the man caft 
extend his thoughts (and that very wisely too} be- 
yond the present moment, whereas in the other case 
he cantiot move a siqgle step forwards. Grant it« 
Stliis will. only $hew that the. mind has wifigs as well 
^ feet, which of ^itself is a .su$^i^t answer to tbi 
iel&$h hyppthe^i^t 



ii6 

convey that idea to the mind, draw all 
their materials from the past and present. 
But all voluntary action must relate solely 
and exclusively to the future. That is, 
all those impressions or ideas with which 
selfish, or more properly speaking, per- 
sonal feelings must be naturally, connected 
are just those which have nothing at all to 
do with the motives of action. ^ 

If indeed it were possible for the human 
mind to alter the present or the past, so as 
cither to recal what was done, or to give it 
a still greater reality, to make it exist over 
again and in some more emphatical sense^ 
then man might with some pretence of rea- 
son be supposed naturally incapable of 
being impelled to the pursuit of sny past 
or present object but froni the mechanical 
excitement of personal motives. It might 
in this case be pretended that the impulses 
of imagination and sympathy are of too 
light, unsubstantial, and remote a nature 
to influence our real conduct, and that 
nothing is worthy of the concern of a wise 



man in which he has not this direct, un- 
avoidable, and homefelt interest. This is 
however too absurd a supposition to be 
dwelt on for a moment. I do not will 
that to be which already exists as an object 
of sense, nor that to have been which has 
already existed, and is become an object 
of memory. Neither can I will a thing 
not to be which actually exists, or tha,t which 
K5S really existed not to have been. The 
only proper objects of voluntary action ar^ 
(by necessity) future events: these can 
excite no possible interest in the mind but 
by means of the imagination; and these 
make the same direct appeal to that faculty 
whether they relate to ourselves, or others, 
as the eye receives with equal directness 
the impression of our own external form, 
or that of others. 

It will be easy to perceive in this man- 
ner how notwithstanding the contradiction 
wnvolved in the supposition of a general, ab- 
solute self-interest, the mind comes to fe^l 
a deep and habitual conviction of the truth 



tii 

of this opinion. Feeling in itself a ddritf? 
nued consciousness of it's past inipressibri^, 
it is naturally disposed to transfer the same 
sort of identity and consciousness to th^ 
whole of it's being, ^s if whatever is saic^ 
generally to belong to ^7se^mustb6ihsepar 
rable from it's very existence. As our acr 
tual being is constantly passing into out 
future being, and carries this internal feeling 
of consciousne$s along with it, we seem tci 
fee already identified with our future being 
in that permanent part of pur nature, arid 
to feel by anticipation the same sort of ne-r 
cessary sympathy with our future selves, 
that we know we shall I^ave with our 
past selves. We take the tablets of me-, 
mory, reverse them, and stamp the image 
of self o^ that, which as yet possesses no- 
thing but the name. It is no wonder then 
that the i^tnagination constantly outstrip^ 
ping the progress of time, when it's course 
is marked out along the strait unbroken 
line of individuality, should confound the 
necessary differences of things, and confer 



119 

on my future interests a reality, and a con- 
nection with my present feelings which 
they can never have. The interest which 
is hereafter to be felt by this continued con*t 
scious beings this indefinite unit, called 
me^ seems necessarily to affect me in every 
part of my eiustence. In the first place, 
we abstract the successive modifications of 
cur being, and particular temporary inte- 
X^sts into one simple nature, and genera^ 
principle of selfrinterest, and then make 
use of this nominal abstraction as an arti* 
:Scial medium to compel those particular 
actual interests into the same close affinity 
and union with each other, as different 
lines meeting in the same centremust have a 
mutiial communication with each other.— » 
Qn the other hand, as I s^lways remain per- 
fectly distinct firqm others, the interest which 
I take in their past or present feelings being 
(like that which I take in iheir future feelings) 
never any thing more than th^ effect of 
in^igination and sytnp<^thy, the same illu« 



sion and preposterous transposition of ideal 
cannot take place with regard to them, 
namely the confounding a physical im- 
pulse with the rational motives of action. 
Indeed the uniform hature of my feelings 
with respect to others (my interest in their 
welfare having always the same source; 
sympathy) seems by analogy to confirm the* 
supposition of a similar simplicity in my re- 
lation to myself, and of a positive, natural, 
absolute interest in whatever relates to that 
self, not confined to my actual existence, 
but extending over the whole of my being. 
Every sensation that I feel, or that after- 
wards recurs vividly to my memory strength- 
ens the sense of self, which increased 
strength in the mechanical feeling is trans- 
ferred to the general idea, and to my remote', 
future, imaginary interest: whereas our sym- 
pathy with the feelings of others being al- 
ways imaginary, having no sensible inte- 
rest, no restlefs mechanical impulse to urge 
it on, the ties by which we are bound to 
others hang loose upon us, the interest wq 



tak^ in their welfare seems to be something 
foreign to our own bosoms, to be transient , ar- 
bitrary, and directly opposite to the neces- 
sary, absolute, permanent interest which 
we have in the pursuit of our own wel- 
fare. 

There is however another consideration 
(and that the principal) to be taken into 
the account in explaining the origin and 
growth of our selfish feelings, arising out 
of the necessary constitution of the human 
2i}ind, and not founded like the former in a 
mere arbitrary association of ideas. There 
is naturally no essential difference between 
the motives by which I am impelled to the 
pursuit of my own good and those by 
which I am impelled to pursue the good of 
others : but though there is not a difference 
in kind, there is one in degree. I know 
better what my future feelings will be than 
what those of others will be in the like case, 
I can apply the materials of memory with 
less difficulty and more in a mass in mak- 
4Pg out the picture of my future pleasures 



and pains, without frittering them away 
or destroying their original sharpnesses, in 
short I can imagine them more plainly and 
must therefore be more interested in them. 
This facility in passing from the recollee^ 
tion of my past impressions to the imagina«^ 
tion of my future ones makes the transi-? 
tion almost imperceptible , and gives to the 
latter an apparent reality and preserUness to 
the imagination, so that the feelings of 
others can never be brought home to us to 
tlie same degree. It is chiefly from this 
greater readiness and certainty with which 
we can look forward into our own minds; 
than out of us into those of other men, 
that that strong 'and uneasy attachment to 
self which comes at last (in most minds) to 
overpower every generous feeling takes it*s 
rise, not, as I think I have shewn, from any 
natural hardness of the human heart, or 
necessary absorption of all i^'s thoughts 
and purposes in an exclusive feeling of self- 
interest. 

It confirms the account ber^ given, tha^ 



123 

we always feel for others in proportion as 
yee know from Ipng ^acquaintance what the 
nature of their feelings is, and that next to 
ourselves we have the strongest attachment 
to OUT immediate relatives and friends, who 
from this intercommunity of feelings and 
situations may more truly be said to be a 
part of ourselves than from the ties of 
blood. Moreover a man must be em* 
ployed more continually in providing for 
his own wants and pleasures than those of 
others. In like manner he is employed in 
providing for the immediate welfare of his 
family and connections much more than in 
providing for the welfare of those, who are 
not bound to him by any positive ties. 
And we consequently find that the atten- 
tion, time and pains bestowed on these se- 
veral objects give him a proportionable de-i 
gree of anxiety about, and attachment to 
his own interest and that of those connected 
with him, but it would be absurd to con- 
clude that his affections are therefore cir- 
CU&iscribed by a natural necessity within 



124 

certain limits which they cannot pa§s, 
cither in the one case, or in the other. 
This general connection between the pur- 
suit of any object and our habitual interest 
in it will also account for the well-known 
observation th9.t the affection of parents to 
children is the strongest of all others, fre- 
quently even overpowering self-love itself. 
This fact is however inconsistent with the 
supposition that the social affections are all 
of them ultimately to be deduced from asso^ 
f:iation, or the repeated connection of th? 
idea of some other person, with immediate 
selfish gratification. If this were i\ie c^s^^ 
we must feel the strongest attachment to 
those from whom we had received, instead 
of those to whom we had done the greatest 
number of kindnesses, or where the greatest 
quantity of selfish enjoyment had been as- 
sociated with an indifferent idea. Junius 
has remarked, that friendship is not conci- 
liated ** by the power of conferring bene- 
fits, but the equality with which they ar? 
received, and may be returned." 



• 1 have hitherto purposely avoided saying 
any thing on the subject of our physical 
iippetites, and the manner in which they 
may be thought to affect the principle of 
the foregoing reasonings. They evidently 
seem at first sight to contradict the general 
Conclusion which I have endeavoured to 
CKtablish, as they all of the'mtend either ex- 
clusively or principally to the gratification 
of the individual, and at the same time re- 
fer to some future or imaginary object as 
the source of this gratification. The im- 
pulse which they give to the will is mecha- 
nical, and yet this impulse, blind as it is, 
constantly tends to, and coalesces with the 
pursuit of some rational end. That is, 
here is an end aimed at, the desire and re- 
gular pursuit of a known good, and all this 
produced by motives evidently mechanical, 
and which never impel the mind but in a 
selfish direction. It makes no difference 
in the question whether the active impulse 
proceeds directly from the desire of posi- 
tive enjoyment, or a wish to get rid of some 



X26 

positive uneasiness. I should -say tbcs 
that setting aside what is of a purely phy- 
sical, or (for aught I can tell) instinctive na* 
ture in the case, the influence of appetite 
over our volitions may be accounted for 
consistently enough with the foregoing hy* 
pothesis from the natural effects of a parti* 
cularly irritable state of bodily feeling, ren* 
dering the idea of that which will heighten 
and gratify it's susceptibility of pleasurable 
feeling, or remove some painful feeling pro- 
portionably vivid^ and the object of a more 
vehement desire than can be excited by the 
same idea, when the body is supposed to 
be in a state of indifference, or only ordi* 
nary sensibility to that particular kind of 
gratification. Thus the imaginary desire 
k sharpened by constantly receiving fresh 
supplies of pungency from the irritation 
of bodily feeling, and it's direction is at the 
same time determined according to the bias 
of this new impulse, first indirectly by 
having the attention fixed on our own im* 
mediate sensations ; secondly, because that 



127 

particular gratification, the desire of which 
is increased by the pressure of physical 
appetite, must be referred primarily and by 
way of distinction to the same being, by 
whom the want of it is felt, that is, fo my- 
self. As the actual uneasiness which ap* 
petite implies can only be excited by the 
irritable state of my own body, so neither 
can the desire of the correspondent gratifi^ 
cation subsist in that intense degree which 
properly constitutes appetite, except when 
it tends to relieve that very same uneasi* 
ness by which it was excited. As in the 
case of hunger. There is in the first place 
the strong mechanical action of the nervous 
and muscular systems co^^operating with 
the rational desire of my own relief, and 
forcing it it's own way* l^condly, this 
state of uneasiness continues to grow more 
and more violent, the longer the relief which 
it requires is withheld from it: — hunger 
takes no denial, it hearkens to no compro* 
ffidse, is soothed by no flattery, tired out 
hy j» delay. It grows more importunate 



: L.o in 
1 i< re 
: • 'II 1^1 
■-.i cin 

* « « 






• * ■ 



: T 



L.'i 



" • T > 



.•^. Ol lili 



■ ' ' ' 1 • ' 1 " . 



.-1 } ■ . 



- • •• > ,; ^ » » 



' ... 



129 

physical desires of both. This is indee4 
the chief foundatjlon of the sexual passion, 
though I believe that it's immediate and. 
determining cause depends upon other 
principles not to be here lightly touched 
on *. It would be easy to shew from many 
things that mere appetite (generally at least 
in reasonable beings) is but the fragment of a 
self-moving machine, but asort ofbalf-organ, 
a subordinate instrument eve^ in the ac- 
complishment of it's own purposes ; that 
it does little or nothing without the aid of 
another faculty to inform and direct it. 
There are several striking examples of this 
gjven by Rousseau in relating the progress 
of his own passions. (See the first volume 
of his Confessions.) Before the impulses 
of appetite can be converted into the regu- 
lar pursuit of a given object, they must 
first be communicated to the understanding, 
^d modify tl^e will through that. Con- 
^quently as the desire of the ultimate grar 

* See Preface to Wordsworth's FQ«ms» 

K 



'^° • not *« «** 

tc<»n»>"";"'X *''"*"""*e^*- 
»^"-■X:^""**<a"°v*a»- 
,Kch it g"«" *1 wefind *- 7^6* 

«'r::rSf-*:r::^^^uty: 

vherc they are c ^^^ P^^ .^ coH- 

and where the V,, every 

pulse docs not overp ^^^ ^^ 

sideration. , objcctio"'--: m 

Make the most f ^^^^tions of tb^ 
only apply to the deter-^^^^, influence 
Jle it is subject to thc^^^ .^ j^, „e.th 

another iaculty. v;^*^^^ nor is »» »» J 

neral at all controulcd ^^, ^^ ^^3^,ne ^ 
tion which I have Pj P ^^^^.ple 

whether there »s any 6 

I 



selfeimess m the kuman mind, or whether 
it i»iM>t naturally disinterested. Now the ef- 
fects of appetite are so far from being any 
cpn&rmation <tf the fir^ supposition, that 
we are even oftener betrayed by them into 
^ctiQAs contrary to our own well-known, 
ckar^ an4 luting interest than into those 
which are injurious to others. The 
<' 4lort-lived pkasure'' and the '^ lasting 
wp^'* £dl tQ the 1q$ of the same being. — I 
ivill give one n^re e^^ample and then have 
dcme. A man addicted to the pleasures 
pf the bottle is less able to govern this pro« 
ptensity after drin]dng a certain quantity 
m^ feeling the actual pleasure and state of 
excitement which it produces, thaa he i$ 
tfK ahstaitt entirely from it's indulgence. 
Wben once the liquor gets into his head, to 
use the cpmnaoii phrase, the force which 
it gives to his predominant feeling gets thf 
iinetter of evejry other idea, and he from 
tJ^t time loses all power of self^cootroul. 
.j^Qth l>efore, and after this, however, the 
ag^ajn^ feeling of actual excitement, wbid) 



132 

urges him on, makes him enter more cor- 
dially into the convivial dispositions of his 
companions, and a man is always earnest 
that others should drink as he becomes un- 
willing, to desist himself. 

To add that there is but one instance in 
which appetite hangs about a man as a per- 
petual clog and dead- weight upon the k-ea- 
son, naniely the sexual appetite, and that 
here the selfish habit produced by this con- 
stant state of animal sensibility seems to 
have a direct counterpoise given to it by na- 
ture in the mutual sympathy of the sexes. 
Quere also whether this general suscepti- 
bility is not itself an efiFect of an irritable 
imagination exerted on that particular sub- 
ject, (See Notes to the Essay on the Ine- 
quality of Mankind.) I hope this will be 
sufficient to break the force of the objec- 
tion as above stated, and m?iy perhaps fur- 
nish a: clue to a satisfactory ^count of the 
subject itself, 

I do not think I should illustrate the 
foregoing reasoning so well by any thing | 



133 

tould add on the subject as by relating thd 
manner in which it first struck mfe. — There 
are moments in the life of a solitary 
thinker which are to him what the evening 
of some great victory is to the conqueror 
and hero— milder triumphs long remem- 
bered with truer and deeper delight. And 
though the shouts of multitudes do not 
Jiail his success^ though gay trophies, 
though the sounds of music, the glittering 
of armour, and the neighing of steeds do 
not mingle with his joy, yet shall he not 
i^rant monuments and witnesses of his glory> 
the deep forest, the willowy brook, the ga* 
thering clotxds of winter, or the silent 
gloOm of his oW'n chamber, '' faithful re- 
niembrancei-s of his high endeavour, and 
his glad sutccess,'* thatj as time passes by 
him iv-ith unfeturning wing, still awaken 
the consciousness of a spirit patient, indc- 
fetigable in the search of truth, and the 
hope of surviving in the thoughts and 
xhinds of other men. — I remember I had 
been reading a speech which Miiabeau 



^34 

(the author of the System of Nature) hsi» 
put into the mouth of a supposed atheist 
at the Last Judgment; and was afterwards 
ted on by some means or other to conlsider 
the question whether it could properly be 
said to be an act of virtue in any one to 
sacrifice his own final happiness to that of 
any other person or number of persons, if 
it were possible for the one ever to be made 
the price of the other. Suppose it were 
my own case — that it were in my power t?o 
save twenty other persons by voluntarily 
consenting to suflFer for them: why sho^d 
I not do a generous thing, and tiever trou- 
ble myself about what might be the conse- 
quence to myself the Lord knows when ? — 
The reason why a man should prefer his 
6wn future welfare to that of Others is that 
he has a necessary, absolute interest in the 
one which he cannot have in the other, and 
this agatn is a consequefnce of his being al- 
ways the same individual, of his continued 
identity with himself. The difference I 
thought was this, that however insensible 1 



>35 

ixiiy t>e to kiy ewn interest at ahy i^tar^ 
period, yet when the time comes I shall feel 
differently about it. I shall then judge of 
it from the actual impression of the object, 
that is truly and certainly ; and as I shall 
stiU be conscious of my past feelings and 
$hall bitterly regret my own folly and in- 
sensibility, I ought as a rational agent 
to be determinjed now by what I shall then 
wish I had done when I shall feel the con* 
sequences of xAy actions most deeply and 
isensibly* It is this eontinued conscious- 
beas of my own feelings which gives me an 
immediate interest in whatever relates ta 
my future welfare, and majkes me at ail 
times accountable to myself for my own 
conduct* As therefore this consciousness 
Will be renewed in me after death, if I^x« 
ist again ^t all — But stop— As I must be 
conscious of my past feelings to be myself, 
and as this conscious being will be myself; 
how if that consciousness should be trans^ 
ferred to some other being ? How am I to 
know that I am not imposed upon by a 



136 

fcilsc claim of identity ? — But that is ri<li- 
culous because you tvill have no other self 
than that which irises from this very con- 
sciousness. Why then this self may be 
multiplied in as many different beings as 
the Deity may think proper to endue with 
the same consciousness, which if it can be 
renewed at will in any one instance, may 
clearly be so in an hundred others. Am 1 
to regard all these as equally myself ? Ant 
i equally interested in the fate of all ? Or 
if I must fix upon some one of them in 
particular as my representative and other 
self, how am I to be determined in my 
choice ? — Here then I saw an end put to 
my speculations about absolute self-interest, 
and personal identity. 1 saw plainly that 
the consciousness of my own feelings which 
is made the foundation of my continued 
interest in them could not extend to what 
had never beeii, and might never be, that 
my identity with myself must be confined 
to the connection between my past and 
**rcsient being, that with respect to my fu- 



lUre feelings or interests they could liav c no 
Gommunication with, or influence over mv 
. present feelings and interests merely because 
they were future, that I shall be hereafter af- 
fected by the recollection of tny past feel- 
itigs and actions, and my remorse be equal- 
ly heightened by reflecting on my past 
folly and late-earned wisdom whether I am 
Teally the same being, or have only the 
ratine consciousness renewed in tne, but 
that to suppose that this remorse can react 
in the reverse order on my present feelings, 
<>r give me an immediate interest in my fu-' 
lure fcelingSj before it exists, is an express 
contradiction in terms. It can only afltct 
me as an imaginary idea, or an idea of 
truth. But so may the interests of others * 
and the question proposed was whether 
1 have not some real, necessary, absolute 
interest in whatever relates to my future 
being in consequence of my immediate 
connection with myself, independently cf 
the general impression which all positive 
ideas have on my mind. How then can 



■< 



Y! 



138 

tbts pretended uxiity of consa6ttsni!sf 
which is only reflected from the p9aii 
which makes me so little ato<^aaintBd widC 
the future that I eamiot even tell |br i 
moment how long it will be oontinwctf, 
whether it will beentireljr intemiptcdby or 
lenewedin me afier cfeatfa, and whicjimi^hflt 
be multiplied in 1 don't humihw many 
different beings and prcdooged bj , cm^ 

m - 

plicated suflFerings without my vbdbg .40]^ 
the wiser for it, how I say can a priivq^le 
of this sort identify my present with 913^ 
future interests, and make me aansocli a 
a participater in what does not at dDl af« 
feet me as if it were actually impressed 
on my senses ? It is plain as this CQn« 
scious being may be decompotmded^ taa* 
tirely destroyed, renewed again, or taal^ 
tiplied in a great number of beings^ a»d 
as, whichever of these takes place^ it. can* 
not produce the least alteration in. my 
present being, that what I am does not 
depend on what I am to be, and that 
there is no communication between my 



M9 

future interests, and the motives by which 
my present conduct must be governed^ 
This can no more be influenced by what 
may be my future feelings with respect to 
it than it will then be possible for me to 
alter my past conduct by wishing that I 
bad acted differently^ I cannot there* 
fore have a principle of active self«inter^st 
arising out of the immediate connection 
between my present and future self, for 
no such connection exists, or is possible, 
I am what X am in spite of the future. 
My feelings, actions, and interests must 
be deteimined by causes already existing 
and acting, and are absolutely indepen- 
dent of the future. Where ther« is not 
an intercommunity of feelings, there can 
be no identity of interests. My personal 
interest in any thing must refer either to 
the interest excited by the actual impres- 
sion of the object which cannot be felt 
before it exists, and can last no longer 
than while the impression lasts, or it 
may refer to the particular manner in 



ft -i**" 



r* . an: saechanically affected by the erff J 
.^wi!! rsipressions in the absence of thci 

oK»'=i t can therefore have no proper 

«^»M^«hir trtterest in my future impres- 
^Ctts >iJace neither nly ideas of future ob-* 

v«.tx Ttor my feelings with respect to them 
.aubtexcited either directly or indirectly by 

uv. impressions themselves or by any ideas 
01 feelings accompanying them without a 
complete transposition of the order in 
which effects follow dne another in na*- 
ture.-^Theonly reasonformypreferringmy 
luture interest to that of others must arise 
trom my anticipating it with greater warmth 
ot present imagination. It is this greater 
liveliness and force with which I can en- 
ter into my future feelings, that in a manner 
identifies them with my present being ; 
iUid this notion of identity being once 
tormed, the mind makes use of it ta 
strengthen it's habitual propensity, by giv- 
ing to personal motives a reality and ab- 
solute truth which they can never have. 

ticnce it has been infen'ed that my real, sub-* 



tit 

s/:antial interest in any thing must be derived 
%n some indirect manner from the impression 
of the object itself, as if that could have 
^y sort of communication with my pre-r 
sent feelings, or excite any interest in my 
piind but by means of the imagination, 
which is naturally aflFected in a certain 
manner ))y the prospect of future good or 
fvil. 



REMARKS 



ON 



THE SYSTEMS OF 

HARTLEY AND HELVETIUS. 

X FIND I owe the reader two explanations, 
one relating to the association of ideaSj, 
from which Hartley and other writers have 
deduced the origin of all our aflFections, 
ftvtn of self-love itself, the other relating to 
the mechanical principle of self-interest 
stated by Helvetius,* It was my first in- 

* I do not mean that Helvetius was the first who 
conceived the hypothesis here spoken of (for I do 
pot think he had wit enough to invent even an in* 
|;enioas absurdity) but it was through him I believe 
^hat this notion has obtained it's present popularity^ 
^uid in France particularly it has h^, I am certain, 
a very general influence on the national character. 
It was brought forward in the most forcible man. 
ner by the writers of the last century, and it is ex. 
pressly stated, and clearly answered by Bishop 
^Sutler in the Preface to his Sermons at the Rolls' 
phapeh After Berkeley's Essay on Vision, I do 



144 

tention tg have given at the end of the 
preceding essay a general account of the 
nature of the will, and to have tried at 
least to dig down a little deeper into the 
foundation of human thoughts and actions 
ih^n I have hitherto done. At present I 
have laid aside all thoughts of this kind as 
I have neither time nor strength for such 
an undertaking : and the most that I shall 
attempt is to point out such contradictions 
and difficulties in both these systems as 
may lessen the weight of any objections 
drawn from them against the one I have 
stated, and leave the argument as above 
explained in it's original force. 

To begin with the doctrine of association. 

The general principle of association as 
laid down by Hartley is this, that if any 
given sensation, idea, pr motion be for. ^ 
number of time$ either accompanied, pr 

immediately followed by any other sensa- 

, . . . . . • 

liotldiow of any work better worth the attention, of 
those who would learn to think than these same me- 
faphysical Discourses preached at the Rolls* Chapel, 



H5 
tion, idea, or muscular motion^ the recur* 
TCnce of the one will afterwards mechanical- 
ly give rise to that of the other. By immtdi* 
atelyjollowcd I mean chstly followed : for sup- 
pose A to be associated with B, and B with C, 
A will not only produce B and C intermedi- 
ately, but will in time produce C immedi- 
ately without the intervention of B. A 
mathematician would perhaps here ask how 
this can ever be actually proved : for 
though it seems reasonable to suppose that 
the influence of A if it extend to B should 
also go a little farther to the next idea, and 
join indirectly and secretly with B in pro- 
ducing C, yet as the connection between 
A and B must be stronger thai^ that be- 
tween A aiid C, if in any case the connec- 
tion between the former become gradually so 
weakened as to dissolve of itself, the latter 
must fail of course, and therefore C can 
never follow A, except when B stands 
equivocally between them. This question 
would go upon the supposition, that ^ 



:46 

_»jv> be impressions of e 

^.;ia and degree of strengt 

. r caiC. A, though more r 

». cc be more intimate 

. . .Adii with B from sever 

:in the greater streng 

.^:!. rrom similarity, & 

.l:c bye that the effect 

v;:vi* on the conjunciion 

kcs, and principles of a 

. unply determined by t] 

. vimitv or remoteness b 

..,- ^ish respect to time < 

I :xrson has done a nun 

•ci!>. which have been o' 

s ^.>uic by another, this a] 

. *.v afterwards associate 

I Iw person, and the rcco 

X'A-volent disposition whic 

VjC actions remains whc 

'»..:!i!cr in which it was exer 

Kirst, because the fee 

»J o: .strongest circumstanc 



^47 

Secondly, the association of our ideas with 
moral qualities is evidently assisted, and 
fprc64 into fhe same general direction by 
tlie simplicity and uniform character of our 
feelipg^ cqmpared with the great variety of 
tUngs and actions, which ma|ces it impos- 
sible tQ cpfnl^^ne such a number of distinct 
foims under the samp general notion. 

What I haye here stated is I believe the 
whple extp^t and compass of the law of as-* 
sociation. It hf^s jbeen said that this prin- 
ciple is pf itself sujOBcient to account for all 
ihiQ phenQmena of the human mind, and is 
t^fo^nd^ti9^ of every rule pf morality ♦ 
JViy design is t,o shew that both these asser- 
^^ns are absolutely false, or that it is ai) 
9^surdity, ai^d aa express contradiction to 
^ix^pose that association is either the only 
^c:K}e of operation of the human mind, or 
it is the primary and most general prin- 
5 of thought and action. — ^But first pf 
[ ^t will be i^ecessary to consider the ac« 
which Hartley himself has given pf 




148 

this principle as depending on the mecha* 
nicsd communication of motion from the 
seat of one idea to that of the next and so 
on, according to a certain local ammge- 
ment of these ideas in the brain, as cer* 
tainiy if thought is carried on in this man* 
ner, that is, by means of vibrations, it is 
difficult to conceive of it's being produced 
by any other means than the accidental 
justling of these one against the other, 
which is what is meant by association. 
There are two or three general observa- 
, tions which will be of use in conducting us 
througl^ this inquiry. In the first place 
it appears to me certain that every impres- 
sion or idea is produced in such a manner 
as to affect or be perceived by the whole 
brain at once, or in immediate succession, 
that is, before the action ceases. For if 
we suppose a certain degree of resemblance 
to subsist between two ideas, the percep- 
tion of the one will always be sure to ex- 
cite a recollection of the other, if it is ^t 



H9 

all worth remembering. I mean for in- 
stance if a person should in some strange 
place suddenly see ah excellent picture 
of their dead father or mother, I sup- 
pose there can be no doubt but the pic- 
ture would call up the memory of the per- 
son whom it resembled with an instantane- 
ous and irresistible force. Now this could 
hot always happen but on the supposition 
that the visible impression of the picture 
was conveyed to every part of the brain, 
as otherwise it must be a mere accident 
whether it would ever come in contact 
with that part of it, where that distinct set 
of recollections was lodged which it was 
calculated to excite; It is evident that 
the force with which the impression of the 
picture acts upon the mind is subsequent 
to the recollection of the likeness and not 
the cause of it, since the picture of any 
bther person woiild act physically upon my 
thind in the same manner. It may be 
Wofth remarking here that the strength, or 
habitual or recent recurrence of any ide* 



*5^ 

makes it more easily ttcbllecttd. I inight 
see a picture of a person whom I had not 
often seen and whose face did hot at all in- 
terest me at the time without fecolltetihg 
whose it was, though the likeness should 
be never so great. The frequent recur- 
rence of the imitation on the other hand 
if it has had it's usual eflFect t^rtAers the 
recollection of the object less dertaih 6t kt 
any rate less vivid every time, till at last 
what remains of it is entirely Ibst, aiid con- 
founded with the imitation ♦• AgStin, it 
is also certain that the pro'xiifhity 'o? the 
parts of an object to one an6ther, 'or of 
one object to another object is '6f itifclf ' a 
suflScient and necessaiy reiason fox' theifreifol- 
lectioh in succession or together, ih'ditesatne 
order in which they were acftiallypercfeivfcfi. 
Unless this were the case, Ve could 'tfever 
recollect any thing at all, las every 'object 

• No doubt the pictoife is always looked at with 
* very di&zent feeling from what it woi|Id h^ve 
■^^ if the idea of the person had never been dis^ 
^inctly associated with it. 



is necessarily composed of parts, s^id those 
agajoi of >othe;rs without end. Now how 
are we to reconcile this with the fir&t-men- 
tion inference that thought is uniformly 
and necessarily communicated to every pOjrt 
0f the thinking substance ? If thought 
is produced in such a nianner, that the 
shAck is inimediatel^y felt in those parts 
^oear^st the seat of the individual impres- 
. ^ioriy ^d is mdeed sure to excite thought 
in. them without ever aflFecting the remote 
parts, of the brain in the same tnanner, it 
j^en^s §trangc that it's own con^municatioii 
:OY.er the Whple brain should be so rapid and 
.ccitain, while the force with which it js 
j»nt .along. (as implied in. it's confiii^fl ppy^er 
pf jp^oducing other thpiights by simple 
iiiypulsej is 50 unequal. 

The reader will I tope Jiave.the good- 
nature to pardon some inconsistencies of 
(expression in treating pf this subject. Iri 
order to disprove the theory which I ani 
' combating I must first assume it's truth, and 
go on talking of the seats of our ideas^ 




^5* • the CO***' 

•^ "^'f : even- i*»' ° Jrf A'*'"^ 



sbe^^^is son 



*** • TbatthcJe^* 

• r«.ds*** *!.._-« W^*.^ .^.-j**'" 






^53 

tliis sort which opens a direct communica- 
tion between our ideas, so that the same 
thinking principle is at the same time con- 
scious of different impressions, and of their 
relations to each other, is what hardly any 
person who attends in the least to what 
passes in his own mind and is not deter- 
tftined to reason himself out of his senses 
will I should think deny. In other words, 
when any two ideas or parts of an idea (for 
thet% is no diflference in this respect) as those 
of two lighted candles, or the top and bot- 
tom of the same candle are impressed at 
the^^me time on different parts of the 
brain, before th^se ideas can be perceived 
in connection as making parts of a whole, 
or can be accompanied with a consciousness 
. of each other's existence, we must suppose 
them mutually to affect the seats of action 
belonging to each other, or else to be 
united in some common principle of 
thought, the same comparing power being 
exerted upon both. Without supposing 
iheir distinct impressions, thus to meet in 



*54 

the same point, it seems a thing impossible 
to conceive how any comparison can take 
place between difiFerent impressions escist* 
ing at the same time, or between our past, 
and present impressions, or ever to explain 
what is meant by saying, / p&rcdve such 
and such objects^ I remember such and such 
events, since these difiFerent impressions are 
evidently referred to the same conscious be-* 
ing, which idea of individuality could 
never have been so much as conceived of 
if there were no other connection between 
our ideas than that which arises from the 
juxtaposition of tHe particles of matter on 
which they are severally impressed. The 
mere juxtaposition of the parts of the think- 
ing substance on which difiFerent ideas are 
impressed will never produce any thing 
more than the actual juxtaposition of the 
ideas themselves, unaccompanied by any 
consciousness of their having this relation 
to each other : for the mind in this case 
consisting of nothing more than a succes' 
sion of material points, each part will be 



^55 

sensible of the corresponding part of any 
object which is impressed upon it, but 
can know jiothing of the impression which 
is made on any other part of the same sub- 
stance, except from it's reaction on the seat 
of the firsts which is contrary to the suppo- 
sit^ioHi In short, to attempt accounting 
at all for the nature of consciousness fi'om 
*h€ proximity of different impressions, or 
^* eheir fluKionad parts to each other in 
-Ike brain seems no less absurd than it would 
Im; to imagine that by placing a number of 
|>ersaiis together in a line we should pro- 
ducein them an immediate consciousness and 
ipetkct knowledge of what was passing in 
each other's minds. If consciousness is to 
"be deduced at all from the circumstance of 
.place, 'it must be that different impressi- 
ons occupy exactly the same place. One 
place has no identity with another : how- 
ever thin the partition between one idea and 
another, the distinction must be as abso- 
lute and complete, and must confine each 
idea as effectually within it's own bounds 



in this fantastical mosaic- work of the hrzihi 
as if the solid skulls of ten philosophers 
Were interposed between each. There is 
another consideration to be attended to; 
which is that sensible iinpressiohs appear 
to be continually ttiade on the same part 
of the brain in succeissidn : — with respect 
to those received by the eye, a tidfr ttt of 
bbjects is almost every moment impressed 
bn the whole organ, and consequently 
transmitted along the nerves to the same re- 
ceptacle in the brain*. It follows frotH 
this last observation in particular (which is 
not a speculative refinement but a plain 
tnatter of fact) that the sphere occupied by 

♦ Those of the touch admit of the greatest variety 
in this respect from the general diffusion of that sense 
over the whole body, and those which depend on 
hearing from the small part of the ear which is in 
general distinctly affected by sound at the same time; 
As to the taste and smell, the stimulants applied to 
these senses are such as for the most part to act on a 
iarge proportion of the organ at once, though only at 
intervals. The direction of smells is hardly distin. 
quishable like that of sounds* 



fiiffeifent vibrations is constantly the same, 
pr that the same region of the brain be-^ 
longs equally to a thousand different im- 
pressions, and consequently that the mere 
pircumstance of situation is insufficient to 
account for that complete distinctness, of 
which our ideas are capable. 

From all these considerations taken to* 
gether I cannot help inferring the fallacy of 
the Hartleian doctrine of vibrations, which 
all along goes on the supposition of the 
most exact distinction and regular arrange- 
inent of the places of our ideas, and which 
therefore cannot be effectually reconciled 
with any reasoning that excludes all local 
^stinction from having a share in the me* 
chanical operations of the human mind. 
For if we suppose the succession of our 
^easto be carried on by the communication 
of the impulse belonging to one idea to the 
(:ontiguous cell, or dormitory of another 
idea formerly associated with it, and if we 
at the same time suppose each idea to oc*^ 
pupy a separate cell which is inviolable, 



15» 

»nd which it has entirely to itself, then nn» 
doubtedly the ideas thus called up will fbl^* 
low one another in the same order in wl^ch 
they were originally excited. But if we- 
take away this imaginary allotment of- se- 
parate parcels of the brain to diff(eretltid6a»^ 
and suppose the same substance oi? princi* 
pie to be constantly impressed with- a suc- 
cession of diflPerent ideas, then there seems 
to be no assignable reason why a-vibmtory 
motion accompanied with thought in pass- 
ing from one part of the thinking substance 
to the next should not excite any other kiea 
which had been impressed there^ as well a^ 
the one with vrhich that particular vibra- 
tion had been originally associated, or why 
it should not by one general impulse 
equally excite them all. It is like sup* 
posing that you might tread on a nest of 
adders twined together, and provoke onil^ 
one of them to sting you. On the other 
hand to say that this speciesof elective affinity 
is determined in it's operation by the greater 
readiness with which the idea of a particu- 



^59 

lar impression recalls the memory of another 
impression which co-existed with it in a 
stjate of sensible excitement is to repeat the 
fact but not (that I can perceive) in any 
manner to account for it. Let any one 
compare this account with the one given 
by Hartley of his own principle, and he 
will be able to judge. 

But farther, even if it could be shewn that 
the doctrine of vibrations accounts satisfac- 
torily for the association of the ideas of any 
one sense, (as those of the sight for exam- 
ple) yet surely the very nature of that 
principle must cut oflf every sort of com- 
munication between the ideas of diflFerent 
senses, (as those of sight and hearing) which 
may have been associated in the order of 
time, but which with respect to actual si- 
tuation must be farther removed from one 
another than any ideas of the same sense, 
at whatever distance of time they may 
have been severally impressed. If from 
the top of a long cold barren hill I hear 
the distant whistle of a thrush which ^toA 



ilSo 

to come up from some warm woody shelter 
beyond the edge of the hill, this sound 
coming f^^int over the rocks with a mingled 
feeling of strangeness and joy, the idea of 
the place ^bput pie, and the imaginary 
one beyond will all be combined together 
in such a manner in nry mipd as to become 
inseparable. Now the dpctripe of vibra- 
tions appears absolutely to exclude the pos- 
sibility of the union of all thes^ into one 
associated idea, because as (he whpl^ of that 
principle is founded oi^ the greater ease and 
certainty with wh^cjl ong Iqcal impression 
is supposed to pfiss into the seat of the next, 
and the greater force with which it acts 
there than it can ^o farther ofiF, the idea 
of a visible object fan n^yer run into the 
notion of a sound, nor v^V^ ^f^^, these 
impressions being of course conveyed along 
different nerves to different and very ^mpte 
parts of the^rain. Perhaps it will be said 
that all ideas impressed at the same mo- 
ment of time may be supposed to be as- 
signed to particular compartments of the 



1^1 

jxmo, as well as where the extemajl objects 
j^i^ coi^tiguous. To this I should answer 
that such 'a supposition does not at all ac« 
.tpount fcr what I have said above with res- 
fpect to consciousness and the association 
€f ideas from similarity, &c. and secondly, 
this supposition is neither included ki 
Hartley's theory, nor does it seem to be 
.compatible with it, as the^e is no other 
jrea£3on on the common material hypothesis 
^r inferring the contiguity of our ide^s in 
'the brain than the contiguity of their cx^ 
(temal objects, and the impression of tho;e 
objects on corresponding parts. of the e:(« 
tenu4 sensible organ. 

The whole of Hartley's system is founfled 
4Ba what seems an entirely gratuitous sup- 
position, vi^. the imaginary eommunica*- 
ti^ of our ideas to particular places in 
the bram to correspond not only with the 
zelations of external objects, but with the 
order of time. This supposition can never 
be reconciled w;ith the inference mentioned 
.above (logo no &rther) that thought is 

M 



tommunicated to every part of the think- 
ing substance by ah immediate and uniform 
"impulse. For though we should suppose 
' that it is communicated iti one itianner to 
' what may be called it's primary seat^ and 
in a different manner ovei* the rest of thfe 
* brain, yet we shall still be as much at a 
""loss as ever to shew a reason why it's pfi- 
'mary action should always excite the stssd- 
ciated or contiguous ideas, while it's indf- 
rect or secondary action has no power at 
'all to excite any of the ideas, with the 
^spheres of which it necessarily comes in 
"contact in it's general diffusion over the 
^ whole brain, that is by it's simple impfulse. 
' This is not all. There is another circum- 
' stance which must entirely prevent the 
least use being made of this distinction, 
which is that associated idfeas are not pro- 
perly such as are contiguous in place, biit 
* all such as are connected in poiht of time, 
the relation of place not being at all ei- 
' sential in the question, for ideas that have 
''been impressed together are ilways r^col- 



163 

Iteted as parts of the same toiiiplex im<s 
.|)ression, without any regard to the proxi- 
.mity or remoteness of their direct, primary 
-seats in the brain, considered as distinct 
local impressions. As has been explained 
above with respect to sounds and visible 
objects, where the association -must evi- 
.dently arise fr omwhat I have called their 
secondary, or relative actions, or, if you 
«ivill, their conscious ideas^ that is those 
.iirhich are not confined to a particular spot 
in. the circumference of the brain, but af*^ 
iect the general principle c^ thought, what*- 
Kver this may be, whether composed of ex- 
tended, ndaterial parts^ or indivisible^ 
Now if these secondary or conscious ideas 
which we may represent as continually 
posting backwar(is and forwards like cou« 
tiers in all directions through all quarters of 
the brain to meet each other and exchange 
iu:counts are in fact the only instruments of 
association, it is plain that the account 
given by Hartley of that principle falls to 
the ground at once, first because that ac- 

M 8 



i94 

» 

i^mint aflfeF4k bo expluiatiMi ei any of ite 
associations wiach ta|ie pkoe in the i»iB4f 
tKcept when there is an immediate e&mnm* 
«ication 'between the ^imary seats of tlie 
associated ideas; secondly, Ibecause tibese 
secondaxy or conscious ideas being spiead 
-^ver die whole brain, or rather -being im- 
pressed on the same thinking principle can- 
not have any particular connection with w 
power to call up cme another or thetcon- 
trary from any circumstances of local dis- 
tinction, which is dius ccmipletely . 4(Hit 
away. — The doctrine of vibrations sup« 
poses ihe order of place and the order of 
timetO'Correspondexactly in all combinai- 
f ions of our ideas, and that it is owing to 
this circumstance entirely that those ideas 
which have been impressed »«uly at thff 
same tkne have afterwards a power to^oall 
up one another from the facility with 
which they must be supposed to pass frmn 
their own primary seats into the contiguous 
ones of the associated i<feas. I have* endea- 
voured to ^ew on the contrary not ^nly 



i€5 

tkat fthore b ao regular loqal snangement 

of oar idca» to correspond exactly with, tke 

ttder ia wlikh tjbey cohere together in the 

amA, but that there appears ta he no dis* 

ttntlioa whatever hi this respect, that they 

am bekmg absolutely to the same place or 

ifitenial seat of coosciousness, that this 

'Want of distinction is an evident fact with 

Jieepect to the successive impressioQs whieli 

jsune inade on the same parts of the body^ 

;and ccM^Sjcquently on the same parts of the 

tittl^kiiig substance, and that it may be dei» 

duced generally from the nature of thoughc 

kself, and the associations which aiise from 

ainularity, &c. that this principle must be 

entirely nugatory with respect to the assOf 

ciaticms of the ideas of diflPer^it senses^ 

even though it should hold true with re9!>' 

p4et to those of any one sensed, lastly that 

* The method taken by IJartley in 4ctailii^ the 
associationsi which take place between the ideas of 
each of the senses one by one, saves him the trouble 
6f explaining those which take place between the 
Uias of ^Sittnt senses at the samt tin^t 



i66 

all ideas impresced at the same time acquire 
a power of exciting one another ever after 
without any regard to the coincidence of 
Hieir imaginary seats iii the brain (accbrd-' 
ing to the material hypothesis) and that 
therefore the true account of the principle 
of association must be derived from the 
first cause, viz* the coincidence of time,- 
and not from the latter which bears na 
manner of proportion to the effects pro^. 
duced-. 

The account indeed which Hartley has 
in one place given of successive a^socia* 
tion as distinct from synchronous seems ta 
have no necessary connection with this last-: 
mentioned principle. He says, page 69;? 
"-If A aiid B be vibrations impressed sue* 
** cessively, then will the latter part of Aj 
•*^ viz. that part which remains alter the. 
*' impression of the object ceases, be mo- 
" dified and altered by B, at the same time 
*' that it will a little modify and alter it, till 
" at last it be quite overpowered by it, and[ 
'* end in it. It follows therefore that thfi 



** successive impression of A and B suffi- 
* ' ciently repeated will so alter the medul- 
*Maiy substance, as that when A is im- 
** pressed alone, it's latter part shall not 
*' be such as the sole impression of A re* 
**. quires, but lean towards B, and end in . 
'^ c at last. But B will not excite a in ^ . 
** retrograde order, since, by supposition,, 
** the latter part of B was npt modified 
*' and altered by A, but by some other yiy 
** bratipn, such as C or D." First of all, 
tjiis account seems to imply that the asso-r , 
ciated impressions A and B are the only 
ones made on the mind, and that they ex- , 
tpnd over the whole medullary substance. 
In this case when the action of A ceases or . 
grows very weal:, we may svppose that, 
tjhe tendency to B will be gradually re- 
vived, and at last completely overpower 
that of A, because these are the only im- . 
pressions existing in the mind, and it must^ 

« 

consequently incline to one or other of, 
them, which would be equally the case,^ 
i^hether they had been impressed together^ 



i69 

or not. Otherwise we mu^ sitffpost the 
iinpressions thus made successhrely to have 
a distinct local communication with eacl| 
other, or there is no reason given vdry A 
shouM excite b more thaii any other vibnt-! 
tion impressed on the brain in general, or 
on the $eat of d in particular. We must 
besides this suppose the vibrations A and 
B to have a particular line of direction^ 
as ^ell as primary sphere of action in the 
brain to account for Ws not exciting^ a iv^ 
the reverse order, &c. The question is, 
how the impression of different objects at 
the same time, or in quick succcssiaii 
gives the idea of one of those objects ^ 
power to excite the idea of the other, 
though the object is absent ; and it is n9 
answer to this question to say, that A be« 
ing often repeated in connection with B, 
yrhen it is afterwards excited, " leans to* 
wards B, and ends in it.** hartley say* 
by way of breakiiig the difficulty, that the 
Utter part of A is altered afid modified hy 
B* This is evident enough while B really 



t6^ 

^Bt^ upon t^ senses : but why should it be 
modified by it in the absence of fi ? This 
modification of the latter part of A by B 
is not the intermediate cause of the excite* 
ment of b, for b, the representative of B, 
iaca^t be excited, at leaest imperfectly, be« 
£dfeie it can modify A (B itself being no^ 
tiling) and the point is how A, or tf ex- 
cdtes the movement connected with B and 
thatronly, not how, supposing this con- 
nection between them to be estaUished^ 
tlie one gradually passes into the other, 
ami ends in it. I think Hartley constantly 
snistakes tracing the order of palpable ef- 
fects, or overt acts of the mind for explain- 
wg, the causes of the connection between 
tfaem^ which he hardly ever does with a 
tnte metaphysical feeling. Etren where he 
^ greatest, he is always the physiologist 
.^sather than the metaphysician *. 

• t have always had the same feelifig witfc res- 
to Hartley (still granting his poorer to the at- 
t) which is pleasantly expressed in an did aathdr» 
Bacon/ qooted by Sit Kdielm Dlghy in hit 



it 



Perhaps a better way to set about dis* 
covering the clue to the principle of asso- . 

answer to Brown, " Those students" he says, 
" who busy themselves much with such notions as» 
•* relate wholly to the fantasie, do hardly ever be«~ 

come idoneoos for abstracted metaphysical specu- j 

lations; the one having bulky foundation of mat. 
** ter or of the accidents of it to settle upon, (at the 
" least with one foot :) the other flying continually, 
•* even to a lessening pitch, in the subtil air. And 
^ accordingly, it hath been generally noted, that- 
'* the exactest mathematicians, who converse altoge^: 
^^. ther with lines, figures, and other differences of 

quantity, have seldom proved eminent in meta. 

phy^icks or speculative divinity. Nor again, the 

professors of these sciences in the other arts* 
•^Much less can it be expected, that an excellent- 
<* physician, whose fancy is always fraught with the- 
^ material drugs that he prescribeth his apothecary 
** to compound his medicines of, and whose hands 

are inured to the cuciing up, and eyes to the in. 

spection of anatomized bodies, should easily and* 
** with success, fiie his thoughts at so towring^ a 
*^ game, as a pure intellect, a separated and unbo- 
" died soul." — I confess I feci in reading Hartley 
tomcthing in the way in which the Dryads must 






it 



1^1 

ciation, setting aside all ideas of extension, 
Contiguity, &c. would be by considering . 

have done shut up in their old oak trees. I feel my 
sides pressed hard, and bored with points of knotty 
inferences piled up one upon another without being 
able ever tp recollect myself, or catch a glimpse of 
the actual world without me. I am somehow 
wedged in between different rows o£ material objects, 
overpowering me by their throng, and from which 
I have no power to escape,, but of which I neither 
know nor understand any thing. I constantly see 
objects multiplied upon mc, not powers at work, I 
know no reason why one thing follows another but 
that something else is conjured up between them, which 
faa9 as little apparent connection with either as they 
have with one another ; — he always reasons from the 
concrete object, not from the abstract or essential 
properties of things, and in his whole book I do not 
believe that there is one good definition. It would 
be a bad way to describe a man's character to say 
that he had a wise father or a foolish son, and yet 
this is the way in which Hartley defines ideas by 
stating what precedes them in the mind, and what 
comes after them. Thus he defines the will to be 
** that idea, or state of mind which precedes action," 
or ''.a desire, or aversion sufficiently strong to pro- 
f* duce action/* &c. He gives you the outward 



1J2 

the manner in which the same conscious 
principle may be supposed to adapt itself 
to, to combine, and as it were reconcile 
together the actions of diflFcrent objects im-' 
pressed on it at once, and to all of whidi 
it is forced to attend at the same time ; by 
which means these several impressions thus 
compelled into agreement, and a kifid fyf 
mutual tmderstanding one with anMher 
afterwards retain a particular tendency dr 
disposition to unite together, that is to say, 
the mind when thrown back into the same 
state by the recurrence of any one of thes< 
ideas is of course put into the way cf acU 
mitting or passing more readily to sttty 
<5ther of the saiiie set of ideas than to any 
other ideas of a different set not so blended 
and harmonized with it» It seems as if 

figns of things in the order in which he conceives 
them to follow one another, never the demonstration 
of certain consequences from the known nature of their 
causes, which alone is true reasoning. Nevertheless^ 
it 18 not to be forgotten, that he was also a gce^t 
man» See his Chapter on Memory^ &c* 



^78 

^^ smnd was laid open to all the impres- 
«oiis which had been made upon it at any 
^ven timCi the moment any one of them 
isecalls a state of feeling habitually in 
<WU90n with the rest. By touching a cer« 
tain spring, all obstacles are removed, the 
fk>ors fly open, and the whole gallery is 
'Ken at a single glance.«*-The mind has a 
xtapacity to perform any complex action 
4dBe easier for having performed the same 
Mtion before. It will consequently have 
E disposition to perform that action ra^ 
tfaer than any other, the other circumstan** 
ces being the same. I imagine that asso- 
idation is to be accounted for on the very 
lame principle as a man's being able to 
comprehend or take in a mathematical de- 
monstration the better for going over it a 
number of times, or to recognise any well- 
known object, as the figure of a man for in- 
stance in the middle of a common, sooner 
than a stunip of a tree, or piece of a rode 
of twice the size, and of just as remarkable 
a ibape,— -In lik^manneri or at least consist 



1^6 

all the general sources of connfictioQ be* 
tween our ideas^ for as to that of cause axx^ 
eflFect, it seems to be referable (ajs remarked 
by Priestley) or at least chiefly jbo to the first 
class, that of common association.— *I hope 
no one will think me weak enough to ima- 
gine that what I have here stated is even n 
remote and £dnt approach to a satifi&ictory 
account of the matter. Eveiy attempt .ctf 
this sort must be light and ineflFcctual wkb^ 
out first ascertaining (if that were po&sihla) 
the manner ^in which our ideas are pio» 
duced, and the nature of consciousnesit 
both of which I am utterly unable to com^ 
prehend. I have endeavoured simply to 
point out what it is that is to be accousibefl 
for, the general feeling with which a reflecU 
ing man should set out in search of tibc truthi 
and the impossibility of ever ariving at .its 
if at the outset we completely cover ov«r 
our own feelings with maps of the bi^»isi« 
dry skulls, musical chords, pendulluMi 
and compasses, or think of looking int^ 
the bottom of our own minds by maam of 



any other instrument than a sharpened in- 
tellect. 

What I at first proposed was to shew, 
that association, however we may suppose 
it to be carried on, is not the only source 
of connection between our ideas, or mode 
of operation of the human mind. This 
has been assumed indiriectly, and I think 
proved with respect to similarity, &c. 
Here however a shrewd turn has been 
given to the argument by the Hartleians, 
who, admitting similarity among the causes 
of connection between our ideas, deny 
that it is any objection to their doctrine, for 
thatthis very example is easily resolved into 
a case of mere association. Similarity 
they say is nothing but partial sameness, 
and that where part of a thing has been 
first associated with certain circumstances, 
and is afterwards conjoined with others, 
making in fact two different objects, it's re- 
currence in the second instance will neces- 
sarily recall the circumstances with which 



178 

it was associated in the first ^•-— In general 
we suppose that if we meet a person in the 
street with a face resembling some other 
face with which we are well acquainted, 
the reason wh^ the one puts us in mind of 
the other is that th^ one is Hie the other ; and 
ve should be little disposed to believe any 
one who told us seriously that in reality wo 
had before seen the one man's nose upon 
the other's face, and that this old impref* 
sion one very identical object brought 
along with it the other ideas with whijch 
it had been formerly associated. This^ 
account would be sufficiently contrary 
to common sense and feeling, and I 
hope to shew that it has as little connec-^ 
tion with any true subtlety of thinking. 
No metaphysician will I am sure be dis-- 
posed to controvert this, who takes the 
trouble accurately to compare the meaning 
of the explanation with the terms and ne- 
cessary import of the law of association. 
For let an impression which I received yts^ 

* See Priestley's Letters to a Philosophical Un. 
believer. 



^79 

terday be in every possible respect the 
same with thd one which I received to-day> 
still the one impression is not the other ; 
they are two distinct impressions ex ting a' 
different times, and by the suppOo.bion as« 
sociated with very different circumstances. 
The one from having been co^existent with 
certain circumstances has a power by the 
law^f association of exciting the recollec* 
tion of those circumstances whenever it is 
its(elf recollected : the other has the same 
power over that particular combination of 
circumstances with which it was associated, 
merely because they were so impressed to^ 
gether on the mind at the same moment of 
time. To say therefore that a particular 
property of an object has a ppwer of ex- 
citing the ideas of several other properties 
of another object, of which it never made 
a part, on the principle of association, is a 
contradiction in terms ^ It's biding essen*^ 
tially or comparatively the same with ano- 
ther property which did actually make part 
pf such an object no more proves the con- 

N 2 



i8o 

sequences which fairly result from the prin- 
ciple of association than it would follow 
from my looking at the same object at 
which another has been looking, that I 
must forthwith be impressed with all the 
ideas, feelings and imaginations which have 
been passing in his mind at the time. This 
last observation has been objected to on the 
ground that there is no connection what- 
ever between one man's ideas, and ano- 
ther's. No doubt : but then it follows as 
clearly (and that is all I meant to shew) 
that the abstract identity of the objects or 
impressions does not of itself produce this 
connection, so that the perception of the 
one must needs bring along with it the as- 
sociated ideas belonging to the other. The 
objects or ideas are the same in both cases, 
if that were all : biit this is not suflScient 
to pfove that they must have the same ac- 
companiments, or associations, because in 
the one case they are impressed on diffe- 
rent minds, and in the other on the same 
piind atdiflFerent times, which is expressly 



i8i 

contrary to the principle of association, un. 
less we assume by the help of a verbal so* 
phism that the same generical idea is the 
same associated idea, and this again would 
lead to the absurd consequence above 
stated. It is not here necessary to give a 
regular definition or account of what in 
general constitutes sameness, or to inquire 
whether strictly speaking such a relation 
can ever be said to subsist between any two 
assignable objects. Such an inquiry would 
be quite foreign to the purpose, and I wish 
to avoid as much as possible all useless 
common-place subtleties, all such as which- 
ever way they are determined can make no 
alteration in the state of the argument. It 
is plain in the present instance for example 
that when it is stated that a particular idea 
haying been once associated with given cir- 
cumstances, the same idea^will ever after- 
wards excite the recollection of those cir- 
cumstances, all that is meant is that the idea 
in the latter case must be a production, con- 
tinuation, or properly a recollection of 



t82 

the former one, so as to retain the impres- 
sion of the accidental modifications by 
which that idea was originally affected* 
It mus't be so far the same as to bear the 
same relation to the surrounding ideas, as 
to depend for what it is on what itltas been, 
and connect the present with the past. It' 
must be the old idea lurking in the mind 
with all it's old associations banging about 
it, and riot an entirely new impression with 
entirely new* associations. This idea must 
therefore be originally derived from an in- 
dividual impression in contradistinction ta 
half a dozen different ones possessing the same 
absolute properties : for the whole point 
turns upon this, that such and such ideas> 
have not naturally any sort of connection 
with certain other ideas, but that any one 
of these ideas having been actually associ- 
ated with any of the others, this accidental 
relation begets a peculiar and artificial con- 
nection between them which is continued 
along with the remembrance of the ideas^ 
themselves^ 



183 

Mr. Mac-Intosh, I remember, ex- 
plained this principle in his lectures in the 
following manner. If, says he, any gen- 
tleman who has heard me in this place to-- 
day should by chance pass by this way to- 
tnoirow, the sight of Lincoln's- Inn Hall 
win upon the principle we are now exa- 
nixiing bring along with it the recollect 
tion of some of the persons he has met 
with the day before, perhaps of some of the 
reasonings which I have the honour to deliver 
to this audience, or in short any of those 
concomitiUit circumstances with which the 
sight of I^ncoln's*Inn Hall has been pre- 
viously associated in his mind. This is a 
correct verbal statement, but it is liable to 
be misunderstood. Mr. Mac-Intosh is no 
doubt a man of a very clear understand- 
ing, of an imposing elocution, a very able 
disputant, and a! very metaphysical law- 
yer, but by no means a profound meta- 
physician, not quite a Berkeley in sub- 
tlety of distinction. I will try as well as 
I am able to help him out in his ex- 



i84 

planation. It is clear that the visible 
image of Lincoln's- Inn Hall which any 
one has presented to his senses at any given 
moment of time cannot have been prtvi* 
ously associated with other images and per- 
ceptions. Neither is a renewed sensible 
impression of a particular object the same 
with or in any manner related to a former 
recollected impression of the same object 
except from the resemblance of the one to 
the other. There can be no doubt then 
of the connection between my idea or re* 
collection of Lincoln's- Inn Hall yesterday, 
and the associated ideas of the persons 
whom I saw there, or the things which I 
heard, the question is how do I get this 
idea of yesterday's impression from seeing 
Lincoln's- Inn Hall to-day. The diflEiculty 
I say is not in connecting the links in the 
chain of previously associated ideas, but 
in arriving at the first link, — in passii:(g 
from a present sensation to the recollection, 
of a past object. Now this can neverb^ 
by an act of association, because it is selfr 



i85 

evident that the present can never havtf 
\>CQn previously associated with the past. 
Every beginning of a series of associations^ 
that is every departure from the continued 
beaten track of old impressions or ideas re- 
membered in regular succession therefore 
implies and must be accounted for from 
some act of the mind which does not de- 
pend on association* 

Association is an habitual relation be- 
tween continuations of the same ideas 
which act upon one another in a certain 
manner simply because the original im- 
pressions were excited, together. Let 
ABC represent any associated impressions. 
Let ab c bt the ideas left in the mind by 
these impressions, and then let A M N re- 
present a repetition of A in conjunction 
with a diflFerent set of objects. Now a the 
idea of A when excited will excite ^ ^ or the 
ideas of B C by association, but A as part 
of the sensible impression A M N cannot 
excite b c by association, because it has 
never been associated with B C, because it 



i86 

is not, like^, the production of the forme? 
impression A, but an entirely new impres* 
sion made from without, totally uncon<» 
nected with the first. I understand then 
from the nature of association how a will 
excite ic, but not how A excites a. I un-» 
derstand how my thinking of Lincoln's* 
Inn Hall, the impression of yesterday, 
should also lead me to think of other things 
connected with that impression according 
to the principle of association : but I can* 
not see how, according to this principle, 
there is any more connection between my 
seeing Lincoln's* Inn Hall to-day, and rc« 
collecting my having seen it yesterday than 
there is between the palace of St, Cloud| 
and the hovel in which Jack Shepherd hid 
himself when he escaped out of Newgate* 
Certainly the new impression is not the old 
one, nor the idea of the old one. What 
is it then that when this second impressio>n 
is made on the mind determines it to con- 
nect itself with the first more than with any 
other indifferent impression, what carries 



187 

it forward in that particular direction which 
is necessary to it's finding out it's fellow, 
or setting aside this geographical reasoning, 
what is there in the action of the one on the 
mind that necessarily revives that of the 
other ? All this has clearly nothing to do 
with association. 

A question however occurs here which 
perplexes the subjefl: a good deal, and 
which I shall state and answer as concisely 
as I can. I have hitherto endeavoured to 
shew that a particular present impression 
cannot excite the recollection of a past im* 
pression by association, that is, that ideas 
cannot be said to excite one another by as- 
sociation which have never been associated. 
But still it may be asked whether a present 
impression may not excite the ideas asso- 
ciated with any similar impression, with- 
out first exciting a distinct recollection of 
the similar impression with which they 
were associated. Now, however we may 
reconcile it with the foregoing reasoning, 
it is certainly a fact that it does do so. 



i88 

And I conceive it will not be di£BcuIt 
to account for this, according to the ex- 
planation above hinted at of the principle 
of association : for we may in general sup- 
pose any similar state of mind to be fa- 
vourable to the readmission, or recollec- 
tion of the ideas already associated with 
such a state of mind, whether the simila-. 
rity is produced by a revival of the old 
idea, or by the recurrence of a similar ex- 
ternal object. In this case however we 
must suppose that association is only a 
particular and accidental effect of some 
more general principle, not the sole-mov- 
ing spring in all combinations which take 
place between our ideas: and still more, 
that similarity itself must be directly a 
very strong source of connection between 
them, since it extends beyond the similar 
ideas . themselves to any ideas associated 
with them. On the other hand according 
to the Uartleian theory of association as 
carried on .by the connection of diflFerent 
local impressions, which alone makes it 



i89 ^ 

diflBcult to admit similarity as a distinct 
source of comiection between our ideas, 
I am utterly unable to conceive how this 
effect can ever take place, that is, I con- 
tend that there must be in this case a direct 
communication between the ne^v impres- 
sion, and the similar old one before there 
can be any poffible reason for the revival 
of the associated ideas, and then the same 
difficulty will return as before, why one 
similar impression should have a natural 
tendency to excite another, which ten- 
dency cannot be accounted for from asso- 
ciation, for it goes before it, and on this 
hypothesis is absolutely necessary to ac- 
count for it. — Whatever relates to local 
connection must be confined to the indi- 
vidual impression and cannot possibly 
extend to the class or genus. Suppose as- 
sociation to depend on the actual juxtapo- 
sition of two, or more local impressions 
which being thus accidentally brought to- 
gether have thrown a sort of grappling irons 
over one another, and continue to act in 



concert in cqnsequence of this immediate 
local communication. It is clear that in 
this case none but the individual, or nume- 
rical impressions sp united can have any 
power over each oJ;her. No matter how 
like any other impression may be to any of 
the associated ones, — if i% does not agree » 
in place as well as kind, it might as weQ^ 
not exist at all ; it's influence can no moT£ 
be felt in the seat of the first, than if it 
were parcel of another intellect, or floated 
in the regions of the mooi^. Again sup^ 
pose association tp consist not in connect- 
ing different local impressions, but in re« 
conciling diffierent heterogeneous actions 
of the same thinking principle, " in sub- 
*' duing the one even to the very quality 
" of the other," here the disposition of the 
mind being the chief thing concerned, not 
only those very identical impressions will 
coalesce together which have been previ- 
ously associated, but any other very simi- 
lar impressions to these will have a facility 
in exciting one another, that is in acting 



^9> 

upon the mind at the same time, their as* 
sociation depending solely on the habitual 
disposition of the mind to receive sucl^ 
and such" impressions when preoccupied 
by certain others, their local relation to 
each other being the same in all cases. — 
The moment it is admitted not to be ne- 
cessary to association that the very indivi- 
dual impressions should be actually re- 
vived, the foundation of all the inferences 
which have been built on this principle 
is completely done away. 

Association is then only one of the ways 
in which ideas are recollected or brought 
l)ack into the mind. Another view of the 
subject remains which is to consider their 
e£Fects after they get there as well as how 
they are introduced, why certain ideas 
affect the mind differently from others, 
and by what means we are enabled to 
form comparisons and draw inferences. 

If association were every thing, and the 
irause of every thing, there could be no 
^mparison of one idea with another, no 



19- 

reasoning, no abstraction, no regular con- 
trivance, no wisdom, no general sense 
of right and wrong, no sympathy, np fore- 
sight of any thing, in short nothing that 
is essential, or honourable to the human 
mind would be left to it. Accordingly 
the abettors of this theory have set them- 
selves to shew, that judgment^ imagination^ 
&c, are mere words that really signify no- 
thing but certain associations of ideas fol- 
lowing one another in the same mechani- 
cal order in which they were originally im-' 
pressed, and that all our feelings, tastes, ha- 
bits and actions spring from the same* 
source. As I know. of no proof whatever 
that haSj or can be given of either of these 
paradoxes but that many of our opinions 
are prejudices, and that many of our feel- 
lings arise from habit, I shall state as con- 
cisely as I can my reasons for thinking that 
association alone does not account either 
for the proper operations of the under- 
standing, or for our moral feelings, and 
voluntary actions, or that there are other 



193 

general, original, independent faculties 
equally necessary and more important in 
the " building up of the human milid." 
In every comparison made by the mind of 
one idea with another, that is perception 
of agreement, or disagreement, or of any 
kind of relation between them, I conceive 
that there is something implied which is 
essentially diflPerent from any association 
of ideas. Before I proceed, however, I 
must repeat that in this question I stand 
merely on the defensive. I have no posi- 
tive inferences to make, nor any novelties 
to bring forward, and I have only to defend 
a commou'-sense feeling against the refine- 
ments of a false philosophy. I under- 
stand by association of ideas the recollect- 
ing or perceiving any two or more ideas 
together, or immediately one after the 
other. Now it is contended that this im- 
mediate succession, coexistence or juxta- 
position of our ideas is all that can be 
meant by their comparison. It is there- 
fore a question in this case what becomes of 



194 

the ideas of likeness, equality, Sec. for if 
there is no other connection between our 
ideas than what arises from positive associ- 
ation, it seems to follow that all objects 
seen, or if you please thought of together 
must be equally like, and that the likeness 
is completely done away by separating the 
objects or supposing them to be separated, 
^s these ideas are some of the clearest and 
most important we have, it may be rea- 
sonably demanded that any attempt to ac- 
count for them by resolving them into 
other ideas with which they have not at 
first sight the least connection should be 
perfectly clear and satisfactory. Let us 
see how far this has been done. It has 
been contended then that the only idea of 
equality which the mind can possibly have 
is the recollection of the sensible impression 
made by the meeting of the contiguous 
points, or ends of two strait lines for ex- 
ample*. Here two questions will arise. The 

* Sec Essays by T. Cooper of Manchester. Thir 
very curious analysis was also delivered with great 



^95 

£rst is whether the idea of equality is merely 
a particular way of considering contiguity^ 
Secondly, whether association, that is the 
succession or juxtaposition of our ideas can 
ever of ijiself produce the idea of this re- 
lation between them. My first object will 
be to inquire whether the perception of the 
equality of two lines is the same with the 
perception of the contiguity of their extre- 
mities, whether the one idea necessarily 
> 

includes tvtry thing that is contained in 
the other.. 

jr 

I sec two points touch one another, or 

gravity by Mr, Macintosh to the metaphysical 
students of Lincoln's.Inn, I confess I like ingenu- 
ity, hoWever misapplied, if it is but a ihan^s own : 
but the dull, affected, pompous repetition of non- 
sense is not to be endured with patience-. In retail- 
ing what is not our own, the only merit must be in the 
cnoice, or judgment. A man, however, without ori. 
ginality may yet have conmion sense and common 
honesty. To be a hawker of Wotn.out paradoxes, 
aad a pander to sophistry denotes indeed a deiperatQ 
ambition. 

o « 



iq6 

that there is no sensible interval between 
them. What possible connection is there 
between this idea, and that of their being 
the boundaries of two lines of equal length ? 
It is only by drawing out those points to 
a certain distance that I get the idea of any 
lines at all ; they must be drawn out to the 
same distance before they can be equal ; 
and I can have no idea of their being equal 
without dividing that equal distance into 
two distinct parts or lines, both of which 
I must consider at the same time as con- 
tained with the same limits. If the ideas 
merely succeeded one another, or even co- 
existed as distinct images, they would 
still be perfectly unconnected with each 
other, each being absolutely contained 
within itself, and there being no com- 
mon act of attention to both to unite 
them together. Now the question is 
whether this perception of the equality 
of these two lines is not properly an idea 
of comparison, (in the sense in which 



^97 

every one uses and feels these words) 
which idea cannot possibly be expressed or 
defined by any other relation between our 
ideas, or whether it is only a round-about 
way of getting at the old idea of the coin- 
cidence of their points or ends, which cer- 
tainly is not an idea of comparison, or of 
the relation between equal quantities sim- 
ply because there are no quantities to be 
compared. The one relates to the agree- 
ment of the things themselves one with 
another, the other to their local situation. 
There is no proving any farther that these 
ideas are different, but by appealing to 
every man's own breast. If any one should 
choose to assert that two and two make six, 
or that the sun is the moon, I can only 
answer by saying that these ideas as they 
exist in my mind are totally different. In 
like manner I am conscious of certain oper 
rations in my own mind in comparing two 
equal lines together essentially different 
from the perception of the contiguity of 
their extremities, and I therefore cpncludc 



that the ideas of equality and contiguity- 
are not the same. 

The second question is whether the idea 
of contiguity itself is an idea of mere asso* 
ciation, that is" whether it is nothing more 
than the recollection of a compound sen* 
sation. If by sensation is to lie understood 
the direct impression of the parts of any 
outward object on corresponding parts of 
ah extended living substance, by which 
means the general mass is converted from a 
dead into a living thing, and that this is 
the only difference that takes place, then 
I deny that this combination of living 
atoms, this diffusion of animal sensibility, 
however exquisite or thrilling to the slight- 
est touch, will ever give the idea of relation 
<3t( any kind whether pf contiguity, co- 
existence, or any thing else either imme- 
diately at the time or by recollection after* 
wards. It has been said that to feel is to 
thinky *' sentir est penser," 1 believe that 
this is true of the human mind, because the 
Jiuman mind is a thinking principle, it is 



^99 

natural to it to think, it cannot feel with^ 
out thinking : but this maxim would not be 
at all true of such a human mind as is de- 
scribed by these philosophers, which would 
be equally incapable both of thought, and 
feeling as it exists in us. As this distinc- 
tion is very difficult to be expressed, I 
hope I may be allowed to express it in the 
best way that I am able. Suppose a number 
of animalculae as a heap of mites in a rotten 
cheese lying as close together as they can 
stick, (though the example should be of- 
something '* more drossy and divisible," of 
something less reasonable, approaching 
nearer to pure sensation than we can con- 
ceive of any creature that exercises the func- 
tions of the meanest instinct.) No one 
will contend that in this heap of living 
matter there is any idea of the number, po- 
sition, or intricate involutions of that litr 
tie, lively, restless tribe. This idea is evi- 
dently not contained in any of the parts 
separately, nor is it contained in all of 
them put together. That is, the aggregate 



20O 

of many actual sensations is, we here 
plainly see, a totally different thing from 
the collective idea, comprehension, or con- 
sciousness of those sensations as many things, 
or of any of their relations to each other. 
We may go on multiplying and combin- 
ing sensations to the end of time without 
ever advancing one step in the other pro- 
cess, or producing one single thought. 
But in what I would ask does this suppo- 
sition differ from that of many distinct par- 
ticles of matter, full of animation, tumb- 

■ 

ling about, and pressing against each other 
in the same brain, except that we make use 
of this brain as a common medium to unite 
their different desultoiy actions in the same 
general principle of thought, or conscious- 
ness ? Therefore if there is no power in 
this principle but to repeat the old story of 
sensation over again, if the mind is but a 
sort of inner room where the images of ex- 
ternal things like pictures in a gallery are 
lodged safe, and dry out of the reach of the 
turbulence of the senses, but remaining as 



201 

distinct from, and if I may so say as per. 
fectly unknown to one another as the pic- 
tures on a wall, there being no general fa- 
culty to overlook and give notice of their 
several impressions, this medium is with- 
out any use, the hypothesis is so far an in- 
cumbrance, not an advantage. To per- 
ceive the relation of one thing to another it 
is not only necessary that the ideas of the 
things themselves should co-exist (which 
would signify nothing) but that they should 
be perceived to co-exist by the same con- 
scious understanding, or that their different 
actions should be felt at the same instant 
by the same being in the strictest sense. If 
1 am asked if I conceive clearly how this is 
possible, I answer no :-— perhaps no one 
ever will, or can. But I do understand 
clearly, that the other supposition is an 
absurdity, and can never be reconciled 
^ivith the nature of thought, or conscious- 
xiess, of that power of which I have an 
•absolute certainty in my own mind. If 
one who still doubts of this will give 



tnc a satisfactory reason wliy he denies the 
same consciousness to different minds, or 
thinks it necessary to circumscribe this prin- 
ciple within the limits of the same brain 
but upon the supposition that one brain is 
one power, in some sort modifying and re- 
acting upon all the ideas contained in it, 
I shall then be ready to give up my dull, 
cloudy, English mysticism for the clear sky 
of French metaphysics. Till then it is in 
vain to tell me that the mind thinks by sen- 
sations, that it then thinks most emphatically, 
then only truly when by decompounding 
it's essence it comes at last to reflect the 
naked impression of material objects. It 
is easy to make a bold assertion, and just 
as easy to deny it ; and I do not know that 
there is any authority yet established by 
which I am bound to yield an implicit as- 
sent to every extravagant opinion which 
some man of celebrity has been hardy 
enough to adopt, and make others believe. 
It does not surely follow that a thing is to 
he dhbelieved, the moment any one thinks 



203 

proper to deny it, merely because it has 
been generally believed, as if truth were 
one entire paradox, and singularity the 
only claim to authority *. 

* This subject of consciousness, the most abstruse, 
the most important of all others, the most filled 
with seeming inexplicable contradictions, that which 
bids the completest defiance to the matter-of-fact 
philosophy and can only be developed by the patient 
soliciting of a man's own spirit has been accordingly 
passed over by the herd of philosophers from Locke 
downwards. There is a short note about it in Hart- 
ley in which he flatly denies the possibility of any 
such thing. Lest what I have already said should 
therefore be insufficient to fix the attention of the 
reader on a subject which he may think quite ex- 
ploded, 1 will add the account which Rousseau has 
given of the same subject, whose authority does 
not weigh the less with me because it is unsupported 
by the Logic of Condillac, or the book De I'Esprit. 

'' Me voici dejk tout aussi sur de Texistence de 
I'univers, que de la mienne. Ensuite je reflechis 
sur les objets de mes sensations, et trouvant en moi 
la faculte de les comparer, je me sens doue d'une 
force active que je nc savois pas avoir auparavant. 
Appercevoir, c'cst sentir; comparer, c'cst juger ; 



«^^ 

• t 



204 

I never could make much of the subject 
of real relations in nature. But in whatever 

juger ct sentir ne sont pas la meme diose. Par la 
sensation, Ics objets s*ofFrent a moi s6par6s, isoles, 
tels qu*ils sont jlans la Natiye ; par la comparaisoPy 
je les rcmue, je Ics transporte, pour ainsi dire, je 
les pose I'un sur Tautre^ pour prononcer sur leur dif- 
ference ou suT Icur similitude, et gcn^ralement'sur tous 
leurs rapports* Scion nwi, la facultc distinctive de 
rStre actif, ou intelligent est de pouvoir donner un 
sens a ce mot, est* Je cherche en vain dans I'etre 
purement sensitif cette force intelligente, qui super. 
pose, et puii qui prononce ; je ne la saurois voir 
dans sa nature* Cet etre passif sentir a chaque objct 
separement, on mcme il sentira Pobjet total form6 
des deux, mais n'ayant aucune force pour les replier 
I'un sur l'autre> il ne les comparcra jamais^ il ne les 
jugera point* 

** Voir deux objets' ^ la fois, n'est pas voir leurs 
rapports, ni juger de leurs differences ; appercevoir 
plusieurs objets les uns hors des autres, n'est pas les 
iiombrcr* Je puis avoir au meme instant I'idee d'un 
grand baton et d'un petit bsfcton sans les comparer, 
sans juger que Tun est plus petit que Pautre, comme 
je puis voir ^ la fois ma main entiere sans faire le 
compte de mes doigts, Ces idees comparatives, 
plus grandy plus petit ^ de meme que les idees nur*.6- 
r:ques d *//«-, de deuXy &c, ne sont ccrtaincment pas 



205 

way we determine with respect to them^ 
whether they are absolutely true in nature, 

des sensations, quoiqoe mon esprit ne Ics produise^ 
qu'k 1 'occasion de mes sensations. 

** On nous dit que Tetre sensitifdi3tlngu2 les sensa- 
tions les unes des autres par les differences qu'ont 
entr'elles ces memes sensations : ceci demande ex- 
plication. Quand les sensations sont diffurentcs^ 
I'fitre sensitif les distingue par leurs differences : 
quand elles sont semblables, il les distingue parce 
qu'il sent les unes hors des autres, Antrement, 
comment dans une sensation simultanee distingne- 
roit-il deux objets egaux ? II faudroit n6cessaire- 
aaent qu'il confondit ces deux objets, et les prit 
pour le m^me, sur-tout dans un systcme ou l^oa 
pretend que les sensations representatives dc I'^ten- 
due ne sont point <*tendues, 

" Quand les deux sensations a comparer sont appcr- 
^ues, leur impression est faite, chaquc objet est 
senti> les deux sont sentis ; mais leur rapport n'est 
pas senti pour cela. Si le jugement de ce rapport n'c- 
toit qu'une sensation, & me venoit uniquement d.c 
I 'objet, mes jugemens ne me tromperoient jamais, 
puisqu'il Ji'est jamais faux que je sente ce queje 
•ens. 

** Pourquoi done est-cc que jc me trompe snr le tap^ 
^t de ces deux batons, sur«tout s'ils ne sont pxa 



s66 

or we only the creatures of the mind, thcj^ 
cannot exist in nature after the same xnari^ 

paralleles> Pourquoi, dis-je, ^r exemple> que Ic 
petit baton est le tiers du grand, tandis qa'U n'en 
e2t que le quart f Fourquoi Timage, qui e$t I9, 
sensation, n'est-elle pas conforme k son modelci qu| 
est I'objet ? C'est que je suis actif quand je juge^ 
que 1 'operation qui cdmpare est fautive, et que mot\ 
entendement, qui juge les rapports, mele ses erreurs 
^ la verite des sensations qui ne montrent que let 
objets. 

Ajoutez a cela une reflexion qui vous frappera^ jc 
jn'assure, quand vous y aurez pense ; c'est que si 
nous jctions purement passifs dans P usage de nos sens, 
il n'y auroit entr'eux aucun communication ; il nous 
auroit impossible de connoitre que le corps que nou5 
touchons, et I'objet que nous voyons sont le meme. 
Qu nous ne sentirions jamais rien hors de nous, ou il 
y auroit pour nous cinq substances sensibles, dent 
nous n'aurions nul moyen d'appercevoirr identity. 

*' Qu'on donne tel ou tel nom k cette force de moa 
esprit qui rapproche et compare mes sensations; 
qu'on I'appelle attention, meditation, reflexion, ou 
comme on voudra ; toujours est.il vrai qu'elle est 
en moi et non dans les choses, que c'est moi seul qui 
la produis, quoique je ne la produisc qu'a I'DCca- 
lion d| I'impression que font sur moi les objjets, 



207 

ner that they exist in the human mind« 
The forms of things in nature are manifold} 
they only become one by being united in 
the same common principle of thought. 
The relations of the things themselves as 
they exist separately and by themselves must 
therefoie be very different from their relations 
as perceived by the mind where they have 
an immediate communication with each 
other. The things themselves can only 
have the same relation to each other that 
the ideas of things have in different minds, 
or that our sensible impressions must have 
to one another before we refer them to some 
inward conscious principle. Without this 
connection between our ideas in the mind 
there could be no preference of one thing 

Sans etre xaaicre de sentir ou de ne pas sentifi je le 
anis d 'examiner plus ou moins ce que je ^ens. 

Je ne snis done pas simplemcnt un etre sensitif et 
pa8sif, mais un ^tre actif et intelligent^ et quoi 
qu'en dise la philosophies j'osexai pr(!tendre a Thon* 
neur de penser^ &c." — Emile, beginning of thtf 
thirds oiT end. of the second volume. 



2o8 

to another, no choice of means to endsi 
that is, no voluntary action. Suppose the 
ideas or impressions of any two objects to be 
perfectly distinct and vivid, suppose them 
moreover to be mtchdjiicslly associated toge« 
thcr in rny mind, and that they bear in fact 
just the same proportion to each other that 
tlie objects do in nature, that the one is at- 
tended with just so much more pleasure than 
the other, and is so much more desirable, what 
effect can this of itself have but to produce 
a proportionable degree of unthinking com- 
placency in the diflFerent feelings belonging 
to each, and a proportionable degree of ve- 
hemence in the blind impulse, by which I am 
attached to each of them separately and for 
the moment ? If there is no perception of 
the relation between diflFerent feelings, no 
proper comparison of the one with the 
other, there may indeed be a stronger im- 
pulse towards the one than there is towards 
the other in the diflFerent seats of perception 
which they severally aflPect, but there can be 
no reasonable attachment, no preference of 



209 

the one to the other in the same general 
principle of thought and action. And 
consequently on this supposition if the 
objects or feelings are incompatible with 
each other^ I, or rather the different sen- 
sible beings within me will be drawn dif- 
ferent ways, each according to it*s own par- 
ticular bias, blindly persisting in it's own 
choice without ever thinking of any other 
interest than it*s own, or being in the least 
effected by any idea of the general good 
of the whole sentient being, which would 
be a thixlg utterly incomprehensible. — To 
pcrcdve relations, — ^if not to choosd be*- 
tween good and evil, to prefer a greater 
good to a less, a lasting to a transient en- 
joyment belongs only to one mind, or spi- 
rit, the mind that is in man, \^hich is the 
centre in which all his thoughts meet, and 
the master-spring by which all his actions 
are governed. Every thing is one in nature, 
and governed by an absolute impulse* 
The mind of man alone is relative to other 
things, it represents not itself but many 

p 



210 

thingi existing out of itself, . it docs not 
therefore represent the truth by being sen- 
sible of one thing but many things (for 
nature, it's object, is manifold) and though 
the things themselves as they really exist 
cannot go out of themselves into other 
things, or compromise their natures, there 
is no reason why the mind which is merely 
representative should be confined to any 
one of them more than to any other, and a 
perfect understanding should comprehend 
them all as they are all contained in nature, 
or in all. No one object or idea therefore 
ought to impel the mind for it's own sake 
but as it is relative to other things, nor is a 
motive true or natural in reference to the 
human mind merely because it exists, un- 
less we at the same suppose it to be stronger 
than all others. 

But to return. I conceive first that vo- 
lition necessarily implies thought or fore- 
sight, that is, that it is not accounted for 
from mere association. All voluntary ac- 
tion implies a view to consequences, a per-^ 



211 

ceptioii of the analogy between certain ac« 
tions already given, and the particular ac- 
tion then to be employed, also a knowledge 
of the connection between certain actions 
and the effects to be produced by them ; and 
lastly, a faculty of combining all these with 
particular circumstances so as to be able to 
judge how far they are likely to impede or 
assist the accoihplishment of our purposes, 
in what xmnn^t it may be necessary to vary 
our exertions according to the nature of 
the cascj whether a greater or less degree 
of force is required to produce the ^ffect^ 
&c. Without this *' discourse of reason," 
this circumspection and comparison, it 
seems to be as impossible for the human 
mind to pursue any regular object as it 
would be for a man hemmed in on all 
sides by the walls of houses and blind al- 
leys to see his way clearly before him from 
one end of London to the other, or to go 
in a strait line from Westminster to Wap- 
ping. One would think it would be suf-^ 
fident to state the question in ordar to shew 

p 2 



2T2 

that mere association or the mechanical re — 
currence of any old impressions itt a ccr^ 
tain order, which can never exactly corres- 
pond with the given circumstances, woulct 
never satisfactorily account (without the aid 
of some other faculty) for the complexity 
and subtle windings and perpetual changes 
in the motives of human action. On the 
hypothesis here spoken of, I could have 
no comprehensive idea of things to check 
^ny immediate, passing impttlse, nor 
should I be able to make any inference with 

* 

respect to the consequences of my actions 
whenever there was the least alteration in 
the circumstances in which I must act. If 
however this general statement docs not 
convince those who are unwilling to be 
convinced on the subject, I hope the na- 
ture of the objection will be made suffici- 
ently clear in the course of the argument.' 
Secondly, if is necessary to volition that 
we should suppose the imaginary or gene- 
ral ideas of things to be efficient causes of 
action. It is implied in the theory we are 



I 



combating that some sort of ideas are effi- 
cient motives to action, because association 
itself consists of ideas. Habit can be no- 
thing but the impulsive force of certain 
physical impressions surviving in their 
ideas, and producing the same effects as 
the original impressions themselves. Why 
then should we refuse to admit the same, 
or a similar power in any ideas of the same 
kind, because they have been combined by 
the imagination with diffierent circumstan- 
ces, or because a great many different ideas 
have gone to make up one general feeUng ? 
Why, if the inherent qualities of the idea^ 
are not changed, should not the effects 
which depend on those qualities be the 
same also ? It cannot be pretended that 
there is something in the nature of all 
ideas which renders them inadequate to the 
production of muscular action, the one 
being a mental, the other a physical es« 
sence. For ideas are evidently the instru- 
ments of association, and must therefore 
one way or other be the efficient causes of 



«i4 

voluntary action. The ideas of imagina« 
tion and reason must be analogous to those 
of memory and association, or they could 
not represent their several objects, which 
|s absurd.; — It is to be remembered that the 
jtendenqy of any ideas to produce action 
(:annot b^ ascribed in the first instance to 
the accidental association between the orii> 
ginal impression and some particularaction, 
for the action is an immediate and natural 
consequence of the impression, and would 
equally follow froin the same impression in 
any other circumstances, and ought to follow 
from ^ny other idea partaking of the same 
general mature a^id properties. The pro^ 
per effects of association can only apply 
to thos^ cas^s, w:here an impression or idea 
by being associa^d with another has ac* 
quired a power of exciting actions to 
which it was itself perfi^ctly indifferent. 
But this^power cannot always be transferred 
from one impression to another, for there 
tpust be some original impression which 



^A- Jh.T'. ■ 



215 

has an inherent independent power to pro- 
dace action. 

I do not know how far the rules of phi- 
losophizing laid down by Sir Isaac New- 
ton apply to the question, but it appears 
to me an evident conclusion of common 
sense not to seek for a remote and indirect 
cause of any effect where there is a direct 
and obvious one. Whenever therefore a 
particular action follows a given impression, 
if there is nothing in the impression itself 
incompatible with such an efiFect, it seems 
an absurdity to go about to deduce that ac^^ 
tion from some other impression, which has 
no more right to it's production than that 
which is immediately and obviously con- 
nected with it. In general it may be laid 
down as a principle of all sound reasoning 
that where there are many things actually 
existing which may be assigned as the causes 
of several known effects, it is best to di- 
vide those effects among them, not arbitra- 
rily to lay the whole weight of a compli- 
cated series of efiPects on the shoulders of 



2l6 

some one of them, generally singled out 
for no other reason than becau^ it is the 
most remote and therefore the least proba^r 
ble. For this there can be no more reason 
than for supposing when I see a large build* 
ing standing on a number of pillars, that the 
whole of it is secretly upheld by some main 
pillar in the centre, an,d that all the other 
pillars stand there for shew, not use. The 
principle that the fewest causes possible are 
to be admitted is certainly not true in the 
abstract; and the injudicious application of 
it has I think been productive of a great 
deal of false reasoning. Unquestionably, 
where there is no appearance of the exis- 
tence of certain causes, they are to be ad- 
mitted with cautiqn : we are not fancifully 
to multiply them ad libitum merely because 
we are not satisfied with those that do ap- 
pear, much less are we to multiply them, 
gratuitously, without any reason at all. 
But where the supposed causes actually ex- 
ist, where they are known to exist, and have^ 
an obvious connection with certain effects^ 



217 

why deprive any of these causes of the real 
activity which they seem to possess to make 
some one of them reel and stagger under 
a weight of consequences which na- 
ture never meant to lay upon it ? This 
mistaken notion of simplicity has been 
the general fault of all system-makers, 
who are so wholly taken up with some 
£ivourite hypothesis or principle, that they 
make that the sole hinge on which every 
thing else turns, and forget that there is 
any other power really at work in the 
universe, all other causes being set aside 
as . fcdse and nugatory, or else resolved 
into that one. — There is another principle 
which has a deep foundation in nature 
that has also served to strengthen the same 
feeling, which is, that things never act 
alone, that almost every efiPect that can be 
mentioned is a compound result of a series 
of causes modifying one another, and that 
the true cause of any thing is therefore 
seldom to be looked for on the sixrface, or 
in the first distinct agent that presents it- 



2l8 

self. This principle consistently followed 
up does not however lead to the suppo- 
sition that the immediate and natural causes 
of things are nothing, but that the most 
trifling and remote are something, it proves 
that the accumulated weight of a long suc- 
cession of real, efficient causes is generally 
far greater than that of any one of them se- 
parately, not that the operation of the 
whole series is in itself null and void but 
as the efficacy of the first sensible cause is 
transmitted downwards by association 
through the whole chain. Association 
has been assinned as the leading principle 
in the operations of the human mind, and 
then made the only one, forgetting first 
that nature must be the foundation of every 
artificial principle, and secondly that with- 
respect to the result, even where associ- 
ation has had the greatest influence, habit 
is at best but a half-worker with nature, for- 
ill proportion as the habit becomes inve- 
^^rate, wc must suppose a greater number 



219 

>f actual impressions to have concurred in 
producing it.* 
Association may relate only to feelings, 
ibit implies action, a disposition to do 
^^Something. Let us suppose then that 
^2it were possible to account in this way for 
^^ail those affections which relate to old ob- 
^^ccts, and ideas, which depend on recall* 
Sng past feelings by looking back into our 
memories. But the moment you intro- 
duce action (if it is any thing more than 
an involuntary repetition of certain mo- 
tions without either end or object, a mere 
trick, and absense of mind) this principle 
can be of no use without the aid of some 
other faculty to enable us to apply old 
associated feelings to new circumstances, 
and to give the will a new direction. 

Mr. Mac-Intosh in his public lectures 
used to deny the existence of such a feeling 
as general benevolence or humanity, on 
the ground that all our affections necessa* 

* I here speak of association as distinct from 
invagination or the efiects of novelty. 



to 
cc 



220 

rily owe their rise to particular previt^"^^ 
associations, and that they cannot exist *^ 

• 

all unless they have been excited before ^^ 

If 
the same manner by the same objects^ ^'' 

1 were disposed to enter particularly in 
this question, I might say in the first plai 
that such a feelins[ as general benevolence^ ^^ 
or kindness to persons whom we have nev^^^ ^^ 
seen or heard of before does exist. I shoul --^" 
not scruple to charge any one who should ^ 
deny this with the mala fides, with prev; 
Ticating either to himself, or others. I 
is a maxim which these gentlemen seem t< 
be unacquainted with that it is necessarjr^ 
to strain an hypothesis to make it fit the* 
&cts, not to deny the facts becau.se they 
do not square with the hypothesis. It ge- 
nerally happens, that, when a metaphy- 
sical paradox is first started, it is thought 
sufficient by a vague and plausible expla* 
Joation ta reconcile it tolerably well with 
inown facts r afterwards it is found to be 
3i shoarter way and savours more of a certain 
^g^eeable daring in matters of philosophy 



i ' ■>. -.tlM- ^^ .< UJ£ ^V .-.. 



221 

and dashes the spirit of opposition sooner 
to deny the facts on the Strength of the 
hypothesis. — -Independently however of 
ail experimental proof, the reasoning as it 
is applied confutes itself. It is said that 
habit is necessary to produce affection. 
Now suppose thii, in what sense is the 
principle true ? If the persons, feelings 
and actions must be exactly and literally 
the same in both cases, there can be no such 
thing as habit : the same objects and cir- 
cumstances that influenced me to-day can* 
not possibly influence me to-morrow. Take 
the example of a child to whose welfare 
the attention of the parent is constantly 
directed. The simple wants of the child 
are never exactly the same in themselves, 
the accidental circumstances with which 
they are combined are necessarily varying 
every moment, nor are the sentiments and 
temper of the father less liable to con- 
stant and imperceptible fluctuations. These 
mbtle changes, however, and this dis^mi-» 
larity in subordinate circumstances do iibt 



222 



prevent the father's affection for the chila 
from becoming an inveterate habit. If 
therefore it is merely an extraordinary de- 
gree of resemblance in the objects which 
produces an extraordinary degree of strength 
in the habitual affection, a more remote 
and imperfect resemblance in the objects 
ought to produce proportionable effects. 
For example, the cries of a stranger's child 
in want of food are similar to those of hi» 
own when hungry, the expressions of their 
countenances are similar, it is also certaixx 
that wholesome food will produce similar 
effects upon both, &c. I am not here 
inquiring into the degree of interest which 
the mind will feel for an entire stranger 
(though that question was well answered 
long ago by the story of the Samaritan.) 
Mf object is to shew that as to mere theory 
there is no essential difference between the 
two cases ; that a continued habit of kind* 
ness to the same person implies the same 
power in the mind as a general dispositioa 
to feel for others in the same situation ; 



223 

and that the attempt to reason us out of ^ 
sense of right and wrong and make men 
believe that they can only feel for them- 
selves, or their immediate connections is 
not only an indecent but a very bungling 
piece of sophistry, — The child's being per* 
sonally the same has nothing to do with 
the question. The idea of personal iden- 
tity is a perfectly generical and abstract 
idea, altogether distinct from aussociation. 
Any other artificial, and general connec- 
tion between our ideas (as that of the same 
species) might as well pass for association. 

The commentators on Hartley have 
either not studied or not underjitood 
him- Otherwise his system could not 
have been supposed to favour the doctrine 
of selfishness. My quarrel with it is not 
that it proves any thing against the notion 
of disinterestedness, but that it proves no- 
thing. He supposes that the human mind is 
neithernaturally selfish, nor naturally bene- 

• 

Volent ; that we are equally indifferent to 
^ur own future happiness or that of others. 



prevent th 
from beco* 
therefore i* 
grce of r 
produces.: 
in the h? 
and inipt 
ought to • 
For cxani' 
in want ot 
own when 
countenar 
that whol 
tjlFccts uf 
inquirino- 
the mind 
(though t 
long ago 

^^f objec 
«e is nc 
aliases 



.-coming interested 
. ■ jumstances. [See 
: r self-love, page 
-• r between this ac- 
ve endeavoured to 
;..>€ that the idea of 
- known good either 
. :r others is in itself an 
.v. ion, whereas accor- 
. iea either of our own 
.'uiers has the least ten* 
uiv such effect except 
le infers that there is 
:i^ desire of happiness 
..:d, because this desire 
_i circumstances, or is 
.citnc persons, and in the 
^rrea-nt times according 
n: :> in. Sec. This ob* 
v.uis cnie if applied to the 
..»^v?* A* a general indefinite 
.^., tiwt is. to a necessary, 
...nm disposition in man as 
. .^v-ttUO the pursuit of good 



225 

as an abstract essence without afty regard to 
the manner in which it is impressed on his 
imagination, to the knowledge which he 
can possibly have of any object as good, 
or to his immediate disposition to be af- 
fected by it. I have however all along 
contended that the desire of happiness is 
natural to the mind only in consequence of 
the idea, or knowledge of it, in the same 
manner that it is natural to the eye to see 
when the object is presented to it ; to which 
it is no objection that this organ is endued 
with diflFerent degrees of sharpness in dif- 
ferent persons, or that we sometimes see 
better than at others. Neither can I con- 
ceive how the associated impulses, spoken 
of in the passage above referred to, without 
an inherent, independent power in the ideas 
of certain objects to modify the will, and in 
the will to influence our actions can ever 
in any instance whatever account for vo- 
luntary action. I need not attempt to 
shew tiiat the mechanical impulses to the 
parsuit of our^ own good or that of any 



226 

Other person derived from past associations 
cannot be supposed to correspond exactly 
and uniformly with the particular succes- 
sive situations, in which it is necessary for 
us to act, often with a view to a great num- 
ber of circumstances, and for very com- 
plex ends. To suppose that the mecha- 
nical tendencies impressed on the muscles 
by any paiticular series of past objects 
can only require to be unfolded to produce 
regular and consistent action is like sup- 
posing that a hand-organ may be set »to 
play a voluntary, or that the same types will 
serve without any alteration to print a co- 
lumn of a newspaper and a page of Tristram 
Shandy. A child for instance in going 
into a strange house soon after he had 
learned to walk would not be able to go 
from one room to another from the mere 
force of habit, that is from yielding to, or 
rather being blindly carried forward by the 
impulse of his past associations with respect 
to walking when at home. He lyould 
run against the doors^ get entangled among 



227 

the chairs;, fall over the stair case: he 

would commit more blunders with his eyes 

wide open than he would otherwise do 

blind-folded. He would be worse off 

without his understanding than without 

bis sight. He might feel his way without 

his eyes, but without his understanding 

neither his hands n(^ eyes would be of any 

use to him. He would be incorrigible to 

falls and bruises. Whoever has seen a 

blind horse stagger against a wall and then 

start back from it awkward and afiFrighted, 

may have some idea of the surprise which 

we should constantly feel at the effects of 

our own actions, but not of the obstinate 

stupidity with which we should persist in 

them. 

To this it is replied/ that the account 
here given does not include all the associ^^ 
ations which really take place : that the 
associations are general as well as particular, 
that there is the association of the general 
idea of a purpost^ of the words to walk^ to 
go forwards^ Sec. and that these general 




23° 

actually done before, in the midst of hia 
career. He is stopped by the idea of a 
pain which he has not yet felt, and which 
can only affect him as a general, or repre- 
sentative idea of pain, the object being 
new, and there being nothing in his past 
associations in the order in which they are 
recalled by memory to produce the neces- 
sary action. Here then he evidently com- 
slrucis an artificial idea of pain beyond his 
actual experience, or he takes the old idea 
of pain which subsisted in his memory, and 
connects it by that act of the mind which 
we call imagination with an entirely new 
object ; and thus torn out of it's place in 
the lists of memory, not strengthened by 
it's connection with any old associated 
ideas, nor moving on with the rOuHiK df 
habitual impulses, it dciCG nOt fail> oil &At 
account to infhienGC; (hirWHl and thrbugl^ 
that the ihotions of the' body;-^N6i»- if 
any one chooses to con»der this as the ef- 
fect of association, heisat.libertjr todb'so. 
The same kind of association, ' hO*fe\*«-, 



831 

must apply to the interest we take in the 
feelings of others, though perfect strangers 
to us, as well as to the interest we feel for 
ourselves. All that can ever take place in 
the imaginary anticipation either of our 
own feelings or those of others can be no- 
thing more than some sort of transposition 
and modification of the old ideas of me- 
mory, or if there is any thing peculiar to 
this act of the mind, it is equally neces- 
sary to our feeling any interest in our own 
future impressions, or those of others. Ac- 
cording to this account therefore the old 
idea of physical pain must be called up 
whenever I see any other person in the like 
danger, and the associated action along 
with it, just as much as if I were exposed to 
the same danger myself. This is I be- 
lieve the doctrine of sympathy advanced 
by Adam Smith in his " Theory of Moral 
Sentiments." It is in fact neither self-love 
nor benevolence, neither fear nor compas- 
sion, nor voluntary attachment to any 
thing, but an unmeaning game of battle- 



232 

dore and shuttle-cock kept up between the 
nerves and muscles. But it seems to me 
a much more rational way to suppose that 
the idea does not lose it's eflScacy by being 
combined with diflFerent circumstances, 
that it retains the same general nature as the 
original impression, that it therefore gives 
a new and immediate impulse to the mind, 
and that it's tendency to produce action is 
not entirely owing to the association between 
the original impression, and a particular ac- 
tion,whichitmechanicaIlyexcitesoveragain. 
First, because the connection between the 
impression and action was not accidental 
but necessary, and therefore the connection 
between the idea and action is not to be 
attributed to association, but to. the general 
nature of the human mini by which similar 
effects follow from similar causes. Se- 
condly, if the imaginary or general idea 
were entirely powerless va itself except as a 
means of exciting some former impulse con- 
nected with physical pain, none but the 
very identical action formerly excited could 



^33 

result from it, that is if I could not avoid 
an object in the same way that I had formerly 
done I should not attempt to avoid it at 
all, but remain quite helpless. Thirdly, 
because the ideas of future objects having 
no eflFect at all on my feelings or actions, 
and the [connection between the original 
associated impressions being the strongest 
and most certain of all others, any parti- 
cular train of mechanical impulses being 
once set in motion would necessarily go on 
in the old way unrestrained by any idea of 
consequences till they were stopped again 
by actual pain. — It is plain however that 
the activity of the understanding pre- 
vents this rough rebuke of experience, that 
the will (and pur actions with it) bends and 
turns and winds according to every change 
of circumstances and impulse of imagina- 
tion, that we need only foresee certain evils 
as the consequences of our actions in order 
to avoid them. The supposition that the 
idea of any particular motion necessary to 
a given end, or of the different motions 



i 



4 



234 

which combined together constitute some 
regular action is suflBcieht to produce that 
action by a subtle law of association can. 
only apply to those diflFerent motions af- 
ter they are willed, not to the willing them. 
That is, there must be a previous determi- 
»ation of the will, or feeling of remote 
good connected with the idea of the action 
before it can have any effect. The idea of 
any action must be in itself perfectly indif- 
ferent, being always advantageous, useless, 
or mischievous according to circumstances. 
I cannot therefore see any reason accord- 
ing to this hypothesis why I should will 
or be inclined to make any exertions not 
originating in some mechanical impulse 
that happens to be strongest at the time, 
merely because they may be necessary to 
avoid an imaginary evil which of itself does 
not cause the slightest emotion in niy mind : 
on the contrary, if the barely thinking of 
any external action is always immediately 
to be followed by that action without a 
particular warrant from the will, there 



235 

could be no such thing as reasonable ac- 
tion among men, our actions would be 
more ridiculous than those of a monkey, 
or of a man possessed with St. Vitus's 
dance ; they would resemble the diseased 
starts and fits of a madman, not the actions 
of a reasonable being. We should thrust 
our hands into the fire, dash our heads 
against the wall, leap down precipices, and 
commit more absurdities every moment of 
our lives than were performed by Don 
Quixote with so much labour and study 
by way of penance in the heart of the 
Brown Mountain. The moinentum of the 
will is necessary to give direction and con- 
stancy to any of our actions; and this 
again can only be determined by the ideas 
of future good and evil, and the connec- 
tion which the mind perceives between cer- 
tain actions, and the attainment of the one 
6y the prevention of the other. If our ac- 
tions did not naturally slide into this track, 
if they did not follow the direction of rea- 
son wherever it points the way, they must 



236 

fall back again at every step into the old 
routine of blind mechanical impulse, and 
headlong associations that neither hear, nor 
see, nor understand any thing. — Lastly the 
tcnns general association mean nothing of 
themselves. I have done a particular ac- 
tion with a certain purpose, or I have had 
in my mind at the time the general idea of 
a purpose, of something useful connected 
with my action. What has this to do with 
my ability to perform any other actioi^, be 
it ever so dififerent, because it i^ also cc^n- 
nee ted with a purpose ? The associated 
idea either of a particular purpose, or of 
a purpose generally speaking can ojojy have 
an immediate tendency to excite that par- 
ticular action, with which it was associated^ 
not any action whatever, merely because it 
may have a connection with some remote 
good. So of any number of actions. For. 
let ever so many different actions have |)eeQ 
associated with the idea of a purpos§, . this 
will not in the least enable me to perform 
any intermediate action, or to combine the. 



m 

old actions in a different order with a \\Q.vi 
to a particular purpose, unless we give to 
the idea of this particular purpose as a 
general idea of good an absolute power to 
controul our actions, and force them into 
their proper places. I grant indeed that 
having once admitted a direct power i;i 
ideas of the same general nature to afFect 
the will in the same manner we may by a 
parity of reasoning suppose that this power 
is capable of being transferred by associ- 
ation to the most indifferent ideas, which, 
as far as they resemble one another, will 
operate as general motives to action, or 
give a necessary bias to the will. But if 
this analogy holds with respect to secon- 
dary and artificial motives which are not in , 
their own nature allied to action, surely it 
must hold much more with respect to the 
direct, original motives themselves, the 
ideas of good aiid evil, where the power 
inheres in the very nature of the object* 
My being led to perform different actions 
with which the same abstract idea of utility 



238 

is connected is not therefore properly ow- 
ing to association, but because any ideas 
or motives of the same kind whether de- 
rived from a new impression, or made out 
by the imagination, or only general feel- 
ings must naturally influence the will in 
the same manner, and this impulse being 
once given, the understanding makes choice 
of such means as are perceived to be ne- 
cessary to the attainment of the given ob- 
ject. For, after all, the execution of bur 
purppses must be left to the understanding. 
The simple or direct ideas of things might 
excite emotion, volition, or action; but 
it would be the volition of the objects 
or feelings themselves, not of the means 
necessary to produce them. Feeling alone 
is therefore insufficient to the pi:oduction 
of voluntary action. Neither is it to be 
accounted for from association. The actual 
means necessary to the production of a 
given end are willed, not because those very 
nieans have been already associated with 
^hat particular end (for this does not hap- 



239 

pen once in a thousand times) but because 
those means are known to be inseparable 
from the attainment of that end in the 
given circumstances. 

There is however another objection to 
the disinterested hypothesis, which was 
long ago stated by Hobbes, Rochefocault, 
and the author of the Fable of the Bees, 
and has been since adopted and glossed 
over by Helvetius. It is pretended that in 
wishing to relieve the distresses of others we 
only wish to remove the uneasiness which 
pity creates in our own minds, that all our 
actions are necessarily selfish, as they all 
arise from some feeling of pleasure or pain 
existing in the mind of the individual, and 
that whether we intend our own good or 
that of others, the immediate gratifica* 
tion connected with the idea of any object 
^is the sole motive which determines us in 
the pursuit of it. 

First, this objection does not at all affect 
the question in dispute* For if it is al- 
lowed that the idea oi the pleasures or 
pains of others excites an immediate interest 



240 

in the mind, if we feel sorrow and anxiety 
for their imaginary distresses exactly in the 
same way that we do for our own, and are 
impelled to action by the same motives; 
whether the action has for it's object our 
own good or that of others, the nature of 
man as a voluntary agent must be the same, 
the effect of the principle impelling him 
must be the same, whether we call this 
principle self-love, or benevolence, or 
whatever refinements we may introduce 
into our manner of explaining it. The re- 
lation of man to himself and others as a 
moral being is plainly determined, for whe- 
ther a regard to the future welfare of him- 
self and others is the real, or only the os- 
tensible motive of his actions, they all tend 
to one or other of these objects, and to one 
as directly as the other, which is the only 
thing worth inquiring about. All that can 
be meant by the most disinterested benevo- 
lence must be this immediate sympathy with 
the feelings of others, and it could never 
be supposed that man is more immediately 



241 

sdiffefcted by the interests of others than he 
kzs^ be even by his own. If by self-love 
i^e understand any thing beyond the im« 
pulse of the present moment, it can be no 
iXLOre a mechanical thing than the most re« 
fined and comprehensive benevolence. I 
only contend then that we are naturally in« 
terested in the welfare of others in the same 
^nse in which we are said to be interested 
In our own future welfare. Self-love used 
in the sense which the above objection im- 
plies must therefore mean something veiy 
different from an exclusive principle of de- 
liberate, [calculating selfishness, which 
knust render us indifiPerent to every thing 
but own advantage, or from the love of 
l^hysical pleasure and aversion to physical 
pain, which would produce no interest i4 
any but sensible impressions *• 

Supposing therefore that our most gene*, 
irous feelings and actions were equivocal, 
khc object only bearing a shew of disinte- 
)restedness^ the motive being always selfish> 

R 



this would be no reason for rejecting the 
conimon use of the term disinterested hene^ 
volence, which expresses nothing more than 
an immediate reference of our actions to 
the good of others, as self-love expresses 
a conscious reference of them to our own 
good, as means to anend. This is the' pro- 
per meaning of the terms. If there is any 
impropriety in the one, the other must be 
equally objectionable^ the same fallacy 
lurks under both. 

Secondly, the objection is not true in 
itself, that is, I see no reason for resolving 
the feelings of compassion, &c. into a 
principle pf mechanical self-love. That 
the motive to action exists in the mind of 
the person who acts is what no one can 
deny. The passion excited and the im- 
pression prodticingit must necessarily aflPect 
the individual. There must always be 
some one to feel and act, or there could be 
no such thing as feeling or action *. It 

* See preface to Butler's Sermons* 



*43 

cannot therefore be implied as a condition 
in the love of others, that this love should 
not be felt by the person who loves them, 
for this would be to say that he must love 
them and not love them at the same time, 
which is palpable nonsense. This absurd 
inference, I say, could never be implied 
in the common use of the terms, as it could 
never be imagined that in order to feel for 
others, we must in reality feel nothing. 
Thi3 distinction proves clearly that it is al- 
ways the individual who lox)ts^ but not that 
he always loves himself; for it is to be pre- 
sumed that the word selfhdis some meaning 
in it, and it would have absolutely none at 
all, if nothing more were intended by it 
than any object or impression existing in 
the mind. Self-love would merely signify 
the love of something, and the distinction 
between ourselves and others be quite con- 
founded. It therefore becomes necessary 
to set limits to the meaning of the term. 

First, it may signify, as explained 
above, the love or affection excited by the 

R 2 



H4 

idea of our own good, and tlie conscious; 
pursuit of it as a general, remote, ideal 
thing. In this sense, that is considered 
with respect to the proposed end of our 
actions, I have shewn sufficiently that 
there is no exclusive principle of self Jove, 
in the human mind which constantly im« 
pels us to pursue our own advantage and 
nothing but thaf^ and that it must be 
equally absurd to consider either self-love 
or benevolence as a physical operation • 

Another sense of the term may be, that 
the indulgence of certain a£Fections neces-- 
sarily tends vnthout our thinking of it to 
our immediate gratification, and that the 
impulse to prolong a state of pleasure and 
put a stop to whatever gives the mind the 
least uneasiness is the real spring and over- 
ruling principle of our actions^ No mat- 
ter whether the impression existing in 
my mind is a sensation or an idea, whether 
it is an idea of my own good or that of 
another, it's effect on the mind is entirely 
©wing to this involuntary attachment to- 



tfhatever contributes to my own gratifi*. 
cation, and avisrsion from actual pain. 
Or the mind is so constructed that with- 
out forethought or any reflection on itself 
it has a natural tendency to prolong and 
heighten a state of pleasurable feeling, and 
instantly remove every painful feeling. 
This tendency must be wholly unconscious ; 
the moment my own gratification is indi* 
rectly adverted to by the mind as the con* 
sequence of indulging certain feelings, and 
so becomes a distinct motive to action, it 
Tcturns back into the limits of deliberate, 
calculating selfishness ; and it has been 
shewn that there is nothing in the idea of 
our Own good which makes it a proper 
motive of action more than that of others. 
There appears to be as little propriety in 
making the mechanical tendency to our 
own good the foundation of human ac* 
tidns. In the first place, it may be suf* 
ficient fo deny the mere matter of fact, that 
such is the natural disposition of the bus- 
man mipd^ We do not on every occasion 



24^ 

I 

blindly consult the interest of the fno* 
ment, there is no instinctive, unen:ing bias 
to our own good, controuling all other 
impulses, and guiding them. to it's own 
purposes. It . is not true that in giving 
way to the feelings . either of sympathy or 
rational self-interest (by one or other of 
which feelings my actions are constantly 
governed *) I always yield to that impulse 
which is accompanied with most pleasure 
at, the time. It is true that I yield to the 
strongest inclination, but not that my 
strongest inclination is to pleasure. The 

* As far as the love of good or happiness operates 
as a general principle of action, it is in this way. JL 
have supposed this principle to be at the bottom of 
all our actions, because I did not desire to enter 
into the question. If I should ever finish the plan 
which I have begun, I shall endeavour to shew that 
the love of happiness even in the most general sense 
does not account for the passions of men. The love 
of truth, and the love of power are I think distinct 
principles of action, and mix with, and modify all 
our pursuits. See Butler as quoted above. 



«47 

idea of the relief I may afiFord to a person 
in extreme distress is not necessarily ac- 
companied by a correspondent degree of 
pleasurable sensation to counterbalance 
the painful feeling his immediate distress 
occasions in my mind. It is certain that 
sometimes the one and sometimes the other 
may prevail without altering my purpose 
in the least : I am held to my purpose 
by the idea (which I cannot get rid of) 
of what another suffers, and that is in my 
power to alleviate his suflFering, not that 
that idea is always the most agreeable con- 
templation I could have. The mind is 
often haunted by painful images and recol- 
lections, not that we court their company, 
but that we cannot shake them oflF, even 
though we strive to do it. Why does a 
woman of the town always turn round to 
look at another finer than herself? Why 
does the envious man torment himself by 
dwelling on the advantages of his rival ? 
Not from the pleasure it affords him. Why 
then should it be maintained that the feel- 



ings of compassioiij generosity, &c. can^r 
not possibly actuate the mind, but because 
and in as far as they contribute to our 
own satisfsLCtion ? Those who willingly per* 
form the most painful duties of friendship 
or humanity do not do this from the im« 
mediate gratification attending it ; it is as 
easy to turn away from a beggar as to re^ 
lieve him ; and if the mind were not 
governed by a sense of truth, and of the 
^real consequences pf it's actions, we should 
treat the distresses of others with the same 
sort of feeling as we go to see a tragedy be- 
<;ause we know that th? pleasure will be 
greater than the pain. There is indeed 
a false and bastard kind of feeling which 
^s govempd altogether by a regard to this 
reaction of pity on pur own minds, and 
which therefore serves more strongly to, 
distinguish the true. So there is a false 
fear, as well as a refined self-interest. We 
very often shrink from immediate pain, 
though we know that it is necessary to our 
pbtaining some important object ; and at 



«49 

other times undergo the most painful ope- 
rations in order to avoid some greater evil 
at a distance. — In the sense which the ob- 
jection implies, my love of another is not 
the love of myself but as it operates to pro- 
duce my own good. The mind is supposed 
to be mechanically attached to, or to fly 
from every idea or impression simply as it 
aflPects it with pleasure, or pain. And if 
this were the case, it might with some pro- 
priety be said to be actuated by a principle 
of mechanical or practical self-love. If 
however there is no such principle regu^ 
lating my attachment to others by my own 
convenience, very little foundation will be 
left for the mechanical theory. For, secondly, 
the real question is, why do we sympathize 
with others at all ? It seems we are first 
impelled by self-love to feel uneasiness at 
the prospect of another's suflFering, in order 
that the same principle of tender concern, 
for ourselves may afterwards impel us to 
get rid of that uneasiness by endeavouring 
^o prevent the suflFering which is the eause 



*5^ 

of it. It is absurd to say that in compas* 
sipnating the distress of others we are only 
aflFected by our own pain or uneasiness, 
since this very pain arises from our com* 
passion. It is putting the effect before the 
cause. Before I can be affected by my 
own pain, I must first be put in pain. If 
1 am affected by, or feel pain and sorrow 
at an idea existing in my mind, which idea 
IS neither pain itself nor an idea of my 
own pain, I wonder in what sense this can 
be called the love of myself. Again, I am 
equally at a loss to conceive bow if the 
pain which this idea gives me does not im- 
pel me to get rid of it as it gives me pain 
or as it actually affects myself as a distinct, 
momentary impression, but as it is con- 
nected with other ideas, that is, is sup- 
posed to affect another, how I say this can 
be considered as the effect of self-love. 
The object, effort or struggle of the mind 
i& not to remove the idea or immediate 
feeling of pain from the individual or to 
put a stop to that feeling as it affects his 



251 

temporary interest, but to produce a dis- 
connection (whatever it may«us|^him) b^- 
twe^ certain ideas of other things exist- 
ing in his mind, namely the idea of pain, 
and the idea of another person . Self, mer€ 
physical self, is .entirely forgotten, both 
practically and consciously. My own 
good is neither the exciting cause nor the 
immediate result of the feeling by which I am 
actuated. I do not shrink from the idea 
of the pain which another feels as it affects 
myself, but it excites repugnance, unea- 
siness, or active aversion in my mind as it 
affects, or is connected with the idea of 
another ; and it is because I know that cer- 
tain actions will prevent or remove that 
pain from that other person according to 
the manner in which I have perceived ef- 
fects to be connected together in nature, 
that I will those actions for that purpose, 
or that their ideas take hold of my mind, 
and aflFect it in such a manner as to pro- 
duce their volition. In short, the change 
which the mind endeavours tp produce is 



not in the relation of a certain painful id^a 
to itself as perceiving it, but in the rdation 
of certain ideas of external things to onean6« 
ther. If this is not sufficient to make the 
distinction intelligible, I cannot exprtess 
it any better, <* Oh, but'\(it will be 
s^dd) ** I cannot help feeling pain when I 
see another in actual pain, or get rid of 
the idea by any other means than by re-^ 
lieving the person, and knowing th^t it 
exists no longer/- But will this ptove 
that my love of others is regulated by any 
love of myself, or that my self-love is subf 
servient to my love Of others ? What hin*f 
^ers me from immediately removing the 
painful idea from my mind but that mjr 
sympathy with others stands in the way df 
it ? That this independent attachment to 
the good of others is a natural, unavbid^ 
able feeling of the human mind is whaft 
I do not wish to deny. It is also, if 
you will, a mechanical feeling ; but theft 
it is neither a physical, nor a selfish me^ 
chanism. I see colours, hear sousid^> 



feel heat, and cold, and believe that twa 
and two make four by a certain mechanism, 
or from the necessary structure oi the hu- 
man mind ; but it does not follow 
that all this has any thing to do with self* 
love. — One half of the process, namely 
the connecting the sense of pain with 
the idea of it, is evidently contrary to 
self-love ; nor do I see any more reason 
for ascribing the uneasiness, or active im« 
pulse which follows to that principle, 
since my own good is neither thought of 
ill it, nor does it follow from it except 
indirectly, slowly and conditionally. The 
mechanical tendency to my own ease or 
gratification is so far from being the teal 
spring or natural motive of compassion 
that it is constantly overruled and defeat^* 
ed by^it. If it should be answered that 
these restrictions and modifications of the 
principle of self-love are a necessary con-* 
sequence of the nature of a thinking being, 
then 1 say that it is nonsense to talk off 
mechanical self*love in connection with » 



«54 

power of reflection, that is, a mind ca- 
pable of perceiving the consequences of 
things beyond itself, and of being aflFected 
by them. To ask therefore whether if 
it were possible to get rid of my own un- 
easiness without supposing the uneasiness 
of another to be removed I should wish 
to remove it, is foreign to the purpose ; 
for it is to suppose that the idea of ano- 
ther's uneasiness is not an immediate iob- 
ject of uneasiness to me, or that by making 
a distinction of reflection between the idea 
of what another suffers, and the uneasiness 
it causes in me, the former will cease to 
give me any uneasiness, which is a con- 
tradiction. A question might as well 
be put whether if pleasure gave me 
pain, and pain pleasure, I should not 
like pain, and dislike pleasure. So long 
as the idea of what another suffers is a ne- 
cessary source of uneasiness to me, and 
the motive and guide of my actions, it 
ft not true that my only concern is for 
myself, or that I am governed solely, by 



•55 

A principle of self-interest.— The body 
has a mechanical tendency to shrink from 
physical pain: this may be called me- 
chanical self-love, because, though the 
good of the individual is not the ob- 
ject of the action, it is the immediate and 
natural eflFect of it. The movement which 
is dictated by nature is directly followed 
by the cessation of the pain by which the 
individual was annoyed. The evil is com- 
pletely removed with respect to the indi- 
vidual, the moment the object is at a dis- 
tance from him ; but it only exists as it af- 
fects the individual, it is therefore completely 
at an end when it ceases to aflFect him. The 
only thing necessary therefore is to pro- 
duce this change in the relation of the 
body to the object ; now this is the exact 
tendency of the impulse produced by bo- 
dily pain, that is, it shrinks €U the pain 
2ind/rom the object. The being dc»es not. 
suffer a moment longer than he can help 
it : for there is nothing that should induce 
him to remain in pain. The body is 



not tied down to do penance under the dis^ 
tipline of external objects^ till by fulfilling 
certain conditions, from which it reaps no 
benefit, it obtains a release ; all it's ex-^> 
ertions tend immediately to it's own re^ 
lief. The body (at least according to the 
account here spoken of) is a machine s6 
contrived, that, as &r as depends on itself; 
it always tends to it's own good, in the 
mind, on the contrary, there are number* 
less lets and impediments that interfere with, 
this object inseparable from it's very na- 
ture ; the body strives to produce such 
alterations in it's relation to oth^r things as 
conduce to it's own advantage, the mind 
seeks to alter the relations of other things 
to one another ; the body loves it's own 
good, for it tends to it, the understanding, 
is not governed solely by this principle^ for 
it is constantly aiming at other objects. To 
make the two cases of physical uneasiness, 
and compassion parallel, it would be ne- 
cessary to suppose either an involuntary 
tendency in the muscles to remove every." 



painful object from another through me- 
chanical sympathy, or that the real object 
of compassion was to remove the nervous 
une^iness, occasioned by the idea of ano- 
ther's pain, as an abstract sensation exist- 
ing in my mind, totally unconnected with 
the idea which gave rise to it. 

Lastly, should any desperate metaphy- 
sician persist in affirming that my love of 
others is still the love of myself because 
the impression exciting my sympathy 
must exist in my mind and so be a part of 
myself, I should answer that this is 
using words without affixing any distinct 
meaning to them. The love or afiFection 
excited by any general idea existing in my 
mind can no more be said to be the love 
of myself than the idea of another perfon 
is the idea of myself because it is I who 
perceive it. This method of reasoning, 
however, will not go a great way to prove 
the doctrine of an abstract principle of 
self-interest, for by the same rule it would 
follow that I hate myself in hating any 



258 

other person. Indeed upon this princi- 
ple the whole structure of language is a 
continued absurdity. Whatever can be 
made the object of our thoughts must be 
a part of ourselves, the whole world is 
contained within us, I am no longer 
John or James, but every one that I 
know or can think of, I am the least part 
of myself, my self-interest is extended as 
far as my thoughts can reach, I can love 
no one but I must love myself in him, 
in hating others I also hate myself. In 
this sense no one can so much as think of, 
much less love any one besides himself, 
for he can only think of his own thoughts. 
If our generous feelings are thus to be 
construed into selfishness, our malevolent 
ones must at least be allowed to be disin- 
. terested, for they are directed against our- 
selves, that is against the ideas of certain 
persons in our minds. If I can have no 
feelingyor any one but myself, I can have 
no feeling about any one but myself. Sup- 
pose I am seized with a fit of rage against 



L. 



^S9 

a man, and take up a knife to stab him, 
the quantity of malice, which according to 
the common notion is here directed against 
another, must according to this system 
fall upon myself* I see a man sitting on 
the opposite side of a table, towards whom 
I think I feel the greatest rancour, but in 
fact I only feel it against myself. For 
what is this man whom I think I see be- 
fore me but an object existing in my mind, 
and therefore a part of myself? The 
sword which I see is not a real sword, but 
an image impressed on my mind ; and 
the mental blow which I strike with it is 
not aimed at another being out of myself, 
(for that is impossible) but at an idea of 
my own, at the being whom 1 hate 
within myself, at myself. If I am always 
necessarily the object of my own thoughts 
and actions, I must hate, love, serve, or 
stab myself as it happens. It is pretended 
by a violent assumption that benevolence 
is only a desire to prolong the idea of 
another's pleasure in one's own mind, 



• 



^0 

because that idea exists there : malevolence 
must therefore be a disposition to prolong 
the idea of pain in one*s own mind for the 
same reason, that is, to injure one's-self, 
for by this philosophy no one cin have 
a single idea which does not refer to, nor 
any impulse which does not originate in 
self. — If by self-love be meant nothing 
more than the attachment of the mind to 
any object or idea existing in it, or the 
connection between any object or idea 
producing aflFection and the state of mind 
produced by it, this is merely the common 
connection between csLuse and eflFect, and 
the love of every thing must be the love 
of myself, for the love of every thing must 
be the love of the object exciting it. On 
the contrary, if by self-love be meant my at* 
tachmentto or interest in any object in con- 
sequence of it's aflFecting me personally or 
from the stronger and more immediate 
manner in which certain objects and im- 
pressions act upon me, then it cannot 
be affirmed without an absurdity that all 
affection whatever is self-love. So if I 



see a man wounded^ and this sight occa- 
sions in me a painful feeling of sympa- 
thy, I do not in this case feel for myself, 
because between that idea or object im- 
pressed on my mind and the painful feel- 
ing which follows there is no such positive 
connection as there is between the inflic- 
tion of the same wound on my own body ; 
and the physical pain which follows it* 
Will it be pretended by any one, on 
whose brain the intricacies of metaphysics 
have not had the same effect as the reading 
of romances had on the renowned knight 
of La Mancha, that a piece of wood which 
I see a man cutting in pieces, and so is an 
object existing in my mind, is -a part of 
myself in the same sense as a leg or an 
arm ? For tny own part, as I am not at 
all affected by the hacking and hewing 
which this piece of wood receives, or all the 
blows with which it rings, which are to me 
mere harmless flourishes in the air, it seems 
to me a very diflFerent thing. The one idea 
is myself in a simple, very abstract s^se 



262 

indeed, the other idea is myself in the 
common emphatical sense, it is a redu-^ 
plication or aggravation of the idea, the 
object becomes myself by a double right, 
I am sensible in the object as well as to it. 
I should say, then, that when the sight 
of another person wounded excites a feel- 
ing of compassion in my mind^ this is not 
a selfish feeling in any narrow or degrad- 
ing sense of the word, which is the only 
thing in dispute, (If selfishness is to 
mean generosity, there is an end at once 
of the dispute.) And that for this plain 
reason, that the connection between the 
visible impression and the feeling of pain 
is of a totally different kind from the con- 
nection between the feeling of pain, and 
the same wound when inflicted on my 
own body. The one is an affair of 
sensation, the other is entirely an affair 
of imagination. My love of others can- 
not therefore be built upon the love of 
ayself, considering this last as the effect 
f " physical sensibility", and the mo- 



263 

ment we resolve self-love into the ra- 
tional pursuit of a remote object, it 
has been shewn that the same reasoning 
applies to both, and that the love of 
others has the same necessary foundation 
in the human mind as the love of our- 
selves. 



THE ENp, 



Prinud by E. Hemstedi NenV'^stteef, Fettermlanu 



KRRATA. 

9S, L ISj Jor interest reoif interesft. 
44> I. 18, for S3rmpathise read sympathize. 
49% L 0, dele comma after virtue. 
56» L 3, for by and bye read by and by. 
•8» L 3, a comma after actios. 
•8> 1. 13, insert a mark tot a parenthesis after in^rkhiiL 
SOff> L 12 ticom the battosn» far auioit read saoiu 



