This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE 


ENGLISH  WORKS 


THOMAS    HOBBES 

OFMALMESBURY; 
NOW  FIRST  COLLECTED  AND  EDITED 


SIR  WILLIAM  MOLESWORTH,  BART. 


VOL  III. 


LONDON: 

JOHN  BOHN, 
HENRIETTA  STREET,  COVENT  GARDEN. 


MDCCCXXXIX. 


j^-,^  Digitized  by  Google 


'!>    , 


\Q-Cl-^''*-^ 


lokoon: 
0.  richards,  fbiktrb,  st.  if  artih's  lan!. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


^^        .  A  im  taf  ^wffstf/s  Sajn'r  Tct-rttm  qtm  (\'tniHiiTrtir  ei. — .lob  xli.  24. 


I 


Digitized  by 


Google 


:.<■> 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LEVIATHAN, 

OR 

THE  MATTER,  FORM,  AND  POWER 

OP  A 

COMMONWEALTH 

ECCLESIASTICAL  AND  CIVIL. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


Digitized  by 


Google 


TO  MY  MOST  HONORED  FRIEND 

MR.  FRANCIS  GODOLPHIN, 


OP  GODOLPHIN. 


Honor'd  Sir, 
Your  most  worthy  brother,  Mr.  Sidney  Godolphin, 
when  he  lived,  was  pleased  to  thmk  my  studies  some- 
thing, and  otherwise  to  oblige  me,  as  you  know,  with 
real  testimonies  of  his  good  opinion,  great  in  themselves, 
and  the  greater  for  the  worthiness  of  his  person.  For 
there  is  not  any  virtue  that  disposeth  a  man,  either  to 
the  service  of  God,  or  to  the  service  of  his  country,  to 
civil  society,  or  private  friendship,  that  did  not  manifestly 
appear  in  his  conversation,  not  as  acquired  by  necessity, 
or  affected  upon  occasion,  but  inherent,  and  shining  in 
a  generous  constitution  of  his  nature.  Therefore,  in 
honour  and  gratitude  to  him,  and  with  devotion  to  your- 
self, I  humbly  dedicate  unto  you  this  my  discourse  of 
Commonwealth.  I  know  not  how  the  world  will  receive 
it,  nor  how  it  may  reflect  on  those  that  shall  seem  to 
favour  it.  For  in  a  way  beset  with  those  that  contend, 
on  one  side  for  too  great  liberty,  and  on  the  other  side 
for  too  much  authority,  't  is  hard  to  pass  between  the 
points  of  both  unwounded.     But  yet,  methinks.  the 

Digitized  by  KjOUQ  L 

VOL.  III.  A 


THE  BPISTLE  DEDICATORY. 

endeavour  to  advance  the  civil  power,  should  not  be  by 
the  civil  power  condemned  ;  nor  private  men,  by  repre- 
hending it,  declare  they  think  that  power  too  great. 
Besides,  I  speak  not  of  .the  men,  but,  in  the  abstract, 
of  the  seat  of  power,  (like  to  those  simple  and  unpartial 
creatures  in  the  Roman  Capitol,  that  with  their  noise 
defended  those  within  it,  not  because  they  were  they, 
but  there),  oflFending  none,  I  think,  but  those  without, 
or  such  within,  if  there  be  any  such,  as  favour  them. 
That  which  perhaps  may  most  oflFend,  are  certain  texts 
of  Holy  Scripture,  alleged  by  me  to  other  purpose  than 
ordinarily  they  use  to  be  by  others.  But  I  have  done  it 
with  due  submission,  and  also,  in  order  to  my  subject, 
necessarily ;  for  they  are  the  outworks  of  the  enemy, 
from  whence  they  impugn  the  civil  power.  If  not- 
withstanding this,  you  find  my  labour  generally  decried, 
you  may  be  pleased  to  excuse  yourself,  and  say,  I  am  a 
man  that  love  my  own  opinions,  and  think  all  true  I 
say,  that  I  honoured  your  brother,  and  honour  you,  and 
have  presumed  on  that,  to  assume  the  title,  without  your 
knowledge,  of  being,  as  I  am, 
Sir, 
Your  most  humble, 

and  most  obedient  Servant, 

Thomas  Hobbes. 
Paris,  April  ^,  1651.  D.t.ed  by  Google 


THE  CONTENTS  OF  THE  CHAPTERS. 


THE  FIRST  PART-— OF  MAN. 

CBA».  >AOB. 

Introduction ix 

1.  Of  Sense 1 

2.  Of  Imagination S 

3.  Of  the  Consequence  or  Train  of  Imaginations  •        .11 

4.  Of  Speech         .........  18 

5.  Of  Reason  and  Science               29 

6.  Of  the  Interior  B^nnings  of  Voluntary  Motions,  commonly 

called  the  Passions ;  and  the  Speeches  by  which  they  are 
expressed      .        .        . 38 

7.  Of  the  Ends  or  Resolntions  of  Discourse  .        .        .51 

8.  Of  the  Virtues,  commonly  called  Intellectual;  and  their  con- 

trary Defects ,        .        .      56 

9.  Of  the  Several  Subjects  of  Knowledge        .        .        .        .71 

10.  Of  Power,  Worth,  Dignity,  Honour,  and  Worthiness  .        .      74 

11.  Of  the  Difference  of  Manners 85 

12.- Of  Religion 94 

^...4^.  Of  the  Natural  Condition  of  Mankind  as  concerning  their 

Felicity  and  Misery 110 

^4f.  Of  the  First  and  Second  Natural  Laws,  and  of  Contract      .     1 16 

,L5r  Of  other  Laws  of  Nature  130 

16.  Of  Persons,  Authors,  and  Things  Personated  .  .147 


THE  SECOND  PART. —  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

^7.  Of  the  Causes,  Generation,  and  Definition  of  a  Commonwealth  153 
J8;  Of  the  Rights  of  Sovereigns  by  Institution  ....  159 
J9r^Of  the  several  kinds  of  Commonwealth  by  Institution ;  and 

of  Succession  to  the  Sovereign  Power    .        .        .        .171 
^.  Of  Dominion  Paternal,  and  Despotical        ....     185 

.^^  Of  the  Liberty  of  Subjects  .        .        .        .        .        .196 

22.  Of  Systems  Subject,  Political,  and  Private  .         .        .        .    210 

23.  Of  the  Public  Minbters  of  Sovereign  Power        .        .        .226 

24.  Of  the  Nutrition,  and  Procreation  of  a  Commonwealth        .    232 

ized  by  GoOQle 


THE  CONTENTS  OF  THE  CHAPTERS. 

25.  Of  Counsel 240 

i«;  OfCivULaws  250 

27*  Of  Crimes,  Excuses,  and  Extenuations        .         .         •        .  277 

28.  Of  Punishments,  and  Rewards 297 

W.  Of  those  things  that  weaken,  or  tend  to  the  Dissolution  of  a  / 

Commonwealth 308  v 

aa  Of  tha  Office  of  the  Sovereign  Representative    .  .  322 

SI.  Of  the  Kingdom  of  God  by  Nature 343>-^^ 

THE  THIRD  FART« OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

5^  Of  the  Principles  of  Christian  Politics         .        .  .     359  \/^ 

33 >  Of  tit e  Number,  Antiquity,  Scope,  Authority,  and  Interpreters 

of  the  Books  of  Holy  Scripture 366 

5^,  Of  the  Signification  of  Spirit,  Angel,  and  Inspiration,  in  the 

Books  of  Holy  Scripture 380      , 

35,  Of  the  Signification  in  Scripture  of  the  Kingdom  of  God, 

of  Holy,  Sacred,  and  Sacrament      ...  .  396       \. 

36.  Of  the  Word  of  God,  and  of  Prophets        .        .        .        .  407  1 

a?.  Of  Miracles,  and  their  Use 427 

SB.  Of  the  Signification  in  Scripture  of  Eternal  Life,  Hell,  Sal- 
vation, the  World  to  Come,  and  Redemption  .        .        •  437    \ 

39^  Of  the  Signification  in  Scripture  of  the  word  Church  .  458 

40*  Of  the  Eights  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  in  Abraham,  Moses,  ^^ 

the  High-Priests,  and  the  Kings  of  Judah       .        .        •  461 

4  L  Of  the  Office  of  Our  Blessed  Saviour  ....  475  v^ 

¥1.  Of  Power  Ecclesiastical 485 

^X  Of  what  is  Necessary  for  a  Man's  Reception  into  the  King- 
dom of  Heaven 584  / 

THE  FOURTH  PART. — OF  THE  KINGDOM  OP  DARKNESS. 

Irt.  Of  Spiritual  Darkness,  from  Misinterpretation  of  Scripture  603 

4.'i.  Of  Demonology,  and  other  Relics  of  the  Religion  of  the  637 

GcDtilfS 

4B,  Of  Darkness  from  Vain  Philosophy,  and  Fabulous  Traditions  664 
47*  Of  the  Benefit  proceeding  from  such  Darkness ;  and  to  whom 

it  accrtaeth 688 

A  Review  and  Conclusion          .        .        .        .        .        .  701 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


IX 


THE 

INTRODUCTION. 


Nature,  the  art  whereby  God  hath  made  and  governs 
the  world,  is  by  the  art  of  man,  as  in  many  other  things, 
so  in  this  also  ^ul;a|ed,  that  it  can  make  anj[^ificial 
ammtdj  For  seeing  life  is  but  a  motion  of  limbs,  the 
beginning  whereof  is  in  some  principal  part  within ; 
why  may  we  not  say,  that  ^  automata J^Vi^^  that 
move  themselves  by  springs  and  wheels  as  doth  a^ 
w^^h)  have  an  artificial  life  ?  For  what  is  the  hearty 
bnt  a  spring;  and  the  nerves ,  but  so  many  strings  ; 
and  the  joints,  but  so  many  wheels,  giving  motion  to 
the  whole  body,  such  as  was  intended  by  the  artificer  ? 
Art  goes  yet  farther,  imitating  that  rational  and  most 
excellent  work  of  nature,  man.  For  by  art  is  created 
that  great  Leviathan  called  a  Commonwealth,  or  \ 
State,  in  Latin  Cfvitas,  which  is  but  an  artificial 
man ;  though  of  greater  stature  and  strength  than  the 
natural,  for  whose  protection  and  defence  it  was  in- 
tended ;  and  in  which  the  sovereignty  is  an  artificial 
soulyB&  giving  life  and  motion  to  the  whole  body98ife 


K  INTRODUCTION.  ,    , 

magistrates^  and  other  officers  of  judicature  and  exe- 
cutioDj  artificial  joints  ;  reward  and  punishment j  by 
which  fastened  to  the  seat  of  the  sovereignty  every 
joint  and  member  is  moved  to  perform  his  duty,  are 
the  nerves  J  that  do  the  same  in  the  body  natural ;  the 
ivealth  and  riches  of  all  the  particular  members,  are  the 
strength  ;  salus  populij  the  people" s  safety ^  its  busi- 
ness ;  counsellors^  by  whom  all  things  needM  for  it  to 
know  are  suggested  unto  it,  are  the  memory ;  equity y 
and  Imm^  an  artificial  reason  and  will ;  concord,  health; 
sediiiofi,  sickness ;  and  civil  war^  death.  Lastly,  the 
pacts  and  covenants^  by  which  the  parts  of  this  body 
politic  were  at  first  made,  set  together,  and  united,  re- 
semble that(/?«^,  or  the  let  us  make  «iflf»,J)ronounced 
by  God  in  the  creation. 

To  describe  the  nature  of  this  artificial  man,  I  will 
eonsider 

First,  the  matter  thereof,  and  the  artificer;  both 
whicli  is  m^n. 

Secondly,  how^  and  by  what  covenants  it  is  made ; 
what  are  the  rights  and  just  power  or  authority  of  a  so- 
vereigu ;  and  what  it  is  that  preserveth  or  dissolveth  it. 

Thirdly,  what  is  a  Christian  commonwealth. 

Lastly,  what  is  the  kingdom  of  darkness. 

Concerning  the  first,  there  is  a  saying  much  usurped 
of  late,  that  wisdom  is  acquired,  not  by  reading  of  books, 


INTRODUCTION.  XI 

but  of  men.    Consequently  ^hereunto,  those  persons, 
that  for  the  most  part  can  give  no  other  proof  of  bemg 
wise,  take  great  delight  to  show  what  they  think  they 
have  read  in  men,  by  uncharitable  censures  of  one 
another  behind  their  backs.     But  there  is  another  say- 
ing not  of  late  understood,  by  which  they  might  learn 
truly  to  read  one  another,  if  they  would  take  the  pains ; 
that  is,  nosce  teipsumj^ead  thyself  ?)'whic\i  was  not 
meant,  as  it  is  now  used,  to  countenance,  either  the 
barbarous  state  of  men  in  power,  towards  their  infe- 
riors ;  or  to  encourage  men  of  low  degree,  to  a  saucy 
behaviour  towards  their  betters ;  but  to  teach  us,  that 
for  th^imilitudejof  the  thoughts  and  passions  of  one 
man,  to  the  thoughts  and  passions  of  another,  whosoever 
looketh  into  himself,  and  considereth  what  he  dothy 
when  he  does  thinky  opine,  reason^  hope,  fear,  &c.  and 
upon  what  grounds ;  he  shall  thereby  read  and  know, 
what  are  the  thoughts  and  passions  (^aU^ther  men 
upon  the  like  occasions.  I  say  the  similitude  of  passions, 
which  are  the  same  in  all  men,  desire^  fear,  hope,  &c ; 
not  the  similitude  of  the  objects  of  the  passions,  which 
are  the  things  desired,  feared,  hoped,  &c :  for  these 
the  constitution  individual,  and  particular  education,  do 
so  vary,  and  they  are  so  easy  to  be  kept  from  our  know- 
ledge, that  the  characters  of  man's  heart,  blotted  and 
confounded  as  they  are  with  dissembling,  lying,  coun- 


Xll  INTRODUCTION. 

terfeiting,  and  erroneous  doctrines,  are  legible  only  to 
him  that  searcheth  hearts.  And  though  by  men's  ac- 
tions we  do  discover  their  design  sometimes ;  yet  to  do 
it  without  comparing  them  with  our  own,  and  distin- 
guishing all  circumstance^s^J^yLi^ch  the  case  may  come 
to  be  altered,  isrto  decypher  without  a  key)  and  be  for 
the  most  part  deceived,  by  too  muchTfust,  or  by  too 
much  diffidence ;  as  he  that  reads,  is  himself  a  good  or 
evil  man. 

But  let  one  man  i;ead  another  by  his  actions  never  so 
perfectly,  it  serves  him  only  with  his  acquaintance,  which 
are  but  few.  He  that  is  to  govern  a  whole  nation,  must 
read  in  himself,  not  this  or  that  particular  man ;  but 
mankmd :  which  though  it  be  hard  to  do,  harder  than 
to  learn  any  language  or  science ;  yet  when  I  shall  have 
set  down  my  own  reading  orderly,  and  perspicuously, 
the  pains  left  another,  will  be  only  to  consider,  if  he 
also  find  not4he  same  in  himself. ;  For  this  kind  of 
doctrine  admitteth  no  other  demonstration. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PART  I. 

OF  MAN. 


PART  I. 

1. 


CHAPTER  L  ■       ^ 

OP    SENSE. 

CJoNCERNiNG  the(thoughts)of  man,  I  will  consider 
them  first  singly,  and  afterwards  in  train,  or  de- 
pendence upon  one  another.    Singly,  they  are  every     sense. 
one  a  representation  or  appearance y  of  some  quality,'" 
or  other  accident  of  a  body  without  us,  which  is 
commonly  called  an  object.    Which  object  worketh 
on  the  eyes,  ears,  and  other  parts  of  a  man's  body ; 
and  by  diversity  of  working,  produceth  diversity  g£^ 
appearances.  ^  / 

The  original  of  them  all,  is  that  which  we  call  /i/  \/{*'^ 
SENSE,  for  there  is  no  conception  in  a  man's  mind,  f    ^^J 
which  hath  not  at  first,  totally,  or  by  parts,  been  I  ^ 
begotten  upon  the  organs  of  sense.     The  rest  arell 
derived  from  that  original.        '^  >l 

To  know  the  natural  cause  of  sense,  is  not  very 
necessary  to  the  business  now  in  hand ;  and  I  have 
elsewhere  written  of  the  same  at  large.  Never- 
theless, to  fill  each  part  of  (my  present  method!  I 
will  briefly  deliver  the  same  in  this  place. 

The  cause  of  sense,  is  the  external  body,  or  object, 

VOL.  III.  B 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


A'^ 


( 


2  OF  MAN. 

PART  I.    wluch([presseth]!the  organ  proper  to  each  sense, 
— ];. —    either  immediately,  as  in  the  taste  and  touch ;  or 
Sense,      mediately,  as  in  seeing,  hearing,  and  smelling ;  which 
pressure,  by  the  mediation  of  the  nerves,  and  other 
strings  and  membranes  of  the  body,  continued  in- 
wards to  the  brain  and  heart,  causeth  there  a  re- 
^         sistance,  or  counter-pressure,  or  endeavour  of  the 
I  heart  to  deliver  itself,  which  endeavour,  because 
^  outward,  seemeth  to  ie  some  matter  without.   And 
thi^g^eg»«8g,  orygygcy Ais  that  which  men  call  sense; 
and  consisteth,  as  terthe  eye,  in  a  lighty  or  colour 
figured;  to  the  ear,  in  a  sound;  to  the  nostril,  in 
an  odour  ;  to  the  tongue  and  palate,  in  a  savour; 
and  to  the  rest  of  the  body,  in  heat,  cold,  hardness, 
softness,  and  such  other  qualities  as  we  discern  by 
feeling.   All  which  qualities,  called  sensible,  are  in 
the  object,  that  causeth  them,  but  so  many  several 
motions  of  the  matterV-  ^^  which  iti  pressetli)  our 
organs  diversely.    Neither  in  us  that  are  pressed, 
are  they  any  thing  else,  but  divws  motions ;  for 
motion  produceth  noting  but  motion.     But  tlieir 
jappearance  to  us  is  fancy,  the  same  waking,  that 
'direamingw     And  as  pressing,  rubbing,  or  striking 
the  eye,  makes  us  £Emcy  a  light ;  and  pressing  the 
ear,  produceth  a  din ;  so  do  the  bodies  also  we  see, 
or  hear,  produce  the  same  by  their  strong,  though 
unobserved  action.    For  if  those  colours  and  sounds 
were  in  the  bodies,  or  objects  that  cause  them,  they 
could  not  be  severed  from  them,  as  by  glasses,  and 
in  echoes  by  reflection,  we  see  they  are ;  where  we 
know  the  thing  we  see  is  in  one  place,  the  appear^ 
ance  in  another.     And  though  at  some  certain 
distance,  the  real  and  very  object  seem  invested 
with  the  fancy  it  b^ets  in  us ;  yet  still  the  object 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


OF  SBNSB. 


Sense. 


is  one  thing,  the  image  or  fancy  is  another.     So    part  i^ 
that  sense^  in  all  cases,  is  nothing  else  but  original  i  >    *• 
&ncy,  caused,  as  I  have  said,  by  the  pressure,  that  f 
is,  by  the  motion,  of  external  tldngs  upon  our  eyes, 
ears,  and  other  organs  thereunto  ordained. 

But  the  philosophy-schools,  through  all  the  uii}-i/ 
v^ities  of  Christendom,  grounded  upon  certain 
texts  of  Aristotle,  teach  another  doctrine,  and  say, 
for  the  cBM^evit  vision,  that  the  thing  seen,  sendeth 
forth  on  every  side  a  visible  species,  in  English,  a 
tyisible  show,  apparition,  or  aspect,  or  a  being 
^een;  the  receiving  whereof  into  the  eye,  is  seeing, 
iVnd  for  the  cause  oi  hearing,  that  the  thing  heard,! 
sendeth  forth  an  audible  species,  that  is  an  audible 
aspect,  or  audible  being  seen;  which  entering  at 
the  ear,  maketh  hearing.  Nay,  for  the  cause  of 
understanding  also,  they  say  the  thing  understood, 
sendeth  forth  an  intelit^ible  species^  that  is,  an 
intelligible  being  seen;  which,  coming  into  the  un- 
derstanding, makes  us  understand.  I  say  not  this, 
as  disproving  the  use  of  universities ;  but  because 
I  am  to  speak  hereafter  of  their  office  in  a  com- 
monwealth, I  must  let  you  see  on  all  occasions  by 
the  way,  what  things  would  be  amended  in  them; 
amongst  which(^e  frequency  of  insignificant  speech^ 
is  one. 


CHAPTER  II. 

OP   IMAGINATION. 

That  when  a  thing  lies  still,  unless  somewhat  else 
rtir  it,  it  will  lie  still  for  ever,  is  a  truth  that  no 
man  doubts  of.    But  that  when  a  thing  is  in  motion^ 

B  2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


4  OP  MAN. 

PART  I.  it  will  eternally  be  in  motion,  unless  somewhat  else 
-  ^'  -  stay  it,  though  the  reason  be  the  same,  namely, 
imiginatjon.  that  nothing  can  change  itself,  is  not  so  easily  as- 
sented to.  For  men  measure,  not  only  other  men, 
but  all  other  things,  (by  themselves  f)  and  because 
tl^ey  find  themselves  subject  after  motion  to  pain, 
and  lassitude,  think  every  thing  else  grows  weary 
of  motion,  and  seeks  repose  of  its  own  accord ;  little 
considering,  whether  it  be  not  some  other  motion, 
wherein  that  desire  of  rest  they  find  in  themselves, 
consisteth.  From  hence  it  is,  that  the  schools  say, 
heavy  bodies  fall  downwards,  out  of  an  appetite  to 
rest,  and  to  conserve  their  nature  in  that  place 
which  is  most  proper  for  them ;  ascribing  appetite, 
and  knowledge  of  what  is  good  for  tiieir  conserva- 
tion, which  is  more  than  man  has,  to  things  inani- 
mate, absurdly. 

When  a  body  is  once  in  motion,  it  moveth,  unless 

something  else  hinder  it,  eternally ;  and  whatsoever 

hindreth  it,  cannot  in  an  instant,  but  in  time,  and 

,j  by  degrees,  quite  extinguish  it;  and  as  we  see  in 

the  water,  though  the  wind  cease,  the  waves  ^ve 

not  over  rolling  for  a  long  time  after :  f  s^  also  it 

happeneth  in  that  motion,  which  is  made  in  the 

internal  parts  of  a  man,  then,  when  he  sees,  drewns, 

&c.    For  after  the  object  is  removed,  or  the  eye 

r  • '      shut,  we  still  retain  an  image  of  the  thing  seen, 

^^^'         "     though  more  obscure  than  when  we  see  it.    And 

this  is  it,  the  Latins  call  imagination^  ^om  the 

image  made  in  seeing ;  and  apply  the  same,  though 

improperijy  to  all  the  other  senses.    But  the  Greeks 

call  it  Jancff  )  which  signifies  appearance^  and  is  as 

proper  to  one  sense,  as  to  anotiier.    Imagination 

I      therefore  is  notiiing  but  decaying  sense;  and  is 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


r  smj>a  i  /A" 


OF  IMAGINATION. 


found  in  men,  and  many  other  living  creatures,  as    part  i. 
well  sleeping,  as  waking.  — ^ — - 

The  decay  of  sense  in  men  waking,  is  not  the  in»gw»*«>on- 
decay  of  the  motion  made  in  sense ;  but  an  ob- 
scuring of  it,  in  such  manner  as  the  light  of  the 
sun  obscureth  the  light  of  the  stars;  which  stars      .  ^ 
do  no  less  exercise  their  virtue,  by  which  they  are 
visible,  in  the  day  than  in  the  night.     But  because 
amongst  many  strokes,  which  our  eyes,  ears,  and 
other    oi^ans    receive  from   external  bodies,  the 
predominant    only    is   sensible;     therefore,    the 
light  of  the  sun  being  predominant,  we  are  not 
aflfected  with  the  action  of  the   stars.     And  any 
object    being    removed  from   our    eyes,    though 
the  impression  it  made  in  us  remain,  yet  other 
objects    more  present  succeeding,  and   working 
on  us,  thft  iTn^^nfttinn  of  the  past  is_obscured,^ 
and  made  weak,  as  the  voice  of  a  man  is  in  the  | 
noise    of    the  day.      From  whence   it  followeth, 
that  the  longer  the  timel  is,  after  the  sight  or  sense   ^ 
of  any  object,  the  weakfer  is  the  imagination.     For 
the  continual  change  of  man's  body  destroys  in 
time  the  parts  which  in  sense  were  moved :  so  that 
distance  of  time,  and  of  place,  hath  one  and  the 
same  effect  in  us.     For  as  at  a  great  distance  of 
place,  that  which  we  look  at  appears  dim,  and 
without  distinction  of  the  smaller  parts;  and  as 
voices  grow  weak,  and  inarticulate  ;  so  also,  after 
great  distance  of  time,  our  imagination  of  the  past 
is  weak ;  and  we  lose,  for  example,  of  cities  we 
have  seen,  many  particular  streets,  and  of  actions, 
many  particular   circumstances.     This  decaying 
sensej  when  we  would  express  the  thing  itself,  I 
mean  fancy  itself,  we  call  imagination^  as  I  said 


Digitized  by 


Google 


6  OP   MAN. 

PART  I.    before :  but  when  we  would  express  the  decay, 

.,  ^  „>    and  signify  that  the  sense  is  fading,  old,  and  past. 

Memory,     it  is  called  memory.     So  that  imaginatiQa.ji^ 

I  memory  are  but  one  thing,  which  for  divers  cgnsi- 

,  derations  hath  divers  names. 

Much  memory,  or  memory  of  many  things,  is 
called/^^m>«c^.y  (Again,  ima^nation  being  only 
of  those  things  which  have  been  formerly  perceived 
by  sense,  either  all  at  once,  or  by  parts  at  several 
^ times;  the  former,  which  is  the  imagining  the 
object  as  it  was  presented  to  the  sense,  is 
^fwwgfe  imagination^  as  when  one  imagineth  a  man, 
Jl  or  horse,  which  he  hath  seen  before.  The  other  is 
cpmpoundedj/B&  when,  from  the  sight  of  a  man  at 
one  time,  and  of  a  horse  at  another,  we  conceive 
/•*in  our  mind  a;  Qgntaiu;^\So  when  a  man  com- 
poundeth  the  image  of  4us  own  person  with  the 
image  of  the  actions  of  another  man,  as  when  a 
man/ imagines  himself  a  Hercules  or  an  Alexander, 
which  happeneth  often  to  them  that  are  much 
taken  with  jr^ding  of  romances,  it  is  a  compound 
imagination,  and  properly  but  a  fiction  of  the 
mind.  There  be  also  other  imaginations  that  rise 
in  men,  though  waking,  from  the  great  impression 
^  made  in  sense  :  as  from  gazing  upon  the  sun,  the 

r^  impression  leaves  an  image  of  the  sun  before  our 
/  ^  eyes  a  long  time  after ;  and  from  being  long  and  ve- 
hemently attent  upon  geometrical  figures,  a  man 
shall  in  the  dark,  though  awake,  have  the  images 
of  lines  and  angles  before  his  eyes  ;  which  kind  of 
fancy  hath  no  particular  name,  as  being  a  thing 
that  doth  not  commonly  fall  into  men's  discourse. 
Dreams.  The  imaginations  of  them  that  sleep  are  those 
we  call  dreams.    And   these  also,  as   all   other 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  IMAGINATION. 


imaginations,  have  been  before,  either  totally  or  by 
parcels,  in  the  sense.  And  because  in  sense,  the 
brain  and  nerves,  which  are  the  necessary  organs 
of  sense,  are  so  benumbed  in  sleep,  as  not  easily  to 
be  moved  by  the  action  of  external  objects,  there 
ean  happen  in  sleep  no  imagmation,  aiul  therefore 
no  dream,  but  what  proceeds  from  the  agitation  of 
the  inward  parts  of  man's  body;  which  inward 
parts,  for  the  connexion  they  have  with  the  brain, 
and  other  organs,  when  they  be  distempered,  do 
keep  the  same  in  motion ;  whereby  the  imagma- 
tions  there  formerly  made,  appear  as  if  a  man  were 
wakiiig  ;^  saving  that  the  organs  of  sense  being 
jttow  benumbed,  so  as  there  is  no  new  object, 
'which  can  master  and  obscure  them  with  a  more 
vigorous  impression,  a  dream  must  needs  be  more 
dear,  in  this  silence  of  sense,  than  our  waking 
Loughts^  :taid"iience  it  cometh  to  pass,  that  it  is 
^Et-hard  matter,  and  by  many  thought  impossible,  ^ 
distinguish  exactly  between  sense  and ,  dreagu&g- 
For  my  part,  when  I  consider  that  in  dreams  I  do 
not  often  nor  coisstantly  think  of  the  same  persons, 
places,  objects,  and  actions^  that  I  do  waking ;  nor 
remember  so  long  a  train  of  coherent  thoughts, 
dreaming,  as  at  other  times ;  and  because  waking 
I  often  observe  the  absurdity  of  dreams,  but  never 
dream  of  the  absurdities  of  my  waking  thoughts ; 
I  am  well  satisfied,  that  being  awake,  I  know  I 
dream  not,  though  when  I  dream  I  think  myself  ^^ 
awake. 

And  seeing  dreams  are  caused  by  the  distemper 
of  some  of  the  inward  parts  of  the  body,  divers 
distempers  must  needs  cause  different  dreams. 
And  hence  it  is  that  lying  cold  breedeth  dreams  of 

Digitized  byC^OOglC 


V-;- 


8 


OF  MAN. 


PART  I. 
2. 

Drenms. 


Apparitions 
or  viiions. 


fear^  and  raiseth  the  thought  and  image  of  some 
fearful  object,  the  motion  from  the  brain  to  the 
inner  parts  and  from  the  inner  parts  to  the  brain 
being  reciprocal ;  and  that  as  anger  causeth  heat 
in  some  parts  of  the  body  when  we  are  awake,  so 
when  we  sleep  the  overheating  of  the  same  parts 
causeth  ^ger,  and  raiseth  up  in  the  brain  the 
imagination^  of  an  enemy.  In  the  same  manner, 
as  natural  kindness,  when  we  are  awake,  causeth 
desire,  and  desire  makes  heat  in  certain  other 
parts  of  the  body  ;  so  also  too  much  heat  in  those 
parts,  while  we  sleep,  raiseth  in  the  brain  an 
imagination  of  some  kindness  shown.  In  sumi,  our 
dreams  are  the  reverse  of  our  waking  imagina- 
tions ;  the  motion  when  we  are  awake  beginning  at 
one  end,  and  when  we  dream  at  another. 

The  most  difficult  discerning  of  a  man's  dream, 
from  his  waking  thoughts,  is  then,  when  by  some 
accident  we  observe  not  that  we  have  slept :  which 
is  easy  to  happen  to  a  man  fall  of  fearful  thoughts, 
and  whose  conscience  is  much  troubled  ;  and  that 
sleepeth,  without  the  circumstances  of  going  to 
bed  or  putting  off  his  clothes,  as  one  that  jLOddeth 
in  a  c^air.  For  he  that  taketh  pains,  and  indus- 
triously lays  himself  to  sleep,  in  case  any  uncouth 
and  exorbitant  fancy  come  unto  him,  cannot  easily 
think  it  other  than  a  dream.  We  read  of  Marcus 
Brutus,  (one  that  had  his  life  given  him  by  Julius 
C8Bsai7  and  was  also  his  favourite,  and  notwith- 
standing murdered  him),  how  at  Philippi,  the 
night  before  he  gave  battle  to  Augustus  Caesar,  he 
saw  a  fearful  apparition,  which  is  commonly  re- 
lated by  historians  as  a  vision;  but  considering 
the  circumstances,  one  may  easily  judge  to  have 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  IMAGINATION.  9 

been  but  a  short  dream.    For  sitting  in  his  tent,    paw  i. 
pensive  and  troubled  with  the  horror  of  his  rash    ..  ^*  ,. 
act,  it  was  not  hard  for  him,  slumbering  in  the  Apptritioiit 
cold,  to  dream  of  that  which  most  a£Enghted  him ;  **'  ^^^ 
which  fear,  as  by  degrees  it  made  him  wake,  so 
also  it  must  needs  make  tl^  apparition  by  degrees 
to  vanish ;  and  having  no  assurance  that  he  slept, 
he  could  have  no  cause  to  think  it  a  dream,  or  any 
thing  but  a  vision.     And  this  is  no  very  rare  acci-^ 
dent ;  for  even  they  that  be  perfectly  awake,  if 
they  be  timorous  and  superstitious,  possessed  with 
fearful  tales,  and  alone  in  the  dark,  are  subject  to 
the  like  fancies,  and  believe  they  see  spirits  and 
d^djaen^s-ghgsts  walking  in  churchyards ;  where- 
as itfa  either  meir  feancj  only,  or  else  the  knavery 
of  such  persons  as  make  use  of  such  superstitious 
fear,  to  pass  disguised  in  the  night,  to  places  they 
would  not  be  known  to  haunt. 

From  this  ignoraijce ,  of  how  to  distinguish 
dreams^  and  other  strong  fancies,  from  vision  and 
seiise,  did  arise  the  greatest  part  of  the  religion  of 
the  Gentiles  in  time  past,  that  worshipped  satyrs,  <- 
&wns,  nymphs,  and  the  like ;  and  now-a-days  the 
opinion  that  rude  people  have  of  fairies,  ghosts, 
and  ^blins,  and  of  the  power  of  witches.  For  as 
for  witches,  I  think  not  that  their  witchcraft  is 
any  real  power ;  but  yet  that  they  are  justly 
punished,  for  the  false  belief  they  have  that  they 
can  do  such  mischief,  joined  with  their  purpose  to 
do  it  if  they  can ;  tiieir  trade  being  nearer  to  a  new 
religion  than  to  a  craft  or  science.  And  for  fairies, 
and  walking  ghosts,  the  opinion  of  them  has,  I 
think,  been  on  purpose  either  taught  or  not  con- 
futed, to  keep  in  credit  the  use  of  exorcism,  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


10 


OF  MAN. 


PABT  I. 

Appairhioiit 
or 


crosses^  of  holy  water,  and  other  such  mventions 
of  ghostly  men.  Nevertheless,  there  is  no  doubt, 
but  God  can  make  uxmatural  apparitions ;  but  that 
he  does  it  so  often,  as  men  need  to  fear  soeh 
things,  more  than  they  fear  the  stay  or  change  of 
the  ccKirae  of  nature,  which  he  also  can  stay,  and 
change,  is  no  point  of  Christian  fedth.  But  (iyil 
men\  under  pretext  that  God  can  do  any  thing,  are 
so  bold  as  to  say  any  thing  when  it  serves  their 
turn,  though  they  think  it  untrue ;  it  is  the  part  of 
a  wise  manXto  believe  them  no  farther,  than  right 
reason  makes  that  which  they  say,  appear  credible. 
If  this  superstitious  fear  of  s][nrits  were  taken 
away,  and  with  it,  prognostics  from  dreams,  false 
prophecies,  and  many  other  things  depending 
tiiiereon,  by  which  crafty  ambitious  persons  abuse 
the  simple  people,  men  would  be  much  more  fitted 
than  they  are  for  civil  obedience.  p  ^        — . 

And  this  ought  to  be(\die  work  of  the  schools  :h 
but  they  rather  nourish  such  doctrine.  For,  not 
knowing  what  imagination  or  the  senses  are,  what 
they  receive,  they  t^u^h :  some  saying,  that  imagi- 
nations rise  of  themselves,  and  have  no  cause; 
others,  that  they  rise  most  commonly  from  tho^ 
will;  and  that  good  thoughts  are  blown  (inspired) 
into  a  man  by  God,  and  evil  thoughts  by  the 
Devil ;  or  that  good  thoughts  are  poured  (infosed) 
into  a  man  by  God,  and  evil  ones  by  the  Devil. 
Some  say  the  senses  receive  the  species  of  things, 
and  deliver  them  to  the  common  sense ;  and  the 
common  sense  delivers  them  over  to  the  fancy,  and 
the  fancy  to  the  memory,  and  the  memory  to  the 
judgment,  like  handing  of  things  from  one  to 
aiioth^,  with  many  words  making  notMng  under- 
stood. ^        I 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


OF  IMAGINATION.  11      ^ 

Tbe  imagination  that  is  ndsed  in  man,  or  any  \  part  i. 
other  creature  indued  with  the  faculty  of  imagin^^^~i^^ 
ing,  by  words,  or  other   voluntary  signs,  is  ta^Undentanding 
we  generally  call  understanding ;  and  is  common        — 
to  man  and  beast.    For  a  dog  by  custom  will  un- 
derstand the  call,  or  the  rating  of  his  master ;  and 
so  will  many  other  beasts.     That  understanding 
which  is  peculiar  to  man,  is  the  understanding  not 
only  his  will,  but  his  conceptions  and  thoughts,  by 
the  sequel  and  contexture  of  the  names  of  things 
Jnto.4iffirmations,  negations,  and  other  forms  of 
spegefae>  and  of  this  kind  of  understanding  I  shall 
"^^peak  nereafter.  >-^<T[  ^  [ 


CHAPTER  m./  >.  ' 

OF  THE  CONSEQUENCE  OR  TRAIN  OF-4MA«N^- 
TIONS. 

By  Consequence,  or  train  of  thoughts,  I  under 
stand  that  succession  of  one  thought  to  another, 
which  is  called,  to  distinguish  it  from  discourse  in 
words,  mental  discourse. 

When  a  manlES^eth  on  any  thing  whatsoever, 
his  next  thought  after,  is  not  altogether  so  casual  as 
it  seems  to  be.  Not  every  thought  to  every  thought 
succeeds  indiflferently.  But  as  we  have  no  imagi- 
nation, whereof  we  have  not  formerly  had  sense,  in 
whole,  or  in  parts ;  so  we  have  no(transition)from 
one  imagination  to  another,  whereof  we  never  had 
the  like  before  in  our  senses.  The  reason  whereof 
is  this.  AU  fancies  are  motions  within  us,  relics 
of'those  made  in  the  sense :  and  those  motions  that 
immediately  succeeded  one  another  in  the  sense. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


12  OF  MAN. 

PART  I.    continue  also  together  after  sense :  insomuch  as 
>,  ^'  ,.    the  former  coming  again  to  take  place,  and  be  pre- 
dominant, the  latter  foUoweth,  by  coherence  of  the 
*     matter  moved,  in  such  manner,  as  water  upon  a 
plane  table  is  drawn  which  way  any  one  part  of  it 
is  guided  by  the  finger.     But  because  in  sense,  to 
one  and  the  same  thing  perceived,  sometimes  one 
thing,  sometimes  another  succeedeth,  it  comes  to 
pass  in  time,  that  in  the  imagining  of  any  thing, 
there  is  no  certainty  what  we  shall  imagine  next ; 
/  only  this  is  certain,  it  shall  be  something  that  suc- 
ceeded the  same  before,  at  one  time  or  another. 
Train  of  This  train  of  thoughts,  or  mental  discourse,  is  of 

un^dS.  two  sorts.  The  first  is  unguidedy  without  design^ 
and  inconstant;  wherein  there  is  no  passionate 
thought,  to  govern  and  direct  those  that  follow,  to 
itself,  as  the  end  and  scope  of  some  desire,  or  other 
passion:  in  which  case  the  thoughts  are  said  to 
wander,  and  seem  impertinent  one  to  another,  as 
in  a  dream.  Such  are  commonly  the  thoughts  of 
men,  that  are  not  only  vdthout  company,  but  also 
vdthout  care  of  any  thing ;  though  even  then  their 
thoughts  are  as  busy  as  at  other  times,  but  without 
harmony ;  as  the  sound  which  a  lute  out  of  tune 
would  yield  to  any  man ;  or  in  tune,  to  one  that 
could  not  play.  And  yet  in  this  wild  ranging  of 
the  mind,  a  man  may  oft-times  perceive  the  way  of 
it,  and  the  dependance  of  one  thought  upon  another. 
For  in  a  discourse  of  our  present  pivil^war,  what 
could  seem  more  impertinent,  than  to  ask,  as  one 
did,  what  was  the  value  of  a  Roman  penny  ?  Yet 
the  coherence  to  me  was  manifest  enough.  For 
the  thought  of  the  war,  introduced  the  thought  of 
the  delivering  up  the  king  to  his  enemies ;  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


TRAIN  OP  IMAGINATIONS.  13 

thought  of  that,  brought  m  the  thought  of  the  de-    part  i. 

livering  up  of  Christ ;  and  that  agam  the  thought    _f: . 

of  the  thirty  pence,  which  was  the  price  of  that 
treason ;  and  thence  easily  followed  that  malicious 
question ,  and  all  this  in  a  moment  of  time ;  for 
thought  is  quick. 

^^ffie  second  is  more  constant ;  as  being  regulated  '^^^^ 
by  some  desire,  and  design.  For  the  impression  reguLted. 
made  by  such  things  as  we  desire,  or  fear,  is  strong, 
and  permanent,  or,  if  it  cease  for  a  time,  of  quick 
return :  so  strong  it  is  sometimes^  as  to  hinder  and 
break  our  sleep.  From  desire,  ariseth  the  thought 
of  some  means  we  have  seen  produce  the  like  of 
that  which  we  aim  at ;  and  from  the  thought  of 
that,  the  thought  of  means  to  that  mean ;  and  so 
continually,  till  we  come  to  some  be^ning  within 
our  own  power.  And  because  (ftie  endj,  by  the 
greatness  of  the  impression,  comes  often  to  mind, 
in  case  our  thoughts  begin  to  wander,  they  are 
quickly  again  reduced  into  the  way:  which  ob- 
served by  one  of  the  seven  wise  men,  made  him 
give  men  this  precept,  which  is  now  worn  out,  Res^ 
JceAnem;  that  is  to  say,  in  all  your  actions,  look 
often'upon  what  you  would  have,  as  the  thing  that 
directs  all  your  thoughts  in  the  way  to  attain  it. 

The  train  of  regulated  thoughts  is  of  two  kinds ; 
one,  when  of  an  eflFect  imagined^e  seek  the  causes, 
or  means  that  produce  it :  and  this  is  common  to 
man  ^d  beast.  The  other  is,  when  imagining  any 
thing  whatsoever,  we  seek  all  the  possible  effects, 
that  can  by  it  be  produced ;  that  is  to  say,  we  ima-  ^ 
gine  what  we  can  do  with  it,  when  we  have  it.  Of 
which!  have  not  at  any  time  seen  any  sign,  but  in 
man  only ;  for  this  is  a  curiosity  hardly  incident 


Digitized  by 


Google 


14  OF  MAN. 

PART  I.  to  the  nature  of  any  living  creature  that  has  no 
^ — !*— ^  other  passion  but  sensual,  such  as  are  hunger,  thirst, 
lust,  and  anger.  In  sum,  the  discourse  of  the 
mind,  when  it  is  governed  by  design,  is  nothing  but 
seeking,  or  th€(feculty  of  inventionHwhich  the  Lar- 
tiiS~ralled  sagaciias,  snd  solerhd;  a  hunting,  out 
of  the  ^u^^  of  some  eflFect,  present  or  past ;  or  of 
the  effects,  of  some  present  or  past  cause.  Some- 
times a  man  seeks  what  he  hath  lost ;  and  from 
that  place,  and  time,  wherein  he  misses  it,  his  mind  * 
runs  back,  from  place  to  place,  and  time  to  time, 
to  find  wh^e,  and  when  he  had  it ;  that  is  to  say, 
to  find  some  certain,  and  limited  time  and  place, 
in  which  to  begin  a  method  of  seeking.  Again, 
from  thence,  his  thoughts  run  over  the  same  places 
and  times,  to  find  what  action,  or  other  occasion 
Remembrance,  mifrht  make  him  lose  ili  This  we  call  remem^ 
l^l^mc^f  or  calling  to  mind :  the  Latins  call  it  re-^ 
mmiscentiay  as  it  were  a  re-conning  of  our  former . 
actions. 

Sometimes  a  man  knows  a  place  determinate^ 
within  the  cqmpass  whereof  he  is  to  seek;  and 
then  his  thoughts  run  over  aU  the  parts  thereof,  in 
the  same  manner  as^  one  would  sweep  a  room,  to 
find  a  jewel ;  or  as  a  spaniel  ranges  the  field,  tiU 
he  find  a  scent;  or  as  a  man  should  run  over  the 
alphabet,  to^^start  Mrhyme. 
Prodence.  Somctimcs  a  man  desires  to  know  the  event  of  an 
action ;  and  then  he  thinketh  of  some  like  action 
^  ,  past,  and  the  events  thereof  one  after  another; 
supposing  like  events  will  £dI1ow  like  actions.  A 
he  th^t  foresees  what  will  become  of  a  criminal,  re- 
cons  what  he  has  seen  follow  on  the  like  crime  be- 
fore ;  having  this  order  of  thoughts,  the  crime,  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


TRAIN  OF  IMAGINATIONS. 

officer,   the  prison,  the  judge,  and  the  gallov 
Which  kind  of  thoughts,  is  called  foresight ,  auu   ., 
dence y  or  providence  ;  and  someBmeTnTiMfow  ; 
lOUgh  such  conjecture,  through  the  difficulty  of 
rving  all   circumstances,  be   very  fallacious, 
his  is  certain;  by  how  much  one  man  has 
tocperience  of  things  past^  than  another,  by 
ill  so  he  is  more  prudent,  and  his  expecta- 
Idomer  fail  him.     The  present  only  has^ 
^ature  ;  things  pant  have  a  being  in  the  n 
.but  things  to  come  have  no  being  at  1 
being  but  a  fiction  of  the  mind,  ap-  'i 
'    of  actions  past,  to  the  actions  \ 
IT  ^hich  mth  most  certainty  is 

most  experience,  but  not 
iVnd  though  it  be  called 
t  answereth  our  expecta- 
!Bir«^  it  is  but  presumption. 
.iiTto  come,  which  is  pro- 
/  whose  mil  they 
hiA^  iRip^i^i  ^upernnturally, 
"^  *        "  turally  is 


\ 


bj. 


h     ft 

all; 

plyiL 

that 

done     J 

with  eertil^ 

prudence,  w  i 

tion ;  yet  in  j 

For  the  foresi. 

videnccj  belong- 

are  to  come.     Fr 

proceeds  proj)hecy 


\ 


\ 


I, 


e  that  is 

guesses 


the  best  guesser ;  ant 
most  versed  and  studied  in 
at :  for  he  hath  most  sig/f^ 

A  Isign  is  the  evident    ;n:*T^niiiMtmf  t^W|.  cdh-  sig 
seqirenF;    and  coutrarily,  thiijkgttl^*^^i\ 
antecedent,  when  the  like  consec|uf 
observed,  before ;  and  the  oftener  tl 
observed,   the   less   uncertain  is  the   si2 
herefore  he  that  has  most  experience  in 
business,  has  most  signs,  whereby  to  guess 
ftiture  time  ;  and  consequently  is  the  most 
and  so  much  more  prudent  Ujan  he  that  is  new  in^ 


^ 


Digitized  by 


Google  ^IPF. 


16 


OF  MAN- 


PART  L 


Conj»^tQre  of 
t]i«  time  puL 


that  kind  of  business^  as  not  to  be  equalled  by  any 
advantage  of  natural  and  extemporary  wit ;  though 
perhaps  many  young  men  think  the  contrary. 

Nevertheless  it  is  not  prudence  that  distmguisl 
eth  man  from  beast.     There  be  beasts,  that 
year  old  observe  more,  and  pursue  that 
for  their  good,  more  prudently,  than  a  d 
do  at  ten. 

As  prudence  is  apremimpfwu  of  thv/g 
tracted  from  the  experience  of  time  ♦ 
is  a  presumption  of  things  past  ts' 
things,  not  friture,  but  past  also..    ' 
seen  by  what  courses  and  li'* 
state  hath  first  come  into  ui  :. 
ruin ;  upon  the  sight  of  th&  AiUi 
will  guess,  the  like  war^  u 
been  there  also.     But  t\ 
uncertainty  almost  w"  \ 
both  being  grouu»  . , . ,  , 

There  is  no  o;        utA  ti 
remember,  n«i*    .ilUy«|liiiti  ^W  n 
no  other  t]^\^ 
a  man 


Those 


ih 

ihing 

len  to 

er  state, 

rses  have 

Tas  the  same 

[of  the  future; 

*erience>y 

mind,  lh|it  I  can 

im,  so  as  to  need 

it,  but  to  be  bom 

of  his  five  senses. 


ts 


rjy  ij0  which  I  shall  speak  by 

L  scpm  proper  to  man  only^  are 

Wi^Hijitiyrnirrl  by  study  and   industry; 

bl9P«^«)iMII^W^^^d  by  instruction,  and  disci- 

:*ed  all  from  the  invention  of  words, 

^^or  besides  sense,  and  thoughts,  and 

thoughts,  the  mind  of  man  has  no  other 

though  by  the  help  of  speech,  and  method, 

ime  faculties  may  be   improved  to  such  a 

:,  as  to  distinguish  men  from  all  other  living 

'creatures,     '     •         ^  -^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


TRAIN  OF  IMAGINATIONS. 


17 


IWhatsoever  we  imagine  is  finite.     Therefore  ^ 
tflere  is  no  idea,  or  conception  of  any  thing  we  call  / 
infinite.    No  man  can  have  in  his  mind  an  image 
of  infinite  magnitude ;  nor  conceive  infinite  swift- 
ness, infinite  time,  or  infinite  force,  or  infinite 
» power.    When  we  say  any  thing  is  infinite,  we 
signify  onlyj  that  we  are  not  able  to  concejye  the 
endg^^nd  bouadsL  of  the  things  named  ;  having  no 
inception  of  the  thiiig,  but  of  our  own  inability, 
therefore  thejnamepf  God  is  used,  not  to  make 
eonceive  him,  for  he  is  incomprehensible;  and 
ri^itness,  mid  power  are  unconceivable ;  but 
may  honoiir  him.     Also  because,  whatso- 
said  before,  we  conceive,  has  been  per- 
,  by  sense,  either  all  at  once,  or  by  parts; 
I  %^TOve  no  thought,  representing  any  thing, 
sense/     No  man   therefore   can 
ing,  but  he  must  conceive  it  in 
indued  with  some  determinate 
jch  may  be  divided  into  parts ; 
all  in  this  place,  and  all  in 
ae  time  \  nor  that  two,  or 


nor 

another  \  . 
more  thiii^ 
once :  for  u^^, 
be  incident  ti 


c|me 

.^Qe,  and  the  same  place  at 


^^gs  ever  have,  nor  can 
^*^^**^^^  absurd  speeches, 
taken  upon  cre(I||wg4niJWi.  ii«  signification  at  all, 
from  deceived  plflMBw^^VP^.v^  deceived,  or  de^ 
ceiving  schoolm^^  nm 


VOL.  Ill, 


Digitized  by 


oogle 


18 


OF  MAN. 


PART  I. 
4. 

Original 
of  speech. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


OF  SPEECH. 


The  invention  of  printing,  though  ingenious,  com- 
pared with  the  invention  of  Jeiier.s\  is  no  great 
matter^     But  who  was  the  first  that  found  the  use 
of  letters,  is  not  known.     He  that  first  brought 
them  into  Greece,  men  say  was  Cadmus,  the  son  of 
Agenor,  king  of  Phcenicia.     A  profitable  inventi'^ 
for  continuing  the  memory  of  time  past,  and 
conjunction  of  mankind,  dispersed  into  s^o  » 
and  distant  regions  of  the  earth;  and  with 
cult,  as  proceeding  from  a  watchful  ob 
of  the  divers  motions  of  the  tongue 
and  other  o^ans  of  speech;  when  h 
many  differences  of  characters,  to  r^ 
But  the  most  noble  and  profitable 
other,  was  that  of  speech,  consj 
appellations^  and  their  conne: 
register  their  thoughts ;  rec 
past;  and  also  declare  th 
mutual  utility  and  con\ 


w 


there  had  been  amons 
wealth,  nor  society, 
more  than  amongst 
first  author  of 
structed  Adam 
presented  to 
farther  in  t 
direct  him 
and  use  of  j 
.fcnd  to  jc 
make 


'••♦'Ifrnit  which, 

it^  ^»\tlfrr  common- 

hr  peace,  no 

wolves.     Tlie 

limself,  that  in- 

creatures  as  he 

Scripture  goeth  no 

this  was  sufficient  to 

ames,  as  the  experience 

ould  give  him  occasion ; 

manner  by  degrees,  as  to 

and  so  by  succession  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  SPEECH.  19 

time^  so  much  language  might  be  gotten,  as  he  had  part  i. 
found  use  for ;  though  not  so  copious,  as  an  orator  — t — ' 
or  philosopher  has  need  of:  for  I  do  not  find  any 
thing  in  the  Scripture,  out  of  which,  directly  or  by 
€X)nsequence,can  be  gathered,  that  Adam  was  taught 
the  names  of  all  figures,  numbers,  measures,  colours, 
sounds,  fancies,  relations ;  much  less  the  names  of 
words  and  speech,  as  general,  special,  affirmative, 
negative,  interrogative,  optative,  ir^finitive,  all 
which  fure  useftd  ;  and  least  of  all,  of  entity,  inten- 
tUmality,  quiddity,  and  other  insignificant  words 
of  the  school. 

But  all  this  language  gotten,  and  augmented  by 
Adam  and  Ms  posterity,  was  again  lost  at  the  Tower 
ofBabel,  when,  by  the  hand  of  God,  every  man  was 
stricken,  for  his  rebellion,  with  an  oblivion  of  his 
former  language.    And  being  hereby  forced  to  dis- 

«  perse  themselves  into  several  parts  of  the  world,  it 
must  needs  be,  that  the  diversity  of  tongues  that 
now  is,  proceeded  by  degrees  from  them,  in  such 
manner,  as  need,  the  mother  of  all  inventions,  taught 
them ;  and  in  tract  of  time  grew  everjrwhere  more 
cc^pious.  — 

The  general  use  of  speech,  isjto  transfer  Q^ir^j^""^ 
mental  discourse,  into  verbain or  the  train  of  our 
thoughts,  into  ^  train  of  words ;  and  that  for  two 

(comanodities^whereof  one  is  the  registering  of  the 
consequences  of  our  thoughts ;  which  being  apt  to 
slip  out  of  our  memory,  and  put  us  lb  a  new  labour, 
may  again  be  faliaJledj  by  such  vords  as  they  were 
marked  by.  So  that  the  first  use  of  names  is  to 
serve  for  marks,  or  notes  of  remembrance.  Another 
is,  when  many  use  the  same  words,  to  signify,  by 
their  connexion  and  order,  one  to  another,  what 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


20 


OF  MAN. 


PART  I. 


G) 


Abuses  of 
speech. 


'i^ 


\ 


they  conceive,  or  think  of  each  matter ;  and  also 
what  they  desire,  fear,  or  have  any  other  passion 
for.  And  for  this  use  they  are  called  i^^  Special 
uses  of  speech  are  these;  first,  to  regis^r;  what  by 
cogitation,  we  find  to  be  the  cause  of  any  things 
present  or  past ;  and  what  we  find  things  present 
or  past  may  produce,  or  eflect ;  which  in  sum,  is 

^  acquiring  of  arts.  Secondly,  to  show  to  others 
that  knowledge  which  we  have  attained,  which  is, 
to  counsel  and  teach  one  another.  Thirdly,  to  make 
known  to  others  our  wills  and  purposes,  that  we 

'  may  have  the  mutual  help  of  one  another.  Fourthly, 
to  please  and  delight  ourselves  and  others,  by^gky- 
mg  with  our  words,  for  pleasure  or  ornament,  in- 
nocently. 
To  these  uses,  there  are  also  four  correspondent 
First,  when  men  register  their  thoughts 
ong,  by  the  inconstancy  of  the  signification  of 
their  words ;  by  which  they  register  for  their  con- 
ception, that  which  they  never  conceived,  and  so 
defceive  themselves.  Secondly,  when  they  use  words 
(metaj^mcaUy!^^  that  is,  in  other  sense  than  that 
they  are  ordained  for ;  and  thereby  deceive  others. 
Thirdly,  by  words,  when  they  declare  that  to  be 
their  will,  which  is  not.  Fourthly,  when  they  use 
them  to  grieve  one  another ;  for  seeing  nature  hath 
armed  living  creatures,  some  with  teeth,  some  with 
horns,  and  some  with  hands,  to  grieve  an  enemy, 
it  is  but  an  abi^e  of  speech,  to  grieve  him  with  the 
tongue,  unless  it  be  one  whom  we  are  obliged  to 
govern ;  and  then  it  is  not  to  grieve,  but  to  cor- 
rect and  amend. 

The  manner  how  speech  serveth  to  the  remem- 
brance of  the  consequence  of  causes  and  effects. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  SPEECH.  21 

consisteth  in  the  imposing  of  names,  and  the  con-    paet  i. 
nexion  of  them.  '  ^     f     : 

Of  names^  some  are  pr^er,  and  singular  to  one  N«ne8,prop«r 
only  thing,  as  Peter y  Jokny  this  many  this  tree ; 
and  some  are  common  to  many  things,  man,  horse, 
tree ;  every  of  which,  though  but  one  name,  is 
nevertheless  the  name  of  divers  particular  things ; 
in  respect  of  all  which  together,  it  is  called  an 
universal;  there  being  nothing  in  the  world  uni-  Univemi 
versaTbut  names ;  for  the  things  namexl  are  every 
one  d{  them  individual  and  singular. 

One  universal  name  is  imposed  on  many  things, 
for  tlieir  similitude  in  some  quality,  or  other  acci- 
demt ;  and  whereas  a  proper  name  bringeth  to  mind 
one  thing  only,  universals  recall  any  one  of  those 
many. 

And  of  names  universal,  some  are  of  more,  and 
some  of  less  extent;  the  larger  comprehending 
the  less  large;  and  some  again  of  equal  extent, 
comprehending  each  other  reciprocally.  As  for 
example :  the  name  body  is  of  larger  signification 
than  the  word  man,  and  comprehendethit;  and  the 
names  man  and  rational,  are  of  equal  extent,  com- 
prehending mutually  one  another.  But  here  we 
must  take  notice,  that  by  a  name  is  not  always  un- 
derstood, as  in  grammar,  one  only  word ;  but  some- 
times, by  circumlocution,  many  words  together. 
For  all  these  words,  he  that  in  his  actions  observeth 
the  laws  of  his  country,  make  but  one  name,  equi- 
valent to  this  one  word,  just. 

By  this  imposition  of  names,  some  of  larger,  some 
of  stricter  signification,  we  turn  the  reckoning  of 
the  consequences  of  things  imagined  in  the  mind^ 
into  a  reckoning  of  the  consequences  of  appellations. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


A 


22  OF  MAN. 

PART  I.  For  example :  a  man  that  hath  no  use  of  speech  at 
^ — t —  all,  such  as  is  bom  and  remains  perfectly  deaf  and 
XJniTcrsai.  dumb,  if  hc  set  before  his  eyes  a  triangle,  and  by 
it  two  right  angles,  such  as  are  the  comers  of  a 
square  figure,  he  may,  by  meditation,  compare  and 
find,  that  the  three  angles  of  that  triangle,  are 
equal  to  those  two  right  angles  that  stand  by  it. 
But  if  another  triangle  be  shown  him,  different  in 
shape  from  the  former,  he  cannot  know,  without  a 
new  labour,  whether  the  three  angles  of  that  also 
be  equal  to  the  same.  But  he  that  hath  the  use  of 
words,  when  he  observes,  that  such  equality  was 
consequent,  not  to  the  length  of  the  sides,  nor  to 
any  other  particular  thing  in  his  triangle;  but  only 
to  this,  that  the  sides  were  straight,  and  the  angles 
three ;  and  that  that  was  all,  for  which  he  named  it 
a  triangle ;  will  boldly  conclude  universally,  that 
such  equality  of  angles  is  in  all  triangles  whatsoever ; 
and  register  his  invention  in  these  general  terms, 
every  triangle  hath  its  three  angles  equal  to  two 
,  right  angles.  And  thus  the  consequence  found  in 
;  one  particular,  comes  to  be  registered  and  remem- 
bered, as  a  universal  rule,  and  discharges  our 
mental  reckoning,  of  time  and  place,  and  delivers 
us  from  all  labour  of  the  mind,  saving  the  first, 
and  makes  that  which  was  found  true  her^y  and 
now^  to  be  true  in  aU  times  axid  places.     " 

But  the  use  of  words  in  registering  our  thoughts 
is  in  nothing  so  evident  as  in  numbering.  A  na- 
tural'fool  that  could  never  learn  by  heart  the  order 
of  numeral  words,  as  one,  two,  and  three,  may  ob- 
serve every  stroke  of  the  clock,  and  nod  to  it,  or 
say  one,  one,  one,  but  can  never  know  what  hour 
it  strikes.     And  it  seems,  there  was  a  time  when 


■■\l 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  SPEECH.  23 

those  names  of  number  were  not  in  use ;  and  men  part  i. 
were  fain  to  apply  their  fingers  of  one  or  both  hands^  .  ^  ^  , 
to  those  things  they  desired  to  keep  account  of ; 
and  that  thence  it  proceeded,  that  now  our  numeral 
words  are  but  ten,  in  any  nation,  and  in  some  but 
five;  and  then  they  begin  again.  And  he  that  can  tell 
ten,  if  he  recite  them  out  of  order,  will  lose  himself, 
and  not  know  when  he  has  done.  Much  less  will 
he  be  able  to  add,  and  subtract,  and  perform  all 
other  operations  of  arithmetic.  Ro  th&t  without 
words  there  is  no  possibility  of  reckoning  of  num- 
bers; muchlessof  magnitudes,  of  swiftness,  of  force, 
and  other  things,  the  reckonings  whereof  are  ne- 
cessary to  the  being,  or  well-being  of  mankind. 

When  two  names  are  joined  together  into  a  con- 
sequence, or  afl&rmation,  as  thus,  a  man  is  a  living 
creature  ;  or  thus,  if  he  he  a  man,  he  is  a  living 
creature  ;  if  the  latter  name,  livihg  creature,  sig- 
nify all  that  the  former  name  man  signifieth,  then 
tiie  affirmation,  or  consequence,  is  true ;  otherwise 
false.  FcMT  true  sndfalse  are  attributes  of  speech, 
not  of  tMngs.  And  where  speech  is  not,  there  is 
neither7r«/A  nor  falsehood ;  error  there  may  be, 
as  when  we  expect  that  which  shall  not  be,  of  ^' 
suspect  what  has  not  been ;  but  in  neither  case  can 
a  man  be  charged  with  untruth. 

Seeing  then  that  truth  consisteth  in  the  right  Necessity  of 

J      .  *  •  /*•  •  1        definition!. 

ordenng  of  names  m  our  affirmations,  a  man  that 
seeketh  precise  truth  had  need  to  remember  what 
every  name  he  uses  stands  for,  and  to  place  it  ac- 
cordingly, OTelse  hewill  find  himself  entangled  in 
words,  afifa^bird  in  lime  iwi^  the  more  he  Strug-  ^ 
gles  the  more  belimed.  And  therefore  in  geome^ 
try,  which  is  the  only  science  that  it  hath  pleased 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


dcfioitiona. 


24  OF  MAN. 

God  hitherto  to  bestow  on  mankind,  men  begin 
at  settling  the  significations  of  their  words ;  which 
Necewity  of    scttUng  of  significations  they  call  definitions^  and 
place  them  in  the  beginning  of  theifreckoning. 

By  this  it  appears  how  necessary  it  is  for  any 
man  that  aspires  to  tme  knowledge,  to  examine 
the  definitions  of  former  authors ;  and  either  to 
correct  them,  where  they  are  negligently  set  down, 
or  to  make  them  himself.  For  the  errgn  of^defi- 
^  V  nitions  multiply  themselves  according  as  the 
reckoning  proceeds,  and  lead  men  into  absurdities, 
which  at  last  they  see,  but  cannot  avoid,  without 
reckoning  anew  from  the  beginning,  in  which 
Ees  the  foundation  of  their  errors.  From  whence 
it  happens,  that  they  which  trust  to  books^  do  as 
they  that  cast  up  many  little  sums  into  a  greater, 
without  considering  whether  those  little  sums  were 
rightly  cast  up  or  not;  and  at  last  finding  the 
error  visible,  and  not  mistrusting  their  first 
grounds,  know  not  which  way  to  clear  themselves, 
but  spend  time  in  fluttering  over  their  books ;  as 
(birds  that  entering  by  the  chimney,  and  finding 
>'  )  themselves  enclosed  in  a  chamber,  flutter  at  the 
'^^  k  false  light  of  a  glass  ;(vindow,  for  want  of  wit  to 
consider  which  way  they  came  in.  So  that  in  the 
right  definition  of  names  lies  the  first  use  of 
speech ;  which  is  the  acquisition  of  science :  and 
in  wrong,  or  no  definitions,  lies  the  first  abuse ; 
from  which  proceed  all  false  and  senseless  tenets  ; 
which  make  those  ^en  that4ake  their  instruction 
from  l,  the  authority  of  books,  Wid  not  from  their 
own  meditation,  to  be  as  muc^  below  the  condi- 
tion of  ignorant  men,  as  men  endued  with  true 
science  are  above  it.    For  between  true  science 


Digitized  by 


Google 


/^oTfo^ 


OF  SPEECH. 


25 


PART  I. 

4. 


and  erroneous  doctrines,  jgtioi^ic^  is  in  the  mid- 
dle. Natural  sense  and  imagination  are  not  sub- 
ject to  absurdity.  Nature  itself  cannot  err ;  and 
as  men  abound  in  copiousness  of  language,  so  they 
become  more  wise,  or  more  mad  than  ordinary. 
Nor  is  it  possible  without  letters  for  any  man  to 
become  either  excellently  wise,  or,  unless  his  me- 
mory be  hurt  by  disease  or  ill 'constitution  of 
organs,  excellently  foolish.  For  words  are  wise 
men's  counters,  they  do  but  reckon  by  them ;  but 
they  are  the  money  of  fools,  that  value  them  by 
the  authority  of  an  Aristotle,  a  Cicero,  or  a  Tho- 
mas, or  any  other  doctor  whatsoever,  if  but  a  man. 

Subject  to  nameSy  is  whatsoever  can  enter  into  Subject  to 
or  be  considered  in  an  account,  and  be  added  one 
to  another  to  make  a  sum,  or  subtracted  one  from 
another  and  leave  a  remainder.  The  Latins  called 
accounts  of  money  rationes,  and  accounting  ratio- 
cinatio  ;  and  that  which  we  in  bills  or  books  of 
account  call  items y  they  call  nomina,  that  is  names  ; 
and  thence  it  seems  to  proceed,  that  they  lextegde^ 
the  word  ratio  to  the  faculty  of  reckoning  in  all 
things.  The  Greeks  have  but  one  word, 
for  both  speech  and  reason  ;  not  that  they 
there  was  no  speech  without  reason,  but 
no  reasoning  without  speech:  and  the  act  of 
reasoning  they  called  syllogism^  which  signifieth 
summing  up  of  the  consequences  of  one  saying  to 
another.  And  because  the  same  thing  may  enter 
into  account  for  divers  accidents,  their  names  are, 
to  show  that  diversity,  diverslywrested  and  diver- 
sified. This^yersity  of  names/may  be  reduced  to 
four  general  heads. 


( 


'I- 


First,  a  thing  may  enter  into  account  for  matter 


<r^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


26 


OF  MAN. 


PILRT  I. 
4. 


9 


or  bodjf  ;  as  livings  sensihley  reUional,  hot,  cold, 
fBoved,  quiet;   with  all  which  names  the  word 
Karnes,    matter y  or  hody^  is  understood;   all  such  being 
names  of  matter. 

Secondly,  it  may  enter  into  account,  or  be  con- 
sidered, for  some  accident  or  quality  which  we 
conceiye  to  be  in  it ;  as  for  being  moeed,  for  being 
so  longy  for  being  hot,  &c.;  and  then,  of  the  name 
of  the  thing  itself,  by  a  little  change  or  wresting, 
we  make  a  name  for  that  accident,  which  we  con- 
sider; and  for  living  put  into  the  account  Iffe; 
for  movedj  motion;  for  hot,  heat;  for  long,  length, 
and  the  like :  and  all  such  names  are  the  names  dT 
the  accidents  and  properties  by  which  one  matter 
and  body  is  distinguished  from  another.  These 
are  called  names  abstract,  because  severed,  not 
from  matter,  but  from  the  account  of  matter. 
Thirdly,  we  bring  into  account  the  properties  of 
^  our  own  bodies,  whereby  we  make  such  distinction; 
.  as  when  anything  is  seen  by  us,  we  reckon  not  the 
thing  itself,  but  the  sight,  the  colour,  the  idea  of  it 
in  the  fancy:  and  when  anything  is  heard,  we 
reckon  it  not,  but  the  hearing  or  sound  only,  which 
is  our  fancy  or  conception  of  it  by  the  ear ;  and 
such  are  names  of  fancies. 

Four^y,  we  bring  into  account,  consider,  and 
give/na5aeS;^to«a^^  themselves,  and  to  speeches: 
^  1     for   general,  unit>ersal,  special,  equivocal,  are 
names  of  names.    And  affirmation,  interrogation, 
commandment,  narration,  syllogism,  sermon,  ora- 
tion, and  many  other  such,  are  names  of  speeches. 
UierfDamcf  And  this  is  all  the  variety  of(^namejB,.^gW/i5£,*^ 
*****  '*         which  are  put  to  mark  somewhat  which  is  in 
nature,  or  may  be  feigned  by  the  mind  of  man,  as 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  SPEECH.  27 

bodies  that  are,  or  may  be  conceived  to  be ;  or  of  part  i. 
bodies,  the  properties  that  are,  or  may  be  feigned  .  ^'  . 
to  be  ;  or  words  and  speech.  

There  be  also  other  names,  called  ^^gf^i'^^^^^^^-X 
which  are  notes  to  signify  that  a  word  is  not  the  thdruses. 
name  of  the  thing  in  question ;  as  these  words, 
nothing,  no  man,  ifffinite,  indocible,  three  want 
ybur,  and  the  like ;  which  are  nevertheless  of  nse 
in  reckoning,  or  in  correcting  of  reckoning,  and 
call  to  mind  our  past  c(^tations,  though  they  be 
not  names  of  any  thing,  because  they  make  us  re- 
fuse to  admit  of  names  not  rightly  used. 

All  other  names  are  but  insignificant  sounds ;  y^}\ 
and  those  of  two  sorts.     One^hen  they  are  new, 
and  yet  their  meaning  not  explained  by  definition ; 
whereof  there  have  been  abundance  coined  by 
schoolmen,  and  puzzled  philosophers. 

Another,  when  men  make  a  name  of  two  names, 
whose  significations  ^re  contradictory  and  incon- 
sistent; as  this  name,  an  incorporeal  body,  or,  f^  ^, . 
which  is  all  one,  an  incorporeal  sub/ftance,  and  a 
great  number  more.  For  whensoever  any  affirma- 
tion is  false,  the  two  names  of  which  it  is  com- 
posed, put  together  and  made  one,  signify  nothing 
at  all.  For  example,  if  it  be  a  false  affirmation  to 
say  a  quadrangle  is  round,  the  word  round  qua^ 
^ruffg/^  signifies  nothing,  but  is  aimere^spimd. .-  } 
So  likewise,  if  it  be  false  to  say  that  virtue  can  be 
poured,  or  blown  up  and  down,  the  words  in- 
poured  virtue,  inblown  virtue,  are  as  absurd  and 
insignificant  as  a  round  quadrangle.  And  there- 
fore you  shall  hardly  meet  with  a  senseless  and  in-  j' 
significant  word,  that  is  not  made  up  of  some  Latin 
or  Greek  names.    A  Frenchman  seldom  hears  our 


Digitized  by 


Google 


28  OP  MAN. 

PABT  I.    Saviour  called  by  the  name  of  parole^  but  by  the 
^    \  _.    name  of  verhe  often ;  yet  verhe  and  parole  diflFer 
^^         no  more,  but  that  one  is  Latin,  the  otheT'fKnch. 
Underiunding     When  a  matt,  upon  the  hearing  of  any  speech, 
,      hath  those  thoughts  which  the  words  of  that  speech 
and  their  connexion  were  ordained  and  constituted 
to  signify,  then  he  is  said  to  understand  it ;  under- 
standing being  nothing  else  but  conception  caused 
by  speech.     And  therefore  if  speech  be  peculiar  to 
man,  as  for  aught  I  know  it  is,  then  is  understand- 
ing peculiar  to  him  also.     And  therefore  of  absurd 
and  false  affirmations,  in  case  they  be  universal^ 
there  can  be  no  understanding;    though  many 
think  they  understatid  then,  when  they  do  but  re- 
peat the  words  softly,  or  con  them  in  their  mind. 

What  kinds  of  speeches  signify  the  appetites, 
aversions,  and  passions  of  man's  mind;  and  of 
their  use  and  abuse,  I  shall  speak  when  I  have 
spoken  of  the  passions. 
inconitant  The  uamcs  of  such  things  as  affect  us,  that  is^ 
which  please  and  displease  us,  because  all  men  be 
not  alike  affected  with  the  same  thing,  nor  the 
same  man  at  all  times,  are  in  the  common  dis- 
courses of  men  of  inconstant  signification.  For 
seeing  all  names  are  imposed  to  signify  our  con- 
ceptions, and  all  our  affections  are  but  conceptions, 
when  we  conceive  the  same  things  differently,  we 
can  hardly  avoid  different  naming  of  them.  For 
though  the  nature  of  that  we  conceive,  be  the  same ; 
yet  the  diversity  of  our  reception  of  it,  in  respect 
of  different  constitutions  of  body,  and  prejudices  of 
opinion,  gives  every  tMng  a  tincture  of  our  diffier- 
ent  passions.  And  therefore  in  reasoning  a  man 
must  take  heed  of  words ;  which  besides  the  signi- 


namet. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  REASON  AND  SCIENCB.  29 

fication  of  what  we  imagine  of  their  nature,  have    part  i, 
a  signification  also  of  the  nature,  disposition,  and   .     ^;     . 
interest  of  the  speaker ;  such  as  are  the  names  of 
virtues  and  vices;   for  one  man  calleth  wisdom^ 
what  another  calleth  fear ;  and  one  crueltff,  what 
another  justice  ;   one  prodigality,  what  another  • 

magnanimity  ;  and  one  gravity  ^  what  another  stu- 
pidity y  &c.  And  therefore  such  names  can  never 
>e  trne^  pounds  of  any  ratiocination.  No  more^' 
can  ^taphors,  and  tropesl)of  speech ;  but  these 
are  less  dangerous,  because  thegjirofrss  their  in- 
constancy ;  which  the  other  do  not. 


CHAPTER  V. 


OF  REASON  AND  SCIENCB. 

inir  ftlaft  hnt 

what  it  is. 


When  a  man  reasoneth^  he  does  nothing  else  but  R«*«>ni 
conceive  a  sum  total,  from  addition  of  parcels  ;  or 
conceive  a  remmnder,  from  subtraction  of  one  sum 
from  another ;  which,  if  it  be  done  by  words,  is 
conceiving  of  the  consequence  of  the  names  of  all 
the  parts,  to  the  name  of  the  whole ;  or  from  the 
names  of  the  whole  and  one  part,  to  the  name  of 
the  other  part.  And  though  in  some  things,  as  in 
numbers,  besides  adding  and  subtracting,  men 
name  other  operations,  as  multiplying  and  divide 
i^y  yet  ^^y  are  the  same  ;  for  multiplication,  is 
but  adding  together  of  things  equal ;  and  division, 
but  subtracting  of  one  thing,  as  often  as  we  can. 
These  operations  are  not  incident  to  numbers  only, 
but  to  all  manner  of  things  that  can  be  added  to- 
gether, and  taken  one  out  of  another.     For  as 


Digitized  by 


Google 


30 


OP  MAN. 


PART  I. 

5. 


S 


m 


i 


arithmeticians  teach  to  add  and  subtract  in  mtm-- 
hers  ;  so  the  geometricians  teach  the  same  in  tines y 
figures y  sSlid  and  superficial,  angles,  proportions y 
times  J  degrees  of  swiftness,  force,  power,  and  the 
like ;  the  logicians  teach  the  same  in  consequences 
of  words  ;  adding  together  two  names  to  make  an 
formation,  and  two  c0rmations  to  make  a  syllo^ 
gism  ;  and  many  syllogisms  to  make  a  demonstra- 
tion ;  and  from  the  sum,  or  conclusion  of  a  syllo- 
gism, they  subtract  one  proposition  to  find  the 
other.  Writers  of  politics  add  together  ^ac^ion* 
to  find  men's  duties  ;  and  lawyers,  laws  and  facts, 
to  find  what  ia  right  and  wrong  in  the  actions  of 
private  men.  (jn  sum,  Jin  what  matter  soever  there 
is  place  for  addition  and  subtraction,  there  also  is 
place  for  reason  ;  and  where  these  have  no  place, 
there  reason  has  nothing  at  all  to  do. 
jReas^  Out  of  all  wWch  wc  may  define,  that  is  to  say 
determine,  what  that  is,  which  is  meant  by  this 
word  reason,  when  we  reckon  it-.amongst  the 
faculties  of  the  mind.  For /reason,™  this  sense, 
is  nothing  but  reckoning,  that  is  adding  and  sub- 
tracting, of  the  consequences  of  general  names 
agreed  upon  for  the  marking  and  signifying  ot  our 
thoughts  ;  I  say  marking  l^em  when  we  reckon  by 
ourselves,  and  signifying,  when  we  demonstrate  or 
approve  our  reckonings  to  other  men. 

And,  as  in  arithmetic,  unpractised  men  must, 
and  professors  themselves  may  often,  err,  and  cast 
up  fiJse  ;  so  also  in  any  other  subject  of  reasoning, 
the  ablest,  most  attentive,  and  most  practised  men 
may  deceive  themselves,  and  infer  false  conclu- 
sions ;  not  but  that  reason  itself  is  always  right 
reason,  a&  well  as  arithmetic  is  a  certain  and  infal- 


defintd) 


BSigltt^ison, 
w^re. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  REASON  AND  SCIENCE.  31 

bble  art :  but  no  one  man's  reason^  nor  the  reason    paf 

of  any  one  number  of  men,  makes  the  certainty ;    , ; 

no  more  than  an  account  is  therefore  welfcast  up, 
because  a  great  many  men  have  unanhnously  ap- 
proved it.     And  therefore,  as  when  there  is  a  con- 
troversy in  an  account,  the  parties  must  by  their     j 
own  accord,  set  up,  for  right  reason,  the  reaso^j^V^ 
some  arbitrator,  or  ju4ge,  to  whose  sentence  tho^  \ 
will  both  stand,  or  their  controversy  must  either  Ak, 
come  to  blows,  or  be  undecided,  for  want  of  a  right  V<I. 
reason  constituted  by  nature ;  so  is  it  also  inralV^^  I 
debates  of  what  kind  soever.     And  when  men  w^      ' 
think  themselves  wiser  than  all  others,  clamour  aiicy^. 
demand  right  reason  for  judge,  yet  seek  no  more, 
but  that  things  should  be  determined,  by  no  other 
men*s  reason  but  their  own,  it  is  as  intolerable  in 
the  society  of  men,  as  it  is  in  play  after  trump  is 
turned,  to  use  for  ^rump  on  every  occasion,  that 
suite  whereof  they  five  most  in  their  hand.     For 
they  do  nothing  else,  that  will  have  every  of  their 
passions,  as  it  comes  to  bear  sway  in  them,  to  be 
taken  for  right  reason,  and  that  in  their  own  con-    * 
troversieis :  be^^ying  their  want  of  right  reason,        | 
by  the  claim  they  lay  to  it. 

The  use  and  end  of  reason,  is  not  the  finding  of  ^^^ 
the  sum  and  truth  of  one,  or  a  few  consequences, 
remote  from  the  first  definitions,  and  settled  signi- 
fications of  names,  but  to  begin  at  these,  and  pro^ 
ceed  from  one  consequence  to  another.  For  there 
^ml)e  no  certainty  o(  the  last  conclusion,  without 
a  certcdnty  of  all  those  affirmations  and  negations, 
cm  which  it  was  grounded  and  inferred.  As  when 
a  master  of  a  family,  in  taking  an  account,  casteth 
up  the  sums  of  all  the  bills  of  expense  into  one  sum. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


rf 


32  OF  MAN. 

and  not  regarding  how  each  bill  is  summed  up,  by 
those  that  give  them  in  account ;  nor  what  it  is  he 
pays  for;  he  advantages  himself  no  more,  than  if  he 
allowed  the  account  in  gross,  trusting  to  every  of  the 
accountants'  skill  and  honesty :  so  also  in  reasoning 
of  all  other  things,  he  that  takes  up  conclusions  on 
theftrust)of  authors,  and  doth  not  fetch  them  from 
the  "first  items  in  every  reckoning,  which  are  the 
significations  of  names  settled  by  definitions,  loses 
his  labour;  and  does  not  know  anything,  but  only 
believeth. 

^and      When  a  man  reckons  without  the  use  of  words^ 
which  may  be  done  in  particular  things,  as  when 
upon  the  sight  of  any  one  thing,  we  conjecture  what 
was  likely  to  have  preceded,  or  is  likely  to  follow 
upon  it ;  if  that  which  he  thought  Ukely  to  follow, 
follows  not,  or  that  which  he  thought  likely  to  have 
prgc^ed  it,  hath  not  preceded  it,  this  is  called 
^  "^  (error)  to  which  even  the  most  prudent  men  are 
subject.     But  when  we  reason  in  words  of  general 
signification,  and  fall  upon  a  general  inference  which 
•  is  false,  though  it  be  commonly  called  error,  it  is 
indeed  an  ahsurdityj   or  senseless  speech.     For 
error  is  but  a  deception,  in  presuming  that  some- 
what is  past,  or  to  come ;  of  which,  though  it  were 
not  past,  or  not  to  come,  yet  there  was  no  impos- 
sibility discoverable. .  But  when  we  make  a  general 
assertion,  unless  it  be  a  true  one,  the  possibility  of 
it  is  mconceivable.    And  words  whereby  we  con- 
nV  ceivef  nothing  but  the  soimd,jare  those  we  call 
.  ^  \  absurd,  insignificant,  and  nonsense.   And  therefore 
if  a  man  should  talk  to  me  of  a  round  quadrangle; 
I     or,  accidents  of  bread  in  cheese;  or,  immaterial 
\    substances;  or  oi  a  free  subject ;  a  free  will ;  or 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THE 

UNIVERSITY 

OF  yj 

jFORHjfe^QP  REASON  AND  SCIENCE.  33 

hXLj  free,  but  free  from  being  hindered  by  opposi-    part  i. 
tion,  I  should  not  say  he  were  in  an  error,  but  that    .     ^'     . 
his  words  were  without  meaning,  that  is  to  say, 
absurd. 

I  have  said  before,  in  the  second  chapter,  that  a 
man  did  excel  all  other  animals  in  this  faculty,  that 
when  he  conceived  any  thing  whatsoever,  he  was 
apt  to  inquire  the  consequences  of  it,  and  what 
eflFects  he  could  do  with  it.     And  now  I  add  this  <r-^^ 

other  degree  of  the  same  excellence,  that  he  can  by  ^  ^ 

words  reduce  the  consequences  he  finds  to  general 
rules,  called  theorems^  or  aphorisms ;  that  is,  he 
can  reason,  or  reckon,  not  only  in  number,  hut  in 
all  other  tMngs,  whereof  one  may  be  added  unto, 
or  subtracted  from  another. 

But  Xhia4myileg;e  is  allayed  by  another ;  and  that 
is,*by|^e  privilege  of  absurdit^  to  which  no  Irving  ^  ^  <^ 

creature  is  subject,  but  man  only.    And  of  men, 
those  are  of  all  most  subject  to  it,  that  profess  phi-  ,  /    (p") 
lo^oj^y.    For  it  is  most  true  that  Cicero  saith  of 
them  somewhere;  that  there  can  be  nothing  so 
absurd,  but  may  be  found  in  the  books  of  philo-  # 

sophers.     And  the  reason  is  manifest.     For  there  ^" 

is  not  one  of  them  that  begins  his  ratiocination  from         ^ 
the  definitions,  or  explications  of  the  names  they  are  * 

to  use ;  which  is  a  method  that  hath  been  used  only  | 

in  geonaeby ;  whose  conclusions  have  thereby  been  \ 

made  indisputable.  "    \ 

'    I.  The  first  cause  of  absurd  conclusions  I  ascribe  ^""^jf 
to  the  want  of  Method ;  in  that  they  begin  not  their    "'    f 
ratiocination  fron^  definitions  ;  that  is,  from  settled 
,sign^cations  of  their  words  :  as  if  they  could  cast  f 

account,  without  knowing  the  value  of  the  numeral         4l 
words,  one,  two,  and  three.  ^ 

VOL.  III.  D 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


34 


OF  MAN. 


PART  I. 

5. 

^ . '  V 

Causes  of 
absurdity. 


And  whereas  all  bodies  enter  into  account  upon 
divers  considerations^  which  I  have  mentioned  in 
the  precedent  chapter ;  these  considerations  being 
diversely  named,  divers  absurdities  proceed  from 
the  confusion,  and  unfit  connexion  of  their  names 
into  assertions.    And  therefore, 

II.  The  second  cause  of  absurd  assertions,  I  as- 
scribe  to  the  giving  of  names  of  bodies  to  accidents; 
or  of  accidents  to  bodies ;  as  they  do,  that  say, 

Jaith  is  ir^usedy  or  inspired;  when  nothing  can  be 
poured^  or  breathed  into  anything,  but  body; 
and  that,  extension  is  body  ;  ^t  phantasms  are 
spirits^  &c. 

III.  The  third  I  ascribe  to  the  giving  of  the  names 
of  the  ax^cidents  of  bodies  without  uSy  to  the  aed^ 
dents  of  our  own  bodies;  as  they  do  that  say,  the 
coUmr  is  in  the  body;  the  sound  is  in  the  air,  &ft. 

IV.  The  fourth,  to  the  giving  of  the  names  of 
bodies  to  names y  or  speeches  ;  as  they  do  that  say, 
that  there  be  things  universal;  that  a  Uving  crea- 
ture is  genus,  or  a  general  thing,  &c. 

V.  The  fifth,  to  the  giving  of  the  names  of  accp- 
dents  to  names  and  speeches;  as  they  do  that  say, 
the  nature  of  a  thing  is  its  definition;  a  nunCs 
command  is  his  will ;  and  the  like. 

r^vi.  The  sijdtbiJo  the  use  of  metaphors,  tropes, 
and  other^ 
For  thougi 

mon  speech,  the  way  goeth,  or  leadeth  hither ,  or 
thither ;  the  proverb  says  this  «r  that,  whereas 
ways  cannot  go,,  nor  proverbs  speak;  yet  in  reckon- 
ing, and  seeking  of  truth,  such  speedies  are  not  to 
be  admitted. 
VII.  The  seventh,  to  names  that  signify  nothing ; 


U 


Digitiz^GoOgk 


dfc} 


OF  REASON  AND  SCIENCE.  35 

but  are  taken  up,  and  learned  by  rote  from  the    part  i. 
schools,  as  hypostatical^  transubstantiate ^  consuh-    ^    ^;     . 
stant%at€y   eternalrnow,  and  the  like   canting  of 
schoolmen. 

To  him  that  can  avoid  these  things  it  is  not  easy 
to  fell  into  any  absurdity,  unless  it  be  by  the 
length  of  an  account ;  wherein  he  may  perhaps  for- 
get what  went  before.  For  all  men  by  nature 
reason  alike,  and  well,  when  they  have  good  prin- 
ciples. For  who  is  so  stupid,  as  both  to  mistake 
in  geometry,  and  also  to  persist  in  it,  when  another 
detects  his  error  to  him  ? 

By  this  it  appears  that  reason  is  not,  as  sense  Science.  .;^ 
and  memory,  bom  with  us ;  nor  gotten  by  expert^ 
ence  only,  as  prudence  is  ;  but  attained  by  indus-      ""^ 
try ;  first  in  apt  imposing  of  names ;  and  secondly     ya    *^ 
by  getting  a  good  and  orderly  method  in  proceed-^ 
ing  from  the  elements,  which  are  names,  to  asser- 
tions made  by  connexion  of  one  of  them  to  another;    ^.  ^  * 
and  so  to  syllogisms,  which  are  the  connexions  of 
one  assertion  to  another,  till  we  come  to  a  know-     y 
ledge  of  all  the  consequences  of  names  appertain- 
hig  to  t^  subject  in  hand  ;  and  that  is  it,  men  call 

muaENCE  J  And  whereas  sense  and  memory  are  but 
knowlet^  of  fact,  which  is  a  thing  past  and 
irrevocable.     Science  is  the  knowledge  of  conse«>      ;  . 

,  quences,  and  dependance  of  one  fact  upon  another :      '^    . 

i  by  which,  out  of  that  we  can  presently  do,  we  v 
know  how  to  do  something  else  when  we  will^  or 
the  like  another  time ;  because  when  we  see  how  any 
thing  comes  about,  upon  what  causes,  and  by  what 
manner;  when  the  like  causes  come  into  our  power, 
we  see  how  to  make  it  produce  the  like  effects. 
Children  therefore  are  not  endued  with  reason 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


36  OF  MAN. 

PART  I.  jat_alLjbill  they  hq^vfi  gtt^ined  the  use  of  speech ; 
.    ^;  _.  Ibut  are  called  reasonable  creaturesTfor  the  possi- 
Science.     biUty  apparent  of  having  the  use  of  reason  in  time 
to  come.     And  the  most  part  of  men,  though  they 
have  the  use  of  reasoning  a  little  way,  as  in  num- 
bering to  some  degree ;  yet  it  serves  them  to  little 
use  in  common  life  ;  in  which  they  govern  them- 
selves, some  better,  some  worse,  according  to  their 
diflFerences  of  experience,  quickness  of  memory, 
and  inclinations  to  several   ends;    but  specially 
according  to  good  or  evil  fortune,  and  the  errors 
of  one  another.     For  as  for  science,  or  certain 
/rules  of  their  actions,  they  are  so  far  from  it,  that 
■;  they  know  not  what  it  is.     Geometry  they  have 
thought  conjuring:  but  for  other  sciences,  they 
who  have  not  been  taught  the  beginnings  and 
some  progress  in  them,  that  they  may  see  how 
they  beacguired  and  generated,  are  in  this  point 
^like  children)  that  having  no  thought  of  generation, 
I  are  made  believe  by  the  women  that  their  brothers 
and  sisters  are  not  bom,  but  found  in  the  garden. 

But  yet  they  that  have  no  science,  are  in  better, 
and  nobler  condition,  with  their  natural  prudence  ; 
than  men,  that  by  mis-reasoning,  or  by  trusting 
'  them  that  reason  wrong,  fall  upon  false  and  absurd 

general  rules.  For  ignorance  of  causes,  and  of 
rules,  does  not  set  men  so  far  out  of  their  way,  as 
relying  on  false  rules,  and  taking  for  causes  of 
what  they  aspire  to,  those  that  are  not  so,  but 
rather  causes  of  the  contrary. 

To  conclude,  the  light  of  human  minds  is  per- 
spicuous words,  but  by  exact  definitions  first 
snuffed,  and  purged  from  ambiguity;  reason  is  the 
pace  ;  increase  of  science,  the  way;  and  the  benefit 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  REASON  AND  SCIENCE.  37 

of  mankind,  the  end.    And,  on  the  contrary,  meta^    part  i. 
]^mrq;^iidj^f^  and  ambig^^Q^^s  words,  are  like    ,     ^;     . 

tgnesfatui  ;  and  reasoning  upon  them  is  wander- 
ing amongst  innumerable  absurdities ;  and  their 
end,  contention  and  sedition,  or  contempt. 
As  much  experience,  is  prudence  ;  so,  is  much  Prudence  and 

•  T»     \t,  1.  n     1.  Mpience,  with 

science  sapience.  For  though  we  usually  have  one  their  diflFerenco 
name  of  wisdom  for  them  both,  yet  the  Latins  did 
always  distinguish  between  prudentia  and  sapien- 
tia  ;  ascribing  the  former  to  experience,  the  latter 
to  science.  But  to  make  their  diflFerence  appear 
more  clearly,  let  us  suppose  one  man  endued  with 
an  excellent  natural  use  and  dexterity  in  handling 
his  arms ;  and  another  to  have  added  to  that  dex- 
terity, an  acquired  science,  of  where  he  can  offend, 
or  be  offended  by  his  adversary,  in  every  possible 
posture  or  guard  :  the  ability  of  the  former,  would  \/ 
be  to  the  ability  of  the  latter,  as  prudence  to 
sapience ;    both  useful ;  but  the  latter  infallible. 

books,  follow  the  blind  blindly,  are  like  him  that, 
trusting  to  the  false  rules  of  a  master  of  fence, 
ventures  presumptuously  upon  an  adversary,  that 
either  kills  or  disgraces  him. 

The  signs  of  science  are  some,  certain  and  infal-  sigw  of 
Uble  ;  some,  uqcfirtain.  Certain,  when  he  that  per- 
tendeth  the  science  of  any  thing,  can  teach  the 
same  ;  that  is  to  say,  demonstrate  the  truth  thereof 
perspicuously  to  another ;  uncertain,  when  only 
some  particular  events  answer  to  his  pretence,  and 
upon  many  occasions  prove  so  as  he  says  they  must. 
Signs  of  prudence  are  all  uncertain ;  because  to 
observe  by  experience,  and  remember  all  circum- 
stances that  may  alter  the  success,  is  impossible. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


38 


OF  MAN. 


PART  I. 
5. 


But  in  any  business,  whereof  a  man  has  not  infal- 
lible science  to  proceed  by;  to  forsake  his  own 
Lnatural  judgment,  and  be  guided  by  general  sen- 
[tences  read  in  authors,  and  subject  to  many  excep- 
Ktions,  is  a  sign  of  folly,  and  generally  scorned  by 
the  name  of  pedantry.     And  even  of  those  men 
themselves,  that  in  councils  of  the  commonwealth 
love  to  show  their  reading  of  poUtics  and  history, 
very  few  do  it  in  their  domestic  affairs,  where 
their  particular  interest  is  concerned ;  having  pru- 
dence enough  for  their  private  affsdrs :    but  in 
pubUc  they  study  more  the  reputation  of  tbdr  own 
wit,  than  the  success  of  another's  business. 


Motiooi  vital 
and  aiihnal. 


,  CHAPTER  VL 

OF  THE  INTERIOR  BEGINNINGS  OF  VOLUNTARY 
MOTIONS  ;  COMMONLY  CALLED  THE  JASSIONS; 
AND  THE  SPEECHES  BY  WHICH  THEY  ARE  EX- 
PRESSED. 

There  be  in  animals,  two  sorts  of  motions  peculiar 
to  them  :  one  called  [vital  i\  begun  in  generation, 
and  continued  without  inteipruption  through  their 
whole  life ;  such  as  are  the  course  of  the  blood, 
the  pulse,  the  breathing,  the  concoction,  nutrition, 
excretion,  &c.  to  which  motions  there  needs  no 
help  of  imagination  :  the  other  ia  animal  \notion, 
otherwise  called  voluntary  motion ;  as  to  go^to 
speak,  to  move  any  of  omr  limbs,  in  such  manner 
as  is  first  fancied  in  our  minds.  That  sense  is 
motion  in  the  organs  and  interior  parts  of  man's 
body,  caused  by  the  action  of  the  things  we  see, 
hear,  &c. ;  and  that  fancy  is  but  the  relics  of  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THE  PASSIONS.  39 

same  motion,  remaining  after  sense,  has  been  al-    part  t. 
ready  said  in  the  first  and  second  chapters.     And    .    ^;    . 
because  going,  speaking,  and  the  like  voluntary 
motions,  depend  always  upon  a  precedent  thought 
of  whither,  which  way,  and  what ;  it  is  evident,  . 
that  the  imagination  is  the  first  internal  beginning  \ 
of^jvolsmte-ry  motion.    And  although  unstudied 
men  do  not  conceive  any  motion  at  all  to  be  there, 
where  the  thing  moved  is  invisible ;  or  the  space  it 
Is  moved  in  is,  for  the  shortness  of  it,  insensible ; 
yet  that  doth  not  hinder,  but  that  such  motions 
are.     For  let  a  space  be  never  so  little,  that  which 
is  moved  over  a  greater  space,  whereof  that  little 
one  is  part,  must  first  be  moved  over  that.    These 
small  beginnings  of  motion,  within  the  body  of 
man,  before  they  appear  in  walking,  speaking, 
striking,  and  other  visible  actions,  are  commonly  / 

Calledy^ENDEAVOURT^  \fendetvour. 

This  endeavour,  when  it  is  toward  something  ^ 

which  causes  it,  is  called  appetite,  or  desire  ;  ^J^**' 
the  latter,  being  the  general  name ;  and  the  other 
oftentimes  restrained  to  signify  the  desire  of  food, 
namely  hunger  and  thirst.    And  when  the  endear  ^^^' 
vour,  is  fromward  something,  it  is  generally  called  ^ 

AVERSION.  These  words,  appetite  and  aversion,  Aversion. 
we  have  from  the  Latins  ;  and  they  both  of  diem 
signify  the  motions,  one  of  approaching,  the  other 
of  retiring.  So  also  do  the  Greek  words  for  the 
sam^,  which  are  op^ri  and  a^opiiri.  For  nature  itself 
does  often  press  upon  men  those  truths,  which 
afterwards,  when  they  look  for  somewhat  beyond 
nature,  they  stumble  at.  For  the  Schools  find  in 
mere  appetite  to  go,  or  move,  no  actual  motion  at 
all :  but  because  some  motion  they  must  acknow- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


40  OF  MAN. 

ledge,  they  call  it  /metaphorical  motion  ;  Which  is  ! 
but  an  absurd  speedi :  for  though  words  may  be, 
called  metaphorical ;  bodies  and  motions  can  not. 

That  which  men  desire,  they  are  also  said  to 
Love.  LOVE  :  and  to  hate  those  things  for  which  they 
- '  have  aversion.  So  that  desire  and  love  are  the 
same  thing ;  save  that  by  desire,  we  always  signify 
the  absence  of  the  object ;  by  love,  most  commonly 
the  presence  of  the  same.  So  also  by  aversion,  we 
signify  the  absence ;  and  by  hate,  the  presence  of 
the  object. 

Of  appetites  and  aversions,  some  are  bom  with 
men ;  as  appetite  of  food,  appetite  of  excretion, 
and  exoneration,  which  may  also  and  more  properly 
be  called  aversions,  from  somewhat  they  feel  in 
their  bodies  ;  and  some  other  appetites,  not  many. 
The  rest,  which  are  appetites  of  particular  things, 
proceed  from  experience,  and  trial  of  their  effects 
upon  themselves  or  other  men.  For  of  things  we 
know  not  at  all,  or  believe  not  to  be,  we  can  have 
no  further  desire,  than  to  taste  and  try.  But 
aversion  we  have  for  things,  not  only  which  we 
know  have  hurt  us,  but  also  that  we  do  not  know 
whether  they  will  hurt  us,  or  not. 
Contempt  Thosc  thiugs  which  we  neither  desire,  nor  hate, 
we  are  said  to  contemn  ;  contempt  being  nothing 
else  but  an  immobility,  or  contumacy  of  tlie  heart, 
in  resisting  the  action  of  certain  things  ;  and  pro- 
ceeding from  that  the  heart  is  already  mpved 
otherwise,  by  other  more  potent  objects  ;  or  from 
want  of  experience  of  them. 

And  because  the  constitution  of  a  man's  body  is 
in' continual  mutation^  it  is  impossible  that  all  the 
same  things  should  always  cause  in  him  the  same 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THE  PASSIONS.  41 

appetites,  and  aversions:  much  less  can  all  men  parti. 
consent,  in  the  desire  of  almost  any  one  and  the  .  ^;  . 
same  object. 

But  whatsoever  is  the  object  of  any  man's  appe-  ' 
tite  or  desire,  that  is  it  which  he  for  his  part  calleth 
good:  and  the  object  of  his  hate  and  aversion 
evil ;  and  of  his  contempt,  vile  and  inconsiderabl 
For  these  words  of  good,  evil,  and  contemptible^ 
are  ever  used  with  relation  to  the  person  that  useth 
them  :  there  being  nothing  simply  and  absolutely 
so ;  nor  any  common  rule  of  good  and  evil,  to  be 
taken  from  the  nature  of  the  objects  themselves  ; 
but  from  the  person  of  the  man,  where  there  is  no 
commonwealth  ;  or,  in  a  commonwealth,  from  the 
person  that  representeth  it ;  or  from  an  arbitrator 
or  judge,  whom  men  disagreeing  shall  by  consent 
set  up,  and  make  his  sentence  the  rule  thereof. 

The  Latin  tongue  has  two  words,  whose  signifi- 
cations approach  to  those  of  good  and  evil ;  but  are 
not  precisely  the  same;  and  those  ^re  pulchrumvnXohnm. 
and  turpe.  Whereof  the  former  signifies  that,  Turpe. 
which  by  some  apparent  signs  promiseth  good ; 
and  the  latter,  that  which  promiseth  evil.  But  in 
our  tongue  we  have  not  so  general  names  to  ex- 
press them  by.  But  for  pulchrum  we  say  in  some 
things,  fair  ;  in  others,  beautiful^  or  handsome, 
or  gallant^  or  honourahley  or  comely ^  or  amiable  ; 
and  for  turpe, foul,  deformed,  ugly,  base,  nauseous^ 
and  the  like,  as  the  subject  shall  require  ;  all  which 
words,  in  their  proper  places,  signify  nothing  else 
but  the  mien,  or  countenance,  that  promiseth  good 
and  evil.  So  that  of  good  there  be  three  kinds ; 
good  in  the  promise,  that  is  pulchrum ;  good  in 
eflfect,  as  the  end  desired,  which  is  cdS\!^^  jucnndum. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


/ 


42 


OF  MAN. 


PART  I. 
6. 


Pleasure. 


delightful ;  and  good  as  the  means,  which  is  called 
utile,  profitable ;  and  as  many  of  evil :  for  evil  in 
Delightful,  promise,  is  that  they  call  turpe  ;  evil  in  eflTect,  and 
UnpieaJ^t.  ^^d,  is  molestunij  unpleasant y  troublesome ;  and 
Unproflubie.  ^^  '^  ^^  mcans,  inutile,  unprofitable,  hurtful. 

r  As,  in  sense,  that  which  is  resdly  within  us,  is,  as 
I  have  said  before,  only  motion,  caused  by  the  action 
of  external  objects,  but  in  apparence ;  to  the  sight, 
light  and  colour ;  to  the  ear,  sound ;  to  the  nostril, 
odour,  &c. :  so,  when  the  action  of  the  same  object 
is  continued  from  the  eyes,  ears,  and  other  organs 
^otfieji^irt^the  real  effect*  there  is  nothing^ but 
motion,  or  endeavour  ;  wEch  consisteth  in  appetite, 
or  aversion,  to  or  from  the  object  moving.  *But 
the  apparence,  or  sense  of  that  motion,  is  that  we 
DisplcMure.  either  call  delight,  or  trouble  of  mind. 

This  motion,  which  is  called  appetite,  and  for  the 
apparence  of  it  delight,  ^xid  pleasure,  seemeth  to 
be  a  corroboration  of  vital  motion,  and  a  help 
thereunto ;  and  therefore  such  things  as  caused 
delight,  were  not  improperly  called  jucunda,  a  Ju- 
vando,  from  helping  or  fortifjring;  and  the  contrary, 
molesta,  offensive,  from  hindering,  and  troubling 
the  motion  vital. 

Pleasure  therefore,  or  delight,  is  the  apparence, 
or  sense  of  good ;  and  molestation,  or  displeasure, 
the  apparence,  or  sense  of  evil.  And  consequently 
all  appetite,  desire,  and  love,  is  accompanied  with 
some  delight  more  or  less ;  and  all  hatred  and  aver- 
sion, with  more  or  less  displeasure  and  offence. 

Of  pleasures  or  delights,  some  arise  from  the 

sense  of  an  object  present ;  and  those  may  be  called 

piewumof  pleasure  of  sense  ;  the  word  sensual,  as  it  is  used 

by  those  only  that  condemn  them,  having  no  place 

till  there  be  laws.     Of  this  kind  are  all  onerations 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


Offence. 


OF  THE  PASSIONS.  43 

and  exonerations  of  the  body ;  as  also  ail  that,  is    part  i. 
pleasant,  in  the  sight j  hearing,  smelly  taste,  or    .     ^;     . 
touch.     Others  arise  from  the  e3q)ectation,  that  pro- 
ceeds from  foresight  of  the  end,  or  conseqnence  of 
things  ;  whether  those  things  in  the  sense  please  or 
displease.    And  these  are  pleasures  of  the  mind  of  ^I'^l  ^^ 
him  that  draweth  those  consequences,  and  are  gene- 
rally calle<|^^JoYp    In  the  like  manner,  displeasures  Joy. 
are  some  in'^^  sense,  and  called  pain  ;  others  in  Ptin. 
the  expectation  of  consequences,  and  are  called^ 

GBIBF.        _  _-  Grief. 

These'^imple  passions  Vcalled  appetite,  desire, 
love,  aversion,  hate,  joy,  and  grief,  have  their 
names  for  divers  considerations  diversified.  As 
first,  when  they  one  succeed  another,  they  are  di- 
versely called  from  the  opinion  men  have  of  the 
likelihood  of  attaining  what  they  desire.  Secondly, 
from  the  object  loved  or  hated.  Thirdly,  from  the  (i 
consideration  of  many  of  them  together.  Fourthly,  :. 
from  the  alteration  or  succession  itself. 

For  appetite,  with  an  opinion  of  attaining,  is 

CaUed  hope.  Hope. 

The  same,  without  such  opinion,  despair.  Despair. 

Aversion,  with  opinion  of  hurt  from  the  object, 

FEAR.  Fear. 

The  same,  with  hope  of  avoiding  that  hurt  by 
resistance,  courage.  courage. 

Sudden  courage,  anger.  Anger. 

C!onstant  hope,  confidence  of  ourselves.  confidence. 

Coustmit  despair,  diffidence  of  ourselves.       Diffidence. 

Anger  for  great  hurt  done  to  another,  when  we  con- 
ceive the  same  to  be  done  by  injury,  indignation,  indignation. 

Desire     of     good    to     another,      benevolence.  Benevolence. 

good   will,    charity.      If  to  man  generally, 

good  nature.  Goodnature. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


44  OF  MAN. 

Desire  of  riches,  covetousness  ;  a  name  used 

always  in  signification  of  blame ;  because  men  con- 

Covetou»ne88.  tending  for  them,  are  displeased  with  one  another 

attaining  them  ;  though  the  desire  in  itself,  be  to 

be  blamed,  or  allowed,  according  to  the  means  by 

which  these  riches  are  sought. 

Ambition.  Destre  of  ofl&ce,  or  precedence,  ambition  :  a 

.    name  used  also  in  the  worse  sense,  for  the  reajson 

before  mentioned. 

Desire  of  things  that  conduce  but  a  little  to 
our  ends,  and  fear  of  things  that  are  but  of  little 
PuMiianimity.  hindrance,  pusillanimity. 
Mignanimity.      Contempt  of  little  helps  and  hindrances,  magna- 
nimity. 

Magnanimity y  in  danger  of  death  or  wounds. 

Valour.  VALOUR,  FORTITUDE. 

Liberality.  Magnanimity  in  the  use  of  riches,  liberality. 

Pusillanimity  in   the   same,    wretchedness, 

Miserableness.  MISERABLENESS,    Or    PARSIMONY  ;     aS   it   is   liked 

or  disliked. 
Kindness.  Love  of  pcrsous  for  society,  kindness. 

Love  of  persons  for  pleasing  the  sense  only. 

Natural  lurt.     NATURAL  LUST. 

Love  of  the  same,  acquired  from  rumination,  that 
Luxury.         ig^  imagination  of  pleasure  past,  luxury. 

Love  of  one  singularly,  with  desire  to  be  singu- 
Jno?^***"  larly  beloved,  the  passion  of  love.  The  same. 
Jealousy.        ^th  fcar  that  the  love  is  not  mutual,  jealousy. 

Desire,  by  dom^"  hurt  to  another,  to  make  him 

Revfnge-  ^      ^         ~^  ' 

lujuess.         condemn  some  fact  of  his  own,  revengefulness. 

Curiosity.  Desire  to  know  why,  and  how,  cjaRiosiTY ;  such 

as  is  in  no  living  creature  but  man :  so  that  man  is 

3>  distinguished,  not  only  by  his  reason,   but  also 

by  this  singular  passion  from  other  animals ;  in 

whom  the  appetite  of  food,  and  other  pleasures  of 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


OF  THE  PASSIONS.  45 

sense,  by  predominance,  take  away  the  care  of /part  i. 
knowing  causes  ;  which  is  a  lust  of  the  mind,  that      ^;   ^ 
by  a  perseverance  of  delight  in  the  continual  and 
indefatigable  generation  of  knowledge,  exceedeth) 
the  short  vehemence  of  any  carnal  pleasure,    y      ^  v,^^ 

Fear  of  power  invisible,  feigned  by  the  mind,  or  ^ 

imagined  from  tales  publicly  allowed,  religion  ;  Religion. 
not  allowed,  superstition.    And  when  the  power  superstition. 
imagined,   is  truly  such  as   we   imagine,    true  True  religion.  \ 

REIJGION.  -" 

Fear,  without  the  apprehension  of  why,  or  what, 
panic  tbrro;r,  called  so  from  the  fables,  that  make  P*nic  terror. 
(^^  the  author  of  them;  whereasT^in  truth,  there 
is  always  in  him  that  so  feareth,  first,  some  appre- 
hension of  the  cause,  though  the  rest  run  away  by 
example,  every  one  supposing  his  fellow  to  know 
why.  And  therefore  this  passion  happens  to  none 
but  in  a  throng,  or  multitude  of  people. 

/oy,  from  apprehension  of  novelty,  ADMIRATION  ;  Admiration. 
proper  to  man,  because  it  excites  the  appetite  of 
knowing  the  cause. 

Joy,  arising  from  imagination  of  a  man's  own 
power  and  ability,  is  that  exultation  of  the  mind 
which  is  called  glorying  :  which  if  grounded  upon  oiory. 
the  experience  of  his  own  former  actions,  is  the 
same  with  cor^dence :  but  if  grounded  on  the  flat- 
tery of  others ;  or  only  supposed  by  himself,  for 
delight  in  the  consequences  of  it,  is  called  vain-  Vainglory. 
GLORT  :  which  name  is  properly  given ;  because  a 
well  grounded  confidence  begetteth  attempt;  where- 
as the  supposing  of  power  does  not,  and  is  there- 
fore rightly  called  vain. 

Grief,  from  opinion  of  want  of  power,  is  called 

dejection  of  mind.  Dejection, 

The  vain-glory  which  consisteth  in  the  feigning 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


46 


OF  MAN. 


or  supposing  of  abilities  in  ourselves,  which  we 
know  are  not,  is  mpst  incident  to  youn^  men,  and 
nourished  by  the|/historie8,  or  fiction^of  gallant 
persons ;  and  is  corrected  oftentimes  by  age,  and 
employment. 
Sadden  glory.  Suddeu  glortf,  is  the  passion  which  maketh  those 
Laughter.  gHmaccs  callcd  LAUGHTBR ;  and  is  caused  either  by 
some  sudden  act  of  their  own,  that  pleaseth  them  ; 
or  by  the  apprehension  of  some  deformed  thing  in 
another,  by  comparison  whereof  they  suddenly 
applaud  themselves.  And  it  is  incident  most  to 
them,  that  are  conscious  of  the  fewest  abilities  in 
themselves ;  who  are  forced  to  keep  themselves  in 
their  own  favour,  by  observing  the  imperfections 
of  other  men.  And  therefore  much  laughter  at  the 
defects  of  others,  is  a  sign  of  pusillanimity.  For  of 
great  minds,  one  of  the  proper  works  is,  to  help 
and  free  others  from  scorn ;  and  compare  them- 
selves only  with  the  most  able. 

On  the  contrary,  sudden  dejection^  is  the  passion 
that  causeth  weeping  ;  and  is  caused  by  such  acci- 
dents, as  suddenly  take  away  some  vehement  hope, 
or  some  prop  of  their  power :  and  they  are  most 
subject  to  it,  that  rely  principally  on  helps  external, 
such  as  are  women,  and  children.  Therefore  some 
weep  for  the  loss  of  friends ;  others  for  their  un- 
kindness ;  others  for  the  sudden  stop  made  to  their 
thoughts  of  revenge,  by  reconciliation.  But  in  all 
cases,  both  laughter,  and  weeping,  are  sudden  mo- 
tions; custom  taking  them  both  away.  For  no 
man  laughs  at  old  jests ;  or  weeps  for  an  old 
calamity. 
Shame.  GHef,  fov  the  discovery  of  some  defect  of  ability, 

is  SHAME,  or  the  passion  that  discovereth  itself  in 


Sudden  de- 
jection. 
Weeping. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THE  PASSIONS.  47 

BLUSHING ;  and  consisteth  in  the  apprehension  of   part  i. 
some  thing  dishonourable ;  and  in  yonng  men,  is  a     ^    ^ 
sign  of  the  love  of  good  reputation,  and  commend-  Blushing. 
able :  in  old  men  it  is  a  sign  of  the  same ;  but  be- 
cause it  comes  too  late,  not  commendable. 
The  contempt  of  good  reputation  is  called  impu*  impudence. 

DENCE. 

Griefy  for  the  calamity  of  another,  is  pity  ;  and  P>ty. 
ariseth  from  the  imagination  that  the  like  calamity 
may  befall  himself;  and  therefore  is  called  also 
COMPASSION,  and  in  the  phrase  of  this  present  time 
a  FELLOW-FEELING :  and  therefore  for  calamity  ar- 
riving from  great  wickedness,  the  best  men  have 
the  least  pity;  and  for  the  same  calamity,  those 
hate  pity,  that  think  themselves  least  obnoxious  to 
the  same. 

Contempt,  or  little  sense  of  the  calamity  of  otheri, 
is  that  which  men  call  cruelty  ;  proceeding  from  cmeity. 
security  of  their  own  fortune.  For,  that  any  man 
should  take  pleasure  in  other  men's  great  harms ; 
without  other  end  of  his  own,  I  do  not  conceive  it 
possible. 

Grirfj  for  the  success  of  a  competitor  in  wealth, 
honour,  or  other  good,  if  it  be  joined  with  endea- 
vour to  enforce  our  own  abilities  to  equal  or  ex- 
ceed him,  is  called  emulation  :  but  joined  with  Emulation. 
endeavour  to  supplant,  or  hinder  a  competitor, 

envy.  Enry. 

When  in  the  mind  of  man,  appetites,  ancl  aver- 
sions, hopes,  and  fears,  concerning  one  and  the 
same  thing,  arise  alternately  ;  and  divers  good  and 
evil  consequences  of  the  doing,  or  omitting  the 
thing  propounded,  come  successively  into  our 
thoughts ;  so  that  sometimes  we  have  an  appetite 


Digitized  by 


Google 


48  OF  MAN. 

PART  I.    to  it ;  sometimes  an  aversion  from  it ;  sometimes 
.    ^;  _.    hope  to  be  able  to  do  it ;  sometimes  despair^  or 
fear  to  attempt  it ;  the  whole  sum  of  desires,  aver- 
sions, hopes  and  fears  continued  till  the  thing  be 
either  done,  or  thought  impossible,  is  that  we  call 

Deliberation.     DJELIBEBATION. 

Therefore  of  things  past,  there  is  no  deliberation  ; 

because  manifestly  impossible  to  be  changed :  nor 

of  things  known  to  be  impossible,  or  thought  so  ; 

because  men  know,  or  think  such  deliberation  vain. 

But  of  things  impossible,  which  we  think  possible, 

we  may  deliberate ;  not  knowing  it  is  in  vain.   And 

^^^it  is  called  deliberation  ;  because  it  is  a  putting  an 

^N^      end  to  the  liberty  we  had  of  doing,  or  omitting, 

according  to  our  own  appetite,  or  aversion. 

i        This  alternate  succession  of  appetites,  aversions, 

,    hopes  and  fears,  is  no  less  in  other  living  creatures 

than  in  man  :  and  therefore  beasts  also^deliberate. 

Every  deliberation  is  then  said  to  end,  when  that 

whereof  they  deliberate,  is  either  done,  or  thought 

impossible ;  because  till  then  we  retain  the  liberty 

of  doing,  or  omitting ;  according  to  our  appetite, 

or  aversion. 

In  deliberation^  the  l^t  appetite,  or  aversion, 
/  immediately  adhering  to  the  action,  or  to  the  omis- 
The  wiii.y  sion  thereof,  is  that  we  call  the  will  ;  the  act,  not 
the  faculty,  of  willing.  And  beasts  that  have  deli- 
beration, must  necessarily  also  have  will.  The 
definition  of  the  will,  given  commonly  by  the 
Schools,  that  it  is  a  rational  appetite,  is  not  good. 
For  if  it  were,  then  could  there  be  no  voluntary 
act  against  reason.  For  a  voluntary  act  is  that, 
which  proceedeth  from  the  will,  and  no  other.  But 
if  instead  of  a  rational  appetite,  we  shall  say  an 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THE  PASSIONS.  49 

/(Appetite  resulting  from  a  jirecedent  deliberg^^  part  r. 
then  the  definition  is  the  same  that  I  have  given  ^  ^-  . 
here.  Will  therefore  is  the  last  appetite  in  deli- 
berating.  And  though  we  say  in  common  dis- 
course, a  man  had  a  will  once  to  do  a  things  that 
nevertheless  he  forbore  to  do  ;  yet  that  is  properly 
but  an  inclination,  which  makes  no  action  volun- 
tary ;  because  the  action  depends  not  of  it,  but  of 
the  last  inclination,  or  appetite.  For  if  the  inter- 
venient  appetites,  make  any  action  voluntary;  then 
by  the  same  reason  all  intervenient  aversions, 
should  make  the  same  action  involuntary ;  and  so 
one  and  the  same  action,  should  be  both  voluntary 
fmd  involuntary. 

By  this  it  is  manifest,  that  not  only  actions  that 
have  their  beginning  from  covetousness,  ambition, 
lust,  or  other  appetites  to  the  thing  propotmded ; 
but  also  those  that  have  their  beginning  from  aver^ 
sion,  or  fear  of  those  consequences  that  follow  the 
omission,  are  voluntary  actions. 

The  forms  of  speech  by  which  the  passions  arei^onnaof 
expressed,  are  partly  the  same,  and  partly  diflferentjJSlM\)n/"  ; 
from  those,  by  which  we  express  our  thoughts. 
And  first,  generally  all  passions  may  be  expressed 
indicatively  ;  as  /  love^  I  fear  ^  I  joy,  I  deliberate^ 
J  will,  I  command:  but  some  of  them  have  parti- 
cular expressions  by  themselves,  which  nevertheless 
are  not  affirmations,  unless  it  be  when  they  serve 
to  make  other  inferences,  besides  that  of  the  passion 
they  proceed  from.  Deliberation  is  expressed  sub- 
junctively ;  which  is  a  speech  proper  to  signify 
suppositions,  with  their  consequences ;  as,  if  this 
be  done,  then  this  will  follow;  and  differs  not  from 
the  language  of  reasoning,  save  that  reasoning  is 

VOL.  III.  E 


Digitized  by 


Google 


J 


50 


OF  MAN. 


PART  I. 
6. 


Good  and 
eTil  apparent. 


in  general  words ;  but  deliberation  for  the  most 
part  is  of  particulars.  The  language  of  desire,  and 
aversion,  is  imp^ative  :  ss  do  this,  forbear  that : 
which  wnen  the  party  is  obliged  to  do,  or  forbear, 
is  command ;  otherwise  prayer  ;  or  else  counsel. 

Tlie_language   of  Vain-:glQry,   nf --mdjgna  rin^  pity 

and  revengefdlness,  optative :  but  of  the  desire  to 
know,  there  is  a  peculiar  expression,  called  jMer-- 
rogatipe ;  as,  what  is  it^  when  shall  ity  how  is  it 
doncy  and  why  so  9  other  language  of  the  passions 
I  find  none  :  for  cursing,  swearing,  reviling,  and 
the  like,  do  not  signify  as  speech;  but  as  the 
actions  of  a  tongue  accustomed. , 

These  forms  of  speech,  I  say,  are  expressions,  or 
voluntary  significations  of  our  passions :  but  certain 
signs  they  be  not ;  because  they  may  be  used  arbi- 
trarily, whether  they  that  use  them,  have  such 
passions  or  not.  The  best  signs  of  passions  pre- 
sent, are  either  in  the  countenance,  motions  of  the 
body,  actions,  and  ends,  or  aims,  which  we  other- 
wise know  the  man  to  have. 

And  because  in  deliberation,  the  appetites,  and 
aversions,  are  raised  by  foresight  of  the  good  and 
evil  consequences,  and  sequels  of  the  action  where- 
of we  deliberate ;  the  good  or  evil  effect  thereof 
dependeth  on  the  foresight  of  a  long  chain  of  con- 
sequences, of  which  very  seldom  any  man  is  able 
to  see  to  the  end.  But  for  so  far  as  a  man  seeth, 
if  the  good  in  those  consequences  be  greater  than 
the  evil,  the  whole  chain  is  that  which  writers  call 
apparent,  or  seeming  good.  And  contrarily,  when 
the  evil  exceedeth  the  good,  the  whole  is  apparent, 
or  seeming  evil :  so  that  he  who  hath  by  experi- 
ence, or  reason,  the  greatest  and  surest  prospect  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THE  PASSIONS.  51 

Gonsequences,  deliberates  best  himself;  and  is  able    part  r. 
when  he  will,  to  give  the  best  counsel  unto  others.    .     ^;    . 

Continual  success  in  obtaining  those  things 
which  aman  from  time  to  time  desire th,  that  is  to  say, 
continual  prospering,  is  that  men  call  felicity  ;  Felicity. 
I  mean  the  felicity  of  this  life.  For  there  is  no 
snch  thing  as  perpetual  tranquillity  of  mind,  while 
we  live  here ;  because  life  itself  is  but  motion,  and 
can  never  be  without  desire,  nor  without  fear,  no 
more  than  without  sense?  What  kind  of  felicity 
God  hath  ordained  to  them  that  devoutly  honour 
Him,  a  man  shall  no  sooner  know^  than  enjoy; 
being  joys,  that  now  are  as  incomprehensible,  as 
the  word  of  school-men  beatifical  vision  is  un- 
intelligible. 

TTie  form  of  speech  whereby  men  signify  their 
opinion  of  the  goodness  of  any  thing,  is  praise.  Pmite. 
That  whereby  they  signify  the  power  and  great- 
ness of  any  thing,  is  magnifying.    And  that  MagnificaUon. 
whereby  they  signify  the  opinion  they  have  of  a 
man's  felicity,  is  by  the  Greeks  called  fiaKupiajiogy  MojcapctrfK^c* 
for  which  we  have  no  name  in  our  tongue.    And 
thus  much  is  suflGicient  for  the  present  purpose^ 
to  have  been  said  of  the  passions. 


CHAPTER  VIL 

OF  THE  ENDS^  or  RESOLUTIONS  OF  DISCOURSE. 

Of  all  discourse y  governed  by  desire  of  knowledge, 
there  is  at  last  an  end^  either  by  attaining,  or  by 
giving  over.  And  in  the  chain  of  discourse,  where- 
soever it  be  interrupted,  there  is  an  end  for  that 
time. 

E  2 

Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC 


52  OF  MAN. 

PART  u  If  the  discourse  be  merely  mental^  it  cousisteth 
I'  .  of  thoughts  that  the  thing  will  be,  and  will  not  be ; 
or  that  it  has  been,  and  has  not  been,  alternately. 
So  that  wheresoever  you  break  oflF  the  chain  of  a 
man's  discourse,  you  leave  him  in  a  presumption  of 
it  will  be,  or,  it  will  not  be ;  or,  it  has  been,  or, 
has  not  been.  All  which  ify^opiniony  And  that 
which  is  alternate  appetite,  in  deliberating  concern- 
ing good  and  evil ;  the  same  is  alternate  opinion, 
in  the  enquiry  of  the  truth  of  past,  and  future. 
And  as  the  last  appetite  in  deliberation,  is  called  the 
will ;  so  the  last  opinion  in  search  of  the  truth  of 

Judgment,  or  past,  aud  futurc,  is  called  the  judgment,  or  reso- 

'  lute  andjinal  sentence  of  him  that  discourseth. 

And  as  the  whole  chain  of  appetites  alternate,  in 

the  question  of  good,  or  bad,  is  called  deliberation^ 

so  the  whole  chain  of  opinions  alternate,  in  the 

Donbt  question  of  true,  or  false,  is  called  toouBxT) 

No  discourse  whatsoever,  can  end  in  absolute 
knowledge  of  fact,  past,  or  to  come.  For,  as  for 
the  knowledge  of  fact,  it  is  originally,  sense ;  and 
ever  after,  memory.  And  for  the  knowledge  of 
consequence,  which  I  have  said  before  is  called 
science,  it  is  not  absolute,  but  conditional.  No 
man  can  know  by  discourse,  that  this,  or  that,  is, 
has  been,  or  will  be ;  which  is  to  know  absolutely : 
but  only,  that  if  this  be,  that  is ;  if  this  has  been, 
that  has  been ;  if  this  shall  be,  that  shall  be :  which 
c  isfto^know  conditionallylb  and  that  not  the  conse- 
quence of  one  thing  to'another ;  but  of  one  name 
of  a  thing,  to  another  name  of  the  same  thing. 

And  therefore,  when  the  discourse  is  put  into 
speech,  and  begins  with  the  definitions  of  words, 
and  proceeds  by  connexion  of  the  same  into  general 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THE  ENDS  OF  DISCOURSE. 


53 


PART  r. 

7. 


<  Conscious. 


affirmations,  and  of  these  again  into  syllogisms ;  the 
end  or  last  sum  is  called  the  conclusion ;  and  the 
thought  of  the  mind  by  it  signified,  is  that  con- 
ditional knowledge,  or  knowledge  of  the  conse- 
quence of  words,  which  is  commonly  called  science,  scicoce. 
But  if  the  first  ground  of  such  discourse,  be  not 
definitions;  or  if  the  definitions  be  not  rightly 
joined  together  into  syllogisms,  then  the  end  or 
conclusion,  is  again  opinion,  namely  of  the  truth  opiaion 
of  somewhat  said,  though  sometimes  in  absurd  and 
senseless  words,  without  possibility  of  being  under- 
stood. When  two,  or  more  men,  know  of  one  ana] 
the  same  fact,  they  are  said  to  be  conscious  of  it 
one  to  another ;  which  is  as  much  as  to  know  it^ 
together.  And  because  such  are  fittest  witnesses  of 
the  facts  of  one  another,  or  of  a  third ;  it  was,  and 
ever  will  be  reputed  a  very  evil  act,  for  any  man 
to  speak  against  his  conscience :  or  to  corrupt  or 
force  another  so  to  do :  insomuch  that  the  plea  of 
conscience,  has  been  always  hearkened  unto  very 
diligently  in  all  times.  Afterwards,  men  made  use 
of  the  same  word  ^metapb^P?^!:^  f^^  *^^  know- 
ledge of  their  own  secret  facts,  and  secret  thoughts ; 
and  therefore  it  is  rhetorically  said,  that  the  con- 
science is  a  thousaiid  witnesses.  And  last  of  all, 
men,  vehemently  in  love  with  their  own  new  opi- 
nions, though  never  so  absurd,  and  obstinately 
bent  to  maintain  them,  gave  those  their  opinions  1 
also  thatfreverenced  name  of  conscience/  as  if  they 
would  have  it  seem  unlawful,  to  change  or  speak 
against  them ;  and  so  pretend  to  know  they  are 
true,  when  they  know  at  most,  but  that  they 
think  so.  ^ 

When  a  man's  discourse  beginneth  not  at  defini 


^7) 


Digitized  by 


Google 


54 


OP  man:. 


PART  I. 

7. 


-// 


tions,  it  beginneth  either  at  some  other  contempla* 
tion  of  his  own,  and  then  it  is  still  called  opinion ; 
or  it  beginneth  at  some  saying  of  another,  of  whose 
ability  to  know  the  tnith,  and  of  whose  honesty  in 
not  deceiving,  he  doubteth  not ;  and  then  the  dis- 
course is  not  so  much  concerning  the  thmg,  as  the 
Bciie£  person;  and  the  resolution  is  called'BEi^^and 
Faiih.  PAITH  i  fttithy  tfi  the  man ;  beliefs  both  of  the  man, 
and  of  the  truth  of  what  he  says^  So  that  in  be- 
lief are  two  opinions ;  one  of  the  saying  of  the 
man ;  the  other  of  his  virtue.  To  have  faith  in, 
or  trust  to,  or  believe  a  man,  signify  the  same  thing ; 
namely,  an  opinion  of  the  veracity  of  the  man  T 
but  to  believe  what  is  said^  signifieth  only  an  opi- 
nion of  the  truth  of  the  saying.  But  we  are  to  ob- 
serve that  this  phrase,  /  believe  in ;  as  also  the 
Latin,  credo  in  ;  and  the  Greek,  m^kpia  ac,  are  never 
used  but  in  the  writings  of  divines.  Instead  of 
them,  in  other  writings  are  put,  /  believe  him  ;  I 
trust  him  ;^  I  have  faiih  in  him  ;  I  rely  on  him  : 
and  in  Latin,  credo  illi :  fido  illi :  and  in  Greek, 
m^iviD  avTu) :  and  that  this  singularity  of  the  eccle- 
siastic use  of  the  word  hath  raised  many  dis- 
putes about  the  right  object  of  the  Christian  faith. 
But  by  believing  in,  as  it  is  in  the  creed,  is 
meant,  not  trust  in  the  person ;  but  confession 
and  acknowledgment  of  the  doctrine.  For  not 
only  Christians,  but  all  manner  of  men  do  so  be- 
lieve in  Gody  as  to  hold  all  for  truth  they  hear  him 
say,  whether  they  understand  it,  or  not ;  which  is 
all  the  faith  and  trust  can  possibly  be  had  in  any 
person  whatsoever  :  but  they  do  not  all  believe  the 
doctrine  of  the  creed. 
From  whence  we  may  infer,  that  when  we  believe 


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


OP  THE  ENDS  OF  DISCOURSE.  55 

any  saying  whatsoever  it  be,  to  be  true,  from  argu-    part  i. 
ments  taken^  not  from  the  thing  itself,  or  from  the   ^     ^    ^ 
principles  of  natural  reason,  bnt  from  the  authority,  ^«^ 
and  good  opinion  we  have,  of  him  that  hath  said 
it ;  then  is  the  speaker,  or  person  we  believe  in,  or 
trust  in,  and  whose  word  we  take,  the  object  of  our 
faith  ;  and  the  honour  done  in  believing,  is  done  to 
him  only.    And  consequently,  when  we  believe 
that  the  Scriptures  are  the  word  of  God,  having  no 
immediate  revelation  from  God  himself,  our  belief, 
faith,  andSnistTs  in  the  cnurcii ;)  whose  word  we 
take,  and  acquiesce  therein.    And  they  that  believe 
that  which  a  prophet  relates  unto  them  in  the 
name  of  God,  take  the  word  of  the  prophet,  do 
honour  to  him,  and  in  him  trust,  and  believe,  touch- 
ing the  truth  of  what  he  relateth,  whether  he  be  a 
true,  or  a  false  prophet.     And  so  it  is  also  with  all 
other  history.    For  if  I  should  not  believe  all  that 
is  written  by  historians,  of  the  glorious  acts  of 
Alexander y  or  desar  ;  I  do  not  think  the  ghost  of 
Alexander,  or  Ccesar,  had  any  just  cause  to  be   , 
offended ;  or  any  body  else,  but  the  historian.     If 
Livy  say  the  Gods  made  once  a  cow  speak,  and 
we  believe  it  not ;  we  distrust  not  God  therein,  but 
Livy.     So  that  it  is  evident,  that  whatsoever  we 
believe,  upon  no  other  reason,  than  what  is  drawn 
from  authority  of  men  only,  and  their  writings ; 
whether  they  be  sent  from  God  or  not,  is  faith  in 
men  only. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


56 


OF  MAN. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

0!?  THE  VIRTUES  COMMONLT  CALLED  INTELLEC- 
TUAL ;   AND  THEIR  CONTRARY   DEFECTS. 


Wit,  natural, 
or  acquired. 


PART  I.  (ViRTUEXgenerally,  in  all  sorts  of  subjects,  is  some- 

_  ^;  _^    what  that  is  valued  for  eminence ;  and  consisteth 

Intellectual     in  compaiison.    For  if  all  things  were  equal  in  all 

*  men,  nothing  would  be  prized.    And  by  virtues 

intellectual^  are  always  imderstood  such  abilities 

of  the  mind^  as  men  praise,  value,  and  desire  should 

be  in  themselves;  and  go  commonly  under  the 

name  of  a  good  wit ;  though  the  same  word  wit, 

be  used  also,  to  distinguish  one  certain  ability  from 

the  rest. 

These  virtues  are  of  two  sorts ;  natural^  and 
acquired.  By  natural,  I  mean  not,  that  which  a 
man  hath  from  his  birth  :  for  that  is  nothing  else 
but  sense ;  wherein  men  diflfer  -so  little  one  from 
another,  and  from  brute  beasts,  as  it  is  not  to  be 
reckoned  amongst  Adrtues.  But  I  mean,  that  wit^ 
which  is  gotten  by  use  only,  and  experience ;  with- 
out method,  culture,  or  instruction.  This  natural 
WIT,  consisteth  principally  in  two  things ;  celerity 
of  imagining  jthat  is,  swift  succession  of  one  thought 
to  another ;  and  steady  direction  to  some  approved 
end.  On  the  contrary  a  slow  imagination,  maketh 
that  defect,  or  fault  of  the  mind,  which  is  commonly 
called  DVLLT^BSSyStupidity^axid  sometimes  by  other 
names  that  signify  slowness  of  motion,  or  difficulty 
to  be  moved. 


Natural  wit 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTELLECTUAL  VIRTUES.  57 

And  this  diflference  of  quickness^  is  caused  by    part  i. 
the  diflference  of  men's  passions ;  that  love  and  dis-        \*    . 
like,  some  one  thing,  some  another :  and  therefore 
some  men's  thoughts  run  one  way,  some  another ; 
and  are  held  to,  and  observe  differently  the  things 
that  pass  through  their  imagination.    And  where- 
as in  this  successiqu  of  men's  thoughts,  there  is 
nothing  to  observe  in  the  things  they  think  on, 
but  either  in  what  they  be  like  one  another,  or  in 
what  they  be  unlike,  or  what  they  serve  for,  or  ^ 
how  they  serve  to  such  a  purpose  ;  those  that  ob-  ^ 
serve  their  similitudes,  in  case  they  be  such  as  are 
but  rarely  observed  by  others,  are  said  to  have  a 
good  wit ;  by  which,  in  this  occasion,  is  meant  a  G<»d  wit, 
good  fancy.  But  they  that  observe  their^diflferences, 
and  dissimilitudes ;  which  is  called  distinguishing, 
and  discerning,  and  judging  between  thing  and 
thing;  in  case,  such  discerning  be  not  easy,  are 
said  to  have  a  good  judgment :  and  particularly  9^  ^^^ 
in  matter  of  conversation  and  business ;  wherein, 
times,  places,  and  persons  are  to  be  discerned,  this 
virtue  is  called  discretion.     The  former,  that  is,  ^»«^"^«°- 
fancy,  without  the  help  of  judgment,  is  not  com- 
mended as  a  virtue :  but  the  latter  which  is  judg- 
ment, and  discretion,  is  commended  for  itself,  with- 
out the  help  of  fancy.     Besides  the  discretion  of 
times,  places,  and  persons,  necessary  to  a  good 
fancy,  there  is  required  also  an  often  application  of 
his  thoughts  to  their  end ;  that  is  to  say,  to  some 
use  to  be  made  of  them.     This  done  ;  he  that  hath 
this  virtue,  will  be  easily  fitted  with  similitudes, 
that  will  please,  not  only  by  illustrations  of  his  dis- 
course, and  adorning  it  with  new  and  apt  metaphors; 
but  also,  by  the  rarity  of  their  invention.     But 
without  steadiness,  and  direction  to  some  end,  a 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


58 


OF  MAN. 


^^ 


great  £Emcy  is  one  kind  of  madness)  such  as  they 
have^  that  entering  into  any  discourse,  are  snatched 
Discretion,  from  their  purposc,  by  every  thing  that  comes  in 
their  thought,  into  so  many,  and  so  long  digressions^ 
and  parentheses,  t^at  they  utterlyflose  themselves : 
which  kind  of  folly,i  I  know  no  particular  name  for : 
but  the  cause  of  it  is,  sometiipes  want  of  experi^ 
ence ;  whereby  that  seemeth  to  a  man  new  and 
rare,  which  doth  not  so  to  others:  sometimes 
pusillanimity  ;  by  which  that  seems  great  to  him, 
which  other  men  think  a  trifle :  and  whatsoever  is 
new,  or  great,  and  therefore  thought  fit  to  be  told, 
withdraws  a  man  by  degrees  from  the  intended  way 
of  his  discourse>v 

In  a  goodfpoem^hether  it  be  epiCy  or  dramatic  ; 
as  also  in  sonnets,  epigrams,  and  other  pieces, 
both  judgment  and  fancy  are  required :  but  the 
fancy  must  be  more  eminent ;  because  they  please 
for  the  extravagancy ;  but  ought  not  to  displease 
by  indiscretion.^,. — . 

In  a  good  history)  the  judgment  must  be  emi- 
nent ;  because  the  goodness  consisteth,  in  the  me-^ 
thod,  in  the  truth,  and  in  the  choice  of  the  actions 
that  are  most  profitable  to  be  known.  Fancy  has 
no  place,  but  only  in  adorning  the  style. 

In  orations  of  praise,  and  in  invectives,  the  fancy 
is  predominant;  because  the  design  is  not  truth, 
but  to  honour  or  dishonour;  which  is  done  by 
noble,  or  by  vile  comparisons.  The  judgment  does 
but  surest  what  circumstances  make  an  action 
laudable,  or  culpable. 

In  hortatives,  and  pleadings,  as  truth,  or  disguise 
serveth  best  to  the  design  in  hand ;  so  is  the  judg-«> 
ment,  or  the  fancy  most  required. 

In  demonstration,  in  counsel,  and  all  rigorous 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


INTELLECTUAL  VIRTUES.  59 

seardi  of  truths  judgment  does  all,  except  some-    part  i. 
times  the  understanding  have  need  to  be  opened  by   ^^' 
some  apt  ^similitudej^  and  thfijUhere  is  so  much  use  Dmcw^oiu 
of  feincy.     But  fofmetaphoreJ[they  are  in  this  case     f   ]  / 
utterly  excluded,     rbr  seeing  they  openly  profess 
deceit ;  to  admit  them  into  counsel,  or  reasoning, 
were  manifest  folly. 

And  in  any  discourse  whatsoever,  if  the  defect  of 
discretion  be  apparent,  how  extravagant  soever  the 
fancy  be,  the  whole  discourse  will  be  taken  for  a 
sign  of  want  of  wit ;  and  so  will  it  never  when  the 
discretion  is  manifest,  though  the  fancy  be  never 
so  ordinary. 

The  secret  thoughts  of  a  man  run  over  all  things, 
holy,  profane,  clean,  obscene,  grave,  and  light,  with- 
out shame,  or  blame  ;  which  verbal  discourse  can- 
not do,  farther  than  the  judgment  shall  approve  of 
the  time,  place,  and  persons.  An  anatomist,  or  a 
physician  may  speak,  or  write  his  judgment  of  un- 
clean things  ;  because  it  is  not  to  please,  but  profit : 
but  for  another  man  to  write  his  extravagant,  and 
pleasant  fiancies  of  the  same,  is  ^^  if  a  man,  from 
being  tumbled  into  the  dirt,  should  come  and  pre- 
sent himself  before  good  company.  And  it  is  the 
want  of  discretion^  that  makes  the  diflPerence. 
Again,  in  professed  remissness  of  mind,  and  familiar 
company,  a  man  may  play  with  the  sounds,  and  ^;  f 
equivocal  significations  of  l?yords  ;  and  that  many 
Smes  with  encounters  of  extraordinary  fancy :  but 
in  a  sermon,  or  in  public,  or  before  persons  un- 
known^ or  whom  we  ought  to  reverence  ;  there  is 
no  gingling  of  words  that  will  not  be  accounted 
folly :  and  the  difference  is  only  in  the  want  of 
discretion.     So  that  where  wit  is  wanting,  it  is  not 


Digitized  by 


Google 


60  OF  MAN. 

PAUT  1.    fancy  that  is  wanting,  but  discretion.    Judgment 
.     ^;     .   therefore  without  fancy  is  wit,  but  fancy  without 
judgment,  not. 

When  the  thoughts  of  a  man,  that  has  a  design 
in  hand,  running  over  a  multitude  of  things,  ob- 
serves how  they  conduce  to  that  design ;  or  what 
design  they  may  conduce  unto;  if  his  observations 
be  such  as  are  not  easy,  or  usual,  this  wit  of  his  is 
Prudence,  called  PRUDENCE;  and  depends  oumuch  experience, 
and  memory  of  the  like  things,  and  their  conse- 
quences heretofore.  In  which  there  is  not  so  much 
difference  of  men ;  as  there  is  in  their  fancies  and 
judgment ;  because  the  experience  of  men  equal  in 
age,  is  not  much  unequal,  as  to  the  quantity ;  but 
lies  in  different  occasions;  every  one  having  his 
\-  private  desigM^  JTo  govern  well  a  family,  and  a 
'-^  )H| kingdom,  are  not  different  degrees  of  prudence; 
but  different  sorts  of  business;  no  more  than  to 
draw  a  picture  in  little,  or  as  great,  or  greater  than 
the  life,  are  different  degrees  of  art.  A  plain  hus- 
bandman is  more  prudent  in  affairs  of  his  own 
house,  than  a  privy-councillor  in  the  affairs  of  ano- 
ther man. 

To  prudence,  if  you  add  the  use  of  unjust,  or 
dishonest  means,  such  as  usually  are  prompted  to 
men  by  fear,  or  want ;  you  have  that  crooked  wis- 
Craft.  dom,  which  is  called  craft  ;  which  is  a  sign  of  pu- 
sillanimity. For  magnanimity  is  contempt  of  un- 
just, or  dishonest  helps.  And  that  which  the  Latins 
call  versutiay  translated  into  .  English,  shifting^ 
jmd  is  a  putting  off  of  a  present  danger  or  incom- 
modity,  by  engaging  into  a  greater,  as  when  a  man 
robs  one  to  pay  another,  is  but  a  shorter-sighted 
craft,  called  versutia,  from  versura,  which  signifies 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTELLECTUAL  VIRTUES.  61 

taking  money  at  usury  for  the  present  payment  of 
interest. 

As  for  acquired  wit,  I  mean  acquired  by  method  Acquired  wit. 
and  instruction,  there  ig^umfiimj^eason ;  which  is 
grounded  on  therighlS^^^seof  speech^  andproduceth 
the  sciences.     But  of  reiSoE-ancl  science  I  have 
already  spoken,  in  the  fifth  and  sixth  chapters. 

The  causes  of  this  difference  of  wits,  are  in  the 
{Mssi^s ;  and  the  difference  of  passions  proceedeth, 
"partly  from  the  different  constitution  of  the  body, 
and  partly  from  different  education.  For  if  the 
difference  proceeded  from  the  temper  of  the  brain, 
and  the  organs  of  sense,  either  exterior  or  interior, 
there  would  be  no  less  difference  of  men  in  their 
sight,  hearing,  or  other  senses,  than  in  their  fancies 
and  discretions.  It  proceeds  therefore  from  the 
passions ;  which  are  different,  not  only  from  the 
difference  of  mens'  complexions;  but  also  from  their 
difference  of  customs,  and  education. 

The  passions  that  most  of  all  cause  the  difference 
of  wit,  are  principally,  the  more  or  less  desire  of 
power,  of  riches,  of  knowledge,  and  of  honour. 
All  which  may  be  reduced  to  the  first,  that  is,  d^kfi 
of  power.  For  riches,  knowledge,  and  honour,  are  ' 
but  several  sorts  of  power. 

And  therefore,  a  man  who  has  no  great  passion 
for  any  of  these  things  ;  but  is,  as  men  term  it,  in- 
different ;  though  he  may  be  so  far  a  good  man,  as 
to  be  free  from  giving  offence ;  yet  he  cannot  pos- 
sibly have  either  a  great  fancy,  or  much  judgment. 
For  the  thoughts  are  to  the  desires,  as  scouts,,' 
and  spies,  to  range  abroad,  and  find  the  way  to  the 
things  desired :  cdl  steadiness  of  the  mind's  motion, ' 
and  all  quickness  of  the  same,  proceeding  from 


Digitized  by 


Google 


62 


OP  MAN. 


PART  I. 

8. 

.  Oiddiness. 


Madnesa. 


thence :  for  as  to  have  no  desire,  is  to  be  dead  :  so 
to  have  weak  passions,  is  dullness ;  and  to  have  pas- 
sions indiflferently  for  everything,  giddiness,  and 
distraction  ;  and  to  have  stronger  and  more  vehe- 
ment passions  for  anything,  than  i^^prdinaiily  seen 
in  others,  is  that  which  men  callTMADNESS?)  c  % 

Whereof  there  be  almost  as  many-kindSTas  of  the 
passions  themselves.  Sometimes  the  extraordinary 
and  extravagant  passion,  proceedeth  from  the  evil 
constitution  of  the  organs  of  the  body,  or  harm 
done  them ;  and  sometimes  the  hurt,  and  indispo- 
sition of  the  organs,  is  caused  by  the  vehemence,  or 
long  continuance  of  the  passion.  But  in  both  cases 
the  Qiadness  is  of  one  and  the  same  nature. 

The  passion,  whose  violence,  or  continuance, 
maketh  madness,  is  either  great  vain-glory  ;  which 
is  commonly  called  jpriVfe,  and  self-conceit ;  or  great 
dejection  of  mind. 

Pride,  subjecteth  a  man  to  anger,  the  excess 
whereof,  is  the  madness  called  rage  and  fury. 
And  thus  it  comes  to  pass  that  excessive  desire  of 
revenge,  when  it  becomes  habitual,  hurteth  the  or- 
gans, and  becomes  rage :  that  excessive  love,  with 
jealousy,  becomes  also  rage :  excessive  opinion  of 
a  man's  own  self,  for  divine  inspiration,  for  wisdom, 
learning,  form  and  the  like,  becomes  distraction 
and  giddiness :  the  same,  joined  with  envy,  rage : 
vehement  opinion  of  the  truth  of  anything,  contra-, 
dieted  by  others,  rage. 

Dejection  subjects  a  man  to  causeless  fears ;  which 

Melancholy,  is  a  maducss,   commouly  called  melancholy  ; 

apparent  also  in  divers  manners ;  as  in  haunting 

of  solitudes  and  graves ;  in  superstitious  behaviour ; 

and  in  fearing,  some  one,  some  another  particular 


Rage. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTELLECTUAL  VIRTUES.  63 

thing.  In  sum,  all  passions  that  produce  strange  part  i. 
and  unusual  behaviour,  are  called  by  the  general  /.  _  ^;  ^ 
name  of  madness*    But  of  the  several  kinds  of  j  Madness. ; 

madness,  he  that  would  take  the  pains,  might  enrol    ^ 

a  l^on.  And  if  the  excesses  be  madness,  there 
is  no  doubt  but  the  passions  themselves,  when 
they  tend  to  evil,  are  degrees  of  the  same. 

For  example,  though  the  effect  of  folly,  in  them 
that  are  possessed  of  an  opinion  of  being  inspired, 
be  not  visible  always  in  one  man,  by  any  very  extra- 
vagant action,  that  proceedeth  from  such  passion  ; 
yet,  when  many  of  them  conspire  together,  the  rage 
of  the  whole  multitude  is  visible  enough.      For 
what  argument  of  madness  can  there  be  greater, 
than  to  clamour,  strike,  and  throw  stones  at  our 
best  friends  ?    Yet  this  is  somewhat  less  than  such 
a  multitude  will  do.    For  they  will  clamour,  fight 
against,  and  destroy  those,  by  whom  all  their  life- 
time before,  they  have  been  protected,  and  secured 
from  injury.     And  if  this  be  madness  in  the  mul- 
titude, it  is  the  same  in  every  particular  man.    For 
afe  in  the  midst  of  the  sea,  though  a  man  perceive 
no  sound  of  that  part  of  the  water  next  him,  yet  he 
is  well  assured,  that  part  contributes  as  much  to  the 
roaring  of  the  sea,  as  any  other  part  of  the  same 
quantity;  so  also,  though  we  perceive  no  great 
unquietness  in  one  or  two  men,  yet  we  may  be 
well  assured,  that  their  singular  passions^  are  parts 
of;the  seditious  roaring  of  a  troubled  natioii,.    And 
if  ^lere  wereliothing  else  fhat  bewrayed  their  mad- 
ness ;  yet  that  very  arrogating  such  inspiration  to 
themselves,  is  argument  enough.     If  some  man  in 
Bedlam  should  entertain  you  with  sober  discourse  ; 
and  you  desire  in  taking  leave,  to  know  what  he 


Digitized  by 


Google 


64  OF  MAN. 

PART  I.    were,  that  you  might  another  time  requite  his 
, — ^ —    civility ;  and  he  should  tell  you,  he  wer/Cod  the 
Madness.    Father  '^  I  think  you  need  expect  no  extravagant 
action  for  argument  of  his  madness. 

This  opinion  of  inspiration,  called  commonly, 
private  spirit,  begins  very  often,  from  some  lucky 
finding  of  an  error  generally  held  by  others ;  and 
not  knowing,  or  not  remembering,  by  what  conduct 
of  reason,  they  came  to  so  singular  a  truth,  (as  they 
think  it,  though  it  be  many  times  an  imtruth  they 
light  on)  they  presently  admire  themselves,  as  being 
in  the  special  grace  of  God  Almighty,  who  hath 
revealed  the  same  to  them  supematm^y,  by  his 
Spirit. 

Again,  that  madness  is  nothing  else,  but  too 
much  appearing  passion,  may  be  gathered  out  of 
the  effects  of  wine,  which  are  the  same  with  those 
of  the  evil  disposition  of  the  organs.  For  the  va- 
riety of  behaviour  in  men  that  have  drunk  toa 
much,  is  the  same  with  that  of  madmen :  some  of 
them  raging,  others  loving,  others  laughing,  all 
extravagantly,  but  according  to  their  several  domi- 
neering passions :  for  the  effect  of  the  wine,  does 
but  remove  dissimulation,  and  take  from  them  the 
sight  of  the  deformity  of  their  passions.  For,  I 
believe,  the  most  sober  men,  when  they  walk  alone 
without  care  and  employment  of  the  mind,  would 
be  unwilling  the  vanity  and  extravagance  of  their 
thoughts  at  that  time  should  be  publicly  seen; 
which  is  a  confession,  that  passions  unguided,  are 
for  the  most  part  mere  madness. 

The  opinions  of  the  world,  both  in  ancient  and 
later  ages,  concerning  the  cause  of  madness,  have 
been  two.     Some  deriving  them  from  the  passions ; 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTELLECTUAL  VIRTUES. 


65 


PART  I. 

8. 


aoine^  from  demons^  or  spirits,  either  good  or  bad, 
which  they  thought  might  enter  into  a  man,  possess 
him,  and  move  his  organs  in  such  strange  and  un-  Madness 
couth  manner,  as  madmen  use  to  do.  The  former 
sort  therefore,  called  such  mai,  madmen :  but  the 
latter,  called  them  sometimes  demoniaea^  that  is, 
possessed  with  spirits ;  sometimes  enurgumeni^  that 
18,  agitated  or  moved  with  spirits ;  and  now  in 
Italy  they  are  called,  not  only  jpasasi,  madm^i ;  but 
also  spiritatiy  men  possessed. 

There  was  once  a  great  conflux  of  people  in 
Abdera,  a  city  of  the  Greeks,  at  the  acting  of  the 
tragedy  of  Andromeda^  upon  an  extreme  hot  day ; 
whereupon,  a  great  many  of  the  spectators  falling 
into  fevers,  had  this  accident  from  the  heat,  and 
from  the  tragedy  together,  that  they  did  nothing 
but  pronounce  iambics,  with  the  names  of  Perseus 
and  Andromeda ;  which,  together  with  the  fever, 
was  cored  by  the  coming  on  of  winter ;  and  this 
madness  was  tiiought  to  proceed  from  the  j^assion 
imprinted  bxthe  tragedy.  Likewise  there  reigned 
a  fit^ofToadness  in  another  Grecian  city,  which 
seized  only  the  young  maidens ;  and  caused  many 
of  them  to  hang  themselves.  This  was  by  most 
then  thought  an  act  of  the  Devil.  But  one  that 
suspected,  that  contempt  of  life  in  them,  might 
proceed  from  some  passion  of  the  mind,  and  sup- 
posing that  they  did  not  contemn  also  their  honour, 
gave  Goui»sel  to  the  magistrates,  to  strip  such  as 
so  hanged  themselves,  and  let  them  hang  out  naked. 
Hiis,  the  story  says,  cured  that  madness.  But  on 
the  other  side,  the  same  Grecians,  did  often  ascribe 
madness  to  the  operation  of  Eumenides,  or  Furies ; 
and  sometimes  of  Ceres,  Phoebus,  and  other  gods ; 

VOL.  III.  F 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^6  OF  MAN. 

^ART  I.  50  much  did  men  attribute  to  phantasms,  as  to  think 
.  ^  .  them  aereal  living  bodies;  and  generally  to  call 
Madness,  them  spirfts.  And  as  the  Romans  in  this,  held  the 
same  opinion  with  the  Greeks,  so  also  did  the  Jews; 
for  they  called  madmen  prophets,  or,  according  as 
they  thought  the  spirits  good  or  bad,  demoniacs : 
and  some  of  them  called  both  prophets  and  demo- 
niacs, madmen ;  and  some  called  the  same  man  both 
demoniac,  and  madman.  But  for  the  Gentiles  it  is 
no  wonder,  because  diseases  and  health,  vices  and 
virtues,  and  many  natural  accidents,  were  with 
them  termed,  and  worshipped  as  demons.  So  that 
a  man  was  to  imderstand  by  demon,  as  well,  some- 
times an  ague,  as  a  devil.  But  for  the  Jews  to  have 
such  opinion,  is  somewhat  strange.  For  neither 
Moses  nor  Abraham  pretended  to  prophecy  by  pos- 
session of  a  spirit ;  but  from  the  voice  of  God ; 
or  by  a  vision  or  dream:  nor  is  there  anything 
in  his  law,  moral  or  ceremonial,  by  which  they 
were  taught,  there  was  any  such  entlipsiasm,  or  any 
possession.  When  God  is  said,  (Numh.  xi.  2b)  to 
to  take  from  the  spirit  that  was  in  Moses,  and  give 
to  the  seventy  elders,  the  Spirit  of  God  (taking  it 
for  the  substance  of  God)  is  not  divided.  The 
Scriptures,  by  the  Spirit  of  God  in  man,  mean  a 
man's  spirit,  inclined  to  godliness.  And  where  it  is 
said,  (Exod.  xxiii.  8)  '^  whom  I  have  filled  with  the 
spirit  of  wisdom  to  make  garments  for  Aaron,^" 
is  not  meant  a  spirit  put  into  them,  that  can  make 
garments,  but  the  wisdom  of  their  own  spirits 
in  that  kind  of  work.  In  the  like  sense,  the  spirit 
of  man,  w^hen  it  produceth  unclean  actions,  is  ordi- 
narily called  an  unclean  spirit,  and  so  other  spirits, 
though  not  always,  yet  as  often  as  the  virtue  or  vice 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTELLECTUAL  VIRTUES.  67 

SO  styled,  is  extraordinary,  and  eminent*     Neither    part  i. 
did  the  other  prophets  of  the  old  Testament  pre-    ._  ^;     . 
tend  enthusiasm ;  or,  that  God  spake  in  them ;  but    Madness. 
to  them,   by  voice,  vision,    or  dream ;    and  the 
burthen  of  the  Lord  was  not  possession,  but  com- 
mand.    IHowthett  "Coifld  the  Jews  fall  into  this 
opinion  of  possession?  I  can  imagine  no  reason,  but 
that  which  is  common  to  all  men ;  namely,  the  want 
of  curiosity  to  search  natural  causes:  and  their 
placing  felicity  in  the  acquisition  of  the  gross  plea- 
sures of  the  senses,  and  the  things  that  most  im- 
mediately conduce  thereto.     For  they  that  see  any 
strange,  and  unusual  ability,  or  defect,  in  a  man's 
mind ;  unless  they  see  withal,  from  what  cause  it 
may  probably  proceed,  can  hardly  think  it  natural ; 
and  if  not  natural,  they  must  needs  think  it  super- 
natural ;  and  then  what  can  it  be,  but  that  either 
God  or  the  Devil  is  in  him  ?    And  hence  it  came 
to  pass,  when  our  Saviour  {Mark  iii.  21)   was 
compassed  about  with  the  multitude,  those  of  the 
house  doubted  he  was  mad,  and  went  out  to  hold 
him :  but  the  Scribes  said  he  had  Beelzebub,  and 
that  was  it,  by  which  he  cast  out  devils ;  as  if  the 
greater  madman  had  awed  the  lesser:  and  that 
{John  X.  20)  some  said,  he  hath  a  devil,  and  is  mad; 
whereas  others  holding  him  for  a  prophet,  said, 
these  are  not  the  words  of  one  that  hath  a  devil. 
So  in  the  old  Testament  he  that  came  to  anoint 
Jehu,  (2  Kings  ix.  11)  was  a  prophet ;  but  some  of 
the  company  asked  Jehu,  what  came  that  fnadman 
for?  So  that  in  sum,  it  is  manifest,  that  whosoever  . 
behaved  himself   in  extraordinary  manner,    was 
thought  by  the  Jews  to  be  possessed  either  with  a  , 
good,  or  evil  spirit ;  except  by  the  Sadducees,  who 

F  2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


grji-KJ','  P 


68  OP  MAN. 

PART  I.    erred  so  far  on  the  other  hand,  as  not  to  believe 
,     ^      .    there  were  at  all  Miy  ^irits,  which  is  very  near  to 
Madness,     direct  athcism ;  and  thereby  perhaps  the  more  pro- 
voked others,  to  term  such  men  demoniacs,  rather 
than  madmen. 

But  why  then  does  our  Saviour  proceed  in  the 
curing  of  them,  as  if  they  were  possessed  ;  and  not 
as  if  they  were  mad  ?  To  which  I  can  give  no 
other  kind  of  answer,  but  that  which  is  given  to 
those  that  urge  the  Scripture  in  like  manner  against 
the  opinion  of  the  motion  of  the  earth.  The  Scrip- 
i}\  jlfr^e  was  written  to  shew  unto  men  the  kingfem 
TofUod,  and  to  prepare  their  minds  to  become  his 
obedient  subjects  ;  leaving  the  world,  and  the  phi- 
losophy thereof,  to  the  disputation  of  men,  for  the 
exercising  of  their  natural  reason.  Whether  the 
earth's,  or  sun's  motion  make  the  day,  and  night ; 
or  whether  the  exorbitant  actions  of  men,  proceed 
from  passion,  or  from  the  devil,  so  we  worship  him 
not,  it  is  ail  one,  as  to  our  obedience,  and  subjec- 
f  tipn  to  God  Almighty ;  which  is  the  thing  for  which 
[the  Scripture  was  written.  As  for  that  our  Saviour 
speaketh  to  the  disease,  as  to  a  person ;  it  is  the 
usual  phrase  of  all  that  cure  by  words  only,  as 
Christ  did,  and  enchanters  pretend  to  do,  whether 
they  speak  to  a  devil  or  not.  For  is  not  Christ  also 
said  {Matt.  viii.  26)  to  have  rebuked  the  winds  ? 
Is  not  he  said  also  {Luke  iv.  39)  to  rebuke  a  fever  ? 
Yet  this  does  not  argue  that  a  fever  is  a  devil. 
And  whereas  many  of  the  devils  are  said  to  confess 
Christ ;  it  is  not  necessary  to  interpret  those  places 
otherwise,  than  that  those  madmen  confessed  him. 
And  whereas  our  Saviour  {Matt.  xii.  43)  speaketh 
of  an  unclean  spirit,  that  having  gone  out  of  a  man. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTELLECTUAL  VIRTUES.  69 

wandereth  through  dry  places^  seekmg  rest,  and    part  i. 
finding  none,  and  retummg  into  the  same  man,    .     ^;     . 
with  seven^bsfi^^irits  worse  than  himself;  it  is 
manifest^]^^^M'ab^  alludictg  to  a  man,  that  after 
a  little  endeavour  toquit  his  lusts,  is  vanquished  by 
the  strength  of  them ;  and  becomes  seven  times 
worse  than  he  was.     So  that  I  see  nothing  at  all  in 
the  Scripture,  that  requireth  a  belief,  that  demo-       .--. 
niacs  were  any  other  thing  but  madmen.  ^^  \^ 

There  is  yet  another  fault  in  the  discourses  idf imignificaut// ,  .\ 
some  men ;  which  may  also  be  numbered  amongSF?^!!.* 
the  sorts  of  madness ;  namely,  that  k^yii^f^jords,  >   %;^. 
whereof  I  have  spoken  before  in  tlie  tirtn  chapter,     , 
by  the  name  of  absurdity.     And  that  is,  when  men 
speak  such  words,  as  put  together,  have  in  them  no 
^gnification  at  all ;  but  are  fallen  upon  by  some,^ 
through^misunderstanding  of  the  words  they  have 
received,  and  repeat  by  rote  ;  by  others  from  inten-  ; 
tion  to  dec^ve  by  obscurity.    And  this  is  incident/ 
to  none  but  those,  that  converse  in  questions  o^  y> 
matters  incomprehensible,  as  the  School-men ;  or  inj 
questions  of  abstruse  philosophy.     The  commoii 
sort  of  men  seldom  speak  insignificantly,  and  are 
therefore,  by  those  other  egregious  persons  oounted 
idiots.     But  to  be  assured  their  words  are  without 
any  thing  corresp^i^ident  to~t^em  in  the  mind,  there 
would  need  some  examples ;  which  if  any  man  re- 
quire, let  him  take  a  School-man  in  his  hands  and 
see  if  he  can  translate  any  one  chapter  concerning 
any  difficult  point,  as  the  Trinity ;  the  Deity ;  the 
nature  of  Christ;  transubstantiation ;  free-will,  &c. 
into  any  of  the  modem  tongues,  so  as  to  make  the 
same  intelligible  ;  or  into  any  tolerable  Latin,  such 
as  they  were  acquainted  vdthal,  that  lived  when 


Digitized  by 


Google 


70  OF  MAN. 

PART  I.  the  Latin  tongue  was  vulgar.  What  is  the  meaning 
^  -f;  .  of  these  words,  The  first  cause  does  not  necessarily 
inngm^cmi  if^w  any  thing  into  the  second^  hy  force  of  the 
speec .  essential  subordination  of  the  second  causes^  hy 
which  it  may  help  it  to  work  ?  They  are  the  trans^ 
lation  of  the  title  of  the  sixth  chapter  of  Suarez' 
first  book,  Of  the  concourse^  motion^  and  helpof 
God.  When  men  write  whole  volumes  of  such 
stuflF,  are  they  not  mad,  or  intend  to  make  others 
so  ?  And  particularly,  in  the  question  of  transub- 
sta^ti^ttion  ;  where  after  certain  words  ^Slcen  ; 
they  that  say,  the  white»^^^,  roundw^*^,  magni^wrf^, 
quaU^y,  corruptibility,  all  which  are  incorporeal, &c. 
go  out  of  the  wafer,  into  the  body  of  our  blessed 
Saviour,  do  they  not  make  those  nesses,  tudesy  and 
tieSy  to  be  so  many  spirits  possessing  his  body? 
For  by  spirits,  they  mean  always  things,  that  being 
incorporeal,  are  nevertheless  moveable  from  one 
place  to  another.  So  that  this  kind  of  absurdity, 
may  rightly  be  numbered  amongst  the  many  sorts 
of  madness ;  and  all  the  time  that  guided  by  clear 
thoughts  of  their  worldly  lust,  they  forbear  dispu- 
ting, or  writing  thus,  but  lucid  intervals.  And 
thus  much  of  the  virtues  and  defects  intellectuaU 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SUBJECTS  OF  KNOWLEDGE. 


71 


CHAPTER  IX. 


OF  THE  SEVERAL  SUBJECTS  OF  KNOWLEDGE. 

There  are  of  knowledge  two  kinds;  whereof  one 
is  knowledge  of  fact :  the  other  knowledge  of  the 
consequence  of  one  affirmation  to  another.  The  K.iiowiedge. 
former  is  nothing  else,xbut  sense  and  memory,  and 
\s(jabsolute  knowledge^)  as  when  we  see  a  fact 
doing,  or  remember  it  done  :  and  this  is  the  know- 
ledge required  in  a  witness.  The  latter  is  called 
science  ;/and  is  conSiiional ;  as  when  we  know, 
TnS7"£/*  the  figure  shown  he  a  circle,  then  any 
straight  line  through  the  centre  shall  divide  it 
into  two  equal  parts.  And  this  is  the  knowledge 
required  in  a  philosopher ;  that  is  to  say,  of  him 
that  pretends  to  reasoning. 

The  register  of  knowledge  of  fact  is  called  his-      14^5.4^. . 
tory.     Whereof  there  be  two  sorts :  one  called'wa- 
tural  history ;  which  is  the  history  of  such  facts, 
or  eflfects  of  nature,  as  have  no  dependence  on     ,    ^  ^  , 
man's  will;  such  as  are  the  histories  of  metals, 
plants,  animals,  regions,  and  the  like.    The  other, 
is  civil  history  ;  which  is  the  history  of  the  volun-   ^ 
tary  actions  of  men  in  commonwealths. 

The  registers  of  science,  are  such  hoohs  as  con- 
tain the  demonstrations  of  consequences  of  one 
affirmation,  to  another ;  and  are  commonly  called 
hooks  of  philosophy^  whereof  the  sorts  are  many, 
Itccording  to  the  diversity  of  the  matter ;  and  may 
be  divided  in  such  manner  as  I  have  divided  them 
in  the  following  table. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


72 


TABLE  OF  THE  SEVERAL 


Consequences  from  the  accidents 
comnum  to  all  bodies  natural; 
which  are  quantity,  and  motion 


SCI  ENCE, 
that  is, 
Icnowledge 
of  conse- 
quences; 
which  is 
called  also 

PHILOSOPHY. 


from       the 
accidents  of 
bodies     na-# 
tural;  which' 

is  called  NA- 
TURAL PHI- 
LOSOPHY. 


Physics  or 
consequen- 
ces from 
qualitiei. 


Consequences 
j&om  the 
accidents  of 
politic  bo- 
dies; which' 
is  called  PO- 
LITICS, and 

CIVlL      PHI- 
LOSOPHY. 


^Consequences  from  the  quali- 
ties of  bodies  tnauienty  sudi 
as  sometimes  appear,  some- 
times vanish,  Meisorology  . 

Consequences 
from       the 

aualities   of 
le  8ian     . 

Consequences 
of  the  qua- 
lities from 
liquid  bo- 
dies, that  fill 
the  space  be- 
tween the 
stars;  such 
as  are  the 
airy  or  sub- 
stances ethe- 
real. 

Consequences 

fxom       the 

qualities   of 

bodie$     ter- 

\    rettrial. 


1.  Of  consequences  from  the  institution  of 
Commonwealths,  to  the  rights,  and  duties  of 
the  body  politic  or  sovereign, 

2.  Of  consequences  from  die  same,  to  the  duty 
and  right  of  the  subjecU. 


Consequences 
from       the 
qualities  of/ 
bodies   per-^ 

,   wanent. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SUBJECTS  OF  SCIBNCE.  73 

(Consequences  £rom  quantity,  and  motion  indeterminate;  which  (pbh^osophia 
beinj^  the  principles  or  first  foundation  of  philosophy,  is  called  -j 


PhiS}$ophia  Prima, 

'^  Consequences 
£rom  quan- 
tity, ana  mo- 
tion   deter- 


Donsequences 
from  motion  { 
and  quantity 
determineiL 


mined. 


By  Figure 


Mathematics, 


Consequences 
from  the  mo- 
tion, and 
quantity  of 
bodies      in 

.    special. 


3y  Number   .    . 

t^nsequences  from 
the  motion  and 
quantity  of  thelcoimography. 
mrealer  narts  off        "^   ^  ^ 
the  world,  as  the  I 
earth  and  start.  ) 

Consequences  from  I 
the    motions    oi\^^chanics. 
special       kinds, )  Doctrine  of  • 
and    figures    of      ^i>eight. 

.   body.  J 


Prima. 
GsoMETar. 

Abithbcxtic. 


^AsTaONOMY. 

I  Geography. 


'Science  of 

EflOINEBRS. 

Architecture 
^Navigation. 

Meteorology 


(Consequences  from  the  light  of  the  stars.    Out  of  this,  and  the  )  o^,^,  ^„„v 
motion  of  the  sun,  is  made  the  science  of     .  .J  »<^'^»a^«^- 

,1 


Consequences  from  the  influences  of  the  stars 


Astrology 


"ponsequences 
from       the 

^  parts  of  the. 

^  earth,  that 
are  without 


'Consequences  from  the  qualities  of  minerals^  as 
stenes^  metals,  &c. 


^Consequences  from  the  qualities  of  vegetables. 


^Consequences 
from  the 
qualities  of 
animals  in 
general. 


I  Consequences 
i   from       the/ 
[  qualities   of  \ 
\  anssnais. 


'  C<msequenceB  from  vision  .        .  Optics. 
Consequences  from  Mmncif  .        .  Music. 

Consequences  froin  the  rest  of 
ihe  senses. 

Consequences    from  the  passions  )  £-„  .-,5 
of  men     .  .  .         ) 


Co«seqae.<«    "^ZT^^^ 


from  the 
qualities  of 
men  in  spe^ 
cto/. 


from  speeckl 


vilifymgy  5jc. 
Jsk  periaadingy 
In  reasomnOy 
In  contracitngj 


[  Poetry. 

Rhetoric. 
Logic. 
The  Science 
of  Just  and 

Unjust. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


74  OF  MAN. 

CHAPTER  X. 

OP  POWER,  WORTH,  DIGNITY,  HONOUR,  AND 
WORTHINESS. 

The  POWER  of  a  mauy  to  take  it  universally,  is  his 
PART  1.    presnent  means ;  to  obtain  some  future  apparent 
>_J^=>.  good ;  and  is  either  original  or  instrumental. 
(^P^wer^      Natural  power,  is  the  eminence  of  the  faculties 
;  '     of  body,  or  mind :  as  extraordinary  strength,  form, 
prudence,  arts,  eloquence,  liberality,  nobility.    In- 
strumental are  those  powers,  which  acquired  by 
these,  or  by  fortune,  are  means  and  instruments  to 
acquire  more:  as  riches,  reputation,  friends,  and 
the  secret  working  of  God,  which  men  call  good 
luck.     For  the  nature  of  power,  is  in  this  point, 
like  to  fame,  increasing  as  it  proceeds  ;  or  like  the 
motion  of  heavy  bodies,  which  the  further  they  go, 
make  still  the  more  haste. 

The  greatest  of  human  powers,  is  that  which  is 
compoimded  of  the  powers  of  most  men,  imited  by 
consent,  in  one  person,  natural,  or  civil,  that  has 
the  use  of  all  their  powers  depending  on  his  vnll ; 
such  as  is  the  power  of  a  common-wealth  :  or  de- 
pending on  the  wills  of  each  particular  ;  such  as  is 
the  power  of  a  faction  or  of  divers  factions  leagued. 
Therefore  to  have  servants,  is  power;  to  have 
friends,  is  power  :  for  they  are  strengths  united. 

Also  riches  joined  with  liberality,  is  power ;  be- 
cause it  procureth  friends,  and  servants :  without 
liberality,  not  so  ;  because  in  this  case  they  defend 
not ;  but  expose  men  to  envy,  as  a  prey. 

Reputation  of  power,  is  power;  because  it  draweth 
with  it  the  adherence  of  those  that  need  protection. 
So  is  reputation  of  love  of  a  man's  country,  called 
popularity,  for  the  same  reason. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


OF  POWER,  WQRTH^  DIGNITY,  ETC.  75 

Also,  what  quality  soever  maketh  a  man  beloved,    part  i. 
or  feared  of  many ;  or  the  reputation  of  such  qua-    ^  ^^'    . 
lity,  is  power ;  because  it  is  a  means  to  have  the     Power. 
assistance,  and  service  of  many. 

Good  success  is  power ;  because  it  maketh  repu- 
tation of  wisdom,  or  good  fortune ;  which  ms^es 
men  either  fear  him,  or  rely  on  him. 

AflFability  of  men  already  in  power,  is  increase 
of  power ;  because  it  gaineth  love. 

Reputation  of  prudence  in  the  conduct  of  peace 
or  war,  is  power;  because  to  prudent  men,  we 
commit  the  government  of  ourselves,  more  willingly 
than  to  others. 

Nobility  is  power,  not  in  all  places,  but  only  in 
those  commonwealths,  where  it  has  privileges: 
for  in  such  privileges,  consisteth  their  power. 

Eloquence  is  power,  because  it  is  seeming  pru- 
dence. 

Form  is  power ;  because  being  a  promise  of  good, 
it  recommendeth  men  to  the  favour  of  women  and 
strangers. 

The  sciences,  are  small  power  ;  because  not  emi- 
nent; and  therefore,  not  acknowledged  in  any 
man  ;  nor  are  at  all,  but  in  a  few,  and  in  them,  but 
of  a  few  things.  For  science  is  of  that  nature,  as 
none  can  understand  it  to  be,  but  such  as  in  a  good 
measure  have  attained  it. 

Arts  of  public  use,  as  fortification,  making  of 
engines,  and  other  instruments  of  war;  because 
they  confer  to  defence,  and  victory,  are  power ; 
and  though  the  true  mother  of  them,  be  science, 
namely  the  mathematics ;  yet,  because  they  are 
brought  into  the  light,  by  the  hand  of  the  artificer, 
they  be  esteemed,  the  midwife  passing  with  the 
vulgar  for  the  mother,  as  his  issue. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


76  —  QF  MAN. 


?,/r 


< 

) 


PART  I.        The  value, jir  worth  of  a  man,  is  as  of  all  other 
-^ — r — '    things,  y&  price ;  that  is  to  say,  so  much  as  would 
Worth,      be  given  for  the  use  of  his  power :  and  therefore  is 
not  absolute  ;  but  a  tiling  dependant  on  the  need 
and  judgment  of  another.    An  able  conductor  of 
_^      soldiers,  is  of  great  price  in  time  of  war  present,  or 
imminent ;  but  in  peace  not  so.   A  learned  and  un- 
corrupt  judge,  is  much  worth  in  time  of  peace ;  but 
not  so  much  in  war.     And  as  in  other  things,  so  in 
men,  not  the  seller,  but  the  buyer  determines  the 
price.     For  let  a  man,  as  most  men  do,  rate  them- 
selves at  the  highest  value  they  can  ;  yet  their  true 
value  is  no  more  than  it  is  esteemed  by  others. 

The  manifestation  of  the  value  we  set  on  one 
another,  is  that  which  is  commonly  called  honour- 
ing, and  dishonouring.  To  value  a  man  at  a  high 
rate,  is  to  kn^ur  liim ;  at  a  low  rate,  is  to  dis- 
hojtour  him.  Wit  high,  and  low,  in  this  case,  is  to 
be  understood  Ijy  (comparison  to  the  rate  that  each 
man  settetll  mi  himself. 

The  public  worth  of  a  man,  which  is  the  value 
set  on  him  by  the  commonwealth,  is  that  which 
Dignity,  mcu  commouly  call  dignity.  And  this  value  of 
him  by  the  commonwealth,  is  understood,  by 
offices  of  command,  judicature,  public  employment ; 
or  by  names  and  titles,  introduced  for  distinction 
of  such  value. 

To  pray  to  another,  for  aid  of  any  kind,  is  to 

HONOUR ;  because  a  sign  we  have  an  opinion  he  has 

power  to  help ;  and  the  more  difficult  the  aid  is, 

the  more  is  the  honour. 

To  honour  and     To  obcy,  is  to  honour,1)ecause  no  man  obeys  them, 

diahonour.      ^hom  they  thiuk  havc  no  power  to  help,  or  hurt 

them.  And  consequently  to  disobey,  is  to  dishonour. 

To  give  great  gifts  to  a  man,  is  to  honour  him; 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


OP  POWER,  WORTH,  DIGNITY,  ETC.  71 

because  it  is  biiying  of  protection,  and  acknowledg-    part  i. 
ing  of  power.     To  give  little  gifts,  is  to  dishonour ;    , — ^^l — . 
because  it  is  but  alms,  and  simifies  an  opinion  of  Tokonourand 
the  need  of  small  helps. 

To  be  sedulous  in  promoting  another's  good; 
also  to  flatter,  is  to  honour ;  as  a  sign  we  seek  his 
protection  or  aid.    To  neglect,  is  to  dishonour. 

To  give  way,  or  place  to  another,  in  any  commo- 
dity, is  to  honour ;  being  a  confession  of  greater 
power.    To  arrogate,  is  to  dishonour. 

To  show  any  sign  of  love,  or  fear  of  another,  is 
to  honour ;  for  both  to  love,  and  to  fear,  is  to  value. 
To  contemn,  or  less  to  love  or  fear,  than  he  expects, 
is  to  dishonour  ;  for  it  is  undervaluing. 

To  praise,  magnify,  or  call  happy,  is  to  honour ; 
because  nothing  but  goodness,  power,  and  felicity 
is  valued.  To  revile,  mock,  or  pity,  is  to  dishonomr. 
To  speak  to  another  with  consideration,  to  ap- 
pear before  him  with  decency,  and  humility,  is  to 
honour  him  ;  as  signs  of  fear  to  oflFend.  To  speak 
to  him  rashly,  to  do  any  thing  before  him  obscenely, 
slovenly,  impudently,  is  to  dishonour. 

To  believe,  to  trust,  to  rely  on  another,  is  to 
honour  him ;  sign  of  opinion  of  his  virtue  and 
power.  To  distrust,  or  not  believe,  is  to  dishonour. 
To  hearken  to  a  man's  coimsel,  or  discourse  of 
what  kind  soever  is  to  honour ;  as  a  sign  we  think 
him  wise,  or  eloquent,  or  witty.  To  sleep,  or  go 
forth,  or  talk  the  while,  is  to  dishonour. 

To  do  those  things  to  another,  which  he  takes 
for  signs  of  honour,  or  which  the  law  or  custom 
makes  so,  is  to  honour ;  because  in  approving  the 
honour  done  by  others,  he  acknowledgefhi  the  power 
which  others  acknowledge.  To  refuse  to  do  them, 
is  to  dishonour. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


78  OF  MAN. 

To  agree  with  in  opinion^  is  to  honour  ;  as  being 

a  sign  of  approving  his  judgment,  and  wisdom. 

To  honour  and  To  disseut,  is   dishouour,  and  an  upbraiding  of 

error ;  and,  if  the  dissent  be  in  many  things,  of 

foUy. 

To  imitate^  is  to  honour ;  for  it  is  vehemently  to 
approve.     To  imitate  one's  enemy,  is  to  dishonour. 

To  honour  those  another  honours,  is  to  honour 
him ;  as  a  sign  of  approbation  of  his  judgment. 
To  honour  his  enemies,  is  to  dishonour  him. 

To  employ  in  counsel,  or  in  actions  of  difl&culty, 
is  to  honoiu* ;  as  a  sign  of  opinion  of  his  wisdom, 
or  other  power.  To  deny  employment  in  the  same 
cases,  to  those  that  seek  it,  is  to  dishonour. 

All  these  ways  of  honouring,  are  natural ;  and 
as  well  within,  as  without  commonwealths.  But 
in  commonwealths,  where  he,  or  they  that  have 
the  supreme  authority,  can  make  whatsoever  they 
please,  to  stand  for  signs  of  honour,  there  be  other 
honours. 

A  sovereign  doth  honour  a  subject,  with  what- 
soever title,  or  office,  or  employment,  or  action, 
that  he  himself  will  have  taken  for  a  sign  of  his  will 
to  honour  him. 

The  king  of  Persia,  honoured  Mordecai,  when  he 
appointed  he  should  be  conducted  through  the 
streets  in  the  king's  garment,  upon  one  of  the  king's 
horses,  with  a  crown  on  his  head,  and  a  prince  be- 
fore him,  proclaiming,  thus  shall  it  he  done  to  him 
that  the  king  will  honour.  And  yet  another  king 
of  Persia,  or  the  same  another  time,  to  one  that  de- 
manded for  some  great  service,  to  wear' one  of  the 
king's  robes,  gave  him  leave  so  to  do ;  but  with 
this  addition,  that  he  should  wear  it  as  the  king's 
fool ;  and  then  it  was  dishonour.     So  that  of  civil 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER,  WORTH,  DIGNITY,  ETC.  79 

honour,  the  fountain  is  in  the  person  of  the  com-    part  r. 
monwealth,   and   dependeth    on  the  will  of  the    ._^^'    . 
sovereign ;  and  is  therefore  temporary,  and  called 
civil  honour;  such  as  magistracy,  offices,  titles; 
and  in  some  places  coats  and  scutcheons  painted : 
and  men  honour  such  as  have  them,  as  having  so 
many  signs  of  favour  in  the  commonwealth  ;  which    • 
favour  is  power. 

Honourable  is  whatsoever  possession,  action,  or  Honourable. 
quality,  is  an  argument  and  sign  of  power. 

And  therefore  to  be  honoiured,  loved,  or  feared 
of  many,  is  honourable ;  as  arguments  of  power. 
To  be  honoured  of  few  or  none,  dishonourable.       Dishonourable. 

Dominion,  and  victory  is  honourable ;  because 
acquired  by  power;  and  servitude,  for  need,  or 
fear,  is  dishonourable. 

Good  fortune,  if  lasting,  honourable ;  as  a  sign 
of  the  favour  of  God.     Ill  fortune,  and  losses,  dis-  ' . 
honourable.     Riches,  fire  honourable  ;  for  they  are    \ 
power.     Poverty,   dishonourable.     Magnanimity, 
liberality,  hope,  courage,  confidence,  are  honour- 
able ;  for  they  proceed  from  the  conscience  of  power,  t^ 
Pusillanimity,  parsimony,  fear,  diffidence,  are  dis- 
honourable. 

Timely  resolution,  or  determination  of  what  a 
man  is  to  do,  is  honourable  ;  as  being  the  contempt 
-of  small  difficulties,  and  dangers.  And  irresolution, 
dishonourable ;  as  a  sign  of  too  much  valuing  of 
little  impediments,  and  little  advantages :  for  when 
a  man  has  weighed  things  as  long  as  the  time  per- 
mits, and  resolves  not,  the  diflference  of  weight  is 
but  little  ;  and  therefore  if  he  resolve  not,  he  over- 
values little  thiugs,  which  is  pusillanimity. 

All  actions,  and  speeches,  that  proceed,  or  seem 
to  proceed,  from  much  experience,  science,  discre- 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


80  OP  MAN. 

PART  L    tion,  or  wit,  are  honourable ;   for  all  these  are 
^    ^^'       powers.    Actions,  or  words  that  proceed  from 
Honourable  &  eoTor,  ienorancc,  or  folly,  dishonourable. 

Dishonourable.       ^        ?.  n       !•      ^  • 

Gravity,  as  fax  forth  as  it  seems  to  proceed  from 
a  mind  employed  on  something  else,  is  honourable ; 
because  employment  is  a  sign  of  power.  But  if  it 
'  seem  to  proceed  from  a  purpose  to  appear  grave,  it 
is  dishonourable.  For  the  gravity  of  the  former,  is 
like  the  steadiness  of  a  ship  laden  with  merchan- 
dize ;  but  of  the  latter,  like  the  steadiness  of  a  ship 
ballasted  with  sand,  and  other  trash. 

To  be  conspicuous,  that  is  to  say,  to  be  known, 
for  wealth,  office,  great  actions,  or  any  eminent 
good,  is  honourable ;  as  a  sign  of  the  power  for 
whidi  he  is  conspicuous.  On  the  contrary,  obscu- 
rity, is  dishonourable. 

To  be  descended  from  conspicuous  parents,  is 
honourable;  because  they  the  more  easily  attain 
the  aids,  and  friends  of  their  ancestors.  On  the 
contrary,  to  be  descended  from  obscure  parentage, 
is  dishonourable. 

Actions  proceeding  from  equity,  joined  with  loss, 
are  honourable ;  as  signs  of  magnanimity :  for  mag- 
nanimity is  a  sign  of  power.  On  the  contrary, 
craft,  shifting,  neglect  of  equity,  is  dishonourable. 

Covetousness  of  great  riches,  and  ambition  of 
great  honours,  are  honourable ;  as  signs  of  power 
to  obtain  them.  CJovetousness,  and  ambition,  of 
little  gains,  or  preferments,  is  dishonourable. 

Nor  does  it  alter  the  case  of  honour,  whether  an 
action,  so  it  be  great  and  difficult,  and  conse- 
quently a  sign  of  much  power,  be  just  or  unjust : 
for  honour  consisteth  only  in  the  opiniQlLgf  power. 
Therefore  the  ancient  heathen  did  noO^S:  they 
dishonoured,  but  greatly  honoured  the  Gods,  when 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


'x 


OF  POWER,  WORTH,   DIGNITY,  ETC.  81 

they  introduced  them  in  their  poems,  committing    part  i. 
rapes,  thefts,  and  other  great,  but  imjust,  or  un-    .    ^^'    . 
clean  acts :  insomuch  as  nothing  is  so  much  cele-  Honourable  & 
brated  in  Jupiter,  as  his  adulteries ;  nor  in  Mercury,    "  °°**'*" 
as  his  frauds,  and  thefts :  of  whose  praises,  in  a 
hymn  of  Homer,  the  greatest  is  this,  that  being 
bom  in  the  morning,  he  had  invented  music  at 
noon,  and  before  night,  stolen  away  the  cattle  of 
Apollo,  from  his  herdsmen. 

Also  amongst  men,  till  there  were  constituted 
great  commonwealths,  it  was  thought  no  dishonour 
to  be  a  pirate,  or  a  highway  thief ;  but  rather  a 
lawful  trade,  not  only  amongst  the  Greeks,  but 
also  amongst  all  other  nations  ;  as  is  manifest  by 
the  histories  of  ancient  time.  And  at  this  day,  in 
this  part  of  the  world,  private  duels  are,  and  always 
will  be  honourable,  though  unlawful,  till  suchjtime 
as  there  shall  be  honour  ordained  for  them  that 
refuse,  andTignominy  for  them  that  make  the  chal- 
lenge. For  duels  also  are  many  times  eflfects  of 
courage;  and  the  ground  of  courage  is  always 
strength  or  skill,  which  are  power ;  though  for  the 
most  part  they  be  eflfects  of  rash  speaking,  and  of 
the  fear  of  dishonour,  in  one,  or  both  the  combat- 
ants ;  who  engaged  by  rashness,  are  driven  into  the 
lists  to  avoid  disgrace. 

Scutcheons,  and  coats  of  arms  hereditary,  where  coata  of  arms. 
they  have  any  eminent  privileges,  are  honourable ; 
otherwise  not :  for  their  power  consisteth  either  in 
such  privileges,  or  in  riches,  or  some  such  thing 
as  is  equally  honoured  in  other  men.  This  kind  of 
honour,  commonly  called  gentrj^,  hath  been  derived 
from  the  ancient  Germans.  For  there  never  was 
any  such  thing  known,  where  the  German  customs 

VOL.  III.  G 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


82  OF  MAN. 

PART  I.  were  unknown.  Nor  is  it  now  any  where  in  use, 
.  ^^'  .  where  the  Germans  have  not  inhabited.  The 
Coau  of  arms,  ancient  Greek  commanders^  when  they  went  to 
war,  had  their  shields  painted  with  such  devices  as 
they  pleased ;  insomuch  as  an  unpainted  buckler 
was  a  sign  of  poverty,  and  of  a  common  soldier ; 
but  they  transmitted  not  the  inheritance  of  them. 
The  Romans  transmitted  the  marks  of  their  fami- 
lies :  but  they  were  the  images,  not  the  devices  of 
their  ancestors.  Amongst  the  people  of  Asia, 
Africa,  and  America,  there  is  not,  nor  was  ever, 
any  such  thing.  The  Germans  only  had  that  cus- 
tom ;  from  whom  it  has  been  derived  into  England, 
France,  Spain,  and  Italy,  when  in  great  numbers 
they  either  aided  the  Romans,  or  made  their  own 
conquests  in  tjiese  western  parts  of  the  world. 

ForjJGermanyi  being  anciently,  as  all  other  coun- 
tries, fertheir  beginnings,  divided  amongst  an  infi- 
nite number  of  little  lords,  or  masters  of  families, 
that  continually  had  wars  one  with  another ;  those 
masters,  or  lords,  principally  to  the  end  they  might, 
when  they  were  covered  with  arms,  be  known  by 
their  followers ;  and  partly  for  ornament,  both 
painted  their  armour,  or  their  scutcheon,  or  coat, 
with  the  picture  of  some  beast,  or  other  thing ;  and 
also  put  some  eminent  and  visible  mark  upon  the 
crest  of  their  helmets.  And  this  ornament  both  of 
the  arms,  and  crest,  descended  by  inheritance  to 
their  children ;  to  the  eldest  pure,  and  to  the  rest 
with  some  note  of  diversity,  such  as  the  old  master, 
that  is  to  say  in  Dutch,  the  Hereof  thought  fit. 
But  when  many  such  families,  joined  together, 
made  a  greater  monarchy,  this  duty  of  the  Herealt, 
to  distinguish  scutcheons,  was  made  a  private  office 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER,  WORTH,  DIGNITY,  ETC.  83 

apart.  And  the  issue  of  these  lords,  is  the  great  part  i. 
and  ancient  gentry ;  which  for  the  most  part  bear  .  ^^'  . 
living  creatures,  noted  for  courage,  and  rapine  ;  or 
castles,  battlements,  belts,  weapons,  bars,  palisa- 
does,  and  other  notes  of  war ;  nothing  being  then 
in  honour,  but  virtue  military.  Afterwards,  not 
only  kings,  but  popular  commonwealths,  gave  di- 
vers manners  of  scutcheons,  to  such  as  went  forth 
to  the  war,  or  returned  from  it,  for  encouragement, 
or  recompense  to  their  service.  All  which,  by  an 
observing  reader,  may  be  found  in  such  ancient 
histories,  Greek  and  Latin,  as  make  mention  of  the 
German  nation  and  manners,  in  their  times. 

Titles  of  honour^  such  as  are  duke,  count,  mar^^S)>f 
quis,  and  baron,  are  honourable ;  as  signifying  the 
value  set  upon  them  by  the  sovereign  power  of  the 
commonwealth :  which  titles,  were  in  old  time 
titles  of  office,  and  command,  derived  some  from 
the  Romans,  some  from  the  Germans  and  French : 
dukes,  in  Latin  duces,  being  generals  in  war : 
counts,  comites,  such  as  bear  the  general  company 
out  of  friendship,  and  were  left  to  govern  and  de- 
fend places  conquered,  and  pacified:  marquises, 
marchionesy  were  counts  that  governed  the  marches, 
or  bounds  of  the  empire.  Which  titles  of  duke, 
count,  and  marquis,  came  into  the  empire,  about 
the  time  of  Constantine  the  Great,  from  the  cus- 
toms of  the  German  militia.  But  baron,  seems  to 
have  been  a  title  of  the  Gauls,  and  signifies  a  great 
man ;  such  as  were  the  king's,  or  prince's  men, 
whom  they  employed  in  war  about  their  persons  ; 
and  seems  to  be  derived  from  t?ir,  to  her,  and  har, 
that  signified  the  same  in  the  language  of  the 

Gauls,  that  vir  in  Latin  ;  and  thence  to  hero^  and 

g2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


84  OF  MAN. 

baro :  so  that  such  men  were  called  herones,  and 
after  harones  ;  and,  in  Spanish,  varones.  But  he 
that  would  know  more  particularly  the  original  of 
titles  of  honour,  may  find  it,  as  I  have  done  this, 
in  Mr.  Selden's  most  excellent  treatise  of  that  sub 
ject.  In  process  of  time  these  offices  of  honour,  by 
occasion  of  trouble,  and  for  reasons  of  good  and 
peaceable  government,  were  turned  into  mere  titles ; 
sef  ving  for  the  most  part,  to  distinguish  the  pre- 
cedence, place,  and  order  of  subjects  in  the  common- 
wealth :  and  men  were  made  dukes,  counts,  mar- 
quises, and  barons  of  places,  wherein  they  had 
neither  possession,  nor  command  :  and  other  titles 
also,  were  devised  to  the  same  end. 

Worthiness.  WoRTHiNESS,is  a  thing  diflfereut  from  the  worth, 
or  value  of  a  man ;  and  also  from  his  merit,  or 
desert,  and  consisteth  in  a  particular  power,  or  abi- 
lity for  that,  whereof  he  is  said  to  be  worthy : 

Fitness.  which  particular  ability,  is  usually  named  fitness, 
or  aptitude. 

For  he  is  worthiest  to  be  a  commander,  to  be  a 
judge,  or  to  have  any  other  charge,  that  is  best 
fitted,  with  the  qualities  required  to  the  well  dis- 
charging of  it ;  and  worthiest  of  riches,  that  has 
the  qualities  most  requisite  for  the  well  using  of 
them :  any  of  which  qualities  being  absent,  one 
may  nevertheless  be  a  worthy  man,  and  valuable 
for  something  else.  Again,  a  man  may  be  worthy 
of  riches,  office,  and  employment,  that  nevertheless, 
can  plead  no  right  to  have  it  before  another  ;  and 
therefore  cannot  be  said  to  merit  or  deserve  it. 
/  For  merit  presupposeth  a  right,  and  that  the  thing 
deserved  is  due  by  promise  :  of  which  I  shall  say 
more  hereafter,  when  I  shall  speak  of  tiontracts. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  MANNERS.  85 

CHAPTER  XI. 

OP  THE  DIFFERENCE  OF  MANNERS. 

By  manners,  I  mean  not  here,  decency  of  beha-  part  i. 
viour ;  as  how  one  should  salute  another,  or  how  -^ — ^ — ' 
a  man  should  wash  his  mouth,  or  pick  his  teeth  ^**"    , 

^  *^  here  meant 

before  company,  and  such  other  points  of  the  small  hymtinnen. 
morals;  but  those  qualities  of  mankind,  that  con- 
cern their  living  together  in  peace^  and  unity.  To 
which  end  we  are  to  consider,  that  the  felicity  of 
this  life,  consisteth  not  in  the  repose  of  a  mind 
satisfied.  For  there  is  tio  such ^»«>M/<mw*,  utmost 
aim,  nor  summum  bonum,  greatest  good,  as  is 
spoken  of  in  the  books  of  the  old  moral  philoso- 
phers. Nor  can  a  man  any  more  live,  whose  desires 
are  at  an  end,  than  he,  whose  senses  and  imagina- 
tions are  at  a  stand.  Felicity  is.  a  continual  pro- 
gress  of  the  desire,  from  one  object  to  another ;  the 
attammg  of  the  former,  being  still  but  the  way  to 
the  latter.  The  cause  whereof  is,  that  the  object 
of  man's  desire,  is  not  to  enjoy  once  only,  and  for 
one  instant  of  time ;  but  to  assure  for  ever,  the  way 
of  his  future  desire.  And  therefore  the  voluntary 
actions,  and  inclinations  of  all  men,  tend,  not  only 
to  the  procuring,  but  also  to  the  assuring  of  a  con- 
tented life;  and  differ  only  in  the  way:  which 
ariseth  partly  from  the  diversity  of  passions,  in 
divers  men  ;  and  partly  from  the  diflference  of  the 
knowledge,  or  opinion  each  one  has  of  the  causes, 
which  produce  the  eflfect  desired. 

So  that  in  the  first  place,  I  put  for  a  general  in-  4  rc«ues«  de- 
clination  of  all  mankind,  a  perpetual  and  restless  i^ln  i^n!" 


Digitized  by 


Google 


86 


M^ 


OF  MAN. 


PART  I. 
11. 


Love  of  con- 
tention from 
competition. 


Civil  obedience 
from  love  of 


From  fear  of 
death,  or 
woands. 


Cdesire  of  power  after  pbwerT)  that  ceaseth  only  in 
death.  And  the  cause  of  this,  is  not  always  that 
a  man  hopes  for  a  more  intensive  delight,  than  he 
has  already  attained  to ;  or  that  he  cannot  be  con- 
tent with  a  moderate  power :  but  because  he  can- 
not assure  the  power  and  means  to  live  well,  which 
he  hath  present,  without  the  acijcdsition  of^more. 
And  from  hence  it  is,  that  kings,  whose  power  is 
greatest,  turn  their  endeavours  to  the  assuring  it 
at  home  by  laws,  or  abroad  by  wars :  and  when 
that  is  done,  there  succeedeth  a  new  desire;  in 
some,  of  fame  from  new  conquest ;  in  others,  of 
ease  and  sensual  pleasure ;  in  others,  of  admiration, 
or  being  flattered  for  excellence  in  some  art,  or 
other  ability  of  the  mind. 

Competition  of  riches,  honour,  command,  or 
other  power,  inclineth  to  contention,  enmity,  and 
war :  because  the  way  of  one  competitor,  to  the 
attaining  of  his  desire,  is  to  kill,  subdue,  supplant, 
or  repel  the  other.  Particularly,  competition  of 
praise,  inclineth  to  a  reverence  of  antiquity.  For 
men  contend  with  the  living,  not  with  the  dead ; 
to  these  ascribing  more  than  due,  that  they  may 
obscure  the  glory  of  the  other. 

Desire  of  ease,  and  sensual  delight,  disposeth  men 
to  obey  a  common  power :  because  by  such  desires, 
a  man  doth  abandon  the  protection  that  might  be 
hoped  for  from  his  own  industry,  and  labour.  Fear 
of  death,  and  wDunds,  disposeth  to  the  same  ;  and 
for  the  same  reason.  On  the  contrary,  needy  men, 
and  hardy,  not  contented  with  their  present  con- 
dition; as  also,  all  men  that  are  ambitious  of 
military  command,  are  inclined  to  continue  the 
causes  of  war ;  and  to  stir  up  trouble  and  sedi- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  MANNERS.  87 

tion :  for  there  is  no  honour  military  but  by  war ;  part  i. 
nor  any  such  hope  to  mend  an  ill  game,  as  by  .,  \^'  .,> 
causing  ji  new  shuffle. 

Desire  of  tnowledce,  and  arts  of  peace,  inclineth  And  from 

°  /^  11-         love  of  arts. 

men  to  obey  a  common  power :  tor  sucn  desure, 
containeth  a  desire  of  leisure ;  and  consequently 
protection  from  some  other  power  than  their  own. 

Desire  of  praise,  disposeth  to  laudable  actions,  j^^eof^jrtue 
such  as  please  them  whose  judgment  they  value ;  praise. 
for  of  those  men  whom  we  contemn,  we  contemn 
also  the  praises.  Desire  of  fame  after  death  does 
the  same.  And  though  after  death,  there  be  no 
sense  of  the  praise  given  us  on  earth,  as  being  joys, 
that  are  either  swallowed  up  in  the  unspeakable 
joys  of  Heaven,  or  extinguished  in  the  extreme 
torments  of  hell :  yet  is  not  such  fame  vain;  because 
men  have  a  present  delight  therein,  from  the  fore- 
sight of  it,  and  of  the  benefit  that  may  redound 
thereby  to  their  posterity :  which  though  they  now 
see  not,  yet  they  imagine ;  and  anything  that  is 
pleasure  to  the  sense,  the  same  also  is  pleasure  in 
the  imagination.  / 

To  have  received  from  one,  to  whom  we  think  ?i^»  f">«», 

1  1  1  /»         1  1  .     ,  difficulty  of 

ourselves  equal,  greater  benefits  than  there  is  hope  requiting  great 
to  requite,  disposeth  to  counterfeit  love  i  but  really 
secret  hatred ;  and  puts  a  man  into  the  estate  of  a 
desperate  debtor,  that  in  declining  the  sight  of  his 
creditor,  tacitly  wishes  him  there,  where  he  might 
never  see  him  more.  For  benefits  oblige,  and 
obligation  is  thraldom ;  and  unrequitable  obliga- 
tion perpetual  thraldom ;  which  is  to  one's  equal, 
hatefdl.  But  to  have  received  benefits  from  one, 
whom  we  acknowledge  for  superior,  inclines  to 
love  ;  because  the  obligation  is  no  new  depression  : 


Digitized  by 


Google 


S8  OF  MAN. 

PART  I.  and  cheerfiil  acceptation,  which  men  call  gratitude j 
.  V'  .  is  such  an  honour  done  to  the  obliger,  as  is  taken 
generally  for  retribution.  Also  to  receive  benefits, 
though  from  an  equal,  or  inferior,  as  long  as  there 
is  hope  of  requital,  disposeth  to  love:  for  in  the 
intention  of  the  receiver,  the  obligation  is  of  aid 
and  service  mutual ;  from  whence  proceedeth  an 
emulation  of  who  shall  exceed  in  benefiting  ;  the 
most  noble  and  profitable  contention  possible ; 
wherein  the  victor  is  pleased  with  his  victory,  and 
the  other  revenged  by  confessing  it. 
And  from  To  havc  douc  morc  hurt  to  a  man,  than  he  can, 

conscience  of  .         ,__.  ,  •       i«        -i      i        i  i 

deserving  to   or  IS  wiUuig  to  cxpiatc,  mclmcth  the  doer  to  hate 
be  hated.      ^^  sufFcrer.     For  he  must  expect  revenge,  or  for- 
giveness ;  both  which  are  hateful, 
i^^urt  fr^      Fear  of  oppression,  disposeth  a  man  to  antici- 
f«*f-  pate,  or  to  seek  aid  by  society :  for  there  is  no 

other  way  by  which  a  man  can  secure  his  life 
and  liberty. 
And  from  Mcu  that  distrust  their  own  subtlety,  are,  in  tu- 

thdr  own  wit  mult  and  sedition,  better  disposed  forMctory,  than 
they  that  suppose  themselves  wise,  or  crafty.  For 
these  love  to  consult,  the  other,  fearing  to  be  cir- 
cumvented, to  strike  first.  And  in  sedition,  men 
being  always  in  the  precincts  of  battle,  to  hold  to- 
gether, and  use  all  advantages  of  force,  is  a  better 
stratagem,  than  any  that  can  proceed  from  subtlety 
of  wit. 
v«n  under.  Vaiu-glorious  mcu,  such  as  without  being  con- 
wgioiy™  scions  to  themselves  of  great  sufl&ciency,  delight  in 
supposing  themselves  gallant  men,  are  inclined  only 
to  ostentation  ;  but  not  to  attempt :  because  when 
danger  or  difl&culty  appears,  they  look  for  nothing 
but  to  have  their  insufficiency  discovered. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  MANNERS.  89 

Vain-glorious  men,  such  as  estimate  their  suffi-  part  i. 
ciency  by  the  flattery  of  other  men,  or  the  fortune  .  ^|'  . 
of  some  precedent  action,  without  assured  ground 
of  hope  from  the  true  knowledge  of  themselves,  are 
inclined  to  rash  engaging  ;  and  in  the  approach  of 
danger,  or  difiiculty,  to  retire  if  they  can  :  because 
not  seeing  the  way  of  safety,  they  will  rather  hazard 
their  honour,  which  may  be  salved  with  an  excuse ; 
than  their  lives,  for  which  no  salve  is  sufficient. 

Men  that  have  a  strong  opinion  of  their  own  Ambitiou, 
wisdom  m  matter  of  government,  are  disposed  to  ©f  sufficiency. 
ambition.  Because  without  public  employment  in 
coimcil  or  magistracy,  the  honour  of  their  wisdom 
is  lost.  And  therefore  eloquent  speakers  are  in- 
clined to  ambition  ;  for  eloquence  seemeth  wisdom, 
both  to  themselves  and  others. 

Pusillanimity  disposeth  men  to  irresolution,  and  irresolution, 

from  too  great 

consequently  to  lose  the  occasions,  and  fittest  op-  raiuing  of 
portunities  of  action.  For  after  men  have  been  in '™  ™* 
deliberation  till  the  time  of  action  approach,  if  it 
be  not  then  manifest  what  is  best  to  be  done,  it  is 
a  sign,  the  difference  of  motives,  the  one  way  and 
the  other,  are  not  great :  therefore  not  to  resolve 
then,  is  to  lose  the  occasion  by  weighing  of  trifles ; 
which  is  pusillanimity. 

Frugality,  though  in  poor  men  a  virtue,  maketh 
a  man  unapt  to  atchieve  such  actions,  as  require 
the  strength  of  many  men  at  once :  for  it  weakeneth 
their  endeavour,  which  is  to  be  nourished  and  kept 
in  vigour  by  reward. 

Eloquence,  with  flattery,  disposeth  men  to  con-  confidence  in 
fide  in  them  that  have  it ;  because  the  former  is  ^^oran^^f 
seeming  wisdom,  the  latter  seeming  kindness.  Add  J^B^Tm  Ind^ 
to  them  military  reputation,  and  it  disposeth  men  kindness. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^0 /  /-r 


90  OP  MAN. 

PART  I.    to  adhere,  imd  subject  themselves  to  those  men 

.    ^^_     that  have  them.     The  two  former  havmg  given 

them  caution  against  danger  from  him ;  the  latter 

gii^  them  caution  against  danger  from  others. 

And  from        /Want  of  scieucc^that  is,  ignorance  of  causes. 

Ignorance  of        L  v  '     *-*  -^ 

natural  causes,  dis^scth,  or  rather  constraineth  a  man  to  rely  on 
the  advice,  and  authority  of  others.  For  all  men 
whom  the  truth  concerns,  if  they  rely  not  on  their 
-  >  own,  must  rely  on  theopinion  of  some  other,  whom 
they  think  wiser  than  themselves,  and  see  not  why 
he  should  deceive  them. 
And  from  Iguoraucc  of  the  signification  of  words,  which 

denu^di^g.  is  waut  of  Understanding,  disposeth  men  to  take 
on  tru|t,  not  only  the  truth  they  know  not ;  but  also 
theerrors ;  and  which  is  more,  the  nonsense  of  them 
they  trust :  for  neither  error  rior  nonsense,  can  vrith- 
out  a  perfect  understanding  of  words,  be  detected. 
From  the  same  it  proceedeth,  that  men  give  ^- 
ferent  names^o  one  and  the  same  thing,  from  the 
diflFerence  of  their  own  passions :  as  they  that  ap- 
prove a  private  opinion,  call  it  opinion ;  but  they 
that  mislike  it,  heresy :  and  yet  heresy  signifies  no 
more  than  private  opinion  ;  but  has  only  a  greater 
tincture  of  choler. 

From  the  same  also  it  proceedeth,  that  men  can- 
not distinguish,  without  study  and  great  under- 
standing, between  one  action  of  many  men,  and 
many  actions  of  one  multitude;  as  for  example, 
between  one  action  of  all  the  senators  of  Rome  in 
killing  Cataline,  and  the  many  actions  of  a  number 
of  senators  in  killing  Caesar;  and  therefore  are 
disposed  to  take  for  the  action  of  the  people,  that 
which  is  a  multitude  of  actions  done  by  a  multitude 
of  men,  led  perhaps  by  the  persuasion  of  one. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  MANNERS.  91 

Ignorance  of  the  causes,  and  original  constitu-    part  i. 
tion  of  right,  equity,  law,  and  justice,  disposeth  a    .    ^]'    . 
man  to  make  custom  and  example  the  rule  of  his  Adherence  to 
actions  ;  in  such  manner,  as  to  think  that  unjust  ignoian'ce  of 
which  it  hath  been  the  custom  to  punish ;  and  that  rfgh?*^  ^^ 
just,  of  the  impunity  and  approbation  whereof  they  '^°«- 
can  produce  an  example,  or,  as  the  lawyers  which 
only  use  this  false  measure  of  justice  barbarously 
call  it,  a  precedent ;  like  little  children,  that  have 
no  other  rule  of  good  and  evil  manners,  but  the 
correction  they  receive  from  their  parents  and 
masters ;  save  that  children  are  constant  to  their 
rule,  whereas,  men  are  not  so  ;  because  grown  old, 
and  stubborn,  they  appeal  from  custom  to  reason, 
and  from  reason  to  custom,  as  it  serves  their  turn ; 
receding  from  custom  when  their  interest  requires 
it,  and  setting  themselves  againsTreason,  as  oft 
as  reason  is  against  them :  which  is  the  cause,  that 
the  doctrine   of  right  and  wrong,  is  jjerpetually 
disputed,  both  byTEe^en  aiid  the  jword :  whereas 
the  doctrine  of  lines,  and  figures,  is  not  so ;  because 
men  care  not,  in  that  subject,  what  be  truth,  as  a 
thing  that  crosses  no  man's  ambition,  profit  or  lust. 
For  I  doubt  not,  but  if  it  had  been  a  thing  contrary^ 
to  any  man's  right  of  dominion,  or  to  the  interest 
of  men  that  have  dominion,  that  the  three  angles 
of  a  triangle  J  should  he  equal  to  two  angles  of  a 
square ;  that  doctrine  should  have  been,  if  not  dis- 
puted, yet  by  the  burning  of  all  books  of  geometry, 
suppressed,  as  far  as  he  whom  it  concerned  was , 
able. 

Ignorance  of  remote  causes,  disposeth  men  to  Adherence  to 
attribute  all  events,  to  the  causes  immediate,  and  fromi^^ce 
instrumental :  for  these  are  all  the  causes  they  per-  of  p^"""^"' 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


92 


OF  MAN. 


PART  I. 
11. 


Credulity, 
from  Ignorance 
of  nature. 


Curiosity  to 
know,  from 
care  of  future 
time. 


Natural 
religion  frt)m 
the  same. 


ceive.  And  hence  it  comes  to  pass^  that  in  all 
places,  men  that  are  grieved  with  payments  to  the 
public,  discharge  their  anger  upon  the  publicans, 
that  is  to  say,  farmers,  collectors,  and  other  officers 
of  the  public  revenue ;  and  adhere  to  such  as  find 
fault  with  the  public  government;  and  thereby, 
when  they  have  engaged  themselves  beyond  hope  of 
justification,  fall  also  upon  the  supreme  authority,  for 
fear  of  punishment,  or  shame  of  receiving  pardon. 

Ignorance  of  natural  causes,  disposeth  a  man  to 
credulity,  so  as  to  believe  many  times  imp^ibi- 
lities  rior  such  know  nothing  to  the  contrary,  but 
that  they  may  be  true ;  being  unable  to  detect  the 
impossibility.  And  credulity,  because  men  like  to 
be  hearkened  unto  in  company,  disposeth  them  to 
lying :  so  that  ignorance  itself  without  malice,  is 
able  to  make  a  man  both  to  believe  lies,  and  tell 
them ;  and  sometimes  also  to  invent  t^em. 

Anxiety  for  the  future  time,  disposeth  men  to 
inquire  into  the  causes  of  things :  because  the 
knowledge  of  them,  maketh  men  the  better  able  to 
order  the  present  to  their  best  advantage. 
)  I-  ^i^osityi)  or  love  of  the  knowledge  of  causes, 
draws  a  man  firom  the  consideration  of  the  eflfect, 
to  seek  the  cause ;  and  again,  the  cause  of  that 
cause ;  till  of  necessity  he  must  come  to  this  thought 
at  last,  that  there  is  some  cause,  whereof  there 
is  no  former  cause,  but  is  eternal ;  which  is  it 
men  call  God.,.  So  that  it  is  impossible  to  make 
any  profound  inquiry  into  natural  causes,  without 
being  inclined  thereby  to  believe  there  is  one  God 
eternal ;  though  they  cannot  have  any  id^a  of  him 
in  their  mind,  answerable  to  his  nature.  For  as  a 
man  that  is  born  blind,  hearing  men  talk  of  warm- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ERS.  93 

ing  themselves  by  the  fire,  and  being  broughjy  to    part  i. 
warm  himself  by  the  same,  may  easily  conceive,    — V^—^ 
and  assiure  himself,  there  is  somewhat  there,  which  Natural 
men  call^^^,   and  is  the  cause  of  the  heat  he  the  same. 
feels ;  but  cannot  imagine  what  it  is  like  ;  nor  have 
an  idea  of  it  in  his  mind,  such  as  they  have  that  ,     ,  / 

see  it :  so  also  by  the  visible  things  in  this  world,  r  '  > 
and  their  admirable  order,  a  man  may  conceive  "^i^ 
there  is  a  cause  of  them,  which  men  ca^"  God ;  and 
yet  not  have  an  i^ji,  or  image  of  him  in-his  mind. 
And  they  thatmake  uttle,  or  no  itiquiry  into 
the  natural  causes  of  things,  yet  from  the  fear  that 
proceeds  from  the  ignorance  itself,  df  what  it  is 
that  hath  the  power  to  do  them  iiduch  good  or 
harm,  are  inclined  to  suppose,  and  feign  unto  them- 
selves, several  kinds  of' powers  ijivisible;)and  to 
stand  in  awe  of  their  own  imaginations;  and  in 
time  of  distress  to  invoke  them ;  as  also  in  the 
time  of  an  expected  good  success,  to  give  them  . 

thanks  ;  faking  the  creatures  of  their  own  fancv>  r  ./r 

their  god^  By  which  means  it  hath  come  to  pass, 
that  from  the  innumerable  variety  of  fancy,  men 
have  created  in  the  world  innumerable  sorts  of 
gods.  And  this  fear  of  things  invisible,  is  the<j 
natural  seed  of  that,  which  every  one  in  himself  T 
calleth  religion ;  and  in  them  that  worship,  or  fear  ^ 
that  power  otherwise  than  they  do,  superstition. 

And  this  seed  of  religion,  having  been  observed 
by  many;  some  of  those  that  have  observed  it, 
have  been  inclined  thereby  to  nourish,  dress,  and 
form  it  into  laws ;  and  to  add  to  it  of  their  own  in- 
vention, any  opinion  of  the  causes  of  future  events, 
by  which  they  thought  they  should  be  best  able 
to  govern  others,  and  make  unto  themselves  the 
greatest  use  of  their  powers. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


94 


OF  MAN. 


CHAPTER  XII. 


OP  RELIGION. 


PART  I. 
12. 

Religion  in 
inwonlj. 


Pint,  from 
his  dedre  of 
knowing 
causes. 


Prom  the  con« 
sideration  of 
the  beginning 
of  things. 


From  his  oIk 
serration  of ' 
the  sequel  of 
things. 

.  V 


Seeing  there  are  no  signs,  nor  fruit  of  religion, 
but  in  man  only ;  there  it  no  cause  to  doubt,  but 
that  the  seed  of  religion,  is  also  only  in^^nan  ;  and 
eonsisteth  in  some  peculiar  quality,  or  at  least  in 
some  eminent  degree  thereof,  not  to  be  found  in 
any  other  living  creatures. 

And  first,  it  is  pecuKar  to  the  nature  of  man, 
to  be  inquisitive  into  the  causes  of  the  events 
they  see,  some  more,  some  less ;  but  all  men  so 
much,  as  to  be  curious  in  the  search  of  the  causes 
of  their  own  good  and  evil  fortune. 

Secondly,  upon  the  sight  of  anything  that  hath 
a  beginning,  to  think  also  it  had  a  cause,  which 
determined  the  same  to  begin,  then  when  it  did, 
rather  than  sooner  or  later. 

Thirdly,  whereas  there  is  no  other  felicity  of 
beasts,  but  the  enjoying  of  their  quotidian  food, 
ease,  and  lusts  ;  as  having  little  or  no  foresight  of 
the  time  to  come,  for  want  of  observation,  and 
memory  of  the  order,  consequence,  and  dependence 
of  the  things  they  see;  man  observeth  how  one 
event  hath  been  produced  by  another  ;  and  remem- 
bereth  in  them  antecedence  and  consequenc^  ;  and 
when  he  cannot  assure  himself  of  the  true  causes 
of  things,  (for  the  causes  of  good  and  evil  fortune 
for  the  most  part  are  invisible,)  he  supposes  causes 
of  them,  either  such  as  his  own  fancy  suggesteth ; 
or  trusteth  the  authority  of  other  men,  such  as  he 
thinks  to  be  his  friends,  and  wiser  than  himself. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  RELIGION.  95 

The  two  first,  make  anxiety.    For  being  assured    part  i. 
that  there  be  causes  of  all  things  that  have  arrived     _  ^^'    . 
hitherto,  or  shall  arrive  hereafter ;  it  is  impossible  The  natural 
for  a  man,  who  continually  endeavoureth  to  secure  ugion,  the 
himself  against  the  evil  he  fears,  and  procure  the  ^^^come! 
good  he  desireth,  not  to  be  in  a  perpetual  solicitude 
of  the  time  to  come ;  so  that  every  man^  especially 
those  that  are  over  provident,  are  in  a  state  like 
to  that  of  R^omg^gus.     For  as  Prometheus,  which 
interpretecl^is,  the  prudent  man^yf^B  bound  to  the 
hill  Caucasus,  a  place  of  largy  prospect^  where,  an      ^  U^*  / 
eagle  feeding  on  his  liver,  devoured  in  the  day,  as  ^      \ 

much  as  was  repaired  in  the  night :  so  that  man, 
which  looks  too  far  before  him,  in  the  care  of  future 
time,  hath  his  heart  all  the  day  long,  gnawed  on  by 
fear  of  death,  poverty,  or  other  calamity ;  and  has 
no  repose,  nor  pause  of  his  anxiety,  hut  in  sleep. 

This  perpetual  jgar,  always  accompanying  man-  which  makes 
kind  in  the  ignorance  of_  causes,  as  it  were  in  the  po^^I^r  onn- 
dark,  must  needs  have  for  object  something.  And  "^^^^^  *^°^''* 
therefore  when  there  is  notliing  to  be  seen,  there 
is  nothing  to  accuse,  either  of  their  good,  or  evil 
fortune,  but  some  power y  or  agent  invisible :  in 
which  sense  perhaps  it  was,  that  some  of  the  old 
poets  said,  that  the  gods  were^at  first  created  by 
human  fear :  which  spoken  of  the  gods,  that  is  to 
say,  of  the  many  gods  of  the  Gentiles,  is  very  true. 
But  the  acknowledging  of  one  God,  eternal,  infinite, 
and  omnipotent,  may  more  easily  be  derived,  firom 
the  desire  men  have  to  know  the  causes  of  natural 
bodies,  and  their  several  virtues,  and  operations ; 
than  from  the  fear  of  what  was  to  befall  them  in 
time  to  come.  For  he  that  from  any  eflFect  he 
seeth  come  to  pass,  should  reason  to  the  next  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


96 


OF  MAN. 


PART  I. 
12. 


1^ 


And  suppose 
tbem  incor- 
poreal. 


immediate  cause  thereof,  and  from  thence  to  the 
cause  of  that  cause,  and  plunge  himself  profoundly 
in  the  pursuit  of  causes  ;  shall  at  last  come  to  this, 
that  there  must  be<,  as  even  the^eathen  philoso- 
phers confessed,^  one  first  mover -^hat  is,ji  first, 
and  an  eternaj_cause  of  all  thinjg;s ;  which  is  that 
which  men  mean  by  the  name  of  Godj^  and  all  this 
without  thought  of  their  fortune;  the  solicitude 
whereof,  both  inclines  to  fear,  and  hinders  them 
from  the  search  of  the  causes  of  other  things ;  and 
thereby  gives  occasion  of  feigning  of  as  many  gods, 
as  there  be  men  that  feign  them. 

And  for  the  matter,  or  substance  of  the  invisible 
agents^  so  fancied  ;  they  could  not  by  natural  cogi- 
tation, fall  upon  any  other  conceit,  but  that  it  was 
the  same  with  that  of  the  soul  of  man ;  and  that 
Ae^ord^fjnafi^  was  of  the  same  substance,  with 
that  which  appeareth  in  a  dream^  to  one  that  sleep- 
eth ;  or  in  a  looking-glass,  to  one  that  is  awake ; 
which,  men  not  knowing  that  such  apparitions  are 
nothing  else  but  creatures  of  the  fancy,  think  to  be 
real,  and  external  substances ;  and  therefore  call 
then^ ghoste]/] as  the  Latins  called  them  imaginesy 
and  umBrae ;  and  thought  them  spirits,  that  is,  thin 
aerial  bodies;  and  those  invisible  agents,  which  they 
feared,  to  be  like  them ;  save  that  they  appear,  and 
vanish  when  they  please.  But  the  opinion  that 
such  spirits  were  incorporeal,  or  immaterial,  could 
never  enter  into  the  mind  of  any  man  by  nature ; 
because,  though  men  may  put  together  words  of 
contradictory  signification,  as  spirit^  and  incor- 
poreal; yet  they  can  never  have  the  imagination  of 
any  thing  answering  to  them :  and  therefore,  men 
that  by  their  own  meditation,  arrive  to  the  acknow- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  KELI6I0N.  9? 

ledgment  of  one  infinite,  omnipotent,  and  eternal    part  i. 
God,  chose  rather  to  confess  he  is  incomprehensible,    .,  ^f'  ,^ 
and  above  their  understanding,  than  to  define  his 
nature  by  spirit  incorporeal,  and  then  confess  their 
definition  to  be  unintelligible :  or  if  they  give  him 
such  a  title,  it  is  not  dogmatically,  with  intention 
to  make  the  divine  nature  understood ;  hut  piously, 
to  honour  him  with  attributes,  of  significations,  as|  |  p,  ^  — 
remote  as  they  can  from  the  grossness  of  bod^eftU 
visible* 

Then,  for  the  way  by  which  they  think  these  in-  But  know 
visible  agents  wrought  their  effects ;  that  is  to  say,  how^they  effect 
what  immediate  causes  they  used,  in  bringing  *"^^*"^* 
things  to  pass,  "tnen  that  know  not  what  it  is  that 
we  call/ caw^m^,]  that  is,  almost  all  men,  have  no 
other  Tuie  to  guess  by>  but  by  observing,  and  re-  . .  , 
membering  what  they  have  seen  to  precede  the 
like  effect  at  some  other  time,  or  times  before,  with- 
out seeing  between  the  antecedent  and  subsequent 
event,  any  dependence  or  connexion  at  all :  and 
therefore  from  the  like  things  past,  they  expect  the 
^like  things^o  come;  and  hope  for  good  or  evil 
^uck,  superstitiously,  from  tilings  that  have  no  part 
at  all  in  the  causing  of  it :  as  the  Athenians  -did 
for  their  war  at  Lepanto,  demand  another  Phormio; 
the  Pompeian  faction  for  their  war  in  Africa,  ano- 
ther Scipio ;  and  others  have  done  in  divers  other 
occasions  since.  In  like  manner  they  attribute 
their  fortune  to  a  stander  by,  to  a  lucky  or  unlucky 
place,  to  words  spoken,  especially  if  the  name  of 
God  be  amongst  them  ;  as  charming  and  conjuring, 
the  liturgv  of  witches  ;  insomuch  as  to  believe, 
they  have<^ower  to  turn\a  stone  into  bread,  bread 
into  a  man,  or  any  thing  into  any  thing. 

VOL.  III.  H 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


98 


OP  MAN. 


PART  I. 

12. 

>i      ,       f 

Bot  honour 
them  as  they 
honour  men. 


And  attri- 
bute to  them 
all  extraordi- 
nary events. 


Four  things, . 
natural  6eeds 
of  religion. 


7. 


Made  different 
by  culture. 


Thirdly,  for  the  worship  which  naturally  men 
exhibit  to  powers  invisible,  it  can  be  no  other, 
but  such  expressions  of  their  reverence,  as  they 
would  use  towards  men;  gifts,  petitions,  thanks, 
submission  of  body,  considerate  addresses,  sober 
behaviour,  premechtated  words,  swearing,  that  is, 
assuring  one  another  of  their  promises,  by  invo- 
king them.  Beyond  that  reason  suggesteth  no- 
thing ;  but  leaves  them  either  to  rest  Aere ;  or  for 
further  ceremonies,  to  rely  on  those  they  believe 
to  be  wiser  than  themselves. 

Lastly,  concerning  how  these  invisible  powers 
declare  to  men  the  things  which  shall  hereafter 
come  to  pass,  especially  concerning  their  good  or 
evil  fortune  in  general,  or  good  or  ill  success  in  any 
particular  undertaking,  men  are  naturally  at  a 
stand  ;  save  that  usin^o  conjectureofthetime  to 
come,  by  the  time  pastJthey are  veryapt,  not  only 
to  take  casual  things,  after  one  or  two  encounters, 
for  prognostics  of  the  like  encoimter  ever  after, 
but  also  to  believe  the  like  prognostics  ft^om  other 
men,  of  whom  they  have  once  conceived  a  good 
opinion. 

I  And  in  these  four  things,  opinion  of  ghosts,  igno- 
rance of  second  causes,  devotion  towards  what  men 
I  fear,  and  taking  of  things  casual  for  prognostics, 
i  consisteth  the  natural  seed  of  religion  ;  which  by 
reason  of  the  different  fancies,  judgments,  and  pas- 
isions  of  several  men,  hath  grown  up  into  cere- 
j  monies  so  different,  that  those  which  are  used  by 
t  one  man,  are  for  the  most  pca*t  ridiculous  to  another. 

For  these  seeds  have  received  culture  ft'om  two 
sorts  of  men.  One  sort  have  been  they,  that  have 
nourished,  and  ordered  them,  according  to  their 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  RELIGION.  99 

own  invention.    The  other  have  done  it,  by  God'sj   part  i. 
commandment,  and  direction  :  but  both  sorts  have    -  ^^'    - 
done  it,  with  a  purpose  to  make  those  men  that 
relied  on  them,  the  more  apt  to  obedience,  laws,K 
peace,  charity,  and  civil  society.     So  that  the  reli-\ 
gion  of  the  former  sort,  is  a  part  ofhnman  politics  ; 
and  teacheth  part  of  the  dnty  which  earthly  kings 
require  of  their  subjects.     And  the  reUgion  of  the 
latter  sort  is  ^yinfi^jol^ics  ;  and  containeth  pre- 
cepts to  those  that  have  yielded  themselves  subjects 
in  the  kingdom  of  God.     Of  the  former  sort,  were 
all  the  founders  of  common-wealths,  and  the  law- 
givers of  the  Gentiles :   of  the  latter  sort,  were 
Abraham,  Moses,  and  our  blessed   Saviour ;   by 
whom  have  been  derived  unto  us  the  laws  of  the 
kingdom  of  God. 

And  for  that  part  of  religion,  which  consisteth  J*^®  j*^^^ 
in  opinions  concerning  the  nature  of  powers  invi-  Ocntiiism. 
sibH  there  is  almost  nothing  that  has  a  name,  that 
has  not  been  esteemed  amongst  the  Gentiles,  in  one 
place  or  another,  a  god,  or  devil ;  or  by  their  poets 
feigned  to  be  inanimated,  inhabited,  or  possessed 
by  some  spirit  or  other. 

The  unforme^  matter  of  the  world,  was  a  god, 
by  the  name  of!  Chaos. 

The  heaven,  the  ocean,  the  planets,  the  fire,  the 
earth,  the  winds,  were  so  many  gods. 

Men,  women,  a  bird,  a  crocodile,  a  calf,  a  dog,  a 
snake,  an  onion,  a  leek,  were  deified.  Besides  that, 
they  filled  almost  all  places,  with  spirits  called 
demons:  the  plains,  with  Pan,  and  Panises,  or  Sa- 
tyrs ;  the  woods,  with  Fawns,  and  Nymphs ;  the 
sea,  with  Tritons,  and  otiier  Nymphs  ;  every  river, 
and  fountain,  with  a  ghost  of  his  name,  and  with 

H  2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


t  J' 


100  t)F   MAN. 

Nymphs ;  every  house  with  its  Lares^  or  familiars  j 
every  man  with  his  Genius;  hell  with  ghosts,  and 
The  absurd  \  Spiritual  officers,  as  Charon,  Cerberus,  and  the 
GentSism.  J  Furfes ;   and  in  the  night  time,  all  places  with 
.  -f)    larvte,  lemures,  ghosts  of  men  deceased,  and  a 
yi>'>  ' '  ^  whole  kingdom  of  fairies  and  bugbears.  They  have 
also  ascribed  divinity,  and  built  temples  to  meer 
J  /    accidents,  and  qualities ;  such  as  are  time,  night,  day, 
peace,  concord,  love,  contention,  virtue,  honour, 
health,  rust,  fever,  and  the  like ;  which  when  they 
prayed  for,  or  against,  they  prayeAto,  as  if  there 
were  ghosts  of  those  names  hanging  over  tiieir 
heads,  and  letting  fall,  or  withholding  that  good, 
v/  ror  evil,  for,  or  against  which  they  prayed.    They 
invoked  also  their  own  wit,  by  the  name  of  Muses ; 
)  their  own  ignorance,  by  the  name  of  Fortune ;  their 
;  own  lusts  by  the  name  of  Cupid ;  their  own  rage, 
by  the  name  of  Furies  ;  their  own  privy  members, 
I  by  the  name  of  Priapus ;  and  attributed  their  pollu- 
tions, to  Incubi,  and  Succubse :  insomuch  as  there 
was  nothing,  which  a  pget  could  introduce  as  a 
person  in  his  poem,  which  they  did  not  make  either 
a  gody  or  a  deviL 

The  same  authors  of  the  religion  of  the  Gentiles, 
observing  the  second  ground  for  religion,  which  is 
men's  ignorance  of  causes  ;  and  thereby  their  apt- 
ness to  attribute  their  fortune  to  causes,  on  which 
there  was  no  dependence  at  all  apparent,  took  oc- 
casion to  obtrude  on  their  ignorance,  instead  of 
second  causes,  a  kind  of  second  and  ministerial 
gods;  ascribing  the  cause  of  fecimdity,  to  Venus;  the 
cause  of  arts,  to  Apollo ;  of  subtlety  and  craft,  to 
Mercury ;  of  tempests  and  storms,  to  iEolus ;  and 
of  other  effects,  to  other  gods ;  insomuch  as  there 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  RELIGION. 


101 


was  amongst  the  heathen  ahnost  as  great  variety  of 
gods,  as  of  business. 

And  to  the  worship,  which  naturally  men  con- 
ceived fit  to  be  used  towards  their  gods,  namely, 
oblations,  prayers,  thanks,  and  the  rest  formerly 
named ;  the  same  legislators  of  the  Gentiles  have 
added  their  images,  both  in  picture^  and  sculpture ; 
that  the  more  ignorant  sort,  that  is  to  say,  the  most 
part  or  generality  of  the  people,  thinking  the  ^ds 
for  whose  representation  they  were  made,  were 
really  included,  and  as  it  were  housedwithin  them, 
might  so  much  the  more  stand  in  fear  of  them :  and 
endowed  them  with  lands,  and  houses,  and  officers, 
andjcevenues,  set  apart  from  all  other  human  uses; 
tiM^i^  consecrated,  and  made  holy  to  those  their 
Qdjfef  as  caverns,  groves,  woods,  mountains,  and 
whole  islands ;  and  have  attributed  to  them,  not 
only  the  shapes,  some  of  men,  some  of  beasts,  some 
of  monsters ;  but  also  the  faculties,  and  passions  of 
men  and  beasts :  as  sense,  speech,  sex,  lust,  gene^ 
ration,  and  this  not  only  by  mixing  one  with  another, 
to  propagate  the  kind  of  gods ;  but  also  by  mixing 
with  men,  and  women,  to  beget  mongrel  gods,  and 
but  inmates  of  heaven,  as  Bacchus,  Hercules,  and 
others ;  besides  anger,  revenge,  and  other  passions 
of  living  creatures,  and  the  actions  proceeding  from 
them,  as  fitiud,  theft,  adultery,  sodomy,  and  any 
vice  that  may  be  taken  for  an  eflFect  of  power,  or  a 
cause  of  pleasure ;  and  all  such  vices,  as  amongst 
men  are  taken  to  be  against  law,  rather  than  against 
honour. 

Lastly,  to  the  prognostics  of  time  to  come ;  which 
are  naturally,  but  conjectures  upon  experience  of 
time  past ;  and  supernaturally,  divine  revelation ; 


PART  I. 
12. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


102 


OF  MAN. 


PART  K 
12. 


the  same  authors  of  the  religion  of  the  Gentiles, 
partly  upon  pretended  experience,  partly  upon  pre- 
tended  revelation,  have  added  innumerable  other 
superstitious  ways  of  divmation ;  and  made  men 
believe  they  should  fina  their  fortunes,  sometimes 
in  the  ambiguous  or  senseless  ansvtrers  of  th^^^t^^ 
at  Delphi,  Delos,  Ammon,  and  other  famouipraclesh 
which  answers,  were  made  ambiguous  by  ^USm^ 
to  own  the  event  both  ways ;  or  absurd,  by  the 
intoxicating  vapour  of  the  place,  which  is  very  fre- 
quent in  sulphurous  caverns:   sometimes  in  the 
leaves  of  the  Sybils  ;  of  whose  prophecies,  like  those 
perhaps  of  Nostradamus  (for  the  fragments  now 
extant  seem  to  be  the  invention  of  later  times),  there 
were  some  books  in  reputation  in  the  time  of  the 
Roman  republic:    sometimes  in  the  insignificant 
speeches  of  madmen,  supposed  to  be  possessed  vdth 
a  divine  spirit,  which  possession  they  called  enthu- 
siasm ;  and  these  kinds  of  foretelling  events,  were 
accounted  theomancy,  or  prophecy :  sometimes  in 
the  aspect  of  the  stars  at  their  nativity ;  which  was 
called  horoscopy,  and  esteemed  a  part  of  judiciary 
astrology :  sometimes  in  their  own  hopes  and  fears, 
called  thumomancy,  or  presage :  sometimes  in  the 
prediction  of  witches,  that  pretended  conference 
with  the  dead ;  which  is  called  necromancy,  con- 
juring, and  witchcraft;  and  is  but  juggling  and 
.  confederate  knavery :  sometimes  in  the  casual  flight, 
or  feeding  of  birds ;  called  augury :  sometimes  in 
the  entrails  of  a  sacrificed  beast ;  which  was  arus-- 
picina:  sometimes  in  dreams :  sometimes  in  croak- 
ing of  ravens,  or  chattering  of  birds :  sometimes  in 
the  lineaments  of  the  face ;  which  was  called  me-  - 
toposcopy ;   or  by  palmistry  in  the  lines  of  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  RELIGION.  10^ 

hand ;  in  casual  words,  called  omina :  sometimes  in    part  i. 
monsters,  or  unusual  accidents ;  as  eclipses,  comets,    .    '^-    . 
rare  meteors,  earthquakes,  inundations,  imcouth 
births,  and  the  like,  which  they  called  portenta, 
and  ostentUj  because  they  thought  them  to  portend, 
or  foreshow  some  great  calamity  to  come ;  some- 
times, in  mere  lottery,  as  cross  and  pile ;  coxmting 
holes  in  a  sieve  ;  dipping  of  verses  in  Homer,  and    c^  ,  , 
Virgil ;   and  innumerable  other  such  vain  conceits.       ' 
So  easy  are  men  to  be  drawn  to  believe  any  thing, 
from  such  men  as  have  gotten  credit  with  them ; 
and  can  with  gentleness,  and  dexterity,  take  hold 
of  their  fear,  and  ignorance. 

And  therefore  the  first  founders,  and  legislators  The  designs  of 
of  commonwealths  among  the  Gentiles,  whose  ends  the  rdigionof 
were  only  to  keep  the  people  in  obedience,  and*®^®*^®°' 
peace,  have  in  all  places  taken  care ;  first,  to  im- 
print in  their  minds  a  belief,  that  those  precepts 
which  they  gave  concerning  religion,  might  not  be 
thought  to  proceed  from  their  own  device,  but 
from  the  dictates  of  some  god,  or  other  spirit ;  oi* 
else  that  they  themselves  were  of  a  higher  nature 
than  mere  mortals,  that  their  laws  might  the  more 
easily  be  received :  so  Numa  Pompilius  pretended 
to  receive  the  ceremonies  he  instituted  amongst 
the  Romans,  from  the  nymph  Egeria :  and  the  first 
king  and  founder  of  the  kingdom  of  Peru,  pre- 
tended himself  and  his  wife  to  be  the  children  of 
the  Sun ;  and  Mahomet,  to  set  up  his  new  religion, 
pretended  to  have  conferences  with  the  Holy  Ghost, 
in  form  of  a  dove.  Secondly,  they  have  had  a  care, 
to  make  it  believed,  that  the  same  things  were  dis- 
pleasing to  the  gods,  which  were  forbidden  by  the 
laws.    Thirdly,  to  prescribe  ceremonies,  supplica- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


104  OP  MAN* 

PART  u    tions,  sacrifices,  and  festivals,  by  which  they  were 

.    ^^  _.   to  believe,  the  anger  of  the  gods  might  be  appeased; 

The  designs  of  and  that  ill  success  in  war,  great  contagions  of  sick- 

the  authors  of  .11  -11  <  •       ^  - 

the  religion  of  ncss,  earthquakcs,  and  each  man  s  private  misery, 
the  heathen,  q^j^q  from  the  angcT  of  the  gods,  and  their  anger 
from  the  neglect  of  their  worship,  or  the  forgetting, 
or  mistaking  some  point  of  the  ceremonies  required. 
And  though  amongst  the  ancient  Romans,  men  were 
not  forbidden  to  deny,  that  which  in  the  poets  is 
written  of  the  pains,  and  pleasures  after  this  life : 
which  divers  of  great  authority,  and  gravity  in  that 
state  have  in  their  harangues  openly  derided ;  yet 
that  belief  was  always  more  cherished,  than  the 
contrary. 

And  by  these,  and  such  other  institutions,  they 
obtained  in  order  to  their  end,  which  was  the  peace 
of  the  commonwealth,  that  the  common  people  in 
their  misfortunes,  laying  the  fault  on  neglect,  or 
error  in  their  ceremonies,  or  on  their  own  disobe-> 
dience  to  the  laws,  were  the  less  apt  to  mutiny 
against  their  governors;  and  being  entertained 
with  the  pomp,  and  pastime  of  festivals,  and  public 
games,  made  in  honour  of  the  gods,  needed  nothing 
else  but  bread  to  keep  them  from  discontent,  mur- 
muring, and  commotion  against  the  state.  And 
therefore  the  Romans,  that  had  conquered  the 
greatest  part  of  the  then  known  world,  made  no 
scruple  of  tolerating  any  religion  whatsoever  in 
the  city  of  Rome  itself;  unless  it  had  something  in 
it,  that  could  not  consist  with  their  civil  govern- 
ment ;  nor  do  we  read,  that  any  religion  was  there 
forbidden,  but  that  of  the  Jews ;  who,  being  the 
peculiar  kingdom  of  God,  thought  it  unlawful  to 
acknowledge  subjection  to  any  mortal  king  or  state 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  RELIGION.  105 

whatsoever.     And  thus  you  see  how  the  religion  of    part  i. 
the  Gentiles  was  a  part  of  their  policy.  ^    ^^    ^ 

/  f     But  where  God  himself,  by  supernatural  revela-  The  true  re- 
tion,  planted  religion ;  there  he  also  made  to  himself  i^^^fGod'i 
a  peculiar  kingdom:  and  gave  laws,  not  only  of^*°sdomthe 
behaviour  towards  himself,  but  also  towards  one 
I  another ;  and  thereby  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  the 
'policy,  and  laws  civU,  are  a  part  of  religion ;  and 
therefore  the  distinction  of  temporal,  and  spiritual 
dominatiQn,  hath  there  no  riace»    It  is  true,  that 
Godjs  king  of  afl  the^^arthx!»yet  may  he  be  king 
of  aTpeculiar,  anH'chosen  nation.     For  there  is  no 
more  incongruity  therein,  than  that  he  that  hath 
the  general  command  of  the  whole  army,  should 
have  withal  a  peculiar  regiment,  or  company  of  his 
own.     God  is  king  of  all  the  earth  by  his  powerr^    . 
but  of  his  chosen  people,  he  is  long  by  covenant.   /  ^ 
But  to  speak  more  largely  of  the  kingdom  of  God, 
both  by  nature,  and  covenant,  I  have  in  the  follow- 
ing discourse  assigned  another  place  (chapter  xxxv) . 

From  the  propagation  of  religion,  it  is  not  hard  The  causes  of 
to  imderstand  the  causes  of  the  resolution  of  theii^oa!'** 
same  into  its  first  seeds,  or  principles ;  which  are 
only  an  opinion  of  a  deity,  and  powgrs  invisible, 
and  supernatural ;  that  can  never  be  so  abolished 
out  of  human  nature,  but  that  new  religions  may 
again  be  made  to  spring  out  of  them,  by  the  culture 
of  such  men,  as  for  such  purpose  are  in  reputation. 
For  seeing  all  formed  religion,  is  foxmded  at  first, 
upon  the  faith  which  a  multitude  hath  in  some  one 
^pereon,  whom  they  believe  not  only  to  be  a  wise 
m^^nd  to  labour  to  procure  their  happiness, 
but  also  to  be  a  holy  man^  to  whom  God  himself     v 
vouchsafeth  to  declare  his  will  supernaturally ;  it 


Digitized  by 


Google 


106  OF  MAN. 

PART  I.    foUoweth  necessarily,  when  they  that  have  the  go-- 
^    ^^    .    vemment  of  religion,  shall  come  to  have  either  the 
wisdom  of  those  men,  their  sincerity,  or  their  love 
suspected ;  or  when  they  shall  be  unable  to  show 
any  probable  token  of  divine  revelation ;  that  the 
religion  which  they  desire  to  uphold,  must  be  sus- 
pected likewise ;  and,  without  the  fear  of  the  civil 
sword,  contradicted  and  rejected. 
Silef°of  miP      ''^*  which  taketh  away  the  reputation  of  wis- 
posMbUitiea.  dom,  in  him  that  formeth  a  religion,  or  addeth  to 
it  when  it  is  already  formed,  is  the  enjoining  of  a 
belief  of  contradictories :  for  both  parts  of  a  con- 
tradiction  cannot  pos^bly  be  true :  and  therefore 
to  enjoin  the  bdief  of  Uiem,  is  an  argument  of 
ignorance ;  which  detects  the  author  in  that ;  and 
discredits  him  in  all  things  else  he  shaQ  propound 
as  from  revelation  supernatural :  which  revelation 
a  man  may  indeed  have  of  many  things  above,  but 
of  nothing  against  natural  reason. 
Doing  con-       That  which  taketh  away  the  reputation  of  sin- 

trary  to  the  . 

religion  they  ccrity,  is  the  doiug  or  saying  of  such  things,  as 
establish,  appear  to  be  signs,  that  what  they  require  other 
men  to  believe,  is  not  believed  by  themselves ;  all 
which  doings,  or  sayings  are  therefore  called  scan* 
dalous,  because  they  be  stumbling  blocks,  that  make 
men  to  fall  in  the  way  of  religion ;  as  injustice, 
cruelty,  profaneness,  avarice,  and  luxury.  For  who 
can  believe,  that  he  that  doth  ordinarily  such  actions 
as  proceed  from  any  of  these  roots,  believeth  there 
is  any  such  invisible  power  to  be  feared,  as  he 
aflftighteth  other  men  withal,  for  lesser  faults  ? 

That  which  taketh  away  the  reputation  (rf  love, 
is  the  being  detected  of  private  ends :  as  when  the 
belief  they  require  of  others,  conduceth  or  seemeth 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  RBLIGION.  107 

to  conduce  to  the  acquiring  of  dominion,  riches,    paet  u 
dignity,  or  secure  pleasure,  to  themselves  only,  or   .    ^^    , 
specially.    For  that  which  men  reap  benefit  by  to 
themselves,  they  are  thought  to  do  for  their  own 
sakes,  and  not  for  love  of  others. 

Lastly,  the  testimony  that  men  can  render  of  want  of  the 
divine  calling,  can  be  no  other,  than  the  operation  ^^^J  ^^ 
of  miracles;  or  true  prophecy,  which  also  is  a 
miraciey  or  extraordinary  felicity.  And  therefore, 
to  those  points  of  religion,  which  have  been  received 
from  them  that  did  such  miracles ;  those  that  are 
added  by  such,  as  approve  not  their  calling  by  some 
miracle,  obtain  no  greater  belief,  than  what  the 
custom  and  laws  of  the  places,  in  which  they  be 
educated,  have  wrought  into  them.  For  as  in  na- 
tural things,  men  of  judgment  require  natural  signs, 
and  aiguments ;  so  in  supernatural  things,  they  re* 
quire  ripps  supernatural,  which  are  miracles,  before 
they  consent  inwardly,  and  from  their  hearts* 

All  which  causes  of  the  weakening  of  men's  faith, 
do  manifestly  appear  in  the  examples  following. 
First,  we  have  the  example  of  the  children  of  Israel; 
who  when  Moses,  that  had  approved  his  calling  to 
them  by  miracles,  and  by  the  happy  conduct  of 
them  out  of  Egypt,  was  absent  but  forty  days,  re- 
volted from  the  worship  of  the  true  God,  recom- 
mended to  them  by  him ;  and  setting  up  {Exod. 
xxxiii.  I,  2)  a  golden  calf  for  their  god,  relapsed 
into  the  idolatry  of  the  Egyptians ;  from  whom  they 
had  been  so  lately  delivered.  And  again,  acfter 
Moses,  Aaron,  Joshua,  and  that  generation  which 
had  seen  the  great  works  of  God  in  Israel,  {Judges 
ii.  II)  were  dead;  another  generation  arose,  and 
served  Baal.  So  that  miracles  failmg,  faith  also 
failed. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


108 


OF  MAN. 


PART  I. 
12. 

Want  of  the 
testimony  of 
miracles. 


Again,  when  the  sons  of  Samuel,  (1  JSam.  viii.  3) 
being  constituted  by  their  father  judges  in  Bersabee^ 
received  bribes,  and  judged  unjustly,  the  people  of 
Israel  refused  any  more  to  have  God  to  be  their 
king,  in  other  manner  than  he  was  king  of  other  peo  • 
pie ;  and  therefore  cried  out  to  Samud,  to  chose 
them  a  king  after  the  manner  of  the  nations.  So 
that  justice  failing,  faith  also  failed :  insomuch,  as 
they  deposed  their  God,  from  reigning  over  them 

And  whereas  in  the  planting  of  Christian  religion, 
the  oracles  ceased  in  all  parts  of  the  Roman  empire, 
and  the  number  of  Christians  increased  wonder- 
fiilly  every  day,  and  in  every  place,  by  the  preaching 
of  the  Apostles,  and  Evangelists ;  a  great  part  of 
that  success,  may  reasonably  be  attributed,  to  the 
contempt,  into  which  the  priests  of  the  Gentiles  of 
that  time,  had  brought  themselves,  by  their  un- 
cleanness,  avarice,  and  juggling  between  princes. 
Also  the  religion  of  the  churdi  of  Rome,  was  partly, 
for  the  same  cause  abolished  in  England,  and  many 
other  parts  of  Christendom ;  insomuch,  as  the  fiEuling 
of  virtue  in  the  pastors,  maketh  faith  ftdl  in  the 
people :  and  partly  from  bringing  of  the  philosophy, 
and  doctrine  of  Aristotle  \  into  religion,  by  the 
Schoolmep^l  from  whence  there  arose  so  many  con- 
tradictions, and  absurdities,  as  brought  the  clergy 
into  a  reputation  both  of  ignorance,  and  of  fraudu- 
lent intention ;  and  inclined  people  to  revolt  from 
them,  either  against  the  will  of  their  own  princes, 
as  in  France  and  Holland ;  or  with  their  will,  as  in 
England. 

Lastly,  amongst  the  points  by  the  church  of 
Rome  declared  necessary  for  salvation,  there  be  so 
many,  manifestly  to  the  advantage  of  the  Pope,  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  RELIGION.  109 

of  his  spiritual  subjects,  residing  in  the  territories  of  part  r. 
other  Christian  princes,  that  were  it  not  for  the  .^^  . 
mutual  emulation  of  those  princes,  they  might  with-  Want  of  the 
out  war,  or  trouble,  exclude  all  foreign  authority,  Sradeif  ^ 
as  easily  as  it  has  been  excluded  in  England*  For  ! 
who  is  there  that  does  not  see,  to  whose  benefit  it 
conduceth,  to  have  it  believed,  that  a  king  hath  not 
his  authority  from  Christ,  unless  a  bishop  crown 
him  ?  That  a  king,  if  he  be  a  priest,  cannot  marry? 
That  whether  a  prince  be  bom  in  lawftd  marriage, 
or  not,  must  be  judged  by  authority  from  Rome  ? 
That  subjects  may  be  freed  from  their  allegiance, 
if  by  the  court  of  Rome,  the  king  be  judged  an 
heretic?  That  a  king,  as  Chilperic  of  France, 
may  be  deposed  by  a  pope,  as  Pope  Zachary,  for 
no  cause ;  and  his  kingdom  given  to  one  of  his 
subjects  ?  That  the  clergy  and  regulars,  in  what 
country  soever,  shall  be  exempt  from  the  jurisdic- 
tion of  their  king  in  cases  criminal  ?  Or  who  does 
not  see,  to  whose  profit  redoxmd  the  fees  of  private 
masses,  and  vales  of  purgatory ;  with  other  signs  of 
private  interest,  enough  to  mortify  the  most  lively 
faith,  if,  as  I  said,  the  civil  magistrate,  and  custom 
did  not  more  sustain  it,  than  any  opinion  they 
have  of  the  sanctity,  wisdom,  or  probity  of  their 
teachers  ?  So  that  I  may  attribute  all  the  changes 
of  religion  in  the  world,  to  one  and  the  same 
,  cause ;  and  that  is,  unpleasing  priests ;  and  those 
not  only  amongst  CathoUcs,  but  even  in  that  church 
that  hath  presumed  most  of  reformation. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^1/ 

}M     110  OP  MAN. 


^" 


CHAPTER  XIIL 


OF    THE  (natural    CONDITION    OF    MANKIND    AS 
CONCERNING  THEIR  FEUCIXIC^AND  MISERY. 


Nature  hath  made  mels(&o^qualJ|iii  the  faculties 
of  the  body,  and  mind  rS^^^hough  there  be 
Men  by       found  oBe  man  sometimes  manifestly  stronger  in 

nature  equal.  .•'*-' 

body,  or  of  quicker  mind  than  another ;  yet  when 
all  is  reckoned  togetiier,  the  difference  between 
man^  and  man,  is  not  so  considerable,  as  that  one 

man  can  thftrmprm  g^im  to  frimaftlf  any  hpnAfit^  ±n 

xvhtn^  PiRftthfr  TT^y  n^t  rTAt^nd^  m  wri]  n^Mhr  For 
as  to  the  strei^h  of  body,  the  weakest  has  strength 
enough  to  kill  the  strongest,  either  by  secret  ma- 
chination, or  by  confederacy  with  others,  that  are 
in  the  same  danger  with  himself. 

And  as  to  the  faculties  of  the  inind,  setting  aside 
the  arts  grounded  upon  words,  and  especially  that 
skill  of  proceeding  upon  general,  and  infallible  rules, 
called  science ;  which  very  few  have,  and  but  in 
few  thiiigs;  as  being  not  a  native  faculty,  bom 
with  us  J  niwr  attained,  as  prudence,  while  we  look 
after  somewhat  else,  I  find  yet  a  greater  equality 
amongst  men,  than  that  of  strength.  For  prudence, 
is  but  experience ;  which  equal  time,  equally  be- 
stows on  aQ  men,  in  those  things  they  equally  apply 
themselves  unto.  That  wl^h  may  perhaps  mieike 
such  equality  incredible,  is  but  a  vain  conceit  of 
one's  own  wisdom,  which  almost  all  men  think  they 
have  in  a  greater  degree,  than  the  vulgar ;  that  is, 
than  all  men  but  themselves,  and  a  few  others, 
whom  by  fame,  or  for  concurring  with  themselves. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


NATURAL  CONDITION  OF  MANKIND.         Ill 

they  approve.  For  such  is  the  nature  of  men,  that  part  i. 
howsoever  they  may  acknowledge  many  others  to  .  ^f •  . . 
be  more  witty,  or  more  eloquent,  or  more  learned ; 
yet  they  will  hardly  believe  there  be  many  so  wise 
as  themselves ;  for  they  see  their  own  wit  at  hand, 
and  other  men's  at  a  distance.  But  this  proveth 
rather  that  men  are  in  that  point  equal,  than  un- 
equal. For  there  is  not  ordinarily  a  greater  sign 
of  the  equal  distribution  of  any  thing,  than  that 
every  man  is  contented  with  his  share*  .. — ^ 

From  this  equality  of  ability,  ariseth  equality  of  Fromequa-  \ 
hope  in  the  attaining  of  our  ends.    And  therefore  a^Jen^*^ 

(if  any  two  men  desire  the  same  thing,  which  never- 
theless they  cannot  both  enjoy,  they  become  ene- 
mies ;  and  in  the  way  to  their  end,  which  is  pnn- 
cipally  their  own  conservation,  and  sometimes  their 
delectation  only,  endeavour  to  destroy,  or  subdue 
one  another.  And  from  hence  it  comes  to  pass, 
that  where  an  invader  hath  no  more  to  fear,  than 
another  man's  single  power;  if  one  plant,  sow, 
build,  or  possess  a  convenient  seat,  others  may  pro- 
bably be  expected  to  come  prepared  with  forces 
united,  to  dispossess,  and  deprive  him,  not  only  of 
the  fruit  of  his  labour,  but  also  of  his  life,  or  liberty. 
And  the  invader  again  is  in  the  like  danger  of 
another. 

And  from  this  difl&dence  of  one  another,  there  is  From^MK 
no  way  for  any  man  to  secure  himself,  so  reason-  •"t'^^J 
able,  as  agtisiBatigB ;  that  is,  by  force,  or  wiles,  to 
master  the  persons  of  all  men  he  can,  so  long,  till 
he  see  no  other  power  great  enough  to  endanger 
him :  and  this  is  no  more  than  his  own  conserva- 
tion requireth,  and  is  generally  allowed.  Also  be- 
cause there  be  some,  that  taking  pleasure  in  con- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


112  OF  MAN. 

?ART  I,  templating  their  own  power  in  the  acts  of  conquest, 
^„  ^f'  „.  which  they  pursue  farther  than  their  security  re- 
From  diffi.  quircs ;  if  others,  that  otherwise  would  be  glad  to 
be  at  ease  within  modest  bounds,  shoidd  not  by  in- 
yasion  increase  their  power,  they  would  not  be  able, 
long  time,  by  standing  only  on  their  defence,  to 
subsist.  And  by  consequence,  such  augmentation  of 
dominion  over  men  being  necessary  to  a  man's 
conservation,  it  ought  to  be  allowed  him. 

Again,  men  have  no  pleasure,  but  on  the  con- 
trary a  great  deal  of  grief,  in  keeping  company, 
where  there  is  no  power  able(to  over-awejthem  aU. 
For  every  man  looketh  that  his  companion  should 
value  him,  at  the  same  rate  he  sets  upon  himself; 
^^-  and  upon  all  signs  of  contempt,  or  undervaluing^ 

naturally  endeavours,  as  far  as  he  dares,  (which 
amongst  them  that  have  no  common  power  to  keep 
them  in  qui^is  far  enough  to  make  them  destroy 
each  other),  to  extort  a  greater  value  from  his  con- 
temners, by  damage;   and  from  others,  by  the 
example, 
^  y       So  that  in  the  nature  of  man,  we  find  three  prin- 
\    cipal  causes  of  (quarrel.  )  First,  competition ;  se-  ^ 
^  condly,  difiBidence  ;  thirdly,  glory. 

The  first,  maketh  men  invade  for  gain ;  the  se- 
cond, for  safety;  and  the  third,  for  reputation. 
The  first  use  violence,  to  make  themselves  masters 
of  other  men's  persons,  wives,  children,  and  cattle ; 
the  second,  to  defend  them ;  the  third,  for  trifles, 
as  a  word,  a  smile,  a  different  opinion,  and  any 
other  sign  of  xmdervalue,  either  direct  in  their  per- 
sons, or  by  reflection  in  their  kindred,  their  friends, 
their  nation,  their  profession,  or  their  name. 
Hereby  it  is  manifest,  that  during  the  time  men 


Digitized  by 


Google 


V 

NATURAL  CONDITION  OF  MANKtND. 


live  without  a  commoxi^pQwer  to  keep  them  all  in    part  i. 
awe,  they  are  in  that  condition  which  is  called  way ;    .  „  ^^'  , . 
and  such  a  war,  as  is  of  every  man^  against  every  Outof  dTii 
man.     For  war,  consisteth  not  in  bdttle  only,  orlh^,w^<H^ 
the  act  of  fighting ;  but  in  a  tract  of  time^  wherein  ^^^^^ery 
the  will  to  contend  by  battigjgsufficiently  known :  o»«* 
and  therefore  the  notion  qfj^^^s-to  be  considered       q 
in  the  nature  of  war ;  as  itiimthe  nat^ore  of  wea^ 
ther.     For  as  the  nature  of  foul  weather,  lieth  not 
in  a  shower  or  two  of  rain  ;  but  in  an  inclination 
thereto  of  many  days  together :  so  the  nature  of 
war,  consisteth  not  in  actual  fighting ;  but  in  the 
jmown  disposition  thereto,  during  all  the  time  there 
Is  no  assurance  to"  the  contrary*    All  other  time  is 
peace. 

Whatsoever  therefore  is  consequent  to  a  time  of  J^«  moomroo- 

.  *  aides  of  lacB 

war,  where  every  man  is  enemy  to  every  man ;  the  »  war. 
same  is  consequent  to  the  time,' wherein  men  live 
without  other  security,  than  what  their  Own  strength^ 
and  their  own  invention  shall  furnish  them  withal. 
In  such  condition,  .there  is  no  place  for  industry ;  I 
because  the  fruit  thereof  is  uncertain  :  and  conse- 
quently no  culture  of  the  earth ;  no  navigation,  nor       0  ^ 
use  of  the  commodities  that  may  be  imported  by 
sea ;  no  commodious  building ;  no  instruments  of 
moving,  and  removing,  such  things  as  require  much 
force ;  no  knowledge  of  the  face  of  the  earth  ;  no 
account  of  time ;  no  arts ;  no  letters ;  no  society  ;  * 
and  which  is  worst  of  all,  continual  fear,  and  dan*    ^        ^ 
Rgr  of  violent  death ;  and  the^Kfeof  man,  solitary,  (| 
pooTj^^nafity^^brati^^  and  short.  ^ 

It  may  seem  strange  to  some  man,  that  has  not  5^ 

well  weighed  these  things ;  that  nature  should  thus 
dissociate,  and  render  men  apt  to  invade,  and  de- 
VOL.  III.  I  , 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


114  OP  MAN. 

JPART  I.    stroy  one  another :   and  he  may  therefore,  not 

^    ^f'   ^    trosting  to  this  inference,  made  from  the  passions. 

The  inwinmo.  desire  perhaps  to  have  the  same  confirmed  by  ex- 

dities  of  such  ^        ,  *  • 

war.  ^perience.    Let  him  therefore  consider  with  him- 

self, when  taking  a  journey,  he  arms  himself,  and 
seeks  to  gp  well  accompanied;  when  going  to 
sleep,  he{1[ock^his  doors ;  when  even  in  his  house 
he  locks  his  chests ;  and  this  when  he  knows  there 
be  laws,  and. public  officers,  armed,  to  revenge  all 
injuries  shall  be  done  him;  what' opinion  he  has  of 
his  fellow-subjects,  when  he  rides  armed ;  of  his 
fellow  citizens,  when  he  locks  his  doors ;  and  of 
his  children,  and  servants,  when  he  locks  his  chests. 
Does  he  not  there  as  much  accuse  mankind  by  his 
,  actions,  as  I  do  by  my  words  ?  i  But  neither  of  us 
^  accuse  man's  nature  in  it.  The  desires,  and  other 
passions  of  man,  are  in  themselves  no  sin.  No 
more  are  the  actions,  that  proceed  from  those  pas- 
sions, till  they  know  a  law  that  forbids  them : 
"(  which  till  laws  be  made  they  cannot  know :  nor 
can  any  law  be  made,  till  they  have  agreed  upon 
the  person  that  shall  make  it. 

It  may  peradventure  be  thought,  there  was  never 
such  a  time,  nor  condition  of  war  as  this  ;  and  I 
believe  rit  was  never  generally  so^>  over  all  the 
world :  but  there  are  many  places,  where  they  live 
so  "now)  For  the  savage  people  in  many  places  of 
America,  except  the  government  of  small  families, 
the  concord  whereof  dependeth  on  natural  lust, 
have  no  government  at  all ;  and  live  at  this  day  in 
that  brutish  manner,  as  I  said  before.  Howsoever, 
it  may  be  perceived  what  manner  of  life  there 
would  be,  where  there  were  no  common  power  to 
fear,  by  the  manner  of  life,  which  men  that  have 


^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


NATURAL  CONDITION  OP  MANKIND.         1 15 

formerly  lived  under  a  peaceful  government,  use  to    part  r. 
degenerate  into,  in  a  civil  war.     ,^ .  .  Vf*    . 

But  though  there  had  never  been  any  time,      y 
wherein  particular  men  were  m  a  condition  of  war 
one  against  another ;  yet  in  all  times,  kings,  and 
l)ersons   of  sovereign  authority,  because  of  their 


V, 


\u 


-r 


independency,  are  in  continual  jealousies,  and  in  i . 
the  state  and  posture  of  gladiators;  having  their 
weapons  pointing,  and  their  eyes  fixed  on  one  ano- 
ther ;  that  is,  their  forts,  garrisons,  and  guns  upon 
the  frontiers  of  their  kingdoms ;  and  continual 
spies  upon  their  neighbours ;  which  is  a  posture  of 
wan  But  because  they  uphold  thereby,  the  indus- 
try of  their  subjects  ;  there  does  not  follow  from  it, 
that  misery,  which  accompanies  the  liberty  of  par- 
ticular men.  ^ 

To  this  (war  of  every  m^n,  against  every  man>  in  such  a 
thisalso  is  consequent ;  that  nothing  can  be  unjust,  ll^iljust!"^ 
The  notions  of  right  and  wrong,  justice  and  injustice 
have  there  no  place.  Where  there  is  no  common 
power,  there  is  no  law :  where  no  law,  no  injustice. 
Force,  and  fraud,  are  in  war  the  two  cardinal  vir- 
tara>  Justice,  and  injustice  are  none  of  the  facul- 
ties neither  of  the  body,  nor  mind.  If  they  were, 
"they  might  be  in  a  man  that  were  alone  in  the 
world,  as  well  as  his  senses,  and  passions.  They 
are  qualities,  that  relate  to  men  in  society,  not  in 

(solitude^  It  is  consequent  also  to  the  same  condi- 
tion, that  there  be  no  propriety,  no  dominion,  no 
mine  and  tkine  distinct ;  but  only  that  to  be  every 
m&a%  that  he  can  get;    and  for  so  long,  as  he  ^    [\i 

^dan  keep  it.  And  thus  much  for  the  ill  condi- 
tion, which  man  byTmere  nature)is  actually  placed 
in;  thot^h  with  a  possibility  to  come  out  of  it, 

I  2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


116  OT  MAN. 

PART  K    consisting  partly  in  the  passions,   partly   in  hi^ 

.    ^f-    .    reason.  ^ 

The  passions  /     The  pas^ions  that  incline  men  to  peace,  arqfrcar 

«:i  toS^  of  death  Jdesire  of  such  things  as  are  necessarfb 

/   commomons  living ;  and  a  hope  by  their  industry 

^    to  obtain  them.    And  reason  su^esteth  convenient 

articles  of  peace,  upon  which  men  may  be  drawn 

to  agreement.     These  articles,   are  they,  which 

otherwise  are  called  the  Laws  of  Nature :  whereof  I 

shall  speak  more  particuiarly7m  iiieTwo  following 

chapters. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


OP  THE  FIRST  AND  SECOND  NATURAL  LAWS,  AND 
O^  CONTRACTS. 

Right  of  nature  The  liiGHT  OF  NATURE,  which  Writers  commonly 

^*'*^*  call  jus  naturale,  is  the  liberty  each  man  hath,  to 

^^  use  his  own  power,  as  he  will  himself,  for  the  pre- 
servation  of  his  own  nature ;  that  is  to  say,  of  his 
own  life ;  and  consequentiy,  of  doing  any  thing, 
which  in  his  own  judgment,  and  reason,  he  shall 
conceive  to  be  the  aptest  means  thereunto. 

Liberty  what.  gy  LIBERTY,  is  undcrstood,  accordiug  to  the 
proper  signification  of  the  word,  the  absence  of  ex- 
V  temal  impediments  :  which  impediments,  may  oft 
take  away  part  of  a  man's  power  to  do  what  he 
would;  but  cannot  hinder  him  from  using  the 
power  left  him,  according  as  his  judgment,  and 
reason  shall  dictate  to  him. 

whUiL^^"*^^*"  A  LAW  OF  NATURE,  lex  uaturalis,  is  a  precept 
or  general  rule,  found  out  by  reason,  by  which  a 


Digitized  by 


Google 


NATURAL  LAWS.  1 1? 

man  is  forbidden  to  do  that,  -which  is  destructive   part  i. 
of  his  life,  or  taketh  away  the  means  of  preserving    .    ^^    .  , 
the  same ;  and  to  omit  that,  by  which  he  thinketh 
it  may  be  best  preserved.     For  though  they  that 
speak  of  this  subject,  use  to  confoun^yi*^,  and  lex^ 
right  and  law:  yet  they  ought  to  be  distmguished  ^,    -^  ^ 

because  right,  consisteth  in  liberty  to  do,  or  io^'^^^^^^^^^  3 
forbear ;  whereas  law,  determineth,  and  bindeth "-  *° 

to  one  of  them :  so  that  law,  and  right,  diflFer  as"^ 

much,  as  obligation,  and  liberty ;  which  in  one  and 
the  same  matter  are  inconsistent. 

And  because  the  condition  of  man,  as  hath  been  Naturally 
declared  in  the  precedent  chapter,  is  a  condition  of  has  nght  to 
war  of  every  one  against  every  one ;  in  which  case  ^^®'^  ^^*"^* 
every  one  is  governed  by  lUs  own  reason;  and 
there  is  nothing  he  can  make  use  of,  that  may  not 
be  a  help  unto  him,  in  preserving  his  life  against 
his  enemies ;  it  followeth,  that  in  such  a  condition, 
every  man  has  a  right  to  every  thing ;  even  toone  , 
Imotners  body.     And  therefore,  as  long  as  this  na-  ; 
tural  rigiit  of  every  man  to  every  tiling  endureth, 
there  can  be  no  security  to  any  man,  how  strong 
or  wise  soever  he  be,  of  living  out  the  time,  which 
nature  ordinarily  alloweth  men  to  live.     And  con-        f^    / 
sequently  it  is  a  precept,  or  general  rulg^  reason, 
that  every  man^  Qjigii  to  endeavouf(p^^k  a^far\ 
as  he  has  hope  of  ohtaining  it;  andtdlSenhe  can^^ 
jiot  obtain  it,  that  he  may  seek,  and  use,  all  helps, 
and  advantages  of  war.   The  firs(  branch  of  which 

(rule,  containeth  the  jftrst,  and  ftuddamentallaw/of 
nature  ;  which  is,  to  seekjaeac^,  I  and  follow  it. 
The  second,  the  sum  dRU^  ngnt?  ol  nature;  which^ 
is,  hy  all  means  we  can,  to  defend  ourselves. 
From  this  fundamental  law  of  nature,  by  which 


be  f  undamen- 
I  law  of-MU 


Digitized  by 


Google 


t 


^         118  OP  MAN. 

PAM!-r.    men  are  commanded  to  endeavour  peace.  Is  derived 
. ,  '^-    .    this  second  law ;  that  a  man  be  willing^  when 

Thesecondiaw  others  are  8o  too,  a^  far-forth^  as  for  peace ^  and 
defence  of  himself  ^^  ^haU  think  it  necessary,  to 
Imj^  down  this  right  to  all  things:  and  be  con- 
tented with  so  much  liberty  against  other  men,  as 
he  would  allow  other  men  against  himself.  For  as 
long  as  every  man  holdeth  this  right,  of  doing  any 
thing  he  liketh ;  so  long  are  all  men  in  the  condi- 
tion of  war.  But  if  other  men  will  not  lay  down 
their  right,  as  well  as  he  ;  then  there  is  no  reason 
for  any  one,  to  divest  himself  of  his  :  for  that  were 
to  expose  himself  to  prey,  which  no  man  is  bound 
to,  rather  than  to  dlispose  himself  to  peace*  This 
is  that  law  of  the  Gosp^f;  whatsoever  you  require 
that  others  shoutdrdo  to  you,  that  do  ye  to  them. 
And  that  law  of  all  men,  quod  tibi  fieri  nan  vis, 
yalteri  nefeceris. 

What  it  is  t/      To  lay  down  a  man's  right  to  any  thing,*  is  to 

ay  ^^own  a  ^^^^gf  himself  of  thc  Hbcrtyj  of  hindering  another 
^  of  the  benefit  of  his  own  right  to  the  same.  For 
he  that  renouneeth,  or  passeth  away  his  right, 
giveth  not  to  any  other  man  a  right  which  he  had 
not  before ;  because  there  is  nothing  to  which 
every  man  had  not  right  by  nature:  but  only 
standeth  out  of  his  way,  )that  he  may  enjoy  his  own 
original  right,  without  hindrance  from  him ;  not 
without  hindrance  from  another.  So  that  the 
effect  which  redoundeth  to  one  man,  by  another 
man's  defect  of  right,  is  but  so  much  diminution  of 
impediments  to  the  use  of  his  own  right  original. 

^H'wh^tftb.  Right  is  laid  aside,  either  by  simply  renouncing 
it ;  or  by  transferring  it  to  another.  By  simply 
RENOUNCING ;  wlieu  he  cares  not  to  whom  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


NATURAL  LAWS.  119 

benefit  thereof  redoundeth.     By  transfbrring  ;    part  i. 
when  he  intendeth  the  benefit  thereof  to  some  cer-    ^    ^*-    . 
tain  person,  or  persons*    And  when  a  man  hath  in rf'h^wh]^ 
either  manner  abandoned,  or  grarxted  away  his  obUgation. 
right ;  then  is  he  said  to  be  obliged^  or  bound, 
not  to  hinder  those,  to  whom  snch  righFis  granted, 
or  abandoned,  from  the  benefit  of  it :  and  that  he 
ought  J  and  it  is  his  duty,  not  to  make  void  that  '^"^y- 
Tolontary  act  of  his  own :  and  that  such  hindrance 
is  INJUSTICE,  and  injury,  as  being  sine  jure;  H^^^^- 
the  right  being  before  renounced,  or  transferred. 
So  that  injury,  or  injustice,  in  the  controversies  of 
the  world,  is  8Pt$mewhat  like  to  that,  which  in  the 
disputations  of  scholars  is  called  absurdity.    For  ?  ? 
as  it  is  there  called  an  absurdifyTto^contradict 
wliof  rnriA  maiiifQini^/^  in  »>ig  he^pmnp; :  so  in  the 

world,  it  is  called  injustice,  and  injury,  voluntarily 
to  undo  that,  which  from  the  beginning  he  had 
voluntarily  done.  The  way  by  which  a  man  either 
simply  renounceth,  or  transferreth  his  right,  is  a 
declaration,  or  signification,  by  some  voluntary  and 
sufficient  sign,  or  signs,  that  he  doth  so  renounce, 
or  transfer;  or  hath  so  renounced,  or  transferred 
the  same,  to  him  that  accepteth  it.  And  these 
signs  are  either  words  only,  or  actions  only ;  or, 
as  it  happeneth  most  often,  both  words,  and  ac- 
tions. And  the  same  are  the  bonds,  by  which 
men  are  bound,  and  obliged:  bonds,  that  have/' 
;  their  strength,  not  from  their  own  nature,  for  no- 
/  thing  is  more  easily  broken  than  a  man's  word,  but 
from  fear  of  some  evil  consequence  upon  the 
!  rupture. 

Whensoever  a  man  transferreth  his  right,  or  re- 
nounceth it ;  it  is  either  in  consideration  of  some 


Digitized  by 


Google 


120  OF  MAN. 

right  reciprocally  transferred  to  himself;    or  for 
ome  other  good  he  hopeth  for  thereby.     For  it  is 
voluntary  act :  and  of  the  voluntary  acts  of  every 
ian,  tHe  object  is  some  good  to  himself. \  And 
therefore  there  be  some  ngnts,  whicii  no  man  can 
be  understood  by  any  words,  or  other  signs,  to 
ave  abandoned,  or  transferred.    As  first  a  man 
ot  lay  down  the  right  of  resisting  them,  that 
_sault  him  by  force,  to  take  away  his  life ;  because 
he  cannot  be  understood  to  aim  thereby,  at  any 
good  to  himself.    The  same  may  be  said  of  wounds, 
and  chains,  and  imprisonment ;  both  because  there 
is  no  benefit  consequent  to  such  patience ;  as  there 
is  to  the  patience  of  suflFering  another  to  be  wounded, 
or  imprisoned :  as  also  because  a  man  cannot  teU, 
when  he  seeth  men  proceed  against  him  by  vio- 
lence, whether  they  intend  his  death  or  not.     And  . 
lastly  the  motive,  and  end  for  which  this  renoun-  1 
cing,  and  traasferring  of  right  is  introduced,  is  | 
nothing  else  but  the  security  of  aman^s  person,  in  1 
his  life,  and  in  the  means  of  so  preserving  life,  as  • 
not  to  be  weary  of  it.    And  therefore  if  a  man  by  ; 
words,  or  other  signs,  seem  to  despoil  himself  of 
the  end,  for  which  those  signs  were  intended ;  he 
is  not  to  be  understood  as  if  he  meant  it,  or  that  it 
was  his  will ;  but  that  he  was  ignorant  of  how  such 

,  "^      \      words  and  actions  were  to  be  interpreted. 

Contwct  fa»^u     The  mutual  transferring  of  right,  is  that  which 

-  ^-3^      men  call  contract. 

There  is  diflFerence  between  transferring  of  right 
to  the  thing ;  and  transferring,  or  tradition,  that  is 
delivery  of  the  thing  itself.  For  the  thing  may  be 
delivered  together  with  the  translation  of  the  right ; 
as  in  buying  and  selling  with  ready- money ;  or  ex- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


NATURAL  LAWS.  121 

change  of  goods,  or  lands :  and  it  may  be  delivered    part  i. 
6ome  time  after.  .  V^-    . 

Again,  one  of  the  contractors,  may  deliver  the 
thing  contracted  for  on  his  part,  and  leave  the 
other  to  perform  his  part  at  some  determinate  time 
nftej^  aud  in  the  mean  time  be  trusted ;  and  then 
tie  contract  on  his  part,  is  called  pact,  or  cove-  c^vcnantwhat. 
NA]gT :  or  both  parts  may  contract  now,  to  periorm  V 
ne^after :  in  which  cases,  he  that  is  to  perform  in 
time  to  come,  being  trusted,  his  performance  is 
called  keeping  of  promise^  or  faith ;  and  the  fail- 
ing of  performance,  if  it  be  voluntary,  violation  of 
faith. 

When  the  transferring  of  right,  is  not  mutual : 
but  one  of  the  parties  transferreth,  in  hope  to  gain 
thereby  friendship,  or  service  from  another,  or  from 
his  friends ;  or  in  hope  to  gain  the  reputation  of  I 
charity,  or  magnanimity ;  or  to  deliver  his  mind 
from  the  pain  of  compassion ;  or  in  hopg-otfJ^ward 
in  heaven ;  this  is  not  contract,  but  ^TFTi/^REE-  Free-gift. 
gift,  grace  :  which  words  signify  oreaiid  the 
same  thing. 

^  Signs  of  contract,  are  either  express,  or  hy  iV  signs  of  con- 
ference.  Express,  are  words  spoken  with  under-  ^*^^  ^^"P"^'*®- 
standing  of  what  they  signify :  and  such  words  are 
either  of  the  time  present ,  or  past;  as,  /  give,  I 
grant,  I  have  given,  I  hwoe  granted,  I  will  thai 
this  he  yours  :  or  of  the  future ;  as,  /  will  give,  I 
will  grant :  which  words  of  the  future  are  called 

PROMISE.  ProiDwc 

Signs  by  inference,  are  sometimes  the  conse- sigA  of 
quence  of  wordT;  sometimes  the  consequence  oV^i^^^l^^ 
silence ;   sometimes  the  consequence  of  actions ; 
sometimes  the  consequence  of  forbearing  an  action : 


Digitized  by 


Google 


122  OF  MAN.  V-— 

PART  I.    and  generally  a  sign  by  inference,  of  any  contract^ 
^ — ^ — '    is  whatsoever  suflSciently  argues  the  will  of  the 
^  contractor. 

ft^b^wo^^  y^dgsflloiie,  if  they  be  of  the  time  to  come,  and 
of  the  present  contain  a  bare  promise,  are  an  insufficient  sign  of 
°'^^''*  a  free-gift,  and  therefore  not  obligatory.     For  if 

they  be  of  the  time  to  come,  as  to-morrow  I  will 
give,  they  are  a  sign  I  have  not  given  yet,  and 
consequently  that  my  right  is  not  transferred,  but 
remaineth  till  I  transfer  it  by  some  other  act.    But 
if  the  words  be  of  the  time  present,  or  past,  as,  / 
have  giveuy  or,  do  give  to  be  delivered  to-morrow, 
then  is  my  to-morrow's  right  given  away  to  day ; 
and  that  by  the  virtue  of  the  words,  though  there 
were  no  other  argument  of  my  will.    And  there  is 
a  great  difference  in  the  signification   of  these 
words,  volo  hoc  tuum  esse  eras,  and  crets  daho  ; 
that  is,  between  /  will  that   this   he  thine  to^ 
morrow,  and,  /  will  give  it  thee  to-mjorrow:  for 
the  word  /  will,  in  the  former  manner  of  speech, 
signifies  an  act  of  the  will  present ;  but  in  the 
latter,  it  signifies  a  promise  of  an  act  of  the  will  to 
come :  and  therefore  the  former  words,  being  of 
the  present,  transfe/a  future  right )  the  latter,  that 
be  of  the  future,  transfer  nothing.     But  if  there  be 
other  signs  of  the  will  to  transfer  a  right,  besides 
words ;  then,  though  the  gift  be  free,  yet  may  the 
right  be  imderstood  to  pass  by  words  of  the  future : 
as  if  a  man  propound  a  prize  to  him  that  comes 
first  to  the  end  of  a  race,  the  gift  is  free ;  and 
though  the  words  be  of  the  future,  yet  the  right 
passeth  :  for  if  he  would  not  have  his  words  so  be 
understood,  he  should  not  have  let  them  run. 
In  contracts,  the  right  passeth,  not  only  where 


Digitized  by 


Google 


NATURAL  LAWS.  123 

the  words  are  of  the  time  present,  or  past,  but  also    part  i. 
where  they  are  of  the  future  :  because  all  contract   .    ^^'    .  ^ 
JH   mntuaJ   translation,   or  change  of  ^^h^^S3  signs  of  con- 
therefore  he  that  promiseth  only,  because  he  hathb^thoruir*^ 
already  received  the  benefit  for  which  he  promiseth,  ^* Vut^re"^' 
is  to  be  understood  as  if  he  intended  the  right 
should  pass :  for  unless  he  had  been  content  to 
have  his  words  so  understood,  the  other  would  not 
have  performed  his  part  first.     And  for  that  cause, 
in  buying,  and  selling,  and  other  acts  of  contract, 
(a  promise  is  equivalent  to  a  covenant^  and  there- 
fore obUgatory. 

He  that  performeth  first  in  the  case  of  a  con-  Merit  what. 
tract,  is  said  to  merit  that  which  he  is  to  receive 
by  the  performance  of  the  other ;  and  he  hath  it  as 
due.  Also  when  a  prize  is  propounded  to  many, 
which  is  to  be  given  to  him  only  that  winneth ;  or 
money  is  thrown  amongst  many,  to  be  enjo;pd  by 
them  that  catch  it ;  though  this  be  afree  gift  i  yet  " ^ 
so  to  win,  or  so  to  catch,  is  to  merit,  and  to  hscve  it 
as  DUE.  For  the  right  is  transferred  in  the  pro- 
pounding of  the  prize,  and  in  throvring  dovni  the 
money;  though  it  be  not  determined  to  whom, 
but  by  the  event  of  the  contention.  But  there  is 
between  these  two  sorts  of  merit,  this  difference, 
that  in  contract,  I  merit  by  virtue  of  my  ovra  power, 
and  the  contractor's  need ;  but  in  this  case  of  free 
gift,  I  am  enabled  to  merit  only  by  the  benignity 
of  the  giver :  in  contract,  I  merit  at  the  contractor's 
hand  that  he  should  depart  vnth  his  right ;  in  this 
case  of  gift,  I  merit  not  that  the  giver  should  part 
with  his  right ;  but  that  when  he  has  parted  with 
it,  it  should  be  mine,  rather  than  another's.  And 
this  I  think  to  be  the  meaning  of  that  distinctioa 


Digitized  by 


Google 


124 


OF  MAN. 


PART  I, 
14. 


Covenants  of 
mutual  trust,' 
when  inralid. 


of  the  Schools,  between  meritum  congruiy  and 
meritum  condigni.  For  God  Almighty,  having 
promised  Para^se  to  those  men,  hoodwinked  with 
carnal  desires,  that  can  walk  through  this^  world 
according  to  the  precepts,  and  limits  prescribed  by 
him ;  they  say,  he  that  shall  so  walk,  shall  merit 
Paradise  ex  congriio.  But  because  no  man  can 
demand  a  right  to  it,  by  his  own  righteousness,  or 
any  other  power  in  himself,  but  by  the  free  grace 
of  God  only ;  they  say,  no  man  can  merit  Paradise 
ex  condigno.  This  I  say,  I  think  is  the  meaning 
of  that  distinction ;  but  because  disputers  do  not 
agree  upon  the  signification  of  their  own  terms  of 
art,  longer  than  it  serves  their  turn ;  I  will  not 
afiKrm  any  thing  of  their  meaning :  only  this  I  say ; 
(When  a  gift  is  given  indefinitely,  as  a  prize  to  be 
contended  for,  he  that  winneth  meriteth,  and  may 
claim  the  prize  as  due. 

If  a  covenant  be  made,  wherein  neither  f  f  the 
parties  perform  presently,  but  trust  one  another; 
in  the  condition  of  mere  nature,  which  is  a  condi- 
tion of  war  of  every  man  against  every  man,  upon 
any  reasonable  suspicion,  it  is  void  :  but  if  there  be 
a  conmion  power  set  over  them  both,  with  right 
and  force  sufficient  to  compel  performance,  it  is 
not  void.  For  he  that  performeth  first,  has  no  as- 
surance the  other  will  perform  after ;  because  the 
fronds  of  words  are  too  weak  to  bridle  men's  am- 
H)ition,  avarice,  anger,  and  other  passions,  without 
the  fear  of  some  coercive  powerljjwhich  in  the  con- 
dition of  mere  nature,  where  alfiiien  are  equal,  and 
judges  of  the  justness  of  their  own  fears,  cannot 
possibly  be  supposed.  And  therefore  he  which 
performeth  first,  does  but  betray  himself  to  hig 


Digitized  by 


Google 


NATURAL  LAWS,  126 

enemy ;  contrary  to  the  right,  he  can  never  aban-    part  i. 
don,  of  defending  his  life,  and  means  of  living.  L  ^^'    ^ 

But  in  a  ciyU  estate,  where  there  is  a  power  set 
up  to  constrain  those  that  would  otherwise  violate  ! 
their  faith>  that  fear  is  no  more  reasonable ;  and     \^ 
for  that  cause,  he  which  by  the  covenant  is  to  per-  ) 
form  first,  is  obliged  so  to  do. 

The  cause  of  fear,  which  maketh  such  a  covenant 
invalid,  must  be  always  something  arising  after  the 
covenant  made ;  as  some  new  fact,  or  other  sign  of 
the  will  not  to  perform :  else  it  cannot  make  the 
covenant  void.  For  that  which  could  not  hinder  a 
man  from  promising,  ought  not  to  be  admitted  as 
a  hindrance  of  performing. 

He  that  transferreth  any  right,  transferreth  the  Right  to  the 

^         •       .         .^  ^  I*    li     •       1  •  end,  containeth 

means  of  enjoying  it,  as  far  as  lieth  m  his  power,  right  to  the 
As  he  that  selleth  land,  is  understood  to  transfer  ™®*"'* 
the  herbage,  and  whatsoever  grows  upon  it :  nor 
can  he  that  sells  a  mill  turn  away  the  stream  that 
drives  it.  And  they  that  give  to  a  man  the  right 
of  government  in  sovereignty,  are  understood  to 
give  him  the  right  of  levying  money  to  maintain 
soldiers;  and  of  appointing  magistrates  for  the 
administration  of  justice. 

To  make  covenants  with  brute  beasts,  is  impossi-  No  covenant 
ble;  because  not  understanding  our  speech,  they'''^^^"^ 
imderstand  not,  nor  accept  of  any  translation  of 
right ;  nor  can  translate  any  right  to  another :  and 
without  mutual  acceptation,  there  is  no  covenant. 

CTo  make  covenant  with  GodJ  is  impossible,  but  Nor  with  Ood 
by  mediation  of  sucn  as  liod  speaketh  to,  either  by  meiaioiT^"* 
revelation  supernatural,  or  by  his  lieutenants  that 
govern  under  him,  and  in  his  name  :  for  otherwise 
we  know  not  whether  our  covenants  be  accepted. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


126  OF  MAN. 

PART  I.     or  not.     And  therefore  they  that  vow  anything 
,    ^^.    contrary  to  any  law  of  nature,  vow  in  vain ;  as 
being  a  thing  unjust  to  pay  such  vow.     And  if  it 
be  a  thing  commanded  by  the  law  of  nature,  it  is 
not  the  vow,  but  the  law  that  binds  them. 
No  covenant.       The  matter,  or  subject  of  a  covenant,  is  always 
and  future.      Something  that  falleth  under  deliberation;  for  to 
covenant,  is  an  act  of  the  will ;  that  is  to  say,  an 
act,  and  the  last  act  of  deliberation  \  and  is  there-^ 
fore  always  understood  to  be  (something  to  come; 
and  which  is  judged  possible  for  him  that  cove^^ 
nanteth,  to  perform. 

And  therefore,  to  promise  that  which  is  known 
to  be  impossible,  is  no  covenant.  But  if  that  prove 
impossible  afterwards,  which  before  was  thought 
possible,  the  covenant  is  valid,  and  bindeth,  though 
not  to  the  thing  itself,  yet  to  the  value ;  or,  if  that 
also  be  impossible,  to  the  unfeigned  endeavour  oi 
performing  as  much  as  is  possible  :  for  to  more  nc 
man  can  be  obliged. 
mX°yo^.^^^  Men  are  freed  of  their  covenants  two  ways  ;  by 
performing ;  or  by  being  forgiven.  For  perform- 
ance, is  the  natural  end  of  obligation  ;  and  forgive- 
ness, the  restitution  of  liberty ;  as  being  a  retrans- 
ferring  of  that  right,  in  which  the  obligation  con- 
sisted. 
torted*h^*fe^  Covenants  entered  into  by  fear,  in  the  condition 
are  valid.  of  mcrc  uaturc,  are  obligatory.  For  example,  if  I 
covenant  to  pay  a  ransom,  or  service  for  my  life, 
to  an  enemy ;  I  am  bound  by  it :  for  it  is  a  contract, 
whcfrein  one  receiveth  the  benefit  of  life ;  the  other 
is  to  receive  money,  or  service  for  it ;  and  conse- 
quently, where  no  other  law,  as  in  the  condition 
of  mere  nature,  forbiddeth  the  performance,  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


NATURAL  LAWS.  12Z 

covenant  is  valid.    Therefore  prisoners  of  war,  if    part  i, 
trusted  with  the  payment  of  their  ransom,   are    .    ^^'    ^ 
obliged  to  pay  it :  and  if  a  weaker  prince,  make  a 
disadvantageous  peace  with  a  stronger,  for  fear ; 
he  is  bound  to  keep  it ;  unless,  as  hath  been  said 
before,  there  ariseth  some  new,  and  just  cause  of 
fear,  to  renew  the  war.     And  even  in  common- 
wealths, if  I  be  forced  to  redeem  myself  from  a 
thief  by  promising  him  money,  I  am  bound  to  pay 
it,  till  the  civil  law  discharge  me.     For  whatsoever 
I  may  lawfully  do  without  obligation,  the  same  I     t^  *   ^  *. 
may  lawfully  covenant  to  do  through  fear:  and 
what  I  lawfdlly  covenant,  I  cannot  lawfully  break. 
•    A  former  covenant,  makes  void  a  later.     For  a  The  former  co- 

" ;         ; 1 ■ T -w-i-  '  V   1     "  venant  to  one, 

man  that  hath  passed  away  his  right  to  one  man  makes  void  the 
to-day,  hath  it  not  to  pass  to-morrow  to  another :  \^l  ^°  '^^ 
and  therefore  the  later  promise  passeth  no  right, 
but  is  null. 

A  covenant  not  to  defend  myself  from  force,  by  a  man's  cove- 
force,  is  always  void.     For,  as  I  have  showed  be-  fe*n"d  himself  Is 
•fore,  no  man  can  transfer,  or  lay  down  his  right  to  ^°***' 
save  himself  from  death,  wounds,  and  imprison-  '  -  ^ 
ment,  the  avoiding  whereof  is  the  only  end  of  laying 
down  any  right ;  and  therefore  the  promise  of  not 
resisting  force,  in  no  covenant  transferreth  any 
right;  nor  is  obliging.     For  though  a  man  may 
covenant  thus,  unless  I  do  so,  or  so,  kill  me;  he 
cannot  covenant  thus,  unless  I  do  so,  or  so,  I  will 
not  resist  youy  when  you  come  to  kill  me.     For 
man  by  nature  chooseth  the  lesser  evil,  which  is 
danger  of  death  in    resisting ; .  rather   than  the 
greater,  which  is  certain  and  present  death  in  not 
resisting.    And  this  is  granted  to  be  true  by  all 
men,  in  that  they  lead  criminals  to  execution,  aud 


Digitized  by 


Google 


128  OF  MAN* 

PART  I.    prison,  with  armed  men,  notwithstanding  that  snob 
-    ^f*        criminals  have  consented  to  the  law,  by  which  they 

Are  condemned. 
No  man  ^  covcnant  to  accuse  oneself,  without  assurance 

obliged  to  ao- 

cuse  himself,  of  pardou,  is  Ukcwisc  invalid.  For  in  the  condition 
of  nature,  where  every  man  is  judge,  there  is  no 
place  for  accusation :  and  in  the  civil  state,  the  ac- 
cusation is  followed  with  punishment ;  which  being 
force,  a  man  is  not  obUged  not  to  resist.  The 
Same  is  also  true,  of  the  accusation  of  those,  by 
whose  condemnation  a  man  falls  into  misery ;  as  of 
a  father,  wife,  or  benefactor*  For  the  testimony 
of  such  an  accuser,  if  it  be  not  willingly  given,  is 
presumed  to  be  corrupted  by  nature ;  and  therrfore 
not  to  be  received :  and  where  a  man's  testimony 
is  not  to  be  credited,  he  is  not  bound  to  give  it. 
Also  accusations  upon  torture,  are  not  to  be  re- 
puted as  testimonies.  ]  For  torture  is  to  be  used 
but  as  means  of  conjecture,  and  light,  in  the  fdr- 
^  ^)  ther  examination,  and  search  of  truth :  and  what 
is  in  that  case  confessed,  tendeth  to  the  ease  of  him 
that  is  tortured ;  not  to  the  informing  of  the  tortu- 
rers :  and  therefore  ought  not  to  have  the  credit  of 
a  sufficient  testimony  :  for  whether  he  deliver  him- 
self by  true,  or  false  accusation,  he  does  it  by  the 
right  of  preserving  his  own  life. 

The  end  of  The  forcc  of  words,  bemg,  as  I  have  formerly 
noted,  too  weak  to  hold  men  to  the  performance  of 
their  covenants;  there  are  in  man's  nature,  but 
two  imaginable  helps  to  strengthen  it.  And  those 
are  either  a  fear  of  the  consequence  of  breaking 
their  word ;  or  a  glory,  or  pride  in  appearing  not 
to  need  to  break  it.  This  latter  is  a  generosity  too 
rarely  found  to  be  presumed  on,  especially  in  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


NATURAL  LAWS.  129 

pursuers  of  wealth,  command,  or  sensual  pleasure ;    part  i. 
which  are  the  greatest  part  of  mankind.     The  pas-    .     '^'    . 
sjon  to  be  reckoned  upon,  is  fegr :  whereof  there 
be  two  very  general  objects:  one,  the  power  of 
spirits  invisible ;  the  other,  the  power  of  those  men 
they  shall  therein  oflFend.     Of  these  two,  though 
the  former  be  the  greater  power,  yet  the  fear  of  the 
latter  is  commonly  the  greater  fear.     The  fear  of 
the  former  is  in  every  man,  his  own  religion :  which     . ,  i,  h-  .  J^ 
hath  place  in  the  nature  of  man  before  civil  society.       ^^  ^  -   ^ 
The  latter  hath  not  so ;  at  least  not  place  enough, 
to  keep  men  to  their  promises;   because  in  the 
condition  of  mere  nature,  the  inequality  of  power 
is  not  discerned,  but  by  the  event  of  battle.     So 
that  before  the  time  of  civil  society,  or  in  the  in- 
terruption thereof  by  war,  there  is  nothing  can 
strengthen  a  covenant  of  peace  agreed  on,  against 
the  temptations  of  avarice,  ambition,  lust,  or  other 
strong  desire,  but  the  fear  of  that  invisible  power, 
which  they  every  one  worship  as  God ;  and  fear  as 
a  revenger  of  their  perfidy.     All  therefore  that  can 
be   oone  between   two  men  not  subject  to  civil 
power,  is  to  put  one  another(4o  swear  by  the  God  ) 
he  feareth  :  which  swearings  or  oath,  is  ^iform  of'^l^^^  "^^ 
speech^  added  to  a  promise;  by  which  he  that     ^*^ 
promisethy  signifieth,  that  unless  he  perform ^  he 
renounceth  the  mercy  of  his  God,  or  calleth  to 
him  for  vengeance  on  himself.     Such  was  the  hea- 
then form,  Let  Jupiter  kill  m^  else,  as  I  kill  this' 
beast.     So  is  our  form,  /  shall  do  thus,  and  thfis, 
so  help  me  God.     And  this,  with  the  rites  and  cere- 
monies, which  every  one  useth  in  his  own  religion, 
that  the  fear  of  breaking  faith  might  be  the  greater. 
By  this  it  appears,  that  an  oath  taken  according 

VOL.  III.  ^  K 


Digitized  by 


Google 


130  OP  MAN. 

PART  I.    to  any  other  form,  or  rite,  than  his,  that  sweareth, 
^    \*'    .    is  in  vain ;   and  no  oath :  and  that  there  is  no 
No  oath        swearing  by  any  thing  which  the  swearer  thinks 
^  not  God.     For  though  men  have  sometimes  used  to 

swear  by  their  kings,  for  fear,  or  flattery  ;  yet  they 
would  have  it  thereby  understood,  they  attributed 
to  them  divine  honour.  And  that  swearing  un- 
necessarily by  God,  is  but  prophaning  of  his  name : 
and  swearing  by  other  things,  as  men  do  in  com- 
mon discourse,  is  not  swearing,  but  an  impious 
custom,  gotten  by  too  much  vehemence  of  talking. 
An  oath  adda  It  appcars  also,  that  the  oath  adds  nothing  to 
obiigrdoiT.  *  the  obligation.  For  a  covenant,  if  lawful,  binds  in 
the  sight  of  God,  without  the  oath,  as  much  as  with 
it :  if  unlawful,  bindeth  not  at  all ;  though  it  be 
confirmed  with  an  oath. 


J 


CHAPTER  XV.' 

OF  OTHER  LAWS  OF  NATURE. 


The  third  law  From  that  law  of  uatupc,  by  which  we  are  obliged 
o^ature,ju8-  ^^  transfer  to  another,  such  rights,  as  being  re- 


) 


tained,  hinder  the  peace  of  mankind,  there  follow- 
eth  a  third  ;  which  is  this,  that  'gien  perform  their 
covenants  made :  without  which,  covenants  are  in 
valh,  andTbut  empty  words ;  and  the  right  of  all 
men  to  all  things  remaining,  we  are  still  in  the 
condition  of  war.  ^ 

Justice  and  in-  And  iu  this  law  of  naturc,  consistetif  the  fountain 
justice  w  at.  ^^^  original  of  justiceT^  For  where  no  covenant 
hath  preceded,  there  hath  no  right  been  transferred, 
and  every  man  has  right  to  every  thing ;  and  con- 
sequently, no  action  can  be  unjust.  But  when  a 
covenant  is  made,  then  to  break  it  is  unjust  f  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LAWS  OP  NATURE.  131 

the  definition  of  injustice,  is  no  other  than  the  part  i. 
not  performance  of  covenant.  And  whatsoever  is  .  ^f-  . 
not  nnjust,  is  Just. 

^    'IBtit'hecause  covenants  of  mutual  trust,  where  justice  and 
there  is  a  fear  of  not  performance  on  either  part,  SSrS^^cSI! 
as  hath  been  said  in  the  former  chapter,  are  in- «t»t«*>o'' <>^ , . 

^  commoQweaitn 

valid  ;  though  the  Qriginal  of  j^^stice  be  the  makinp;   ,-^j,  . 
ofcovenagjs ;.  yet  injustice  actually  there  caii"  be 
none,  till  the  cause  of  such  fear  be  taken  away ; 
which  while  men  are  in  the  natural  condition  of 
war,  cannot  be  done.    Therefore  before  the  names  ■   \ 
of  just,  and  unjust  can  have  place,  there  must  be      ^ 
some  coercive  power,  to  compel  men  equally  to  the 
peifoiSSc^oitheSr  covenants,  by  the  terror  of 
some  punishment,  greater  than  the  benefit  they 
'expect  by  the  breach  of  their  covenant ;  and  to 
make  good  that  propriety,  which  by  mutual  con- 
tract men  acquire,  in  recompense  of  the  universal 
right  they  abandon :  and  such  power  there  is  none 
before  the  erection  of  a  commonwealth.     And  this 
is  also  to  be  gathered  out  of  the  ordinary  definition 
of  justice  in  the  Schools  :  for  they  say,  thBt  justice    j 
is  the  constant  will  of  giving  to  every  man  his    \ 
own.    And  therefore  where  there  is  no  own,  that  is    ;  v«C^ 
DO  propriety,  ther^  is  no  m]ustice :  and  where  there  ,     | 
IS  no  coercive  power  erected,  that  is,  where  there  / 
IS  "no  commonwealth,  there  is  no  propriety;  all     : 
men  having  right  to  all  things :  therefore  wKere 
'^ef  e  is  no  commonwealth,  there  nothing  is  unjust. 
So  that  the  nature  of  justice,  consisteth  in  keeping 
of  valid  covenants :  but  the  validity  of  covenants 
begins  not  but  with  the  constitution  of  a  civil  power,      '        V 
sufficient  to  compel  men  to  keep  them :  and  then 
it  is  also  that  propriety  begins. 


^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


i 


132  OF  MAN. 

PART  I.  The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart,  there  is  no  such 
' — r^ — '  thing  as  justice;  and  sometimes  also  with  his 
ton^/rar^  to  touguc ;  scriously  alleging,  that  every  man's  conser- 
reason.  vatiou,  and  contentment,  being  committed  to  his 
own  care,  there  could  be  no  reason,  why  every  man 
might  not  do  what  he  thought  conduced  thereunto : 
and  therefore  also  to  make,  or  not  make ;  keep,  or 
not  keep  covenants,  was  not  against  reason,  when 
it  conduced  to  one's  benefit.  He  does  not  therein 
deny,  that  there  be  covenants  ;  and  that  they  are 
sometimes  broken,  sometimes  kept ;.  and  that  such 
breach  of  them  may  be  called  injustice,  and  the 
observance  of  them  justice :  but  he  questioneth, 
whether  injustice,  taking  away  the  fear  of  God,  fqr 
the  same  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart  there  is  no  God, 
may  not  sometimes  stand  with  that  reason,  which 
dictateth  to  every  man  his  own  good ;  and  particu- 
IbtIj  then,  when  it  conduceth  to  such  a  benefit,  as 
shall  put  a  man  in  a  condition,  to  neglect  not  only 
the  dispraise,  and  revilings,  but  also  the  power  of 
other  men.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  gotten  by  vio- 
lence :  but  what  if  it  "could  be  gotten  by  uhj&st 
violence  ?  were  it  against  reason  so  to  get  it,  when  it 
is  impossible  to  receive  hurt  by  it  ?  and  if  it  be  not 
against  reason,  it  is  not  against  justice ;  or  else 
justice  is  not  to  be  approved  for  good.  From  such 
reasoning  as  this,  successful  wickedness  hath  ob- 
tained the  name  of  virtue :  and  some  that  in  all 
other  things  have  disallowed  the  violation  of  faith ; 
yet  have  allowed  it,  when  it  is  for  the  getting  of  a 
kingdom.  And  the  heathen  that  believed,  fliat 
Saturn  was  deposed  by  his  son  Jupiter,  believed 
nevertheless  the  same  Jupiter  to  be  the  avenger  of 
injustice :  somewhat  like  to  a  piece  of  law  in  Coke's 
Commentaries  on  Littleton;  where  he  says,  if  the 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


LAWS  OF  NATURE.  133 

right  heir  of  the  crown  be  attamted  of  treason ;    part  i. 
yet  the  crown  shall  descend  to  him,  and  eo  instante 


the  attainder  be  void :  from  which  instances  a  man  ^^^^^  "^f 

contrary  to 

will  be  very  prone  to  infer ;  that  when  the  heir  "wod. 
apparent  of  a  kingdom,  shall  kill  him  that  is  in 
possession,  though  his  father ;  you  may  call  it  in- 
justice, or  by  what  other  name  you  will ;  yet  it  can 
never  be  against  reason,  seeing  all  the  voluntary 
actions  of  men  tend  to  the  benefit  of  themselves ; 
and  those  actions  are  most  reasonable,  that  conduce 
most  to  their  ends.  This  specious  reasoning  is 
nevertheless  false. 

For  the  question  is  not  of  promises  mutual, 
where  there  is  no  security  of  performance  on  either 
side ;  as  when  there  is  no  civil  power  erected  over 
the  parties  promising ;  for  such  promises  are  no 
covenants :  but  either  where  one  of  the  parties  has 
performed  already  ;  or  where  there  is  a  power  to 
make  him  perform  ;  there  is  the  question  whether 
it  be  against  reason,  that  is,  against  the  benefit  of 
the  other  to  perform,  or  not.  And  I  say  it  is  not 
against  reason.  For  the  manifestation  whereof,  we 
are  to  consider ;  first,  that  when  a  man  doth  a 
thing,  which  notwithstanding  any  thing  can  be 
foreseen,  and  reckoned  on,  tendeth  to  his  own  des- 
truction, howsoever  some  accident  which  he  could 
not  expect,  arriving  may  turn  it  to  his  benefit ;  yet 
such  events  do  not  make  it  reasonably  or  wisely 
done.  Secondly,  that  in  a  condition  of  war,  wherein 
every  man  to  every  man,  for  want  of  a  common 
power  to  keep  them  all  in  awe,  is  an  enemy,  there 
is  no  man  who  can  hope  by  his  own  strength,  or  wit, 
to  defend  himself  from  destruction,  without  the 
heJBjgf  confederates ;  where  every  one  expects  the 
same  defence  by  the  confederation,  that  any  one  else 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


134  OF  MAN. 

PART  I.  does  :  and  therefore  he  which  declares  he  thinks  it 
.  ^f-  .  reason  to  deceive  those  that  help  him,  can  in  rea« 
Justice  not  gon  cxpcct  no  othcr  means  of  safety,  than  what 
rcMon.  can  be  had  from  his  own  single  power.  He  there- 
fore that  breaketh  his  covenant,  and  consequently 
declareth  that  he  thinks  he  may  with  reason  do  so, 
cannot  be  received  into  any  society,  that  unite 
themselves  for  peace  and  defence,  but  by  the  error 
of  them  that  receive  him ;  nor  when  he  is  received, 
be  retained  in  it,  without  seeing  the  danger  of 
their  error ;  which  errors  a  man  cannot  reasonably 
reckon  upon  as  the  means  of  his  security :  and 
therefore  if  he  be  left,  or  cast  out  of  society,  he 
perisheth ;  and  if  he  live  in  society,  it  is  by  the 
eirors  of  other  men,  which  he  could  not  foresee, 
nor  i^kon  upon;  and  consequently  against  the 
reason  of  his  preservation ;  and  so,  as  all  men  that 
contribute  not  to  his  destruction,  forbear  him  only 
out  of  ignorance  of  what  is  good  for  themselves. 

As  for  the  instance  of  gaining  the  secure  and 
perpetual  felicity  of  heaven,  by  any  way ;  it  is  fri- 
volous :  there  being  but  one  way  imaginable ;  and 
that  is  not  breaking,  but  keeping  of  covenant. 

And  for  the  other  instance  of  attaining  sove- 
reignty by  rebellion  ;  it  is  manifest,  that  though  the 
event  followTyet  because  it  cannot  reasonably  be 
expected,  but  rather  the  contrary  ;  and  because  by 
gaining  it  so,  others  are  taught  to  gain  the  same 
in  like  manner,  the  attempt  thereof  is  against  rea- 
son.    Justice  therefore,  that  is  to  say,  keeping  of 
_    ,^  covenant,  is  a  rule  of  reason,  by  which  we  are  for- 
\  Ibidden  to  do  any  thing  destructive  to  our  life ;  and 
'  consequently  a  law  of  nature. 

There  be  some  that  proceed  further;  and  will 
not  have  the  law  of  nature,  to  be  those  rules  which 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


LAWS  OP  NATURE.  135 

conduce  to  the  preservation  of  man's  life  on  earth ;  part  i. 
but  to  the  attaining  of  an  eternal  felicity  after  .  ^^'  . 
death ;  to  which  they  think  the  breach  of  covenant 
may  conduce ;  and  consequently  be  just  and  rea- 
sonable; such  are  they  that  think  it  a  work  of 
merit  to  kill,  or  depose,  or  rebel  against,  the  sove- 
reign power  constituted  over  them  by  their  own 
consent.  But  because  there  is  no  natural  know- 
ledge of  man's  estate  after  death ;  much  less  of  the 
reward  that  is  then  to  be  given  to  breach  of  faith ; 
but  only  a  belief  groimded  upon  other  men's  saying, 
that  they  know  it  supematurally,  or  that  they  know 
those,  that  knew  them,  that  knew  others,  that 
knew  it  supematurally ;  breach  of  faith  cannot  be 
called  a  precept  of  reason,  or  nature. 

Others,  that  allow  for  a  law  of  nature,  the  keep-  corenanu  not 
ing  of  faith,  do  nevertheless  make  exception  of  cer-  thrvfcTof  ib^ 
tain  persons  ;  as  heretics,  and  such  as  use  not  to  th^°are  mad^ 
perform  their  covenant  to  others :  and  this  also  is 
against  reason.     For  if  any  fault  of  a  man,  be  suffi- 
cient to  discharge  our  covenant  made;  the  same 
ought  in  reason  to  have  been  sufficient  to  have 
hindered  the  making  of  it. 

The  names  of  just,  and  injust,  when  they  are  at-  JuaUce  of  men 
tributed  to  meuy  signify  one  thing ;  and  when  they  actionVwUt*^ 
are  attributed  to  actions^  another.     When  they  are 
attributed  to  men,  they  signify  conformity,  or  in- 
conformity  of  manners,  to  reason.     But  when  they    ^ 
are  attributed  to  actions,  they  signify  the  conform- 
ity, or  inconformity  to  reason,  not  of  manners,  or 
manner  of  life,  but  of  particular  actions.     A  just 
man  therefore,  is  he  that  taketh  all  the  care  he 
can,  that  his  actions  may  be  all  just :  and  an  un- 
just man,  is  he  that  neglecteth  it.     And  such  men 
are  more  often  in  our  language  styled  by  the  names 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


136  OF  MAN. 

PART  I.  of  righteous,  and  unrighteous  ;  than  just,  and  un- 
.  ^f  .  just ;  though  the  meaning  be  the  same.  Therefore 
a  righteous  man,  does  not  lose  that  title,  by  one, 
or  a  few  unjust  actions,  that  proceed  from  sudden 
passion,  or  mistake  of  things,  or  persons :  nor  does 
an  unrighteous  man,  lose  his  character,  for  such 
actions,  as  he  does,  or  forbears  to  do,  for  fear : 
because  his  will  is  not  framed  by  the  justice,  but 
by  the  apparent  benefit  of  what  he  is  to  do.  That 
which  gives  to  human  actions  the  relish  of  justice, 
is  a  certain  nobleness  or  gallantness  of  courage, 
rarely  found,  by  which  a  man  scorns  to  be  beholden 
for  the  contentment  of  his  life,  to  fraud,  or 
breach  of  promise.  This  justice  of  the  manners, 
is  that  which  is  meant,  where  justice  is  called  a 
virtue ;  and  injustice  a  vice. 

But  the  justice  of  actions  donominates  men,  not 
just,  but  guiltless :  and  the  injustice  of  the  same, 
which  is  also  called  injury,  gives  them  but  the 
J  name  of  guilty. 

Justice  of  man.  Again,  the  injustice  of  manners,  is  the  disposi- 
uc^ofactwns.  tiou,  or  aptitudc  to  do  injury  ;  and  is  injustice?  be- 
fore it  proceed  to  act ;  and  without  supposing  any 
individual  person  injured.  But  the  injustice  of  an 
action,  that  is  to  say  injury,  supposeth  an  individual 
person  injured ;  namely  him,  to  whom  the  cove- 
nant was  made :  and  therefore  many  times  the  in- 
jury is  received  by  one  man,  when  tiie  damage  re- 
doundeth  to  another.  As  when  the  master  com- 
mandeth  his  servant  to  give  money  to  a  stranger ; 
if  it  be  not  done,  the  injury  is  done  to  the  master, 
whom  he  had  before  covenanted  to  obey ;  but  the 
damage  redoundeth  to  the  stranger,  to  whom  he 
had  no  obligation ;  and  therefore  could  not  injure 
him.     And  so  also  in  commonwealths,  private  men 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


LAWS  OF  NATURE.  137 

may  remit  to  one  another  their  debts ;  but  not    part  i. 
robberies  or  other  violences,  whereby  they  are  en-    ._  ^^-  _. 
damaged ;  because  the  detaining  of  debt,  is  an  in- 
jury to  themselves  ;  but  robbery  and  violence,  are 
injuries  to  the  person  of  the  commonwealth. 

Whatsoever  is  done  to  a  man,  conformable  to  Nothing  done 
his  own  will  signified  to  the  doer,  is  no  injury  to  ^nTon^n^^ 
him.     For  if  he  that  doeth  it,  hath  not  passed  <^»^  ^« '"J^'y 
away  his  original  right  to  do  what  he  please,  by 
some  antecedent  covenant,  there  is  no  breach  of 
covenant ;  and  therefore  no  injury  done  him.  And 
if  he  have ;  then  his  will  to  have  it  done  being 
signified,  is  a  release  of  that  covenant:   and  so 
again  there  is  no  injury  done  him. 

Justice  of  actions,  is  by  writers  divided  into  J"«^<^f  ^o™- 

,  •'    ,  i      1         i»  mutative  and 

commutative^  and  dtstributwe :  and  the  former  distnbuUve. 
they  say  consisteth  in  proportion  arithmetical ;  the  £^ 
latter  in  proportion  geometrical.  Commutative 
therefore,  they  place  in  the  equality  of  value  of  the 
things  contracted  for ;  and  distributive,  in  the  dis- 
tribution of  equal  benefit,  to  men  of  equal  merit. 
As  if  it  were  injustice  to  sell  dearer  than  we  buy  ; 
or  to  give  more  to  a  man  than  he  merits.  The 
value  of  all  things  contracted  for,  is  measured  by 
the  appetite  of  the  contractors :  and  therefore  the 
just  value,  is  that  which  they  be  contented  to  give. 
And  merit,  besides  that  which  is  by  covenant, 
where  the  performance  on  one  part,  meriteth  the 
performance  of  the  other  part,  and  falls  under  justice 
commutative,  not  distributive,  is  not  due  by  justice ; 
but  is  rewarded  of  grace  only.  And  therefore 
this  distinction,  in  the  sense  wherein  it  useth  to  be 
expounded,  is  not  right.  To  speak  properly,  com- 
mutative justice,  is  the  justice,  of  a  contractor; 
that  is,  a  performance  of  covenant,  in  buying,  and 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


-  k 


138  OF  MAN. 

PART  I.     selling ;  hiring,  and  letting  to  hire ;  lending,  and 
.    ^^'    .    borrowing ;  exchanging,  bartering,  and  other  acts 
of  contract. 

And  distributive  justice,  the  justice  of  an  arbi- 
trator ;  that  is  to  say,  the  act  of  defining  what  is 
just.  Wherein,  being  trusted  by  them  that  make 
him  arbitrator,  if  he  perform  his  trust,  he  is  said 
to  distribute  to  every  man  his  own :  and  this  is  in- 
deed just  distribution,  and  may  be  called,  though 
improperly,  distributive  justice  ;  but  more  properly 
equity ;  which  also  is  a  law  of  nature,  as  shall  be 
shownin  due  place.  ^ , , 

The  fourth  law     As  (j^ustice  dcpcndcth  on  antecedent  covenant;  | 
titude!**^  *^  so  doek'^ATiTUDK  depend  on  antecedent  grace; 
[^      that  is  to  say,  antecedent  free  gift :   and  is  the 
fourth  law  of  nature  ;  which  may  be  conceived  in 
this  form,  that  a  man  which  receiveth   benefit 
from  another  of  mere  grace,  endeavour  that  he 
-    -^         which  giveth  it,  have  no  reasonable  cause  to  re- 
pent him  of  his  good  will.     For  no  man  giveth, 
but^with  intention  of  good  to  himself;   because 
gift  is  voluntary  ;  and"  oraH  voluntary  acts,  the  ob- 
ject is  to  every  man  his  own  good ;  of  which  if  men 
see  they  shall  be  frustrated,  there  will  be  no  be- 
ginning of  benevolence,  or  trust ;  nor  consequently 
of  mutual  help ;  nor  of  reconciliation  of  one  man 
to  another ;  and  therefore  they  are  to  remain  still 
in  the  condition  of  war;  which  is  contrary  to  the 
first  and  fundamental  law  of  nature,  which  com- 
mandeth  men  to  seek  peace.  The  breach  of  this  law, 
,  ^  \        is  csHledingratitude  ;  and  hath  the  same  relation  to 
^  grace,  that  injustice  hath  to  obligation  by  covenant. 

The  fifth  mu-     A  fifth  law  of  uatuTc,  is  COMPLAISANCE  ;  that 
^tio^  w"^m-  ^s  to  say,  that  every  man  strive  to  accommodate 
piaisance.  ^    himself  to  the  rest.    For  the  understanding  where- 
Digitized  by  VjOOQ  IC 


LAWS  OF  NATURE.  139 

of,  we  may  consider,  that  there  is  in  men^s  ^tness 
to  society,  )a  diversity  of  nature,  rising  from  their 
diversity  of  aflFections ;  not  Ti^jj^j^jthat  we  see 
in  stones  brought  together  fo^SiilS^^tef  an  edi- 
fice. For  as  that  stone  which  by  the  asperity,  and 
irr^nlarity  of  figure,  takes  more  room  from  others, 
than  itself  fills ;  and  for  the  hardness,  cannot  be 
easily  made  plain,  and  thereby  hindereth  the  build- 
ing, is  by  the  builders  cast  away  as  unprofitable, 
and  troublesome:  so  also,  a  man  that  by  asperity 
of  nature,  will  strive  to  retain  those  things  which 
to  himself  are  superfluous,  and  to  others  necessary ; 
and  for  the  stubbornness  of  his  passions,  cannot  be 
corrected,  is  to  be  left,  or  cast  out  of  society,  as 
cumbersome  thereunto.  For  seeing  every  man, 
not  only  by  right,  but  also  by  necessity  of  nature, 
is  supposed  to  endeavour  all  he  can,  to  obtain  that 
which  is  necessary  for  his  conservation ;  he  that 
shall  oppose  himself  against  it,  for  things  super-  < 
fluous,  is  guilty  of  the  war  that  thereupon  is  to 
follow  ;  and  therefore  doth  that,  which  is  contrary 
to  the  fundamental  law  of  nature,  which  command- 
eth  to  seek  peace.  The  observers  of  this  law, 
may  be  called  sociable,  the  Latins  call  them 
commodi;  the  contrary,  stuhhorn,  insociahley  fro-  . 

wardj  intractable.  d^  l< 

A  sixth  law  of  nature,  is  this,  that  upon  can-  The  sixth, 
tion  of  the  future  time,  a  man  ought  to  pardon  ^on/° 
the  offep^en^-pQ^t  of  them  that  repenting,  desire  it. 
ForfpARDON Jis  nothing  but  granting  of  peace ; 
which  thuugn  granted  to  them  that  persevere  in 
their  hostility,  be  not  peace,  but  fear ;  yet  not 
granted  to  them  that  give  caution  of  the  future 
time,  is  sign  of  an  aversion  to  peace ;  and  there- 
fore contrary  to  the  law  of  nature. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


140 


OF  MAN. 


The  seventh, 
that  in  re- 
venges, men 
respect  only 
the  future 
good. 


>s 


A  seventh  is,  that  in  revenges,  that  is,  retribu- 
tion of  evil  for  evil,  men  look  not  at  the  greatness 
of  the  evil  past ^  hut  the  greatness  of  the  good  to 
follow.  Whereby  we  are  forbidden  to  inflict  pu- 
nishment with  any  other  design,  than  for  correction 
of  the  oflFender,  or  direction  of  others.  For  this 
law  is  consequent  to  the  next  before  it,  that  com- 
mandeth  pardon,  upon  security  of  the  future  time. 
Besides,  revenge  without  respect  to  the  example, 
and  profit  to  come,  is  a  triumph,  or  glorying  in  the 
hurt  of  another,  tending  to  no  end ;  for  the  end  is 
always  somewhat  to  come ;  and  glorying  to  no  end, 
is  vain-glory,  and  contrary  to  reason,  and  to  hurt 
without  reason,  tendeth  to  the  introduction  of  war; 
which  is  against  the  law  of  nature ;  and  is  com- 
monly styled  by  the  name  of  cruelty. 
Tiie  eighth,  A  And  bccausc  all  signs  of  hatred,  or  contempt, 
ag^ins^tcon  /  pj-^y^j^^  ^^  fight;  iusomuch  as  most  men  choose 

\  rather  to  hazard  their  life,  than  not  to  be  revenged ; 

J    we  may  in  the  eighth  place,  for  a  law  of  nature, 

^  /    set  down  this  precept,  that  no  man  hy  deed,  word, 

1     countenance,  or  gesture,  declare  hatred,  or  con- 

\  tempt  of  another.     The  breach  of  which  law,  is 

commonly  called  contumely. 

The  question  who  is  tlje  better  man,  has  no 
place  in  the  condition  of  mere  nature  %  where,  as 
has  been  shewn  before,  all  men  are  equal.  The 
inequality  that  now  is,  has-been  mtrodfifeed  by  the 
aws  civil.  I  know  that  ^A^i§S^^in  the  first  book 
of  his  Politics,  for  a  foundation  of  his  doctrine, 
maketh  men  by  nature,  some  more  worthy  to  com- 
mand, meaning  the  wiser  sort,  such  as  he  thought 
himself  to  be  for  his  philosophy  ;  others  to  serve, 
meaning  those  that  had  strong  bodies,  but  were 
not  philosophers  as  he ;  as  if  master  and  sei'vant  y 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


"^ 


The  ninth, 
against  pride. 


1/' 


-V 


KV 


fla 


/ 


LAWS  OP  NATURE.  141 

were  not  introduced  by  consent  of  men,  but  by 
diflFerence  of  wit :  which  is  not  only  against  reason ; 
but  also  against  experience.     For  there  are  very 
few  so  foolish,  that  had  not  rather  govern  them- 
selves, than  be  governed  by  others  :  nor  when  the 
wise  in  their  own  conceit,  contend  by  fprce,  with 
them  who  distrust  their  own  wisdom,  do  they  al- 
ways, or  often,  or  almost  at  any  time,  get  the  vic- 
tory.    If  nature  therefore  have  made  men  equal, 
that  equality  is  to  be  acknowledged  :  or  if  nature 
have  made  men  unequal ;  yet  because  men  that 
think  themselves  equal,  will  not  enter  into  condi- 
tions of  peace,  but  upon  equal  terms,  such  equality 
must  be  admitted.     And  therefore  for  the  ninth 
law  of  nature,  I  put  this,  that  every  man  acknow- 
ledge another  for  his  equalh^  nature.    The  breach 
of  this  precept  is  pride. 
^        On  this  law,   dependeth  another,  that  at  /A^  The  tenth, 
'»    entrance  into  conditions  of  peace  y  no  man  require  ^"cT  *"^ 
\   to  reserve  to  himself  any  rights  which  he  is  not 
content  should  he  reserved  to  every  one  of  the       x     ^ 
rest.     As  it  is  necessary  for  all  men  that  seek 
peace,  to  lay  down  certain  rights  of  nature ;  that 
is  to  say,  not  to  have  liberty  to  do  all  they  list :  so 
is  it  necessary  for  man's  life,  to  retain  some ;  as 
right  to  govern  their  own  bodies ;  enjoy  air,  water, 
motion,  ways  to  go  from  place  to  place ;  and  all 
things  else,  without  which  a  man  cannot  live,  or 
not  live  well.     If  in  this  case,  at  the  making  of 
peace,  men  require  for  themselves,  that  which  they 
would  not  have  to  be  granted  to  others,  they  do  \ 
contrary  to  the  precedent  law,  that  commandeth  1 
the  acknowledgment  of  natural  equality,  and  there-/ 
fore  also  against  the  law  of  nature.     The  observers 
of  this  law,  are  those  we  call  modesty  and  the 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


142  OF  MAN. 

PART  I.    breakers  arrogant  men.    The  Greeks  call  the  vio- 
.  ^f •    .    lation  of  this  law  irXcovc^m ;  that  is,  a  desire  of 

more  than  their  share. 

The  eleventh,/  Also  if  «  man  he  tmsted  to  judge  between  man 

/  equity.         ^^  man^  it  is  a  precept  of  the  law  of  natm-e,  that 

he  deal  equally  between  them.    For  without  that, 

the  controversies  of  men  cannot  be  determined  but 

by  war.     He  therefore  that  is  partial  in  judgment, 

^    \    doth  what  in  him  lies,  to  deter  men  from  the  use  of 

judges,  and  arbitrators ;  and  consequently,  against 

/    the  fundamental  law  of  nature,  is  the  cause  of  wm*. 

'         The  observance  of  this  law,  from  the  equal  dis- 

:     tribution  to  each  man,  of  that  which  in  reason  be- 

longeth  to  him,  is  called  equity,  and,  as  I  have 


M' 


I 


common. 


Iv) 


said  before,  distributive  justice  :  the  violation,  ac- 
ception  of  persons,  irpwrioiroXnxpla. 
The  twelfth,       And  from  this  followeth  another  law,  that  such 
^  thin*^^      things  as  cannot  be  divided^  be  enjoyed  in  common^ 
tf  it  can  be;  and  \f  the  quantity  of  the  thing  per- 
^    mity  without  stint ;  otherwise proportionably  to  the 
V      number  of  them  that  have  right.   For  otherwise  the 
distribution  is  unequal,  and  contrary  to  equity. . 
The  thirteenth,     But  somc  thiugs  there  be,  that  can  neither  be 
ofioL  divided,  nor  enjoyed  in  common.    Then,  the  law 

of  nature,  which  prescribeth  equity,  requireth,  that 
\  ■' j         the  entire  right ;  or  else,  making  the  use  alter^ 
^  nate,  the  first  possession^  be  determined  by  lot. 

For  equal  distribution,  is  of  the  law  of  nature  ;  and 
other  means  of  equal  distribution  cannot  be  ima- 
gined. 
Thefourteenth,     Of  lots  there  bc  two  sorts,  arbitrary,  and  natvr- 
unll'T^^ll  ^^^-     Arbitrary,  is  that  which  is  agreed  on  by  the 
?«•  competitors :    natural,   is    either    primogeniture,^ 

which  the  Greek  calls  KXripovofila,  which  signifies, 
]     given  by  lot ;  or  first  seizure. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


seizini 


LAWS  OP  NATURE.  143 

And  therefore  those  things  which  cannot  be  en-    part  i. 
joyed  m  common^  nor  divided,  ought  to  be  ad-    .,  ^^'    . 
judged  to  the  first  possessor ;  and  in  some  cases  to 
the  first  bom,  as  acquired  by  lot. 

It  is  also  a  law  of  nature,  tlmt  all  men  /^?|The  fifteenth, 
mediate  peace^  he  allowed  s(ife  conduct.    For  thev  ™  -*^^' 
law  that  commandeth  peace,  as  the  end^  command-V    \l1J 
eth  intercession,  as  the  means;  and  to  intercession y 
the  means  is  safe  conduct.  .^^^^ 

And  because,  though  men  be  never  so  willing  to  The  sixteenth, 

,  .,  I  ,1  _r%     1  •       of  submission 

observe  these  laws,  there  may  nevertheless  arise  to  arbitrement. 
questions  concerning  a  man's  action ;  first,  whether 
it  were  done,  or  not  done ;   secondly,   if  done, 
whether  against  the  law,  or  not  against  the  law  ; 
the  former  whereof,  is  called  a  question  of  fact ; 
the  latter  a  question  of  right,  therefore  unless  the 
parties  to  the  question,  covenant  mutually  to  stand 
to  the  sentence  of  another,  they  are  as  far  from   \ 
peace  as  ever.     This  other  to  whose  sentence  they   (      "f^ 
submit  is  called  an  arbitrator.     And  therefore    / 
it  is  of  the  law  of  nature,  that  they  that  are  at       \y' 
controversy,  submit  their  right  to  the  judgment  of  J 
an  arbitrator. 

And  seeing  every  man  is  presumed  to  do  ^l^nu^^n^ 
things  in  order  to  his  own  benefit,  no  man  is  a  fit  JW  jshis 
arbitrator  in  his  own  cause ;  and  if  he  were  never  °j  ^"  ^^* 
so  fit;  yet  equity  allowing  to  each  party  equal  '  ^\, 
benefit,  if  one  be  admitted  to  be  judge,  the  other  is  j 
to  be  admitted  also ;  and  so  the  controversy,  that  is,  / 
the  cause  of  war,  remains,  against  the  law  of  nature. 

For  the  same  reason  no  man  in  any  cause  ought  ^tmbf  no 
to  be  received  for  arbitrator,   to  whom  greater  PJ^J**^^^ 
.profit,  or  honour,  or  pleasure  apparently  ariseth  has  in' him  a 
out  of  the  victory  of  one  party,  than  of  the  other :  ©r  ^rtiA^S^? 


V 


Digitized  by 


Google 


144 


OP  MAN. 


r 


l^ 


/ 


PART  I.  for  he  hath  taken,  though  an  unavoidable  bribe, 
.  '^'  _-  yet  a  bribe;  and  no  man  can  be  obliged  to  trust  him. 
And  thus  also  the  controversy,  and  the  condition  of 
war  remaineth^  contrary  to  the  law  of  nature. 
TTie  nineteenth  And  iu  a  coutrovcrsy  oifact,  the  judge  being  to 
give  no  more  credit  to  one,  than  to  the  other,  if 
there  be  no  other  arguments,  must  give  credit  to  a 
third  ;  or  to  a  third  and  fourth ;  or  more :  for  else 
the  question  is  undecided,  and  left  to  force,  con- 
trary to  the  law  of  nature. 

These  are  the  laws  of  nature,  dictating  peace, 
for  a  means  of  the  conservation  of  men  in  multi- 
tudes; and  which  only  concern  the  doctrine  of 
civil  society.  There  be  other  things  tending  to  the 
destruction  of  particular  men ;  as  drunkenness, 
and  all  other  parts  of  intemperance ;  which  may 
therefore  also  be  reckoned  amongst  those  things 
w  hich  the  law  of  nature  hath  forbidden ;  but  are 
not  necessary  to  be  mentioned,  nor  are  pertinent 
enough  to  this  place. 

And  though  this  may  seem  too  subtle  a  deduc- 
tion of  the  laws  of  nature,  to  be  taken  notice  of  by 
all  men ;  whereof  the  most  part  are  too  busy  in 
getting  food,  and  the  rest  too  negligent  to  under- 
stand ;  yet  to  leave  all  men  inexcusable,  they  have 
been  contracted  into  one  easy  sum,  intelligible 
even  to  the  meanest  capacity ;  and  that  is.  Do  not 
that  to  another^  which  thou  wouldest  not  have 
done  to  thyself;  which  sheweth  him,  that  he  has 
no  more  to  do  in  learning  the  laws  of  nature,  but, 
when  weighing  the  actions  of  other  men  with  his 
own,  they  seem  too  heavy,  to  put  thenti  into  the 
other  part  of  the  balance,  and  his  own  into  their 
place,  that  his  own  passions,  and  self-love,  may 


A  rule,  by 
which  the 
laws  of 
nature  may 
easily  be 
examined. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LAWS  OP  NATURE.  145 

add  nothing  to  the  weight ;  and  then  there  is  none  part  t. 
of  these  laws  of  nature  that  will  not  appear  unto  .  '^-  . 
him  very  reasonable.  ^        \ 

The  laws   of  nature  oblige  in  Jpro  interno/'^^  i>^ 

1         •         ■'  "      1  "-^V^ — \^^^^T^^    1      .     \     \ \ —    T 1  of  nature 

that  is  to  say,  they  bind  fa[  a  desire)  they  should  owige  m 
take  place  :  but  in  foro  externa  ;  that  is,  to  the  Sw^yiTbat 

^^utting  them  in  act,) not  always.      For  he  thatjjjjj^^* 
should  be  modest,  and  tractable,  and  perform  all  yi>cn  there 
he  promises,  in  such  time,  and  place,  where  no    "**^^ 
man  else  should  do  so,  should  but  make  himself  a 
prey  to  others,  and  procure  his  own  certain  ruin, 
contrary  to  the  ground  of  all  laws  of  nature,  which 
tend  to  nature's  preservation^   And  again,  he  that 
having  sufficient  security,  that  others  shall  observe 
the   same  laws  towards  him,  observes  them  not 
himself,  seeketh  not  peace,  but  war;  and  con- 
sequently the  destruction  of  his  nature  by  vio- 
lence. 

And  whatsoever  laws  bind  in  foro  interna^  may 
be  broken,  not  only  by  a  fact  contrary  to  the  law, 
but  also  by  a  fact  according  to  it,  in  case  a  man 
think  it  contrary.  For  though  his  action  in  this 
case,  be  according  to  the  law  ;  yet  his  purpose  was 
against  the  law ;  which,  where  the  obligation  is  in 

foro  internOy  is  a  breach.  -v 

The  laws  of  nature  are  immutable  and  etemal^''^e  ^»m%sA     \ 

— '  _  fgyj..^^    ^nature  are  i 

for  injustice,  ingratitude,  arrogance,  pride,  iniquity  JctemaL 
acception  of  persons,  and  the  rest,  can  never  beV  j 

made  lawful.     For  it  can  never  be  that  war  shajK     ^^        ) 
preserve  life>  and  peace  destroy  it. 

The  same  laws,  because  they  oblige  only  to  a  And  yet  easy. 
desire,  and  endeavour,  I  mean  an  unfeigned  and 
constant  endeavour,  are  easy  to  be  observed.    For 
in  that  they  require  nothing  but  endeavour,  he 

VOL.  III.  L 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


146  OF  MAN. 

PARTI,    that   endeavoureth   their    performance^  folfilleth 
.  ^^'    .    them  ;  and  he  that  fiilfilleth  the  law,  is  just. 
The  science  of  ^  And  the  science  of  them,  is  the  true  and  only 
thettue mii2i  ttioral  philosophy.   )For  moral  philosophy  is  no- 
phiiowphy.     ii^g  else  but  tite  science  of  what  is  good,  and 
evil,  in  the  conversation,  and  society  of  mankind. 
^  (      Good^  and  evil^  are  names  that  signify  our  appe- 
tites, and  aversions ;  which  in  different  tempers, 
customs,  and  doctrines  of  men,  are  different :  and 
divers  men,  differ  not  only  in  theif  judgment,  on 
die  senses  of  what  is  pleasant,  and  unpleasant  to 
the  taste,  smell,  hearing,  touch,  and  sight ;  but  also 
of  what  is  conformable,  or  disagreeable  to  reason, 
in  the  actions  of  common  life.     Nay,  the  same  man, 
in  divers  times,  differs  from  himseLf ;  and  one  time 
praiseth,  that  is,  calleth  good,  what  another  time 
he  dispraiseth,  and  caUeth  evil :  from  whence  arise 
disputes,   controversies,   and  at  last   war.     And 
therefore  so  long  as  a  man  is  in  the  condition  of 
mere  nature,  which  is  a  condition  of  war,  as  pri- 
vate appetite  is  the  measure  of  good,  and  evil :  and 
consequently  all  men  agree  on  this,  that  peace  is 
good,  and  therefore  also  the  way,  or  means  of 
peace,  which,  as  I  have  shewed  before,  axe  justice y 
gratitude^  modesty,  equity,  mercy,  and  the  rest  of 
the  laws  of  nature,  are  good;  that  is  to  say; 
moral  virtues  ;  and  their  contrary  «?tc^*,  evil.  Now 
&e  science  of  virtue  and  vice,  is  moral  phildsophy ; 
J  and  therefore  the^  true  doctrine  of  the  lawB^of 
'nature^  is  the  true  moral  philosophy.     But  the 
writers  of  moral  philosophy,  though  they  acknow- 
ledge the  same  virtues  and  vices ;  yet  not  seeing 
wherein  consisted  their  goodness;  nor  that  they 
come  to  be  praised,  as  the  means  of  peaceable. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LAWS  OF  NATURE.  147 

sociable,  and  comfortable  living,  place  them  in  a    part  i. 
mediocrity  of  passions :  as  if  not  tJie  canse,  bnt  the   .    ^^-    . 
degree  of  daring,  made  fortitude ;  or  not  the  cause,  The  science  of 
but  the  quantity  of  a  gift,  made  liberality.  the  teue'^'oIJli 

These  ^ctates  of  reason,  men  used  to  call  by  the  v^^v^y- 
name  of  laws,  but  improperly:  for  they  are  but       i^/^^.v. 
conclusions,  or  theorems  concerning  what  con-     -      ..  ;. 
duceth  to  the  conservation  and  defence  of  them-  ^ ' 

selves ;  whereas  law,  properly,  is  the  word  of  him, 
that  by  right  hath  command  over  others.  But  yet 
if  we  consider  the  same  theojems,  as  delivered  in 
the  word  of  God,  that  by  right  commandeth  all 
things ;  then  are  they  properly  called  laws. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

OF  PERSONS,  AUTHORS,  AND  THINGS 
PERSONATED. 

^AjPERSON^s  he,  whose  words  or  actions  are  con-  a  person  what 
sidered,  either  a*  his  own,  or  as  representing  the 
words  or  actions  of  another  man,  or  of  any  other 
thing,  to  whom  they  are  attributed,  whether  truly 
or  hy  fiction. 

When  they  are  considered  as  his  own,  then  is  he  Pewon  natural, 

^  and  artificial. 

called  a  natural  person  :  and  when  they  are  con- 
sidered as  representing  the  words  and  actions  of 
another,  then  is  he  a  feigned  or  artificial  person.     '  X 

The  word  j^^i^BK^Latin  :  instead  whereof  the  The  word  per- 
€k-eeks  hav^firfo^iiwr^jivhich  signifies  the ,^ce,  as***"'    *"^* 
j^ersana^  li^&^^mnes  the  disguise,  or  outward 
appearance  of  a  man,  counterfeited  on  the  stage  ; 
Mid  sometimes  more  particularly  that  part  of  it, 
whitfh  dis^uiseth  the  face,  as  a  mask  or  vizard: 

L2 

'-  ■  ^  »* 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


PART  I. 


representer  of  speecn 


OF  MAN. 


hath  beeii  translated)  to  any 
and  action^  as  well  m  tribu- 


an 

representer  oi  spee^ 
nals,  as  theatres.  So  that  a .  person^  is  the  same 
that  an  actor  is,  both  on  the  stage  and  in  common 
conversation  fand  to  personate^  is  to  act^  or  re- 
present himself,  or  another ;  and  he  that  acteth 
another,  is  said  to  bear  his  person,  or  act  in  his 
name ;  in  which  sense  Cicero  useth  it  where  he 
says,  Unus  sustineo  tres  personas ;  mei,  adcersarii, 
et  judicis :  I  bear  three  persons ;  my  own,  my 
adversary's,  and  the  judge's  ;  and  is  called  in  divers 
occasions,  diversly ;  as  a  representer,  or  represent- 
ative, a  lieutenant,  a  vicar,  an  attorney,  a  deputy ^ 
2l  procurator,  an  ac/oCa  and  the  like. 

Offcersonsartificial,  sjome  have  their  words  and 

^    2S^iio^ownem^^  those  whom  they  represent.    And 

Actor.  then  the  person  is  the  actor  ;  and  he  that  owneth  his 

iHthoR         words  and  actions,  is  the  ajiihor  :  in  which  case  the 

actor  acteth  by  authority.   For  that  which  in  speak^ 

ing  of  goods  and  possessions,  is  called  an  o^ger,  and 

in  Latin  £^0972mfi^,  in  Greek  ^coc  speakingdTactions, 

is  called  author.    And  as  the  right  of  possession, 

is  called  dominion ;  so  the  right  of  doing  any  action, 

AnAority.      is  called  ^AUTHORiTY?^  So  that  by  authority,  is 

always  understoodlTright  of  doing  any  act ;  and 

done  hy  authority,  done  by  commission,  or  licence 

from  him  whose  right  it  is. 

Cotenants  by       From  hcuce  it  jfolloweth,  that  when  the'  actor 

the  auAor. '"  maketh  a  covenant  by  authority,  he  bindeth  thereby 

the  author,  no  less  than  if  he  had  made  it  himself; 

and  no  less  subjecteth  him  to  all  the  consequences  of 

the  same.     And  therefore  all  that  hath  been  said 

formerly,  (chap,  xtv)  of  the  nature  of  covenants 

between  man  and  man  in  their  natural  capacity,  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  PERSONS,  AUTHORS,  BTC*  149 

true  also  when  they  are  made  by  their  actors,  repre-    part  i. 
senters,  or  procxirators,  that  have  authority  from    .    ^^'  _ 
them,  so  far  forth  as  is  in  their  commission,  but 
no  further. 

And  therefore  he  that  maketh  a  coyenant  with 
the  actor,  or  representer,  not  knowing  the  authority 
he  hath,  doth  it  at  his  own  peril.  For  no  man  is 
obliged  by  a  covenant,  whereof  he  is  not  author ; 
nor  consequently  by  a  covenant  made  against,  or 
beside  the  authority  he  gave. 

When  the  actor  doth  anything  against  the  law  of  But  not  the 
nature  by  command  of  the  author,  if  he  be  obliged  •^'^ 
by  former  covenant  to  obey  him,  not  he,  but  the 
author  breaketh  the  law  of  nature  ;  fot  though  the 
action  be  against  the  law  of  nature ;  yet  it  is  not 
his :  but  contrarily,  to  refuse  to  do  it,  is  against  the 
law  of  nature,  that  forbiddeth  breach  of  covenant. 

And  he  that  maketh  a  covenant  with  the  author,  xbe  authority 
by  mediation  of  the  actor,  not  knowing  what  autho-  "  ^  ^  ^^^^ 
rity  he  hath,  but  only  takes  his  word ;  in  case  such 
authority  be  not  made  manifest  unto  him  upon  de- 
mand, is  no  longer  obliged :  for  the  covenant  made 
with  the  author,  is  not  valid,  without  his  punter - 
assurance. )  But  if  he  that  so  covenanteth,  knew 
beforehand  he  was  to  expect  no  other  assurance, 
than  the  actor's  word ;  then  is  the  covenant  valid ; 
because  the  actor  in  this  case  maketh  himself  the 
author.  And  therefore,  as  when  the  authority  is 
evident,  the  covenant  obligeth  the  author,  not  the 
actor ;  so  when  the  authority  is  feigned,  it  obligeth 
the  actor  only ;  there  being  no  author  but  himself. 

There  are  few  things,  that  are  incapable  of  being  Things 
represented  bv  fiction.     Inanimate  things,   as  af®]^^^^' 
church,  an  hospital,  a  bridge,  may  be  personated  by 
a  rector,  master,  or  overseer.  But  things  inanimate. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


l&D 


OP  MAN. 


PART  I. 
16. 


cannot  be  authors^  nor  therefore  give  authority  to 
_  iheir  actors  :  yet  the  actors  may  hare  aathority  to 
procure  their  maintenance^  giren  diem  by  those 
that  are  owners,  or  governors  of  those  thing^  And 
therefore,  such  things  cannot  be  personatedyWbre 
there  be  some  state  of  civil  government. 
irndonai.  likcwise  children,  fools,  and  madmen  that  have 
no  use  of  reason,  may  bejpersonatedjby  guardians, 
or  curators ;  but  can  be  no  authors,  during  that 
time,  of  any  action  done  by  them,  longer  than, 
when  they  shall  recover  the  use  of  reason,  they 
shall  judge  the  same  reasonable.  Yet  during  the 
folly,  he  that  hath  right  of  governing  them,  may 
give  authority  to  the  guardian.  But  this  again  has 
no  place  but  in  a  state  civil,  because  before  sudi 
estate,  there  is  no  dominion  of  persons. 

False  gods.  Au  idol,  or  mcrc  figment  of  the  brain,  may  be 
personated ;  as  were  the  gods  of  the  heathen :  which 
by  such  officers  as  the  state  appointed,  were  per- 
sonated, and  held  possessions,  and  other  goods,  and 
rights,  which  men  from  time  to  time  dedicated, 
and  consecrated  unto  them.  But  idols  camiot  be 
authors:  for  an  idol  is  nothing.  The  authority 
proceeded  from  the  state :  and  therefore  before  in- 
troduction of  civil  government^  the  gods  of  the 
heathen  could  not  be  personated. 

The  true  God.  The  tTUc  God  may  be  personated.  As  he  was ; 
first,  by  Mo^ ;  who  governed  the  Israelites,  that 
were  nofms,  but  God's  people,  not  in  his  own 
name,  with  hoc  dicit  Moses^ ;  but  in  God's  name, 
with  hoc  dicit  Domifms.  Secondly,  by  the  Son 
of  man,  his  own  Son,  our  blessed  Saviour  J^s 
Christ,  that  came  to  reduce  the  Jews,  and  induce 
all  nations  into  the  kingdom  of  his  father ;  not  as 
of  himself,  but  as  sent  from  his  father.   And  thirdly. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


OF  PERSONS,  AUTHORS,  ETC.  151 

by  the  Holy  Ghost,  or  Comforter,  speaking,  and    part  i, 
working  in  the  Apostles  :  which  Holy  Ghost,  was    .  _  ^f-  _ . 
a  Comforter  that  came  not  of  himsdf ;  but  was  sent,       _. . . 
and  proceeded  from  them  both, 

A  multitude  of  men,  are  mad^^^m^  pers^^hen  a  mui^uide  of 
they  are  by  one  man,  or  one  person,  represented  ij^^**\**"^ 
so  that  it  be  done  with  the  consent  of  every  one  of  ^  ?!^  -^-^ 
that  multitude  in  particular.     For  it  is  the  unity  of    -^ 
the  r^resenter,  not  the  umty  of  the  repres^ited,    ^^ 
that  maketh  the  person  one.    And  it  is  the  repre*     / 
senter  that  bearetb  the  person,  and  but  one  person : 

and  unity ^  nannn^  pfjiprwi<ip  hp.  nff Hftratood  in  mul- 
^titgde.  y 

And  because  the  multitude  naturally  is  not  one^  ETeryooeU 
but  maim;  they  cannot  be  imderstood  for  one;*'**^"* 
but  many  authors,  of  every  thing  their  representa- 
tive saith,  or  doth  in  their  name  ;  every  man  giving 
their  common  representer,  authority  from  himself 
in  particular ;  and  owning  all  the  actions  the  re- 
presenter  doth,  in  case  they  give  him  authority  with- 
out stint :  otherwise,  when  they  limit  him  in  what, 
and  how  far  he  shall  represent  them,  none  of  them 
owneth  more  than  they  gave  him  commission  to  act 

And  if  the  representative  consist  of  many  men.  An  actor  may 

the  voice   of  the   U^^s\\pt  nnrnhftr.    mUSt  be  COnsi-  maS*Sne™b^ 

dered  as  the  voice  of  them  all.  For  if  the  lesser  pJ^^^^'^  ^^ 
number  pronounce,  for  example,  in  the  affirmative, 
and  the  greater  in  the  negative,  there  will  be  nega- 
tives more  than  enough  to  destroy  the  affirmatives ; 
and  thereby  the  excess  of  negatives,  standing  uncon- 
tradicted, are  the  only  voice  the  representative  hath. 

And  a  representative  of  even  number,  especially  Repnwenta- 
when  the  number  is  not  great,  whereby  the  con-  th?5umw 
tradictory  voices  are  oftentimes  equal,  is  therefore  profi^bu^ 
oftentimes  mute,  and  incapable  of  action.     Yet  in 

"-"^ —  Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


) 


voice. 


152  OF  MAN. 

PART  I.  some  cases  contradictory  voices  equal  in  number, 
.  ^f-  .  may  determine  a  question ;  as  in  condemning,  or 
absolving,  equality  of  votes,  even  in  that  they  con- 
demn not,  do  absolve ;  but  not  on  the  contrary 
condemn,  in  that  they  absolve  not.  For  when  a 
cause  is  heard ;  not  to  condemn,  is  to  absolve:  but 
on  the  contrary,  to  say  that  not  absolving,  is  con- 
demning, is  not  true.  The  like  it  is  in  a  deli- 
beration of  executing  presently,  or  deferring  till 
another  time :  for  when  the  voices  are  equal,  the 
not  decreeing  execution,  is  a  decree  of  dilation. 
Negative         Q^  jf  j-j^g  number  be  odd,  as  three,  or  more,  men 

voice.  '  '  ^ 

or  assemblies  ;  whereof  every  one  has  by  a  nega- 
tive voice,  authority  to  take  away  the  eflFect  of  all 
the  affirmative  voices  of  the  rest,  this  number  is  no 
representative ;  because  by  the  diversity  of  opinions, 
and  interests  of  men,  it  becomes  oftentimes,  and  in 
cases  of  the  greatest  consequence,  a  mute  person, 
and  unapt,  as  for  many  things  else,  so  for  the  go- 
vemment  of-^  multitude,  especially  in  time  of  war. 
Of/authi)ri^  there  be  two  sorts.  The  first  simply 
so  called;  which  I  have  before  defined  to  be  him, 
that  owneth  the  action  of  another  simply.  The 
second  is  he,  that  owneth  an  action,  or  covenant  of 
another  conditionally ;  that  is  to  say,  he  under- 
taketh  to  do  it,  if  the  other  doth  it  not,  at,  or  before 
a  certain  time.  And  these  authors  conditional,  are 
generally  called  sureties,  in  Latin,  JidejussareSy 
and  sponsor es ;  and  particularly  for  debt,  prtedes; 
and  for  appearance  before  a  judge,  or  magistrate, 
x>ades. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PART  IL 


OF  COMMONWEALTH. 


CHAPTER  XVIL 

OF  THE  CAUSES,  GENERATION,  AND  DEFINITION 
OF  A  COMMONWEALTH. 

The  final  csuge^^end^  or  design  of  men,  who  natu-   pa.rt  ii. 
rally  love  liberty,  and  dominion  over  others,  in  the    ' — A-'    . 
introduction  of  that  restraint  upon  themselves,  inT}»««»d        ^ 

,         ,      '  ,  of  commoii- 

which  we  see  them  liyj^  in  commonwealths,  is  the  wealth,  parti- 
foresight  of  their  owiy[)reservation,jand  of  a  more  ^"  "  •^^^'y* 
contented  life  ther^y ;  that  is  to  say,  of  getting 
themselves  out  from  that  miserable  condition  of 
war,  which  is  necessarily  consequent,  as  hath  been 
shown  in  chapter  xiii,  to  the  natural  passions  of 
men,  when  there  is  no  visible  power  to  keep  them 
in  awe,  and  tie  them  by  fear  of  punishment  to  the 
performance  of  their  covenants,  and  observation  of 
those  laws  of  nature  set  down  in  the  fourteenth 
and  fifteenth  chapters. 

For  the  laws  of  nature,  as  Justice,  equity,  mo-  which  u  not 
desty,  mercy,  and,  in  sum,  doing  to  others,  as  ir^theUwof"*™ 
would  he  done  to,  of  themselves,  without  the  terror  "****"' 
of  some  power,  to  cause  them  to  be  observed,  are 
contrary  to  our  natural  passions,  that  carry  us  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


154  OP  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.   partiality,  pride,  revenge,  and  the  like.    And  cove* 

.  /  Strength  to  secure  a  man  at  all.  Therefore  not- 
withstanding the  laws  of  nature,  which  every  one 
hath  then  kept,  when  he  has  the  will  to  keep  them^ 
when  he  can  do  it  safely^  if  there  be  no  power 
erected,  or  not  great  enough  for  our  security; 
every  man  will,  and  may  lawfully  rely  on  his  own 
strength  and  art,  for  caution  against  all  other  men. 
And  in  all  places,  where  men  have  lived  by  small 
families,  to^^b  and  spoil  one  another,  has  been  a 
trade,  andsofar  fix>m  being  reputed  against  the 
law  of  nature,  that  the  greater  spoils  they  gained, 
the  greater  was  their  honour ;  and  men  observed 
no  other  laws  therein,  but  the  laws  of  honour ;  that 
is,  to  abstain  from  cruelty,  leaving  to  men  their 
lives,  and  instruments  of  husbandry.  And  as  small 
families  did  then ;  so  now  do  cities  and  kingdoms 
which  are  but  greater  families,  for  their  own  secu- 
rity, enlarge  their  dominions,  upon  all  pretences  of 
danger,  and  fear  of  invasion,  or  assistance  that  may 
be  given  to  invaders^  and  endeavour  as  much  as 
they  can,  to  subdue,  or  weaken  their  neighbours, 
by  open  force,  and  secret  arts,  for  want  of  other 
caution,  justly  i  and  are  remembered  for  it  in  after 
ages  with  honour. 
Nor  from  the  Nor  is  it  the  joiulug  together  of  a  small  numbw 
Tfcw  meror  of  mcu,  that  givcs  them  this  security ;  because  m 
families:  gmall  uumbcrs,  small  additions  on  the  one  side 
or  the  other,  make  the  advantage  of  strength  so 
great,  as  is  sufficient  to  carry  the  victory;  and 
therefore  gives  encouragement  to  an  invasion.  The 
multitude  sufficient  to  confide  in  for  our  security, 
is  not  determined  by  any  certain  number,  but  by 

Digitized  by  VjOO^IC* 


OF  THE 

PNIVERSITV 


ETC.  OF  A  COMMONWEALTH.         155 


comparison  with  the  enemy  we  fear ;  and  is  then   part  ii. 
sufficient,  when  the  odds  of  the  enemy  is  not  of  so    .    ^J-   . 
visible  and  conspicuous  moment,  to  determine  the 
event  of  war,  as  to  move  him  to  attempt. 

And  be  there  never  so  great  a  multitude ;  yet  if  ^^^/^"ijl. 
their  actions  be  directed  according  Co  their  parti-  tude,  nnieM 
cular  judgments,  and  particular  appetites,  they  can  judgment?  °"* 
expect  thereby  no  defence,  nor  protection,  neither 
against  a  common  enemy,  nor  against  the  injuries 
of  one  another.    For  being  distracted  in  opinions 
concerning  the  best  use  and  application  of  thdir 
strength,  they  do.  not  help  but  hinder  one  ano- 
ther ;  and  reduce  their  strength  by  mutual  oppo- 
sition to  nothing :  whereby  they  are  easily,  not 
only  subdued  by  a  very  few  that  agree  together ; 
but  also  when  there  is  no  common  enemy,  they 
make  war  upon  each  other,  for  their  particular 
interests.    For  if  we  could  suppose  a  great  multi-  i/ 
tude  of  men  to  consent  in  the  observation  erf  jus-  "^ 
tice,  and  other  laws  of  nature,  vnthout  a  common 
power  to  keep  them  all  in  awe ;  we  might  as  well 
suppose  all  mankind  to  do  the  same;   and  then 
there  neither  would  be,  nor  need  to  be  any  civil 
government,  or  commonwealth   at  all ;   because   . 
there  would  be  peace  vrithout  subjection. 

Nor  is  it  enough  for  the  security,  which  men  And  that 
desire  should  last  all  the  time  of  their  life,  that  *^"^*""  ^' 
they  be  governed,  and  directed  by  one  judgment, 
for  a  limited  time  ;  as  in  one  battle,  or  one  war. 
For  though  they  obtain  a  victory  by  their  unani- 
mous endeavour  against  a  foreign  enemy;  yet 
afterwards,  when  either  they  have  no  common 
enemy,  or  he  that  by  oi^  part  is  held  for  an  enemy, 
is  ^y  another  pmt  held  for  a  friend,  they  must 


/- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


/ 


V/' 


l56  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  needs  by  the  diflFerence  of  their  interests  dissolve, 
.  ^^'  .  and  fall  again  into  a  war  amongst  themselves. 
Why  certain  It  is  true,  that  certain  living  creatures,  as  bees, 
^t*re^nror  and  ants,  live  sociably  one  with  another,  which  are 
n^^elew  therefore  by  Aristotle  numbered  amongst  political 
wiUiou?M^'  creatures  ;  anoyet  have  no  other  direction,  than 
coercive  power,  their  particular  judgments  and  appetites;  nor 
speech,  whereby  one  of  them  can  signify  to  ano- 
ther, what  he  thinks  expedient  for  the  common 
benefit:  and  therefore  some  man  may  perhaps 
desire  to  know,  why  mankind  cannot  do  the  same. 
To  which  I  answer, 

"^  First,  that  men  are  continually  in  competition 
for  honour  and  dignity,  which  these  creatures  are 
not ;  and  consequently  amongst  men  there  ariseth 
on  that  ground,  envy  and  hatred,  and  finally  war ; 
but  amongst  these  not  so. 
y/  Secondly,  that  amongst  these  creatures,  the  com- 
mon good  differeth  not  from  the  private ;  and  being 
by  nature  inclined  to  their  private,  they  procure 
thereby  the  common  benefit.  But  man,  whose  joy 
consisteth  in  comparing  himself  with  other  men, 
can  relish  nothing  but  what  is  eminent. 
^  Thirdly,  that  these  creatures,  having  not,  as  man, 
the  use  of  reason,  do  not  see,  nor  think  they  see 
any  fault,  in  the  administration  of  their  common 
business;  whereas  amongst  men,  there  are  very 
many,  that  think  themselves  wiser,  and  abler  to 
govern  the  public,  better  than  the  rest ;  and  these 
strive  to  reform  and  innovate,  one  this  way,  ano- 
ther that  way ;  and  thereby  bring  it  into  distrac- 
tion and  civil  war. 

Fourthly,  that  these  creatures,  though  they  have 
some  use  of  voice,  in  making  known  to  one  another 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CAUSES,  ETC.  OF  A  COMMONWEALTH.         1 57 

their  desires,  and  other  affections ;  yet  they  want   part  ii. 
that/&t  of  wordsT^y  which  some  men  can  repre-    .  ^^'    . 
sent  to  others,  that  which  is  good,  in  the  likeness    v. 
of  evil;  and  evil,  in  the  likeness  of  good;  and 
augment,  or  diminish  the  apparent  greatness  of 
good  and  evil ;  discontenting  men,  and  troubling 
th^r  peace  at  their  pleasure. 
"^Fifdily,  irrational  creatures  cannot  distinguish 
between  injury^  and  damage;   and  therefore  as 
long  as  they  be  at  ease,  they  are  not  oflFended  with 
their  fellows  :  whereas  man  is  then  most  trouble- 
some, when  he  is  most  at  ease :  for  then  it  is  that 
he  loves  to  shew  his  wisdom,  and  control  the  ac- 
tions of  them  that  govern  the  commonwealth. 
^  Lastly,  the  agreement  of  these  creatures  is  natu- 
ral ;  that  of  men,  is  by  covenant  only,  which  is 
artificial :  and  therefore  it  is  no  wonder  if  there  be  ' 
somewhat  else  required,  besides  covenant,  to  make ' 
their  agreement  constant  and  lasting ;  which  is  a 
common  power,  to  keep  them  in  awe,  and  to  direct 
their  actions  to  the  common  benefit. 

JTje  only  -yyay  to^rpot  SodlJLiaJBaffiSajMH^   ^  2?a SSSS" 
may  be  able  to  defend  them  from  the  invasion  of ''«*i*^- 
foreigners,  and  the  injuries  of  one  another,  and  . 

thereby  to  secure  them  in  such  sort,  as  that  by  their      r\     ( 
own  industry,  and  by  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  they       vy 
may  nourish  themselves  and  live  contentedly  ;J»r-x 
to-confer  all  their  power  and  stren^h  upo^loiie 
inap,  >r  upon  one  assembly  of  TYiftn^  thfltli^y  r^^::^ 
*       l^their  wills,  by  plurality  of  voices,  unto  one  \ 

ich  is  as  much  as  to  say^  to  appointjonfi 
man,  or  assembly  of  men^  to  bear  their  person^  ^d  \ 

every  one  to  own,  and  acknowledge  himself  tq^iifi 
author  of  whatsoever  he  that  so  beareth  their  per- 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

V 


li^'f.v 


168.  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 


PART  iL   800^  shall  act^  or  cause  to  be  acted,  in  those  things 
^    ^^       which  concern  the  common  peace  and  safety ;  and 
therein  to  submit  their  wills,  every  one  to  his  will, 
and  their  judgments,  to  his  judgment.     This  is 
more  than  consent,  or  concord ;  it  is  a  real  unity 
of  them  all,  in  one  and  the  same  person,  made  by 
covenant  of  every  man  with  every  man,  in  such 
manner,  as  if  every  man  should  say  to  every  man, 
I  /  authorise  and  give  up  my  right  of  governing 
V/l  myse(f,  to  this  man,  or  to  this  assembly  of  men, 
|J  on  this  condition,  that  thou  give  up  thy  right  to 
V  him,  and  authorize  all  his  actions  tn  like  manner. 
This  done,  the  multitude  so  united j^psigii^on, 
is  called  a  commonwealth. 
This  is  the  generation  of  that  g^i 
rather,  to  speak  more  reverent!; 
god,  to  which  we  owe  under  the  immortal  God, 
our  peace  and  defence.     For  by  this  authority, 
given  him  by  every  particular  man  in  the  common- 
w^th,  he  hath  the  use  of  so  much  power  an4 
strength  conferred  on  him,  that  by  terror  thereof, 
he  is  enabled  to  perform  the  wills  of  them  all,  to 
peace  at  home,  and  mutual  aid  against  their  ene- 
mies abroad.    And  in  him  con»steth  the  essence 

The  definitioo  of  the  commouwcalth ;  which,  to  define  it,  is  one 

weaiS"^**""  [person,  of  whose  acts  a  great  multitude,  hy  mutual 

\^    covenants  one  with  another,  have  made  themselves 

every  one  the  author,  to  the  end  he  maywfe  the 

strength  and  means  of  them  all,  asheshalljhink 

expedient,  for  their  peace  and  common  dtfence. 

SoTercign,  and      And  hc  that  carricth  this  person,  is   called 

subject,  what  ji         •  j    ^      i 

SOVEREIGN,  and  said  to  have  sovereign  power ; 
and  every  one  besides,  his  subject. 

The  attaining  to  this  sovereign  power,  is  by  two 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CAUSES^  ETC.  OF  A  COMMONWEALTH.         16d 

I   ways.     One,  byZnatnral  forc^  as  when  a  man   part  n. 
maketh  his  chUaren^  to  suBnnt  themselves,  and   .,  ^f'  .. 
their  children  to  his  government,  as  being  able  to 
destroy  them  if  they  refuse ;  or  by  war  subdueth 
his  enemies  to  his  will,  giving  tliem  their  lives  on 

Vthat  condition.  The  other,  is  when  men  agree 
amongst  themselves,  to  snbioit  to  some  man,  or 
assembly  of  men,^oluntarily^on  confidence  to  be 
protected  by  him^rcgainst  all  mhers.  This  latter, 
may  be  called  a  political  commonwealth,  or  com- 
monwealth by  institution;  and  the  former,  a  com- 
monwealth hYO^uisitign.  And  first,  I  shall  speak 
of  a  commonwealth  by  institution. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

OF  THE  BIGHTS  OF  SOVEREIGNS  BY  INSTITUTION. 

A  commonwealth  is  said  to  be  instituted,  when  The  act  of  in- 

_  ,       _       ^  _  .  stitntiDga corn- 

It  mmtttude  of  men  do  agree^  and  covenant^  every  monweaith, 

one^  with  every  one^  that  to  whatsoever  man^  or  ^*^*'' 
assembly  ofmen^  shall  be  given  by  the  major  part, 
11^  right  to  present  the  person  of  them  all,  that 
is  to  say,  to  be  their  representative;  every  one,  as 
well  he  that  voted  for  it,  as  he  that  voted  against 
it,  diall  authorise  all  the  actions  and  judgments, 
of  that  man,  or  assembly  of  men,  in  the  same  man- 
ner, as  if  they  were  his  own,  to  the  end,  to  live 
peaceably  amongst  themselves,  and  be  protected 
against  otiier  men. 

From  this  institution  of  a  commonwealth  areTheconae. 
dcarived  all  the  rights,  and  /acuities  of  him,  or  SlMtitu. 
them,  on  whom  sovereign  power  is  conferred  by  ****"'  '^^^ 
the  consent  of  the  people  assembled. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


160  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  n.  First,  because  they  covenant,  it  is  to  be  tinder- 
.  \^'  .  stood,  they  are  not  obliged  by  former  covenant  to 
i.Thesubjccto  anything  repugnant  hereunto.  And  consequently 
tbefonnof  ^  they  that  have  already  instituted  a  commonwealth, 
government,  ly^ij^g  thereby  bouud  by  covenant,  to  own  the  ac- 
Y  tions,  and  judgments  of  one,  cannot  lawfully  make 
a  new  covenant,  amongst  themselves,  to  be  obedi- 
ent to  any  other,  in  any  thing  whatsoever,  without 
his  permission.  And  therefore,  they  that  are  sub- 
jects to  a  monarch,  cannot  without  his  leave  cast 
oflF  monarchy,  and  return  to  the  confusion  of  a  dis- 
united multitude ;  nor  transfer  their  person  from 
him  that  beareth  it,  to  another  man,  or  other 
assembly  of  men :  for  they  are  bound,  every  man 
to  every  man,  to  own,  and  be  reputed  author  of 
all,  that  he  that  already  is  their  sovereign,  shall  do, 
and  judge  fit  to  be  done :  so  that  any  one  man 
dissenting,  all  the  rest  should  break  their  covenant 
made  to  that  man,  which  is  injustice :  and  they 
.  have  also  every  man  given  the  sovereignty  to  him 
that  beareth  their  person;  and  therefore  if  they 
depose  him,  they  take  from  him  that  which  is  his 
own,  and  so  again  it  is  injustice.  Besides,  if  he 
that  attempteth  to  depose  his  sovereign,  be  killed, 
or  punished  by  him  for  such  attempt,  he  is  author 
of  his  ovm  punishment,  as  being  by  the  institution, 
author  of  all  his  sovereign  shall  do  :  and  because 
it  is  injustice  for  a  man  to  do  anything,  for  which 
he  may  be  punished  by  his  own  authority,  he  is 
also  upon  that  title,  unjust.  And  whereas  some 
men  have  pretended  for  their  disobedience  to  their 
sovereign,  a  new  covenant,  made,  not  with  men, 
but  with  God ;  this  also  is  unjust :  for  there  is  no 
covenant  with  God,  but  by  mediation  of  somebody 


Digitized  by 


Google 


RIGHTS  OF  SOVEREIGNS.  161 

that  representeth  God's  person ;  which  none  doth   part  ii. 
but  God's  lieutienant,  who  hath  the  sovereignty  un-    .    'f-  ^ 
der  God.     But  this  pretence  of  covenant  with  God, 
is  so  evident  a  lie,  even  in  the  pretenders'  own 
consciences,  that  it  is  not  only  an  act  of  an  unjust, 
but  also  of  a  vile,  and  unmanly  disposition. 

Secondly,  because  the  right  of  bearing  the  per-^  2.  Sovereign 
son  of  them  all,  is  given  to  him  they  make  sovereign,  be^'forf^ed. 
by  covenant  only  of  one  to  another,  and  not  of  him 
to  any  of  them ;  there  can  happen  no  breach  of 
covenant  on  the  part  of  the  sovereign ;  and  con- 
sequently none  of  his  subjects,  by  any  pretence  of 
forfeiture,  can  be  freed  from  his  subjection.  That 
he  which  is  made  sovereign  maketh  no  covenant 
with  his  subjects  beforehand,  is  manifest ;  because 
either  he  must  make  it  with  the  whole  multitude, 
as  one  party  to  the  covenant;  or  he  must  make 
a  several  covenant  with  every  man.  With  the 
whole,  as  one  party,  it  is  impossible ;  because  as 
yet  they  are  not  one  person :  and  if  he  make  so 
many  several  covenants  as  there  be  men,  those 
covenants  after  he  hath  the  sovereignty  are  void  ; 
because  what  act  soever  can  be  pretended  by  any 
one  of  them  for  breach  thereof,  is  the  act  both  of  him- 
self, and  of  all  the  rest,  because  done  in  the  person, 
and  by  the  right  of  every  one  of  them  in  particular. 
Besides,  if  any  one,  or  more  of  them,  pretend  a 
breach  of  the  covenant  made  by  the  sovereign  at 
his  institution ;  and  others,  or  one  other  of  his 
subjects,  or  himself  alone,  pretend  there  was  no 
such  breach,  there  is  in  this  case,  no  judge  to  decide 
the  controversy ;  it  returns  therefore  to  the  sword 
again ;  and  every  man  recovereth  the  right  of  pro- 
tecting himself  by  his  own  strength,  contrary  to  the 

VOL.  Ill,  M 


Digitized  by 


Google 


162  OP  COMMON WEAXTH. 

PART  IK  design  they  had  in  the  institution.  It  is  therefore 
^  _  ^f'  .-  in  vain  to  grant  sovereignty  by  way  of  precedent 
covenant.  The  opinion  that  any  monarch  receiveth 
his  power  by  covenant,  that  is  to  say,  on  condition, 
proceedeth  from  want  of  understanding  this  easy 
tnith,  that  covenants  being  but  words  and  breath, 
have  no  force  to  oblige,  contain,  constrain,  or  pro- 
tect any  man,  but  what  it  has  from  the  public 
sword ;  that  is,  from  the  untied  hands  of  that  man, 
or  assembly  of  men  that  hath  the  sovereignty,  and 
whose  actions  are  avouched  by  them  all,  and  per- 
formed by  the  strength  of  them  all,  in  him  imited. 
But  when  an  assembly  of  men  is  made  sovereign ; 
then  no  man  imagineth  any  such  covenant  to  have 
passed  in  the  institution ;  for  no  man  is  so  dull  as 
to  say,  for  example,  the  people  of  Rome  made  a 
covenant  with  the  Romans,  to  hold  the  sovereignty 
on  such  or  such  conditions ;  which  not  performed, 
the  Romans  might  lawfully  depose  the  Roman 
people.  That  men  see  not  the  reason  to  be  alike 
in  a  monarchy,  and  in  a  popular  government,  pro- 
ceedeth from  the  ambition  of  some,  that  are  kinder 
to  the  government  of  an  assembly,  whereof  they 
may  hope  to  participate,  than  of  monarchy,  which 
they  despair  to  enjoy. 

».  No  man  Thirdly,  because  the  major  part  hath  by  con- 
can  without  in-  ,.  .  J      1         J  •  T_      .!_    u.  J» 

justice  protest  scutmg  voiccs  declared  a  sovereign  ;  he  that  dis- 
luiitiOT^f  the  sented  must  now  consent  with  the  rest ;  that  is,  be 
tovereigii  de-  contcutcd  to  avow  all  the  actions  he  shall  do,  or  else 

clared    by  the 

major  part,  justly  be  dcstroycd  by  the  rest.  For  if  he  volunta- 
rily entered  into  the  congregation  of  them  that  were 
assembled,  he  sufficiently  declared  thereby  his  will, 
and  therefore  tacitly  covenanted,  to  stand  to  what 
the  major  part  should  ordain :  and  therefore  if  he 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EIGHTS  OP  SOVEREIGNS.  163 

refuse  to  stand  thereto,  or  make  protestation  against  part  ii, 
any  of  their  decrees,  he  does  contrary  to  his  cove-  ^f- 
nant,  and  therefore  imjostly.  And  whether  he  be 
of  the  congregation,  or  not ;  and  whether  his  con- 
sent be  asked,  or  not,  he  must  either  submit  to 
their  decrees,  or  be  left  in  the  condition  of  war  he 
was  in  before ;  wherein  he  might  without  injustice 
be  destroyed  by  any  man  whatsoever. 

Fourthly,  because  everjr  subject  is  by  this  insti-  4.  Thcsove- 
tution  author  of  all  the  actions,  and  judgments  of  ^rot\e£iy 
the  sovereign  instituted ;  it  follows,  that  whatsoever  ^^used  by  the 
he  doth,  it  can  be  no  injury  to  any  of  his  subjects ; 
nor  ought  he  to  be  by  any  of  them  accused  of  in- 
justice.    For  he  that  doth  anything  by  authority 
from  another,  doth  therein  no  injury  to  him  by 
whose  authority  he  acteth :  but  by  this  institution  . 

of  a  commonwealth,  every  particular  man  is  author 
of  all  the  sovereign  doth :  and  consequently  he  that 
complaineth  of  injury  from  his  sovereign,  com- 
plaiueth  of  that  whereof  he  himself  is  author ;  and 
therefore  ought  not  to  accuse  any  man  but  himself; 
no  nor  himself  of  injury ;  because  to  do  injury  to 
one's  self,  is  impossible.  It  is  true  that  they  that 
have  sovereign  power  may  commit  iniquity ;  but  / 

not  injustice,  or  injury  in  the  proper  signification. 

Fifthly,  and  consequently  to  that  which  was  said  5.  whateoever 
last,  no  man  that  hath  sovereign  power  can  justly  J^^^  1^0^^- 
be  put  to  death,  or  otherwise  in  any  manner  by  his  "*»^We  by  the 
subjects  punished.     For  seeing  every  subject  is     ^^ 
author  of  the  actions  of  his  sovereign ;  he  punisheth 
another  for  the  actions  committed  by  himself. 

And  because  the  end  of  this  institution,  is  the  ^•.  The  sove- 
peace  and  defence  of  them  all ;  and  whosoever  has  of  ^hat  w°ne. 
right  to  the  end,  has  right  to  the  means ;  it  be- 

M2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


164  OP  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.    longeth  of  right,  to  whatsoever  man,  or  assembly 
.    ^^'    .    that  hath  the  sovereignty,  to  be  judge  both  of  the 
cessary  for  the  means  of  peace  and  defence,  and  also  of  the  hm- 
^^  "of  hii  drances,  and  disturbances  of  the  same  ;  and  to  do 
subjeots.         whatsoever  he  shall  think  necessary  to  be  done, 
both  beforehand,  for  the  preserving  of  peace  and 
security,  by  prevention  of  discord  at  home,  and 
hostility  from  abroad ;  and,  when  peace  and  secu- 
rity are  lost,  for  the  recovery  of  the  same.     And 
therefore. 
And  judge  of      Sixthly,  it  is  annexed  to  the  sovereignty,  to  be 
]^**firto  °bJ  J^<Jg^  ^f  what  opinions  and  doctrines  are  averse,  and 
taught  them,    ^hat  couduciug  to  pcacc ;  and  consequently,  on  what 
occasions,  how  far,  and  what  men  are  to  be  trusted 
withal,  in  speaking  to  multitudes  of  people ;  and 
who  shall  examine  the  doctrines  of  all  books  before 
they  be  published.     For  the  actions  of  men  pro- 
ceed from  their  opinions ;  and  in  the  well-governing 
(rf  opinions,  consisteth  the  well-governing  of  men's 
actions,  in  order  to  their  peace,  and  concord.     And 
though  in  matter  of  doctrine,  nothing  ought  to  be 
regarded  but  the  truth  ;  yet  this  is  not  repugnant 
to  regulating  the  same  by  peace.     For  doctrine 
repugnant  to  peace,,  can  no  more  be  true,  than 
peace  and  concord  can  be  against  the  law  of  nature. 
It  is  true,  that  in  a  commonwealth,  where  by 
the  negligence,  or  imskilfiilness  of  governors,  and 
teachers,  false  doctrines  are  by  time  generally  re- 
ceived ;  the  contrary  truths  may  be  generally  offen- 
sive.    Yet  the  most  sudden,  and  rough  bursting  in 
of  a  new  truth,  that  can  be,  does  never  break  the 
peace,  but  only  sometimes  awake  the  war.     For 
those  men  that  are  so  remissly  governed,  that  they 
dare  take  up  arms  to  defend,  or  introduce  an  opinion. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


RIGHTS  OF  SOVEREIGNS.  165 

are  still  in  war ;  and  their  condition  not  peace,  but  part  ii. 
only  a  cessation  of  arms  for  fear  of  one  another ;  .  '  ^-  , 
and  they  live,  as  it  were,  in  the  precincts  of  battle 
continually.  It  belongeth  therefore  to  him  that 
hath  the  sovereign  power,  to  be  judge,  or  constitute 
all  judges  of  opinions  and  doctrines,  as  a  thing 
necessary  to  peace;  thereby  to  prevent  discord 
and  civil  war. 

Seventhly,  is  annexed  to  the  sovereignty,  the^^*^^^^ 
whole  power  of  prescribing  the  rules,  whereby  every  whereby  the 

,  ,  11  •  J  subjecU  may 

man  may  know,  what  goods  he  may  enjoy,  and  every  man 
what  actions  he  may  do,  without  being  molested  go  hL  own!  m 
by  any  of  his  fellow-subjects;  and  this  is  it  ^len P^j**^^^^'^^ 
call  propriety.  For  before  constitution  of  sovereismi  <>«*  injustice 

11        1  11  1  11  ,      ,  ^^^  it    from 

.  power,  as  hath  already  been  shown,  all  men  had  him, 

■"right  to  all  things  ;  which  necessarily  causeth  war : 

•^^^d'tfierefore  this  propriety,  being  necessary  to 

peace,  and  depending  on  sovereign  power,  is  the  act 

ofthat  jjower^  in  order  to  the  public  peaceT    These 

rules  of  propriety,  or  meum  and  tuunif  and  of  good, 

^ilj  lawful,  and  unlawful  in  the  actions  of  subjects, 

•Sffe  the  civil  laws ;  that  is  to  say,  the  laws  of  each 

^commonwealth  in  particular ;  though  the  name  of 

civil  law  be  now  restrained 'to  the  ancient  civil 

laws  of  the  city  of  Rome ;  which  being  the  head  of 

a  great  part  of  the  world,  her  laws  at  that  time 

were  in  these  parts  the  civil  law.  y^ 

Eighthly,  is  annexed  to  the  sovereignty,  the  right  ^j J<»  ^*™  *^ 
of  judicature  ;  that  is  to  say,  of  hearing  and  de- right  of  jadica. 
ciding  all  controversies,  which  may  arise  concerning  a^on  oTcontro" 
law,  either  civil,  or  natural ;  or  concerning  fact.  ^*"^' 
For  without  the  decision  of  controversies,  there  is 
no  protection  of  one  subject,  against  the  injuries  of 
another ;  the  laws  concerning  meum  and  tuum  are 
in  vain;  and  to  every  man  remaineth,  from  the 

'*'"'"^'  "^  Digitized  by  GoOglC 


166  OP  COMMONWEALTH* 

PART  II.  natural  and  necessary  appetite  of  his  own  conser- 
.  ^^'  .  vation,  the  right  of  protecting  himself  by  his  private 
strength,  which  is  the  condition  of  war,  and  con- 
trary to  the  end  for  which  every  commonwealth  is 
instituted. 
maki"^  wu  Ninthly,  is  annexed  to  the  sovereignty,  the  right 
and  peace,  u  of  making  War  and  peace  with  other  nations,  and 
b^L  *  ***  commonwealths ;  that  is  to  say,  of  judging  when  it 
is  for  the  public  good,  and  how  great  forces  are  to 
be  assembled,  'armed,  and  paid  for  that  end ;  and 
to  levy  money  upon  the  subjects,  to  defray  the 
expenses  thereof.  For  the  power  by  which  the 
people  are  to  be  defended,  consisteth  in  their  armies ; 
and  the  strength  of  an  army,  in  the  union  of 
their  strength  under  one  command ;  which  com- 
mand the  sovereign  instituted,  therefore  hath ; 
because  the  command  of  the  militia,  without  other 
institution,  maketh  him  that  hath  it  sovereign. 
And  therefore  whosoever  is  made  general  of  an 
army,  he  that  hath  the  sovereign  power  is  always 
generalissimo. 

10.  And  of  Tenthly,  is  annexed  to  the  sovereignty,  the  choos- 
eounldforsand  iug  of  all  couusellors,  ministers,  magistrates,  and 
Tf  S^"&  war.  officers,  both  in  peace,  and  war.     For  seeing  the 

sovereign  is  charged  with  the  end,  which  is  the 
common  peace  and  defence,  he  is  understood  to 
have  power  to  use  such  means,  as  he  shall  think 
most  fit  for  his  discharge. 

11.  And  of         Eleventhly,  to  the  sovereieii  is  committed  the 

rewarding  and  i>  j-  --..i.       •    i.  u  j 

punuhing,  and  powcr  of  rewarding  with  nches,  or  honour,  and 
foraiCTUw ha°h  of  pimishiug  with  corporal  or  pecuniary  punish- 
me^^re  ^f*it)  ^^^^5  ^r  with  iguominy,  every  subject  according  to 
aibitrariiy.  the  law  hc  hath  formerly  made  ;  or  if  there  be  no 
law  made,  according  as  he  shall  judge  most  to  con- 
duce to  the  encouraging  of  men  to  serve  the  com- 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


honour  and 
order. 


RIOHTS  OF  SOVBREIGNS.  167 

Daonwealth^  or  deterring  of  them  from  doing  dis-    part  ii 
service  to  the  same.  .    ^f- 

Lastly^  considering  what  value  men  are  naturally  12.  And  of 
apt  to  set  upon  themselves ;  what  respect  they  look 
for  from  others  ;  and  how  little  they  value  other 
men ;  from  whence  continually  arise  amongst  them, 
emulation,  quarrels,  factions,  and  at  last  war,  to 
the  destroying  of  one  another,  and  diminution  of 
their  strength  against  a  common  enemy ;  it  is  ne- 
cessary that  there  be  laws  of  honour,  and  a  public 
rate  of  the  worth  of  such  men  as  have  deserved,  or 
are  able  to  deserve  well  of  the  commonwealth  ;  and 
that  there  be  force  in  the  hands  of  some  or  other, 
to  put  those  laws  in  execution.  But  it  hath  al- 
ready been  shown,  that  not  only  the  whole  militia^ 
or  forces  of  the  commonwealth ;  but  also  the  ju- 
dicature of  all  controversies,  is  annexed  to  the 
sovereignty.  To  the  sovereign  therefore  it  be- 
longeth  also  to  give  titles  of  honour ;  and  to  appoint 
what  order  of  place,  and  dignity,  each  man  shall 
hold ;  and  what  signs  of  respect,  in  public  or  pri- 
vate meetings,  they  shall  give  to  one  another. 

These  are  the  rights,  which  make  the  essence  of  These  rights 

,,.,  ^,  ,  iT.a'e  indivisible. 

sovereignty ;  and  which  are  the  marks,  whereby  a 
man  may  discern  in  what  man,  or  assembly  of  men, 
the  sovereign  power  is  placed,  and  resideth.  For 
these  are  incommunicable,  and  inseparable.  The 
power  to  coin  money ;  to  dispose  of  the  estate  and 
persons  of  infant  heirs;  to  have  preemption  in 
markets ;  and  all  other  statute  prerogatives,  may 
be  transferred  by  the  sovereign ;  and  yet  the  power 
to  protect  his  subjects  be  retained.  But  if  he 
transfer  the  militia^  he  retains  the  judicature  in 
vain,  for  want  of  execution  of  the  laws :  or  if  he 
grant  away  the  power  of  raising  money ;  the  militia 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


168  OP  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.    is  in  vain ;  or  if  he  give  away  the  government  of 
.    ^^-    .    doctrines,  men  will  be  frighted  into  rebellion  witli 
the  fear  of  spirits.     And  so  if  we  consider  any 
one  of  the  said  rights,   we  shall  presently  see, 
that  the  holding  of  aQ  the  rest  will  produce  no 
effect,  in  the  conservation  of  peace  and  justice,  the 
end  for  which  all  commonwealths  are  instituted. 
And  this  division  is  it,  whereof  it  is  said,  a  king- 
dom divided  in  itself  cannot  stand:  for  unless 
this  division  precede,  division  into  opposite  armies 
^can  never  happen.     If  there  had  not  first  been  an 
opinion  received  of  the  greatest  part  of  England, 
that  these  powers  were  divided  between  the  King, 
and  the  Lords,  and  the  House  of  Commons,  the 
people  had  never  been  divided  and  fallen  into  this 
civil  war;  first  between  those  that  disagreed  in 
politics;   and  after  between  the  dissenters  about 
the  liberty  of  religion  ;  which  have  so  instructed 
men  in  this  point  of  sovereign  right,  that  there  be 
few  now  in  England  that  do  not  see,  that  these 
rights  are  inseparable,  and  will  be  so  generally 
acknowledged  at  the  next  return  of  peace ;  and  so 
continue,  till  their  miseries  are  forgotten ;  and  no 
longer,  except  the  vulgar  be  better  taught  than 
they  have  hitherto  been. 
And  can  by         Aud  bccausc  they  are  essential  and  inseparable 
away  ""Jdth^  rights,  it  follows  ncccssarily,  that  in  whatsoever 
ci^o/uJe"'^  words  any  of  them  seem  to  be  granted  away,  yet  if 
vereign  power,  the  sovcrcigu  powcr  itsclf  be  not  in  direct  terms 
renounced,  and  the  name  of  sovereign  no  more 
given  by  the  grantees  to  him  that  grants  them,  the 
grant  is  void :  for  when  he  has  granted  all  he  can, 
if  we  grant  back  the  sovereignty,  all  is  restored,  as 
^  inseparably  annexed  thereunto. 

This  great  authority  being  indivisible,  and  in- 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


RIGHTS  OP  SOVEREIGNS..  169 

separably  annexed  to  the  sovereignty,  there  is  little    part  ii. 
gronnd  for  the  opinion  of  them,  that  say  of  sove-    .    ^f-    . 
reign  kings,  though  tiLej  he  singulis  major es,  of  The  power  and 
greater  power  than  every  one  of  their  subjects,  yet  jects  vnmsheth 
they  be  universis  minoreSj  of  less  power  than  them  |,°  uie'^owex 
all  together.  ^For  if  by  all  together ^  they  mean  not  ■o^««gn. 
the  collective  body  as  one  person,  then  all  together^ 
and  every  one^  signify  the  same  ;  and  the  speech 
is  absurd.     But  if  by  all  together,  they  understand 
them  as  one  person,  which  person  the  sovereign 
bears,  then  the  power  of  all  together,  is  the  same 
with  the  sovereign's  power ;  and  so  again  the  speech 
is  absurd :  which  absurdity  they  see  well  enough, 
when  the  sovereignty  is  in  an  assembly  of  the 
people ;  but  in  a  monarch  they  see  it  not ;  and 
yet  the  power  of  sovereignty  is  the  same  in  whom- 
soever it  be  placed. 

And  as  the  power,  so  also  the  honour  of  the 
sovereign,  ought  to  be  greater,  than  that  of  any, 
or  all  the  subjects.  For  in  the  sovereignty  is  the 
fountain  of  honour.  The  dignities  of  lord,  earl, 
duke,  and  prince  are  his  creatures.     As  in  the  pre-  ^ 

sence  of  the  master,  the  servants  are  equal,  and 
without  any  honour  at  all ;  so  are  the  subjects,  in 
the  presence  of  the  sovereign.  And  though  they 
shine  some  more,  some  less,  when  they  are  out  of 
his  sight ;  yet  in  his  presence,  they  shine  no  more  ^ 
than  the  stars  in  the  presence  of  the  sun. 

But  a  man  may  here  object,  that  the  condition  of  Sovereign 
subjects  is  very  miserable  ;  as  being  obnoxious  to  Lrtfui  as  the 
the  lusts,  and  other  irregular  passions  of  him,  or  ofe^^hurt  p^ 
them  that  have  so  unlimited  a  power  in  their  hands.  greaL^part^^ 
And  commonly  they  that  live  under  a  monarch,  ^o™  not  sub- 

1  •    "I     •       1       /»      t         i»  1  11  IT        milting  readily  > 

think  it  the  fault  of  monarchy ;  and  they  that  live  to  a  less. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


170  OF  COMMONWBALTH. 

PART  II.   under  the  government  of  democracy,  or  other  sove- 

.    ^f'    .    reign  assembly,  attribute  all  the  inconvenience  to 

Sovereign       that  form  of  commonwealth ;  whereas  the  power  in 

power  not  10  ./.i,  ^  i  i 

hurtful  M  the  all  forms,  if  they  be  perfect  enough  to  protect  them, 
th^  hurt'  pro-  is  the  same :  not  considering  that  the  state  of  man 
^^f^^  ^  can  never  be  without  some  incommodity  or  other ; 
fr?™.  ^y*^  and  that  the  greatest,  that  in  any  form  of  govern- 
to  a  len.  ment  can  possibly  happen  to  the  people  in  general, 
is  scarce  sensible,  in  respect  of  the  miseries,  and 
horrible  calamities,  that  accompany  a  civil  war, 
or  that  dissolute  condition  of  masterless  men,  with- 
out subjection  to  laws,  and  a  coercive  power  to  tie 
their  hands  from  rapine  and  revenge:  nor  con- 
sidering that  the  greatest  pressure  of  sovereign 
governors,  proceedeth  not  from  any  delight,  or 
profit  they  can  expect  in  the  damage  or  weakening 
of  their  subjects,  in  whose  vigour,  consisteth  their 
own  strength  and  glory  ;  but  in  the  restiveness  of 
themselves,  that  unwillingly  contributing  to  their 
own  defence,  make  it  necessary  for  their  governors 
to  draw  from  them  what  they  can  in  time  of  peace, 
that  they  may  have  means  on  any  emergent  occa- 
sion, or  sudden  need,  to  resist,  or  take  advantage 
on  their  enemies.  For  all  men  are  by  nature  pro- 
vided of  notable  multiplying  glasses,  that  is  their 
passions  and  self-love,  through  which,  every  little 
pajrment  appeareth  a  great  grievance  ;  but  are  des- 
titute of  those  prospective  glasses,  namely  moral 
and  civil  science,  to  see  afar  oflf  the  miseries  that 
hang  over  them,  and  cannot  without  such  payments 
be  avoided. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


KINDS  OF  COMMONWBiv-r^^  c  r    .      ^^ 

CHAPTER  XIX:>;^7pQj^jj^^,     ' 

OF  THE  SEVERAL  KINDS  OF  COMMONWEALTH  BY 

INSTITUTION,  AND  OP  SUCCESSION  TO  THE 

SOVEREIGN  POWER. 

The  difference  of  commonwealths,  consisteth  in  the  part  ii. 
differejuje  of  the  sovereign,  or  the  person  represen-  .  'f  •  . 
tative  of  all  and  every  one  of  the  multitude.    And  Thedifiennt 

i_  .V  •       ^      •        '^i  •  forms  of  com- 

because  the  sovereignty  is  either  m  one  man,  or  monweaithB 
in  an  assembly  of  more  than  one  ;  and  into  that  ^"*  *^^** 
assembly  either  every  man  hatb  right  to  enter,  or 
not  every  one,  but  certain  men  distinguished  from 
the  rest ;  it  is  manifest,  there  can  be  but  three 
kinds  of  commonv^ealth.     For  the  representative 
must  needs  be  one  man,  or  more :  and  if  more,  then 
it  is  ifhe  assembly  of  all,  or  but  of  a  part.    When 
the  representative  is  one  man,  then  is  the  com- 
monwealth a  MONARCHY :  vsrhen  an  assembly  of  all 
that  will  come  together,  then  it  is  a  democracy, 
or  popular  commonwealth  :  when  an  assembly  of  a     *  ^  '-- 
a  part  only,  then  it  is  called  an  aristocracy.      ^ 
Other  kind  of  commonwealth  there  caii  be  none : 
for  either  one,  or  more,  or  all,  must  have  the  sove- 
reign power,  which  I  have  shown  to  be  indivisible, 
entire. 

There  be  other  names  of  government,  in  the  Tyranny  and 
histories,  and  books  of  policy;  as  tyranny,  and  oli-  different^name» 
garchy:  but  they  are  not  the  names  of  other  forms  aLSst^rwy 
of  government,  but  of  the  same  forms  misliked. 
For  they  that  are  discontented  under  monarchy , 
call  it  tyranny;  and  they  that  are  displeased  with 
aristocracy,  call  it  oligarchy:  so  also,  they  which 


Digitized  by 


Google 


172  OP  COMMONWEALTH, 

PART  II.    find  themselves  grieved  under  a  democracy y  call  it 
^    ^f*    -    anarchy y  which  signifies  want  of  government ;  and 
yet  I  think  no  man  believes,  that  want  of  govern- 
ment, is  any  new  kind  of  government :  nor  by  the 
same  reason  ought  they  to  believe,  that  the  govern- 
ment is  of  one  kind,  when  they  like  it,  and  another, 
when  they  mislike  it,  or  are   oppressed  by  the 
governors. 
Subordinate         It  is  manifest,  that  men  who  are  in  absolute 
dangeroua.      liberty,  may,  if  they  please,  give  authonty  to  one 
man,  to  represent  them  every  one ;  as  well  as  give 
such  authority  to  any  assembly  of  men  whatsoever ; 
and  consequently  may  subject  themselves,  if  they 
think  good,  to  a  monarch,  as  absolutely,  as  to  any 
other  representative.     Therefore,  where  there  is 
already  erected  a  sovereign  power,  there  can  be  no 
other  representative  of  the  same  people,  but  only 
to  certain  particular  ends,  by  the  sovereign  limited. 
For  that  were  to  erect  two  sovereigns ;  and  every 
man  to  have  his  person  represented  by  two  actors, 
that  by  opposing  one  another,  must  needs  divide 
that  power,  which,  if  men  will  live  in  peace,  is  in- 
divisible; and  thereby  reduce  the  multitude  into 
the  condition  of  war,  contrary  to  the  end  for  which 
all  sovereignty  is  instituted.   '  And  therefore  as  it  is 
absurd,  to  think  that  a  sovereign  assembly,  inviting 
the  people  of  their  dominion,  to  send  up  their 
deputies,  with  power  to  make  known  their  advice, 
or  desires,  should  therefore  hold  such  deputies, 
rather  than  themselves,  for  the  absolute  represen- 
tatives of  the  people :  so  it  is  absurd  also,  toithink 
the  same  in  a  monarchy.     And  I  know  not  how 
this  so  manifest  a  truth,  should  of  late  be  so  little 
observed;  that  in  a  monarchy,  he  that  had  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


KINDS  OP  COMMONWEALTH.  173 

sovereignty  from  a  descent  of  six  hundred  years,  part  ii. 
was  alone  called  sovereign,  had  the  title  of  Majesty  >,  ^f*  . 
from  every  one  of  his  subjects,  and  was  unquestion- 
ably taken  by  them  for  their  king,  was  notwith- 
standing never  considered  as  their  representative ; 
the  name  without  contradiction  passing  for  the 
title  of  those  men,  which  at  his  command  were 
sent  up  by  the  people  to  carry  their  petitions,  and 
give  him,  if  he  permitted  it,  their  advice.  Which 
may  serve  as  an  admonition,  for  those  that  are  the 
true,  and  absolute  representative  of  a  people,  to 
instruct  men  in  the  nature  of  that  office,  and  to 
take  heed  how  they  admit  of  any  other  general 
representation  upon  any  occasion  whatsoever,  if 
they  mean  to  dischai^e  the  trust  committed  to 
them. 

The  difference  between  these  three  kinds  of  ^;»°^p*"T 

of  monarchy, 

commonwealth,  consisteth  not  in  the  difference  of  withsoirercign 

i.«i./v«  /•  •  assemblies. 

power;  but  m  the  difference  of  convenience,  or 
aptitude  to  produce  the  peace,  and  security  of  the 
people ;  for  which  end  they  were  instituted.  And 
to  compare  monarchy  with  the  other  two,  we  may 
observe ;  first,  that  whosoever  beareth  the  person 
of  the  people,  or  is  one  of  that  assembly  that  bears 
it,  beareth  also  his  own  natural  person.  And 
though  he  be  careful  in  his  politic  person  to  pro- 
cure the  common  interest ;  yet  he  is  more,  or  no 
less  careful  to  procure  the  private  good  of  himself, 
his  family,  kindred  and  friends  ;  and  for  the  most 
part,  if  the  public  interest  chance  to  cross  the  pri- 
vate, he  prefers  the  private:  for  the  passions  of 
men,  are  commonly  more  potent  than  their  reason. 
From  whence  it  follows,  that  where  the  public  and 
private  interest  are  most  closely  united,  there  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


174  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.    the  public  most  advanced.     Now  in  monarchy,  the 

^ — }^ ^    private  interest  is  the  same  with  the  public.    The 

Comptrison     rfchcs,  powcf,  aud  hououT  of  a  monarch  arise  only 

of  monarchy^  • 

with  sovereign  fiTom  the  richcs,  Strength  and  reputation  of  his 
****"  ^  subjects.  For  no  king  can  be  rich,  nor  glorious, 
nor  secure,  whose  subjects  are  either  poor,  or 
contemptible,  or  too  weak  through  want  or  dissen- 
tion,  to  maintain  a  war  against  their  enemies: 
whereas  in  a  democracy,  or  aristocracy,  the  public 
prosperity  confers  not  so  much  to  the  private 
fortune  of  one  that  is  corrupt,  or  ambitious,  as 
doth  many  times  a  perfidious  advice,  a  treacherous 
action,  or  a  civil  war. 
^  /  Secondly,  that  a  monarch  receiveth  counsel  of 
y,  I  whom,  when,  and  where  he  pleaseth ;  and  conse- 
^  quently  may  hear  the  opinion  of  men  versed  in  the 
matter  about  which  he  deliberates,  of  what  rank 
or  quality  soever,  and  as  long  before  the  time  of 
action,  and  with  as  much  secrecy,  as  he  will.  But 
when  a  sovereign  assembly  has  need  of  counsel, 
none  are  admitted  but  such  as  have  a  right  thereto 
from  the  beginning ;  which  for  the  most  part  are 
of  those  who  have  been  versed  more  in  the  acqui- 
sition of  wealth  than  of  knowledge ;  and  are  to 
give  their  advice  in  long  discourses,  which  may, 
and  do  commonly  excite  men  to  action,  but  not 
govern  them  in  it.  For  the  understanding  is  by 
the  flame  of  the  passions,  never  enlightened,  but 
daxzled.  Nor  is  there  any  place,  or  time,  wherein 
an  assembly  can  receive  counsel  with  secrecy,  be- 
cause of  their  own  multitude. 

Thirdly,  that  the  resolutions  of  a  monarch,  are 

subject  to  no  other  inconstancy,  than  that  of  human 

^  nature ;  but  in  assemblies,  besides  that  of  nature. 


\ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


v/ 


X 


KINDS  OF  COMMONWEALTH.  176 

there  ariseth  an  inconstancy  firom  the  number,  partil 
For  the  absence  of  a  few,  that  would  have  the  reso-  .  ^^'  . 
lution  once  taken,  contmue  firm,  which  may  happen  comparison 

•■  •,  !•  •      ^     •  J*  ^  ofmonarchy, 

by  security,  negligence,  or  private  impediments,  or  ^th  wverMgn 
the  diligent  appearance  of  a  few  of  the  contrary  "^*"****"- 
opinion,  undoes  to-day,  all  that  was  concluded 
yesterday. 

Fourthly,  that  a  monarch  cannot  disagree  with 
himself,  out  of  envy,  or  interest ;  but  an  assembly 
may ;  and  that  to  such  a  height,  as  may  produce  a 
civil  war.  _ 

Fifthly,  jthat  in  monarchy  there  is  this  inconve- 
nience ;  that  any  subject,  by  the  power  of  one  man, 
for  the  enriching  of  a  favourite  or  flatterer,  may  be 
deprived  of  all  he  possesseth ;  which  I  confess  is  a 
great  and  inevitable  inconvenience,  j  But  the  same 
may  as  well  happen,  where  the  sovereign  power  is 
in  an  assembly :  for  their  power  is  the  same ;  and 
they  are  as  subject  to  evil  counsel,  and  to  be 
seduced  by  orators,  as  a  monarch  by  flatterers; 
and  becoming  one  another's  flatterers,  serve  one 
another's  covetousness  and  ambition  by  turns. 
And  whereas  the  favourites  of  monarchs,  are  few, 
and  they  have  none  else  to  advance  but  their  own 
kindred ;  the  favourites  of  an  assembly,  are  many  ; 
and  the  kindred  much  more  numerous,  than  of  any 
monarch.  Besides,  there  is  no  favourite  of  a  mo- 
narch, which  cannot  as  well  succour  his  friends,  as 
hurt  his  enemies:  but  orators,  that  is  to  say, 
favourites  of  sovereign  assembUes,  though  they 
have  great  power  to  hurt,  have  little  to  save.  For 
to  accuse,  requires  less  eloquence,  such  is  man's 
nature,  than  to  excuse;  and  condemnation,  than 
absolution  more  resembles  justice. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


176  OP  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.        Sixthly,  that  it  is  an  inconvenience  in  monarchy, 
^    ^^'  _     that  the  sovereignty  may  descend  npon  an  infant, 
Comparbon     OF  onc  that  cannot  discern  between  good  and  evil : 
^ol  w^iJ^  and  consisteth  in  this,  that  the  use  of  his  power, 
asacmbUea.      u^jjst  be  in  the  hand  of  another  man,  or  of  some 
assembly  of  men,  which  are  to  govern  by  his  right, 
and  in  his  name ;  as  curators,  and  protectors  of  his 
person,  and  authority.     But  to  say  there  is  incon- 
venience, in  putting  the  use  of  the  sovereign  power, 
into  the  hand  of  a  man,  or  an  assembly  of  men ;  is 
to  say  that  all  government  is  more  inconvenient, 
than  confusion,  and  civil  war.    And  therefore  all 
the  danger  that  can  be  pretended,  must  arise  from 
the  contention  of  those,  that  for  an  office  of  so 
great  honour,  and  profit,  may  become  competitors. 
To  make  it  appear,  that  this  inconvenience,  pro- 
ceedeth  not  from  that  form  of  government  we  call 
monarchy,  we  are  to  consider,  that  the  precedent 
monarch  hath  appointed  who  shall  have  die  tuition 
of  his  infant  successor,  either  expressly  by  testa- 
ment, or  tacitly,  by  not  controlling  the  custom  in 
that  case  received :  and  then  such  inconvenience, 
if  it  happen,  is  to  be  attributed,  not  to  the  monar- 
chy, but  to  the  ambition,  and  injustice  of  the  sub- 
jects ;  which  in  all  kinds  of  government,  where  the 
people  are  not  well  instructed  in  their  duty,  and  the 
rights  of  sovereignty,  is  the  same.    Or  else  the  pre- 
cedent monarch  hath  not  at  all  taken  order  for  such 
tuition ;  and  then  the  law  of  nature  hath  provided 
this  sufficient  rule,  that  the  tuition  shall  be  in  him, 
that  hath  by  nature  most  interest  in  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  authority  of  the  infant,  and  to  whom 
least  benefit  can  accrue  by  his  death,  or  diminution. 
For  seeing  every  man  by  nature  seeketh  his  own 


Digitized  by 


Google 


KINDS  OF  COMMONWEALTH.  177 

benefit,  and  promotion ;  to  put  an  infant  into  the  part  ii. 
power  of  those,  that  can  promote  themselves  by  .  ^^-  . 
his  destruction,  or  damage,  is  not  tuition,  but  compariscn 
treachery.  So  that  sufficient  provision  being  taken,  with  wlercigu 
against  all  just  quarrel,  about  the  government  un-  "*«n>^^««- 
der  a  child,  if  any  contention  arise  to  the  disturb- 
ance of  the  public  peace,  it  is  not  to  be  attributed 
to  the  form  of  monarchy,  but  to  the  ambition  of 
subjects,  and  ignorance  of  their  duty.  On  the 
other  side,  there  is  no  great  commonwealth,  the 
sovereignty  whereof  is  in  a  great  assembly,  which 
is  not,  as  to  consultations  of  peace,  and  war,  and 
making  of  laws,  in  the  same  condition,  as  if  the 
government  were  in  a  chUd.  For  as  a  child  wanta^ 
the  judgment  to  dissent  from  counsel  given  him, 
and  is  thereby  necessitated  to  take  the  advice  of 
them,  or  him,  to  whom  he  is  committed :  so  an 
assembly  wanteth  the  liberty,  to  dissent  from  the 
counsel  of  the  major  part,  be  it  good,  or  bad.  And 
as  a  child  has  need  of  a  tutor,  or  protector,  to  pre- 
serve his  person  and  authority :  so  also,  in  great 
commonwealths,  the  sovereign  assembly,  in  all 
great  dangers  and  troubles,  have  need  of  custodes 
lihertatis ;  that  is  of  dictators,  or  protectors  of^ 
their  authority ;  which  are  as  much  as  temporary 
monarchs,  to  whom  for  a  time,  they  may  commit 
the  entire  exercise  of  their  power ;  and  have,  at 
the  end  of  that  time,  been  oftener  deprived  thereof, 
than  infant  kings,  by  their  protectors,  regents,  or 
any  other  tutors. 

Though  the  kinds  of  sovereignty  be,  as  I  have 
now  shown,  but  three ;  that  is  to  say,  monarchy,, 
where  one  man  has  it ;  or  democracy,  where  the 
general  assembly  of  subjects  hath  it ;  or  aristocracy,, 

VOL.  III.  N 


Digitized  by 


Google 


178 


OP  COMMONWEALTH. 


PART  II. 

19. 

*-  .  -* 

Definition 
of  monarchy, 
and  other 
forms. 


where  it  is  in  an  assembly  of  certain  persons  nomi- 
nated, or  otherwise  distinguished  from  the  rest: 
yet  he  that  shall  consider  the  particular  common- 
wealths that  have  been,  and  are  in  the  world,  will 
not  perhaps  easily  reduce  them  to  three,  and  may 
thereby  be  inclined  to  think  there  be  other  forms, 
arising  from  these  mingled  together.  As  for  exam- 
ple, elective  kingdoms;  where  kings  have  the 
sovereign  power  put  into  their  hands  for  a  time ; 
or  kingdoms,  wherein  the  king  hath  a  power 
limited :  which  governments,  are  nevertheless  by 
most  writers  called  monarchy.  Likewise  if  a  popu- 
lar, or  aristocratical  commonwealth,  subdue  an 
enemy's  country,  and  govern  the  same,  by  a  presi- 
dent, procurator,  or  other  magistrate;  this  may 
seem  perhaps  at  first  sight,  to  be  a  democrati- 
cal,  or  aristocratical  government.  But  it  is  not  so. 
For  elective  kings,  are  not  sovereigns,  but  minis- 
ters of  the  sovereign ;  nor  limited  kings,  sovereigns, 
but  ministers  of  them  that  have  the  sovereign 
power :  nor  are  those  provinces  which  are  in  sub- 
jection to  a  democracy,  or  aristrocracy  of  another 
commonwealth,  democratically  or  aristocratically 
governed,  but  monarchically. 
'  And  first,  concerning  an  elective  king,  whose 
power  is  limited  to  his  life,  as  it  is  in  many  places 
of  Christendom  at  this  day ;  or  to  certain  years  or 
months,  as  the  dictator's  power  amongst  the  Ro- 
mans ;  if  he  have  right  to  appoint  his  successor,  he 
is  no  more  elective  but  hereditary.  But  if  he  have 
no  power  to  elect  his  successor,  then  there  is  some 
other  man,  or  assembly  known,  which  after  his  de- 
cease may  elect  anew,  or  else  the  commoiiwealth 
dieth,  and  dissolveth  with  him,  and  retumeth  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


KINDS  OF  COMMONWEALTH.  179 

the  condition  of  war.     If  it  be  known  who  have   part  ii. 
the  power  to  give  the  sovereignty  after  his  deaths    .    '^'    , 
it  is  known  also  that  the  sovereignty  was  in  them  Befinuion  of 
before :  for  none  have  right  to  give  that  which  ™°'^*^^'^'  ^^• 
they  have  not  right  to  possess^  and  keep  to*them- 
selves^  if  they  think  good.     But  if  there  be  none 
that  can  ^e  the  sovereignty,  after  the  decease  of 
him  that  was  first  elected ;  then  has  he  power,  nay 
he  is  obliged  by  the  law  of  nature,  to  provide,  by 
establishing  his  successor,  to  keep  those  that  had 
trusted  him  with  the  government,  from  relapsing 
into  the  miserable  condition  of  civil  war.     And 
consequently  he  was,  when  elected,  a  sovereign 
absolute. 

Secondly,  that  king  whose  power  is  limited,  is 
^not  superior  to  him,  or  them  that  have  the  power 
to  limit  it;  and  he  that  is  not  superior,  is  not 
supreme ;  that  is  to  say  not  sovereign.  The  sove- 
reignty therefore  was  always  in  that  assembly  which 
had  the  right  to  limit  him ;  and  by  consequence 
the  government  not  monarchy,  but  either  demo- 
cracy, or  aristocracy ;  as  of  old  time  in  Sparta ; 
where  the  kings  had  a  privilege  to  lead  their 
armies ;  but  the  sovereignty  was  in  the  Ephori. 

Thirdly,  whereas  heretofore  the  Roman  people 
governed  the  land  of  Judea,  for  example,  by  a  pre- 
sident ;  yet  was  not  Judea  therefore  a  democracy ; 
because  they  were  not  governed  by  any  assembly, 
into  the  which,  any  of  them,  had  right  to  enter ; 
nor  an  aristocracy;  because  they  were  not  go- 
verned by  any  assembly,  into  which,  any  man 
could  enter  by  their  election :  but  they  were 
governed  by  one  person,  which,  though  as  to  the 
people  of  Rome,  was  an  assembly  of  the  people,  or 

N  2   • 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


•uccesnoiu 


180  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  democracy ;  yet  as  to  the  people  of  Judea^ which  had 
,  ^^'  .  no  right  at  all  of  participating  in  the  government, 
was  a  monarch.  For  though  where  the  people  are 
governed  by  an  assembly,  chosen  by  themselves 
out  of  their  own  number,  the  government  is  called 
a  democracy,  or  aristocracy ;  yet  when  they  are 
governed  by  an  assembly,  not  of  their  own  choos- 
ing, it  is  a  monarchy ;  not  of  one  man,  over  ano^ 
ther  man ;  but  of  one  people,  over  another  people. 
Of  the  right  of  Of  iji  these  forms  of  government,  the  matter 
being  mortal,  so  that  not  only  monarchs,  but  also 
whole  assemblies  die,  it  is  necessary  for  the  con- 
servation of  the  peace  of  men,  that  as  there  was 
order  taken  for  an  artificial  man,  so  there  be  order 
also  taken,  for  an  artificial  eternitgoflife ;  without 
which,  men  that  are  governed  by  an  assembly, 
should  return  into  the  condition  of  war  in  every 
age ;  and  they  that  are  governed  by  one  man,  as 
soon  as  their  governor  dieth.  This  artificial  eter- 
4iity,  is  that  which  men  call  the  right  of  succession. 
''  There  is  no  perfect  form  of  govermnent,  where 
the  disposing  of  the  succession  is  not  ixx  the  pre- 
sent sovereign.  For  if  it  be  in  any  other  particular 
man,  or  private  assembly,  it  is  in  a  peifson  subject^ 
and  may  be  assumed  by  the  sovereign  at  his  plea- 
sure ;  and  consequently  the  right  is  in  himself* 
And  if  it  be  in  no  particular  man,  but  left  to  a  new 
choice ;  then  is  the  commonwealth  dissolved ;  and 
the  right  is  in  him  that  can  get  it ;  contrary  to 
the  intention  of  them  that  did  institute  the  com- 
monwealth, for  their  perpetual,  and  not  temporary 
security. 

In  a  democracy,  the  whole  assembly  cannot  fail, 
unless  the  multitude  that  are  to  be  governed  fedl. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC. 


KINDS  OF  COMMONWEALTH.  18  i 

And  therefore  questions  of  the  right  of  succession,   part  ii. 
have  in  that  form  of  government  no  place  at  all.       ^    '|^  ^. 

In  an  aristocracy,  when  any  of  the  assembly 
dieth,  the  election  of  another  into  his  room  belong-^ 
eth  to  the  assembly,  as  the  sovereign,  to  whom 
belongeth  the  choosing  of  all  counsellors  and 
officers.  For  that  which  the  representative  doth, 
as  actor,  every  one  of  the  subjects  doth,  as  author. 
And  though  the  sovereign  assembly  may  give 
power  to  others,  to  elect  new  men,  for  supply  of 
their  court ;  yet  it  is  still  by  their  authority,  that 
the  election  is  made ;  and  by  the  same  it  may, 
when  the  public  shall  require  it,  be  recalled. 

The  greatest  difficulty  about  the  right  of  succes-  ^'^^"^^i^ 
sion,  is  in  monarchy:   and  the  difficulty  ariseth  right  to  di». 
from  this,  that  at  first  sight,  it  is  not  manifest  who  Si^c^on! 
is  to  appoint  the  successor ;  nor  many  times,  who 
it  is  whom  he  hath  appointed.    For  in  both  these 
cases,  there  is  required  a  more  exact  ratiocination, 
than  every  man  is  accustomed  to  use.    As  to  the 
question,   who  shall  appoint  the  successor,  of  a 
monarch  that  hath  the  sovereign  authority ;  that  is 
to  say,  who  shall  determine  of  the  right  of  inherit- 
ance, (for  elective  kings  and  princes  have  not  the 
sovereign  power  in  propriety,  but  in  use  only),  we 
are  to  consider,  that  either  he  that  is  in  possession, ' 
has  right  to  dispose  of  the  succession,  or  else  that 
right  is  again  in  the  dissolved  multitude.    For  the  ^ 
death  of  him  that  hath  the  sovereign  power  in  pro- 
priety, leaves  the  multitude  without  any  sovereign 
at  all ;  that  is,  without  any  representative  in  whom 
they  should  be  united,  and  be  capable  of  doing  any 
one  action  at  all :  and  therefore  they  are  incapable 
of  election  of  any  new  monarch ;  every  man  having 


Digitized  by 


Google 


182  OP  COMMONWEALTH. 

PAUT II.  equal  right  to  submit  hhnself  to  such  as  he  thinkb 
.  ^^-  ,  best  able  to  protect  him;  or  if  he  can,  protect 
himself  by  his  own  sword ;  which  is  a  return  to 
confusion,  and  to  the  condition  of  a  war  of  every 
man  agaitist  every  man,  contrary  to  the  end  for 
which  monarchy  had  its  first  institution.  There- 
fore it  is  manifest,  that  by  the  institution  of  mo- 
narchy, the  disposing  of  the  successor,  is  always 
left  to  the  judgment  and  will  of  the  present 
possessor. 
\^  And  for  the  question,  which  may  arise  some- 
times, who  it  is  that  the  monarch  in  possession, 
hath  designed  to  the  succession  and  inheritance  of 
his  power ;  it  is  determined  by  his  express  words, 
and  testament ;  or  by  other  tacit  signs  sufficient. 
succesaion  gy  exprcss  words,   or  testament,  when  it  is 

paKsetb  by  ex*  ^  i^  ... 

press  words ;  dcclarcd  by  him  in  his  lifetime,  viva  vocsj  or  by  vm- 
ting ;  as  the  first  emperors  of  Rome  declared  who 
should  be  their  heirs.  For  the  word  heir  does  not 
of  itself  imply  the  children,  or  nearest  kindred  of 
a  man ;  but  whomsoever  a  man  shall  any  way  de- 
clare, he  would  have  to  succeed  him  in  his  estate. 
If  therefore  a  monarch  declare  expressly,  that  such 
a  man  shall  be  his  heir,  either  by  word  or  vniting, 
then  is  that  man  immediately  after  the  decease  of 
his  predecessor,  invested  in  the  right  of  being 
monarch. 

Or,  by  not  g^t  whcrc  tcstamcut,  and  express  words  are 

controlling  '  ^ 

a  custom ;  wautiug,  othcr  natural  signs  of  the  will  are  to  be 
followed  :  whereof  the  one  is  custom.  And  there- 
fore where  the  custom  is,  that  the  next  of  kindred 
absolutely  succeedeth,  there  also  the  next  of  kin- 
dred hath  right  to  the  succession ;  for  that,  if  the 
will  of  him  that  was  in  possession  had  been  other- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


KINDS  OF  COMMONWEALTH.  183 

wise,  he  might  easily  have  declared  the  same  in  his  part  il 
life^time.  And  likewise  where  the  custom  is,  that  .  ^^'  . 
the  next  of  the  male  kindred  succeedeth,  there 
also  the  right  of  succession  is  in  the  next  of  the 
kindred  male,  for  the  same  reason.  And  so  it  is 
if  the  custom  were  to  advance  the  female.  For 
whatsoever  custom  a  man  may  by  a  word  control, 
and  does  not,  it  is  a  natural  sign  he  would  have 
that  custom  stand. 

But  where  neither  custom,  nor  testament  hath^^^yp*^*^- 
preceded,  there  it  is  to  be  understood,  first,  that  a  of  natural 
monarch's  will  is,  that  the  government  remahi  *^**^'^°"' 
monarchical ;  because  he  hath  approved  that 
government  in  himself.  Secondly,  that  a  child  of 
his  own,  male,  or  female,  be  preferred  before  any 
other ;  because  men  are  presumed  to  be  more  in- 
clined by  nature,  to  advance  their  own  children, 
than  the  children  of  other  men  ;  and  of  their  own, 
rather  a  male  than  a  female ;  because  men,  are 
naturally  fitter  than  women,  for  actions  of  labour 
and  danger.  Thirdly,  where  his  own  issue  faileth, 
rather  a  brother  than  a  stranger ;  and  so  still  the 
nearer  in  blood,  rather  than  the  more  remote  ;  be- 
cause it  is  always  presumed  that  the  nearer  of  kin, 
is  the  nearer  in  affection  ;  and  it  is  evident  that  a 
man  receives  always,  by  reflection,  the  most  honour 
from  the  greatness  of  his  nearest  kindred. 

But  if  it  be  lawful  for  a  monarch  to  dispose  of  t'o  <>>8po»«  ©^ 

-  •         1  1        i»  *  the  saccesnoDy 

the  succession  by  words  of  contract,  or  testament,  though  to  a 
men  may  perhaps  object  a  great  inconvenience :  IJJSfonf Il^t^*^ 
for  he  may  sell,  or  give  his  right  of  governing  to  a'*"^'^"^ 
stranger ;  which,  because  strangers,  that  is,  men 
not  used  to  live  under  the  same  government,  nor 
speaking  the  same  language,  do  commonly  imder- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


184  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  11.  value  one  another^  may  turn  to  the  oppression  of 
.  'f-  .  his  subjects ;  which  is  indeed  a  great  inconveni- 
To  dispose  of  ence :  but  it  proceedeth  not  necessarily  from  the 
though  to  a  '  subjection  to  a  stranger's  government,  but  from  the 
nl"fon[  not**' ^iiiskilftilness  of  the  governors,  ignorant  of  the 
uiiiawftii.  jj^g  rvles  of  politics.  And  therefore  the  Romans 
when  they  had  subdued  many  nations,  to  make 
their  government  digestible,  were  wont  to  take 
away  that  grievance^  as  much  as  they  thought 
necessary,  by  giving  sometimes  to  whole  nations^ 
and  sometimes  to  principal  men  of  every  nation 
they  conquered,  not  only  the  privileges,  but  also 
the  nan^e  of  Romans ;  anfl  took  many  of  them  into 
the  senate,  and  offices  of  cha^e,  even  in  the  Ro* 
man  city.  And  this  was  it  dtlr  most  wise  king, 
king  James^  aimed  at^  in  endeavouring  the  union 
of  his  two  realms  of  England  and  Scotland.  Which 
if  he  could  have  obtained,  had  in  all  likelihood 
prevented  the  civil  wars,  which  make  both  those 
kingdoms^  at  this  present,  miserable.  It  is  not 
therefore  any  injury  to  the  people,  for  a  monarch 
to  dispose  of  the  succession  by  will ;  though  by  the 
fault  of  many  princes,  it  hath  been  sometimes 
found  inconvenient.  Of  the  lawfulness  of  it,  this 
also  is  an  argument,  that  whatsoever  inconvenience 
can  arrive  by  giving  a  kingdom  to  a  stranger,  may 
arrive  also  by  so  marrying  with  strangers,  as  the 
right  of  succession  may  descend  upon  them :  yet 
this  by  all  men  is  accounted  lawful. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


DOMINION  PATERNAL^  ETC.  185 

CHAPTER  XX. 

OP  DOMINION  PATERNAL,  AND  DESPOTICAL. 

A  COMMONWEALTH  hff  acquisition,  is  that,  where    part  ii. 
the  sovereign  power  is  acquired  by  force ;  and  it    .  ^^'   ^ 
is  acquired  by  force,  when  men  singly,  or  many  ^  ^^JT"" 
together  by  plurality  of  voices,  for  foar  of  death,  Bcquitition. 
or  bonds,  do  authorize  all  the  actions  of  that  man, 
or  assembly,  that  hath  their  lives  and  liberty  in  his 
power. 

And  this  kind  of  dominion,  or  sovereignty,  wherein  difle^ 
differeth  from  sovereignty  by  institution,  only  in  commonwUith 
this,  that  men  who  choose  their  sovereign,  do  it  for  ^^  >'»»'>^»**^"- 
fear  of  one  another,  and  not  of  him  whom  they  in- 
stitute :  but  in  this  case,  they  subject  themselves, 
to  him  th^  are  afraid  of.  In  both  cases  they  do 
it  for  fear  rv  which  is  to  be  noted  by  them,  that 
hold  all  su(m  covenants,  as  proceed  from  fear  of 
death  or  violence,  void :  which  if  it  were  true,  no 
man,  in  any  kind  of  commonwealth,  could  be 
obliged  to  obedience.  It  is  true,  that  in  a  common- 
wealth once  instituted,  or  acquired,  promises  pro« 
ceeding  from  fear  of  death  or  violence,  are  no 
covenants,  nor  obliging,  when  the  thing  promised 
is  contrary  to  the  laws ;  but  the  reason  is  not,  be- 
cause it  was  made  upon  fear,  but  because  he  that 
promiseth,  hath  no  right  in  the  thing  promised. 
Also,  when  he  may  lawfully  perform,  and  doth  not, 
it  is  not  the  invalidity  of  the  covenant,  that  absol- 
veth  him,  but  the  sentence  of  the  sovereign.  Other- 
wise, whensoever  a  man  lawfolly  promiseth,  he  un- 
lawfully breaketh  :  but  when  the  sovereign,  who  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


186  OF  <K)MMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.   the  actor,  acquitteth  him,  then  he  is  acquitted  by 
^  ^^'  _.   him  that  extorted  the  promise,  as  by  the  author  of 
such  absolution. 
The  right!  of       But  the  rights,  and  consequences  of  sovereignty, 
^(Tmboth/ are  the  same  in  both.     His  power  cannot,  without 
his  consent,  be  transferred  to  another :  he  cannot 
forfeit  it :  he  cannot  be  accused  by  any  of  his  sub- 
jects, of  injury :  he  cannot  be  punished  by  them  2 
he  is  judge  of  what  is  necessary  for  peace ;  and 
judge  of  doctrines :  he  is  sole  legislator ;  and  su* 
preme  judge  of  controversies ;  and  of  the  times, 
and  occasions  of  war,  and  peace :  to  him  it  belong- 
eth  to  choose  magistrates,  counsellors,  command- 
ers, and  all  other  officers,  and  ministers ;  and  to 
determine  of  rewards,  and  punishments,  honour, 
and  order.    The  reasons  whereof,  are  the  same 
which  are  alleged  in  the  precedent  chapter,  for 
the  same  rights,  and  consequences  of  sovereignty 
by  institution. 
Dominion    ^     Dominiou  is  acquired  two  ways ;  by  generation, 
Stain"^.  °*    and  by  conquest.    The  right  of  dominion  bygene- 
ration,  is  that,  which  the  parent  hath  over  his 
children  ;  and  is  called  paternal.    And  is  not  so 
J!lSon^bi!t°r   ^^"'^^d  from  the  generation,  as  if  therefore  the 
coutfwt;        parent  had  dominion  over  his  child  because  he 
begat  him ;  but  from  the  child's  consent,  either 
express,  or  by  other  sufficient  argumente^eclared. 
For  as  to  the  generation,  God  hath  ordained  to  man 
a  helper  ;  and  there  be  always  two  that  are  equally 
parents:  the  dominion  therefore  over  the  child, 
should  belong  equally  to  both ;  and  he  be  equally 
subject  to  both,  which  is  impossible ;  for  no  man 
can  obey  two  masters.     And  whereas  some  have 
attributed  the  dominion  to  the  man  only,  as  being 


Digitized  by 


Google 


DOMINION  PATERNAL^  ETC.  187 

of  the  more  excellent  sex ;  they  misreckon  in  it,  part  ii. 
For  there  is  not  always  that  difference  of  strength^  .  ^^'  . 
or  prudence  between  the  man  and  the  woman,  as 
that  the  right  can  be  determined  without  war.  In 
commonwealths,  this  controversy  is  decided  by  the  ^\ 
civil  law ;  and  for  the  most  part,  but  not  always, 
the  sentence  is  in  favour  of  the  father ;  because  for 
the  most  part  commonwealths  have  been  erected 
by  the  fathers,  not  by  the  mothers  of  families. 
But  the  question  lieth  now  in  the  state  of  mere 
nature ;  where  there  are  supposed  no  laws  of  matri- 
mony ;  no  laws  for  the  education  of  children ;  but 
the  law  of  nature,  and  the  natural  inclination  of 
the  sexes,  one  to  another,  and  to  their  children. 
In  this  condition  of  mere  nature,  either  the  parents 
between  themselves  dispose  of  the  dominion  over 
the  child  by  contract ;  or  do  not  dispose  thereof  at 
all.  If  they  dispose  thereof,  the  right  passeth  ac- 
cording to  the  contract.  We  find  in  history  that^ 
the  Amazons  contracted  with  the  men  of  the  neigh- 
bouring countries,  to  whom  they  had  recourse  for 
issue,  that  the  issue  male  should  be  sent  back,  but 
the  female  remain  with  themselves:  so  that  the 
dominion  of  the  females  was  in  the  mother. 

If  there  be  no  contract,  the  dominion  is  inthe  Or  educnion ; 
mother.  For  in  the  condition  of  mere  nature, 
where  there  are  no  matrimonial  laws,  it  cannot  be 
known  who  is  the  father,  unless  it  be  declared  by 
the  mother :  and  therefore  the  right  of  dominion 
over  the  child  dependeth  on  her  will,  and  is  conse^ 
quently  hers.  Again,  seeing  the  infant  is  first  in 
the  power  of  the  mother,  so  as  she  may  either 
nourish,  or  expose  it ;  if  she  nourish  it,  it  oweth 
its  life  to  the  mother ;  and  is  therefore  obliged  to 


Digitized  by 


Obogk 


188 


OP  COMMONWEALTH. 


PART  II, 
20. 


Or  precedent 
subjection  of 
one  of  the 
parents  to  the 
other. 


The  right  of 
succession 
followeth  the 
rules  of  the 
right  of 
possession. 

Despoticsl 
domin  ion 
attained. 


obey  her,  rather  than  any  other ;  and  by  cohse* 
quence  the  dommion  over  it  is  hers.  But  if  she 
expose  it,  and  another  find  and  nourish  it,  the 
dominion  is  in  him  that  nourisheth  it.  For  it 
ought  to  obey  him  by  whom  it  is  preserved  ;  be-^ 
cause  preservation  of  life  being  the  end,  for  which 
one  man  becomes  subject  to  another,  every  man  is 
supposed  to  promise  obedience,  to  him,  in  whose 
power  it  is  to  save,  or  destroy  him. 

If  the  mother  be  the  father's  subject,  the  child, 
is  in  the  father's  power :  and  if  the  father  be  the 
mother's  subject,  as  when  a  sovereign  queen  mar^ 
rieth  one  of  her  subjects,  the  child  is  subject  to  the 
mother ;  because  the  father  also  is  her  subject. 

If  a  man  and  woman,  monarchs  of  two  several 
kingdoms,  have  a  child,  and  contract  concerning 
who  shall  have  the  dominion  of  him,  the  right  of 
the  dominion  passeth  by  the  contract.  If  they  con- 
tract not,  the  dominion  followeth  the  dominion  of 
the  place  of  his  residence.  For  the  sovereign  of  each 
country  hath  dominion  over  all  that  reside  therein. 

He  that  hath  the  dominion  over  the  child,  hath 
dominion  also  over  the  children  of  the  child ;  and 
over  their  children's  children.  For  he  that  hath 
dominion  over  the  person  of  a  man,  hath  dominion 
over  all  that  is  his ;  vdthout  which,  dominion  were 
but  a  title,  without  the  effect. 

The  right  of  succession  to  paternal  dominion^ 
proceedeth  in  the  same  manner,  as  doth  the  right 
of  succession  of  monarchy ;  of  which  I  have  already 
sufficiently  spoken  in  the  precedent  chapter. 

Dominion  acquired  by  conquest,  or  victory  in 
war,  is  that  which  some  writers  call  despotical, 
from  Aea?roTiyc>  which  signifieth  a  lordy  or  master; 


Digitized  by 


Google 


DOMINION  PATERNAL,  ETC.  189 

-and  is  the  dominion  of  the  master  over  his  servant,  part  n. 
And  this  dominion  is  then  acquired  to  the  victor,  .  ^'  . 
when  the  vanquished,  to  avoid  the  present  stroke 
of  death,  covenanteth  either  in  express  words,  or 
by  other  sufficient  signs  of  the  will,  that  so  long  as 
his  life,  and  the  liberty  of  his  body  is  allowed  him, 
tlie  victor  shall  have  the  use  thereof,  at  his  plea- 
sure. And  after  such  covenant  made,  the  van* 
quished  is  a  servant,  and  not  before :  for  by  the 
word  servant^  whether  it  be  derived  from  servircy 
to  serve,  or  from  servare^  to  save,  which  I  leave  to 
grammarians  to  dispute,  is  not  meant  a  captive, 
which  is  kept  in  prison,  or  bonds,  till  the  owner  of 
him  that  took  him,  or  bought  him  of  one  that  did, 
shall  consider  what  to  do  with  him :  for  such  men, 
commonly  called  slaves,  have  no  obligation  at  all ; 
but  may  break  their  bonds,  or  the  prison ;  and  kill, 
or  carry  away  captive  their  master,  justly :  but  one, 
that  being  taken,  hath  corporal  liberty  allowed  him ; 
and  upon  promise  not  to  run  away,  nor  to  do  vio- 
lence to  his  master,  is  trusted  by  him* 

It  is  not  therefore  the  victory,  that  giveth  the  Not  by  the  ric 
right  of  dominion  over  the  vanquished,  but  his  own  coSiijnf  of  th^ 
covenant.    Nor  is  he  obliged  because  he  is  con-^*°^""^^ 
quered ;  that  is  to  say,  beaten,  and  taken,  or  put 
to  flight ;  but  because  he  cometh  in,  and  submitteth 
to  the  victor;  nor  is  the  victor  obliged  by  an 
enemy^s  rendering  himself,  without  promise  of  life, 
to  spare  him  for  this  his  yielding  to  discretion ; 
which  obliges  not  the  victor  longer,  than  in  his  own 
discretion  he  shall  think  fit« 

And  that  which  men  do,  when  they  demand,  as 
it  is  now  called,  quarter,  which  the  Greeks  called 
Ztfrypiof  taking  alive,  is  to  evade  the  present  fury 


Digitized  by 


Google 


190  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  IK    of  the  victor,  by  submission,  and  to  compound  for 

.    ^^'  _.    their  life,  with  ransom,  or  service :  and  therefore 

Not  by  the  Vic  he  that  hath  quarter,  hath  not  his  life  given,  but 

coMen't^of^  the  deferred  till  farther  deliberation;  for  it  is  not  a 

vanquUhed.     yielding  ou  couditiou  of  life,  but  to  discretion.  And 

then  only  is  his  life  in  security,  and  his  service  due, 

when  the  victor  hath  trusted  him  with  his  corporal 

liberty.     For  slaves  that  work  in   prisons ;    or 

fetters,  do  it  not  of  duty,  but  to  avoid  the  cruelty 

of  their  task-masters. 

The  master  of  the  servant,  is  master  also  of  all 
he  hath :  and  may  exact  the  use  thereof;  that  is  to 
say,  of  his  goods,  of  his  labour,  of  his  servants,  and 
of  his  children,  as  often  as  he  shall  think  fit.  For 
he  holdeth  his  life  of  his  master,  by  the  covenant 
of  obedience ;  that  is,  of  owning,  and  authorizing 
whatsoever  the  master  shall  do.  And  in  case  the 
master,  if  he  refuse,  kill  him,  or  cast  him  into 
bonds,  or  otherwise  punish  him  for  his  disobedi- 
ence, he  is  himself  the  author  of  the  same ;  and 
cannot  accuse  him  of  injury. 

In  sum,  the  rights  and  consequences  of  both 
paternal  and  despotical  dominion,  are  the  very 
same  with  those  of  a  sovereign  by  institution ;  and 
for  the  same  reasons  :  which  reasons  are  set  down 
in  the  precedent  chapter.  So  that  for  a  man  that 
is  monarch  of  divers  nations,  whereof  he  hath,  in 
one  the  sovereignty  by  institution  of  the  people  as- 
sembled, and  in  another  by  conquest,  that  is  by  the 
submission  of  each  particular,  to  avoid  death  or 
bonds ;  to  demand  of  one  nation  more  than  of  the 
other,  from  the  title  of  conquest,  as  being  a  con- 
quered nation,  is  an  act  of  ignorance  of  the  rights 
of  sovereignty ;  for  the  sovereign  is,  absolute  over 


Digitized  by 


Google 


DOMINION  PATERNAL,  ETC.  191 

both  alike ;  or  else  there  is  no  sovereignty  at  all ;   part  ii. 
and  so  every  man  may  lawfully  protect  himself,  if  ^,.  ^^'  ,  ^ 
he  can,  with  his  own  sword,  which  is  the  condition 
of  war.  ^ 

By  this  it  appears ;  that  a  great  family,  if  it  be  iwfference 
not  part  of  some  commonwealth,  is  of  itself,  as  to  family  and 
the  rights  of  sovereignty,  a  Uttle  monarchy :  whe-  *  ^^'^sf^^™- 
ther  that  family  consist  of  a  man  and  his  children ; 
or  of  a  man  and  his  servants  ;  or  of  a  man,  and  his 
children,  and  servants  together :  wherein  the  fa- 
ther or  master  is  the  sovereign.  But  yet  a  family 
is  not  properly  a  commonwealth  ;  unless  it  be  of 
that  power  by  its  own  number,  or  by  other  oppor- 
tunities, as  not  to  be  subdued  without  the  hazard 
of  war.  For  where  a  number  of  men  are  mani- 
festly too  weak  to  defend  themselves  nnited,  every 
one  may  use  his  own  reason  in  time  of  danger,  to 
save  his  own  life,  either  by  flight,  or  by  submission 
to  the  enemy,  as  he  shall  think  best ;  in  the  same 
manner  as  a  very  small  company  of  soldiers,  sur- 
prised by  an  army,  may  cast  down  their  arms,  and 
demand  quarter,  or  run  away,  rather  than  be  put 
to  the  sword.  And  thus  much  shall  suffice,  con- 
cerning what  I  find  by  speculation,  and  deduction, 
of  sovereign  rights,  from  the  nature,  need,  and  de- 
signs of  men,  in  erecting  of  commonwealths,  and 
putting  themselves  under  monarchs,  or  assembhes, 
entrusted  with  power  enough  for  their  protection. 

Let  us  now  consider  what  the  Scripture  teacheth  i^e  righta  of 
in  the  same  point.     To  Moses,  the  children  of  scr?^re^  "*"* 
Israel  say  thus :   Speak  thou  to  us,  and  we  will 
hear  thcf;  but  let  not  God  speak  to  us,  lest  we 
die.  {EAod.  xx.  19.)     This  is  absolute  obedience 
to  Mj^.    Concerning  the  right  of  kings,  God 


Digitized  by 


Google 


192  OP  COMMONWEALTH, 

PART  II.  himself  by  the  mouth  of  Samuel,  sidth,  (1  Sam.  viii.' 
.  ^-  .  11,  12,  &c.)  This  shall  be  the  right  of  the  king 
The  righu  of  you  will  have  to  reign  over  you.  He  shall  take 
siripmre^  ™  your  sons,  and  set  them  to  drive  his  chariots,  and 
to  be  his  horsemen,  and  to  run  before  his  chariots  ; 
and  gather  in  his  harvest ;  and  to  m4ike  his  en- 
gines of  war,  and  instruments  of  his  chariots ; 
and  shall  take  your  daughters  to  make  perfumes y 
to  be  his  cooks,  and  bakers.  He  shall  take  your 
fields,  your  vinery ards,  and  your  olive-yards,  and 
give  them  to  his  servants.  He  shall  take  the 
tithe  of  your  corn  and  wine,  and  give  it  to  the 
men  of  his  chamber,  and  to  his  other  servants. 
He  shall  take  your  manservants,  and  your  maid- 
servants, and  the  choice  of  your  youth,  and  employ 
them  in  his  business*  He  shall  take  the  tithe  of 
your  flocks ;  and  you  shall  be  his  servants.  Thia 
is  absolute  power,  and  summed  up  in  the  last  words, 
you  shall  be  his  servants.  Again,  when  the  peo- 
ple heard  what  power  their  king  was  to  have,  yet 
they  consented  thereto,  and  say  thus,  {verse  10) 
we  will  be  as  all  other  nations,  and  our  king  shall 
judge  our  causes,  and  go  brfore  us,  to  conduct 
our  wars.  Here  is  confirmed  the  right  that  sove- 
reigns have,  both  to  the  militia,  and  XxyjsXH  judica^ 
ture  ;  in  which  is  contained  as  absolute  power,  as 
one  man  can  possibly  transfer  to  another*  Again, 
the  prayer  of  king  Solomon  to  God,  was  this  (1 
Kings,  iii.  9)  :  Give  to  thy  servant  understanding, 
to  judge  thy  people,  and  to  discern  between  good 
and  evil.  It  belongeth  therefore  to  tJ|je  sovereign 
to  h^  judge,  and  to  prescribe  the  rules  c\f  discern^ 
ing  good  and  evil:  which  rules  are  lays;  and 
therefore  in  him  is  the  legislative  power.     Saul 


Digitized  by 


Google> 


DOMINION  PATERNAL,  ETC.  193 

sought  the  life  of  David ;  yet  when  it  was  in  his  part  ii. 
power  to  slay  Saul,  and  his  servants  would  have  .^^'  . 
done  it,  David  forbad  them,  saying,  (1  Sam.  xxiv.  6)  The  rights  of 
God  forbid  I  should  do  such  an  act  against  niy^^^ji  "™ 
Lord^  the  anointed  of  God.  For  obedience  of  ser- 
vants St.  Paul  saith  ;  {Col.  iii.  22)  Servants  obey 
your  masters  in  all  things ;  and,  {Col.  iii.  20) 
children  obey  your  parents  in  all  things.  There 
is  simple  obedience  in  those  that  are  subject  to 
paternal,  or  despotical  dominion.  Again,  {Matt. 
xxiii.  2, 3)  The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  sit  in  Moses" 
chair ^  and  therefore  all  that  they  shall  bid  you 
observe^  that  observe  and  do.  There  again  is  sim- 
ple obedience.  And  St.  Paul,  {Titus  iii.  2)  Warn 
them  that  they  subject  themselves  to  princes,  and 
to  those  that  are  in  authority,  and  obey  them. 
This  obedience  is  also  simple.  Lastly,  our  Saviour 
himself  acknowledges,  that  men  ought  to  pay  such 
taxes  as  are  by  kings  imposed,  where  he  says,  give 
to  CcBsar  that  which  is  Caesar's;  and  paid  such 
taxes  himself.  And  that  the  king's  word,  is  suffi- 
cient to  take  anything  from  any  subject,  when 
there  is  need ;  and  that  the  king  is  judge  of  that 
need :  for  he  himself,  as  king  of  the  Jews,  com- 
manded his  disciples  to  take  the  ass,  and  ass's  colt 
to  carry  him  into  Jerusalem,  saying,  {Matth.  xxi. 
2, 3)  Go  into  the  village  over  against  you,  and  you 
shall  find  a  she  ass  tied,  and  her  colt  with  her, 
untie  them,  and  bring  them  to  me.  And  \f  any 
man  ask  you,  what  you  mean  by  it,  say  the  Lord 
hath  need  of  them :  and  they  will  let  them  go. 
They  will  not  ask  whether  his  necessity  be  a  suffi- 
cient title  ;  nor  whether  he  be  judge  of  that  neces- 
sity ;  but  acquiesce  in  the  will  of  the  Lord. 

VOL.  III.  o 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


194  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  To  these  places  may  be  added  also  that  of 
.  ^f'  -  Genesis,  (iii.  6)  Ye  shall  be  as  gods,  knowing 
gdod  and  evil.  And  {verse  11)  Who  told  thee 
that  thou  wast  naked  ?  hast  thou  eaten  of  the  tree, 
of  which  I  commanded  thee  thou  shouldest  not 
eat  9  For  the  cognizance  or  judicature  of  good 
and  evil,  being  forbidden  by  the  name  of  the  fruit 
of  the  tree  of  knowledge^  as  a  trial  of  Adam's  obe- 
dience ;  the  devil  to  inflame  the  ambition  of  the 
woman,  to  whom  that  fruit  already  seemed  beau- 
tiful, told  her  that  by  tasting  it,  they  should  be  as 
gods,  knowing  good^mA  evil.  Whereupon  having 
both  eaten,  they  did  indeed  take  upon  them  God's 
office,  which  is  judicature  of  good  and  evil ;  but 
acquired  no  new  ability  to  distinguish  between 
them  aright.  And  whereas  it  is  said,  that  having 
eaten,  they  saw  they  were  naked ;  no  man  hath  so 
interpreted  that  place,  as  if  they  had  been  formerly 
blind,  and  saw  not  their  own  skins :  the  meaning 
is  plain,  that  it  was  then  they  first  judged  their 
nakedness,  wherein  it  was  God's  will  to  create 
them,  to  be  uncomely ;  and  by  being  ashamed, 
did  tacitly  censure  God  himself.  And  thereupon 
God  saith;  HmI  thou  eaten,  fyc.  as  if  he  should  say, 
doest  thou  that  owest  me  obedience,  take  upon 
thee  to  judge  of  my  commandments  ?  Whereby  it 
is  clearly,  though  allegorically,  signified,  that  the 
commands  of  them  that  have  the  right  to  command, 
are  not  by  their  subjects  to  be  censured,  nor 
disputed. 
soTCTdgn  So  that  it  appeareth  plainly,  to  my  understand- 

in  aii  common- ing,  both  from  reason,  and  Scripture,  that  the 
TbToiutc!^  ^   sovereign  power,  whether  placed  in  one  man,  as  in 
monarchy,  or  in  one  assembly  of  men,  as  in  popu- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


DOMINION  PATERNAL,  ETC.  W5 

lar,  and  luistocratical  commonwealths,  is  as  great,   part  n. 
as  possibly  men  can  be  imagined  to  make  it.    And   .    ^'    . 
though  of  so  unlimited  a  power,  men  may  fscrtcy  sovereign 
many  evil  consequences,  yet  the  consequences  of  ^riuommon 
the  want  of  it,  which  is  perpetual  war  of  every  man  ]^^oJ^fe)°  ^ 
against  his  neighbour,  are  much  worse.     The  con- 
dition of  man  in  this  life  shall  never  be  without  in- 
conveniences ;  but  there  happeneth  in  no  common- 
wealth any  great  inconvenience,  but  what  proceeds 
from  the  subject's  disobedience,   and  breach   of 
those  covenants,  from  which  the  commonwealth 
hath  its  being.     And  whosoever  thinking  sove- 
reign power  too  great,  will  seek  to  make  it  less, 
must  subject  himself,  to  the  power,  that  can  limit 
it ;  that  is  to  say,  to  a  greater. 

The  greatest  objection  is,  that  of  the  practice ; 
when  men  ask,  where,  and  when,  such  power  has 
by  subjects  been  acknowledged.  But  one  may  ask 
them  again,  when,  or  where  has  there  been  a  king- 
dom long  ft^e  from  sedition  and  civil  war.  In 
those  nations,  whose  commonwealths  have  been 
long-lived,  and  not  been  destroyed  but  by  foreign 
war,  the  subjects  never  did  dispute  of  the  sove- 
reign power.  But  howsoever,  an  argument  from 
the  practice  of  men,  that  have  not  sifted  to  the 
bottom,  and  with  exact  reason  weighed  the  causes, 
and  nature  of  commonwealths,  and  suffer  daily 
those  miseries,  that  proceed  from  the  ignorance 
thereof,  is  invalid.  For  though  in  all  places  of  the 
world,  men  should  lay  the  foundation  of  their 
houses  on  the  sand,  it  could  not  thence  be  inferred, 
that  so  it  ought  to  be.  The  skill  of  making,  and 
maintaining  commonwealths,  consisteth  in  certain 
rules,  as  doth  arithmetic  and  geometry ;  not,  as 

o  2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


196  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.   tennis-play,  on  practice  only :  which  rules,  neither 
.    ^^'    .    poor  men  have  the  leisure,  nor  men  that  have  had 

the  leisure,  have  hitherto  had  the  curiosity,  or  the 

method  to  find  out. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

OP  THE  LIBERTY  OF  SUBJECTS. 

Liberty  what  Liberty,  or  freedom,  signifieth,  properly,  the 
absence  of  opposition ;  by  opposition,  I  mean  ex- 
ternal impediments  of  motion  ;  and  may  be  applied 
no  less  to  irrational,  and  inanimate  creatures,  than 
to  rational.  For  whatsoever  is  so  tied,  or  envi- 
roned, as  it  cannot  move  but  within  a  certain 
space,  which  space  is  determined  by  the  opposition 
of  some  external  body,  we  say  it  hath  not  liberty  to 
go  further.  And  so  of  all  living  creatures,  whilst 
they  are  imprisoned,  or  restrained,  with  walls,  or 
chains ;  and  of  the  water  whilst  it  is  kept  in  by 
banks,  or  vessels,  that  otherwise  would  spread 
itself  into  a  larger  space,  we  use  to  say,  they  are 
not  at  liberty,  to  move  in  such  manner,  as  without 
those  external  impediments  they  would.  B«t  when 
the  impediment  of  motion,  is  in  the  constitution  of 
the  thing  itself,  we  use  not  to  say*5  it  wants  the 
liberty ;  but  the  power  to  move ;  as  when  a  stone 
lieth  still,  or  a  man  is  fastened  to  his  bed  by 
sickness. 

What  it  18        And  according  to  this  proper,   and  generally 

to  be  free.  .       j  •  /•  a.\_  j  •      i 

received  meamng  of  the  word,  a  freeman,  ts  he, 
that  in  those  things^  which  by  his  strength  and 
wit  he  is  able  to  do,  is  not  hindered  to  do  what  he 


Digitized  by 


Google 


X 


OF  THE  LIBERTY  OF  SUBJECTS.  19/ 

hats  d  will  to.  But  when  the  words  yr^^,  and  partiu 
liberty  J  are  applied  to  any  thing  but  bodies^  they  .  ^|-  , 
are  abused ;  for  that  which  is  not  subject  to  motion, 
is  not  subject  to  impediment :  and  therefore,  when 
it  is  said,  for  example,  the  way  is  free,  no  liberty 
of  the  way  is  signified,  but  of  those  that  walk  in  it 
without  stop.  And  when  we  say  a  gift  is  free, 
there  is  not  meant  any  liberty  of  the  gift,  but  of 
the  giver,  that  was  not  bound  by  any  law  or  cove- 
nant to  give  it.  So  when  we  speak  freely j  it  is 
not  the  liberty  of  voice,  or  pronunciation,  but  of 
the  man,  whom  no  law  hath  obliged  to  speak  other- 
wise than  he  did.  Lastly,  from  the  use  of  the 
word  free-will,  no  liberty  can  be  inferred  of  the 
will,  desire,  or  inclination,  but  the  liberty  of  the 
man ;  which  consisteth  in  this,  that  he  finds  no 
stop,  in  doing  what  he  has  the  will,  desire,  or  in- 
clination to  do. 

Fear  and  liberty  are  consistent ;  as  when  a  man  P"'  *n^ 
throweth  his  goods  into  the  sea  for  fear  the  ship  consistent. 
should  sink,  he  doth  it  nevertheless  very  willingly, 
and  may  refuse  to  do  it  if  he  will :  it  is  therefore 
the  action  of  one  that  was  free:  so  a  man  some- 
times pays  his  debt,  only  iorfear  of  imprisonment, 
which  because  nobody  hindered  him  from  detain- 
ing, was  the  action  of  a  man  at  liberty.  And 
generally  all  actions  which  men  do  in  common- 
wealths, iorfear  of  the  law,  are  actions,  which  the 
doers  had  liberty  to  omit. 

Liberty^  and  necessity  are  consistent:  as  in  the  J'^JjJ^l *"^ 
water,  that  hath  not  only  liber  ty,  but  a  necessity  consistent. 
of  descending  by  the  channel ;   so  likewise  in  the 
actions  which  men  voluntarily  do :  which,  because 
they  proceed  from  their  will,  proceed  from  liberty ; 


Digitized  by 


Google 


198  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  and  yet,  because  every  act  of  man's  will,  and  every 
.  ^1'  .  desire,  and  inclination  proceedeth  from  some  cause, 
and  that  from  another  cause,  in  acoi^tinual  chain, 
whose Jirst  link  is  in  the  hand  of  Uod  ^e^rStSTldl 
causes,  proceed  from  necessity.  So  that  to  him 
that  could  see  the  connexion  of  those  causes,  the 
necessity  of  all  men's  voluntary  actions,  would 
'  I  appear  manifest.  And  therefore  God,  that  seeth, 
and  disposeth  all  things,  seeth  also  that  the  liberty 
of  man  in  doing  what  he  will,  is  accompanied  with 
the  necessity  of  doing  that  which  God  will,  and  no 
more,  nor  less.  For  though  men  may  do  many 
things,  which  God  does  not  command,  nor  is  there- 
fore author  of  them ;  yet  they  can  have  no  passion, 
nor  appetite  to  anything,  of  which  appetite  God's 
will  is  not  the  cause.  And  did  not  his  will  assure 
the  necessity  of  man's  will,  and  consequently  of  all 
that  on  man's  will  dependeth,  the  liberty  of  men 
would  be  a  contradiction,  and  impediment  to  the 
omnipotence  and  liberty  of  God.  And  this  shall 
suffice,  as  to  the  matter  in  hand,  of  that  natural 
liberty i  which  only  is  properly  called  liberty. 

Artificial  /But  as  mcu,  for  the  attainine^  of  peace,  and  con- 
bonds,  or^^  .  /•,  ,  11        ^  ■■ 

coveouits.  servation  of  themselves  thereby,  have  made  an 
artificial  man,  which  we  call  a  commonwealth ;  so 
also  have  they  made  artificial  chains,  called  dcil 
laws,  which  they  themselves,  by  mutual  covenants, 
have  fastened  at  one  end,  to  the  lips  of  that  man, 
or  assembly,  to  whom  they  have  given  the  sove- 
reign power ;  and  at  the  other  end  to  their  own 
ears.  These  bonds,  in  their  own  nature  but  weak, 
may  nevertheless  be  made  to  hold,  by  the  danger, 
though  not  by  the  difficulty  of  breaking  them. 
In  relation  to  these  bonds  only  it  is,  that  I  am  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THE  LIBERTY  OP  SUBJECTS. 


199 


speak  now,  of  the  liberty  of  subjects.    For  seeing 
there  is  nocommonwealth  in  theworld,  wherein  there 


ART  II. 


PARI 


be  rules  enough  set  down,  for  the  r^ulating  of  all  the  LiiJerty  of  sub- 

-— 'icor-'-*^*** 

iber 


actions,  and  words  of  men ;  as  being  a  thing  impos-  In  liberty  from 


J  coTeaants. 


v 


sible :  it  followeth  necessarily,  that  in  all  kinds  of 
actions  by  the  laws  pretermitted,  men  have  the 
liberty,  of  doing  what  their  oWn  reasons  shall  sug- 
gest, for  the  most  profitable  to  themselves.     For  if 
we  take  Uberty  in  the  proper  sense,  for  corporal 
liberty ;  that  is  to  say,  freedom  from  chains  and 
prison ;  it  were  very  absurd  for  men  to  clamour  as 
they  do,  for  the  liberty  they  so  manifestly  enjoy. 
Again,  if  we  take  liberty,  for  an  exemption  from 
laws,  it  is  it  no  less  absurd,  for  men  to  demand  as      \ 
they  do,  that  liberty,  by  which  all  other  men  may      * 
be  masters  of  their  lives.     And  yet,  as  absdfdas  it      j 
is,  this  is  it  they  demand;  not  knowing  thai  the  laws      j 
are  of  no  power  to  protect  them,  withom  a  sword      1 
in  the  hands  of  a  man,  or  men,  to  cause  Jthose  laws 
to  be  put  in  execution.    The  liberty  of  a  subject,      I 
lieth  therefore  only  in  those  things,  wnich  in  re- 
gulating their  actions,  the  sovereign  hath  prseter- 
mitted :  such  as  is  the  liberty  tojj^uy,  and  sell,  and 
otherwise  contract  with  one  another;  to  choose 
their  own  abode,  their  own  diet,  their  own  trade 
o^  Ufe,  and  institute  their  children  as  they  them- 
selves think  fit ;  and  the  like. 

Nevertheless  we  are  not  to  understand,  that  by      '  ^ 
such  liberty,  the  sovereign  power  of  life  and  death^^'^^'^.o^ 
is  either  abolished,  or  Hmited.     For  it  has  bee^consiatentwith 
already  shown,  that  nothing  the  sovereign  repre-powe?i°thc 
tentative  can  do  to  a  subject,  on  what  pretence  »<>'«">8°- 
soever,  can  properly  be  caUed  injustice,  o^JJhjury ; 
because  every  subject  is  author  of  every  a<^the . 


Digitized  by 


Google 


200  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PAET  n.   sovereign  doth ;  so  that  he  never  wanteth  right  to 

.    ^}'  _ .    anything,  otherwise,  than  as  he  himself  is  the  sub- 

liberty  of      ject  of  God,  and  bound  thereby  to  observe  the  laws 

the  tubgect       ''  ai-i  /.  •  iiia^ 

coMwtent  with  01  nature.  And  therefore  it  may,  and  doth  often 
powwoTthc  happen  in  commonwealths,  that  a  subject  may  be 
•oTereign.  p^j  ^  death,  by  the  command  of  the  sovereign 
power;  and  yet  neither  do  the  other  wrong:  as 
when  Jephtha  caused  his  daughter  to  be  sacrificed : 
in  which,  and  the  like  cases,  he  that  so  dieth,  had 
liberty  to  do  the  action,  for  which  he  is  neverthe- 
less, without  injury  put  to  death.  And  the  same 
holdeth  also  in  a  sovereign  prince,  that  putteth  to 
death  an  innocent  subject.  For  though  the  action 
be  against  the  law  of  nature,  as  being  contrary  to 
equity,  as  was  the  killing  of  Uriah,  by  David  ;  yet 
it  was  not  an  injury  to  Uriah,  but  to  God.  Not  to 
Uriah,  because  the  right  to  do  what  he  pleased 
was  given  him  by  Uriah  himself:  and  yet  to  God, 
because  David  was  God's  subject,  and  prohibited 
all  iniquity  by  the  law  of  nature :  which  distinc- 
tion, David  himself,  when  he  repented  the  fact, 
evidently  confirmed,  saying.  To  thee  only  have 
I  sinned.  In  the  same  manner,  the  people  of 
Athens,  when  they  banished  the  most  potent  of 
their  commonwealth  for  ten  years,  thought  they 
committed  no  injustice  ;  and  yet  they  never  ques- 
tioned what  crime  he  had  done  ;  but  what  hurt  he 
would  do :  nay  they  commanded  the  banishment 
of  they  knew  not  whom ;  and  every  citizen  bringing 
his  oystershell  into  the  market  place,  written  with 
the  name  of  him  he  desired  should  be  banished, 
without  actually  accusing  him,  sometimes  banished 
an  Aristides,  for  his.reputation  of  justice ;  and  some- 
times a  scurrilous  jester,  as  Hyperbolus,  to  make  a 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  THE  LIBERTY  OF  SUBJJICTS.  201 

3^t  of  it.  And  yet  a  man  cannot  say,  the  sovereign  part  ii. 
people  of  Athens  wanted  right  to  banish  them ;  or  .  ^|'  . 
an  Athenian  the  liberty  to  jest,  or  to  be  just. 

The  liberty,  whereof  there  is  so  frequent  Mid  The  liberty 
honourable  mention,  in  the  histories,  and  phuo- pra\8c,T8"thr 
sophy  of  the  ancient  Greeks,  and  Romans,  and  in  ^iei^g^[  not 
the  writings,  and  discourse  of  those  that  from  them  "fprivatcmen. 
have  received  all  their  learning  in  the  politics,  is  not  ^ 
the  liberty  of  particular  men  ;  but  the  liberty  of  the 
<K)mmonwealth  :  which  is  the  same  with  that  which 
every  man  then  should  have,  if  there  were  no  civil 
laws,  nor  commonwealth  at  all.  And  the  eflfects 
of  it  also  be  the  same.  For  as  amongst  masterless 
men,  there  is  perpetual  war,  of  every  man  against 
his  neighbour ;  no  inheritance,  to  transmit  to  the 
son,  nor  to  expect  from  the  father ;  no  propriety  of 
goods,  or  lands  ;  no  security ;  but  a  fuU  and  abso- 
lute liberty  in  every  particular  man :  so  in  states, 
and  commonwealths  not  dependent  on  one  another, 
every  commonwealth,  not  every  man,  has  an  abso- 
lute liberty,  to  do  what  it  shall  judge,  that  is  to  say, 
what  that  man,  or  assembly  that  representeth  it, 
shall  judge  most  conducing  to  their  benefit.  But 
withal,  they  live  in  the  condition  of  a  perpetual 
war,  and  upon  the  confines  of  battle,  with  their 
frontiers  armed,  and  cannons  planted  against  their 
neighbours  round  about.  The  Athenians,  and  Ro- 
mans were  free ;  that  is,  free  commonwealths :  not 
that  any  particular  men  had  the  liberty  to  resist 
their  own  representative ;  but  that  their  represen- 
tative had  the  liberty  to  resist,  or  invade  other  peo- 
ple. There  is  written  on  the  turrets  of  the  city  of 
Lucca  in  great  characters  at  this  day,  the  word  li- 
BBRTAS  ;  yet  no  man  can  thence  infer,  that  a  par- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


202  .OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  ticnlar  man  has  more  liberty,  or  immnnity  from  the 
.  ^}'  .  service  of  the  commonwealth  there,  than  in  C!on- 
The  liberty  stantinoplc.  Whether  a  commonwealth  be  mon- 
P^M^IT tb^  ardiical,  or  popular,  the  freedom  is  still  the  same. 
vw^™V^t  ^^^  it  is  an  easy  thing,  for  men  to  be  deceived, 
of  private  men.  by  the  spccious  name  of  liberty ;  and  for  want  of 
judgment  to  distinguish,  mistake  that  for  their  pri- 
vate inheritance,  andbirth-right^  which  is  the  right 
of  die  public  only.  And  when  the  same  error  is 
confirmed  by  the  authority  of  men  in  reputation  for 
their  writings  on  this  subject,  it  is  no  wonder  if  it 
produce  sedition,  and  change  of  government.  In 
these  western  parts  of  the  world,  we  are  made  to 
receive  our  opinions  concerning  the  institution,  and 
rights  of  commonwealths,  from  Aristotle,  Cicero, 
and  other  men,  Greeks  and  Romans,  that  living 
under  popular  states,  derived  those  rights,  not  from 
the  principles  of  nature,  but  transcribed  them  into 
their  books,  out  of  the  practice  of  their  own  com- 
monwealths, which  were  popular ;  as  the  grammar 
rians  describe  the  rules  of  language,  out  of  the 
practice  of  the  time ;  or  the  rules  of  poetry,  out 
of  the  poems  of  Homer  and  Virgil.  And  because 
the  Athenians  were  taught,  to  keep  them  from  de- 
sire of  changing  their  government,  that  they  were 
freemen,  and  all  that  lived  under  monarchy  were 
slaves  ;  therefore  Aristotle  puts  it  down  in  his  Poli- 
tics, (lib.  6.  cap.  ii.J  In  democracy y  libbrty  m  to 
be  supposed:  for  it  is  commonly  held,  that  no  man 
is  FREB  in  any  other  government.  And  as  Aristotle ; 
so  Cicero,  and  other  writers  have  grounded  their 
civil  doctrine,  on  the  opinions  of  the  Romans,  who 
were  taught  to  hate  monarchy,  at  first,  by  them  that 
having  deposed  their  sovereign,sharedamongstthem 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THB  LIBERTY  OF  SUBJECTS.  203 

tiie  sovereignty  of  Rome ;  and  afterwards  by  their  part  ii* 
successors.  And  by  reading  of  these  Greek,  and  .  ^]'  . 
Latin  authors,  men  from  their  childhood  have  gotten 
a  habit,  under  a  false  show  of  liberty,  of  favoxuri|^ 
tumults,  and  of  licentious  controlling  the  actions 
of  their  sovereigns,  and  again  of  controlling  those 
controllers ;  with  the  eflFusion  of  so  much  blood,  as 
I  think  I  may  truly  say,  there  was  never  any  thing 
so  dearly  bought,  as  these  western  parts  have  bought 
the  learning  of  the  Greek  and  Latin  tongues. 

To  come  now  to  the  particulars  of  the  true  liberty  Liberty  of  tub- 
of  a  subject ;  that  is  to  say,  what  are  the  things,  measured. 
which  though  commanded  by  the  sovereign,  he  may 
nevertheless,  without  injustice,  refuse  to  do  ;  we  are 
to  consider,  what  rights  we  pass  away,  when  we 
make  a  commonwealth ;  or,  which  is  all  one,  what 
liberty  we  deny  ourselves,  by  owning  all  the  actions, 
without  exception,  of  the  man,  or  assembly  we  make 
our  sovereign.  For  in  the  act  of  our  submission,  con- 
sisteth  both  our  obligation^  and  our  liberty  ;  which 
must  therefore  be  inferred  by  arguments  taken  from 
thence;  there  being  no  obligation  on  any  man, 
which  ariseth  not  from  some  act  of  his  own  ;  for 
all  men  equally,  are  by  nature  free.  And  because 
such  arguments,  must  either  be  drawn  from  the 
express  words,  /  authorize  all  Jus  actions ,  or  from 
the  intention  of  him  that  submitteth  himself  to  his 
power,  which  intention  is  to  be  understood  by  the 
end  for  which  he  so  submitteth ;  the  obligation,  and 
liberty  of  the  subject,  is  to  be  derived,  either  from 
those  words,  or  others  equivalent ;  or  else  from  the 
end  (rf  Ihe  institution  of  sovereignty,  namely,  the 
peace  of  the  subjects  within  themselves,  iemd  their 
defence  against  a  common  enemy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


204  OF  COMMONWEALTH.  ^ 

PART  II.  First  therefore,  seeing  sovereignty  by  institution^ 
^  ^1*  -  is  by  eoyenant  of  every  one  to  every  one ;  and 
Subject!  hare  Sovereignty  by  acquisition,  by  covenants  of  the  van- 
fend  their  <^  quished  to  the  victor,  or  child  to  the  parent ;  it  is 
^M  th^  manifest,  that  every  subject  has  liberty  in  all  those 
iDTideAclIf  things,  the  right  whereof  cannot  by  covenant  be 
.  transferred.  I  have  shewn  before  in  the  14th  chap- 
ter, that  covenants,  not  to  defend  a  man*s  own  body, 
are  void.  Therefore, 
to^huTSl^  I^  t^^  sovereign  command  a  man,  though  justly 
■«*^^  condemned,  to  kill,  wound,  or  maim  himself;  or  not 

to  resist  those  that  assault  him ;  or  to  abstain  from 
the  use  of  food,  air,  medicine,  or  any  other  thing, 
without  which  he  cannot  live  ;  yet  hath  that  man 
the  liberty  to  disobey. 

If  a  man  be  interrogated  by  the  sovereign,  or  his 
authority,  concerning  a  crime  done  by  himself,  he 
is  not  bound,  without  assurance  of  pardon,  to  con- 
fess it;  because  no  man,  as  I  have  shown,  in  the 
same  chapter,  can  be  obliged  by  covenant  to  accuse 
himself. 

Again,  the  consent  of  a  subject  to  sovereign  power, 
is  contained  in  these  words,  /  authorize,  or  take 
upon  me,  all  his  actions;  in  which  there  is  no  re- 
striction at  all,  of  his  own  former  natural  liberty : 
for  by  allowing  him  to  kill  me,  I  am  not  bound  to 
kill  myself  when  he  commands  me.  It  is  one  thing 
to  say,  kill  me,  or  my  fellow,  if  you  please ;  ano- 
ther thing  to  say,  /  will  kill  myself,  or  my  fellow. 
It  foUoweth  therefore,  that 

No  man  is  bound  by  the  words  themselves,  either 
to  kill  himself,  or  any  other  man ;  and  consequently, 
that  the  obligation  a  inan  may  sometimes  have,  upon 
the  command  of  the  sovereign  to  execute  any  dan- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  THE  LIBERTY  OF  SUBJECTS.  205 

^rous,  or  dishonourable  oflfice,  dependeth  not  on   part  ii. 
the  words  of  onr  submission  ;  but  on  the  intention,    .    ^}'    . 
which  is  to  be  understood  by  the  end  thereof.  When 
therefore  our  refusal  to  obey,  frustrates  the  end  for 
which  the  sovereignty  was  ordained ;  then  there  is  - 
no  liberty  to  refuse :  otherwise  there  is. 

Upon  this  ground,  a  man  that  i^commanded  as  J|I,°elfS^' 
a  soldier  to  fight  against  the  enemy,  though  his  so-  vohmtaniy 

•        u  •    ul^  1.^  -iV-         %.       ^      .^,    undertake  it 

vereign  have  right  enough  to  punish  his  refusal  with 
death,  may  nevertheless  in  many  cases  refuse,  with- 
out injustice ;  as  when  he  substituteth  a  sufficient 
soldier  in  his  place :  for  in  this  case  he  deserteth  not 
the  service  of  the  commonwealth.  And  there  is 
allowance  to  be  made  for  natural  timorousness ;  not 
only  to  women,  of  whom  no  such  dangerous  duty  is 
expected,  but  also  to  gagiigflgminine  courage.  When 
armies  fight,  there  is  on  one  side,  or  both,  a  running, 
away ;  yet  when  they  do  it  not  out  of  treachery, 
but  fear,  they  are  not  esteemed  to  do  it  unjustly,  but 
dishonourably.  For  the  same  reason,  to  avoid  battle, 
is  not  injustice,  but  cowardice.  But  he  that  in- 
rolleth  himself  a  soldier,  or  taketh  imprest  money, 
taketh  away  the  excuse  of  a  timorous  nature ;  and 
is  obliged,  not  only  to  go  to  the  battle,  but  also  not 
to  run  from  it,  without  his  captain's  leave.  And 
when  the  defence  of  the  commonwealth,  requireth 
at  once  the  help  of  all  that  are  able  to  bear  arms, 
every  one  is  obliged ;  because  otherwise  the  institu- 
tion of  the  commonwealth,  which  they  have  not  the 
purpose,  or  courage  to  preserve,  was  in  vain. 

To  resist  the  sword  of  the  commonwealth,  in  de- 
fence of  another  man,  guilty,  or  innocent,  no  man 
hath  liberty ;  because  such  liberty,  takes  away  from 
*lie .  sovereign,  the  means  of  protecting  us ;  and  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


206  OP  THE  LIBERTY  OP  SUBJECTS. 

PART  11.  therefore  destmctive  of  the  very  essence  of  govem- 
^  ^1*  _  ment.  But  m  ease  a  great  many  men  together,  have 
ahready  resisted  the  sovereign  power  unjustly,  or 
committed  some  capital  crime,  for  which  every  one 
of  them  expecteth  death,  whether  have  they  not  the 
liberty  then  to  join  together,  and  assist,  and  defend 
one  another  ?  Certainly  they  have :  for  they  but 
defend  their  lives^  which  the  guilty  man  may  as 
well  do,  as  the  innocent.  There  was  indeed  injus- 
tice in  the  first  breach  of  their  duty ;  their  bearing 
of  arms  subsequent  to  it,  though  it  be  to  maintain 
what  they  have  done,  is  no  new  unjust  act.  And  if 
it  be  only  to  defend  their  persons,  it  is  not  unjust 
at  all.  But  the  offer  of  pardon  taketh  from  them, 
to  whom  it  is  offered,  the  plea  of  self-defence,  and 
mAketh  their  perseverance  in  assisting,  or  defending 
the  rest,  unlawfid. 
The  greatest        As  for  othcr  liberties,  they  depend  on  the  silence 

liberty  of  ittb-      -     ,       ,  ,  ,  ,  .         , 

jecti,  depen-  of  the  law«  In  cases  where  the  sovereign  has  pre- 
8iiencJ"of  the  scrfbed  uo  rulc,  there  the  subject  hath  the  liberty 
'"'•  to  do,  or  forbear,  according  to  his  own  discreticni. 

Ay  And  therefore  such  Uberty  is  in  some  places  more, 
and  in  some  less ;  and  in  some  times  more,  in  other 
times  less,  according  as  they  that  have  the  sove- 
reignty shall  think  most  convenient.  As  for  example, 
there  was  a  time,  when  in  England  a  man  might 
enter  into  his  own  land,  and  dispossess  such  as 
wrongfully  possessed  it,  by  force.  But  in  after- 
times,  that  liberty  of  forcible  entry,  was  taken  away 
by  a  statute  made,  by  the  king,  in  parliament.  And 
in  some  places  of  the  world,  men  have  the  liberty 
of  many  wives :  in  other  places,  such  liberty  is  not 
allowed. 

If  a  subject  have  a  controversy  with  his  sovereign , 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THE  LIBERTY  OP  SUBJECTS.  207 

of  debt,  or  of  right  of  possession  of  lands  or  goods,    part  ii. 
or  concerning  any  service  required  at  his  hands,  or    >., — r^ — 
concerning  any  penalty,  corporal,  or  P^c^^^ii^^' iJS^oVTub- 
grounded  on  a  precedent  law;  he  hath  the  samejecta,  depen- 
liberty  to  sue  for  his  right,  as  if  it  were  against  a  siieace  of  the 
subject ;  and  before  such  judges,  as  are  appointed  **"• 
by  the  sovereign*     For  seeing  the  sovereign  de- 
mandeth  by  force  of  a  former  law,  and  not  by  virtue 
of  his  power ;  he  declareth  thereby,  that  he  re- 
quireth  no  more,  than  shall  appear  to  be  due  by 
that  law.    The  suit  therefore  is  not  contrary  to  the 
will  of  the  sovereign ;  and  consequently  the  subject 
hath  the  liberty  to  demand  the  hearing  of  his  cause ; 
and  sentence,  according  to  that  law.     But  if  he  de- 
mand, or  take  anything  by  pretence  of  his  power ; 
there  lieth,  in  that  case,  no  action  of  law ;  for  all 
that  is  done  by  him  in  virtue  of  his  power,  is  done 
by  the  authority  of  every  subject,  and  consequently 
he  that  brings  an  action  against  the  sovereign,  brings 
it  against  lymself. 

If  a  monarch,  or  sovereign  assembly,  grant  a 
liberty  to  all,  or  any  of  his  subjects,  which  grant 
standing,  he  is  disabled  to  provide  for  their  safety, 
the  grant  is  void ;  unless  he  directly  renounce,  or 
transfer  the  sovereignty  to  another.  For  in  that  he 
might  (^nly,  if  it  had  been  his  will,  and  in  plain 
terms, have  renounced, or  transferred  it,  and  did  not; 
it  is  to  be  understood  it  was  not  his  will,  but  that 
the  grant  proceeded  from  ignorance  of  the  repug- 
nancy between  such  a  liberty  and  the  sovereign 
power;  and  therefore  the  sovereigntyis  still  retained; 
and  consequently  all  those  powers,  which  are  neces- 
sary to  the  exercising  thereof ;  such  as  are  the  power 
of  war,  and  peace,  of  judicature,  of  appointing 


Digitized  by 


Google 


208 


OF  COMMONWEALTH. 


^^theirobedieiiiie 
to  tbeif  80- 
YereigD. 


ftART'ii.  o&cers,  and  councillors,  of  levying  money,  and  the 
„^  ^!^^>  rest  named  in  the  18th  chapter. 
,w  ^^^^^  The  obligation  of  subjects  to  the  sovereign,  is 
i,of  understood  to  last  as  long,  and  no  longer,  than  the 
*  power  lasteth,  by  which  he  is  able  to  protect  them. 
For  the  right  men  have  by  nature  to  protect  them- 
selves, when  none  else  can  protect  them,  can  by  no 
covenant  be  relinquished.  The  sovereignty  is  the  soul 
of  the  commonwealth  ;  which  once  departed  from 
the  body,  the  members  do  no  more  receive  their 
motion  from  it.  The  end  of  obedience  is  protec- 
tion ;  which,  wheresoever  a  man  seeth  it,  either  in 
his  ovra,  or  in  another's  sword,  nature  applieth  his 
obedience  to  it,  and  his  endeavour  to  maintain  it. 
And  though  sovereignty,  in  the  intention  of  them 
that  make  it,  be  immortal ;  yet  is  it  in  its  own  na- 
ture, not  only  subject  to  violent  death,  by  foreign 
war  ;  but  also  through  the  ignorance,  and  passions 
of  men,  it  hath  in  it,  from  the  very  institution,  many 
seeds  of  a  natural  mortality,  by  intestine  discord. 
^  If  a  subject  be  taken  prisoner  in  war ;  or  his  per- 
son, or  his  means  of  life  be  within  the  guards  of  the 
enemy,  and  hath  his  life  and  corporal  liberty  given 
him,  on  condition  to  be  subject  to  the  victor,  he 
hath  liberty  to  accept  the  condition ;  and  having 
accepted  it,  is  the  subject  of  him  that  took  him ; 
because  he  bad  no  other  way  to  preserve  himself. 
The  case  is  the  same,  if  he  be  detained  on  the  same 
terms,  in  a  foreign  country.  But  if  a  man  be  held 
in  prison,  or  bonds,  or  is  riot  trusted  with  the  liberty 
of  his  body ;  he  cannot  be  understood  to  be  bound 
by  covenant  to  subjection ;  and  therefore  may,  if 
he  can,  make  his  escape  by  any  means  whatsoever* 


In  caae  of 
captmty. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  THE  LIBERTY  OF  SUBJECTS.  td< 

If  a  monarch  shall  relinquish  t^e  sovereignty  bcfth  MUXm 
for  himself^  and  his  heirs  ;  his  subjects  return  to  ib€    «^    ^ 
absolute  Uberty  of  nature  ;  because,  though  natitrt  |*^*J|^y*^ 
may  declare  who  are  his  sons,  and  who  are  thtaHiM^pK^ 
nearest  of  his  kin;  yet  it  dependeth  on  his  owUhmtmrmdltt, 
will,  as  hath  been  said  in  the  precedent  chapter,  who  ^ 
shall  be  his  heir.     If  therefore  he  will  have  no  heir, 
there  is  no  sovereignty,  nor  subjection.  The  case  is 
the  same,  if  he  die  without  known  kindred,  and 
without  declaration  of  his  heir.    For  then  there  can 
no  heir  be  known,  and  consequently  no  subjection 
be  due. 

If  the  sovereign  banish  his  subject ;  during  the  Jn  ^Jl[^ 
banishment,  he  is  not  subject.  But  he  that  is  sent 
on  a  message,  or  hjith  leave  to  travel,  is  still  subject; 
but  it  is,  by  co^ract  between  sovereigns,  not  by 
virtue  of  the  coyenant  of  subjection.  For  whoso- 
ever entereth  in|to  another's  dominion,  is  subject  to 
all  the  laws  tWreof ;  unless  he  have  a  privilege  by 
the  amity  of  ttie  sovereigns,  or  by  special  licence. 

If  a  monafrch  subdued  by  war,  render  himself  ^^  «*'f  ^« 

7  •  1  /•  sovereign 

subject  to  thfe  victor;  his  subjects  are  delivered  from  render  him- 
their  formw  obligation,  and  become  obliged  to  the  to  anothw. 
victor.  3ut  if  he  be  held  prisoner,  or  have  not  the 
liberty  o^  his  own  body  ;  he  is  not  understood  to 
have  givftn  away  the  right  of  sovereignty;  and  there- 
fore his  Subjects  are  obliged  to  yield  obedience  to 
the  magistrates  formerly  placed,  governing  not  in 
their  owl^  name,  but  in  his.  For,  his  right  remain- 
ing, the  Question  is  only  of  the  administration ;  that 


IS  to  say. 


of  the  magistrates  and  ofl&cers  ;  which,  if 
he  have  not  means  to  name,  he  is  supposed  to 
approve  Jkhose,  which  he  himself  had  formerly  ap- 
pointed. •  ^ 

VOJ   ,  III.  P 

Digitized  by  Google 


210  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 


/  CHAPTER  XXII. 

OP  SYSTEMS  SUBJECT,  POLITICAL,  AND   PRIVATE. 

PART  II.    Having  spoken  of  the  generation,  form,  and  power 

•^ — Ir^ — '    of  a  commonwealth,  I  am  in  order  to  speak  next 

wm^f  ays-     ^^  ^^  P^^^  thereof.     And  first  of  systems,  which 

tenw  of  people,  resemble  the  similar  parts,  or  muscles  of  a  body 

natural.     By  systems,  I  understand  any  numbers 

of  men  joined  in  one  interest,  or  one  business.    Of 

which,  some  are  regular,  and  some  irregular. 

Regular  are  those,  where  one  man,  or  assembly  of 

men,  is  constituted  representative  of  the  whole 

number.    All  other  are  irregular. 

Of  regular,  some  are  absolute,  and  independent, 
subject  to  none  but  their  own  representative :  such 
are  only  commonwealths;  of  which  I  have  spoken 
already  in  the  five  last  precedent  chapters.  Others 
are  dependent ;  that  is  to  say,  subordinate  to  some 
sovereign  power,  to  which  every  one,  as  also  their 
representative  is  subject. 

Of  systems  subordinate,  some  are  political^  and 
^ome  private.  Political,  otherwise  cidled  bodies po-- 
litic,  and  persons  in  law,  are  those,  which  are  made 
by  authority  from  the  sovereign  power  of  the  com- 
monwealth. Private,  are  those,  which  a"*e  consti- 
tuted by  subjects  amongst  themselves,  or  by  au- 
thority from  a  stranger.  For  no  authority  derived 
from  foreign  power,  within  the  dominion  of  another, 
is  public  there,  but  private. 

And  of  private  systems,  some  are  lawful;  some 
unlawful.  Lawful,  are  those  which  are  allowed  by 


Digitized  by 


Google 


STSTBMS  SUBJKCT^  POLITICAL,  ETC.         211 

the  commonwealth :  all  other  are  ufdawfal.  Irregu-  part  ir. 
lar  systems^  are  those  which  having  no  representa-  .  ^'^  . 
tive,  consist  only  in  concourse  of  people ;  which  if 
not  forbidden  by  the  commonwealth,  nor  made  on 
evil  design,  such  as  are  conflux  of  people  to  markets, 
or  shows,  or  any  other  harmless  end,  are  lawfiil. 
But  when  the  intention  is  evil,  or  (if  the  number  be 
considerable),  unknown,  they  are  unlawful. 

In  bodies  politic J;hepower.ofthe  representative  '\^^  Jjf** 
is  always  limited :  tfScFftffirivEch  prescribeth  the  power  of  the 
limits  thereof,  is  the  power  sovereign.  Forpower  un-  [sESl^^** 
limited,  is  absolute  sovereignty.  And  the  sovereign 
in  every  commonwealth,  is  the  absolute  representa- 
tive of  all  the  subjects ;  and  therefore  no  other  can 
be  representative  of  any  part  of  them,  but  so  far 
forth,  as  he  shall  give  leave.  And  to  give  leave  tp  a 
body  politic  of  subjects,  to  have  an  absolute  repre- 
sentative to  all  intents  andpuiposes,  were  to  abandon 
the  government  of  so  much  of  the  commonwealth, 
and  to  divide  the  dominion,  contrary  to  their  peace 
and  defence ;  which  the  sovereign  cannot  be  under- 
stood to  do,  by  any  grant,  that  does  not  plainly,  and 
directly  discharge  them  of  their  subjection.  For 
consequences  of  words,  are  not  the  signs  of  his  will, 
when  other  consequences  are  signs  of  the  contrary ; 
but  rather  signs  of  error,  and  misreckoning ;  to 
which  all  mankind  is  too  prone. 

The  bounds  of  that  power,  which  is  given  to  the 

representative  of  a  body  politic,  are  to  be  taken 

notice  of,  from  two  things.    One  is  their  writ,  or 

,  letters  from  the  sovereign  :  the  other  is  the  law  of 

the  commonwealth. 

For  thoi^  in  the  institution  or  acquisition  of  a  By  letters 
commonwealth,  which  is  independent,  there  needs  ^***'*^' 

p2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


2t2  OP  COMMONWEALTH. 

no  writing,  because  the  power  of  the  representative 
has  there  no  other  bounds,  but  such  as  are  set  out 
by  the  unwritten  law  of  nature ;  yet  in  subordinate 
bodies,  there  are  such  diversities  of  limitation  neces- 
sary, concerning  their  businesses,  times,  and  places^ 
as  can  neither  be  remembered  without  letters,  nor 
taken  notice  of,  unless  such  letters  be  patent,  that 
they  may  be  read  to  them,  and  withal  sealed,  or 
testified,  with  the  seals,  or  other  permanent  signs 
of  the  authority  sovereign. 

And  the  laws:  And  bccausc  such  limitation  is  not  always  easy,  or 
perhaps  possible  to  be  described  in  writing ;  the  or- 
dinary laws,  common  to  all  subjects,  must  determine 
what  the  representative  may  lawfully  do,  in  all  cases^ 
where  the  letters  themselves  are  silent.  And  there- 
fore. 

When  th^jce^     In  a  body  poUtic,  if  the  representative  be  one 

presentative  .^     x  -^  * 

k^mriMfl,     man,  whatsoever  he  does  in  the  person  of  the  body, 

eA^i^^^  which  is  not  warranted  in  his  letters,  nor  by  the 

own  only.       ig^ws^  is  his  owu  act,  and  not  the  act  of  the  body, 

nor  of  any  other  member  thereof  besides  himself: 

because  fiirther  than  his  letters,  or  the  laws  limit, 

he  representeth  no  man's  person,  but  his  own.    But 

what  he  does  according  to  these,  is  the  act  of  every 

one :  for  of  the  act  of  the  sovereign  every  one  is 

author,  because  he  is  their  representative  unlimited; 

and  the  act  of  him  that  recedes  not  from  the  letters 

of  the  sovereign,  is  the  act  of  the  sovereign,  and 

therefore  every  member  of  the  body  is  author  of  it. 

When  it  is  an       But  if  the  representative  be  an  assembly;  what- 

thllSt  o^'them  socvcr  that  assembly  shall  decree,  not  warranted  by 

^niy.*"'"'*^^   their  letters,  or  the  laws,  is  the  act  of  the  assembly, 

or  body  politic,  and  the  act  of  every  one  by  whose 

vote  the  decree  was  made  ;  but  not  the  act  of  any 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SYSTEMS  SUBJECT,  POLITICAL,  ETC.         2*8 

man  that  being  present  voted  to  the  contrary ;  nor 
of  aay  man  absent,  unless  he  voted  it  by  procura- 
tion. It  is  the  act  of  the  assembly,  because  voted 
by  the  major  part ;  and  if  it  be  a  crime,  the  assem- 
bly may  be  punished,  as  far  forth  as  it  is  capable, 
as  by  dissolution,  or  forfeiture  of  their  letters  (which 
is  to  such  artificial,  and  fictitious  bodies,  capital)  or, 
if  the  assembly  have  a  common  stock,  wherein  none 
of  the  innocent  members  have  propriety,  by  pecuni- 
ary mulct.  For  from  corporal  penalties  nature  hath 
exempted  all  bodies  politic.  But  they  that  gave 
not  their  vote,  are  therefore  innocent,  because  the 
assembly  cannot  represent  any  man  in  things  un- 
warranted by  their  letters,  and  consequently  are  not 
involved  in  their  votes. 

If  the  person  of  the  body  politic  beine:  in  one  '^^•^  ^f  '«• 

*  i»  1^  presentatiTe 

man,  borrow  money  of  a  stranger,  that  is,  of  one  js  one  man, 
that  is  not  of  the  same  body,  (for  no  letters  need  money^  or  owe 
limit  borrowing,  seeing  it  is  left  to  men's  own  in-h^^^^^HabiT^' 
clinations  to  limit  lending),  the  debt  is  the  represen-  oniy»ii»«  «««>»- 

•      ^  -r.        -i.  1         1        1  1  1  1        •        /.  ^  .    be"  not. 

tative  s.  For  if  he  should  have  authonty  from  his 
letters,  to  make  the  members  pay  what  he  bor- 
roweth,  he  should  have  by  consequence  the  so- 
vereignty of  them ;  and  therefore  the  grant  were 
either  void,  as  proceeding  from  error,  commonly 
incident  to  human  nature,  and  an  insufficient  sign 
of  the  will  of  the  granter ;  or  if  it  be  avowed  by 
him,  then  is  the  representer  sovereign,  and  falleth 
not  under  the  present  question,  which  is  only  of 
bodies  subordinate.  No  member  therefore  is  obliged 
to  pay  the  debt  so  borrowed,  but  the  representative 
himself :  because  he  that  lendeth  it,  being  a  stranger 
to  the  letters,  and  to  the  qualification  of  the  body, 
understandeth  those  only  for  his  debtors,  that  are 


Digitized  by 


Google 


214  OP  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  engaged :  and  seeing  the  representer  can  engage 

^^    .   himself^  and  none  else,  has  him  only  for  debtor ; 

who  mnst  therefore  pay  him,  out  of  the  common 

stock,  if  there  be  any,  or,  if  there  be  none,  out  of 

his  own  estate. 

If  he  come  into  debt  by  contract,  or  mulct,  the 
case  is  the  same* 
]II?embiy/tht5     But  whcu  the  representative  is  an  assembly,  and 
only  are  Uabic  the  debt  to  a  straugcr ;  all  they,  and  only  they  are 

that  hare   aa-  .1,4.         1        ,   /        1  1     . 

■ented.  respousiblc  for  the  debt,  that  gave  their  votes  to 

the  borrowing  of  it,  or  to  the  contract  that  made 
it  due,  or  to  the  fact  for  which  the  mulct  was  im- 
posed ;  because  every  one  of  those  in  voting  did 
engage  himself  for  the  payment :  for  he  that  is 
author  of  the  borrowing,  is  obliged  to  the  payment, 
even  of  the  whole  debt ;  though  when  paid  by  any 

—  one,  he  be  discharged. 

?o  ^e'^of^th^  ^^*  ^  ^^  ^^^'  ^^  ^  ^^^  ^^  *^  assembly,  the 
assembly,  the  assembly  only  is  obliged  to  the  payment,  out  of 
ow^^^  their  common  stock,  if  they  have  any :  for  having 
liberty  of  vote,  if  he  vote  the  money  shall  be 
borrowed,  he  votes  it  shall  be  paid ;  if  he  vote  it 
shall  not  be  borrowed,  or  be  absent,  yet  because  in 
lending,  he  voteth  the  borrowing,  he  contradicteth 
his  former  vote,  and  is  obliged  by  the  latter,  and 
becomes  both  borrower  an4  lender,  and  conse- 
quently cannot  demand  payment  from  any  parti- 
cular man,  but  from  the  common  treasure  only ; 
which  failing  he  hath  no  remedy,  nor  complaint, 
but  against  himself,  that  being  privy  to  the  acts  of 
the  assembly,  and  to  their  means  to  pay,  and  not 
being  enforced,  did  nevertheless  through  his  own 
folly  lend  his  money. 

It  is  manifest  by  this,  that  in  bodies  politic  sub- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SYSTEMS  SUBJECT^  POLITICAL^  ETC.         215 

ordinate,  and  subject  to  a  sovereign  power,  it  is    part  ii. 
sometimes  not  only  lawfiil,  but  expedient,  for  a   .    ^J-    . 
particular  man  to  make  open  protestation  against  protestation 
the  decrees  of  the  representative  assembly,  and^^/^^^J 
cause  their  dissent  to  be  registered,  or  to  take  wit-  {5J^^'[^,^^f„^ 
ness  of  it ;  because  otherwise  they  may  be  obliged  but  against  io- 
to  pay  debts  contracted,  and  be  responsible  for  neve?"  ^"^^^ 
crimes  committed  by  other  men.    But  in  a  sove- 
reign assembly,  that  liberty  is  taken  away,  both 
because  he  that  protesteth  there,  denies  their  sove- 
reignty;  and  also  because   whatsoever  is  com- 
manded by  the  sovereign  power^  is  as  to  the  sub- 
ject, though  not  so  always  in  the  sight  of  God, 
justified  by  the  command :  for  of  such  command 
every  subject  is  the  author. 

The  variety  of  bodies  politic,  is  almost  infinite :  J^Jgo^e^ent 
for  they  are  not  only  distinguished  by  the  several  of  a  province, 
afifairs,  for  which  they  are  constituted,  wherein  *^°"^'*^^  ^ 
there  is  an  unspeakable  diversity ;  but  also  by  the 
times,  places,  and  numbers,  subject  to  many  limi- 
tations.   And  as  to  their  affairs,  some  are  ordained 
for  government ;  as  first,  the  government  of  a  pro- 
vince may  be  committed  to  an  assembly  of  i9^n, 
wherein  all  resolutions  shall  depend  on  th^  votes 
of  the  major  part;  and  then  this  assembly  is  a 
body  politic,  and  their  power  limited  by  commis-  * 

sion.  This  word  province  signifies  a  charge,  or 
care  of  business,  which  he  whose  business  it  is, 
committeth  to  another  man,  to  be  administered  for, 
and  under  him ;  and  therefore  when  in  one  com- 
monwealth there  be  divers  countries,  that  have 
their  laws  distinct  one  from  another,  or  are  far 
distant  in  place,  the  adpainistration  of  the  govern- 
ment being  committed  to  divers  persons,  those 


Digitized  by 


Google 


216  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.   countries  where  the  sovereign  is  not  resident,  but 

^    ^^'  _^   governs  by  commission,  are  called  provinces.    But 

Bodies  politic  of  the  ffovemment  of  a  province,  by  an  assembly 

forgoyernment         .••..,  .  .       ^/.     ,  i       i. 

of  a  province,  Tcsidiug  m  the  provmcc  Itself,  there  be  few  exam- 
coony,ortonjfrpj^  Thc  Romaus  who  had  the  sovereignty  of 
many  provinces ;  yet  governed  them  always  by 
presidents;  and  praetors  ;  and  not  by  assemblies,  as 
they  governed  the  city  of  Rome,  and  territories 
adjacent.  In  like  manner,  when  there  were  colo- 
nies sent  from  England,  to  plant  Virginia,  and 
Sommer-islands ;  though  the  governments  of  them 
here,  were  committed  to  assemblies  in  London,  yet 
did  those  assembUes  never  commit  the  government 
under  them  to  any  assembly  there,  but  did  to  each 
plantation  send  one  governor.  For  though  every 
man,  where  he  can  be  present  by  nature,  desires  to 
participate  of  government ;  yet  where  they  cannot 
be  present,  they  are  by  nature  also  inclined,  to 
commit  the  government  of  their  common  interest  • 
rather  to  a  monarchical,  than  a  popular  form  of 
government :  which  is  also  evident  in  those  men  . 
that  have  great  private  estates ;  who  when  they  are 
unwilling  to  take  the  pains  of  administering  the 
business  that  belongs  to  them,  chuse  rather  to  trust 
one  servant,  than  an  assembly  either  of  their  friends 
or  servants.  But  howsoever  it  be  in  fact,  yet  we 
may  suppose  the  government  of  a  province,  or 
colony  committed  to  an  assembly :  and  when  it  is, 
that  which  in  this  place  I  have  to  say,  is  this ;  that 
whatsoever  debt  is  by  that  assembly  contracted ; 
or  whatsoever  unlawful  act  is  decreed,  is  the  act 
only  of  those  that  assented,  and  not  of  any  that 
dissented,  or  were  absent,  for  the  reasons  before 
alleged.     Also  that  an  assembly  residing  out  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SYSTEMS  SUBJECT,  POLITICAL,  ETC.         217 

the  bounds  of  that  colony  whereof  they  have  the    part  ii. 
government/ cannot  execute  any  power  over  the     _  ^'    . 
persons,  or  goods  of  any  of  the  colony,  to  seize  on  b<x1»^  po^jJj|j 
them  for  debt,  or  other  duty,  in  any  place  without  of  a  province, 
the  colony  itself,  as  having  no  jurisdiction,  nor*^^^^^'**'^''" 
authority  elsewhere,  but  are  left  to  the  remedy, 
which  the  law  of  the  place  alloweth  them.    And 
though  the  assembly  have  right,  to  impose  a  mulct 
upon  any  of  their  members,  that  shall  break  the 
laws  they  make ;  yet  out  of  the  colony  itself,  they 
have  no  right  to  execute  the  same.    And  that 
which  is  said  here,  of  the  rights  of  an  assembly,  for 
the  government  of  a  province,  or  a  colony,  is 
appliable  also  to  an  assembly  for  the  government 
of  a  town,  an  university,  or  a  college,  or  a  church, 
or  for  any  other  government  over  the  persons  of 
men. 

And  generally,  in  all  bodies  politic,  if  any  parti- 
cular member  conceive  himself  injured  by  the  body 
itself,  the  cognizance  of  his  cause  belongeth  to  the 
sovereign,  and  those  the  sovereign  hath  ordained 
for  judges  in  such  causes,  or  shall  ordain  for  that 
particular  cause ;  and  not  to  the  body  itself.  For 
the  whole  body  is  in  this  case  his  fellow-subject, 
which  in  a  sovereign  assembly,  is  otherwise :  for 
there,  if  the  sovereign  be  not  judge,  though  in  his 
own  cause,  there  can  be  no  judge  at  all. 

In  a  body  politic,  for  the  well  ordering  of  foreign  Bodies  politic 
traffic,  the  most  commodious  representative  is  an  of  trade, 
assembly  of  all  the  members ;  that  is  to  say,  such 
a  one,  as  every  one  that  adventureth  his  money, 
may  be  present  at  all  the  deliberations,  and  resolu- 
tions of  the  body,  if  they  will  themselves.  For 
"proo  f  whereof,  we  are  to  consider  the  end,  for 


Digitized  by 


Google 


218  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  which  men  that  are  merchants^  and  may  buy  and 
.  ^f'  -  sell,  export,  and  import  their  merchandize,  accord- 
Bodies  poiitie  ing  to  their  own  discretions,  do  nevertheless  bind 
of'tnuie?^^  thcmselves  up  in  one  corporation.  It  is  true,  there 
be  few  merchants,  that  with  the  merchandize  they 
buy  at  home,  can  freight  a  ship,  to  export  it ;  or 
with  that  they  buy  abroad,  to  bring  it  home; 
and  have  therrfore  need  to  join  together  in  one 
society ;  where  every  man  may  either  participate 
of  the  gain,  according  to  the  proportion  of  his  ad- 
venture ;  or  take  his  own,  and  sell  what  he  trans- 
ports, or  imports,  at  such  prices  as  he  thinks  fit. 
But  this  is  nobody  politic,  there  being  no  common 
representative  to  oblige  them  to  any  other  law, 
than  that  which  is  common  to  all  other  subjects. 
The  end  of  their  incorporating,  is  to  make  their 
gain  the  greater ;  which  is  done  two  ways ;  by  sole 
buying,  and  sole  selling,  both  at  home,  and  abroad. 
So  that  to  grant  to  a  company  of  merchants  to  be 
a  corporation,  or  body  politic,  is  to  grant  them  a 
double  monopoly,  whereof  one  is  to  be  sole  buyers ; 
another  to  be  sole  sellers.  For  when  there  is  a 
company  incorporate  for  any  particular  foreign 
country,  they  only  export  the  commodities  ven- 
dible in  that  country;  which  is  sole  buying  at 
home,  and  sole  selling  abroad.  For  at  home  there 
is  but  one  buyer,  and  abroad  but  one  that  selleth : 
both  which  is  gainful  to  the  merchant,  because 
thereby  they  buy  at  home  at  lower,  and  sell  abroad 
at  higher  rates :  and  abroad  there  is  but  one  buyer 
of  foreign  merchandize,  and  but  one  that  sells  them 
at  home;  both  which  again  are  gainful  to  the 
adventurers. 

Of  this  double  monopoly  one  part  is  disadvan- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SYSTEMS  SUBJECT,  POLITICAL,  ETC.        2 1 9 

tageons  to  the  people  at  home,  the  other  to  fo-  vI\kt  it. 
reigners.    For  at  home  by  their  sole  exportation    ^^f  ,. 
they  set  what  price  they  please  on  the  husbandry.  Bodies  politic 
and  handy-works  of  the  people ;  and  by  the  sole  ©rtrode.'"* 
importation,  what  price  tiiey  please  on  all  foreign 
commodities  the  people  have  need  of;  botii  which 
are  ill  for  the  people.     On  the  contrary,  by  the 
sole  selling  of  the  native  commodities  abroad,  and 
sole  buying  the  foreign   commodities  upon  the 
place,  they  raise  the  price  of  those,  and  abate  the 
price  of  these,  to  the  disadvantage  of  the  foreigner: 
for  where  but  one  selleth,  the  merchandize  is  the 
dearer ;  and  where  but  one  buyeth,  the  cheaper. 
Such  corporations  therefore  are  no  other  than 
monopolies  ;  though  they  would  be  very  profitable 
for  a  commonwealth,  if  being  bound  up  into  one 
body  in  foreign  markets  they  were  at  hberty  at 
home,  every  man  to  buy,  and  sell  at  what  price  he 
could. 

The  end  then  of  these  bodies  of  merchants,  being 
not  a  common  benefit  to  the  whole  body,  which 
have  in  this  case  no  common  stock,  but  what  is 
deducted  out  of  the  particular  adventures,  for 
building,  bu3ring,  victualUng  and  manning  of  ships, 
but  the  particular  gain  of  every  adventurer,  it  is 
reason  that  every  one  be  acquainted  with  the  em- 
ployment of  his  own ;  that  is,  that  every  one  be  of 
the  assembly,  that  shall  have  the  power  to  order 
the  same ;  and  be  acquainted  with  their  accounts. 
And  therefore  the  representative  of  such  a  body 
must  be  an  assembly,  where  every  member  of  the 
body  miay  be  present  at  the  consultations,  if  he  will. 

If  a  body  poUtic  of  merchants,  contract  a  debt 
to  a  stranger  by  the  act  of  their  representative 


Digitized  by 


Google 


220  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  assembly,  every  member  is  liable  by  himself  for  the 

^^ ,   whole.    For  a  stranger  can  take  no  notice  of  thdr 

Bodiet  politic  private  laws,  but  considereth  them  as  so  many  par- 
^or^ordenng  ^j^j^jjj^  j^^^^  obliged  cvcry  one  to  the  whole  pay- 
ment^ till  payment  made  by  one  dischargeth  all 
the  rest :  but  if  the  debt  be  to  one  of  the  company, 
the  creditor  is  debtor  for  the  whole  to  himself,  and 
cannot  therefore  demand  his  debt,  but  only  from 
the  common  stock,  if  there  be  any. 

If  the  commonwealth  impose  a  tax  upon  the 
body,  it  is  understood  to  be  laid  upon  every  mem- 
ber proportionably  to  his  particular  adventure  in 
the  company.  For  there  is  in  this  case  no  oth^ 
common  stock,  but  what  is  made  of  their  particular 
adventures. 

If  a  mulct  be  laid  upon  the  body  for  some  un- 
lawful act,  they  only  are  liable  by  whose  votes  the 
act  was  decreed,  or  by  whose  assistance  it  was  exe- 
cuted ;  for  in  none  of  the  rest  is^  there  any  other 
crime  but  being  of  the  body  ;  which  if  a  crime,  be- 
cause the  body  was  ordained  by  the  authority  of 
the  commonwealth,  is  not  his. 

If  one  of  the  members  be  indebted  to  the  body, 
he  may  be  sued  by  the  body ;  but  his  goods  cannot 
be  taken,  nor  his  person  imprisoned  by  the  authority 
of  the  body  ;  but  only  by  authority  of  the  common- 
wealth :  for  if  they  can  do  it  by  their  own  authority, 
they  can  by  their  own  authority  give  judgment  that 
the  debt  is  due ;  which  is  as  much  as  to  be  judge 
in  their  own  cause. 
A  body  politic     Those  bodies  made  for  the  government  of  men, 
£^pTen°to  the  or  of  traffic,  be  either  perpetual,  or  for  a  time  pre- 
wvereign.       scribcd  by  writing.    But  there  be  bodies  also  whose 
times  are  limited,  and  that  only  by  the  nature  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


8T8TBM5  SUBJECT,  POLITICAL,  ETC.         221 

flieir  business.    For  example,  if  a  sovereign  mo-   part  ii. 
narch,  or  a  sovereign  assembly,  shall  think  fit  to    - — :^ — - 
give  command  to  the  towns,  and  other  several  parts  foj'^^nJ'^^' to 
of  their  territory,  to  send  to  him  their  deputies,  ^  p^?°  ^  *« 

•'  ,  ,  sovereign* 

to  inform  him  of  the  condition,  and  necessities  of 
the  subjects,  or  to  advise  with  him  for  the  making 
of  good  laws,  or  for  any  other  cause,  as  with  one 
person  representing  the  whole  country,  such  de- 
puties, having  a  place  and  time  of  meeting  assigned 
them,  are  there,  and  at  that  time,  a  body  politic, 
representing  every  subject  of  that  dominion ;  but 
it  is  only  for  such  matters  as  shall  be  propounded 
unto  them  by  that  man,  or  assembly,  that  by  the 
sovereign  authority  sent  for  them;  and  when  it  shall 
be  declared  that  nothing  more  shall  be  propounded, 
nor  debated  by  them,  the  body  is  dissolved.    For 
if  they  were  tiie  absolute  representatives  of  the 
people,  then  were  it  the  sovereign  assembly ;  and 
so  there  would  be  two  sovereign  assemblies,  or  two 
sovereigns,  over  the  same  people;  which  cannot 
consist  with  their  peace.     And  therefore  where 
there  is  once  a  sovereignty,  there  can  be  no  abso- 
lute representation  of  the  people,  but  by  it.     And 
forthe  limits  of  how  far  such  a  body  shall  repre- 
sent the  whole  people,  they  are  set  forth  in  the 
writing  by  which  they  were  sent  for.     For  the 
people  cannot  choose  their  deputies  to  other  in- 
tent, than  is  in  the  writing  directed  to  them  from 
their  sovereign  expressed. 

Private  bodies  regular,  and  lawful,  are  those  that  ^  'e««i"  P"- 

^  1         .  ,  ,  ,  .  Tate  body,  law- 

are  constituted  without  letters,  or  other  written  fait«  a  femiiy. 

authority,  saving  the  laws  common  to  all  other 
subjects.  And  because  they  be  united  in  one  per- 
son representative,  they  are  held  for  regular ;  such 
as  are  all  families,  in  which  the  father,  or  master 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


222  OF  COMMONWBALTH. 

PART  II.    ordereth  the  whole  &mUy.    For  he  obHgeth  his 
.    ^    .    children,  and  servants,  as  far  as  the  law  permitteth, 
though  not  further,  because  none  of  them  are  bound 
to  obedience  in  those  actions,  which  the  law  hath 
forbidden  to  be  done.     In  all  other  actions,  during 
the  time  they  are  under  domestic  government,  they 
are  subject  to  their  fathers,  and  masters,  as  to  their 
immediate  sovereigns.     For  the  father  and  master^ 
I  being  before  the  institution  of  commonwealth,  ab- 
I  solute  sovereigns  in  their  own  families,  they  lose 
/  afterward  no  more  of  their  authority,  than  the  law 
of  thie  commonwealth  taketh  from  them. 
wS«.b^"     Private  bodies  regular,  but  unlawful,  are  those 
unUwfui.       that  unite  themselves  into  one  person  representa- 
tive, without  any  public  authority  at  all ;  such  as 
are  the  corporations  of  beggars,  thieves  and  gipsies^ 
the  better  to  order  their  trade  of  begging  and  steal- 
ing ;  and  the  corporations  of  men,  that  by  autho-* 
rity  from  any  foreign  person,  unite  themselves  in 
another's  dominion,  for  the  easier  propagation  of 
doctrines,  and  for  making  a  party,  against  the  power 
of  the  commonwealth. 
r^SS'such       Irregular  systems,  in  their  nature  but  leagues^ 
at  are  prirate  or  somctimcs  mcrc  coucoursc  of  people,  without 
"'         union  to  any  particular  design,  not  by  obligation 
of  one  to  another,  but  proceeding  only  from  a  simi- 
litude of  wills  and  inclinations,  become  lawful,  or 
unlawful,  according  to  the  lawfulness,  or  unlawful- 
ness of  every  particular  man's  design  therein :  and 
his  design  is  to  be  understood  by  the  occasion. 

The  leagues  of  subjects,  because  leagues  are  com- 
monly made  for  mutual  defence,  are  in  a  common- 
wealth, which  is  no  more  than  a  league  of  all  the 
subjects  together,  for  the  most  part  unnecessary, 
and  savour  of  unlawful  design ;  and  are  for  that 


Digitized  by 


Google 


8YSTBM8  SUBJECT,  POLITICAL,  BTC.        223 

cause  imlawfdl,  and  go  commmily  by  the  name  of  part  ii. 
fections,  or  conspiracies.     For  a  league  being  a   .    ^^'    . 
connexion  of  men  by  covenants,  if  there  be  no  power  systems  ir- 
given  to  any  one  man  or  assembly,  as  in  the  con-  M^a^'plwate 
dition  of  mere  nature,  to  compel  them  to  perform-  ^••8""- 
ance,  is  so  long  only  valid,  as  there  ariseth  no  just 
cause  of  distrust :  and  therefore  leagues  between 
commonwealths^  over  whom  there  is  no  human 
X)ower  established,  to  keep  them  all  in  awe,  are  not 
only  lawful,  but  also  profitable  for  the  time  they 
last.     But  leagues  of  the  subjects  of  one  and  the 
same  commonwealth,  where  every  one  may  obtain  • 
his  right  by  means  of  the  sovereign  power,  are  un- 
necessary to  the  maintaining  of  peace  and  justice, 
and,  in  case  the  design  of  them  be  evil  or  unknown 
to  the  commonwealth,  unlawful.    For  all  uniting 
of  strength  by  private  men,  is,  if  for  evil  intent, 
unjust ;  if  foi'  intent  unknown,  dangerous  to  the 
public,  and  unjustly  concealed. 

If  the  sovereign  power  be  in  a  great  assembly,  secret  cabals. 
and  a  number  of  men,  part  of  the  assembly,  without 
authority,  consult  apart,  to  contrive  the  guidance 
of  the  rest ;  this  is  a  faction,  or  conspiracy  unlaw- 
ful, as  being  a  fraudulent  seducing  of  the  assembly 
for  their  particular  interest.  But  if  he,  whose  pri- 
vate interest  is  to  be  debated  and  judged  in  the 
assembly,  make  as  many  friends  as  he  can ;  in  him 
it  is  no  injustice ;  because  in  this  case  he  is  no  part 
of  the  assembly.  And  though  he  hire  such  friends 
with  money,  unless  there  be  an  express  law  against 
it,  yet  it  is  not  injustice.  For  sometimes,  as  men's 
manners  are,  justice  cannot  be  had  without  money ; 
and  every  man  may  think  his  own  cause  just,  till 
it  be  heard,  and  judged* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


2^ 


OP  COMMONWEALTH. 


PART  II. 
22. 


Factions  for  « 
government. 


In  all  commonwealths^  if  private  men  entertain 
more  servants^  liian  the  government  of  his  estate,- 
Feu<b  of  pru  and  lawfol  employment  he  has  for  them  requires, 
it  is  faction,  and  nnlawfcQ.  For  having  the  pro- 
tection of  the  commonwealth,  he  needeth  not  the 
defence  of  private  force.  And  whereas  in  nations 
not  thoroughly  civilized,  several  numerous  families 
have  lived  in  continual  hostility,  and  invaded  one 
another  with  private  force;  yet  it  is  evident  enough, 
that  they  have  done  unjustly ;  or  else  they  had  no 
commonwealth. 

And  as  factions  for  kindred,  so  also  factions  for  go- 
vernment of  religion,  as  of  Papists,  Protestants,  &c. 
or  of  state,  as  patricians,  and  plebeians  of  old  time 
in  Rome,  and  of  aristocraticals  and  democraticals 
of  old  time  in  Greece,  are  unjust,  as  being  contrary 
to  the  peace  and  safety  of  the  people,  and  a  taking 
of  the  sword  out  of  the  hand  of  the  sovereign. 

Concourse  of  people  is  an  irregular  system,  the 
lawfulness,  or  unlawfulness,  whereof  dependeth  on 
the  occasion,  and  on  the  number  of  them  that  are  as- 
sembled. If  the  occasion  be  lawful,  and  manifest,  the 
concourse  is  lawful ;  as  the  usual  meeting  of  men  at 
church,  or  at  a  public  show,  in  usual  numbers :  for  if 
the  numbers  be  extraordinarily  great,  the  occasion  is 
not  evident;  and  consequently  he  that  cannot  render 
a  particular  and  good  account  of  his  being  amongst 
them,  is  to  be  judged  conscious  of  an  unlawful,  and 
tumultuous  design.  It  may  be  lawful  for  a  thou- 
sand men,  to  join  to  a  petition  to  be  delivered  to  a 
judge,  or  magistrate  ;  yet  if  a  thousand  men  come 
to  present  it,  it  is  a  tumultuous  assembly ;  because 
there  needs  but  one  or  two  for  that  purpose.  But 
in  such  cases  as  these,  it  is  not  a  set  number  that 


Concourse  of 
people. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SYSTEMS  SUBJECT,  POLITICAL,  ETC.         225 

makes  the  assembly  milawfdl,  but  such  a  number,  part  ii. 
as  the  present  ofl&cers  are  not  able  to  suppress,  and  .  ^^'  ^ 
bring  to  justice. 

When  an  unusual  number  of  men,  assemble  ^onoourte  of 
against  a  man  whom  they  accuse ;  the  assembly  is 
an  unlawful  tumult ;  because  they  may  deliver  their 
accusation  to  the  magistrate  by  a  few,  or  by  one 
man.  Such  was  the  case  of  St.  Paul  at  Ephesus ; 
where  Demetrius  and  a  great  number  of  other  men, 
brought  two  of  Paul's  companions  before  the  ma- 
gistrate, saying  with  one  voice.  Great  is  Diana  of 
the  Ephesians;  which  was  their  way  of  demanding 
justice  against  themfor  teachingthe  people  such  doc- 
trine, as  was  against  their  religion,  and  trade.  The 
occasion  here,  considering  the  laws  of  that  people, 
was  just ;  yet  was  their  assembly  judged  urdawfiil, 
and  the  magistrate  reprehended  them  for  it  in  these 
words  f^e/^xix.  38-40.)  If  Demetrius  andtheother 
workmen  can  accuse  any  man^  of  any  things  there 
heplea^^  and  deputies^  let  them  accuse  one  another. 
And  if  you  have  any  other  thing  to  demand^  your 
case  may  he  judged  in  an  assembly  lawfully  called. 
For  we  are  in  danger  to  he  accused  for  this  day*s 
sedition;  because  there  is  no  cause  by  which  any 
man  can  render  any  reason  of  this  concourse  of 
people.  Where  he  calleth  an  assembly,  whereof 
men  can  give  no  just  account,  a  sedition,  and  such 
as  they  could  not  answer  for.  And  this  is  all  I  shall 
say  concerning  systems j  and  assemblies  of  people, 
which  may  be  compared,  as  I  said,  to  the  similar 
parts  of  man's  body;  such  as  be  lawful,  to  the 
muscles  ;  such  as  are  unlawful,  to  wens,  biles,  and 
apostems,  engendered  by  the  unnatural  conflux  of 
evil  humours. 

VOL.  III.  Q 


Digitized  by 


Google 


226  OP  COMMONWEALTH. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

OF  THE  PUBLIC  MINISTERS  OP  SOVEREIGN 
POWER. 

PART  11.  In  the  last  chapter  I  have  spoken  of  the  similar 
.  ^'  .  parts  of  a  commonwealth  :  in  this  I  shall  speak  of 
the  parts  organical,  which  are  public  ministers. 
PuMicminister  A  PUBLIC  MINISTER,  is  hc,  that  by  the  Sovereign, 
whether  a  monarch  or  an  assembly,  is  employed 
jn  any  affairs,  with  authority  to  represent  in  that 
employment,  the  person  of  tie  commpiQK^th.  And 
whereas  every  man,  or  assembly  that  hath  sove- 
reignty, representeth  two  persons,  or,  as  the  more 
common  phrase  is,  has  two  capacities,  one  natural, 
and  another  politic:  as  a  monarch,  hath  the  person 
not  only  of  the  commonwealth,  but  also  of  a  man ; 
and  a  sovereign  assembly  hath  the  person  not  only 
of  the  commonwealth,  but  also  of  the  assembly: 
they  that  be  servants  to  them  in  their  natural  capa- 
city, are  not  public  ministers ;  but  those  only  that 
serve  them  in  the  administration  of  the  public  busi- 
ness. And  therefore  neither  ushers,  nor  sergeants, 
nor  other  ofl&cers  that  wait  on  the  assembly,  for  no 
other  purpose,  but  for  the  commodity  of  the  men 
assembled,  in  an  aristocracy,  or  democracy;  nor 
stewards,  chamberlains,  cofferers,  or  any  other 
officers  of  the  household  of  a  monarch,  are  public 
ministers  in  a  monarchy. 
mmBten  for  Qf  public  ministers,  some  have  charge  committed 
miniitration.  to  them  of  a  general  administration,  either  of  the 
whole  dominion,  or  of  a  part  thereof.  Of  the  whole, 
as  to  a  protector,  or  regent,  may  be  committed  by 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  PUBLIC  MINISTERS. 


227 


the  predecessor  of  an  infant  king,  during  his  mi-  part  ii. 
nority,  the  whole  administration  of  his  kingdom.  .  _  ^'  . 
In  which  case,  every  subject  is  so  far  obliged  to 
obedience,  as  the  ordinances  he  shall  make,  and  the 
commands  he  shall  give  be  in  the  king's  name,  and 
not  inconsistent  writh  his  sovereign  power.  Of  a 
part,  or  province ;  as  when  either  a  monarch,  or  a 
sovereign  assembly,  shall  give  the  general  charge 
thereof  to  a  governor,  lieutenant,  prsefect,  or  vice- 
roy :  and  in  this  case  also,  every  one  of  that  pro- 
vince is  obliged  to  all  he  shall  do  in  the  name  of 
the  sovereign,  and  that  not  incompatible  with  the 
sovereign's  right.  For  such  protectors,  viceroys, 
and  governors,  have  no  other  right,  but  what  de- 
pends on  the  sovereign's  will ;  and  no  commission 
that  can  be  given  them,  can  be  interpreted  for  a 
declaration  of  the  vrill  to  transfer  the  sovereignty, 
vrithout  express  and  perspicuous  words  to  that  pur- 
pose. And  this  kind  of  public  ministers  resembleth 
the  nerves,  and  tendons  that  move  the  several  limbs 
of  a  body  natural. 

Others  have  special  administration  ;  that  is  to  f?' .^pedai  ad- 
say,  charges  of  some  special  business,  either  at  home,  as  for  economy. 
or  abroad  :  as  at  home,  first,  for  the  economy  of  a 
commonwealth,  they  that  have  authority  concerning 
the  treasure,  as  tributes,  impositions,  rents,  fines, 
or  whatsoever  public  revenue,  to  collect,  receive, 
issue,  or  take  the  accounts  thereof,  are  public  mi- 
nisters :  ministers,  because  they  serve  the  person 
representative,  and  can  do  nothing  against  his  com- 
mand, nor  without  his  authority :  public,  because 
they  serve  him  in  his  political  capacity. 

Secondly,  they  that  have  authority  concerning 
the  militia;  to  have  the  custody  of  arms,  forts, 

Q2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


228  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  ports ;  to  levy,  pay,  or  conduct  soldiers ;  or  to 
.  ^^'  .  provide  for  any  necessary  thing  for  the  use  of  war, 
either  by  land  or  sea,  are  public  ministers.  But  a 
soldier  without  command,  though  he  fight  for  the 
commonwealth,  does  not  therefore  represent  the 
person  of  it ;  because  there  is  none  to  represent  it 
to.  For  every  one  that  hath  command,  represents 
it  to  them  only  whom  he  commandeth. 

^^'the^o^^r  Th^y  ^^^  *^^*  ^^^^  authority  to  teach,  or  to 
enable  others  to  teach  the  people  their  duty  to  the 
sovereign  power,  and  instruct  them  in  the  know- 
ledge of  what  is  just,  and  unjust,  thereby  to  render 
them  more  apt  to  live  in  godliness,  and  in  peace 
amongst  themselves,  and  resist  the  public  enemy, 
are  public  ministers :  ministers,  in  that  they  do  it 
not  by  their  own  authority,  but  by  another's ;  and 
public,  because  they  do  it,  or  should  do  it,  by  no 
authority  but  that  of  the  sovereign.  The  monarch, 
or  the  sovereign  assembly  only  hath  immediate  au- 
thority from  God,  to  teach  and  instruct  the  people ; 
and  no  man  but  the  sovereign,  receiveth  his  power 
Dei  gratia  simply  ;  that  is  to  say,  from  the  favour 
of  none  but  God :  all  other,  receive  theirs  from  the 
favour  and  providence  of  God,  and  their  sovereigns; 
as  in  a  monarchy  Dei  gratia  et  regis;  or  Dei 
providentid  et  voluntate  regis. 

For  judicature.  They  also  to  whom  jurisdiction  is  given,  are  pub- 
lic ministers.  For  in  their  seats  of  justice  they 
represent  the  person  of  the  sovereign ;  and  their 
sentence,  is  his  sentence :  for,  as  hath  been  before 
declared,  all  judicature  is  essentially  annexed  to  the 
sovereignty  ;  and  therefore  all  other  judges  are  but 
ministers  of  him  or  them  that  have  the  sovereign 
power.     And  as  controversies  are  of  two  sorts. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  PUBLIC  MINISTERS.  229 

namely  oifact^  and  of  law  ;  so  are  judgments,  some    part  ii. 
of  fact,  some  of  law :  and  consequently  in  the  same    .    ^^-    . 
controversy,  there  may  be  two  judges,  one  of  fact,  For  judicature. 
another  of  law. 

And  in  both  these  controversies,  there  may  arise 
a  controversy  between  the  party  judged,  and  the 
judge  ;•  which  because  they  be  both  subjects  to  the 
sovereign,  ought  in  equity  to  be  judged  by  men 
agreed  on  by  consent  of  both  ;  for  no  man  can  be 
judge  in  his  own  cause.  But  the  sovereign  is  already 
agreed  on  for  judge  by  them  both,  and  is  therefore 
either  to  hear  the  cause,  and  determine  it  himself, 
or  appoint  for  judge  such  as  they  shall  both  agree 
on.  And  this  agreement  is  then  understood  to  be 
made  between  them  divers  ways ;  as  first,  if  the 
defendant  be  allowed  to  except  against  such  of  his 
judges,  whose  interest  maketh  him  suspect  them, 
(foras  to  the  complainant,  he  hath  already  chosen  his 
own  judge),  those  which  he  excepteth  not  against, 
are  judges  he  himself  agrees  on.  Secondly,  if  he 
appeal  to  any  other  judge,  he  can  appeal  no  further ; 
for  his  appeal  is  his  choice.  Thirdly,  if  he  appeal 
to  the  sovereign  himself,  and  he  by  himself,  or  by 
delegates  which  the  parties  shall  agree  on,  give 
sentence ;  that  sentence  is  final :  for  the  defendant  is 
judged  by  his  own  judges,  that  is  to  say,  by  himself. 

These  properties  of  just  and  rational  judicature 
considered,  I  cannot  forbear  to  observe  the  excel- 
lent constitution  of  the  courts  of  justice,  established 
both  for  Common,  and  also  for  Public  Pleas  in  Eng- 
land. By  Common  Pleas,  I  mean  those,  where  both 
the  complainant  and  defendant  are  subjects :  and 
by  public,  which  are  also  called  Pleas  of  the  Crown, 
those  where  the  complainant  is  the  sovereign.    For 


Digitized  by 


Google 


230  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  whereas  there  were  two  orders  of  men,  whereof  one 
^  ^^'  .  was  Lords,  the  other  Commons ;  the  Lords  had  this 
For  judicature,  privilege,  to  have  for  judges  in  all  capital  crimes, 
none  but  Lords ;  and  of  them,  as  many  as  would  be 
present ;  which  being  ever  acknowledged  as  a  pri- 
vilege of  favour,  their  judges  were  none  but  such 
as  they  had  themselves  desired.  And  in  all  con- 
troversies, every  subject,  (as  also  in  civil  controver- 
sies the  Lords),  had  for  judges,  men  of  the  country 
where  the  matter  in  controversy  lay ;  against  which 
he  might  make  his  exceptions,  till  at  last  twelve 
men  without  exception  being  agreed  on,  they  were 
judged  by  those  twelve.  So  that  having  his  own 
judges,  there  could  be  nothing  allied  by  the  party, 
why  the  sentence  should  not  be  final.  These  public 
persons,  with  authority  from  the  sovereign  power, 
either  to  instruct,  or  judge  the  people,  are  such 
members  of  the  commonwealth,  as  may  fitly  be 
compared  to  the  organs  of  voice  in  a  body  natural. 
For  execution.  PubUc  ministers  are  also  all  those,  that  have  au- 
thority from  the  sovereign,  to  procure  the  execution 
of  judgments  given  ;  to  publish  the  sovereign's 
commands ;  to  suppress  tumults ;  to  appr^end, 
and  imprison  malefactors  ;  and  other  acts  tending 
to  the  conservation  of  the  peace.  For  every  act 
they  do  by  such  authority,  is  the  act  of  the  com- 
monwealth ;  and  their  service,  answerable  to  that 
of  the  hands,  in  a  body  natural. 

Public  ministers  abroad,  are  those  that  represent 

\     the  person  of  their  own  sovereign,  to  foreign  states. 

Such  are   ambassadors,   messengers,  agents,  and 

heralds,  sent  by  public   authority,  and  on  public 

business. 

But  such  as  are  sent  by  authority  only  of  some 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  PUBLIC  MINISTERS.  231 

private  party  of  a  troubled  state,  though  they  be  part  ii. 
received,  are  neither  public,  nor  private  ministers  .  ^'  : 
of  the  commonwealth;  because  none  of  their  actions 
have  the  commonwealth  for  author.  Likewise,  an 
ambassador  sent  from  a  prince,  to  congratulate, 
condole,  or  to  assist  at  a  solemnity ;  though  the 
authority  be  public  ;  yet  because  the  business  is  pri- 
vate, and  belonging  to  him  in  his  natural  capacity ; 
is  a  private  person.  Also  if  a  man  be  sent  into 
another  country,  secretly  to  explore  their  counsels, 
and  strength ;  though  both  the  authority,  and  the 
business  be  public ;  yet  because  there  is  none  to 
take  notice  of  any  person  in  him,  but  his  own ;  he 
is  but  a  private  minister ;  but  yet  a  minister  of  the 
commonwealth ;  and  may  be  compared  to  an  eye 
in  the  body  natural.  And  those  that  are  appointed 
to  receive  the  petitions  or  other  informations  of  the 
people,  and  are  as  it  were  the  public  ear,  are  public 
ministers,  and  represent  their  sovereign  in  that 
office. 

Neither  a  councillor,  nor  a  council  of  state,  if  we  Conncfflon 
consider  it  with  no  authority  of  judicature  or  com-  employment 
mand,  but  only  of  giving  advice  to  the  sovereign  ^l\%  pubUc 
when  it  is  required,  or  of  oflfering  it  when  it  is  not  »">»•*•». 
required,  is  a  public  person.     For  the  advice  is  ad- 
dressed to  the  sovereign  only,  whose  person  cannot 
in  his  own  presence,  be  represented  to  him,  by 
another.     But  a  body  of  councillors,  are  never 
without  some  other  authority,  either  of  judicature, 
or  of  immediate  administration :  as  in  a  monarchy, 
they  represent  the  monarch,  in  delivering  his  com- 
mands to  the  public  ministers :  in  a  democracy, 
the  council,  or  senate  propounds  the  result  of  their 
deliberations  to  the  people,  as  a  council ;  but  when 


Digitized  by 


Google 


232  OF   COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  iL   they  appoint  judges,  or  hear  causes,  or  give  audi- 
.  ^f  •  _.    ence  to  ambassadors,  it  is  in  the  quality  of  a  minis- 
ter of  the  people :  and  in  an  aristocracy,  the  council 
of  state  is  the  sovereign  assembly  itself;  and  gives 
counsel  to  none  but  themselves. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

OP  THE  NUTRITION,  AND  PROCREATION  OF  A 
COMMONWEALTH. 

The  nourUh-  The  NUTRITION  of  a  commouwealth  consisteth,  in 
SoSwcaUh**™'  the  plenty y  and  distribution  of  materials  condu- 
thr^mnM^S-  ^^^S  *^  ^^^  •  ^  concoction,  or  preparation  ;  and, 
ti(w  of  MAand  ^iien  coucoctcd,  in  the  conveyance  of  it,  by  con- 
venient conduits,  to  the  public  use. 

As  for  the  plenty  of  matter,  it  is  a  thing  limited 
by  nature,  to  those  commodities,  which  from  the 
two  breasts  of  our  common  mother,  land  and  sea, 
God  usually  either  freely  giveth,  or  for  labour 
selleth  to  mankind. 

For  the  matter  of  this  nutriment,  consisting  in 
animals,  vegetals,  and  minerals,  God  hath  freely 
laid  them  before  us,  in  or  near  to  the  face  of  the 
earth ;  so  as  there  needeth  no  more  but  the  labour, 
and  industry  of  receiving  them.  Insomuch  as 
plenty  dependeth,  next  to  God's  favour,  merely  on 
the  labour  and  industry  of  men. 

This  matter,  commonly  called  commodities,  is 
partly  native ,  and  partly  foreign :  native,  that 
which  is  to  be  had  within  the  territory  of  the  com- 
monwealth :  foreign,  that  which  is  imported  from 
without.  And  because  there  is  no  territory  under 
the  dominion  of  one  commonwealth,  except  it  be 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  NUTRITION  OP  A  COMMONWEALTH.     233 

of  very  vast  extent,  that  produceth  all  things  need-  part  ii. 
ful  for  the  maintenance,  and  motion  of  the  whole  .  ^^-  . 
body ;  and  few  that  produce  not  some  thing  more 
than  necessary  ;  the  superfluous  commodities  to  be 
had  within,  become  no  more  superfluous,  but  sup- 
ply these  wants  at  home,  by  importation  of  that 
which  may  be  had  abroad,  either  by  exchange,  or 
by  just  war,  or  by  labour.  For  a  man's  labour  also, 
is  a  commodity  exchangeable  for  benefit,  as  well  as 
any  other  thing :  and  there  have  been  common- 
wealths that  having  no  more  territory,  than  hath 
served  them  for  habitation,  have  nevertheless,  not 
only  maintained,  but  also  encreased  their  power, 
partly  by  the  labour  of  trading  from  one  place  to  an- 
other, and  partly  by  selling  the  manufactures  where- 
of the  materials  were  brought  in  from  other  places. 

The  distribution  of  the  materials  of  this  nourish-  4"^.^^«  "k^^ 
ment,  is  the  constitution  of  mine^  and  thine^  and  them. 
his ;  that  is  to  say,  in  one  word  propriety ;  and 
belongeth  in  all  kinds  of  commonwealth  to  the 
sovereign  power.  For  where  there  is  no  common- 
wealth, there  is,  as  hath  been  already  shown,  a 
perpetual  war  of  every  man  against  his  neighbour ; 
atid  therefore  every  thing  is  his  that  getteth  it,  and 
Keepeth  it  by.  force ;  which  is  neither  propriety ^ 
nor  community;  but  uncertainty.  Which  is  so'^ 
evident,  that  even  Cicero,  a  passionate  defender  of 
liberty,  in  a  public  pleading,  attributeth  all  pro- 
priety to  the  law  civil.  Let  the  civil  law^  saith  he, 
he  once  abandoned^  or  hut  negligently  guarded^ 
not  to  say  oppressed^  and  there  is  nothing,  that 
any  man  can  he  sure  to  receive  from  his  ancestor  ^ 
or  leave  to  his  children.  And  again ;  Take  away 
the  civil  law,  and  no  man  knows  what  is  his  ovm, 


V 


Digitized  by 


Google 


234  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  and  what  another  man's.  Seeing^  therefore  the 
.  ^^-  _.  introduction  of  propriety  is  an  effect  of  common- 
wealth, which  can  do  nothing  but  by  the  person 
that  represents  it,  it  is  the  act  only  of  the  sove- 
reign ;  and  consisteth  in  the  laws,  which  none  can 
make  that  have  not  the  sovereign  power.  And 
this  they  well  knew  of  old,  who  called  that  No^oc, 
that  is  to  say,  distributiony  which  we  call  law  ;  and 
defined  justice,  by  distributing  to  every  man  his 
own. 
All  private  ea-      jj^  ^jj^g  distribution,  the  first  law,  is  for  division 

lates    of    land  '  /   j    .        -  ,      y? 

ipnicced  Dri^i-  of  the  land  itself:  wherein  the  sovereign  assigneth 

i  urIIv  from  tlie  ^  ^.  ,.  ,  ,  ^ 

'arbitrary  db-  to  cvcry  mau  a  portion,  accordmg  gaiJi&^.and  not 
'^^o^rreign!^ '^""^  n^ccordiug  as  any  subject,  or  any  number  of  theift, 
shall  judge  agreeable  to  equity,  and  the  common 
good.  The  children  of  Israel,  were  a  common- 
wealth in  the  wilderness;  but  wanted  the  commo- 
dities of  the  earth,  till  they  were  masters  of  the 
Land  of  Promise;  which  afterward  was  divided 
amongst  them,  not  by  their  own  discretion,  but  by 
the  discretion  of  Eleazar  the  Prjest,  and  Joshua 
their  General,  who,  when  there  were  twelve  tribes, 
making  them  thirteen  by  subdivision  of  the  tribe 
of  Joseph,  made  nevertheless  but  twelve  portions 
of  the  land ;  and  ordained  for  the  tribe  of  Levi  no 
land;  but  assigned  them  the  tenth  part  of  the 
whole  fruits;  which  division  was  therefore  arbi- 
trary. And  though  a  people  coming  into  possession 
of  a  land  by  war,  do  not  always  exterminate  the 
ancient  inhabitants,  as  did  the  Jews,  but  leave  to 
many,  or  most,  or  all  of  them  their  estates ;  yet  it 
is  manifest  they  hold  them  afterwards,  as  of  the 
victors'  distribution  ;  as  the  people  of  England  held 
ail  theirs  of  William  the  Conqueror. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


f     THE  NUTRITION  OF  A  COMMONWEALTH.     235 

Prom  whence  we  may  collect,  that  the  propriety    part  n. 

which  a  subject  hath  in  his  lands,  consisteth  in  a    , ^ — . 

-right  to  exclude  all  other  subjects  from  the  use  of^^PJ^^^yj*^    I 
them ;  and  not  to  exclude  their  sovereign,  be  it  eludes  not  the  l 

,  ,  "1  T-i  •         ^1  dominion  of 

an  assembly,  or  a  monarch.  For  seemg  the  sove-  the  sorereign, 
reign,  that  is  to  say,  the  commonwealth,  whose  ^J^^^^J^ygct 
person  he  representeth,  is  understood  to  do  nothing 
but  in  order  to  the  common  peace  and  security, 
this  distribution  of  lands,  is  to  be  understood  as 
done  in  order  to  the  same :  and  consequently, 
whatsoever  distribution  he  shall  make  in  prejudice 
thereof,  is  contrary  tp  the  will  of  every  subject, 
that  committed  his  peace,  and  safety  to  his  discre- 
tion, and  conscience  ;  and  therefore  by  the  vrill  of 
every  one  of  them,  is  to  be  reputed  void.  It  is 
true,  that  a  sovereign  monarch,  or  the  greater  part 
of  a  sovereign  assembly,  may  ordain  the  doing  of 
many  things  in  pursuit  of  their  passions,  contrary 
to  their  own  consciences,  which  is  a  breach  of 
trust,  and  of  the  law  of  nature ;  but  this  is  not 
enough  to  authorize  any  subject,  either  to  make 
war  upon,  or  so  much  as  to  accuse  of  injustice,  or 
any  way  to  speak  evil  of  their  sovereign ;  because 
they  have  authorized  all  his  actions,  and  in  bestow- 
V  ing  the  sovereign  power,  made  them  their  own. 
But  in  what  cases  the  commands  of  sovereigns  are 
contrary  to  equity,  and  the  law  of  nature,  is  to  be 
considered  hereafter  in  another  place. 

In  the  distribution  of  land,  the  commonwealth  The  public  is 
itself,  may  be  conceived  to  have  a  portion,  and  pos-  "^  ° 
sess,  and  improve  the  same  by  their  representative ; 
and  that  such  portion  may  be  made  sufl&cient,  to 
sustain  the  whole  expense  to  the  common  peace. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


236  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  11.    and  defence  necessarily  required.  Which  were  very 

^ ?f',.    true,  if  there  could  be  any  representative  conceived 

The  public  u  free  from  human  passions,  and  infirmities.     But 
the  nature  of  men  bemg  as  it  is,  the  settmg  forth 
of  public  land,  or  of  any  certain  revenue  for  the  com- 
monwealth, is  in  vain ;  and  tendeth  to  the  dissolu- 
tion of  government,  and  to  the  condition  of  mere 
nature,  and  war,   as  soon  as  ever  the  sovereign 
power  falleth  into  the  hands  of  a  monarch,  or  of  an 
assembly,  that  are  either  too  negligent  of  money, 
or  too  has^rdous  in  engaging  the  public  stock  into 
a  long  or  costly  war.     Commonwealths  can  endure 
no  diet :  for  seeing  their  expense  is  not  Umited  by 
their  own  appetite,  but  by  external  accidents,  and 
the  appetites  of  their  neighbours,  the  public  riches 
cannot  be  limited  by  other  limits,  than  those  which 
the  emergent  occasions  shall  require.    And  whereas 
in  England,  there  were  by  the  Conqueror,  divers 
lands  reserved  to  his  own  use,  besides  forests  and 
chases,  either  for  his  recreation,  or  preservation  of 
woods,  and  divers  services  reserved  on  the  land  he 
gave  his  subjects ;  yet  it  seems  they  were  not  re- 
served for  his  maintenance  in  his  public,  but  in  his 
natural  capacity.  For  he,  and  his  successors  did  for 
all  that,  lay  arbitrary  taxes  on  all  subjects'  land, 
when  they  judged  it  necessary.     Or  if  those  public 
lands,  and  services,  were  ordained  as  a  sufficient 
maintenance  of  the  commonwealth,  it  was  contrary 
to  the  scope  of  the  institution;  being,  as  it  ap- 
peared by  those  ensuing  taxes,  insufficient,  and,  as 
it  appears  by  the  late  small  revenue  of  the  crown, 
subject  to  alienation  and  diminution.     It  is  there- 
fore in  vain,  to  assign  a  portion  to  the  common- 
wealth ;  which  may  sell,  or  give  it  away ;  and  does 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  NUTRITION  OF  A  COMMONWEALTH.    237 

sell  and  give  it  away,  when  it  is  done  by  their    partii. 
representative.  _  ^*'    . 

/      As  the  distribution  of  lands  at  home ;  so  also  to  The  places  and 

1     -.      1  J    1?  i_    ^  j*-».«         matter  of  traf- 

assign  m  what  places,  and  for  what  commodities,  fie  depend,  as 
the  subject  shall  traffic  abroad,  belongeth  to  the  ^^^  /^'l^^'*' 
sovereign.     For  if  it  did  belong  to  private  persons  «oTereign. 
to  use  their  own  discretion  therein,  some  of  them 
would  be  dravm  for  gain,  both  to  fiimish  the  enemy    ^ 
with  means  to  hurt  the  commonwealth,  and  hurt  it 
themselves,  by  importing  such  things,  as  pleasing 
men's  appetites,  be  nevertheless  noxious,  or  at  least 
improfitable  to  them.    And  therefore  it  belongeth 
to  the  commonwealth,  that  is,  to  the  sovereign  only, 
to  approve,  or  disapprove  both  of  the  places,  and 
matter  of  foreign  traffic. 

Further,  seeing  it  is  not  enough  to  the  susten-  ^gf*]I2n°^ 
tation  of  a  commonwealth,  that  every  man  have  a  propriety  be- 

.   ^      .  _^.  i»i       J  •  £  longalsotothe 

propriety  m  a  portion  of  land,  or  m  some  few  com-  tovereign. 
modities,  or  a  natural  property  in  some  useful  art, 
and  there  is  no  art  in  the  world,  but  is  necessary 
either  for  the  being,  or  well  being  almost  of  every  a 
particular  man ;  it  is  necessary,  that  men  distribute 
that  which  they  can  spare,  and  transfer  their  pro- 
priety therein,  mutually  one  to  another,  by  exchange, 
and  mutual  contract.  And  therefore  it  belongeth 
to  the  commonwealth,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  sovereign, 
to  appoint  in  what  manner  all  kinds  of  contract 
between  subjects,  as  buying,  selling,  exchanging, 
borrowing,  lending,  letting,  and  taking  to  hire,  are 
to  be  made ;  and  by  what  words  and  signs  they 
shall  be  understood  for  valid.  And  for  the  matter, 
and  distribution  of  the  nourishment,  to  the  several 
members  of  the  commonwealth,  thus  much,  con- 
sidering the  model  of  the  whole  work,  is  sufficient. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


238  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.       By  concoction,  I  understand  the  reducing  of  all 

^    ^*'  _     commodities,  which  are  not  presently  consumed. 

Money  the      ^ut  rescTved  for  nourishment  in  time  to  come,  to 

blood  Ola  con- 

monweaith.  Something  of  equal  value,  and  withal  so  portable^ 
as  not  to  hinder  the  motion  of  men  from  place  to 
place  ;  to  the  end  a  man  may  have  in  what  place 
O^  soever,  such  nourishment  as  the  place  a£fordeth. 
And  this  is  nothing  else  but  gold,  and  silver,  and 
money.  For  gold  and  silver,  being,  as  it  happens, 
.  almost  in  all  countries  of  the  world  highly  valued, 
is  a  commodious  measure  of  the  value  of  all  things 
else  between  nations ;  and  money,  of  what  matter 
soever  coined  by  the  sovereign  of  a  commonwealth, 
is  a  sufficient  measure  of  the  value  of  all  things  else, 
between  the  subjects  of  that  commonwealth.  By 
the  means  of  which  measures,  all  commodities, 
moveable  and  immoveable,  are  made  to  accom* 
pany  a  man  to  all  places  of  his  resort,  within  and 
without  the  place  of  his  ordinary  residence ;  and 
the  same  passeth  from  man  to  man,  within  the 
commonwealth  ;  and  goes  roundabout,  nourishing, 
as  it  passeth,  every  part  thereof ;  in  so  much  as 
this  concoction,  is  as  it  were  the  sanguification  of 
the  commonwealth:  for  natural  blood  is  in  like 
manner  made  of  the  fruits  of  the^artK  ;  and  cir- 
culating, nourisheth  by  the  way  every  member  of 
the  body  of  man. 

And  because  silver  and  gold  have  their  value 
from  the  matter  itself ;  they  have  first  this  privi- 
lege, that  the  value  of  them  cannot  be  altered  by 
O  the  power  of  one,  nor  of  a  few  commonwealths ;  as 
being  a  common  measure  of  the  commodities  of  all 
places.  But  base  money,  may  easily  be  enhanced, 
or  abased.     Secondly,  they  have  the  privilege  to 


0 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  NUTRITION  OF  A  COMMONWEALTH.     239 

make  commonwealths  move,  and  stretch  out  their  part  ii. 
arms,  when  need  is,  into  foreign  countries :  and  ^^'  . 
supply,  not  only  private  subjects  that  travel,  but 
also  whole  armies  with  provision.  But  that  coin, 
which  is  not  considerable  for  the  matter,  but  for 
the  stamp  of  the  place,  being  unable  to  endure 
change  of  air,  hath  its  effect  at  home  only ;  where 
also  it  is  subject  to  the  change  of  laws,  and  thereby 
to  have  the  value  diminished,  to  the  prejudice  many 
times  of  those  that  have  it. 

The  conduits,  and  ways  by  which  it  is  conveyed  '^^^  conduits 
to  the  public  use,  are  of  two  sorts  :  one,  that  con-  money  to  the 
veyeth  it  to  the  public  coffers;   the  other,  that^°  *^'"^* 
issueth  the  same  out  again  for  public  payments.  Of 
the  first  sort,  are  collectors,  receivers,  and  trea- 
surers ;  of  the  second,  are  the  treasurers  again,  and 
the  officers  appointed  for  payment  of  several  public 
or  private  ministers.   And  in  this  also,  the  artificial 
man  maintains  his  resemblance  with  the  natural ; 
whose  veins  receiving  the  blood  from  the  several 
parts  of  the  body,  carry  it  to  the  heart ;  where  being 
made  vital,  the  heart  by  the  arteries  sends  it  out 
^ain,  to  enliven,  and  enable  for  motion  all  the 
members  of  the  same. 

The  procreation  or  children  of  a  commonwealth,  The  children 
are  those  we  call  plantations,  or  colonies  ;  which  weaith^dMdM 
are  numbers  of  men  sent  out  from  the  common- 
wealth, under  a  conductor,  or  governor,  to  inhabit 
a  foreign  country,  either  formerly  void  of  inhabi- 
tants, or  made  void  then  by  war.  And  when  a 
colony  is  settled,  they  are  either  a  commonwealth 
of  themselves,  discharged  of  their  subjection  to  their 
sovereign  that  sent  them,  as  hath  been  done  by 
many  commonwealths,  of  ancient  time,  in  which 


Digitized  by 


Google 


240 


OF  COMMONWEALTH. 


PART  II. 
24. 


case  the  commonwealth  from  which  they  went,  was 
called  their  metropolis  or  mother,  and  requires  no 
more  of  them,  than  fathers  require  of  the  children, 
whom  they  emancipate  and  make  free  from  their 
domestic  government,  which  is  honour,  and  friend- 
ship ;  or  else  they  remain  united  to  their  metropolis, 
as  were  the  colonies  of  the  people  of  Rome ;  and 
then  they  are  no  commonwealths  themselves,  but 
provinces,  and  parts  of  the  commonwealth  that  sent 
them.  So  that  the  right  of  colonies,  saving  honour 
and  league  witht  heir  metropolis,  dependeth  wholly 
on  their  licence  or  letters,  by  which  their  sovereign 
authorized  them  to  plant. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


OF   COUNSEL. 


Caonsei  what.  How  fallacious  it  is  to  judgc  of  the  nature  of  things 
by  the  ordinary  and  inconstant  use  of  words,  ap- 
peareth  in  nothing  more,  than  in  the  conftision  of 
counsels,  and  commands,  arising  from  the  impera- 
tive manner  of  speaking  in  them  both,  and  in  many 
other  occasions  besides.  For  the  words  do  this, 
are  the  words  not  only  of  him  that  commandeth ; 
but  also  of  him  that  giveth  counsel ;  and  of  him 
that  exhorteth ;  and  yet  there  are  but  few,  that 
see  not  that  these  are  very  different  things,  or 
that  cannot  distinguish  between  them,  when  they 
perceive  who  it  is  that  speaketh,  and  to  whom  the 
speech  is  directed,  and  upon  what  occasion.  But 
finding  those  phrases  in  men's  writings,  and  being 
not  able,  or  not  willing  to  enter  into  a  conside- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP   COUNSEL.  241 

ration  of  the  circumstances,  they  mistake  some-   part  ir. 

times  the  precepts  of  counsellors,  for  the  precepts  ^ ^L^ 

of  them  that  command ;  and  sometimes  the  con- 
trary ;  according  as  it  best  agreeth  with  the  con- 
clusions they  would  infer,  or  the  action^  they  ap- 
prove. To  avoid  which  mistakes,  and  render  to 
those  terms  of  commanding,  counselling  and  ex- 
horting, their  proper  and  distinct  significations,  I 
define  them  thus. 

Command  is,  where  a  man  saith,  do  this,  or  do  piffcrencei 

_.  ._  .  -  __      between  com- 

not  thtSy  without  expectmg  other  reason  than  thcmandand 
will  of  him  that  says  it.     From  this  it  foUoweth  ~^'^'- 
manifestly,  that  he  that  commandeth,  pretendeth 
thereby  his  own  benefit :    for  the  reason  of  his 
command  is  his  own  will  only,  and  the  proper  ob- 
ject of  every  man's  will,  is  some  good  to  himself. 

Counsel,  is  where  a  man  saith,  rfb,  or  do  not 
this,  and  deduceth  his  reasons  from  the  benefit  that 
arriveth  by  it  to  him  to  whom  he  saith  it.  And 
from  this  it  is  evident,  that  he  that  giveth  counsel, 
pretendeth  only,  whatsoever  he  intendeth,  the  good 
of  him,  to  whom  he  giveth  it. 

Therefore  between  counsel  and  command,  one 
^eat  difference  is,  that  command  is  directed  to  a 
man's  own  benefit ;  and  counsel  to  the  benefit  of 
another  man.  And  from  this  ariseth  another  dif- 
ference, that  a  man  may  be  obliged  to  do  what  he 
is  commanded;  as  when  he  hath  covenanted  to 
obey :  but  he  cannot  be  obliged  to  do  as  he  is 
counselled,  because  the  hurt  of  not  following  it,  is 
his  own;  or  if  he  should  covenant  to  follow  it,  then 
is  the  counsel  turned  into  the  nature  of  a  com- 
mand. A  third  difl^erence  between  them  is,  that 
BO  man  can  pretend  a  right  to  be  of  another  man's 

VOL.  III.  R 


Digitized  by 


Google 


242 


OF  COMMONWEALTH. 


PART  11. 

26. 
^     _  - 

Differences 
between  com- 
mand and 
counsel. 


Exhortation 
and  dehorta- 
tion  what 


counsel ;  because  he  is  not  to  pretend  benefit  by  it 
to  himself:  but  to  demand  right  to  counsel  ano- 
ther, argues  a  will  to  know  his  designs^  or  to  gain 
some  other  good  to  himself:  which,  as  I  said  be- 
fore, is  of  every  man^s  will  the  proper  object. 

This  also  is  incident  to  the  nature  of  counsel ; 
that  whatsoever  it  be,  he  that  asketh  it,  cannot  in 
equity  accuse,  or  punish  it :  for  to  ask  counsel  of 
another,  is  to  permit  him  to  give  such  counsel  as 
he  shall  think  best;  and  consequently,  he  that 
giveth  counsel  to  his  sovereign,  whether  a  monarchy 
or  an  assembly,  when  he  asketh  it,  cannot  in  equity 
be  punished  for  it,  whether  the  same  be  conform- 
able to  the  opinion  of  the  most,  or  not,  so  it  be 
to  the  proposition  in  debate.  For  if  the  sense  of 
the  assembly  can  be  taken  notice  of,  before  the 
debate  be  ended,  they  should  neither  ask,  nor  take 
any  further  counsel ;  for  the  sense  of  the  assembly, 
is  the  resolution  of  the  debate,  and  end  of  all  deli- 
beration. And  generally  he  that  demandeth  coun- 
sel, is  author  of  it ;  and  therefore  cannot  punish 
it ;  and  what  the  sovereign  cannot,  no  man  else 
can.  But  if  one  subject  giveth  counsel  to  another, 
to  do  anything  contrary  to  the  laws,  whether  that 
counsel  proceed  from  evil  intention,  or  from  igno- 
rance only,  it  is  punishable  by  the  commonwealth ; 
because  ignorance  of  the  law  is  no  good  excuse, 
where  every  man  is  bound  to  take  notice  of  the 
laws  to  which  he  is  subject. 

Exhortation  and  dehortation  is  counsel,ae^ 
companied  with  signs  in  him  that  giveth  it,  of  vehe- 
ment desire  to  have  it  followed  :  or  to  say  it  more 
briefly,  counsel  vehemently  pressed.  For  he  thatex- 
horteth,  doth  not  deduce  the  consequences  of  what 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  COUNSEL.  243 

he  adyiseth  to  be  done^  and  tie  himself  therein  to  the   part  ji. 
rigour  of  true  reasoning ;  but  encourages  him  he    ^^  ^*  ^ 
counselleth  to  action :  as  he  that  dehorteth,  deter-  Exhorution 
reth  him  from  it.     And,  therefore,  they  have  in  Hon,  what 
their  speeches,  a  r^tu'd  to  the  common  passions 
and  opinions  of  men,  in  deducing  their  reasons ; 
and  make  use  of  similitudes,  metaphors,  examples, 
and  other  tools  of  oratory,  to  persuade  their  hearers 
of  the  utility,  honour,  or  justice  of  following  their 
advice. 

From  whence  may  be  inferred,  first,  that  exhorta- 
tion and  dehortation  is  directed  to  the  good  of  him 
that  giveth  the  counsel,  not  of  him  that  asketh  it, 
which  is  contrary  to  the  duty  of  a  counsellor ;  who, 
by  the  definition  of  counsel,  ought  to  regard  not 
his  own  benefit,  but  his  whom  he  adviseth.  And 
that  he  directeth  his  counsel  to  his  own  benefit,  is 
manifest  enough,  by  the  long  and  vehement  urging, 
or  by  the  artificial  giving  thereof  ;  which  being  not 
required  of  him,  and  consequently  proceeding  from 
his  own  occasions,  is  directed  principally  to  his 
own  benefit,  and  but  accidentally  to  the  good  of 
him  that  is  counselled,  or  not  at  all. 
,  Secondly,  that  the  use  of  exhortation  and  de- 
hortation lieth  only  where  a  man  is  to  speak  to  a 
multitude ;  because  when  the  speech  is  addressed 
to  one,  he  may  interrupt  him,  and  examine  his 
reasons  more  rigorously  than  can  be  done  in  a 
multitude ;  which  are  too  many  to  enter  into  dis- 
pute, and  dialogue  with  him  that  speaketh  indif- 
ferently to  them  all  at  once. 

Thirdly,  that  they  that  exhort  and  dehort,  where 
they  are  required  to  give  counsel,  are  corrupt  coun- 
sellors, and  as  it  were  bribed  by  their  own  interest. 

r2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


344 


or  COMMONWEALTH. 


PART  II. 

25. 

Exhortation 
and  dehorta- 
tion  what 


For  though  the  counsel  they  give  be  never  so  good ; 
yet  he  that  gives  it,  is  no  more  a  good  counsellor, 
than  he  that  giveth  a  just  sentence  for  a  reward,  is 
a  just  judge.  But  where  a  man  may  lawfully  com- 
mand, as  a  father  in  his  family,  or  a  leader  in  an 
army,  his  exhortations  and  dehortations,  are  not 
only  lawful,  but  also  necessary,  and  laudable.  But 
then  they  are  no  more  counsels,  but  commands ; 
which  when  they  are  for  execution  of  sour  labour, 
sometimes  necessity,  and  always  humanity  requireth 
to  be  sweetened  in  the  delivery,  by  encouragement, 
and  in  the  tune  and  phrase  of  counsel,  rather  than 
in  harsher  language  of  command. 

Examples  of  the  diflference  between  command 
and  counsel,  we  may  take  from  the  forms  of  speech 
that  express  them  in  Holy  Scripture.  Have  no 
other  Gods  but  me  ;  make  to  thyself  no  graven 
image ;  take  not  Gods  name  in  vain  ;  sanctify 
the  sabbath  ;  honour  thy  parents  ;  kill  not  ;  steal 
not^  8fc.  are  commands ;  because  the  reason  for 
which  we  are  to  obey  them,  is  drawn  from  the  will 
of  God  our  king,  whom  we  are  obliged  to  obey. 
But  these  words,  Sell  all  thou  hast ;  give  it  to  the 
poor;  and  follow  me,  are  counsel:  because  the 
reason  for  which  we  are  to  do  so,  is  drawn  from  our 
own  benefit;  which  is  this,  that  we  shall  have  trea- 
sure in  Heaven.  These  words,.  Go  into  the  village 
over  against  you,  and  you  shall  Jind  an  ass  tied, 
and  her  colt ;  loose  her^  and  bring  her  to  me,  are 
a  command :  for  the  reason  of  their  fact  is  drawn 
from  the  will  of  their  Master :  but  these  words, 
Repent  and  be  baptized  in  the  name  qfJestis,  are 
counsel ;  because  the  reason  why  we  should  so  do, 
tcndeth  not  to  any  benefit  of  God  Almighty,  who 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  COUNSEL.  246 

fehall  still  be  king  in  what  manner  soever  we  rebel;  part  ii. 
but  of  ourselves,  who  have  no  other  means  of  avoid-  ^J!^ — . 
ing  the  punishment  hanging  over  us  for  our  sins. 

As  the  diflFerence  of  counsel  from  command,  hath  ^^^^1^^^^''^ 
been  now  deduced  from  the  nature  of  counsel,  con-  counsellors. 
sisting  in  a  deducing  of  the  benefit,  or  hurt  that 
may  arise  to  him  that  is  to  be  counselled,  by  the 
necessary  or  probable  consequences  of  the  action 
he  propoundeth ;  so  may  also  the  differences  be- 
tween apt  and  inept  counsellors  be  derived  from 
the  same.  For  experience,  being  but  memory  of  the 
consequences  of  like  actions  formerly  observed,  and 
counsel  but  the  speech  whereby  that  experience  is 
made  known  to  another ;  the  virtues,  and  defects  of 
counsel,  are  the  same  with  the  virtues,  and  defects 
intellexjtual :  and  to  the  person  of  a  commonwealth, 
his  counsellors  serve  him  in  the  place  of  memory, 
and  mental  discourse.  But  with  this  resemblance 
of  the  commonwealth,  to  a  natural  man,  there  is 
one  dissimilitude  joined,  of  great  importance;  which 
is,  that  a  natural  man  receiveth  his  experience,  from 
the  natural  objects  of  sense,  which  work  upon  him 
without  passion,  or  interest  of  their  own  ;  whereas 
they  that  give  counsel  to  the  representative  person 
of  a  commonwealth,  may  have,  and  have  often  their 
particular  ends  and  passions,  that  render  their  coun- 
sels always  suspected,  and  many  times  unfaithful. 
And  therefore  we  may  set  down  for  the  first  con- 
dition of  a  good  counsellor,  that  his  ends,  and  in- 
terests, be  not  inconsistent  with  the  ends  and  in- 
terests of  him  he  counselleth. 

Secondly,  because  the  oflSce  of  a  counsellor,  when 
an  action  comes  into  deliberation,  is  to  make  mani- 
fest the  consequences  of  it,  in  such  manner,  as  he 


Digitized  by 


Google 


246  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PAftt  11.  t^^t  is  counselled  may  be  truly  and  evidently  in- 
.  ^^f'^.  formed ;  he  ought  to  propound  his  advice,  in  such 
Differeocesof  foHu  of  spccch,  as  may  make  the  truth  most  evi- 
couMluon!  dently  appear ;  that  is  to  say,  with  as  firm  ratioci- 
nation, as  significant  and  proper  language,  and  as 
briefly,  as  the  evidence  will  permit.  And  therefcMre 
rash  and  unevident  %7\ferenceSy  such  as  are  fetched 
only  from  examples,  or  authority  of  books,  and  are 
not  arguments  of  what  is  good,  or  evil,  but  wit^ 
nesses  of  fact,  or  of  opinion;  obscure^  cor^used^ 
and  ambiguous  expressions ^  also  all  metaphorical 
speeches^  tending  to  the  stirring  up  of  passion, 
(because  such  reasoning,  and  such  expressions,  are 
usefiil  only  to  deceive,  or  to  lead  him  we  counsel 
towards  other  ends  than  his  own)  are  repugnant 
to  the  office  of  a  counsellor. 

Thirdly,  because  the  ability  of  counselling  pro- 
ceedeth  from  experience,  and  long  study ;  and  no 
man  is  presumed  to  have  experience  in  all  those 
things  that  to  the  administration  of  a  great  com- 
monwealth are  necessary  to  be  known,  no  man  is 
presumed  to  be  a  good  counsellor,  but  in  such 
business  J  as  he  hath  not  only  been  much  versed  in, 
but  hath  also  much  meditated  on,  and  considered. 
For  seeing  the  business  of  a  commonwealth  is  this, 
to  preserve  the  people  in  peace  at  home,  and  de- 
fend them  against  foreign  invasion,  we  shall  find,  it 
requires  great  knowledge  of  the  disposition  of  man- 
kind, of  the  rights  of  government,  and  of  the  nature 
of  equity,  law,  justice,  and  honour,  not  to  be  attain- 
ed without  study;  and  of  the  strength,  commodities, 
places,  both  of  their  own  country,  and  their  neigh- 
bours ;  as  also  of  the  inclinations,  and  designs  of 
all  nations  that  may  any  way  annoy  them.     And 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  COUNSEL.  247 

this  is  not  attained  to,  without  mndi  experience,    paet  ii. 
Of  which  things,  not  only  the  whole  sum,  but    >-^' — * 
every  one  of  the  particulars  requires  the  age,  and  Y^^'^^r^^a  ^ 
observation  of  a  man  in  years,  and  of  more  than  counteiion. 
ordinary  study.    The  wit  required  for  counsel,  as  I 
have  said  before  (chap,  viii.)  is  judgment.  And  the 
differences  of  men  in  that  point  come  from  different 
education,  of  some  to  one  kind  of  study  or  business, 
and  of  others  to  another.    When  for  the  doing  of 
any  thing,  there  be  infallible  rules,  as  in  engines 
and  edifices,  the  rules  of  geometry,  all  the  experi- 
ence of  the  world  cannot  equal  his  counsel,  that  has 
learnt,  or  found  out  the  rule.     And  when  there  is 
no  such  rule,  he  that  hath  most  experience  in  that 
particular  kind  of  business,  has  therein  the  best 
judgment,  and  is  the  best  counsellor. 

Fourthly,  to  be  able  to  give  counsel  to  a  common- 
wealth, in  a  business  that  hath  reference  to  another 
commonwealth,  it  is  necessary  to  be  acquainted 
with  the  intelligences,  and  letters  that  come  from 
thence,  and  with  all  the  records  of  treaties,  and 
other  transactions  of  state  between  them;  which 
none  can  do,  but  such  as  the  representative  shaD 
think  fit.  By  which  we  may  see,  that  they  who 
are  not  called  to  coimsel,  can  have  no  goqd  coun^ 
sel  in  such  cases  to  obtrude. 

Fifthly,  supposing  the  number  of  counsellors 
equal,  a  man  is  better  counselled  by  hearing  them 
apart,  than  in  an  assembly;  and  that  for  many 
causes.  First,  in  hearing  them  apart,  you  have 
the  advice  of  every  man ;  but  in  an  assembly  many 
of  them  deliver  their  advice  with  aye,  or  no,  or  with 
their  hands,  or  feet,  not  moved  by  their  own  sense, 
but  by  the  eloquence  of  another,  or  for  fear  of  dis^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


248  OP  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  n.   pleasing  some  that  have  spoken^   or  the  whole 


25 


assembly,  by  contradiction ;  or  for  fear  of  appear- 
Differenceiof  ing  dullcr  in  apprehension,  than  those  that  have 

fit  and  unfit        ^^  _        ,     ,     ,         '^'^  .    .  ^  ,i         . 

couoMiion.  applanded  the  contrary  opimon.  Secondly,  m  an 
assembly  of  many,  there  cannot  choose  but  be  some 
whose  interests  are  contrary  to  that  of  the  public ; 
and  these  their  interests  make  passionate,  and  pas- 
sion eloquent,  and  eloquence  draws  others  into  the 
1  same  advice.  For  the  passions  of  men,  which 
I  asunder  are  moderate,  as  the  heat  of  one  brand ;  in 
i  an  assembly  are  like  many  brands,  that  inflame  one 
!  another,  especially  when  they  blow  one  another 
;  with  orations,  to  the  setting  of  the  commonwealth 
on  fire,  under  pretence  of  counselling  it.  Thirdly, 
in  hearing  every  man  apart,  one  may  examine, 
when  there  is  need,  the  truth,  or  probability  of  his 
reasons,  and  of  the  grounds  of  the  advice  he  gives, 
by  frequent  interruptions,  and  objections ;  which 
cannot  be  done  in  an  assembly,  where,  in  every 
difficult  question,  a  man  is  rather  astonied,  and 
dazzled  with  the  variety  of  discourse  upon  it,  than 
informed  of  the  course  he  ought  to  take.  Besides, 
there  cannot  be  an  assembly  of  many,  called  to- 
gether for  advice,  wherein  there  be  not  some,  that 
have  the  ambition  to  be  thought  eloquent,  and  also 
learned  in  the  politics ;  and  give  not  their  advice 
with  care  of  the  business  propounded,  but  of  the 
applause  of  their  motley  orations,  made  of  the  divers 
coloured  threds,  or  shreads  of  authors ;  which  is 
an  impertinence  at  least,  that  takes  away  the  time 
of  serious  consultation,  and  in  the  secret  way  of 
counselling  apart,  is  easily  avoided.  Fourthly,  in 
deliberations  that  ought  to  be  kept  secret,  whereof 
there  be  many  occasions  in  public  business,  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF   COUNSEL.  249 

counsels  of  many,  and  especially  in  assemblies,  are   part  il 
dangerous ;  and  therefore  great  assemblies  are  ne-   .  ^'    . 
cessitated  to  commit  such  affairs  to  lesser  numbers,  Diffcrencctof 
and  of  such  persons  as  are  most  versed,  and  in  elwLeUon. 
whose  fidelity  they  have  most  confidence. 

To  conclude,  who  is  there  that  so  far  approves 
the  taking  of  counsel  from  a  great  assembly  of 
counsellors,  that  wisheth  for,  or  would  accept  of 
their  pains,  when  there  is  a  question  of  marrying 
his  children,  disposing  of  his  lands,  governing  his 
household,  or  managing  his  private  estate,  especially 
if  there  be  amongst  them  such  as  wish  not  his  pros- 
perity ?  A  man  that  doth  his  business  by  the  help 
of  many  and  prudent  counsellors,  with  every  one 
consulting  apart  in  his  proper  element,  does  it  best, 
as  he  that  useth  able  seconds  at  tennis  play,  placed 
in  their  proper  stations.  He  does  next  best,  that 
useth  his  own  judgment  only  ;•  as  he  that  has  no 
second  at  all.  But  he  that  is  carried  up  and  down 
to  his  business  in  a  framed  counsel,  which  cannot 
move  but  by  the  plurality  of  consenting  opinions, 
the  execution  whereof  is  commonly,  out  of  envy  or 
interest,  retarded  by  the  part  dissenting,  does  it 
worst  of  all,  and  like  one  that  is  carried  to  the  ball, 
though  by  good  players,  yet  in  a  wheel-barrow,  or 
other  frame,  heavy  of  itself,  and  retarded  also  by 
the  inconcurrent  judgments,  and  endeavours  of 
them  that  drive  it ;  and  so  much  the  more,  as  they 
be  more  that  set  their  hands  to  it ;  and  most  of  all, 
when  there  is  one,  or  more  amongst  them,  that 
desire  to  have  him  lose.  And  though  it  be  true, 
that  many  eyes  see  more  than  one ;  yet  it  is  not  to 
be  understood  of  many  counsellors ;  but  then  only, 
when  the  final  resolution  is  in  one  man.     Other- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


250  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  lu   wise^  because  many  eyes  see  the  same  thing  in 
s,  ^  „.    divers  lines,  and  are  apt  to  look  asquint  towards 
Difference  of  their  private  benefit ;  they  that  desire  not  to  misa 
wuwUorfc     *^®ir  mark,  though  they  look  about  with  two  eyes, 
yet  they  never  aim  but  with  one ;  and  therefore  no 
great  popular  commonwealth  was  ever  kept  up,  but 
either  by  a  foreign  enemy  that  united  them ;  or  by 
the  reputation  of  some  eminent  man  amongst  them; 
or  by  the  secret  counsel  of  a  few ;  or  by  the  mutual 
fear  of  equal  factions ;  and  not  by  the  open  consul- 
tations of  the  assembly.     And  as  for  very  little 
commonwealths,  be  they  popular,  or  monarchical, 
Awe^is  no  human  wisdom  can  uphold  them,  longer 
than  the  jealousy  lasteth  of  their  potent  neighbours. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

OF  CIVIL  LAWS. 

Civil  uw  what.  By  CIVIL  LAWS,  I  Understand  the  laws,  that  men  are 
therefore  bound  to  observe,  because  they  are  mem- 
bers, not  of  this,  or  that  commonwealth  in  particular, 
but  of  a  commonwealth.  For  the  knowledge  of  par- 
ticular laws  belongeth  to  them,  that  profess  the 
study  of  the  laws  of  their  several  countries ;  but 
the  knowledge  of  civil  law  in  general,  to  any  man. 
The  ancient  law  of  Rome  was  called  their  civil  law, 
from  the  word  civitas,  which  signifies  a  common- 
wealth :  and  those  countries,  which  having  been  un- 
der the  Roman  empire,  and  governed  by  that  law, 
retain  still  such  part  thereof  as  they  think  fit,  call 
that  p8«t  the  civil  law,  to  distinguish  it  from  the 
rest  of  their  own  civil  laws.     But  that  is  not  it  I 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  CIVIL  LAWS.  251 

intend  to  speak  of  here  ;  my  design  being  not  to   part  it, 
show  what  is  law  here,  and  there ;  but  what  is    .    ^^'    . 
law ;  as  Plato,  Aristotle,  Cicero,  and  divers  others  civii  Uwwhau 
have  done^  without  taking  upon  them  the  profession 
of  the  study  of  the  law. 

And  first  it  is  manifest,  that  law  in  general,  is  not 
counsel,  but  command ;  nor  a  command  of  any 
man  to  any  man  ;  but  only  of  him,  whose  command 
is  addressed  to  one  formerly  obliged  to  obey  him. 
And  as  for  civil  law,  it  addeth  only  the  name  of  the 
person  commanding,  which  is  persona  civitatis, 
the  person  of  the  commonwealth. 

Which  considered,  I  define  civil  law  in  this 
manner.  Civil  law,  is  to  every  subject ,  those 
ruleSy  which  the  commonwealth  hath  commanded 
him,  hy  word,  writing,  or  other  stffficient  sign  of 
the  willy  to  make  use  of,  for  the  distinction  of 
right,  and  wrong  ;  that  is  to  say,  of  what  is  con^ 
trary,  and  what  is  not  contrary  to  the  rule. 

In  which  definition,  there  is  nothing  that  is  not 
at  first  sight  evident.  For  every  man  seeth,  that 
some  laws  are  addressed  to  all  the  subjects  in 
general ;  some  to  particular  provinces ;  some  to 
particular  vocations ;  and  some  to  particular  men ; 
and  are  therefore  laws,  to  every  of  those  to  whom 
the  command  is  directed,  and  to  none  else.  As 
also,'  that  laws  are  the  rules  of  just,  and  unjust; 
nothing  being  reputed  unjust,  that  is  not  contrary 
to  some  law.  Likewise,  that  none  can  make  laws 
but  the  commonwealth ;  because  our  subjection  is 
to  the  commonwealth  only :  and  that  commands, 
are  to  be  signified  by  sufficient  signs ;  because  a 
man  knows  not  otherwise  how  to  obey  them.  And 
therefore,  whatsoever  can  from  this  definition  b) 


Digitized  by 


Google 


252  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  necessary  consequence  be  deduced^  ought  to  be 
.  ■  ^' , .  acknowledged  for  tmth.  Now  I  deduce  from  it 
this  that  followeth. 
Vu^utM^  1.  The  legislator  in  all  commonwealths,  is  only 
the  soypreign,  be  he  one  man,  as  in  a  monarchy^ 
or  one  assembly  of  men,  as  in  a  democracy,  or  aris- 
tocracy. For  the  legislator  is  he  that  maketh  the 
law.  And  the  commonwealth  only  prescribes,  and 
commandeth  the  observation  of  those  rules,  which 
we  call  law :  therefore  the  commonwealth  is  the 
legislator.  But  the  commonwealth  is  no  person, 
nor  has  capacity  to  do  anything,  but  by  the  repre- 
sentative, that  is,  the  sovereign ;  and  therefore  the 
sovereign  is  the  sole  legislator.  For  the  same 
reason,  none  can  abrogate  a  law  made,  but  the 
sovereign;  because  a  law  is  not  abrogated,  but 
by  another  law,  that  forbiddeth  it  to  be  put  in 
execution. 
And  not  2.  The  sovereiffu  of  a  commonwealth,  be  it  an 

■abject  to  _,  ^  .  ..  ^-.^ 

cini  uw.     assembly,  or  one  man,  is  not  subject  to  the  civil 

laws.     For  having  power  to  make,  and  repeal  laws, 

he  may  when  he  pleaseth,  free  himself  from  that 

subjection,  by  repealing  those  laws  that  trouble  him, 

and  making  of  new ;  and  consequently  he  was  free 

before.     For  he  is  free,  that  can  be  free  when  he 

will :  nor  is  it  possible  for  any  person  to  be  bound 

to  himself ;  because  he  that  can  bind,  can  release ; 

and  therefore  he  that  is  bound  to  himself  only,  is 

not  bound. 

Sfb*virtue        ^'  ^^^^  ^^^S  ^se  obtaineth  the  authority  of  a 

oftime,  butof  law,  it  is  uot  the  length  of  time  that  maketh  the 

coniem!"'^ '  authority,  but  the  will  of  the  sovereign  signified  by 

his  silence,  for  silence  is  sometimes  an  argument  of 

consent ;  and  it  is  no  longer  law,  than  the  sovereign 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  CIVIL  LAWS.  253 

shall  be  sUent  therein.  And  therefore  if  the  sove-  part  ii. 
reign  shall  have  a  question  of  right  grounded,  not  _  ^f *  . 
npon  his  present  will,  but  upon  the  laws  formerly 
made ;  the  length  of  time  shall  bring  no  prejudice 
to  his  right ;  but  the  question  shall  be  judged  by 
equity.  For  many  unjust  actions,  and  unjust  sen- 
tences, go  uncontrolled  a  longer  time  than  any  man 
can  remember.  And  our  lawyers  account  no  cus- 
toms law,  but  such  as  are  reasonable,  and  that  evil 
customs  are  to  be  abolished.  But  the  judgment  of 
what  is  reasonable,  and  of  what  is  to  be  abolished, 
belongeth  to  him  that  maketh  the  law,  which  is  the 
sovereign  assembly,  or  monarch.  ^ 

4.  The  law  of  nature,  and  the  civil  law,  contain  ?*®^*'7lJl*'  1 

'  '  tore,  and  the 

each  other,  and  are  of  equal  extent.  For  the  laws  ciyu  uw  cou-  I 
of  nature,  which  consist  in  equity,  justice,  grati- 
tude, and  other  moral  virtues  on  these  depending, 
in  the  condition  of  mere  nature,  as  I  have  said  be- 
fore in  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  chapter,  are  not 
properly  laws,  but  qualities  that  dispose  men  to 
peace  and  obedience.  When  a  commonwealth  is 
once  settled,  then  are  they  actually  laws,  and  not 
before  "r  as  being  then  the  commands  of  the  com- 
monwealth ;  and  therefore  also  civil  laws :  for  it  is 
the  sovereign  power  that  obliges  men  to  obey  them. 
For  in  the  differences  of  private  men,  to  declare, 
what  is  equity,  what  is  justice,  and  what  is  moral 
virtue,  and  to  make  them  binding,  there  is  need  of 
the  ordinances  of  sovereign  power,  and  punishments 
to  be  ordained  for  such  as  shall  break  them;  which 
ordinances  are  therefore  part  of  the  civil  law.  The 
law  of  nature  therefore  is  a  part  of  the  civil  law  in 
all  commonwealths  of  the  world.  Reciprocally  also, 
tlie  civil  law  is  a  part  of  the  dictates  of  nature. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


254  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  0.  For  justice,  that  is  to  say,  performaace  of  covenant, 
.  ^  -  and  giving  to  every  man  his  own,  is  a  dictate  of 
the  law  of  nature.  But  every  subject  in  a  com* 
monwealth,  hath  convenanted  to  obey  the  civil  law ; 
either  one  with  another,  as  when  they  assemble  to 
make  a  common  representative,  or  with  the  repre* 
sentative  itself  one  by  one,  when  subdued  by  the 
sword  they  promise  obedience,  that  they  may  re- 
ceive  life ;  and  therefore  obedience  to  the  civil  law 
is  part  also  of  the  law  of  nature.  (Civil,  and  natural 
law  are  not  different  kinds,  but  different  parts  of 
law ;  whereof  one  part  being  vrritten,  is  called  civil, 
the  other  unwritten,  natural.)  But  the  right  erf 
nature,  that  is,  the  natural  liberty  ci  man,  may  by 
the  civil  law  be  abri<%ed,  and  restrained :  nay,  the 
end  oi  making  laws,  is  no  oUiar,  but  such  restraint ; 
without  the  which  there  cannot  possibly  be  any 
peace.  And  law  was  brought  into  the  world  for 
nothing  else,  but  to  limit  the  natural  liberty  of  par-* 
ticular  men,  in  such  manner,  as  they  might  not 
hurt,  but  assist  one  another,  and  join  together 
against  a  common  enemy. 
ProTiDdai  5.  If  the  sovereign  of  one  commonwealth,  sub- 

^e*h^  c^  due  a  people  that  have  lived  under  other  written 
^J^^  ^*  laws,  and  afterwards  govern  them  by  the  same  laws,. 
!»*«•  by  which  they  were  governed  before;  yet  those 

laws  are  the  civil  laws  of  the  victor,  and  not  of  the 
vanquished  commonwealth.  For  the  l^idator  is 
he,  not  by  whose  authority  the  laws  were  first  made, 
but  by  whose  authority  they  now  continue  to  be 
laws.  And  therefore  where  there  be  divers  pro- 
vinces, within  the  dominion  of  a  commonwealth, 
and  in  those  provinces  diversity  of  laws,  which 
commonly  are  called  the  customs  of  each  several 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  CIVIL  LAW8.  265 

province,  we  are  not  to  understand  tiiat  snch  cu»-  part  ii. 
toms  have  their  force,  only  from  length  of  time ;  .^'  . 
but  that  they  were  anciently  laws  written,  or  other- 
wise made  known,  for  the  constitutions,  and 
statutes  of  their  sovereigns  ;  and  are  now  laws,  not 
by  virtue  of  tte  prescription  of  time,  but  by  the 
constitutions  of  their  present  sovereigns.  But  if 
an  imwritten  law,  in  all  the  provinces  of  a  domi- 
nion, shall  be  generally  observed,  and  no  iniquity 
appear  in  the  use  thereof ;  that  law  can  be  no  other 
but  a  law  of  nature,  equally  obliging  all  mankind. 

6.  Seeing  then  all  laws,  written  and  unwritten,  Somefboiwh 

c  '  '  opinions  of 

have  their  authority  and  force,  from  the  will  of  the  uwyew  con- 
commonwealth  ;  that  is  to  say,  from  the  will  of  the  ^ng  of* 
representative ;  which  in  a  monarchy  is  the  mo-  ^*^ 
nardi,  and  in  other  commonwealths  the  sovereign 
assembly ;  a  man  may  wonder  from  whence  pro- 
ceed such  opinions,  as  are  found  in  the  books  cf 
lawyers   of  aoimence  in   several  commonwealths, 
<Urectly,  or  by  consequence  making  the  legislative 
power  depend  on  private  men,   or  subordinate 
judges.     As  for  example,  that  the  common  lam, 
fuUh  no  controller  hut  the  parliament ;   which  is 
true  only  where  a  parliament  has  the  sovereign 
power,  and  cannot  be  assembled,  nor  dissolved,  but 
by  their  own  discretion.     For  if  there  be  a  light  in 
any  else  to  dissolve  them,  there  is  a  right  also  to 
ccmtrol  them,  and  consequently  to  control  their 
controllings.     And  if  there  be  no  such  right,  then 
the  controller  of  laws  is  not  par  liametUum,  but  rex 
in  parliamento.    And  where  a  parliament  is  sove- 
reign, if  it  should  assemble  never  so  many,  or  so 
wise  men,  fromi  the  countries  subject  to  them,  for 
whatsoever  cause  ;  yet  there  is  no  man  will  believe. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


256  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  that  such  an  assembly  hath  tliereby  acquired  to 
.  ^'  themselves  a  legislative  poorer.  Itemy  that  the  two 
arms  of  a  commonwealth,  are  force  and  justice  ; 
the  first  whereof  is  in  the  king  ;  the  other  depo- 
sited in  the  hands  of  the  parliament.  As  if  a 
commonwealth  could  consist,  where  the  force  were 
in  any  hand,  which  justice  had  not  the  authority  to 
command  and  govern. 

7.  That  law  can  never  be  against  reason,  our 
lawyers  are  agreed ;  and  that  not  the  letter,  that 
is  every  construction  of  it,  but  that  which  is  accord- 
ing to  the  intention  of  the  legislator,  is  the  law. 
And  it  is  true  :  but  the  doubt  is  of  whose  reason  it 
is,  that  shall  be  received  for  law.  It  is  not  meant 
of  any  private  reason ;  for  then  there  would  be  as 
much  contradiction  in  the  laws,  as  there  is  in  the 
Sir  Edw.  Coke  Schools  ;  uor  yct,  as  Sir  Edward  C!oke  makes  it,  an 
^^j^^^e^"'  artificial  perfection  of  reason,  gotten  by  long 
foi.  97,  b.  study,  observation,  and  experience,  as  his  was. 
For  it  is  possible  long  study  may  increase,  and  con- 
firm erroneous  sentences :  and  where  men  build  on 
false  grounds,  the  more  they  build,  the  greater  is 
the  ruin :  and  of  those  that  study,  and  observe 
with  equal  time  and  diligence,  the  reasons  and 
resolutions  are,  and  must  remaui  discordant :  and 
therefore  it  is  not  thai  juris  prudentia,  or  wisdom 
of  subordinate  judges  ;  but  the  reason  of  this  our 
artificial  man  the  commonwealth,  and  his  command, 
that  maketh  law:  and  the  commonwealth  being 
in  their  representative  but  one  person,  there  can- 
not easily  arise  any  contradiction  in  the  laws ;  and 
when  there  doth,  tiie  same  reason  is  able,  by  inter- 
pretation, or  alteration,  to  take  it  away.  In  all 
courts  of  justice,  the  sovereign,  which  is  the  per- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  CIVIL  LAWS.  257 

son  of  the  commonwealth,  is  he  that  judgeth  :  the    part  il 
subordinate  judge,  ought  to  have  regard  to  the    .    ^^'    . 
reason,  which  moved  his  sovereign  to  make  such 
law,  that  his  sentence  maybe  according  thereunto ; 
which  then  is  his  sovereign's  sentence ;  otherwise 
it  is  his  own,  and  an  unjust  one. 

8.  From  this,  that  the  law  is  a  command,  and  a^^™*^«»'/ 

Dot  also  made 

command  consisteth  in  declaration,  or  manifesta-  known,  u  no 
tion  of  the  will  of  him  that,  commandeth,  by  voice,  *^' 
writing,  or  some  other  sufficient  argument  of  the 
same,  we  may  understand,  that  the  command  of 
the  commonwealth  is  law  only  to  those,  that  have 
means  to  take  notice  of  it.  Over  natural  fools, 
children,  or  madmen,  there  is  no  law,  no  more 
than  over  brute  beasts ;  nor  are  they  capable  of 
the  title  of  just,  or  unjust ;  because  they  had  never 
power  to  make  any  covenant,  or  to  understand  the 
consequences  thereof;  and  consequently  never  took 
upon  them  to  authorize  the  actions  of  any  sove- 
reign, as  they  must  do  that  make  to  themselves  a 
commonwealth.  And  as  those  from  whom  nature 
or  accident  hath  taken  away  the  notice  of  all  laws 
in  general ;  so  also  every  man,  from  whom  any 
accident,  not  proceeding  from  his  own  default,  hath 
taken  away  the  means  to  take  notice  of  any  par- 
ticular law,  is  excused,  if  he  observe  it  not :  and  to 
speak  properly,  that  law  is  no  law  to  him.  It  is 
therefore  necessary,  to  consider  in  this  place,  what 
arguments,  and  signs  be  sufficient  for  the  know- 
ledge of  what  is  the  law ;  that  is  to  say,  what  is 
the  will  of  the  sovereign,  as  well  in  monarchies,  as 
in  other  forms  of  government. 

And  first,  if  it  be  a  law  that  obliges  all  the  sub- 
jects without  exception,  and  is  not  written,  nor 

VOL.  III.  s 


Digitized  by 


Google 


258 


OF  COMMONWEALTH. 


PART  u.  Otherwise  published  in  such  places  as  they  may  take 
.^  ^'  .  notice  thereof,  it  is  a  law  of  nature.  For  whatso- 
I  Unwritten  uwi  cvcr  men  are  to  take  knowledge  of  for  law,  not 
I  Lws  of  nature!  ^pou  othcr  mcu^s  words,  but  every  one  from  his 
own  reason,  must  be  such  as  is  agreeable  to  the 
reason  of  all  men ;  which  no  law  can  be,  but  the 
law  of  nature.  The  laws  of  nature  therefore  need 
not  any  publishing,  nor  proclamation ;  as  being 
contained  in  this  one  sentence,  approved  by  all  the 
world,  Do  not  that  to  another^  which  thou  thinkest 
unreasonable  to  he  done  by  another  to  thyself. 
^  Secondly,  if  it  be  a  law  that  obliges  only  some 
condition  of  men,  or  one  particular  man,  and  be 
not  written,  nor  published  by  word,  then  also  it  is 
a  law  of  nature ;  and  known  by  the  same  argu- 
ments, and  signs,  that  distinguish  those  in  such  a 
condition,  from  other  subjects.  For  whatsoever  law 
is  not  written,  or  some  way  published  by  him  that 
makes  it  law,  can  be  known  no  way,  but  by  the 
reason  of  him  that  is  to  obey  it ;  and  is  therefore 
also  a  law  not  only  civil,  but  natural.  For  example, 
if  the  sovereign  employ  a  public  minister,  without 
written  instructions  what  to  do ;  he  is  obliged  to 
take  for  instructions  the  dictates  of  reason ;  as  if 
he  make  a  judge,  the  judge  is  to  take  notice,  that 
his  sentence  ought  to  be  according  to  the  reason  of 
his  sovereign,  which  being  always  understood  to  be 
equity,  he  is  bound  to  it  by  the  law  of  nature :  or 
if  an  ambassador,  he  is,  in  all  things  not  contained 
in  his  written  instructions,  to  take  for  instruction 
that  which  reason  dictates  to  be  most  conducing 
to  his  sovereign's  interest ;  and  so  of  all  other  mi- 
nisters of  the  sovereignty,  public  and  private.  All 
which  instructions  of  natural  reason  may  be  com- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  CIVIL  LAWS.  259 

prehended  under  one  name  oi fidelity;  which  is  a   part  ii. 
branch  of  natural  justice.  .    ^^'    . 

The  law  of  nature  excepted,  it  belongeth  to  the 
essence  of  all  other  laws,  to  be  made  known,  to 
every  man  that  shall  be  obliged  to  obey  them,  either 
by  word,  or  writing,  or  some  other  act,  known  to 
proceed  from  the  sovereign  authority.  For  the 
will  of  another  cannot  be  understood,  but  by  his 
own  word,  or  act,  or  by  conjecture  taken  from  his 
scope  and  purpose;  which  in  the  person  of  the 
commonwealth,  is  to  be  supposed  always  consonant 
to  equity  and  reason.  And  in  ancient  time,  before 
letters  were  in  common  use,  the  laws  were  many 
times  put  into  verse ;  that  the  rude  people  taking 
pleasure  in  singing,  or  reciting  them,  might  the 
more  easily  retain  them  in  memory.  And  for  the 
same  reason  Solomon  (Prov.  vii.  3)  adviseth  a  man, 
to  bind  the  ten  commandments  upon  his  ten  fin- 
gers. And  for  the  law  which  Moses  gave  to  the 
people  of  Israel  at  the  renewing  of  the  covenant 
(Deut.  xi.  19),  he  biddeth  them  to  teach  it  their 
children,  by  discoursing  of  it  both  at  home,  and 
upon  the  way ;  at  going  to  bed,  and  at  rising  from 
bed ;  and  to  write  it  upon  the  posts,  and  doors  of 
their  houses ;  and  (Deut.  xxxi.  12)  to  assemble  the 
people,  man,  woman,  and  child,  to  hear  it  read. 

Nor  is  it  enough  the  law  be  written,  and  pub-  Nothing  is  law 
lished ;  but  also  that  there  be  manifest  signs,  that guutorcw^ot 
it  proceedeth  from  the  will  of  the  sovereign.     For  ^  ^^^"^^^    ^ 
private  mien,  when  they  have,  or  think  they  have 
force  enough  to  secure  their  unjust  designs,  and 
convoy  them  safely  to  their  ambitious  ends,  may 
publish  for  laws  what  they  please,  without,  or 
against  the  legislative  authority.  There  is  therefore 

S2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


260  OP  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  requisite,  not  only  a  declaration  of  the  law,  but  also 
' — ^^ — '  sufficient  signs  of  the  author  and  authority.  The 
author,  or  legislator  is  supposed  in  every  common- 
wealth to  be  evident,  because  he  is  the  sovereign, 
who  having  been  constituted  by  the  consent  of 
every  one,  is  supposed  by  every  one  to  be  suffici- 
ently known.  Ajid  though  the  ignorance  and  se- 
curity of  men  be  such,  for  the  most  part,  as  that 
when  the  memory  of  the  first  constitution  of  their 
commonwealth  is  worn  out,  they  do  not  consider, 
by  whose  power  they  used  to  be  defended  against 
their  enemies,  and  to  have  their  industry  protected, 
and  to  be  righted  when  injury  is  done  them ;.  yet 
because  no  man  that  considers,  can  make  question 
of  it,  no  excuse  can  be  derived  from  the  ignorance 
of  where  the  sovereignty  is  placed.  And  it  is  a 
dictate  of  natural  reason,  and  consequently  an  evi- 
dent law  of  nature,  that  no  man  ought  to  weaken 
that  power,  the  protection  whereof  he  hath  himself 
demanded,  or  wittingly  received  against  others. 
Therefore  of  who  is  sovereign,  no  man,  but  by  his 
own  fault,  (whatsoever  evil  men  suggest,)  can  make 
any  doubt.  The  difficulty  consisteth  in  the  evi- 
dence of  the  authority  derived  from  him ;  the  re- 
moving whereof,  dependeth  on  the  knowledge  of 
the  public  registers,  public  counsels,  public  minis- 
ters, and  public  seals  ;  by  which  all  laws  are  suf- 
Differeiwae  be-  ficicutly  Verified ;  verified,  I  say,  not  authorized : 
&  au"ihomin^  for  thc  Verification,  is  but  the  testimony  and  record, 
not  the  authority  of  the  law ;  which  consisteth  in 
the  command  of  the  sovereign  only. 
The  law  vc-  If  thcrcforc  a  man  have  a  question  of  injury,  de- 
subordinate  pending  on  the  law  of  nature ;  that  is  to  say,  on 
^^^^^'  common  equity  ;  the  sentence  of  the  judge,  that 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


OF  CIVIL  LAWS.  261 

by  commission  hath  authority  to  take  cognizance  part  u. 
of  such  causes^  is  a  sufficient  verification  of  the  law  ,  ^^'  . 
of  nature  in  that  individual  case.  For  though  the 
advice  of  one'  that  professeth  the  study  of  the  law, 
be  useful  for  the  avoiding  of  contention ;  yet  it  is 
but  advice :  it  is  the  judge  must  tell  men  what  is 
law,  upon  the  hearing  of  the  controversy. 

But  when  the  question  is  of  injury,  or  crime,  By  the  public 
upon  a  written  law ;  every  man  by  recourse  to  the  '^^"^"• 
registers,  by  himself  or  others,  may,  if  he  will,  be 
sufficiently  informed,  before  he  do  such  injury,  or 
commit  the  crime,  whether  it  be  an  injury,  or  not: 
nay  he  ought  to  do  so :  for  when  a  man  doubts 
whether  the  act  he  goeth  about,  be  just,  or  unjust ; 
and  may  inform  himself,  if  he  will ;  the  doing  is 
unlawful.  In  like  manner,  he  that  supposeth  him- 
self injured,  in  a  case  determined  by  the  wi:itten 
law,  which  he  may,  by  himself  or  others,  see  and 
consider ;  if  he  complain  before  he  consults  with 
the  law,  he  does  unjustly,  and  bewrayeth  a  disposi- 
tion rather  to  vex  other  men,  than  to  demand  his 
own  right. 

Kthe  question  be  of  obedience  to  a  public  officer;  By  letters 
to  have  seen  his  commission,  with  the  public  seal,  public  seal, 
and  heard  it  read ;  or  to  have  had  the  means  to 
be  informed  of  it,  if  a  man  would,  is  a  sufficient 
verification  of  his  authority.  For  every  man  is 
obliged  to  do  his  best  endeavour,  to  inform  him- 
self of  all  written  laws,  that  may  concern  his  own 
future  actions. 

The  legislator  known;  and  the  laws,  either  byTheinterpreu 

,--.    -^  -^.-  -      tionofthelaw 

writing,  or  by  the  light  of  nature,  sufficiently  pub-  dependeth  on 
lished;  there  wanteth  yet  another  very  material  ^'^er.'^'^**^'* 
circumstance  to  make  them  obligatory.     For  it  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


262  OP  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  u.  not  the  letter,  but  the  intendment,  or  meaning, 
- — !Jl— .  that  is  to  say,  the  authentic  interpretation  of  the 
law  (which  is  the  sense  of  the  legislator),  in  which 
the  nature  of  the  law  consisteth ;  and  therefore  the 
interpretation  of  all  laws  dependeth  on  the  autho- 
rity sovereign ;  and  the  interpreters  can  be  none 
I  but  those,  which  the  sovereign,  to  whom  only  the 
f  subject  oweth  obedience,  shall  appoint.  For  else, 
by  the  craft  of  an  interpreter,  the  law  may  be  made 
to  bear  a  sense,  contrary  to  that  of  the  sovereign : 
by  which  means  the  interpreter  becomes  the  legis- 
lator. 
All  laws  need  All  laws,  writtcu,  and  unwritten,  have  need  of 
7a^^/%  '°°  interpretation.  The  unwritten  law  of  nature, 
though  it  be  easy  to  such,  as  without  partiality 
and  passion,  make  use  of  their  natural  reason,  and 
therefore  leaves  the  violators  thereof  without  ex- 
cuse ;  yet  considering  there  be  very  few,  perhaps 
none,  that  in  some  cases  are  not  blinded  by  self- 
love,  or  some  other  passion ;  it  is  now  become  of 
all  laws  the  most  obscure,  and  has  consequently 
the  greatest  need  of  able  interpreters.  The  written 
laws,  if  they  be  short,  are  easily  misinterpreted, 
from  the  divers  significations  of  a  word,  or  two  :  if 
long,  they  be  more  obscure  by  the  divers  significa- 
tions of  many  words :  insomuch  as  no  written  law, 
delivered  in  few,  or  many  words,  can  be  well  un- 
derstood, without  a  perfect  understanding  of  the 
final  causes,  for  which  the  law  was  made;  the 
knowledge  of  which  final  causes  is  in  the  legislator. 
To  him  therefore  there  cannot  be  any  knot  in  the 
law,  insoluble ;  either  by  finding  out  the  ends,  to 
undo  it  by ;  or  else  by  making  what  ends  he  will, 
as  Alexander  did  with  his  sword  in  the  Gordian 


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


OF  CIVIL  LAWS.  263 

knot,  by  the  legislative  power ;  which  no  other  in-   part  ii. 
terpreter  can  do.  ^    ^^'  ^ 

The  interpretation  of  the  laws  of  nature,  in  a  The  authenti- 
commonwealth,  dependeth  not  on  the  books  of  tion*o?^w^'ii 
moral  philosophy.  The  authority  of  writers,  with- 1%^  ^^ 
out  the  authority  of  the  commonwealth,  maketh 
not  their  opinions  law,  be  they  never  so  true.  That 
which  I  have  written  in  this  treatise,  concerning 
the  moral  virtues,  and  of  their  necessity  for  the 
procuring,  and  maintaining  peace,  though  it  be 
evident  truth,  is  not  therefore  presently  law ;  but 
because  in  all  commonwealths  in  the  world,  it  is 
part  of  the  civil  law.  For  though  it  be  naturally 
reasonable ;  yet  it  is  by  the  sovereign  power  that 
it  is  law :  otherwise,  it  were  a  great  error,  to  call 
the  laws  of  nature  unwritten  law ;  whereof  we  see 
so  many  volumes  published,  and  in  them  so  many 
contradictions  of  one  another,  and  of  themselves. 

The  interpretation  of  the  law  of  nature,  is  the  The  interpreter 
sentence  of  the  judge  constituted  by  the  sovereign  the  judgS  giv- 
authority,  to  hear  and  determine  such  controver-  ^^f^^^e-^ 
sies,  as  depend  thereon ;  and  consisteth  in  the  ap-  i^'l^^^' 
plication  of^the  law  to  the  present  case.    For  in 
the  act  of  judicature,  the  judge  doth  no  more  but 
consider,  whether  the  demand  of  the  party,  be 
consonant  to  natural  reason,  and  equity ;  and  the 
sentence  he  giveth,  is  therefore  the  interpretation 
of  the  law  of  nature ;  which  interpretation  is  au- 
thentic ;  not  because  it  is  his  private  sentence ; 
but  because  he  giveth  it  by  authority  of  the  sove- 
reign, whereby  it  becomes  the  sovereign's  sentence.; 
which  is  law  for  that  time,  to  the  parties  pleading. 

But  because  there  is  no  judge  subordinate,  nor  The  sentence 
sovereign,  but  may  err  in  a  judgment  of  equity  ;  if  not' Wud  him' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


264  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PAiiT  II.  afterward  in  another  like  case  he  find  it  more  con- 
.  ^^_.  sonant  to  equity  to  give  a  contrary  sentence,  he  is 
or  anothtr  obligcd  to  do  it.  No  man's  error  becomes  his  own 
iikt^s^eml^ce  law ;  nor  obliges  him  to  persist  in  it  Neither,  for 
in  like  rases  ^^^  samc  rcason,  becomes  it  a  law  to  other  judg^ 
though  sworn  to  follow  it.  For  though  a  wrong 
sentence  given  by  authority  of  the  sovereign,  if  he 
know  and  allow  it,  in  such  laws  as  are  mutable,  be 
a  constitution  of  a  new  law,  in  cases,  in  which 
every  little  circumstance  is  the  same  ;  yet  in  laws 
immutable,  such  as  are  the  laws  of  nature,  they  are 
no  laws  to  the  same  or  other  judges,  in  the  like 
cases  for  ever  after.  Princes  succeed  one  another ; 
and  one  judge  passeth,  another  cometh  ;  nay,  hea- 
ven and  earth  shall  pass ;  but  not  one  tittle  of  the 
law  of  nature  shall  pass ;  for  it  is  the  eternal  law 
of  God.  Therefore  all  the  sentences  of  precedent 
judges  that  have  ever  been,  cannot  altogether 
make  a  law  contrary  to  natural  equity :  nor  any 
examples  of  former  judges,  can  warrant  an  unreap- 
sonable  sentence,  or  discharge  the  present  judge  of 
the  trouble  of  studying  what  is  equity,  in  the  case 
he  is  to  judge,  from  the  principles  of  his  own  natu- 
ral reason.  For  example  sake,  it  is  against  the  law 
of  nature,  to  punish  the  innocent ;  and  innocent  is 
he  that  acquitteth  himself  judicially,  and  is  acknow- 
ledged for  innocent  by  the  judge.  Put  the  case 
now,  that  a  man  is  accused  of  a  capital  crime,  and 
seeing  the  power  and  malice  of  some  enemy,  and 
the  frequent  corruption  and  partiality  of  judges, 
runneth  away  for  fear  of  the  event,  and  aft^-wards 
is  taken,  and  brought  to  a  legal  trial,  and  maketh 
it  sufficiently  appear,  he  was  not  guilty  of  the 
crime,  and  being  thereof  acquitted,  is  nevertheless 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  CIVIL  LAWS.  ,  265 

condemned  to  lose  his  goods ;  this  is  a  manifest  part  il 
condemnation  of  the  innocent.  I  say  therefore,  .  ^f-  . 
that  there  is  no  place  in  the  world,  where  this  can  The  semeijce 

1  .  -/.li*  ^  1     of  a  judge  docs 

be  an  mterpretation  of  a  law  of  nature,  or  be  made  not  bind  him, 
a  law  by  the  sentences  of  precedent  judges,  that  ^' 
had  done  the  same.  For  he  that  judged  it  first, 
judged  unjustly ;  and  no  injustice  can  be  a  pattern 
of  judgment  to  succeeding  judges.  A  written  law 
may  forbid  innocent  men  to  fly,  and  they  may  be 
punished  for  flying :  but  that  flying  for  fear  of  in- 
jury, should  be  taken  for  presumption  of  guilt, 
after  a  man  is  abeady  absolved  of  the  crime  judi- 
cially, is  contrary  to  the  nature  of  a  presumption, 
which  hath  no  place  after  judgment  given.  Yet 
this  is  set  down  by  a  great  lawyer  for  the  common 
law  of  England.  If  a  man,  saith  he,  that  is  inno^ 
cent  J  he  accused  of  felony,  and  for  fear  fly  eth  for 
the  same  ;  albeit  he  judicially  acquitteth  himself 
of  the  felony  ;  yet  if  it  he  found  that  he  fled  for 
the  felony,  he  shall  notwithstanding  his  innocency, 
forfeit  all  his  goods,  chattels,  dehts,  and  duties. 
For  as  to  the  forfeiture  of  them,  the  law  will  ad- 
mit no  proof  against  the  presumption  in  law, 
grounded  upon  his  flight.  Here  you  see,  an  inno^ 
cent  mun  judicially  acquitted,  notwithstanding 
his  innocency,  when  no  written  law  forbad  him  to 
fly,  after  his  acquittal,  upon  a  presumption  in  law, 
condemned  to  lose  all  the  goods  he  hath.  If  the 
law  ground  upon  his  flight  a  presumption  of  the 
fact,  which  was  capital,  the  sentence  ought  to  have 
been  capital :  if  the  presumption  were  not  of  the 
fact,  for  what  then  ought  he  to  lose  his  goods  ? 
This  therefore  is  no  law  of  England;  nor  is  the 
condemnation  grounded  upon  a  presumption  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


266  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.    law,  but  upon  the  presumption  of  the  judges.     It 
.    ^f '    .    is  also  against  law,  to  say  that  no  proof  shall  be 
The  sentence   admitted  agaiust  a  presumption  of  law.     For  all 
not  bLd  him^  judges.  Sovereign  and  subordinate,  if  they  refuse  to 
*^  hear  proof,  refuse  to  do  justice:  for  though  the 

sentence  be  just,  yet  the  judges  tiiat  condemn 
without  hearing  the  proofs  offered,  are  unjust 
judges ;  and  their  presumption  is  but  prejudice ; 
which  no  man  ought  to  bring  with  him  to  die  seat 
of  justice,  whatsoever  precedent  judgments,  or  ex- 
amples he  shall  pretend  to  follow.  There  be  other 
things  of  this  nature,  wherein  men*s  judgments 
have  been  perverted,  by  trusting  to  precedents : 
but  this  is  enough  to  show,  that  though  the  sen- 
tence of  the  judge,  be  a  law  to  the  party  pleading, 
yet  it  is  no  law  to  any  judge,  that  shall  succeed 
him  in  that  o£Bice. 

In  like  manner,  when  question  is  of  the  meaning 
of  written  laws,  he  is  not  the  interpreter  of  them, 
that  writeth  a  commentary  upon  them.  For  com- 
mentaries are  commonly  more  subject  to  cavil,  than 
the  text ;  and  therefore  need  other  commentaries ; 
and  so  there  will  be  no  end  of  such  interpretation. 
And  therefore  unless  there  be  an  interpreter  autho- 
rized by  the  sovereign,  from  which  the  subordinate 
judges  are  not  to  recede,  the  interpreter  can  be  no 
other  than  the  ordinary  judges,  in  the  same  manner, 
as  they  are  in  cases  of  the  unwritten  law ;  and  their 
sentences  are  to  be  taken  by  them  that  plead,  for 
laws  in  that  particular  case ;  but  not  to  bind  other 
judges,  in  like  cases  to  give  like  judgments.  For 
a  judge  may  err  in  the  interpretation  even  of  written 
laws ;  but  no  error  of  a  subordinate  judge,  can 
change  the  law,  which  is  the  general  sentence  of 
the  sovereign. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


OF  CIVIL  LAWS.  267 

In  written  laws,  men  use  to  make  a  difference  part  ii. 
between  the  letter,  and  the  sentence  of  the  law :  .  ^^-  ^ 
and  when  by  the  letter,  is  meant  whatsoever  can  The  difference 
be  gathered  from  the  bare  words,  it  is  well  distin-  l^t^r  and  sen- 
gnished.  For  the  significations  of  almost  all  words,  ^•"c*®^^®^'' 
are  either  in  themselves,  or  in  the  metaphorical  use 
of  them,  ambigaons ;  and  may  be  drawn  in  argu- 
ment, to  make  many  senses ;  but  there  is  only  one 
sense  of  the  law.  But  if  by  the  letter,  be  meant 
the  literal  sense,  then  the  letter,  and  the  sentence 
or  intention  of  the  law,  is  all  one.  For  the  literal 
sense  is  that,  which  the  legislator  intended,  should 
by  the  letter  of  the  law  be  signified.  Now  the  inten- 
tion of  the  legislator  is  always  supposed  to  be  equity : 
for  it  were  a  great  contumely  for  a  judge  to  think 
otherwise  of  the  sovereign.  He  ought  therefore, 
if  the  word  of  the  law  do  not  fully  authorize  a  rea- 
sonable sentence,  to  supply  it  with  the  law  of  nature; 
or  if  the  case  be  di£Bicult,  to  respite  judgment  till 
he  have  received  more  ample  authority.  For  ex- 
ample, a  written  law  ordaineth,  that  he  which  is 
thrust  out  of  his  house  by  force,  shall  be  restored 
by  force :  it  happens  that  a  man  by  negligence 
leaves  his  house  empty,  and  returning  is  kept  out 
by  fi)rce,  in  which  case  there  is  no  special  law  or- 
dained. It  is  evident  that  this  case  is  contained  in 
the  same  law :  for  else  there  is  no  remedy  for  him 
at  all ;  which  is  to  be  supposed  against  the  inten- 
tion of  the  legislator.  Again,  the  word  of  the  law 
commandeth  to  judge  according  to  the  evidence : 
a  man  is  accused  falsely  of  a  fact,  which  the  judge 
himself  saw  done  by  another,  and  not  by  him  that 
is  accused.  In  this  case  neither  shall  the  letter  of 
the  law  be  followed  to  the  condemnation  of  the  in- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


268 


OF  COMMONWEALTH. 


The  abilities 
required  ia 
a  judge. 


PART  11.  nocent,  nor  shall  the  judge  give  sentence  against 
.  ^f-  .  the  evidence  of  the  witnesses ;  because  the  letter  of 
the  law  is  to  the  contrary :  but  procure  of  the  sove- 
reign that  another  be  made  judge,  and  himself 
witness.  So  that  the  incommodity  that  follows  the 
bare  words  of  a  written  law,  may  lead  him  to  the  in- 
tention of  the  law,  whereby  to  interpret  the  same  the 
better ;  though  no  incommodity  can  warrant  a  sen- 
tence against  the  law.  For  every  judge  of  right, 
and  wrong,  is  not  judge  of  what  is  commodious, 
or  incommodious  to  the  commonwealth. 

The  abilities  required  in  a  good  interpreter  of 
the  law,  that  is  to  say,  in  a  good  judge,  are  not  the 
same  with  those  of  an  advocate ;  namely  the  study 
of  the  laws.  For  a  judge,  as  he  ought  to  take 
notice  of  the  fact,  from  none  but  the  witnesses ;  so 
also  he  ought  to  take  notice  of  the  law  from  nothing 
but  the  statutes,  and  constitutions  of  the  sovereign, 
alleged  in  the  pleading,  or  declared  to  him  by 
some  that  have  authority  from  the  sovereign  power 
to  declare  them ;  and  need  not  take  care  brfore- 
hand,  what  he  shall  judge ;  for  it  shall  be  given 
him  what  he  shall  say  concerning  the  fact,  by  wit- 
nesses ;  and  what  he  shall  say  in  point  of  law^  from 
those  that  shall  in  their  pleadings  show  it,  and  by 
authority  interpret  it  upon  the  place.  The  Lords 
of  parUament  in  England  were  judges,  and  most 
difficult  causes  have  been  heard  and  determined  by 
them ;  yet  few  of  them  were  much  versed  in  the 
study  of  the  laws,  and  fewer  had  made  profession 
of  them :  and  though  they  consulted  with  lawyers, 
that  were  appointed  to  be  present  there  for  that 
purpose  ;  yet  they  alone  had  the  authority  of  giving 
sentence.     In  like  manner,  in  the  ordinary  trials  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  CIVIL  LAWS.  269 

right,  twelve  men  of  the  common  people,  are  the   part  ii. 
judges,  and  give  sentence,  not  only  of  the  fact,  but    ,-^f-  .. 
of  the  right;  and  pronotmce  simply  for  the  com- The awutiet 
plainant,  or  for  the  defendant ;  that  is  to  say,  are  ITjudge. 
judges,  not  only  of  the  fact,  but  also  of  the  right : 
and  m  a  question  of  crime,  not  only  determine 
whether  done,  or  not  done ;  but  also  whether  it 
be  murder y  homicidey  felony <,  assault ^  and  the  like, 
which  are  determinations  of  law :  but  because  they 
are  not  supposed  to  know  the  law  of  themselves, 
there  is  one  that  hath  authority  to  inform  them  of 
it,  in  the  particular  case  they  are  to  judge  of.     But 
yet  if  they  judge  not  according  to  that  he  tells  them, 
they  are  not  subject  thereby  to  any  penalty ;  unless 
it  be  made  appear,  that  they  did  it  against  their 
consciences,  or  had  been  corrupted  by  reward. 

The  things  that  make  a  good  judge,  or  good  in- 
terpreter of  the  laws,  are,  first,  a  right  under- 
standing of  that  principal  law  of  nature  called 
equity;  which  depending  not  on  the  reading  of 
other  men's  writings,  but  on  the  goodness  of  a  man's 
own  natural  reason,  and  meditation,  is  presumed 
to  be  in  those  most,  that  have  had  most  leisure, 
and  had  the  most  inclination  to  meditate  thereon. 
Secondly,  contempt  of  unnecessary  riches^  and 
preferments.  Thirdly,  to  be  able  in  judgment  to 
divest  himself  of  all  fear y  anger ^  hatred^  lovcy 
and  compassion.  Fourthly,  and  lastly,  patience  to 
hear;  diligent  attention  in  hearing;  and  memory 
to  retain,  digest  and  apply  what  he  hath  heard. 

The  diflference  and  chvision  of  the  laws,  has  been  Divinoni 
made  in  divers  manners,  according  to  the  diflferent  ^ 
methods,  of  those  men  that  have  written  of  them. 
For  it  is  a  thing  that  dependeth  not  on  nature,  but 


Digitized  by 


Google 


270 


OP  COMMONWEALTH. 


DiviuooB  of 
law. 


PART  II.  on  the  scope  of  the  writer ;  and  is  subservient  to 
.  ^^'  .  every  man*s  proper  method.  In  the  Institutions  of 
Justinian,  we  find  seven  sorts  of  civil  laws : 

1 .  The  edicts y  constitutions,  and  epistles  of  the 
prince,  that  is,  of  the  emperor ;  because  the  whole 
power  of  the  people  was  in  him.  like  these,  are 
the  proclamations  of  the  kings  of  England. 

2.  The  decrees  of  the  whole  people  of  Rome, 
comprehending  the  senate,  when  they  were  put  to 
the  question  by  the  senate.  These  were  laws,  at 
first,  by  the  virtue  of  the  sovereign  power  residing 
in  the  people ;  and  such  of  them  as  by  the  emperors 
were  not  abrogated,  remained  laws,  by  the  au- 
thority imperial.  For  all  laws  that  bind,  are  un- 
derstood to  be  laws  by  his  authority  that  has  power 
to  repeal  them.  Somewhat  like  to  these  laws,  are 
the  acts  of  parliament  in  England. 

3.  The  decrees  of  the  common  people,  excluding 
the  senate,  when  they  were  put  to  the  question  by 
the  tribune  of  the  people.  For  such  of  them  as 
were  not  abrogated  by  the  emperors,  remained 
laws  by  the  authority  imperial.  Like  to  these,  were 
the  orders  of  the  House  of  Commons  in  England. 

4.  Senatus  consult  a,  the  orders  of  the  senate  ; 
because  when  the  people  of  Rome  grew  so  numer- 
ous, as  it  was  inconvenient  to  assemble  them ;  it 
was  thought  fit  by  the  emperor,  that  men  should 
consult  the  senate,  instead  of  the  people ;  and  these 
have  some  resemblance  vnth  the  acts  of  counciL 

5.  The  edicts  of  praetors,  and  in  some  cases  of 
€Bdiles :  such  as  are  the  chief  justices  in  the  courts 
of  England. 

6.  Responsa  prudentum ;  which  were  the  sen- 
tences, and  opinion  of  those  lawyers,  to  whom  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Another  divi- 
sion of  law. 


OF  CIVIL  LAWS.  271 

emperor  gave  authority  to  interpret  the  law,  and  to   part  ii 
give  answer  to  such  as  in  matter  of  law  demanded     _^f'    ^ 
their  advice ;  which  answers,  the  judges  in  giving 
judgment  were  obliged  by  the  constitutions  of  the 
emperor  to  observe :  and  should  be  like  the  reports 
of  cases  judged,  if  other  judges  be  by  the  law  of  Eng-        ^ 
land  boimd  to  observe  tiiem.  For  the  judges  of  the 
common  law  of  England,  are  not  properly  judges, 
but  juris  consulti ;  of  whom  the  judges,  who  are 
either  the  lords,  or  twelve  men  of  the  country,  are 
in  point  of  law  to  ask  advice. 

7.  Also,  unwritten  customs,  which  in  their  own 
nature  are  an  imitation  of  law,  by  the  tacit  consent 
of  the  emperor,  in  case  they  be  not  contrary  to  the 
law  of  nature,  are  very  laws. 

Another  division  of  laws,  is  into  naturaVciXiA 
positive.  Natural  are  those  which  have  been  laws 
from  all  eternity  ;  and  are  called  not  only  natural, 
but  also  moral  laws  ;  consisting  in  the  moral  vir- 
tues, as  justice,  equity,  and  all  habits  of  the  mind 
that  conduce  to  peace,  and  charity ;  of  which  I 
have  already  spoken  in  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth 
chaptersv^^ 

Positi^  are  those  which  have  not  been  from 
eternity ;  but  have  been  made  laws  by  the  will  of 
those  that  have  had  the  sovereign  power  over 
others ;  and  are  either  written,  or  made  known  to 
men,  by  some  other  argument  of  the  will  of  their 
legislator. 

Again,  of  positive  laws  some  are  human,  some 
divine ;  and  of  human  positive  laws,  some  are  dis^ 
trihutivej  some  penal.  Distributive  are  those  that 
determine  the  rights  of  the  subjects,  declaring  to 
every  man  what  it  is,  by  which  he  acquireth  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


272  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  holdeth  a  propriety  in  lands,  or  goods,  and  a  right 
.  ^*  ,  or  liberty  of  action :  and  these  speak  to  all  the 
subjects.  Penal  are  those,  which  declare,  what 
penalty  shall  be  inflicted  on  those  that  violate  the 
law;  and  speak  to  the  ministers  and  officers  or- 
dained for  execution.  For  though  every  one  ought 
to  be  informed  of  the  punishments  ordained  be- 
forehand for  their  transgression ;  nevertheless  the 
command  is  not  addressed  to  the  delinquent,  who 
cannot  be  supposed  will  faithfully  punish  himself, 
but  to  public  ministers  appointed  to  see  the  penalty 
executed.  And  these  penal  laws  are  for  the  most 
part  written  together  with  the  laws  distributive ; 
and  are  sometimes  called  judgments.  For  all  laws 
are  general  judgments,  or  sentences  of  the  legisla- 
tor ;  as  also  every  particular  judgment,  is  a  law  to 
him,  whose  case  is  judged. 
Uw  hoi?^lIdr  -Oif?fW  positive  laws  (for  natural  laws  being  eter- 
known  to  be  nal,  and  universal,  are  all  divine),  are  those,  which 
being  the  commandments  of  God,  not  from  all 
eternity,  nor  universally  addressed  to  all  men,  but 
only  to  a  certain  people,  or  to  certain  persons,  are 
declared  for  such,  by  those  whom  God  hath  autho- 
rized to  declare  them.  But  this  authority  of  man 
to  declare  what  be  these  positive  laws  of  God,  how 
can  it  be  known  ?  God  may  command  a  man  by  a 
supernatural  way,  to  deliver  laws  to  other  men. 
But  because  it  is  of  the  essence  of  law,  that  he  who 
is  to  be  obliged,  be  assured  of  the  authority  of  him 
that  declareth  it,  which  we  cannot  naturally  take 
notice  to  be  from  God,  how  can  a  man  without 
supernatural  revelation  he  assured  of  the  revela- 
tion received  hy  the  declarer  ?  and  how  can  he  he 
hound  to  ohey  them  ?     For  the  first  question,  how 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  CIVIL  LAWS.  273 

a  man  can  be  assured  of  the  revelation  of  another,  part  u. 
without  a  revelation  particularly  to  himself,  it  is  ^J^l— 
evidently  impossible.    For  though  a  man  may  benivinepowtire 

.      ,  1  IT  1  1      .  /•  _      "^      .    law  how  made 

mduced  to  believe  such  revelation,  from  the  mi-  known  to  be 
racles  they  see  him  do,  or  from  seeing  the  extra-  ^*''' 
ordinary  sanctity  of  his  life,  or  from  seeing  the 
extraordinary  wisdom,  or  extraordinary  felicity  of 
his  actions,  all  which  are  marks  of  God*s  extraor- 
dinary favour  ;  yet  they  are  not  assured  evidences 
of  special  revelation.  Miracles  are  marvellous 
works  :  but  that  which  is  marvellous  to  one,  may 
not  be  so  to  another.  Sanctity  may  be  feigned ; 
and  the  visible  felicities  of  this  world,  are  most 
often  the  work  of  God  by  natural,  and  ordinary 
causes.  And  therefore  no  man  can  infallibly  know 
by  natural  reason,  that  another  has  had  a  super- 
natural revelation  of  God's  will ;  but  only  a  belief ; 
every  one,  as  the  signs  thereof  shall  appear  greater 
or  lesser,  a  firmer  or  a  weaker  belief. 

But  for  the  second,  how  can  he  be  bound  to 
obey  them ;  it  is  not  so  hard.  For  if  the  law  de- 
clared, be  not  against  the  law  of  nature,  which  is 
undoubtedly  God's  law,  and  he  undertake  to  obey 
it,  he  is  bound  by  his  own  act ;  bound  I  say  to 
obey  it,  but  not  bound  to  believe  it :  for  men's 
belief,  and  interior  cogitations,  are  not  subject  to 
the  commands,  but  only  to  the  operation  of  God, 
ordinary,  or  extraordinary.  Faith  of  supernatural 
law,  is  not  a  fulfilling,  but  only  an  assenting  to  the 
same ;  and  not  a  duty  that  we  exhibit  to  God,  but 
a  gift  which  God  freely  giveth  to  whom  he  pleaseth ; 
as  also  unbeUef  is  not  a  breach  of  any  of  his  laws ; 
but  a  rejection  of  them  all;  except  the  laws  natural. 
But  this  that  I  say,  will  be  made  yet  clearer,  by  the 

VOL.  III.  T 


Digitized  by 


Google 


374  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  11.   examples  and  testimonies  concerning  this  point  in 

.    ^f*  ,>    holy  Scripture.     The  covenant  God  made  with 

Dinnepofitive  Abraham, in  a  supernatural  manner,  was  thus,  (Gen. 

law  how  mad*       ..  _,_  ,     ,      ^  ».».  iii 

known  to  be  xvu.  10)  i  Ats  ts  the  covetumt  whtch  thou  Shalt  ob- 
serve between  me  and  thee  and  thy  seed  qfter  thee. 
Abraham's  seed  had  not  this  revelation,  nor  were 
yet  in  being ;  yet  they  are  a  party  to  the  covenant, 
and  bound  to  obey  what  Abraham  should  declare 
to  them  for  God's  law ;  which  they  could  not  be,  but 
in  virtue  of  the  obedience  they  owed  to  their 
parents ;  who,  if  they  be  subject  to  no  other 
earthly  power,  as  here  in  the  case  of  Abraham, 
have  sovereign  power  over  their  children  and  ser- 
vants. Again,  where  God  saith  to  Abraham,  In  thee 
shall  all  nations  of  the  earth  he  blessed;  for  I 
know  thou  wilt  command  thy  children^  and  thy 
house  €{fter  thee  to  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord^  and 
to  observe  righteousness  and  judgment ,  it  is  mani* 
fest,  the  obedience  of  his  family,  who  had  no  reve- 
lation, depended  on  their  former  obligation  to  obey 
their  sovereign.  At  Mount  Sinai  Moses  only  went 
up  to  God ;  the  people  were  forbidden  to  approach 
on  pain  of  death;  yet  they  were  bound  to  obey  all 
that  Moses  declared  to  them  for  God's  law.  Upon 
what  ground,  but  on  this  submission  of  their  own. 
Speak  thou  to  us,  and  we  will  hear  thee  ;  but  let 
not  God  speak  to  us,  lest  we  die  f  By  which  two 
places  it  sufficiently  appeareth,  that  in  a  common- 
wealth, a  subject  that  has  no  certain  and  assured 
revelation  particularly  to  himself  concerning  the 
will  of  God,  is  to  obey  for  such,  the  command  of 
the  commonwealth :  for  if  men  were  at  liberty,  to 
take  for  God's  commandments,  their  own  dreams 
and  fancies,  or  the  dreams  and  fancies  of  private 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  CIVIL  LAWS.  275 

men  ;  scarce  two  men  would  agree  upon  what  is    part  il 
God's  commandment ;  and  yet  in  respect  of  them,    .,  '^'  ,. 
every  man  would  despise  the  commandments  of  the  pivinopo«tive 
commonwealth.     I  conclude  therefore,  that  m  all  known  to  be 
things  not  contrary  to  the  moral  law,  that  is  to  *^' 
say,  to  the  law  of  nature,  all  subjects  are  bound  to 
obey  that  for  divine  law,  which  is  declared  to  be 
so,  by  the  laws  of  the  commonwealth.    Which  also 
is  evident  to  any  man's  reason ;  for  whatsoever  is 
not  against  the  law  of  nature,  may  be  made  law  in 
the  name  of  them  that  have  the  sovereign  power ; 
and  there  is  no  reason  men  should  be  the  less 
obliged  by  it,  when  it  is  propounded  in  the  name 
of  God.     Besides,  there  is  no  place  in  the  world 
where  men  are  permitted  to  pretend  other  com- 
mandments of  God,  than  are  declared  for  such  by 
the  commonwealth.     Christian  states  punish  those 
that  revolt  from  the  Christian  religion,  and  all  other 
states,  those  that  set  up  any  religion  by  them  for- 
bidden.    For  in  whatsoever  is  not  regulated  by  the 
commonwealth,  it  is  equity,  which  is  the  law  of 
nature,  and  therefore  an  eternal  law  of  God,  that 
every  man  equally  enjoy  his  liberty. 

There  is  also  another  distinction  of  laws,  into  4'*^*^/f  ^^- 

non  of  laws. 

Jkndamental  and  not  fundamental ;  but  I  could 
never  see  in  any  author,  what  a  fundamental  law 
signifieth.  Nevertheless  one  may  very  reasonably 
distinguish  laws  in  that  manner. 

For  a  fundamental  law  in  every  commonwealth  ^^"^^iJ2?*°'*^ 
is  that,  which  being  taken  away,  the  common- 
wealth faileth,  and  is  utterly  dissolved ;  as  a  build- 
ing whose  foundation  is  destroyed.  And  therefore 
a  fundamental  law  is  that,  by  which  subjects  are 
bound  to  uphold  whatsoever  power  is  given  to  the 

T  2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


876  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

FA&T  n.  sovereign,  wheth^  a  monarch,  or  a  sovereign  as^ 
_^'  -  sembly,  without  which  the  commonwealth  cannot 
stand  ;  snch  as  is*  the  power  of  wsr  and  peace,  of 
judicature,  of  election  of  officers,  and  of  doing  what- 
soever he  shall  think  necessary  for  the  public  good. 
Not  fundamental  is  that,  the  abrogating  whereof, 
draweth  not  widi  it  the  dissolution  of  the  common- 
wealth ;  such  as  are  the  laws  concerning  contro- 
versies between  subject  and  subject.  Thus  much 
of  the  division  of  laws. 
^^*5J^  I  find  the  words  lex  civilis,  and  Jus  civile,  that 
•nd  right.  is  to  Say  Uiw  and  right  civil,  promiscuously  used  for 
the  same  thing,  even  in  the  most  learned  authors ; 
which  nevertheless  ought  not  to  be  so.  For  right 
is  liberty,  namely  that  liberty  which  the  civil  law 
r>,  ii^\iov^^^t^ea,yesdWi :  but  civil  law  is  an  obligation,  and  takes 
from  us  the  liberty  which  the  law  of  nature  gave 
Us.  Nature  gave  a  right  to  every  man  to  secure 
himself  by  his  own  strength,  and  to  invade  a  sus- 
pected neighbour,  by  way  of  prevention :  but  the 
civil  law  takes  away  that  liberty,  in  all  cases  where 
the  protection  of  the  law  may  be  safely  stayed  for. 
Insomuch  as  lex  and  Jus,  are  as  different  as  obli^ 
gation  and  liberty. 
iltJ^d^^  Likewise  laws  and  charters  are  taken  promiscu- 
a  charter.  ously  for  the  Same  thing.  Yet  charters  are  dona- 
tions of  the  sovereign ;  and  not  laws,  but  exemp- 
tions from  law.  The  phrase  of  a  law  is,  Jubeo^ 
ifijungo,  I  command  and  enjoin :  the  phrase  of  a 
charter  is,  dedi,  concessi,  I  have  given,  I  have 
granted:  but  what  is  given  or  granted,  to  a  man, 
is  not  forced  upon  him,  by  a  law.  A  law  may  be 
made  to  bind  all  the  subjects  of  a  commonwealth : 
a  liberty,  or  charter  is  only  to  one  man,  or  some 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  CIVIL  LAWS.  277 

one  part  of  the  people.    For  to  say  all  the  people   part  ii. 
of  a  commonwealth,  have  liberty  in  any  case  what-   .  ^-    . 
soever,  is  to  say,  that  in  such,  case,   there  hath 
been  no  law  made  ;  or  else  having  been  made,  is 
now  abrogated. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

OF  CRIMES,  EXCUSES,  AND  EXTENUATIONS. 

A  sm,  is  not  only  a  transgression  of  a  law,  but  sin»  what 
alroany  contempt  of  the  legislator.  For  such  con- 
tempt, is  a  breach  of  all  his  laws  at  once.  And 
therefore  may  consist,  not  only  in  the  commission 
of  a  fact,  or  in  speaking  of  words  by  the  laws  for- 
i)idden,  or  in  the  omission  of  what  the  law  com- 
mandeth,  but  also  in  the  intention,  or  purpose  to 
transgress.  For  the  purpose  to  break  the  law,  is 
some  degree  of  contempt  of  him,  to  whom  it  be- 
longeth  to  see  it  executed.  To  be  delighted  in  the 
imagination  only,  of  being  possessed  of  another 
man's  goods,  servants,  or  wife,  without  any  inten- 
tion to  take  them  from  him  by  force  or  fraud,  is 
no  breach  of  the  law,  that  saith.  Thou  shalt  not 
covet :  nor  is  the  pleasure  a  man  may  have  in  ima- 
gining or  dreaming  of  the  death  of  him,  from 
whose  life  he  expecteth  nothing  but  damage,  and 
displeasure,  a  sin ;  but  the  resolving  to  put  some 
act  in  execution,  that  tendeth  thereto.  For  to  be 
pleased  in  the  fiction  of  that,  which  would  please  a 
man  if  it  were  real,  is  a  passion  so  adherent  to  the 
nature  both  of  man,  and  every  other  living  crea- 
ture, as  to  make  it  a  sin,  were  to  make  sin  of  being 
a  man.    The  consideration  of  this,  has  made  me 


Digitized  by 


Google 


278  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PARTu.  think  th^m  too  severe,  both  to  themselyes>  and 
.  ^J'  others,  that  maintain,  that  the  first  motions  of  the 
mind,  though  checked  with  the  fear  of  God,  be 
sins.  But  I  confess  it  is  safer  to  err  on  that  hand, 
than  on  the  other. 
A  crime,  what  A  CRIMB,  is  a  siu,  cousistiug  in  the  committing, 
by  deed  or  word,  of  that  which  the  law  forbiddeth, 
or  the  omission  of  what  it  hath  commanded.  So 
that  every  crime  is  a  sin;  but  not  every  sin  a 
crime.  To  intend  to  steal,  or  kill,  is  a  "sin,  though 
it  never  appear  in  word,  or  fact:  for  God  that 
seeth  the  thoughts  of  man,  can  lay  it  to  his  charge : 
but  till  it  appear  by  something  done,  or  said,  by 
which  the  intention  may  be  argued  by  a  human 
judge,  it  hath  not  the  name  of  crime :  which  dis- 
tinction the  Greeks  observed,  in  the  word  afxaprnfuh 
and  ey/cXi?/ia,  or  aiTia  J  whcrcof  the  former,  which 
is  translated  *m,  signifieth  any  swerving  from  the 
law  whatsoever;  but  the  two  latter,  which  are 
translated  crime^  signify  that  sin  only,  whereof 
one  man  may  accuse  another.  But  of  intentions, 
which  nevCT  appear  by  any  outward  act,  there  is 
no  place  for  human  accusation.  In  like  manner 
the  Latins  by  pec€€Uumy  which  is  sin,  signify  all 
manner  of  deviation  from  the  law ;  but  by  critnen^ 
which  word  they  .derive  fix)m  cemo,  which  signi- 
fies to  perceive y  they  mean  only  such  sins,  as  may 
be  made  appear  before  a  judge ;  and  therefore  are 
not  mere  intentions. 
Where  no  civil  From  this  relation  of  sin  to  the  law,  and  of  crime 
*  nJcrime.^""  to  the  civU  law,  may  be  inferred,  first,  that  where 
law  ceaseth,  sin  ceaseth.  But  because  the  law  <rf 
nature  is  eternal^  violation  of  covenants,  ingrati- 
tude, arrogance,  and  all  facts  contrary  to  any 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


OF  CBIME6,  EXCUSES,  ETC.  279 

moral  virtue,  can  never  cease  to  be  sin.  Secondly,  part  ii. 
that  the  civil  law  ceasing,  crimes  cease :  for  there  ^  ^f*  ^ 
being  no  other  law  remaining,  bnt  that  of  nature, 
there  is  no  place  for  accusation ;  every  man  being 
his  own  judge,  and  accused  only  by  his  own  con- 
science, and  cleared  by  the  uprightness  of  his  own 
intention.  When  therefore  his  intention  is  right, 
his  fact  is  no  sin  :  if  otherwise,  his  fact  is  sin ;  but 
not  crime.  Thirdly,  that  when  the  sovereign  power 
ceaseth,  crime  also  ceaseth  ;  for  where  there  is  no 
such  power,  there  is  no  protection  to  be  had  from 
the  law ;  and  therefore  every  one  may  protect  him- 
self by  his  own  power :  for  no  man  in  the  institu- 
tion of  sovereign  power  can  be  supposed  to  give 
away  the  right  of  preserving  his  own  body ;  for 
the  safety  whereof  all  sovereignty  was  ordained. 
But  this  is  to  be  understood  only  of  those,  that 
have  not  themselves  contributed  to  the  taking  away 
of  the  power  that  protected  them ;  for  that  was  a 
crime  from  the  beginning. 

The  source  of  every  crime,  is  some  defect  of  the  ignorance  of 

i        ^        ,.  .  ,  the  law  of  na* 

understanding;  or  some  error  m  reasonmg;  or  tare  ezctueth 
some  sudden  force  of  the  passions.  Defect  in  the  ^^  ""^ 
understanding,  is  ignarante,;  in  reasoning,  erro- 
neous  opinion.  Again,  ignorance  is  of  three  sorts ; 
of  the  law,  and  of  the  sovereign,  and  of  ih^  penalty. 
Ignorance  of  the  law  of  nature  excuseth  no  man ; 
because  every  man  that  hath  attained  to  the  use  of 
reason,  is  supposed  to  know,  he  ought  not  to  do  to 
another,  what  he  would  not  have  done  to  himself. 
Therefore  into  what  place  soever  a  man  shall  come, 
if  he  do  anything  contrary  to  that  law,  it  is  a  crime. 
If  a  man  come  from  the  Indies  hither,  and  per- 
suade men  here  to  receive  a  new  religion,  or  teach 


t 


Digitized  by 


Google 


280 


OF  COMMONWEALTH. 


PART  II. 
27. 


Ignonmce  of 
the  civil  law 
ezcuseth 
lometimet. 


IgpAonnce  of 
the  Bovereign 
excuaeth  not. 


Ignorance  of 
the  penalty 
excuseth  not. 


them  anything  that  tendeth  to  disobedience  of  the 
laws  of  this  country,  though  he  be  never  so  well 
persuaded  of  the  truth  of  what  he  teacheth,  he 
commits  a  crime,  and  may  be  justly  punished  tor 
the  same,  not  only  because  his  doctrine  is  false, 
but  also  because  he  does  that  which  he  would  not 
approve  in  another,  namely,  that  coming  from 
hence,  he  should  endeavour  to  alter  the  religion 
there.  But  ignorance  of  the  civil  law,  shall  excuse 
a  man  in  a  strange  country,  till  it  be  declared  to 
him ;  because,  till  then  no  civil  law  is  binding. 

In  the  like  manner,  if  the  civil  law  of  a  man^s 
own  country,  be  not  so  sufficiently  declared,  as  be 
may  know  it  if  he  will ;  nor  the  action  against  the 
law  of  nature  ;  the  ignorance  is  a  good  excuse :  in 
other  cases  ignorance  of  the  civU  law,  excuseth 
not. 

Ignorance  of  the  sovereign  power,  in  the  place 
of  a  man's  ordinary  residence,  excuseth  him  not ; 
because  he  ought  to  take  notice  of  the  power,  by 
which  he  hath  been  protected  there. 

Ignorance  of  the  penalty,  where  the  law  is  de- 
clared, excuseth  no  man  :  for  in  breaking  the  law, 
which  without  a  fear  of  penalty  to  follow,  were  not 
a  law,  but  vain  words,  he  undergoeth  the  penalty, 
though  he  know  not  what  it  is ;  because,  who- 
soever voluntarily  doth  any  action,  accepteth  all 
the  known  consequences  of  it ;  but  punishment  is 
a  known  consequence  of  the  violation  of  the  laws, 
in  every  commonwealth ;  which  punishment,  if  it 
be  determined  already  by  the  law,  he  is  subject  to 
that ;  if  not,  then  he  is  subject  to  arbitrary  punish- 
ment. For  it  is  reason,  that  he  which  does  injury, 
without  other  limitation  than  that  of  his  own  will, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  CRIMES,  EXCUSES,  ETC.  281 

should  suffer  punishment  without  other  limitation,    part  ii. 
than  that  of  his  will  whose  law  is  thereby  violated.    .^^'    . 

But  when  a  penalty,  is  either  annexed  to  the  Punishmente 
crime  in  the  law  itself,  or  hath  been  usually  in- thefi^t,  excuse 
flicted  in  the  like  cases ;  there  the  delinquent  is  ^^gSmenu 
excused  from  a  greater  penalty.     For  the  punish-  »^''  >*• 
ment  foreknown,  if  not  great  enough  to  deter  men 
from  the  action,  is  an  invitement  to  it :  because 
when  men  compare  the  benefit  of  their  injustice, 
with  the  harm  of  their  punishment,  by  necessity  of 
nature  they  chuse  that  which  appeareth  best  for 
themselves  :  and  therefore  when  they  are  punished 
more  than  the  law  had  formerly  determined,  or 
more  than  others  were  punished  for  the  same  crime ; 
it  is  the  law  that  tempted,  and  deceiveth  them. 

No  law,  made  after  a  fact  done,  can  make  it  Nothing  can  b« 
a  crime  :  because  if  the  fact  be  against  the  law  of  by  a  Uw  made 
nature,  the  law  was  before  the  fact ;  and  a  positive  ^^^  ^®  ^^ 
law  cannot  be  taken  notice  of,  before  it  be  made ; 
and  therefore  cannot  be  obligatory.     But  when  the 
law  that  forbiddeth  a  fact,  is  made  before  the  fact 
be  done ;  yet  he  that  doth  the  fact,  is  liable  to  the 
penalty  ordained  after,  in  case  no  lesser  penalty 
were  made  known  before,  neither  by  writing,  nor 
by  example,   for  the  reason  immediately  before 
alleged. 

From  defect  in  reasonincr,  that  is  to  say,  from  False  princi- 

.1  11.  Ple»  of  right 

error,  men  are  prone  to  violate  the  laws,  three  &  wrong  caa- 
ways.  First,  by  presumption  of  false  principles  :***°^*^"™*' 
as  when  men,  from  having  observed  how  in  all 
places,  and  in  all  ages,  unjust  actions  have  been 
authorized,  by  the  force,  and  victories  of  those  who 
have  committed  them ;  and  that  potent  men,  break- 
ing through  the  cobweb  laws  of  their  country,  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


282  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  weaker  sort,  and  those  that  have  fedled  in  their 
^  ^^*  _  enterprises,  have  been  esteemed  the  only  criminals; 
have  thereupon  taken  for  principles,  and  grounds 
of  their  reasoning,  that  justice  is  hut  a  vain  ward: 
that  whatsoever  a  man  can  get  hy  his  own  indus- 
try ^  and  hazard i  is  his  own  :  that  the  practice  of 
aU  nations  cannot  he  unjust :  that  examples  ^ 
former  times  are  good  arguments  of  doing  the 
like  again  ;  and  many  more  of  that  kind  :  which 
being  granted,  no  act  in  itself  can  be  a  crime,  bat 
must  be  made  so,  not  by  the  law,  but  by  the  suc- 
cess of  them  that  commit  it ;  and  the  same  fact  be 
virtuous,  or  vicious,  as  fortune  pleaseth ;  so  that 
what  Marius  makes  a  crime,  Sylla  shall  make 
meritorious,  and  Csesar,  the  same  laws  standing, 
turn  again  into  a  crime,  to  the  perpetual  disturb- 
ance of  the  peace  of  the  commonwealth. 
Faite  teachen     Sccoudly,  by  falsc  tcachcrs,  that  either  mi»n- 

mif-interpret-  i       t  i.  i  •        •      i  i 

iog  the  law  of  tcrprct  the  law  of  nature,  makmg  it  thereby  repug- 

"**"'*'  nant  to  the  law  civil ;   or  by  teaching  for  laws, 

such  doctrines  of  their  own,  or  traditions  of  for« 

mer  times,  as  are  inconsistent  with  the  duty  <rf  a 

subject. 

And  &ife  in-       Thirdly,  by  erroneous  inferences  from  true  prin- 

ferences  ifrom       .    .  i  .    i    i  i  i 

tnieprindpiet,  ciplcs ;  which  happcus  commouly  to  men  that  are 
by  teachen.  \^^^^  ^^^  precipitate  iu  concluding,  and  resolving 
what  to-  do ;  such  as  are  they,  that  have  both  a 
great  opinion  of  their  own  understanding,  and 
believe  that  things  of  this  nature  require  not  time 
and  study,  but  only  common  experience,  and  a 
good  natural  wit ;  whereof  no  man  thinks  himsdf 
unprovided  :  whereas  the  knowledge,  of  right  and 
wrong,  which  is  no  less  difl&cult,  there  is  no  man 
will  pretend  to,  without  great  and  long  study. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  CRIMBS,  EXCUSES^  ETC.  283 

And  of  those  defedts  in  reasoning,  there  is  none  part  ii. 
that  can  excuse,  though  some  of  them  may  exte-^  ^  ^f-'  , 
naate,  a  crime  in  any  man^  that  pretendeth  to  the 
administration  of  his  own  private  business ;  much 
less  in  them  that  undertake  a  public  charge ; 
because  they  pretend  to  the  reason,  upon  the  want 
whereof  they  would  ground  thdr  excuse. 

Of  the  passions  that  most  frequently  are  the  By  their 
causes  of  crime,  one,  is  ram  glory,  or  a  foolish  over- 
rating of  their  own  worth;  as  if  difiFerence  of 
worth,  were  an  eflPect  of  their  wit,  or  riches,  or 
blood,  or  some  other  natural  quality,  not  depend- 
ing on  the  will  of  those  that  have  the  sovereign 
authority.  From  whence  proceedeth  a  presump- 
tion that  the  punishments  ordained  by  the  laws, 
and  extended  generally  to  all  subjects,  ought  not  . 
to  be  inflicted  on  them,  with  the  same  rigour  they 
are  inflicted  on  poor,  obscure,  and  simple  men, 
comprehended  under  the  name  of  the  vulgar. 

Therefore  it  happeneth  commonly,  that  such  as  ^/^"p*"®" 
value  themselves  by  the  greatness  of  their  wealth, 
adventure  on  crimes,  upon  hope  of  escaping  punish- 
ment, by  corrupting  public  justice,  or  obtaining 
pardon  by  money,  or  other  rewards. 

And  that  such  as  have  multitude  of  potent  kin-  And  fnendi. 
dred;  and  popular  men,  that  have  gained  repu- 
tation amongst  the  multitude,  take  courage  to 
violate  the  laws,  from  a  hope  of  oppressing  the 
power,  to  whom  it  belongeth  to  put  them  in 
execution. 

And  that  such  as  have  a  great,  and  false  opinion  wisdom, 
of  their  own  wisdom,  take  upon  them  to  reprehend 
the  actions,  and  call  in  question  the  authority  of 
them  that  govern,  and  so  to  unsettle  the  laws  with 


Digitized  by 


Google 


284 


OF  COMMONWEALTH. 


Wiadom. 


PARTU.  their  public  discourse,  as  that  nothing  shall  be 
.  ^'  .  a  crime,  but  what  their  own  designs  require  should 
be  so.  It  happeneth  also  to  the  same  men,  to  be 
prone  to  all  such  crimes,  as  consist  in  craft,  and 
in  deceiving  of  their  neighbours;  because  they 
think  their  designs  are  too  subtle  to  be  perceivecL 
These  I  say  are  effects  of  a  false  presumption  of 
their  own  wisdom.  For  of  them  that  are  the  first 
movers  in  the  disturbance  of  commonwealth,  which 
can  never  happen  without  a  civil  war,  very  few  are 
left  alive  long  enough,  to  see  their  new  designs 
established:  so  that  the  benefit  of  their  crimes 
redoundeth  to  posterity,  and  such  as  would  least 
have  wished  it :  which  argues  they  were  not  so 
wise,  as  they  thought  they  were.  And  those  that 
deceive  upon  hope  of  not  being  observed,  do  com- 
monly deceive  themselves,  the  darkness  in  which 
they  believe  they  lie  hidden,  being  nothing  else 
but  their  own  blindness ;  and  are  no  wiser  than 
children,  that  think  all  hid,  by  hiding  their  own 
eyes. 

And  generally  all  vain-glorious  men,  unless  they 
be  withal  timorous,  are  subject  to  anger  ;  as  being 
more  prone  than  others  to  interpret  for  contempt, 
the  ordinary  liberty  of  conversation :  and  there 
are  few  crimes  that  may  not  be  produced  by  anger. 
As  for  the  passions,  of  hate,  lust,  ambition,  and 
covetousness,  what  crimes  they  are  apt  to  produce, 
is  so  obvious  to  every  man's  experience  and  underr 
standing,  as  there  needeth  nothing  to  be  said  of 
them,  saving  that  they  are  infirmities,  so  annexed 
to  the  nature,  both  of  man,  and  all  other  living 
creatures,  as  that  their  effects  cannot  be  hindered, 
but  by  extraordinary  use  of  reason,  or  a  constant 


Hatred,  lust, 
ambitioD, 
covetoasneMy 
catues  of  crime 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  CRIMES,  EXCUSES,  ETC.  285 

^verity  in  punishing  them.  For  in  those  things  part  ii. 
men  hate,  they  find  a  continual,  and  unavoidable  _^\'  . 
molestation ;  whereby  either  a  man's  patience  must 
be  everlasting,  or  he  must  be  eased  by  removing  the 
power  of  that  which  molesteth  him.  The  former  is 
difficult ;  the  latter  is  many  times  impossible,  with- 
out some  violation  of  the  law.  Ambition,  and 
covetousness  are  passions  also  that  are  perpetually 
incumbent,  and  pressing;  whereas  reason  is  not 
perpetually  present,  to  resist  them  :  and  therefore 
whensoever  the  hope  of  impunity  appears,  their 
eflfects  proceed.  And  for  lust,  what  it  wants  in  the 
lasting,  it  hath  in  the  vehemence,  which  sufficeth 
to  weigh  down  the  apprehension  of  all  easy,  or  un- 
certain punishments. 

Of  all  passions,  that  which  inclineth  men  least  to  Fearsome- 
break  the  laws,  is  fear.    Nay,  excepting  some  ge-  crime,  u  when 
nerous  natures,  it  is  the  only  thing,  when  there  is  ^ther^^nt 
apparence  of  profit  or  pleasure  by  breaking  the^^'^'P^"^ 
Iscws,  that  makes  men  keep  them.   And  yet  in  many 
cases  a  crime  may  be  committed  through  fear. 

For  not  every  fear  justifies  the  action  it  produ- 
ceth,  but  the  feieur  only  of  corporeal  hurt,  which  we 
call  bodily  fear  y  and  from  which  a  man  cannot  see 
how  to  be  delivered,  but  by  the  action.  A  man  is 
assaulted,  fears  present  death,  from  which  he  sees 
not  how  to  escape,  but  by  wounding  him  that  as- 
saulteth  him :  if  he  wound  him  to  death,  this  is  no 
crime ;  because  no  man  is  supposed  at  the  making 
of  a  commonwealth,  to  have  abandoned  the  defence 
of  his  life,  or  limbs,  where  the  law  cannot  arrive 
time  enough  to  his  assistance.  But  to  kill  a  man, 
because  from  his  actions,  or  his  threatenings,  I  may 
argue  he  will  kill  me  when  he  can,  seeing  I  have 


Digitized  by 


Google 


286  OP  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  iL   time,  and  means  to  demand  protection,  from  the 
^    ^'  _     sovereign  power,  is  a  crime.   Again,  a  man  receives 
Pear  loroe-     words  of  disgracc  or  some  litUe  injuries,  for  which 
crime,  as  when  they  that  made  the  laws,  had  assigned  no  punish- 
^eithJ?f^nt  ^^^^9  ^OT  thought  it  worthj  of  a  man  that  hath  the 
nor  corporeaL  ^g^  of  rcasoU;,  to  take  uotice  of,  and  is  afraid,  un- 
less he  revenge  it,  he  shall  fall  into  contempt,  and 
consequently  be  obnoxious  to  the  like  injuries  from 
others ;  and  to  avoid  this,  breaks  the  law,  and  pro- 
tects himself  for  the  future,  by  the  terror  of  his  pri- 
vate revenge.    This  is  a  crime :  for  the  hurt  is  not 
corporeal,  but  phantastical,  and,  though  in  this 
comer  of  the  world,  made  sensible  by  a  custom  not 
many  years  since  begun,  amongst  young  and  vain 
men,  so  light,  as  a  gallant  man,  and  one  that  is  as- 
sured of  his  own  courage,  cannot  take  notice  of. 
Also  a  man  may  stand  in  fear  of  spirits,  either 
through  his  own  superstition,  or  through  too  muek 
credit  given  to  other  men,  that  tell  him  of  strange 
dreams  and  visions ;  and  thereby  be  made  believe 
they  will  hurt  him,  for  doing,  or  omitting  divers 
things,  which  nevertheless,  to  do,  or  omit,  is  con- 
trary to  the  laws ;  and  that  which  is  so  done,  or 
omitted,  is  not  to  be  excused  by  this  fear ;  but  is  a 
crime.    For,  as  I  have  shown  before  in  the  second 
chapter,  dreams  be  naturally  but  the  fancies  re- 
maining in  sleep,  after  the  impressions  our  senses 
had  formerly  received  waking ;  and  when  men  are 
by  any  accident  xmassured  they  have  slept,  seem  to 
be  real  visions ;  and  therefore  he  that  presumes  to 
break  the  law  upon  his  own,  or  another's  dream, 
or  pretended  vision,  or  upon  other  fancy  of  the 
power  of  invisible  spirits,  than  is  permitted  by  the 
commonwealth,  leaveth  the  law  of  nature,  which  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  CRIMES,  EXCUSES,  ETC.  287 

a  certwn  offence,  and  foUoweth  the  imagery  of  his  part  ii- 
own,  or  another  private  man's  brain,  which  he  can  .  ^^'  ^ 
never  know  whether  it  signifieth  any  thing  or  no- 
thing, nor  whether  he  that  tells  his  dream,  say  trae, 
or  lie ;  which  if  every  private  man  should  have  leave 
to  do,  as  they  must  by  the  law  of  nature,  if  any  one 
have  it,  there  could  no  law  be  made  to  hold,  and 
so  all  commonwealth  would  be  dissolved. 

From  these  different  sources  of  crimes,  it  appears  ^^^^^^^ 
already,  that  all  crimes  are  not,  as  the  Stoics  of 
old  time  maintained,  of  the  same  allay.  There  is 
place,  not  only  for  excuse,  by  which  that  which 
seemted  a  crime,  is  proved  to  be  none  at  all ;  but 
also  for  EXTENUATION,  by  which  the  crime,  that 
seemed  great,  is  made  less.  For  though  all  crimes 
do  equally  deserve  the  name  of  injustice,  as  all  de- 
viation from  a  straight  line  is  equally  crookedness, 
which  the  Stoics  rightly  observed  :  yet  it  does  not 
follow  that  all  crimes  are  equally  unjust,  no  more 
than  that  all  crooked  lines  are  equally  crooked ; 
which  the  Stoics  not  observing,  held  it  as  great  a 
crime,  to  kill  a  hen,  against  the  law,  as  to  kill  one's 
lather. 

That  which  totally  excuseth  a  fact,  and  takes  Total  excutcs. 
away  from  it  the  nature  of  a  crime,  can  be  none 
but  that,  which  at  the  same  time,  taketh  away  the 
obligation  of  the  law.  For  the  fact  committed  once 
against  the  law,  if  he  that  committed  it  be  obliged 
to  the  law,  can  be  no  other  than  a  crime. 

The  want  of  means  to  know  the  law,  totally  ex- 
cuseth. For  the  law  whereof  a  man  has  no  means 
to  inform  himself,  is  not  obligatory.  But  the  want 
of  diligence  to  inquire,  shall  not  be  considered  as 
a  want  of  means ;  nor  shall  any  man,  that  pre- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


288 


OF  COMMONWEALTH. 


PART  II. 

Total 


Excuses 
Against 
the  author. 


tendeth  to  reason  enough  for  the  government  of 
his  own  affairs,  be  supposed  to  want  means  to 
know  the  laws  of  nature ;  because  they  are  known 
by  the  reason  he  pretends  to  :  only  children,  and 
madmen  are  excused  from  offences  against  the  law 
natural. 

Where  a  man  is  captive,  or  in  the  power  of  the 
enemy  (and  he  is  then  in  the  power  of  the  enemy, 
when  his  person,  or  his  means  of  living,  is  so),  if 
it  be  without  his  own  fault,  the  obligation  of  the 
law  ceaseth ;  because  he  must  obey  the  enemy,  or 
die  ;  and  consequently  such  obedience  is  no  crime : 
for  no  man  is  obliged,  when  the  protection  of  the 
law  faileth,  not  to  protect  himself,  by  the  best 
means  he  can. 

If  a  man,  by  the  terror  of  present  death,  be 
compelled  to  do  a  fact  against  the  law,  he  is 
totally  excused ;  because  no  law  can  oblige  a  man 
to  abandon  his  own  preservation.  And  supposing 
such  a  law  were  obligatory;  yet  a  man  would 
reason  thus.  If  I  do  it  not,  I  die  presently  ;  \f  I 
do  ity  I  die  qfterwards ;  therefore  by  doing  it, 
there  is  time  of  life  gained ;  nature  therefore 
compels  him  to  the  fact. 

When  a  man  is  destitute  of  food,  or  other  thing 
necessary  for  his  life,  and  cannot  preserve  himself 
any  other  way,  but  by  some  fact  against  the  law  ;  as 
if  in  a  great  famine  he  take  the  food  by  force,  or 
stealth,  which  he  cannot  obtain  for  money  nor 
charity;  or  in  defence  of  his  life,  snatch  away 
another  man's  sword ;  he  is  totally  excused,  for  the 
reason  next  before  alleged. 

Again,  facts  done  against  the  law  by  the  autho- 
rity of  another,  are  by  that  authority  excused 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  CRIMES,  BXCUSB8,  BTC.  289 

against  the  author;   because  no  man  ought  to   ^artii. 
accuse  his  own  fact  in  another,  that  is  but  his    .  /^\-    . 
instrument :  but  it  is  not  excused  against  a  third  Excuses 
person  thereby  injured ;  because  in  the  violation  tSTrathor. 
of  the  law,  both  the  author  and  actor  are  crimi- 
nals.    From  hence  it  followeth  that  when  that 
man,  or  assembly,  that  hath  the  sovereign  power, 
commandeth  a  man  to  do  that  which  is  contrary 
to  a  former  law,  the  doing  of  it  is  totally  excused : 
for  he  ought  not  to  condemn  it  himself,  because  he 
is  the  author ;  and  what  cannot  justly  be  condemned 
by  the  sovereign,  cannot  justly  be  punished  by  any 
other.     Besides,  when  the  sovereign  commandeth 
anything  to  be  done  against  his  own  former  law,  the 
command,  as  to  that  particular  fact,  is  an  abroga^- 
tion  of  the  law. 

If  that  man,  or  assembly,  that  hath  the  sove- 
reign power,  disclaim  any  right  essential  to  the 
sovereignty,  whereby  there  accrueth  to  the  subject, 
any  liberty  inconsistent  with  the  sovereign  power, 
that  is  to  say,  with  the  very  being  of  a  common- 
wealth, if  the  subject  shall  refuse  to  obey  the  com- 
mand in  anything  contrary  to  the  liberty  granted, 
this  is  nevertheless  a  sin,  and  contrary  to  the  duty 
of  the  subject :  for  he  ought  to  take  notice  of  what 
is  inconsistent  with  the  sovereignty,  because  it 
was  erected  by  his  own  consent  and  for  his  own 
defence ;  and  that  such  liberty  as  is  inconsistent 
with  it,  was  granted  through  ignorance  of  the  evil 
consequence  thereof.  But  if  he  not  only  disobey, 
but  also  resist  a  public  minister  in  the  execution 
of  it,  then  it  is  a  crime ;  because  he  might  have 
been  righted,  without  any  breach  of  the  peace, 
upon  complaint. 

VOL.  III.  u 


Digitized  by 


Google 


390 


OP  COMMONWEALTH. 


FART  n, 

27. 


Pretompdon 
of  power 
aggraTAteth. 


Evil  teachers 
extenuate. 


The  degrees  of  crime  are  taken  on  divers  scales, 
and  measured,  first,  by  the  mahgnity  of  the  source, 
or  cause;  secondly,  by  the  contagion  of  the 
example ;  thirdly,  by  the  mischief  of  the  eflFect ; 
and  fourthly,  by  the  concurrence  of  times,  places, 
and  persons. 

TTie  same  tact  done  against  the  law,  if  it  pro- 
ceed from  presmnption  of  strength,  riches,  or 
friends  to  resist  those  that  are  to  execute  the  law,  is 
a  greater  crime  than  if  ft  proceed  from  hope  of  not 
being  discovered,  or  of  escape  by  flight :  for  pre- 
sumption of  impunity  by  force,  is  a  root,  from 
whence  springeth,  at  all  times,  and  upon  all  temp- 
tations, a  contempt  of  all  laws;  whereas  in  the 
latter  case,  the  apprehension  of  danger,  that  makes 
a  man  fly,  renders  him  more  obedient  for  the  future. 
A  crime  which  we  know  to  be  so,  is  greater  than 
the  same  crime  proceeding  *from  a  false  persuasion 
that  it  is  lawful ;  for  he  that  committeth  it  against 
his  own  conscience,  presumeth  on  his  force,  or  other 
power,  which  encourages  him  to  commit  the  same 
again :  but  he  that  doth  it  by  error,  after  the  error 
is  shewn  him,  is  conformable  to  the  law. 

He,  whose  error  proceeds  from  the  authority  of 
a  teacher,  or  an  interpreter  of  the  law  publicly 
authorized,  is  not  so  faulty  as  he  whose  error  pro- 
ceedeth  from  a  peremptory  pursuit  of  his  own 
principles  and  reasoning:  for  what  is  taught  by 
one  that  teacheth  by  public  authority,  the  com- 
monwealth teacheth,  and  hath  a  resemblance  of 
law,  till  the  same  authority  controlleth  it ;  and  in 
all  crimes  that  contain  not  in  them  a  denial  of  the 
sovereign  power,  nor  are  against  an  evident  law, 
excuseth  totally:  whereas  he  that  groundeth  his 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  CRIMBS3  BXCUSB8,  ETC.  291 

actions  on  his  private  judgment,  onght,  accord-  part  ii. 
hig  to  the  rectitude,  or  error  thereof,  to  stand  or  .  ^^'  . 
fall. 

The  same  fact,  if  it  have  been  constantly  punished  Examples  of 

,  _  1  impunity 

in  other  men,  is  a  greater  crime,  than  if  there  have  extenuate. 
been  many  precedent  examples  of  impunity.  For 
those  examples  are  so  many  hopes  of  impunity,  given 
by  the  sovereign  himself :  and  because  he  which  fur- 
nishes a  man  with  such  a  hope  and  presumption 
of  mercy,  as  encourageth  him  to  offend,  hatii  his 
part  in  the  offence ;  he  cannot  reasonably  charge 
the  offender  with  the  whole. 

A  crime  arising  from  a  sudden  passion,  is  not  so  Premediution 
great,  as  when  the  same  ariseth  from  long  medita-  *^'^*^'  ^ 
tion :  for  in  the  former  case  there  is  a  place  for  y 

extenuation,  in  the  common  infirmity  of  human  /( 
nature:  but  he  that  doth  it  with  premeditation, 
has  used  circumspection,  and  cast  his  eye  on  the 
law,  on  the  punishment,  and  on  the  consequence 
thereof  to  human  society;  all  which,  in  committing 
the  crime,  he  hath  contemned  and  postposed  to  his 
own  appetite.  But  there  is  no  suddenness  of  pas- 
sion sufficient  for  a  total  excuse :  for  all  the  time 
between  the  first  knowing  of  the  law,  and  the 
commission  of  the  fact,  shall  be  taken  for  a  time  of 
deliberation;  because  he  ought  by  meditation  of 
the  law,  to  rectify  the  irregularity  of  his  passions.  • 

Where  the  law  is  publicly,  and  with  assiduity, 
before  all  the  people  read  and  interpreted,  a  fact 
done  against  it,  is  a  greater  crime,  than  where 
men  are  left  without  such  instruction,  to  enquire  of 
it  with  difficulty,  uncertainty,  and  interruption  of 
their  callings,  and  be  informed  by  private  men : 
for  in  this  case,  part  of  the  fault  is  discharged 


>^ 


Digitized  by  Vj(}!OQJ^V^   o"'^ 


J 


extenuates. 


292  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.    upon  common  infirmity ;  but,  in  the  former,  there 
.    ^l'  _     is  apparent  negligence,  which  is  not  without  some 

contempt  of  the  sovereign  power. 
h^\  of  uT  Th^se  facts  which  the  law  expressly  condemneth , 
soyercign  but  the  law-makcr  by  other  manifest  agns  of  his 
will  tacitly  approveth,  are  less  crimes,  than  the 
same  facts,  condemned  both  by  the  law  and  law- 
maker. For  seeing  the  will  of  the  law-maker  i^  a 
law,  there  appear  in  this  case  two  contradictory 
laws;  which  would  totally  excuse,  if  men  were 
bound  to  take  notice  of  the  sovereign's  approba^ 
tion,  by  other  arguments  than  are  expressed  by  his 
command.  But  because  there  are  punishments 
consequent,  not  only  to  the  transgression  of  his 
law,  but  also  to  the  observing  of  it,  he  is  in  part  a 
cause  of  the  transgression,  and  therefore  cannot 
reasonably  impute  the  whole  crime  to  the  delin- 
quent. For  example,  the  law  condemneth  duels ; 
the  punishment  is  made  capital :  on  the  contrary 
part,  he  that  refiiseth  duel,  is  subject  to  contempt 
and  scorn,  without  remedy;  and  sometimes  by  the 
sovereign  himself  thought  unworthy  to  have  any 
charge,  or  preferment  in  war.  If  thereupon  he 
accept  duel,  considering  all  men  lawfully  endea- 
vour to  obtain  the  good  opinion  of  them  that 
have  the  sovereign  power,  he  ought  not  in  reason 
to  be  rigorously  punished;  seeing  part  of  the 
fault  may  be  discharged  on  the  punisher :  which 
I  say,  not  as  wishing  liberty  of  private  revenges, 
or  any  other  kind  of  disobedience ;  but  a  care 
in  governors,  not  to  countenance  anything  ob- 
liquely, which  directly  they  forbid.  The  examples 
of  princes,  to  those  that  see  them,  are,  and  ever 
have  been,  more  potent  to  govern  their  action^, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  CRIMES^  EXCUSES^  ETC.  293 

than  the  laws  themselves.     And   though  it  be   partii. 
our  duty  to  do,  not  what  they  do,  but  what  they    ^    ^J'    - 
say ;  yet  will  that  duty  never  be  performed,  till  it 
please  God  to  give  men  an  extraordinary,  and  su- 
pernatural grace  to  follow  that  precept. 

Again,  if  we  compare  crimes  by  the  mischief  of  crimJTfr^m*^ 
their  eflFects ;  first,  the  same  fact,  when  it  redounds  their  effecu. 
to -the  damage  of  many,  is  greater,  than  when  it 
redounds  to  the  hurt  of  few.  And  therefore,  when 
a  fact  hurteth,  not  only  in  the  present,  but  also, 
by  example,  in  the  future,  it  is  a  greater  crime, 
than  if  it  hurt  only  in  the  present :  for  the  former, 
is  a  fertile  crime,  and  multiplies  to  the  hurt  of 
many;  the  latter  is  barren.  To  maintain  doctrines 
contrary  to  the  religion  established  in  the  common- 
wealth, is  a  greater  fault,  in  an  authorized  preacher, 
than  in  a  private  person :  so  also  is  it,  to  live  pro- 
fanely, incontinently,  or  do  any  irrehgious  act 
whatsoever.  Likewise  in  a  professor  of  the  law, 
to  maintain  any  point,  or  do  any  act,  that  tendeth 
to  the  weakening  of  the  sovereign  power,  is  a 
greater  crime,  than  in  another  man  :  also  in  a  man 
that  hath  such  reputation  for  wisdom,  as  that  his 
counsels  are  followed,  or  his  actions  imitated  by 
many,  his  fact  against  the  law,  is  a  greater  crime, 
than  the  same  fact  in  another :  for  such  men  not 
only  commit  crime,  but  teach  it  for  law  to  all  other 
men.  And  p;(^nerany  all  f^rimes  are  the  ^eater,  by  { 
Jhejcandal  theyjgive ;  that  is  to  say,  by  becoming  \ 
stumbling-blocks  to  the  weak,  that  look  not  so 
much  upon  the  way  they  go  in,  as  upon  the  light 
that  other  man  carry  before  them. 

Also  facts  of  hostility  against  the  present  state  i^«a  MiyMtas 


Digitized  by 


Google 


294  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  11.  of  the  eommonwealth^  are  greater  crimes,  tbau  the 
^  ^l'  •  same  acts  done  to  private  men :  for  the  damage 
extencjs  itself  to  all :  such  are  the  betraying  of  the 
strengths,  or  revealing  of  the  secrets  of  the  com- 
monwealth to  an  enemy ;  also  all  attempts  upon 
the  representative  of  the  commonwealth,  be  it  a 
monarch,  or  an  assembly ;  and  all  endeavours  by 
word,  or  deed,  to  diminish  the  authority  of  the 
same,  either  in  the  present  time,  or  in  succession  : 
which  crimes  the  Latins  understand  by  crimina 
Ues€B  majestatis,  and  consist  in  design,  or  act,  con- 
trary to  a  fundamental  law. 
Bribeiy  and        Ldkewisc  thosc  crimcs,  which  render  judgments 

false  teitimoiiy  '    .  i  •    •      •        j 

of  no  eflrect,  are  greater  cnmes,  than  mjuries  done 
to  one,  or  a  few  persons  ;.  as  to  receive  money  to 
give  false  judgment,  or  testimony,  is  a  greater 
crime,  than  otherwise  to  deceive  a  man  of  the  like, 
or  a  greater  sum ;  because  not  only  he  has  wrong, 
that  falls  by  such  judgments ;  but  all  judgments 
are  rendered  useless,  and  occasion  ministered  to 
force,  and  private  revenges. 

Depecuiation.  ^Iso  Tobbcry,  and  depeculation  of  the  public 
treasure,  or  revenues,  ig  a  greater  crime,  than  the 
robbing,  or  defrauding  of  a  private  man ;  because 
to  rob  the  public,  is  to  rob  many  at  once. 

connterfeitiiig  Also  the  Counterfeit  usurpation  of  public  minis- 
try, the  counterfeiting  of  public  seals  or  public 
coin,  than  counterfeiting  of  a  private  man's  person, 
or  his  seal ;  because  the  fraud  thereof,  extendeth 
to  the  damage  of  many. 

Crimes  against     Qf  focts  a^iust  the  law,  douc  to  private  men, 

pnvatemen  ...  i  ^        t  .        , 

compared.  the  greater  crime,  is  that,  where  the  damage  m  the 
common  opinion  of  men,  is  most  sensible.  And 
therefore 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  CRIMBS,  £X CUBES,  BTC.  29S 

To  kill  against  the  law,  is  a  greater  crime,  than   part  il 
any  other  injury,  life  preserved.  > — ^ — - 

And  to  kiU  with  torment,  greater,  than  simply  J^j;;^^;^"'* 

to  kill.  compared. 

And  mutilation  of  a  limb,  greater,  than  the  spoil- 
ing a  man  of  his  goods. 

And  the  spoiling  a  man  of  his  goods,  by  terror 
of  death,  or  wounds,  than  by  clandestine  surrep- 
tion. 

And  by  clandestine  surreption,  than  by  consent 
fraudulently  obtained. 

And  the  violation  of  chastity  by  force,  greater, 
than  by  flattery. 

And  of  a  woman  married,  than  of  a  womto  not 
married^ 

For  all  the^  things  are  commonly  so  Valued : 
though  some  men  are  more,  and  some  less  sensible 
of  the  same  offence.  But  the  law  regardeth  not 
the  particular,  but  the  general  inclination  of  man- 
kind. 

And  therefore  the  offence  men  take,  from  con- 
tumely, in  words,  or  gesture,  when  they  produce 
no  other  harm,  than  the  present  grief  of  him  that 
is  reproached,  hath  been  neglected  in  the  laws  of 
the  Greeks,  Romans,  and  other  both  ancient  and 
modem  commonwealths  ;  supposing  the  true  cause 
of  such  grief  to  consist,  not  in  the  contumely, 
which  takes  no  hold  upon  men  conscious  of  their 
own  virtue,  but  in  the  pusillanimity  of  him  that  is 
offended  by  it. 

Also  a  crime  against  a  private  man,  is  much 
aggravated  by  the  person,  time,  and  place.  For 
to  kill  one's  parent,  is  a  greater  crime,  than  to  kill 
another :  for  the  parent  ought  to  have  the  honour 


Digitized  by 


Google 


296  OP  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.   of  a  sovereign^  thougli  he  surrendered  his  power  to 
^    ^'    .    the  civU  law ;  because  he  had  it  originally  by  na- 
ture.   And  to  rob  a  poor  man,  is  a  greater  crime, 
than  to  rob  a  rich  man;  because  it  is  to  the  poor  a 
more  sensible  damage. 

And  a  crime  committed  in  the  time  or  place 
appointed  for  devotion,  is  greater^  than  if  com- 
mitted at  another  time  or  place :  for  it  proceeds 
from  a  greater  contempt  of  the  law. 

Many  other  cases  of  aggravation,  and  extenua- 
tion might  be  added :  but  by  these  I  have  set  down, 
it  is  obvious  to  every  man,  to  take  the  altitude  of 
any  other  crime  proposed. 
Public  crimes  Lastly,  bccausc  in  almost  all  crimes  there  is  an  in- 
jury  done,  not  only  to  some  private  men,  but  also  to 
the  commonwealth;  the  same  crime, when  the  accu- 
sation is  in  the  name  of  the  commonwealth,  is  called 
public  crime  :  and  when  in  the  name  of  a  private 
man,  a  private  crime;  and  the  pleas  according 
thereunto  called  public,  judicia  publicUy  Pleas  of 
the  Crown  ;  or  Private  Pleas.  As  in  an  accusation 
of  murder,  if  the  accuser  be  a  private  man,  the 
plea  is  a  Private  Plea ;  if  the  accuser  be  the  sove- 
reign, the  plea  is  a  Public  Plea. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PUNISHMENTS  AND  REWARDS.  297 


CHAPTER  XXVIIL  .     , 

OF  PUNISHMENTS  AND  REWARDS.       *^ '    ' 

A  PUNISHMENT,  ts  an  evil  irifiicted  hy  public  an-  part  !!• 
thorityy  on  him  that  hath  done,  or  omitted  that  ^  ^f-  _. 
which  is  judged  hy  the  same  authority  to  he  a  Th«  definition 

•  r»    1      ^  1  -ail  .„  of  punlBhment. 

transgression  of  the  law  ;  to  the  end  that  the  will 
of  men  may  thereby  the  hetter  he  disposed  to 
obedience. 

Before  I  infer  any  thing  from  this  definition,  ^8^**op"?"^ 

.  .1  li.  -1-        whence  denyed 

there  is  a  question  to  be  answered,  of  much  im- 
portance ;  which  is,  by  what  door  the  right  or 
authority  of  punishing  in  any  case,  came  in.  For 
by  that  which  has  been  said  before,  no  man  is  sup- 
posed bound  by  covenant,  not  to  resist  violence ; 
and  consequently  it  cannot  be  intended,  that  he 
gave  any  right  to  another  to  lay  violent  hands  upon 
his  person.  In  the  making  of  a  commonwealth, 
every  man  giveth  away  the  right  of  defending 
another ;  but  not  of  defending  himself.  Also  he 
obligeth  himself,  to  assist  him  that  hath  the  so- 
vereignty, in  the  punishing  of  another ;  but  of  him-  ? 
self  not.     But  to  covenant  to  assist  the  sovereign,  1 

in  doing  hurt  to  another,  unless  he  that  so  cove-        ^  \ ' 
nanteth  have  a  right  to  do  it  himself,  is  not  to  give  "^ 

him  a  right  to  punish.  It  is  manifest  therefore  that 
the  right  which  the  commonwealth,  that  is,  he,  or 
they  that  represent  it,  hath  to  punish,  is  not  ground-  —  *  /^ 
ed  on  any  concession,  or  gift  of  the  subjects.    But      "^ 
I  have  also  showed  formerly,  that  before  the  insti- 
tution of  coiomonwealth,  every  man  had  a  right  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


298  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

pARTii«   every  tinng,  and  to  do  whatsoerer  he  thought 
.    ^        necessary  to  his  own  preservation;  snbdning,  hurt- 
ing, or  Idlling  any  man  in  order  diereunto.    And 
this  is  the  foundation  of  that  ri^t  of  punishing, 
which  is  exercised  in  every  commonwealth.     For 
the  subjects  did  not  ^ve  the  sovereign  that  right ; 
but  only  in  lairing  down  thdrs,  strengthened  him 
^     to  use  his  own,  as  he  should  think  fit,  for  the  pre* 
^^  '^^Z^^:^  servation  of  thrai  all :  so  that  it  was  not  given,  but 
, ./  >  ix^      left  to  him^  and  to  him  only ;  and  (excepting  the 
...  .}^  ■    limits  set  him  by  natural  law)  as  entire,  as  in  the 
-     ' .       .  condition  of  mere  nature,  and  of  war  of  every  one 

against  his  neighbour. 
priTateiojmies     From  dic  definition  of  punishment,  I  infer,  first, 
piu^i^^t^  that  neither  private  revenges,  nor  injuries  of  private 
men,  can  properly  be  styled  punishment ;  because 
they  proceed  not  firom  public  authority. 
^^^tf      Secondly,  that  to  be  n^lected,  and  unpreferred 
by  the  public  favour,  is  not  a  punishment ;  because 
no  new  evil  is  thereby  on  any  man  inflicted ;  he  is 
only  left  ia  the  estate  he  was  in  before. 
S^'^tb^ut     T^dly,   that  the  evil  inflicted  by  public  au- 
pabiicheariog;  thority,  without  precedent  public  condemnation,  is 
not  to  be  styled  by  the  name  of  punishment ;  but 
of  an  hostile  act ;  because  the  fact  for  which  a  man 
is  pimished,  ought  first  to  be  judged  by  public  au- 
thority, to  be  a  transgression  of  the  law. 
Nor  pain  FouTthly,  that  the   evil  inflicted  by  usurped 

a°inrpedpo^er;  power,  and  judgcs  witbout  authority  from  the  so- 
vereign, is  not  punishment ;  but  an  act  of  hostility ; 
because  the  acts  of  power  usurped,  have  not  for 
author,  the  person  condemned  ;  and  therefore  are 
not  acts  of  public  authority. 

Fifthly,  that  all  evil  which  is  inflicted  without 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PUNISHMENTS  AND  RBWARDS.  299 

intention,  or  possibility  oi  disposing  the  delinquent,  part  it. 
or,  by  his  example,  other  men,  to  obey  the  laws,  ^  ^'  ^ 
is  not  punishment ;  but  an  act  of  hostility :  because  Nor  paiD  in- 

..^  -I  3  1^3  •  ^-T  flicted  without 

Without  such  an  end,  no  hurt  done  is  contained  respect  to  the 
under  that  name.  future  good. 

Sixthly^  whereas  to  certain  actions,  there  be  Natural  evii 

11  ^  j«  T_    _..i»  1  consequences 

annexed  by  nature,  divers  hurtful  consequences ;  no  punUh- 
as  when  a  man  in  assaulting  another,  is  himself  "™®*^^ 
slain,  or  wounded ;  or  when  he  fedleth  into  sick- 
ness by  the  doing  of  some  unlawful  act;  such  hurt, 
though  in  respect  of  God,  who  is  the  author  of  na- 
ture, it  may  be  said  to  be  inflicted,  and  therefore 
a  punishment  divine  ;  yet  it  is  not  contained  in  the 
name  of  punishment  in  respect  of  men,  because  it 
is  not  inflicted  by  the  authority  of  man. 

Seventhly,  if  the  harm  inflicted  be  less  than  the  ^^^^^^; 
benefit,  or  contentment  that  naturally  foUoweth  benefitoftians- 
the  crime  committed,  that  harm  is  not  within  the  ^^^IhOiment? 
definition ;  and  is  rather  the  price,  or  redemption, 
than  the  punishment  of  a  crime  :  because  it  is  of 
the  nature  of  punishment,  to  have  for  end,  the  dis- 
posing of  men  to  obey  the  law  ;  which  end,  if  it  be 
less  than  the  benefit  of  the  transgression,  it  at- 
taineth  not,  but  worketh  a  contrary  efiect. 

Eighthly,  if  a  punishment  be  determined  and^>^f^e 
prescribed  in  the  law  itself,  and  after  the  crime  annexed  to  the 
committed,  there  be  a  greater  punishment  inflicted,  hJrtL^f^' 
the  excess  is  not  punishment,  but  an  act  of  hosti-  Jut  hoSitiw. 
lity.     For  seeing  the  aim  of  punishment  is  not  a 
revenge,  but  terror;  and  the  terror  of  a  great 
punishment  unknown,  is  taken  away  by  the  de- 
claration of  a  less,  the  unexpected  addition  is  no 
part  of  the  punishment.     But  where  there  is  no 
punishment  al  all  determined  by  the  law,  there 


Digitized  by 


Google 


300  OP  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II,    whatsoever  is  inflicted,  hath  the  nature  of  punish^ 
^    ^f*  _-    ment.     For  he  that  goes  about  the  violation  of  a 
law,  wherein  no  penalty  is  determined,  expecteth 
an  indeterminate,  that  is  to  say,  an  arbitrary  punish- 
ment. 
for"^ft^d^e      Ninthly,  harm  inflicted  for  a  fact  done  be«Dre 
before  the  law,  thcrc  was  a  law  that  forbade  it,  is  not  punishment, 

DopaDithmenL  ^ 

but  an  act  of  hostility :  for  before  the  law,  there 
is  no  transgression  of  the  law:  but  punishment 
supposeth  a  fact  judged,  to  have  been  a  transgresr 
sion  of  the  law;  therefore  harm  inflicted  before 
the  law  made,  is  not  punishment,  but  an  act  of 
hostility. 
The  represcn-      Tcuthly,  huTt  iuflictcd  ou  thc  representative  of 

tativeofthe        ,  ^^  i  ,       .  .11 

commonwealth  tuc  commouwcalth^  IS  uot  puuishmcnt,  but  an  act 
unpun  c.  ^^  hostility :  because  it  is  of  the  nature  of  punish- 
ment, to  be  inflicted  by  public  authority,  which  is 
the  authority  only  of  the  representative  itself. 
^yted^sJTects  L^tly>  harm  inflicted  upon  one  that  is  a  de- 
it  done  by  right  clared  enemy,  falls  not  under  the  name  of  punish- 
way"?  p^sh-  ment:  because  seeing  they  were  either  never  subject 
"*°^'  to  the  law,  and  therefore  cannot  transgress  it ;  or 

having  been  subject  to  it,  and  professing  to  be  no 
longer  so,  by  consequence  deny  they  can  transgress 
it,  all  the  harms  that  can  be  done  them,  must  be 
taken  as  acts  of  hostility.  But  in  declared  hostility, 
all  infliction  of  evil  is  lawful.  From  whence  it 
foUoweth,  that  if  a  subject  shall  by  fact,  or  word, 
wittingly,  and  deliberately  deny  the  authority  of 
the  representative  of  the  commonwealth  (whatsoever 
penalty  hath  been  formerly  ordained  for  treason) 
he  may  lawfully  be  made  to  suffer  whatsoever  the 
representative  will.  For  in  denying  subjection,  he 
denies  such  punishment  as  by  the  law  hath  been 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PUNISHMENTS  AND  REWARD.  301 

ordained ;  and  therefore  suflFers  as  an  enemy  of  the  part  ii. 
commonwealth;  that  is,  according  to  the  will  of  _  ^'  ^ 
the  representative.     For  the  punishments  set  down  ' 

in  the  law,  are  to  subjects,  not  to  enemies*;  such 
as  are  they,  that  having  been  by  their  own  acts 
subjects,  deliberately  revolting,  deny  the  sovereign 
power. 

The  first,  and  most  general  distribution  of  punish- 
ments, is  into  divine^  and  human.  Of  the  former 
I  shall  have  occasion  to  speak,  in  a  more  conve- 
nient place  hereafter. 

Human^  are  those  punishments  that  be  inflicted 
by  the  commandment  of  man ;  and  are  either  cor- 
poral, or  pecuniary y  or  ignominy ,  or  imprisonment , 
or  exile,  or  mixed  of  these. 

Corporal  punishment  is  that,  which  is  inflicted  PuniAments 
on  the  body  directly,  and  according  to  the  inten- 
tion of  him  that  inflicteth  it :  such  as  are  stripes, 
or  wounds,  or  deprivation  of  such  pleasures  of  the 
body,  as  were  before  lawfully  enjoyed. 

And  of  these,  some  be  capital,  some  less  than  Capital. 
capital.  Capital,  is  the  infliction  of  death ;  and 
that  either  simply,  or  with  torment.  Less  than 
capital,  are  stripes,  wounds,  chains,  and  any  other 
corporal  pain,  not  in  its  own  nature  mortal.  For 
if  upon  the  infliction  of  a  punishment  death  follow 
not  in  the  intention  of  the  inflictor,  the  punishment 
is  not  to  be  esteemed  capital,  though  the  harm 
prove  mortal  by  an  accident  not  to  be  foreseen ; 
in  which  case  death  is  not  inflicted,  but  hastened. 

Pecuniary  punishment,  is  that  which  consisteth 
not  only  in  the  deprivation  of  a  sum  of  money,  but 
also  of  lands,  or  any  other  goods  which  are  usually 


Digitized  by 


Google 


302  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  ih  bought  and  sold  for  money.  And  in  case  the  law, 
.  ^'  .  that  ordaineth  such  a  punishment,  be  made  with 
design  to  gather  money,  from  such  as  shall  trans- 
gress .the  same,  it  is  not  properly  a  punishment, 
but  the  price  of  privilege  and  exemption  from  the 
law,  which  doth  not  absolutely  forbid  the  fact,  but 
only  to  those  that  are  not  able  to  pay  the  money : 
except  where  the  law  is  natural,  or  part  of  religion; 
for  in  that  case  it  is  not  an  exemption  from  the  law, 
but  a  transgression  of  it.  As  where  a  law  exacteth 
a  pecuniary  mulct,  of  them  that  take  the  name  of 
God  in  vain,  the  payment  of  the  mulct,  is  not  the 
price  of  a  dispensation  to  swear,  but  the  punish- 
ment of  the  transgression  of  arlaw  indispensable. 
In  like  manner  if  the  law  impose  a  sum  of  money 
to  be  paid,  to  him  that  has  been  injured ;  this  is  but 
a  satisfaction  for  the  hurt  done  him  ;  and  extin- 
guisheth  the  accusation  of  the  party  injured,  not 
the  crime  of  the  oflFender. 
Ignominy.  Ignominy,  is  the  infliction  of  such  evil,  as  is  made 
dishonourable  ;  or  the  deprivation  of  such  good,  as 
is  made  honourable  by  tije  commonwealth.  For 
there  be  some  things  honourable  by  nature ;  as  the 
effects  of  courage,  magnanimity,  strength,  wisdom, 
and  other  abilities  of  body  and  mind :  others  mctde 
honourable  by  the  commonwealth ;  as  badges,  titles, 
offices,  or  any  other  singular  mark  of  the  sovereign's 
favour.  The  former,  though  they  may  fail  by  na- 
ture, or  accident,  cannot  be  taken  away  by  a  law ; 
and  therefore  the  loss  of  them  is  not  punish- 
ment. But  the  latter,  may  be  taken  away  by 
the  public  authority  that  made  them  honourable, 
and  are  properly  punishments :  such  are  degrading 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PUNISHMENTS  AND  REWARDS.  303 

men  condemned,  of  their  badges,  titles,  and  oflBces;  part  ii. 
or  declaring  them  incapable  of  the  like  in  time  to  _  ^^'  . 
come. 

Imprisonment,  is  when  a  man  is  by  public  autho-  imprisonment. 
rity  deprived  of  liberty ;  and  may  happen  from  two 
divers  ends ;  whereof  one  is  the  safe  custody  of  a 
man  accused ;  the  other  is  the  inflicting  of  pain  on 
a  man  condemned.     The  former  is  not  punishment ; 
because  no  man  is  supposed  to  be  punished,  before 
be  be  judicially  heard,  and  declared  guilty.    And 
Hierefore  whatsoever  hurt  a  man  is  made  to  suflFer 
by  bonds,  or  restraint,  before  his  cause  be  heard, 
over  and  above  that  which  is  necessary  to  assure 
his  custody,  is  against  the  law  of  nature.     But  the 
latter  is  punishment,  because  evil,  and  inflicted  by 
public  authority,  for  somewhat  that  has  by  the 
same  authority  been  judged  a  transgression  of  the 
law.     Under  this  word  imprisonment,  I  compre- 
hend all  restraint  of  motion,  caused  by  an  external 
obstacle,  be  it  a  house,  which  is  called  by  the  ge- 
neral niyne  of  a  prison  ;  or  an  island,  as  when  men 
are  said  to  be  confined  to  it ;  or  a  place  where 
men  are  set  to  work,  as  in  old  time  men  have 
been  condemned  to  quarries,  and  in  these  times 
to  galleys ;  or  be  it  a  chain,  or  any  other  such 
impediment. 

Exile  (banishment)  is  when  a  man  is  for  a  crime,  ExUc. 
condemned  to  depart  out  of  the  dominion  of  the 
commonwealth,  or  out  of  a  certain  part  thereof : 
and  during  a  prefixed  time,  or  for  ever,  not  to  re- 
turn into  it :  and  seemeth  not  in  its  own  nature, 
without  other  circumstances,  to  be  a  punishment ; 
but  rather  an  escape,  or  a  public  commandment  to 
avoid  punishment  by  flight.    And  Cicero  says,  there 


Digitized  by 


Google 


30  If  OP  COMMONWEALTH. 

PA^T  II.  was  never  any  such  punishment  ordained  in  the 
.  ^'  city  of  Rome ;  but  calls  it  a  refuge  of  men  in  danger* 
For  if.  a  man  banished,  be  nevertheless  permitted  to 
enjoy  his  goods,  and  the  revenue  of  his  lands^  the 
mere  change  of  air  is  no  punishment,  nor  does  it 
tend  to  that  benefit  of  the  commonwealth,  for  which 
all  punishments  are  ordained,  that  is  to  say,  to  the 
forming  of  men's  wills  to  the  observation  of  the 
law ;  but  many  times  to  the  damage  of  the  com- 
monwealth. For  a  banished  man,  is  a  lawful  enemy 
of  the  commonwealth  that  banished  him ;  as  being 
no  more  a  member  of  the  same.  But  if  he  be 
withal  deprived  of  his  lands,  or  goods,  then  the 
punishment  lieth  not  in  the  exile,  but  is  to  be 
reckoned  amongst  punishments  pecuniary. 
ThcpttnUh-        ^11  punishmeuts  of  innocent  subjects,  be  they 

meut  of  iDoo-  ^  /• 

cent tubjects is  great  or  little,  are  against  the  law  of  nature;  for 
ur'5?atSw.*  punishment  is  only  for  transgression  of  the  law,  and 
therefore  there  can  be  no  punishment  of  the  inno- 
cent. It  is  therefore  a  violation,  first,  of  that  law 
of  nature,  which  forbiddeth  all  men,  in  their  re- 
venges, to  look  at  anything  but  some  future  good : 
for  there  can  arrive  no  good  to  the  commonwealth^ 
by  punishing  the  innocent.  Secondly,  of  that, 
which  forbiddeth  ingratitude :  for  seeing  all  sove- 
reign power,  is  originally  given  «by  the  consent  of 
every  one  of  the  subjects,  to  the  end  they.should 
as  long  as  they  are  obedient,  be  protected  thereby ; 
the  punishment  of  the  innocent,  is  a  rendering  of 
evil  for  good.  And  thirdly,  of  the  law  that  com- 
mandeth  equity;  that  is  to  say,  an  equal  distribution 
of  justice  ;  which  in  punishing  the  innocent  is  not 
observed. 

But  the  infliction  ef  what  evil  soever,  on  an  in- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PUNISHMENTS  AND  REWARDS.  305 

nocent  man,  that  is  not  a  subject,  if  it  be  for  the    part  ii, 
benefit  of  the  commonwealth,  and  without  viola-    .    ^^'    . 
tion  of  any  former  covenant,  is  no  breach  of  the  bui  the  harm 
law  of  nature.     For  all  men  that  are  not  subjects,  cenuinwrr 
are  either  enemies,  or  else  they  have  ceased  from  "^^  "** 
being  so   by  some  precedent    covenants.      But 
agsdnst  enemies,  whom  the  commonwealth  judgeth 
capable  to  do  them  hurt,  it  is  lawful  by  the  original 
right  of  nature  to  make  war ;  wherein  the  sword 
judgeth  not,  nor  doth  the  victor  make  distinction 
of  nocent,  and  innocent,  as  to  the  time  past   nor 
has  other  respect  of  mercy,  than  as  it  conduceth  to 
the  good  of  his  own  people.  And  upon  this  ground  i^aow^uTdi?* 
it  is,  that  also  in  subjects,  who  deliberately  deny  ci«"d  rebeu. 
the  authority  of  the  commonwealth  established,  the 
vengeance  is  lawfully  extended,  not  only  to  the 
fathers,  but  also  to  the  third  and  fourth  generation 
not  yet  in  being,  and  consequently  innocent  of  the 
fact,  for  which   they  are  afilicted :  because  the 
nature  of  this  oflFence,  consisteth  in  the  renouncing 
of  subjection ;  which  is  a  relapse  into  the  condi- 
tion of  war,  commonly  called  rebellion ;  and  they 
that  so  ofiend,  suflFer  not  as  subjects,  but  as  enemies. 
For  rebellion,  is  but  war  renewed. 

Reward,  is  either  of  g^ft^  or  by  contract.  When  Reward  is 
by  contract,  it  is  cdled  salary ,  and  wages ;  which  OT^Le."^ 
is  benefit  due  for  service  performed,  or  promised. 
When  of  gift,  it  is  benefit  proceeding  from  the 
grace  of  them  that  bestow  it,  to  encourage,  or  en- 
able men  to  do  them  service.  And  therefore  when 
the  sovereign  of  a  commonwealth  appointeth  a  salary 
to  any  public  oflSce,  he  that  receiveth  it,  is  bound 
in  justice  to  perform  his  office ;  otherwise,  he  is 
bound  only  in  honour,  to  acknowledgment,  and 

VOL.  III.  "'  X 


Digitized  by 


Google 


306  OP  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  n,    an  endeavoftr  of  reqnital.    For  though  men  have 

.  ^^'  .  no  lawftd  remedy,  when  they  be  commanded  to 
quit  their  private  business^  to  serve  the  public, 
without  reward  or  salary ;  yet  they  are  not  bound 
thereto,  by  the  law  of  nature,  nor  by  the  institution 
of  the  commonwealth,  unless  the  service  cannot 
otherwise  be  done ;  because  it  is  supposed  the  so- 
vereign may  make  use  of  all  their  means,  insomuch 
as  the  most  common  soldier,  may  demand  the 
wages  of  his  warfare,  as  a  debt. 

Benefiube-        The  benefit  which  a  sovereign  bestoweth  on  a 

IrenotrewardB.  subjcct,  for  fcaT  of  somc  powcr  and  ability  he  hath 
to  do  hurt  to  the  commonwealth,  are  not  properly 
rewards ;  for  they  are  not  saTaries;  because  there 

*  is  in  this  case  no  contract  supposed,  every  man 

being  obliged  already  not  to  do  the  commonwealth 
disservice :  nor  are  they  graces ;  because  they  be 

gj  extorted  by  fear,  which  ought  not  to  be  incident  to 

the  sovereign  power:  but  are  rather  sacrifices, 
which  the  sovereign,  considered  in  his  natural  per- 
son, and  not  in  the  person  of  th^e  commonwealth, 
makes,  for  the  appeasing  the  discontent  of  him  he 
thinks  more  potent  than  himself;  and  encourage 
not  to  obedience,  but  on  the  contrary,  to  the  con- 
tinuance, and  increasing  of  further  extortion. 

sdariei  ccr-  And  whcrcas  some  salaries  are  certain,  and  pro- 
ceed  from  the  public  treasure ;  and  others  uncer- 
tain, and  casual,  proceeding  from  the  execution  of 
the  oflSce  for  which  the  salary  is  ordained;  the 
latter  is  in  some  cases  hurtful  to  the  commonwealth ; 
as  in  the  case  of  judicature.  For  where  the  benefit 
of  the  judges,  and  ministers  of  a  court  of  justice 
ariseth  from  the  multitude  of  causes  that  are  brought 
to  their  cognizance,  there  must  needs  follow  two 


tain  and  caiaal. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PUNISHMENTS  AND  REWARDS.  307 

inconveniences  :  one,  is  the  nourishing  of  suits ;  for  part  ii. 
the    more  suits,   the   greater  benefit:   and  ano-    .    ^f-    . 
ther  that  depends  on  that,  which  is  contention  saUriescer. 
about  jurisdiction  ;  each  court  drawing  to  itself,  as  ^""*"***'^""**- 
many  causes  as  it  can.     But  in  offices  of  execution 
there  are  not  those  inconveniences ;  because  their 
employment  cannot  be  increased  by  any  endeavour 
of  their  own.     And  thus  much  shall  suffice  for  the 
nature  of  punishment  and  reward;  which  are,  as  it 
were,  the  nerves  and  tendons,  that  move  the  limbs 
and  joints  of  a  commonwealth. 

Hitherto  I  have  set  forth  the  nature  of  man, 
whose  pride  and  other  passions  have  compelled 
him  to  submit  himself  to  government :  together 
with  the  great  power  of  his  governor,  whom  I  com-  % 

pared  to  Leviathan^  taking  that  comparison  out  of 
the  two  last  verses  of  the  one-and-fortieth  of  Job  ; 
where  God  having  set  forth  the  great  power  of  Levi-  ^ . 

athany  calleth  him  king  of  the  proud.  There  is 
nothings  saith  he,  on  earthy  to  he  compared  with 
him.  He  is  made  so  as  not  to  be  afraid.  He 
seeth  every  high  thing  below  him  ;  and  is  king  of 
all  the  children  of  pride.  But  because  he  is 
mortal,  and  subject  to  decay,  as  all  other  earthly 
creatures  are ;  and  because  there  is  that  in  heaven, 
though  not  on  earth,  that  he  should  stand  in  fear 
of,  and  whose  laws  he  ought  to  obey ;  I  shall  in 
the  next  following  chapters  speak  of  his  diseases, 
and  the  causes  of  his  mortality  ;  and  of  what  laws 
of  nature  he  is  bound  to  obey. 


X  2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


308  OF  COMMONWBALTH. 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

OP   THOSE   THINGS  THAT  WEAKEN,  OR  TEND    TO 
THE  DISSOLUTION  OP  A  COMMONWEALTltt. 

PART  II.  Though  nothing  can  be  immortal^  which  mortals 
.^'  .  make  ;  yet,  if  men  had  the  use  of  reason  they  pre- 
DittoiotioDof  tend  to,  their  commonwealths  might  be  secured,  at 
wJJ^rpro-  ^^^^  fr^™^  perishing  by  internal  diseases.  For  by 
Sr>  ?  ^if  t  *^®  nat^ire  of  their  institution,  they  are  designed 
iotutatioii.  to  Uvc,  as  long  as  mankind,  or  as  the  laws  of 
nature,  or  as  justice  itself,  which  gives  them  life. 
Therefore  when  they  come  to  be  dissolved,  not  by 
external  violence,  but  intestine  disorder,  the  fault 
is  not  in  men,  as  they  are  the  matter;  but  as  they 
are  the  makers^  and  orderers  of  them.  For  men, 
as  they  become  at  last  weary  of  irregular  jostling, 
and  hewing  one  another,  and  desire  with  all  their 
hearts,  to  conform  themselves  into  one  firm  and 
lasting  edifice:  so  for  want,  both  of  the  art  of 
making  fit  laws,  to  square  their  actions  by,  and 
also  of  humility,  and  patience,  to  suflFer  the  rude 
and  cumbersome  points  of  their  present  greatness 
to  be  taken  ofi^,  they  cannot  without  the  help  of  a 
very  able  architect,  be  compiled  into  any  other 
than  a  crazy  building,  such  as  hardly  lasting  out 
their  own  time,  must  assuredly  fall  upon  the  heads 
of  their  posterity. 

Amongst  the  infirmities  therefore  of  a  common- 
wealth, I  will  reckon  in  the  first  place,  those  that 
arise  from  an  imperfect  institution,  and  resemble 


Digitized  by 


Google 


DISSOLUTION  OF    COMMONWEALTHS.        309 

the  diseases  of  a  natural  body,  which  proceed  from   part  u. 
a  defectuous  procreation.  ^^'    . 

Of  which,  this  is  one,  that  a  man  to  obtain  a  Want  of 
kingdom^  is  sometimes  content  with  less  power ^ 
than  to  the  peace^  and  defence  of  the  common-  V 
wealth  is  necessarily  required.  From  whence  it 
cometh  to  pass,  that  when  the  exercise  of  the 
power  laid  by,  is  for  the  public  safety  to  be  re- 
sumed, it  hath  the  resemblance  of  an  unjust  act ; 
which  disposeth  great  numbers  of  men,  when  occa- 
sion is  presented,  to  rebel ;  in  the  same  manner  as 
the  bodies  of  children,  gotten  by  diseased  parents, 
are  subject  either  to  untimely  death,  or  to  purge 
the  ill  quality,  derived  from  their  vicious  concep- 
tion, by  breaking  out  into  biles  and  scabs.  And 
when  kings  deny  themselves  some  such  necessary 
power,  it  is  not  always,  though  sometimes,  out  of 
Ignorance  of  what  is  necessary  to  the  office  they 
undertake ;  but  many  times  out  of  a  hope  to  re- 
cover the  same  again  at  their  pleasure.  Wherein 
they  reason  not  well ;  because  such  as  will  hold 
them  to  their  promises,  shall  be  maintained  against 
them  by  foreign  commonwealths ;  who  in  order  to 
the  good  of  their  own  subjects  let  slip  few  occa- 
sions to  weaken  the  estate  of  their  neighbours.  So 
was  Thomas  Becket,  archbishop  of  Canterbury, 
supported  against  Henry  the  Second,  by  the  Pope ; 
the  subjection  of  ecclesiastics  to  the  commonwealth, 
having  been  dispensed  with  by  William  the  Con- 
queror at  his  reception,  when  he  took  an  oath,  not 
to  infringe  the  liberty  of  the  church.  And  so  were 
the  barons,  whose  power  was  by  William  Rufiis, 
to  have  their  help  in  transferring  the  succession 
from  his  elder  brother  to  himself,  increased  to  a 


Digitized  by 


Google 


310 


OF  COMMONWEALTH. 


PART  II 

29. 


Private  jadg. 
ment  of  good 
and  evil. 


inconsistent  with  the  sovereign  power, 
maintained  in  their  rebellion  against  king  John, 
by  the  French. 

^  Nor  does  this  happen  in  monarchy  only.  For 
whereas  the  style  of  the  ancient  Roman  common- 
wealth, was,  the  senate  and  people  of  Rome  ;  nei- 
ther senate,  nor  people  pretended  to  the  whole 
power ;  whiek  first  caused  the  seditions,  of  Tibe- 
rius Gracchns,  Cains  Gracchus,  Lucius  Satuminus, 
and  others  ;  and  afterwards  the  wars  between  the 
senate  and  the  people,  under  Marius  and  Sylla; 
and  again  under  Pompey  and  Csesar,  to  the  extinc- 
tion of  their  democracy,  and  the  setting  up  of 
monarchy. 

The  people  of  Athens  bound  themselves  but  from 
one  only  action ;  which  was,  that  no  man  on  pain 
of  death  should  propound  the  renewing  of  the  war 
for  the  island  of  Salamis ;  and  yet  thereby,  if  Solon 
had  not  caused  to  be  given  out  he  was  mad,  and 
afterwards  in  gesture  and  habit  of  a  madman,  and 
in  verse,  propounded  it  to  the  people  that  flodced 
about  him,  they  had  had  an  enemy  perpetually  in 
readiness,  even  at  the  gates  of  their  city;  such 
damage,  or  shifts,  are  all  commonyrealths  forced  to, 
that  have  their  power  never  so  little  limited. 

In  the  second  place,  I  observe  the  diseases  of  a 
commonwealth,  diat  proceed  from  the  poison  of 
seditious  doctrines,  whereof  one  is.  That  every 
y  private  man  is  judge  of  good  and  evil  actions. 
This  is  true  in  the  condition  of  mere  nature,  where 
there  are  no  civil  laws ;  and  also  under  civil  govern- 
ment, in  such  cases  as  are  not  determined  by  the 
law.  But  otherwise,  it  is  manifest,  that  the  mea- 
sure of  good  and  evil  actions,  is  the  civil  law ;  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


DISSOLUTION  OF  COMMONWEALTHS.        31 1 

the  judge  the  legislator,  who  is  always  representa-  part  ii. 
tive  of  the  commonwealth.  From  this  false  doc-  .  -^-  . 
trine,  men  are  disposed  to  debate  with  themselves, 
and  dispute  the  commands  of  the  commonwealth ; 
and  afterwards  to  obey,  or  disobey  them,  as  in 
their  private  judgments  they  shall  thmk  fit ;  where- 
by the  commonwealth  is  distracted  and  weakened. 

Another  doctrine  repugnant  to  civil  society,  is,  Erroncout 
that  whatsoever  a  inan  does  against  his  cansci-^y^^^^^' 
ence,  is  sin  ;  and  it  dependeth  on  the  presumption 
of  making  himself  judge  of  good  and  evil.  For  a 
man's  conscience,  and  his  judgment  is  the  same 
thing,  and  as  the  judgment,  so  also  the  conscience 
may  be  erroneous.  Therefore,  though  he  that  is 
subject  to  no  civil  law,  sinneth  in  all  he  does  against 
his  conscience,  because  he  has  no  other  rule  to 
follow  but  his  own  reason ;  yet  it  is  not  so  with 
him  that  lives  in  a  commonwealth;  because  the 
law  is  the  public  conscience,  by  which  he  bath  al- 
ready undertaken  to  be  guided.  Otherwise  in  such 
diversity,  as  there  is  of  private  consciences,  which 
are  but  private  opinions,  the  commonwealth  must 
needs  be  distracted,  and  no  man  dare  to  obey  the 
sovereign  power,  further  than  it  shall  seem  good  in 
his  own  eyes. 

It  hath  been  also  commonly  taught,  that  faith  Pwtence  of 
and  sanctity y  are  not  to  he  attained  by  study  and 
reason^  but  by  supernatural  inspiration,  or  irfu-  t' 
sion.  ^Vhich  granted,  I  see  not  why  any  man 
should  render  a  reason  of  his  faith ;  or  why  every 
Chrbtian  should  not  be  also  a  prophet ;  or  why  any 
man  should  take  the  law  of  his  country,  rather  than 
his  own  inspiration,  iox  the  rule  of  his  action.  And 
thus  we  fall  again  in  the  fault  of  taking  upon  us  to 


Digitized  by 


Googk 


313  OP  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  judge  of  good  and  evil;  or  to  make  judges  of  it, 
^  ^^'  .  such  private  men  as  pretend  to  be  supematurally 
inspired,  to  the  dissolution  of  all  civil  government. 
Faith  comes  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  those  acci- 
dents, which  guide  us  into  the  presence  of  them 
that  speak  to  us ;  which  accidents  are  all  contrived 
by  God  Almighty ;  and  yet  are  not  supernatural, 
but  only,  for  the  great  number  of  them  that  con- 
cur to  every  eflfect,  unobservable.  Faith  and  sanc- 
tity, are  indeed  not  very  frequent ;  but  yet  they 
are  not  miracles,  but  brought  to  pass  by  education, 
discipline,  correction,  and  other  natural  ways,  by 
which  God  worketh  them  in  his  elect,  at  such  times 
as  he  thinketh  fit.  And  these  three  opinions,  per- 
nicious to  peace  and  government,  have  in  this  part 
of  the  world,  proceeded  chiefly  from  the  tongues, 
and  pens  of  unlearned  divines,  who  joining  the 
words  of  Holy  Scripture  together,  otherwise  than 
is  agreeable  to  reason,  do  what  they  can,  to  make 
men  think,  that  sanctity  and  natural  reason,  cannot 
stand  together. 
Subjecting  the  A  fourth  opiuiou,  repuguaut  to  the  nature  of  a 
powi^  to^  commonwealth,  is  this,  that  he  that  hath  the  sove- 
reign power  is  subject  to  the  civil  laws.  It  is 
'/  true,  that  sovereigns  are  all  subject  to  the  laws  of 
nature ;  because  such  laws  be  divine,  and  cannot 
by  any  man,  or  commonwealth  be  abrogated.  But 
to  those  laws  which  the  sovereign  himself,  that  is, 
which  the  commonwealth  maketh,  he  is  not  sub- 
ject. For  to  be  subject  to  laws,  is  to  be  subject  to 
the  commonwealth,  that  is  to  the  sovereign  repre- 
sentative, that  is  to  himself ;  which  is  not  subjec- 
tion, but  freedom  from  the  laws.  Which  error, 
because  it  setteth  the  laws  above  the  sovereign. 


cifil  laws. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


DISSOLUTION  OP  COMMONWEALTHS.        313 

setteth  also  a  judge  above  him,  and  a  power  to    part  ii. 
punish  him ;  which  is  to  make  a  new  sovereign ;    .    ^^'    . 
and  again  for  the  same  reason  a  third,  to  punish 
the  second ;  and  so  continually  without  end,  to  the 
confusion,  and  dissolution  of  the  commonwealth. 

A  fifth  doctrine,  that  tendeth  to  the  dissolution  Attributing  of 
of  a  commonwealth,  is,  that  every  private  man  hcts  ^ety  to^"^ 
an  absolute  propriety  in  his  goods ;  such,  as  ex^-^^^j^ 
cludeth  the  right  of  the  sovereign.    Every  man 
has  indeed  a  propriety  that  excludes  the  right  of 
every  other  subject:  and  he  has  it  only  from  the 
sovereign  power;  without  the  protection  whereof, 
every  other  man  should  have  equal  right  to  the 
same.     But  if  the  right  of  the  sovereign  also  be 
excluded,  he  cannot  perform  the  ofl&ce  they  have 
put  him  into  ;  which  is,  to  defend  them  both  from 
foreign  enemies,  and  from  the  injuries  of  one  ano- 
ther ;  and  consequently  there  is  no  longer  a  com- 
monwealth. 

And  if  the  propriety  of  subjects,  exclude  not  the 
right  of  the  sovereign  representative  to  their  goods ; 
much  less  to  their  ofl&ces  of  judicature,  or  execu- 
tion, in  which  they  represent  the  sovereign  himself. 

There  is  a  sixth  doctrine,  plainly,  and  directly  Dividing  of  the 
against  the  essence  of  a  commonwealth  ;  and  it  is  ^w^.*^ 
this,  that  the  sovereign  power  may  he  divided. 
For  what  is  it  to  divide  the  power  of  a  common- 
wealth, but  to  dissolve  it;  for  powers  divided 
mutually  destroy  each  other.  And  for  these  doc- 
trines, men  are  chiefly  beholding  to  some  of  those, 
that  making  profession  of  the  laws,  endeavour  to 
make  them  depend  upon  their  own  learning,  and 
not  upon  the  legislative  power. 

And  as  false  doctrine,  so  also  oftentimes  the 


\\ 


i      \ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


314  OP  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  lu  example  of  different  goyemment  in  a  neighbouring 
.  ^-  .  nation,  disposeth  men  to  alteration  of  the  form  al- 
imitatioii  of  '"ready  settled.  So  the  people  of  the  Jews  were 
natfoi^'^  stirred  up  to  reject  God,  and  to  call  upon  the  pro- 
phet Samuel,  for  a  king  after  the  manner  of  the 
nations :  so  also  the  lesser  cities  of  Greece,  were 
continually  disturbed,  with  seditions  of  the  aristo- 
cratical,  and  democratical  factions ;  one  part  of  al- 
most every  commonwealth,  desiring  to  imitate  the 
Lacedemonians ;  the  other,  the  Athenians.  And  I 
doubt  not,  but  many  men  have  been  contented  to 
see  the  late  troubles  in  England,  out  of  an  imita- 
tion of  the  Low  Countries;  supposing  there  needed 
no  more  to  grow  rich,  than  to  change,  as  they  had 
done,  the  form  of  their  government.  For  the  con- 
stitution of  man's  nature,  is  of  itself  subject  to  de- 
sire  novelty.  When  therefore  they  are  provoked  to 
the  same,  by  the  neighbourhood  also  of  those  that 
have  been  enriched  by  it,  it  is  almost  impossible 
for  them,  not  to  be  content  with  those  that  soUcit 
them  to  change ;  and  love  the  first  beginnings^ 
though  they  be  grieved  with  the  continuance  of 
disorder ;  like  hot  bloods,  that  having  gotten  the 
y/^\^        itch,  tear  themselves  with  their  own  nails,  till  they 

can  endure  the  smart  no  longer. 
Imitation  of        And  as  to  rebellion  in  particular  against  monar* 
lUma^.  **"^  chy ;  one  of  the  most  frequent  causes  of  it,  is  the 
^y     reading  of  the  books  of  policy,  and  histories  erf  the 
ancient  Greeks,  and  Romans  ;  from  which,  young 
men,  and  all  others  that  are  unprovided  of  the  an- 
tidote of  solid  reason,  receiving  a  strong,   and 
delightful  impression,  of  the  great  exploits  oi  war, 
achieved  by  the  conductors  of  their  armies,  receive 
withal  a  pleasing  idea,  of  all  they  have  done  be- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


DISSOLUTION  OP  COMMONWEALTHS.         315 

sides ;  and  imagine  their  great  prosperity,  not  to  part  ii. 
have  proceeded  from  the  emulation  of  partictdar  .  ^'  . 
men,  but  from  the  virtue  of  their  popular  form  of  imititionof 
government :  not  considenng  the  frequent  sedi-  Roman*. 
tions,  and  civil  wars,  produced  by  the  imperfection 
of  their  poUcy,  From  the  reading,  I  say,  of  such 
books,  men  have  undertaken  to  kill  their  kings,  be- 
cause the  Greek  and  Latin  writers,  in  their  books, 
and  discourses  of  policy,  make  it  lawful,  and  lauda- 
ble, for  any  man  so  to  do  ;  provided,  before  he  do 
it,  he  call  him  tyrant.  For  they  say  not  regicide, 
that  is,  killing  a  king,  but  tyrannicidey  that  is,  kill- 
ing of  a  tyrant  is  lawfril.  From  the  same  books, 
they  that  live  under  a  monarch  conceive  an  opi- 
nion, that  the  subjects  in  a  popular  commonwealth 
enjoy  liberty  ;  but  that  in  a  monarchy  they  are  all 
slaves.  I  say,  they  that  live  under  a  monarchy 
conceive  such  an  opinion ;  not  they  that  live  under 
a  popuhgr  government :  for  they  find  no  such  mat- 
ter. In  sum,  I  cannot  imagine,  how  anything  can 
be  more  prejudicial  to  a  monarchy,  than  the  allow- 
ing of  such  books  to  be  publicly  read,  without  pre- 
sent applying  such  correctives  of  discreet  masters, 
as  are  fit  to  take  away  their  venom  :  which  venom 
I  will  not  doubt  to  compare  to  the  biting  of  a  mad 
dog,  which  is  a  disease  the  physicians  call  Ayrfro- 
phobittj  or  /ear  of  water.  For  as  he  that  is  so 
bitten,  has  a  continual  torment  of  thirst,  and  yet 
abhorreth  water ;  and  is  in  such  an  estate,  as  if  the 
poison  endeavoured  to  convert  him  into  a  dog :  so 
when  a  monarchy  is  once  bitten  to  the  quick,  by 
those  democratical  writers,  that  continually  snarl 
at  that  estate;  it  wanteth  nothing  more  than  a 
strong  monarch,  which  nevertheless  out  of  a  cer- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


316  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  tain  tyrannophohia,  or  fear  of  being  strongly 
.  ^-  .  governed,  when  they  have  him,  they  abhor. 
The  opinioD  As  there  have  been  doctors,  that  hold  there  be 
more  M>7e-  thrcc  souls  in  a  man  ;  so  there  be  also  that  think 
IT^e^cJ^t"*  there  may  be  more  souls,  that  is,  more  sovereigns, 
monweaith.  ^hdiXi  onc,  in  a  commonwealth ;  and  set  up  a  supre^ 
y  macy  against  the  sovereignty;   canons    against 

\j^  laws  ;  and  a  ghostly  authority  against  the  civil ; 

working  on  men's  minds,  with  words  and  distinc- 
tions, that  of  themselves  signify  nothing,  but  be- 
ij  wray  by  their  obscurity;  that  there  walketh,  as 
some  think,  invisibly  another  kingdom,  as  it  were 
a  kingdom  of  fairies,  in  the  dark.  Now  seeing  it 
is  manifest,  that  the  civil  power,  and  the  power  of 
the  commonwealth  is  the  same  thing ;  and  that  su- 
premacy, and  the  power  of  making  canons,  and 
granting  faculties,  implieth  a  commonwealth ;  it 
followeth,  that  where  one  is  sovereign,  another 
supreme ;  where  one  can  make  laws,  and  another 
make  canons ;  there  must  needs  be  two  common- 
wealths, of  one  and  the  same  subjects  ;  which  is  a 
kingdom  divided  in  itself,  and  cannot  stand.  For 
notwithstanding  the  insignificant  distinction  of 
temporal,  and  ghostly ,  they  are  still  two  kingdoms, 
and  every  subject  is  subject  to  two  masters.  For 
seeing  the  ghostly  power  challengeth  the  right  to 
declare  what  is  sin,  it  challengeth  by  consequence 
to  declare  what  is  law,  sin  being  nothing  but  the 
transgression  of  the  law;  and  again,  the  civil 
power  challenging  to  declare  what  is  law,  every 
subject  must  obey  two  masters,  who  both  will  have 
their  commands  be  observed  as  law ;  which  is  im- 
possible. Or,  if  it  be  but  one  kingdom,  either  the 
civil,  which  is  the  power  of  the  commonwealth. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


DISSOLUTION  OF  COMMONWEALTHS.         317 

must  be  subordinate  to  the  ghostly y  and  then  there    part  ii. 
is  no  sovereignty  but  the  ghostly  ;  or  the  ghostly    ._  ^f*    . 
must  be  subordinate  to  the  tem/poraL  and  then  The  opinion 
there  is  no  sv/premacy  but  the  temporal.     When  more  sove. 
therefore  these  two  powers  oppose  one  another,  the  [^e  Jom^^ 
commonwealth  cannot  but  be  in  great  danger  of  ™**''''**^*'^ 
civil  war  and  dissolution.     For  the  civil  authority 
being  more  visible,  and  standing  in  the  clearer 
light  of  natural  reason,  cannot  choose  but  diaw  to 
it  in  all  times  a  very  considerable  part  of  the  peo- 
ple: and  the  spirittuil^  though  it  stand  in  the 
darkness  of  School  distinctions,  and  hard  words, 
yet  because  the  fear  of  darkness  and  ghosts,  is 
greater  than  other  fears,  cannot  want  a  party  suffi- 
cient to  trouble,  and  sometimes  to  destroy  a  com- 
monwealth. And  this  is  a  disease  which  not  unfitly 
may  be  compared  to  the  epilepsy,  or  falling  sick- 
ness, which  the  Jews  took  to  be  one  kind  of  posses- 
sion by  spirits,  in  the  body  natural.     For  as  in  this 
disease,  there  is  an  unnatural  spirit,  or  wind  in  the 
head  that  obstructeth  the  roots  of  the  nerves,  and 
moving  them  violently,  taketh  away  the  motion 
which  naturally  they  should  have  from  the  power 
of  the  soul  in  the  brain,  and  thereby  causeth  vio- 
lent, and  irregular  motions,  which  men  call  convul- 
sions, in  the  parts  ;  insomuch  as  he  that  is  seized 
therewith,  falleth  down  sometimes  into  the  water, 
and  sometimes  into  the  fire,  as  a  man  deprived  of 
his  senses ;  so  also  in  the  body  politic,  when  the 
spiritual  power,  moveth  the  members  of  a  common- 
wealth, by  the  terror  of  punishments,  and  hope  of 
rewards,  which  are  the  nerves  of  it,  otherwise  than 
by  the  civil  power,  which  is  the  soul  of  the  com- 
monwealth,  they   ought  to  be  moved;    and  by 


Digitized  by 


Google 


318  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  strajpige^  and  hard  word^  suffocaJb^  theur  under-' 
.  ^'  J  stradingi  it  must  needs  thereby  distract  the  peo^, 
aad  either  overwhekn  the  commonwealth  with  op^ 
pression,  or  cast  it  into  the  fire  of  a  civil  war. 


Mixed  \  Sometimes  also  in  the  merely  civil  government, 
goTemmen  ^^^^  |^  moTc  than  onc  soul ;  as  when  the  pow«r 
of  levying  money,  which  is  the  nutritive  feculty, 
has  depended  on  a  general  assembly ;  the  power  of 
conduct  and  command,  which  is  the  motive  faculty, 
ou  one  man ;  and  the  power  of  making  laws,  which 
is  the  rational  faculty,  on  the  accidental  consent, 
not  ouly  of  those  two,  but  also  of  a  third ;  this  en- 
dangeretli  the  commonwealth,  sometimes  for  want 
of  consent  to  good  laws :  but  most  often  for  waixt 
of  such  nouri^ment^  as  is  necessary  to  life,  and 
motion.  For  although  few  perceive,  that  such  go- 
vermn^ent,  is  not  government,  but  division  of  the 
commonwealth  into  three  factions,  and  csall  it 
mixed  monarchy ;  yet  the  truth  is,  tJMUt  it  is  not 
one  independent  commonwealth,  but  three  inde- 
pendent factions ;  nor  one  representative  person, 
but  three.  In  the  kingdom  of  God,  there  may  be 
three  persons  independent,  without  breach  of  unity 
in  God  that  reigneth  ;  but  where  men  reign,  that 
be  subject  to  diversity  of  opinions,  it  cannot  be  so. 
And  therefore  if  the  king  bear  the  person  of  the 
people,  and  the  general  assembly  bear  also  the 
person  of  the  people,  and  another  assembly  bear 
the  person  of  a  part  of  the  people,  they  are  not  one 
person,  nor  one  sovereign,  but  three  person,  and 
three  sovereigns. 

To  what  disease  in  the  natural  body  of  man,  I 
may  exactly  compare  this  irregularity  of  a  com- 
monwealth, I  know  not.     But  I  have  seen  a  man. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


DISSOLUTION  OP  COMMONWEALTHS.         319 

that  had  another  man  growing  out  of  his  side,  part  ii. 
with  a  head,  arms,  breast,  and  stomach,  of  his     _^'   ^ 
own:   if  he  had  had  another  man  growing  out 
of  his  other  side,  the  comparison  might  then  have 
been  exact. 

Hitherto  I  have  named  such  diseases  of  a  com-  ^»»' 

1-1  f    ^  -I  of  money. 

monwealth,  as  are  of  the  greatest,  and  most  present 
danger.   There  be  other  not  so  great;  which  never- 
theless  are  not  unfit  to  be  observed.    As  first,  the 
difficulty  of  raising  money,  for  the  necessary  uses 
of  the  commonwealth ;  especially  in  the  approach 
of  war.    This  difficulty  ariseth  from  the  opinion, 
that  every  subject  hath  a  propriety  in  his  lands  and 
goods,  exclusive  of  the  sovereign's  right  to  the  use 
of  the  same.    From  whence  it  cometh  to  pass,  that 
the  sovereign  power,  which  foreseeth  the  necessi- 
ties and  dangers  of  the  commonwealth,  finding  the 
passage  of  money  to  the  public  treasury  obstructed, 
by  the  tenacity  of  the  people,  whereas  it  ought  to 
extend  itself,  to  encounter,  and  prevent  such  dan- 
gers in  their  beginnings,  contractetli  itself  as  long 
as  it  can,  and  when  it  cannot  longer,  struggles  with 
the  people  by  stratagems  of  law,  to  obtain  little 
sums,  which  not  sufficing,  he  is  fain  at  last  vio- 
lently to  open  the  way  for  present  supply,  or  perish; 
and  being  put  often  to  these  extremities,  at  last 
reduceth  the  people  to  their  due  temper ;  or  else 
the  commonwealth  must  perish.     Insomuch  as  we 
may  compare  this  distemper  very  aptly  to  an  ague; 
wherein,  the  fleshy  parts  being  congealed,  or  by 
venomous  matter  obstructed,  the  veins  which  by 
their  natural  course  empty  themselves  into  the  heart, 
are  not,  as  they  ought  to  be,  supplied  firom  the  arte- 
ries, whereby  there  succeedeth  at  first  a  cold  con- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


320 


OP  COMMOKWBALTH. 


PART  U. 

29. 


Mooopoliai, 
ofpuUieaiis. 


traction^  and  trembling  of  the  limbs ;  and  afterward 
a  hot,  and  strong  endeavonr  of  the  heart,  to  force 
a  passage  for  the  blood ;  and  before  it  can  do  that, 
contenteth  itself  with  the  small  refreshments  of  such 
things  as  cool  for  a  time,  tiU,  if  nature  be  strong 
enongh,  it  break  at  last  the  contumacy  of  the  parts 
obstructed,  and  dissipateth  the  yenom  into  sweat ; 
or,  if  nature  be  too  weak,  the  patient  dieth. 

Again,  there  is  sometimes  in  a  commonwealth, 
a  disease,  which  r^HM^m^Mh  thfi  pleurisy ;  and  that 
is,  when  the  treasure  of  the  commonwealth,  flowing^ 
out  of  its  due  course,  is  gathered  together  in  too 
much  abundance^  in  one,  or  ajfew  jrivate  men,  by 
monopolies,  or  by  farms  of  the  public  revenues ; 
in  the  same  manner  as  the  blood  in  a  pleurisy, 
getting  into  the  membrane  of  thehieast,  breedeth 
there  an  inflammation,  accompanied  with  a  fever, 
and  painful  stitches. 
Popular  men.     Also  the  popularity  of  a  potent  subject,  unless 
the  commonwealth  have  very  good  caution  of  his 
fidelity,  is  a  dangerous  disease ;  because  the  people, 
which  should  receive  their  motion  from  the  autho- 
rity of  the  sovereign,  by  the  flattery  and  by  the 
reputation  of  an  ambitious  man  are  drawn  away 
from  their  obedience  to  the  laws,  to  follow  a  man, 
of  whose  virtues,  and  designs  they  have  no  know- 
ledge.    And  this  is  commonly  of  more  danger  in  a 
popular  government,  than  in  a  monarchy  ;  because 
an  army  is  of  so  great  force,  and  multitude,  as  it 
may  easily  be  made  believe,  they  are  the  people. 
By  this  means  it  was,  that  Julius  Caesar,  who  was 
set  up  by  the  people  against  the  senate,  having  won 
to  himself  the  affections  of  his  army,  made  himself 
master  both  of  senate  and  people.     And  this  pro- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


DISSOLUTION  OF  COMMONWEALTHS.        321 

ceeding  of  popular,  and  ambitious  men,  is  plain  part  n. 
rebellion  ;  and  may  be  resembled  to  the  effects  of  .  ^f-  •. 
witchcraft. 

Another  infirmity  of  a  commonwealth,  is  the  im-  Excessive 
moderate  greatness  of  a  town,  when  it  is  able  to  to^,  ^uw- 
fdmish  out  of  its  own  circuit,  the  number,  and  ex-  J^m.^'^" 
pense  of  a  great  army:  as  also  the  great  number  of 
corporations;  which  are  as  it  were  many  lesser 
commonwealths  in  the  bowels  of  a  greater,  like 
worms  in  the  entrails  of  a  natural  man.    To  which  Liberty 
may  be  added,  the  liberty  of  disputing  against  ab-  Ja^JfU^y"! 
solute  power,  by  pretenders  to  political  prudence ;  reign  power. 
which  though  bred  for  .the  most  part  in  the  lees  of 
the  people,  yet  animated  by  false  doctrines,  are 
perpetually  meddling  with  the  fundamental  laws, 
to  the  molestation  of  the  commonwealth ;  like  the 
little  worms,  which  physicians  call  ascarides. 

We  may  further  add,  me  insatiable  appetite,  or 
/3ovXi/iia,  of  enlarging  dominion ;  with  the  incura- 
ble wounds  thereby  many  times  received  ft-om  the 
enemy ;  and  the  wens^  of  ununited  conquests,  which 
are  many  times  a  burthen,  and  with  less  danger 
lost,  than  kept ;  as  also  the  lethargy  of  ease,  and 
consumption  of  riot  and  vain  expense. 

*  Lastly,  when  in  a  war,  foreign  or  intestine,  the  Dissolution  of 
enemies  get  a  final  victory ;  so  as,  the  fbrc^i^f  the  weaiS!"™**'^ 
commonwealth  keeping  the  field  no  longer,  there  is 
no  farther  protection  of  subjects  in  their  loyalty ; 
then  is  the  commonwealth  dissolved,  and  every 
man  at  liberty  to  protect  himself  by  such  courses 
as  his  own  discretion  shall  suggest  unto  him.  For 
the  sovereign  is  the  public  soul,  giving  life  and 
motion  to  the  commonwealth ;  which  expiring,  the 
members  are  governed  by  it  no  more,  than  the  car- 

VOL.  III.  Y 


Digitized  by 


Google 


322 


OF  COMMONWEALTH. 


PART  n. 
29. 


caae  of  a  man,  by  his  departed,  though  immortal, 
soxd.  For  though  the  right  of  a  sovareign  monarch 
cannot  be  extinguished  by  the  act  of  another ;  yet 
the  obligation  of  the  members  may.  For  he  that 
wants  protection,  may  seek  it  any  where ;  and  when 
he  hath  it,  is  obliged,  without  fraudulent  pretence 
of  having  submitted  himself  out  of  fear,  to  protect 
his  protection  as  long  as  he  is  able.  But  when  the 
power  of  an  assembly  is  once  suppressed,  the  right 
of  the  same  pmsheth  utterly;  because  the  assembly 
itself  is  extinct ;  and  consequently,  there  is  no  pos- 
sibility for  the  soverdgnty  to  re-enter. 


\} 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

OF  THE  OFFICE  OP  THE  SOVEREIGN 
REPRESENTATIVE. 

The  office  of  the  sovereign,  be  it  a  monarch  or 

assembly,  consisteth  in  the  end,  for  which  be  was 

rusted  with  the  sovereign  power,  namely  the  pro- 

uration  of  th^  surety  of  the  people;  to  which  he 

is  obliged  by  the  law  of  nature,  and  to  render  an 

account  thereof  to  God,  the  author  of  that  law,  and 

to  noiie  but  him.    But  by  safety  here,  is  not  meant 

hare  preservation,  but  also  all  other  contentments 

f  life,  which  every  man  by  lawfdl  industry,  without 

aiigiT;,  or  hurt  to  the  commonwealtlr,  shall  acquire 

to  himself. 

By  iiMtniction  And  this  is  intended  should  be  done,  not  by  care 
applied  to  individuals,  further  than  their  protection 
from  injuries,  when  they  shall  complain ;  but  by  a 
general  providence,  contained  in  public  instructioii, 
both  of  doctrine,  and  example ;  and  in  the  making 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  OFFICE  OF  THE  SOVEREIGN  323 

and  executing  of  good  laws,  to  which  individual 
persons  may  apply  their  own  cases.  /^         .     ^     . 

And  because,  if  the  essential  rights  of  sovlfeignty,  Against  the 
•specified  before  in  the  eighteenth  chapter,  be  taken  soverdp^to 
away,  the  commonwealth  is  thereby  dissolved,  and  ^^"^^J^jj  ^gh^ 
every  man  retumeth  into  the  condition,  and  cala-  of  «>vercigniy. 
mity  of  a  war  with  every  other  man,  which  is  the 
greatest  evil  that  can  happen  in  this  life ;  it  is  the 
office  of  the  sovereign,  to  maintain  those  rights 
entire  ;  and  consequently  against  his  duty,  first,  to 
transfer  to  another,  or  to  lay  from  himself  any  of 
them.    For  he  that  deserteth  the  means,  deserteth 
the  ends ;  and  he  deserteth  the  means,  that  being 
the  sovereign,  acknowledgeth  himself  subject  to  the 
civil  laws  ;  and  renounceth  the  power  of  supreme 
jfudicatare ;  or  of  making  war,  or  peace  by  his  own 
authority ;  or  of  judging  of  the  necessities  of  the 
commonwealth ;  or  of  levying  money  and  soldiers,^ 
when,  and  as  much  as  in  his  own  conseience 
shall  judge  necessary ;  or  of  making  officers,  al 
ministers  both  of  war  and  prace  ;  or  of  appoint!  j 
teachers,  and  examining  what  doctrines  are  vm 
formable,  or  contrary  to  the  defence,  peace,  and 
good  of  the  people.     Secondly,  it  is  against  his  or  not 
duty,  to  let  the  people  be  ignorant,  or  misinformed  ^pfe^ugiit 
of  the  grounds,  and  reasons  of  those  his  essential  ^«^®"'*^*'^ 
rights ;  because  thereby  men  are  easy  to  be  seduced, 
and  drawn  to  resist  him,  when  the  commonwealth 
shall  require  their  use  and  exercise. 

And  the  grounds  of  these  rights,  have  the  rather 
need  to  be  diligently,  and  truly  taught ;  because 
they  cannot  be  maintained  by  any  civil  law,  or 
terror  of  legal  punishment.  For  a  civil  law,  that 
shall  forbid  rebeUion,  (and  stidi  is  all  rei^dlaDee  to 

Y  2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


324  OF   COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  n.    the  essential  rights  of  the  sovereignty),  is  not,  as  a 
^    ^^'    .    civil  law,  any  obligation,  but  by  virtue  only  of  the 
law  of  nature,  that  forbiddeth  the  violation  of  faith; 
which  natural  obligation,  if  men  know  not,  they  can- 
not know  the  right  of  any  law  the  sovereign  maketh. 
And  for  the  punishment,  they  take  it  but  for  an 
act  of  hostility ;  which  when  they  think  they  have 
strength  enough,  they  will  endeavour  by  acts  of 
hostility,  to  avoid. 
objcctioii  of        As  I  have  heard  some  say,  that  justice  is  but  a 
there  Je"o  word,  without  substance;  and  that  whatsoever  a 
?JiS^n^for.bf  Daan  can  by  force,  or  art,  acquire  to  himself,  not 
solute   80TC-  Qj^iy  jjj  t[jg  condition  of  waF,  but  also  in  a  common- 

reigDtj.  "^  ' 

wealth,  is  his  own,  which  I  have  already  showed  to 
be  false :  so  there  be  also  that  maintain,  that  there 
are  no  grounds,  nor  principles  of  reason,  to  sustain 
those  essential  rights,  which  mak^  sovereignty  ab- 
solute. For  if  there  were,  they  would  have  been 
found  out  in  someplace,  or  othei*;  whereas  we  see, 
there  has  not  hitherto  been  any  commonwealth, 
where  those  rights  have  been  acknowledged,  or 
^  challenged.  Wherein  they  argue  as  ill,  as  if  the 
savage  people  of  America,  should  deny  ther^  were 
any  grounds,  or  principles  of  reason,  so  t8  build  a 
^  house,  as  to  last  as  long  as  the  materials,  because 

they  never  yet  saw  any  so  well  built.  Time,  and 
industry,  produce  every  day  new  knowledge.  And 
as  the  art  of  well  building  is  derived  from  princi- 
ples of  reason,  observed  by  industrious  men,  that 
had  long  studied  the  nature  of  materials,  and  the 
divers  eflfects  of  figure,  and  proportion,  Idng  after 
mankind  began,  though  poorly,  to  build :  so,  long 
time  after  men  have  begun  to  constitute  common- 
wealths, imperfect,  and  aipt  to  relapse  into  disorder. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THB  OFFICE  OF  THE  SOVEREIGN.  325 

there  may  principles  of  reason  be  found  out,  by  part  ii. 
industrious  meditation,  to  make  their  constitution,  ^  ^^-  ^ 
excepting  by  external  violence,  everlasting.  And 
such  are  those  which  I  have  in  this  discourse  set 
forth  :  which  whether  they  come  not  into  the  sight 
of  those  that  have  power  to  make  use  of  them,  or 
be  n^lected  by  them,  or  not,  concemeth  my  par- 
ticular interests,  at  this  day,  very  little.  But  sup- 
posing that  these  of  mine  are  not  such  principles 
of  reason ;  yet  I  am  sure  they  are  principles  from 
authority  of  Scripture ;  as  I  shall  make  it  appear, 
when  I  shall  come  to  speak  of  the  kingdom  of  God, 
administered  by  Moses,  over  the  Jews,  his  peculiar 
people  by  covenant. 

But  they  say  again,  that  though  the  principles  be  objection  from 
right,  yet  common  people  are  not  of  capacity  enough  ©f  Uie°v^i^. 
to  be  made  to  understand  them.  I  should  be  glad, 
that  the  rich  and  potent  subjects  of  a  kingdom,  or 
those  that  are  accounted  the  most  learned,  were  no 
less  incapable  than  they.  But  all  men  know,  that 
the  obstructions  to  this  kind  of  doctrine,  proceed 
not  so  much  from  the  difl&culty  of  the  matter,  as 
from  the  interest  of  them  that  are  to  learn.  Potent 
men,  digest  hardly  any  thing  that  setteth  up  a  power 
to  bridle  their  affections ;  and  learned  men,  any 
thing  that  discovereth  their  errors,  and  thereby  les- 
seneth  their  authority :  whereas  the  common  peo- 
ple's minds,  unless  they  be  tainted  with  dependance 
on  the  potent,  or  scribbled  over  with  the  opinions 
of  their  doctors,  are  like  clean  paper,  fit  to  receive 
whatsoever  by  public  authority  shall  be  imprinted 
in  them.  Shall  whole  nations  be  brought  to  ae- 
quiesce  in  the  great  mysteries  of  the  Christian  re- 
ligion, which  are  above  reason,  andmilUonsof  men 


Digitized  by 


Googk 


S2^ 


OF  COMMONWEALTH- 


PART  II. 


be  made  batieve»  that  t)ie  same  body  may  be  in 
iimumerable  places  at  one  and  the  same  time, 
which  is  against  reason;  and  shall  not  men  be 
able,  by  their  teaching,  and  preaching,  protected 
by  the  law,  to  make  that  received,  which  is  so  con- 
sonant to  reason,  that  any  unprejudicated  man, 
needs  no  more  to  learn  it,  than  to  hear  it  ?  I 
conclude  therefore,  that  in  the  instruction  of  the 
people  in  the  essential  rights  which  are  the  natu- 
ral and  fundamental  laws  of  sovereignty,  there  is 
no  difficulty,  whilst  a  sovereign  has  his  power 
entire,  but  what  proceeds  from  his  own  fault,  or 
the  fault  of  those  whom  he  trusteth  in  the  admi- 
nistration of  the  commonwealth ;  and  consequently, 
it  is  his  duty,  to  cause  them  so  to  be  instructed ; 
and  not  oidy  his  duty,  but  his  benefit  also,  and 
security  against  the  danger  that  may  arrive  to 
himself  in  his  natural  person  from  rd>ellion. 

And,  to  desceid  to  particulars,  the  people  are  to 
be  taught,  first,  that  they  ought  not  to  be  in  love 
^^«^[^  with  any  form  of  government  they  see  in  their 
neighbour  nations,  more  than  with  thfeir  own,  nor,' 
whatsoever  present  prosperity  they  bdbold  in  nar- 
tions  that  are  otherwise  govened  than  liiey,  to 
desire  change.  For  the  prosperity  of  a  people 
ruled  by  an  aristooratical,  or  demooratical  assem- 
bly, cometh  not  from  aristocracy,  nor  from  de- 
mocracy, but  from  the  obedience,  and  concord  of 
the  subjects  :  nor  do  the  peo}^e  flourish  in  a  mo- 
narchy, becauae  one  man  has  the  right  to  rule  them, 
but  because  they  obey  him.  Take  away  in  any 
kind  of  state,  the  obedience,  and  consequently  the 
concord  of  the  people,  and  they  shall  not  only  not 
flourish,  but  in  short  time  be  dissolved.    And  they 


Subject!  are 
to  be  taught 
not  to  affect 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THB  OFFICE  OF  THE  SOVEREIGN.  827 

tliat  go  about  by  disobedience,  to  do  no  more  than  part  n, 
rrfonn  the  commonwealth,  shall  find  they  do  ^^'  . 
thereby  destroy  it;  like  the  foolish  daughters  of 
Peleus,  in  the  fable  ;  which  desiring  to  renew  the 
youth  of  their  decrepid  father,  did  by  the  counsel 
of  Medea,  cut  him  in  pieces,  and  boil  him,  together 
with  strange  herbs,  but  made  not  of  him  a  new 
man.  This  desire  of  change,  is  like  the  breach  of 
the  first  of  God's  commandments :  for  there  God 
says,  Non  kahebis  Deos  alienos ;  Thou  shalt  not 
have  the  Gods  of  other  nations ;  and  in  another 
j^ace  concerning  kings,  that  they  are  Gods. 

Secondly,  they  are  to  be  taught,  tjiat  they  ought  Nor  adhere. 
not  to  be  led  with  admiration  of  the  virtue  of  any  1?^"^,  to 
of  their  fellow-subjects,  how  high  soever  he  stand,  vov^^'^^^^- 
or  how  conspicuously  soever  he  shine  in  the  com- 
monwealth ;  nor  of  any  assembly,  except  the  sove- 
reign assembly,  so  as  to  defer  to  them  any  obedi- 
ence, or  honour,  appropriate  to  the  sovereign  only, 
whom,  in  their  particular  stations,  they  represent ; 
nor  to  receive  any  influence  from  them,  but  such 
as  is  conveyed  by  them  ftt)m  the  sovereign  autho- 
rity. For  that  sovereign  cannot  be  imagined  to 
love  his  people  as  he  ought,  that  is  not  jealous  of 
them,  but  suflfers  them  by  the  flattery  of  popular 
men,  to  be  seduced  from  their  loyalty,  as  they 
have  often  been,  not  only  secretly,  but  openly,  so 
as  to  proclaim  marriage  vidth  them  in  facie 
ecclesiee  by  preachers,  and  by  publishing  the  same 
in  the  open  streets :  which  may  fitly  be  compared 
to  the  violation  of  the  second  of  the  ten  com- 
mandments. 

Thirdly,  in  consequence  to  this,  they  ought  to  be  Nor  to  dispute 
informed,  how  great  a  fault  it  is,  to  speak  evil  of  powerr"^*^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


328  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  !!•    the  sovereign  representative,  whether  one  man,  or 
.     ^^'  ^    an  assembly  of  men ;  or  to  argue  and  dispute  his 
power ;  or  any  way  to  use  his  name  irreverently, 
whereby  he  may  be  brought  into  contempt  with  his 
people,  and  their  obedience,  in  which  the  safety  of 
the  commonwealth  consisteth,  slackened.     Which 
doctrine  the  third  commandment  by  resemblance 
pointeth  to. 
And  to  haya        Fourthly,  seeing  people  cannot  be  taught  this, 
to  km  th«r   nor  when  it  is  taught,  remember  it,  nor  after  one 
duty.  generation  past,  so  much  as  know  in  whom  the 

sovereign  power  is  placed,  without  setting  apart 
from  their  ordinary  labour,  some  certain  times,  in 
which  they  may  attend  those  that  are  appointed  to 
instruct  them;  it  is  necessary  that  some  such 
times  be  determined,  wherein  they  may  assemble 
together,  and,  after  prayers  and  praises  given  to 
God,  the  sovereign  of  sovereigns,  hear  those  their 
duties  told  them,  and  the  positive  laws,  such  as 
generally  concern  them  all,  read  and  expounded, 
and  be  put  in  mind  of  the  authority  that  maketh 
^  them  laws.  To  this  end  had  the  Jews  every 
seventh  day,  a  sabbath,  in  which  the  law  was  read 
and  expounded;  and  in  the  solemnity  whereof 
they  were  put  in  mind,  that  their  king  was  God ; 
that  having  created  the  world  in  six  days,  he  rested 
the  seventh  day ;  and  by  their  resting  on  it  from 
their  labour,  that  that  God  was  their  king,  which 
redeemed  them  from  their  servile,  and  painftd 
laboar  in  Egypt,  and  gave  them  a  time,  after  they 
had  rejoiced  in  God,  to  take  joy  also  in  themselves, 
by  lawful  recreation.  So  that  the  first  table  of  the 
commandments,  is  spent  all  in  setting  down  the 
sum  of  God's  absolute  power;  not  only  as  God, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  OFFICE  OF  THE  SOVEREIGN.  329 

but  as  king  by  pact,  in  peculiar,  of  the  Jews ;  and   part  ii. 
may  therefore  give  light,  to  those  that  have  sove-    .    ^-    . 
reign  power  conferred  on  them  by  the  consent  of 
men,  to  see  what  doctrine  they  ought  to  teach  their 
subjects. 

And  because  the  first  instruction  of  children]  And  to  honour 
dependeth  on  the  care  of  their  parents,-it  is  neces-    "'^"^  ' 
sary  that  they  should  be  obedient  to  them,  whilst 
they  are  under  their  tuition ;  and  not  only  so,  but 
that  also  afterwards,  as  gratitude  requireth,  they 
acknowledge  the  benefit  of  their  education,  by  ex- 
ternal signs  of  honour.     To  which  end  they  are  to  ^ 
be  taught,  that  originally  the  father  of  every  man 
was  also  his  sovereign  lord,  with  power  over  him 
of  life  and  death ;  and  that  the  fathers  of  families,  '^ 

when  by  instituting  a  commonwealth,  they  re- 
signed that  absolute  power,  yet  it  was  never  in- 
tended, they  should  lose  the  honour  due  unto  them 
for  their  education.  For  to  relinquish  such  right, 
was  not  necessary  to  the  institution  of  sovereign 
power;  nor  would  there  be  any  reason,  why  any 
man  should  desire  to  have  children,  or  take  the 
care  to  nourish  and  instruct  them,  if  they  were 
afterwards  to  have  no  other  benefit  from  them, 
than  from  other  men.  And  this  accordeth  with 
^the  fifth  commandiSeiil 


Aeain,  every  sovereign  ought  to  cause  justice  to  ^^^  ^  »void 

U     *         1.4.        \J  V.  '4.'         •      4.   1  •        A.  doingof injury. 

be  taught,  which,  consisting  m  taking  from  no  man 
what  is  his,  is  as  much  as  to  say,  to  cause  men  to 
be  taught  not  to  deprive  their  neighbours,  by  vio- 
lence or  fraud,  of  any  thing  which  by  the  sovereign 
authority  is  theirs.  Of  things  held  in  propriety, 
those  that  are  dearest  to  a  man  are  his  own  life, 
and  limbs ;  and  in  the  next  degree,  in  most  men^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


330  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  those  that  ameera  conjugal  affection ;  and  after 
_^^\_  them,  riches  and  means  of  livmg.  Therefore  the 
people  are  to  be  taught,  to  abstain  from  violence  to 
one  another's  person,  by  private  revenges ;  from 
violation  of  conjugal  honour;  and  from  forcible 
rapine,  and  fraudulent  surreption  of  one  another's 
goods.  For  which  purpose  also  it  is  necessary  tiiey 
be  showed  the  evil  consequences  of  false  judgment, 
by  corruption  either  (tf  judges  or  witnesses,  where- 
by the  distinction  of  propriety  is  taken  away,  and 
justice  becomes  of  no  effect :  all  which  things  are 
intimated  in  the  sixth,  seventh,  eighth,  and  ninth 
commandments. 
And  to  do  all  Lastly,  they  are  to  be  taught,  that  not  only  the 
fromlhThei^  uujust  feicts,  but  the  dcsigus  and  intentions  to  do 
them,  though  by  accident  hindered,  are  injustice  i 
which  consisteth  in  the  pravity  of  the  will,  as  well 
as  in  the  irregularity  of  the  act.  And  this  is  the 
intention  of  the  tenth  commandment,  and  the  sum 
of  the  second  table ;  which  is  reduced  all  to  this 
one  commandment  of  mutual  charity,  thou  shaU 
laee  thy  neighbour  as  thyself:  as  the  sum  of  the 
first  table  is  reduced  to  the  love  qf  God;  whom 
they  had  then  newly  received  as  their  king. 
The  use  of         A.S  for  the  means,  and  conduits,  by  which  the 

aniYersities.  .  .         ,  .    .  .  , 

people  may  receive  this  instruction,  we  are  to  search, 
by  what  means  so  many  opinions,  contrary  to  the 
peace  of  mankind,  upon  weak  and  false  principles, 
have  nevertheless  been  so  deeply  rooted  in  them. 
I  mean  those,  which  I  have  in  the  precedent  chap- 
ter specified :  as  that  men  shall  judge  of  what  is 
lawfol  and  unlawful,  not  by  the  law  itself,  but  by 
their  own  consciences ;  that  is  to  say,  by  their  own 
private  judgments :  that  subjects  sin  in  obejang  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  OFFICE  OF  THE  SOVEREIGN.  381 

commaiidB  of  the  coiDmoiiwealth,  unless  they  them*  fart  n. 
selves  have  first  judged  them  to  be  lawfdl :  that  .  ^'  . 
their  jwropriety  m  their  riches  is  such,  as  to  exclude  The  use  of 
the  dominion,  which  the  commonwealth  hath  over  «°^«^*^~- 
the  same :  that  it  is  lawful  for  sut^ects  to  kill  such, 
as  they  call  tyrants :  that  the  sovereign  power  may 
be  divided,  and  the  like;  which  come  to  be  in- 
stilled into  the  people  by  this  means.  They  whom 
necessity,  or  covetousness  keepeth  att^it  on  their 
trades,  and  labour ;  and  they,  on  the  other  side, 
whom  superfluity,  or  sloth  carrieth  after  their  sen- 
sual pleasures ;  which  two  sorts  of  men  take  up  the 
greatest  part  of  mankind ;  being  diverted  from  the 
deep  meditation,  which  the  learning  of  truth,  not 
only  in  the  matter  of  natural  justice,  but  also  of  all 
other  sciences  necessarily  requireth,  receive  the 
notions  of  their  duty,  cMefly  from  divines  in  the 
pulpit,  and  partly  from  such  of  their  neighbours 
or  familiar  acquaintance,  as  having  the  faculty  of 
discoursing  readily,  and  plausibly,  seem  wiser  and 
better  learned  in  cases  of  law  and  conscience,  than 
themselves.  And  the  divines,  and  such  others  as 
makejjhnw  of  liiHi  um^,  derive  their  knowledge  from 
th^ftmiver^tieSj^^^  from  the  schools  of  law,  or 
from  Tbe^^^iera^which  by  men,  eminent  in  those 
schools  and  universities,  have  been  published.  It 
is  tti^tlfefore  manifest,  that  the  instruction  of  the 
people^  dependeth  wholly,  on  the  right  teaching  of  • 
youth  in  the  universities.  But  are  not,  may  some 
man  say,  the  universities  of  England  learned  enough 
already  to  do  that  ?  or  is  it  you,  will  undertake  to 
teach  the  universities  ?  Hard  questions.  Yet  to 
the  first,  I  doubt  not  to  answer ;  that  till  towards 
the  latter  end  of  Henry  the  Eighth,  the  power  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


asa 


OF  COMMONWEALTH. 


PART  II. 
SO. 

The  use  of 
uniyenities. 


the  Pope,  was  always  upheld  against  the  power  of 
the  commonwealth,  principally  by  the  universities; 
and  that  the  doctrines  maintidned  by  so  many 

:  preachers,  against  the  sovereign  power  of  the  king, 
and  by  so  many  lawyers,  and  others,  that  had  their 
education  there,  is  a  sufficient  argument,  that  though 
the  universities  were  not  authors  of  those  false  doc- 
trines, yet  they  knew  not  how.lo-plant^the  true. 
For  in  such  a  contradiction  of  opinions,  it  is  most 
certain,  that  they  have  not  been  sufficiently  in- 
structed ;  and  it  is  no  wonder,  if  they  yet  retain  a 
relish  of  that  subtle  liquor,  wherewith  they  were 
first  seasoned,  against  the  civil  authority.  But  to 
the  latter  question,  it  is  not  fit,  nor  needful  for  me 
to  say  either  aye,  or  no :  for  any  man  that  sees  what 
I  am  doing,  may  easily  perceive  what  I  think. 

^  The  safety  of  the  people,  requireth  further,  from 
him,  or  them  that  have  the  sovereign  power,  that 
justice  be  equally  administered  to  all  degrees  of 
people ;  that  is,  that  as  well  the  rich  and  mighty, 
as  poor  and  obscure  persons,  may  be  righted  of  the 
injuries  done  them ;  so  as  the  great,  may  have  no 
greater  hope  of  impunity,  when  they  do  violence, 
dishonour,  or  any  injury  to  the  meaner  sort,  than 
when  one  of  these,  does  the  like  to  one  of  them : 
for  in  this  consisteth  equity ;  to  which,  as  being  a 
precept  of  the  law  of  nature,  a  sovereign  is  as  much 

'subject,  as  any  of  the  meanest  of  his  people./  All 
breaches  of  the  law,  are  oflFences  against  the  com- 
monwealth :  but  there  be  some,  that  are  also  against 
private  persons.  Those  that  concern  the  common- 
wealth only,  may  without  breach  of  equity  be  par- 
doned ;  for  every  man  may  pardon  what  is  doife 
against  himself,  according  to  his  own  discretion. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  OFFICE  OF  THE  SOVEREIGN.  333 

But  an  offence  against  a  private  man,  cannot  in  part  ii. 
equity  be  pardoned,  without  the  consent  of  him  ^'  , 
that  is  injured ;  or  reasonable  satisfaction. 

The  inequality  of  subjects,  proceedeth  from  the 
acts  of  sovereign  power ;  and  therefore  has  no  more 
place  in  the  presence  of  the  sovereign,  that  is  to 
say,  in  a  court  of  justice,  than  the  inequaUty  between 
kings  and  their  subjects,  in  the  presence  of  the 
King  of  kings.  The  honour  of  great  persons,  is  to 
be  valued  for  their  beneficence  and  the  aids  they 
give  to  men  of  inferior  rank,  or  not  at  all.  And 
the  violences,  oppressions,  and  injuries  they  do,  are 
not  extenuated,  but  aggravated  by  the  greatness  of 
their  persons ;  because  they  have  least  need  to  com- 
mit them.  The  consequences  of  this  partiality 
towards  the  great,  proceed  in  this  manner.  Im- 
pimity  maketh  insolence;  insolence,  hatred;  and 
hatred,  an  endeavour  to  pull  down  all  oppressing 
and  contumelious  greatness,  though  with  the  ruin 
of  the  commonwealth. 

To  equal  justice,  appertaineth  also  the  equal  im-  E<^ai  taxes. 
position  of  taxes ;  the  equality  whereof  dependeth 
not  on  the  equality  of  riches,  but  on  the  equality 
of  the  debt  that  every  man  oweth  to  the  common- 
wealth for  his  defence,  fit  is  not  enough,  for  a 
man  to  labour  for  the  maintenance  of  his  life ;  but 
also  to  fight,  if  need  be,  for  the  securing  of  his 
labour.  They  must  either  do  as  the  Jews  did  after 
their  return  from  captivity,in  re-edifying  the  temple, 
build  with  one  hand,  and  hold  the  sword  in  the 
other ;  or  else  they  must  hire  others  to  fight  for 
them.l  For  the  impositions,  that  are  laid  on  the 
people  by  the  sovereign  power,  are  nothing  else 
but  the  wages,  due  to  them  that  hold  the  public 


Digitized  by 


Google 


334  OF  COMMONWBALTH. 

PART  II.  Bword^  to  defend  pmate  men  in  the  exercise  d  tindr 
^  '  several  trades,  and  eaUings.  /  Seeing  then  the  be^ 
nefit  that  every  one  receiveth  thereby,  is  the  enjoy- 
ment of  life,  which  is  equally  dear  to  poor  and  rich ; 
the  debt  which  a  poor  man  oweth  them  that  defend 
his  life,  is  the  same  which  a  rich  man  oweth  for  the 
defence  of  hisY  saving  that  the  rich,  who  have  the 
service  of  the  poor,  may  be  debtors  not  only  for 
their  own  persoiMS  but  for  many  more.  Whidi  consi- 
dered, the  equality  of  imposition,  consosteth  rather 
in  the  equality  of  that  which  is  consumed,  than  of 
the  riches  of  the  persons  that  consume  the  same. 
For  what  reason  is  there,  that  he  which  laboureth 
much,  and  sparing  the  fruits  of  his  labour,  con- 
sumeth  little,  should  be  more  charged,  than  he  tfai^ 
living  idly,  getteth  little^  and  spendeth  all  he  gets ; 
seeing  the  one  hath  no  more  protection  from  the 
commonwealth,  than  the  other?  But  wh^i  the 
impositions,  are  laid  upon  those  things  which  mt&i 
consume,  every  man  payeth  equally  for  what  he 
useth :  nor  is  the  commonwealth  defrauded  by  the 
luxurious  waste  of  private  men. 

Public  charity.  And  whcreas  many  men,  by  accident  inevitaUe, 
become  unable  to  maintain  themselves  by  their 
labour ;  they  ought  not  to  be  left  to  the  charity  oi 
private  persons ;  but  to  be  provided  for,  as  far  forth 
as  the  necessities  of  nature  require,  by  the  laws  of 
the  commonwealth.  For  as  it  is  uncharitableness 
in  any  man,  to  neglect  the  impotent ;  so  it  is  in  the 
sovereign  of  a  commonwealth,  to  expose  them  to 
the  hazard  of  such  uncertain  charity. 

Prevention  But  for  such  as  havc  strong  bodies,  the  case  is 

"***"     otherwise :  they  are  to  be  forced  to  work ;  and  to 

avoid  the  excuse  of  not  findu^  employment,  there 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


THE  OFFICE  OF  THE  SOVEREIGN.  335 

ought  to  be  such  laws,  as  may  eneoorage  all  manner   fart  n. 
of  arts ;  as  navigation,  agriculture,  fishing,  and  all   .^  ^'    . 
manner  of  manufacture  that  requires  labour.    The  i  . 
multitude  of  poor,  and  yet  strong  people  still  in-  / 1     O 
creasing,  they  axe  to  be  transplanted  into  countries/  ' 
not  sufficiently  inhabited:  where  nevertheless,  they 
are  not  to  exterminate  those  they  find  there ;  hot 
constrain  them  to  inhabit  closer  together,  and  not 
to  range  a  great  deal  of  ground,  to  snatch  what 
they  find ;  but  to  court  each  little  plot  with  art  and 
labour,  to  give  them  their  sustenance  in  due  season. 
And  when  all  the  world  is  overcharged  with  inha- 
bitants, then  the  last  remedy  of  all  is  war ;  which 
provideth  for  every  man,  by  victory,  or  death. 

To  the  care  of  the  sovereign,  belongeth  the  making  Good  Uwi, 
of  good  laws.     But  what  is  a  good  law  ?     By  a  ^^^' 
good  law^  I  mean  not  a  just  law :  for  no  law  can  be  \  \ 
imjust.    The  law  is  made  by  the  sovereign  power, '  ^ 
and  aU  that  is  done  by  such  power,  is  warranted, 
and  owned  by  every  one  of  the  people ;  and  that 
which  every  man  will  have  so,  no  man  can  say  is 
unjust    It  is  in  the  laws  of  a  commonwealth,  as  in 
the  laws  of  gaming :  whatsoever  the  gamesters  all 
agree  on,  is  injustice  to  none  of  them.    A  good  law  < 
is  that,  which  is  needful^  for  the  good  of  the  people^ 
VQA.ynt)[^  perspicuous. 

For  the  use  of  laws,  which  are  but  rules  autho-  soch  u  are 
rized,  is  not  to  bind  the  people  from  all  voluntary  "®*^"*'y' 
actions ;  but  to  direct  and  keep  them  in  such  a 
motion,  as  not  to  hurt  themselves  by  their  own 
impetuous  desires,  rashness  or  indfecretion ;  as 
hec^es  are  set,  not  to  stop  travellers,  but  to  keep 
them  in  their  way.  And  therefore  a  law  that  is  not 
needful,  having  not  the  true  end  of  a  law^  is  not 
good.     A  law  may  be  conceived  to  be  good,  when 


Digitized  by 


Google 


336  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  it  is  for  the  benefit  of  the  sovereign ;  though  it  be 
.  ^^'  .  not  necessary  for  the  people ;  but  it  is  not  so.  For 
the  good  of  the  sovereign  and  people,  cannot  be 
separated.  It  is  a  weak  sovereign,  that  has  weak  sub- 
jects ;  and  a  weak  people,  whose  sovereign  wanteth 
power  to  rule  them  at  his  will.  Unnecessary  laws 
are  not  good  laws ;  but  traps  for  money :  which 
where  the  right  of  sovereign  power  is  acknowledged, 
are  superfluous;  and  where  it  is  not  acknowledged, 
insufficient  to  defend  the  people. 
Such  as  arc      The  perspicuitv,  consisteth  not  so  much  in  the 

perspicuous.  ii»7       !•       ii»  •  11  •  /»! 

words  of  the  law  itself,  as  m  a  declaration  of  the 
causes,  and  motives  for  which  it  was  made.  That 
is  it,  that  shows  us  the  meaning  of  the  legislator ; 
and  the  meaning  of  the  legislator  known,  the  law 
is  more  easily  understood  by  few,  than  many  words. 
For  all  words,  are  subject  to  ambiguity ;  and  there- 
fore multiplication  of  words  in  the  body  of  the  law, 
is  multiplication  of  ambiguity  :  besides  it  seems  to 
imply,  by  too  much  diligence,  that  whosoever  can 
evade  the  words,  is  without  the  compass  of  the  law. 
And  this  is  a  cause  of  many  unnecessary  processes. 
For  when  I  consider  how  short  were  the  laws  of 
ancient  times ;  and  how  they  grew  by  degrees  still 
longer ;  methinks  I  see  a  contention  between  the 
penners,  and  pleaders  of  the  law ;  the  former  seek- 
ing to  circumscribe  the  latter ;  and  the  latter  to 
evade  their  circumscriptions  ;  and  that  the  pleaders 
have  got  the  victory.  It  belongeth  therefore  to  the 
office  of  a  legislator,  (such  as  is  in  all  common- 
wealths the  supreme  representative,  be  it  one  man, 
or  an  assembly),  to  make  the  reason  perspicuous, 
why  the  law  was  made  ;  and  the  body  of  the  law 
itself,  as  short,  but  in  as  proper,  and  significant 
terms,  as  may  be. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  OFFICE  OF  THE  SOVEREIGN.  337 

It  belongeth  also  to  the  ofl&ce  of  the  sovereign,  part  ii. 
to  make  a  right  application  of  punishments,  and  .  ^^'  . 
rewards.  And  seeing  the  end  of  punishing  is  not  Punishments. 
revenge,  and  discharge  of  choler ;  but  correction, 
either  of  the  oflFender,  or  of  others  by  his  example; 
the  severest  punishments  are  to  be  inflicted  for  those 
crimes,  that  are  of  most  danger  to  the  public;  such 
as  axe  those  which  proceed  from  malice  to  the  go- 
vernment established ;  those  that  spring  from  con- 
tempt of  justice ;  those  that  provoke  indignation 
in  the  multitude ;  and  those,  which  unpimished, 
seem  authorized,  as  when  they  are  committed  by 
sons,  servants,  or  favourites  of  men  in  authority. 
For  indignation  carrieth  men,  not  only  against  the 
actors,  and  authors  of  injustice;  but  against  all 
power  that  is  likely  to  protect  them ;  as  in  the  case 
of  Tarquin ;  when  for  the  insolent  act  of  one  of  his 
sons,  he  was  driven  out  of  Rome,  and  the  monarchy 
itself  dissolved.  But  crimes  of  infirmity ;  such  as  we 
those  which  proceed  from  great  provocation,  from 
great  fear,  great  need,  or  from  ignorance  whether 
the  fact  be  a  great  crime,  or  not,  there  is  place 
many  times  for  lenity,  without  prejudice  to  the 
commonwealth ;  and  lenity,  when  there  is  such  place 
for  it,  is  required  by  the  law  of  nature.  The  pun- 
ishment of  the  leaders  and  teachers  in  a  commo- 
tion, not  the  poor  seduced  people,  when  they  are 
punished,  can  profit  the  commonwealth  by  their 
example.  To  be  severe  to  the  people,  is  to  punish 
that  ignorance,  which  may  in  great  part  be  imputed 
to  the  sovereign,  whose  fault  it  was,  that  they  were 
no  better  instructed. 

In  like  manner  it  belongeth  to  the  ofl&ce,  and  Rewafdi. 
duty  of  the  sovereign,  to  apply  his  rewards  always 

VOL.  III.  z 


Digitized  by 


Google 


338  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  11.  80^  as  thefe*ma!y  arise  from  them  benefit  to  the 
.  ^'  .  commonwealth ;  wherein  consisteth  their  nse,  and 
Rewtrds.  end ;  lemd  is  then  done,  when  they  that  have  well 
served  the  commonwealth,  are  with  as  little  expense 
of  the  common  treasure,  as  is  possible,  so  well  re- 
compensed, as  others  thereby  may  be  encouraged, 
both  to  serve  the  same  as  faithfolly  as  they  can, 
and  to  study  the  arts  by  which  th6y  may  be  en- 
abled to  do  it  hetter.  To  buy  with  money,  or  pre- 
ferment, from  a  populM-  ambitious  subject,  to  be 
quiet,  and  desist  from  making  ill  impressions  in  die 
minds  of  the  people,  has  nothing  of  the  nature  of 
reward ;  (which  is  ordained  not  for  disservice,  but 
for  service  past ;)  nor  a  sign  of  gratitude,  but  of 
fear ;  nor  does  it  tend  to  the  benefit,  but  to  the 
damage  of  the  public.  It  is  a  contention  with  am- 
bition,like  that  of  Hercules  with  the^faon^ter  Hydra, 
which  having  many  heads,  for  every  one  that  was 
vanquished,  there  grew  up  three.  For  in  like  man- 
ner, when  the  stubbornness  of  one  popular  man,  is 
overcome  with  reward,  there  arise  many  more,  by 
the  example,  that  do  the  'same  mischief,  in  hope  of 
like  benefit :  and  as  all  sorts  of  manufacture,  so  also 
malice  encreaseth  by  being  vendible.  And  though 
sometimes  a  civil  war,  may  be  deferred  by  such 
ways  as  that,  yet  the  danger  grows  still  the  greater, 
and  the  public  ruin  more  assured.  It  is  therefore 
against  the  duty  of  the  sovereign,  to  whom  the 
public  safety  is  committed,  to  reward  those  that 
aspire  to  greatness  by  disturbing  the  peace  of  their 
country,  and  not  rather  to  oppose  the  beginnings 
of  such  men,  with  a  little  danger,  than  after  a  longer 
time  with  greater. 

Another  business  of  the  sovereign,  is  to  choose 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THB  OFFICE  OF  THE  SOVEREIGN.  339 

good  counsellors ;  I  mean  such,  whose  advice  he  is  part  it. 
to  take  in  the  government  of  the  commonwealth.  ^Q- 
For  this  word  counsel,  consilium,  corrupted  from  counsellors. 
cansidium,  is  of  a  large  signification,  and  compre- 
hendeth  all  assemblies  of  men  that  sit  together, 
not  only  to  deliberate  what  is  to  be.  done  hereafter, 
but  also  to  judge  of  facts  past,  and  of  ^w  for  the 
present.  I  take  it  here  in  the  first  sense  only :  and 
in  this  sense,  there  is  no  choice  of  counsel,  neither 
in  a  democracy,  nor  aristocracy ;  because  the  per- 
sons counselling  are  members  of  the  person  coun- 
selled. The  choice  of  counsellors  therefore  is  pro- 
per to  monarchy;  in  which,  the  sovereign  that 
endeavoureth  not  to  make  choice  of  those,  that  in 
every  kind  are  the  most  able,  dischargeth  not  his 
office  as  he  oi:^ht  to  do.  The  mo^t  able  counsel- 
lors, axe  they  that  have  least  hope  of  benefit  by 
giving  evil  counsel,  and  most  knowledge  of  those 
things  that  conduce  to  the  peace,  and  defence  of 
the  commonwealth.  It  is  a  hard  matter  to  know 
who  expecteth  benefit  from  public  troubles;  but 
the  signs  that  guide  to  a  just  suspicion,  is  the  sooth- 
ing of  the  people  in  their  unreasonable,  or  irreme- 
diable grievances,  by  men  whose  estates  are  not 
sufficient  to  discharge  their  accustomed  expenses, 
aud  may  easily  be  obseiyed  by  any  one  whom  it 
concerns  to  know  it.  But  to  know,  who  has  most 
knowledge  of  the  public  affairs,  is  yet  harder ;  and 
they  that  know  them,  need  them  a  great  deal  the 
less.  For  to  know,  who  knows  the  rules  almost  of 
any  art,  is  a  great  degree  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
same  art ;  because  no  man  can  be  assured  of  the 
truth  of  another's  rules,  but  he  that  is  first  taught 
to  understand  them.     But  the  b^st  signs  of  loiow- 

z  2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


340  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PARI'  II.  ledge  of  any  art,  are,  much  conversing  in  it,  and 
^  ^^'  .  constant  good  eflFects  of  it.  Good  counsel  comes 
Counseiiort.  not  by  lot,  uoF  by  inheritance ;  and  therefore  there 
is  no  more  reason  to  expect  good  advice  from  the 
rich  or  noble,  in  matter  of  state,  than  in  delineat- 
ing the  dimensions  of  a  fortress ;  unless  we  shall 
think  there  needs  no  method  in  the  study  of  the 
politics,  as  there  does  in  the  study  of  geometry,  but 
only  to  be  lookers  on ;  which  is  not  so.  For  the 
politics  is  the  harder  study  of  the  two.  Whereas 
in  these  parts  of  Europe,  it  hath  been  taken  for  a 
right  of  certain  persons,  to  have  place  in  the  highest 
council  of  state  by  inheritance ;  it  is  derived  from 
the  conquests  of  the  ancient  Germans;  wherein 
many  absolute  lords  joining  together  to  conquer 
other  nations,  would  not  enter  into  the  confederacy, 
without  such  privileges,  as  might  be  marks  of  dif- 
ference in  time  following,  between  their  posterity, 
and  the  posterity  of  their  subjects ;  which  privileges 
being  inconsistent  with  the  sovereign  power,  by  the 
favour  of  the  sovereign,  they  may  seem  to  keep;  but 
contending  for  them  as  their  right,  they  must  needs 
by  degrees  let  them  go,  and  have  at  last  no  further 
honour,  than  adhereth  naturally  to  their  abilities. 

And  how  able  soever  be  the  counsellors  in  any 
affaif ,  the  benefit  of  their  counsel  is  greater,  when 
they  give  every  one  his  advice,  and  the  reasons  of 
it  apart,  than  when  they  do  it  in  an  assembly,  by 
way  of  orations ;  and  when  they  have  premeditated, 
than  when  they  speak  on  the  sudden ;  both  because 
they  have  more  time,  to  survey  the  consequences 
of  action ;  and  are  less  subject  to  be  carried  away 
to  contradiction,  through  envy,  emulation,  or  other 
passions  arising  from  the  diflFerence  of  opinion. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


/ 

THE  OFFICE  OF  THE  SOVEREIGN.  341 

The  best  counsel,  in  those  thmgs  that  concern  part  n. 
not  other  nations,  but  only  the  ease  and  benefit  .,  ^f*  .. 
the  subjects  may  enjoy,  by  laws  that  look  only  in- 
ward, is  to  be  taken  from  the  general  informations, 
and  complaints  of  the  people  of  each  province,  who 
are  best  acquainted  with  their  own  wants,  and 
ought  therefore,  when  they  demand  nothing  in  de- 
rogation of  the  essential  rights  of  sovereignty,  to 
be  diligently  taken  notice  of.  For  without  those 
essential  rights,  as  I  have  often  before,  said,  the 
commonwealth  cannot  at  all  subsist. 

A  commander  of  an  army  in  chief,  if  he  be  not  commtnden. 
popular,  shall  not  be  beloved  nor  feared  as  he 
ought  to  be  by  his  army  ;  and  consequently,  can- 
not perform  that  office  with  good  success.  He 
must  therefore  be  industrious,  valiant,  affable, 
liberal  and  fortunate,  that  he  may  gain  an  opinion 
both  of  sufficiency,  and  of  loving  his  soldiers.  This 
is  popularity,  and  breeds  in  the  soldiers  both  desire, 
and  courage,  to  recommend  themselves  to  his  favour ; 
and  protects  the  severity  of  the  general  in  punish- 
ing, when  need  is,  the  mutinous,  or  negligent  sol- 
diers. But  this  love  of  soldiers,  if  caution  be  not 
given  of  the  commander's  fidelity,  is  a  dangerous 
thing  to  sovereign  power ;  especially  when  it  is  in 
the  hands  of  an  assembly  not  popular.  It  belong- 
eth  therefore  to  the  safety  of  the  people,  both  that 
they  be  good  conductors,  and  faithful  subjects,  to 
whom  the  sovereign  commits  his  armies. 

But  when  the  sovereign  himself  is  popular ;  that 
is,  reverenced  and  beloved  of  his  people,  there  is 
no  danger  at  all  from  the  popularity  of  a  subject. 
For  soldiers  are  never  so  generally  unjust,  as  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


342  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  side  with  their  captain  though  they  love  him, 
.  ^'  ,  against  their  sovereign,  when  they  love  Hot  only 
Commandcw.  his  pcrson,  but  also  his  cause.  And  therefore 
those,  who  by  violence  have  at  any  time  suppressed 
the  power  of  their  lawful  sovereign,  before  they 
could  settle  themselves  in  his  place,  have  been  al- 
ways put  to  the  trouble  of  contriving  their  titles, 
to  save  the  people  from  the  shame  of  receiving 
them.  To  have  a  known  right  to  sovereign  power, 
is  so  popular  a  quality,  as  he  that  has  it  needs  no 
more,  for  his  own  part,  to  turn  the  hearts  of  his 
subjects  to  him,  but  that  they  see  him  able  abso- 
lutely to  govern  his  own  family :  nor,  on  the  part 
of  his  enemies,  but  a  disbanding  of  their  armies. 
For  the  greatest  and  most  active  part  of  mankind, 
has  never  hitherto  been  well  contented  ynth  the 
present. 

C!onceming  the  offices  of  one  sovereign  to  ano- 
ther, which  are  comprehended  in  that  law,  which 
is  commonly  called  the  law  of  nations,  I  need  not 
say  anything  in  this  place;  because  the  law  of 
nations,  and  the  law  of  nature,  is^e  same  thing. 
And  every  sovereign  hath  the  samie  right,  in  pro- 
curing the  safety  of  his  people,  that  any  particular 
man  can  have,  in  procuring  the  safety  of  Ms  owii 
body.  And  the  same  law,  that  dictateth  to  men 
that  have  no  civU^overnment,  what  they  ought  to 
do,  and  what  to  avoid  in  regard  of  one  another, 
dictateth  the  same  to  commonwealths,  that  is,  to 
the  consciences  of  sovereign  princes  and  sovereign 
assemblies ;  there  being  no  court  of  natural  justice, 
but  in  the  conscience  only ;  where  not  man,  but 
God  reigneth ;  whose  laws,  such  of  them  as  ob%e 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.  343 

all  mankind,  in  respeot  of  God,  as  he  is  tlu&  audior   part  ii. 
of  nature,  are  natural;  and  in  respect  of  die  same    ,    ^^-    . 
God,  as  he  is  King  of  kings,  are  laws.    But  of  the 
kingdom  of  God,  as  King  of  kings,  and  as  King  also 
of  a  peculisur  people,  I  shall  speak  in  the  rest  of 
this  discourse. 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 

OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD  BY  NATURE. 

That  the  condition  of  mere  nature,  that  is  to  say,  xheicopeof 
of  absolute  liberty!,  such  as  is  theirs,  that  neither  chlptewT'"^ 
are  sovereigns,  nor  subjects,  is  anarchy,  and  the 
condition  of  war :  that  the  precepts,  by  which  men 
are  guided  to  avoid  that  condition,  are  the  laws  of 
nature :  that  a  commonwealth,  without  sovereign 
power,  is  but  a  word  without  substance,  and  can- 
not stand :  that  subjects  owe  to  sovereigns,  simple 
obedirace,  in  all  things  wherein  their  obedience  is 
not  repugnant  to  the  laws  of  God,  I  have  suffi- 
ciently proved,   in   that   which  I  have   already 
written.    There  wants  only,  for  the  entire  know- 
ledge of  civil  duty,  to  know  what  are  those  laws  of 
God.     For  without  that,  a  man  knows  not,  when 
he  is  commanded  any  thing  by  the  civil  power, 
\  whether  it  be  contrary  to  the  law  of  God,  or  not : 
\  and  so,  either  by  too  much  civil  obedience,  offends 
Ithe  Divine  Majesty;  or  through  fear  of  offending 
j  God,  transgresses  the  commandments  of  the  com- 
'  monwealth.    To  avoid  both  these  rocks,  it  is  neces-  [  ^ 
sary  to  know  what  are  the  laws  divine.    And  I 
seeing  the  knowledge  of  all  law,^  dependeth  on  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


344  OP  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  fa^owledge.  of  the  sovereign  power,  I  shall  say 
31.       something  in  that  which  foUoweth,  of  the  King- 
dom OP  God. 
wboareiub-       God  is  king,  let  the  earth  rejoice,  saith  the 
iS^l^m^f    psalmist,    (xcvii.  1).     And  again,  {Psalm  xcix.  1) 
^®*-  God  is  king,  though  the  nations  he  angry  ;  and 

he  that  sitteth  on  the  cherubims,  though  the 
earth  be  moved.  Whether  men  will  or  not,  they 
must  be  subject  always  to  the  divine  power.  By 
denying  the  existence,  or  providence  of  God,  men 
may  shake  off  their  ease,  but  not  their  yoke.  But 
to  call  this  power  of  God,  which  extendeth  itself 
not  only  to  man,  but  also  to  beasts,  and  plants,  and 
bodies  inanimate,  by  the  name  of  kingdom,  is  but 
(jBi  metaphoricduse  of  the  word^  For  he  only  is 
proper^^laid  to  reign^'ttnrtrgovems  his  subjects 
by  his  word,  and  by  promise  of  rewards  to  Uiose 
that  obey  it,  and  by  threatening  them- with  punish- 
ment that  obey  it  not.  Subjects  therefore  in  the 
kingdom  of  God,  are  not  bodies  inanimate,  nor 
creatures  irrational ;  because  they  understand  no 
precepts  as  his:  nor  atheists,  nor  they  that  be- 
lieve not  that  God  has  any  care  of  the  actions  of 
mankind ;  because  they  acknowledge  no  word  for 
his,  nor  have  .hopeC  of  his  rewards  or;  fear  of  hjs 
.  tbreatenings.  They  therefore  that  believe  there  is 
a  God  that  govemeth  the  world,  and  hath  given 
precepts,  and  propounded  rewards,  and  punish- 
ments to  mankind,  are  God's  subjects ;  all  the  rest, 
are  to  be  understood  as  enemies. 
A  threefold  To  Hilc  by  words,  rcquircs  that  such  words  be 
w«Mnf  reldi-  Dianifestly  made  known ;  for  else  they  are  no  laws : 
tion,  prophecy,  for  to  thp  uaturc  of  laws  belongeth  a  sufficient,  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  KINGDOM  OP  GOD.  345* 

clear  promtdgation,  such  as  may  take  away  the  ex-  p^rt  n. 
cuse  of  ignorance ;  which  in  the  laws  of  men  is  but  ^^- 
of  one  only  kind^  and  that  is,  proclamation,  or  pro- 
mulgation by  the  voice  of  man.  But  God  declareth 
his  laws  three  ways ;  by  the  dictates  of  natural 
reason  J  hy  revelation,  and  by  the  voice  of  some 
man,  to  wtom  by  the  operation  of  miracles,  he 
procureth  credit  with  the  rest.  From  hence  there 
ariseth  a  triple  word  of  God,  rational,  sensible, 
and  prophetic :  to  which  correspondeth  a  triple 
Gearing;  right  reason,  sense  supernatural,  and 
faith.  As  Tor  sense  supernatural,  which  consisteth 
Tn^velation  or  inspiration,  there  have  not  been 
any  universal  laws  so  given,  because  God  speaketh 
not  in  that  manner  but  to  particular  persons,  and 
to  divers  men  divers  things. 

From  the  diflFerence  between  the  other  two  kinds  Atwofoid 

kiDgdom  of 

of  God's  word,  rational,  wA  prophetic,  there  may  God,  natuni 
be  attributed  to  God,  a  twofold  kingdom,  natural, "  ^^^  ***** 
and  prophetic :  natural,  wherein  he  govemeth  as 
many  of  mankind  as  acknowledge  his  providence, 
by  the  natural  dictates  of  right  reason ;  and  pro- 
phetic, wherein  having  chosen  out  one  peculiar 
nation,  the  Jews,  for  his  subjects,  he  governed 
them,  and  none  but  them,  not  only  by  natural  rea- 
son, but  by  positive  laws,  which  he  gave  them  by 
the  mouths  of  his  holy  prophets.  Of  the  natural 
kingdom  of  God  I  intend  to  speak  in  this  chapter. 

The  right  of  nature,  whereby  God  reigneth  over  The  right  of 
men,  and  punisheth  those  that  break  his  laws,  is  to  reignty  iTdtrf- 
be  derived,  not  from  his  creating  them,  as  if  he  re-  omi^otenw. 
quired  obedience  as  of  gratitude  for  his  benefits ; 
but  from  his  irresistible  power.     I  have  formerly 


Digitized  by 


Google 


346 


OF  COMMONWEALTH. 


PART  II. 

31. 


Sin  not  the 
cause  of  all 
afiiiotioo. 


shown,  how  die  sovereign  r^dfc  visedi  from,  pact : 
to  show  how  .the  saine  right  may  arise  from  nature^ 
reqmres  no  more,  but  to  show  in  what  case  it  is 
nerer  taken  away.  Seeing  all  men  by  natore  had 
right  to  all  things,  they  had  ri^t  ev&ry  one  to 
re^  orer  all  the  rest.  But  because  this  right 
could  not  be  obtained  by  force,  it  concerned  the 
safety  of  every  one,  laying  by  that  right,  to  set  u]^ 
men,  with  sovereign  anthority,  by  conupioii  consult, 
to  rule  and  defend  them:  whereas  if  there  had 
been  any  man  of  power  irresistible,  there  had  been 
no  reason,  why  he  should  not  by  that  power  have 
ruled  and  defended  both  himsdf,  and  them,  ac- 
cording to  his  own  discretion.  To  those  therefore 
whose  ^ow^  is  irresistible,  the  dominion  of  all 
men  adhereth  naturally  by  their  excellence  of 
power;  and  consequ^itly  it  is  from  that  power, 
that  the  kingdom  over  men,  and  the  right  of 
afflicting  men  at  his  pleasure,  belongeth  naturally 
to  God  Almighty ;  not  as  Creator,  and  gracious ; 
but  as  omnipotent.  And  though  punishment  be 
due  for  sin  only,  because  by  that  word  is  under- 
stood affliction  for  sin ;  yet  the  right  of  afflicting, 
is  not  always  derived  from  men's  sin,  but  from 
God's  power. 

This  question,  why  evil  men  €(flen  prosper,  and 
good  men  suffer  adversity ,  has  been  much  disputed 
by  the  ancient,  and  is  the  same  with  this  of  ours, 
by  what  right  God  dispenseth  the  prosperities 
and  adversities  of  this  life  ;  and  is  of  that  diffi- 
culty, as  it  hath  shaken  the  faith,  not  only  of  the 
vulgar,  but  of  philosophers,  and  which  is  more,  of 
the  Saints,   concerning   the   Divine  Providence. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


TH^  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.  347 

Hdfst  g66d,  sdSCh  Dairtd,  {PMlmhcxm.  1,  2,  3)   part  ii. 
is  the  God  of  Israel  fo'  thoee  that  are  upright   .   ^-  ^ 
in  heart ;  and  yet  my  feet  were  almost  gone,  my 
treadings  had  well-nigk  slipt;  for  I  was  grieved 
at  the  wicked^  when  I  saw  the  ungodly  in  mseh 
prosperity.    And  Job,  how  earnestly  does  he  ex- 
postulate with  God,  for  the  many  afflictions  he  suf- 
fered,  notwithstanding  his  righteousness  ?     This 
question  in  the  case  of  Job,  is  decided  by  God  him- 
self, not  by  arguments  derived  from  Job's  sin,  but 
his  own  power.     For  whereas  the  friends  of  Job 
drew  their  arguments  from  his  affliction  to  his  sin, 
and  he  defended  himself  by  the  conscience  of  his 
innocence,  God  himself  taketh  up  the  matter,  and 
having  justified  the  affliction  by  arguments  drawn 
from  his  power,    such  as  this,   I  Job  xxxviii.  4) 
Where  wast  thoUy  when  I  laid  the  foundations  of 
the  earth  f  and  the  like,  both  approved  Job's  inno- 
cence, and  reproved  the  erroneous  doctrine  of  his 
friends.     C!onformable  to  this  doctrine  is  the  sen- 
tence of  our  Saviour,  concerning  the  man  that  was 
bom  blind,  in  these  words.  Neither  hath  this  man 
sinnedy  nor  his  fathers  i  but  that  the  works  <f 
God  might  be  made  manifest  in  him.     And  though 
it  be  said,  that  death  entered  into  the  world  by 
sin,  (by  which  is  meant,  that  if  Adam  had  never 
sinned,  he  had  never  died,  that  is,  never  suffered 
any  separation  of  his  soul  from  his  body,)  it  follows 
not  thence,  that  God  could  not  justly  have  afflicted 
him,  though  he  had  not  sinned,   as  well  as  he 
afflicteth  other  living  creatures,  that  cannot  sin. 

Having  spoken  of  the  right  of  God's  sovereignty,  Divine  laws. 
as  grounded  only  on  nature ;  we  are  to  consider 


Digitized  by 


Google 


348  OP  CaMMGNWEALTH. 

PART  II.  next,  what  are  the  Divine  laws,  or  dictates  of  natu-i 
.  ^^'  -  ral  reason ;  which  laws  concern  either  the  natural 
duties  of  one  man  to  another,  or  the  honour  natu- 
rally due  to  our  Divine  Sovereign.  The  first  are 
the  same  laws  of  nature,  of  which  I  have  spoken 
already  in  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  chapters  of 
this  treatise  ;  namely,  equity,  justice,  mercy,  humi- 
lity, and  the  rest  of  the  moral  virtues.  It  remaineth 
therefore  that  we  consider,  what  precepts  are  dic- 
tated to  men,  by  their  natural  reason  only,  without 
other  word  of  God,  touching  the  honour  and  wor- 
ship of  the  Divine  Majesty. 
Honour  and  HonouT  cousistcth  in  the  inward  thought,  and 
^'  ^  *  opinion  of  the  power,  and  goodness  of  another ; 
and  therefore  to  honour  God,  is  to  think  as  highly 
of  his  power  and  goodness,  as  is  possible.  And  of 
that  opinion,  the  external  signs  appearing  in  the 
words  and  actions  of  men,  are  called  worship; 
which  is  one  part  of  that  which  th^JLadns  under- 
stand by  the  word  cultus.  ForQ^w/^  jsignifieth 
properly,  and  constantly,  that  labour  which  a  man 
bestows  on  anything,  with  a  purpose  to  make 
benefit  by  it.  Now  those  things  whereof  we  make 
benefit,  are  either  subject  to  us,  and  the  profit  they 
yield,  followeth  the  labour  we  bestow  upon  them, 
as  a  natural  effect ;  or  they  are  not  subject  to  us, 
but  answer  our  labour,  according  to  their  own  wills. 
In  the  first  sense  the  labour  bestowed  on  the  earth, 
is  called  culture ;  and  the  education  of  children,  a 
jmlture  of  their  minds.  In  the  second  sense, 
where  men's  wills  are  to  be  wrought  to  our  pur- 
pose, not  by  force,  but  by  complaisance,  it  signifi- 
eth  as  much  as  courting,  that  is,  a  winning  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  KINGDOM  Ot  GOD.  349 

favour  by  good  offices ;  as  by  praises,  by  acknow-    part  if. 
ledging  their  power,  and  by  whatsoever  is  pleasing    ,    ^]'    . 
to  them  from  whom  we  look  for  any  benefit.    And 
this  is  properly  worship:  in  which  sense  Publicola, 
is  understood  for  a  worshipper  of  the  people ;  and 
cultus  Deiy  for  the  worship  of  God. 

From  internal  honour,  consisting  in  the  opinion  ScTerti  signs 

jf  J  J  •        ^1  •  7  of  honour. 

of  power  and  goodness,  anse  three  passions ;  love, 
which  hath  reference  to  goodness  ;  and  hopey  and 
feaVy  that  relate  to  power :  and  three  parts  of  ex- 
ternal worship ;  praise y  magnifying^  and  blessing: 
the  subject  of  praise,  being  goodness ;  the  subject 
of  magnifying  and  blessing,  being  power,  and  the 
eflFect  thereof  felicity.  Praise,  and  magnifying  are 
signified  both  by  words,  and  actions:  by  words, 
when  we  say  a  man  is  good,  or  great :  by  actions, 
when  we  thank  him  for  his  bounty,  and  obey  his 
power.  The  opinion  of  the  happiness  of  another, 
can  only  be  expressed  by  words. 

There  be  some  signs  of  honour,  both  in  attri-  worship 
butes  and  actions,  that  be  naturally  so ;  as  amongst  ubUnr^ 
attributes,  goody  justy  liheraly  and  the  like ;  and 
amongst  actions,  prayers,  thanksy  and  obedience. 
Others  are  so  by  institution,  or  custom  of  men ; 
and  in  some  times  and  places  are  honourable ;  in 
others,  dishonourable ;  in  others,  indifferent :  such 
as  are  the  gestures  in  salutation,  prayer,  and 
thanksgiving,  in  different  times  and  places,  differ- 
ently used.  The  former  is  natural ;  the  latter  ar- 
bitrary  worship. 

And  of  arbitrary  worship,  there  be  two  differ-  Worship 

i?  ^«  'i.    •  J   J  commanded 

ences :  for  sometimes  it  is  a  commandedy  some-  and  free, 
times  voluntary  worship:  commanded,  when  it" is 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


350  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART II.  such  as.  he  requireth,  who  is  worshipped:  free, 
.  ^'-  ■  when  it  is  such  as  the  worshipper  thinks  fit  When 
it  is  commanded,  not  the  words,  or  gesture,  but 
the  obedience  is  the  worship.  But  when  free,  the 
worship  consists  in  the  opinion  of  the  beholders : 
for  if  to  them  the  .words,  or  actions  by  .which  we 
intend  honour,  seem  ridiculous,  and  tending  to 
contumely,  they  are  no  worship,  because  no 
signs  of  honour ;  and  no  signs  of  honour,  because 
a  sign  is  not  a  sign  to  him  that  giyeth  it,  but  to 
him  to  whom  it  is  made,  that  is,  to  the  spectator. 

Md"ri?ate^'  *^  Again,  there  is  a  public,  and  a,  private  worship. 
,  Public,  is  the  worship  that  a  commonwealth  perform- 
sCth,  as  one  person.  Private,  is  that  which  a  priviate 
person  exhibiteth.  .  Public,  in  respect  of  the  whole 
commonwealth,  is  free ;  but  in  respect  of  parti- 
cular men,  it  is  not  so.  Private,  is  in  secret  free; 
but  in  the  sight  of  the  multitude,  it  is  pever  with- 
out some  restraint,  either  from  the  laws,  or  from 
the  opinion  of  .men;  which  is  contrary  to  the 
nature  of  liberty. 

The  end  of         The  cud  of  worsMp  amongst  men,  is  power. 

won  ip.  p^^  where  a  man  seeth  another  worshipped,  he 
supposeth  him  powerful,  and  is  the  readier  to  obey 
him ;  which  makes  his  power  greater.  But  God 
has  no  ends :  the  worship  we  do  him,  proceeds 
from  our  duty,  and  is  directed  according  to  our 
capacity,  by  those  rules  of  honour,  that  reason 
dictateth  to  be  done  by  the  weak  to  the  more  po- 
tent men,  in  hope  of  benefit,  for  fear  of  daii:\age,»or 
in  thankfrOness  for  good  already  received  from  them. 

Attributes  of      That  wc  may  know  what  worship  of  God  is 
our.  ^^gj^^.  ^g  i^y  ^g  ]j^ght  of  nature,  I  will  b^n  with 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.  851 

^js  attnbttteb.  Where,  fir«t,  it  is  manifeBt,  we  part  n. 
oSgETtolittribute  to  Mm^irienee.  <Fot  no  man  ^  ^|'  . 
can  have  the  will  to  honour  that,  which  he  thinks  Attributes  of 
not  to  have  any  being.  ^""^^  ^^^"'^• 

Secondly,  that  those  philosophers,  who  said  the 
world,  or  the  soul  of  the  world  was  God,  spake  un- 
worthily of  him  ;  and  denied  his  existence.  For  by 
God^Js^undteret^^  ;  and  to      .  , 

day  the  world  is  God,  is  to  say  there  is  no  cause  of  ; 

•it,  that  is,  no  God.  ; 

Thirdly,  to  say  the  world  was  not  created,  but    I      i 
eterEral,  seeing  that  which  is  eternal  has  no  cause,    •       *^ 
is  to  deny  there  is^a  God.  ^  /      } 

Fourthly,  that  they  who  attributing,  w  they 
think,  ease  to  God,  take  from  him  the  care  of  man- 
kind ;  take  from  him  his  honour :  for  it  takes  away 
men's  love,  and  fear  of  him ;  which  is  the  root  of 
honour. 

fifthly,  in  those  things  that  signify  greatness, 
and  power ;  to  say  he  is  finite,  is  not  to  honour 
him :  for  it  is  not  a  sign  oTthe  will  to  honour  God, 
to  attribute  to  him  less*  than  we  can ;  and  finite,  is 
less  than  we  can ;  because  to  finite,  it  is  easy  to 
add  more. 

Therefore  to  attribute  figure  to  him,  is  not  ho- 
nour; for  all  figure  is  finiteT^ 

Nor  to  say  we  conceive,  and  imagine,  or  have  an 
idea  of  him,  in  our  mind :  for  whatsoever  we  con- 
'  ceive  is  finite  : 

Nor  to  attribute  to  him  parts ,  or  totality;  which 
are  the  attributes  only  of  things  finite : 

Nor  to  say  he  is  in  this,  or  that  place :  for  what- 
soever is'  in  place,  is  bounded,  and  finite : 


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


352  OF  COMMONWEALTH; 

PART  11.    Nor  that  he  is  moved,  or  resteth:  for  both  these 
.    ^)-    .    attributes  ascribe  to  him  place  : 
Attributes  of       Nor  that  there  be  more  Gods  than  one ;  because 
ouour.  .^  jjj^pUgg  them  all  finite :  for  there  cannot  be  more 
than  one  infinite : 

Nor  to  ascribe  to  him,  (unless  metaphorically, 
meaning  not  the  passion  but  the  effect,)  passions 
that  partake  of  grief;  as  repentance y  anger ^ 
mercy  :  or  of  want ;  as  appetite ^  hope,  desire;  or 
of  any  passive  faculty :  for  passion,  is  power  limited 
by  somewhat  else. 

And  therefore  when  we  ascribe  to  God  a  willy  it 
is  not  to  be  understood,  as  that  of  man,  for  a 
rational  appetite  ;  but  as  the  power,  by  which  he 
effecteth  every  thing. 

Likewise  when  we  attribute  to  him  sighty  and 
other  acts  of  sense  ;  as  also  knowledge y  and  under- 
standing ;  which  in  us  is  nothing  else,  but  a  tu- 
mult of  the  mind,  raised  by  external  things  that 
press  the  organical  parts  of  man's  body :  for  there 
is  no  such  thing  in  God ;  and  being  things  that  de- 
pend on  natural  causes,  cannot  be  attributed  to  him. 

He  that  will  attribute  to  God,  nothing  but  what 
is  warranted  by  natural  reason,  must  either  use 
such  negative  attributes,  as  infinitCy  etemaly  in- 
comprehensible; or  superlatives,  as  most  high, 
most  great y  and  the  like ;  or  indefinite,  as  goody 
justy  holyy  creator;  and  in  such  sense,  as  if  he 
meant  not  to  declare  what  he  is,  (for  that  were  to 
circimiscribe  him  within  the  limits  of  our  fancy,) 
but  how  much  we  admire  him,  and  how  ready  we 
would  be  to  obey  him  ;  which  is  a  sign  of  humility, 
and  of  a  will  to  honour  him  as  much  as  we  can. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.  353 

For  there  is  but  one  nameto^agniiy  our  conception   part  n. 
of  his  nature,  and  that  is,^^M^  and  but  one  name    .    ^]'    . 
of  his  relation  to  us,  and  th^Ts,  God;  in  which  is 
contained  Father,  King,  and  Lord. 

Concerning  the  actions  of  divine  worship,  it  is  a  Actions  that 
most  general  precept  of  reason,  that  they  be  signs  di^ne^onour. 
of  the  intention  to  honour  God ;  such  as  are,  first, 
prayers.    For  not  the  carvers,  when  they  made 
images,  were  thought  to  make  them  gods ;  but  the 
people  that  prayed  to  them. 

Secondly,  thanksgiving;  which  differeth  from 
prayer  in  divine  worship,  no  otherwise,  than  that 
prayers  precede,  and  thanks  succeed  the  benefit ; 
the  end,  both  of  the  one  and  the  other,  being  to 
acknowledge  God,  for  author  of  all  benefits,  as  well 
past,  as  future. 

Thirdly,  gifts,  that  is  to  say,  sacrifices  BXid  ob-^ 
lationSy  if  they  be  of  the  best,  are  signs  of  honour : 
for  they  are  thanksgivings. 

Fourthly,  not  to  swear  hy  any  hut  God,  is  natu- 
rally a  sign  of  honour :  for  it  is  a  confession  that 
God  only  knoweth  the  heart ;  and  that  no  man's 
wit  or  strength  can  protect  a  man  against  God*s 
vengeance  on  the  perjured. 

Fifthly,  it  is  a  part  of  rational  worship,  to  speak 
considerately  of  God ;  for  it  argues  a  fear  of  him, 
and  fear  is  a  confession  of  his  power.  Hence  fbl- 
loweth,  that  the  name  of  God  is  not  to  be  used 
rashly,  and  to  no  purpose ;  for  that  is  as  much,  as  in 
vain :  and  it  is  to  no  purpose,  unless  it  be  by  way  of 
oath,  and  by  order  of  the  commonwealth,  to  make 
judgments  certain ;  or  between  commonwealths,  to 
avoid  war.  And  that  disputing  of  God's  nature  is 
contrary  to  his  honour ;  for  it  is  supposed,  that  in 

VOL.  III.  A  A 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


364  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  II.  this  natural  kingdom  of  God,  there  is  no  other  way 
.^  ^1'  _.  to  know  anything,  but  by  natural  reason,  that  ia^ 
Actions  that  from  the  principles  of  natural  science ;  which  are 
di^^honoiir.  SO  far  from  teaching  i:^  any  thing  of  God's  nature, 
as  they  cannot  teach  us  our  own  najture,  nor  the 
nature  of  the  smallest  creature  living.  And  there- 
fore, when  men  out  of  the  principles  of  natural 
reason,  dispute  of  the  attributes  of  God,  they  but 
dishonour  him :  for  in  the  attributes  which  we  give 
to  God,  we  are  not  to  consider  the  signification  of 
philosophical  truth ;  but  the  signification  of  pious  in- 
tention, to  do  him  the  greatest  honour  we  are  able. 
JbVom  the  want  of  which  consideration,  have  pro- 
ceeded the  volumes  of  disputation  about  the  nature 
of  God»  that  tend  not  to  his  honour,  but  to  the 
honour  of  our  own  wits  and  learning;  and  are 
nothing  else  but  inconsiderate  and  vain  abuses  of 
his  sacred  name. 

Sixthly,  in  prayers^  thanksgivings,  offerings, 
and  seuTtfiees,  it  is  a  dictate  of  natural  reason,  that 
they  be  every  one  in  his  kind  the  best,  and  most 
significant  of  honour.  As  for  example,  that  prayers 
and  thanksgiving,  be  made  in  words  and  phrases, 
not  sudden,  nor  light,  nor  plebeian ;  but  beautiftd, 
and  weU  composed.  For  else  we  do  not  God  as  much 
honour  as  we  can.  And  therefore  the  heathens 
did  absurdly,  to  worship  images  for  gods :  but  their 
doing  it  in  verse,  and  with  music,  both  of  voice 
and  instruments,  was  reasonable.  Also  that  the 
beasts  they  oflFered  in  sacrifice,  and  the  ^fts  they 
oflfered,  and  their  actions  in  worshipping,  were  ftiU 
*|  of  submission,  and  commemorative  of  benefits  re- 

ceived, was  accq;rding  to  reason,  i^  proceeding  from 
iBin  intention  to  hoiftur  him*  ^ 

,^  .^  Digitizedby  VjOOQIC  I  ^ 


THE  KINGDOM  OP  GOD.  356 

SeventMy,  reason  directeth  not  only  to  worship   part  ii. 
God  in  secret ;  hut  also,  and  especially,  in  puhlic,    .  ^j- 
and  in  the  sight  of  men.    For  without  that,  that 
which  in  honour  is  most  acceptable,  the  procuring 
others  to  honour  him,  is  lost. 

Lastly,  obedience  to  his  laws,  that  is,  in  this  case 
to  the  laws  of  nature,  is  the  greatest  worship  of  all. 
For  as  obedience  is  more  acceptable  to  God  than 
sacrifice;  so  also  to  set  light  by  his  commandments, 
is  the  greatest  of  all  contumelies.  And  these  are 
the  laws  of  that  divine  worship^  which  natural  rea- 
son dictateth  to  private  men. 

But  seeing  a  commonwealth  is  but  one  person,  it  Public  worship 
ought  also  to  exhibit  to  God  but  one  worship ;  which  uniformity.  ^^ 
then  it  doth,  when  it  commandeth  it  to  be  exhi- 
bited by  private  men,  publicly.  And  this  is  pub- 
lic worship ;  the  property  whereof,  is  to  be  uniform  : 
for  those  actions  that  are  done  diflferently,  by  dif- 
ferent men,  cannot  be  said  to  be  a  public  worship. 
And  therefore,  wh«re  many  sorts  of  worship  be 
allowed,  proceeding  from  the  diflferent  religions  of 
private  men,  it  cannot  be  said  there  is  any  public 
worship,  nor  that  the  commonwealth  is  of  any  re- 
ligion at  all. 

And  because  words,  and  consequently  the  attri-  ah  attributes 
butes  of  God,  have  their  signification  by  agreement  fa^ws  dv?"  '^"^ 
and  constitution  of  men,  those  attributes  are  to  be 
held  significative  of  honour,  that  men  intend  shall 
so  be ;  and  whatsoever  may  be  done  by  the  wills 
of  particular  men,  where  there  is  no  law  but  reason, 
may  be  done  by  the  will  of  the  commonwealth,  by 
laws  civil.  And  because  a  commonwealth  hath  no 
will,  nor  makes  no  laws,  but  those  that  are  made 
hy  the  will  of  him,^  or  thepa  that  have  the  sovereign  ^    .... 

A  A2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


356  OF  COMMONWEALTH. 

PAUT  II.  power ;  it  followeth  that  those  attributes  which 
.  ^]'  ^  the  sovereign  ordaineth,  in  the  worship  of  God,  for 
sifms  .of  honour,  ought  to  be  taken  and  xised  for 
such,  by  private  men  in  their  public  worship. 

Notanjwtjont.  But  bccausc  not  all  actions  are  signs  by  consti- 
tution, but  some  are  naturally  signs  of  honour, 
others  of  contumely ;  these  latter,  which  are  those 
that  men  are  ashamed  to  do  in  the  sight  of  them 
they  reverence,  cannot  be  made  by  human  power 
a  part  of  Divine  worship  ;  nor  the  former,  such  as 
are  decent,  modest,  humble  behaviour,  ever  be  se- 
parated from  it.  But  whereas  there  be  an  infinite 
number  of  actions  and  gestures  of  an  indifferent 
nature  ;  such  of  them  as  the  commonwealth  shall 
ordain  to  be  publicly  and  universally  in  use,  as 
signs  of  honour,  and  part  of  God's  worship,  are  to 
be  taken  and  used  for  such  by  the  subjects.  And 
that  which  is  said  in  the  Scripture,  It  is  better  to 
obey  God  than  man,  hath  place  in  the  kingdom  of 
God  by  pact,  and  not  by  nature. 

Natural  Haviug  thus  briefly  spoken  of  the  natural  king- 

dom  of  God,  and  his  natural  laws,  I  will  add  only 
to  this  chapter  a  short  declaration  of  his  natural 
punishments.  There  is  no  action  of  man  in  this 
life,  that  is  not  the  beginning  of  so  long  a  chain  of 
consequences,  as  no  human  providence  is  high 
enough,  to  give  a  man  a  prospect  to  the  end.  And 
in  this  chain,  there  are  linked  together  both  pleas- 
ing and  unpleasing  events ;  in  such  manner,  as  he 
that  will  do  anything  for  his  pleasure,  must  engage 
himself  to  suffer  all  the  pains  annexed  to  it ;  and  tiiese 
pains,  are  the  natural  punishments  of  those  actions, 
which  are  the  beginning  of  more  harm  than  good. 
And  hereby  it  comas  to  pass,  that  intemperance  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.  367 

naturally  punished  with  diseases ;  rashness^  with  part  ii. 
mischances ;  injustice,  with  the  violence  of  enemies :  ^|'  . 
pride,  with  ruin  ;  cowardice,  with  oppression:  ne- 
gligent government  of  princes,  with  rebellion  ;  and 
rebellion,  with  slaughter.  For  seeing  punishments 
are  consequent  to  the  breach  of  laws  ;  natural 
punishments  must  be  naturally  consequent  to  the 
breach  of  the  laws  of  nature  ;  and  therefore  follow 
them  as  their  natural,  not  arbitrary  eflfects. 

And  thus  far  concerning  the  constitution,  nature.  The  conclusion 
and  right  of  sovereigns,  and  concerning  the  duty  p^^t?*  "*^'*^ 
of  subjects,  derived  from  the  principles  of  natural 
reason.  And  now,  considering  how  diflferent  this 
doctrine  is,  from  the  practice  of  the  greatest  part  of 
the  world,  especially  of  these  western  parts,  that 
have  received  their  moral  learning  from  Rome  and 
Athens  ;  and  how  much  depth  of  moral  philosophy 
is  required,  in  them  that  have  the  administration  of 
the  sovereign  power ;  1  am  at  the  point  of  believ- 
ing this  my  labour,  as  useless,  as  the  common- 
wealth of  Plato.  For  he  also  is  of  opinion  that  it 
is  impossible  for  the  disorders  of  state,  and  change 
of  governments  by  civil  war,  ever  to  be  taken  away, 
till  sovereigns  be  philosophers.  But  when  I  con- 
sider again,  that  the  science  of  natural  justice,  is 
the  only  science  necessary  for  sovereigns  and.  their 
principal  ministers ;  and  that  they  need  not  be 
charged  with  the  sciences  mathematical,  as  by 
Plato  they  are,  farther  than  by  good  laws  to  en- 
courage men  to  the  study  of  them ;  and  that 
neither  Plato,  nor  any  other  philosopher  hitherto, 
hath  put  into  order,  and  sufficiently  or  probably 
proved  all  the  theorems  of  moral  doctrine,  that 
men  may  learn  thereby,  both  how  to  govern,  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


858 


PART  II. 

Conclusiou. 


OF  COMMONWEAI.TH. 


II 


how  to  obey ;  I  recover  some  hope,  that  one  titiae 
or  other,  this  writing  of  mine  may  fall  into  thf) 
hands  of  a  sovereign,  who  will  consider  it  himself, 
(for  it  is  short,  and  I  think  clear,)  without  the  help 
of  any  interested,  or  envious  interpreter ;  and  by 
the  exercise  of  entire  sovereignty,  in  protecting  the 
pubUc  teaching  of  it,  convg^t^^igjjgjl^^^^rahir- 
tion^tp  the  Jltf^l^ty.iMjpracti(?e. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OFTHC 

UNIVtRt. 

OF 


PART  IIL 


OF  A 

CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 


CHAPTER  XXXIL 

OF  THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  CHRISTIAN  POLITICS, 

I  HAVE  derived  the  rights  of  sovereign  power,  part  in. 
and  the  duty  of  subjects,  hitherto  from  the  princi-  ^  ^f*  ^ 
pies  of  nature  onlv ;  such  as  experience  has  found  The  word  of 

f_  ' "^^^  .  1  /.  ,     ,         God  delivered 

true,  or  consent  concerning  the  use  of  words  has  by  prophets  is 
made  so ;  that  is  to  say,  from  the  nature  of  men,  c^pinrchris. 
known  to  us  by  experience,  and  from  definitions  ***°  politics. 
of  such  words  as  are  essential  to  all  political  rea- 
soning, universally  agreed  on.     But  in  that  I  am 
next  to  handle,  which  is  the  nature  and  rights  of  a 
Christian  Commonwealth,  whereof  there  de- 
pendeth  much  upon  supernatural  revelations  of  the 
will  of  God ;  the  ground  of  my  discourse  must  be, 
not  only  the  natural  word  of  God,  but  also  the 
prophetical. 

Nevertheless,  we  are  not  to  renoimce  our  senses.  Yet  u  not  m- 
and  experience  ;  nor,  that  which  is  the  undoubted  be'ren^^** 
word  of  God,  our  natural  reason.     For  they  are 
the  talents  which  he  hath  put  into  our  hand^  to 
n^otiate,  till  the  coming  again  of  our  blessed 
Saviour ;  and  therefore  not  to  be  folded  up  in  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


360  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  HI.  napkin  of  an  implicit  faith,  but  employed  in  the  pnr- 
^  ^f'  _-  chase  of  justice,  peace,  and  true  religion.  For 
though  there  be  maay  things  in  God*8  word  above 
reason  ;  that  it  is  to  say,  which  cannot  by  natural 
reason  be  either  demonstrated,  or  confuted ;  yet 
there  is  nothing  contrary  to  it ;  but  when  it  seem- 
eth  so,  the  fault  is  either  in  our  unskilful  interpre- 
tation, or  erroneous  ratiocination. 

Therefore,  when  anything  therein  written  is  too 
hard  for  our  examination,  we  are  bidden  to  capti- 
yate  our  understanding  to  the  words ;  and  not  to 
labour  in  sifting  out  a  philosophical  truth  by  logic, 
of  such  mysteries  as  are  not  comprehensible, 
nor  fall  under  any  rule  of  natural  science.  For  it 
is  with  the  mysterie&of  our  religion,  as  with  whole- 
some pills  for  the  sick ;  which  swallowed  whole, 
have  the  virtue  to  cure ;  but  chewed,  are  for  the 
most  part  cast  up  again  without  effect. 

What  it  18  to       But  by  the  captivity  of  our  understandinG",  is  not 

capuvate  the  "^       ,       .     .  /.     t        .        ii  i    i.        t 

uDdentandiDg.  mcaut  a  subuussiou  of  the  mtellectual  faculty  to 
the  opinion  of  any  other  man  ;  but  of  the  will  to 
obedience,  where  obedience  is  due.  For  sense, 
memory,  understanding,  reason,  and  opinion  are 
not  in  our  power  to  change ;  but  always,  and  ne- 
cessarily such,  as  the  things'we  see,  hear,  and  con- 
sider suggest  unto  us ;  and  therefore  are  not  effects 
of  our  will,  but  our  will  of  them.  We  then  capti- 
vate our  understanding  and  reason,  when  we  for- 
bear contradiction  ;  when  we  so  speak,  as  by  law- 
ful authority  we  are  commanded ;  and  when  we 
live  accordingly;  which,  in  sum,  is  trust  and 
faith  reposed  in  him  that  speaketh,  though  the 
mind  be  incapable  of  any  notion  at  all  from  the 
words  spoken. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHRISTIAN  POLITICS.  361 

When  God  speaketh  to  man,  it  must  be  eithw  part  hi. 
immediately ;  or  by  mediation  of  another  man,  to     _  ^f '    . 
whom  he  had  formerly  spoken  by  himself  imme-    How  God 
diately.     How  God  speaketh  to  a  man  immediately,    t?  men. 
may  be  nnderstood  by  those  well  enough,  to  whom 
he  hath  so  spoken ;  but  how  the  same  should  be 
understood  by  another,  is  hard,  if  not  impossible 
to  know.     For  if  a  man  pretend  to  me,  that  God 
hath  spoken  to  him    supematurally  and  imme- 
diately, and  I  make  doubt  of  it,  I  cannot  easily 
perceive  what  argument  he  can  produce,  to  oblige 
me  to  believe  it.     It  is  true,  that  if  he  be  my  sove- 
reign, he  may  oblige  me  to  obedience,  so,  as  not  by 
act  or  word  to  declare  I  believe  him  not ;  but  not 
to  think  any  otherwise  than  my  reason  persuades 
me.     But  if  one  that  hath  not  such  authority  over 
me,  should  pretend  the  same,  there  is  nothing  that 
exacteth  either  belief,  or  obedience. 

For  to  say  that  God  hath  spoken  to  him  in  the 
Holy  Scripture,  is  not  to  say  God  hath  spoken  to 
him  immediately,  but  by  mediation  of  the  prophets, 
or  of  the  apostles,  or  of  the  church,  in  such  man^ 
ner  as  he  speaks  to  all  other  Christian  men.  To 
say  he  hath  spoken  to  him  in  a  dream,  is  no  more 
than  to  say  he  dreamed  that  God  spake  to  him ; 
which  is  not  of  force  to  win  belief  from  any  man, 
that  knows  dreams  are  for  the  most  part  natural, 
and  may  proceed  from  former  thoughts ;  and  such 
dreams  as  that,  from  seJf-conceit,  and  foolish  arro- 
gance, and  false  opinion  of  a  man's  own  godliness, 
or  other  virtue,  by  which  he  thinks  he  hath 
merited  the  favour  of  extraordinary  revelation.  To 
say  he  hath  se^i  a  vision,  or  heard  a  voice,  is  to 
say,  that  he  hath  dreamed  between  sleeping  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


362  OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

FART  III.  waking :  for  in  such  manner  a  man  doth  many 
^    ^^    .    times  naturally  take  his  dream  for  a  vision,  as  not 
having  well  observed  his  own  slumbering.    To  say 
he  speaks  by  supernatural  inspiration,  is  to  say  he 
finds  an  ardent  desire  to  speak,  or  some  strong 
opinion  of  himself,  for  wMch  he  can  all^e  no 
natural  and  sufficient  reason.     So  that  though  God 
Almighty  can  speak  to  a  man  by  dreams,  visions, 
voice,  and  inspiration ;  yet  he  obliges  no  man  to 
believe  he  hath  so  done  to  him  that  pretends  it ; 
who,  being  a  man,  may  err,  and,  which  is  more, 
may  lie. 
By  whatmariLB     How  then  cau  hc,  to  whom  God  hath  never  re- 
kni^.  "*    vealed  his  will  immediately,  saving  by  the  way  of 
natural  reason,  know  when  he  is  to  obey,  or  not  to 
obey  his  word,  delivered  by  him  that  says  he  is  a 
prophet  ?    Of  four  hundred  prophets,  of  whom  the 
king  of  Israel  asked  counsel,  concerning  the  war  he 
made  against  Ramoth  Gilead,  (1  Kings,  xxii.)  only 
Micaiah  was  a  true  one.    The  prophet  that  was  sent 
to  prophecy  against  the  altar  set  up  by  Jeroboam» 
(I  Kings  J  xiii.)  though  a  true  prophet,  and  that  by 
two  miracles  done  in  his  presence,  appears  to  be  a 
prophet  sent  from  God,  was  yet  deceived  by  ano- 
ther old  prophet,  that  persuaded  him  as  from  the 
mouth  of  God,  to  eat  and  drink  with  him.     If  one 
prophet  deceive  another,  what  certainty  is  there  of 
knowing  the  will  of  God,  by  other  way  than  that  of 
reason?   To  which  I  answer  out  of  the  Holy  Scrip- 
ture, that  there  be  two  marks,  by  which  together, 
j  not  asunder,  a  true  prophet  is  to  be  known.    One 
J  is  the  doing  of  miracles ;  the  other  is  the  not  teach- 
I  ing  any  other  religion  than  that  which  is  already 
(established.  Asunder,  I  say,  neither  of  these  is  suffix 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHRISTIAN  POLITICS.  363 

cienl.  ][faprophet rise ainongsf  you,  or  d dreamer  part  in. 
qf  dreams y  and  shall  pretend  the  doing  of  a  mira^  ^g- 
cfc,  and  the  miracle  come  to  pass;  \f  he  say.  Let  By  what  marks 
us  follow  strange  Gods,  which  thou  hast  not  knowny  "^^^  "** 
thou  shall  not  hearken  to  him,  8fc.  But  that  pro-  ^ 
phet  and  dreamer  of  dreams  shall  he  put  to  deathy  l^ 
because  he  hath  spoken  to  you  to  revolt  from 
the  Lord  your  God.  {Deut.  xiii.  1-5.)  In  which 
words  two  thmgs  are  to  be  observed ;  first,  that 
God  will  not  have  miracles  alone  serve  for  argu- 
ments, to  approve  the  prophet's  calling ;  but,  as  it 
is  in  the  third  verse,  for  an  experiment  of  the  con- 
stancy of  our  adherence  to  himself.  For  the  works 
of  the  Egyptian  sorcerers,  though  not  so  great  as 
those  of  Moses,  yet  were  great  miracles.  Secondly, 
that  how  great  soever  the  miracle  be,  yet  if  it  tend 
to  stir  up  revolt  against  the  king,  or  him  that 
govemeth  by  the  king's  authority,  he  that  doth 
such  miracle,  is  not  to  be  considered  otherwise 
than  as  sent  to  make  trial  of  their  allegiance.  For 
these  words,  revolt  from  the  Lord  your  Gody  are 
in  this  place  equivalent  to  revolt  from  your  king. 
For  they  had  made  God  their  king  by  pact  at  the 
foot  of  Mount  Sinai ;  who  ruled  them  by  Moses 
only ;  for  he  only  spake  with  God,  and  from  time 
to  time  declared  God's  commandments  to  the  peo- 
ple. In  like  manner,  after  our  Saviour  Christ  had 
made  his  disciples  acknowledge  him  for  the  Mes- 
siah, (that  is  to  say,  for  God's  anointed,  whom  the 
nation  of  the  Jews  daily  expected  for  their  king, 
but  refused  when  he  came,)  he  omitted  not  to  ad- 
vertise them  of  the  danger  of  miracles.  There 
shall  ariscy  saith  he,  false  Christs,  and  false  pro^ 
phets,  and  shall  do  great  wonders  and  miracles. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


364  OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  even  to  the  seducing^  (f  it  were  possible^  of  the 
^  ^^  _.  f>ery  elect.  {Matt.  xxiv.  34.)  By  which  it  appears, 
that  false  prophets  may  have  the  power  of  mira- 
cles ;  yet  are  we  not  to  take  their  doctrine  for  God's 
word.  St.  Paul  says  farther  to  the  Galatians.  {G(d. 
i.  8.)  that  if  himself ^  or  an  angel  from  heaven 
preach  another  gospel  to  them^  than  he  had 
preached^  let  him  he  accursed.  That  gospel  was, 
that  Christ  was  King ;  so  that  all  preaching  against 
the  power  of  the  king  received,  in  consequence  to 
these  words,  is  by  St.  Paul  accursed.  For  his  speech 
is  addressed  to  those,  who  by  his  preaching  had 
already  received  Jesus  for  the  Christ,  that  is  to  say, 
for  King  of  the  Jews. 
The  marks  of  •     And  as  miraclcs,  without  preaching  that  doctrine 

prophet  ID  the         ,  ,  , 

old  Uw,  mira.  which  God  hath  established;  so  preaching  the  true 
teSi  TOmfoi^  doctrine,  without  the  doing  of  miracles,  is  an  in- 
•bietotheiaw.  g^flg^jgjjj.  argument  of  immediate  revelation.  For 
if  a  man  that  teacheth  not  false  doctrine,  should 
pretend  to  be  a  prophet  without  showing  any 
miracle,  he  is  never  the  more  to  be  regarded  for  his 
pretence,  as  is  evident  by  Deut.  xviii.  v.  21,  22, 
If  thou  say  in  thy  heart,  How  shall  we  know  thai 
the  word  (of  the  prophet)  is  not  thai  which  the 
Lord  hath  spoken  ?  when  the  prophet  shall  have 
spoken  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  that  which  shall 
not  come  to  pass,  that  is  the  word  which  the  Lord 
hath  not  spoken,  but  the  prophet  has  spoken  it 
out  of  the  pride  of  his  own  heart,  fear  him  not. 
But  a  man  may  here  again  ask,  when  the  prophet 
hath  foretold  a  thing,  how  shall  we  know  whether 
it  will  come  to  pass  or  not  ?  For  he  may  foretell 
it  as  a  thing  to  arrive  after  a  certain  long  time, 
longer  than  the  time  of  man's  life ;  or  indefinitely. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHRISTIAN  POLITICS.  365 

that  it  will  come  to  pass  one  time  or  other :  in  part  hi. 
which  case  this  mark  of  a  prophet  is  unus^fiil ;  and  ,  ^^'  . 
therefore  the  miracles  that  oblige  us  to  believe  a 
prophet,  ought  to  be  confirmed  by  an  immediate, 
or  a  not  long  deferred  event.  So  that  it  is  manifest, 
that  the  teaching  of  the  religion  which  God  hath 
established,  and  the  showing  of  a  present  miracle, 
joined  together,  were  the  only  marks  whereby  the 
Scripture  would  have  a  true  prophet,  that  is  to 
say,  immediate  revelation,  to  be  acknowledged  ; 
neither  of  them  being  singly  sufficient  to  oblige 
any  other  man  to  regard  what  he  saith. 

Seeing  therefore  miracles  now  cease,  we  have  Miracles  ceas- 
no  sign  left,  whereby  to  acknowledge  the  pretended  l.eMe.^a'iSd^hc 
revelations  or  inspirations  of  any  private  man ;  pHeiXfrtS^^ 
nor  obligation  to  give  ear  to  any  doctrine,  farther 
than  it  is  conformable  to  the  Holy  Scriptures, 
which  since  the  time  of  our  Saviour,  supply  the 
place,  and  sufficiently  recompense  the  want  of  all 
other  prophecy  ;  and  from  which,  by  wise  and 
learned  interpretation,  and  careful  ratiocination, 
all  rules  and  precepts  necessary  to  the  knowledge 
of  our  duty  both  to  God  and  man,  without  enthu- 
siasm or  supernatural  inspiration,  may  easily  be 
deduced.  And  this  Scripture  is  it,  out  of  which  I 
am  to  take  the  principles  of  my  discourse,  concern- 
ing the  rights  of  those  that  are  the  supreme  go- 
vernors on  earth  of  Christian  commonwealths ;  and 
of  the  duty  of  Christian  subjects  towards  their 
sovereigns.  And  to  that  end,  I  shall  speak  in  the 
next  chapter,  of  the  books,  writers,  scope  and  au- 
thority of  the  Bible. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


366  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 


CHAPTER  XXXni. 

OF  THE  NUMBER,  ANTIQUITY,  SCOPE,  AUTHORITY 

AND   INTERPRETERS    OF   THE  BOOKS  OF 

HOLY  SCRIPTURE. 

PART  iiL  By  the  Books  of  Holy  Scripture,  are  understood 
.  -  ^f'    *    those^  which  ought  to  be  the  canon^  that  is  to  say, 
«  ?ll!rl!f  "^the  rules  of  Christian  life. 

HolyScnptnre. 

And  because  all  rules  of  life,  which  men  are  in 
conscience  bound  to  observe,  are  laws ;  the  question 
of  the  Scripture,  is  the  question  of  what  is  law 
throughout  all  Christendom,  both  natural  and  civil. 
For  though  it  be  not  determined  in  Scripture,  what 
laws  every  Christian  king  shsdl  constitute  in  his  own 
dominions ;  yet  it  is  determined  what  laws  he  shall 
not  constitute.  Seeing  therefore  I  have  already 
proved,  that  sovereigns  in  their  own  dominions  are 
the  sole  legislators ;  those  books  only  are  canonical, 
that  is,  law,  in  every  nation,  which  are  established 
for  such  by  the  sovereign  authority.  It  is  true, 
that  God  is  the  sovereign  of  all  sovereigns ;  and 
therefore,  when  he  speaks  to  any  subject,  he  ought 
to  be  obeyed,  whatsoever  any  earthly  potentate 
command  to  the  contrary.  But  the  question  is 
not  of  obedience  to  God,  but  of  when  and  what  God 
hath  said ;  which  to  subjects  that  have  no  super- 
natursd  revelation,  cannot  be  known,  but  by  that 
natural  reason,  which  guideth  them,  for  the  ob- 
taining of  peace  and  justice,  to  obey  the  authority 
of  their  several  commonwealths,  that  is  to  say,  of 
their  lawful  sovereigns.  According  to  this  obliga- 
tion, I  can  acknowledge  no  other  books  of  the  Old 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THE  BOOKS  OF  HOLT  SCRIPTURE.         367 

Testament,  to  be  Holy  Scripture,  but  those  which  part  hi. 
have  been  commanded  to  be  acknowledged  for     ^f'    . 
such,  by  the  authority  of  the  Church  of  England,  ofthebooiuof 
What  books  these  are,  is  sufficiently  known,  with-    **  ^  °"p  "'*" 
out  a  catalogue  of  them  here ;  and  they  are  the 
same  that  are  acknowledged  by  St.  Jerome,  who 
holdeth  the  rest,  namely,  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon^ 
EcelesiasticuSy  Judith,  Tobias,  the  first  and  the 
second  of  Maccabees^  (though  he  had  seen  the  first 
in  Hebrew,)  and  the  third  and  fourth  of  Esdras,  for 
Apocrypha.   Of  the  canonical,  Josephus,  a  teamed 
Jew,  that  wrote  in  the  time  of  the  emperor  Domi- 
tian,  reckoneth  twenty-two,  making  the  number 
agree  with  the  Hebrew  alphabet.    St.  Jerome  does 
the  same,  though  they  reckon  them  in  different 
manner.     For  Josephus  numbers  five  Books  of 
Moses,  thirteen  of  Prophets  that  writ  the  history 
of  their  own  times,  (which  how  it  agrees  with  the 
prophets'  writings  contained  in  the  Bible  we  shall 
see  hereafter,)  and  four  of  hymns  and  moral  pre- 
cepts.     But   St.  Jerome  reckons  five   books  of 
Moses,  eight  of  Prophets,  and  nine  of  other  Holy 
Writ,  which  he  calls  of  oyioypa^a.     The  Septu- 
agint,  who  were  seventy  learned  men  of  the  Jews, 
sent  for  by  Ptolemy,  king  of  Egypt,  to  translate  the 
Jewish  law  out  of  the  Hebrew  into  the  Greek,  have 
left  us  no  other  for  Holy  Scripture  in  the  Greek 
tongue,  but  the   same  that  are  received  in   the 
Church  of  England. 

As  for  the  Books  of  the  New  Testament,  they 
are  equally  acknowledged  for  canon  by  all  Christian 
diurches,  and  by  all  sects  of  Christians,  that  admit 
any  books  at  all  for  canonical. 

Who  were  the  ori^nal  writers  of  the  several 
•Books  of  Holy  Scripture,  has  not  been  made  evi- 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


368         OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  iiL  dent  by  any  sufficient  testimony  of  other  history, 
.  *f-  .  which  is  the  only  proof  of  matter  of  fact ;  nor  can 
Thciraniiquity  bc,  by  any  arguments  of  natural  reason:  for  reason 
serves  only  to  convince  the  truth,  not  of  fact,  but, 
of  consequence.  The  light  therefore  that  must 
guide  us  in  this  question,  must  be  that  which  is 
held  out  unto  us  from  the  books  themselves :  and 
this  light,  though  it  show  us  not  the  writer  of 
every  book,  yet  it  is  not  unuseful  to  give  us  know- 
ledge of  the  time,  wherein  they  were  written. 

And  first,  for  the  Pentateuch^  it  is  not  argument 
enough  that  they  were  written  by  Moses,  because 
they  are  called  the  five  Books  oi  Moses  \  no  more 
than  these  titles,  the  Book  of  Joshua,  the  Book  of 
Judges y  the  Book  of  Ruth,  and  the  Books  of  the 
Kings,  are  arguments  sufficient  to  prove,  that  they 
were  written  by  Joshua,  by  the  Judges,  by  Ruth, 
and  by  the  Kings.  For  in  titles  of  bool^,  ^e  sub- 
ject is  marked,  as  often  as  the  writer.  The  history 
of  livy,  denotes  the  writer;  but  the  history  of 
Scanderberg,  is  denominated  from  the  subject.  We 
The  Penta-  ^^^^  ^^  *'^^  ^^*  chaptcr  of  Deutetonomy,  verse  6th, 
teuch  not  writ-  concemiug  the  sepulchre  of  Moses,  that  no  man 
^  '  knoweth  of  his  sepulchre  to  this  day,  that  is,  to 
to  the  day  wherein  those  words  were  written.  It 
is  therefore  manifest,  that  those  words  were  written 
after  his  interment.  For  it  were  a  strange  inter- 
pretation, to  say  Moses  spake  of  his  own  sepulchre, 
though  by  prophecy,  that  it  was  hot  found  to  that 
day,  wherein  he  was  yet  living.  But  it  may  per- 
haps be  alleged,  that  the  last  chapter  only,  not  the 
whole  Pentateuch,  was  written  by  some  other  man, 
but  the  rest  not.  Let  us  therefore  consider  that 
which  we  find  in  the  book  of  Genesis,  (xii.  6.) 
And  Abraham  passed  through  the  land  to  the 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


OF  THE  BOOKS  OF  HOLY  SCRIPTURE.        369 

place  of  SichemyUnto  the  plain  of  Moreh,  and  the  part  hi. 
Canaanite  wa^  then  in  the  land;  which  must  needs    .    ^f -  ,. 
be  the  words  of  one  that  wrote  when  the  Canaanite  The  Penu- 
was  not  in  the  land  ;    and  consequently,  not  of  ^0*^57  Moles! 
Moses,  who  died  before  he  came  into  it.     Like- 
wise Numbers y  xxi.  14,  the  writer  citeth  another 
more  ancient  book,  entitled,  The  Book  of  the  Wars 
of  the  Lordy  wherein  were  registered  the  acts  of 
Moses,  at  the  Red  Sea,  and  at  the  brook  of  Arnon. 
It  is  therefore  sufl&ciently  evident,  that  the  five 
Books  of  Moses  were  written  after  his  time,  though 
how  long  after  it  be  not  so  manifest. 

But  though  Moses  did  not  compile  tliose  books 
entirely,  and  in  the  form  we  have  them ;  yet  he 
wrote  all  that  which  he  is  there  siud  to  have  writ- 
ten :  as  for  example,  the  Volume  of  the  Law,  which 
is  contained,  as  it  seemeth,  in  the  xith.  of  Deutero- 
nomy, and  the  following  chapters  to  the  xxviith. 
which  was  also  commanded  to  be  written  on  stones, 
in  then*  entry  into  the  land  of  Canaan.  And  this  also 
did  Moses  himself  write,  f-D^w^.xxxi.  9, 10)  and  deli- 
Tered  to  the  priests  and  elders  of  Israel,  to  be  read 
every  seventh  year  to  all  Israel,  at  their  assembling 
m  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  And  this  is  that  law 
which  God  commanded,  that  their  kings,  when  they 
dliould  have  established  that  form  of  government, 
should  take  a  copy  of  ft-om  the  priests  and  Levites : 
and  which  Moses  commanded  the  priests  and  Le- 
vites to  lay  in  the  side  of  the  ark,  {Deut.  xxxi.  26) ; 
and  the  same  which  having  been  lost,  was  long  time 
after  found  again  by  Hilkiah,  and  sent  to  king 
Josias  (2  Kings  xxii.  8)  who  causing  it  to  be  read 
to  the  people,  (2  Kings  xxiii.  1,  2,  3)  renewed  the 
covenant  between  God  and  them. 

VOL.  in,  B  B 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


370 


OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEAXTH. 


PART  III. 

The  book  of 
Joshua  written 
after  his  tiuio. 


The  books  of 
Judges  and 
RuUi  writteu 
long  after  the 
captiyity. 


The  like 
of  the  books 
of  Samuel. 


That  the  book  dlJMlma  was  also  written  long 
after  the  time  of  Joshua,  may  be  gatiiered  ont  of 
many  places  of  the  book  itself.  Joshua  had  set  up 
twelve  stones  in  the  midst  of  Jordan,  for  a  monu- 
ment of  their  passage ;  of  which  the  writer  saith 
thus,  They  are  there  unto  this  day  {Josh.  iv.  9) ; 
for  %mto  this  day^  is  a  phrase  that  signifieth  a  time 
past,  beyond  the  memory  of  man.  In  like  manner, 
upon  the  saying  of  the  Lord,  that  he  had  rolled  off 
from  the  people  the  reproach  of  Egypt,  the  writer 
saith.  The  place  is  called  Oilgal  unto  this  day 
{Josh,  V.  9) ;  which  to  have  said  in  the  time  of 
Joshua  had  been  improper.  So  also  the  name  of 
the  valley  of  Achor,  from  the  trouble  that  Achan 
raised  in  the  camp,  the  writer  saith,  remaineth  unto 
this  day  {Josh.  vii.  26) ;  which  tntist  needs  be 
therefore  long  after  the  time  of  Joshua.  Arguments 
of  this  kind  there  be  many  other  ;  as  Josh.  viii.  29, 
xiii.  13,  xiv.  14,  xv.  63. 

The  same  is  manifest  by  like  arguments  of  the 
book  of  Judges,  chap.  i.  21, 26,  vi.  24,  x.  4,  xv.  19, 
xvii.  6,  and  Ruih  i.  1 ;  but  especially  Judg.  xviii.  30, 
where  it  is  said,  that  Jonathan  and  his  sons  were 
priests  to  the  tribe  of  Dan^  until  the  day  of  the 
captivity  of  the  land. 

That  the  books  of  Samuel  were  also  written  after 
his  own  time,  there  are  the  like  arguments,  1  Sam. 
V.  5,  vii.  13,  15;  xxvii,6,  and  xxx.  25,  where,  after 
David  had  adjudged  equal  part  of  the  spoils,  to 
them  that  guarded  the  ammunition,  with  them  that 
fought,  the  writer  saith.  He  made  it  a  statute  and 
an  ordinance  to  Israel  to  this  day.  Again,  when 
David,  displeased,  that  the  Lord  had  sldn  Uzzah, 
for  putting  out  his  hand  to  sustain  the  ark,  called 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  THE  BOOKS  OF  HOLY  SCRIPTURB.         371 

tlie  place  Ptf ez-Uzzah^  the  writer  saith,  (2  Sam.  paht  i\u 
vi.  8)  it  is  called  so  to  this  day :  the  time  there-        ^'    . 
fore  of  the  writing  of  that  book^  must  be  long 
after  the  time  of  the  fact ;  that  is,  long  after  the 
time  of  David. 

As  for  the  two  books  of  the  Kings ,  and  the  two  The  books  of 
books  of  the  Chronicles,  besides  tie  places  which  fhe  chronicles. 
mention  such  monuments^  as  the  writer  saith,  re- 
mained till  his  own  days  ;  such  as  are  1  Kings  ix. 
13,  ix.  21,  X.  12,  xii.  19.  2  Kings  ii.  22,  viii.  22, 
X.  27,  xiv.  7,  xvi.  6,  xvii.  28,  xvii.  34,  xvii.  41,  and 
1  Chron.  iv.  4 1 ,  v.  26 :  it  is  ailment  sufficient  they 
were  written  after  the  captivity  in  Babylon,  that 
the  history  of  them  is  continued  till  that  time.  For 
the  facts  registered  are  always  more  ancient  than 
the  register;  and  much  more  ancient  than  such 
books  as  make  mention  of,  and  quote  the  register; 
as  these  books  do  in  divers  places,  referring  the 
reader  to  the  Chronicles  of  the  Kings  of  Judah,  to 
the  Chronicles  of  the  Kings  of  Israel,  to  the  Books 
of  the  prophet  Samuel,  of  the  prophet  Nathan,  of 
tiie  prophet  Ahijah ;  to  the  Vision  of  Jehdo,  to  the 
books  of  the  prophet  Serveiah,  and  of  the  prophet 
Addo. 

The  books  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  were  written  Fxra  and 
certainly  after  their  return  from  captivity ;  because  ^***^™*^' 
their  return,  the  re-edification  of  the  walls  and 
houses  of  Jerusalem,  the  renovation  of  the  cove- 
nant, and  ordination  of  their  policy,  are  therein 
contained. 

The  history  of  Queen  Esther  is  of  the  time  of  Esther. 
the  captivity  ;  and  therefore  the  writer  must  have 
been  of  the  same  time,  or  after  it. 

The  book  of  Job  hath  no  mark  in  it  of  the  time  Job. 

BB  2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


3/2  OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  ni.  wherein  it  was  written  ;  and  though  it  appear  suf- 

^  ^  .  ficiently  (Ezeiiel  xiv.  14,  and  James  v.  1 1)  that  he 
was  na  feigned  person  ;  yet  the  book  itself  seemeth 
not  to  be  a  history,  but  a  treatise  concerning  a 
question  in  ancient  time  much  disputed,  why  wick- 
ed  men  have  often  prospered  in  this  worlds  and 
good  men  have  been  qfflicted;  and  this  is  the  more 
probable,  because  from  the  beginning,  to  the  third 
verse  of  the  third  chapter,  where  the  complaint  of 
Job  beginneth,  the  Hebrew  is,  as  St.  Jerome  testi- 
fies, in  prose ;  and  from  thence  to  the  sixth  verse 
of  the  last  chapter,  in  hexameter  verses  ;  and  the 
rest  of  that  chapter  again  in  prose.  So  that  the 
dispute  is  all  in  verse  ;  and  the  prose  is  added,  but 
as  a  preface  in  the  beginning,  and  an  epilogue  in 
the  end.  But  verse  is  no  usual  style  of  such,  as 
either  are  themselves  in  great  pain,  as  Job ;  or  of 
such  as  come  to  comfort  them,  as  his  friends  ;  but 
in  philosophy,  especially  moral  philosophy,  in  an- 
cient time  frequent. 

The  Psalter.  Thc  Psalms  wcrc  writtcu  the  most  part  by  David, 
for  the  use  of  the  quire.  To  these  are  added  some 
songs  of  Moses,  and  other  holy  men ;  and  some  of 
them  after  the  return  from  the  captivity,  as  the 
1 37th  and  the  1 26th,  whereby  it  is  manifest  that  the 
Psalter  was  compiled,  and  put  into  the  form  it  now 
hath,  after  the  return  of  the  Jews  from  Babylon. 

ThcProverU.  The  ProverhSj  being  a  collection  of  wise  and 
godly  sayings,  partly  of  Solomon,  partly  of  Agur, 
the  son  of  Jakeh,  and  partly  of  the  mother  of  king 
Lemuel,  cannot  probably  be  thought  to  have  been 
collected  by  Solomon,  rather  than  by  Agur,  or  the 
mother  of  Lemuel ;  and  that,  though  the  sentences 
be  theirs,  yet  the  collection  or  compiling  them  into 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THE  BOOKS  OF  HOLY  SCRIPTURE.       373 

this  one  book,  was  the  work  of  some  other  godly  part  hi. 
man,  that  lived  after  them  all.  .    ^-    . 

The  books  of  Ecclesiastes  and  the  Canticles  have  e. desiMtes 
nothing  that  was  not  Solomon's,  except  it  be  the  t^dell* *  ^*" 
titles,  or  inscriptions.  For  The  Words  of  the 
Preacher^  the  son  of  David,  king  in  Jerusalem  ; 
and,  The  Song  of  Songs,  which  is  Solomon's,  seem 
to  have  been  made  for  distinction's  sake,  then, 
when  the  Books  of  Scripture  were  gathered  into 
one  body  of  the  law ;  to  the  end,  that  not  the 
doctrine  only,  but  the  authors  also  might  be 
extant. 

Of  the  prophets,  the  most  ancient,  are  Zephaniah,  T^e  Proph^u. 
Jonah,  Amos,  Hosea,  Isaiah,  and  Michah,  who 
lived  in  the  time  of  Amaziah  and  Azariah,  other- 
vnse  Ozias,  kings  of  Judah.  But  the  book  of  Jonah 
is  not  properly  a  register  of  his  prophecy ;  for  that 
is  contained  in  these  few  words,  Forty  days  and 
Niniveh  shall  be  destroyed;  but  a  history  or  narra- 
tion of  his  frowardness  and  disputing  God's  com- 
mandments ;  so  that  there  is  small  probability  he 
should  be  the  author,  seeing  he  is  the  subject  of  it. 
But  the  book  of  Amos  is  his  prophecy. 

Jeremiah,  Obadiah,  Nahum,  and  Habakkuk  pro- 
phecied  in  the  time  of  Josiah. 

Ezekiel,  Daniel,  Haggai,  and  Zechariah,  in  the 
captivity. 

When  Joel  and  Malachi  prophecied,  is  not  evi- 
dent by  their  writings.  But  considering  the  in- 
scriptions, or  titles  of  their  books,  it  is  manifest 
enough,  that  the  whole  Scripture  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, was  set  forth  in  the  form  we  have  it,  after 
the  return  of  the  Jews  from  their  captivity  in 
Babylon,  and  before  the  time  of  Ptolomseus  Phila- 

Digitized  by  Vj(0OQ'|* 


374         OF  A  CHRI6TIAN  COMMONWEALTH . 

PART  in.  delpfatis^  that  caused  it  to  be  translated  into  Gredt 
^  ^f'  .  by  seventy  men,  which  were  sent  him  out  of  Jndea 
for  that  purpose.  And  if  the  books  of  Apocrypha, 
which  are  recommended  to  us  by  the  church, 
though  not  for  canonical,  yet  for  profitable  books 
for  our  instruction,  may  in  this  point  be  credited, 
the  Scripture  was  set  forth  in  the  form  we  have  it 
in,  by  Esehras :  as  may  appear  by  that  which  he 
himself  saith,  in  the  second  book,  (chapter  xiv. 
verse  21,  22,  &c.)  where  speaking  to  God,  he  saith 
thus.  Thy  law  is  burnt ;  therefore  no  man  know- 
eth  the  things  which  thou  hast  done,  or  the  works 
that  are  to  begin.  But  if  I  have  found  grace 
before  thee,  send  down  the  holy  spirit  into  me, 
and  I  shall  write  all  that  hath  been  done  in  the 
world,  since  the  beginning,  which  were  written  in 
thy  laWy  that  men  may  find  thy  path,  and  that 
they  which  will  live  in  the  latter  day,  may  live. 
And  verse  45 :  And  it  came  to  pass  when  the 
forty  days  were  fuelled,  that  the  highest  spake, 
saying,  The  first  that  thou  hast  written,  publish 
openly,  that  the  worthy  and  unworthy  may  read 
it ;  but  keep  the  seventy  last,  that  thou  mayest 
deliver  them  only  to  such  as  be  wise  among  the 
people.  And  thus  much  concerning  the  time  of 
the  writing  of  the  books  of  the  Old  Testament. 

The  New  The  writcrs  of  the  New  Testament  lived  all  in 

less  than  an  age  after  Christ's  ascension,  and  had 
all  of  them  seen  our  Saviour,  or  been  his  disciples, 
except  St.  Paul,  and  St.  Luke ;  and  consequently 
whatsoever  was  written  by  them,  is  as  ancient  as 
the  time  of  the  apostles.  But  the  time  wherein 
the  books  of  the  New  Testament  were  received, 
and  acknowledged  by  the  church  to  be  of  their 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THE  BOOKS  OF  HOLY  SCRIPTURB.        87§ 

writing,  is  not  altogether  «o  ancient.  For,  ^  thq  part  hi. 
books  of  the  Old  Testament  are  derived  to  us,  .  ^'  . 
from  no  other  time  than  that  of  Esdras,  who  by  the  The  New 
direction  of  God's  spirit  retrieved  them,  when  they 
were  lost :  those  of  the  New  Testament,  of  which 
the  copies  were  not  many,  nor  could  easily  be  all 
in  any  one  private  man's  hand,  cannot  be  derived 
from  a  higher  time,  than  that  wherein  the  gover- 
nors of  the  church  collected,  approved,  an4  recom- 
mended them  to  us,  as  the  writings  of  those  apos- 
tles and  disciples,  under  whose  names  they  go. 
The  first  enumeration  of  all  the  books,  both  of  the 
Old  and  New  Testament,  is  in  the  canons  of  the 
apostles,  supposed  to  be  collected  by  Clement,  the 
first  (after  St.  Peter)  bishop  of  Rome.  But  because 
that  is  but  supposed,  and  by  many  questioned,  the 
Council  of  Laodicea  is  the  first  we  know,  that  re- 
commended the  Bible  to  the  then  Christian  chur- 
ches, for  the  writings  of  the  prophets  and  apostles : 
and  this  Council  was  held  in  the  364th  year  after 
Christ.  At  which  time,  though  ambition  had  so 
far  prevailed  on  the  great  doctors  of  the  church,  as 
no  more  to  esteem  emperors,  though  Christian,  for 
the  shepl^erds  of  the  people,  but  for  sheep ;  and 
emperors  not  Christian,  for  wolves ;  and  endea- 
voured to  pass  their  doctrine,  not  for  counsel  and 
information,  as  preachers ;  but  for  laws,  as  absolute 
governors ;  and  thought  such  frauds  as  tended  to 
make  the  people  the  more  obedient  to  Christian 
doctrine,  to  be  pious ;  yet  I  am  persuaded  they  did 
not  therefore  falsify  the  Scriptures,  though  the 
copies  of  the  books  of  the  New  Testament,  were 
in  the  hands  only  of  the  ecclesiastics;  because  if  they 
had  had  an  intention  so  to  do,  they  would  surely 


Digitized  by 


Google 


376  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  have  made  them  more  favourable  to  their  power 
^   ^f*  _-    over  Christian  princes,  and  civil  sovereignty,  than 
they  are.    I  see  not  therefore  any  reason  to  doubt 
but  that  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  as  we  have 
them  now,  are  the  true  registers  of  those  things^ 
which  were  done  and  said  by  the  prophets  and 
apostles.    And  so  perhaps  are  some  of  those  books 
which  are  called  apocrjqiha,  and  left  out  of  the 
canon,  not  for  inconformity  of  doctrine  with  the 
rest,  but  only  because  they  are  not  found  in  the 
Hebrew.     For  after  the  conquest  of  Asia  by  Alex- 
ander the  Great,  there  were  few  learned  Jews,  that 
were  not  perfect  in  the  Greek  tongue.    For  the 
seventy  interpreters  that  converted  the  Bible  into 
Greek,  were  all  of  them  Hebrews ;  and  we  have 
extant  the  works  of  Philo  and  Josephus,  both  Jews, 
written  by  them  eloquently  in  Greek.     But  it  is 
not  the  writer,  but  the  authority  of  the  church, 
Tbeir  scope,  that  makcth  the  book  canonical.     And  although 
these  books  were  written  by  divers  men,  yet  it  is 
manifest  the  writers  were  all  indued  with  one  and 
the  same  spirit,  in  that  they  conspire  to  one  and 
the  same  end,  which  is  setting  forth  of  Ae  rights 
of  the  kingdom  of  God,  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost.     For  the  book    of  Genesis^  deriveth  the 
genealogy  of  God*s  people,  from  the  creation  of  the 
world,  to  the  going  into  Egypt:  the  other  four 
books  of  Moses  contain  the  election  of  God  for 
their  king,  and  the  laws  which  he  prescribed  for 
their  government :  the  books  of  Joshua^  Judges^ 
Ruthy  and  Samuel^  to  the  time  of  Saul,  describe 
the  acts  of  God*s  people,  till  the  time  they  cast  off 
God's  yoke,  and  called  for  a  king,  after  the  manner 
of  their  neighbour  nations.   The  rest  of  the  history 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THE  BOOKS  OF  HOLY  SCRIPTURE.        377 

of  the  Old  Testament  derives  the  succession  of  the  part  hi. 
line  of  David,  to  the  captivity,  out  of  which  line  .^f-  . 
was  to  spring  the  restorer  of  the  kingdom  of  God, 
even  our  blessed  Saviour  God  the  Son,  whose 
coming  was  foretold  in  the  books  of  the  prophets, 
after  whom  the  Evangelists  write  his  life,  and  ac- 
tions, and  his  claim  to  the  kingdom,  whilst  he  lived 
on  earth :  and  lastly,  the  Acts,  and  Epistles  of  the 
Apostles,  declare  the  coming  of  God  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  the  authority  he  left  with  them  and 
their  successors,  for  the  direction  of  the  Jews,  and 
for  the  invitation  of  the  Gentiles.  In  sum,  the 
histories  and  the  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament, 
and  the  gospels  and  epistles  of  the  New  Testament, 
have  had  one  and  the  same  scope,  to  convert  men 
to  the  obedience  of  God ;  i.,  in  Moses,  and  the 
Priests ;  ii.,  in  the  man  Christ ;  and  iii.,  in  the 
Apostles  and  the  successors  to  apostolical  power. 
For  these  three  at  several  times  did  represent  the 
person  of  God :  Moses,  and  his  successors  the  High 
Priests,  and  Kings  of  Judah,  in  the  Old  Testament : 
Christ  himself,  in  the  time  he  lived  on  earth :  and 
the  Apostles,  and  their  successors,  from  the  day  of 
Pentecost,  when  the  Holy  Ghost  descended  on 
them,  to  this  day. 

It  is  a  question  much  disputed  between  the  divers  The  question 
sects  of  Oiristian  religion,  from  whence  the  Scrip-  of  thr'scrip^ 
tures  derive  their  authority ;   which  question  is  '"'^  "**^^' 
also  propounded  sometimes  in  other  terms,  as,  how 
we  know  them  to  he  the  word  of  God,  or,  why  we 
believe  them  to  he  so :  and  the  difficulty  of  resolv- 
ing it,  ariseth  chiefly  from  the  improperness  of  the 
words  wherein  the  question  itself  is  couched.     For 
it  is  believed  on  all  hands,  that  the  first  and  ori- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


878         OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH, 

PART  111.  gmal  author  of  them  is  God ;  oud  cons^u^tly  t)^ 
.  ^f-  .  question  disputed,  is  not  that.  Again^  it  is  manifest, 
that  none  can  know  they  are  God's  word,  (though 
all  true  Christians  believe  it,)  but  thos^  to  whom 
God  himself  hath  revealed  it  supernaturally ;  and 
therrfore  the  question  is  not  rightly  moved,  of  our 
knowledge^  of  it.  Lastly,  when  the  question  is 
propounded  of  our  belief;  because  some  are  moved 
to  believe  for  one,  and  others  for  other  reasons ; 
there  can  be  rendered  no  one  general  answer  for 
them  ail.  The  question  truly  stated  is,  by  what 
authority  they  are  made  law. 

Their  autho        As  far  as  they  diflfer  not  from  the  laws  of  na- 

nty  and  inter-  .iiii  11  i» 

preution.  turc,  there  IS  no  doubt,  but  they  are  the  law  of 
God,  and  carry  their  authority  vnth  them,  legible 
to  all  men  that  have  the  use  of  natural  reason : 
but  this  is  no  other  authority,  than  that  of  all  other 
moral  doctrine  consonant  to  reason ;  the  dictates 
whereof  are  laws,  not  made,  but  eternal. 

If  they  be  made  law  by  God  himself,  they  are  of 
the  nature  of  written  law,  which  are  laws  to  them 
only  to  whom  God  hath  so  sufficiently  published 
them,  as  no  man  can  excuse  himself,  by  saying,  he 
knew  not  they  were  his. 

He  therefore  to  whom  God  hath  not  supernatu- 
rally revealed  that  they  are  his,  nor  that  those  that 
published  them,  were  sent  by  him,  is  not  obliged  to 
obey  them,  by  any  authority,  but  his,  whose  com- 
mands have  already  the  force  of  laws ;  that  is  to 
.  say,  by  any  other  authority,  than  that  of  the  com- 
monwealth, residing  in  the  sovereign,  who  only  has 
the  legislative  power.  Again,  if  it  be  not  the  legis- 
lative authority  of  the  commonwealth,  that  giveth 
them  the  force  of  laws,   it  must  be  some  other 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THB  BOOKS  OF  HOLY  SCRIPTURB.      379 

aathoiity  derived  from  God,  either  private^  ot  vart  ui. 
public  :  if  private,  it  obliges  only  him,  to  whom  in  .  ^'  ^ 
partiexdar  God  hath  been  pleased  to  reveal  it.  For  Their  autho- 
u.  every  man  should  be  obliged,  to  take  for  God  s  preution. 
law,  what  particular  men,  on  pretence  of  private 
inspiration,  or  revelation,  should  obtrude  upon  him, 
in  such  a  number  of  men,  that  out  of  pride  and 
ignorance,  take  their  own  dreams^  and  extravagant 
femcies,  and  madness,  for  testimonies  of  God's 
spirit ;  or  out  of  ambition,  pretend  to  such  divine 
testimonies,  falsely,  and  contrary  to  their  own  con^ 
sciences,  it  were  impossible  that  any  divine  law 
should  be  acknowledged.  If  public,  it  is  the  au-^ 
thority  of  the  commonweaUhy  or  of  the  church.  But 
the  church,  if  it  be  one  person,  is  the  same  thing 
with  a  commonwealth  of  Christians ;  called  a  com- 
monwealthy  because  it  consisteth  of  men  united  in 
one  person,  their  sovereign ;  and  a  churchy  because 
it  consisteth  in  Christian  men,  united  in  one  Christ- 
ian sovereign.  But  if  the  church  be  not  one  per- 
son, then  it  hath  no  authority  at  all :  it  can  neither 
command,  nor  do  any  action  at  all ;  nor  is  capable 
of  having  any  power,  or  right  to  anything :  nor 
has  any  will,  reason  nor  voice  ;  for  all  these  qualities 
are  personal.  Now  if  the  whole  number  of  Christ- 
ians be  not  contained  in  one  commonwealth,  they 
are  not  one  person;  nor  is  there  an  universal 
church  that  hath  any  authority  over  them ;  and 
therefore  the  Scriptures  are  not  made  laws,  by  the 
universal  church  :  or  if  it  be  one  commonwealth, 
then  all  Christian  monarchs  and  states  are  private 
persons,  and  subject  to  be  judged,  deposed,  and 
punished  by  an  universal  sovereign  of  all  Christen- 
dom.    So  that  the  question  of  the  authority  of  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


380  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMKONWSALTH. 

PART  III.  Scriptures,  is  reduced  to  this,  whether  ChrUtiam 
.  ^'  hingSy  and  the  sovereign  assemblies  in  Christian 
commonwealths^  he  absolute  in  their  own  terri- 
tories,  immediately  under  God;  or  subject  to  one 
vicar  of  Christ,  constituted  of  the  universal 
church ;  to  be  judged,  condemned,  deposed,  and 
put  to  death,  as  he  shall  think  expedient,  or  ne- 
cessary for  the  common  good. 

Which  question  cannot  be  resolved,  without  a 
more  particular  consideration  of  the  Kingdom  of 
God ;  from  whence  also,  we  are  to  judge  of  the  au- 
thority of  interpreting  the  Scripture.  For,  whoso« 
ever  hath  a  lawiful  power  over  any  writing,  to  make 
it  law,  hath  the  power  also  to  approve,  or  disap- 
prove the  interpretation  of  the  same. 


CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

OF  THE  SIGNIFICATION    OF  SPIRIT,  ANGEL, 

AND  INSPIRATION  IN  THE  BOOKS   OF 

HOLY  SCRIPTURE. 

Bodjraodtpirit  SEEING  the  foundation  of  all  true  ratiocination,  is 
thTscripturer  the  coustaut  signification  of  words  ;  which  in  the 
doctrine  following,  dependeth  not,  as  in  natural 
science,  on  the  will  of  the  writer,  nor,  as  in  com- 
mon conversation,  on  vulgar  use,  but  on  the  sense 
they  carry  in  the  Scripture ;  it  is  necessary,  before 
I  proceed  any  further,  to  determine,  out  of  the 
Bible,  the  meaning  of  such  words,  as  by  their  am- 
biguity, may  render  what  I  am  to  infer  upon  them, 
obscure,  or  disputable.  I  will  begin  with  the  words 
BODY  and  SPIRIT,  which  in  the  language  of  the 
Schools  are  termed,  substances,  corporeal,,  and 
incorporeal. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SIGNIFICATION  OF  SPIRIT,  ETC.  381 

The  word  hody^  in  the  most  general  accep^tion,   part  hi. 
signifieth  that  which  filleth,  or  occnpieth  some  cer-     ^f  •    . 
tain  room,  or  imagined  place ;  and  dependeth  not  Body  and  tpint 
on  the  imagination,  but  is  a  real  part  of  that  we  xh7scdp^e!^ 
call  the  universe.     For  the   universe^  being  the 
aggregate  of  all  bodies,  there  is  no  reed  part  thereof 
that  is  not  also  body ;  nor  any  thing  properly  a 
body  J  that  is  not  also  part  of  that  aggregate  of  all 
bodies  J  the  universe.  The  same  also,  because  bodies 
are  subject  to  change,  that  is  to  say,  to  variety  of 
aj^arence   to   the  sense  of  living  creatures,   is 
called  substance^  that  is  to  say,  subject  to  various 
accidents :  as  sometimes  to  be  moved ;  sometimes 
to  standstill ;  and  to  seem  to  our  senses  sometimes 
hot,  sometimes  cold,  sometimes  of  one  colour,  smell, 
taste,  or  sound,  sometimes  of  another.     And  this 
diversity  of  seeming,  produced  by  the  diversity  of 
the  operation  of  bodies  on  the  organs  of  our  sense, 
we  attribute  to  alterations  of  the  bodies  that  ope- 
rate, and  call  them  accidents  of  those  bodies.  And 
according  to  this  acceptation  of  the  word,  sub- 
stance and   body  signify  the  same  thing  ;    and 
therefore  substance  incorporeal  are  words,  which 
when  they  are  joined  together,  destroy  one  another, 
as  if  a  man  should  say,  an  incorporeal  body. 

But  in  the  sense  of  common  people,  not  all  the 
universe  is  called  body,  but  only  such  parts  thereof 
as  they  can  discern  by  the  sense  of  feeling,  to  resist 
their  force,  or  by  the  sense  of  their  eyes,  to  hinder 
them  from  a  farther  prospect.  Therefore  in  the 
common  language  of  men,  atr,  and  aerial  sub- 
stances^ use  not  to  be  taken  for  bodies ^  but  (as 
often  as  men  are  sensible  of  their  eflfects)  are  called 
windf  or  breathy  or  (because  the  same  are  called  in 


Digitized  by 


Google 


S83  OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMOICWBALTH. 

PART  TIL  the  Latin  ipiritus)  spirits  ;  as  when  they  cafi  that 
>.  ^*'  aerial  substance^  which  in  the  body  of  any  living 
Bodyand  spirit  creature  gives  it  life  and  motion,  vital  and  animal 
the^cn^tun.^  spirits.  But  foF  those  idols  of  the  brain,  which 
represent  bodies  to  us,  where  they  are  not,  as  in  a 
looking-glass,  in  a  dream,  or  to  a  distempered  brain 
waking,  they  are,  as  the  apostle  saith  generally  of 
all  idols^  nothing ;  nothing  at  all,  I  say,  there  where 
they  seem  to  be ;  and  in  the  brain  itself,  nodiing 
but  tumult,  proceeding  either  from  the  action  of 
the  objects,  or  from  the  disorderly  agitation  of  the 
organs  of  our  sense.  And  men,  that  are  otherwise 
employed,  than  to  search  into  their  causes,  know 
not  of  themselves,  what  to  call  them ;  and  may 
therefore  easily  be  persuaded,  by  those  whose  know- 
ledge they  much  reverence,  some  to  call  them  io- 
diesy  and  think  them  made  of  air  compacted  by  a 
power  supernatural,  because  the  sight  judges  them 
corporeal ;  and  some  to  call  them  spirits^  becaue 
the  sense  of  touch  discemeth  nothing  in  the  pldce 
where  they  appear,  to  resist  their  fingers :  so  thttit 
the  proper  signification  of  spirit  in  common  iq)eedi, 
is  either  a  subtle,  fluid,  and  invisible  body,  or  a 
ghost,  or  other  idol  or  phantasm  of  the  imagina- 
tion. But  for  metaphorical  significations,  there  be 
many :  for  sometimes  it  is  taken  for  disposition  or 
inclination  of  the  mind;  as  when  for  the  disposition 
to  controul  the  sayings  of  other  men,  we  say,  a 
spirit  of  contradiction  ;  for  a  disposition  to  un^ 
cleanness,  an  unclean  spirit ;  for  perversenessy  a 
Jroward  spirit ;  for  sullennesSy  a  dumb  spirit ;  and 
for  inclination  to  godliness  and  Gods  service^  the 
Spirit  of  God :  sometimes  for  any  eminent  ability 
or  extraordinary  passion,  or  disease  of  the  mind^  as 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SIGNIFICATION  OF  SPIRIT,  ETC.  383 

when  great  m^dom  is  called  the  spirit  of  wis-  part  hi. 
dom  ;  and  madmen  are  said  to  be  possessed  with  ^'  . 
n  spirit. 

Other  signification  of  spirit  I  find  nowhere  any; 
and  where  none  of  these  can  satisfy  the  sense  of 
that  word  in  Scripture,  the  place  falleth  not  under 
human  understanding ;  and  our  faith  therein  con- 
sisteth  not  in  our  opinion,  but  in  our  submission  ;  as 
in  all  places  where  God  is  said  to  be  a  Spirit ;  bt 
where  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  is  meant  God  himself. 
For  the  nature  of  God  is  incomprehensible ;  that  is 
to  say,  we  understand  nothing  of  what  he  is,  but 
only  that  he  is;  and  therefore  the  attributes  wte 
give  him,  are  not  to  tell  one  another,  what  he  is, 
nor  to  signify  our  opinion  of  his  nature,  but  our 
desire  to  honour  him  with  such  names  as  we  con- 
ceive most  honourable  amongst  ourselves. 

Gen.  i.  2.  The  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  'A^^JJ^^^!^ 
Jace  of  the  waters.     Here  if  by  the  Spirit  of  God  the  scripture 
be  meant  God  himself,  then  is  ynotion  attributed  to  f^^a  wind" 
God,  and  consequently  place,  which  are  intelligible  ^^  **'®****- 
only  of  bodies,  and  not  of  substances  incorporeal ; 
and  so  the  place  is  above  our  understanding,  that 
can  conceive  nothing  moved  that  changes  not  place, 
or  that  has  not  dimension;  and  whatsoever  has  di- 
mension, is  body.    But  the  meaning  of  those  words 
is  best  understood  by  the  like  place,  {Gen.  viii.  1.) 
where  when  the  earth  was  covered  with  waters,  as 
in  the  beginning,  God  intending  to  abate  them,  and 
again  to  discover  the  dry  land,  useth  the  like  words, 
/  will  hritig  my  Spirit  upon  the  earth,  and  the 
waters  shall  he  diminished:  in  which  place,  by 
Spirit  is  understood  a  wind,  that  is  an  air  or  Spirit 
moved,  which  might  be  called,  as  in  the  former 


Digitized  by 


Google 


384  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTn. 

PART  III.  place,  the  Spirit  of  God,  because  it  was  God's 
.  ^^-  work. 
Secondly,  for  GcD.  xll.  38,  Pbaroah  calleth  the  Wisdom  of 
^fu^of^lbZ  Joseph,  the  Spirit  of  God.  For  Joseph  having 
undcrrtandiug.  ^dyiged  him  to  look  out  a  wise  and  discreet  man, 
and  to  set  him  over  the  land  of  Egypt,  he  saith 
thus,  Can  we  find  such  a  man  as  this  is,  in  whom 
is  the  Spirit  of  God?  And  Exod.  xxviii.  3,  Thou 
shalt  speaky  saith  God,  to  all  the  wise  hearted, 
whom  I  have  filled  with  the  spirit  of  wisdom,  to 
make  Aaron  garments,  to  consecrate  him :  where 
extraordinary  understanding,  though  but  in  making 
garments,  as  being  the  gift  of  God,  is  caUed  the 
Spirit  of  God.  The  same  is  found  again,  Exod.  xxxi. 
3, 4, 5,  6,  and  xxxv.  31 .  And  Isaiah  xi.  2, 3,  where 
the  prophet  speaking  of  the  Messiah,  saith,  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  abide  upon  him,  the 
spirit  of  wisdom  and  understanding,  the  spirit  of 
counsel  and  fortitude,  and  the  spirit  of  the  fear 
of  the  Lord.  Where  manifestly  is  meant,  not  so 
many  ghosts,  but  so  many  eminent  graces  that  God 
would  give  him. 
Thirdly,  for  In  the  book  of  Judges,  an  extraordinary  zeal 
affections.  and  couragc  m  the  defence  of  God  s  people,  is 
called  the  Spirit  of  God ;  as  when  it  excited  0th- 
niel,  Gideon,  Jephtha,  and  Sampson  to  deliver  them 
from  servitude,/Mc/g*^*,  iii.  10,  vi.  34,  xi.  29,  xiii.  26, 
xiv.  6,  19.  And  of  Saul,  upon  the  news  of  the 
insolence  of  the  Ammonites  towards  the  men  of 
Jabesh  Gilead,  it  is  said,  (1  Sam.  xi.  6)  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  came  upon  Saul,  and  his  anger,  (or, 
as  it  is  in  the  Latin,  his  fury),  was  kindled  greatly. 
Where  it  is  not  probable  was  meant  a  ghost,  but 
an  extraordinary  zeal  to  punish  the  cruelty  of  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SIGNIFICATION  OF  SPIRIT,  ETC.  385 

Ammonites.     In  like  manner  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  part  ih. 
that  came  upon  Saul,  when  he  was  amongst  the       ^^-    . 
prophets  that  praised  God  in  songs  and  music, 
(1  Sum.  xix,  23),  is  to  be  understood,  not  a  ghost, 
but  an  unexpected  and  sudden  zeal  to  join  with 
them  in  their  devotion. 

The  false  prophet  Zedekiah  saith  to  Micaiah  Fourthly, 
(1  Kings  xxii.  24),  which  way  went  the  Spirit  qf^ot^r^ttltm 
the  Lord  from  me  to  speak  to  thee?  Which  can  ^Ja^Jj*^*^ 
not  be  understood  of  a  ghost ;  for  Micaiah  de- 
clared before  the  kings  of  Israel  and  Judah,  the 
evejit  of  the  battle,  as  from  a  vision,  and  not  as 
from  a  spirit  speaking  in  him. 

In  the  same  manner  it  appeareth  in  the  books 
of  the  Prophets,  that  though  they  spake  by  the 
spirit  of  God,  that  is  to  say,  by  a  special  grace  of 
prediction ;  yet  their  knowledge  of  the  future, 
WBS  not  by  a  ghost  within  them,  but  by  some  su- 
pernatural dream  or  vision. 

Gen.  ii.  /,  it  is  said,  God  made  man  of  the  dust  Fift%^forKfc. 
of  the  earthy  and  breathed  into  his  nostrils  (spi- 
raculum  vitae)  the  breath  of  life,  and  man  wc^ 
made  a  living  soul.  There  the  breath  of  life  in- 
pired  by  God,  signifies  no  more,  but  that  God  gave 
him  life  ;  and  {Job  xxvii.  3)  as  long  as  the  Spirit  of 
God  is  in  my  nostrils j  is  no  more  than  to  say,  a^ 
long  as  I  live  So  in  E%eh.  '\.  20,  the  spirit  of 
life  was  in  the  wheels ,  is  equivalent  to,  the  wheels 
were  alive.  And,  {Ezek.  ii.  2)  the  Spirit  entered 
into  me,  and  set  me  on  my  feet,  that  is,  I  recovered 
my  vital  strength  ;  not  that  any  ghost  or  incorpo- 
real substance  entered  into,  and  possessed  his  body. 

In  the  xith  chap,  of  Numbers,  v.  17,  /  will  take,  sixthij,  for» 
saith  God,  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  upon  thee,  and  to  anthon^. 
VOL.  III.  c  c 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


386  OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III,  will  put  it  upon  them^  and  they  shall  hear  the 

^    ^^'    ^    burthen  of  the  people  with  thee;  that  is,  upon  the 

Sixthly,  for  a  sevcntv  eldcFS :  whereupon  two  of  the  seventy  are 

subordination         -j^  -i-^i  i»i 

to  authority.  saiQ  to  prophecy  m  the  camp ;  of  whom  some  com- 
plained, and  Joshua  desired  Moses  to  forbid  them ; 
which  Moses  would  not  do.  Whereby  it  appeard, 
that  Joshua  knew  not  that  they  had  received  au- 
thority so  to  do,  and  prophecied  according  to  the 
mind  of  Moses,  that  is  to  say,  by  a  spirit ^  or  autho^ 
rity  subordinate  to  his  own. 

In  the  like  sense  we  read,  {Deut.  xxxiv.  9)  that 
Joshua  was  full  of  the  spirit  of  wisdom,  because 
Moses  had  laid  his  hands  upon  him  :  that  is  be- 
cause he  was  ordained  by  Moses,  to  prosecute  the 
work  he  had  himself  begun,  namely  the  bringing 
of  God's  people  into  the  promised  land,  but  pre- 
vented by  death,  could  not  finish. 

In  the  like  sense  it  is  said,  (Rom.  viii.  9)  If  any 
man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  ^ 
his :  not  meaning  thereby  the  ghost  of  Christ,  but  a 
submission  to  his  doctrine.  As  also,  (1  John  iv.  2) 
Hereby  you  shall  know  the  Spirit  of  God;  every 
spirit  t^hat  coffesseth  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in 
the  flesh,  is  of  God  ;  by  which  is  meant  the  spirit 
of  unfeigned  Christianity,  or  submission  to  that 
main  article  of  Christian  fedth,  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ ;  which  cannot  be  interpreted  of  a  ghost. 

Likewise  these  words,  (Luke  iv.  1 )  And  Jesus  full 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  (that  is,  as  it  is  expressed.  Matt. 
iv.  1,  and  Marki.  \2,  of  the  Holy  Spirit,)  may  be 
understood,  for  zeal  to  do  the  work  for  which  he 
was  sent  by  God  the  Father  :  but  to  interpret  it  of 
a  ghost,  is  to  say,  that  God  himself,  for  so  our 
Saviour  was,  was  filled  with  God ;  which  is  very 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SIGNIFICATION  OP  BPIRIT,  ETC.  38/ 

# 

improper  and  insignificant.  How  we  came  to  part  iif. 
translate  spirits,  by  the  word  ghosts,  whi?h  signi-  .  ^*-  . 
fieth  nothing,  neither  in  heaven,  nor  earth,  but  the 
imaginary  inhabitants  of  man's  brain,  I  examine 
not :  but  this  I  say,  the  word  spirit  in  the  text 
signifieth  no  such  thing ;  but  either  properly  a  real 
substance,  or  metaphorically,  some  extraordinary 
ability  or  qffection  of  the  mind,  or  of  the  body. 

The  disciples  of  Christ,  seeing  him  walking  upon  Seventhijr,  for 
the  sea,  {Matt  .xiv.  26,  and  Mark  vi.  49)  supposed  •^"•^»»^«« 
him  to  be  a  Spirit,  meaning  thereby  an  aerial  body, 
and  not  a  phantasm;  for  it  is  said,  they  all  saw 
him  ;  which  cannot  be  understood  of  the  delusions 
of  the  brain,  (which  are  not  common  to  many  at 
once,  as  visible  bodies  are ;  but  singular,  because 
of  the  diflFerences  of  fancies,)  but  of  bodies  only.  In 
like  manner,  where  he  was  taken  for  a  spirit,  by 
the  same  apostles,  (Luke  xxiv.  37):  so  also  (Acts 
xii.  1 5)  when  St.  Peter  was  delivered  out  of  prison, 
it  woidd  not  be  believed  ;  but  when  the  maid  said 
he  was  at  the  door,  they  said  it  was  his  angel ;  by 
which  must  be  meant  a  corporeal  substance,  or  we 
must  say,  the  disciples  themselves  did  follow  the 
common  opinion  of  both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  that 
some  such  apparitions  were  not  imaginary,  but  real, 
and  such  as  needed  not  the  fancy  of  man  for  their 
existence.  These  the  Jews  called  spirits,  and  angels^ 
good  or  bad;  as  the  Greeks  called  the  same  by  the 
name  of  demons.  And  some  such  apparitions  may 
be  real,  and  substantial;  that  is  to  say,  subtle 
bodies,  which  God  can  form  by  the  same  power,  by 
which  he  formed  all  things,  and  make  use  of,  as  of 
ministers,  and  messengers,  that  is  to  say,  angels, 
to  declare  his  wiU,  a,nd  execute  the  same  when  he 

c  c  2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


388  OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  pleasethjin  extraordinary  and  supernatural  manner. 
.  ^^-  .  But  when  he  hath  so  formed  them,  they  are  sub- 
stances, endued  with  dimensions,  and  take  up 
room,  and  can  be  moved  from  place  to  place,  which 
is  peculiar  to  bodies ;  and  therefore  are  not  ghosts 
incorporeal,  that  is  to  say,  ghosts  that  are  in  no 
place ;  that  is  to  say,  that  are  no  where ;  that  is 
to  say,  that  seeming  to  be  somewhat,  are  nothing. 
But  if  corporeal  be  taken  in  the  most  vulgar  man- 
ner, for  such  substances  as  are  perceptible  by  our 
external  senses ;  then  is  substance  incorporeal,  a 
thing  not  imaginary,  but  real ;  namely,  a  thin  sub- 
stance invisible,  but  that  hath  the  same  dimensions 
that  are  in  grosser  bodies. 

Angel,  what.  By  the  uamc  of  angel,  is  signified  generally,  a 
messenger ;  and  most  often,  a  messenger  of  God; 
and  by  a  messenger  of  God,  is  signified,  any  thing 
that  makes  known  his  extraordinary  presence; 
that  is  to  say,  the  extraordinary  manifestation  of 
his  power,  especially  by  a  dream  or  vision. 

Concerning  the  creation  of  angels,  there  is 
nothing  delivered  in  the  Scriptures.  That  they 
are  spirits,  is  often  repeated :  but  by  the  name  of 
spirit,  is  signified  both  in  Scripture,  and  vulgarly, 
both  amongst  Jews  and  Gentiles,  sometimes  thin 
bodies  :  as  the  air,  the  wind,  the  spirits  vital  and 
animal  of  living  creatures;  and  sometimes  the 
images  that  rise  in  the  fancy  in  dreams  and 
visions ;  which  are  not  real  substances,  nor  last 
any  longer  than  the  dream,  or  vision  they  appear 
in ;  which  apparitions,  though  no  real  substances, 
but  accidents  of  the  brain  ;  yet  when  God  ndseth 
them  supematurally,  to  signify  his  will,  they  are 
not  improperly  termed  God's  messengers,  that  is  to 
say,  his  angels. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SIGNIFICATION  OF  SPIRIT,  ETC.  389 

And  as  the  Gentiles  did  vulgarly  conceive  the  part  hi. 
imagery  of  the  brain,  for  things  really  subsistent  .  ^f •  ^ 
without  them,  and  not  dependent  on  the  fancy ;  Angei.  what. 
and  out  of  them  framed  their  opinions  of  demons^ 
good  and  evil ;  which  because  they  seemed  to  sub- 
sist really,  they  called  substances ;  and,  because 
they  could  not  feel  them  with  their  hands,  incor- 
poreal: so  also  the  Jews,  upon  the  same  ground, 
without  any  thing  in  the  Old  Testament  that  con- 
strained them  thereunto,  had  generally  an  opinion, 
except  the  sect  of  the  Sadducees,  that  those  appari- 
tions, which  it  pleased  God  sometimes  to  produce 
in  the  fancy  of  men,  for  his  own  service,  and  there- 
fore called  them  his  angels,  were  substances,  not 
dependent  on  the  fancy,  but  permanent  creatures 
of  God ;  whereof  those  which  they  thought  were 
good  to  them,  they  esteemed  the  angels  of  God, 
and  those  they  thought  would  hurt  them,  they 
called  evil  angels,  or  evil  spirits ;  such  as  was  the 
spirit  of  Python,  and  the  spirits  of  madmen,  of  lu- 
natics and  epileptics :  for  they  esteemed  such  as 
were  troubled  with  such  diseases,  demoniacs. 

But  if  we  consider  the  places  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment where  angels  are  mentioned,  we  shall  find, 
that  in  most  of  them,  there  can  nothing  else  be  un- 
derstood by  the  word  angel,  but  some  image  raised, 
supematurally,  in  the  fancy,  to  signify  the  presence 
of  God  in  the  execution  of  some  supernatural  work ; 
and  therefore  in  the  rest,  where  their  nature  is 
not  expressed,  it  may  be  understood  in  the  same 
manner. 

For  we  read,  {Gen,  xvi.)  that  the  same  apparition 
is  called,  not  only  an  angel^  but  God ;  where  that 
which  (verse  7)  is  called  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  in 
the  tenth  verse,  saith  to  Agar,  /  will  multiply  thy 


Digitized  by 


Google 


390  OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  seed  exceedingly  ;  that  is,  speaketh  in  the  person 
v_^t'  --    of  God.     Neither   was  this  apparition  a  fancy 

Angel,  whau  figured,  but  a  voice.  By  which  it  is  manifest,  that 
angel  signifieth  there,  nothing  but  God  himself, 
that  caused  Agar  supematurally  to  apprehend  a 
voice  from  heaven ;  or  rather,  nothing  else  but  a 
voice  supernatural,  testifying  God's  special  pre- 
sence there.  Why  therefore  may  not  the  angels 
that  appeared  to  Lot,  and  are  called  {Oen.iax.  12) 
men;  and  to  whom,  though  they  were  two.  Lot 
speaketh  (verse  18)  as  but  to  one,  and  that  one,  as 
God,  (for  the  words  are,  Lot  said  unto  them.  Oh 
not  so  my  Lord),  be  understood  of  images  of  men, 
supematurally  formed  in  the  fancy ;  as  well  as  be- 
fore by  angel  was  understood  a  fancied  voice? 
When  the  angel  called  to  Abraham  out  of  heaven, 
to  stay  his  hand  {Gen.naii.  11)  from  slaying  Isaac, 
there  was  no  apparition,  but  a  voice ;  which  never- 
theless was  called  properly  enough  a  messenger  or 
angel  of  God,  because  it  declared  God's  will  super- 
naturally,  and  saves  the  labour  of  supposing  any 
permanent  ghosts.  The  angels  which  Jacob  saw 
on  the  ladder  of  Heaven,  {Gen.  xxviii,  12)  were  a 
vision  of  his  sleep ;  therefore  only  fancy,  and  a 
dream ;  yet  being  supernatural,  and  signs  of  God's 
special  presence,  those  apparitions  are  not  impro- 
perly called  angels.  The  same  is  to  be  understood, 
{Gen.  xxxi.  11)  where  Jacob  saith  thus.  The  Angel 
of  the  Lord  appeared  to  me  in  my  sleep.  For  an 
apparition  made  to  a  man  in  his  sleep,  is  that  which 
all  men  call  a  dream,  whether  such  dream  be 
natural,  or  supernatural:  and  that  which  there 
Jacob  calleth  an  angel,  was  God  himself ;  for  the 
same  angel  saith,  verse  13,  lam  the  God  of  Bethel. 
Also  {Exod.  xiv.  19)  the  angel  that  went  before 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


SIGNIFICATION  OP  SPIRIT,  ETC.  8^1 

the  army  of  Israel  to  the  Red  Sea,  and  then  came  part  hi. 
behind  it,  is,  (verse  24)  the  Lord  himself;  and  he    .  ^  ^^'    . 
appeared,  not  in  the  form  of  a  beautiAil  man,  but  Aiigci»  what. 
in  form,  {Exod.  xiii.  21)  by  day,  of  ^pillar  of  cloudy 
and,  by  night,  in  form  of  b,  pillar  of  fire ;  and  yet 
this  pillar  was  all  the  apparition  and  angel  pro- 
mised to  Moses,  {Exod.  xxxiii.  3)  for  the  army's 
guide  :    for  this  cloudy  pillar  (Exod.  xxxiii.  9)  is 
said  to  have  descended,  and  stood  at  the  door  of 
the  Tabemade,  and  to  have  talked  with  Moses. 

There  you  see  motion  and  speech^  which  are 
commonly  attributed  to  angels,  attributed  to  a 
dond,  because  the  cloud  served  as  a  ^gn  of  God's 
presence ;  and  was  no  less  an  angel,  than  if  it  had 
had  the  form  of  a  man,  or  child  of  never  so  great 
beauty ;  or  wings,  as  usually  they  are  painted,  for 
the  false  instruction  of  common  people.  For  it  is 
not  tiie  shape;  but  their  use  that  makes  them 
angels.  But  their  use  is  to  be  significations  of  God's 
presence  in  supernatural  operations;  as  when 
Moses  {Estod.  xxxiii.  14)  had  desired  God  to  go 
along  with  the  camp,  as  he  had  done  always  before 
the  making  of  the  golden  calf,  God  did  not  answer, . 
/  miU  g^y  nor,  /  wiU  send  an  angel  in  my  stead ; 
but  thus,  My  presence  shall  go  with  thee. 

To  mention  all  the  places  of  the  Old  Testament 
where  the  name  of  angel  is  found,  would  be  too 
long.  Therefore  to  comprehend  them  all  at  once, 
I  say,  there  is  no  text  in.  that  part  of  the  Old  Test- 
ament, which  the  Church  of  England  holdeth  for 
canonical^  from  which  we  can  conclude,  there  is, 
or  hath  been  created,  any  permanent  thing,  under- 
stood by  the  name  of  spirit  or  angel,  that  hath 
not  quantity ;  and  that  may  not  be  by  the  under- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


392  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH- 
PART  III.  Standing  divided  j  that  is  to  say,  considered  by 
^  ^^'  _■  parts ;  so  as  one  part  may  be  in  one  place,  and  the 
Angel,  what,  next  part  in  the  next  place  to  it ;  and,  in  sum, 
which  is  not  (taking  body  for  that,  which  is  some- 
what or  some  where,)  corporeal ;  but  in  every  place, 
the  sense  will  bear  the  interpretation  of  angel,  for 
messenger ;  as  John  Baptist  is  called  an  angel,  and 
Christ  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant ;  and  as,  accord- 
ing to  the  same  analogy,  the  dove  and  tte  fiery 
tongues,  in  that  they  were  signs  of  God's  special 
presence,  mightalso  be  called  angels.  Though  we 
find  in  Darnel  two  names  of  angels,  Gabriel  and 
Michael ;  yet  it  is  dear  out  of  the  text  itself,  {Dan. 
xii.  1)  that  by  Michael  is  meant  Christ,  not  as  an 
angd,  but  as  a  prince :  and  that  Gabriel,  as  the  like 
apparitions  made  to  other  holy  men  in  their  sleep, 
was  nothing  but  a  supernatural  phantasm,  by  which 
it  seemed  to  Daniel,  in  his  dream,  that  two  saints 
being  in  talk,  one  of  them  said  to  the  other,  Gabriel, 
Let  us  make  thi»  man  understand  his  vision :  for 
God  needeth  not  to  distinguish  his  celestial  ser- 
vants by  names,  which  are  useful  only  to  the  short 
memories  of  mortals.  Nor  in  the  New  Testament 
is  there  any  place,  out  of  which  it  can  be  provedy 
that  angels,  except  when  they  are  put  for  such  men 
as  God  hath  made  the  messengers  and  ministers  of 
his  word  or  works,  are  things  permanent,  and  withal 
incorporeal.  That  they  are  permanent,  may  be 
gathered  from  the  words,  of  our  Saviour  himself^ 
(Matt.  XXV.  41)  where  he  saith,  it  shall  be  said  to 
the  wicked  in  the  last  day,  Ga  tfe  cursed  into  ever- 
lasting  fire  prepared  for  the  Devil  and  his  angels  t 
which  place  is  manifest  for  the  permanence  of  evil 
angels,  (unless  we  might  think  the  name  of  Devil 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SIGNIFICATION  OF  SPIRIT,  ETC.  398 

and. his  angels  may  be  nnderstood  of  the  Church's  part  in. 
adversaries  and  their  ministers);  but  then  it  is  re-  ._  ^^'  . 
pugnant  to  their  immateriality ;  because  everlasting  Angei,  what. 
fire  is  no  punishment  to  impatible  substances,  such 
as  are  all  things  incorporeaL  Angels  therefore 
are  not  thence  proved  to  be  incorporeal.  In  like 
manner  where  St.  Paul  says,  (1  Cor.  vi.  a)  Know 
ye  not  that  we  shall  judge  tfie  angels  ?  and  2  Pet, 
ii.  4,  For  if  God  spared  not  the  angels  that  sin- 
ned, but  cast  them  down  into  hell :  and  (J tide  i. 
6)  And  the  angels  that  kept  not  their  first  es- 
tate,  hut  left  their  own  habitationy  h£  hath  re- 
served in  everlasting  chains  under  darkness  u?ito 
the  Judgment  of  the  last  day :  though  it  prove 
the  permanence  of  angelical  nature,  it  confirmeth 
also  their  materiality.  And  (Matt,  xxii.  30^  In 
the  resurrection  men  do  neither  marry  nor  give  in 
marriage y  but  are  as  the  angels  of  God  in  heaven  : 
but  in  the  resurrection  men  shall  be  permanent, 
and  not  incorporeal;  so  therefore  also  are  the 
angels. 

There  be  divers  other  places  out  of  which  may 
be  drawn  the  like  conclusion.  To  men  that  under- 
stand the  signification  of  these  words,  substance, 
and  incorporeal ;  as  incorporeal  is  taken,  not  for 
subtle  body,  but  for  not  body ;  they  imply  a  contra- 
diction :  insomuch  as  to  say,  an  angel  or  spirit  is 
in  that  sense  an  incorporeal  substance,  is  to  say  in 
effect,  there  is  no  angel  nor  spirit  at  all.  Consi- 
dering therefore  the  signification  of  the  word  angel 
in  the  Old  Testament,  and  the  nature  of  dreams 
and  visions  that  happen  to  men  by  the  ordinary 
way  of  nature ;  I  was  inclined  to  this  opinion,  that 
angels  were  nothing  but  supernatural  apparitions 


Digitized  by 


Google 


394  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COIIMONWBALTH. 

PART  III.  of  the  fancy^  raised  by  the  special  and  extraordi** 
^  ^f*  _  ^  nary  operatioQ  of  God,  thereby  to  make  his  pre- 
smice  and  commandments  known  to  mankindj  and 
chiefly  to  his  own  people.  But  the  many  places  c^ 
the  New  Testament,  and  onr  Saviour's  own  words, 
and  in  such  texts,  whwein  is  no  suspicion  of  cor- 
ruption of  tiie  Scripture,  have  extorted  from  my 
feeble  reason,  an  acknowledgment  and  belief,  that 
there  be  also  angels  substantial,  and  permanent. 
But  to  believe  they  be  in  no  place,  that  is  to  say, 
no  where,  that  is  to  say,  nothing,  as  they,  though 
indirectly,  say,  that  will  have  them  incorporeal, 
cannot  by  Scripture  be  evinced. 
TniipiratioD,  Qn  the  signification  of  the  word  spirit^  dependeth 
that  of  the  word  inspiration  ;  which  must  either 
be  taken  properly ;  and  then  it  is  nothing  but  the 
blowing  into  a  man  some  thin  and  subtle  air  or 
wind,  in  such  manner  as  a  man  fiUeth  a  bladder 
with  his  breath ;  or  if  S{nrits  be  not  corporeal,  but 
have  their  existence  only  in  the  fwcy,  it  is  nothing 
but  the  blowing  in  of  a  phantasm  ;  which  is  im* 
proper  to  say,  and  impossible;  for  phantasms  are 
not,  but  only  seem  to  be,  somewhat.  That  word 
therefore  is  used  in  the  Scripture  metaphorically 
only:  as  {Gen.  ii.  7)  where  it  is  said  that  God  in- 
spired  into  man  the  breath  of  life,  no  more  is  meant, 
than  that  God  gave  unto  him  vital  motion.  For  we 
are  not  to  think  that  God  made  first  a  living  breadi 
and  then  blew  it  into  Adam  after  he  was  made, 
whether  that  breath  were  real,  or  seeming;  but 
only  as  it  is,  {Acts  xvii.  25)  that  he  gave  him  life^ 
and  breath  ;  that  is,  made  him  a  living  creature. 
And  where  it  is  said,  (2  Tm.iii.  16^  all  Scripture 
is  giveti  by  inspiration  froKii  God^  speaking  tiiere 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SIGNIFICATION  OF  SPIRIT,  ETC.         <    395 

of  the  Scripture  of  the  Old  Testament,  it  is  an  easy  part  hi. 
metaphor,  to  signify,  that  God  inclined  the  spirit   .  ^^'    . 
or  mind  of  those  writers,  to  write  that  which  should  in«piration, 
be  useful,  in  teaching,  reproving,  correcting,  and 
instructing  men  in  the  way  of  righteous  living. 
But  where  St.  Peter,  (2  Pet.  i.  21J  saith,  that 
Prophecy  came  not  in  old  time  by  the  will  of  man, 
but  the  holy  men  of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved 
hy  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  the  Holy  Spirit  is  meant 
the  voice  of  God  in  a  dream  or  vision  supernatural, 
which  is  not  inspiration.    Nor,  when  our  Saviour 
breathing  on  his  disciples,  said.  Receive  the  Holy 
Spirit y  was  that  breath  the  Spirit,  but  a  sign  of 
the  spiritual  graces  he  gave  unto  them.  And  though 
it  be  said  of  many,  and  of  our  Saviour  himself,  that 
he  was  full  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  yet  that  fulness 
is  not  to  be  understood  for  infusion  of  the  sub- 
stance of  God,  but  for  accumulation  of  his  gifts, 
such  as  are  the  gift  of  sanctity  of  life,  of  tongues, 
and  the  like,  whether  attained  supematurally,  or 
by  study  and  industry ;  for  in  all  cases  they  are 
the  gifts  of  God.    So  likewise  where  God  says 
{Joel  ii.  28J  /  will  pour  out  my  Spirit  npon  all 
fleshy  and  your  sons  and  your  daughters  shall 
prophecy,  your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams,  and 
your  young  men  shall  see  visions,  we  are  not  to 
understand  it  in  the  proper  sense,  as  if  his  Spirit 
were  like  water,  subject  to  effusion  or  infusion ; 
but  as  if  God  had  promised  to  give  them  propheti- 
cal dreams,  and  visions.     For  the  proper  use  of 
the  word  infused,  in  speaking  of  the  graces  of  God, 
is  an  abuse  of  it ;  for  those  graces  are  virtues, 
not  bodies  to  be  carried  hither  and  thither,  and  to 
be  poured  into  men  as  into  barrels. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


396  OF  A  CKRISTFAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  In  the  same  manner,  to  take  inspiration  in  the 
.  ^^'  ■  proper  sense,  or  to  say  that  good  spirits  entered 
into  men  to  make  them  prophecy,  or  evil  spirits  into 
those  that  became  phrenetic,  lunatic,  or  epileptic, 
is  not  to  take  the  word  in  the  sense  of  the  Scripture  ; 
for  the  Spirit  there  is  taken  for  the  power  of  God, 
working  by  causes  to  us  unknown.  As  also  {Acts 
ii.  2)  the  wind,  that  is  there  said  to  fill  the  house 
wherein  the  apostles  were  assembled  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost,  is  not  to  be  understood  for  the  Holy 
Spirit  y  which  is  the  Deity  itself;  but  for  an  external 
sign  of  God's  special  working  on  their  hearts,  to 
eflFect  in  them  the  internal  graces,  and  holy  virtues 
he  thought  requisite  for  the  performance  of  their 
apostleship. 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 

OF  THE  SIGNIFICATION    IN    SCRIPTURE  OF 

KINGDOM  OF  GOD,  OF  HOLY,  SACRED, 

AND  SACRAMENT. 

ThekingdomofTHE  Kingdom  of  God  in  the  writings  of  divines, 
divincB  4eu.^  and  specially  in  sermons  and  treatises  of  devotion, 
m  °the*SOT^***  is  taken  mo3t  commonly  for  eternal  felicity,  after 
tures  properly.  ^}^\^  ufg^  in  the  highest  hcavcn,  which  they  also 
call  the  kingdom  of  glory  ;  and  sometimes  for  the 
earnest  of.  that  felicity,  sanctification,  which  they 
term  the  kingdom  of  grace  ;  but  never  for  the 
monarchy,  that  is  to  say,  the  sovereign  power  of 
God  over  any  subjects  acquired  by  their  own  con- 
sent, which  is  the  proper  signification  of  kingdom. 
To  the  contrary,  I  find  the  kingdom  of  God 
to  signify,  in  most  places  of  Scripture,  a  kingdom 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SIGNIFICATION  OF  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.        397 

joroperly  m  named^  constituted  by  the  votes  of  the  part  iil 
people  of  Israel  in  peculiar  m^iner ;  wherein  they  .  ^f'  . 
-chose  God  for  their  king  by  covenant  made  with 
him,  upon  God's  promising  them  the  possession  of 
the  land  of  Canaan ;  and  but  seldom  metaphori- 
<;ally  ;  and  then  it  is  taken  for  dominion  over  sin ; 
(and  only  in  the  New  Testament ;)  because  such  a 
dominion  as  that,  every  subject  shall  have  in  the 
kingdom  of  God,  and  without  prejudice  to  the 
sovereign. 

From  the  very  creation,  God  not  only  reigned 
over  ^1  men  naturally  by  his  might ;  but  also  had 
peculiar  subjects,  whom  he  commanded  by  a  voice, 
as  one  man  speaketh  to  another.  In  which  man- 
ner he  reigned  over  Adam,  and  gave  him  command- 
ment to  abstain  from  the  tree  of  cognizance  of  good 
and  evil ;  which  when  he  obeyed  not,  but  tasting 
thereof,  took  upon  him  to  be  as  God,  judging  be- 
tween good  and  evil,  not  by  his  creator's  com- 
mandment, but  by  his  own  sense,  his  punishment 
was  a  privation  of  the  estate  of  eternal  life,  wherein 
God  had  at  first  created  him  •  and  afterwards  God 
punished  his  posterity  for  their  vices,  all  but  eight 
persons,  with  an  universal  deluge;  and  in  these 
eight  did  consist  the  then  kingdom  of  God. 

After  this  it  pleased  God  to  spedc  to  Abraham,  Tjie  origirtAi 
and((r^«.xvii.  7, 8)  to  make  a  covenant  with  him  in  dom  ofc^ 
these  words,  /  will  establish  my  covenant  between 
me,  and  thee,  and  thy  seed  after  thee  in  their 
generations,  for  an  everlasting  covenant,  to  be  a 
God  to  thee,  and  to  thy  seed  after  thee ;  and  I 
will  give  unto  thee,  and  to  thy  seed  after  thee, 
the  land  wherein  thou  art  a  stranger,  all  the  land 
of  Canaan  for  an  everlasting  possession.    In  this 


Digitized  by 


Google 


396  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONITBALTH. 

PART  III.  coveoant  AhraJumpromiseth/ar  Mwue^mmdhi^ 
.    "•    .  posterity  J  to  obey  m  God^  the  Lord  that  spake  to 
kkm;  amd  God  om  kU  part  promisetk  to  Abraham 
the  lamd  iff  Canaan /or  an  everlasting  possession. 
Andfor  amanorial,  anda fa^en  of  this  covenant^  he 
ordaineth  {Gen.  xvii.  11)  the  sacrament  ofcWcmmr- 
cision.    This  is  it  which  is  called  the  old  covenant 
or  testament ;  and  contain^ii  a  contract  between 
God  and  Abraham;  by  which  Abraham  obligeth 
himself^  and  his  posterity^  in  a  pecoliar  mannw  to 
be  subject  to  God*s  positive  law ;  for  to  the  law 
moral  he  was  obliged  before^  as  by  an  oath  of  alle- 
giance.   And  thongh  the  name  of  King  be  not  yet 
given  to  God,  nor  of  kmgdom  to  Alnraham  and  his 
seed :  yet  the  thing  is  the  same ;  namely,  an  instl- 
tation  by  pact,  of  God*8  peculiar  soverdgnty  ov^* 
the  seed  of  Abraham ;  which  in  the  renewing  of 
the  same  covenant  by  Moses,  at  Mount  Sinai,  is 
expressly  called  a  peculiar  kingdom  of  God  over 
the  Jews :  and  it  is  of  Abraham,  not  of  Moses,  St. 
Paul  saith  {Rom.  iv.  1 1)  that  he  is  i\k^  father  of 
the  faithful;  that  is,  of  those  that  are  loyal^  and 
do  not  violate  their   allegiance   sworn   to  God, 
then  by  circumdsion,  and  afterwards  in  the  new 
covenant  by  baptism. 
That  the  kiit^.     This  coveuaut,  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Sinai,  was 
pn^7  hii"  renewed  by  Moses,  {Exod.  xix.  5)  where  the  Lord 
ty  ovwT^fS."  commandeth  Moses  to  speak  to  the  people  in  this 
liar^peopfe  by  manner,  7/"  you  will  obey  my  voice  indeed,  and 
keep  my  covenant^  then  ye  shall  be  a  peculiar 
people  to  me,  for  all  the  earth  is  mine  ;  and  ye 
shall  be  unto  me  a  sacerdotal  kingdofn,  and  an 
holy  nation.     For  a  peculiar  people,  the  vulgar 
Latin  hath  peculinm  de  cunctis  populis :  the  Bug- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


translation  is  rtie  first,  because  it  is  confirmed  by  ^j'tler'^^e 
St  Paul  himself  (Tit.  ii-  14)  where  he  saith,  allu-  «•'  P«op»«  ^ 


SIGNIFICATION   OF  KINGDOM  OP  GOD«      399 

Ush  translalion,  made  in  the  beginning  of  the  reign  part  ni. 
of  King  James,  hath  a  peculiar  treasure  unto  me    :    ^'    . 
above  all  nations;  and  the  Geneva  French,  lA^  That  the  wng- 
most  precious  jewel  of  all  nations.    But  the  truest  pJIS^dy  his" 

.  civil  fOYereign- 

r  over  apecu- 

by 

pact. 

ding  to  that  place,  that  our  blessed  Saviour  g-aw 
himself /or  us,  that  he  might  purify  us  to  himse^, 
a  peculiar,  that  is,  an  extraordinary,  people :  fiwr 
the  word  is  in  the  Greek  ircpiovinoc,  which  is  op- 
posed commonly  to  the  word  ciriov<noc :  and  as  this 
signifieth  ordinary,  quotidian,  or,  as  in  the  Lord's 
Pi^y^i'^  ^  daily  use ;  so  the  other  signifieth  that 
which  is  overplus,  and  stored  up,  and  enjoyed  in 
a  special  manner ;  which  the  Latins  call  pecu- 
Hum :  and  this  meaning  of  the  place  is  confirmed 
by  the  reason  God  rendereth  of  it,  which  foUoweth 
immediately,  in  that  he  addeth.  For  all  the  earth 
is  mine,  as  if  he  should  say.  All  the  nations  of  the 
t^orld  are  mine ;  but  it  is  not  so  that  you  are 
mine,  but  in  a  special  manner :  for  they  are  all 
mine,  by  reason  of  my  power ;  but  you  shall  be 
mine,  by  your  own  consent,  and  covenant ;  which 
is  an  addition  to  his  ordinary  title,  to  all  nations. 

The  same  is  again  confirmed  in  express  words  in 
the  same  text,  Ye  shall  be  to  me  a  sacerdotal 
kingdom,  and  an  holy  nation.  The  vulgar  Latin 
hath  it,  regnum  sacerdotale,  to  which  agreeth 
the  translation  of  that  place  (I  Pet.  ii.  9)  Sacer- 
dotium  regale,  a  regal  priesthood ;  as  also  the 
institution  itself,  by  which  no  man  might  enter 
into  the  Sanctum  Sanctorum,  that  is  to  say,  no 
man  might  enquire  God's  will  immediately  of  God 
himself,  but  only  the  high-priest.     The  English 


Digitized  by 


Google 


400  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  translation  before  mentioned,   following   that  of 

-    ^'  _.    Geneva,  has,  a  kiugdom  of  priests ;  which  is  either 

That  the  king-  meant  of  the  succession  of  one  high-priest  after 

properiy  hi«"  anothcF,  OF  clsc  it  accordeth  not  with  St,  Peter, 

Sl^p^I^or  with  the  exercise  of  the  high-priesthood  :  for 

iut  people  by  thcrc  was  ncvcr  any  but  the  high-priest  only,  that 

was  to  inform  the  people  of  God's  will ;  nor  any 

convocation  of  priests  ever  allowed  to  enter  into 

the  Sanctum  Sanctorum. 

Again,  the  title  of  a  holy  nation  confirms  the 
same:  for  holy  signifies,  that  which  is  God's  by 
special,  not  by  general  right.  All  the  earth,  as  is 
said  in  the  text,  is  <jk)d's ;  but  all  the  earth  is  not 
called  holy^  but  that  only  which  is  set  apart  for  his 
especial  service,  as  was  the  nation  of  the  Jews,  It 
is  therefore  manifest  enough  by  this  one  place, 
"that  by  the  kingdom  of  God^  is  properly  meant  a 
commonwealth,  instituted,  by  the  consent  of  those 
which  were  to  be  subject  thereto,  for  their  civil 
government,  and  the  regulating  of  their  behaviour, 
not  only  towards  God  their  king,  but  also  towards 
one  another  in  point  of  justice,  and  towards  other 
nations  both  in  peace  and  war ;  which  properly 
was  a  kingdom  wherein  God  was  king,  and  the 
high-priest  was  to  be,  after  the  death  of  Moses,  his 
sole  viceroy  or  lieutenant 

But  there  be  many  other  places  that  clearly 
prove  the  same.  As  first  (1  Samuel^  viii.  7)  when 
the  Elders  of  Israel,  grieved  with  the  corruption  of 
the  sons  of  Samuel,  demanded  a  king,  Samuel  dis- 
pleased therewith,  prayed  unto  the  Lord,  and  the 
Lord  answering  said  unto  him,  Hearken  tudo  the 
voice  of  the  people j  for  they  have  not  rejected 
thee,  hut  they  have  rejected  mCj  that  I  should  not 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SIGNIFICATION  OP  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.      401 

reign  over  them.    Out  of  which  it  is  evident,  that  part  ni. 
God  himself  was  then  their  king ;  and  Samuel  did    .    ^^'    . 
not  command  the  people,  but  only  delivered  to  That  ihe  king- 
them  that  which  God  from  time  to  time  appointed  pj^y^  ws" 

Iiith  civil  807ereign- 

""****•  tj  OYcr  a  pecu- 

Again,  (1  Sam.  xii.  12)  where  Samuel  saith  to  li*^  people  by 
the  people.  When  ye  saw  that  Nahash^  king  of 
the  children  of  Ammon,  came  against  you,  ye 
said  unto  me,  Nay,  hut  a  king  shall  reign  over  us  ; 
when  the  Lord  your  God  was  your  king.  It  is 
manifest  that  God  was  their  king,  and  governed 
the  civil  state  of  their  commonwealth. 

And  after  the  Israelites  had  rejected  God,  the 
prophets  did  foretell  his  restitution ;  as  {Isaiah, 
xxiv,  23)  Then  the  moon  shall  be  confounded, 
and  the  sun  ashamed,  when  the  Lord  of  hosts 
shall  reign  in  Mount  Zion,  and  in  Jerusalem ; 
where  he  speaketh  expressly  of  his  reign  in  Zion 
and  Jerusalem ;  that  is,  on  earth.  And  (Micah, 
iv.  7)  And  the  Lord  shall  reign  over  them  in 
Mount  Zion:  this  Mount  Zion  is  in  Jerusalem, 
upon  the  earth.  And  (Ezek.  xx.  33)  As  I  live, 
saith  the  Lord  God,  surely  with  a  mighty  hand, 
and  a  stretched  out  arm,  and  with  fury  poured 
out,  I  will  rule  over  you  ;  and  (verse  37)  /  wUl 
cau^e  you  to  pass  under  the  rod,  and  I  will  bring 
you  into  the  bond  of  the  covenant ;  that  is,  I  will 
reign  over  you,  and  make  you  to  stand  to  that 
covenant  which  you  made  with  me  by  Moses,  and 
brake  in  your  rebellion  against  me  in  the  days  of 
Samuel,  and  in  your  election  of  another  king. 

And  in  the  New  Testament,  the  angel  Gabriel 
saith  of  our  Saviour  {Luke  i.  32,  33)  He  shall  he 
great,  and  be  called  the  Son  of  the  most  High, 

VOL.  III.  D  D 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


402  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  HI*  ^nd  the  Lord  shall  give  unto  him  the  throne  of  his 
.  ^f'  ^.  father  Datid;  and  he  shall  reign  over  the  house 
That  the  king,  of  Jacoh  for  ewT ;  and  of  his  kingdom  there 
pr^eV  hu  ^^^  ^  no  end.  This  is  also  a  kingdom  upon 
ty  om'iSS;  ^«^  5  for  the  claim  whereof,  as  an  enemy  to 
iL  people  by  Ceesar^  he  was  put  to  death ;  the  title  of  his  cross, 
was,  Jesus  of  Nazareth^  King  of  the  Jeass  i  he 
was  crowned  in  scorn  with  a  crown  of  tl^^oms ;  and 
for  the  proclaiming  of  him,  it  is  said  of  the  dis^ 
ciples  {Acts  xvii.  7)  That  they  did  all  of  them 
contrary  to  the  decrees  of  C^esar^  toying  there 
was  another  king,  one  Jesus.  The  kingdom  there- 
fore of  God  is  a  real^  not  a  metaphorical  kingdom ; 
and  so  taken,  not  only  in  the  Old  Testament^  but 
in  the  New  \  when  we  say.  For  thine  is  the  kingdom^ 
the  power,  and  glory,  it  is  to  be  understood  of 
God*8  kingdom,  by  force  of  our  covenant,  not  by 
the  right  of  God's  power;  for  such  a  kingdom  God 
always  hath ;  so  that  it  were  superfluous  to  say  in 
our  prayer.  Thy  kingdom  come,  unless  it  be  meant 
of  the  restoration  of  that  kingdom  of  God  by  Christ, 
which  by  revolt  of  the  Israelites  had  been  inter- 
rupted in  the  election  of  Saul.  Nor  had  it  been 
proper  to  say.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand; 
or  to  pray,  Thy  kingdom  come,  if  it  had  still  con- 
tinued. 

There  be  so  many  other  places  that  confirm  this 
interpretation,  that  it  were  a  wonder  there  is  no 
greater  notice  taken  of  it,  but  that  it  gives  too 
much  light  to  Christian  kings  to  see  their  right  of 
ecclesiastical  government.  This  they  have  ob- 
served, that  instead  of  a  sacerdotal  kingdom, 
translate,  a  kingdom  qf  priests  ;  for  they  may  as 
well  translate  a  royal  priesthood,  as  it  is  in  St* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SIGNIFICATION  OF  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.     403 

Petelr,  into  a  priesthood  of  kings.    And  whereas,  part  hi. 
ft)f  h  peculiar  people^  they  put  a  precious  jewels    .^  ^f-    . 
(Mr  treasure,  a  man  might  as  well  call  the  special  That  the  idng- 
regiment,  or  company  of  a  general,  the  general's  pj^riy  wa" 
precious  jewel,  or  his  treasure.  ^£^7^2: 

In  short,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  a  civil  kingdom ;  ^^  p«op»«  ^y 

,  which  consisted,  first,  in  the  obligation  of  the  people 
of  Israel  tQ,  those  laws,  which  Moses  should  bring 
unto  them  from  Mount  Sinai }  and  which  after- 

I  wards  the  high-priest  for  the  time  being,  should 

/  deliver  to  them  from  before  the  cherubims  in  the 
sanctum  sanctorum  ;  and  which  kingdom  having 
been  cast  off  in  the  election  of  Saul,  the  prophets 
foretold^  should  be  restored  by  Christ ;  and  the  re- 
storation whereof  we  daily  pray  for,  when  we  say 
in  the  Lord's  Prayer,  Thy  kingdom  come ;  and 
the  right  whereof  we  acknowledge,  when  we  addi 
For  thine  is  the  kingdom,  the  power,  and  glory  A 

for  ever  and  ever.  Amen;  and  the  proclaiming' 
whereof,  was  the  preaching  of  the  apostles ;  and 
to  which  men  are  prepared,  by  the  teachers  of  the 
Gospel ;  to  embrace  which  Gospel,  that  is  to  say, 
to  promise  obedience  to  God's  government,  is  to  be 
in  the  kingdom  of  grace,  because  God  hath  gratis 
given  to  such  the  power  to  be  the  subjects,  that  is 
children,  of  God  hereafter,  when  Christ  shall  come 
in  majesty  to  judge  the  world,  and  actually  to  go- 
vern his  own  people,  which  is  called  the  kingdom 
of  glory.  If  the  kingdom  of  God,  called  also  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  from  the  gloriousness  and  ad- 
mirable height  of  that  throne,  were  not  a  kingdom 
which  God  by  his  lieutenants,  or  vicars,  who  deli- 
ver his  commandments  to  the  people,  did  exercise 
on  earth }  there  would  not  have  been  so  much  con- 

DD2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


404         OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  tention,  and  war,  about  who  it  is,  by  whom  God 
.  ^  ^  speaketh  to  us ;  neither  would  many  priests  have 
troubled  themselves  with  spiritual  jurisdiction,  nor 
any  king  have  denied  it  them. 
Hoij,  what.  Out  of  this  literal  interpretation  of  the  kingdom 
of  God,  ariseth  also  the  true  interpretation  of  the 
word  Holy.  For  it  is  a  word,  which  in  God's 
kingdom  answereth  to  that,  which  men  in  their 
kingdoms  use  to  call  public^  or  the  king*s. 

The  king  of  any  country  is  the  public  person,  or 
representative  of  all  his  own  subjects.  And  God 
the  king  of  Israel  was  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  The 
nation  which  is  subject  to  one  earthly  sovereign,  is 
the  nation  of  that  sovereign,  that  is,  of  the  public 
person.  So  the  Jews,  who  were  God*s  nation,  were 
called  {Exod.  xix.  6)  a  holy  nation.  For  by  holy, 
is  always  understood  either  God  himself^  or  that 
which  is  God's  in  propriety ;  as  by  public  is  always 
meant,  either  the  person  of  the  commonwealth 
itself,  or  something  that  is  so  the  commonwealth's, 
as  no  private  person  can  claim  any  propriety 
therein. 

Therefore  the  Sabbath,  God's  day,  is  a  holy  day; 
the  temple,  God's  house,  a  holy  house  ;  sacrifices, 
tithes,  and  oflFerings,  God's  tribute,  holy  duties; 
priests,  prophets,  and  anointed  kings,  under  Christ, 
God's  ministers,  holy  men  ;  the  celestial  ministering 
spirits,  God's  messengers,  holy  angels;  and  the 
like :  and  wheresoever  the  word  holy  is  taken  pro- 
perly, there  is  still  something  signified  of  propriety, 
gotten  by  consent.  In  saying.  Hallowed  be  thy 
namey  we  do  but  pray  to  God  for  grace  to  keep  the 
first  commandment,  of  having  no  other  Gods  but 
him.    Mankind  is  God's  nation  in  propriety :  but 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SIGNIFICATION  OP  HOLY,  SACRED^  ETC.      406 

the  Jews  only  were  a  holy  nation.    Why,  but  be*  part  in, 
caiise  they  became  his  propriety  by  covenant  ?  .    ^^-   . 

And  the  word  profane,  is  usually  taken  in  the 
Scripture  for  the  same  with  common ;  and  conse- 
quently their  contraries,  holy  and  proper ,  in  the 
kingdom  of  God,  must  be  the  same  also.  But  figu- 
ratively, those  men  also  are  called  holy,  that  led 
such  godly  lives,  as  if  they  had  forsaken  all  worldly 
designs,  and  wholly  devoted  and  given  themselves 
to  God.  In  the  proper  sense,  that  which  is  made 
holy  by  God's  appropriating  or  separating  it  to  his 
own  use,  is  said  to  be  sanctified  by  God,  as  the 
seventh  day  in  the  fourth  commandment ;  and  as 
the  elect  in  the  New  Testament  were  said  to  be 
sanctified,  when  they  were  endued  with  the  spirit 
of  godliness.  And  that  which  is  made  holy  by  the 
dedication  of  men,  and  given  to  God,  so  as  to  be 
used  only  in  his  public  service,  is  called  also 
SACRED,  and  said  to  be  consecrated,  as  temples,  Sacred,  what. 
and  other  houses  of  public  prayer,  and  their  uten- 
sils, priests,  and  ministers,  victims,  oflFerings,  and 
the  external  matter  of  sacraments. 

Of  holiness  there  be  degrees :  for  of  those  things  Dcgreca  of 
that  are  set  apart  for  the  service  of  God,  there  ^^^^^^' 
may  be  some  set  apart  again,  for  a  nearer  and 
more  especial  service.  The  whole  nation  of  the 
Israelites  were  a  people  holy  to  God ;  yet  the  tribe 
of  Levi  was  amongst  the  Israelites  a  holy  tribe ; 
and  amongst  the  Levites,  the  priests  were  yet  more 
holy;  and  amongst  the  priests,  the  high-priest 
was  the  most  holy.  So  the  land  of  Judea  was  the 
Holy  Land ;  btit  the  holy  city  wherein  God  was  to 
be  worshipped,  was  more  holy;  and  again  the 
Temple  more  holy  than  the  city,  and  the  sanctum 
sanctorum  more  holy  than  the  rest  of  the  T^J^ple. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


406  OF  A  CHRISTIAN*  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  m.  A  SACRAMENT^  is  a  sq)aratioii  of  some  yisiblo 
._  ^y.  thing  from  commoii  use ;  and  a  consecration  of  it 
Sacraments  to  God's  service,  foF  a  sign  either  of  onr  admission 
into  the  kingdom  of  God^  to  be  of  the  number  of 
his  peculiar  people^  or  for  a  commemoration  of  the 
same.  In  the  Old  Testament^  the  sign  of  admis- 
sion was  circumcision;  in  the  New  Testament^ 
baptism.  The  commemoration  of  it  in  the  Old 
Testament^  was  the  eatings  at  a  certain  time  which 
was  anniversary,  of  the  Paschal  Lamb  ;  by  which 
they  were  put  in  mind  of  the  night  wherein  they 
were  delivered  out  of  their  bondage  in  Egypt ;  and 
in  the  New  Testament,  the  celebrating  of  the 
hordes  Supper;  by  which,  we  are  put  in  mind  of 
our  deliverance  from  the  bondage  of  sin,  by  our 
blessed  Saviour's  death  upon  the  cross«  The  sa- 
craments of  admission^  are  but  once  to  be  used, 
because  there  needs  but  one  admission  ;  but  be- 
cause we  have  iieed  of  being  often  put  in  mind  of 
our  deliverance,  and  of  our  allegiance,  the  sacra^ 
ments  of  commemoration  have  need  to  be  reiterated. 
And  these  are  the  principal  sacraments,  and  as  it 
were  the  solemn  oaths  we  make  of  our  allegiabce. 
There  be  s^so  other  consecrations,  that  may  be 
called  sacrameuta,  as  the  word  implieth  only  consor 
cration  to  God's  service ;  but  as  it  implies  an  oath, 
or  promise  of  aUegianoe  to  God,  there  were  no 
other  in  the  Old  Testament,  but  circumcision,  and 
the  passover ;  nor  are  there  any  other  in  the  New 
Testament,  but  baptism  aud  the  Lead's  Supper. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THK  WOBD  OF  OOP,  BTC  407 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

OF  THK  WOBD  OF  GOD,  AND  OF  PROPHETS. 

Whbn  there  is  mention  of  the  word  of  God,  or  part  hi. 
of  fnan,  it  doth  not  signify  a  part  of  speech,  such    ^ — ^ — ' 
as  grammarians  call  a  nonn,  or  a  verb,  or  any  ^""^^  ''^^^ 
simple  voice,   without  a  contexture  with  other 
words  to  make  it  significative ;  but  a  perfect  speech 
or  discourse,  whereby  the  speaker  qffirmeth,  de- 
nieths  comnunuleth,  promUeih,  threateneth,  wish- 
eihj  or  interrogateth.    In  which  sense  it  is  not 
vocabuhmy  that  signifies  a  word;  but  sermo,  (in 
Greek  Xoyoc)  that  is,  some  speech,  discourse,  or 
Mjfing. 

Again,  if  we  say  the  word  qf  God,  or  of  man,  '^V'^^^^^. 
it  may  be  understood  sometimes  of  the  speaker  \  as  Ind  co^ncemhif^ 
the  words  that  God  hath  spoken,  or  that  a  man^^ita^God^^^^ 
hath  spoken;  in  which  sense,  when  we  say,  thej^^^^'^"?* 
Gospel  of  St.  Matthew,  we  understand  St.  Matthew 
to  be  the  writer  of  it :  and  sometimes  of  the  sub- 
ject ;  in  which  sense,  when  we  read  in  the  Bible, 
ike  wwds  ^the  days  <f  the  kings  qf  Israel,  or 
Judah,  it  is  meant,  that  the  acts  that  were  done 
in  those  days,  were  the  subject  of  those  words ;  and 
in  the  Greek,  which,  in  the  Scripture,  retaineth 
many  Hebraisms,  by  the  word  of  God  is  oftentimes 
meant,  not  that  which  is  spoken  by  God,  but  con- 
cerning God,  and  his  government  i  that  is  to  say, 
the  doctrine  of  religion :  insomuch,  as  it  is  all  one, 
to  say  Xoyoc  Bcou,  and  theologia ;  which  is,  that 
doctrine  which  we  usually  call  divinity,  as  is  ma-. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


408  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH, 

PART  III.  nifest  by  the  places  following,  (Acts,  xiii.  46)  Then 
^    ^f*    .    Paul  and  Barnabas  waxed  bold,  and  said,  it  wa^ 
The  wordi      uecessary  that  the  word  of  God  should  first  have 
^^^^T^%been  spoken  to  you,  but  seeing  you  put  it  from 
S^^God^  yotf,  and  judge  yourselves  unworthy  qf  everlast^ 
w^  in  Scrip-  ing  life,  lo,  we  turn  to  the  Gentiles.    That  which 
is  here  called  the  word  of  God,  was  the  doctrine  of 
Christian  religion ;  as  it  appears  evidently  by  that 
which  goes  before.    And  (Acts  v.  20)  where  it  is 
said  to  the  apostles  by  an  angel,  Go  stand  and 
speak  in  the  Temple,   all  the  words  qf  this  life  ; 
by  the  words  of  this  life,  is  meant,  the  doctrine  of 
the  Gospel ;  as  is  evident  by  what  they  did  in  the 
Temple,  and  is  expressed  in  the  last  verse  of  the 
same  chapter,  Daily  in  the  Temple,  and  in  every 
house  they  ceased  not  to  teach  and  preach  Christ 
Jesus :  in  which  place  it  is  manifest^  that  Jesus 
Christ  was  the  subject  of  this  word  qf  life ;  or, 
which  is  all  one,  the  subject  of  the  words  qfthis 
life  eternal,  that  our  Saviour  oflFered  them.    So 
(Acts  XV.  7)  the  word  of  God,  is  called  the  word  of 
the  Gospel,  because  it  containeth  the  doctrine  of 
the  kingdom  of  Christ ;  and  the  same  word  (Rom. 
X.  8,  9)  is  called  the  word  of  faith  ;  that  is,  as 
is  there  expressed,  the  doctrine  of  Christ  come,  and 
raised  from  the  dead.  Also  (Matth.^ii.  19)  When 
any  one  heareth  the  word  qf  the  kingdom  ;  that 
is,  the  doctrine  of  the  kingdom  taught  by  Christ. 
Again,  the  same  word,  is  said  {Acts  xii.  24)  to 
grow  and  to  be  multiplied ;  which  to  understand 
of  the  evangelical  doctrine  is  easy,  but  of  the  voice  or 
speech  of  God,hard  and  strange.  In  the  same  sense 
(1  Tim.  iv.  1)  the  doctrine  qf  devils  signifieth  not 
the  words  of  any  devil^  but  the  doctrine  of  heathen 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THE  WORD  OP  GOD,  ETC.  409 

men    concerning  demons^  and  those  phantasms  part  hi, 
which'they  worshipped  as  gods.  ^    ^^'    ^ 

Considering  these  two  significations  of  the  word 
OF  God,  as  it  is  taken  in  Scriptnre,  it  is  manifest  in 
this  latter  sense,  where  it  is  taken  for  the  doctrine  of 
CJhristian  religion,  that  the  whole  Scripture  is  the 
word  of  God :  but  in  the  former  sense,  not'  so. .  For 
sample,  though  these  words,  /  am  the  Lord  thy 
God,  8fc.  to  the  end  of  the  Ten  Commandments, 
were  spoken  by  God  to  Moses ;  yet  the  preface, 
God  spake  these  words  and  saidy  is  to  be  under- 
stood for  the  words  of  him  that  wrote  the  holy  his- 
tory. The  word  of  God,  as  it  is  taken  for  that 
which  he  hath  spoken,  is  understood  sometimes 
properly y  sometimes  metaphorically.  Properly ,  Godmetophori- 
as  the  words  he  hath  spoken  to  his  prophets :  J^^y^^^*^^^^ 
metaphorically,  for  his  wisdom,  power,  and  eter-  and  power  of 
nal  decree,  in  making  the  world ;  in  which  sense, 
those  fiats.  Let  there  be  light,  Let  there  be  a 
firmament,  Let  us  make  man,  Sfc.  (Gen.  i.)  are 
the  word  of  God.  And  in  the  same  sense  it  is  said 
(John  i.  3)  All  things  were  made  by  it,  and 
without  it  was  nothing  made  that  was  made :  and 
(Heb.  i.  3)  He  upholdeth  all  things  by  the  word 
of  his  power  ;  that  is,  by  the  power  of  his  word ; 
that  is,  by  his  power :  and  (Heb.,  xi.  3)  The 
worlds  were  framed  by  the  word  of  God;  and 
many  other  places  to  the  same  sense :  as  also 
amongst  the  Latins,  the  name  of  fate,  which  sig- 
nifieth  properly  the  word  spoken^  is  taken  in  the 
same  sense. 

Secondly,  for  the  eflFect  of  his  word ;  that  is  to  ^^^f  J^^^ 
say,  for  the  thing  itself,  which  by  his  word  is  of  hw  word. 
affirmed,  commanded,  threatened,  or  promised ;  as 


Digitized  by 


Google 


410  OF  A  CHBISTIAN  0OMMONW£AXTH« 

P4RT  m.  (Pwlm  CY.  19)  where  Joseph  is  said  to  have  been 
.^^•_.   kept  in  prison,  tifl  his  word  %dm  ame  ;  that  ii. 
Secondly,  for  tUl  that  was  qome  to  pass  which  he  had  foretold 
hirword!^°  to  Pharaoh's  butler  {Gen.Ts\,  13)  conoeraing  his 
being  restored  to  his  office :  for  there,  by  his  word 
was  €ome^  is  meant,  the  thing  itself  was  come  to 
pass?  8o  also  (1  Kings  xviii,  36)  Elijah  saith  to 
God,  /  have  done  all  these  thy  words,  ixis^b^ 
of  /  hope  done  aU  these  things  at  thy  word,  or 
eommandment  I  and  {Jer^  icvii,  15)  Where  is  the 
word  qf  the  Lord,  is  put  for.  Where  is  the  evU 
he  threatened.    And  (Enek,  xii,  28)  T/^ere  ^haU 
$Hme  qf  my  words  he  prolonged  any  more :  by 
words  are  understood  those  things,  which  God 
promised  to  his  people.    And  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment (Matth.  xxiv,  35)  heaven  and  earth  shall 
pass  away,  Imt  my  words  shall  not  pass  away; 
that  is,  there  is  nothing  that  I  have  promised  or 
foretold,  that  shall  not  come  to  pass.    And  in  this 
sense  it  is,  that  St  John  the  Evangelist,  and,  I 
think,  St,  John  only,  oalleth  our  Saviour  himself  as 
in  the  flesh  the  word  ^  God,  as  {John  U  14)  the 
word  was  madefiesh ;  that  is  to  say,  the  word,  or 
promise  that  Clulat  should  come  into  the  world ; 
who  in  the  beginning  was  with  God;  that  is  to 
say,  it  was  in  the  purpose  of  God  the  Father,  to 
send  God  the  Son  into  the  world,  to  enlighten  men 
in  the  way  of  eternal  life ;  but  it  was  not  till  then 
put  in  execution,  and  actually  incarnate.     So  that 
our  Saviour  is  there  called  the  word,  not  because 
he  was  the  promise,  but  the  thing  promised.  They 
that  taking  occasion  from  this  place,  do  commonly 
call  him  the  verb  of  God,  do  but  render  the  text 
more  obscure.    They  might  aa  wdl  term  him  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THE  WORD  OF  ODD,  BTO.  411 

noun  of  God  s  for  as  by  noun,  so  also  by  verb,  part  hi, 

men  undoFatand  nothing  but  a  part  of  apeeoh^  a   .    *f*   . 

yoice^  a  sonnd^  that  neither  afiKrms^  nor  denies^ 

nor  commands,  nor  promlseth^  nor  is  any  anbatance 

corporeal^  or  apiritual ;  and  therefore  it  cannot  be 

3aid  to  be  either  God,  or  man ;  whereas  our  Sa^- 

vionr  is  both.    And  thia  word,  which  St.  John  in 

his  gospel  aaith  waa  with  God^a  (in  hia^r^^  EpUtle, 

verse  I)  called  the  wm^  f^Hfo ;  and  (verae  2)  the 

eternal  life,  vxhick  was  with  the  Father.    So  that 

he  can  be  in  no  other  aenae  called  the  ward,  than 

in  that,  wherein  he  is  called  eternal  life ;  that  is, 

he  that  hath  procured  us  eternal  Iffh,  by  his 

coming  in  the  flesh.    So  alao  {Apoealypse  xix.  13) 

the  apoatle  apeaking  of  Christ,  clothed  in  a  gar^ 

ment  dipped  in  blood,  aaith,  his  name  is  the  word 

of  God;  which  is  to  be  nnderatood,  as  if  he  had 

said  hia  name  had  been,  He  that  was  eome  accords 

ing  to  the  purpose  qf  Qod  from  the  beginning, 

and  according  to  his  word  and  promises  delivered 

by  the  prophets.    So  that  there  is  nothing  here  of 

the  incarnation  of  a  word,  but  of  the  incarnation 

of  God  the  Son,  therefore  called  the  word,  because 

hia  incarnation  waa  the  performance  of  the  pro^ 

miae ;  in  Uke  manner  aa  the  Holy  Ghoat  ia  called 

(Acts  i,  4  I  Luke  xxiv,  49)  the  promise. 

There  are  also  plaoea  of  the  Scripture,  where,  Thirdly,  for  the 
by  the  word  ^  Qod,  ia  aignified  auch  worda  aa  are  Tnd  eVuity"^^ 
conaonant  to  reaaon  and  equity,  though  apoken 
sometimes  neither  by  prophet,  nor  by  a  holy  man. 
For  Pharaoh^Necho  waa  a;n  idolater ;  yet  hia  worda 
to  the  good  king  Joaiah,  in  which  he  adTised  him 
by  messengers,  not  to  oppose  him  in  his  march 
against  Charchemiah^  are  said  to  have  proceeded 


Digitized  by 


Google 


412  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  iiL  from  the  mouth  of  God ;  and  that  Josiah^  not 
.  ^y.  hearkening  to  them^  was  slain  in  the  battle ;  as  is 
to  be  read  (2  Chron.  xxxv.  21,  22,  23.)  It  is  tnie, 
that  as  the  same  history  is  related  in  the  first  book 
of  Esdras,  not  Pharaoh,  but  Jeremiah,  spake  these 
words  to  Josiah,  from  the  mouth  of  the  Lord.  But 
we  are  to  give  credit  to  the  canonical  Scripture, 
.  whatsoever  be  written  in  the  Apocrypha. 

The  word  of  God,  is  then  also  to  be  taken  for 
the  dictates  of  reason  and  equity,  when  the  same 
is  said  in  the  Scriptures  to  be  written  in  man's 
iheart ;  as  Psalm  xxxvii.  31  ;  Jer.  xxxi.  33 ;  Deut. 
XXX.  11,  14,  and  many  other  like  places. 
Diveritcccp.  The  name  of  prophet  signifieth  in  Scripture, 
woid  prophet,  somctimcs  prolocutoT ;  that  is,  he  that  speaketh 
from  God  to  man,  or  from  man  to  God :  and  some- 
times predictor^  or  a  foreteller  of  things  to  come  : 
and  sometimes  one  that  speaketh  incoherently,  as 
men  that  are  distracted.  It  is  most  frequently 
used  in  the  sense  of  speaking  from  God  to  the  peo- 
ple. So  Moses,  Samuel,  Elijah,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah, 
and  others  were  prophets.  And  in  this  sense  the 
high-priest  was  a  prophet ,  for  he  only  went  into 
the  sanctum  sanctorum,  to  enquire  of  God ;  and 
was  to  declare  his  answer  to  the  people.  And 
therefore  when  Caiphas  said,  it  was  expedient  that 
one  man  should  die  for  the  people,  St.  John  saith 
(chapter  xi.  51)  that  He  spake  not  this  of  himself, 
but  being  high-priest  that  year,  he  prophesied 
that  one  man  should  die  for  the  nation.  Also  they 
that  in  Christian  congregations  taught  the  people, 
(1  Cor.  xiv.  3)  are  said  to  prophecy.,  In  the  like 
sense  it  is,  that  God  saith  to  Moses  {Exod.  iv.,  16) 
concerning  Aaron,  He  shall  be  thy  spokesman  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  PROPHETS,  ETC.  4 1  3 

the  people  ;  and  he  shall  be  to  thee  a  nwuth,  and  part  hi. 
thou  shalt  he  to  him  instead  qf  God :  that  which    .  ^f  y  ^ 
here  is  spokesman,   is  {Exod.yii.  1)  interpreted  DiTemccep- 
prophet ;  See^  saith  God,  /  have  made  thee  a  God  ^^  prophet 
to  Pharaoh,  and  Aaron  thy  brother  shall  be  thy 
prophet.    In  the  sense  of  speaking  from  man  to 
God,  Abraham  is  called  a  prophet  {Gen.  xx.  7) 
where  God  in  a  dream  speaketh  to  Abimelech  in 
this  manner.  Now  therefore  restore  the  man  his 
wife,  for  he  is  a  prophet,  and  shall  pray  for  thee; 
whereby  may  be  also  gathered,  that  the  name  of 
prophet  may  be  given,  not  improperly,  to  them  that 
in  Christian  churches,  have  a  calling  to  say  public 
prayers  for  the  congregation.    In  the  same  sense, 
the  prophets  that  came  down  from  the  high  place, 
or  hill  of  God,  with  a  psaltery,  and  a  tabret,  and  a 
pipe,  and  a  harp  (1  Sam.  x.  5,  6,  and  10),  Saul 
amongst  them,  are  said  to  prophecy,  in  that  they 
praised  God  in  that  manner  publicly.    In  the  like 
sense,  is  Miriam   (Exod.  xv.  20)  called  a  pro- 
phetess.    So  is  it  also  to  be  taken  (1  Cor.  xi.  4,  5), 
where  St.  Paul  saith.  Every  man  that  prayeth  or 
prophecieth  with  his  head  covered,  Spc.,  and  every 
woman  that  prayeth  or  prophecieth  with  her  head 
uncovered :  for  prophecy,  in  that  place,  signifieth 
no  more,  but  praising  God  in  psalms  and  holy 
songs;   which  women  might  do  in  the  church, 
though  it  were  not  lawful  for  them  to  speak  to  the 
congregation.    And  in  this  signification  it  is,  that 
the  poets  of  the  heathen,  that  composed  hymns  and 
other  sorts  of  poems  in  the  honour  of  their  gods, 
were  called  vatesy  prophets;  as  is  well  enough 
known  by  all  that  are  versed  in  the  books  of  the 
Gentiles,  and  as  is  evident  {Tit.  i.  12),  where  S<u 


Digitized  by 


Google 


il4  OF  A  CHtttBTlAN  COMMONWEALTH- 

PART  III.  Paul  saith  of  the  Ci^etians,  that  a  prophet  of  their 
^^*^'-^    own  said>  they  were  liars ;  not  that  St.  Paul  held 
their  poets  for  prophets^  but  acknowledgeth  that 
the  Word  prophet  was  commonly  used  to  signify 
them  that  celebrated  the  honour  of  God  in  verse. 
^^^nt^      When  by  prophecy  is  meant  prediction,  or  fore- 
Sr?*ro  h*^'  telling  (rf  Mure  contingents ;  not  only  they  were 
yiprop  ecy.  p^^^pj^^j^^  ^^^  ^^^^  God*8  spokesmeu,  and  fbretold 

those  things  to  others,  which  God  had  foretold 
to  them ;  but  also  all  those  impostors,  that  pretend, 
by  help  of  familiar  spirits,  or  by  superstitious  divi- 
nation of  events  past,  from  false  causes,  to  foretel 
the  like  events  in  time  to  come :  of  which,  as  I 
have  declared  already  in  the  twelfth  chapter  of  this 
discourse,  there  be  many  kinds,  who  gain  in  the 
opinion  of  the  common  sort  of  men,  a  greater  repu- 
tation of  prophecy^  by  one  casual  event  that  may  be 
but  wrested  to  their  purpose,  than  can  be  lost  again 
by  never  so  many  foilings.  Prophecy  is  not  an  art, 
nor,  when  it  is  taken  for  prediction,  a  constant  vo- 
cation ;  but  an  extraordinary,  and  temporary  em- 
ployment from  God,  most  often  of  good  men,  but 
sometimes  also  of  the  wicked.  The  woman  of 
Endor,  who  is  said  to  have  had  a  fiuniliar  spirit, 
and  thereby  to  have  raised  a  phantasm  of  Samuel, 
and  foretold  Saul  his  death,  was  not  therefore  a 
prophetess;  for  neither  had  she  any  science, whereby 
she  could  raise  such  a  phantasm ;  nor  does  it  appear 
that  God  commanded  the  raising  of  it  5  but  only 
guided  that  imposture  to  be  a  means  of  Saul's  ter* 
ror  and  discouragement,  and  by  consequent,  of  the 
discomfiture  by  which  he  fell.  And  for  incoherent 
speech,  it  was  amongst  the  Gentiles  taken  for  one 
sort  of  prophecy,  because  the  prophets  of  their  oftu 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  l»!lOPttBl'S>  UTO*  415 

cles,  intoxicated  with  a  spirit  ot  vapour  from  the  paAt  iti. 
cave  of  the  Pythian  oracle  at  Delphi,  were  for  the , .  ^:  .-. 
time  really  mad,  and  spake  like  madmen ;  of  whose 
loose  words  a  sense  might  be  made  to  fit  any  event, 
in  such  sort,  as  all  bodies  are  said  to  be  made  of 
materia  prima.  In  Scripture  1  find  it  also  so  taken 
(1  Sam.  xviii.  10)'  in  these  words.  And  the  etil 
spirit  came  upon  Saul^  and  he  prophecied  in  the 
midet  of  the  house. 

And  although  there  be  so  many  significatiobs  in  The  ^^^ 
Scripture  of  the  word  prophet ;  yet  is  that  the  g^dteato  int 
most  frequent,  in  which  it  is  taken  for  him,  to^^*^^ 
whom  God  speaketh  immediately  that  which  the 
prophet  is  to  say  from  him,  to  some  other  man,  or 
to  the  people.  And  hereupon  a  question  may  be 
asked,  in  what  manner  God  speaketh  to  such  a 
prophet.  Can  it,  may  some  say,  be  properly  said, 
that  God  hath  voice  and  language,  when  it  cannot 
be  properly  said,  he  hath  a  tongue,  or  other  organs, 
as  a  man  ?  The  prophet  David  argueth  thus,  {Psalm 
xciv.9)  Shall  he  that  made  the  eye^  not  see  9  or  he 
that  made  the  ear,not  hearfl&nt  this  maybespoken, 
not  as  usually,  to  signify  God's  nature,  but  to  signify 
our  intention  to  honour  him.  For  to  see^  and  hear, 
a:re  honourable  attributes,  and  may  be  given  to  God, 
to  declare,  as  far  as  our  capacity  can  conceive,  his 
almighty  power.  But  if  it  were  to  be  taken  in  the 
strict  and  proper  sense,  one  might  argue  from  his 
making  of  all  other  parts  of  man's  body,  that  he 
had  also  the  same  use  of  ihem  which  we  have;  which 
would  be  many  of  them  so  uncomely,  as  it  would 
be  the  greatest  contumely  in  the  world  to  ascribe 
them  to  him.  Therefore  we  are  to  interpret  God's 
speaking  to  men  immediately,  for  that  way,  whatso- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


416  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PiBT  HL  ever  it  be,  by  which  God  makes  them  miderstand 
>    ^'  _^    his  will   And  the  ways  whereby  he  doth  this,  are 
many,  and  to  be  sought  onlyin  the  Holy  Scripture: 
where  though  many  times  it  be  said,  that  God  spake 
to  this,  and  that  person,  without  declaring  in  what 
manner ;  yet  there  be  again  many  places,  that  de- 
liver also  the  signs  by  which  the/  were  to  acknow- 
ledge his  presence,  and  commandment ;   and  by 
these  may  be  understood,  how  he  spake  to  many 
of  the  rest, 
^^i^^^      In  what  manner  God  spake  to  Adam,  and  Eve, 
olldT^u^ent ^^^ ^^^y  ^^^ Noah,  is  not  expressed ;  nor  how  he 
he  ipdLe  bj  spakc  to  Abraham,  till  such  time  as  he  came  out 
KMM,  Of      ^  j^j^  ^^^^  country  to  Sichem  in  the  land  of  Ca- 
naan ;  and  then  {Gen.  xii.  7)  God  is  said  to  have 
appeared  to  him.    So  there  is  one  way,  whereby 
God  made  his  presence  manifest ;  that  is,  by  an 
apparition^  or  vision.    And  again,  {Gen.  xv.  1)  the 
word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Abraham  in  a  vision  ; 
that  is  to  say,  somewhat,  as  a  sign  of  God's  pre- 
sence, appeared  as  God*s  messenger,  to  speak  to 
him.   Again,  the  Lord  appeared  to  Abraham  {Gen. 
xviiL  1)  by  an  apparition  of  three  angels ;  and  to 
Abimelech  {Gen.  xx.  3)  in  a  dream  :  to  Lot  {Gen. 
xix.  1)  by  an  apparition  of  two  angels:   and  to 
Agar  (Gen.  xxi.   17)  by  the  apparition  of  one 
angel :  and  to  Abraham  again  {Gen.  xxii.  1 1)  by 
the  apparition  of  a  voice  from  heaven  :  and  {Gen. 
xxvi.  24)  to  Isaac  in  the  night,  that  is,  in  his  sleep, 
or  by  dream :  and  to  Jacob  {Gen.  xxviii.  12)  in  a 
dream ;  that  is  to  say,  as  are  the  words  of  the  text, 
Jacob  dreamed  that  he  saw  a  ladder,  S^c:  and 
{Gen.  xxxii.  I)  in  a  vision  of  angels :  and  to  Moses 
{Exod  iii.  2)  in  the  apparition  of  a  flame  of  fire  out 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  WORD  OP  GOD,  ETC.  417 

of  the  midst  of  a  bush.     And  after  the  time  of  part  hi. 
Moses,  where  the  manner  how  God  spake  immedi-    .  ^^'    . 
ately  to  man  in  the  Old  Testament  is  expressed,  he  To  theextni. 
spake  always  by  a  vision,  or  by  a  dream ;  as  to  JJ^u*7f ^a^ 
Gideon,  Samuel,  Eliah,  Elisha,  Isaiah,  Ezekiel,  and^J^^;°;^* 
the  rest  of  the  prophets;  and  often  ,in  the  New  droami,  orvi- 
Testament,  as  to  Joseph,  to  St.  Peter,  to  St.  Paul,  "^*^ 
and  to  St.  John  the  Evangelist  in  the  Apocaljrpse. 
Only  to  Moses  he  spake  in  a  more  extraordi- 
nary manner  in  Mount  Sinai,  and  in  the  Taber- 
nacle ;  and  to  the  high-priest  in  the  Tabernacle, 
and  in   the  sanctum  sanctorum  of  the  Temple. 
But  Moses,  and  after  him  the  high-priests,  were 
prophets  of  a  more  eminent  place  and  degree  in 
God's  favour ;  and  God  himself  in  express  words 
declareth,  that  to  other    prophets   he    spake  in 
dreams  and  visions,  but  to  his  servant  Moses,  in 
such  manner  as  a  man  speaketh  to  his  friend.    The 
words  are  these  (Numb.  xii.  6,  7,  8)   If  there  be  a 
prophet  among  you,  I  the  Lord  will  make  myself 
known  to  him  in  a  vision,  and  will  speak  unto  him 
in  a  dream.    My  servant  Moses  is  not  so,  who  is 
faithful  in  all  my  house  ;  with  him  I  will  speak 
mouth  to  mouth,  even  apparently,  not  in  dark 
speeches  ;  and  the  similitude  of  the  Lord  shall  he 
behold.    And  (Exod.  xxxiii.  \\)  The  Lord  spake 
to  Moses  face  to  face,  as  a  man  speaketh  to  his 
friend.    And  yet  this  speaking  of  God  to  Moses, 
was  by  mediation  of  an  angel,  or  angels,  as  appears 
expressly.  Acts  vii.  35  and  63,  and  Gal.  iii.  19 ; 
and  was  therefore  a  vision,  though  a  more  clear 
vision  than  was  given  to  other  prophets.  And  con- 
formable hereunto,  where  God  saith  (Deut.  xiii.  1) 
If  there  arise  amongst  you  a  prophet,  or  dreamer 

VOL.  III.  E  E 


Digitized  by 


Google 


418  OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  m.  of  dreams^  the  latter  word  is  but  the  interpretation 
.    *^   .    of  the  former.    And  {Joelf  ii.  28)  Your  sons  and 
To  the  extra-  pouT  daughters  skall  prophecy ;  your  old  men 
\\il^^^^%  shall  dream  dreams,  and  your  young  men  shall 
hJ^IjSir  w*  *^^  visions  ;  where  again,  the  word  prophecy  is 
dreanu,  or  Ti-  expoTUided  by  dreamy  and  vision.    And  in  the  same 
manner  it  was,  that  God  spake  to  Solomon,  promis- 
ing him  wisdom,  riches,  and  honour ;  for  the  text 
saith,  (1  Kings  iii.  15)  And  Solomon  awoke y  and 
behold  it  was  a  dream;  so  that  generally  the 
prophets  extraordinary  in  the  Old  Testament  took 
notice  of  the  word  of  God  no  otherwise  than  from 
their  dreams,  or  visions  ;  that  is  to  say,  from  the 
imaginations  which  they  had  in  their  sleep,  or  in  an 
extasy :  whidi  imaginations  in  every  true  prophet 
were  supernatural;    but  in  false  prophets  were 
dther  natural  or  feigned. 

The  same  prophets  were  nevertheless  said  to 
speak  by  the  spirit ;  as  {Zeeh.  vii,  12) ;  where  the 
prophet  speaking  of  the  Jews,  saith.  They  made 
their  hearts  hard  as  adamant,  lest  they  should 
hear  the  law,  and  the  words  which  the  Lord  of 
Hosts  hath  sent  in  his  Spirit  by  the  former  pro^ 
phets.  By  which  it  is  manifest,  that  speaking  by  the 
spirit  J  or  inspiration,  was  not  a  particular  manner 
of  God's  speaking,  diflferent  from  vision,  when  they, 
that  were  said  to  speak  by  the  Spirit,  were  extra- 
ordinary prophets,  such  as  for  every  new  message, 
were  to  have  a  peculiar  commission,  or,  which  is 
all  one,  a  new  dream,  or  vision. 
To  prophets  Of  prophcts,  that  were  so  by  a  perpetual  calling 
wmnjJTM*]  ^  *^^  ^1^  Testament,  some  were  supreme^  and 
BupremcGod  gomc   Subordinate  I    supreme  were  first  Moses; 

spake  m  the  ^ 

and  after  him  the  high-priests,  every  one  for  his 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  WORD  OP  GOD,  ETC.  419 

time,  as  long  as  the  priesthood  was  royal ;  and  part  hi, 
after  the  people  of  the  Jews  had  rejected  God,    .    ^-   . 
that  he  should  no  more  reign  over  them,  those  oia  Testament 
kings  which  submitted  themselves  to  God's  govern-  ^^  l^V^IS^ 


ment,  were  aliso  his  chief  prophets ;  and  the  high-  ^'^**^*ISp. 
priest's  office  became  ministeriaL  And  when  God  ta». 
was  to  be  consulted,  they  put  on  the  holy  vest- 
ments, and  enquired  of  the  Lord,  as  the  king  com- 
manded them,  and  were  deprived  of  their  office, 
when  the  king  thought  fit'.  For  king  Saul  (1  Sam. 
xiii.9)  commanded  the  burnt  offering  to  be  brought, 
and  (1  Sam.  xiv.  18)  he  commands  the  priests  to 
bring  the  ark  near  him ;  and  (v.  19)  again  to  let  it 
alone,  because  he  saw  an  advantage  upon  his  ene- 
mies. And  in  the  same  chapter  (v.  37)  Saul  asketh 
counsel  of  God.  In  like  manner  king  David,  after  his 
being  anointed,  though  before  he  had  possession  of 
the  kingdom,  is  said  to  enquire  of  the  Lord  ( i  Sam. 
xxiii.  2)  whether  he  should  fight  against  the  Philis- 
tines at  Keilah ;  and  (verse  9)  David  commandeth 
the  priest  to  bring  him  the  ephod,  to  enquire 
whether  he  should  stay  in  Keilah,  or  not.  And 
king  Solomon  (1  Kings  ii.  27)  took  the  priesthood 
from  Abiathar,  and  gave  it  (verse  35)  to  Zadok. 
Therefore  Moses,  and  the  high-priests,  and  the  pious 
kings,  who  enquired  of  God  on  all  extraordinary 
occasions,  how  they  were  to  carry  themselves,  or 
what  event  they  were  to  have,  were  all  sovereign 
prophets.  But  in  what  manner  God  spake  unto 
them  is  not  manifest.  To  say  that  when  Moses 
went  up  to  God  in  Mount  Sinai,  it  was  a  dream  or 
vision,  such  as  other  prophets  had,  is  contrary  to 
that  distinction  which  God  made  between  Moses 
and  other  prophets  (Numb.  xii.  6,  7,  8).    To  say 

EE  2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


420  OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  God  spake  or  appeared  as  he  is  in  his  own  nature, 
.  ^^*  .  is  to  deny  his  infiniteness,  invisibility,  incomprehen- 
sibility. To  say  he  spake  by  inspiration,  or  infu- 
sion of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  the  Holy  Spirit  signi- 
fieth  the  Deity,  is  to  make  Moses  equal  with  Christ, 
in  whom  only  the  Godhead  (as  St.  j^aul  speaketh. 
Col.  ii.  9)  dwelleth  bodily.  And  lastly,  to  say  he 
spake  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  it  signifieth  the  graces 
or  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  to  attribute  nothing 
to  him  supernatural.  For  God  disposeth  men  to 
piety,  justice,  mercy,  truth,  faith,  and  all  manner 
of  virtue,  both  moral  and  intellectual,  by  doctrine, 
example,  and  by  several  occasions,  natural  and 
ordinary. 

And  as  these  ways  cannot  be  applied  to  Gpd  in 
his  speaking  to  Moses,  at  Mount  Sinai ;  so  also, 
they  cannot  be  applied  to  him,  in  his  speaking  to 
the  high-priests,  from  the  mercy-seat.    Therefore 
in  what  manner  God  spake  to  those  sovereign 
prophets  of  the  Old  Testament,  whose  office  it  was 
to  enquire  of  him,  is  not  intelligible.     In  the  tiriae 
of  the  New  Testament,  there  was  no  sovereign 
prophet,  but  our  Saviour ;  who  was  both  God  that 
spake,  and  the  prophet  to  whom  he  spake. 
If  e"*^ma'       ^^  subordinate  prophets  of  perpetual  calling,  I 
calling,  bat  find  uot  any  place  that  proveth  God  spake  to  them 
God^pake'  supcmaturally  ;  but  only  in  such  manner,  as  natu- 
bythe.pirit.  ^^^  ^le  uxclincth  men  to  piety,  to  belief,  to  right- 
eousness,  and  to  other  virtues  all  other  Christian 
men.    Which  way,  though  it  consist  in  constitu- 
tion, instruction,  education,  and  the  occasions  and 
invitements  men  have  to  Christian  virtues ;  yet  it 
is  truly  attributed  to  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  of 
God,  or  Holy  Spirit,  which  we  in  our  language  call 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  WORD  OF  GOD,  ETC.  421 

the  Holy  Ghost :  for  there  is  no  good  inclination,  part  hi. 
that  is  not  of  the  operation  of  God.     But  these   .    ^f*    . 
operations  are  not  always  supernatural.    When  To  propheu 
therefore  a  prophet  is  said  to  speak  in  the  spirit,  or  U\^^ut 
by  the  spirit  of  God,  we  are  to  understand  no  0^^'^*°*^'; 
more,  but  that  he  speaks  according  to  God's  will,  by  thetpmu 
declared  by  the  supreme  prophet.    For  the  most 
common  acceptation  of  the  word  spirit,  is  in  the 
signification  of  a  man's  intention,  mind,  or  dis- 
position. 

In  the  time  of  Moses,  there  were  seventy  men 
besides  himself,  that  prophecied  in  the  camp  of  the 
Israelites.     In  what  manner  God  spake  to  them,  is 
declared  in  NumherSy  chap.   xi.  verse  25.     The 
Lord  came  down   in  a   cloudy  and  spake  unto 
Moses,  and  took  of  the  spirit  that  was  upon  him, 
<ind  gave  it  to  the  seventy  elders.     And  it  came 
to  pasSy  when  the  spirit  rested  upon  themj  they 
prophecied  and  did  not  cease.     By  which  it  is 
manifest,  first,  that  their  prophecying  to  the  peo- 
ple was  subservient  and  subordinate  to  the  pro- 
phecying of  Moses;  for  that  God  took  of  the 
spirit  of  Moses,  to  put  upon  them ;  so  that  they 
prophecied  as  Moses  would  have  them  :  otherwise 
they  had  not  been   suflfered  to  prophecy  at  all. 
For  there  was  (verse  27)  a  complaint  made  against 
them  to  Moses ;  and  Joshua  would  have  Moses  to 
have  forbidden  them ;  which  he  did  not,  but  said  to 
Joshua,  he  not  jealous  in  my  behalf.     Secondly, 
that  the  spirit  of  God  in  that  place  signifieth  no- 
thing but  the  mind  and  disposition  to  obey  and 
assist  Moses  in  the  administration  of  the  govern- 
ment.    For  if  it  were  meant  they  had  the  sub- 
stantial spirit  of  God ;  that  is,  the  divine  nature, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


422         OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PARTUi*  inspired  into  them^  then  they  had  it  in  no  less 
.  ^f-  .  manner  than  Christ  himself^  in  whom  only  the 
spirit  of  God  dwelt  bodily.  It  is  meant  therefore 
of  the  gift  and  grace  of  God^  that  guided  them  to 
cooperate  with  Moses;  from  whom  their  spirit 
was  derived.  And  it  appeareth  (iVwrnJ.  xi.  16)  that 
they  were  such  as  Moses  himself  should  appoint 
for  elders  and  officers  of  the  people :  for  the  words 
are^  Gather  unto  me  seventy  men,  wham  thou 
hnowest  to  he  elders  and  officers  of  the  people  : 
where^  thou  hnowest,  is  the  same  with  thou  ap^ 
pointest,  or  hast  appointed  to  be  such.  For  we 
are  told  before  (Exod.  rviii.  24)  that  Moses  follow- 
ing the  connsel  of  Jethro^  his  father-in-law^  did 
i^point  judges  and  officers  over  the  people^  such 
as  feared  God ;  and  of  these  were  those  seventy, 
whom  God,  by  patting  upon  them  Moses'  spirit,  in- 
cHned  to  aid  Moses  in  the  administration  of  the 
kingdom :  and  in  this  sense  the  spirit  of  God  is 
said  (1  Sam.  xvL  1 3,  14)  presently  npon  the  anoint- 
ing of  David,  to  have  come  upon  David,  and  left 
Saul ;  God  giving  his  graces  to  him  he  chose  to 
govern  his  people,  and  taking  them  away  from 
him  he  rejected.  So  that  by  the  spirit  is  meant 
inclination  to  God's  service ;  and  not  any  super- 
natural revelation. 

Oodsometimef     God  spakc  also  many  times  by  the  event  of  lots  ; 

fote.  ^  which  were  ordered  by  such  as  he  had  put  in 

authority  over  his  people.  So  we  read  that  God 
manifested  by  the  lots  which  Sanl  caused  to  be 
drawn  (1  Sam.  xiv.  43)  the  fault  that  Jonathan  had 
committed,  in  eating  a  honey-comb,  contrary  to 
the  oath  taken  by  the  people.  And  (Josh,  xviii. 
10)  God  divided  the  land  of  Canaan  amongst  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  WORD  OF  GOD,  ETC.  424 

Israelites,  by  the  lots  that  Joshua  did  cast  before  part  iii« 
the  Lord  in  Shiloh.     In  the  same  manner  it  seem-    .    ^^*   . 
eth  to  be,  that  God  discovered  {Joshua  vii.  16,  &c.) 
the  crime  of  Achan.    And  these  are  the  ways 
whereby  God  declared  his  will  in  the  Old  Testament* 

All  which  ways  he  used  also  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. To  the  Virgin  Mary,  by  a  vision  of  an  angel : 
to  Joseph  in  a  dream  :  again,  to  Paul,  in  the  way 
to  Damascus,  in  a  vision  of  our  Saviour :  and  to 
Peter  in  the  vision  of  a  sheet  let  down  from  heaven, 
with  divers  sorts  of  flesh ;  of  clean,  and  unclean 
beasts ;  and  in  prison,  by  vision  of  an  angel :  and 
to  all  the  apostles,  and  writers  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, by  the  graces  of  his  spirit ;  and  to  the  apo8-> 
ties  again,  at  the  choosing  of  Matthias  in  the  place 
of  Judas  Iscariot,  by  lot. 

Seeing  then,  all  prophecy  supposeth  vision,  or  E^ery  man 
dream,  (which  two,  when  they  be  natural,  are  the  amine  the  pro- 
same),  or  some  especial  gift  of  God  so  rarely  ob-^/ende/pro- 
served  in  mankind  as  to  be  admired  where  ob- p^^^'*  <^**^°8- 
served ;  and  seeing  as  well  such  gifts,  as  the  most 
extraordinary   dreams  and  visions,  may  proceed 
from  God,  not  only  by  his  supernatural,  and  imme- 
diate, but  also  by  his  natural  operation,  and  by 
mediation  of  second  causes ;  there  is  need  of  rea- 
son and  judgment  to  discern  between  natural,  and 
supernatural  gifts,  and  between  natural,  and  super- 
natural visions  or  dreams.      And  consequently 
men  had  need  to  be  very  circumspect  and  wary, 
in  obeying  the  voice  of  man,  that  pretending  him- 
self to  be  a  prophet,  requires  us  to  obey  God  in 
that  way,  which  he  in  God's  name  telleth  us  to  be 
the  way  to  happiness.    For  he  that  pretends  to 
teach  men  the  way  of  so  great  felicity,  pretends  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


424  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  govern  them  ;  that  is  to  say,  to  rule  and  reign  over 
^-  ^f'_.  them ;  which  is  a  thing,  that  all  men  naturally  desire, 
Erery  man  and  is  therefore  worthy  to  be  suspected  of  ambition 
^nl  the  pro-  Rud  impostUTC  ;  and  consequently,  ought  to  be  ex- 
JJ^temiedpro*  M^^ed  and  tried  by  every  man,  before  he  yield 
pheftctUing.  them  obedience;  unless  he  have  yielded  it  them 
already,  in  the  institution  of  a  commonwealth ;  as 
when  the  prophet  is  the  civil  sovereign,  or  by  the 
civil  sovereign  authorized.  And  if  this  examination 
of  prophets  and  spirits,  were  not  allowed  to  every 
one  of  the  people,  it  had  been  to  no  purpose  to  set 
out  the  marks,  by  which  every  man  might  be  able 
to  distinguish  between  those,  whom  they  ought,  and 
those  whom  they  ought  not  to  follow.  Seeing 
therefore  such  marks  are  set  out  (Deuf  .xiii.  I,  &c.) 
to  know  a  prophet  by ;  and  (1  John  iv.  1,  &c.) 
to  know  a  spirit  by :  and  seeing  there  is  so  much 
prophecying  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  so  much 
preaching  in  the  New  Testament,  against  prophets ; 
and  so  much  greater  a  number  ordinarily  of  false 
prophets,  than  of  true ;  every  one  is  to  beware  of 
obeying  their  directions,  at  their  own  peril.  And 
first,  that  there  were  many  more  false  than  true 
prophets,  appears  by  this,  that  when  Ahab  ( 1  Kings 
xxii.)  consulted  four  hundred  prophets,  they  were  all 
false  impostors,  but  only  one  Micaiah.  And  a 
little  before  the  time  of  the  captivity,  the  prophets 
were  generally  liars.  The  prophetSj  (saith  the 
Lord,  by  Jeremiah^  chapter  xiv.  14)  prophecy  lies 
in  my  name.  I  sent  them  noty  neither  have  Icom^ 
manded  them,  nor  spake  unto  them;  they  prophecy 
to  you  a  false  vision,  a  thing  of  nought  ^  and  the 
deceit  of  their  heart.  Insomuch  as  God  com- 
manded the  people  by  the  mouth  of  the  prophet 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  WORD  OF  GOD,  ETC.  425 

Jeremiah  (chapter  xxiii.  46)   not  to  obey  them:  part  iii. 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hostSy  hearken  not  unto     _  ^f'  _. 
the  words  of  the  prophets y  that  prophecy  to  yoti. 
They  make  you  vain^  they  speak  a  vision  of  their 
oum  heart,  and  not  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Lord. 

Seeing  then  there  was  in  the  time  of  the  Old  ah  prophecy 

m      .  1  1  ,  .   .  but  of  the  80- 

Testament,  such  quarrels  amongst  the  visionary  vereign  pro- 
prophets,  one  contesting  with  another,  and  asking,  examined  by 
when  departed  the  Spirit  from  me^  to  go  to  thee  ?  ^^^^^  subject. 
as  between  Micaiah  and  the  rest  of  the  four  hun- 
dred ;  and  such  giving  of  the  lie  to  one  another, 
(as  in  Jerem.  xiv.  14)  and  such  controversies  in  the 
New  Testament  at  this  day,  amongst  the  spiritual 
prophets  ;  every  man  then  was,  and  now  is  bound 
to  make  use  of  his  natural  reason,  to  apply  to  all 
prophecy  those  rules  which  God  hath  given  us,  to 
discern  the  true  from  false.  Of  which  rules,  in  the 
Old  Testament,  one  was,  conformable  doctrine  to 
that  which  Moses  the  sovereign  prophet  had  taught 
them ;  and  the  other,  the  miraculous  power  of 
foretelling  what  God  would  bring  to  pass,  as  I  have 
already  showed  out  oiDeut.  xiii.  I,  &c.  And  in  the 
New  Testament  there  was  but  one  only  mark ; 
and  that  was  the  preaching  of  this  doctrine,  that 
Jesus  is  the  Christy  that  is,  king  of  the  Jews, 
promised  in  the  Old  Testament.  Whosoever  denied 
that  article,  he  was  a  false  prophet,  whatsoever 
miracles  he  might  seem  to  work;  and  he  that 
taught  it  was  a  true  prophet.  For  St.  John 
(1  Epist.  iv.  2,  &c.)  speaking  expressly  of  the 
means  to  examine  spirits,  whether  they  be  of  God, 
or  not ;  after  he  had  told  them  that  there  would 
arise  false  prophets,  saith  thus,  Hereby  know  ye 
the  Spirit  of  God.    Every  spirit  that  confesseth 


Digitized  by 


Google 


426  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

FART  III.  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  fleshy  is  qf  God ; 
.  ^'  ■  that  is,  is  approved  and  allowed  as  a  prophet  of  God : 
All  prophecy  not  that  he  is  a  godly  man,  or  one  of  the  elect,  for 
ve^n^pr^  this,  that  he  confesseth,  professeth,  or  preacheth 
wamined  b^  Jcsus  to  be  the  CJhrist ;  but  for  that  he  is  a  prophet 
every  subject  avowed.  For  God  sometimes  speaketh  by  pro- 
phets, whose  persons  he  hath  not  accepted;  as  he 
did  by  Balaam ;  and  as  he  foretold  Saul  of  his 
death,  by  the  ^tch  of  Endor.  Again  in  the  next 
verse,  Every  spirit  that  confesseth  not  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh,  is  not  qf  Christ ;  and 
this  is  the  spirit  qf  Anti-Christ.  So  that  the  rule 
is  perfect  on  both  sides ;  that  he  is  a  true  prophet, 
which  preacheth  the  Messiah  already  come,  in  the 
person  of  Jesus  ;  and  he  a  false  one  that  denieth 
him  come,  and  looketh  for  him  in  some  future  im 
poster,  that  shall  take  upon  him  that  honour  fEdsely, 
whom  the  apostle  there  properly  calleth  Anti- 
Christ.  Every  man  therefore  ought  to  consider 
who  is  the  sovereign  prophet ;  that  is  to  say,  who 
it  is,  that  is  God's  vicegerent  on  earth ;  and  hath 
next  under  God,  the  authority  of  governing  Chris- 
tian men ;  and  to  observe  for  a  rule,  that  doctrine, 
which  in  the  name  of  God,  he  hath  conmianded  to 
be  taught ;  and  thereby  to  examine  and  try  out  the 
truth  of  those  doctrines,  which  pretended  prophets 
with  miracle,  or  without,  shall  at  any  time  advance : 
and  if  they  find  it  contrary  to  that  rule,  to  do  as 
they  did,  that  came  to  Moses,  and  complained  that 
there  were  some  that  prophecied  in  the  camp, 
whose  authority  so  to  do  they  doubted  of;  and 
leave  to  the  sovereign,  as  they  did  to  Moses,  to  up- 
hold, or  to  forbid  them,  as  he  should  see  cause ; 
and  if  he  disavow  them,  then  no  more  to  obey 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  WORD  OF  GOD,  ETC,  427 

thfeir  voice ;  or  if  he  approve  them,  then  to  obey  part  in, 
them,  aj3  men  to  whom  God  hath  given  a  part  of  the  .  ^f  •  ^ 
spirit  of  their  sovereign.  For  when  Christian  men, 
take  not  their  Christian  sovereign,  for  God's  pro- 
phet ;  they  must  either  take  their  own  dreams,  for 
the  prophecy  they  mean  to  be  governed  by,  and 
the  tumor  of  their  own  hearts  for  the  Spirit  of 
God ;  or  they  must  suffer  themselves  to  be  led  by 
some  strange  prince;  or  by  some  of  their  fellow- 
subjects,  that  can  bewitch  them,  by  slander  of  the 
government,  into  rebellion,  without  other  miracle 
to  confirm  their  calling,  than  sometimes  an  extra- 
ordinary success  and  impimity ;  and  by  this  means 
destro3ringall  laws,  both  divine  and  human,  reduce 
all  order,  government,  and  society,  to  the  first 
chaos  of  violence  and  civil  war. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIL 

OF  MIRACLES,  AND  THEIR  USB. 

By  miracles  are  signified  the  admirable  works  of  a  miracle 
God :  and  therefore  they  are  also  called  wonders,  cauarth'admu 
And  because  they  are  for  the  most  part,  done,  for  '*'^°°" 
a  signification  of  his  commandment,  in  such  occa- 
sions, as  without  them,  men  are  apt  to  doubt, 
(following  their  private  natural  reasoning,)  what  he 
hath  commanded,  and  what  not,  they  are  com- 
monly, in  holy  Scripture,  called  signs^  in  the  same 
sense,  as  they  are  called  by  the  Latins,  ostenta, 
and  portentUy  from  showing  and  fore-signifying 
that,  which  the  Almighty  is  about  to  bring  to  pass. 
To  understand  therefore  what  is  a  miracle,  we 
must  .first  understand  what  works  they  are^  which 


Digitized  by 


Google 


428  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH 

PART  III.  men  wonder  at,  and  call  admirable.  And  there  be  but 
-    ^^  _  -    two  things  which  make  men  wonder  at  any  event : 
And  must      the  onc  is,  if  it  be  strange^  that  is  to  say,  such  as 
b^  me,  Md     the  like  of  it  hath  never,  or  very  rarely  been  pro- 
Ts'l.Tnltu^"  duced :  the  other  is,  if  when  it  is  produced,  we 
ciuse  known,  caunot  imagine  it  to  have  been  done  by  natural 
means,  but  only  by  the  immediate  hand  of  God. 
But  when  we  see  some  possible,  natural  cause  of 
it,  how  rarely  soever  the  like  has  been  done,  or  if 
the  like  have  been  often  done,  how  impossible  so- 
ever it  be  to  imagine  a  natural  means  thereof,  we 
no  more  wonder,  nor  esteem  it  for  a  miracle. 

Therefore,  if  a  horse  or  cow  should  speak,  it 
were  a  miracle  ;  because  both  the  thing  is  Strange, 
and  the  natural  cause  difficult  to  imagine.  So  also 
were  it  to  see  a  strange  deviation  of  nature,  in  the 
production  of  some  new  shape  of  a  living  creature. 
But  when  a  man,  or  other  animal,  engenders  his 
like,  though  we  know  no  more  how  this  is  done, 
than  the  other;  yet  because  it  is  usual,  it  is  no 
miracle.  '  In  like  manner,  if  a  man  be  metamor- 
phosed into  a  stone,  or  into  a  pillar,  it  is  a  miracle ; 
because  strange:  but  if  a  piece  of  wood  be  so 
changed  ;  because  we  see  it  often,  it  is  no  miracle : 
and  yet  we  know  no  more  by  what  operation  of 
God,  the  one  is  brought  to  pass,  than  the  other. 

The  first  rainbow  that  was  seen  in  the  world, 
was  a  miracle,  because  the  first ;  and  consequently 
strange ;  and  served  for  a  sign  from  God,  placed 
in  heaven,  to  assure  his  people,  there  should  be  no 
more  any  universal  destruction  of  the  world  by- 
water.  But  at  this  day,  because  they  are  frequent, 
they  are  not  miracles,  neither  to  them  that  know 
their  natural  causes,  nor  to  them  who  know. them 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MIRACLES^  AND  THEIR  USE.  429 

not.    Again,  there  be  many  rare  works  produced  part  hi. 
by  the  art  of  man :  yet  when  we  know  they  are    ^^^'  ^  . 
done;  because  thereby  we  know  also  the  means 
how  they  are  done,  we  count  them  not  for  mira->  ' 
cles,  because  not  wrought  by  the  immediate  hand 
of  God,  but  of  human  industry. 

Furthermore,  seeing  admiration  and  wonder  are  That  wWch 
consequent  to  the  knowledge  and  experience,where-  mh^de  to 
with  men  are  endued,  some  more,  some  less ;  it  gee,^o*the^w 
followeth,  that  the  same  thing  may  be  a  miracle  to  *«  another. 
one,  and  not  to  another.    And  thence  it  is,  that 
ignorant  and  superstitious  men  make  great  won- 
ders of  those  works,  which  other  men,  knowing 
to  proceed  from  nature,  (which  is  not  the  imme- 
diate, but  the  ordinary  work  of  God),  admire  not 
at  all :  as  when  eclipses  of  the  sun  and  moon  have 
been  taken  for  supernatural  works,  by  the  common 
people ;  when  nevertheless,  there  were  others,  who 
could  from  their  natural  causes  have  foretold  the 
very  hour  they  should  arrive :  or,  as  when  a  man, 
by  confederacy  and  secret  intelligence,    getting 
knowledge  of  the  private  actions  of  an  ignorant, 
unwary  man,  thereby  tells  him  what  he  has  done 
in  former  time;  it  seems  to  him  a  miraculous 
thing ;  but  amongst  wise,  and  cautelous  men,  such 
miracles  as  those,  cannot  easily  be  done. 

Again,  it  belongeth  to  the  nature  of  a  miracle,  '^^  f"*^. 

1.1  1       I*         1  .  ^  -..        '  of  miracles. 

that  It  be  wrought  for  the  procuring  of  credit  to 
God's  messengers,  ministers,  and  prophets,  that 
thereby  men  may  know,  they  are  called,  sent,  and 
employed  by  God,  and  thereby  be  the  better  in- 
clined to  obey  them.  And  therefore,  though  the 
creation  of  the  world,  and  after  that  the  destruc- 
tion of  all  living  creatures  in  the  universal  deluge. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


of  miracles* 


430         OF  ▲  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  were  admirable  works ;  yet  because  they  were  not 
-  ^J*_-  done  to  procure  credit  to  any  prophet,  or  other 
The  end^  minister  of  God,  they  use  not  to  be  called  miracles. 
For  how  admirable  soever  any  work  be,  the  admi- 
ration consisteth  not  in  that  it  could  be  done ;  be- 
cause men  naturally  believe  the  Almighty  can  da 
all  things ;  but  because  he  does  it  at  the  prayer  or 
word  of  a  man.  But  the  works  of  God  in  Egypt, 
by  the  hand  of  Moses,  were  properly  miracles ; 
because  they  were  done  with  intention  to  make 
the  people  of  Israel  believe,  that  Moses  came  unto 
them,  not  out  of  any  design  of  his  own  interest, 
but  as  sent  from  God.  Therefore,  after  God  had 
commanded  him  to  deliver  the  Israelites  from  the 
Egjrptian  bondage,  when  he  said  {Exod.  iv.  1)  They 
will  not  believe  me^  but  will  say,  the  Lord  hath  not 
appeared  unto  me^  God  gave  him  power,  to  turn  the 
rod  he  had  in  his  hand  into  a  serpent,  and  again 
to  return  it  into  a  rod ;  and  by  putting  his  hand 
into  his  bosom,  to  make  it  leprous ;  and  again  by 
putting  it  out,  to  make  it  whole ;  to  make  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel  believe  (as  it  is  verse  6)  that  the  God 
of  their  fathers  had  appeared  unto  him :  and  if  that 
were  not  enough,  he  gave  him  power  to  turn  their 
waters  into  blood.  And  when  he  had  done  these 
miracles  before  the  people,  it  is  said  (verse  31) 
that  they  believed  him.  Nevertheless,  for  fear 
of  Pharaoh,  they  durst  not  yet  obey  him.  There- 
fore the  other  works  which  were  done  to  plague 
Pharaoh  and  the  Egyptians,  tended  all  to  make 
the  Israelites  believe  in  Moses,  and  were  pro- 
perly miracles.  In  like  manner  if  we  consider  all 
the  miracles  done  by  the  hand  of  Moses,  and  all 
the  rest  of  the  prophets,  till  the  captivity;  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MIRACLBS^  AND  THEIR  USE.  431 

those  of  onr  Saviour,  and  his  apostles  afterwards ;  part  ni; 
we  shall  find,  their  end  was  always  to  beget  or   .    ^J-   . 
confirm  belief,  that  they  came  not  of  their  own  The  end 
motion,  but  were  sent  by  God.     We  may  farther  °^'"^"^^«"- 
observe  in  Scripture,  that  the  end  of  miracles,  was 
to  beget  belief,  not  universally  in  all  men,  elect 
and   reprobate ;   but  in   the   elect  only ;   that  is 
to  say,  in  such  as  God  had  determined  should  be- 
come his  subjects*     For  those  miraculous  plagues 
of  Egypt,  had  not  for  their  end,  the  conversion  of 
Pharaoh ;  for  God  had  told  Moses  before,  that  he 
v^ould  harden  the  heart  of  Pharoah,  that  he  should 
not  let  the  people  go :  and  when  he  let  them  go 
at  last,  not  the  miracles  persuaded  him,  but  the 
plagues  forced  him  to  it.     So  also  of  our  Saviour, 
it  is  written  {Matth.  xiii.  58),  that  he  wrought  not 
many  miracles  in  his  own  country,  because  of  their 
unbelief;    and   (in  Mark  vi.  5)  instead  of.  He 
wrought  not  martyr  it  is,  He  could  work  none.    It 
was  not  because  he  wanted  power ;  which  to  say, 
were  blasphemy  against  God ;  nor  that  the  end  of 
miracles  was  not  to  convert  incredulous  men  to 
Christ ;  for  the  end  of  all  the  miracles  of  Moses,  of 
the  prophets,  of  our  Saviour,  and  of  his  apostles 
was  to  add  men  to  the  church :  but  it  was,  because 
the  end  of  their  miracles,  was  to  add  to  the  church, 
not  all  men,  but  such  as  should  be  saved ;  that  is 
to  say,  such  as  God  had  elected.     Seeing  therefore 
our  Saviour  was  sent  from  his  Father,  he  could  not 
use  his  power  in  the  conversion  of  those,  whom  his 
Father  had  rejected.    They  that  expounding  this 
place  of  St.  Mark,  say,  that  this  word,  He  could 
not,  is  put  for.  He  would  not,  do  it  without  exam- 
ple in  tiie  Greek  tongue :  where  would  not j,  is  put 


Digitized  by 


Google 


432         OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  sometimes  for  could  not,  in  things  inanimate,  that 
^  ^1'  -  have  no  will ;  but  could  not,  for  would  not  never : 
and  thereby  lay  a  stumbling  block  before  weak 
Christians ;  as  if  Christ  could  do  no  miracles,  but 
amongst  the  credulous. 
The  definition  From  that  which  I  have  here  set  down,  of  the 
nature  and  use  of  a  miracle,  we  may  define  it  thus : 
A  MIRACLE  is  a  work  of  Gody  (besides  his  opera^ 
tion  by  the  way  of  nature  ^ordained  in  tJie  creation) 
done,  for  the  making  manifest  to  his  electa  the 
mission  of  an  extraordinary  minister  for  their 
salvation. 

And  from  this  definition,  we  may  infer;  first, 
that  in  all  miracles,  the  work  done,  is  not  the  effect 
of  any  virtue  in  the  prophet;  because  it  is  the  effect 
of  the  immediate  hand  of  God;  that  is  to  say  God 
hath  done  it,  without  using  the  prophet  therein, 
as  a  subordinate  cause. 

Secondly,  that  no  devil,  angel,  or  other  created 
spirit,  can  do  a  miracle.  For  it  must  either  be  by 
virtue  of  some  natural  science,  or  by  incantation, 
that  is,  by  virtue  of  words.  For  if  the  enchanters 
do  it  by  their  own  power  independent,  there  is  some 
power  that  proceedeth  not  from  God ;  which  all 
men  deny :  and  if  they  do  it  by  power  given  them, 
then  is  the  work  not  from  the  immediate  hand 
of  God,  but  natural,  and  consequently  no  miracle. 

There  be  some  texts  of  Scripture,  that  seem  to 
attribute  the  power  of  working  wonders,  equal  to 
some  of  those  immediate  miracles  wrought  by  God 
himself,  to  certain  arts  of  magic  and  incantation. 
As  for  example,  when  we  read  that  after  the  rod  of 
Moses  being  cast  on  the  ground  became  a  serpent, 
(Exod.y'n.  11)  the  magicians  of  Egypt  did  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


of  a  miracle. 


MIRACLES^  AND  THEIR  USE.  433 

like  hy  their  enchantments  ;  and  that  after  Moses  part  hi. 
had  turned  the  waters  of  the  Egyptian  streams,  .  ^^'  . 
rivers,  ponds,  and  pools  of  water  into  blood,  {Exod.  Definition 
vii.  22)  the  magicians  did  so  likewise  with  their 
enchantments ;  and  that  after  Moses  had  by  the 
power  of  God  brought  ft*ogs  upon  the  land,  {Exod^ 
viii.  7)  the  magicians  also  did  so  with  their  en- 
chantments^ and  brought  up  frogs  upon  the  land 
of  Egypt ;  will  not  a  man  be  apt  to  attribute  mi- 
racles to  enchantments ;  that  is  to  say,  to  the  effi- 
cacy of  the  sound  of  words ;  and  think  the  same 
very  well  proved  out  of  this,  and  other  such  places  ? 
And  yet  there  is  no  place  of  Scripture,  that  telleth 
us  what  an  enchantment  is.  If  therefore  enchant- 
ment be  not,  as  many  think  it,  a  working  of  strange 
eflFects  by  spells  and  words ;  but  imposture  and  de- 
lusion, wrought  by  ordinary  means ;  and  so  far  from 
supernatural,  as  the  impostors  need  not  the  study  so 
much  as  of  natural  causes,  but  the  ordinary  igno- 
rance, stupidity,  and  superstition  of  mankind,  to  do 
them;  those  texts  that  seem  to  countenance  the 
power  of  magic,  witchcraft,  and  enchantment,  must 
needs  have  another  sense,  than  at  first  sight  they 
seem  to  bear. 

For  it  is  evident  enough,  that  words  have  no 
effect,  but  on  those  that  understand  them ;  and 
then  they  have  no  other,  but  to  signify  the  inten- 
tions or  passions  of  them  that  speak ;  and  thereby 
produce  hope,  fear,  or  other  passions  or  concep- 
tions in  the  hearer.  Therefore  when  a  rod  seemeth 
a  serpent,  or  the  waters  blood,  or  any  other  miracle 
seemeth  done  by  enchantment ;  if  it  be  not  to  the 
edification  of  God's  people,  not  the  rod,  nor  the 
water,  nor  any  other  thing  is  enchanted ;  that  is  to 

VOL.  III.  F  P 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


434         OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  Bay,  wrought  upon  by  the  words,  but  the  spectator. 
.  ^^'  -  So  that  all  the  miracle  consisteth  in  this,  that  the 
enchanter  has  deceived  a  man ;  which  is  no  miracle, 
but  a  very  easy  matter  to  do. 
That  men  are  FoT  such  is  the  ignorauce  and  aptitude  to  error 
mUdbyfaki)  generally  of  all  men,  but  especially  of  them  that 
miraciet.  j^^^^^  j^^j  jj^j^^}^  kuowlcdge  of  uatural  causes,  and 
of  the  nature  and  interests  of  men ;  as  by  innume^ 
rable  and  easy  tricks  to  be  abused.  What  opinion 
of  miraculous  power,  before  it  was  known  there 
was  a  science  of  the  course  of  the  stars,  might  a 
man  have  gained,  that  should  have  told  the  people, 
this  hour  or  day  the  sun  should  be  darkened  ?  A 
juggler  by  the  handling  of  his  goblets  and  other 
trinkets,  if  it  were  not  now  ordinarily  practised, 
would  be  thought  to  do  his  wonders  by  tiie  power 
at  leastof  the  devil.  A  man  that  hath  practised  to 
speak  by  drawing  in  of  his  breath,  (which  kind  of 
men  in  ancient  time  were  called  ventriloqui),  and 
so  make  the  weakness  of  his  voice  seem  to  proceed, 
not  from  the  weak  impulsion  of  the  organs  of 
speech,  but  from  distance  of  place,  is  able  to  make 
very  many  men  believe  it  is  a  voice  from  Heaven, 
whatsoever  he  please  to  tell  them.  And  for  a 
crafty  man,  that  hath  enquired  into  the  secrets,  and 
fBmodliar  confessions  that  one  man  ordinarily  maketh 
to  another  of  his  actions  and  adventures  past,  to  tell 
them  hun  again  is  no  hard  matter  $  and  yet  there 
be  many,  that  by  such  means  as  that  obtain  the 
reputation  of  being  conjurers.  But  it  is  too  long  a 
business,  to  reckon  up  the  several  sorts  of  those 
men,  which  the  Greeks  called  dov/iarovpyoc,  that 
is  to  say,  workers  of  things  wonderful :  and  yet 
these  do  all  they  do,  by  their  own  single  dexterity. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MIRACLES,  AND  THEIR  USE.  435 

But  if  we  look  upon  the  impostures  wrought  by  part  hi. 
confederacy,  there  is  nothing  how  impossible  so-  .^^-  . 
ever  to  be  done^  that  is  impossible  to  be  believed. 
For  two  men  conspiring,  one  to  seem  lame^  the 
other  to  core  him  with  a  charm,  will  deceive  many : 
but  many  conspiring,  one  to  seem  lame,  another  so 
to  cure  faim^  and  all  the  rest  to  bear  vdtness,  will 
deceive  many  more. 

In  this  aptitude  of  mankind,  to  give  too  hasty  be-  Cautions 

,*.    ^  11.1  ,,  ,  against  the 

lief  to  pretended  miracles,  there  can  be  no  better,  imposture 
nor  I  think  any  other  caution^  than  that  which  God  ^^  °""*^*^ 
hath  prescribed,  first  by  Moses,  as  I  have  said  be- 
fore in  the  precedent  chapter,  in  the  beginning  of 
the  xiiith  and  end  of  the  xviiith  of  Deuteronomy  ; 
that  we  take  not  any  for  prophets,  that  teach  any 
other  religion^  than  that  which  God's  lieutenant, 
which  at  that  time  was  Moses^  hath  established ; 
nor  any,  though  he  teach  the  same  religion^  whose 
prediction  we  do  not  see  come  to  pass.  Moses 
therefore  in  his  time^  and  Aaron  and  his  succes- 
sors in  their  times,  and  the  sovereign  governor  of 
God's  people,  next  under  God  himself,  that  is  to 
say,  the  head  of  the  Church,  in  all  times,  are  to  be 
consulted,  what  doctrine  he  hath  established,  be- 
fore we  give  credit  to  apretended  miracle  or  prophet. 
And  when  that  is  done,  the  thing  they  pretend  to 
be  a  miracle,  we  must  both  see  it  done,  and  use  all 
means  possible  to  consider,  whether  it  be  really 
done  I  and  not  only  so,  but  whether  it  be  such,  as 
no  man  can  do  the  like  by  his  natural  power,  but 
that  it  requires  the  immecUate  hand  of  God.  And 
in  this  also  we  must  have  recourse  to  God's  lieu- 
tenant, to  whom  in  all  doubtful  cases,  we  have  sub- 
mitted our  private  judgments.    For  example ;  if  a 

FP  2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


436 


OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 


Caations 
against  the 
imposture 
of  miracles. 


PART  III.  man  pretend,  after  certain  words  spoken  over  a 
.  ^f-  _.  piece  of  bread,  that  presently  God  hath  made  it 
not  bread,  but  a  god,  or  a  man,  or  both,  and  never- 
theless it  looketh  still  as  like  bread  as  ever  it  did ; 
there  is  no  reason  for  any  man  to  think  it  really 
done,  nor  consequently  to  fear  him,  till  he  enquire 
of  God,  by  his  vicar  or  lieutenant,  whether  it  be 
done,  or  not.  If  he  say,  not,  then  followeth  that 
which  Moses  saith  {Deut.  xviii.  22)  he  hath  spoken 
it  presumptuously  y  thou  shalt  not  fear  him.  If  he 
say,  it  is  done,  then  he  is  not  to  contradict  it.  So 
also  if  we  see  not,  but  only  hear  tell  of  a  miracle, 
we  are  to  consult  the  lawful  Church ;  that  is  to 
say,  the  lawful  head  thereof,  how  far  we  are  to 
give  credit  to  the  relators  of  it.  And  this  is 
chiefly  the  case  of  men,  that  in  these  days  live  un- 
der Christian  sovereigns.  For  in  these  times,  I 
do  not  know  one  man,  that  ever  saw  any  such  won- 
derous  work,  done  by  the  charm,  or  at  the  word, 
or  prayer  of  a  man,  that  a  man  endued  but  with  a 
mediocrity  of  reason  would  think  supernatural :  and 
the  question  is  no  more,  whether  what  we  see  done^ 
be  a  miracle ;  whether  the  miracle  we  hear,  or 
read  of,  were  a  real  work,  and  not  the  act  of  a 
tongue,  or  pen ;  but  in  plain  terms,  whether  the 
report  be  true,  or  a  lie.  In  which  question  we  are 
not  every  one,  to  make  our  own  private  reason, 
or  conscience,  but  the  public  reason,  that  is,  the 
reason  of  God's  supreme  lieutenant,  judge ;  and 
indeed  we  have  made  him  judge  already,  if  we  have 
given  him  a  sovereign  power,  to  do  all  that  is  ne- 
cessary for  our  peace  and  defence.  A  private  man 
has  always  the  liberty,  because  thought  is  firee,  to 
believe  or  not  believe  in  his  heart  those  acts  that 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MIRACLES,  AND  THEIR  USE.  437 

have  been  given  out  for  miracles,  according  as  he  part  hi. 
shall  see  what  benefit  can  accrue  by  men's  belief,    .    ^^'    . 
to  those  that  pretend  or  countenance  them,  and  caations 
thereby  conjecture  whether  they  be  miracles  or  "]Sl»M*tlire* 
lies.    But  when  it  comes  to  confession  of  that  faith,  ^^  ™»"«^«»- 
the  private  reason  must  submit  to  the  public ;  that 
is  to  say,  to  God's  lieutenant.     But  who  is  this 
lieutenant  of  God,  and  head  of  the  Church,  shall  be 
considered  in  its  proper  place  hereafter. 


CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 

OF  THE  SIGNIFICATION    IN  SCRIPTURE  OF    ETER- 
NAL LIFE,  HELL,  SALVATION,  THE  WORLD 
TO  COMB,  AND  REDEMPTION. 

The  maintenance  of  civil  society  depending  on 
justice,  and  justice  on  the  power  of  life  and  death, 
and  other  less  rewards  and  punishments,  residing 
in  them  that  have  the  sovereignty  of  the  common- 
wealth; it  is  impossible  a  commonwealth  should 
stand,  where  any  other  than  the  sovereign  hath 
a  power  of  giving  greater  rewards  than  life,  and  of 
inflicting  greater  punishments  than  death.  Now 
seeing  eternal  life  is  a  greater  reward  than  the  life 
present;  and  eternal  torment  a  greater  punish- 
ment than  the  death  of  nature  ;  it  is  a  thing  worthy 
to  be  well  considered  of  all  men  that  desire,  by 
obeying  authority,  to  avoid  the  calamities  of  con- 
fusion and  civil  war,  what  is  meant  in  Holy  Scrip- 
ture, by  life  eternal,  and  torment  eternal;  and 
for  what  offences,  and  against  whom  committed, 
men  are  to  be  eternally  tormented ;  and  fpr  Y^h^t 
actions  they  are  to  obtain  eternal  life^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


438        OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  And  first  we  find  that  Adam  was  created  in  such 
.  ^f '  .  a  condition  of  life,  as  had  he  not  broken  the  com^ 
The  place  of  mandmcnt  of  God,  he  had  enjoyed  it  in  the  paradise 
^^if  ho^  of  Eden  everlastingly.  For  there  was  the  tree  qf 
b^^ttiTtor^  /j/J?,  whereof  he  was  so  long  allowed  to  eat,  as  he 
trial  Paradise,  fihould  forbear  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil ;  which  was  not  allowed  him.  And 
therefore  as  soon  as  he  had  eaten  of  it,  God  throat 
him  out  of  Paradise,  {Gen.  iii.22)  lest  he  should  put 
forth  his  hand,  and  take  also  of  the  tree  of  life  and 
live  for  ever.  By  which  it  seemeth  to  me,  (with  sub- 
missionnevertheless  both  in  this,  and  in  all  questions 
whereof  the  determination  dependeth  on  the  Scrip- 
tures, to  the  interpretation  of  the  Bible  authorized 
by  the  commonwealth,  whose  subject  I  am),  that 
Adam,if  he  had  not  sinned, had  had  an  eternal  life  on 
earth,  and  that  mortality  entered  upon  himself  and 
his  posterity  by  his  first  sin*  Not  that  actual  death 
then  entered;  for  Adam  then  could  nevw  have 
had  children ;  whereas  he  lived  long  after,  and  saw 
a  numerous  posterity  ere  he  died.  But  where  it  is 
said,(&^.ii.  17)  In  the  duy  thai  thou  eatest  thereof, 
thou  shalt  surely  die,  it  must  needs  be  meant  of 
his  mortality,  and  certitude  of  death.  Seeing  then 
eternal  life  was  lost  by  Adam's  forfeiture  in  com- 
mitting sin,  he  liiat  should  cancel  that  forfeiture, 
was  to  recover  thereby  that  life  again.  Now  Jesus 
Christ  hath  satisfied  for  the  sins  of  all  that  believe 
in  him;  and  therefore  recovered  to  all  believers, 
that  eternal  life  whidi  was  lost  by  the  sin  of  Adam. 
And  in  this  sense  it  is  that  the  comparison  of  St. 
Paul  holdeth,  (Rom.  v.  18,  \9)  As  by  the  offence 
if  one,  judgment  came  upon  all  men  to  condem- 
nation, even  so  by  the  righteousness  of  one,  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SIGNIFICATION  OF  BTBRNAL  LIFE.        439 

free  gift  came  upon  all  men  to  justyication  of  part  in. 
Iffe  ;  which  is  again  (1  Cor.  xv.  21,  22)  more  per-    ^.  ^f-  ^  . 
spicuously  delivered  in  these  words,  For  since  by 
man  came  death,  by  man  came  aho  the  resurrec^ 
tion  of  the  dead*    For  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so 
in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive. 

Concerning  the  place  wherein  men  shall  enjoy  Texts  concern- 
that  eternal  life  which  Ohrist  hath  obtained  fbroflifeeter^, 
them,  the  texts  next  before  alleged  seem  to  make  ^^' *^*''^*"' 
it  on  earth.  For  if  as  in  Adam  all  die,  that  is,  have 
forfeited  paradise  and  eternal  life  on  earth,  even  so 
in  Christ  all  shall  be  made  alive ;  then  all  men  shall 
be  made  to  live  on  earth  i  for  else  the  comparison 
were  not  proper.  Hereunto  seemeth  to  agree 
that  of  the  psalmist  (Psalm,  cxxxiii.  3)  upon 
Zion  God  commanded  the  blessing,  even  life  far 
evermore :  for  Zion  is  in  Jerusalem  upon  earth :  as 
also  that  of  St.  John  (Rev.  ii.  7)  To  him  that 
jovercometh  I  will  give  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  life, 
which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  paradise  qf  God. 
This  was  the  tree  of  Adam's  eternal  life ;  but  his 
life  was  to  have  been  on  earth.  The  same  seemeth 
to  be  confirmed  again  by  St.  John  (Rev.  xxi.  2), 
where  he  saith,  /  John  saw  the  holy  city,  new 
Jerusalem,  coming  down  from  God  out  qf  heaven, 
prepared  as  a  bride  adorned  for  her  husband: 
and  again  (verse  10)  to  the  same  effect  t  as  if  he 
should  say,  the  new  Jerusalem,  the  paradise  of  God, 
at  the  coining  again  of  Christ,  should  come  down 
to  God's  people  from  heaven,  and  not  they  go  up 
to  it  frt)m  eiurth.  And  this  differs  nothing  from 
that,  which  the  two  men  in  white  clothing,  that  is 
the  two  angels,  said  to  the  apostles  that  were  look* 
ingupon  Christ  ascending  (Acts  i»  11)  This  sam$ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


440  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PAKT  ui.  Jesus^  who  is  taken  upfront  you  into  heaven^  shall 

.    ^f  •    .   so  come,  as  you  have  seen  him  go  up  into  heaven^ 

Texts  eoncem.  Which  soundeth  OS  if  they  had  said  he  should 

iDff  the  place  of 

life  eternal,  for  come  down  to  govem  them  under  his  Father  eter- 
^**^*^*"*  nally  here,  and  not  take  them  up  to  govem  them 
in  heaven ;  and  is  conformable  to  the  restoratioii 
of  the  kingdom  of  God  instituted  -under  Moses, 
which  was  a  political  government  of  the  Jews  on 
earth.  Again^  that  saying  of  our  Saviour  {Matth. 
xxii.  30),  that  in  the  resurrection  they  neither 
marry y  nor  are  given  in  marriage^  hut  are  a^  the 
angels  of  God  in  heaven^  is  a  description  of  an 
eternal  life,  resembling  that  which  we  lost  in  Adam 
in  the  point  of  marriage.  For  seeing  Adam  and 
Eve,  if  they  had  not  sinned,  had  lived  on  earth 
eternally  in  their  individual  persons ;  it  is  mani- 
fest, they  should  not  continually  have  procreated 
their  kind ;  for  if  immortals  should  have  generated 
as  mankind  doth  now,  the  earth  in  a  small  time 
would  not  have  been  able  to  afford  them  place  to 
stand  on.  The  Jews  that  asked  our  Saviour  the 
question,  whose  wife  the  woman  that  had  married 
many  brothers  should  be  in  the  resurrection,  knew 
not  what  were  the  consequences  of  life  eternal : 
and  therefore  our  Saviour  puts  them  in  mind  of 
this  consequence  of  immortality ;  that  there  shall 
be  no  generation,  and  consequently  no  marriage, 
no  more  than  there  is  marriage  or  g^ieration 
among  the  angels.  The  comparison  between  that 
eternal  life  which  Adam  lost,  and  our  Saviour  by 
his  victory  over  death  hath  recovered,  holdeth 
also  in  this;  that  as  Adam  lost  eternal  life  by 
his  sin,  and  yet  lived  after  it  for  a  time,  so  the 
faithful  Christian  hath  recovered  eternal  life  by 


Digitized  by 


Google 


/SIGNIFICATION  OF  ETERNAL  LIFE.  44J 

Christ's  passion,  though  he  die  a  natural  death,  part  iil 
and  remain  dead  for  a  time,  namely,  till  the  re-   .^f*   ,. 
surrection.    For  as  death  is  reckoned  from  the 
condemnation  of  Adam,  not  from  the  execution ; 
so  life  is  reckoned  from  the  absolution,  not  from 
the  resurrection  of  them  that  are  elected  in  Christ. 

That  the  place  wherein  men  are  to  live  eternally,  AaceoMon 
after  the  resurrection,  is  the  heavens,  (meaning  by 
heaven,  those  parts  of  the  world,  which  are  the 
most  remote  from  earth,  as  where  the  stars  are,  or 
above  the  stars,  in  another  higher  heaven,  called 
ccelum  empyreum,  whereof  there  is  no  mention  in 
Scripture,  nor  ground  in  reason),  is  not  easily  to  be 
drawn  from  any  text  that  I  can  find.  By  the  King- 
dom of  Heaven,  is  meant  the  kingdom  of  the  King 
that  dwelleth  in  heaven ;  and  his  kingdom  was  the 
people  of  Israel,  whom  he  ruled  by  the  prophets, 
his  lieutenants ;  first  Moses,  and  after  him  Eleazar, 
and  the  sovereign  priests,  till  in  the  days  of  Samuel 
they  rebelled,  and  would  have  a  mortal  man  for 
their  king,  after  the  manner  of  other  nations.  And 
when  our  Saviour  Christ,  by  the  preaching  of  his 
ministers,  shall  have  persuaded  the  Jews  to  return, 
and  called  the  Gentiles  to  his  obedience,  then  shall 
there  be  a  new  kingdom  of  heaven ;  because  our 
king  shall  then  be  God,  whose  throne  is  heaven : 
without  any  necessity  evident  in  the  Scripture, 
that  man  shall  ascend  to  his  happiness  any  higher 
than  God's  footstool  the  earth.  On  the  contrary, 
we  find  written  {John  iii.  13)  that  no  man  hath 
ascended  into  heaven,  but  he  that  came  down  from 
heaven,  even  the  son  of  man,  that  is  in  heaven. 
Where  I  observe  by  the  way,  that  these  words  are 
not,  as  those  which  go  immediately  before,  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


into  beayen. 


442  OV  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWBALTH. 

PAET  III.  word*  of  our  Saviour^  but  of  St.  John  himself;  for 
-  ^f-  Christ  waa  then  not  in  heaven,  but  upon  the  earth. 
Aseenfion  The  like  Is  said  of  David  (Acts  ii.  34)  where 
St.  Vet&t^  to  prove  the  ascension  of  Christ,  using  the 
words  of  the  Psalmist  (P^a^  xvi.  10)>  Tfu>u  wilt  not 
leave  my  mouI  in  hell^  nor  9^er  thine  hohf  one  to 
see  cotrtq^iion^  saith^  they  were  spoken,  not  of 
David,  but  of  Christ ;  and  to  prove  it,  addeth  this 
reason,  For  David  is  not  ascended  into  heaven. 
But  to  this  a  man  may  easily  answer>  and  say,  that 
though  their  bodies  were  not  to  asoend  till  the 
general  day  of  judgment,  yet  their  souls  were  in 
heavmi  as  soon  as  they  were  departed  from  their 
bodies ;  which  also  seemeth  to  be  confirmed  by  the 
words  of  our  Saviour  {Luke  xx.  B7s  38),  who  pro- 
ving the  resurrection  out  of  the  words  of  Moses, 
saith  thus,  ^hat  the  dead  are  raised^  even  Moses 
shewed  at  the  bush^  when  he  calleth  the  Lord^  the 
Ood  of  Abraham^  and  the  God  of  IsaaCy  and  the 
God  of  Jacob,  For  he  is  not  a  God  of  the  dead, 
but  of  the  living ;  for  they  all  live  to  him.  But 
if  these  words  be  to  be  understood  only  of  the  im- 
mortality of  the  soul,  they  prove  not  at  all  that 
which  ofir  Savbur  intended  to  prove,  which  was 
the  resurrection  of  the  body,  that  is  to  say,  the  im- 
mortality of  the  man-  Therefore  our  Saviour 
meaneth,  that  those  patriarchs  were  immortal  t  not 
by  a  property  consequent  to  the  essence  and  na- 
ture of  mankind ;  but  by  the  will  of  God,  that  was 
pleased  of  his  mere  grace,  to  bestow  eternal  life 
upon  the  &ithful.  And  though  at  lliat  time  the 
patriarchs  and  many  other  faithful  men  were  dead^ 
yet  as  it  is  in  the  text,  they  lived  to  Godi  that  is, 
they  were  written  in  the  Book  of  life  with  th^n 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SIONIFICATION  OF  ETERNAL  UFB.  443 

that  were  absolred  of  their  sins,  and  ordained  to  life  part  uu 
eternal  at  the  resurrection.   That  the  soul  of  man  is    .^    ^ 
in  its  own  nature  eternal,  and  a  living  creature  in*  Ascension 
dependent  on  the  body,  or  that  any  mere  man  is  im-  °     ^^^' 
mortal,  otherwise  than  by  the  resurrection  iti  the  last 
day,  except  Enoch  and  Elias,  is  a  doctrine  not  ap- 
parent in  Scripture.  The  whole  of  the  xivih  chapter 
of  Joby  which  is  the  speech  not  of  his  friends,  but 
of  himself,  is  a  complaint  of  this  mortality  of  nature ) 
and  yet  no  contradiction  of  the  immortality  at  the 
resurrection.     There  is  hope  of  a  tree^  saith  he, 
(verse  7)  tf  it  he  cast  down.     Though  the  root 
thereof  wax  old^  and  the  stock  thereof  die  in  the 
ground^  yet  when  it  scenteth  the  water  it  will  hud^ 
and  bring  forth  boughs  like  a  plant.  But  man  dieth 
and  wasteth  away,  yea^  man  giveth  up  the  ghost^ 
and  where  is  he  9     And  (verse  \2)  ^Man  lieth 
down^  and  riseth  not^  till  the  heavens  be  no  more. 
But  when  is  it,  that  the  heavens  shall  be^o  more  ? 
St.  Peter  tells  us,  that  it  is  at  the  general  resurrec- 
tion.   For  in  his  2nd  Epistle^  chap.  iii.  verse  7, 
he  saith,  that  the  heathens  and  the  earth  that  ate 
noWy  are  reserved  unto  fire  against  the  day  of 
Judgment,  and  perdition  of  ungodly  men,  and 
(v.  12)  looking  for^  and  hasting  to  the  coming  qf 
Gody  wherein  the  heavens  shall  be  on  fire  and 
shall  be  dissolved,  and  the  elements  shall  melt 
with  fervent  heati     Nevertheless,  we  according 
to  the  promise  look  for  new  heavens,  and  a  new 
earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness.    There- 
fore where  Job  saith,  man  riseth  not  till  the  hea- 
vens be  no  more  ;  it  is  all  one,  as  if  he  had  said, 
the  immortal  life,  (and  soul  and  life  in  the  Scripture 
do  usually  signify  the  same  thing,)  beginneth  not  in 


Digitized  by 


Google 


444  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PAKT  lu.  man,  till  the  resurrection  and  day  of  judgment ; 

^   ^^*    .    and  hath  for  cause,  not  his  specifical  nature  and 

generation,  but  the  promise.    For  St*  Peter  says, 

not  We  look  for  new  heavens  and  a  new  earthy 

from  nature y  butyrow  promise. 

Lastly,  seeing  it  hath  been  already  proved  out  of 
divers  evident  places  of  Scripture,  in  chap.  xxxv. 
of  this  book,  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  a  civil 
commonwealth,  where  God  himself  is  sovereign,  by 
virtue  first  of  the  old^  and  since  of  the  new  covenant, 
wherein  he  reigneth  by  his  vicar  or  lieutenant; 
the  same  places  do  therefore  also  prove,  that  after 
the  coming  again  of  our  Saviour  in  his  majesty 
and  glory,  to  reign  actually  and  eternally,  the 
kingdom  of  God  is  to  be  on  earth.  But  because 
this  doctrine,  though  proved  out  of  places  of  Scrip- 
ture not  few  nor  obscure,  will  appear  to  most  men  a 
novelty,  I  do  but  propound  it ;  maintaining  nothing 
in  this,  or  any  other  paradox  of  religion ;  but  attend- 
ing the  end  of  that  dispute  of  the  sword,  concern- 
ing the  authority,  not  yet  amongst  my  countrymen 
decided,  by  which  all  sorts  of  doctrine  are  to  be  ap- 
proved or  rejected ;  and  whose  commands,  both  in 
speech  and  writing,  whatsoever  be  the  opinions  of 
private  men,  must  by  all  men,  that  mean  to  be  pro- 
tected by  their  laws,  be  obeyed.  For  the  points  of 
doctrine  concerning  the  kingdom  of  God,  have  so 
great  influence  on  the  kingdom  of  man,  as  not  to 
be  determined,  but  by  them,  that  under  God  have 
the  sovereign  power. 
Tiiepiaco  after  As  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  eternal  life,  so  also 
tbo^who^re  God's  euemies,  and  their  torments  after  judgment, 
togdJm^of  appear  by  the  Scripture  to  have  their  place  on  earth. 
The  name  of  the  place^  where  all  men  remain  till 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


SIGNIFICATION  OP  HELL.  445 

the  resurrection,  that  were  either  buried,  or  swal-  part  hi. 
lowed  up  of  the  earth,  is  usually  called  in  Scripture,    ._^^'    . 
by  words  that  sigtnfy  under  ground;  which  the  Ooa, or haring 
latins  read  generally  infernus,  and  inferi^  and  the  ca8t*oat.*"* 
Greek  SSnc,  that  is  to  say,  a  place  where  men  can- 
not see ;  and  containeth  as  well  the  grave,  as  any 
any  other  deeper  place.      But  for  the  place  of  the 
damned  after  the  resurrection,  it  is  not  determined, 
neither  in  the  Old  nor  New  Testament,  by  any  note 
of  situation ;  but  only  by  the  company :  as  that  it 
shall  be,  where  such  wicked  men  were,  as  God  in  for- 
mer times,  in  extraordinary  and  miraculous  manner, 
had  destroyed  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth :  as  for 
example,  that  they  are  in  Inferno^  in  Tartarus ,  or  Tartami. 
in  the  bottomless  pit ;  because  Corah,  Dathan,  and 
Abiron,  were  swallowed  up  alive  into  the  earth. 
Not  that  the  writers  of  the  Scripture  would  have 
us  believe,  there  could  be  in  the  globe  of  the  earth, 
which  is  not  only  finite,  but  also,  compared  to  the 
height  of  the  stars,  of  no  considerable  magnitude, 
a  pit  without  a  bottom,  that  is,  a  hole  of  infinite 
depth,  such  as  the  Greeks  in  their  demonologyy  (that 
is  to  say,  in  their  doctrine  concerning  demons),  and 
after  them  the  Romans,  called  Tartarus;  of  which 
Vh-gil  {^n.  VI.  578,  679)  says. 

Bis  patet  in  prseceps  tantum,  tenditque  sub  umbras, 
Quantus  ad  eetherium  coeli  suspectus  Olympum : 

for  that  is  a  thing  the  proportion  of  earth  to  heaven 
cannot  bear :  but  that  we  should  believe  them  there, 
indefinitely,  where  those  men  are,  on  whom  God 
inflicted  that  exemplary  punishment. 
Again,  because  those  mighty  men  of  the  earth,  that  Ti»e  congrega- 

1-        11-        1         •  n  ik.r      -»      %     i*  1       /I        '•/■••-i    *'0"  ^^  giants. 

lived  m  the  tmie  of  Noah,  before  the  flood,  (which 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 

J 


446        OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  HI.  the  Greeks  call  heroes^  and  the  Scripture  gianUy 
.    ^f'    .    and  both  say  were  begotten  by  copulation  of  the 
children  of  God  with  the  children  (rf  men^)  were  for 
their  wicked  life  destroyed  by  the  general  deluge; 
the  place  of  the  damned,  is  therefore  also  some* 
times  marked  out,  by  the  company  of  those  de* 
ceased  giants ;  as  Prwerhs  xxi.  16,  The  man  thai 
wander eth  out  ofth§way  of  underatandingy  shall 
remain  in  the  congregation  of  the  giants ;  and 
Job  xxvi.  5,  Behold  the  giants  groan  under  watery 
and  they  that  dwell  with  them.    Here  the  place 
of  the  damned  is  under  the  water.    And  IsainUk 
xiv.  9,  Hell  is  troubled  how  to  meet  thee  (that  is, 
the  King  of  Babylon)  and  will  displace  the  giants 
for  thee :  and  here  again  the  place  of  the  damned^ 
if  the  sense  be  literal,  is  to  be  under  water.  Thirdly, 
Lake  of  fire,  bccausc  the  citics  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  by  the 
extraordinary  wrath  of  God,  were  consumed  for 
their  wickedness  with  fire  and  brimstone,  and  to- 
gether with  them  the  country  about  made  a  stinking 
bituminous  lake :  the  place  of  the  damned  is  some- 
times expressed  by  fire,  and  a  fiery  lake ,  as  in  the 
Apoealypscy  xxi.  8,  BtU  the  timorous^  incredulous, 
and  abominable,  and  murderers,  and  whoremon^ 
gers,  and  sorcerers,  and  idolaters,  and  alljiars, 
shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake  that  burneth  with 
fire  and  brimstone ;  which  is  the  second  death. 
So  that  it  is  manifest,  that  hell  fire,  which  is  here 
expressed  by  metaphor  from  the  real  fire  of  Sodom, 
signifieth  not  any  certain  kind  or  place  of  torment; 
but  is  to  be  taken  indefinitely,  for  destruction,  as  it 
is  in  Rev.  xx.  14,  where  it  is  said,  that  death  and 
hell  were  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire;  that  is  to  say, 
were  abolished  and  destroyed ;  as  if  after  the  day  ' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SIGNIFICATION  OV  HELL.  447 

of  judgment,  there  shall  be  no  more  dying,  nor  no  part  iir. 
more  going  into  hell;  that  is,  no  more  going  to   .  ^'    . 
Hades,  (from  which  word  p^haps  our  word  Hell  is 
derived,)  which  is  the  same  with  no  more  dying. 

Fourthly,  from  the  plague  of  darkness  i^cted  utter  darknew. 
on  the  Egyptians,  of  which  it  is  written  (Exod. 
X.  23J  They  aaw  not  one  another,  neither  rose 
any  man  from  hia  place  for  three  days  ;  hut  all 
the  children  of  Israel  had  light  in  their  dwellings  ; 
the  place  of  the  wicked  after  judgment,  is  called 
utter  darkness,  or,  as  it  is  in  the  original,  darkness 
without.  And  so  it  is  expressed  {Matth.  xxii. 
13)  where  the  king  commanded  his  servants,  to 
hind  hand  and  foot  the  man  that  had  not  on 
his  wedding  garment,  and  to  east  him  out,  cic  ri 
(ficoroc  TO  i^(arepov,intoemtemaldariness,or  darkness 
without :  which  though  translated  utter  darkness, 
does  not  signify  how  great,  but  where  that  dark^ 
ness  is  to  be }  namely,  without  the  habitation  of 
God's  elect. 

Lastly,  whereas  there  was  a  place  near  Jerusa-  oehenna, 
lem,  called  the  Valley  of  the  Children  qf  Hinnon  ;  ^ 
in  a  part  whereof,  called  Tophet,  the  Jews  had  com* 
mitted  most  grievous  idolatry,  sacrificing  their 
children  to  the  idol  Moloch ;  and  wherein  also  God 
had  afflicted  his  enemies  with  most  grievous  punish* 
ments ;  and  wherein  Josiah  had  burned  the  priests 
of  Moloch  upon  their  own  altars,  as  appeareth  at 
laige  in  the  2nd  of  Kings,  chap,  xxiii.  t  the  place 
served  afterwards  to  receive  the  filth  and  garbage 
which  was  carried  thither  out  of  the  city;  and 
there  used  to  be  fires  made  from  time  to  time,  to 
pmrify  the  air,  and  take  away  the  stench  of  car- 
•  rion.  From  this  abominable  place,  the  Jews  used 
ever  after  to  call  the  place  of  the  damned,  by  the 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


448 


OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 


PART  III, 

38. 


Of  the  literal 
nense  of  the 
Scripture  con- 
cerniog  hell. 


Satan,  Devil, 
not  proper 
Dames,  but 
appellatives. 


name  of  Gehenna^  or  Valley  of  Hinnon.  And  this 
•  Gehenna^  is  that  word  which  is  usually  now  trans- 
lated HELL  ;  and  from  the  fires  from  time  to  time 
there  burning,  we  have  the  notion  of  everlasting 
and  unquenchable  fire. 

Seeing  now  there  is  none,  that  so  interprets 
the  Scripture,  as  that  after'  the  day  of  judgment, 
the  wicked  are  all  eternally  to  be  punished  in 
the  Valley  of  Hinnon ;  or  that  they  shall  so  rise 
again,  as  to  be  ever  after  imder  ground  or  under 
water ;  or  that  after  the  resurrection,  they  shall  no 
more  see  one  another,  nor  stir  from  one  place  to 
another ;  it  foUoweth,  methinks,  very  necessarily, 
that  that  which  is  thus  said  concerning  hell  fire,  is 
spoken  metaphorically ;  and  that  therefore  there  is 
a  proper  sense  to  be  enquired  after,  (for  of  all  me- 
taphors there  is  some  r6al  ground,  that  may  be  ex- 
pressed in  proper  words,)  both  of  the  place  of  heUj 
and  the  nature  of  hellish  torments^  and  tormenters. 

And  first  for  the  tormenters,  we  have  their  na- 
ture and  properties,  exactly  and  properly  delivered 
by  the  names  of,  the  Enemy ^  or  Satan ;  the  Ac- 
cuser ^  or  Diaholus  ;  the  Destroy e^^  or  Abaddon, 
Which  significant  names,  Satan,  Devil,  Abaddon, 
set  not  forth  to  us  any  individual  person,  as 
proper  names  use  to  do  ;  but  only  an  oflSce,  or 
quality;  and  are  therefore  appellatives;  which 
ought  not  to  have  been  left  untranslated,  as  they 
are  in  the  Latin  and  modem  Bibles ;  because 
thereby  they  seem  to  be  proper  names  of  demons; 
and  men  are  the  more  easily  seduced  to  believe  the 
doctrine  of  devils  ;  which  at  that  time  was  the  re- 
ligion of  the  Gentiles,  and  contrary  to  that  of  Moses 
and  of  Christ. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SIGNIFICATION  OP  HELL.  449 

And  because  by  the  Enemy,  the  Accuser ,  and  part  hi. 
Destroyer,  is  meant  the  enemy  of  them  that  shall  ._  ^f-  ^ 
be  m  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  therefore  if  the  king- 
dom of  God  after  the  resurrection,  be  upon  the 
earth,  as  in  the  former  chapter  I  have  shown  by 
Scripture  it  seems  to  be,  the  Enemy  and  his  king- 
dom must  be  on  earth  also.  For  so  also  was  it,  in 
the  time  before  the  Jews  had  deposed  God.  For 
God's  kingdom  was  in  Palestine ;  and  the  nations 
round  about,  were  the  kingdoms  of  the  Enemy ; 
and  consequently  by  Satan,  is  meant  any  earthly 
enemy  of  the  Church. 

The  torments  of  hell,  are  expressed  sometimes,  Torments 
by  weepingy  and  gnashing  of  teeth,  as  Matth.  viii.  ° 
12.  Sometimes  by  the  worm  of  conscience;  as 
Jsaiah  Ixvi.  24,  and  Mark  ix.  44,  46,  48 :  some- 
times, by  fire,  as  in  the  place  now  quoted,  where  the 
worm  dieth-'vot,  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched,  and 
many  places  beside :  sometimes  by  shame  and  con- 
tempt, as  Dan.  xii  2,  And  many  of  them  that  sleep 
in  the  dust  of  the  earth,  shall  awake ;  some  to 
everlasting  life ;  and  some  to  shame,  and  ever- 
lasting contetppt.  All  which  places  design  meta- 
phorically a  grief  and  discontent  of  mind,  from 
the  sight  of  that  eternal  felicity  in  others,  which 
they  themselves  through  their  own  incredulity 
and  disobedience  have  lost.  And  because  such 
felicity  in  others,  is  not  sensible  but  by  compari- 
son with  their  own  actual  miseries;  it  folio weth 
that  they  are  to  suffer  such  bodily  pains,  and  cala- 
mities, as  are  incident  to  those,  who  not  only  live 
under  evil  and  cruel  governors,  but  have  also  for 
enemy  the  eternal  king  of  the  saints,  God  Almighty. 
And  amongst  these  bodily  pains,  is  to  be  reckoned 
VOL.  in.  G  G 


Digitized  by 


Google 


450  OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  also  to  every  one  of  the  wicked  a  second  death. 
.  ^f'  _.  For  though  the  Scripture  be  clear  for  an  universal 
Tonnenu  Tesurrcction  ;  yet  we  do  not  read,  that  to  any  of 
the  reprobate  is  promised  an  eternal  life.  For 
whereas  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  xv.42, 43)  to  the  question 
concerning  what  bodies  men  shall  rise  with  again, 
saith,  thelt  The  body  is  sown  in  corruption,  and 
is  raised  in  iMorruption  ;  it  is  sown  in  dishonour, 
it  is  raised  in  glory ;  it  is  sown  in  weakness,  it  is 
raised  in  power.  Glory  and  power  cannot  be  ap- 
plied to  the  bodies  of  the  wicked :  nor  can  the 
name  of  second  death  be  applied  to  those  that  can 
never  die  but  once :  and  although  in  metaphori- 
cal speech,  a  calamitous  life  everlasting,  may  be 
called  an  everlasting  death,  yet  it  cannot  well  be 
tmderstood  of  a  second  death. 

The  fire  prepared  for  the  wicked,  is  an  everlast- 
ing fire :  that  is  to  say,  the  estate  wherein  no  man 
can  be  without  torture,  both  of  body  and  mind, 
after  the  resurrection,  shall  endure  for  ever;  and 
in  that  sense  the  fire  shall  be  unquenchable,  and 
the  torments  everlasting:  but* it  cannot  thence 
be  inferred,  that  he  who  shall  be  cast  into  that 
fire,  or  be  tormented  with  those  torments,  shall 
endure  and  resist  them  so  as  to  be  eternally 
burnt,  and  tortured,  and  yet  never  be  destroyed, 
nor  die.  And  though  there  be  many  plkces 
that  ajfirm  everlasting  fire  and  torments,  into 
which  men  may  be  cast  successively  one  after  ano- 
ther as  long  as  the  world  lasts,  yet  I  find  none 
that  afl&rm  there  shall  be  an  eternal  life  therein  of 
any  individual  person;  but  to  the  contrary,  an 
/  everlasting  death,  which  is  the  second  death :  {Rev. 
V    ^  XX.  13,  14)  For  after  death  and  tJie  grave  shall 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


SIGNIFICATION  OP  SALTAtlON.  451 

'h€tf>e  delivered  up  the  dead  which  were  in  them^  part  in. 
Mild  every  man  he  judged  according  to  his  works  ;    ^    ^f-    ^ 
death  and  the  grave  shaU  also  be  cast  into  the 
lake  of  fire.    This  is  the  second  death.  Whereby 
it  is  evident  that  there  is  to  be  a  second  death  of 
every  one  that  shall  be  condemned  at  the  day  of 
judgment,  after  which  he  shall  die  no  more. 

The  joys  of  life  eternal,  are  in  Scripture  compre-  Thejoyitif 
hended  all  under  the  name  of  salvation,  or  being  and  Mii^dop, 
saved.  To  be  saved,  is  to  be  secured,  either  re-^^^^^"^' 
spectively,  agamst  special  evils,  or  absolutely, 
against  all  evils,  comprehending  want,  sickness, 
and  death  itself.  And  because  man  wafi  created 
in  a  condition  immortal,  not  subject  to  corruption, 
and  consequently  to  nothing  that  tendeth  to  the 
dissolution  of  his  nature  ;  and  fell  from  that  happi* 
ness  by  the  sin  of  Adam ;  it  followeth,  that  to  be 
saved  from  sin,  is  to  be  saved  from  all  the  evil  and 
calamities  that  sin  hath  brought  upon  us.  And  saWttion  from 
therefore  in  the  holy  Scrijiture,  remission  of  sin,miJciy,aiio^e! 
and  salvation  from  death  and  misery,  is  the  same 
thing,  as  it  appears  by  the  words  of  our  Saviour, 
who  having  cured  a  man  sick  of  the  palsy,  by 
saying,  {Maith.  ix.  2)  Son  be  of  good  cheer ^  thy 
sins  be  -forgiven  thee;  and  knowing  that  the 
Scribes  took  for  blasphemy,  that  a  man  should  pre- 
^tend  to  forgive  sins,  asked  them  (verse  5)  whether 
■it  were  easier  to  sny^  Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee^ 
or^  Arise  and  walk  ;  signifying  thereby,  that  it 
Was  all  one,  as  to  the  saving  of  the  sick,  to  say, 
Thy  sins  are  forgiven,  and  Arise  and  walk  ;  and 
that  he  used  tiiat  form  of  speech,  only  to  shew  he 
had  power  to  forgive  sins.  And  it  is  besides  evi- 
dent in  reason,  that  since  death  and  misery  were  . 

GG  2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


J 


.452         OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH 

PART  III.  the  punishments  of  sin,  the  discharge  of  sin  must 
^  ^^'  .  also  be  a  discharge  of  death  and  misery  ;  that  is  to 
say,  salvation  absolute,  such  as  the  faithful  are  to 
enjoy  after  theday  of  judgment,  by  the  power  and 
favour  of  Jesus  Christ,  >vho  for  that  cause  is  called 
our  Saviour. 

Concerning  particular  salvations,  such  as  are  un- 
derstood, ( 1  Sam.  xiv.  39)  as  the  Lord  liveth  that 
saveth  Israel,  that  is,  from  their  temporary  ene- 
mies, and  (2  Sam.  xxii.  3)  Thou  art  my  Saviour^ 
thou  savest  me  from  violence;  and,  (2  Kings  xiii. 
5)  God  gave  the  Israelites  a  Saviour,  and  so 
they  were  delivered  from  the  hand  of  the  Assy- 
rians, and  the  like,  I  need  say  nothing;  there 
being  neither  diflSculty,  nor  interest  to  corrupt 
the  interpretation  of  texts  of  that  kind. 
The  place  But  conccming  the  general  salvation,  because  it 
laivatioD.  must  be  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  there  is  great 
difficulty  concerning  the  place.  On  one  side,  by 
kingdom,  which  is  an  estate  ordained  by  men  for 
their  perpetual  security  against  enemies  and  want, 
it  seemeth  that  this  salvation  should  be  on  earth. 
For  by  salvation  is  set  forth  unto  us,  a  glorious 
reign  of  our  king,  by  conquest ;  not  a  safety  by 
escape:  and  therefore  there  where  we  look  for 
salvation,  we  must  look  also  for  triumph ;  and  be- 
fore triumph,  for  victory ;  and  before  victory,  for 
battle ;  which  cannot  well  be  supposed,  shall  be 
in  heaven.  But  how  good  soever  this  reason  may 
be,  I  vnll  not  trust  to  it,  vrithout  very  evident 
places  of  Scripture.  The  state  of  salvation  is 
described  at  large,  Isaiah  xxxiii.  20,  21,  22, 
23,  24  : 

Look  upon  Zion,  the  city  of  our  Solemnities ; 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SIGNIFICATION  OP  SALVATION.  463 

thine  eyes  shall  see  Jerusalem  a  quiet  habitation^  part  hi. 
a  tabernacle  that  shall  not  be  taken  down  ;  not    -    ^f*  .. 
one  of  the  stakes  thereof  shall  ever  be  removed^    The  place 
"neither  shall  any  of  the  cords  tliereof  be  broken.    ia^iiSn. 

But  there  the  glorious  Lord  will  be  unto  us  a 
2)lace  of  broad  rivers  and  streams  ;  wherein  shdll 
go  no  galley  with  oars,  neither  shall  gallant  ship 
pass  thereby. 

For  the  Lord  is  our  Judge,  the  Lord  is  our 
law-giver,  the  Lord  is  our  king,  he  will  save  us. 

Thy  tacklings  are  loosed  ;  they  could  not  well 
strengthen  their  mast ;  they  could  not  spread  the 
sail :  then  is  the  prey  of  a  great  spoil  divided ; 
the  lame  take  the  prey : 

And  the  inhabitant  shall  not  say,  I  am  sick  ; 
tlie  people  that  shall  dwell  therein  shall  be  for- 
given their  iniquity. 

In  which  words  we  have  the  place  from  whence 
salvation  is  to  proceed,  Jerusalem,  a  quiet  habita- 
tion ;  the  eternity  of  it,  a  tabernacle  that  shall  not 
he  taken  down,  Sfc ;  the  Saviour  of  it,  the  Lord, 
their  Judge,  their  law-giver,  their  king,  he  will 
save  us  ;  the  salvation,  the  Lord  shall  be  to  them 
as  a  broad  moat  of  swft  waters,  Sfc ;  the  condition 
of  their  enemies,  their  tacklings  are  loose,  their 
musts  weak,  the  lame  shall  take  the  spoil  of  them  ; 
the  condition  of  the  saved,  the  inhabitant  shall 
not  say,  I  am  sick :  and  lastly,  all  this  is  compre- 
hended in  forgiveness  of  sin,  the  people  that 
dwell  therein  shall  be  forgiven  their  iniquity. 
By  which  it  is  evident,  that  salvation  shall  be  on 
earth,  then,  when  God  shall  i^eign,  at  the  coming 
again  of  Christ,  in  Jerusalem ;  and  from  Jerusalem 
shall  proceed  the  salvation  of  the  Gentiles  that  shall 


Digitized  by 


Google 


454  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  iHv  be  received  into  God*s  kingdom :  as  is  ako  more  ex- 
^  ^f '  pressly  declared  by  the  same  prophet,  {Isaiah  kvL 
The  place  20,  21),  And  they  (that  is  the  Gentiles  who  had  any 
•alvltioB.  Jew  in  bondage)  shall  bring  all  your  brethren^ 
for  an  offering  to  the  Lord,  out  of  all  nations, 
upon  horsesy  and  in  chariots,  and  in  litterSy 
and  upon  mules,  and  upon  swift  beasts^  to  my 
holy  mountain,  Jerusalem,  saith  the  Lord,  as 
the  children  of  Israel  bring  an  offering  in  a 
clean  vessel  into  the  house  of  the  Lord.  And 
I  wiU  also  take  of  them  for  priests  and  for 
Levites,  saith  the  Lord.  Whereby  it  is  manifest, 
that  the  chief  seat  of  God*s  kingdom,  which  is  the 
place  from  whence  the  salvation  of  us  that  were 
Gentiles  shall  proceed,  shall  be  Jerusalem:  and 
the  same  is  also  confirmed  by  our  Saviour  in  his 
discourse  with  the  woman  of  Samaria,  concerning 
die  place  of  God*s  worship;  to  whom  he  saith 
(John  iv.  22)  that  the  Samaritans  worshipped  they 
knew  not  what,  but  the  Jews  worshipped  what  they 
knew,  for  salvation  is  qf  the  Jevis  (ex  Jud^eis^ 
that  is,  begins  at  the  Jews)  :  as  if  he  should  say,  you 
worship  God,  but  know  not  by  whom  he  will  save 
you,  as  we  do,  that  know  it  shall  be  by  one  of  the 
tribe  of  Judah;  a  Jew,  not  a  Sainaritan.  And  there- 
fore also  the  woman  not  impertinently  answered 
him  again,  We  know  the  Messias  shall  come.  So- 
that  which  our  Saviour  saith.  Salvation  is  from  the 
Jews,  is  the  same  that  Paul  says  {Rom.  i.  16,  17) 
The  Gospel  is  the  power  qf  God  to  salvation  to 
every  one  thai  believeth:  to  the  Jew  first,  and 
also  to  the  Greek.  For  therein  is  the  righteous^ 
ness  qf  God  revealed  from  faith  to  faith;  from 
the  faith  of  the  Jew  to  the  faith  of  the  Gentile.    In 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SIGNIFICATION  OF  SALVATION.  455 

the  like  sense  the  prophet  Joel  describing  the  day  part  hi, 
of  Judgment,  (chap.  ii.  30,  31)  that  God  would  shew  .  ^^'  . 
wonders  in  heaven^  and  in  earth,  bloody  and  fire,  The  place 
and  pillars  of  smoke ;  the  sun  shall  he  turned  2[i*|I|j^** 
to  darkness y  and  the  moon  into,  blood,  before  the 
great  and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord  come :  he  add- 
eth,  (verse  32)  and  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  who- 
soever shall  cq,ll  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall 
be  saved.  For  in  Mount  Zion  and  in  Jerusalem 
shall  be  salvation.  And  Obadiah,  (verse  17)  saith 
the  same.  Upon  Moufit  Zion  shall  be  deliverance  ; 
and  there  shall  be  holiness,  and  tfie  house  of  Jacob 
shall  possess  their  possessions,  that  is  the  posses- 
sions of  the  heathen,  which  possessions,  be  ex- 
presseth  more  pjEurticularly  in  the  following  verses, 
by  the  mount  of  Esau,  the  Land  qf  the  Philis- 
tines^ ^t  fields  of  Ephrqim,  of  Sangria,  Gilead, 
and  the  cities  of  the  south,  aijid  concludes  wil;l\ 
these  words,  the  kingdom  shall  be  tfie  I^ofrd^s. 
All  th^se  places  are  for  salva;tion,  ^nd  the  kingdoi^i^ 
of  God,  after  the  day  of  judgment,  upon  earth. 
On  the  other  side,  I  have  not  found  any  text  that 
pan  probably  be  drawn,  to  prove  any  ascension  of 
the  saints  into  heaven ;  that  is  to  say,  into  any 
Qoelum  empyreum,  or  other  setherial  region ;  saying 
that  it  is  called  the  kingdom  of  Heaven :  which 
^ame  it  may  have,  beca^use  God,  t;hat  was  king  of 
the  Jews^  governed  them  by  his  commands,  sent  to 
Mo^^  by  angels  from  heaven;  and  after  the  re- 
volt, sent  his  Son  from  heaven  to  reduce  them  to 
their  obedience ;  and  shall  send  him  thence  again 
to  rule  both  them,  and  all  other  faithful  men,  from 
the  day  of  judgment,  evefJjasti;^y :  or  frpm  th^t, 
that  the  throne  of  this  our  grea^t  king  is  in  heaven  ; 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The  world 
to  come. 


456  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  whereas  the  earth^  is  but  his  footstool.     But  that 

.    ^f'    .    the  subjects  of  God  should  have  any  place  as  high 

as  his  throne,  or  higher  than  his  footstool,  it  seem- 

eth  not  suitable  to  the  dignity  of  a  king,  nor  can  I 

find  any  evident  text  for  it  in  Holy  Scripture. 

From  this  that  hath  been  said  of  the  kingdom  of 
God,  and  of  salvation,  it  is  not  hard  to  interpret 
what  is  meant  by  the  world  to  comb.  There 
are  three  worlds  mentioned  in  Scripture,  the  old 
worlds  the  present  worlds  and  the  world  to  come. 
Of  the  first,  St.  Peter  speaks,  (2  Pet.  ii.  5)  If  God 
spared  not  the  old  worlds  hut  saved  Noah  the 
eighth  person,  a  preacher  of  righteousness,  bring- 
ing the  flood  upon  the  world  of  the  ungodly,  Sfc. 
So  the  J?r*/  world,  was  from  Adam  to  the  general 
flood.  Of  the  present  world,  our  Saviour  speaks 
(John  xviii.  36)  My  ki?igdom  is  not  of  this  world. 
For  he  came  only  to  teach  men  the  way  of  salvation, 
and  to  renew  tihe  kingdom  of  his  Father,  by  his 
doctritie.  Of  the  world  to  come,  St.  Peter  speaks 
(2  Pet.  iii.  1 3)  Nevertheless  we  according  to  his 
promise  look  for  new  heavens,  and  a  new  earth. 
This  is  that  world,  wherein  Christ  coming  down 
from  heaven  in  the  clouds,  with  great  power,  atod 
•  glory,  shall  send  his  angels,  and  shall  gather  to- 
gether his  elect,  from  the  four  winds,  and  from  the 
uttermost  parts  of  the  earth,  and  thenceforth  reign 
over  them,  under  his  Father,  everlastingly. 

Redemption.  Salvation  of  a  sinner,  supposeth  a  precedent  re- 
demption ;  for  he  that  is  once  guilty  of  sin,  is  ob- 
noxious to  the  penalty  of  the  same ;  and  must  pay, 
or  some  other  for  him,  such  ransom  as  he  that  is 
offended,  and  has  him  in  his  power,  shall  require. 
And  seeing  the  person  offended,  is  Almighty  God, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SIGNIPICATION  OP  REDEMPTION;  457 

in  whose  power  are  all  things ;  such  ransom  is  to  part  hi. 
be  paid  before  salvation  can  be  acquired,  as  God  ,  ^^-  . 
hath  been  pleased  to  require.  By  this  ransom,  is  Redemption. 
not  intended  a  satisfaction  for  sin,  equivalent  to 
the  offence ;  which  no  sinner  for  himself,  nor  right- 
eous man  can  ever  be  able  to  make  for  another : 
the  damage  a  man  does  to  another,  he  may  make 
amends  for  by  restitution  or  recompense ;  but  sin 
cannot  be  taken  away  by  recompense;  for  that 
were  to  make  the  liberty  to  sin,  a  thing  vendible. 
But  sins  may  be  pardoned  to  the  repentant,  either 
gratis^  or  upon  such  penalty  as  God  is  pleased  to 
accept.  That  which  God  usually  accepted  in  the 
Old  Testament,  was  some  sacrifice  or  oblation.  To 
forgive  sin  is  not  an  act  of  injustice,  though  the 
ptmishment  have  been  threatened.  Even  amongst 
men,  though  the  promise  of  good,  bind  the  promiser ; 
yet  threats,  that  is  to  say,  promises  of  evil,  bind 
them  not;  much  less  shall  they  bind  God,  who 
is  infinitely  more  merciful  than  men.  Our  Saviour 
Christ  therefore  to  redeem  us,  did  not  in  that  sense 
satisfy  for  the  sins  of  men,  as  that  his  death,  of  its 
own  virtue,  could  make  it  unjust  in  God  to  punish 
sinners  with  eternal  death ;  but  did  make  that  sa-  . 
crifice  and  oblation  of  himself,  at  his  first  coming,  * 
which  God  was  pleased  to  require  for  the  salvation, 
at  his  second  coming,  of  such  as  in  the  meantime 
should  repent,  and  believe  in  him.  .  And  though 
this  act  of  our  redemption^  be  not  always  in  Scrip- 
ture called  a  sacrifice,  and  oblation,  but  sometimes 
a  price  ;  yet  by  price  we  are  not  to  understand 
anything,  by  the  value  whereof,  he  could  claim 
right  to  a  pardon  for  us,  from  his  offended  Father ; 
but  that  price  which  God  the  Father  was  pleased 
in  mercy  to  demand. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Lord's  house. 


438         OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

OP  THE  SIGNIFICATION  IN  SCRIPTURE  OP 
THE  WORD  CHURCH. 

PART  III.  ^^^  word  Church,  (Ecclesia)  signifieth  in  the 
^g'       books  of  Holy  Scripture  divers  things.      Some- 

Church  the  tiiues,  thpugh  not  often^  it  is  taken  for  GoiT^  house, 
that  is  to  say,  for  a  temple,  wherein  Christians 
assembled  to  perform  holy  duties,  publicly,  as 
(1  Cor.  xiv.  34)  Let  your  women  keep  silence  in 
t/ie  Churches :  but  this  is  metaphorically  put  for 
the  congregation  there  assembled ;  and  hath  beea 
siijice  used  for  the  edifice  itself,  to  distinguish  be- 
tween the  temples  of  Christians  and  idolaters.  The 
Temple  of  Jerusalem  was  GotTs  house,  and  the 
hou^e  of  prayer ;  and  so  is  ^y  edifice  dedicated  by 
Christians  to  the  worship  of  Christ,  Christ's  house  .• 
and  therefore  the  Greek  fathers  call  it  Kvpcaic^,  the 
Lords  housfi :  ajid  thence  in  our  language  it  came 
to  be  called  h/rke^  and  church. 

£«rfcija,  ^  ^  Churchy  when  not  taken  for  a  house,  signifieth 
t^e  same  that  ecclesia  signified  in  the  Grecian  com- 
monwealth, that  is  to  say,  a  congregation,  or  an 
assembly  of  citizens,  called  forth  to  hear  the  Hia- 
^trate  speak  unto  them ;  and  which  in  the  com- 
i^onwealth  of  Rome  was  called  concio:  as  he 
t;h^  &ip^e  was  called  ecclesitisteSy  and  concionator. 
And  when  they  were  called  forth  by  lawful  autho- 
rity, (^ct^  xix.  39)  it  was  Ecclesia  legitima,  a 
laujful  Church,  iwo^oc  ewXWa*  But  when  they 
were  ex;cited  by  tumultuous  and  seditious  clamour, 
tihr^  it  was  a  confused  Church,  cicicXi|<rio  avyKBxvfuvri. 
It  i;s  taken  also  sometimes  for  the  men  that  have 
right  to  be  of  the  congregation,  though  not  actually 


properly  what 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SIGNIFICATION  OP  CHUB€H.  459 

assembled,  that  is  to  say,  for  the  whole  multitude  ^art  hi* 
of  Christian  men,  how  far  soever  they  be  dispersed :  .^  ^^'  . 
as  {Acts  viil  3)  where  it  is  said,  that  Saul  made 
havoc  of  the  Church:  and  in  this  sense  is  Christ 
said  to  be  the  head  of  the  Church.  And  sometimes 
ifyx  a  certwi  part  of  Christians,  as  {Col.  iv.  15) 
Salute  the  Church  that  is  in  his  house.  Some- 
times also  for  the  elect  only;  as  {Eph.  y.  27) 
A  glorious  Churchy  without  spot,  or  wrinklcy 
holy,  and  without  blemish  ;  which  is  meant  of  the 
Church  triumphant^  or  Church  to  come.  Some- 
times, for  a  congr^ation  assembled  of  professors 
of  Christiauity,  whether  their  profession  be  true 
or  counterfeit ;  as  it  is  understood,  {Matth.  xviji.  17) 
where  it  is  said.  Tell  it  to  the  Church  ;  and,  if  he 
neglect  to  hear  the  Churchy  let  him  he  to  thee  a^ 
a  Gentile,  or  publican. 

And  in  this  last  sense  only  it  is  that  the  Church  in  what  seoM 
can  be  taken  for  one  person ;  that  is  to  say,  that  it  one  pe^n. ' 
can  be  said  to  have  power  to  will,  to  pronounce,  to 
command,  to  be  obeyed,  to  make  laws,  or  to  clo 
any  other  action  whatsoever.  For  without  autho- 
rity from  a  lawful  congregation,  whatsoever  act  be 
done  in  a  concourse  of  people,  it  is  the  particular 
act  of  every  one  of  those  that  were  present,  and 
gave  their  aid  to  the  performance  of  it ;  and  not 
the  act  of  them  all  in  gross,  as  of  one  body ; 
much  less  the  act  of  them  that  were  absent,  or 
that  bdng  present,  were  not  willing  it  should  be 
done.  According  to  this  senpe^  I  define  a  chuucH'  cbarch 
to  be,  a  company  of  men  professing  Christian  re- 
ligion^ united  in  the  person  qf  qn^  sovereign,  at 
whose  commtmd  they  ought  to  as^eml^le,  and  withr 
out  whose  authority  they  ought  not  to  assemble. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


460  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  And  because  in  all  commonwealths^  that  assembly^ 

^    ^f •    .    which  is  without  warrant  from  the  civil  sovereign, 

is  unlawful ;  that  Church  also,  which  is  assembled 

in  any  commonwealth  that  hath  forbidden  them  to 

assemble,  is  an  unlawful  assembly. 

A  Christian         jj  foUoweth  also,  that  there  is  on  earth,  no  such 

commonweaJth        .  i  /->,  -■ 

and  a  church  uuivcrsal  Church,  as  all  Christians  are  bound  to 
obey ;  because  there  is  no  ppwer  on  earth,  to  which 
all  other  commonwealths  are  subject.  There  are 
Christians,  in  the  dominions  of  several  princes  and 
states ;  but  every  one  of  them  is  subject  to  that 
commonwealth,  whereof  he  is  himself  a  member ; 
and  consequently,  cannot  be  subject  to  the  com- 
mands of  any  other  person.  And  therefore  a  Church, 
such  a  one  as  is  capable  to  command,  to  judge, 
absolve,  condemn,  or  do  any  other  act,  is  the  same 
thing  with  a  civil  commonwealth,  consisting  of 
Christian  men ;  and  is  called  a  civil  state ^  for  that 
the  subjects  of  it  are  men :  and  a  Churchy  for  that 
the  subjects  thereof  aire  Christians.  TemporM^d 
spiritual  government,  are  but  two  words  broug^ht 
into  the  world,  to  make  men  see  double,  and  mis- 
take their  lawful  sovereign.  It  is  true,  that  the 
bodies  of  the  faithful,  after  the  resurrection,  shall 
be  not  only  spiritual,  but  eternal ;  but  in  this  life 
they  are  gross,  and  corruptible.  There  is  there- 
fore no  other  government  in  this  life,  neither  of 
state,  nor  religion,  but  temporal ;  nor  teaching  of 
any  doctrine,  lawful  to  any  subject,  which  the  go- 
vernor both  of  the  state,  and  of  the  religion  for- 
biddeth  to  be  taught.  And  that  governor  must  be 
one ;  or  else  there  must  needs  follow  faction  and 
civil  war  in  the  commonwealth,  between  the  Church 
and  State ;  between  spiritualists  and  temporal^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


I 

i 
SIGNIFICATION  OP  CHURCH.  461  i 

ists  ;  between  the  sword  of  justice,  and  the  shield  part  hi. 
of  faith :  and,  which  is  more,  in  every  Christian  .  ^^'  . 
man's  own  breast,  between  the  Christian,  and  the 
mrifi.  The  doctors  of  the  Church,  are  called 
pastors ;  so  also  are  civil  sovereigns.  But  if  pastors 
be  not  subordinate  one  to  another,  so  as  that  there 
may  be  one  chief  pastor,  men  will  be  taught  con- 
trary doctrines ;  whereof  both  may  be,  and  one  must 
be  false.  Who  that  one  chief  pastor  is,  according 
to  the  law  of  nature,  hath  been  already  shown ; 
namely,  that  it  is  the  civil  sovereign :  and  to  whom 
the  Scripture  hath  assigned  that  office,  we  shall 
see  in  the  chapters  following. 


CHAPTER  XL, 

OF   THE    RIGHTS  OP    THE    KINGDOM    OP   GOD,    IN 

ABRAHAM,  MOSES,  THE  HIGH-PRIESTS,  AND 

THE  KINGS  OP  JUDAH. 

The  father  of  the  faithful,  and  first  in  the  kingdom  The  soye- 
of  God  by  covenant,  was  Abraham.  For  with  him  ^  Abw5»m. 
was  the  covenant  first  made ;  wherein  he  obliged 
himself,  and  his  seed  after  him,  to  acknowledge  and 
obey  the  commands  of  God ;  not  only  such,  as  he 
could  take  notice  of,  (as  moral  laws,)  by  the  light 
of  nature ;  but  also  such,  as  God  should  in  special 
maimer  deliver  to  him  by  dreams  and  visions.  For 
as  to  the  moral  law,  they  were  already  obliged,  and 
needed  not  have  been  contracted  withal,  by  pro- 
mise of  the  land  of  Canaan.  Nor  was  there  any 
contract,  that  could  add  to,  or  strengthen  the  ob- 
ligation, by  which  both  they,  and  all  men  else  were 
bound  naturally  to  obey  God  Almighty :  and  there- 
fore the  covenant  which  Abraham  made  with  God, 


Di£^itized  by 


Google 


462         OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  was  to  take  for  the  commandment  of  God,  that 
^    ^'  _-    which  in  the  name  of  God  was  commanded  him  in 
a  dream,  or  vision ;  and  to  deliver  it  to  his  family, 
and  canse  them  to  observe  the  same. 

In  this  contract  of  God  with  Abraham,  we  may 
observe  three  points  of  important  consequence  in 
the  government  of  God's  people.  First,  that  at  the 
making  of  this  covenant,  God  spake  only  to  Abra- 
ham ;  and  therefore  contracted  not  with  any  of  his 
family,  or  seed,  otherwise  thain  as  their  wills,  which 
make  the  essence  of  all  covenants,  were  before  the 
contract  involved  in  the  will  of  Abraham ;  who  Was 
therefore  supposed  to  have  had  a  lawful  power,  to 
make  them  perform  all  that  he  covenanted  for 
them.  According  whereunto  (<j^«.  xviii.  18,  19) 
God  sidth.  All  the  nations  of  the  earth  shall  be 
blessed  in  him  ;  for  I  know  him  that  he  will  com^ 
mand  his  children  and  his  household  ftfter  hinty 
and  they  shall  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord.  From 
whence  may  be  concluded  this  first  point,  that 
they  to  whom  God  hath  not  spoken  immediately, 
are  to  receive  the  positive  commimdments  of  God, 
from  their  sovereign ;  as  the  family  and  seed  of 
Abraham  had  Abraham  did  from  Abraham  their  fedier,  and  Lord, 

the  sole  power  -i     •    •!  *  a      ji  ^i       • 

of  ordering  the  and  civil  sovercign.  And  consequently  m  every 
J^^^Vie**"  commonwealth,  they  who  have  no  supernatural  re- 
velation to  the  contrary,  ought  to  obey  the  laws  of 
their  own  sovereign,  in  the  external  acts  and  pro- 
fession of  religion.  As  for  the  inward  theughty 
and  belief  of  men,  which  huknah  ^^vemdrs  can 
take  no  notice  of,  (for  God  only  know6t^  the  heairt), 
they  are  not  voluntary,  nor  the  effect  6f  the  laws, 
but  of  the  unrevealed  vrill  and  of  the  power  of 
God ;  and  consequently  fall  not  under  obligation. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


RIGHTS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.         463 

From  whence  proceedeth  another  point,  that  it  tart  hi. 
^WBS  not  unlawful  for  Abraham,  when  any  of  his   .   ^'    . 
subjects  should  pretend  private  vision  or  spirit,  or  No  pretence  of 
other  revelation  from  God,  for  the  countenancing  J^^*^  the* "L 
of  any  doctrine  whidh  Abraham  should  forbid,  or}j^°**^^**~' 
when  they  followed  or  adhered  to  any  such  pre- 
tender, to  punish  them ;  and  consequently  that  it 
is  lawful  now  for  the  sovereign  to  pimish  any  man 
that  shall  oppose  his  private  sjiirit  against  the  laws : 
for  he  hath  the  same  place  in  the  commonwealth, 
that  Abraham  had  in  his  own  family. 

There  ariseth  also  from  the  same,  a  third  point ;  AbmiiMa  sole 
that  as  none  but  Abraham  in  his  family,  so  none  prater  of  what 
but  the  sovereign  in  a  Christian  commonwealth,  ^'*^*^^ 
can  take  notice  what  is,  or  what  is  not  the  word 
of  God.    Por  God  spake  only  to  Abraham  ;  and  it 
-was  he  only,  that  was  able  to  know  whiat  God  said, 
and  to  interpret  the  same  to  his  family :  and  there- 
fore also,  they  that  have  the  place  of  Abraham 
in  a  commonwealth,  are  the  only  interpreters  of 
what  God  hath  spoken. 

The  same  covenant  Was  renewed  with  Isaac ;  The  authority 
and  afterwards  with  Jacob;  but  afterwards  no  on  grounded'*^ 
more,  till  the  Israelites  were  freed  from  the  Egyp- 
tians, and  arrived  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Sinai :  and 
then  it  was  renewed  by  Moses,  (as  I  have  said  be- 
fore, chap.  XXXV.)  in  such  manner,  as  they  be- 
came from  that  time  forward  the  peculiar  kingdom 
of  God ;  whose  lieutenant  was  Moses,  for  his  own 
time  :  and  the  succession  to  that  office  was  settled 
upon  Aaron,  and  his  heirs  after  him,  to  be  to  God  a 
a  sacerdotal  kingdom  for  ever. 

By  this  constitution,  a  kingdom  is  acquired  to 
God.     But  seeing  Moses  had  no  authority  to  go- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


464  OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  vera  the  Israelites^  as  a  successor  to  the  right  of 
^  ^'  .  Abraham^  because  he  could  not  claim  it  by  inheri- 
Authoritir  of  tance ;  it  appeareth  not  as  yet^  that  the  people 
oo^gromded.  werc  obliged  to  take  him  for  God's  lieutenant, 
longer  than  they  believed  that  God  spake  unto  him. 
And  therefore  his  authority,  notwithstanding  the 
covenant  they  made  with  God,  depended  yet  merely 
upon  the  opinion  they  had  of  his  sanctity,  and  of 
the  reality  of  his  conferences  with  God,  and  the 
verity  of  his  miracles ;  which  opinion  coining  to 
change,  they  were  no  more  obl^ed  to  take  any- 
thing for  the  law  of  God,  which  he  propounded  to 
them  in  God's  name.  We  are  therefore  to  consider, 
what  other  ground  there  was,  of  their  obligation 
to  obey  him.  For  it  could  not  be  the  command- 
ment of  God  that  could  oblige  them ;  because  God 
spake  not  to  them  immediately,  but  by  the  media- 
tion of  Moses  himself :  and  our  Saviour  saith  of 
himself,  {John  v.  31)  If  I  hear  witness  of  myself, 
my  witness  is  not  true  ;  much  less  if  Moses  bear 
witness  of  himself,  especially  in  a  claim  of  kingly 
power  over  God's  people,  ought  his  testimony  to  be 
received.  His  authority  therefore,  as  the  authority 
of  all  other  princes,  must  be  grounded  on  the  con- 
sent of  the  people,  and  their  promise  to  obey  him. 
And  so  it  was :  for  the  people  {Exod.  xx.  18,  19) 
when  they  saw  the  thunderings,  and  the  lighten- 
ingSy  and  the  noise  of  the  trumpets,  and  the  moun- 
tain smoking,  removed,  and  stood  afar  off.  And 
they  said  unto  Moses,  speak  thou  with  us,  and  we 
will  hear,  hut  let  not  God  speak  with  us  lest  we 
die.  Here  was  their  promise  of  obedience  ;  and 
by  this  it  was  they  obliged  themselves  to  obey 
whatsoever  he  should  deliver  unto  them  for  the 
commandment  of  God. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BIGHTS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.         465 

And  notwithstanding  the  covenant  constituted  part  hi. 
a  sacerdotal  kingdom,  that  is  to  say,  a  kingdom    .  ^'    . 
hereditary  to  Aaron ;  yet  that  is  to  be  understood  Mo«eswas, 
of  the  suct^ession  after  Moses  should  be  dead.    For  vereign  of'u^e 
whosoever  ordereth  and  establisheth  the  policy,  as  time,*^hougr 
first  founder  of  a  commonwealth,  be  it  monarchy,  ^^^^  ^^® 
aristocracy,  or  democracy,  must  needs  have  sove-  ^"^ 
reign  power  over  the  people  all  the  while  he  is 
doing  of  it.    And  that  Moses  had  that  power  all 
his  own  time,  is  evidently  afl&nned  in  the  Scripture. 
First,  in  the  text  last  before  cited,  because  the 
people  promised  obedience,  not  to  Aaron,  but  to  him. 
Secondly,  {Exod.  xxiv.  1,  2)  And  God  said  unto 
Moses,  Come  up  unto  the  Lord,  thoti  and  Aaron, 
Nadab  and  Ahihu,  and  seventy  of  the  Elders  of 
Israel.    And  Moses  alone  shall  come  near  the 
Lordy  but  they  shall  not  come  nigh,  neither  shall 
the  people  go  up  with  him.     By  which  it  is  plain, 
that  Moses,  who  was  alone  called  up  to  God,  (and 
not  Aaron,  nor  the  other  priests,  nor  the  seventy 
elders,  nor  the  people  who  were  forbidden  to  come 
up,)  was  alone  he,  that  represented  to  the  Israelites 
the  person  of  God,  that  is  to  say,  was  their  sole 
sovereign  under  God.    And  though  afterwards  it  be 
said  (verses  9, 1 0)  Then  went  up  Moses  and  Aaron, 
Nadab  and  Abihu,  and  seventy  of  the  elders  of 
Israel,  and  they  saw  the  God  of  Israel,  and  there 
was  under  his  feet,  as  it  were  a  paved  work  of  a 
sapphire  stone  8fc;  yet  this  was  not  till  after  Moses 
had  been  with  God  before,  and  had  brought  to  the 
people  the  words  which  God  had  said  to  him.     He 
only  went  for  the  business  of  the  people ;  the  others, 
as  the  nobles  of  his  retinue,  were  admitted  for 
honour  to  that  special  grace,  which  was  not  allowed 

VOL.  III.  H  H 


Digitized  by 


Google 


466         OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  to  the  people ;  which  was,  as  in  the  verse  after  ap- 
^  ^  _-  peareth^  to  see  God  and  lire,  God  laid  not  his 
Moset  was,  hond  upon  them,  they  saw  God  and  did  eat  and 
Y^rd^  of  f^  drink  J  that  is,  did  live :  but  did  not  carry  any  com* 
\\Zlf^^l^  mandment  from  him  to  the  people.  Again^  it  is 
^^^J^^  everywhere  said,  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses,  as 
in  all  other  occasions  of  government,  so  also  in  the 
ordering  of  the  ceremonies  of  religion,  contained  in 
chapters  xxv.  xxvi.  xxvii.  xxviii.  xxix.  xxx.  and  xxxi. 
of  Exodus,  and  thronghoat  Leviticus :  to  Aaron 
seldom.  The  calf  that  Aaron  made,  Moses  threw 
into  the  fire.  Lastly,  the  question  of  the  authority 
of  Aaron,  by  occasion  of  his  and  Miriam's  mutiny 
against  Moses,  was  {Numh*^!.)  judged  by  God  him- 
self for  Moses.  So  also  in  the  question  between 
Moses  and  the  people,  who  had  the  right  of  govern- 
ing the  people,  when  Corah^  Dathan,  and  Abiram, 
and  two  hundred  and  fifty  princes  of  the  assembly, 
gathered  themselves  together  {Numb,  xvi  3)  against 
Moses,  and  against  Aaron,  and  said  unto  them, 
ye  take  too  much  upon  you,  seeing  all  the  congre- 
gation are  holy,  every  one  qf  them,  and  the  Lord 
is  amongst  them,  why  Itft  you  up  yourselves  above 
the  congregation  qf  the  Lord?  God  caused  the 
earth  to  swallow  Corah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram,  with 
their  wives  and  children,  alive,  and  consumed  those 
two  hundred  and  fifty  princes  with  fire.  Therefore 
neither  Aaron,  nor  the  people,  nor  any  aristocracy 
of  the  chief  princes  of  the  people,  but  Moses  akne 
had  next  under  God  the  sovereignty  over  the  Israel- 
ites :  and  that  not  only  in  causes  of  civil  policy, 
but  also  of  religion :  for  Moses  only  spake  with 
God,  and  therefore  only  could  tell  the  people  what 
it  was  that  God  required  at  their  hands.    No  man 


Digitized  by 


Google 


RIGHTS  OF  THB  KINGDOM  OF  GOD«  46/ 

upon  pain  of  death  might  be  so  presumptuons  as  to  pAttf  iik 
approach  the  moontain  where  God  talked  with  .-^.  ^'  . 
Moses.  Thou  ekalt  set  bounds  (saith  the  Lord^ 
Exod.  xix^  13)  to  the  pe&pld  round  about ,  and 
say  J  Take  heed  to  yourselves  that  you  go  ndi  up 
into  the  Moiint,  or  touch  the  border  of  it ;  whoso-^ 
etef  toMch^th  the  Mount  shall  surely  be  pui  to 
death.  And  again  (yefrse  21)  6^0  down,  charge 
the  people f  lest  they  bfeak  through  unto  the  Lord 
to  gaze.  Out  of  which  we  may  conclude^  that  who- 
soever in  a  Christian  doitimanwealth  holdeth  the 
place  of  Moses^  is  the  sole  messenger  of  Gdd^  and 
interpreter  of  his  commtihdments.  And  acciording 
hereniit6>  no  man  ought  in  the  interpretation  of  the 
Scripture  to  proceed  farther  than  the  bounds  which 
ate  set  by  their  severd  sovereigns.  For  the  Scrip- 
turesi  since  God  now  speaketh  in  them^  are  the 
Monnt  Sinai;  the  bounds  whereof  are  the  laws 
of  thCTtt  that  represent  God's  person  on  earth.  To 
look  upon  them>  and  therein  to  behold  the  won- 
drous works  of  God,  and  learn  to  fear  him,  is 
allowed ;  but  to  interpret  them^  that  is,  to  pry  into 
what  God  fiaith  to  him  whom  hcf  appointeth  to 
govern  ttader  him,  and  make  themselves  judges 
whether  he  govern  as  God  commandeth  him,  or  not, 
is  to  tramsgress  the  bounds  God  hath  set  us,  and  to 
gaze  uJ)on  God  irrevereritly. 

There  was  no  prophet  in  the  time  of  Moses,  nor  aii  spirits  were 

*^      ^  ^  Bubordinate  to 

pretender  to  the  spirit  of  God,  bnt  stcfh  as  Moses  tbe  spirit  of 
had  approved  and  authori^edi  F*or  there  were  in 
hid  time  but  seventy  men,  that  are  said  to  prophecy 
by  the  spirit  of  God,  and  these  wete  all  of  Moses 
his  election ;  concerning  whom  God  said  to  Mosesj 
{Numb,  xii  16)  Gather  to  me  seventy  of  the  elders 

nn  2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


468  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTD. 

PART  III.  of  Israel y  whom  thou  hnowest  to  he  the  elders  of 
_^'  '  the  people.  To  these  God  imparted  his  spirit ;  but 
it  was  not  a  different  spirit  from  that  of  Moses ; 
for  it  is  said  (verse  25)  God  came  down  in  a  cloudy 
and  took  of  the  spirit  that  was  upon  Moses^  and 
gave  it  to  the  seventy  elders.  But  as  I  have  shown 
before  (chap,  xxxvi.)  by  spirit,  is  understood  the 
mind;  so  that  the  sense  of  the  place  is  no  other 
than  this,  that  God  endued  them  with  a  mind  con- 
formable and  subordinate  to  that  of  Moses,  that 
they  might  prophecy,  that  is  to  say,  speak  to  the 
people  in  God's  name,  in  such  manner,  as  to  set 
forward,  as  ministers  of  Moses  and  by  his  autho- 
rity, such  doctrine  as  was  agreeable  to  Moses  his 
doctrine.  For  they  were  but  ministers ;  and  when 
two  of  them  prophecied  in  the  camp,  it  was  thought 
a  new  and  unlawful  thing ;  and  as  it  is  in  verses 
27  and  28  of  the  same  chapter,  they  were  accused 
of  it,  and  Joshua  advised  Moses  to  forbid  them,  as 
not  knowing  that  it  was  by  Moses  his  spirit  that 
they  prophecied.  By  which  it  is  manifest,  that  no 
subject  ought  to  pretend  to  prophecy,  or  to  the 
spirit,  in  opposition  to  the  doctrine  established  by 
him  whom  God  hath  set  in  the  place  of  Moses. 
After  Moses  Aarou  being  dead,  and  after  him  also  Moses,  the 
WM  hi'SrSgh  kingdom,  as  being  a  sacerdotal  kingdom,  descended 
pncst.  |jy  virtue  of  the  covenant,  to  Aaron's  son  Eleazar 

the  high-priest :  and  God  declared  him,  next  under 
himself,  for  sovereign,  at  the  same  time  that  he  ap- 
pointed Joshua  for  the  General  of  their  army.  For 
thus  God  saith  expressly  (Numb,  xxvii.  21)  con- 
cerning Joshua :  He  shall  stand  before  Eleazar 
the  priest,  who  shall  ash  counsel  for  him  hrfar^ 
the  Lord;  at  his  word  shall  they  go  out,  and  at 


Digitized  by 


Google 


RIGHTS  OP  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.        469 

his  word  they  shall  come  in,  both  he^  and  all  the  part  hi. 
children  of  Israel  with  him.  Therefore  the  su-  .  ^'  . 
preme  power  of  making  war  and  peace,  was  in  the 
priest.  The  supreme  power  of  judicature  belonged 
also  to  the  high-priest:  for  the  book  of  the  law  was 
in  their  keeping;  and  the  priests  and  Levites  only 
were  the  subordinate  judges  in  causes  civil,  as  ap- 
pears in  Deut.  xvii.  8,  9,  10.  And  for  the  manner 
of  God's  worship,  there  was  never  doubt  made,  but 
that  the  high-priest  till  the  time  of  Saul,  had  the 
supreme  authority.  Therefore  the  civil  and  eccle- 
siastical power  were  both  joined  together  in  one 
and  the  same  person,  the  high-priest ;  and  ought 
to  be  so,  in  whosoever  govemeth  by  divine  right, 
that  is,  by  authority  immediate  from  God. 

After  the  death  of  Joshua,  till  the  time  of  Saul,  of  thefore- 

'  '  reign  power  be- 

the  time  between  is  noted  frequently  in  the  Book  twecn  the  time 
of  Judges y  That  there  was  in  those  days  no  king  in  of  sauL 
Israel;  and  sometimes  with  this  addition,  that 
every  man  did  that  which  was  right  in  his  own 
eyes.  By  which  is  to  be  understood,  that  where  it 
is  said,  there  was  no  king,  is  meant,  there  was  no 
sovereign  power  in  Israel.  And  so  it  was,  if  we 
consider  the  act  and  exercise  of  such  power.  For 
after  the  death  of  Joshua  and  Eleazar,  there  arose 
another  generation  (Judges  ii.  10,  11)  that  knew 
not  the  Lordy  nor  the  works  which  he  had  done  for 
Israely  hut  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  and 
served  Baalim.  And  the  Jews  had  that  quality 
which  St.  Paul  noteth,  to  look  for  a  sign^  not  only 
before  they  would  submit  themselves  to  the  govern- 
ment of  Moses,  but  also  after  they  had  obliged 
themselves  by  their  submission.  Whereas  signs  and 
miracles  had  for  end  to  procure  faith,  not  to  keep 
men  from  violating  it,  when  they  have  once  given 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


470         OF  A  CHBI8TUK  COMMQHWBALTH. 

PART  lUt  it ;  for  to  that  men  are  obliged  by  the  law  of  na* 
^  ^'  .  ture.  But  if  we  consider  not  the  exercise^  but  the 
right  pf  govemiug,  the  sovereign  power  was  still  in 
the  high-priest.  Therefore  whatsoever  obedience 
W&s  yielded  to  any  of  the  judges^  who  were  men 
chosen  by  God  extraordinarily  tp  save  his  rebeU 
lious  subjects  out  of  the  hands  of  the  enemy^  it 
cannot  be  drawn  into  argument  against  the  right 
the  high-priest  had  to  the  sovereign  power,  in  all 
matters  both  of  policy  and  religion.  And  neither  the 
judges  nor  Samuel  himself  had  an  ordinary,  Imt  an 
ei^traordinary  calling  to  the  government ;  and  were 
obeyed  by  the  Israelites,  not  out  of  duty,  but  out 
of  reverence  to  their  favour  with  God,  appearing 
in  their  wisdom,  courage,  or  felicity.  Hith^ix) 
therefore  the  right  of  regulating  both  the  policy, 
and  the  religion,  were  inseparable, 
oj^^  To  the  judges  succeeded  kings  j  and  whereas 

kmgsofisraei.  before,  all  authority,  both  in  religion  and  policy, 
was  in  the  highrpriest ;  so  now  it  was  all  in  the 
king.  For  the  sovereignty  over  the  people,  whiqh 
was  before,  not  only  by  virtue  of  the  divine  power, 
but  also  by  a  particular  paet  of  the  Israelites,  in 
God,  and  next  under  him^  in  the  high-^est,  as  his 
vicegerent  on  earth,  was  cast  off  by  the  people,  with 
the  consent  of  God  himself.  For  when  they  said  to 
Samuel  (1  Sam,  viii.  6)  Make  w  a  king  to  judge 
m  like  all  the  nations,  they  signified  that  they 
would  no  more  be  governed  by  the  commands  that 
should  be  U^d  upon  them  by  the  priest,  in  the  name 
of  Go4 ;  but  by  one  that  should  command  them  in 
the  same  manner  that  all  other  nations  were  oom- 
manded ;  and  consequently  in  deposing  the  high- 
priest  of  royal  authority,  they  deposed  that  peculiar 
government  of  God.    And  yet  God  consented  to  it. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


BIGHTS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD,        471 

saying  to  Samuel  (1  Sam.  viii.  7)  Hearken  unto  the  part  in. 
voice  of  the  people ^  in  all  that  they  shall  say  unto  ,  ^'  , 
thee;  for  they  have  not  rejected  thee^  hut  they  have  or  the 
rejected  me^  that  I  should  not  reign  over  them.  ^^oMwtei. 
Having  therefore  rejected  God,  in  whose  right  the 
priests  governed,  there  was  no  authority  left  to  the 
priests,  but  such  as  the  king  was  pleased  to  allow 
them ;  which  was  more  or  less,  according  as  the 
Irings  were  good  or  evil.  And  for  the  government 
of  civil  affairs,  it  is  manifest,  it  was  all  in  the  hands 
of  the  king.  For  in  the  same  chapter,  (verse  20), 
they  say  they  will  he  like  all  the  nations  ;  that  their 
king  shall  he  their  judge ^  and  go  before  them,  and 
Jight  their  battles  ;  that  is,  he  shall  have  the  whole 
authority,  both  in  peace  and  war.  In  which  is  con- 
tained also  the  ordering  of  religion :  for  there  was 
no  other  word  of  God  in  that  time,  by  which  to  re- 
gulate religion,  but  the  law  of  Moses,  which  was 
their  civil  law.  Besides,  we  read  (1  Kings  ii.  27) 
that  Solomon  thrust  out  Ahiathar  from  being 
priest  before  the  Lord:  he  had  therefore  authority 
over  the  high-priest,  as  over  any  other  subject ; 
which  is  a  great  mark  of  supremacy  in  religion* 
And  we  read  also,  (1  Kings  viii.)  that  he  dedicated 
the  Temple  ;  that  he  blessed  the  people ;  and  that 
he  himself  in  person  made  that  excellent  prayer, 
used  in  the  consecration  of  all  churches  and  houses 
of  prayer ;  which  is  another  great  mark  of  supre- 
macy in  religion.  Again,  we  read  (2  Kings  xxii.) 
that  when  there  was  question  concerning  the  Book 
of  the  Law  found  in  the  Temple,  the  same  was  not 
decided  by  the  high-priest,  but  Josiah  sent  both  him 
and  others  to  enquire  concerning  it,  of  Huldah,  the 
prophetess ;  which  is  another  mark  of  supremacy 


Digitized  by 


Google 


472  OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  in  religion.  Lastly^  we  read  (1  Chron.  xxvi.  30) 
.  Vf  V  .  that  David  made  Hashabiah  and  his  brethren,  He- 
bronites,  officers  of  Israel  among  them  westward, 
in  all  their  business  of  the  Lordy  and  in  the  service 
of  the  king.  Likewise  (verse  32)  that  he  made 
other  Hebronites,  rulers  over  the  ReuhemteSy  the 
GaditeSy  and  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  (these 
were  the  rest  of  Israel  that  dwelt  beyond  Jordan) 
for  every  matter  pertaining  to  God,  and  chairs  of 
the  king.  Is  not  this  full  power,  both  temporal 
and  spiritual,  as  they  call  it  that  would  divide  it  ? 
To  conclude ;  from  the  first  institution  of  God's 
kingdom,  to  the  captivity,  the  supremacy  of  reli- 
gion was  in  the  same  hand  with  that  of  the  civil 
sovereignty;  and  the  priest's  office  after  the  election 
of  Saul,  was  not  magisterial,  but  ministerial. 
The  practice        Notwithstanding  the  government  both  in  policy 

of  supremacy  o  o  r         j 

in  reiigjOD  waa  and  rcligiou,  were  joined,  first  in  the  high-priests^ 
oftbekmg8,ac  and  aftciwards  in  the  kings,  so  far  forth  as  con- 
r^t"th^?* cemed  the  right;  yet  it  appeareth  by  the  same 
holy  history,  that  the  people  understood  it  not : 
but  there  being  amongst  them  a  great  part,  and 
probably  the  greatest  part,  that  no  longer  than 
they  saw  great  miracles,  or,  what  is  equivalent  to 
a  miracle,  great  abilities,  or  great  felicity  in  the 
enterprises  of  their  governors,  gave  sufficient  credit 
either  to  the  fame  of  Moses  or  to  the  colloquies' 
between  God  and  the  priests ;  they  took  occasion, 
as  oft  as  their  governors  displeased  them,  by 
blaming  sometimes  the  policy,  sometimes  the  reli- 
gion, to  change  the  government  or  revolt  from 
their  obedience  at  their  pleasure :  and  from  thence 
proceeded  from  time  to  time  the  civil  troubles, 
divisions,  and  calamities  of  the  nation.    As  for  ex- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


RIGHTS  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.         473 

ample^  after  the  death  of  Eleazar  and  Joshua,  the  part  hi. 
next  generation  which  had  not  seen  the  wonders  _  ^'  _^ 
of  God,  but  were  left  to  their  own  weak  reason,  The  practice 

,  .  _  -  -I  I-        -11-1  of  supremacy 

not  knowing  themselves  obliged  by  the  covenant  in  religion  was 
of  a  sacerdotal  kingdom,  regarded  no  more  the  "f {helang^w! 
commandment  of  the  priest  nor  any  law  of  Moses,  righuLieof!"* 
but  did  every  man  that  which  was  right  in  his  own 
eyes,  and  obeyed  in  civil  afifairs  such  men,  as  from 
time  to  time  they  thought  able  to  deliver  them  from 
the  neighbour  nations  that  oppressed  them ;  and 
consulted  not  with  God,  as  they  ought  to  do,  but 
with  such  men  or  women,  as  they  guessed  to  be 
prophets  by  their  predictions  of  things  to  come ; 
and  though  they  had  an  idol  in  their  chapel,  yet  if 
they  had  a  Levite  for  their  chaplain,  they  made 
account  they  worshipped  the  God  of  Israel. 

And  afterwards  when  they  demanded  a  king 
after  the  manner  of  the  nations ;  yet  it  was  not 
with  a  design  to  depart  from  the  worship  of  God 
their  king ;  but  despairing  of  the  justice  of  the 
sons  of  Samuel,  they  would  have  a  king  to  judge 
them  in  civil  actions ;  but  not  that  they  would 
allow  their  king  to  change  the  religion  which  they 
thought  was  recommended  to  them  by  Moses.  So 
that  they  always  kept  in  store  a  pretext,  either  of 
justice  or  religion,  to  discharge  themselves  of  their 
obedience,  whensoever  they  had  hope  to  prevail. 
Samuel  was  displeased  with  the  people,  for  that 
they  desired  a  king ;  for  God  was  their  king  already, 
and  Samuel  had  but  an  authority  under  him ;  yet 
did  Samuel,  when  Saul  observed  not  his  counsel, 
in  destroying  Agag  as  God  had  commanded,  anoint 
another  king,  namely  David,  to  take  the  succession 
from  his  heirs.  Rehoboam  was  no  idolater;  but  when 


Digitized  by 


Google 


474  OF  A  CHBI8TIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

4 

PAET  III.  the  people  thought  himim  oppressor,  that  eivU  pre* 
.    ^•_,    tence  carried  from  him  ten  tribes  to  Jeroboam  an 
idolater.    And  generally  through  the  whole  history 
of  the  kings,  as  well  of  Jndah  as  of  Israel,  there 
were  prophets  that  always  controlled  the  kings,  for 
transgressing  the  religion;   and  sometimes   also 
for  errors  of  state ;  as  Jehosaphat  was  reproved 
(2  Chran.  xix.  2)  by  the  prophet  Jehu,  for  aiding  the 
king  of  Israel  against  the  Syrians;  and  Hezekiah,  by 
Isaiah,  (xxxix.  8-7)  for  shewing  his  treasures  to  the 
ambassadors  of  Babylon.  By  all  which  it  appeareth, 
that  though  the  power  both  of  state  and  religion 
were  in  the  kings ;  yet  none  of  them  were  uncon- 
trolled in  the  use  of  it,  but  such  as  were  gracious  for 
their  own  natural  abilities  or  felicities.  So  that  from 
the  practise  of  those  times,  there  can  no  argument 
be  drawn,  that  the  right  of  supremacy  in  religion 
was  not  in  the  kings,  unless  we  place  it  in  the  pro* 
phets,  and  conclude,  that  because  Hezekiah  pray- 
ing to  the  Lord  before  the  cherubims,  was  not  an- 
swered from  thence,  nor  then,  but  afterwards  by 
the  prophet  Isaiah,  therefore  Isaiah  was  supreme 
head  of  the  church ;  or  because  Josiah  consulted 
Huldah  the  prophetess,  concerning  the  Book  of  the 
Law,  that  therefore  neither  he  nor  the  high*-prie8t, 
but  Huldah  the  prophetess,  had  the  supreme  autho^ 
rity  in  matter  of  religion ;  which  I  think  is  not  the 
opinion  of  any  doctor. 
During  the  captivity,  the  Jews  had  no  common- 
After  the  cap-  wealth  at  all  \  and  after  their  return,  though  they 
had^io  setuld  reucwed  their  covenant  with  God,  yet  there  was  no 
commonwealth  ^^^^;^^  ^^dc  of  obedicuce,  neither  to  Esdras,  nor 
to  any  other :   and  presently  after,  they  became 
subjects  to  the  Greeks,  from  whose  customs  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


RIOHTS  09  THB  KINGDOM  OF  GOD.         475 

demonology^  and  fr(»m  the  doctrine  of  the  Cabal-  part  hi. 
ists,  their  religion  became  much  corrupted:  in  .^'  ^ 
su^h  so]rt  as  nothing  can  be  gathered  from  their 
copfasion^  both  in  state  and  religion^  concerning 
the  supremacy  in  either.  And  ther^ore  so  far 
forth  as  concemeth  the  Old  Testament,  wc  may 
(conclude,  that  whosoever  had  the  sovereignty  of 
the  commonwealth  amongst  the  Jews,  the  same 
had  also  the  supreme  authority  in  matter  of  Qod*s 
cactemal  worship,  and  represented  God's  person ; 
that  is,  the  person  of  God  the  Father ;  though  he 
were  not  called  by  the  name  of  Father,  till  such 
time  as  he  sent  into  the  world  his  son  Jesus  Christ, 
to  redeem  mankind  from  their  sins,  and  bring  them 
into  hip  everlasting,  kingdom,  to  be  saved  ft>r  ever- 
more. Of  which  we  are  to  speak  in  the  chapter 
following. 


CHAPTER  XLI. 

OF  TPK  oFpic?  OP  OUR  9i<b;sse;d  saviqub, 

W»  find  in  Holy  Seripture  three  parts  of  the 
pftee  of  the  Measiah :  the  first  of  a  Redeemer  or  Three  partt 
SmtQurs  the  second  of  a  pastor,  cauMelhr,  orofchnV 
tmtiher,  that  is,  of  a  prophet  sent  from  God  to 
pauye?t  such  as  God  hatii  elected  to  salvation ;  the 
third  (rf  a  king,  an  eternal  hing,  but  under  his 
Father^  as  Moses  and  the  high-priests  were  iff  their 
several  times.  And  to  these  three  parts  are  cor- 
rfipondent  three  times.  For  our  redemption  he 
wrought  at  his  first  coming,  by  the  sacrifice  where- 
in be  offered  up  himself  for  our  sins  upon  the  cross : 


V    V 


^--^-^ 


^ 


-< 


Digitized  by  vJk''vV^        O     ^ 


>-=^='„«^, 


476  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  iir.  our  conversion  he  vn-ought  pscrtly  then  m  his  own 
.    ^y    .    person,  and  partly  worketh  now  by  his  ministers, 

and  will  continue  to  work  till  his  coming  again. 

And  after  his  coming  again,  shall  begin  that  his 

glorious  reign  over  his  elect,  which  is  to  last 

eternally. 
To  the  ofl&ce  of  a  Redeemer,  that  is,  of  one  that 
His  office  as   payeth  the  ransom  of  sin,  which  ransom  is  death, 

a  Redeemer.  *"'  -iii  •/»!  i    ^         t 

it  appertaineth,  that  he  was  sacnficed,  and  thereby 
bare  upon  his  own  head  and  carried  away  from  us 
our  iniquities,  in  such  sort  as  God  had  required. 
Not  that  the  death  of  one  man,  though  without 
sin,  can  satisfy  for  the  offences  of  all  men,  in  the 
rigour  of  justice,  but  in  the  mercy  of  God,  that 
ordained  such  sacrifices  for  sin,  as  he  was  pleased 
in  his  mercy  to  accept.  In  the  old  law  (as  we  may 
read,  Levit.  xvi.)  the  Lord  required  that  there 
should,  every  year  once,  be  made  an  atonement 
for  the  sins  of  all  Israel,  both  priests  and  others ; 
for  the  doing  whereof,  Aaron  alone  was  to  sa- 
crifice for  himself  and  the  priests  a  young  bullock ; 
and  for  the  rest  of  the  people,he  was  to  receive  from 
them  two  young  goats,  of  which  he  was  to  sacrifice 
one  ;  but  as  for  the  other,  which  was  the  scape-goaf, 
he  was  to  lay  his  hands  on  the  head  thereof,  and  by  a 
confession  of  the  iniquities  of  the  people,  to  lay 
them  all  on  that  head,  and  then  by  some  opportune 
man,  to  cause  the  goat  to  be  led  into  the  wilderness, 
and  there  to  escape,  and  carry  away  with  him  the 
iniquities  of  the  people.  As  the  sacrifice  of  the  one 
goat  was  a  sufl&cient,  because  an  acceptable,  price 
for  the  ransom  of  all  Israel ;  so  the  death  of  the 
Messiah,  is  a  sufl&cient  price  for  the  sins  of  all 
mankind,  because  there  was  no  more  required. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  OFFICE  OF  OUR  SAVIOUR.  477 

Our  Saviour  Christ's  sufferings  seem  to  be  here  part  hi 
figured,  as  clearly  as  in  the  oblation  of  Isaac,  or  .  *'•  . 
in  any  other  type  of  him  in  the  Old  Testament. 
He  was  both  the  sacrificed  goat,  and  the  scape- 
goat; he  was  oppressed^  and  he  was  evicted 
{Isaiah  liii.  7)  ;  he  opened  not  his  mouth  ;  he  is 
brought  as  a  lamh  to  the  slaughter^  and  a^  a 
sheep  is  dumb  before  the  shearer,  so  he  opened 
not  his  mouth :  here  he  is  the  sacrificed  goat.  He 
hath  borne  our  griefs  (verse  4),  and  carried  our 
sorrows :  and  again,  (verse  6),  the  Lord  hath  laid 
upon  him  the  iniquities  of  us  all :  and  so  he  is  the 
scape-goat.  He  was  cut  off  from  the  land  of  the 
living  (yer.  8)  for  the  transgression  of  mt/  people : 
there  again  he  is  the  sacrificed  goat.  And  again, 
(verse  11)  he  shall  bear  their  sins:  he  is  the 
scape  goat.  Thus  is  the  lamb  of  God  equivalent 
to  both  those  goats ;  sacrificed,  in  that  he  died ; 
and  escaping,  in  his  resurrection;  being  raised 
opportunely  by  his  Father,  and  removed  from  the 
habitation  of  men  in  his  ascension. 

For  as  much  therefore,  as  he  that  redeemeth  cjinst's 
hath  no  title  to  the  thing  redeemed,  before  M^  of this^wiHd. 
redemption,  and  ransom  paid ;  and  this  ransom 
was  the  death  of  the  Redeemer ;  it  is  manifest, 
that  our  Saviour,  as  man,  was  not  king  of  those 
that  he  redeemed,  before  he  suffered  death ;  that 
isi  during  that  time  he  conversed  bodily  on  the 
earth.  I  say,  he  was  not  then  king  in  present,  by 
virtue  of  the  pact,  which  the  faithful  make  with 
him  in  baptism.  Nevertheless,  by  the  renewing  of 
their  pact  with  God  in  baptism,  they  were  obliged  to 
obey  him  for  king,  under  his  Fatiier,  whensoever 
he  should  be  pleased  to  take  the  kingdom  upon 


Digitized  by 


Google 


478  OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH, 

PART  III.  him*     According  whereunto,  our  Saviour  himself 
.    ^1*    .    expressly  saith^  {John  xviii*  86)  My  kingdom  is 
Christ's  Icing,  not  qf  tkis  world.      Now  seeing  the  Bcriptore 
t^Tworid.      maketh  mention  but  of  two  worlds ;  this  that  is 
now^  and  nftiall  remain  tmto  the  daj  of  judgmoit^ 
which  is  therefore  also  called  the  Uut  dap  /  atld 
that  which  shall  be  after  the  day  of  judgmefif^  when 
there  shall  be  a  new  heayen,  and  a  new  earth }  the 
kingdom  of  Christ  is  not  to  b^pil  till  the  gebaral 
resurrection.    And  that  is  It  which  our  Saviirad* 
satith,  (Matth.  xvi.27  )  The  Son  qf  man  shall  come 
in  the  glory  (tfhis  Fatherfttith  his  angeU ;  and 
then  he  shall  reward  every  man  according  to  hie 
works.    To  reward  erery  man  according  to  his 
works,  is  to  execute  the  office  of  a  king ;  and  this 
is  not  to  be  till  he  come  in  the  glory  of  his  Father, 
with  his  angelSi    When  our  Saviour  saith^  {Matth. 
xxiii.  2, 8)  The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  sit  in  Mosett 
seat;   all    therefore   whatsoever   they  hid  you 
do,  that   observe  and  do  i   he  declared  plainly^ 
that  he  ascribed  kingly  power,  for  that  time.  Hot 
to  himself,  but  to  them.     And  so  he  doth  also, 
where  he  saith  {Luke  xii.  14)    Who  made  nte  a 
judge  or  divider  over  you  9    And  {Jokri  xii.  47) 
/  came  not  to  judge  the  world,  but  to  save  the 
world.    And  yet  our  Saviour  came  into  this  world 
that  he  might  be  a  kii^  and  a  judge  in  the  worM 
to  come :  for  he  was  the  Messiah,  that  is,  the  CSbrist, 
that  is,  the  anointed  priest^   and  the  soverrign 
prophet  of  God  i  that  is  to  say,  he  was  to  have  all 
the  power  that  was  in  Moses  the  prophet,  in  the 
high-priests  that  succeeded  Moses,  dnd  in  the  kings 
that  succeeded  the  priests.    And  St.  John  says  ex- 
pressly (chap.  V.  verse  22)  the  Father  judgeih  no 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  OFFICE  OP  OUR  SAVIOUR.  479 

nmn,  but  hath  committed  all  judgment  to  the  Son.  part  hi 

And  this  ia  not  rqnignant  to  that  other  place^  /   -_^|'    ^ 

came  not  to  Judge  the  world:  for  this  is  spoken  of 

the  world  present^  the  other  of  the  world  to  come  ; 

as  also  where  it  is  said^  that  at  the  second  coming 

of  Christy  (Matth,  xix.  38)  Ye  that  hate  followed 

me  in  the  regeneration^  when  the  Son  of  Man 

shall  sit  in  the  throne  of  his  glory y  ye  shall  also 

sit  on  twehe  thrones,  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of 

Israel. 

If  then  CSirist^  whilst  he  was  on  earth,  had  no  Hie  end  of ' 
kingdom  in  this  world,  to  what  end  was  his  first  was  \o  ^rlmew 
oommg?    It  was  to  restore  onto  God,  by  a  fiewj^^^^i^^^g^',^^ 
covenant,  the  kingdom,  which  being  his  by  the  old  God,andtoper. 
covenant,  had  been  cut  off  by  the  rebellion  of  the  to  embrace  it, 
Israelites  in  the  election  of  Sanl,    Which  to  do,  he  I^condl^t*  o^f 
^was  to  preach  nnto  them,  that  he  was  the  Messiah,  ^^  °®^^' 
that  is,  the  king  promised  to  them  by  the  prophets ; 
and  to  offer  himself  in  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  them 
that  shonld  by  faith  submit  themselves  thereto; 
and  in  case  the  nation  generally  should  refuse  him, 
to  call  to  his  obedience  such  as  should  believe  in 
him  amongst  the  Gentiles.     So  that  there  are  two 
parts  of  our  Saviour's  office  during  his  abode  upon 
the  earth :  one  to  proclaim  himself  the  Christ ; 
and  another  by  teaching,  and  by  working  of  fmra- 
cles,  to  persuade  and  prepare  men  to  live  so,  as  to 
be  worthy  of  the  immortality  beHevers  were  to  en- 
joy, at  such  time  as  he  should  come  in  majesty  to 
take  possesion  of  bis  Father's  kingdom.      And 
th^efore  it  is,  that  itie  time  of  his  preaching  is 
often  by  himself  called  the  regeneration  ;  which 
is  not  properly  a  kingdom,  and  thereby  a  warrant 
to  deny  obe^ence  to  the  ma^strates  that  then 


Digitized  by 


Google 


480  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  were ;  for  he  commanded  to  obey  those  that  sat 
.    ^}'    .    then  in  Moses*  chah*^  and  to  pay  tribute  to  Caesar ; 
but  only  an  earnest  of  the  kingdom  of  God  that 
was  to  come,  to  those  to  whom  God  had  given  the 
grace  to  be  his  disciples,  and  to  believe  in  him  ;  for 
which  cause  the  godly  are  said  to  be  already  in  the 
kingdom  of  grace,  as  naturalized  in  that  heavenly 
kingdom. 
The  preaching      Hithcrto,  therefore,   there  is  nothing  done  or 
contra^'to°the  taught  by  Christ,  that  tendeth  to  the  diminution 
JetV'noflf'  of  ^^  civU  right  of  the  Jews  or  of  Caesar.    For 
Caesar.  gg  touchiug  the  commonwcalth  which  then  was 

amongst  the  Jews,  both  they  that  bare  rule  amongst 
them,  and  they  that  were  governed,  did  all  expect 
the  Messiah  and  kingdom  of  God;  which  they 
could  not  have  done,  if  their  laws  had  forbidden 
him,  when  he  came,  to  manifest  and  declare  him- 
self. Seeing  therefore  he  did  nothing,  but  by 
preaching  and  miracles  go  about  to  prove  himself 
to  be  that  Messiah,  he  did  therein  nothing  against 
their  laws.  The  kingdom  he  claimed  was  to  be  in 
another  world  :  he  taught  all  men  to  obey  in  the 
mean  time  them  that  sat  in  Moses'  seat :  he  allowed 
them  to  give  Caesar  his  tribute,  and  refused  to  take 
upon  himself  to  be  a  judge.  How  then  could  his 
words  or  actions  be  seditious,  or  tend  to  the  over- 
throw of  their  then  civil  government  ?  But  God 
having  determined  his  sacrifice  for  the  reduction 
of  his  elect  to  their  former  covenanted  obedience, 
for  the  means,  whereby  he  would  bring  the  same  to 
effect,  made  use  of  their  malice  and  ingratitude. 
Nor  was  it  contrary  to  the  laws  of  Caesar.  For 
though  Pilate  himself,  to  gratify  the  Jev^,  delivered 
him  to  be  crucified ;  yet  before  he  did  so,  he  pro- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  OFFICE  OF  OUR  SAVIOUR.  481 

Doimced  openly,  that  he  found  no  fault  in  him :  part  hi. 
andpntfor  title  of  his  condemnation,  not  as  the    .    '^^   . 
Jews  required,  that  he  pretended  to  he  king  ;  but 
simply,  that  he  was  king  of  the  Jews ;  and  not- 
withstanding their  clamour,  refused  to  alter  it; 
sajring,  What  I  have  written,  I  have  written. 

As  for  the  third  part  of  his  ofl&ce,  which  was  to  The  third  part 
be  hing^  I  have  already  shewn  that  his  kingdom  to  be  k^^u" 
was  not  to  begin  till  the  resurrection.  But  then  orthS'ei^"' 
he  shall  be  king,  not  only  as  God,  in  which  sense 
he  is  king  already,  and  ever  shall  be,  of  all  the 
earth,  in  virtue  of  his  omnipotence ;  but  also  pe- 
culiarly of  his  own  elect,  by  virtue  of  the  pact  they 
make  with  him  in  their  baptism.  And  therefore  it 
is,  that  our  Saviour  saith  (Matth.  xix.  28)  that  his 
apostles  should  sit  upon  twelve  thrones,  judging  the 
twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  When  the  Son  of  Man  shall 
sit  in  the  throne  of  his  glory :  whereby  he  sig- 
nified that  he  should  reign  then  in  his  human 
nature  ;  and  {Matth.  xvi.  27)  The  Son  of  Man 
shall  come  in  the  glory  of  his  Father ^  with  his 
angels,  and  then  he  shall  reward  every  man  ac- 
cording  to  his  works.  The  same  we  may  read, 
Mark  xiii.  26,  and  xiv.  62 ;  and  more  expressly  for 
the  time,  Luke  xxii.  29,  30,  /  appoint  unto  you  a 
kingdom,  as  my  Father  hath  appointed  to  me, 
that  you  may  eat  and  drink  at  my  table  in  my 
kingdom,  and  sit  on  thrones  judging  the  twelve 
tribes  of  Israel.  By  which  it  is  manifest,  that 
the  kingdom  of  Christ  appointed  to  him  by  his 
Father,  is  not  to  be  before  the  Son  of  Man  shall 
come  in  glory,  and  make  his  apostles  judges  of  the 
twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  But  a  man  may  here  ask, 
seeing  there  is  no  marriage  in  the  kingdom  of 
VOL.  HI.  1 1 


Digitized  by 


Google 


488         OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PAET  III.  heaven,  whether  men  shall  then  eat  and  drink? 

^_^)*  _-  What  eating  therrfore  is  meant  in  this  place?  T\m 
is  expounded  by  our  Saviour  (John  vi.  37),  where 
he  saith.  Labour  not /or  the  meat  which  perisheth, 
but  for  that  meat  which  endureth  unto  everlasting 
life,  which  the  Son  iff  Man  ehall  give  you.  So 
that  by  eating  at  Christ's  table,  is  meant  the  eating 
of  the  tree  of  life ;  that  is  to  say,  the  enjoying  of 
immortality,  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  Man. 
By  which  places  and  many  more,  it  is  evident 
that  our  Saviour's  kingdom  is  to  be  exercised  by 
him  in  his  human  nature. 

Christ's  au-       Agaiu,  he  is  to  be  king  then,  no  otherwise  than 

tbontyinthe  it  .  i«  ^     i     <■       -n     •■ 

kingdom  of  as  Subordinate  or  vicegerent  of  God  the  Father,  as 
nate'  to  ^hat"  Moses  was  iu  thc  wilderness ;  and  as  the  high-priests 
of  his  Father,  ^gpe  bcforc  the  roigu  of  Saul;  and  as  the  kings 
were  after  it  For  it  is  one  of  the  prophecies  con- 
cerning Christ,  that  he  should  be  like,  in  office,  to 
Moses :  /  will  raise  them  up  a  prophet ,  saith  the 
Lord  {Deut.-xyvi.  18)  from  amongst  their  brethren, 
like  unto  thee,  and  will  put  my  words  into  his 
mouth;  and  this  similitude  with  Moses,  is  also  ap^ 
parent  in  the  actions  of  our  Saviour  himself,  whilst 
he  was  conversant  on  earth.  For  as  Moses  chose 
twelve  princes  of  the  tribes,  to  govern  under  him ; 
so  did  our  Saviour  choose  twdve  apostles,  who 
shall  sit  on  twelve  thrones,  and  judge  the  twelve 
tribes  of  Israel.  And  as  Moses  authorised  seventy 
elders,  to  receive  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  to  pro- 
phecy to  the  people,  that  is,  as  I  have  said  before, 
to  speak  nnto  them  in  the  name  of  God ;  so  our 
Saviour  also  ordained  seventy  disciples,  to  preach 
his  kingdom  and  salvation  to  all  nations.  And  as 
when  a  complaint  was  made  to  Moses,  against 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THB  OJPICK  OF  OUR  SAVIOUR.  488 

those  of  the  seventy  that  prophecied  in  the  camp  part  hi. 
of  Israel,  he  justified  them  in  it,  as  being  subser-  j)*  . 
vient  therein  to  his  government ;  so  also  onr  Sa- 
viour, when  St.  John  complained  to  him  of  a  certain 
man  that  cast  out  devils  in  his  name,  justified  him 
therein,  saying,  (Luke  ix.  hO)  Forbid  him  not^for 
he  that  is  not  against  us,  is  on  our  part. 

Again,  our  Saviour  resembled  Moses  in  the  in-  chmfiM. 
stitution  of  sacraments,  both  of  admtsston  mto  the  kingdom  of 
kingdom  of  God,  and  of  commemoration  of  his  de-  na^'to  Xit" 
liverance  of  his  elect  from  their  miserable  condition.  ®^^"  ^**^®'- 
As  the  children  of  Israel  had  for  sacrament  of  their 
reception  into  the  kingdom  of  God,  before  the  time 
of  Moses,  the  rite  of  circumcision,  which  rite 
having  been  omitted  in  the  wilderness,  was  again 
restored  as  soon  as  they  came  into  the  Land  of  Pro* 
mise ;  so  also  the  Jews,  before  the  coming  of  our 
Saviour,  had  a  rite  of  baptizing,  that  is,  of  vrash- 
ing  vrith  water,  all  those  that  being  Gentiles  em- 
braced  the  God  of  Israel.  This  rite  St.  John  the 
Baptist  used  in  the  reception  of  all  them  that  gave 
their  names  to  the  Christ,  whom  he  preached  to  be 
already  come  into  the  world ;  and  our  Saviour  in- 
stituted the  same  for  a  sacrament  to  be  taken  by 
all  that  believed  in  him.  From  what  cause  the  rite 
of  baptism  first  proceeded,  is  not  expressed  for- 
mally in  the  Scripture ;  but  it  may  be  probably 
thought  to  be  an  imitation  of  the  law  of  Moses, 
concerning  leprosy ;  wherein  the  leprous  man  was 
commanded  to  be  kept  out  of  the  camp  of  Israel 
for  a  certain  time ;  after  which  time  being  judged 
by  the  priest  to  be  clean,  he  was  admitted  into 
the  camp  after  a  solemn  washing.  And  this  may 
therefore  be  a  type  of  the  washing  in  baptism ; 

112 


Digitized  by 


Google 


484  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH 

PART  in.  wherein  such  men  as  are  cleansed  of  the  leprosy 
.  ^^*  .  of  sin  by  fidth,  are  received  into  the  Church  with 
cbriflt'iMi-  the  solemnity  of  baptism.  There  is  another  con- 
SnSJ^^f*  jecture,  drawn  from  the  ceremonies  of  the  Gentiles^ 


nati'to"^  in  a  certain  case  that  rarely  happens :  and  tibiat  is, 
of  his  Father,  when  a  man  that  was  thought  dead  chanced  to  re- 
cover, other  men  made  scruple  to  converse  with 
him,  as  they  would  do  to  converse  with  a  ghost, 
unless  he  were  received  again  into  the  number  of 
men  by  washing,  as  children  new-bom  were  washed 
frx)m  the  uncleanness  of  their  nativity ;  which  was  a 
kind  of  new  birth.  This  ceremony  of  the  Greeks, 
in  the  time  that  Judea  was  under  the  dominion 
of  Alexander  and  the  Greeks  his  successors,  may 
probably  enough  have  crept  into  the  reli^on  of  the 
Jews.  But  seeing  it  is  not  likely  our  Saviour 
would  countenance  a  heathen  rite,  it  is  most  likely 
it  proceeded  from  the  legal  ceremony  of  washing 
after  leprosy.  And  for  the  other  sacrament  of 
eating  the  Paschal  lamby  it  is  manifestly  imitated 
in  the  sacrament  of  the  LorcTs  Supper  ;  in  which 
the  breaking  of  the  bread,  and  the  pouring  out  of 
the  wine,  do  keep  in  memory  our  deliverance  from 
the  misery  of  sin,  by  Christ's  passion,  as  the  eating 
of  tiie  Paschal  lamb  kept  in  memory  the  deliver- 
ance of  the  Jews  out  of  the  bondi^  of  Egypt. 
Seeing  therefore  the  authority  of  Moses  was  but 
subordinate,  and  he  but  a  lieutenant  of  God ;  it 
followeth  that  Christ,  whose  authority,  as  man, 
was  to  be  like  that  of  Moses,  was  no  more  but  sub- 
ordinate to  the  authority  of  his  Father.  The  same 
is  more  expressly  signified,  by  that  that  he  teacheth 
us  to  pray.  Our  Father,  let  thy  kingdom  come ; 
and.  For  thine  is  the  kingdom,  the  power  and  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  OFFICE  OF  OUR  SAVIOUR.  485 

glory  r  and  by  that  it  is  said,  that  He  shall  come  part  i\u 
in  the  glory  of  his  Father  ;  and  by  that  which  St.    .    ^|'    . 
Paul  saith,  (I  Cor.  xv,  24)  then  cometh  the  end, 
when  he  shall  have  delivered  up  the  kingdom  to 
God,  even  the  Father  ;  and  by  many  other  most 
express  places. 

Our  Saviour,  therefore,  both  in  teaching  and  One  and 
reigning,  representeth,  as  Moses  did,  the  person  of  L  the  perron 
God ;  which  God  from  that  time  forward,  but  not  by^StLd 
before,  is  called  the  Father ;  and  being  still  one  and  chri»t. 
the  same  substance,  is  one  person  as  represented 
by  Moses,  and  another  person  as  represented  by  his 
son  the  Christ.    For  person  being  a  relative  to  a 
representer,  it  is  consequent  to  plurality  of  repre- 
senters,  that  there  be  a  plurality  of  persons,  though 
of  one  and  the  same  substance.^ 


CHAPTER  Xm. 

OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAI 

For  the  understanding  of  power  ecclesiasti- 
cal, what,  and  in  whom  it  is,  we  are  to  distinguish 
the  time  from  the  ascension  of  our  Saviour,  into 
two  parts  ;  one  before  the  conversion  of  kings,  and 
men  endued  with  sovereign  civil  power ;  the  other 
after  their  conversion.  For  it  was  long  after  the 
ascension,  before  any  king  or  civil  sovereign  em- 
braced and  publicly  allowed  the  teaching  of  Chris- 
tian religion. 

And  for  the  time  between,  it  is  manifest,  that  of  Ae  holy 
the  power  ecclesiastical  was  in  the  apostles ;  and  SX!!^u^ 
after  them  in  such  as  were  by  them  ordained  to 
preach  the  gospel,  and  to  convert  men  to  Christi- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


486         OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  anity,  and  to  direct  them  that  were  convCTted  in 
.  ^f-  ^  the  way  of  salvation ;  and  after  these,  the  power 
was  delivered  again  to  others  by  these  ordained, 
and  this  was  done  by  imposition  of  hands  upon 
such  as  were  ordained ;  by  which  was  signified  the 
giving  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  or  Spirit  of  God,  to 
those  whom  they  ordained  ministers  of  God,  to  ad- 
vance his  kingdom.  So  that  imposition  of  hands 
was  nothing  else  but  the  seal  of  their  commission 
to  preach  Christ,  and  teach  his  doctrine ;  and  the 
giving  of  the  Holy  Ghost  by  that  ceremony  of  im- 
position of  hands,  was  an  imitation  of  that  which 
Moses  did.  For  Moses  nsed  the  same  ceremony  to 
his  minister  Joshua,  as  we  read  {Deut.  xxxiv.  9) 
And  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun  was  full  of  the  spirit 
of  wisdom  ;  for  Moses  had  laid  his  hands  upon 
him.  Our  Saviour  therefore,  between  his  resurrec- 
tion and  ascension,  gave  his  spirit  to  the  apostles; 
j&rst,by  breathing  on  them,  and  saying,  (John  xx. 
22)  Receive  ye  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  after  his  as- 
cension {Acts  ii.  2, 3)  by  sending  down  upon  them 
a  mighty  wind^  and  cloven  tongues  of  fire;  and 
not  by  imposition  of  hands ;  as  neither  did  God 
lay  his  hands  on  Moses:  and  his  apostles  after- 
ward transmitted  the  same  spirit  by  imporition  of 
hands,  as  Moses  did  to  Joshua.  So  that  it  is  mani^ 
fest  hereby,  in  whom  the  power  ecclesiastical  con- 
tinually remained,  in  those  first  times  where  there 
was  not  any  Christian  commonwealth;  namely, 
in  them  that  received  the  same  from  the  apostles, 
by  successive  laying  on  of  hands. 
Of  uw  Trinity.  Here  we  have  the  person  of  God  bom  now  the 
third  time.  For  as  Moses,  and  the  high-priests^ 
were  God's  representative  in  the  Old  TestMient ; 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ICCLBSIAMICAL,      *        487 

and  our  Saviour  himself^  as  man^  during  his  abode  paut  ill* 
on  earth :  bo  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  is  to  say  the    .   ^^*   . 
apostles  and  their  successors,  in  the  office    ofo/theTunity. 
preaching   and  teaching,  that  had  received  the 
holy  Spirit, have  represented  him  ever  since.  But  a 
person,  as  I  have  shown  before,  (chap,  xiii.)  is  he 
that  is  represented,  as  often  as  he  is  represented ; 
and  therrfore  God,  who  has  been  represented,  that 
is  personated,  thrice,  may  properly  enough  be  said 
to  be  three  persons }  though  neither  the  word  Per^ 
sofiy  nor  Trinity y  be  ascribed  to  him  in  the  Bible. 
St.  John,  indeed  (1  Epist.  v.  7)  saith.  There  be 
three  that  bear  witness  in  heaven,  the  Father,  the 
Word,  and  the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  these  three  are 
One.  But  this  disagreeth  not,  but  accordeth  fitly 
with  three  persons  in  the  proper  signification  of 
persons;  which  is,  that  which  is  represented  by 
another.    For  so  God  the  Father,  as  represented 
by  Moses,  is  one  person ;  and  as  represented  by 
his  Son,  another  person;  and  as  represented  by 
the  apostles,  and  by  the  doctors  that  taught  by  au- 
thority from  them  derived,  is  a  third  person ;  and 
yet  every  person  here,  is  the  person  of  one  and  the 
same  God.    But  a  man  may  here  ask,  what  it  was 
whereof  these  three  bear  witness.    St.  John  there- 
fore tells  us  (verse  11)  that  they  bear  witness,  that 
God  hath  given  us  eternal  l\fe  in  his  Son.  Again, 
if  it  should  be  asked,  wherein  that  testimony  ap- 
peareth,  the  answer  is  easy ;  for  he  hath  testified 
the  same  by  the  miracles  he  wrought,  first  by  Moses; 
secondly,  by  his  Son  himself;   and  lastly  by  his 
apostles,  that  had  received  the  Holy  Spirit;  all 
which  in  their  times  represented  the  person  of 
God,  and  either   prophecied  or  preached  Jesus 


Digitized  by 


Google 


488  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  Christ.  And  as  for  the  apostles,  it  was  the  charac- 
.    ^^  ^    ter  of  the  apostleship,  in  the  twelve  first  luid  ^reat 

Of  the  Trinity,  apostles,  to  bear  witness  of  his  resurrection;  as  ap- 
peareth  expressly  {Acts  i.  21,  22),  where  St.  Peter, 
when  a  new  apostle  was  to  be  chosen  in  the  place 
of  Judas  Iscariot,  useth  these  words,  Of  these  mem 
which  have  companied  with  us  all  the  time  that 
the  Lord  Jesus  went  in  and  out  amongst  us,  be^ 
'  ginning  at  the  baptism  of  John,  unto  that  same 
day  that  he  was  taken  up  from  us,  must  one  he 
ordained  to  he  a  witness  with  us  of  his  resurrec- 
tion :  which  words  interpret  the  bearing  of  wit^ 
vess,  mentioned  by  St.  John.  There  is  in  the 
same  place  mentioned  another  Trinity  of  witnesses 
in  earth.  For  ( 1  John  v.  8)  he  saith,  there  are  three 
that  bear  witness  in  earth,  the  Spirit,  and  the  water, 
and  the  blood,  and  these  three  agree  in  one  :  that 
is  to  say,  the  graces  of  God's  spirit,  and  the  two  sa- 
craments, baptism,  and  the  Lord's  supper,  which 
all  agree  in  one  testimony  to  assure  the  consci- 
ences of  believers,  of  eternal  life ;  of  which  testi- 
mony he  saith  (verse  10)  He  that  believe th  on  the 
Son  of  man  hath  the  witness  in  himself.  In  this 
Trinity  on  earth,  the  unity  is  not  of  the  thing ; 
for  the  spirit,  the  water,  and  the  blood,  are  not  the 
same  substance,  though  they  give  the  same  testi- 
mony :  but  in  the  Trinity  of  heaven,  the  persons 
are  tiie  persons  of  one  and  the  same  God,  though 
represented  in  three  dijQferent  times  and  occasions. 
To  concltide,  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  as  far  as 
can  be  gathered  directly  from  the  Scripture,  is  in 
substance  this,  that  the  God  who  is  always  one  and 
the  same,  was  the  person  represented  by  Moses ; 
.    the  person  represented  by  his    Son   incarnate; 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  489 

and  the  person  represented  by  the  apostles.  As  part  hi. 
represented  by  the  apostles,  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  .  /*^'  . 
which  they  spake,  is  God ;  as  represented  by  his 
Son,  that  was  God  and  man,  the  Son  is  that  God; 
as  represented  by  Moses  and  the  high-priests,  the 
Father,  that  is  to  say,  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  is  that  God.  From  whence  we  may  gather 
the  reason  why  those  names  Father^  SoUy  and  Holy 
Spirit,  in  the  signification  of  the  Godhead,  are 
never  used  in  the  Old  Testament:  for  they  are 
persons,  that  is,  they  have  their  names  from  repre- 
senting ;  which  coidd  not  be,  till  divers  men  had 
represented  God's  person  in  ruling  or  in  directing 
under  him. 

Thus  we  see  how  the  power  ecclesiastical  was 
left  by  our  Saviour  to  the  apostles  ;  and  how  they 
were,  to  the  end  they  might  the  better  exercise 
that  power,  endued  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  is 
therefore  called  sometimes  in  the  New  Testament 
paracletus,  which  signifieth  an  assister,  or  one 
called  to  for  help,  though  it  be  commonly  trans- 
lated a  comforter.  Let  us  now  consider  the  power 
itself,  what  it  was,  and  over  whom. 

Cardinal  Bellarmine,  in  his  third  general  contro-  Tbe  power 
versy,  hath  handled  a  great  many  questions  con-b^t^th"p^wer 
ceming  the  ecclesiastical  power  of  the  pope  of*^*®*^^* 
Rome.;  and  begins  with  this,  whether  it  ought  to 
be  monarchical,  aristocratical,   or   democratical : 
all  which  sorts  of  power  are  sovereign  and  coer- 
cive.    If  now  it  should  appear,  that  there  is  no  co- 
ercive power  left  them  by  our  Saviour,  but  only  a 
power  to  proclaim  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  and  to 
persuade  men  to  submit  themselves  thereunto;  and 
by  precepts  and  good  counsel,  to  teach  them  that 


Digitized  by 


Google 


490        OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWBALTH. 

PART  III.  liftve  submitted,  what  ihey  are  to  do,  that  they 
^  ^  .  may  be  received  into  the  kingdom  of  God  when  it 
comes  ;  and  that  the  apostles,  and  other  ministers 
of  the  Gospel,  are  our  schoolmasters,  and  not  our 
commanders,  and  their  precepts  not  laws,  but 
wholesome  counsels  :  then  were  all  that  dispute  in 
yain« 
An  argu.  I  havc  showu  already,  in  the  last  chapter,  that 

thrpowerof  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  not  of  this  world :  there- 
Christ  himself.  ^^^^  neither  can  his  ministers,  unless  they  be  kings, 
require  obedience  in  his  name.  For  if  the  su- 
preme king  have  not  his  regal  power  in  this 
world;  by  what  authority  can  obedience  be  re- 
quired to  his  ofl&cers  ?  As  my  Father  sent  me,  so 
saith  our  Saviour,  («/bAn  XX.  21)  I  send  you.  But  our 
Saviour  was  sent  to  persuade  the  Jews  to  return  to, 
and  to  invite  the  Gentiles  to  receive,  the  kingdom 
of  his  Father,  and  not  to  reign  in  majesty,  no  not 
as  his  Father's  lieutenant,  till  the  day  of  judgment. 
From  the  name  The  time  betwccu  the  ascension  and  the  general 
ofregcnenition.  resurrection,  is  called,  not  a  reigning,  but  a  rege- 
neration ;  that  is,  a  preparation  of  men  for  the 
second  and  glorious  coming  of  Christ,  at  the  day 
of  judgment ;  as  appeareth  by  the  words  of  our 
Saviour,  {Matth,  xix.  28,)  You  that  have  followed 
me  in  the  regeneration,  when  the  Son  of  man  shall 
sit  in  the  throne  of  his  glory,  you  shall  also  sit 
upon  twelve  thrones  ;  and  of  St.  Paul  {Ephes.  vi. 
16)  Having  your  feet  shod  with  the  preparation 
if  the  gospel  of  peace. 
From  the  And  is  Compared  by  our  Saviour,  to  fishing,  that 

comparison  of   .        ^  .       .  ^         -i      t  .    i  . 

it,  with  fishing,  IS,  to  wmnmg  men  to  obedience,  not  by  coercion 

leaven,  seed.    ^^^  punishiug,  but  by  pcrsuasiou :  and  therefore 

he  said  not  to  his  apostles,  he  would  make  them  so 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  491 

many  Nimrods,  hunters  of  men ;  hut  .fiihers  qf  ^xslt  m. 
men.  It  is  compared  also  to  leaven,  to  sowing  of  . ,  ^V  . 
seed,  and  to  the  multiplication  of  a  grain  of  mus- 
tard-seed ;  by  all  which  compulsion  is  excluded ; 
and  consequently  there  can  in  that  time  be  no 
actual  reigning.  The  work  of  Christ's  ministers, 
is  evangelization ;  that  is,  a  proclamation  of  Christ, 
and  a  preparation  for  his  second  coming,  as  the 
evangelization  of  John  the  Baptist  was  a  prepara- 
tion to  his  first  coming. 

Again,  the  ofl&ce  of  Christ's  ministers  in  this  From  the 

1  ,    .  ,  ,    ,.  ,  ,  /•  •  1.    .     nature  of  uiuu 

world,  IS  to  make  men  believe  and  have  faith  m 
Christ ;  but  faith  hath  no  relation  to,  nor  depen- 
dance  at  all  upon  compulsion  or  commandment ; 
but  only  upon  certainty  or  probability  of  argu- 
ments drawn  from  reason,  or  from  something  men 
believe  already.  Therefore  the  ministers  of  Christ 
in  this  world,  have  no  power,  by  that  title,  to  punish 
any  man  for  not  believing  or  for  contradicting 
what  they  say ;  they  have  I  say  no  power  by  that 
title  of  Christ's  ministers,  to  punish  such ;  but  if 
they  have  sovereign  civil  power,  by  politic  institu- 
tion, then  they  may  indeed  lawftdly  punish  any 
contradiction  to  their  laws  whatsoever:  and  St. 
Paul,  of  himself  and  other  the  then  preachers  of 
the  gospel,  saith  in  express  words  (2  Cor.  i.  24), 
We  have  no  dominion  over  your  faith,  hut  are 
helpers  of  your  joy. 

Another  argument,  that  the  ministers  of  Christ  From  the  an. 
in  this  present  world  have  no  right  of  command-  haA '^len  to* 
ing,  may  be  drawn  from  the  lawful  authority  which  "^^^  p'^"''"- 
Christ  hath  left  to  all  princes,  as  well  Christians 
as  infidels.     St.  Paul  saith  {Col.  iii.  20)  Children 
ohey  your  parents  in  all  things  ;  for  this  is  well 


Digitized  by 


Google 


492  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH, 

PART  III.  pleasing  to  the  Lord:  and  (verse  22)  Servants^ 
.    ^^-    .    obey  in  all  things  your  masters  according  to  the 
From  ihe  9X1- flesh;  not  with  eye-service y  as  men-pleaserSy  but  in 
lIi^^  i^ft^to'*  ^i^gl^^^^^  of  heart,  as /earing  the  Lord  ;  this  is 
civD  princes,  spoken  to  them  whose  masters  were  infidels ;  and 
yet  they  are  bidden  to  obey  them  in  all  things. 
And  again,  concerning  obedience  to  princes  (Rom. 
xiii.  the  first  six  verses),  exhorting  to  be  subject  to 
the  higher  powers,  he  saith,  that  all  power  is  or- 
dained  of  God ;  and  that  we  ought  to  be  subject 
to  them  J  not  only  for  fear  qf  incurring  their  wrath, 
but  also  for  conscience  sake.    And  St.  Peter 
(1  Epistle  ii.  13,   14,   15),  Submit  yourselves  to 
every  ordinance  of  man,  for  the  Lord's  sake,  whe- 
ther it  be  to  the  king,  as  supreme;  or  unto  gover- 
nors, as  to  them  that  be  sent  by  him  for  the  pun- 
ishment of  evil  doers,  and  for  the  praise  of  them 
that  do  well ;  for  so  is  the  will  of  God.    And 
again  St.  Paul  (Titus  m.  1),  Put  men  in  mind  to  be 
subject  to  principalities  and  powers,  and  to  obey 
magistrates.    These  princes  and  powers,  whereof 
St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  here  speak,  were  all  infi- 
dels :   much  more  therefore  we  are   to  observe 
those  Christians,  whom  God  hath  ordained  to  have 
sovereign  power  over  us.     How  then  can  we  be 
obliged  to  obey  any  minister  of  Christ,  if  he  should 
command  us  to  do  anything  contrary  to  the  com- 
mand of  the  king,  or  other  sovereign  representant 
of  the  commonwealth  whereof  we  are  members, 
and  by  whom  we  look  to  be  protected  ?      It  is 
therefore  manifest,  that  Christ  hath  not  left  to 
his  ministers  in  this  world,  unless  they  be  also  en- 
dued with  civil  authority,  any  authority  to  com- 
mand other  men. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWBR  ECCLESIASTICAL.  493 

But  what,  may  some  object,  if  a  king,  or  a  se-  part  hi. 
nate,  or  other  sovereign  person  forbid  us  to  believe  .  ^^'  . 
in  Christ  ?  To  this  I  answer,  that  such  forbidding  what  chris- 
is  of  no  effect ;  because  belief  and  unbelief  never  ^  a'o™p«r- 
follow  men's  commands.  Faith  is  a  gift  of  God,  •«*^^^'^ 
which  man  can  neither  give,  nor  take  away  by 
promise  of  rewards,  or  menaces  of  torture.  And 
if  it  be  further  asked,  what  if  we  be  commanded  by 
our  lawful  prince  to  say  with  our  tongue,  we  be- 
lieve not ;  must  we  obey  such  command  ?  Profes- 
sion with  the  tongue  is  but  an  external  thing,  and 
no  more  than  any  other  gesture  whereby  we  signify 
our  obedience ;  and  wherein  a  Christian,  holdi  n 
firmly  in  his  heart  the  faith  of  Christ,  hath  the  same 
liberty  which  the  prophet  Elisha  allowed  to  Naaman 
the  Syrian.  Naaman  was  converted  in  his  heart 
to  the  God  of  Israel ;  for  he  saith  (2  Kings  v.  17, 18) 
Thy  servant  will  henceforth  offer  neither  burnt 
offering  nor  sacrifice  unto  other  gods,  but  unto 
the  Lord,  hi  this  thing  the  Lord  pardon  thy 
servant y  that  when  my  master  goeth  into  the  house 
of  Rimmon  to  worship  tJiere,  and  he  leaneth  on  my 
handy  and  I  bow  myself  in  the  house  qf  Rimmon  : 
when  I  bow  doum  myself  in  the  house  qf  Rim- 
mon, the  Lord  pardon  thy  servant  in  this  thing. 
This  the  prophet  approved,  and  bid  him  Go  in 
peace.  Here  Naaman  believed  in  his  heart ;  but  by 
bowing  before  the  idol  Rimmon,  he  denied  the  true 
God  in  effect,  as  much  as  if  he  had  done  it  with  his 
lips.  But  then  what  shall  we  answer  to  our  Saviour's 
saying,  {Matth.x.33)  Whosoever  deniethme  before 
men,  I  will  deny  him  before  my  Father  which  is 
in  heaven.  This  we  may  say,  that  whatsoever  a 
subject,  as  Naaman  was,  is  compelled  to  do  in  obe- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


494         OF  A  GHRI8TIAN  OOMMOMWBALTH. 

PART  in.  dience  to  bis  sovereign,  and  doth  it  not  in  order 
^  ^^  _.   to  his  own  mind,  but  in  order  to  the  laws  of  his 
country,  that  action  is  not  his,  but  his  sovereign's  ; 
nor  is  it  he  that  in  this  case  denieth  Christ  before 
men,  but  his  governor,  and  the  law  of  his  country. 
If  any  man  shall  accuse  this  doctrine,  as  repugnant 
to  true  and  unfeigned  Christianity ;  I  ask  him,  in 
case  there  should  be  a  subject  in  any  Christian  com* 
monwealth,  that  should  be  inwardly  in  his  heart  of 
the  Mahomedan  religion,  whether  if  his  sovereign 
command  him  to  be  present  at  the  divine  service  of 
the  Christian  church,  and  that  on  pain  of  death,  he 
think  that  Mahomedan  obliged  in  conscience  to 
suffer  death  for  that  cause,  rather  than  obey  that 
command  of  his  lawful  prince.    If  he  say,  he  ought 
rather  to  suffer  death,  then  he  authorizeth  all  pri- 
vate men  to  disobey  their  princes  in  maintenance 
of  their  religion,  true  or  false :  if  he  say,  he  ought  to 
be  obedient,  then  he  alloweth  to  himself  that  whidi 
he  denieth  to  another,  contrary  to  the  words  of  our 
Saviour,  {Luke  vi«31)  Whatsoever  you  would  that 
men  should  do  unto  you,  that  do  ye  unto  them  ;  and 
contrary  to  the  law  of  nature,  which  is  the  indu- 
bitable everlasthig  law  of  God,  Do  not  to  another , 
that  which  thou  wonldest  not  he  should  do  unto  thee. 
Of  martyn.      But  what  then  shall  we  say  of  all  those  martyrs  we 
read  of  in  the  history  of  the  Church,  that  they  have 
needlessly  cast  away  their  lives  ?   For  answer  here- 
unto, we  are  to  distinguish  the  persons  that  have 
been  for  that  cause  put  to  death :  wherectf  some 
have  received  a  calling  to  preach,  and  profess  the 
kingdom  of  Christ  openly;  others  have  had  no  such 
calling,  nor  more  has  been  required  of  them  than 
their  own  faith.    The  former  sort,  if  they  have 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  POWER  BCCLRSIASTICAL,  496 

been  put  to  death,  for  bearing  witness  to  thig  point,  part  iii 
that  Jesug  Christ  is  risen  from  the  dead,  were  true  .^fy^ 
martyrs ;  for  a  martyr  is,  (to  give  the  true  defini**  or  martyw. 
tion  of  the  word)  a  witness  of  the  resurrection  of 
Jesus  the  Messiah ;  which  none  can  be  but  those 
that  conversed  with  him  on  earth,  and  saw  him 
after  he  was  risen :  for  a  witness  must  have  seen 
what  he  testifieth,  or  else  his  testimony  is  not  good. 
And  that  none  but  such  can  properly  be  caUed 
martyrs  of  Christ,  is  manifest  out  of  the  words 
of  St.  Peter,  {Acts  i.  21,  22)  Wherefore  qf  these 
men  which  have  companied  with  ua  all  the  time 
that  the  Lord  Jesus  went  in  and  out  amongst  us, 
heginning/rom  the  baptism  qfJohn  unto  that  same 
day  he  was  taken  up  from  us,  must  one  be  or^ 
dained  to  he  a  martyr  (that  is  a  witness)  with  us 
of  his  resurrection :  where  we  may  observe,  that 
he  which  is  to  be  a  witness  of  the  truth  of  the  re- 
surrection of  Christ,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  truth  of 
this  fdndamental  article  of  Christian  religion,  that 
Jesus  was  the  Christ,  must  be  some  disciple  that 
conversed  with  him,  and  saw  him  before  and  after 
his  resurrection ;  and  consequently  must  be  one  of 
his  original  disciples :  whereas  tiiey  which  were 
not  so,  can  witness  no  more  but  that  their  ante*- 
cessors  said  it,  and  are  therefore  but  witnesses  of 
other  men's  testimony ;  and  are  but  second  martyrs, 
or  martyrs  of  Christ's  witnesses. 

He,  that  to  maintain  every  doctrine  which  he 
himself  draweth  out  of  the  history  of  our  Saviour's 
life,  and  of  the  Acts  or  Epistles  of  the  apostles,  or 
which  he  believeth  upon  the  authority  of  a  private 
man,  will  oppose  the  laws  and  authority  of  the  civil 
state,  is  very  far  from  being  a  martyr  of  Christ,  or 
a  martyr  of  his  martyrs.    It  is  one  article  only. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


496         OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  which  to  die  for,  meriteth  so  honourable  a  name; 
.  ^^'  .  and  that  article  is  this,  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ ; 
that  is  to  say,  He  that  hath  redeemed  us,  and  shall 
come  again  to  give  us  salvation,  and  eternal  life  in 
his  glorious  kingdom.  To  die  for  every  tenet  that 
serveth  the  ambition  or  profit  of  the  clergy,  is  not 
required ;  nor  is  it  the  death  of  the  witness,  but 
the  testimony  itself  that  makes  the  martyr  :  for  the 
word  signifieth  nothing  else,  but  the  man  that 
beareth  witness,  whether  he  be  put  to  death  for  his 
testimony,  or  not. 

Also  he  that  is  not  sent  to  preach  this  fdnda- 
mental  article,  but  taketh  it  upon  him  of  his 
private  authority,  though  he  be  a  witness,  and  con- 
sequently a  martyr,  either  primary  of  Christ,  or  se- 
condary of  his  apostles,  disciples,  or  their  succes- 
sors ;  yet  is  he  not  obliged  to  suffer  death  for  that 
cause ;  because  being  not  called  thereto,  it  is  not 
required  at  his  hands ;  nor  ought  he  to  complain, 
if  he  loseth  the  reward  he  expecteth  from  those 
that  never  set  him  on  work.  None  therefore  can 
be  a  martyr,  neither  of  the  first  nor  second  degree, 
that  have  not  a  warrant  to  preach  Christ  c(mie  in 
the  flesh ;  that  is  to  say,  none,  but  such  as  are  sent 
to  the  conversion  of  infidels.  For  no  man  is  a 
witness  to  him  that  already  believeth,  and  there- 
fore needs  no  witness  ;  but  to  them  that  deny,  or 
doubt,  or  have  not  heard  it.  Christ  sent  his  apostles, 
and  his  seventy  disciples,  with  authority  to  preach ; 
he  sent  not  all  that  believed.  And  he  sent  them  to 
unbelievers;  I  send  you,  saith  he,  (Matth.  x.  16)  as 
sheep  amongst  wolves  ;  not  as  sheep  to  other  sheep. 
Argument  Lastlv,  the  ooiuts  of  their  commission,  as  they 

from  the  i  ,  .1  1  • 

point*  of  their  are  expressly  set  down  in  the  gospel,  contain,  none 
of  them,  any  authority  over  the  congregation. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


commission. 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  497 

We  have  first  {Matth.  x.  6,  7,)  that  the  twelve  part  in. 
apostles  were  sent  to  the  lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  .  ^^'  . 
Israel  J  and  commanded  to  preach  that  the  king-  To  preach; 
dom  of  God  was  at  hand.  Now  preaching,  in  the 
original,  is  that  act,  which  a  crier,  herald,  or  other 
ofl&cer  nseth  to  do  publicly  in  proclaiming  of  a 
king.  But  a  crier  hath  not  right  to  command  any 
man.  And  {Luke  x.  2)  the  seventy  disciples  are 
sent  out  as  Labourers^  not  as  Lords  of  the 
harvest;  and  are  bidden  (verse  9)  to  say,  The 
kingdom  of  God  is  come  nigh  unto  you  ;  and  by 
kingdom  here  is  meant,  not  the  kingdom  of  grace, 
but  the  kingdom  of  glory ;  for  they  are  bidden  (verse 
11,  12)  to  denounce  it  to  those  cities  which  shall 
not  receive  them,  as  a  threatening  that  it  shall  be 
more  tolerable  in  that  day  for  Sodom^  than  for 
such  a  city.  And  (Matth.  xx.  28)  our  Saviour 
telleth  his  disciples,  that  sought  priority  of  place, 
their  ofl&ce  was  to  minister,  even  as  the  son  of 
man  came^  not  to  be  ministered  unto^  but  to  mi- 
nister. Preachers  therefore  have  not  magisterial, 
but  ministerial  power :  Be  not  called  ma^ters^ 
saith  our  Saviour,  {Matth.  xxiii.  10)  for  one  is 
your  master,  even  Christ. 

Another  point  of  their  commission,  is,  to  Teach  And  teach; 
all  nations  ;  as  it  is  in  St.  Matth.  xxviii.  19,  or  as 
in  St.  Mark,  xvi.  lb  \  Go  into  all  the  world,  and 
preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature.  Teaching 
therefore,  and  preaching,  is  the  same  thing.  For 
they  that  proclaim  the  coming  of  a  king,  must 
withal  make  known  by  what  right  he  cometh,  if 
they  mean  men  shall  submit  themselves  unto  him : 
as  St.  Paul  did  to  the  Jews  of  Thessalonica,  when 
{Acts  xvii.  2,  3)  three  Sabbath  days  he  reasoned 

VOL.  III.  K  K 


Digitized  by 


Google 


498  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  ui.  y^ith  them  out  of  the  Scriptures^  opening,  and  allege 
.  ^^  ^  ing  that  Christ  must  needs  have  suffered,  and  risen 
again  from  the  dead,  and  that  this  Jesus  is  Christ. 
But  to  teach  out  of  the  Old  Testament  that  Jesus 
was  Christ,  that  is  to  say,  king,  and  risen  from  the 
dead,  is  not  to  say  that  men  are  bound,  after  they 
believe  it,  to  obey  those  that  tell  them  so,  against 
the  laws  and  commands  of  their  sovereigns ;  but 
that  they  shall  do  wisely,  to  expect  the  coming  of 
Christ  hereafter,  in  patience  and  faith,  with  obedi- 
ence to  their  present  magistrates. 
To  baptize ;  Auothcr  poiut  of  their  commission,  is  to  baptize ^ 
in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  qf  the  Son,  and  qf 
the  Holy  Ghost.  What  is  baptism  ?  Dipping  into 
water.  But  what  is  it  to  dip  a  man  into  the  water 
in  the  name  of  any  thing  ?  The  meaning  of  these 
words  of  baptism  is  this.  He  that  is  baptized,  is 
dipped  or  washed,  as  a  sign  of  becoming  a  new 
man,  and  a  loyal  subject  to  that  God,  whose  person 
was  represented  in  old  time  by  Moses,  and  the 
high-priests,  when  he  reigned  over  the  Jews ;  and 
to  Jesus  Christ  his  Son,  God  and  Man,  that  hath 
redeemed  us,  and  shall  in  his  human  nature  repre- 
sent his  Father's  person  in  his  eternal  kingdom 
after  the  resurrection;  and  to  acknowledge  the 
doctrine  of  the  apostles,  who,  assisted  by  the  spirit 
of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son,  were  left  for  guides 
to  bring  us  into  that  kingdom,  to  be  the  only  and 
assured  way  thereunto.  This  being  our  promise 
in  baptism;  atid  the  authority  of  earthly  sove- 
reigns being  not  to  be  put  down  till  the  day  of 
judgment;  for  that  is  expressly  afl&rmed  by  St. 
Paul  (1  Cor.  XV.  22,  23,  24)  where  he  saith.  As  in 
Adam  all  die,  so  in  Christ  all  shall  be  made  aUve. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  499 

But  every  man  in  his  own  order ^  Christ  the  first  part  hi, 
fruits,  afterward  they  that  are  Christ's  at  his  .  J*f '  ^^ 
coming  ;  then  cometh  the  end,  when  he  shall  have 
delivered  up  the  kingdom  to  God,  even  the  Father, 
when  he  shall  have  put  down  all  rule,  and  all 
authority  and  power:  it  is  manifest^  that  we  do  not 
in  baptism  constitute  over  us  another  authority,  by 
which  our  external  actions  are  to  be  governed  in 
this  life ;  but  promise  to  take  the  doctrine  of  the 
apostles  for  our  direction  in  the  way  to  life  eternal. 

The  power  of  remission  and  retention  of  sins,  ^^^^^  [orgiye, 

-,     ,     ,         ,  /.  »         .  1    t  »     T  1  and  retain  Sins. 

called  also  the  power  of  loosing  and  binding,  and 
sometimes  the  keys  qfthe  kingdom  qf  heaven,  is  a 
consequence  of  the  authority  to  baptize,  or  refuse 
to  baptize.  For  baptism  is  the  sacrament  of  alle- 
giance of  them  that  are  to  be  received  into  the 
kingdom  of  God ;  that  is  to  say,  into  eternal  life ; 
that  is  to  say,  to  remission  of  sin :  for  as  eternal 
life  was  lost  by  the  committing,  so  it  is  recovered 
by  the  remitting  of  men's  sins.  The  end  of  baptism 
is  remission  of  sins :  and  therefore  St.  Peter,  when 
they  that  were  converted  by  his  sermon  on  the  day 
of  Pentecost,  asked  what  they  were  to  do,  advised 
them  {Actsn.  38)  to  repent^  and  he  baptized  in  tJie 
nameqf  Jesus  for  the  remission  of  sins.  And  there- 
fore, seeing  to  baptize  is  to  declare  the  reception  of 
men  into  God's  kingdom ;  and  to  refuse  to  baptize 
is  to  declare  their  exclusion ;  it  foUoweth,  that  the 
power  to  declare  them  cast  out,  or  retained  in  it, 
was  given  to  the  same  apostles,  and  their  substitutes 
and  successors.  And  therefore  after  our  Saviour 
had  breathed  upon  them,  saying  {John  xx.  22) 
Receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  addeth  in  the  next 
Terse,  Whosesoever  sins  ye  remit,  they  are  remit- 

KK  2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


500  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  m.  t^d  unto  tliem;  and  whosesoever  sins  ye  retain^ 
^  ^  they  are  retained.  By  which  words,  is  not  granted 
Andtoforgive,  an  authority  to  forgive  or  retain  sins,  simply  and 
and  retain  tmt.  g^bsolutely,  as  God  forgivcth  or  retaineth  them,  who 
knoweth  the  heart  of  man,  and  tmth  of  his  peni- 
tence and  conversion;  but  conditionally,  to  the 
penitent:  and  this  forgiveness,  or  absolution,  in 
case  the  absolved  have  but  a  feigned  repentance,  is 
thereby,  vrithout  other  act,  or  sentence  of  the  ab- 
solved, made  void,  and  hath  no  effect  at  all  to  sal- 
vation, but  on  the  contrary  to  the  aggravation  of 
his  sin.  Therefore  the  apostles,  and  their  succes- 
sors, are  to  follow  but  the  outward  marks  of  re- 
pentance ;  which  appearing,  they  have  no  authority 
to  deny  absolution ;  and  if  they  appear  not,  they 
have  no  authority  to  absolve.  The  same  also  is  to 
be  observed  in  baptism  :  for  to  a  converted  Jew,  or 
Gentile,  the  apostles  had  not  the  power  to  deny 
baptism ;  nor  to  grant  it  to  the  unpenitent.  But 
seeing  no  man  is  able  to  discern  the  truth  of  another 
man's  repentance,  further  than  by  external  marks, 
taken  from  his  words  and  actions,  which  are  sub- 
ject to  hypocrisy ;  another  question  will  arise,  who 
it  is  that  is  constituted  judge  of  those  marks  ?  And 
this  question  is  decided  by  our  Saviour  himself; 
If  thy  brother^  saith  he,  (Matth.  xviii.  15,  16,  17) 
shall  trespass  against  thee,  go  and  tell  him  his 
fault,  between  tliee  ajidhim  alone;  jfhe  shall  hear 
thee,  thou  hxist  gained  thy  brother.  But  if  he  will 
not  hear  thee,  then  take  with  thee  one  or  two  more. 
And  if  he  shall  neglect  to  hear  them,  tell  it  unto 
the  Church  ;  but  if  he  neglect  to  hear  the  Church, 
let  him  be  unto  thee  a^  an  heathen  man  and  a  pub- 
lican.   By  which  it  is  manifest,  that  the  judgment 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCIiESIASTICAL.  501 

concerning  the  truth  of  repentance,  belonged  not  part  in. 
to  any  one  man,  but  to  the  Church,  that  is,  to  the  .  ^f-  _. 
assembly  of  the  faithful,  or  to  them  that  have  au-  And  to  forgjre, 
thority  to  be  their  representant.  But  besides  the  *" 
judgment,  there  is  necessary  also  the  pronouncing 
of  sentence.  And  this  belonged  always  to  the  apos- 
tle, or  some  pastor  of  the  Church,  as  prolocutor ; 
and  of  this  our  Saviour  speaketh  in  the  18th  verse, 
Whatsoever  ye  shall  hind  on  earth,  shall  be  hound 
in  heaven  ;  and  whatsoever  ye  shall  loose  on  earth, 
shall  be  loosed  in  heaven.  And  conformable  here- 
unto was  the  practise  of  St.  Paul,  (1  Cor.  v.  3,  4,  5) 
where  he  saith,  For  I  verily,  as  absent  in  body, 
hut  present  in  spirit,  have  determined  already, 
as  though  I  were  present,  concerning  him  that 
hath  so  done  this  deed  ;  in  the  name  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  when  ye  are  gathered  together, 
and  my  spirit,  with  the  power  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  to  deliver  such  a  one  to  Satan;  that  is  to 
say,  to  cast  him  out  of  the  Church,  as  a  man  whose 
sins  are  not  forgiven.  Paul  here  pronounceth  the 
sentence ;  but  the  assembly  was  first  to  hear  the 
cause,  for  St.  Paul  was  absent,  and  by  consequence 
to  condemn  him.  But  in  the  same  chapter  (verses 
11,  12,)  the  judgment  in  such  a  case  is  more  ex- 
pressly attributed  to  the  assembly :  But  now  I  have 
written  unto  you,  not  to  keep  company,  if  any  man 
that  is  called  a  brother  be  a  fornicator,  ^c.  with 
such  a  one,  no  not  to  eat.  For  what  have  I  to  do 
to  judge  them  that  are  without?  Do  not  ye  judge 
them  that  are  within?  The  sentence  therefore  by 
which  a  man  was  put  out  of  the  Church,  was  pro- 
noxmced  by  the  apostle,  or  pastor ;  but  the  judgment 
concerning  the  merit  of  the  cause,  was  in  the 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


602         OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III,  Church ;  that  is  to  say,  as  the  times  were  before 
.    ^f -    .    the  conversion  of  kings,  and  men  that  had  sove- 
reign authority  in  the  commonwealth,  the  assembly 
of  the  Christians  dwelling  in  the  same  city :  as  in 
Corinth,  in  the  assembly  of  the  Christians  of  Corinth, 
Of  excom-        xhis  part  of  the  power  of  the  keys,  by  which  men 

munication.  ^  ^  ••/•V^i.-i 

were  thrust  out  from  the  kingdom  of  God,  is  that 
which  is  called  excommunication;  and  to  excommur- 
nicatCj  is  in  the  original,  airofrvvayioyov  Trotav,  to  cast 
out  of  the  synagogtce;  that  is,  out  of  the  place  of 
divine  service ;  a  word  drawn  from  the  custom  of 
the  Jews,  to  cast  out  of  their  synagogues  such  as 
they  thought,  in  manners  or  doctrine,  contagious, 
as  lepers  were  by  the  law  of  Moses  separated  from 
the  congregation  of  Israel,  till  such  time  as  they 
should  be  by  the  priest  pronounced  clean. 
The  use  of  The  usc  and  eflFect  of  excommunication,  whilst  it 

cation  without  was  not  yct  strengthened  with  the  civil  power,  was 
civil  power.  ^^  morc  than  that  they,  who  were  not  excommu- 
nicate, were  to  avoid  the  company  of  them  that 
were.  It  was  not  enough  to  repute  them  as  heathen, 
that  never  had  been  Christians ;  for  with  such  they 
might  eat  and  drink ;  which  with  excommunicate 
persons  they  might  not  do ;  as  appeareth  by  the 
words  of  St.  Paul,  (I  Cor.  v.  9,  10,  &c.)  where  he 
telleth  them,  he  had  formerly  forbidden  them  to 
company  with  fornicators ;  but,  because  that  could 
not  be  without  going  out  of  the  world,  he  restrain- 
eth  it  to  such  fornicators,  and  otherwise  vicious 
persons,  as  were  of  the  brethren ;  with  such  a  one, 
he  saith,  they  ought  not  to  keep  company,  no  not 
to  eat.  And  this  is  no  more  than  our  Saviour  saith 
(Matth.  xviii.  17),  Let  him  be  to  thee  as  a  heathen, 
and  as  a  publican.  For  publicans,  which  signifieth 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL,  603 

farmers  and  receivers  of  the  revenue  of  the  com-  part  in. 
monwealth,  were  so  hated  and  detested  by  the  Jews  .  ^^'  . 
that  were  to  pay  it,  as  that  publican  and  sinner 
were  taken  amongst  them  for  the  same  thing :  in- 
somuch, as  when  our  Saviour  accepted  the  invita- 
tion of  Zacchseus  a  publican ;  though  it  were  to 
convert  him,  yet  it  was  objected  to  him  as  a  crime. 
And  therefore,  when  our  Saviour  to  heathen  added 
publican^  he  did  forbid  them  to  eat  with  a  man 
excommunicate. 

As  for  keeping  them  out  of  their  synagogues,  or 
places  of  assembly,  they  had  no  power  to  do  it,  but 
that  of  the  owner  of  the  place,  whether  he  were 
Christian,  or  heathen.  And  because  all  places  are 
by  right  in  the  dominion  of  the  commonwealth ; 
as  well  he  that  was  excommunicated,  as  he  that 
never  was  baptized,  might  enter  into  them  by  com- 
mission from  the  civil  magistrate ;  as  Paul  before 
his  conversion  entered  into  their  synagogues  at 
Damascus,  (Acts  ix.  2)  to  apprehend  Christians, 
men  and  women,  and  to  carry  them  bound  to  Je- 
rusalem, by  commission  from  the  high-priest. 

By  which  it  appears,  that  upon  a  Christian,  that  of  no 
should  become  an  apostate,  in  a  place  where  thean^oltate; 
civU  power  did  persecute,  or  not  assist  the  Church, 
the  eflFect  of  excommunication  had  nothing  in  it, 
neither  of  damage  in  this  world,  nor  of  terror:  not 
of  terror,  because  of  their  unbelief ;  nor  of  damage, 
because  they  are  returned  thereby  into  the  favour  of 
the  world ;  and  in  the  world  to  come  were  to  be  in 
no  worse  estate,  than  they  which  never  had  believed. 
The  damage  redounded  rather  to  the  Church,  by 
provocation  of  them  they  cast  out,  to  a  freer  execu- 
tion of  their  malice^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


504  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III,  Excommunication  therefore  had  its  eflFect  only 
.    ^^'  _.    upon  those,  that  believed  that  Jesus  Christ  was  to 

But  upon  the  comc  again  in  glory,  to  reign  over  and  to  judge 
u  on  y.  ^^^^  ^^^  quick  and  the  dead,  and  should  therefore 
refuse  entrance  into  his  kingdom  to  those  whose 
sins  were  retained,  that  is,  to  those  that  were  ex- 
communicated by  the  Church.  And  thence  it  is, 
that  St.  Paul  calleth  excommunication,  a  delivery 
of  the  excommunicate  person  to  Satan.  For  with- 
out the  kingdom  of  Christ,  all  other  kingdoms,  after 
judgment,  are  comprehended  in  the  kingdom  of 
Satan.  This  is  it  that  the  faithful  stood  in  fear  of, 
as  long  as  they  stood  excommunicate,  that  is  to 
say,  in  an  estate  wherein  their  sins  were  not  for- 
given. Whereby  we  may  understand,  that  excom- 
munication, in  the  time  that  Christian  religion  was 
not  authorized  by  the  civil  power,  was  used  only 
for  a  correction  of  manners,  not  of  errors  in  opinion : 
for  it  is  a  punishment,  whereof  none  could  be  sen- 
sible but  such  as  believed,  and  expected  the  coming 
again  of  our  Saviour  to  judge  the  world ;  and  they 
who  so  believed,  needed  no  other  opinion,  but  only 
uprightness  of  life,  to  be  saved. 

For  what  fault      Thcrc  licth  excommunication  for  iniustice  ;  as 

Iieth  excom-  ,  o  ' 

muuication.  {Muttk.  xviii.).  If  thy  brother  offend  thee,  tell  it 
him  privately  ;  then  with  witnesses  ;  lastly,  tell  the 
Church  ;  and  then  if  he  obey  not,  Let  him  be  to 
thee  as  an  heathen  man  and  a  publican.  And 
there  Iieth  excommunication  for  a  scandalous  life, 
as  (1  Cor.  \.  l\)  If  any  man  that  is  called  a 
brother,  be  a  fornicator y  or  covetous,  or  an  ido^ 
later,  or  a  drunkard,  or  an  extortioner,  with  such 
a  one  ye  are  not  to  eat.  But  to  excommunicate 
a  man  that  held  this  foundation,  that  Jesus  was  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF   POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  505 

Christy  for  diflFerence  of  opinion  in  other  points,  by  part  hi. 
which  that  foundation  was  not  destroyed,  there  .  ^]'  _. 
appeareth  no  authority  in  the  Scripture,  nor  ex- For  wimt  fault 
ample  in  the  apostles.  There  is  indeed  in  St.  Paul  minicatiom 
{Titus  iii.  10)  a  text  that  seemeth  to  be  to  the  con- 
trary ;  A  man  that  is  an  heretic ^  after  the  first  and 
second  admonition^  reject.  For  an  heretic,  is  he, 
that  being  a  member  of  the  Church,  teacheth  ne- 
vertheless some  private  opinion,  which  the  Church 
has  forbidden :  and  such  a  one,  St.  Paul  adviseth 
Titus,  after  the  first  and  second  admonition,  to 
reject.  But  to  reject,  in  this  place,  is  not  to  ex- 
communicate  the  man  ;  hxxttogive  over  admonish- 
ing him,  to  let  him  alone,  to  set  by  disputing 
with  him,  as  one  that  is  to  be  convinced  only  by 
himself.  The  same  apostle  saith  (2  7V/;i.  ii.  23) 
Foolish  and  unlearned  questions  avoid:  the  word 
avoid  iu  this  place,  ^xiA,  reject  in  the  former,  is  the 
same  in  the  original,  irapaiTov :  but  foolish  questions 
may  be  set  by  without  excommunication.  And 
again,  {Titus  iii.  9)  Avoid/oolish  questions,  where 
the  original  v^pAtrraao  (set  them  hy)  is  equivalent  to 
the  former  word  reject.  There  is  no  other  place 
that  can  so  much  as  colourablybe  drawn,  to  coun- 
tenance the  casting  out  of  the  Church  faithful  men, 
such  as  believed  the  foundation,  only  for  a  singular 
superstructure  of  their  own,  proceeding  perhaps 
from  a  good  and  pious  conscience.  But  on  the 
contraiy,  all  such  places  as  command  avoiding  such 
disputes,  are  written  for  a  lesson  to  pastors,  such 
as  Timothy  and  Titus  were,  not  to  make  new  ar- 
ticles of  faith,  by  determining  every  small  contro- 
versy, which  oblige  men  to  a  needless  burthen  of 
conscience,  or  provoke  them  to  break  the  union  of 
the  Church.    Which  lesson  the  apostles  themselves 


Digitized  by 


Google 


606        OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH, 


PART  III. 
42. 


Of  persons 
liable  to 
excommu- 
nicadoD. 


observed  well.  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul,  though 
their  controversy  were  great,  as  we  may  read  in 
Gal.  ii.  11,  yet  they  did  not  cast  one  another  out 
of  the  Church.  Nevertheless,  during  the  apostles* 
times,  there  were  other  pastors  that  observed  it  not ; 
as  Diotrephes  (3  Johtiy  9,  &c.)  who  cast  out  of  the 
Church  such  as  St  John  himself  thought  fit  to  be 
received  into  it,  out  of  a  pride  he  took  in  preemi- 
nence. So  early  it  was,  that  vain  glory  and  ambi- 
tion had  found  entrance  into  the  Church  of  Christ. 

That  a  man  be  liable  to  excommunication,  there 
be  many  conditions  requisite ;  as  first,  that  he  be  a 
member  of  some  commonalty,  that  is  to  say,  of 
some  lawful  assembly,  that  is  to  say,  of  some  Chris- 
tian Church,  that  hath  power  to  judge  of  the  cause 
for  which  he  is  to  be  excommunicated.  For  where 
there  is  no  community,  there  can  be  no  excommu- 
nication ;  nor  where  there  is  no  power  to  judge, 
can  there  be  any  power  to  give  sentence. 

From  hence  it  followeth,  that  one  Church  cannot 
be  excommunicated  by  another:  for  either  they 
have  equal  power  to  excommunicate  each  other,  in 
which  case  excommunication  is  not  discipline,  nor 
an  act  of  authority,  but  schism,  and  dissolution  of 
charity ;  or  one  is  so  subordinate  to  the  other,  as 
that  they  both  have  but  one  voice ;  and  then  they 
be  but  one  Church ;  and  the  part  excommunicated 
is  no  more  a  Church,  but  a  dissolute  number  of 
individual  persons. 

And  because  the  sentence  of  excommunication, 
importeth  an  advice,  not  to  keep  company  nor  so 
much  as  to  eat  with  him  that  is  excommunicate,  if 
a  sovereign  prince  or  assembly  be  excommunicate, 
the  sentence  is  of  no  effect.  For  all  subjects  are 
bound  to  be  in  the  company  and  presence  of  their 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  507 

own  sovereign,  when  he  requireth  it,  by  the  law  of  part  iir. 
nature;  nor  can  they  lawfully  either  expel  him   ^ ^^'  _. 
from  any  place  of  his  own  dominion,  whether  pro-  or  persons 
fane  or  holy ;  nor  go  out  of  his  dominion  without  communfc*. 
his  leave ;  much  less,  if  he  call  them  to  that  honour,  ^'°^* 
refuse  to  eat  with  him.    And  as  to  other  princes 
and  states,  because  they  are  not  parts  of  one  and 
the  same  congregation,  they  need  not  any  other 
sentence  to  keep  them  from  keeping  company  with 
the  state  excommunicate :  for  the  very  institution, 
as  it  uniteth  many  men  into  one  community,  so  it 
dissociateth  one  community  from  another  :  so  that 
excommunication  is  not  needful  for  keeping  kings 
and  states  asimder ;    nor  has  any  further  effect   • 
than  is  in  the  nature  of  policy  itself,  unless  it  be  to 
instigate  princes  to  war  upon  one  another. 

Nor  is  the  excommunication  of  a  Christian  sub- 
ject, that  obeyeth  the  laws  of  his  own  sovereign, 
whether  Christian  or  heathen,  of  any  effect.  For 
if  he  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christy  he  hath  the 
Spirit  of  God  (1  John  v.  1)  :  and  God  dwelleth  in 
hiniy  and  he  in  God  (1  John  iv.  15.)  But  he  that 
hath  the  spirit  of  God ;  he  that  dwelleth  in  God  ; 
he  in  whom  God  dwelleth,  can  receive  no  harm 
by  the  excommunication  of  men.  Therefore,  he 
that  believeth  Jesus  to  be  the  Christ,  is  free  from 
all  the  dangers  threatened  to  persons  excommuni- 
cate. He  that  believeth  it  not,  is  no  Christian. 
Therefore  a  true  and  unfeigned  Christian  is  not 
liable  to  excommunication :  nor  he  also  that  is  a 
professed  Christian,  till  his  hypocrisy  appear  in  his 
manners,  that  is,  till  his  behaviour  be  contrary  to 
the  law  of  his  sovereign,  which  is  the  rule  of  man- 
ners, and  which  Christ  and  his  apostles  have  com- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


608  OF  A  CHKISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  manded  us  to  be  subject  to.     For  the  Church  can- 
.    ^J-  _.    not  judge  of  manners  but  by  external  actions,  which 

Of  persons      actious  cau  uevcr  be  unlawftd,  but  when  they  are 

commmiicV.    Bgaiust  the  law  of  the  commonwealth. 

^®°'  If  a  man's  father,  or  mother,  or  master,  be  ex- 

communicate, yet  are  not  the  children  forbidden 
to  keep  them  company,  nor  to  eat  with  them :  for 
that  were,  for  the  most  part,  to  oblige  them  not  to 
eat  at  all,  for  want  of  means  to  get  food ;  and  to 
authorize  them  to  disobey  their  parents  and  mas- 
ters, contrary  to  the  precept  of  the  apostles. 

In  sum,  the  power  of  excommunication  cannot 
be  extended  farther  than  to  the  end  for  which  the 
.  apostles  and  pastors  of  the  Church  have  their  com- 
mission from  our  Saviour ;  which  is  not  to  rule  by 
command  and  co-action,  but  by  teaching  and  direc- 
tion of  men  in  the  way  of  salvation  in  the  world 
to  come.  And  as  a  master  in  any  science  may 
abandon  his  scholar,  when  he  obstinately  neglect- 
eth  the  practise  of  his  rules ;  but  not  accuse  him 
of  injustice,  because  he  was  never  bound  to  obey 
him :  so  a  teacher  of  Christian  doctrine  may  aban- 
don his  disciples  that  obstinately  continue  in  an 
unchristian  life ;  but  he  cannot  say,  they  do  him 
wrong,  because  they  are  not  obliged  to  obey  him. 
For  to  a  teacher  that  shall  so  complain,  may  be  ap- 
plied the  answer  of  God  to  Samuel  in  the  like  place, 
( I  Sam.  viii.  7)  Thej/  have  not  rejected  thee,  but 
me.  Excommunication  therefore,  when  it  wanteth 
the  assistance  of  the  civil  power,  as  it  doth,  when 
a  Christian  state  or  prince  is  excommunicate  by  a 
foreign  authority,  is  without  effect;  and  conse- 
quently ought  to  be  without  terror.  The  name  of 
Fulmen  excommunicationis,  that  is,  the  thunder-^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  509 

holt  of  extommunicationy  proceeded  from  an  ima-  part  hi. 
gination  of  the  Bishop  of  Rome,  which  first  used  .  ^^  . 
it,  that  he  was  king  of  kings;  as  the  heathen  made 
Jupiter  king  of  the  gods,  and  assigned  him,  in 
their  poems,  and  pictures,  a  thunderbolt,  where- 
with to  subdue  and  punish  the  giants,  that  should 
dare  to  deny  his  power.  Which  imagination  was 
grounded  on  two  errors ;  one,  that  the  kingdom 
of  Christ  is  of  this  world,  contrary  to  our  Saviour's 
own  words,  {John  xviii.  36)  My  kingdom  is  not  of 
this  world;  the  other,  that  he  is  Christ's  vicar, 
not  only  over  his  own  subjects,  but  over  all  the 
Christians  of  the  world ;  whereof  there  is  no  ground 
in  Scripture,  and  the  contrary  shall  be  proved  in 
its  due  place. 

St.  Paul  coming  to  Thessalonica,  where  was  a  or  the  inter- 
Synagogue  of  the  Jews,  {Acts,  xvii.  2,  3)  as  his  g^n^u^e Jbo. 
manner  wa>s.  went  in  unto  them,  and  three  Sabbath  ^^f®  ^»\;*  •***^" 

^  r»      •  reigns  became 

days  reasoned  with  them  out  of  the  Scriptures,  chriitians. 
opening  and  alleging,  that  Christ  must  needs 
have  suffered  and  risen  again  from  the  dead; 
and  that  this  Jesus  whom  he  preached  was  the 
Christ.  The  Scriptures  here  mentioned  were  the 
Scriptures  of  the  Jews,  that  is,  the  Old  Testament. 
The  men,  to  whom  he  was  to  prove  that  Jesus  was 
the  Christ  and  risen  again  from  the  dead,  were 
also  Jews,  and  did  believe  already,  that  they  were 
the  word  of  God.  Hereupon  (as  it  is  in  verse  4) 
some  of  them  believed,  and  (as  it  is  in  verse  5) 
some  believed  not.  What  was  the  reason,  when  they 
all  believed  the  Scripture,  that  they  did  not  all  be- 
lieve alike;  but  that  some  approved,  others  dis- 
approved the  interpretation  of  St.  Paul  that  cited 
them ;  and  every  one  interpreted  them  to  himself? 


Digitized  by 


Google 


510         OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWBALTH. 

PART  HI.  It  was  this ;  St.  Paul  came  to  them  without  any 
>    ^f*  _     legal  commission,  and  in  the  manner  of  one  that 
Of  the  inter-    would  uot  commaud,  but  persuade ;  which  he  must 
s^pLre«,be-  needs  do,  either  by  miracles,  as  Moses  did  to  the 
Snttlcamc"  IsracUtcs  iu  Egypt,  that  they  might  see  his  autho- 
christians.      rfty  iu  God's  works ;   or  by  reasoning  from  the 
already  received  Scripture,  that  they  might  see  the 
truth  of  his  doctrine  in  God's  word.    But  who- 
soever persuadeth  by  reasoning  from  principles 
written,  maketh  him  to  whom  he  speaketh  judge, 
both  of  the  meaning  of  those  principles,  and  also 
of  the  force  of  his  inferences  upon  them.     K  these 
Jews  of  Thessalonica  were  not,  who  else  was  the 
judge  of  what  St.  Paul  alleged  out  of  Scripture  ? 
If  St.  Paul,  what  needed  he  to  quote  any  places  to 
prove  his  doctrine  ?     It  had  been  enough  to  have 
said,  I  find  it  so  in  Scripture,  that  is  to  say,  in 
your  laws,  of  which  I  am  interpreter,  as  sent  by 
Christ.    The  interpreter  therefore  of  the  Scripture, 
to  whose  interpretation  the  Jews  of  Thessalonica 
were  bound  to  stand,  could  be  none :  every  one 
might  believe,  or  not  believe,  according  as  the 
allegation  seemed  to  himself  to  be  agreeable,  or 
not  agreeable  to  the  meaning  of  the  places  alleged. 
And  generally  in  all  cases  of  the  world,  he  that 
pretendeth  any  proof,  maketh  judge  of  his  proof 
him  to  whom  he  addresseth  his  speech.    And  as  to 
the  case  of  the  Jews  in  particular,  they  were  bound 
by  express  words  {Deut.  xvii.)  to  receive  the  deter- 
mination of  all  hard  questions,  from  the  priests  and 
judges  of  Israel  for  the  time  being.   But  this  is  to  be 
understood  of  the  Jews  that  were  yet  unconverted. 
For  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles,  there  was  no 
use  of  alleging  the  Scriptures,  whidi  they  believed 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  511 

not.    The  apostles  therefore  laboured  by  reason  to  part  hi. 
confute  their  idolatry ;  and  that  done,  to  persuade    -_  ^^'  ^ 
them  to  the  faith  of  Christ,  by  their  testimony  of  oftheinur- 
his  life  and  resurrection.     So  that  there  could  not  scriptures,  be- 
yet  be  any  controversy  concerning  the  authority  to  felgni'bl^e 
interpret  Scripture ;  seeing  no  man  was  obliged,  chrUUans. 
during  his  infidelity,  to  follow  any  man's  interpre- 
tation of  any  Scripture,  except  his  sovereign's  in- 
terpretation of  the  laws  of  his  country. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  conversion  itself,  and 
see  what  there  was  therein  that  could  be  cause 
of  such  an  obligation.  Men  were  converted  to  no 
other  thing  than  to  the  belief  of  that  which  the 
apostles  preached  :  and  the  apostles  preached  no- 
thing, but  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,  that  is  to  say, 
the  king  that  was  to  save  them,  and  reign  over 
them  eternally  in  the  world  to  come ;  and  conse- 
quently that  he  was  not  dead,  but  risen  again  from 
the  dead,  and  gone  up  into  heaven,  and  should  come 
again  one  day  to  judge  the  world,  (which  also 
should  rise  again  to  be  judged,)  and  reward  every 
man  according  to  his  works.  None  of  them 
preached  that  himself,  or  any  other  apostle,  was 
such  an  interpreter  of  the  Scripture,  as  all  that  be- 
came Christians,  ought  to  take  their  interpretation 
for  law.  For  to  interpret  the  laws,  is  part  of  the 
administration  of  a  present  kingdom;  which  the 
apostles  had  not.  They  prayed  then,  and  all  other 
pastors  ever  since,  let  thy  kingdx)m  come  ;  and  ex- 
horted their  converts  to  obey  their  then  ethnic 
princes.  The  New  Testament  was  not  yet  pub- 
lished in  one  body.  Every  of  the  evangelists  was 
interpreter  of  his  own  gospel ;  and  every  apostle 
of  his  own  epistle ;  and  of  the  Old  Testament  our 


Digitized  by 


Google 


512  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  Saviour  himself  saith  to  the  Jews  {John  v.  39) 
.  ^j^'  -  Search  the  Scriptures ;  for  in  them  ye  think  to 
have  eternal  l\fe,  and  they  are  they  that  testify 
of  me.  If  he  had  not  meant  they  should  interpret 
diem,  he  would  not  have  bidden  them  take  thence 
the  proof  of  his  being  the  Christ :  he  would  either 
have  interpreted  them  himself,  or  referred  them  to 
the  interpretation  of  the  priests. 

When  a  difficulty  arose,  the  apostles  and  elders 
of  the  Church  assembled  themselves  together,  and 
determined  what  should  be  preached  and  taught, 
and  how  they  should  interpret  the  Scriptures  to  the 
people ;  but  took  not  from  the  people  the  liberty 
to  read  and  interpret  them  to  themselves.  The 
apostles  sent  divers  letters  to  the  Churches,  and 
other  writings  for  their  instruction ;  which  had  been 
in  vain,  if  they  had  not  allowed  them  to  interpret, 
that  is,  to  consider  the  meaning  of  them.  And  as 
it  was  in  the  apostles'  time,  it  must  be  till  such 
time  as  there  should  be  pastors,  that  could  autho- 
rize an  interpreter,  whose  interpretation  should 
generally  be  stood  to :  but  that  could  not  be  till 
kings  were  pastors,  or  pastors  kings. 
Of  the  There  be  two  senses,  wherein  a  writing  may  be 

power  to  make        .,         ,  •in  ••/•?  t 

Scripture,  law.  said  to  bc  Canonical;  for  canon,  signifieth  a  rule  ; 
and  a  rule  is  a  precept,  by  which  a  man  is  guided 
and  directed  in  any  action  whatsoever.  Such  pre- 
cepts, though  given  by  a  teacher  to  his  disciple,  or 
a  counsellor  to  his  friend,  without  power  to  com- 
pel him  to  observe  them,  are  nevertheless  (canons  ; 
because  they  are  rules.  But  when  they  are  given 
by  one,  whom  he  that  receiveth  them  is  bound  to 
obey,  then  are  those  canons,  not  only  rules,  but 
laws.   The  question  therefore  here,  is  of  the  power 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  513 

to  make  the  Scriptures,  which  are  the  rules  of  part  iiu 
Christian  faith,  laws.  .    ^^'  . 

That  part  of  the  Scripture,  which  was  first  law,  ofthetencom- 
was  the  Ten  (Commandments,  written  in  two  tables  ™*° 
of  stone,  and  delivered  by  God  himself  to  Moses ; 
and  by  Moses  made  known  to  the  people.  Before 
that  time  there  was  no  written  law  of  God,  who  as 
yet  having  not  chosen  any  people  to  be  his  pecu- 
liar kingdom,  had  given  no  law  to  men,  but  the 
law  of  nature,  that  is  to  say,  the  precepts  of  na- 
tural reason,  written  in  every  man's  own  heart. 
Of  these  two  tables,  the  first  containeth  the  law  of 
sovereignty;  1.  That  they  should  not  obey,  nor 
honour  the  gods  of  other  nations,  in  these  words, 
Non  hahehis  deos  alienos  coram  me,  that  is,  thou 
shalt  not  have  for  gods,  the  gods  that  other  na- 
tions worship,  but  only  me :  whereby  they  were 
forbidden  to  obey,  or  honour,  as  their  king  and  go- 
vernor, any  other  God,  than  him  that  spake  unto 
them  then  by  Moses,  and  afterwards  by  the  high- 
priest.  2.  That  they  should  not  ma&e  any  image 
to  represent  him  ;  that  is  to  say,  they  were  not  to 
choose  to  themselves,  neither  in  heaven,  nor  in 
earth,  any  representative  of  their  own  fancying, 
but  obey  Moses  and  Aaron,  whom  he  had  ap- 
pointed to  that  ofiice.  3.  That  they  should  not 
take  the  name  of  God  in  vain  ;  that  is,  they  should 
not  speak  rashly  of  their  king,  nor  dispute  his 
right,  nor  the  commissions  of  Moses  and  Aaron, 
his  lieutenants.  4.  That  they  should  every  seventh 
{lay  abstain  from  their  ordinary  labour,  and  em- 
ploy that  time  in  doing  him  public  honour.  The 
second  table  containeth  the  duty  of  one  man  to- 
wards ^another,  as  to  honour  parents  ;  not  to  kill ; 

VOL.  III.  L  L 


Digitized  by 


Google 


314  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

EART  III.  f^t  to  commit  adultery  ;  not  to  steal;  not  to  cor^ 
.  '^"'  .  rupt  judgment  hy  false  witness  ;  and  finally,  not 
so  much  a^  to  design  in  their  heart  the  doing  of 
any  injury  one  to  another.  The  qnestion  now  is, 
who  it  was  that  gave  to  these  written  tables  the 
obligatory  force  of  laws.  There  is  no  doubt  but 
they  were  made  laws  by  God  himself :  but  because 
a  law  obliges  not,  nor  is  law  to  any,  but  to  them 
that  acknowledge  it  to  be  the  act  of  the  sovereign; 
how  could  the  people  of  Israel,  that  were  forbidden 
to  approach  the  mountain  to  hear  what  God  said 
to  Moses,  be  obliged  to  obedience  to  all  those  laws 
which  Moses  propounded  to  them  ?  Some  of  them 
were  indeed  the  laws  of  nature,  as  all  the  second 
table ;  and  therefore  to  be  acknowledged  for  God's 
laws;  not  to  the  Israelites  alone,  but  to  all  people: 
but  of  those  that  were  peculiar  to  the  Israelites,  as 
those  of  the  first  table,  the  question  remains ;  sa^ 
ving  that  they  had  obliged  themselves,  presently 
after  the  propounding  of  them,  to  obey  Moses,  in 
these  words  {Exod.  xx.  19),  Speah  thou  to  us,  and 
we  will  hear  thee ;  hut  let  not  God  speah  to  us, 
lest  we  die.  It  was  therefore  only  Moses  then, 
and  after  him  the  high-priest,  whom,  by  Moses, 
God  declared  should  administer  this  his  peculiar 
kingdom,  that  had  on  earth  the  power  to  make  this 
short  Scripture  of  the  Decalogue  to  be  law  in  the 
commonwealth  of  Israel.  But  Moses,  and  Aaron, 
and  the  succeeding  high-priests,  were  tiie  civil  so- 
vereigns. Therefore  hitherto,  the  canonizing  or 
making  the  Scripture  law,  belonged  to  the  ciidl 
sovereign. 
ofthejttdid^  The  judicid  law,  that  is  to  say,  the  laws  that 
uw.  God  prescribed  to  the  magistrates  of  Israel  for  the 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  515 

rule  of  their  administration  of  justice,  and  of  the  ^^kt  hi. 
sentences  or  judgments  they  should  pronounce  in  ^^  _^ 
pleas  between  man  and  man ;  and  the  Levitical 
law,  that  is  to  say,  the  rule  that  God  prescribed 
touching  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  priests 
and  Levites,  were  all  delivered  to  them  by  Moses 
only ;  and  therefore  also  became  laws,  by  virtue  of 
the  same  promise  of  obedience  to  Moses.  Whe- 
ther these  laws  were  then  written,  or  not  written, 
but  dictated  to  the  people  by  Moses,  after  his  being 
forty  days  with  God  in  the  Mount,  by  word  of 
mouth,  is  not  expressed  in  the  text ;  but  they  were 
all  positive  laws,  and  equivalent  to  holy  Scripture, 
and  made  canonical  by  Moses  the  civil  sovereign. 

After  the  Israelites  were  come  into  the  plains  of  ^^  second 
Moab  over  against  Jericho,  and  ready  to  enter  into 
the  land  of  promise,  Moses  to  the  former  laws  added 
divers  others ;  which  therefore  are  called  Deuter- 
onomy; that  is,  second  laws.  And  are,  (as  it  is 
written  Deut.  xxix.  1)  the  words  of  a  covenant 
which  tJie  Lord  commanded  Moses  to  make  with 
the  children  of  Israel^  besides  the  covenant  which 
be  made  with  them  in  Horeh.  For  having  ex- 
plained those  former  laws,  in  the  beginning  of  the 
book  oi  Deuteronomy^  he  addeth  others,  that  begin 
at  the  xiith  chapter,  and  continue  to  the  end  of  the 
xxvith  of  the  same  book.  This  law  {Deut.  xxvii.  3) 
they  were  commanded  to  write  upon  greajt  stones 
plastered  over,  at  their  pas$ing  over  Jordan :  this 
law  also  was  written  by  Moses  himself  in  a  book, 
and  delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  priests^  and  to 
the  elders  of  Israel  (Deut.  xxxi.  9),  and  com- 
manded (verse  26)  to  he  put, in  the  side  of  the  ark; 
for  in  the  urk  itself  was  nothing  but  the  teii  com- 

LL2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


516  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  mandments.  This  was  the  law,  which  Moses  {Detit. 
.  ^^'  .  xvii.  18)  commanded  the  kings  of  Israel  should 
The  second  kccp  a  copy  of :  and  this  is  the  law,  which  having 
been  long  time  lost,  was  found  again  in  the  temple 
in  the  time  of  Josiah,  and  by  his  authority  received 
for  the  law  of  God.  But  both  Moses  at  the  writ- 
ing, and  Josiah  at  the  recovery  thereof,  had  both 
of  them  the  civil  sovereignty.  Hitherto  therefore 
the  power  of  making  Scripture  canonical,  was  in 
the  civil  sovereign. 

Besides  this  book  of  the  law,  there  was  no  other 
book,  from  the  time  of  Moses  till  after  the  Capti- 
vity, received  amongst  the  Jews  for  the  law  of  God. 
For  the  prophets,  except  a  few,  lived  in  the  time  of 
the  Captivity  itself;  and  the  rest  lived  but  a  little 
before  it ;  and  were  so  far  from  having  their  pro- 
phecies generally  received  for  laws,  as  that  their 
persons  were  persecuted,  partly  by  false  prophets, 
and  partly  by  the  kings  which  were  seduced  by 
them.  And  this  book  itself,  which  was  confirmed 
by  Josiah  for  the  law  of  God,  and  with  it  all  the 
history  of  the  works  of  God,  was  lost  in  the  capti- 
vity and  sack  of  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  as  appeals 
by  that  of  2  EsdraSy  xiv.  21,  thy  law  is  burnt; 
therefore  no  man  knoweth  the  things  that  are  done 
of  thee y  or  the  works  that  shall  begin.  And  be- 
fore the  captivity,  between  the  time  when  the  law 
was  lost,  (which  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Scripture, 
but  may  probably  be  thought  to  be  the  time  of  Re- 
hoboam,  wben  ( 1  Kings  xiv.  26)  Shishak,  king  of 
Egypt,  took  the  spoil  of  the  temple),  and  the  time  of 
Josiah  when  it  was  found  again,  they  had  no  writ- 
ten word  of  God,  but  ruled  according  to  their  own 
discretion,  or  by  the  direction  of  such  as  each  of 
them  esteemed  prophets. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  517 

From  hence  we  may  infer,  that  the  Scriptures  of  part  hi. 
the  Old  Testament,  which  we  have  at  this  day,  were   .    ^^'    . 
not  canonical  nor  a  law  unto  the  Jews,  till  the  re-  The  oidies- 
novation  of  their  covenant  with  God  at  their  return  mX^canonrcui 
from  the  captivity,  and  restoration  of  their  common- 
wealth under  Esdras.     But  from  that  time  forward 
they  were  accounted  the  law  of  the  Jews,  and  for 
such  translated  into  Greek  by  seventy  elders  of 
Judea,  and  put  into  the  library  of  Ptolemy  at  Alex- 
andria, and  approved  for  the  word  of  God.     Now 
seeing  Esdras  was  the  high-priest,  and  the  high- 
priest  was  their  civil  sovereign,  it  is  manifest  that 
the  Scriptures  were  never  made  laws,  but  by  the 
sovereign  civil  power. 

By  the  writings  of  the  fathers  that  lived  in  the  The  New  Tea- 
time  before  that  the  Christian  religion  was  received,  {o^b^wnon^cai 
and  authorized  by  Constantine  the  emperor,  we  may  ""^^ef 9^"**^**" 

J  r  '  J  sovereigns. 

find,  that  the  books  we  now  have  of  the  New  Tes- 
tament were  held  by  the  Christians  of  that  time, 
except  a  few,  (in  respect  of  whose  paucity  the  rest 
were  called  the  Catholic  Church,  and  others  here- 
tics), for  the  dictates  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  conse- 
quently for  the  canon  or  rule  of  faith :  such  was 
the  reverence  and  opinion  they  had  of  their  teach- 
ers ;  as  generally  the  reverence,  that  the  disciples 
bear  to  their  first  masters  in  all  manner  of  doctrine 
they  receive  from  them,  is  not  small.  Therefore 
there  is  no  doubt,  but  when  St.  Paul  wrote  to  the 
Churches  he  had  converted ;  or  any  other  apostle 
or  disciple  of  Christ,  to  those  which  had  then  em- 
braced Christ ;  they  received  those  their  writings 
for  the  true  Christian  doctrine.  But  in  that  time, 
when  not  the  power  and  authority  of  the  teacher, 
but  the  faith  of  the  hearer,  caused  them  to  receive 


Digitized  by 


Google 


518  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  it,  it  was  not  the  apostles  that  made  their  own  writ- 
^   *^'  __-   ings  canonical^  but  every  convert  made  them  so  to 

The  New  Tea-  himSClf. 

tament  began  -ri  *  .         ,  .  ,  ayi     •     • 

to  be  canonical     But  thc  qucstion  hcrc,  IS  Hot  what  any  Christian 
sovcreig^*'*"  made  a  law  or  canon  to  himself,  which  he  might 
again  reject  by  the  same  right  he  received  it ;  but 
what  was  so  made  a  canon  to  them,  as  without  injus- 
tice they  could  not  do  any  thing  contrary  thereunto. 
That  the  New  Testament  should  in  this  sense  be 
canonical,  that  is  to  say  a  law,  in  any  place  where 
the  law  of  the  commonwealth  had  not  made  it  so, 
is  contrary  to  the  nature  of  a  law.    For  a  law,  as 
has  been  already  shown,  is  the  commandment  of 
that  man  or  assembly,  to  whom  we  have  given 
sovereign  authority  to  make  such  rules  for  the  di- 
rection of  our  actions  as  he  shall  think  fit,  and 
to  punish  us  when  we  do  any  thing  contrary  to  the 
same.    When  therefore  any  other  man  shall  offer 
unto  us  any  other  rules,  which  the  sovereign  ruler 
hath  riot  prescribed,  they  are  but  counsel  and 
advice ;   which,  whether  good  or  bad,  he  that  is 
counselled,  may  without  injustice  refuse  to  observe; 
and  when  contrary  to  the  laws  already  established, 
without  injustice  cannot  observe,  how  good  soever 
he  conceiveth  it  to  be.     I  say,  he  cannot  in  this 
case  observe  the  same  in  his  actions,  nor  in  his  dis- 
course with  other  men ;  though  he  may  without 
blame  believe  his  private  teachers,  and  wish  he  had 
the  liberty  to  practise  their  advice,  and  that  it 
were  publicly  received  for  law.     For  internal  fiiith 
is  in  its  own  nature  invisible,  and  consequently  ex- 
empted from  all  human  jurisdiction ;  whereas  the 
words  and  actions  that  proceed  from  it,  as  breaches 
of  our  civil  obedience,  are  injustice  both  before  God 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  BCCLESIASTICAL.  519 

and  man.     Seeing  then  our  Saviour  hath  denied  part  iir. 
his  kingdom  to  be  in  this  world,  seeing  he  had  said,    .    ^p-  _^ 
he  came  not  to  judge,  but  to  save  the  world,  he  The^NewTea- 
hath  not  subjected  us  to  other  laws  than  those  of  to^r^nonfcM 
the  commonwealth ;  that  is,  the  Jews  to  the  law  of  "°^®^9^"»^**" 

^  sovereigns. 

Moses,  which  he  saith  {Matth.  v.  17)  he  came  not  to 
destroy,  but  to  fulfil ;  and  other  nations  to  the  laws 
of  theii;  several  sovereigns,  and  all  men  to  the  laws 
of  nature ;  the  observing  whereof,  both  he  himself, 
and  his  apostles,  have  in  their  teaching  recommend- 
ed to  us,  as  a  necessary  condition  of  being  admitted 
by  him  in  the  last  day  into  his  eternal  kingdom, 
wherein  shall  be  protection,  and  life  everlasting. 
Seeing  then  our  Saviour,  and  his  apostles,  left  not 
new  laws  to  oblige  us  in  this  world,  but  new  doc- 
trine to  prepare  us  for  the  next ;  the  books  of  the 
New  Testament,  which  contain  that  doctrine,  until 
obedience  to  them  was  commanded  by  them  that 
God  had  given  power  to  on  earth  to  be  legislators, 
were  not  obligatory  canons,  that  is,  laws,  but  only 
good  and  safe  advice,  for  the  direction  of  sinners 
in  the  way  to  salvation,  which  every  man  might 
take  and  refuse  at  his  own  peril,  without  injustice. 
Again,  our  Saviour  Christ's  commission  to  his 
apostles  and  disciples,  was  to  proclaim  his  king- 
dom>  not  present,  but  to  come ;  and  to  teach  dl 
nations,  and  to  baptize  them  that  should  believe ; 
and  to  enter  into  the  houses  of  them  that  should 
receive  them,  and  where  they  were  not  received,  to 
shake  off  the  dust  of  their  feet  against  them  ;  but 
not  to  call  for  fire  from  heaven  to  destroy  them, 
nor  to  compel  them  to  obedience  by  the  sword. 
In  lA  which  there  is  nothing  of  power,  but  of  per- 
suasion.    He  sent  them  out  as  sheep  unto  wolves. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


620  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  iiL  not  as  kings  to  their  subjects.    They  had  not  in 
.,  ^f-    .    coramission  to  make  laws ;  but  to  obey,  and  teach 
obedience  to  laws  made;  and  consequently  they 
could  not  make  their  writings  obligatory  canons, 
without  the  help  of  the  sovereign  civil  power.     And 
therefore  the  Scripture  of  the  New  Testament  is 
there  only  law,  where  the  lawful  civil  power  hath 
made  it  so.     And  there  also  the  king,  or  sovereign, 
maketh  it  a  law  to  himself;  by  which  he  subjecteth 
himself,   not  to  the  doctor  or  aiH)stle  that    con- 
verted him,  but  to  God  himself  and  his  Son  Jesus 
Christ,  as  immediately  as  did  the  apostles  them- 
selves. . 
Of  the  power       That  which  may  seem  to  give  the  New  Testament, 
t*o  make  the     iu  rcspcct  of  thosc  that  have  embraced  Christian 
scnpturcsiaw.  (jQ(>tj.ing^  tjj^  forcc  of  laws,  in  the  times  and  places 

of  persecution,  is  the  decrees  they  made  amongst 
themselves  in  their  synod.  For  we  read  (Acts  xv. 
28)  the  style  of  the  council  of  the  apostles,  the 
elders,  and  the  whole  Church,  in  this  manner ;  // 
seemed  good  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  to  us,  to  lay 
ftpon  you  no  greater  burthen  than  these  necessary 
things,  Sfc  ;  which  is  a  style  that  signifieth  a  power 
to  lay  a  burthen  on  them  that  had  received  their 
doctrine.  Now  to  lay  a  burthen  on  fl»o/A^r,seemeth 
the  same  as  to  oblige ;  and  therefore  the  acts  of 
that  council  were  laws  to  the  then  Christians. 
Nevertheless,  they  were  no  more  laws  than  are 
these  other  precepts.  Repent ;  be  baptized ;  keep 
the  commandments  ;  believe  the  gospel ;  come  unto 
me  ;  sell  all  that  thou  hast ;  give  it  to  the  poor  ; 
and^  follow  me  ;  which  are  not  commands,  but  in- 
vitations, and  callings  of  men  to  Christianity,  like 
that  of  Isaiah  Iv.  1  ;  Ho,  every  man  that  thirsteth. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  521 

come  ye  to  the  waters,  come,  and  buy  wine  and  part  ni. 
milfe  without  money.     For  first,  the  apostles'  power    ,  /^^'    ^ 
was  no  other  than  that  of  our  Saviour,  to  invite  of  the  power 
men  to  embrace  the  kingdom  of  God;  which  they  ^omrkelhe 
themselves  acknowledged  for  a  kingdom,  not  pre-  scnpturet  law. 
^ent,  but  to  come ;  and  they  that  have  no  kingdom, 
can  make  no  laws.     And  secondly,  if  their  acts  of 
council  were  laws,  they  could  not  without  sin  be  dis- 
(*eyed.    But  we  read  not  any  where,  that  they  who 
received  not  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  did  therein  sin ; 
but  that  they  died  in  their  sins ;  that  is,  that  their 
sins  against  the  laws  to  which  they  owed  obedience, 
were  not  pardoned.     And  those  laws  were  the  laws 
of  nature,  and  the  civil  laws  of  the  state,  whereto 
every  Christian  man  had  by  pact  submitted  himself. 
And  therefore  by  the  burthen,  which  the  apostles 
might  lay  on  such  as  they  had  converted,  are  not 
to  be  understood  laws,  but  conditions  proposed  to 
those   that  sought  salvation;    which  they  might 
accept  or  refuse  at  their  own  peril,  without  a  new 
sin,  though  not  without  the  hazard  of  being  con- 
demned and  excluded  out  of  the  kingdom  of  God 
for  their  sins  past.     And  therefore  of  infidels,  St. 
John  saith  not,  the  wrath  of  God  shall  come  upon 
them,  but  (John  iii.  36)  the  wrath  of  God  remaineth 
vpon  them ;  and  not  that  they  shall  be  condemned, 
but  that  {John  iii.  18)  they  are  coftdemned  already. 
Nor  can  it  be  conceived,  that  the  benefit  of  faith 
is  remission  of  sins,  unless  we  conceive  withal,  that 
the  damage   of  infidelity  is  the  retention  of  the 
jtame  sins. 

But  to  what  end  is  it,  may  some  man  ask,  that 
the  apostles,  and  other  pastors  of  the  Church  after 
their  time^  should  meet    together  to  agree  upon 


Digitized  by 


Google 


622  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  HI.  what  doctrine  should  be  taught^  both  for  fidth  and 
.    ^p-    ,    manners,  if  no  man  were  obliged  to  observe  their 
Of  the  power   dccrces  ?  To  this  may  be  answered^  that  the  apostles 
to  mX^the    and  elders  of  that  council  were  obliged  even  by 
Scriptures  law.  ^j^^j,.  entrance  into  it,  to  teach  the  doctrine  therein 
concluded  and  decreed  to  be  taught,  so  far  fidith, 
as  no  precedent  law,  to  which  they  were  obliged  to 
yield  obedience,  was  to  the  contrary ;  but  not  that 
all  other  Christians  should  be  obliged  to  observe 
what  they  taught.    For  though  they  might  deli- 
berate what  each  of  them  should  teach ;  yet  they 
could  not  deliberate  what  others  should  do,  unless 
their  assembly  had  had  a  legislative  power ;  which 
none  could  have  but  civil  sovereigns.     For  though 
God  be  the  sovereign  of  all  the  world,  we  are  not 
bound  to  take  for  his  law  whatsoever  is  propounded 
by  every  man  in  his  name  ;  nor  anything  contrary 
to  the  civil  law,  which  God  hath  expressly  com- 
manded us  to  obey. 

Seeing  then  the  acts  of  council  of  the  apostles, 
were  then  no  laws,  but  counsels;  much  less  are 
laws  the  acts  of  any  other  doctors  or  coimcil  since, 
if  assembled  without  the  authority  of  the  civil 
sovereign.  And  consequently,  the  Books  of  the 
New  Testament,  though  most  perfect  rules  of 
Christian  doctrine,  could  not  be  made  laws  by  any 
other  authority  than  that  of  kings  or  sovereign 
assemblies. 

The  first  council,  that  made  the  Scriptures  we 
now  have  canon,  is  not  extant:  for  that  collec- 
tion of  the  canons  of  the  apostles,  attributed  to 
Clemens,  the  first  bishop  of  Rome  after  St.  Peter, 
is  subject  to  question.  For  though  the  canonical 
books  be  there  reckoned  up ;   yet  these  words. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  523 

sint  vobis  omnibus  clericis  et  laicis  libri  vener-  part  hi. 
andiy  etc.  contain  a  distinction  of  clergy  and  laity,  .  /*]^'  . 
that  was  not  in  use  so  near  St.  Peter's  time.  The 
first  council  for  settling  the  canonical  Scripture, 
that  is  extant,  is  that  of  Laodicea,  {Can.  lix.)  which 
forbids  the  reading  of  other  books  than  those  in 
the  churches  ;  which  is  a  mandate  that  is  not  ad- 
dressed to  every  Christian,  but  to  those  only  that 
had  authority  to  read  any  thing  publicly  in  the 
church ;  that  is,  to  ecclesiastics  only. 

Of  ecclesiastical  officers  in  the  time  of  the  apos-  9^J*«, 

^  ngbt  of  con- 

tles,  some  were  magisterial,  some  ministerial.    Ma-  stituUng  ec- 
gisterial  were  the  offices  of  the  preaching  of  theoffi^i^ 
gospel  of  the  kmgdom  of  God  to  infidels;  of  ad- ^^  J^J^i^^, 
ministering  the  sacraments,  and  divine  service ;  and 
of  teaching  the  rules  of  faith  and  manners  to  those 
that  were  converted.     Ministerial  was  the  office  of 
deacons,  that  is,  of  them  that  were  appointed  to 
the  administration  of  the  secular  necessities  of  the 
church,  at  such  time  as  they  lived  upon  a  common 
stock  of  money,  raised  out  of  the  voluntary  contri- 
butions of  the  faithful. 

Amongst  the  officers  magisterial,  the  first  and 
principal  were  the  apostles ;  whereof  there  were  at 
first  but  twelve  ;  and  these  were  chosen  and  con- 
stituted by  our  Saviour  himself;  and  their  office 
was  not  only  to  preadh,  teach,  and  baptize,  but 
also  to  be  martyrs,  witnesses  of  our  Siaviour's  re- 
surrection.  This  testimony  was  the  specifical 
and  essential  mark,  whereby  the  apostleship  was 
distinguished  from  other  magistracy  ecclesiastical ; 
as  being  necessary  for  an  apostle,  either  to  have 
seen  our  Saviour  after  his  resurrection,  or  to 
have  conversed  with   him   before,   and   seen  his 


Digitized  by 


Google 


524  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  works,  and  other  arguments  of  his  divinity ;  where-' 
.  *f-  .  by  they  might  be  taken  for  sufficient  witnesses. 
And  therefore  at  the  election  of  a  new  apostle  in 
the  place  of  Judas  Iscariot,  St.  Peter  saith  (Acts 
i.  21,  22)  Of  these  men  that  have  companied  with 
us,  all  the  time  that  the  Lord  Jesus  went  in  and 
out  amongst  us,  beginning  from  the  baptism  of 
John  unto  that  same  day  that  he  was  taken  up 
from  tiSy  must  one  be  ordained  to  be  a  witness 
with  us  of  his  resurrection :  where  by  this  word 
mv^ty  is  implied  a  necessary  property  of  an  apostle, 
to  have  companied  with  the  first  and  prime  apostles, 
in  the  time  that  our  Saviour  manifested  himself  in 
the  flesh. 
^oiVAe*"  The  first  apostle,  of  those  which  were  not  con- 
congregation,  stitutcd  by  Chrfst  iu  the  time  he  was  upon  the  earth, 
was  Matthias,  chosen  in  this  maimer.  There  were 
assembled  together  in  Jerusalem  about  one  hun- 
dred and  twenty  Christians  {Acts  i.  16).  These 
(verse  23)  appointed  two,  Joseph  the  Just  and  Mat- 
thias, and  caused  lots  to  be  drawn ;  and  (verse  26) 
the  lot  fell  on  Matthias,  and  he  was  numbered 
with  the  apostles.  So  that  here  we  see  the  ordi- 
nation of  this  apostle  was  the  act  of  the  congrega- 
tion, and  not  of  St.  Peter  nor  of  the  eleven,  other- 
wise than  as  members  of  the  assembly. 
PauiandBar-      After  him  there  was  never  any  other  apostle 

iiabas  made  ^  ^ 

apostles  by    ordaiucd,  but  Paul  and  Barnabas ;  which  was  done 

the  Church  i     r  ^    .         •••      ,      ^      «>x    •        .1  • 

of  Antioch.  as  wc  read  (Acts  xiu.  1,  2,  3)  m  this  manner. 
There  were  in  the  Church  that  was  at  Antioch, 
certain  prophets  and  teachers;  as  Barnabas, 
and  Simeon  that  was  called  Niger,  and  Lucius 
of  Cyrene,  and  Manaen  ;  which  had  been  brought 
up  with  Herod  the  Tetrarch,  and  Saul.    As  they 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  625 

ministered  unto  the  Lord,  and  fasted^  the  Holy  part  iii. 
Ghost  said,  Separate  me  Barnabas  and  Saul  for   .    ^^'    . 
the  work  whereunto  I  have  called  them.     -4w£/ Paul  and  Bar- 
when  they  had  fasted  and  prayed,  and  laid  ^A^iVa^stUsby 
hands  on  them,  they  sent  them  away.  o^r  A^nUoch. 

By  which  it  is  manifest,  that  though  they  were 
called  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  their  calling  was  de- 
clared xinto  them  and  their  mission  authorized  by 
the  particular  Church  of  Antioch.     And  that  this 
their  calling  was  to  the  apostleship,  is  apparent  by 
that,  that  they  are  both  called  {Acts  xiv.  14)  apos- 
tles :  and  that  it  was  by  virtue  of  this  act  of  the 
Church  of  Antioch,  that  they  were  apostles,  St. 
Paid  declareth  plainly  {Rom.  i.  1),  in  that  he  useth 
the  word,   which  the   Holy   Ghost  used   at  his 
calling :  for  he  styleth  himself.  An  apostle  sepa- 
rated unto  the  gospel  of  God;  alluding  to  the 
words  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  Separate  m£  Barnabas 
and  Saul,  8fc.     But  seeing  the  work  of  an  apostle, 
was  to  be  a  witness  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  a 
man  may  here  ask,  how  St.  Paul,  that  conversed 
not  with  our  Saviour  before  his  passion,  could 
know  he  was  risen  ?    To  which  is  easily  answered, 
that  our  Saviour  himself  appeared  to  him  in  the 
way  to  Damascus,  from  heaven,  after  his  ascension ; 
and  chose  him  for  a   vessel  to  bear  his  name 
before  the  Gentiles,  and  kings,  and  children  of 
Israel:  and  consequently,  having  seen  the  Lord 
after  his  passion,  he  was  a  competent  witness  of  his 
resurrection.   And  as  for  Barnabas,  he  was  a  dis- 
ciple before  the  passion.     It  is  therefore  evident 
that  Paul  and  Barnabas  were  apostles;   and  yet 
chosen  and  authorized,  not  by  the  first  apostles 
alone,  but  by  the  Church  of  Antioch ;  as  Matthias 


Digitized  by 


Google 


526  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  HI.  was  chosen  and  authorized  by  the  Church  of 
^^^  .  Jerusalem. 
What  offices  Btskop,  a  word  formed  in  our  language  out 
wcnSi^^sLof  the  Greek  Extencoiroc,  signifieth  an  overseer  or 
superintendent  of  any  business^  and  particularly  a 
pastor  or  shepherd ;  and  thence  by  metaphor  was 
taken^  not  only  amongst  the  Jews  that  were  origi- 
nally shepherds,  but  also  amongst  the  heathen^  to 
sigiiify  the  office  of  a  king,  or  any  other  rule  or 
guide  of  people,  whether  he  ruled  by  laws  or  doc- 
trine. And  so  the  apostles  were  the  first  Christian 
bishops,  instituted  by  Christ  himself:  in  which 
sense  the  apostleship  of  Judas  is  called  (Acts  i.  20) 
his  bishopric.  And  afterwards,  when  there  were 
constituted  elders  in  the  Christian  Churches,  with 
charge  to  guide  Christ's  flock  by  their  doctrine 
and  advice ;  these  elders  were  also  called  bishop^. 
Timothy  was  an  elder,  (which  word  elder,  in  the 
New  Testament,  is  a  name  of  office,  as  well  as  of 
age) ;  yet  he  was  also  a  bishop.  And  bishops  were 
then  content  with  the  title  of  elders*  Nay  St.  John 
himself,  the  apostle  beloved  of  our  Lord,  b^nneth 
his  second  Epistle  with  these  words.  The  elder  (o 
the  elect  lady.  By  which  it  is  evident,  that  hishop, 
pastor,  elder ^  doctor,  that  is  to  say,  teacher,  were 
but  so  many  divers  names  of  the  same  office  in  the 
time  of  the  apostles ;  for  there  was  then  no  govern- 
ment by  coercion,  but  only  by  doctrine  pud  per- 
suading. The  kingdom  of  God  was  yet  to  come, 
in  a  new  world  :  so  that  there  could  be  no  autho- 
rity to  compel  in  any  Church,  till  the  common- 
wealth had  embraced  the  Christian  faitJi :  and  con- 
sequently no  diversity  of  authority,  though  there 
were  diversity  of  employments. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  BCCLESIA8TICAL.  527 

Besides  these  magisterial  employments  in  the  part  iii. 
Church,  namely,  apostles,  bishops,  elders,  pastors,  .^f-  . 
and  doctors,  whose  calling  was  to  proclaim  Christ 
to  the  Jews  and  infidels,  and  to  direct  and  to  teach 
those  that  believed,  we  read  in  the  New  Testament 
of  no  other.  For  by  the  names  of  evangelists  and 
prophets^  is  not  signified  any  ofi^e,  but  several 
^fts,  by  which  several  men  were  profitable  to  the 
CSiurch :  as  evangelists,  by  writing  the  life  and  acts 
of  our  Saviour  i  such  as  were  St.  Matthew  and  St. 
John  apostles,  and  St.  Mark  and  St.  Luke  disciples, 
and  whosoever  else  wrote  of  that  subject,  (as  St. 
Thomas,  and  St.  Barnabas  are  said  to  have  done, 
though  the  Church  have  not  received  the  books 
that  have  gone  under  their  names) :  and  as  pro- 
phets, by  the  gift  of  interpreting  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, and  sometimes  by  declaring  their  special 
revelations  to  the  Church.  For  neither  these  gifts, 
nor  the  gifts  of  languages,  nor  the  gift  of  casting 
out  devils,  nor  of  curing  other  diseases,  nor  any 
thing  else,  did  make  an  officer  in  the  Church,  save 
only  the  due  calling  and  election  to  the  charge  of 
teaching. 

As  the  apostles,  Matthias,  Paul,  and  Barnabas,  ordination 

■It  rN      .  1  .  1/.   1  of  teachers. 

were  not  made  by  our  Saviour  himself,  but  were 
dlected  by  the  Church,  that  is,  by  the  assembly  of 
Christians;  namely,  Matthias  by  the  Church  of 
Jerusalem,  and  Paul  and  Barnabas  by  the  Church 
of  Antioch ;  so  were  also  the  presbyters  and  pas- 
tors  in  other  cities,  elected  by  the  Churches  of 
those  cities.  For  proof  whereof  let  us  consider, 
first,  how  St.  Paul  proceeded  in  the  ordination  of 
presbyters,  in  the  cities  where  he  had  converted 
men  to  the  Christian  faith,  immediately  after  he 


Digitized  by 


Google 


528  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  and  Barnabas  had  received  their  apostleship.     We 

^    ^^'  _.    read  (Acts  xiv.  23)  that  tkey  ordained  elders  in 

Ordination    every  Church  ;  which  at  first  sight  may  be  taken 

eac  erg.  ^^^  ^^  argument,  that  they  themselves  chose,  and 

gave  them  their  authority :  but  if  we  consider  the 

original  text,  it  will  be  manifest  that  they  were 

authorized  and  chosen  by  the  assembly  of  the 

Christians  of  each  city.    For  the  words  there  are, 

\€t^ovJi(ravTi£  avrocc   irpiafivTipovQ    imt*    iKt^ri<rlay^  that    IS, 

when  they  had  ordained  tJiem  elders  by  the  hold- 
'    ing  up  of  hands  in  every  congregation.     Now  it 
is  well  enough  known,  that  in  all  those  cities  the 
manner  of  choosing  magistrates  and  officers,  was 
by  plurality  of  sufirages ;  and,   because  the  ordi- 
nary way  of  distinguishing  the  affirmative  votes 
from  the  negatives,  was  by  holding  up  of  hands,  to 
ordain  an  officer  in  any  of  the  cities,  was  no  more 
but  to  bring  the  people  together,  to  elect  them  by 
plurality  of  votes,  whether  it  were  by  plurality  of 
elevated  hands,  or  by  plurality  of  voices,  or  plu- 
rality of  balls,  or  beans,  or  small  stones,  of  which 
every  man  cast  in  one,  into  a  vessel  marked  for  the 
affirmative  or  negative  ;  for  divers  cities  had  divers 
customs  in  that  point.     It  was  therefore  the  as- 
sembly that  elected  their  own  elders  :  the  apostles 
were  only  presidents  of  the  assembly,  to  call  them 
together  for  such  election,  and  to  pronounce  them 
elected,  and  to  give  them  the  benediction  which 
now  is  called  consecration.     And  for  this  cause, 
they  that  were  presidents  of  the  assemblies,  as  in 
the  absence  of  the  apostles  the  elders  were,  were 
called  7r/t>o€<Tra>rcc9  and  in  Latin  antistites  ;  which 
words  signify  the  principal  person  of  the  assembly, 
whose  office  was  to  number  the  votes,  and  to  de- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  629 

clare  thereby  who  was  chosen ;  and  where  the  votes  part  hi. 
were  equal,  to  decide  the  matter  in  question,  by   ._  ^f*    . 
adding  his  own  ;  which  is  the  office  of  a  president  Ordination 
in  council.    And,  because  all  the  Churches  had  their  ^  ^"^  ^"' 
presbyters  ordained  in  the  same  manner,  where  the 

word  is  constitute^  (as  Titus  i.  5)  iVa  icaTaemjOTjc  Kara 

TTokiv  vpiq^ipovQj  For  this  cause  left  I  thee  in 
Crete,  that  thou  shouldest  constitute  elders  in  every 
city,  we  are  to  understand  the  same  thing,  namely, 
that  he  should  call  the  faithful  together,  and  ordain 
them  presbyters  by  plurality  of  suffrages.  It  had 
been  a  strange  thing,  if  in  a  town,  where  men  per- 
haps had  never  seen  any  magistrate  otherwise 
chosen  than  by  an  assembly,  those  of  the  town  be- 
coming Christians  should  so  much  as  have  thought 
on  any  other  way  of  election  of  their  teachers  and 
guides,  that  is  to  say,  of  their  presbyters,  (otherwise 
called  bishops)  than  this  of  plurality  of  suflFrages, 
intimated  by  St.  Paul  {Acts  xiv.  23)  in  the  word 
X€tpoTovi?<TavT£c.  Nor  was  there  ever  any  choosing 
of  bishops,  before  the  emperors  found  it  necessary 
to  r^ulate  them,  in  order  to  the  keeping  of  the 
peace  amongst  them,  but  by  the  assemblies  of  the 
Christians  in  every  several  town. 

The  same  is  dso  confirmed  by  the  continual 
practice,  even  to  this  day,  in  the  election  of  the 
bishops  of  Rome.  For  if  the  bishop  of  any  place 
had  the  right  of  choosing  another,  to  the  succession 
of  the  pastoral  office,  in  any  city,  at  such  times  as 
he  went  from  thence  to  plant  the  same  in  another 
place ;  much  more  had  he  had  the  right  to  appoint 
his  successors  in  that  place,  in  which  he  last  resided 
and  died :  and  we  find  not  that  ever  any  bishop  of 
Rome  appointed  his  successor.     For  they  were  a 

VOL.  III.  M  M 


Digitized  by 


Google 


530  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III,  long  time  chosen  by  the  people,  as  we  may  see  by 
^  ^f'  -  the  sedition  raised  about  the  election  between  Da- 
masus  and  Ursicinus  ;  which  Ammianus  Marcel- 
linns  saith  was  so  great,  that  Juventius  the  praefect, 
unable  to  keep  the  peace  between  them,  was  forced 
to  go  out  of  the  city  ;  and  that  there  were  above 
an  hundred  men  found  dead  upon  that  occasion  in 
the  church  itself.  And  though  they  afterwards 
were  chosen,  first,  by  the  whole  clergy  of  Rome, 
and  afterwards  by  the  cardinals  ;  yet  never  any 
was  appointed  to  the  succession  by  his  predecessor. 
If  therefore  they  pretended  no  right  to  appoint 
their  own  successors,  I  think  I  may  reasonably  con- 
clude they  had  no  right  to  appoint  the  successors 
of  other  bishops,  without  receiving  some  new  power; 
which  none  could  take  from  the  Church  to  bestow 
on  them,  but  such  as  had  a  lawful  authority,  not 
only  to  teach,  but  to  command  the  Church  ;  which 
none  could  do,  but  the  civil  sovereign. 
Ministeriof  the  The  Word  minister y  in  the  original  Aiaicovoc,  sig- 
""^^ '  '^  *  nifieth  one  that  voluntarily  doth  the  business  of 
another  man ;  and  differeth  from  a  servant  only  in 
this,  that  servants  are  obliged  by  their  condition,  to 
do  what  is  commanded  them ;  whereas  ministers 
are  obliged  only  by  their  undertaking,  and  bound 
therefore  to  no  more  than  that  they  have  under- 
taken :  so  that  both  they  that  teach  the  word  of 
God,  and  they  that  administer  the  secular  affairs  of 
the  Church,  are  both  ministers,  but  they  are  ministers 
of  different  persons.  For  the  pastors  of  the  Church, 
called  {Acts  vi.  4)  the  ministers  of  the  wordy  are 
ministers  of  Christ,  whose  word  it  is :  but  the  mi- 
nistry of  a  deacon,  which  is  called  (verse  2  of  the 
same  chapter)  serving  of  tables y  is  a  service  done 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  531 

to  the  Church  or  congregation :  so  that  neither  any  part  hi. 
one  man,  nor  the  whole  church,  could  ever  of  their  ^  ^^-  . 
pastor  say,  he  was  their  minister :  but  of  a  deacon,  Minwtersofthe 
whether  the  charge  he  undertook  were  to  serve  ^*^""'^'  '^^*^' 
tables,  or  distribute  maintenance  to  the  Christians, 
when  they  lived  in  each  city  on  a  common  stock 
or  upon  collections,  as  in  the  first  times,  or  to  take 
a  care  of  the  house  of  prayer,  or  of  the  revenue,  or 
other  worldly  business  of  the  Church,  the  whole 
congregation  might  properly  call  him  their  minister. 
For  their  employment,  as  deacons,  was  to  serve 
the  congregation;  though  upon  occasion  they  omitted 
not  to  preach  the  gospel,  and  maintain  the  doctrine 
of  Christ,  every  one  according  to  his  gifts,  as  St. 
Stephen  did ;  and  both  to  preach  and  baptize,  as 
Philip  did.  For  that  Philip,  which  (Acts  viii.  6) 
preached  the  gospel  at  Samaria,  and  (verse  38)  bap- 
tized the  Eunuch,  was  Philip  the  deacon,  not  Philip 
the  apostle.  For  it  is  manifest  (verse  1)  that  when 
Philip  preached  in  Samaria,  the  apostles  were  at 
Jerusalem,  and  (verse  14)  when  they  heard  that  Sa- 
maria  had  received  the  word  of  Godj  sent  Peter 
and  John  to  them  ;  by  imposition  of  whose  hands, 
they  that  were  baptized  (verse  15),  received,  which 
before  by  the  baptism  of  Philip  they  had  not  re- 
ceived, the  Holy  Ghost.  For  it  was  necessary  for 
the  conferring  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  that  their  bap- 
tism should  be  administered  or  confirmed  by  a 
minister  of  the  word,  not  by  a  minister  of  the 
Church.  And  therefore  to  confirm  the  baptism  of 
those  that  Philip  the  deacon  had  baptized,  the 
apostles  sent  out  of  their  own  number  from  Jeru- 
salem to  Samaria,  Peter  and  John ;  who  conferred 
on  them  that  before  were  but  baptized,  those  graces 

MM  2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


532 


OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 


PART  III. 
42. 


And  how 
choseiL 


that  were  signs  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  at  that 
time  did  accompany  all  true  believers ;  which  what 
they  were  may  be  understood  by  that  which  St. 
Mark  saith  (chap.  xvi.  17),  these  signs  follow  them 
that  believe  in  my  name;  they  shall  cast  out  detnls; 
they  shall  speak  with  new  tongues;  they  shall 
take  up  serpents ;  and  if  they  drink  any  deadly 
thing,  it  shall  not  hurt  them  ;  they  shall  lay  hands 
on  the  sicky  and  they  shall  recover.  This  to  do, 
was  it  that  Philip  could  not  give  ;  but  the  apostles 
could,  and,  as  appears  by  this  place,  effectusJly  did 
to  every  man  that  truly  believed  and  was  by  a  mi- 
nister of  Christ  himself  baptized:  which  power 
either  Christ's  ministers  in  this  age  cannot  confer, 
or  else  there  are  very  few  true  believers,  or  Christ 
hath  very  few  ministers. 

That  the  first  deacons  were  chosen,  not  by  the 
apostles,  but  by  a  congregation  of  the  disciples, 
that  is,  of  Christian  men  of  all  sorts,  is  manifest  out 
of  Acts  vi,  where  we  read  that  the  Twelve,  after 
the  number  of  disciples  was  multiplied,  called  them 
together,  and  having  told  them,  that  it  was  not  fit 
that  the  apostles  should  leave  the  word  of  God  and 
serve  tables,  said  unto  them,  (verse  3)  Brethren ,  look 
you  out  among  you  seven  men  of  honest  report^ 
full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  wisdom,  whom  we 
may  appoint  over  this  business.  Here  it  is  ma- 
nifest, that  though  the  apostles  declared  them 
elected ;  yet  the  congregation  chose  them ;  which 
also  (verse  6)  is  more  expressly  said,  where  it  is 
written,  XhsX  the  saying  pleaded  the  whole  multi- 
tude,  and  they  chose  seven,  Sfc. 

Under  the  Old  Testament,  the  tribe  of  Levi  were 
only  capable  of  the  priesthood,  and  other  inferior 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL,  633 

offices  of  the  Church.  The  land  was  divided  part  hi. 
amongst  the  other  tribes,  Levi  excepted,  which,  by  .  ^f-  . 
the  subdivision  of  the  tribe  of  Joseph  into  Ephrdm  of  ecciesiaa. 
and  Manasseh^  were  still  twelve.  To  the  tnbe  of  under  the 
Levi  were  assigned  certain  cities  fortheir  habitation,  ^^^  ^^  ^^*^^' 
with  the  suburbs  for  their  cattle :  but  for  their  por- 
tion, they  were  to  have  the  tenth  of  the  fruits  of 
the  land  of  their  brethren.  Again,  the  priests  for 
their  maintenance  had  the  tenth  of  that  tenth,  to- 
gether with  part  of  the  oblations  and  sacrifices. 
For  God  had  said  to  Aaron  (Numb,  xviii.  20)  Thou 
shalt  have  no  inheritance  in  their  land ;  neither 
shalt  thou  liave  any  part  ainongst  them  ;  I  am  thy 
part  and  thine  inheritance  amongst  the  children 
of  Israel.  For  God  being  then  king,  and  having 
constituted  the  tribe  of  Levi  to  be  his  public  mi- 
nisters, he  allowed  them  for  their  maintenance 
the  public  revenue,  that  is  to  say,  the  part  that  God 
had  reserved  to  himself;  which  were  tithes  and 
oflFerings :  and  that  is  it  which  is  meant,  where  God 
saith,  /  am  thine  inheritance.  And  therefore  to 
the  Levites  might  not  unfitly  be  attributed  the 
name  of  clergy^  from  /cXripoc,  which  signifieth  lot 
or  inheritance ;  not  that  they  were  heirs  of  the 
kingdom  of  God,  more  than  other ;  but  that  God's 
inheritance  was  their  maintenance.  Now,  seeing 
in  this  time  God  himself  was  their  king,  and  Moses, 
Aaron,  and  the  succeeding  high-priests,  were  his 
lieutenants ;  it  is  manifest,  that  the  right  of  tithes 
and  oflFerings  was  constituted  by  the  civil  power. 

After  their  rejection  of  God  in  the  demanding  of 
a  king,  they  enjoyed  still  the  same  revenue ;  but 
the  right  thereof  was  derived  from  that,  that  the 
kings  did  never  take  it  from  them :  for  the  public 


Digitized  by 


Google 


534         OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  revenue  was  at  the  disposing  of  him  that  was  the 
.  ^f'  .  public  person ;  and  that,  till  the  Captivity,  was  the 
king.  And  again,  after  the  return  from  the  Capti- 
vity, they  paid  their  tithes  as  before  to  the  priest. 
Hitherto  therefore  Church  livings  were  determined 
by  the  civil  sovereign. 
savkura  ^^  *^^  maintenance  of  our  Saviour  and  his  apos- 

time,  and  after,  ties,  wc  read  ouly  they  had  a  purse,  which  was 
carried  by  Judas  Iscariot ;  and  that  of  the  apostles, 
such  as  were  fishermen  did  sometimes  use  their 
trade ;  and  that  when  our  Saviour  sent  the  twdve 
apostles  to  preach,  he  forbad  them  (Matth.  x.  9, 
10) :  to  carry  gold,  and  silvery  and  brass  in  their 
purses,  for  that  the  workman  is  worthy  of  his  hire. 
By  which  it  is  probable,  their  ordinary  maintenance 
was  not  unsuitable  to  their  employment ;  for  their 
employment  was  (verse  8)  freely  to  give,  because 
they  had  freely  received;  and  their  maintenance 
was  the  free  gift  of  those  that  believed  the  good 
tiding  they  carried  about  of  the  coming  of  the  Mes- 
siah their  Saviour.  To  which  we  may  add,  that 
which  was  contributed  out  of  gratitude  by  such 
as  our  Saviour  had  healed  of  diseases ;  of  which  are 
mentioned  {Luke  viii.  2,  3)  Certain  women  which 
had  been  healed  of  evil  spirits  and  infirmities  ; 
Mary  Magdalen,  out  of  wliom  went  seven  devils  ; 
and  Joanna  the  wife  of  Chuza,  Herod s  steward, 
and  Susanna,  and  many  others,  which  ministered 
unto  him  of  their  substance. 

After  our  Saviour's  ascension,  the  Christians  of 
every  city  lived  in  common  {Acts'w.  34,35)  upon  the 
money  which  was  made  of  the  sale  of  their  lands 
and  possessions,  and  laid  down  at  the  feet  of  the 
apostles,  of  good  will,  not  of  duty ;  for,  whilst  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWBR  ECCLESIASTICAL.  535 

land  remained,  saith  St.  Peter  to  Ananias  {Acts  part  iir. 
V.  4),  was  it  not  thine  ?  and  after  it  was  sold,  was  ^  ^^-  . 
it  not  in  thy  power  ?  which  sheweth  he  needed 
not  have  saved  his  land  nor  his  money  by  lying, 
as  not  being  bound  to  contribute  any  thing  at  all, 
unless  he  had  pleased.  And  as  in  the  time  of  the 
apostles,  so  also  all  the  time  downward,  till  after 
Constantine  the  Great,  we  shall  find  that  the 
maintenance  of  the  bishops  and  pastors  of  the 
Christian  Church  was  nothing  but  the  voluntary 
contribution  of  them  that  had  embraced  their  doc- 
trine. There  was  yet  no  mention  of  tithes:  but 
such  was  in  the  time  of  Constantine  and  his  sons 
the  affection  of  Christians  to  their  pastors,  as 
Ammianus  Marcellinus  saith,  describing  the  sedi- 
tion of  Damasus  and  Ursicinus  about  the  bishopric, 
that  it  was  worth  their  contention,  in  that  the 
bishops  of  those  times,  by  the  liberality  of  their 
flock,  and  especially  of  matrons,  lived  splendidly, 
were  carried  in  coaches,  and  were  sumptuous  in 
their  fare  and  apparel. 

But  here  may  some  ask,  whether  the  pastors  were  The  ministers 
then  bound  to  live  upon  voluntary  contribution,  Hved^n  the^^ 
as  upon  alms ;  For  who,  saith  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  ix.  7)  ^^eh!fl"odc8 
goeth  to  war  at  his  own  charges?  or  whofeedeth  a 
Jloch,  and  eateth  not  of  the  milk  of  the  flock  ?    And 
again,  (verse  13)  Do  ye  not  know  that  they  which 
minister  about  holy  things,  live  of  the  things  of  the 
temple ;  and  they  which  wait  at  the  altar,  par- 
take with  the  altar ;  that  is  to  say,  have  part  of 
that  which  is  offered  at  the  altar  for  their  mainte- 
nance?  And  then  he  concludeth,  (verse  14)  Even  so 
hath  the  Lord  appointed,  that  they  which  preach 
the  gospel  should  live  of  the  gospel.     From  which 
place  may  be  inferred  indeed,  that  the  pastors  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


536  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  the  Church  ought  to  be  maintamed  by  their  flocks ; 
^  ^f-  .  but  not  that  the  pastors  were  to  determine,  either 
The  ministers  thc  quantity,  OT  thc  kind  of  their  own  allowance, 
iivS*on  Sr'  «^d  be,  as  it  were,  their  own  carvers.  Their  allow- 
^"hlh^  fl*^.  *^^^  must  needs  therefore  be  determined,  either 
by  the  gratitude  and  liberality  of  every  particular 
man  of  their  flock,  or  by  the  whole  congr^ation. 
By  the  whole  congregation  it  could  not  be,  because 
their  acts  were  then  no  laws ;  therefore  the  main- 
tenance of  pastors  before  emperors  and  civil  sove- 
reigns had  made  laws  to  settie  it,  was  nothing  but 
benevolence.  They  that  served  at  the  altar  lived 
on  what  was  offered.  So  may  the  pastors  also 
take  what  is  offered  them  by  their  flock ;  but  not 
exact  what  is  not  offered.  In  what  come  should 
they  sue  for  it,  who  had  no  tribunals  ?  Or,  if  they 
had  arbitrators  amongst  themselves,  who  should 
execute  their  judgments,  when  they  had  no  power 
to  arm  their  ofl&cers  ?  It  remaineth,  therefore,  that 
there  could  be  no  certain  maintenance  assigned  to 
any  pastors  of  the  Church,  but  by  the  whole  con- 
gregation; and  then  only,  when  their  decrees 
should  have  the  force,  not  only  of  canons ^  but  also 
of  laws  ;  which  laws  could  not  be  made,  but  by 
emperors,  kings,  or  other  civil  sovereigns.  The 
right  of  tithes  in  Moses'  law,  could  not  be  applied 
to  the  then  ministers  of  the  gospel ;  because  Moses 
and  the  high-priests  were  the  civil  sovereigns  of 
the  people  under  God,  whose  kingdom  amongst 
the  Jews  was  present ;  whereas  the  kingdom  of 
God  by  Christ  is  yet  to  come. 

Hitherto  hath  been  shewn  what  the  pastors  of 
the  Church  are  ;  what  are  the  points  of  tiieir  com- 
mission, as  that  they  were  to  preach,  to  teach,  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  537 

baptize^  to  be  presidents  in  their  several  congrega-  part  hi. 
tions ;  what  is  ecclesiastical  censure,  viz.  excom-  -_^^'  ^ 
munication,  that  is  to  say,  in  those  places  where 
Christianity  was  forbidden  by  the  civil  laws,  a 
putting  of  themselves  out  of  ihe  company  of  the 
excommunicate,  and  where  Christianity  was  by  the 
civil  law  commanded,  a  putting  the  excommunicate 
out  of  the  congregations  of  Christians ;  who  elected 
the  pastors  and  ministers  of  the  Church,  that  it 
was  the  congregation ;  who  consecrated  and 
blessed  them,  that  it  was  the  pastor;  what  was 
their  due  revenue,  that  it  was  none  but  their  own 
possessions,  and  their  own  labour,  and  the  volun- 
tary contributions  of  devout  and  grateful  Chris- 
tians. We  are  to  consider  now,  what  ofl&ce  in  the 
Church  those  persons  have,  who  being  civil  sove- 
reigns, have  embraced  also  the  Christian  faith. 

And  first,  we  are  to  remember,  that  the  right  of '"^***?®  <^|7^^ 

^  ^  o  sovereign,  be- 

jud^g  what  doctrines  are  fit  for  peace,  and  to  be  ingachnstian, 

•^  ,    ^  ,  ,  .  .      .         „  ^  ^      ...       hath  the  right 

taught  the  subjects,  is  m  all  commonwealths  m-  of  appointing 
separably  annexed,  as  hath  been  already  proved  ^^^'^ 
(chapter  xviii.),  to  the  sovereign  power  civil,  whe- 
ther it  be  in  one  man,  or  in  one  assembly  of  men. 
For  it  is  evident  to  the  meanest  capacity,  that 
men's  actions  are  derived  from  the  opinions  they 
have  of  the  good  or  evil,  which  from  those  actions  • 
redound  unto  themselves ;  and  consequently,  men 
that  are  once  possessed  of  an  opinion,  that  their 
obedience  to  the  sovereign  power  will   be  more 
hurtful  to  them  than  their  disobedience,  will  dis- 
obey the  laws,  and  thereby  overthrow  the  common- 
wealth, and  introduce  confusion  and  civil  war;  for 
the  avoiding  whereof,  all  civil  government  was  or- 
dained.    And  therefore  in  all  commonwealths  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


538         OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  the  heathen,  the  sovereigns  have  had  the  name  <m 

^^'    ■    pastors  of  the  people,  because  there  was  no  subject 

That  the  civil   that  could  lawfullv  teach  the  people,  but  by  their 

sovereign,  be-  .     •  ,        ^i        -^ 

ing  a  Christian,  permission  and  authority. 

oflpSfno^g*  This  right  of  the  heathen  kings  cannot  be  thought 
pasiora.  takcu  from  them  by  their  conversion  to  the  faith  of 
Christ;  who  never  ordained  that  kings, for  believing 
in  him,  should  be  deposed,  that  is,  subjected  to  any 
but  himself,  or,  which  is  all  one,  be  deprived  of 
the  power  necessary  for  the  conservation  of  peace 
amongst  their  subjects,  and  for  their  defence  against 
foreign  enemies.  And  therefore  Christian  kings 
are  still  the  supreme  pastors  of  their  people,  and 
have  power  to  ordain  what  pastors  they  please^  to 
teach  the  Church,  that  is,  to  teach  the  people  com- 
mitted to  their  charge. 

Again,  let  the  right  of  choosing  them  be,  as  be- 
fore the  conversion  of  kings,  in  the  Church ;  for  so 
it  was  in  the  time  of  the  apostles  themselves,  as 
hath  been  shown  already  in  this  chapter ;  even  so 
also  the  right  will  be  in  the  civil  sovereign.  Christian. 
For  in  that  he  is  a  Christian,  he  allows  the  teaching; 
and  in  that  he  is  the  sovereign,  which  is  as  much 
as  to  say,  the  Church  by  representation,  the  teach- 
ers he  elects  are  elected  by  the  Church.  And  when 
•  an  assembly  of  Christians  choose  their  pastor  in  a 
Christian  commonwealth,  it  is  the  sovereign  that 
electeth  him,  because  it  is  done  by  his  authority ; 
in  the  same  manner,  as  when  a  town  choose  their 
mayor,  it  is  the  act  of  him  that  hath  the  sovereign 
power :  for  every  act  done,  is  the  act  of  him,  with- 
out whose  consent  it  is  invalid.  And  therefore 
whatsoever  examples  may  be  drawn  out  of  history, 
concerning  the  election  of  pastors  by  the  people. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OWER  ECCLBSIASTICAL.  53d 

Clergy,  they  are  no  arguments  against  part  hi. 
the  right  of  any  civil  sovereign,  because  they  that  .  _  ^^'  . 
elected  them  did  it  by  his  authority.  That  the  dvii 

Seeing  then  in  every  Christian  commonwealth,  [^Vchriitun, 
the  civil  sovereign  is  the  supreme  pastor,  to  whose  Jj^pJ^fnUng* 
charge  the  whole  flock  of  his  subjects  is  committed,  pwtow. 
and  consequently  that  it  is  by  his  authority  that  all 
other  pastors  are  made,  and  have  power  to  teach, 
and  perform  all  other  pastoral  oflices ;  it  foUoweth 
also,  that  it  is  from  the  civil  sovereign  that  all 
other  pastors  derive  their  right  of  teaching,  preach- 
ing, and  other  functions  pertaining  to  that  ofiice, 
and  that  they  are  but  his  ministers ;  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  magistrates  of  towns,  judges  in  courts 
of  justice,  and  commanders  of  armies,  are  all  but 
ministers  of  him  that  is  the  magistrate  of  the  whole 
commonwealth,  judge  of  all  causes,  and  commander 
of  the  whole  militia,  which  is  always  the  civil  sove- 
reign. And  the  reason  hereof,  is  not  because  they 
that  teach,  but  because  they  that  are  to  learn,  are 
his  subjects.  For  let  it  be  supposed,  that  a  Chris- 
tian king  commit  the  authority  of  ordaining  pastors 
in  his  dominions  to  another  king,  as  divers  Christian 
kings  allow  that  power  to  the  Pope ;  he  doth  not 
thereby  constitute  a  pastor  over  himself,  nor  a  so- 
vereign pastor  over  his  people ;  for  that  were  to 
deprive  himself  of  the  civil  power ;  which,  depend- 
ing on  the  opinion  men  have  of  their  duty  to  him 
and  the  fear  they  have  of  punishment  in  another 
world,  would  depend  also  on  the  skill  and  loyalty 
of  doctors,  who  are  no  less  subject,  not  only  to 
ambition,  but  also  to  ignorance,  than  any  other  sort 
of  men.  So  that  where  a  stranger  hath  authority 
to  appoint  teachers,  it  is  given  him  by  the  sovereign 


Digitized  by 


Google 


540  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  in  whose  dominions  he  teaeheth.  Christian  doctors 
.  ^f'  ,  are  our  schoolmasters  to  Christianity ;  but  kings 
are  fathers  of  families,  and  may  receive  schoolmas- 
ters for  their  subjects  from  the  recommendation  erf* 
a  stranger^  but  not  from  the  command ;  especially 
when  the  ill  teaching  them  shall  redound  to  the 
great  and  manifest  profit  of  him  that  recommends 
them:  nor  can  they  be  obliged  to  retain  them, 
longer  than  it  is  for  the  public  good  ;  the  care  of 
which  they  stand  so  long  charged  withal,  as  they 
retain  any  other  essential  right  of  the  sovereignty. 

The  pastoral        If  a  man  therefore  should  ask  a  pastor,  in  the 

aathonty  of  , 

sovereigns  only  execution  of  his  officc,  as  the  chief-priests  and 
thit  o^fo'tjhw '  elders  of  the  people  (Matth.  xxi.  23)  asked  our 
^stora  is  jure  gaviour.  By  what  authority  doest  thou  these  things, 
and  who  gave  thee  this  authority  ?  he  can  make 
no  other  just  answer,  but  that  he  doth  it  by  the 
authority  of  the  commonwealth,  given  him  by  the 
king,  or  assembly  that  representeth  it.  All  pastors, 
except  the  supreme,  execute  their  charges  in  the 
right,  that  is  by  the  authority  of  the  civil  sovereign, 
that  is,  jure  civili.  But  the  king,  and  every  other 
sovereign,  executeth  his  office  of  supreme  pastor 
by  immediate  authority  from  God,  that  is  to  say, 
in  God*s  right  or  jure  divino.  And  therefore 
none  but  kings  can  put  into  their  titles  a  mark  of 
their  submission  to  God  only,  Dei  gratia  rex,  &c. 
Bishops  ought  to  say  in  the  beginning  of  their 
mandates.  By  the  favour  of  the  King's  Majesty^ 
bishop  of  such  a  diocese  ;  or  as  civil  ministers,  in 
His  Majesty's  name.  For  in  saying,  Divind  pro- 
videntidy  which  is  the  same  with  Dei  gratia,  though 
disguised,  they  deny  to  have  received  their  autho- 
rity from  the  civil  state ;  and  slily  slip  off  the  col- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  541 

lar  of  their  civil  subjection,  contrary  to  the  unity  part  lu. 
and  defence  of  the  commonwealth.  .  ^f  •    . 

But  if  every  Christian  sovereign  be  the  supreme  christian 
pastor  of  his  own  subjects,  it  seemeth  that  he  hath  p^^r  to  «te- 
also  the  authority,  not  only  to  preach,  which  per-  ^ofl^^toiii 
haps  no  man  will  deny,  but  also  to  baptize  and  function. 
to  administer  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper : 
and  to  consecrate  both  temples  and  pastors  to  God's 
service ;  which  most  men  deny ;    partly  because 
they  use  not  to  do  it,  and  partly  because  the  ad- 
ministration  of  sacraments,   and  consecration  of 
persons  and  places  to  holy  uses,  requireth  the  im- 
position of  such  men's  hands,  as  by  the  like  impo- 
sition successively  from  the  time  of  the  apostles 
have  been  ordained  to  the  like  ministry.    For  proof 
therefore  that  Christian  kings  have  power  to  bap- 
tize, and  to  consecrate,  I  am  to  render  a  reason, 
both  why  they  use  not  to  do  it,  and  how,  without 
the  ordinary  ceremony  of  imposition  of  hands,  they 
are  made  capable  of  doing  it  when  they  will. 

There  is  no  doubt  but  any  king,  in  case  he  were 
skilful  in  the  sciences,  might  by  the  same  right  of 
his  ofl&ce  read  lectures  of  them  himself,  by  which 
he  authorizeth  others  to  read  them  in  the  univer- 
sities. Nevertheless,  because  the  care  of  the  sum 
of  the  business  of  the  commonwealth  taketh  up 
his  whole  time,  it  were  not  convenient  for  him  to 
apply  himself  in  person  to  that  particular.  A  king 
may  also,  if  he  please,  sit  in  judgment  to  hear  and 
determine  all  manner  of  causes,  as  well  as  give 
others  authority  to  do  it  in  his  name  ;  but  that  the 
charge,  that  lieth  upon  him  of  command  and  go- 
vernment, constrain  him  to  be  continually  at  the 
helm,  and  to  commit  the  ministerial  offices  to  others 


Digitized  by 


Google 


542         OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  under  him.     In  the  like  manner  our  Saviour,  who 

^    ^f •  _  -    surely  had  power  to  baptize,  baptized  none  {John 

Christian       iv.  2)  himsclf,  but  sent  his  apostles  and  disciples  to 

piwtoTxe-  baptize.      So   also   St.  Paid,  by  the  necessity  of 

wl^of  ^pS^ia  preaching  in  divers  and  far  distant  places,  baptized 

function.        few :  amongst  all  the  CJorinthians  he  baptized  only 

(1  Cor.i.  14, 16,)  Crispus,  Gains,  and  Stephanas;  and 

the  reason  was,  (1  Cor.  i.  17)  because  his  principal 

charge  was  to  preach.     Whereby  it  is  manifest, 

that  the  greater  charge,  such  as  is  the  government 

of  the  Chnrch,  is  a  dispensation  for  the  less.     The 

reason  therefore  why  Christian  kings  use  not  to 

baptize,  is  evident,  and  the  same  for  which  at  this 

day  there  are  few  baptized  by  bishops,  and  by  the 

Pope  fewer. 

And  as  concerning  imposition  of  hands,  whether 
it  be  needfhl  for  the  authorising  of  a  king  to  bap- 
tize and  consecrate,  we  may  consider  thus : 

Imposition  of  hands,  was  a  most  ancient  public 
ceremony  amongst  the  Jews,  by  which  was  de- 
signed, and  made  certain,  the  person,  or  other 
thing  intended  in  a  man*s  prayer,  blessing,  sacri- 
fice, consecration,  condemnation,  or  other  speech. 
So  Jacob,  in  blessing  the  children  of  Joseph  {Gen. 
xlviii.  14),  Laid  his  right  hand  on  Ephraim  the 
younger^  and  his  left  hand  an  Manasseh  the  first 
born  ;  and  this  he  did  wittingly  (though  they  were 
so  presented  to  him  by  Joseph,  as  he  was  forced  in 
doing  it  to  stretch  out  his  arms  across)  to  design  to 
whom  he  intended  the  greater  blessing.  So  also  in 
the  sacrificing  of  the  burnt  oflFering,  Aaron  is  com- 
manded {Exod.  xxix.  10)  to  lay  his  hands  on  the 
head  of  the  bullock :  and  (verse  ]5)  to  lay  his  hand 
on  the  head  qf  the  ram.    The  same  is  also  sidd 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  543 

agmn  Levit.  i.  4,  and  viii.  14.     Likewise  Moses,  part  hi. 
when  he  ordained  Joshua  to  be  captain  of  the  Israel-    .    ^^-    . 
ites,  that  is,   consecrated  him  to  God's  service,  christian 
(Numb,  xxvii.  23)  Laid  his  hands  upon  him,  and  pow«  tTexe- 
gave  him  his  charge^  designing  and  rendering  cer-  ^y "  ^wi 
tain,  who  it  was  they  were  to  obey  in  war.     And  foaction. 
in  the  consecration  of  the  Levites  {Numb.  viii.  10), 
God  commanded  that  the  children  of  Israel  should 
put  their  hands  upon  the  Levites.     And  in  the 
condemnation  of  him  that  had  blasphemed  the 
Lord  (Levit.  xxiv.  14^,  God  commanded  that  all 
that  heard  him  should  lay  their  hands  on  his  head, 
and  that  all  the  congregation  should  stone  him. 
And  why  should  they  only  that  heard  him,  lay  their 
hands  upon  him,  and  not  rather  a  priest,  Levite,  or 
other  minister  of  justice,  but  that  none  else  were 
able  to  design  and  to  demonstrate  to  the  eyes  of 
the  congregation,  who  it  was  that  had  blasphemed 
and  ought  to  die  ?      And  to  design  a  man  or  any 
other  thing,  by  the  hand  to  the  eye,  is  less  subject 
to  mistake,  than  when  it  is  done  to  the  ear  by  a 
name. 

And  so  much  was  this  ceremony  observed,  that 
in  blessing  the  whole  congregation  at  once,  which 
cannot  be  done  by  laying  on  of  hands,  yet  Aaron 
(Levit.  IK.  22)  did  l\ft  up  his  hands  toward  the 
people  when  he  blessed  them.  And  we  read  also 
of  the  like  ceremony  of  consecration  of  temples 
amongst  the  heathen,  'as  that  the  priest  laid  his 
hands  on  some  post  of  the  temple,  all  the  while  he 
was  uttering  the  words  of  consecration.  So  natural 
it  is  to  design  any  individual  thing,  rather  by  the 
hand,  to  assure  the  eyes,  than  by  words  to  inform 
the  ear,  in  matters  of  God*s  public  service. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


544  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  Hi.  This  ceremony  was  not  therefore  new  in  bur 
.  ^^'  .  Saviour's  time.  For  Jairus  (Mark  v.  23),  whose 
Christian  daughter  was  sick,  besought  our  Saviour,  not  to 
poi^  tTeze.  heal  her,  but  to  lay  his  hands  upon  her  that  she 
Ztf^'^^ig^i  *^  Sealed.  And  {Matthew  xix.  13)  they 
fiinctioiL  brought  unto  him  little  children,  that  he  should 
put  his  hands  on  them,  and  pray. 

According  to  this  ancient  rite,  the  apostles,  and 
presbyters,  and  the  presbytery  itself,  laid  hands 
on  them  whom  they  ordained  pastors,  and  withal 
prayed  for  them  that  they  might  receive  the  Holy 
Ghost;  and  that  not  only  once,  but  sometimes 
oftener,  when  a  new  occasion  was  presented :  but 
the  end  was  still  the  same,  namely  a  punctual  and 
religious  designation  of  the  person,  ordained  either 
to  the  pastoral  charge  in  general,  or  to  a  particular 
mission.  So  (Jets  vi.  6)  The  apostles  prayed,  and 
laid  their  hands  on  the  seven  deacons ;  which  was 
done,  not  to  give  them  the  Holy  Ghost,  (for  they 
were  ftdl  of  the  Holy  Ghost  before  they  were 
chosen,  as  appeareth  immediately  before,  verse  3) 
but  to  design  them  to  that  office.  And  after  Philip 
the  deacon  had  converted  certain  persons  in  Sa- 
maria, Peter  and  John  went  down  (Acts  viii.  17), 
and  laid  their  hands  on  them,  and  they  received 
the  Holy  Ghost.  And  not  only  an  apostle,  but  a 
presbyter  had  this  power:  for  St.  Paul  adviseth 
Timothy  (1  Tim.  v.  22)  Lay  hands  suddenly  on  no 
man  ;  that  is,  design  no  man  rashly  to  the  office  of 
a  pastor.  The  whole  presbytery  laid  their  hands 
on  Timothy,  as  we  read  1  Tim.  iv.  14 :  but  this  is 
to  be  understood,  as  that  some  did  it  by  the  ap- 
pointment of  the  presbytery,  and  most  likely  their 
^fwcffrwc,  or  prolocutor,   which  it  may  be  was  St. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  545 

Paul  himself.  For  in  his  second  Epistle  to  Timothy,  part  hi. 
(chap.  i.  6)  he  saith  to  him,  Stir  up  the  gift  of  God,  .  /*^-  . 
which  is  in  thee  by  the  laying  on  of  my  hands  :  Christian 
where  note  by  the  way,  that  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  pow^eiM^'^exe- 
not  meant  the  third  person  in  the  Trinity,  but  the  „eJ^J}"  ^fo"iii 
gifts  necessary  to  the  pastoral  office.  We  read  also,  function. 
that  St.  Paul  had  imposition  of  hands  twice ;  once 
from  Ananias  at  Damascus,  {Acts  ix.  17,  \^)  at 
the  time  of  his  baptism ;  and  again  {Acts  xiii.  3) 
at  Antioch,  when  he  was  first  sent  out  to  preach. 
The  use  then  of  this  ceremony,  considered  in  the 
ordination  of  pastors,  was  to  design  the  person  to 
whom  they  gave  such  power.  But  if  there  had 
been  then  any  Christian,  that  had  had  the  power  of 
teaching  before ;  the  baptizing  of  him,  that  is,  the 
making  him  a  Christian,  had  given  him  no  new 
power,  but  had  only  caused  him  to  preach  true  doc- 
trine, that  is,  to  use  his  power  aright ;  and  there- 
fore the  imposition  of  hands  had  been  unnecessary ; 
baptism  itself  had  been  sufficient.  But  every  so- 
vereign, before  Christianity,  had  the  power  of  teach- 
ing, and  ordaining  teachers  ;  and  therefore  Christ- 
ianity gave  them  no  new  right,  but  only  directed 
them  in  the  way  of  teaching  truth ;  and  conse- 
quently they  needed  no  imposition  of  hands,  besides 
that  which  is  done  in  baptism,  to  authorize  them  to 
exercise  any  part  of  the  pastoral  function,  as  namely, 
to  baptize  and  consecrate.  And  in  the  Old  Tes- 
tament, though  the  priest  only  had  right  to  conse- 
crate, during  the  time  that  the  sovereignty  was  in 
the  high-priest;  yet  it  was  not  so  when  the  so- 
vereignty was  in  the  king.  For  we  read  (1  Kings 
viii.)  that  Solomon  blessed  the  people,  consecrated 
,the  Temple,  and  pronounced  that  public  prayer 

VOL.  III.  N  N 


Digitized  by 


Google 


own  dominions^'  j 


546  OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  HI.  which  is  the  pattern  now  for  consecration  of  all 
.    ^p-    .    Christian  churches  and  chapels :   whereby  it  ap- 
pears, he  had  not  only  the  right  of  ecclesiastical 
government,   but  also  of  exercising  ecclesiastical 
functions. 
^rei^fift        ^ODa  this  consolidation  of  the  right  politic  and 
chriatiiD,  is    ecclcsiastic  in  Christian  sovereigns,  it  is  evident, 

head  of  the        ^,         ,  ,.  ^  i     .  ,  . 

Church  in  his  jthcy  uavc  all  manner  of  power  over  their  subjects, 
'  that  can  be  given  to  man,  for  the  government  of 
men's  external  actions,  both  in  policy  and  religion ; 
and  may  make  such  laws  as  themselves  shall  judge 
fittest,  for  the  government  of  their  own  subjects, 
both  as  they  are  the  commonwealth,  and  as  they 
are  the  Church ;  for  both  State  and  Church  are  the 
same  men. 

If  they  please,  therefore,  they  may,  as  many 
Christian  kings  now  do,  commit  the  government  of 
their  subjects  in  matters  of  religion  to  the  Pope ; 
but  then  the  Pope  is  in  that  point  subordinate  to 
them,  aaid  exerciseth  that  charge  in  another^s  do- 
minio  i  jure  civili,  in  the  right  of  the  civil  so- 
vereign ;  not  jure  divinOy  in  God's  right;  and  may 
therefore  be  discharged  of  that  office,  when  the 
sovereign,  for  the  good  of  his  subjects,  shall  think 
it  necessary.  They  may  also,  if  they  please,  com- 
mit the  care  of  religion  to  one  supreme  pastor,  or 
to  an  assembly  of  pastors ;  and  give  them  what 
power  over  the  Church,  or  one  over  another,  they 
think  most  convenient ;  and  what  titles  of  honour, 
as  of  archbishops,  bishops,  priests,  or  presbyters, 
they  will ;  and  make  such  laws  for  theirmaintenance, 
either  by  tithes  or  otherwise,  as  they  please,  so  they 
do  it  out  of  a  sincere  conscience,  of  which  God 
only  is  the  judge.     It  is  the  civil  sovereign  that  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  547 

to  appoint  judges  and  interpreters  of  the  canonical  part  hi. 
Scriptures;  for  it  is  he  that  maketh  them  laws.  .  ^^  . 
It  is  he  also  that  giveth  strength  to  excommuni- 
cations ;  which  but  for  such  laws  and  punishments^ 
as  may  humble  obstinate  libertines,  and  reduce  them 
to  union  with  the  rest  of  the  Church,  would  be 
contemned.  In  sum,  he  hath  the  supreme  power 
in  all  causes,  as  well  ecclesiastical  as  civil,  as  far  as 
concemeth  actions  and  words,  for  those  only  are 
known  and  may  be  accused;  and  of  that  which 
cannot  be  accused,  there  is  no  judge  at  all  but  God, 
that  knoweth  the  heart.  And  these  rights  are 
incident  to  all  sovereigns,  whether  monarchs  or 
assemblies:  for  they  that  are  the  representants 
of  a  Christian  people,  are  representants  of  the 
Church:  iox  a  Church,  and  a  commonwealth  of 
Christian  people,  are  the  same  thing. 

Though  this  that  I  have  here  said,  and  in  other  Cardinal 
places  of  this  book,  seem  clear  enough  for  the  as-  booiw,  De 
serting  of  the    supreme  ecclesiastical   power  tojj^,^^. 
Christian  sovereigns;   yet  because  the  Pope  of 
Rome's  challenge  to  that  power  universally,  hath 
been  maintained  chiefly,  and  I  think,  as  strongly  as 
is  possible,  by  Cardinal  Bellarmine,  in  his  con- 
troversy De  Summo  Pont\fice ;  I  have  thought  it 
necessary,  as  briefly  as  I  can,  to  examine  the 
grounds  and  strength  of  his  discourse. 

Of  five  books  he  hath  written  of  this  subject,  the  The  first  book. 
first  containeth  three  questions:  one,  which  is 
simply  the  best  government.  Monarchy,  Aris- 
tocracy, or  Democracy;  and  concludeth  for  neither, 
but  for  a  government  mixed  of  all  three :  another, 
which  of  these  is  the  best  government  of  the  Church ; 
and  concludeth  for  the  mixed,  but  which  should 

N  N  2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


548  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  m,  most  participate  of  moiiarchy :  the  third,  whether 
.    ^^'    .    in  this  mixed  monarchy,  St.  Peter  had  the  place  of 

The  first  book,  monarch.  C!onceming  his  first  conclusion,  I  have 
already  sufficiently  proved  (chapter  xviii.)  that  all 
governments  which  men  are  bound  to  obey,  are 
simple  and  absolute.  In  monarchy  there  is  but 
one  man  supreme ;  and  all  other  men  that  have 
any  kind  of  power  in  the  state,  have  it  by  his  com- 
mission, during  his  pleasure,  and  execute  it  in  his 
name :  and  in  aristocracy  and  democracy,  but  one 
supreme  assembly,  with  the  same  power  that  in 
monarchy  belongeth  to  the  monarch,  which  is  not 
a  mixed,  but  an  absolute  sovereignty.  And  of  the 
three  sorts,  which  is  the  best,  is  not  to  be  disputed, 
where  any  one  of  them  is  already  established ;  but 
the  present  ought  always  to  be  preferred,  main- 
tained, and  accounted  best;  because  it  is  against 
both  the  law  of  nature,  and  the  divine  positive  law, 
to  do  anything  tending  to  the  subversion  thereof. 
Besides,  it  maketh  nothing  to  the  power  of  any 
pastor,  unless  he  have  the  civil  sovereignty,  what 
kind  of  government  is  the  best ;  because  their  call- 
ing is  not  to  govern  men  by  commandment,  but  to 
teach  them,  and  persuade  them  by  arguments,  and 
leave  it  to  them  to  consider  whether  they  shall  em- 
brace, or  reject  the  doctrine  taught.  For  monarchy, 
aristocracy,  and  democracy,  do  mark  out  unto  us 
three  sorts  of  sovereigns,  not  of  pastors ;  or,  as  we 
may  say,  three  sorts  of  masters  of  families,  not 
three  sorts  of  schoolmasters  for  their  children. 

And  therefore  the  second  conclusion,  concerning 
the  best  form  of  government  of  the  Church,  is 
nothing  to  the  question  of  the  Pope's  power  with- 
out his  own  dominions.     For  in  all  other  common- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWBR  ECCLESIASTICAL*  549 

wealths  his  poWer,  if  he  have  any  at  all,  is  that  of  part  hi. 
the  schoolmaster  only,  and  not  of  the  master  of  the    .    ^^'    . 

family.  The  first  book. 

For  the  third  conclusion,  which  is,  that  St.  Peter 
was  monarch  of  the  Church,  he  bringeth  for  his 
chief  argument  the  place  of  St.  Matthew  (chap.  xvi. 
18, 19)  Thou  art  Peter,  and  upon  this  rock  I  will 
build  my  Church,  8fc.  And  I  will  give  thee  the 
keys  of  heaven  ;  whatsoever  thou  shalt  bind  on 
earth,  shall  be  bound  in  heaven,  and  whatsoever 
thou  shalt  loose  on  earth,  shall  be  loosed  in 
heaven.  Which  place,  well  considered,  proveth  no 
more,  but  that  the  Church  of  Christ  hath  for  foun- 
dation one  only  article ;  namely,  that  which  Peter  in 
the  name  of  all  the  apostles  professing,  gave  occa- 
.  sion  to  our  Saviour  to  speak  the  words  here  cited. 
Which  that  we  may  clearly  understand,  we  are  to 
consider,  that  our  Saviour  preached  by  himself,  by 
John  the  Baptist,  and  by  his  apostles,  nothing  but 
this  article  of  faith,  that  he  was  the  Christ ;  all 
other  articles  requiring  faith  no  otherwise,  than  as 
founded  on  that.  John  began  first,  (Matth.  iii.  2) 
preaching  only  this,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  at 
hand.  Then  our  Saviour  himself  {Matth.  iv.  17) 
preached  the  same:  and  to  his  twelve  apostles, 
when  he  gave  them  their  commission,  (^j^aWA.x.  7), 
there  is  no  mention  of  preaching  any  other  article 
but  that.  This  was  the  fundamental  article,  that 
is  the  foundation  of  the  Church's  faith.  Afterwards 
the  apostles  being  returned  to  him,  he  (Matth. 
xvi.  13)  asketh  them  all,  not  Peter  only,  who  men 
said  he  was;  and  they  answered,  that  some  said  he 
was  John  the  Baptist,  some  Elias,  and  others 
Jeremiah,  or  one  of  the  Prophets.  Then  (verse  1 5) 


Digitized  by 


Google 


550  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  ni.  he  asked  them  all  again,  not  Peter  only,  whom  say 
.    ^^    -    ye  that  I  am  9    Therefore  St.  Peter  answered  for 

The  fint  book,  them  all.  Thou  art  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living 
God;  which  I  said  is  the  foundation  of  the  &ith 
of  the  whole  Church ;  from  which  our  Saviour 
takes  the  occasion  of  saying,  upon  this  stone  I  will 
build  my  Church  :  by  which  it  is  manifest,  that  by 
the  foundation-stone  of  the  Church,  was  meant  the 
fundamental  article  of  the  Church's  faith.     But 
why  then,  will  some  object,  doth  our  Saviour  in- 
terpose these  words,  thou  art  Peter  9     If  the 
original  of  this  text  had  been  rigidly  translated, 
the  reason  would  easily  have  appeared.     We  are 
therefore  to  consider,  that  the  apostle  Simon  was 
sumamed  Stone,  which  is  the  signification  of  the 
Syriac  word  Cephas,  and  of  the  Greek  word  IIcTpoc. 
Our  Saviour  therefore,  after  the  confession  of  that 
fundamental  article,  alluding  to  his  name,  said  (as  if 
it  were  in  English)  thus.  Thou  art  Stone,  and  upon 
this  Stone  I  will  build  my  Church :  which  is  as  much 
as  to  say,  this  article,  that  /  am  the  Christ,  is  the 
foundation  of  all  the  faith  I  require  in  those  that 
are  to  be  members  of  my  Church.    Neither  is  this 
allusion  to  a  name,  an  imusual  thing  in  common 
speech.     But  it  had  been  a  strange  and  obscure 
speech,  if  our  Saviour,  intending  to  build  his  Church 
on  the  person  of  St.  Peter,  had  said,  thou  art  a 
stone,  and  upon  this  stone  I  will  build  my  Church; 
when  it  was  so  obvious,  without  ambiguity,  to  have 
said,  /  will  build  my  Church  on  thee;  and  yet 
there  had  been  still  the  same  allusion  to  his  name. 
And  for  the  following  words,  I  will  give  thee  the 
keys  of  heaven,  Sfc.  it  is  no  more  than  what  our 
Saviour  gave  also  to  all  the  rest  of  his  disciples, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  551 

(Matth.  xviii.  1*8),  Whatsoever  ye  shall  hind  on  part  hi. 
earthy  shall  he  hound  in  heaven  :  and  whatsoever  .  ^^  . 
ye  shall  loose  on  earthy  shall  he  loosed  in  heaven. 
But  howsoever  this  be  mterpreted,  there  is  no  doubt 
but  the  power  here  granted  belongs  to  all  supreme 
pastors ;  such  as  are  all  Christian  civil  sovereigns 
in  their  own  dominions.  In  so  much,  as  if  St. 
Peter,  or  our  Saviour  himself,  had  converted  any  of 
them  to  believe  him,  and  to  acknowledge  his  king- 
dom ;  yet,  because  his  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world, 
he  had  left  the  supreme  care  of  converting  his  sub- 
jects to  none  but  him ;  or  else  he  must  have  deprived 
him  of  the  sovereignty,  to  which  the  right  of 
teaching  is  inseparably  annexed.  And  thus  much 
in  refutation  of  his  first  book,  wherein  he  would 
prove  St.  Peter  to  have  been  the  monarch  universal 
of  the  Church,  that  is  to  say,  of  all  the  Christians 
in  the  world. 

The  second  book  hath  two  conclusions :  one,  that  The  second 
St.  Peter  was  bishop  of  Rome,  and  there  died :  the 
other,  that  the  Popes  of  Rome  are  his  successors. 
Both  which  have  been  disputed  by  others.  But 
supposing  them  true;  yet  if  by  Bishop  of  Rome, 
be  understood  either  the  monarch  of  the  Church, 
or  the  supreme  pastor  of  it;  not  Silvester,  but 
Constantine,  who  was  the  first  Christian  emperor, 
was  that  bishop ;  and  as  Constantine,  so  all  other 
Christian  emperors,  were  of  right  supreme  bishops 
of  the  Roman  empire :  I  say,  of  the  Roman  empire, 
not  of  all  Christendom ;  for  other  Christian  so- 
vereigns had  the  same  right  in  their  several  ter- 
ritories, as  to  an  office  essentially  adherent  to  their 
sovereignty.  Which  shall  serve  for  answer  to  his 
second  book. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


552  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.       In  the  third  book  he  handleth  the  question, 
.    ^f-    .    whether  the  Pope  be  Antichrist  ?  For  my  part,  I  see 

The  third  book,  no  argument  that  proves  he  is  so,  in  that  sense  the 
Scripture  useth  the  name:  nor  will  I  take  any 
argument  from  the  quality  of  Antichrist,  to  con- 
tradict the  authority  he  exerciseth,  or  hath  here- 
tofore exercised,  in  the  dominions  of  any  other 
prince  or  state. 

It  is  evident  that  the  prophets  of  the  Old  Tes- 
tament foretold,  and  the  Jews  expected  a  Messiah, 
that  is,  a  Christ,  that  should  re-establish  amongst 
them  the  kingdom  of  God,  which  had  been  rejected 
by  them  in  the  time  of  Samuel,  when  they  required 
a  king  after  the  manner  of  other  nations.  This 
expectation  of  theirs  made  them  obnoxious  to  the 
imposture  of  all  such,  as  had  both  the  ambition  to 
attempt  the  attaining  of  the  kingdom,  and  the  art 
to  deceive  the  people  by  counterfeit  miracles,  by  hy- 
pocritical life,  or  by  orations  and  doctrine  plausible. 
Our  Saviour  therefore,  and  his  apostles,  forewarned 
men  of  false  prophets  and  of  false  Christs.  False 
Christs  are  such  as  pretend  to  be  the  Christy  but  are 
not,  and  are  called  properly  Antichrists;  in  such 
sense,  as  when  there  happeneth  a  schism  in  the 
Church,  by  the  election  of  two  Popes,  the  one  calleth 
the  other  Antipapa,  or  the  false  Pope.  And  therefore 
Antichrist  in  the  proper  signification  hath  two  es- 
sential marks;  one,  that  he  denieth  Jesus  to  be 
Christ;  and  another  that  he  professeth  himself  to  be 
Christ.  The  first  mark  is  set  down  by  St  John  in 
his  first  Epistle,  iv.  3,  Every  Spirit  that  confesseth 
not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  fleshy  is  not 
of  God ;  and  this  is  the  spirit  of  Antichrist. 
The  other  mark  is  expressed  in  the  words  of  our 


Digitized  by  VjOO^IC 


OP  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  653 

Saviour,  (Matth.  xxiv.  5)  many  shall  come  in  my  part  iij. 
name^  aaying,  I  am  Christ;  and  again,  (verse  23)  If  ^  ^J*  , 
any  man  shall  say  unto  youj  lo!  here  is  Christ,  there  The  third  book. 
is  Christy  believe  it  not.  And  therefore  Antichrist 
must  be  a  false  Christ ;  that  is,  some  one  of  them  that 
shall  pretend  themselves  to  be  Christ.  And  out  of 
these  two  marks,  to  deny  Jesus  to  he  the  Christy 
a^d  to  qffirm  himself  to  he  the  Christy  it  foUoweth, 
tha:t  he  must  also  be  an  adversary  of  Jesus  the 
true  Christy  which  is  another  usual  signification  of 
the  word  Antichrist.  But  of  these  many  Antichrists, 
there  is  one  special  one,o  Avriyfiurrogy  the  Antichrist, 
or  Antichrist  definitely,  as  one  certain  person ;  not 
indefinitely  an  Antichrist.  Now,  seeing  the  Pope 
of  Rome  neither  pretendeth  himself,  nor  denieth 
Jesus  to  be  the  Christ,  I  perceive  not  how  he  can 
be  called  Antichrist ;  by  which  word  is  not  meant, 
one  that  falsely  pretendeth  to  be  his  lieutenant  or 
vicar-generaly  but  to  be  He.  There  is  also  some 
mark  of  the  time  of  this  special  Antichrist,  as 
(Matth.  xxiv.  1 5),  when  that  abominable  destroyer, 
spoken  of  by  Daniel  (Dan.  ix.  27)  shall  stand  in  the 
Holy  place,  and  such  tribulation  as  was  not  since 
the  beginning  of  the  world,  nor  ever  shall  be  again, 
insomuch  as  if  it  were  to  last  long,  (Matth.  xxiv.  22) 
no  flesh  could  be  saved  ;  hut  for  the  elects  sake 
those  days  shall  he  shortenedy  made  fewer.  But 
that  tribulation  is  not  yet  come;  for  it  is  to  be 
followed  immediately  (verse  29)  by  a  darkening  of 
the  sun  and  moon,  a  falling  of  the  stars,  a  con- 
cussion of  the  heavens,  and  the  glorious  coining 
again  of  our  Saviour  in  the  clouds.  And  therefore 
the  Antichrist  is  not  yet  come;  whereas,  many 
Popes  are  both  come  and  gone.     It  is  true,  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


554  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  Pope,  in  taking  npon  him  to  give  laws  to  all  Chris- 
.    ^^'    .    tian  kings  and  nations,  usurpeth  a  kingdom  in  this 
world,  which  Christ  took  not  on  him :  but  he  doth 
it  not  as  Christ,  but  as^br  Christ,  wherein  there 
is  nothing  of  the  Antichrist. 
Fourth  book.       i^  the  fouith  book,  to  prove  the  Pope  to  be  the 
supreme  judge  in  all  questions  of  faith  and  man- 
ners, which  is  as  much  as  to  be  the  absolute  nto- 
narch  of  all  Christians  in  the  world,  he  bringeth 
three  propositions:  the  first,  that  his  judgments 
are  infallible :  the  second,  that  he  can  make  very 
laws,  and  punish  those  that  observe  them  not :  die 
third,  that  our  Saviour  conferred  all  jurisdiction 
ecclesiastical  on  the  Pope  of  Rome. 
Texte  fwthe        For  the  infallibility  of  his  judgments,  he  all^eth 
of  the  Popoi    the  Scriptures  :  and  first,  that  of  Luke,  xxii.  31^32 : 
poinu  of^fidth.  Simon,  Simon,  Satan  hath  desired  you,  that  he  may 
sjft  you  as  wheat ;  but  I  have  prayed  for  thee, 
that  thy  faith  fail  not;  and  when  thou  art  con- 
verted, strengthen  thy  brethren.    This,  according 
to  Bellarmine*s  exposition,  is,  that  Christ  gave  here 
to  Simon  Peter  two  privileges :  one,  that  neither 
his  faith  should  fail,  nor  the  faith  of  any  of  his 
successors :  the  other,  that  neither  he,  nor  any  of 
his  successoirs,  should  ever  define  any  point  con- 
cerning faith  or  manners  erroneously,  or  contrary 
to  the  definition  of  a  former  Pope :  which  is  a 
strange,  and  very  much  strained  interpretation. 
But  he  that  with  attention  readeth  that  chapter, 
shall  find  there  is  no  place  in  the  whole  Scripture 
that  maketh  more  against  the  Pope's  authority,  than 
this  very  place.    The  Priests  and  Scribes  seeking 
to  kill  our  Saviour  at  the  Passover,  and  Judas  pos- 
sessed with  a  resolution  to  betray  him,  and  the  day 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  POWER  ECCLBSIASTICAL.  555 

of  killing  the  Passover  being  come,  our  Saviour  part  hi. 
celebrated  the  same  with  his  apostles,  which  he  .  ^]^'  . 
said,  till  the  kingdom  of  God  was  come  he  would  Texts  for  the 
do  no  more;  and  withal  told  them,  that  one  ofofthePo^'s 
them  was  to  betray  him.  Hereupon  they  questioned  ^"ifS  oVfiSth. 
which  of  them  it  should  be  ;  and  withal,  seeing  the 
next  Passover  their  master  would  celebrate  should 
be  when  he  was  king,  entered  into  a  contention, 
who  should  then  be  the  greatest  man.  Our  Sa- 
viour therefore  told  them,  that  the  kings  of  the 
nations  had  dominion  over  their  subjects,  and  are 
called  by  a  name  in  Hebrew,  that  signifies  boun- 
tiful ;  but  I  cannot  be  so  to  you,  you  must  en- 
deavour to  serve  one  another ;  I  ordain  you  a  king- 
dom, but  it  is  such  as  my  Father  hath  ordained  me ; 
a  kingdom  that  I  am  now  to  purchase  with  my 
blood,  and  not  to  possess  till  my  second  coming ; 
then  ye  shall  eat  and  drink  at  my  table,  and  sit  on 
thrones  judging  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.  And 
then  addressing  himself  to  St.  Peter,  he  saith ; 
Simon,  Simon,  Satan  seeks,  by  suggesting  a  present 
domination,  to  weaken  your  faith  of  the  future ; 
but  I  have  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  faith  shall  not 
fail;  thou  therefore  note  this,  being  converted,  and 
understanding  my  kingdom  as  of  another  world, 
confirm  the  same  faith  in  thy  brethren.  To  which 
St.  Peter  answered,  as  one  that  no  more  expected 
any  authority  in  this  world.  Lardy  I  am  ready  to 
go  with  thee^  not  only  to  prison,  hut  to  death. 
Whereby  it  is  manifest,  St.  Peter  had  not  only  no 
jurisdiction  given  him  in  this  world,  but  a  charge 
to  teach  all  the  other  apostles,  that  they  also  should  . 
have  none.  And  for  the  infallibility  of  St.  Peter's 
sentence  definitive  in  matter  of  faith,  there  is  no 


Digitized  by 


Google 


556  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  in.  niore  to  be  attributed  to  it  out  of  this  text,  than 

.    ^f-    .    that  Peter  should  continue  in  the  belief  of  this 

Texts  for  the   poiut,  namely,  that  Christ  should  come  again  and 

of  the  Pole's    possess  the  kingdom  at  the  day  of  judgment ;  which 

ioifu  of  fidth.  ^^  ^^*  given  by  this  text  to  all  liis  successors ;  for 

we  see  they  claim  it  in  the  world  that  now  is. 

The  secondplace  is  that  of  Matth.xvi.  18,  Thau  art 
Peter,  and  upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  Church, 
and  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it. 
By  which,  as  I  have  already  shown  in  this  chapter, 
is  proved  no  more,  than  that  the  gates  of  hell  shall 
not  prevail  against  the  confession  of  Peter,  which 
gave  occasion  to  that  speech;  namely  this,  that 
Jesus  is  Christ  the  Son  of  God. 

The  third  text  is  John  xxi.  16,  17 :  Feed  my 
sheep  ;  which  contains  no  more  but  a  commission 
of  teaching.  And  if  we  grant  the  rest  of  the  apostles 
to  be  contained  in  that  name  of  sheep  ;  then  it  is 
the  supreme  power  of  teaching :  but  it  was  only 
for  the  time  that  there  were  no  Christian  sovereigns 
already  possessed  of  that  supremacy.  But  I  have 
already  proved,  that  Christian  sovereigns  are  in 
their  own  dominions  the  supreme  pastors,  and  in- 
stituted thereto,  by  virtue  of  their  being  baptized, 
though  without  other  imposition  of  hands.  For 
such  imposition,  being  a  ceremony  of  designing  the 
person,  is  needless,  when  he  is  already  designed 
to  the  power  of  teaching  what  doctrine  he  will, 
by  his  institution  to  an  absolute  power  over  his 
subjects.  For  as  I  have  proved  before,  sovereigns 
are  supreme  teachers,  in  general,  by  their  office; 
and  therefore  oblige  themselves,  by  their  baptism, 
to  teach  the  doctrine  of  Christ :  and  when  they 
suflfer  others  to  teach  their  people,  they  do  it  at  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  557 

peril  of  their  own  souls ;  for  it  is  at  the  hands  of  part  hi. 
the  heads  of  families  that  God  will  require  the  ac-  .  ^f  *  . 
count  of  the  instruction  of  his  chilcten  and  ser- 
vants. It  is  of  Abraham  himself,  not  of  a  hireling, 
that  God  saith  {Gen.  xviii.  19)  /  hnow  him  that  he 
will  command  his  children^  and  his  household  after 
him,  that  they  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord,  afid  do 
Justice  and  judgment. 

The  fourth  place  is  that  of  Exod.  xxviii.  30 : 
Thou  shalt  put  in  the  breast-plate  of  judgment, 
the  Urim  and  the  Thummim :  which  he  saith  is 
interpreted  by  the  Septuagint  InKvunv  Khi  &x^e«ov; 
that  is,  evidence  and  truth :  and  thence  concludeth, 
God  hath  given  evidence  and  truth,  which  is  al- 
most infallibility,  to  the  high-priest.     But  be  it 
evidence  and  truth  itself  that  was  given ;  or  be  it 
but  admonition  to  the  priest  to  endeavour  to  inform 
himself  clearly,  and  give  judgment  uprightly ;  yet 
in  that  it  was  given  to  the  high-priest,  it  was  given 
to  the  civil  sovereign ;  (for  such  next  under  God  was 
the  high-priest  in  the  commonwealth  of  Israel);  and 
is  an  argument  for  evidence  and  truth,  that  is,  for 
the  ecclesiastical  supremacy  of  civil  sovereigns  over 
their  own  subjects,  against  the  pretended  power  of 
the  Pope.    These  are  all  the  texts  he  bringeth  for 
the  infallibility  of  the  judgment  of  the  Pope  in  point 
of  faith. 

For  the  infallibility  of  his  judgment  concerning  Texts  for  the 
manners,  he  bringeth  one  text,  which  is  that  of  ofnumSew."* 
John  xvi.  13 :  When  the  Spirit  of  truth  is  come^ 
he  will  lead  you  into  all  truth  :  where,  saith  he, 
by  all  truth,  is  meant,  at  least  all  truth  necessary 
to  salvation.  But  with  this  mitigation,  he  attri- 
buteth  no  more  infallibility  to  the  Pope,  than  to  any 


Digitized  by 


Google 


558  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  man  that  professeth  Christianity  and  is  not  to  be 

.    ^^    .   damned.    For  if  any  man  err  in  any  point,  wherein 

Texts  for  the  Dot  to  err  is  necessaiy  to  salvation,  it  is  impossiUe 

S^McraT^he  should  be  saved ;  for  that  only  is  necessary  to 

salvation,  without  which  to  be  saved  is  impossible. 

What  points  these  are,  I  shall  declare  out  of  the 

Scripture  in  the  chapter  following.    In  this  place 

I  say  no  more,  but  that  though  it  were  granted, 

the  Pope  could  not  possibly  teach  any  error  at  all, 

yet  doth  not  this  entitie  him  to  any  jurisdiction  in 

the  dominions  of  another  prince ;  unless  we  shall 

also  say,  a  man  is  obliged  in  conscience  to  set  on 

work  upon  all  occasions  the  best  workman,  even 

then  also  when  he  hath  formerly  promised  his  work 

to  another. 

Besides  the  text,  he  argueth  from  reason,  thus. 
If  the  Pope  could  err  in  necessaries,  then  Christ 
hath  not  sufl&ciently  provided  for  the  Church's 
salvation ;  because  he  hath  commanded  her  to  fol- 
low the  Pope's  directions.  But  this  reason  is  in- 
valid, unless  he  shew  when  and  where  Christ  com- 
manded that,  or  took  at  all  any  notice  of  a  Pope. 
Nay,  granting  whatsoever  was  given  to  St.  Peter, 
was  given  to  the  Pope  ;  yet  seeing  there  is  in  the 
Scripture  no  command  to  any  man  to  obey  St.  Peter, 
no  man  can  be  just,  that  obeyeth  him,  when  his 
commands  are  contrary  to  those  of  his  lawful  so- 
vereign. 

Lastly,  it  hath  not  been  declared  by  the  Church, 
nor  by  the  Pope  himself,  that  he  is  the  civil  sove- 
reign of  all  the  Christians  in  the  world ;  and  there- 
fore all  Christians  are  not  bound  to  acknowledge 
his  jurisdiction  in  point  of  manners.  For  the  civU 
sovereignty,  andsupreme  judicature  in  controversies 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  559 

of  manners^  are  the  same  thing :  and  the  makers  of  part  hi. 
civil  laws,  ar6  not  only  declarers,  but  also  makers    .  /*^    . 
of  the  justice  and  injustice  of  actions ;  there  being  Texts  for  the 
nothing  in  men's  manners  that  makes  them  right-  of^M^KT* 
ecus  or  unrighteous,  but  their  conformity  with  the 
law  of  the  sovereign.    And  therefore,  when  the 
Pope  challengeth  supremacy  in  controversies  of 
maimers,  he  teacheth  men  to  disobey  the  civil  so- 
vereign ;  which  is  an  erroneous  doctrine,  contrary 
to  the  many  precepts  of  our  Saviour  and  his  apostles, 
delivered  to  us  in  the  Scripture. 

To  prove  the  Pope  has  power  to  make  laws,  he 
allegeth  many  places ;  as  first,  (JDeut.  xvii.  12), 
The  man  that  will  do  presumptuously,  and  will 
not  hearken  unto  the  priest,  that  standeth  to 
minister  there  before  the  Lord  thy  God,  or  unto 
the  judge,  even  that  man  shall  die  ;  and  thou  shalt 
put  away  the  evil  from  Israel.  For  answer  where- 
unto,  we  are  to  remember  that  the  high-priest, 
next  and  immediately  under  God,  was  the  civil 
sovereign ;  and  all  judges  were  to  be  constituted 
by  him.  The  words  alleged  sound  therefore  thus : 
The  man  that  will  presume  to  disobey  the  civil 
sovereign  for  the  time  being,  or  any  of  his  officers 
in  the  execution  of  their  places,  that  man  shall 
die,  fyc;  which  is  clearly  for  the  civil  sovereignty, 
against  the  universal  power  of  the  Pope. 

Secondly, he  allegeth  that  of  Matth.xvi.  19,  What^ 
soever  ye  shall  bind,  Sfc,  and  interpreteth  it  for 
such  binding  as  is  attributed  (Matth.  xxiii.  4)  to 
the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  They  bind  heavy  bur^ 
thens,  and  grievous  to  be  borne,  and  lay  them 
on  men's  shoulders  ;  by  which  is  meant,  he  says, 
making  of  laws ;  and  concludes  thence,  that  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


560  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  in.  Pope  can  make  laws.    But  this  also  maketh  only 

.    ^^    .    for  the  legislative  power  of  civil  sovereigns.    For 

Texts  for  the  the  Scribcs  and  Pharisees  sat  in  Moses'  chair;  but 

of^noMs!"*  Moses  next  under  God  was  sovereign  of  the  people 

of  Israel :  and  therefore  our  Saviour  commanded 

them  to  do  all  that  they  should  say,  but  not  all 

that  they  should  do:  that  is,  to  obey  their  laws, 

but  not  follow  their  example. 

The  third  place  is  John  xxi.  16,  Feed  my  sheep; 
which  is  not  a  power  to  make  laws,  but  a  command 
to  teach.  Making  laws  belongs  to  the  lord  of  the  fa- 
mily ;  who  by  his  own  discretion  chooseth  his  chap- 
lain, as  also  a  schoolmaster  to  teach  his  children. 

The  fourth  place  (John  xx.  21)  is  against  him. 
The  words  are.  As  my  father  sent  me^  so  send  I 
you.  But  our  Saviour  was  sent  to  redeem  by  his 
death  such  as  should  believe,  and  by  his  own  and 
his  apostles'  preaching  to  prepare  them  for  thdr 
entrance  into  his  kingdom ;  which  he  himself  saith, 
is  not  of  this  world,  and  hath  taught  us  to  pray 
for  the  coming  of  it  hereafter,  though  he  refused 
(Acts  i.  6,  7)  to  tell  his  apostles  when  it  should 
come ;  and  in  which,  when  it  comes,  the  twelve 
apostles  shall  sit  on  twelve  thrones,  every  one  per- 
haps as  high  as  that  of  St.  Peter,  to  judge  the  twelve 
tribes  of  Israel.  Seeing  then  God  the  Father  sent 
not  our  Saviour  to  make  laws  in  this  present  world, 
we  may  conclude  from  the  text,  that  neither  did  our 
Saviour  send  St.  Peter  to  make  laws  here,  but  to 
persuade  men  to  expect  his  second  coming  with  a 
steadfast  faidi ;  and  in  the  mean  time,  if  subjects, 
to  obey  their  princes ;  and  if  princes,  both  to  be- 
lieve it  themselves,  and  to  do  their  best  to  make 
their  subjects  do  the  same ;  which  is  the  office  of  a 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  561 

bishop*  Therefore  this  place  maketh  most  strongly  part  hi. 
for  the  joining  of  the  ecclesiastical  supremacy  to  ,  ^^  . 
the  civil  sovereignty,  contrary  to  that  which  Car-  Texts  for  the 
dinal  Bellarmine  allegeth  it  for.  Xanne«°'°' 

The  fifth  place  is  Acts  xv.  28, 29,  It  hath  seemed 
good  to  the  Holy  Spirit  and  to  us,  to  lay  upon  you 
no  greater  burthen,  than  these  necessary  things, 
that  ye  abstain  from  meats  offered  to  idols,  and 
from  blood,  and  from  things  strangled,  and  from 
fornication.  Here  he  notes  the  word  laying  of 
burthens  for  the  legislative  power.  But  who  is 
there,  that  reading  this  text,  can  say,  this  style  of 
the  apostles  may  not  as  properly  be  used  in  giving 
counsel,  as  in  making  laws  ?  The  style  of  a  law  is, 
we  command:  but,  we  think  good,  is  the  ordinary 
style  of  them,  that  but  give  advice ;  and  they  lay 
a  burthen  that  give  advice,  though  it  be  conditional, 
that  is,  if  they  to  whom  they  give  it,  will  attain 
their  ends:  and  such  is  the  burthen  of  abstaining 
from  things  strangled,  and  from  blood ;  not  abso- 
lute, but  in  case  they  will  not  err.  I  have  shown 
before, (chapter  xx  v.)that  law  is  distinguished  from 
counsel  in  this,  that  the  reason  of  a  law  is  taken 
from  the  design  and  benefit  of  him  that  prescribeth 
it ;  but  the  reason  of  a  counsel,  from  the  design 
and  benefit  of  him  to  whom  the  counsel  is  given. 
But  here,  the  apostles  aim  only  at  the  benefit  of  the 
converted  Gentiles,  namely  their  salvation ;  not  at 
their  own  benefit;  for  having  done  their  endea- 
vour, they  shall  have  their  reward,  whether  they 
be  obeyed  or  not.  And  therefore  the  acts  of  this 
council,  were  not  laws,  but  counsels. 

The  sixth  place  is  that  of  Rom.  xiii.  Let  every 
soul  be  subject  to  the  higher  powers,  for  there  r* 

VOL.  III.  o  o 


Digitized  by 


Google 


562  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  in.  no  power  hut  of  God ;  which  is  meant,  he  saith, 
.  ^^'  , ,  not  only  of  secular,  but  also  of  ecclesiastical  princes. 
Texto  for  the  To  which  I  answcF,  first,  that  there  are  no  eccle- 
Jifmannerar*  siastical  priuccs  but  thosc  that  are  also  civil  so- 
vereigns ;  and  their  principalities  exceed  not  the 
compass  of  their  civil  sovereignty  ;  .without  those 
bounds,  though  they  may  be  received  for  doctors, 
they  cannot  be  acknowledged  for  princes.  For  if 
the  apostle  had  meant,  we  should  be  subject  both 
to  our  own  princes,  and  also  to  the  Pope,  he  had 
taught  us  a  doctrine,  which  Christ  himself  hath  told 
us  is  impossible,  namely,  to  serve  two  masters.  And 
though  the  apostle  say  in  another  place,  (2  Cor.  xiii. 
10)  I  write  these  things  being  absent,  lest  being 
present  I  should  use  sharpness,  according  to  the 
power  which  the  Lord  hath  given  w^;  it  is  not, that 
he  challenged  a  power  either  to  put  to  death,  impri- 
son, banish,  whip,  or  fine  any  of  them,  which  are 
punishments ;  but  only  to  excommunicate,  which, 
without  the  civil  power,  is  no  more  but  a  leaving 
of  their  company,  and  having  no  more  to  do  with 
them  than  with  a  heathen  man  or  a  publican; 
which  in  many  occasions  might  be  a  greater  pain 
to  the  excommunicant,  than  to  the  excommunicate. 
The  seventh  place  is  1  Cor.  iv.  21,  Shall  I  come 
unto  you  with  a  rod,  or  in  love,  and  the  spirit  of 
lenity  ?  But  here  again,  it  is  not  the  power  of  a 
magistrate  to  punish  offenders,  that  is  meant  by  a 
rod ;  but  only  the  power  of  excommunication,  which 
is  not  in  its  own  nature  a  pimishment,  but  only  a  de- 
nouncing of  punishment,  that  Christ  shall  inflict 
when  he  shall  be  in  possession  of  his  kingdom,  at  the 
day  of  judgment.  Nor  then  also  shaU  it  be  properly 
a  punishment,  as  upon  a  subject  that  hath  broken  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  563 

law ;  but  a  revenge,  as  upon  an  enemy  or  revolter,  part  hi. 
that  denieth  the  right  of  our  Saviour  to  the  kingdom.  .  ^^  . 
And  therefore  this  proveth  not  the  legislative  power  Texts  for  the 
of  any  bishop,  that  has  not  also  the  civil  power.     ^*ilnere*°^ 

The  eighth  place  is  1  Timothy ^  iii.  2 ;  A  bishop 
must  he  the  husband  of  hut  one  wife,  vigilant, 
sober,  fyc:  which  he  saith  was  a  law.  I  thought 
that  none  could  make  a  law  in  the  Church,  but  the 
monarch  of  the  Church,  St.  Peter.  But  suppose 
this  precept  made  by  the  authority  of  St.  Peter ; 
yet  I  see  no  reason  why  to  call  it  a  law,  rather  than 
an  advice,  seeing  Timothy  was  not  a  subject,  but  a 
disciple  of  St.  Paul ;  nor  the  flock  under  the  charge 
of  Timothy,  his  subjects  in  the  kingdom,  but  his 
scholars  in  the  school  of  Christ.  If  all  the  precepts 
he  giveth  Timothy  be  laws,  why  is  not  this  also  a 
law,  (I  Tim.  v.  23)  Drink  no  longer  water,  but 
use  a  little  wine  for  thy  health's  sake.  And  why 
are  not  also  the  precepts  of  good  physicians  so 
many  laws,  but  that  it  is  not  the  imperative  manner 
of  speaking,  but  an  absolute  subjection  to  a  per- 
son, that  maketh  his  precepts  laws  ? 

In  like  manner,  the  ninth  place,  1  Tim.  v.  19, 
Against  an  elder  receive  not  an  accusation,  but 
before  two  or  three  witnesses,  is  a  wise  precept, 
but  not  a  law. 

The  tenth  place  is  Luke  x.  16,  He  that  heareth 
you,  heareth  me ;  and  he  that  despiseth  you, 
despiseth  me.  And  there  is  no  doubt,  but  he  that 
despiseth  the  counsel  of  those  that  are  sent  by 
Christ,  despiseth  the  counsel  of  Christ  himself. 
But  who  are  those  now  that  are  sent  by  Christ,  but 
such  as  are  ordained  pastors  by  lawful  authority  ? 
And  who  are  lawfully  ordained,  that  are  not  or- 


o  o^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


564  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  m.  daiiied  by  the  sovereign  pastor  ?  And  who  is  or- 
.  ^^  .  dained  by  the  sovereign  pastor  in  a  Christian  com- 
Texts  for  the  monwealth,  that  is  not  ordained  by  the  authority 
onawumerT"'  of  the  Sovereign  thereof  ?  Out  of  this  place  there- 
fore it  foUoweth,  that  he  which  heareth  his  sove- 
reign, being  a  Christian,  heareth  Christ ;  and  he 
that  despiseth  the  doctrine  which  his  king,  being  a 
Christian,  authorizeth,  despiseth  the  doctrine  of 
Christ :  which  is  not  that  which  Bellarmine  in- 
tendeth  here  to  prove,  but  the  contrary.  But  all 
this  is  nothing  to  a  law.  Nay  more,  a  Christian 
king,  as  a  pastor  and  teacher  of  his  subjects,  makes 
not  thereby  his  doctrines  laws.  He  cannot  oblige 
men  to  believe ;  though  as  a  civil  sovereign  he  may 
make  laws  suitable  to  his  doctrine,  which  may 
oblige  men  to  certain  actions,  and  sometimes  to 
such  as  they  would  not  otherwise  do,  and  which  he 
ought  not  to  command;  and  yet  when  they  are 
commanded,  they  are  laws ;  and  the  external  actions 
done  in  obedience  to  them,  without  the  inward  ap- 
probation, are  the  actions  of  the  sovereign,  and  not 
of  the  subject,  which  is  in  that  case  but  as  an  in- 
strument, without  any  motion  of  his  own  at  all ; 
because  God  hath  commanded  to  obey  them. 

The  eleventh  is  every  place  where  the  apostle 
for  counsel  putteth  some  word,  by  which  men  use 
to  signify  command;  or  calleth  the  following  of 
his  counsel  by  the  name  of  obedience.  And  there- 
fore they  are  alleged  out  of  1  Cor.  xi.  2,  /  com- 
mend you  for  keeping  my  precepts  as  I  delivered 
them  to  you.  The  Greek  is,  /  commend  you  for 
keeping  those  things  I  delivered  to  youy  as  I  de- 
livered them.  Which  is  far  from  signifying  that 
they  were  laws,  or  anything  else,  but  good  counsel. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLBSIA8TICAL.  565 

And  that  of  1  Thess.  iv.  2,   You  know  what  com-  part  iii 
mandments  we  gave  you :  where  the  Greek  word    .    ^^'    . 

is   jrapayyeXiag  i^wKafUVy  equivalent  tO   rrapiStJKafABVy  Texts  for  the 

what  we  delivered  to  you,  as  in  the  place  next  ^llnnenl''** 
before  alleged,  which  does  not  prove  the  traditions 
of  the  apostles  to  be  any  more  than  counsels; 
though  as  is  said  in  the  8th  verse,  he  that  despiseth 
them,  despiseth  not  man,  hut  God.  For  our  Saviour 
himself  came  not  to  judge,  that  is,  to  be  king  in 
this  world ;  but  to  sacrifice  himself  for  sinners,  and 
leave  doctors  in  his  Church  to  lead,  not  to  drive 
men  to  Christ,  who  never  accepteth  forced  actions, 
(which  is  all  the  law  produceth,)  but  the  inward  con- 
version of  the  heart ;  which  is  not  the  work  of  laws, 
but  of  counsel  and  doctrine. 

And  that  of  2  Thess.  iii.  14,  7/*  any  man  obey 
not  our  word  by  this  Epistle,  note  that  man,  and 
have  W)  company  with  him,  that  he  may  be  ashamed: 
where  from  the  word  obey,  he  would  infer,  that  this 
epistle  was  a  law  to  the  Thessalonians.  The  epistles 
of  the  emperors  were  indeed  laws.  If  therefore 
the  epistle  of  St.  Paul  were  also  a  law,  they  were  - 
to  obey  two  masters.  But  the  word  obey,  as  it  is 
in  the  Greek  viraKovu,  signifieth  hearkening  to  or 
putting  in  practice,  not  only  that  which  is  com- 
manded by  him  that  has  right  to  punish,  but  also 
that  which  is  delivered  in  a  way  of  counsel  for  our 
good ;  and  therefore  St.  Paul  does  not  bid  kill  him 
that  disobeys  ;  nor  beat,  nor  imprison,  nor  amerce 
him,  which  legislators  may  all  do ;  but  avoid  his 
company,  that  he  may  be  ashamed :  whereby  it  is 
evident,  it  was  not  the  empire  of  an  apostle,  but 
his  reputation  amongst  the  faithful,  which  the 
Christians  stood  in  awe  of. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


566         OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  The  last  place  is  that  of  Heb.  xiii.  17,  Obey  your 
.  ^^;  .  leader 8 y  and  submit  yoursehes  to  them;  for  they 
watch  for  your  souls ^  as  they  that  must  give  ac-  . 
count :  and  here  also  is  intended  by  obedience,  a 
folloi^ing  of  their  coonseL  For  the  reason  of  our 
obedience  is  not  drawn  from  the  will  and  command 
of  our  pastors,  but  from  our  own  benefit,  as  being 
the  salvation  of  our  souls  they  watch  for,  and  not 
for  the  exaltation  of  their  own  power  and  authority. 
If  it  were  meant  here,  that  all  they  teach  were 
laws,  then  not  only  the  Pope,  but  every  pastor  in 
his  parish  should  have  l^slative  power.  Agsdn, 
they  that  are  bound  to  obey  their  pastors,  have  no 
power  to  examine  their  commands.  What  then 
shall  we  say  to  St.  John,  who  bids  us  (1  Epistle 
iv.  I)  Not  to  believe  every  spirit,  but  to  try  the 
spirits  whether  they  are  of  God;  because  many 
false  prophets  are  gone  out  into  the  world  ?  It 
is  therefore  manifest,  that  we  may  dispute  the  doc- 
trine of  our  pastors ;  but  no  man  can  dispute  a  law. 
The  commands  of  civil  sovereigns  are  on  all  sides 
granted  to  be  laws :  if  any  else  can  make  a  law 
besides  himself,  all  commonwealth,  and  conse- 
quently all  peace  and  justice  must  cease  ;  which 
is  contrary  to  all  laws  both  divine  and  human.  No- 
thing therefore  can  be  drawn  from  these,  or  any 
other  places  of  Scripture,  to  prove  the  decrees  of 
the  Pope,  where  he  has  not  also  the  civil  sove- 
reignty, to  be  laws. 
The  quc8-  Thc  last  poiut  he  would  prove,  is  this,  Thai  our 
o^jh^een  Saviour  Christ  has  committed  ecclesiastical  juris- 
^«  biahop«.  diction  immediately  to  none  but  the  Pope.  Wherein 
he  handleth  not  the  question  of  supremacy  between 
the  Pope  and  Christian  kings,  but  between  the  Pope 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  BCCLBSIASTICAL.  567 

and  other  bishops.     And  first,  he  says,  it  is  agreed  part  hi. 
that  the  jurisdiction  of  bishops  is  at  least  in  the    .    ^f*    . 
general  dejure  divino,  that  is,  in  the  right  of  God ;  The  ques- 
for  which  he  alleges  St.  Paul,  Eph.  iv.  11,  where  onVbetlfcen 
he  says,  that  Christ  after  his  ascension  into  heaven,  ^^^^w 
gave  gifts  to  meUy  some  apostles^  some  prophets^ 
and  some  evangelists ^  and  some  pastors ^  and  some 
teachers;   and   thence  infers,  they  have  indeed 
their  jurisdiction  in  God's  right ;  but  will  not  grant 
they  have  it  immediately  from  God,  but  derived 
through  the  Pope.     But  if  a  man  may  be  said  to 
have  his  jurisdiction  de  jure  divino^  and  yet  not 
immediately ;  what  lawful  jurisdiction,  though  but 
civil,  is  there  in  a  Christian  commonwealth,  that  is 
not  also  dejuro  divino  ?  For  Christian  kings  have 
their  civil  power  from  God  immediately ;  and  the 
magistrates  under  him  exercise  their  several  charges 
in  virtue  of  his  commission ;  wherein  that  which 
they  do,  is  no  less  de  jure  divino  fnedia/o,  than 
that  which  the  bishops  do  in  virtue  of  the  Pope's 
ordination.     All  lawful  power  is  of  God,  imme- 
diately in  the  Supreme  Governor,  and  mediately 
in  those  that  have  authority  under  him :  so  that 
either  he  must  grant  every  constable  in  the  state, 
to  hold  his  ofl&ce  in  the  right  of  God;  or  he  must 
not  hold  that  any  bishop  holds  his  so,  besides  the 
Pope  himself. 

But  this  whole  dispute,  whether  Christ  left  the 
jurisdiction  to  the  Pope  only,  or  to  other  bishops 
also,  if  considered  out  of  those  places  where  the 
Pope  has  the  civil  sovereignty,  is  a  contention  de 
lana  caprina :  for  none  of  them,  where  they  are 
not  sovereigns,  has  any  jurisdiction  at  all.  For 
jurisdiction  is  the  power  of  hearing  and  determin- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


568         OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  ing  causes  between  man  and  man ;  and  can  belong 

.  /^f •    .    to  none  but  him  that  hath  the  power  to  prescribe 

The  quet.     the  rulcs  of  right  and  wrong ;  that  is,  to  make  laws ; 

oriiy'betl^e'n  Mid  with  the  sword  of  justice  to  compel  men  to 

Sher  bwhoM.  ^^^Y  ^^  dccisious,  prouounccd  either  by  himself, 

or  by  the  judges  he  ordaineth  thereunto ;  which 

none  can  lawfully  do  but  the  civil  sovereign. 

Therefore  when  he  allegeth  out  of  chapter  vi.  of 
Luke  J  that  our  Saviour  called  his  disciples  together, 
and  chose  twelve  of  them,  which  he  named  apostles, 
he  proveth  that  he  elected  them  (all,  except  Mat- 
thias, Paul  and  Barnabas,)  and  gave  them  power 
and  command  to  preach,  but  not  to  judge  of  causes 
between  man  and  man :  for  that  is  a  power  which 
he  refused  to  take  upon  himself,  saying,  Who  made 
me  a  judgey  or  a  divider,  amongst  you  ?  and  in 
another  place,  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world. 
But  he  that  hath  not  the  power  to  hear  and  deter- 
mine causes  between  man  and  man,  cannot  be  said 
to  have  any  jurisdiction  at  all.  And  yet  this  hinders 
not,  but  that  our  Saviour  gave  them  power  to 
preach  and  baptize  in  all  parts  of  the  world,  sup- 
posing they  were  not  by  their  own  lawful  sovereign 
forbidden :  for  to  our  own  sovereigns  Christ  him- 
self, and  his  apostles,  have  in  sundry  places  ex- 
pressly commanded  us  in  all  things  to  be  obedient. 
The  arguments  by  which  he  would  prove,  that 
bishops  receive  their  jurisdiction  from  the  Pope 
(seeing  the  Pope  in  the  dominions  of  other  princes 
hath  no  jurisdiction  himself,)  are  all  in  vain.  Yet 
because  liiey  prove,  on  the  contrary,  that  all  bishops 
receive  jurisdiction,  when  they  have  it,  from  their 
civil  sovereigns,  I  will  not  omit  the  recital  of  them. 
The  first  is  from  chapter  xi.  of  Numbers,  where 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  569 

Moses  not  being  able  alone  to  undergo  the  whole  part  hi. 
burthen  of  administering  the  a£Fairs  of  the  people    ._  ^f*    . 
of  Israel,  God  commanded  him  to  choose  seventy  The  ques- 
elders,  and  took  part  of  the  spirit  of  Moses^  to  put  oritybe'tw^n* 
it  upon  those  seventy  elders  :  by  which  is  under-  oAot  bSi^. 
stood^  not  that  God  weakened  the  spirit  of  Moses ; 
for  that  had  not  eased  him  at  all ;  but  that  they 
had  all  of  them  their  authority  from  him ;  wherein 
he  doth  truly  and  ingenuously  interpret  that  place. 
But  seeing  Moses  had  the  entire  sovereignty  in  the 
commonwealth  of  the  Jews,  it  is  manifest,  that  it  is 
thereby  signified,  that  they  had  their  authority  from 
the  civil  sovereign :  and  therefore  that  place  proveth 
that  bishops  in  every  Christian  commonwealth  have 
their  authority  from  the  civil  sovereign  ;  and  from 
the  Pope  in  his  own  territories  only,  and  not  in  the 
territories  of  any  other  state. 

The  second  argument,  is  from  the  nature  of  mo- 
narchy ;  wherein  all  authority  is  in  one  man,  and 
in  others  by  derivation  from  him.  But  the  govern- 
ment of  the  Church,  he  says,  is  monarchical.  This 
also  makes  for  Christian  monarchs.  For  they  are 
really  monarchs  of  their  own  people ;  that  is,  of 
their  own  Church ;  for  the  Church  is  the  same  thing 
with  a  Christian  people;  whereas  the  power  of 
the  Pope,  though  he  were  St.  Peter,  is  neither  mo- 
narchy, nor  hath  anything  of  archicaly  nor  crati- 
caly  but  only  of  didactical ;  for  God  accepteth  not 
a  forced,  but  a  willing  obedience. 

The  third,  is  from  that  the  see  of  St.  Peter  is 
called  by  St.  Cyprian,  the  head,  the  source^  the 
rooty  the  sun^  from  whence  the  authority  of  bishops 
is  derived.  But  by  the  law  of  nature,  which  is  a 
better  principle  of  right  and  wrong  than  the  word 


Digitized  by 


Google 


M 


70  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 


PART  III.  of  any  doctor  that  is  but  a  man,  the  civil  sover^gn 
.  ^f'_-  in  every  commonwealth,  is  the  head^  the  source^ 
The  ques-  thc  root^  and  the  sun^  from  which  all  jurisdiction  is 
ori^b/^^n'  derived.  And  therefore  the  jurisdiction  of  bishops, 
^ Si.  is  derived  from  the  civil  sovereign. 

The  fourth,  is  taken  from  the  inequality  of  their 
jurisdictions.  For  if  God,  saith  he,  had  given  it 
them  immediately,  he  had  given  as  well  equality 
of  jurisdiction,  as  of  order :  but  we  see,  some  are 
bishops  but  of  one  town,  some  of  a  hundred  towns, 
and  some  of  many  whole  provinces ;  which  diflfier- 
ences  were  not  determined  by  the  command  of 
God ;  their  jurisdiction  therefore  is  not  of  God,  but 
of  man ;  and  one  has  a  greater,  another  a  less,  as 
it  pleaseth  the  Prince  of  the  Church.  Which  argu- 
ment, if  he  had  proved  before,  that  the  Pope  had 
an  universal  jurisdiction  over  all  Christians,  had 
been  for  his  purpose.  But  seeing  that  hath  not 
been  proved,  and  that  it  is  notoriously  known,  the 
large  jurisdiction  of  the  Pope  was  given  him  by 
those  that  had  it,  that  is,  by  the  emperors  of  Rome, 
(for  the  patriarch  of  Constantinople,  upon  the  same 
title,  namely  of  being  bishop  of  the  capital  city  of 
the  empire,  and  seat  of  the  emperor,  claimed  to  be 
equal  to  him),  it  followeth,  that  all  other  bishops 
have  their  jurisdiction  from  the  sovereigns  of  the 
place  wherein  they  exercise  the  same.  And  as  for 
that  cause  they  have  not  their  authority  de  jure 
divino  ;  so  neither  hath  the  Pope  his  dejure  divino, 
except  only  where  he  is  also  the  civil  sovereign. 

His  fifth  argument  is  this :  if  bishops  have  their 
jurisdiction  immediately  from  God,  the  Pope  could 
not  take  it  from  them/for  he  can  do  nothing  con- 
trary to  Gods  ordination  ;  and  this  consequence 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  671 

is  good,  and  well  proved.     But^  saith  he,  the  Pope  part  hi. 
can  do  this,  and  has  done  it.    This  also  is  granted,    .  ^^    . 
so  he  do  it  in  his  own  dominions,  or  in  the  domi-  The  quea- 
nions  of  any  other  prince  that  hath  given  him  that  ority°betIfeen 
power ;  but  not  universally,  in  right  of  the  pope-  JI^^ ^1^1 
dom :  for  that  power  belongeth  to  every  Christian 
sovereign,  within  the  bounds  of  his  own  empire, 
and  is  inseparable  from  the  sovereignty.     Before 
the  people  of  Israel  had,  by  the  commandment  of 
God  to  Samuel,  set  over  themselves  a  king,  after 
the  manner  of  other  nations,  the  high-priest  had 
the  civil  government ;  and  none  but  he  could  make 
or  depose  an  inferior  priest.     But  that  power  was 
afterwards  in  the  king,  as  may  be  proved  by  this 
same  argument  of  Bellarmine ;  for  if  the  priest,  be 
he  the  high-priest  or  any  other,  had  his  jurisdiction 
immediately  from  God,  then  the  king  could  not 
take  it  from  him ;  Jor  he  could  do  nothing  con- 
trary to  God's  ordinance.     But  it  is  certain  that 
king  Solomon  (1  Kings  ii.  26,27)  deprived  Abiathar 
the  high-priest  of  his  office,  and   placed  Zadok 
(verse  36)  in  his  room.    Kings  therefore  may  in  like 
manner  ordain  and  deprive  bishops,  as  they  shall 
think  fit  for  the  well-governing  of  their  subjects. 

His  sixth  argument  is  this,  if  bishops  have  their 
jurisdiction  de  jure  divino,  that  is,  immediately 
from  God,  they  that  maintain  it,  should  bring  some 
word  of  God  to  prove  it :  but  they  can  bring  none. 
The  argument  is  good ;  I  have  therefore  nothing  to 
say  against  it.  But  it  is  an  argument  no  less  good, 
to  prove  the  Pope  himself  to  have  no  jurisdiction 
in  the  dominion  of  any  other  prince. 

Lastly,  he  bringeth  for  argument  the  testimony 
of  two  popes.  Innocent  and  Leo ;  and  I  doubt  not 


Digitized  by 


Google 


572         OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  he  might  have  alleged,  with  as  good  reason,  the 
.  Z*^  .  testimonies  of  all  the  popes  almost  since  St.  Peter. 
For  considering  the  love  of  power  naturally  im- 
planted in  mankind,  whosoever  were  made  Pope, 
he  would  be  tempted  to  uphold  the  same  opinion. 
Nevertheless,  they  should  therein  but  do,  as  Inno- 
cent and  Leo  did,  bear  witness  of  themselves,  and 
therefore  their  witness  should  not  be  good. 
Of  the  In  the  fifth  book  he  hath  four  conclusions.     The 

poSpoww'  first  is,  that  the  Pope  is  not  lord  of  all  the  world : 
the  second,  that  the  Pope  is  not  the  lord  of  all  the 
Christian  world:  the  third,  that  the  Pope,  without 
his  own  terri  ory,  has  not  any  temporal  jurisdie- 
tion  DIRECTLY.  Thcsc  three  conclusions  are  easily 
granted.  The  fourth  is,  that  the  Pope  hjos,  in 
the  dominions  of  other  princes,  the  supreme  tem^ 
poral power  indirectly  :  which  is  denied;  un- 
less he  mean  by  indirectly,  that  he  has  gotten  it  by 
indirect  means,  then  is  that  also  granted.  But  I 
imderstand,  that  when  he  saith  he  hath  it  indi- 
rectly, he  means,  that  such  temporal  jurisdiction 
belongeth  to  him  of  right,  but  that  this  right  is  but 
a  consequence  of  his  pastoral  authority,  the  which 
he  could  not  exercise  unless  he  have  the  other 
with  it :  and  therefore  to  the  pastoral  power,  which 
he  calls  spiritual,  the  supreme  power  civil  is  neces- 
sarily annexed ;  and  that  thereby  he  hath  a  right  to 
change  kingdoms,  giving  them  to  one  and  taking 
them  from  another,  when  he  shall  think  it  con- 
duces to  the  salvation  of  souls. 

Before  I  come  to  consider  the  arguments  by 
which  he  would  prove  this  doctrine,  it  will  not  be 
amiss  to  lay  open  the  consequences  of  it ;  that 
princes  and  states,  that  have  the  civil  sovereignty 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWBR  ECCLESIASTICAL.  573 

in  their  several  commonwealths,  may  bethink  them-  part  hi. 
selves,  whether  it  be  convenient  for  them,  and  con-    .  ^^*    . 
ducing  to  the  good  of  their  subjects,  of  whom  they  or  the 
are  to  give  an  account  at  the  day  of  judgment,  to  ^Sfpow™^ 
admit  the  same. 

When  it  is  said,  the  Pope  hath  not,  in  the  ter- 
ritories of  other  states,  the  supreme  civil  power 
directly  ;  we  are  to  understand,  he  doth  not  chal- 
lenge it,  as  other  civil  sovereigns  do,  from  the  ori- 
ginal submission  thereto  of  those  that  are  to  be 
governed.  For  it  is  evident,  and  has  already  been 
sufficiently  in  this  treatise  demonstrated,  that  the 
right  of  all  sovereigns  is  derived  originally  from 
the  consent  of  every  one  of  those  that  are  to  be 
governed ;  whether  they  that  choose  him,  do  it  for 
their  common  defence  against  an  enemy,  as  when 
they  agree  amongst  themselves  to  appoint  a  man 
or  an  assembly  of  men  to  protect  them ;  or  whether 
they  do  it,  to  save  their  lives,  by  submission  to  a 
conquering  enemy.  The  Pope  therefore,  when  he 
disclaimeth  the  supreme  civil  power  over  other 
states  directly^  denieth  no  more,  but  that  his  right 
Cometh  to  him  by  that  way ;  he  ceaseth  not  for  all 
that,  to  claim  it  another  way ;  and  that  is,  without 
the  consent  of  them  that  are  to  be  governed,  by  a 
right  given  him  by  God,  which  he  calleth  indirectly ^ 
in  his  assumption  to  the  papacy.  But  by  what  way 
soever  he  pretend,  the  power  is  the  same ;  and  he 
may,  if  it  be  granted  to  be  his  right,  depose  princes 
and  states,  as  often  as  it  is  for  the  salvation  of  souls, 
that  is,  as  often  as  he  will ;  for  he  claimeth  also  the 
sole  power  to  judge  whether  it  be  to  the  salvation 
of  men's  souls  or  not.  And  this  is  the  doctrine, 
not  only  that  Bellarmine  here,  and  many  other  doc- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


574  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  HI.  ^^9  teach  in  their  sermons  and  books^  but  also  that 
^  ^^'  -  some  councils  have  decreed,  and  the  Popes  have 
Of  the  accordingly,  when  the  occasion  hath  served  them, 
ponS  po^r.  P^t  in  practice.  For  the  fourth  council  of  Lateran, 
held  under  Pope  Innocent  the  Third,  in  the  third 
chapter  De  HtereticiSj  hath  this  canon :  If  a  king, 
at  the  Papers  admonition^  do  not  purge  his  king- 
dom  of  heretics y  and  being  excommunicate  Jhr  the 
same^  make  not  satisfaction  within  a  year^  his 
subjects  are  absolved  of  their  obedience.  And 
the  practice  hereof  hath  been  seen  on  divers  occa- 
sions ;  as  in  the  deposing  of  CJhilperic,  king  of 
France  ;  in  the  translation  of  the  Roman  empire  to 
Charlemagne  ;  in  the  oppression  of  John,  king  of 
England ;  in  transferring  the  kingdom  of  Navarre; 
and  of  late  years,  in  the  league  against  Henry  the 
Third  of  France,  and  in  many  more  occurrences. 
I  think  there  be  few  princes  that  consider  not 
this  as  unjust,  and  inconvenient ;  but  I  wish  they 
would  all  resolve  to  be  kings  or  subjects.  Men 
cannot  serve  two  masters.  They  ought  therefore  to 
ease  them,  either  by  holding  the  reins  of  govern- 
ment wholly  in  their  own  hands ;  or  by  wholly  de- 
livering them  into  the  hands  of  the  Pope ;  that  such 
men  as  are  willing  to  be  obedient,  may  be  protected 
in  their  obedience.  For  this  distinction  of  tempo- 
ral and  spiritual  power  is  but  words.  Power  is  as 
really  divided,  and  as  dangerously  to  all  purposes, 
by  sharing  with  another  indirect  power,  as  with  a 
direct  one.     But  to  come  now  to  his  arguments. 

The  first  is  this.  The  civil  power  is  subject  to  the 
spiritual:  therefore  he  that  hath  the  supreme 
power  spiritual^  hath  right  to  command  temporal 
princes^  and  dispose  of  their  temporals  in  order 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWSR  ECCLESIASTICAL.  675 

to  the  spiritual.    As  for  the  distinction  of  tell-  part  in. 
pond  and  spiritual,  let  us  consider  in  what  sense  it    .    ^^'    . 
may  be  said  intelligibly,  that  the  temporal  or  civil  or  the 
power  is  subject  to  the  spiritual.    There  be  but  p^»iJower" 
two  ways  that  those  words  can  be  made  sense. 
For  when  we  say,  one  power  is  subject  to  another 
power,  the  meaning  either  is,  that  he  which  hath 
the  one,  is  subject  to  him  that  hath  the  other ; 
or  that  the  one  power  is  to  the  other,  as  the  means 
to  the  end.     For  we  cannot  understand,  that  one 
power  hath  power  over  another  power ;  or  that 
one  power  can  have  right  or  command  over  another. 
For  subjection,  command,  right,  and  power,  are  ac- 
cidents, not  of  powers,  but  of  persons.   One  power 
may  be  subordinate  to  another,  as  the  art  of  a 
saddler  to  the  art  of  a  rider.     If  then  it  be  granted, 
that  the  civil  government  be  ordained  as  a  means 
to  bring  us  to  a  spiritual  felicity ;  yet  it  does  not 
follow,  that  if  a  king  have  the  civil  power,  and  the 
Pope  the  spiritual,  that  therefore  the  king  is  bound 
to  obey  the  Pope,  more  than  every  saddler  is  bound 
to  obey  every  rider.     Therefore  as  from  subor- 
dination of  an  art,  cannot  be  inferred  the  subjec- 
tion of  the  professor  ;  so  from  the  subordination  of 
a  government,  cannot  be  inferred  the  subjection  of 
the  governor.    When  therefore  he  saith,  the  civil 
power  is  subject  to  the  spiritual,  his  meaning  is, 
that  the  civil  sovereign  is  subject  to  the  spiritual 
sovereign.     And  the  argument  stands  thus.  The 
civil  sovereign  is  subject  to  the  spiritual ;  there- 
Jhre  the  spiritual  prince  may  command  temporal 
princes.     Where  the  conclusion  is  the.  same  with 
the  antecedent  he  should  have  proved.  But  to  prove 
it,  he  allegeth  first,  this  reason.-  Kings  and  popes  ^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


576  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  in.  clergy  and  laity ^  make  hut  one  commonwealth  ; 
.  ^^  .  that  is  to  say,  hut  one  Church  :  and  in  all  bodies 
Of  the  the  memhers  depend  one  upon  another :  hut  thinss 
poS  power,  spiritual  depend  not  of  things  temporal :  there- 
fore  temporal  depend  on  spiritual,  and  therefore 
are  suhject  to  them.  In  which  argumentatioii 
there  be  two  gross  errors  :  one  is,  that  all  Christian 
kings,  popes,  clergy,  and  all  other  Christian  men, 
make  but  one  commonwealth.  For  it  is  evident  that 
France  is  one  commonwealth,  Spain  another,  and 
Venice  a  third,  &c.  And  these  consist  of  Christ- 
ians; and  therefore  also  are  several  bodies  of 
Christians ;  that  is  to  say,  several  Churches :  and 
their  several  sovereigns  represent  them,  whereby 
they  are  capable  of  commanding  and  obeying,  of 
doing  and  suffering,  as  a  natural  man ;  which  no 
general  or  universal  Church  is,  till  it  have  a  repre- 
sentant ;  which  it  hath  not  on  earth  :  for  if  it  had, 
there  is  no  doubt  but  that  all  Christendom  were 
one  commonwealth,  whose  sovereign  were  that  re- 
presentant,  both  in  things  spiritual  and  temporal. 
And  the  Pope,  to  make  himself  this  representant, 
wanteth  three  things  that  our  Saviour  hath  not 
given  him,  to  command^  and  to  judge,  and  to 
punish,  otherwise  than,  by  excommunication,  to 
run  from  those  that  will  not  learn  of  him.  For 
though  the  Pope  were  Christ's  only  vicar,  yet  he 
cannot  exercise  his  government,  till  our  Saviour's 
second  coming  :  and  then  also  it  is  not  the  Pope, 
but  St.  Peter  himself  with  the  other  apostles,  that 
are  to  be  judges  of  the  world. 

The  other  error  in  this  his  first  argument  is, 
that  he  says,  the  members  of  every  commonwealth, 
as  of  a  natural  body,  depend  one  of  another.  It  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  677 

true,  they  cohere  together ;  but  they  depend  obIv  part  hi. 
on  the  sovereign,  which  is  the  soul  of  the  common-  .  "^^  ^ 
wealth;  which  failing,  the  commonwealth  is  dis-  ofthe 

1       J    •    ^  •    -1  u  Pope's  tem- 

solved  mto  a  civil  war,  no  one  man  so  much  as  porai  power. 
cohering  to  another,  for  want  of  a  common  depend- 
ance  on  a  known  sovereign  ;  just  as  the  members 
of  the  natural  body  dissolve  into  earth,  for  want  of 
a  soul  to  Tiold  them  together.  Therefore  there  is 
nothing  in  this  similitude,  from  whence  to  infer  a 
dependance  of  the  laity  on  the  clergy,  or  of  the 
temporal  officers  on  the  spiritual ;  but  of  both  on 
the  civil  sovereign ;  which  ought  indeed  to  direct 
his  civil  commands  to  the  salvation  of  souls  ;  but  is 
not  therefore  subject  to  any  but  God  himself.  And 
thus  you  see  the  laboured  fallacy  of  the  first  argu- 
ment, to  deceive  such  men  as  distinguish  not  be- 
tween the  subordination  of  actions  in  the  way  to 
the  end;  and  the  subjection  of  persons  one  to  an- 
other in  the  administration  of  the  means.  For  to 
every  end,  the  means  are  determined  by  nature,  or 
by  God  himself  supernaturally :  but  the  power  to 
make  men  use  the  means,  is  in  every  nation  re- 
signed, by  the  law  of  nature,  which  forbiddeth  men 
to  violate  their  faith  given,  to  the  civil  sovereign. 
His  second  argument  is  this;  Every  common-- 
wealth  J  because  it  is  supposed  to  be  perfect  and 
siffficient  in  itself,  may  command  any  other  com- 
monwealth  not  subject  to  it,  and  force  it  to  change 
the  administration  of  the  government ;  nay,  depose 
the  prince,  and  set  another  in  his  room,  vf  it  can- 
riot  otherwise  defend  itself  against  the  injuries  he 
goes  about  to  do  them :  much  nmre  may  a  spiritual 
commonwealth  command  a  temporal  one  to  change 
the  administration  of  their  government ^  and  may 

VOL.  III.  p  p 


Digitized  by 


Google 


678  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  HI.  depose  princes^  and  institute  others,  when  they 
.  Z*^-    .    cannot  otherwise  defend  the  spiritual  good. 
Of  the  That  a  commonwealth^  to  defend  itself  against 

^wfpower.  injuries,  may  lawfully  do  all  that  he  hath  here  said, 
is  very  true ;  and  hath  already  in  that  which  hath 
gone  before  been  sufficiently  demonstrated.  And 
if  it  were  also  true,  that  there  is  now  in  this  world 
a  spiritual  commonwealth,  distinct  from  a  civil 
commonwealth,  then  might  the  prince  thereof,  upon 
injury  done  him,  or  upon  want  of  caution  that 
injury  be  not  done  him  in  time  to  come,  repair 
and  secure  himself  by  war ;  which  is,  in  sum,  de- 
posing, killing,  or  subduing,  or  doing  any  act  of 
hostility.  But  by  the  same  reason,  it  would  be  no 
less  lawful  for  a  civil  sovereign,  upon  the  like  in- 
juries done,  or  feared,  to  make  war  upon  the  spi- 
ritual sovereign ;  which  I  believe  is  more  than  Car- 
dinal Bellarmine  would  have  inferred  from  his  own 
proposition. 

But  spiritual  commonwealth  there  is  none  in  this 
world :  for  it  is  the  same  thing  with  the  kingdom 
of  Christ,  which  he  himself  saith,  is  not  of  this 
world ;  but  shall  be  in  the  next  world  at  the  re- 
surrection, when  they  that  have  lived  justly,  and 
believed  that  he  was  the  Christ,  shall,  though  they 
died  natural  bodies,  rise  spiritual  bodies ;  and  then 
it  is,  that  our  Saviour  shall  judge  the  world,  and 
conquer  his  adversaries,  and  make  a  spiritual  com- 
monwealth. In  the  meantime,  seeing  there  are  no 
men  on  earth  whose  bodies  are  spiritual,  there  can 
be  no  spiritual  commonwealth  amongst  men  that 
are  yet  in  the  flesh  ;  unless  we  call  preachers,  that 
have  commission  to  teach,  and  prepare  men  for 
their  reception  into  the  kingdom  of  Christ  at  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWBB  BCCLE6IASTICAL.  679 

resurrection,  a  commcmwealth ;  which  I  have  proved  part  hi. 
already  to  be  none.  .  ^^'    . 

The  third  argument  is  this  ;  It  is  not  lawful  for  of  the 
Christians  to  tolerate  aninjidely  or  heretical  king,  po»iplwer. 
in  case  he  endeavour  to  draw  them  to  his  heresij 
or  if^elity.  But  to  judge  whether  a  king  draw 
his  subjects  to  heresy  or  not,  helongeth  to  the  Pope, 
Therefore  hath  the  Pope  right  to  determine 
whetlier  the  prince  he  to  he  deposed,  or  not  de- 
posed. 

To  this  I  answer,  that  both  these  assertions  are 
fedse.  For  <]!hristians,or  men  of  what  religion  soever, 
if  they  tolerate  not  their  king,  whatsoever  law  he 
maketh^  though  it  be  concerning  religion,  do  violate 
their  fiedth,  contrary  to  the  divine  law,  both  natural 
and  positive:  nor  is  there  any  judge  of  heresy 
amongst  subjects,  but  their  own  civil  sovereign. 
For  heresy  is  nothing  else  hut  a  private  opinion 
obstinately  maintained,  contrary  to  the  opinion 
which  the  public  person,  that  is  to  say,  the  repre- 
sentant  of  the  commonwealth,  hath  commanded 
to  be  taught.  By  which  it  is  manifest,  that  an 
opinion  publicly  appointed  to  be  taught,  cannot  be 
heresy ;  nor  the  sovereign  princes  that  authorize 
them,  heretics.  For  heretics  are  none  but  private 
men,  Ihat  stubbornly  defend  some  doctrine,  pro- 
hibited by  their  lawful  sovereigns. 

But  to  prove  that  Christians  are  not  to  tolerate 
infidel  or  heretical  kings,  he  allegeth  a  place  in 
Detrf.  xvii.  1 5,  where  God  forbiddeth  the  Jews,  when 
they  shall  set  a  king  over  themselves,  to  choose  a 
stranger :  and  from  thence  inferreth,  that  it  is  un- 
lawful for  a  Christian  to  choose  a  king  that  is  not 
a  Christian.      And  it  is  true,  that  he  that  is  a 

PP2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


580 


OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 


PART  III. 
42. 

Of  the 
Pope's  tem- 
poral power. 


Christian^  that  is^  he  that  hath  already  obliged  him- 
self to  receive  our  Saviour,  when  he  shall  come,  for 
his  king,  shall  tempt  God  too  much  in  choosing  for 
king  in  this  world,  one  that  he  knoweth  will  en- 
deavour, both  by  terror  and  persuasion,  to  make 
him  violate  his  faith.  But  it  is,  saith  he,  the  same 
danger,  to  choose  one  that  is  not  a  Christian,  for 
king,  and  not  to  depose  him  when  he  is  chosen. 
To  this  I  say,  the  question  isnot  of  the  danger  of 
not  deposing ;  but  of  the  justice  of  deposing  him. 
To  choose  him,  may  in  some  cases  be  unjust ;  but 
to  depose  him  when  he  is  chosen,  is  in  no  case  just. 
For  it  is  always  violation  of  faith,  and  consequently 
against  the  law  of  nature,  which  is  the  eternal  law 
of  God.  Nor  do  we  read  that  any  such  doctrine 
was  accounted  Christian  in  the  time  of  the  apostles; 
nor  in  the  time  of  the  Roman  emperors,  till  the 
Popes  had  the  civil  sovereignty  of  Rome.  But  to 
this  he  hath  replied,  that  the  Christians  of  old  de- 
posed not  Nero,  nor  Dioclesian,  nor  Julian,  nor  Va- 
lens  an  Arian,  for  this  cause  only,  that  they  wanted 
temporal  forces.  Perhaps  so.  But  did  our  Saviour, 
who  for  calling  for,  might  have  had  twelve  legions 
of  immortal,  invulnerable  angels  to  assist  him,  want 
forces  to  depose  Caesar,  or  at  least  Pilate,  that  un- 
justly, without  finding  fault  in  him,  delivered  him 
to  the  Jews  to  be  crucified  ?  Or  if  the  apostles 
wanted  temporal  forces  to  depose  Nero,  was  it 
therefore  necessary  for  them,  in  their  epistles  to  the 
new  made  Christians,  to  teach  them,  as  they  did, 
to  obey  the  powers  constituted  over  them,  whereof 
Nero  in  that  time  was  one,  and  that  they  ought  to 
obey  them,  not  for  fear  of  their  wrath,  but  for  con- 
science sake  ?    Shall  we  say  they  did  not  only  obey, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLESIASTICAL.  581 

but  also  teach  what  they  meant  not,  for  want  of  part  hi. 
strength  ?  It  is  not  therefore  for  want  of  strength,  .  ^J-  . 
bnt  for  conscience  sake,  that  Christians  are  to  or  the 
tolerate  their  heathen  princes,  or  princes  (for  I  can-  poS  pwr. 
not  call  any  one  whose  doctrine  is  the  public  doc- 
trine, an  heretic)  that  authorize  the  teaching  of  an 
error.  And  whereas  for  the  temporal  power  of  the 
Pope,  he  allegeth  further,  that  St.  Paid  (1  Cor.  vi.) 
appointed  judges  under  the  heathen  princes  of 
those  times,  such  as  were  not  ordained  by  those 
princes;  it  is  not  true.  For  St.  Paul  does  but 
advise  them,  to  take  some  of  their  brethren  to  com- 
pound their  diflFerences  as  arbitrators,  rather  than 
to  go  to  law  one  with  another  before  the  heathen 
judges  ;  which  is  a  wholesome  precept,  and  fiill  of 
charity,  fit  to  be  practised  also  in  the  best  Christian 
commonwealths. .  And  for  the  danger  that  may  arise 
to  religion,  by  the  subjects  tolerating  of  a  heathen, 
or  an  erring  prince,  it  is  a  point  of  which  a  subject 
is  no  competent  judge;  or  if  he  be,  the  Pope's  tem- 
poral subjects  may  judge  also  of  the  Pope's  doc- 
trine. For  every  Christian  prince,  as  I  have 
formerly  proved,  is  no  less  supreme  pastor  of  his 
own  subjects,  than  the  Pope  of  his. 

The  fourth  argument,  is  taken  from  the  baptism 
of  kings  ;  wherein,  that  they  may  be  made  Chris- 
tians, they  submit  their  sceptres  to  Christ ;  and 
promise  to  keep  and  defend  the  Christian  faith. 
This  is  true ;  for  Christian  kings  are  no  more  but 
Christ's  subjects:  but  they  may,  for  all  that,  be  the 
Pope's  fellows ;  for  they  are  supreme  pastors  of 
their  own  subjects ;  and  the  Pope  is  no  more  but 
king  and  pastor,  even  in  Rome  itself. 

The  fifth  argument,  is  drawn  from  the  words 


Digitized  by 


Google 


582 


OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 


PAET  111. 
42. 

Of  the 
Pope's  tem- 
^nl  power. 


spoken  by  our  Saviour,  Feed  my  sheep ;  by  which 
was  given  all  power  necessary  for  a  pastor;  as  the 
power  to  chase  away  wolves,  such  as  are  heretics ; 
the  power  to  shut  up  rams,  if  they  be  mad,  or  push 
at  the  other  sheep  vnth  their  horns,  such  as  are 
evil,  though  Christian,  kings ;  and  power  to  give 
the  flock  convenient  food.  From  whence  he  in- 
ferreth,  that  St.  Peter  had  these  three  powers  given 
him  by  Christ.  To  which  I  answer,  that  the  last 
of  these  powers  is  no  more  than  the  power,  or 
rather  command,  to  teach.  For  the  first,  which 
is  to  chase  away  wolves,  that  is,  heretics,  the  place 
he  quoteth  is  {Matth.  vii.  15)  Beware  of  false 
prophets^  which  coine  to  you  in  sheep* s  clothing, 
but  inwardly  are  ravening  wolves.  But  neither 
are  heretics  false  prophets,  or  at  all  prophets :  nor, 
admitting  heretics  for  the  wolves  there  meant, 
were  the  apostles  commanded  to  kill  them,  or  if 
they  were  kings,  to  depose  them ;  but  to  beware 
of,  fly,  and  avoid  them :  nor  was  it  to  St.  Peter, 
nor  to  any  of  the  apostles,  but  to  the  multitude  of 
the  Jews  that  followed  him  into  the  mountain,  men 
for  the  most  part  not  yet  converted,  that  he  gave 
this  counsel,  to  beware  of  false  prophets :  which 
therefore,  if  it  confer  a  power  of  chasing  away 
kings,  was  given,  not  only  to  private  men,  but  to 
men  that  were  not  at  all  Christians.  And  as  to  the 
power  of  separating,  and  shutting  up  of  furious 
rams,  by  which  he  meaneth  Christian  kings  that 
refuse  to  submit  themselves  to  the  Roman  pastor, 
our  Saviour  refused  to  take  upon  him  that  power 
in  this  world  himself,  but  advised  to  let  the  com 
and  tares  grow  up  together  till  the  day  of  judgment : 
much  less  did  he  give  it  to  St.  Peter,  or  can  St. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  POWER  ECCLBSIASTICAL.  583 

Peter  give  it  to  the  Popes.     St.  Peter,  and  all  other  part  hi. 
pastors^  are  bidden  to  esteem  those  Christians  that   .    ^^   . 
disobey  the  Church,  that  is,  that  disobey  the  Chris-  of  the 
tian  sovereign,  as  heathen  men,  and  as  publicans.  ^^  ^w"r. 
Seeing  then,  men  challenge  to  the  Pope  no  autho- 
rity over  heathen  princes,  they  ought  to  challenge 
none  over  those  that  are  to  be  esteemed  as  heathen. 

But  from  the  power  to  teach  only,  he  inferreth 
also  a  coercive  power  in  the  Pope  over  kings. 
The  pastor,  saith  he,  must  give  his  flock  convenient 
food :  therefore  the  Pope  may,  and  ought  to  compel 
kings  to  do  their  duty.  Out  of  which  it  followeth, 
that  the  Pope,  as  pastor  of  Christian  men,  is  king 
of  kings  :  which  all  Christian  kings  ought  indeed 
either  to  confess,  or  else  they  ought  to  take  upon 
themselves  the  supreme  pastoral  charge,  every  one 
in  his  own  dominion. 

His  sixth  and  last  argument,  is  from  examples. 
To  which  I  answer,  first,  that  examples  prove  no- 
thing: secondly,  that  the  examples  he  fdlegeth 
make  not  so  much  as  a  probability  of  right.  The 
fact  of  Jehoiada,  in  killing  Athaliah,  (2  Kings  xi.) 
was  either  by  the  authority  of  king  Joash,  or  it 
was  a  horrible  crime  in  the  high-priest,  which  ever 
after  the  election  of  king  Saul  was  a  mere  subject 
The  fact  of  St.  Ambrose,  in  excommunicating  The- 
odosius  the  emperor,  if  it  were  true  he  did  so,  was 
a  capital  crime.  And  for  the  Popes,  Gregory  I, 
Gregory  II,  Zachary,  and  Leo  III,  their  judgments 
are  void,  as  given  in  their  own  cause ;  and  the  acts 
done  by  them  conformably  to  this  doctrine,  are  the 
greatest  crimes,  especially  that  of  Zachary,  that 
are  incident  to  human  nature.  And  thus  much  of 
Power  Ecclesiastical ;  wherein  I  had  been  more 


Digitized  by 


Google 


684  OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  in*  brief,  forbearing  to  examine  these  arguments   of 
.   *^'  ,.    Bellarmine,  if  they  had  been  his  as  a  private  man, 
and  not  as   the  champion  of  the  Papacy  against 
all  other  Christian  Princes  and  States. 


CHAPTER  XLIII. 

OP  WHAT  IS   NECESSARY  POR  A  MAN's    RECEP- 
TION INTO  THE  KINGDOM  OP  HEAVEN. 

The  difficulty  The  most  frcqucnt  pretext  of  sedition,  and  civil 
God  and"man  war,  in  Christian  commonwealths,  hath  a  long  time 
bothatooce;  proceeded  from  a  difficulty,  not  yet  sufficiently  re- 
solved, of  obeying  at  once  both  God  and  man, 
then  when  their  commandments  are  one  contrary 
to  the  other.  It  is  manifest  enough,  that  when  a 
man  receiveth  two  contrary  commands,  and  knows 
that  one  of  them  is  God's^  he  ought  to  obey  that,  and 
not  the  other,  though  it  be  the  command  even  of 
his  lawful  sovereign  (whether  a  monarch,  or  a  so- 
vereign assembly),  or  the  command  of  his  father. 
The  difficulty  therefore  consisteth  in  this,  that  men, 
when  they  are  commanded  in  the  name  of  God, 
know  not  in  divers  cases,  whether  the  command  be 
from  God,  or  whether  he  that  commandeth  do 
but  abuse  God's  name  for  some  private  ends  of  his 
own.  For  as  there  were  in  the  Church  of  the 
Jews,  many  false  prophets,  that  sought  reputation 
with  the  people,  by  feigned  dreams  and  visions ; 
so  there  have  been  in  all  times  in  the  Church  of 
Christ,  false  teachers,  that  seek  reputation  with  the 
people,  by  fantastical  and  false  doctrines ;  and  by 
such  reputation,  (as  is  the  nature  of  ambition),  to 
govern  them  for  their  private  benefit. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


WHAT  NECESSARY  TO  SALVATION.  685 

But  this  difficulty  of  obeying  both  God  and  the  part  hi. 
civil  sovereign  on  earth,  to  those  that  can  distin-    .    *f  •    . 
guish  between  what  is  necessary^  and  what  is  not  Ts  none  to 
necessary  for  their  reception  into  the  kingdom  o/'^^guish 
God,  is  of  no  moment.   For  if  the  command  of  the  ^^^JJ^^J^ua 
civil  sovereign  be  such,  as  that  it  may  be  obeyed  ^ot  neccaaary 
without  the  forfeiture  of  life  eternal ;  not  to  obey 
it  is  unjust ;  and  the  precept  of  the  apostle  takes 
place :  Servants  ohey  your  masters  in  all  things ; 
and  Children  obey  your  parents  in  all  things  ; 
and  the  precept  of  our  Saviour,  The  Scribes  and 
Pharisees  sit  in  Moses*  chair;  all  therefore  they 
shall  say,  that  observe  and  do.     But  if  the  com- 
mand be  such  as  cannot  be  obeyed,  without  being 
damned  to  eternal  death ;  then  it  were  madness  to 
obey  it,  and  the  council  of  our  Saviour  takes  place, 
{Matth.  X.  28),  Fear  not  those  that  kill  the  body, 
but  cannot  kill  the  soul.     All  men  therefore  that 
would  avoid,  both  the  punishments  that  are  to  be 
in  this  world  inflicted,  for  disobedience  to  their 
earthly  sovereign,  and  those  that  shall  be  inflicted 
in  the  world  to  come,  for  disobedience  to  God,  have 
need  be  taught  to  distinguish  well  between  what 
is,  and  what  is  not  necessary  to  eternal  salvation. 

All  that  is  NECESSARY  to  salvation,  is  contained  au  that  i 
in  two  virtues,  faith  in  Christ,  and  obedience  to  gS^^i^ 
laws.    The  latter  of  these,  if  it  were  perfect,  were  ;o°J»»ned  in 

'  r  *  faith  and  obe- 

enough  to  us.  But  because  we  are  all  guilty  of  dience. 
disobedience  to  God's  law,  not  only  originally  in 
Adam,  but  also  actually  by  our  own  transgressions, 
there  is  required  at  our  hands  now,  not  only  obe- 
dience for  the  rest  of  our  time,  but  dso  a  remission 
of  sins  for  the  time  past;  which  remission  is  the 
reward  of  our  faith  in  Christ.    That  nothing  else  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


586  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH* 

pAax  iiL.  neeessarily  required  to  salvation,  is  manifest  from 
.  ^  .  this,  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  shut  to  none 
but  to  sinners ;  that  is  to  say,  to  the  disobedient,  or 
transgressors  of  the  law ;  nor  to  them,  in  ease  they 
repent,  and  believe  all  the  articles  c^  Christian 
faith  necessary  to  salvation. 
whatobe-  The  obedience  required  at  our  hands  by  God, 
n^e^tfy;  that  acccptcth  in  all  our  actions  the  will  for  the 
deed,  is  a  serious  endeavour  to  obey  him ;  and  is 
called  also  by  all  such  names  as  signify  that  en- 
deavour. And  therefore  obedience  is  sometimes 
called  by  the  names  of  charity  and  loDe^  because 
they  imply  a  will  to  obey ;  and  our  Saviour  him- 
self maketh  our  love  to  God,  and  to  one  another, 
a  fulfilling  of  the  whole  law :  and  sometimes  by  the 
name  of  righteousness ;  for  righteousness  is  but 
the  will  to  give  to  every  one  his  own  ;  that  is  to 
say,  the  will  to  obey  the  laws :  and  sometimes  by 
the  name  of  repentance ;  because  to  repent,  im- 
plieth  a  turning  away  from  sin,  which  is  the  same 
with  the  return  of  the  will  to  obedience.  Whosoever 
therefore  unfeignedly  desireth  to  fulfil  the  com- 
mandments of  God,  or  repenteth  him  truly  of  his 
transgressions,  or  that  loveth  God  with  all  his  heart, 
and  his  neighbour  as  himself,  hath  all  the  obedience 
necessary  to  his  reception  into  the  kingdom  of  God. 
For  if  God  should  require  perfect  innocence,  there 
could  no  flesh  be  saved. 
And  to  But  what  commandments  are  those  that  God 

what  laws,  j^^^j^  given  US  ?  Atc  all  those  laws  which  were  given 
to  the  Jews  by  the  hand  of  Moses,  the  command- 
ments of  God  ?  If  they  be,  why  are  not  Christians 
taught  to  obey  them  ?  If  they  be  not,  what  others  are 
so, besides  the  law  of  nature?  For  our  Saviour  Christ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


WHAT  NBGSSSARY  TO  SAIiVATION.  587 

hath  not  given  ns  new  laws,  bmt  counsel  to  observe  part  hi. 
those  we  are  subject  to  ;  that  is  to  say,  the  laws  of  .  ^'  ,. 
nature,  and  the  laws  oi  our  several  sovereigns  :  nor 
did  he  make  any  new  law  to  the  Jews  in  his  sermon 
on  the  Mount,  but  only  expounded  the  law  of 
Moses,  to  which  they  were  subject  before.  The 
laws  of  God  therefore  are  none  but  the  laws  of 
nature,  whereof  the  principal  is,  that  we  should  not 
violate  our  faith,  that  is,  a  commandment  to  obey 
our  civil  sovereigns,  which  we  constituted  over  us 
by  mutual  pact  one  with  another.  And  this  law  of 
God,  that  commandeth  obedience  to  the  law  civil, 
commandeth  by  consequence  obedience  to  all  the 
precepts  of  the  Bible  ;  which,  as  I  have  proved  in 
the  precedent  chapter,  is  there  only  law,  where  the 
civil  sovereign  hath  made  it  so  ;  and  in  other  places, 
but  counsel ;  which  a  man  at  his  own  peril  may 
without  injustice  refuse  to  obey. 

Knowing  now  what  is  the  obedience  necessary  in  the  fauh 
to  salvation,  and  to  whom  it  is  due;  we  are  to  who  is  St  per- 
consider  next  concerning  faith,  whom,  and  why  we  "O"^^^*^®^®^- 
believe ;  and  what  are  the  articles,  or  points  neces- 
sary to  be  believed  by  them  that  shall  be  saved. 
And  first,  for  the  person  whom  we  believe,  because 
it  is  impossible  to  believe  any  person,  before  we 
know  what  he  saith,  it  is  necessary  he  be  one  that 
we  have  heard  speak.  The  person,  therefore,  whom 
Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  Moses,  and  the  prophets, 
believed,  was  God  himself,  that  spake  unto  them 
supematurally :  and  the  person,  whpm  the  apostles 
and  disciples  that  conversed  with  Christ  believed, 
was  our  Saviour  himself.  But  of  them,  to  whom 
neither  God  the  father,  nor  our  Saviour,  ever  spake, 
it  cannot  be  said  that  the  person  whom  they  be- 
lieved, was  God.    They  believed  the  apostles,  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


588  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  after  them  the  pastors  and  doctors  of  the  Chnrch, 
^    ^^'    .    that  recommended  to  their  faith  the  history  of  the 
Old  and  New  Testament :  so  that  the  faith  of  Chris- 
tians ever  since  om*  Saviour's  time,  hath  had  for 
foundation^  first,  the  reputation  of  their  pastors, 
and  afterward,  the  authority  of  those  that  made 
the  Old  and  New  Testament  to  be  received  for  the 
rule  of  faith  ;  which  none  could  do  but  Christian 
sovereigns ;  who  are  therefore  the  supreme  pastors, 
and  the  only  persons  whom  Christians  now  hear 
speak  from  God ;  except  such  as  God  speaketh  to 
in  these"  days  supematurally.     But  because  there 
be  many  false  prophets  gOTie  out  into  the  world, 
other  men  are  to  examine  such  spirits,  as  St.  John 
adviseth  us,  (1st  Epistle  iv.  1)  whether  they  be  of 
GodyOrnot.  And  therefore,  seeing  the  examination 
of  doctrines  belongeth  to  the  supreme  pastor,  the 
person,  which  all  they  that  have  no  special  revela- 
tion are  to  believe,  is,  in  every  commonwealth,  the 
supreme  pastor,  that  is  to  say,  the  civil  sovereign. 
The  causes  of      The  causcs  why  men  believe  any  Christian  doc- 
chrisuanfwtb.  ^^^^^^  ^^.^  various.   For  faith  is  the  gift  of  God ;  and 
he  worketh  it  in  each  several  man,  by  such  wap  as 
it  seemeth  good  unto  himself.    The  most  ordinary 
immediate  cause  of  our  belief,  concerning  any  point 
of  Christian  faith,  is,  that  we  believe  the  Bible  to 
be  the  word  of  God.     But  why  we  believe  the  Bible 
to  be  the  word  of  God,  is  much  disputed,  as  all  ques- 
tions must  needs  be,  that  are  not  well  stated.    For 
they  make  not  .the  question  to  be,  why  we  believe 
it  J  but,  how  we  know  it ;  as  if  believing  and  know- 
ing  were  all  one.  And  thence  while  one  side  ground 
their  knowledge  upon  the  infalUbility  of  the  Church, 
and  the  other  side,  on  the  testimony  of  the  private 
spirit,  neither  side  concludeth  what  it  pretends.  For 


Digitized  by 


Google 


WHAT  NECESSARY  TO  SALVATION.  589 

how  shall  a  man  know  the  infallibility  of  the  Church,  part  hi. 
but  by  knowing  first  the  infallibility  of  the  Scrip-  .  /^'  . 
ture  ?  Or  how  shall  a  man  know  his  own  private 
spirit  to  be  other  than  a  beUef,  grounded  upon  the 
authority  and  arguments  of  his  teachers,  or  upon 
a  presumption  of  his  own  gifts  ?  Besides,  there  is 
nothing  in  the  Scripture,  from  which  can  be  in- 
ferred the  infallibiUty  of  the  Church  ;  much  less, 
of  any  particular  Church ;  and  least  of  all,  the  in- 
fallibility of  any  particular  man. 

It  is  manifest  therefore,  that  Christian  men  do  FaiUi  comet 
not  know,  but  only  believe  the  Scripture  to  be  the 
word  of  God  ;  and  that  the  means  of  making  them 
believe,  which  God  is  pleased  to  afford  men  ordina- 
rily, is  according  to  the  way  of  nature,  that  is  to 
say,  from  their  teachers.     It  is  the  doctrine  of  St 
Paul  concerning  Christian  faith  in  general  (Rom. 
X,  17),  Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  that  is,  by  hearing 
our  lawful  pastors.     He  saith  also,  (verses  14,  15, 
of  the  same  chapter),  Hotv  shall  they  believe  in  him 
of  whom  they  have  not  heard?   and  how  shall 
they  hear  without  a  preacher  9  and  hmo  shall 
they  preachy  except  they  be  sent  ?    Whereby  it  is 
evident,  that  the  ordinary  cause  of  believing  that 
the  Scriptures  are  the  word  of  God,  is  the  same 
with  the  cause  of  the  believing  of  all  other  articles 
of  our  faith,  namely,  the  hearing  of  those  that  are 
by  the  law  allowed  and  appointed  to  teach  us,  as 
our  parents  in  their  houses,  and  our  pastors  in  the 
churches.     Which  also  is  made  more  manifest  by 
experience.     For  what  other  cause  can  there  be 
assigned,  why  in  Christian  commonwealths  all  men 
either  beUeve,  or  at  least  profess  the  Scripture  to 
be  the  word  of  God,  and  in  other  commonwealths 
scarce  any ;  but  that  in  Christian  commonwealths 


Digitized  by 


Google 


590  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  tibey  are  taiight  it  from  their  infancy ;  and  in  other 
^._  ^'  _.   places  they  are  taught  otherwise  ? 

But  if  teaching  be  the  cause  of  faith^  why  do  not 
all  believe  ?  It  is  certain  therefore  that  feith  is  the 
gift  of  God,  and  he  giveth  it  to  whom  he  wilL 
Nevertheless,  because  to  them  to  whom  he  giveth  it, 
he  giveth  it  by  the  means  of  teachers,  the  immediate 
cause  of  faith  is  hearing.  In  a  school,  where  many 
are  taught,  and  some  profit,  others  profit  not,  the 
cause  of  learning  in  them  that  profit,  is  the  master; 
yet  it  cannot  be  thence  inferred,  that  learning  is 
not  the  gift  of  God.  All  good  things  proceed  frt>m 
God ;  yet  cannot  all  that  have  them,  say  they  are 
inspired ;  for  that  implies  a  gift  supernatural,  and 
the  immediate  hand  of  God ;  which  he  that  .pre- 
tends to,  pretends  to  be  a  prophet,  and  is  subject 
to  the  examination  of  the  Church. 

But  whether  men  know,  or  believe^  or  grant  the 
Scriptures  to  be  the  word  of  God ;  if  out  of  such 
places  of  them,  as  are  without  obscurity,  I  shall 
show  what  articles  of  faith  are  necessary,  and  only 
necessary  for  salvation,  those  men  must  needs  knoWy 
believe^  or  grant  the  same. 
The  only  ne-       The  unum  necessarium,  only  article  of  fmth,  whi<^ 
of  cSsS^^  *  the  Scripture  maketh  simply  necessary  to  salvation, 
^"^'  is  this,  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ.    By  the  name 

of  Christ  is  understood  the  king,  which  God 
had  before  promised  by  the  prophets  of  the  Old 
Testament,  to  send  into  the  world,  to  reign  (over 
the  Jews,  and  over  such  of  other  nations  as  should 
believe  in  him),  under  himself  eternally ;  and  to  give 
them  that  eternal  Ufe,  which  was  lost  by  the  sin  of 
Adam.  Which  when  I  have  proved  out  of  Scripture, 
I  will  farther  show  when,  and  in  what  sense,  some 
other  articles  may  be  ^o  called  necessary. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


WHAT  NECBSSARY  TO  SALVATION.  691 

For  proof  that  the  belief  of  this  article,  Jesus  part  hi. 
is  the  Christy  is  all  the  faith  required  to  solvation,    .    ^'   . 
my  first  argament  shall  be  from  the  scope  of  the  Proved 
Evangelists;  which  was  by  the  description  of  the scope^f the 
life  of  our  Saviom-,  to  establish  that  one  article,  ^^"*«'^^^= 
Jesus  is  the  Christ.    The  sum  of  St.  Matthew's 
Gospel  is  this,   that  Jesus  was  of  the  stock  of 
David,  bom  of  a  Yirgin ;  which  are  the  marks  of 
the  true  Christ :  that  the  Magi  came  to  worship 
him  as  King   of  the  Jews :   that  Herod  for  the 
same  cause  sought  to  kill  him :   that  John  the 
Baptist  proclaimed  him :  that  he  preached  by  him- 
self and  his  apostles  that  he  was  that  king  :   that 
he  taught  the  law,  not  as  a  scribe,  but  as  a  man  of 
authority :  that  he  cured  diseases  by  his  word  only, 
and  did  many  other  miracles,  which  were  foretold 
the  Christ  should  do :   that  he  was  saluted  king 
when  he  entered  into  Jerusalem :  that  he  forewarned 
them  to  beware  of  all  others  that  should  pretend 
to  be  Christ :   that  he  was  taken,  accused,  and  put 
to  death,  for  sapng  he  was  king  :  that  the  cause  of 
his  condemnation  written  on  the  cross  was,  JESUS 
OF  NAZARETH,  THE  KING  OF  THE  JEWS. 
All  which  tend  to  no  other  fend  than  this,  that  men 
should  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ.     Such 
therefore  was  the  scope  of  St.  Matthew's  Gospel. 
But  the  scope  of  all  the  evangelists,  as  may  appear 
by  reading  them,  was  the  same.    Therefore  the 
scope  of  the  whole  Gospel  was  the  establishing  of 
that  only  article.     And  St.  John  expressly  makes 
it  his  conclusion,  (John  xx.  31),  These  things  are 
written,  that  you  may  know  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christy  tlie  Son  of  the  living  God. 
My  second  argument  is  taken  from  the  subjects  From  the 

/  /*!  1  iii-i  sermons  of 

of  the  sermons  of  the  apostles,  both  whilst  our  the  apostles: 


Digitized  by 


Google 


592  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  uu  Saviour  lived  on  earthy  and  after  his  ascension. 

.  ^^'  .  The  apostles,  in  our  Saviour*s  time,  were  sent,  {Luke 
ix.  2)  to  preach  the  kingdom  of  God.  For  neither 
there,  nor,  Matth.  x.  7>  giveth  he  any  commission 
to  them  other  than  this,  As  ye  gOy  preachy  sayingy 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand;  that  is,  that 
Jesus  is  the  Messiah,  the  Christy  the  King  which 
was  to  come.  That  their  preaching  also  after  his 
ascension  was  the  same,  is  manifest  out  of  Acts 
xvii.  6,  7,  They  drew,  saith  St.  Luke,  Jason  and 
certain  brethren  unto  the  rulers  of  the  city,  crying^ 
these  that  have  turned  the  world  upside  down  are 
come  hither  also,  whom  Jason  hath  received: 
and  these  all  do  contrary  to  the  decrees  of  de^ar, 
sayingy  tlmt  there  is  another  kingy  one  Jesus, 
And  out  of  the  2nd  and  3rd  verses  of  liie  same 
chapter,  where  it  is  said,  that  St.  Paul,  a^  his  manner 
wasy  went  in  unto  tJiem ;  and  three  sabbath  days 
reasoned  with  them  out  of  the  Scriptures;  opening 
and  allegingy  that  Christ  must  needs  have  s^eredy 
and  risen  again  from  the  dead,  and  that  this 
JesuSy  whom  he  preackedy  is  Christ. 

From  the        The  third  argument  is  from  those  places  of 

S2*d(^hie:  Sciipturc,  by  which  all  the  faith  required  to  sal- 
vation is  declared  to  be  easy.  For  if  an  inward 
assent  of  the  mind  to  all  the  doctrines  concerning 
Christian  faith  now  taught,  whereof  the  greatest 
part  are  disputed,  were  necessary  to  salvation^ 
there  would  be  nothing  in  the  world  so  hard  as  to 
be  a  Christian.  The  thief  upon  the  cross,  though 
repenting,  could  not  have  been  saved  for  saying. 
Lord  remember  me  when  thou  comest  into  thy 
kingdom ;  by  which  he  testified  no  belief  of  any 
other  article,  but  this,  that  Jesus  was  the  king. 
Nor  could  it  be  said  (as  it  is,  Matth.  xi.  30),  that 


Digitized  by 


Google 


WHAT  NECESSARY  TO  SALVATION.  593 

Christ* s  yoke  is  easy,  and  his  burthen  light :  nor  part  iiu 
that  little  children  believe  in  him,  as  it  is  Matth.  -  ^f*  . 
xviii.  6.  Nor  could  St.  Paul  have  said,  (1  Cor. 
i.  21),  It  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness  of 
preaching,  to  save  them  that  believe.  Nor  could  St. 
Paul  himself  have  been  saved,  much  less  have  been 
so  great  a  doctor  of  the  Church  so  suddenly,  that 
never  perhaps  thought  of  transubstantiation  nor 
purgatory,  nor  many  other  articles  now  obtruded. 

The  fourth  argument  is  taken  from  places  ex-  From  formal 

•I  -I  •  .  n  *       and  dear  texts. 

press,  and  such  as  receive  no  controversy  of  m- 
terpretation ;  as  first,  John  v.  39 ;  Search  the 
Scriptures;  for  in  them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal 
life  ;  and  they  are  they  that  testify  of  me.  Our 
Saviour  here  speaketh  of  the  Scriptures  only  of  the 
Old  Testament ;  for  the  Jews  at  that  time  could 
not  search  the  Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament, 
which  were  not  written.  But  the  Old  Testament 
hath  nothing  of  Christ,  but  the  marks  by  which 
men  might  know  him  when  he  came ;  as  that  he 
should  descend  from  David ;  be  bom  at  Bethlehem, 
and  of  a  Virgin ;  do  great  miracles,  and  the  like. 
Therefore  to  believe  that  this  Jesus  was  He,  was 
sufficient  to  eternal  life :  but  more  than  sufficient 
is  not  necessary ;  and  consequently  no  other  article 
is  required.  Again,  (John  xi.  26)  Whosoever 
liveth  and  believeth  in  me,  shall  not  die  eternally. 
Therefore  to  believe  in  Christ,  is  faith  sufficient  to 
eternal  life;  and  consequently  no  more  faith  than 
that  is  necessary.  But  to  believe  in  Jesus,  and  to 
believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  is  all  one,  as  ap- 
peareth  in  the  verses  immediately  following.  For 
when  our  Saviour  (verse  26)  had  said  to  Martha, 
Believest  thou  this?  she  answereth  (verse  27), 
Yea,  Lord,  I  believe  that  thou  art  the  Christy  the 

VOL.  III.  QQ 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC 


594  OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  Son  of  Gody  which  should  come  into  the  world. 
^    ^'    -    Therefore  this  article  alone  is  faith  sufficient  to  life 
eternal ;  and  more  than  sufficient  is  not  necessary. 
Thirdly,  JbAit  xx.  31 :  These  things  are  written  that 
ye  might  believe,  that  Jestis  is  the  Christ,  the 
Son  of  God,  and  that  believing  ye  might  have 
life  through  his  name.  There,  to  believe  that  Jestu 
is  the  Christ,  is  faith  sufficient  to  the  obtaining  of 
life;  and  therefore  no  other  article  is  necessary. 
Fourthly,   1  John  iv.  2 :  Every  spirit  that  con- 
fesseth  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flesh, 
is  of  God.    And  1  John  v.  1 :  Whosoet^er  helieveth 
that  Jesus  is  the  Christy  is  horn  of  God.     And 
verse  5,  Who  is  he  that  overcometh  the  world,  but 
he  that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  Godf 
Fifthly,  Acts  viii.  36,  37  :  See,  saith  the  Eunuch, 
Iiere  is  water,  what  doth  hinder  me  to  be  baptized? 
And  Philip  said,  if  thou  believest  with  all  thy 
heart,  thou  mayst.     And  he  answered  and  said, 
I  believe  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Son  of  God. 
Therefore  this  article  believed,  Jesus  is  the  Christ, 
is  sufficient  to  baptism,  that  is  to  say,  to  our  re- 
ception into  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  by  con- 
sequence, only  necessary.      And  generally  in  all 
places  where  our  Saviour  saith  to  any  man.  Thy 
faith  hath  saved  thee,  the  cause  he  saith  it,  is  some 
confession,  which  directly,  or  by  consequence,  im- 
plieth  a  belief,  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ. 
From  that         The  last  argument  is  from  the  places,  where  this 
dation  of  all   article  is  made  the  foundation  of  faith  :  for  he  that 
erarticef.  j^qIj^jj^  ^jj^  fQUud^tion,  shall  be  savcd.  Which  placcs 
are  first,  Matth.  xxiv.  23,  24 :  If  any  man  shall 
say  unto  you,  Lo  here  is  Christ,  or  there,  believe 
it  not ;  for  there  shall  arise  false  Christs,  and 
false  prophets,  and  shall  shew  great  signs  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


J 


WHAT  NECESSARY  TO  SALVATION.  595 

wonders^  Sfc.   Here  we  see  this  article,  Jesus  is  the  part  in. 
Christy  must  be  held,  though  he  that  shall  teach    ^  /*f ■    . 
the  contrary  should  do  great  miracles.    The  second  From  that 
place  is.  Gal.  i.  8  :   Though  wey  or  an  angel  from  datton  of  aif 
heave  If  y  preach  any  other  gospel  unto  yoUy  than  ***"  "^<^^e8. 
that  we  have  preached  unto  yoUy  let  him  he  ac^ 
cursed.     But  the  gospel  which  Paul,  and  the  other 
apostles,  preached,  was  only  this  article,  that  Jesus 
is  the  Christ :  therefore  for  the  belief  of  this  ar- 
ticle, we  are  to  reject  the  authority  of  an  angel  from 
heaven  ;  much  more  of  any  mortal  man,  if  he  teach 
the  contrary.     This  is  therefore  the  fundamental 
article  of  Christian  faith.     A  third  place  is,  1  John, 
iv.  1,2  .•  Beloved,  believe  not  every  spirit:  fiereby 
ye  shall  know  the  Spirit  of  God;  every  spirit 
that  confesseth  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the 
flesh  J  is  of  God.     By  which  it  is  evident,  that  this 
article,  is  the  measure  and  rule,  by  which  to  esti- 
mate and  examine  all  other  articles ;  and  is  there- 
fore only  fundamental.   A  fourth  is  Matth.  xvi.  16, 
18,  where  after  St.  Peter  had  professed  this  article, 
saying  to  our  Saviour,  Thou  art  Christ  the  Son  of 
the  living  God,  our  Saviour  answered,  Thou  art 
Peter,  and  upon  this  rock  I  will  build  my  Church  ; 
from  whence  I  infer,  that  this  article  is  that,  on 
which  all  other  doctrines  of  the  Church  are  built,  as 
on  their  foundation.   A  fifth  is  1  Cor.  iii.  U,  12,  &c. 
Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay,  than  that  which 
is  laid,  Jesus  is  the  Christ.   Now  jfany  man  build 
upon  this  foundation,  gold,  silver,  precious  stones, 
wood, hay,  stubble;  every  marCs  work  shall  be  made 
manifest  ;  for  the  day  shalhdeclare  it,  because  it 
shall  be  revealed  by  fire,  and  the  fire  shall  try 
every  man^s  wcrk  of  what  sort  it  is.    If  any  man's 
work  abide,  which  he  hath  built  thereupon,  he  shall 

QQ2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


596  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  receive  a  reward.  If  anymans  work  shall  he  burnt, 
^    ^f-    .    he  shall  suffer  loss;  but  he  himself  shall  be  saved. 
From  that      yet  SO  as  by  fire.    Which  words,  being  partly  plain 
dauon  of*']^    and  easy  to  understand,  and  partly  allegoriad  and 
other  articles,  difficult;  out  of  that  which  is  plain,  may  be  inferred, 
that  pastors  that  teach  this  foundation,  that  Jesus 
is  the  Christy  though  they  draw  from  it  false  con- 
sequences, which  all  men  are  sometimes  subject 
to,  they  may  nevertheless  be  saved ;   much  more 
that  they  may  be  saved,  who  being  no  pastors,  but 
hearers,  believe  that  which  is  by  their  lawful  pastors 
taught  them.    Therefore  the  belief  of  this  article  is 
sufficient ;  and  by  consequence,  there  is  no  other 
article  of  faith  necessarily  required  to  salvation. 

Now  for  the  part  which  is  allegorical,  as  that 
the  fire  shall  try  every  man's  worh^  and  that  they 
shall  be  saved,  but  so  as  by  fire,  or  through  fire, 
(for  the  original  is  Sea  irvpoq^)  it  maketh  nothing 
against  this  conclusion  which  I  have  drawn  from 
the  other  words,  that  are  plain.  Nevertheless, 
because  upon  this  place  there  hath  been  an  argu- 
ment taken,  to  prove  the  fire  of  pulsatory,  I  will 
also  here  oflFer  you  my  conjecture  concerning  the 
meaning  of  this  trial  of  doctrines,  and  saving  of 
men  as  by  fire.  The  apostle  here  seemeth  to  allude 
to  the  words  of  the  prophet  ZiecAflrriaA,  (xiii.  8,  9), 
who  speaking  of  the  restoration  of  the  kingdom  of 
God,  saith  thus ;  Two  parts  therein  shall  be  cut 
offy  and  die,  but  the  third  shall  be  left  therein  ; 
and  I  will  bring  the  third  part  through  the  fire, 
and  will  refine  them  as  silver  is  refined,  and  will 
try  them  as  gold  is  tried ;  they  shall  call  on  the 
name  of  the  Lord,  and  I  will  hear  them.  The 
day  of  judgment  is  the  day  of  the  restoration  of 
the  kingdom  of  God ;  and  at  that  day  it  is,  that  St. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


WHAT  NECESSARY  TO  SALVATION.  697 

Peter  tells  us  (2  Pet.  iii.  7, 10, 12)  shall  be  the  con-  part  hi. 
flagration  of  the  world,  wherein  the  wicked  shall  .  ^-  ^ 
perish ;  but  the  remnant  which  God  will  save,  shall 
pass  through  that  fire  unhurt,  and  be  therein,  (as 
silver  and  gold  are  refined  by  the  fire  from  their 
dross,)  tried,  and  refined  from  their  idolatry,  and 
be  made  to  call  upon  the  name  of  the  true  God. 
Alluding  whereto,  St.  Paul  here  saith,  that  the  day, 
that  is,  the  day  of  judgment,  the  great  day  of  our 
Saviour's  coming  to  restore  the  kingdom  of  God  in 
Israel,  shall  try  every  man's  doctrine,  by  judging 
which  are  gold,  silver,  precious  stones,  wood,  hay, 
stubble;  and  then  they  that  have  built  false  conse- 
quences on  the  true  foundation,  shall  see  their  doc- 
trines condemned;  nevertheless  they  themselves 
shall  be  saved,  and  pass  unhurt  through  this  uni- 
versal fire,  and  live  eternally,  to  call  upon  the  name 
of  the  true  and  only  God.  In  which  sense  there  is 
nothing  that  accordeth  not  with  the  rest  of  Holy 
Scripture,  or  any  glimpse  of  the  fire  of  purgatory. 

But  a  man  may  here  ask,  whether  it  be  not  as  in  what  sense 
necessary  to  salvation,  to  believe,  that  God  is  om-  Liy^e^fed 
nipotent ;  Creator  of  the  world  ;  that  Jesus  Christ  *^®«»^- 
is  risen ;  and  that  all  men  else  shall  rise  again  from 
the  dead  at  the  last  day  ;  as  to  believe  that  Jesus 
is  the  Christ.     To  which  I  answer,  they  are ;  and 
so  are  many  more  articles :  but  they  are  such,  as 
are  contained  in  this  one,  and  may  be  deduced  from 
it,  with  more  or  less  difficulty.     For  who  is  there 
that  does  not  see,  that  they  who  believe  Jesus  to  be 
the  Son  of  the  God  of  Israel,  and  that  the  Israelites 
had  for  God  the  Omnipotent  Creator  of  all  things, 
do  therein  also  believe,  that  God  is  the  Omnipotent 
Creator  of  all  things  ?     Or  how  can  a  man  believe, 
that  Jesus  is  the  king  that  shall  reign  eternally. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


698  OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  unless  he  believe  him  also  risen  again  from  the 

.    ^^'    .    dead  ?     For  a  dead  man  cannot  exercise  the  office 

of  a  king.     In  sum,  he  that  holdeth  this  foundation, 

Jesu^  is  the  Christy  holdeth  expressly  all  that  he 

seeth  rightly  deduced  from  it,  and  implicitly  all 

that  is  consequent  thereunto,  though  he  have  not 

skill  enough  to  discern  the  consequence.      And 

therefore  it  holdeth  still  good,  that  the  belief  of  this 

one  article  is  sufficient  faith  to  obtain  remission 

of  sins  to  the  penitent,  and  consequently  to  bring 

them  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

'^^^I^      Now  that  I  have  shown,  that  all  the  obedience 

both  of  them    reouircd  to  salvation,  consisteth  in  the  will  to  obey 

Decestanr  to.*.  i*  r>t     t      t         >  •  j 

MdrAtioD.  the  law  of  God,  that  is  to  say,  m  repentance ;  and 
all  the  faith  required  to  the  same,  is  comprehended 
in  the  belief  of  this  article,  Jesus  is  the  Christ;  I 
will  further  allege  those  places  of  the  Gospel,  that 
prove,  that  all  that  is  necessary  to  salvation  is  con- 
tained in  both  these  joined  together.  The  men  to 
whom  St.  Peter  preached  on  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
next  after  the  ascension  of  our  Saviour,  asked  him, 
and  the  rest  of  the  apostles,  saying,  {Acts  ii.  37), 
Men  and  brethren,  what  shall  we  do?  To  whom 
St.  Peter  answered  (in  the  next  verse)  Repent,  and 
be  baptized  every  one  of  you,  for  the  remission  of 
sins,  and  ye  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Therefore  repentance,  and  baptism^  that 
is,  believing  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  is  all  that  is 
necessary  to  salvation.  Again,  our  Saviour  being 
asked  by  a  certain  ruler  {Luke  xviii.  18),  What  shall 
I  do  to  inherit  eternal  life?  answered,  (verse  20) 
Thou  knowest  the  commandments,  do  not  commit 
adultery,  do  not  kill,  do  not  steal,  do  not  bear  false 
^  witness,  honour  thyfat/ier  and  thy  mother.  Whidi 
when  he  said  he  had  observed,  our  Saviour  added^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


WHAT  NECESSARY  TO  SALVATION.  599 

(verse  22)  Sell  all  thou  hasty  give  it  to  the  poor ^  and  part  hi. 
come  and  follow  me:  which  was  as  much  as  to  say,    .^-    . 
rely  on  me  that  am  the  king.     Therefore  to  fulfil 
the  law,  and  to  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  king,  is  all 
that  is  required  to  bring  a  man  to  eternal  life. 
Thirdly,  St.  Paul  saith  {Rom.  i.  17),  The  just  shall 
live  by  faith;  not  every  one,  but  the  Jiw/;  there- 
fore/a// A  and  justice  (that  is,  the  will  to  be  just ^ 
or  repentance)  are  all  that  is  necessary  to  life  eter- 
nal.    And  (Mark  i.  1 5)  our  Saviour  preached,  say- 
ing, The  time  is  fulfilled,  and  the  kingdom  of  God 
is  at  handy  repent  and  believe  the  evangile,  that 
is,  the  good  news  that  the  Christ  was  come.  There 
fore,  to  repent,  and  to  believe  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ,  is  all  that  is  required  to  salvation. 

Seeing  then  it  is  necessary  that  faith  and  obedi-  ^jfeiT^ntri- 
ence,  implied  in  the  word  repentance,  do  both  con-  batesthereunto 
cur  to  our  salvation ;  the  question  by  which  of  the 
two  we  are  justified,  is  impertinently  disputed. 
Nevertheless,  it  will  not  be  impertinent,  to  make 
manifest  in  what  manner  each  of  them  contributes 
thereunto ;  and  in  what  sense  it  is  siud,  that  we  are 
to  be  justified  by  the  one,  and  by  the  other.  And 
first,  if  by  righteousness  be  understood  the  justice 
of  the  works  themselves,  there  is  no  man  that  can 
be  saved ;  for  there  is  none  that  hath  not  trans- 
gressed the  law  of  God.  And  therefore  when  we 
are  said  to  be  justified  by  works,  it  is  to  be  under- 
stood of  the  will,  which  God  doth  always  accept 
for  the  work  itself,  as  well  in  good,  as  in  evil  men. 
And  in  this  sense  only  it  is,  that  a  man  is  called 
justy  or  unjust;  and  that  his  justice  justifies  him, 
that  is,  gives  him  the  title,  in  God's  acceptation, 
of  just;  and  renders  him  capable  of  living  by  his 
faithy  which  before  he  was  not.     So  that  justice 


Digitized  by 


Google 


60d  OP  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  jostifies  in  that  sense^  in  which  to  justify ,  is  the 
^    ^^'  . .    same  as  that  to  denominate  a  man  just;  and  not  in 
the  signification  of  discharging  the  law ;  whereby 
the  punishment  of  his  sins  should  be  unjust. 

But  a  man  is  then  also  said  to  be  justified,  when 
his  plea,  though  in  itself  insufficient,  is  accepted ; 
as  when  we  plead  our  will,  our  endeavour  to  fulfil 
the  law,  and  repent  us  of  our  failings,  and  God  ac- 
cepteth  it  for  the  performance  itself.  And  because 
God  accepteth  not  the  will  for  the  deed,  but  only 
in  the  faithful;  it  is  therefore  faith  that  makes 
good  our  plea ;  and  in  this  sense  it  is,  that  fedth 
only  justifies.  So  \h?X  faith  and  obedience  are  both 
necessary  to  salvation ;  yet  in  several  senses  each 
of  them  is  said  to  justify. 
G^d^T to^e  Having  thus  shown  what  is  necessary  to  salva- 
dvu  sovereign  tiou ;  it  is  uot  hard  to  reconcile  our  obedience  to 
eot,  wSer  God,  with  our  obedience  to  the  civil  sovereign;  who 
omS  is  eitlier  Christian,  or  infidel.  If  he  be  a  Christian, 
he  alloweth  the  belief  of  this  article,  that  Jesus  is 
the  Christ;  and  of  all  the  articles  that  are  con- 
tained in,  or  are  by  evident  consequence  deduced 
from  it :  which  is  all  the  faith  necessary  to  salva- 
tion. And  because  he  is  a  sovereign,  he  requireth 
obedience  to  all  his  own,  that  is,  to  all  the  civfl 
laws ;  in  which  also  are  contained  all  the  laws  erf 
nature,  that  is  all  the  laws  of  God :  for  besides  the 
laws  of  nature,  and  the  laws  of  the  Church,  which 
are  part  of  the  civil  law,  (for  the  Church  that  can 
make  laws  is  the  commonwealth),  there  be  no  other 
laws  divine.  Whosoever  therefore  obeyeth  his 
Christian  sovereign,  is  not  thereby  hindered,  neither 
from  believing,  nor  from  obeying  God.  But  suj>- 
pose  that  a  Christian  king  should  from  this  foun- 
dation Jesus  is  the  Christ,  draw  some  false  conse- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


WHAT  NECESSARY  TO  SALVATION.  601 

quences,  that  is  to  say,  make  some  superstructions  part  hi. 
of  hay  or  stubble,  and  command  the  teaching  of   .    ^f-  ^ 
the  same;  yet  seeing  St.  Paul  says  he   shall  be g^«**^°^^®^^^^ 
saved ;  much  more  shall  he  be  saved,  that  teacheth  civil  sovereign 
them  by  his  command;  and  much  more  yet,  he ent, whether 
that  teaches  not,  but  only  believes  his  lawful  teacher.  ^^•^*°' 
And  in  case  a  subject  be  forbidden  by  the  civil  so- 
vereign to  profess  some  of  those  his  opinions,  upon 
what  just  ground  can  he  disobey  ?   Christian  kings 
may  err  in  deducing  a  consequence,  but  who  shall 
judge  ?     Shall  a  private  man  judge,  when  the  ques- 
tion is  of  his  own  obedience  ?   Or  shall  any  man 
judge  but  he  that  is  appointed  thereto  by  the  Church, 
that  is,  by  the  civil  sovereign  that  representeth  it  ? 
Or  if  the  pope,  or  an  apostle  judge,  may  he  not  err 
in  deducing  of  a  consequence  ?  Did  not  one  of  the 
two,  St.  Peter  or  St.  Paul,  err  in  a  superstructure, 
when  St.  Paul  withstood  St.  Peter  to  his  face? 
There  can  therefore  be  no  contradiction  between 
the  laws  of  God,  and  the  laws  of  a  Christian  com- 
monwealth. 

And  when  the  civil  sovereign  is  an  infidel,  every  Or  infidel. 
one  of  his  own  subjects  that  resisteth  him,  sinneth 
against  the  laws  of  God,  (for  such  are  the  laws  of 
nature),  and  rejecteth  the  counsel  of  the  apostles, 
that  admonisheth  all  Christians  to  obey  their  prin- 
ces, and  all  children  and  servants  to  obey  their 
parents  and  masters  in  all  things.  And  for  their 
faiih^  it  is  internal,  and  invisible  ;  they  have  the 
license  that  Naaman  had,  and  need  not  put  them- 
selves into  danger  for  it.  But  if  they  do,  they 
ought  to  expect  their  reward  in  heaven,  and  not 
complain  of  their  lawful  sovereign ;  much  less  make  ^  - 
war  upon  him.     For  he  that  is  not  glad  of  any  yo&tX 

/    /V 

Digitized  by  VjC^O^IC 


603  OF  A  CHRISTIAN  COMMONWEALTH. 

PART  III.  occasion  of  martyrdom,  has  not  the  faith  he  pro- 
.  ^•_-  fesseth,  but  pretends  it  only,  to  set  some  colour 
upon  his  own  contumacy.  But  what  infidel  king  is 
so  unreasonable,  as  knowing  he  has  a  subject,  that 
waiteth  for  the  second  coming  of  Christ,  after  the 
present  world  shall  be  burnt,  and  intendeth  then  to 
obey  him,  (which  is  the  intent  of  believing  that  Jesus 
is  the  Christ,)  and  in  the  mean  time  thinketh  him- 
self bound  to  obey  the  laws  of  that  infidel  king, 
(which  all  Christians  are  obliged  in  conscience  to 
do),  to  put  to  death  or  to  persecute  such  a  subject? 
conciusioii.  And  thus  much  shall  suffice,  concerning  the  king- 
dom of  God,  and  policy  ecclesiastical.  Wherein  I 
pretend  not  to  advance  any  position  of  my  own, 
but  only  to  show  what  are  the  consequences  that 
seem  to  me  deducible  from  the  principles  of  Chris- 
tian politics,  (which  are  the  holy  Scriptures,)  in  con- 
firmation of  the  power  of  civil  sovereigns,  and  the 
duty  of  their  subjects.  And  in  the  allegation  of 
Scripture,  I  have  endeavoured  to  avoid  such  texts 
as  are  of  obscure  or  controverted  interpretation ; 
and  to  allege  none,  but  in  such  sense  as  is  most 
plain,  and  agreeable  to  the  harmony  and  scope  of 
the  whole  Bible ;  which  was  written  for  the  re-es- 
tablishment of  the  kingdom  of  God  in  Christ.  For 
it  is  not  the  bare  words,  but  the  scope  of  the  writer, 
that  giveth  the  true  light,  by  which  any  writing  is 
to  be  interpreted ;  and  they  that  insist  upon  single 
texts,  without  considering  the  main  design,  can 
derive  nothing  from  them  clearly ;  but  rather  by 
casting  atoms  of  Scripture,  as  dust  before  men's 
eyes,  make  every  thing  more  obscure  than  it  is ;  an 
ordinary  artifice  of  those  that  seek  not  the  truth, 
but  their  own  advantage. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PART  IV- 


OF 

THE   KINGDOM   OF  DARKNESS. 


CHAPTER  XLIV. 

OF  SPIRITUAL  DARKNESS,  FROM  MISINTERPRE- 
TATION OF  SCRIPTURE. 

Besides  these  sovereign  powers,  divine,  and  Aw-  part  iv. 
matiy  of  which  I  have  hitherto  discoursed,  there  is    wJJ: — ^ 
mention  in  Scripture  of  another  ppwer,  i^a^^^ly^  J/*  p^^e^" 
(Epk.  vi.  1 2)  that  of  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of^hAi. 
this  world;  (Matth.  xii.  26)  the  kingdom  of  Satan; 
and  {Matth.  ix.  34)  the  principality  of  Beehehub 
over  demons,  that  is  to  say,  over  phantasms  that  ap- 
pear in  the  air :  for  which  cause  Satan  is  also  called, 
{Eph.  ii.2)  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air;  and, 
because  he  ruleth  in  the  darkness  of  this  world, 
{John  xvi.  11)  the  prince  of  this  world:  and  in  con- 
sequence hereunto,  they  who  are  under  his  domi- 
nion, in  opposition  to  the  faithful,  (who  are  the  cA«7- 
dren  of  the  light ^  are  called  the  children  of  dark^ 
ness.    For  seeing  Beelzebub  is  prince  of  phantasms, 
inhabitants  of  his  dominion  of  air  and  darkness,  the 
children  of  darkness,  and  these  demons,  phantasms, 
or  spirits  of  illusion,  signify  allegorically  the  same 
thing.     This  considered,  the  kingdom  of  darkness, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


604  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.   as  it  is  set  forth  in  these  and  other  places  of  the 
^    ^'    .    Scripture,  is  nothing  else  but  a  confederacy  of  de- 
ceiver^y  that  to  obtain  dominion  over  men  in  this 
present  worlds  endeavour  by  dark  and  erroneous 
doctrines^  to  extinguish  in  them  the  light,  both  of 
nature y  and  of  the  gospel ;  and  so  to  disprepare 
them  for  the  kingdom  of  God  to  come. 
TheChurchnot     As  men  that  are  utterly  deprived  from  their  na- 
of  darkless!     tivity,  of  the  light  of  the  bodily  eye,  have  no  idea  at 
all  of  any  such  light ;  and  no  man  conceives  in  his 
imagination  any  greater  light,  than  he  hath  at  some 
time  or  other  perceived  by  his  outward  senses  :  so 
also  is  it  of  the  light  of  the  gospel,  and  of  the  light 
of  the  understanding,  that  no  man  can  conceive 
there  is  any  greater  degree  of  it,  than  that  which  he 
hath  already  attained  unto.    And  from  hence  it 
comes  to  pass,  that  men  have  no  other  means  to  ac- 
knowledge their  own  darkness,  but  only  by  reason- 
ing from  the  unforeseen  mischances,  that  befall  them 
in  their  ways.  The  darkest  part  of  the  kingdom  of 
Satan,  is  that  which  is  without  the  Church  of  God; 
that  is  to  say,  amongst  them  that  believe  not  in 
Jesus  Christ.  But  we  cannot  say,  that  therefore  the 
Church  enjoyeth,  as  the  land  of  Goshen,  all  the  light, 
which  to  the  performance  of  the  work  enjoined  us 
by  God,  is  necessary.     Whence  comes  it,  that  in 
Christendom  there  has  been,  almost  from  the  time 
of  the  Apostles,  such  justling  of  one  another  out  of 
their  places,  both  by  foreign  and  civil  war ;  such 
stumbling  at  every  little  asperity  of  their  own  for- 
tune, and  every  little  eminence  of  that  of  other  men; 
and  such  diversity  of  ways  in  running  to  the  same 
mwcky  felicity y  if  it  be  not  night  amongst  us,  or  at 
least  a  mist  ?    We  are  therefore  yet  in  the  dark. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MISINTERPRBTATION  OF  SCRIPTURE.   605 

The  enemy  has  been  here  in  the  night  of  our  na-  part  iv. 
tnral  ignorance,  and  sown  the  tares  of  spiritual  er-  .^'  ^ 
TOTS ;  and  that,  first,  by  abusing,  and  putting  out  Four  causes 
the  light  of  the  Scriptures :  for  we  err,  not  knowing  dlrim^MT 
the  Scriptures.  Secondly,  by  introducing  the  de* 
monology  of  the  heathen  poets,  that  is  to  say,  their 
fabulous  doctrine  concerning  demons,  which  are  but 
idols,  or  phantasms  of  the  brain,  without  any  real 
nature  of  their  own,  distinct  from  human  fancy ; 
such  as  are  dead  men*s  ghosts,  and  fairies,  and  other 
matter  of  old  wives'  tales.  Thirdly,  by  mixing  with 
the  Scripture  divers  relics  of  the  religion,  and  much 
of  the  vain  and  erroneous  philosophy,  of  the  Greeks, 
especially  of  Aristotle.  Fourthly,  by  mingling  with 
both  these,  false,  or  uncertain  traditions,  and 
feigned,  or  uncertain  history.  And  so  we  come  to 
err,  by  giving  heed  to  seducing  spirits,  and  the 
demonology  of  such  ds  speak  lies  in  hypocrisy;  or 
as  it  is  in  the  original,  (1  Tim.  iv.  1,2)  of  those  that 
play  the  part  of  liars,  with  a  seared  conscience, 
that  is,  contrary  to  their  own  knowledge.  Cioncem- 
ing  the  first  of  these,  which  is  the  seducing  of  men 
by  abuse  of  Scripture,  I  intend  to  speak  briefly  in 
this  chapter. 

The  greatest  and  main  abuse  of  Scripture,  and  Errors  from 
to  which  almost  all  the  rest  are  either  consequent  S^^Ae  Srip" 
or  subservient,  is  the  wresting  of  it,  to  prove  that  the  in^tridng™ 
kingdom  of  God,  mentioned  so  often  in  the  Scrip- *°'^**^^°^- 
ture,  is  the  present  Church,  or  multitude  of  Chris- 
tian men  now  living,  or  that  being  dead,  are  to  rise 
again  at  the  last  day :  whereas  the  kingdom  of  God 
was  first  instituted  by  the  ministry  of  Moses,  over 
the  Jews  only ;  who  were  therefore  called  his  pecu- 
liar people ;  and  ceased  afterward,  in  the  election  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


606  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  Saul,  when  they  refused  to  be  governed  by  God  any 
.  ^'  .  more,  and  demanded  a  king  after  the  manner  of 
the  nations;  which  God  himself  consented  unto, 
as  I  have  more  at  large  proved  before  in  chapter 
XXXV.  After  that  time,  there  was  no  other  king- 
dom of  God  in  the  world,  by  any  pact,  or  otherwise, 
than  he  ever  was,  is,  and  shall  be  king  of  all  men, 
and  of  al]  creatures,  as  governing  according  to  his 
will,  by  his  infinite  power.  Nevertheless,  he  pro- 
mised by  his  prophets  to  restore  this  his  govern- 
ment to  them  again,  when  the  time  he  hath  in  his 
secret  counsel  appointed  for  it  shall  be  fully  come, 
and  when  they  shall  turn  unto  him  by  repentance 
and  amendment  of  life.  And  not  only  so,  but  he  in- 
vited the  Gentiles  to  come  in,  and  enjoy  the  happi- 
ness of  his  reign,  on  the  same  conditions  of  conver- 
sion and  repentance;  and  he  promised  also  to  send 
his  Son  into  the  world,  to  expiate  the  sins  of  them  all 
by  his  death,  and  to  prepare  them  by  his  doctrine, 
to  receive  him  at  his  second  coming.  Which  second 
coming  not  yet  being,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  yet 
come,  and  we  are  not  now  under  any  other  kings 
by  pact,  but  our  civil  sovereigns;  saving  only,  that 
Christian  men  are  already  in  the  kingdom  of  grace^ 
in  as  much  as  they  have  already  the  promise  of 
being  received  at  his  coming  again. 
As  that  the  CJousequcnt  to  this  error,  that  the  present  Church 
God  isThe  is  Christ's  kingdom,  there  ought  to  be  some  one  man, 
presentchurch  ^^  asscmbly,  by  whosc  mouth  our  Saviour,  now  in 
heaven,  speaketh,  giveth  law,  and  which  repre- 
senteth  his  person  to  all  Christians;  or  divers  men, 
or  divers  assemblies  that  do  the  same  to  divers  parts 
of  Christendom.  This  power  regal  under  Christ, 
being  qhallenged,  universally  by  the  Pope,  and  in 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MISINTERPRETATION  OP  SCRIPTURE.        607 

particular  commonwealths  by  assemblies  of  the  part  iv. 
pastors  of  the  place^  (when  the  Scripture  gives  it  to  .  ^  . 
none  but  to  civil  sovereigns,)  comes  to  be  so  pas- 
sionately disputed,  that  it  putteth  out  the  light  of 
nature,  and  causeth  so  great  a  darkness  in  men's 
understanding,  that  they  see  not  who  it  is  to  whom 
they  have  engaged  their  obedience. 

Consequent  to  this  claim  of  the  Pope  to  be  vicar-  And  that  the 
general  of  Christ  in  the  present  Church,  (supposed  Ticargeneni: 
to  be  that  kingdom  of  his  to  which  we  are  ad- 
dressed in  the  gospel,)  is  the  doctrine,  that  it  is 
necessary  for  a  Christian  king  to  receive  his  crown 
by  a  bishop ;  as  if  it  were  from  that  ceremony,  that 
he  derives  the  clause  of  Dei  gratia  in  his  title ; 
and  that  then  only  he  is  made  king  by  the  favour 
of  God,  when  he  is  crowned  by  the  authority  of 
God's  universal  vicegerent  on  earth ;  and  that  every 
bishop,  whosoever  be  his  sovereign,  taketh  at  his 
consecration  an  oath  of  absolute  obedience  to  the 
Pope.  Consequent  to  the  same,  is  the  doctrine  of 
the  fourth  Council  of  Lateran,  held  under  Pope 
Innocent  the  Third,  (chap.  iii.  De  Hereticis),  that 
if  a  king  at  the  Papers  admonition^  do  not  purge 
his  kingdom  of  heresies ^  and  being  excommunicate 
for  the  same^  do  not  give  satisfaction  within  a 
year,  his  subjects  are  absolved  of  the  bond  of  their 
obedience.  Where,  by  heresies  are  understood  all 
opinions  which  the  Church  of  Rome  hath  forbidden 
to  be  maintained.  And  by  this  means,  as  often  as 
there  is  any  repugnancy  between  the  poHtical 
designs  of  the  Pope,  and  other  Christian  princes, 
as  there  is  very  often,  there  ariseth  such  a  mist 
amongst  their  subjects,  that  they  know  not  a  stranger 
that  thrusteth  himself  into  the  throne  of  their  law- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


608  OP  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  M  prince^  from  him  whom  they  had  themselyes 
■    ^  _.    placed  there ;  and  in  this  darkness  of  mind,  are 
made  to  fight  one  against  another,  without  discern- 
ing their  enemies  from  their  friends,  under  the  con- 
duct of  another  man's  ambition. 
^^m^     From  the  same  opinion,  that  the  present  Church 
the  clergy,    is  the  kingdom  of  God,  it  proceeds  that  pastors, 
deacons,  and  all  other  ministers  of  the  Church,  take 
the  name  to  themselves  of  the  clergy  ;  giving  to 
other  Christians  the  name  of  laity y  that  is,  simply 
people.    For  clergy  signifies  those,  whose  main- 
tenance is  that  revenue,  which  God  having  reserved 
to  himself  during  his  reign  over  the  Israelites, 
assigned  to  the  tribe  of  Levi,  (who  were  to  be  his 
public  ministers,  and  had  no  portion  of  land  set 
them  out  to  live  on,  as  their  brethren,)  to  be  their 
inheritance.    The  Pope  therefore,  pretending  the 
present  Church  to  be,  as  the  realm  of  Israel,  the 
kingdom  of  God,  challenging  to  himself  and  his 
subordinate  ministers,  the  like  revenue,  as  the  inhe- 
ritance of  God,  the  name  of  clergy  was  suitable  to 
that  claim.  And  thence  it  is,  that  tithes,  and  other 
tributes  paid  to  the  Levites,  as  God's  right,  amongst 
the  Israelites,  have  a  long  time  been  demanded,  and 
taken  of  Christians,  by  ecclesiastics,  jure  divittOy 
that  is,  in  God's  right.  By  which  means,  the  people 
every  where  were  obliged  to  a  double  tribute ;  one 
to  the  state,  another  to  the  clergy ;  whereof,  that 
to  the  clergy,  being  the  tenth  of  their  revenue,  is 
double  to  that  which  a  king  of  Athens,  and  esteemed 
a  tyrant,  exacted  of  his  subjects  for  the  defraying 
of  all  public  charges :  for  he  demanded  no  more  but 
the  twentieth  part,  and  yet  abundantly  maintained 
therewith  the  commonwealth.  And  in  the  kingdom 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MISINTERPRETATION  OP  SCRIPTURE.        609 

of  the  Jews,  during  the  sacerdotal  reign  of  God,  the  part  iv. 
tithes  and  offerings  were  the  whole  public  revenue.    .    ^'    . 

From  the  same  mistaking  of  the  present  Church  And  that 
for  the  kingdom  of  God,  came  in  the  distinction  are  tCdJ^. 
between  the  civil  and  the  canon  laws:  the  civil 
law  being  the  acts  of  sovereigns  in  their  own  domi- 
nions, and  the  canon  law  being  the  acts  of  the  Pope 
in  the  same  dominion.  Which  canons,  though  they 
were  but  canons,  that  is,  rules  propounded^  and 
but  voluntarily  received  by  Christian  princes,  till 
the  translation  of  the  empire  to  Charlemagne ;  yet 
afterwards,  as  the  power  of  the  Pope  increased, 
became  rules  commanded,  and  the  emperors  them- 
selves, to  avoid  greater  mischiefs,  which  the  people 
blinded  might  be  led  into,  were  forced  to  let  them 
pass  for  laws. 

From  hence  it  is,  that  in  all  dominions  where  the 
Pope's  ecclesiastical  power  is  entirely  received,  Jews, 
Turks,  and  Gentiles,  are  in  the  Roman  Church  tole- 
rated in  their  religion,  as  far  forth,  as  in  the  exer- 
cise and  profession  thereof  they  offend  not  against 
the  civil  power :  whereas  in  a  Christian,  though  a 
stranger,  not  to  be  of  the  Roman  religion,  is  capital; 
because  the  Pope  pretendeth,  that  all  Christians, 
are  his  subjects.  For  otherwise  it  were  as  much 
against  the  law  of  nations,  to  persecute  a  Christian 
stranger,  for  professing  the  religion  of  his  own 
country,  as  an  infidel ;  or  rather  more,  in  as  much 
as  they  that  are  not  against  Christ,  are  with  him. 

From  the  same  it  is,  that  in  every  Christian  state 
there  are  certain  men,  that  are  exempt,  by  eccle- 
siastical liberty,  from  the  tributes,  and  from  the 
tribunals  of  the  civil  state ;  for  so  are  the  secular 
clergy,  besides  monks  and  friars,  which  in  many 

VOL.  III.  R  R 


Digitized  by 


Google 


610  OP  THB  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNB^S. 

PAKT  IV.  places  bear  so  great  a  prpportion  to  the  common 

^    ^  ^   people,  as  if  need  wpre,  there  might  be  raised  out 

of  them  alope,  an  army,  swfl&ciwt  for  any  war  the 

Church  militant  should  employ  them  in^  against 

their  own,  or  other  princes. 

miluk^'coii.     ^  second  ge»eral  abuse  of  Scripture,  is  the  tum- 

secration  for    iqg  pf  cousccration  into  conjuration,  or  enchant- 

conjuration.  ^  •        .      Vi      •  «• 

ment.  To  consecrate,  is,  m  Sqnpture,  to  o^r, 
give,  or  dedicate,  in  pious  and  decent  language  and 
gesture,  a  man,  or  any  other  thing  to  God,  by  se- 
parating of  it  from  common  use ;  that  is  to  say^  tp 
sanctify,  or  mal^e  it  God's,  and  to  be  used  only  hy 
those,  wljoiu  God  hath  appointed  to  be  his  public 
ministers,  (as  I  hs^ve  already  proved  at  large  in  the 
xxxvth  chapter,)  and  thereby  to  change,  not  th© 
thing  consecrated,  but  only  the  use  of  it,  from  bei?ig 
profane  aud  conunon,  to  be  holy,  and  peculM^r  to 
God's  service.  But  when  by  such  words,  the  nature 
or  quality  of  the  thing  itself,  is  pretended  to  be 
changed,  it  is  not  consecration,  but  either  an  ex- 
traordinary work  of  God,  or  a  vain  and  impious 
conjuration.  But  seeing,  for  the  frequency  of  pre- 
tending the  changjB  of  o^ature  in  their  consecrations, 
it  cannot  be  esteemed  a  work  extraordinary,  it  is 
no  other  than  a  conjuration  or  incantation^yfherehY 
they  would  have  men  to  believe  an  alteration  of 
nature  that  is  not,  contrary  to  the  testimony  of 
man's  sight,  and  of  all  the  rest  of  his  senses.  As 
for  example,  when  the  priest,  instead  of  conseprat- 
ing  bread  and  wine  to  God's  peculiar  service  in  the 
sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  (which  is  but  a  se- 
paration of  it  from  the  common  use,  to  signify, 
that  is,  to  put  men  in  mind  of  their  redemption,  by 
the  passion  of  Christ,  whose  body  was  broken,  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MISINTERPRETATION  O?  SCRIPTUR^.        61 1 

bipod  sted  upon  the  cross  for  our  trjmsgressioiisj  part  ^v. 
pretends^  that  by  saying  of  the  words  of  pw  Saviour,  . ,  "^f* ., . 
This  is  my  hady,  and  this  is  my  hlood.  the  nature  Error  from 
oi  bread  is  no  more  there,  but  ws  very  bpdy ;  not-  secrationfor 
withstanding  tjiere  appearet;Ji  not  tp  th?  sig^t,  or  ^°'^"™^'°"- 
other  sense  of  the  receiver,  any  thing  that  appes^r- 
ed  not  before  thp  consecration.  Tl^e  Egyptian  ppn- 
jflrers,  th^^t  are  said  to  havp  turned  tl^eir  rpds  to  . 
serppnts,  and  the  water  into  Wpod,  arp  thpught  \^t 
tp  have  deluded  t^e  s^ses  pf  thp  specta^or^  by  l^ 
false  show  of  things^  yet  ?^re  esteenip4  ^chan^er^. 
;EJu^  what  should  we  have  thqugfet  of  them,  if  there 
Jiad  appeared  in  their  rocis  nqth^flg  like  ^  ^erpe^it, 
^i^d  in  the  water  enchanted,  nothii^g  like  blood,  npx 
lijte  any  thing  else  bi^t  watpr,  but  that  they  had 
faced  down  the  king,  that  they  were  serpents  that 
Ipoke^l  like  rods,  and  that  it  w^is.  blood  that  sepnied 
water?  That  had  been  both  enchantment,  ?^nd 
lying.  And  yet  in  this  daily  act  of  the  priest,  they 
^o  the  very  same,  by  turning  the  holy  words  into 
the  manner  of  a  charm,  which  produceth  nothing 
new  to  the  sense ;  but  they  face  us  down,  that  it 
hath  turned  the  bread  into  a  man ;  nay  more,  into 
a  God;  and  require  men  to  worship  it,  as  ^  it 
were  our  Saviour  himself  prpsent  God  and  md^^  and 
thereby  to  commit  most  gross  idolatry.  Fpr  if  it 
be  enough  to  excuse  it  of  idolatry,  tp  say  it  is  no 
more  bread,  but  God;  why  should  not  the  same 
excuse  serve  the  Egyptians,  in  case  they  had  the 
faces  to  say,  the  leeks  and  onions  they  worshipped, 
were  not  very  leeks  and  oniony  but  a  divinity  under 
their  species^  or  likeness.  The  words.  This  is  my 
body,  are  equivalent  to  these,  this  signifies^  ox  re- 
presents my  body;  and  it  is  an  ordinary  figure  of 

RR  2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


612  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PA&T  IV  speech :  but  to  take  it  literally^  is  an  abuse  ;  nor 
-  ^'  _  though  so  taken^  can  it  extend  any  further,  than  to 
the  bread  which  Christ  himself  with  his  own  hands 
consecrated.  For  he  never  said,  that  of  what  bread 
soever,  any  priest  whatsoever,  should  say,  ThU  is 
my  body,  or,  this  is  Christ's  body,  the  same  should 
presendy  be  transubstantiated.  Nor  did  the  Church 
.  of  Rome  ever  establish  this  transubstantiadon,  till 
the  time  of  Innocent  the  Third ;  which  was  not  above 
600  years  ago,  when  the  power  of  popes  was  at  the 
highest,  and  the  darkness  of  the  time  grown  so 
great,  as  men  discerned  not  the  bread  that  was 
given  thepi  to  eat,  especially  when  it  was  stamped 
with  the  figure  of  Christ  upon  the  cross,  as  if  they 
would  have  men  believe  it  were  transubstantiated, 
not  only  into  the  body  of  Christ,  but  also  into  the 
wood  of  his  cross,  and  that  they  did  eat  both  to- 
gether in  the  sacrament. 
toS*^mo.  '^^  ^^^^  incantation,  instead  of  consecration,  is 
niMofbi^tian:  uscd  also  in  the  sacramcut  of  baptism  :  where  the 
abuse  of  God's  name  in  each  several  person,  and  in 
the  whole  Trinity,  with  the  sign  of  the  cross  at  each 
name,  maketh  up  the  charm.  As  first,  when  they 
make  the  holy  water,  the  priest  saith,  /  conjure 
thee,  thou  creature  of  water,  in  the  name  of  God 
the  Father  Almighty,  and  in  the  name  of  Jesus 
Christ  his  only  Son  our  Lord,  and  in  virtue  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  that  thou  become  conjured  water,  to 
drive  away  all  the  powers  of  the  enemy,  and  to 
eradicate,  and  supplant  the  enemy,  Sfc.  And  the 
same  in  the  benediction  of  the  salt  to  be  mingled 
with  it :  That  thou  become  conjured  salt,  that  all 
phantasms,  and  knavery  of  the  deviVs  fraud  may 
fly  and  depart  from  the  place  wherein  thou  art 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MISINTERPRETATION  OF  SCRIPTURE.         613 

sprinkled;  and  every  unclean  spirit  he  conjured  part  iv. 
by  Him  that  shall  come  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  .  ^-  . 
dead.  The  same  in  the  benediction  of  the  oil; 
That  all  the  power  of  the  enemy ,  all  the  host  of 
the  devily  all  assaults  and  phantasms  of  Satan, 
may  he  driven  away  hy  this  creature  of  oil.  And 
for  the  infant  that  is  to  be  baptized,  he  is  subject 
to  many  charms :  first,  at  the  church  door  the  priest 
blows  thrice  in  the  child's  face,  and  says :  Go  out 
of  him  unclean  spirit,  and  give  place  to  the  Holy 
Ghost  the  comforter.  As  if  all  children,  till  blown 
on  by  the  priest,  were  demoniacs.  Again,  before  his 
entrance  into  the  church,  he  saith  as  before,  1  con^ 
jure  theCy  8fc.  to  go  out,  and  depart froiii  this  ser^ 
vant  of  God.  And  again  the  same  exorcism  is  re- 
peated once  more  before  he  be  baptized.  These, 
and  some  other  incantations,  are  those  that  are  used 
instead  of  benedictions,  and  consecrations,  in  ad- 
ministration of  the  sacraments  of  baptism,  and  the 
Lord's  supper ;  wherein  every  thing  that  serveth 
to  those  holy  uses,  except  the  unhallowed  spittle  of 
the  priest,  hath  some  set  form  of  exorcism. 

Nor  are  the  other  rites,  as  of  marriage,  of  ex-  Andinmar- 
treme  unction,  of  visitation  of  the  sick,  of  con- JlJfoV(!f  the' 
secrating  churches  and  churchyards,  and  the  like,  ^^^^e^j^li 
exempt  from  charms ;  inasmuch  as  there  is  in  them  o^  pi«ce<- 
the  use  of  enchanted  oil  and  water,  with  the  abuse 
of  the  cross,   and  of  the  holy  word  of  David, 
asperges  me  Domine  hyssopOy  as  things  of  efficacy 
to  drive  away  phantasms,  and  imaginary  spirits. 

Another  general  error,  is  from  the  misinter- Errors 
pretation  of  the  words  eternal  life,  everlasting  taking  etemii 
death,  and  the  second  death.    For  though  we  read  llSti^g  a^S: 
plainly  in  Holy  Scripture,  that  God  create  Adtm 


Digitized  by 


Google 


614  OP  THE  KINGDOM  OP  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  in  ah  estate  of  liting  for  ever,  which  was  conditional, 
,    ^'    .    thi|t  is  to  say,  if  he  disobeyed  not  his  commandment ; 
Errors  T^hich  was  not  essential  to  human  nature,  but  con- 

tlkb  "Jtemai  sequent  to  the  virtue  of  the  tree  of  life ;  whereof 
iwar^dcX  ^^  ^^^  liberty  to  eat,  as  long  as  he  had  not  sinned; 
and  that  he  was  thrust  out  of  Paradise  after  he  had 
sinned,  lest  he  should  eat  thereof,  and  live  for  ever; 
and  that  Christ's  Passion  is  a  discharge  of  sin  to 
all  that  believe  on  him;  and  by  consequence,  a 
restitution  of  eternal  life  to  all  the  faithful,  and  to 
theiii  only :  yet  the  doctrine  is  now,  and  hath  been 
a  long  tiine  far  otherwise ;  namely,  that  every  man 
hath  etertiity  of  life  by  nature,  inasmuch  as  his 
sdiil  is  immolrtal.  So  that  the  flaming  sword  at  the 
eiitrance  of  Paradise,  though  it  hinder  a  man  from 
comifag  to  the  tree  of  life,  hinders  him  not  fi-om 
the  immbrtality  ivhich  Gbd  took  from  hiiu  for  his 
siU;  nor  makes  him  to  need  the  sacrificing  of 
Christ,  for  the  recovering  of  the  saine ;  and  con- 
sequently, not  only  the  faithful  and  righteous,  but 
also  the  wickied  and  the  heiathen,  sh^  enjoy  eterriial 
life,  without  any  death  at  all ;  much  less  a  second, 
and  everlasting  death.  To  salve  this,  it  is  said, 
that  by  second,  dnd  everlasting  death,  is  ineant  a 
second,  and  everlasting  life,  but  in  torinents ;  a 
figutej  heVer  used  but  in  this  very  case. 

All  which  doctrine  is  founded  only  on  some  of 
the  obscuret  places  of  the  New  Testament ;  which 
nevfertheless,  the  whole  scope  of  the  Scriptui'e  con- 
sidered, are  cleiir  enough  in  a  different  serise,  sAiA 
uinibcessaiy  to  the  Christian  faith.  For  suppoising 
that  when  a  inan  dies,  there  remaineth  nothing  6t 
him  but  his  ciaxcass ;  cannot  God,  that  raised  in- 
animated  dust  and  clay  into  a  living  creature  by 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MISINTERPRETATION  OP  SCRIPTURE.        615 

his  word,  as  easUy  raise  a  dead  carcass  to  life  part  iv. 
again,  and  continue  him  aliye  for  ever,  or  Inake  .  ^*  . 
him  die  again,  by  another  word?  The  soul  in  Errors 
Scripture,  signifieth  always^  either  the  life.  Or  the  taSdi^etemai 
living  creature ;  and  the  body  and  soul  jointly,  the  {jJ^ti^gaeYth i 
body  alite.  In  the  fifth  day  of  the  creation,  God  said : 
Let  the  waters  produce  reptile  animce  viventis,  the 
creeping  thing  that  hath  in  it  a  living  soul ;  the 
English  translate  it,  that  hath  life.  And  again, 
God  created  whales,  et  omnem  animam  viventem  ; 
which  in  the  English  is,  every  living  creature. 
And  likewise  of  man,  God  made  him  bf  the  dust  df 
the  earth,  and  breathed  in  his  face  the  brieath  df 
life,  et  f actus  est  homo  in  animam  viventem^  that 
is,  and  man  was  niade  U  living  creature.  And  after 
Noah  came  out  of  the  ark,  God  saith,  he  will  no 
more  smite  omnem  animam  viventem,  that  is,  every 
living  creature.  And  (Deut.  xii.  23),  Eat  not  the 
blood,  for  the  blood  is  the  soul ;  that  is,  the  life. 
From  which  places,  if  by  soul  were  meant  a  sub- 
stance incorporeal,  with  an  Existence  separated 
from  the  body,  it  might  as  well  be  inferred  of  any 
other  living  creature  as  of  man.  But  that  the 
souls  of  the  faithful,  are  not  of  their  own  nature, 
but  by  God's  special  grace,  to  remain  in  thieir 
bodies,  from  the  resurrection  to  all  eternity,  1  have 
already,  I  think,  sufiiciently  proved  out  of  the 
Scriptures,  in  chapter  xxxviii.  And  for  the 
places  of  the  New  Testament,  where  it  is  said  that 
any  man  shall  be  cast  body  and  soul  into  hell  fire, 
it  is  no  more  than  body  and  life  ;  that  is  to  say, 
they  shall  be  cast  alive  into  the  perpetual  fire  of 
Gehenna. 
This  Iraidow  it  i6,  that  gives  entrance  to  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


616  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.   dark  doctrine,  first,  of  eternal  torments ;  and  after- 
^   ^'    .    wards    of   pnrgatory,   and  consequently  of   the 
As  the  doc    Walking  abroad,  especially  in  places  consecrated, 
^tor^,  Md'  solitary,  or  dark,  of  the  ghosts  of  men  deceased ; 
and'iiiv'^'i.    ^^  thereby  to  the  pretences  of  exorcism  and 
liou  of  saints,  conjuration  of  phantasms;  as  also  of  invocation 
of  men  dead ;  and  to  the  doctrine  of  indulgoices, 
that  is  to  say,  of  exemption  for  a  time,  or  for  ever, 
from  the  fire  of  purgatory,  wherein  these  incor- 
poreal substances  are  pretended  by  burning  to  be 
cleansed,  and  made  fit  for  heaven.     For  men  being 
generally  possessed  before  the  time  of  our  Saviour, 
by  contagion  of  the  demonology  of  the  Greeks, 
of  an  opinion,  that  the  souls  of  men  were  substances 
distinct  from  their  bodies,  and  therefore  that  when 
the  body  was  dead,  the  soul  of  every  man,  whether 
godly  or  wicked,  must  subsist  somewhere  by  virtue 
of  its  own  nature,  without  acknowledging  therein 
any  supernatural  gift  of  God ;  the  doctors  of  the 
Church  doubted  a  long  time,  what  was  the  place, 
which  they  were  to  abide  in,  till  they  should  be 
reunited  to  their  bodies  in  the  resurrection ;  sup- 
posing for  a  while,  they  lay  under  the  altars ;  but 
afterward  the  Church  of  Rome  found  it  more  pro- 
fitable to  build  for  them  this  place  of  purgatory ; 
which  by  some  other  Churches  in  this  latter  age 
has  been  demolished. 
The  texts  Let  us  now  consider  what  texts  of  Scripture 

the  doctrines    sccm  most  to  coufirm  these  three  general  errors,  I 
i^°T7bee"n«n!'^have  here  touched.     As  for  those  which  Cardinal 
swered  before.  Bellarmiuc  hath  alleged,  for  the  present  kingdom 
of  God  administered  by  the  Pope,  than  which  there 
are  none  that  make  a  better  show  of  proof ;  I  have 
already  answered  them ;  and  made  it  evident,  that 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MISINTERPRETATION  OF  SCRIPTURE.        617 

the  kingdom  of  God,  instituted  by  Moses,  ended  part  iv. 
in  the  election  of  Said ;  after  which  time  the  priest  _^'  ^ 
of  his  own  authority  never  deposed  any  king. 
That  which  the  high-priest  did  to  Athaliah,  was 
not  done  in  his  own  right,  but  in  the  right  of  the 
young  king  Joash  her  son :  but  Solomon  in  his  own 
right  deposed  the  high-priest  Abiathar,  and  set  up 
another  in  his  place.  The  most  difficult  place  to 
answer,  of  all  those  that  can  be  brought  to  prove 
the  kingdom  of  God  by  Christ  is  already  in  this 
world,  is  alleged,  not  by  Bellarmine,  nor  any  other 
of  the  Church  of  Rome ;  but  by  Beza,  that  will 
have  it  to  begin  from  the  resurrection  of  Christ. 
But  whether  he  intend  thereby,  to  entitle  the  Pres- 
bytery to  the  supreme  power  ecclesiastical  in  the 
commonwealth  of  Geneva,  and  consequently  to 
every  presbytery  in  every  other  commonwealth,  or 
to  princes,  and  other  civil  sovereigns,  I  do  not 
know.  For  the  presbytery  hath  challenged  the 
power  to  excommunicate  their  own  kings,  and  to 
be  the  supreme  moderators  in  religion,  in  the 
places  where  they  have  that  form  of  Church-go- 
vernment, no  less  than  the  Pope  challengeth  it 
universally. 

The  words  are  {Mark  ix.  1),  Verily  I  say  unto  ^"^^^^^^J^^ 
you,  that  there  he  some  of  them  that  stand  here,  Bezainferreth 
which  shall  not  taste  of  death,  till  they  have  seen  domo^r  cbmt 
the  kingdom  of  God  come  with  power.     Which  resurrection* 
words  if  taken  grammatically,  make  it  certain,  that 
either  some  of  those  men  that  stood  by  Christ  at 
that  time,  are  yet  alive ;  or  else,  that  the  kingdom 
of  God  must  be  now  in  this  present  world.    And 
then  there  is  another  place  more  difficult.  For  when 
the  apostles,  after  our  Saviour's  resurrection,  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


618  OF  THB  KINGDOM  OV  DARKNB88. 

PART  IV.  immediately  before  his  ascension,  asked  onr  Savioar^ 
-  ^  saying,  (Acts  L  6),  Wilt  thou  at  this  time  restore 
Answer  to  the  again  the  kingdom  to  Israel  f  he  answered  them, 
Beza  hiferreth  It  is  not  for  ffou  to  know  the  times  and  the  seasons, 
^  of^obmt  ^^^c^  If^  Father  hath  put  in  his  own  power  ;  but 
began  at  the    yg  shall  reccive  power  bn  the  coming  of  the  Holw 

resurrection.      *^  ir  *f  o    */  ^^ 

Ghost  upon  you,  and  ye  shall  he  my  (martyrs)  wit- 
nesses both  in  Jerusalem,  and  in  all  Judea,  and  in 
Samaria,  and  unto  the  uttermost  part  of  the 
earth.  Which  is  as  much  as  to  say,  My  kmgdomifi 
not  yet  come,  nor  shall  yon  foreknow  when  it  shall 
come;  for  it  shall  come  as  a  thief  in  the  night; 
but  I  will  send  you  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  by  him 
you  shall  have  power  to  bear  witness  to  all  the 
world,  by  your  preaching,  of  my  resurrection,  and 
the  works  I  have  done,  and  the  dodtrine  I  hove 
taught,  that  they  may  believe  in  me,  and  expect 
eternal  life,  at  my  coming  again.  How  does  this 
agree  with  the  coming  of  Christ's  kingdom  at  the 
resurrection  ?  And  that  which  St.  Paul  says(l  Thess. 
i.  9,  10),  That  they  turned  from  idols,  to  serx^e 
the  living  and  true  God,  and  to  wait  for  his  Son 
from  heaven;  where  to  wait  for  his  Son  from 
heaven,  is  to  wait  for  his  coming  to  be  king  in 
power ;  which  were  not  necessary,  if  his  kingdom 
had  been  then  present.  Again,  if  the  kingdom  of 
God  began,  as  Beza  on  that  place  {Mark  ix.  1) 
would  have  it,  at  the  resurrection  ;  what  reason 
is  there  for  Christians  ever  since  the  i-esurrection 
to  say  in  their  prayers.  Let  thy  kingdom  come  9 
It  Is  therefore  manifest,  that  the  words  of  St.  Mark 
are  not  so  to  be  interpreted.  There  be  some 
of  them  that  stand  here,  salth  our  Saviour,  that 
shall  not  taste  of  death  till  thev  have  seen  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MISINTERPRETATION  OP  SCRIPTURE,        619 

kingdom  of  God  come  in  power.    If  then  this  king-  part  iv. 
dom  were  to  come  at  the  resurrection  of  Christy    ._^'    . 
why  is  it  said,  some  of  them ^  rather  than  all?  For 
they  all  lived  till  after  Christ  was  risen. 

But  they  that  require  an  exact  interpretation  Explication 

^  '■  *  of  the  place 

of  this  text,  let  them  interpret  first  thfe  like  words  in  Mark  ix.  i. 
of  our  Saviour  to  St.  Peter,  concertiing  St.  John, 
(chap.  xxi.  22),  If  I  will  that  he  tarry  till  I  come, 
what  is  that  to  thee  ?  upon  which  was  grounded  a 
riepbrt  that  he  should  not  die.  Nevertheless  the 
truth  of  that  report  was  neither  confirmed,  as  well 
grbiiiided ;  nor  refiited,  as  ill  grounded  on  those 
words;  but  left  as  a  saying  not  understood.  The 
same  difilculty  is  also  in  the  place  of  St.  Mark.  And 
if  it  be  lawftd  to  conjecture  at  their  meaning,  by 
that  wliich  immediately  follows,  both  here,  and  ill 
St.  Luke,  where  the  same  is  again  repeated,  it  is 
not  improbable,  to  say  they  have  relation  to  the 
Transfiguration,  which  is  described  in  the  verses 
immediately  following :  where  it  is  said,  that  e^teir 
six  days  Jesus  taketh  with  him  Peter,  and  James, 
and  John  (not  all,  but  isomie  of  his  disciples),  and 
leadeth  them  up  into  a  high  mountain  apart  by 
themselves,  and  was  transfigured  before  them: 
and  his  raifnent  became  shining,  exceedifig  ^hite  * 
as  snow  ;  so  as  m>  fuller  on  earth  can  white  them: 
and  there  appeared  unto  them,  tJlias  with  Moses ^ 
and  they  were  talking  with  Jesus,  fyc.  So  that 
thiey  saw  Christ  in  glory  ahd  majiesty,  as  he  is  to 
come ;  insomuch  as  they  were  sore  afraid.  And 
thus  the  promise  of  our  Saviour  was  accomplished 
by  way  of  vision.  For  it  was  a  vision,  as  may  pro- 
bably be  inferred  out  of  St.  Luke,  that  reciteth  the 
same  story  (chap.  ix.  28,  &c.),  and  saith,  that  Peter 


Digitized  by 


Google 


620 


OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 


PART  IV.   andthey  that  were  with  him,  were  heavy  with  sleep: 
^   ^'  _.    but  most  certainly  out  of  Matth.  xvii.  9,  where  the 
same  is  again  related;  for  our  Saviour  charged  them, 
sapng,  Tell  no  man  the  vision  until  the  Son  of 
Man  he  risen  from  the  dead.     Howsoever  it  be, 
yet  there  can  from  thence  be  taken  no  argument, 
to  prove  that  the  kingdom  of  God  taketh  beginning 
till  the  day  of  judgment. 
oAe"  exu  ii*      As  for  somc  other  texts,  to  prove  the  Pope's 
defence  of  the  powcr  ovcr  civil  sovcrcigus,  (besides  those  of  Bellar- 
1^^^  ^    ^    mine,)  as  that  the  two  swords  that  Christ  and  his 
apostles  had  amongst  them,  were  the  spiritual  and 
the  temporal  sword,  which  they  say  St.  Peter  had 
given  him  by  Christ :  and,  that  of  the  two  lomi- 
naries,  the  greater  signifies  the  Pope,  and  the  lesser 
the  King ;  one  might  as  well  infer  out  of  the  first 
verse  of  the  Bible,  that  by  heaven  is  meant  the 
Pope,  and  by  earth  the  King-    Which  is  not  arguing 
from  Scripture,  but  a  wanton  insulting  over  princes, 
that,  came  in  fashion  after  the  time  the  Popes  were 
grown  so  secure  of  their  greatness,  as  to  contemn 
all  Christian  kings ;  and  treading  on  the  necks  of 
emperors,  to  mock  both  them  and  the  Scripture, 
in   the  words  of  Psahn  xci.  13,   Thou  shalt  tread 
*  upon  the  lion  and  the  adder ;  the  young  lion  and 
the  dragon  thou  shalt  trample  under  thy  feet. 

As  for  the  rights  of  consecration,  though  they 
depend  for  the  most  part  upon  the  discretion  and 
judgment  of  the  governors  of  the  Church,  and  not 
upon  the  Scriptures;  yet  those  governors  are 
obliged  to  such  direction,  as  the  nature  of  the 
action  itself  requireth;  as  that  the  ceremonies, 
words,  and  gestures,  be  both  decent  and  signifi- 
cant, or  at  least  conformable  to  the  action.   When 


The  manner 
of  consecra- 
tions in  the 
Scripture, 
was  without 
exorcisms. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MISINTERPRETATION  OP  SCRIPTURE.        621 

Moses  consecrated  the  tabernacle,  the  altar,  and  part  iv. 
the  vessels  belonging  to  them,  (Exod.  xl.  9),  he    ,,'*^*   ^ 
anointed  them  with  the  oil  which  God  had  com-  The  minner 
manded  to  be  made  for  that  purpose:  and  they  tioni  in  the 
were  holy :  there  was  nothing  exorcised,  to  drive  ^^*^uhout 
away  phantasms.    The  same  Moses,  the  civil  sove-  exorcisms. 
reign  of  Israel,  when  he  consecrated  Aaron,  the 
high-priest,   and  his  sons,   did  wash  them  with 
-water,  not  exorcised  water,  put  their  garments 
xipon  them,  and  anointed  them  with  oil ;  and  they 
were  sanctified,  to  minister  unto  the  Lord  in  the 
priest's  office;   which  was  a  simple  and  decent 
cleansing,  and  adorning  them,  before  he  presented 
them  to  God,  to  be  his  servants.    When  king  Solo- 
mon, the  civil  sovereign  of  Israel,  consecrated  the 
temple  he  had  built,  (1  Kings  viii.),  he  stood  before 
all  the  congregation  of  Israel ;  and  having  blessed 
them,  he  gave  thanks  to  God,  for  putting  into  the 
heart  of  his  father  to  build  it ;  and  for  giving  to 
himself  the  grace  to  accomphsh  the  same;  and 
then  prayed  unto  him,  first,  to  accept  that  house, 
though  it  were  not  suitable  to  his  infinite  great- 
ness ;  and  to  hear  the  prayers  of  his  servants  that 
should  pray  therein,  or,  tf  they  were  absent,  to- 
wards it ;  and  lastly,  he  oflFered  a  sacrifice  of  peace- 
oflFering,  and  the  house  was  dedicated.     Here  was 
no  procession;   the  king  stood  still  in  his  first 
place ;  no  exorcised  water ;  no  Asperges  me,  nor 
other  impertinent  application  of  words  spoken 
upon  another  occasion ;  but  a  decent  and  rational 
speech,  and  such  as  in  making  to  God  a  present  of 
his  new-built  house,  was  most  conformable  to  the 
occasion. 
We  read  not  that  St.  John  did  exorcise  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


622  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  PAI^KNBSS. 

PART  IV.  water  of  Jordan ;  nor  Philip  the  water  of  the  river 
.    ^'    ■    wherein  he  baptized  the  Eunuch;  nor  that  any 
pastor  in  the  time  of  the  apostles,  did  take  his 
spittle,  and  put  it  to  the  nose  of  the  person  to  be 
baptized,  and  say,  in  odorem  suavitatis,  that  i& 
for  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord;  wher^  nd- 
ther  the  ceremony  of  spittle,  for  the  uncleanness ; 
nor  the  application  of  that  Scripture  for  t^e  levity, 
pan  by  any  authority  of  man  be  justified. 
25fJ*^^,^      To  prove  that  the  soul  separated  from  the  body, 
soui.not proved  liveth  ctemally,  not  only  the  souls  of  the  elect,  by 
bl  oc  nat^/°  especial  grace,  and  restoration  of  the  eternal  life 
but  of  grace,   ^j^j^jj  Adam  lost  by  sin,  an4  our  Saviour  restpTed 
by  the  sacrifice  of  himself,  to  the  HEdthfiil ;  but  a)so 
the  souls  of  reprobates,  as  a  property  naturally 
consequent  to  the  essence  of  mankind,  without 
other  grace  of  God,  but  that  which  is  universally 
given  to  all  mankind;  thpre  are  divers  places^ 
which  at  the  first  sight  seem  sufficiently  to  serve 
the  turn  :  but  such,  as  when  I  compare  them  with 
that  which  I  have  before  (chapter  xx?:viii)  al- 
leged out  of  the  Hth  of  Job,  seein  to  n^e  much 
more  subject  to  a  diverse  interpretation,  than  the 
words  of  Job. 

And  first  there  are  the  words  of  Solomon  (Bccles. 
xii.  7)i  Then  shall  the  ckist  return  to  dust,  as  it 
was,  and  the  spirit  shall  return  to  God  that  gave 
it.  Which  may  bear  well  enough,  if  there  be  no 
other  text  directly  against  it,  this  interpretation, 
that  God  only  knows,  but  man  not,  what  becomes 
of  a  man's  spirit,  when  he  expireth ;  and  the  same 
Solomon,  in  the  same  book,  (chapter  iii.  20,  21) 
delivereth  the  same  sentence  in  the  same  sense  I 
have  given  it.     His  words  are :  All  go,  (man  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MISINTBBPRETATION  OP  SCRIPTURE.        623 

beast),  to  the  same  place;  all  are  of  the  dusty  and  part  iv. 
all  turn  to  dust  again;   who  knoweth  that  the    -_^    . 
spirit  of  man  goeth  upward^  and  that  the  spirit  The  immoT-  ^ 
of  the  beast  goeth  downward  to  the  earth  9  That  souIfnoipJoTca 
is,  none  knows  but  God;  nor  is  it  an  unusual ^^f"P^,'®^'' 
phrase  to  say  of  things  we  understand  not,  God^^^'^^^s^^' 
knows  whaty  and,    God  knows  where.    TJiat  of 
(Gen.  V.  24)  Enoch  walked  with  God,  and  he  was 
not;  for   God  took  him;  which  is  expounded, 
(Heh.  xi.  5),  He  was  translated,  that  he  should 
not  die;  and  was  not  found,  because  God  had 
translated  him.    For  b^ore  his  translation,  he 
had  this  testimony,  that  he  pleased  God;  making 
as  much  for  the  immortality  of  the  body,  as  of  the 
soul,  proveth,  that  this  his  translation  was  peculiar 
to  them  that  please  God ;  not  common  to  them 
with  the  wicked,  and  depending  on  grace,  not  on 
nature.     But  on  the  contrary,  what  interpretation 
shall  we  give  besides  the  literal  sense,  of  the  words 
of  Solomon  (Eccles.  iii.  19),  That  which  befalleth 
the  sons  of  men,  befalleth  beasts  ;  even  one  thing 
b^alleth  them;    as  the  one  dieth,  so  doth  the 
other  ;  yea,  they  have  all  one  breath,  (one  spirit) ; 
so  that  a  man  hath  no  pre-eminence  above  a  beast, 
for  all  is  vanity.     By  the  literal  sense,  here  is  no 
natural  immortality  of  the  soul ;  nor  yet  any  re- 
pugi^ancy  with  the  life  eternal,  which  the  elect 
shajl  enjoy  by  grace.     And  {Eccles.  chap.  iv.  3.) 
Better  is  he  that  hath  not  yet  been,  than  both 
they  ;  that  is,  than  they  that  live,  or  have  lived } 
which,  if  the  soul  of  all  them  that  have  lived,  were 
immortal,  were  a  hard  saying;  for  then  to  have 
an  imimortal  soul,  were  worse  than  to  have  no  soi^l 
at  all.    And  again,  (chapter  ix.  6),   The  living 


Digitized  by 


Google 


624  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  iv.  hiow  they  shall  die,  but  the  dead  know  not  any 
^    ^'  _-    thing  ;  that  is,  naturally,  and  before  the  resmrec- 
Theimmor-  ^  tion  of  the  body. 

souifnot^ed  Another  place  which  seems  to  make  for  a 
bJ^nJt^ur7,^i^atural  immortality  of  the  soul,  is  that,  where  our 
bat  of  grace.  Saviour  saith,  that  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  are 
living :  but  this  is  spoken  of  the  promise  of  God, 
and  of  their  certitude  to  rise  again,  not  of  a  life 
then  actual ;  and  in  the  same  sense  that  God  said 
to  Adam,  that  on  the  day  he  should  eat  of  the  for- 
bidden fruit,  he  should  certainly  die;  from  that 
time  forward  he  was  a  dead  man  by  sentence ;  but 
not  by  execution,  till  almost  a  thousand  years  after. 
So  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  were  alive  by  pro- 
mise, then,  when  Christ  spake ;  but  are  not  actu- 
ally till  the  resurrection.  And  the  history  of  Dives 
and  Lazariis,  makes  nothing  against  this,  if  we  take 
it,  as  it  is,  for  a  parable. 

But  there  be  other  places  of  the  New  Testament, 
where  an  immortality  seemeth  to  be  directly  attri- 
buted to  the  wicked.  For  it  is  evident  that  they 
shall  all  rise  to  judgment.  And  it  is  said  besides 
in  many  places,  that  they  shall  go  into  everlasting 
fire,  everlasting  torments,  everlasting  punish- 
ments ;  and  that  the  worm  of  conscience  never 
dieth ;  and  all  this  is  comprehended  in  the  word 
everlasting  death,  which  is  ordinarily  interpreted 
everlasting  l\fe  in  torments.  And  yet  I  can  find  no 
where  that  any  man  shall  live  in  torments  everlast- 
ingly. Also,  it  seemeth  hard,  to  say,  that  God  who 
is  the  father  of  mercies ;  that  doth  in  heaven  and 
earth  all  that  he  will ;  that  hath  the  hearts  of  all 
men  in  his  disposing ;  that  worketh  in  men  both  to 
do,  and  to  will ;  and  without  whose  free  gift  a  man 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MISINTERPRETATION  OF  SCRIPTURE.         625 

hath  neither  inclination  to  good,  nor  repentance  of  part  iv. 
evil,  should  punish  men's  transgressions  without  any   .    ^-    ^ 
end  of  time,  and  with  all  the  extremity  of  torture.  The  immor- 
that  men  can  imagine,  and  more.  We  are  therefore  louUotproTed 
to  consider,  what  the  meaning  is,  of  ^^^t^^H^g  ll^f^^H^ll^"* 
jire^  and  other  the  like  phrases  of  Scripture.  but  of  grace. 

I  have  showed  already,  that  the  kingdom  of  God 
by  Christ  beginneth  at  the  day  of  judgment :  that 
in  that  day  the  faithful  shall  rise  again,  with  glo- 
rious and  spiritual  bodies,  and  be  his  subjects  in 
that  his  kingdom,  which  shall  be  eternal :  that  they 
shall  neither  marry  nor  be  given  in  marriage,  nor 
eat  and  drink,  as  they  did  in  their  natural  bodies ; 
but  live  for  ever  in  their  individual  persons,  without 
the  specifical  eternity  of  generation :  and  that  the 
reprobates  also  shall  rise  again,  to  receive  punish- 
ments for  their  sins :  as  also,  that  those  of  the  elect, 
which  shall  be  alive  in  their  earthly  bodies  at  that 
day,  shall  have  their  bodies  suddenly  changed,  and 
made  spiritual  and  immortal.  But  that  the  bodies 
of  the  reprobate,  who  make  the  kingdom  of  Satan, 
shall  also  be  glorious,  or  spiritual  bodies,  or  that 
they  shall  be  as  the  angels  of  God,  neither  eat- 
ing, nor  drinking,  nor  engendering ;  or  that  their 
life  shall  be  eternal  in  their  individual  persons,  as 
the  life  of  every  faithful  man  is,  or  as  the  life  of 
Adam  had  been  if  he  had  not  sinned,  there  is  no 
place  of  Scripture  to  prove  it ;  save  only  these  places 
concerning  eternal  torments ;  which  may  otherwise 
be  interpreted. 

From  whence  may  be  inferred,  that  as  the  elect 
after  the  resurrection  shall  be  restored  to  the  estate, 
wherein  Adam  was  before  he  had  sinned ;  so  the 
reprobate  shall  be  in  the  estate,  that  Adam  and  his 
posterity  were  in  after  the  sin  committed ;  saving 

VOL.  III.  s  s 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


626  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  that  God  promised  a  Redeemer  to  Adam,  and  such 
.  ^^'  .  of  his  seed  as  should  trust  in  him,  and  repent ;  but 
not  to  them  that  should  die  in  their  sins,  as  do  the 
reprobate.  . 
Eternal  tor-  These  thiugs  cousidered,  the  texts  that  mention 
eternal  fire,  eternal  torments,  or  the  worm  that 
never  dieth,  contradict  not  the  doctrine  of  a  second, 
and  everlasting  death,  in  the  proper  and  natural 
sense  of  the  word  death.  The  fire,  or  torments  pre- 
pared for  the  wicked  in  Gehenna,  Tophet,  or  in 
what  place  soever,  may  continue  for  ever;  and 
there  may  never  want  wicked  men  to  be  tormented 
in  them ;  though  not  every,  nor  any  one  eternally. 
For  the  wicked  being  left  in  the  estate  they  were 
in  after  Adam's  sin,  may  at  the  resurrection  live  as 
they  did,  marry,  and  give  in  marriage,  and  have 
gross  and  corruptible  bodies,  as  all  mankind  now 
have ;  and  consequently  may  engender  perpetually, 
after  the  resurrection,  as  they  did  before  :  for  there 
is  no  place  in  Scripture  to  the  contrary.  For  St. 
Paul,  speaking  of  the  resurrection  (I  Cor.  xv.) 
understandeth  it  only  of  the  resurrection  to  life 
eternal ;  and  not  the  resurrection  to  punishment. 
And  of  the  first,  he  saith,  that  the  body  is  sown 
in  corruption  J  raised  in  incorruption ;  sown  in 
dishonour,  raised  in  honour  ;  sown  in  weakness, 
raised  in  power ;  sown  a  natund  body,  raised 
a  spiritual  body.  There  is  no  such  thing  can 
be  said  of  the  bodies  of  them  that  rise  to  punish- 
ment. So  also  our  Saviour,  when  he  speaketh  of 
the  nature  of  man  after  the  resurrection,  meaneth 
the  resurrection  to  life  eternal,  not  to  punishment 
The  text  is,  Luke  xx.  verses  34, 35, 36,  a  fertile  text : 
The  children  of  this  world  marry,  and  are  given 
in    marriage;  but   they   that   shall  be  counted 


Digitized  by 


Google 


i 


MISINTERPRETATION  OF  SCRIPTURE.        627 

worthy  to  obtain  that  world,  and  the  resurrec-  part  iv. 
Hon  from  the  dead^  neither  marry ^  nor  are  given  .  '^'  . 
in  marriage:  neither  can  they  die  any  more  ;  for 
they  are  equal  to  the  angels^  and  ar^  the  chil- 
dren of  God  J  being  tli£  children  of  the  resurrec- 
tion. The  children  of  this  world,  that  are  in  the 
estate  which  Adam  left  them  in,  shall  marry,  and 
be  given  in  marriage ;  that  is,  corrupt,  and  generate 
successively ;  which  is  an  immortality  of  the  kind, 
but  not  of  the  persons  of  men :  they  are  not  worthy 
to  be  counted  amongst  them  that  shall  obtain  the 
next  world,  and  an  absolute  resurrection  from  the 
dead;  but  only  a  short  time,  as  inmates  of  that 
world;  and  to  the  end  only  to  receive  condign 
punishment  for  their  contumacy.  The  elect  are  the 
only  children  of  the  resurrection ;  that  is  to  say, 
the  sole  heirs  of  eternal  life :  they  only  can  die  no 
more,  it  is  they  that  are  equal  to  the  angels,  and 
that  are  the  children  of  God ;  and  not  the  reprobate. 
To  the  reprobate  there  remaineth  after  the  resur- 
rection, a  second  and  eternal  death:  between 
which  resurrection,  and  their  second  and  eternal 
death,  is  but  a  time  of  punishment  and  torment ; 
and  to  last  by  succession  of  sinners  thereunto,  as 
long  as  the  kind  of  man  by  propagation  shall  endure ; 
which  is  eternally. 

Upon  this  doctrine  of  the  natural  eternity  of  se-  Answer  of  the 
parated  souls,  is  founded,  as  I  sfidd,  the  doctrine  of  for  purgaiory. 
purgatory.  For  supposing  eternal  life  by  grace  only, 
there  is  no  life  but  the  life  of  the  body ;  and  no 
immortality  till  the  resurrection.  The  texts  for  pur- 
gatory alleged  by  Bellarmine  out  of  the  canonical 
Scripture  of  the  Old  Testament,  are,  first,  the  fast- 
ing of  David  for  Saul  and  Jonathan,   mentioned 

SS  2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


628  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.   2  Sam.  i.  12,  and  again,  2  Sam.  iii.  35,  for  the  death 
^    ^  _.    of  Abner.    This  fasting  of  David,  he  saith,  was  for 

Answer  of  the  the  obtaining  of  something  for  them  at  God's  hands. 

^r^ur^^ory.  aftCF  their  death :  because  after  he  had  fasted  to 
procure  the  recovery  of  his  own  child,  as  soon  as 
he  knew  it  was  dead,  he  called  for  meat.  Seeing 
then  the  soul  hath  an  existence  separate  from  the 
body,  and  nothing  can  be  obtained  by  men's  fasting 
for  the  souls  that  are  already  either  in  heaven,  or 
hell,  it  foUoweth  that  there  be  some  souls  of  dead 
men,  that  are  neither  in  heaven,  nor  in  hell ;  and 
therefore  they  must  be  in  some  third  place,  which 
must  be  purgatory.  And  thus  with  hard  straining, 
he  has  wrested  those  places  to  the  proof  of  a  pur- 
gatory :  whereas  it  is  manifest,  that  the  ceremonies 
of  mourning,  and  fasting,  when  they  are  used  for 
the  death  of  men,  whose  life  was  not  profitable  to 
the  mourners,  they  are  used  for  honour's  sake  to 
their  persons ;  and  when  it  is  done  for  the  death  of 
them  by  whose  life  the  mourners  had  benefit,  it  pro- 
ceeds from  their  particular  damage.  And  so  David 
honoured  Saul  and  Abner,  with  his  fasting ;  and  in 
the  death  of  his  own  child,  recomforted  himself,  by 
receiving  his  ordinary  food. 

In  the  other  places,  which  he  allegeth  out  of  the 
Old  Testament,  there  is  not  so  much  as  any  show, 
or  colour  of  proof.  He  brings  in  every  text  wherein 
there  is  the  word  angers  or  fire,  or  burning,  or 
purging,  or  cleansing,  in  case  any  of  the  fathers 
have  but  in  a  sermon  rhetorically  applied  it  to  the 
doctrine  of  purgatory,  already  believed.  The  first 
verse  of  Psalm  xxxvii;  O  Lord,  rebuke  me  not  in 
thy  wrath,  nor  chasten  tne  in  thy  hot  displeasure : 
what  were  this  to  purgatory,  if  Augustine  had  not 
applied  the  wrath  to  the  fire  of  hell,  and  the  dis- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MISINTERPRETATION  OF  SCRIPTURE.       629 

pleasure  to  that  of  purgatory  ?  And  what  is  it  to  part  iv. 
purgatory,  that  of  Psalm  Ixvi.  1 2,  We  went  through  .  ^^;  . 
fire  and  water ^  and  thou  hroughtest  us  to  a  moist 
place ;  and  other  the  like  texts,  with  which  the 
doctors  of  those  times  intended  to  adorn,  or  extend 
their  sermons,  or  commentaries,  haled  to  their 
purposes  by  force  of  wit  ? 

But  he  allegeth  other  places  of  the  New  Testa-  ^^"^^^fj^"" 
ment,  that  are  not  so  easy  to  be  answered.  Andmentforpurpa 
first  that  of  Matth.  xii.  32  :  Whosoever  speaheth  ^"^^  ""^"^^^^  • 
a  word  against  the  Son  of  man,  it  shall  he  for- 
given him  ;  hut  whosoever  speaheth  against  the 
Holy  Ghosty  it  shall  not  he  forgiven  him  neither 
in  this  world,  nor  in  the  world  to  come  :  where 
he  will  have  purgatory  to  be  the  world  to  come, 
wherein  some  sins  may  be  forgiven,  which  in  this 
world  were  not  forgiven :  notwithstanding  that  it 
is  manifest,  there  are  but  three  worlds^  one  from 
the  creation  to  the  flood,  which  was  destroyed  by 
water,  and  is  called  in  Scripture  the  old  world ; 
another  from  the  flood,  to  the  day  of  judgment, 
which  is  the  present  world,  and  shall  be  destroyed 
by  fire;  and  the  third,  which  shall  be  from  the 
day  of  judgment  forward,  everlasting,  which  is 
called  the  world  to  come :  and  in  which  it  is 
agreed  by  all,  there  shall  be  no  purgatory:  and 
therefore  the  world  to  come,  and  purgatory,  are 
inconsistent.  But  what  then  can  be  the  meaning 
of  those  our  Saviour's  words  ?  I  confess  they  are 
very  hardly  to  be  reconciled  with  all  the  doctrines 
now  unanimously  received :  nor  is  it  any  shame,  to 
confess  the  profoundness  of  the  Scripture  to  be 
too  great  to  be  sounded  by  the  shortness  of  human 
understanding.  Nevertheless,  I  may  propound  such 
things  to  the  consideration  of  more  learned  divines. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


630  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  as  the  text  itself  suggesteth.     And  first,  seeing  to 
.    ^'    .    speak  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  being  the  third 
Places  of  the    pcrson   of  the  Trinity,   is   to  speak   against  the 
mertfoTpuii^a- Church,  iu  which  the  Holy  Ghost  resideth ;   it 
tory  answered,  geemcth  the   comparison  is   made,  between   the 
easiness  of  our  Saviour,  in  bearing  with  offences 
done  to  him  while  he  himself  taught  the  world, 
that  is,  when  he  was  on  earth,  and  the  severity  of 
the  pastors  after  him,  against  those  which  should 
deny  their  authority,  which  was  from  the  Holy 
Ghost.     As  if  he  should  say,  you  that  deny  my 
power;  nay  you  that  shall  crucify  me,  shall  be 
pardoned  by  me,  as  often  as  you  turn  unto  me  by 
repentance :  but  if  you  deny  the  power  of  them 
that  teach  you  hereafter,  by  virtue  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  they  shall  be  inexorable,  and  shall  not  for- 
give you,  but  persecute  you  in  this  world,  and 
leave  you  without  absolution,  (though  you  turn  to 
me,  unless  you  turn  also  to  them),  to  the  punish- 
ments, as  much  as  lies  in  them,  of  the  world  to 
come.    And  so  the  words  may  be  taken  as  a  pro- 
phecy, or  prediction  concerning  the  times,  as  they 
have  along  been  in  the  Christian  Church.  Or  if  this 
be  not  the  meaning,  (for  I  am  not  peremptory  in 
such  difl&cult  places),  perhaps  there  may  be  places 
left  after  the  resurrection,  for  the  repentance  of 
some  sinners.  And  there  is  also  another  place,  that 
seemeth  to  agree  therewith.     For  considering  the 
words  of  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  xv.  29),  What  shall  tJiey 
do  which  are  baptized  for  the  dead,  if  the  dead 
rise  not  at  all?  why  also  are  they  baptized  for 
the  dead?  a  man  may  probably  infer,  as  some 
have  done,  that  in  St.  Paul's  time,  there  was  a 
custom,  by  receiving  baptism  for  the  dead,  (as  men 
that  now  believe,  are  sureties  and  undertakers  for 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MISINTERPRETATION  OF  SCRIPTURE.       631 

the  faith  of  infants,  that  are  not  capable  of  believ-  part  iv. 
ing),  to  undertake  for  the  persons  of  their  deceased      /*^'    ^ 
friends,  that  they  should  be  ready  to  obey,  and  re-  Places  of  the 
ceive  our  Saviour  for  their  king,  at  his  coming  „,entfo7j^'rga- 
again ;   and  then  the  forgiveness  of  sins  in  the  ^"^^^  answered. 
world  to  come,  has  no  need  of  a  purgatory.     But 
in  both  these  interpretations,  there  is  so  much  of 
paradox,  that  I  trust  not  to  them ;  but  propound 
them  to  those  that  are  thoroughly  versed  in  the 
Scripture,  to  inquire  if  there  be  no  clearer  place 
that  contradicts  them.     Only  of  thus  much,  I  see 
evident  Scripture,  to  persuade  me,  that  there  is 
neither  the  word,  nor  the  thing  of  purgatory,  nei- 
ther in  this,  nor  any  other  text ;  nor  any  thing  that 
can  prove  a  necessity  of  a  place  for  the  soul  with- 
out the  body ;   neither  for  the   soul  of  Lazarus 
during  the  four  days  he  was  dead ;  no^  for  the 
souls  of  them  which  the  Roman  Church  pretend 
to  be  tormented  now  in  purgatory.     For  God,  that 
could  give  a  life  to  a  piece  of  clay,  hath  the  same 
power  to  give  life  again  to  a  dead  man,  and  renew 
his  inanimate,  and  rotten  carcase,  into  a  glorious, 
spiritual,  and  immortal  body. 

Another  place  is  that  of  1  Cor,  iii.,  where  it  is 
said,  that  they  which  build  stubble,  hay,  &c.  on  the 
true  foundation,  their  work  shall  perish  ;  but  they 
themselves  shall  be  saved,  but  as  through  Jire : 
this  fire,  he  will  have  to  be  the  fire  of  purgatory. 
The  words,  as  I  have  said  before,  are  an  allusion  to 
those  of  Zech.  xiii.  9,  where  he  saith,  /  will  bring 
the  third  part  through  the  fire,  and  refine  them 
as  silver  is  refined,  and  will  try  them  as  gold  is 
tried:  which  is  spoken  of  the  coming  of  the 
Messiah  in  power  and  glory  ;  that  is,  at  the  day  of 
judgment,  and  conflagration  of  the  present  world 


Digitized  by 


Google 


632  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.   wherein  the  elect  shall  not  be  consumed,  but  be 
^    ^]'  __.    refined;  that  is,  depose  their  erroneous  doctrines 
and  traditions,  and  have  them  as  it  were  singed  off; 
and  shall  afterwards  call  upon  the  name  of  the  true 
God.     In  like  manner^  the  apostle  saith  of  them, 
that  holding  this  foundation,  Jesus  is  the  Christy 
shall  build  thereon  some  other  doctrines  that  be 
erroneous,  that  they  shall  not  be  consumed  in  that 
fire  which  reneweth  the  world,   but  shall  pass 
through  it  to  salvation ;  but  so  as  to  see,  and  relin- 
quish their  former  errors.     The  builders,  are  the 
pastors  ;  the  foundation,  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ ; 
the  stubble  and  hay,  false  consequences  drawn 
from  it  through  ignorance y  or  frailty ;  the  gold, 
silver,  and  precious  stones,  are  their  true  doctrines; 
and  their  refining  or  purging,  the  relinquishing  of 
tlieir  errors.     In  all  which  there  is  no  colour  at 
all  for  the  burning  of  incorporeal,  that  is  to  say, 
impatible  souls. 
Baptism  for       ^  third  placc  is  that  of  1  Cor.  xv.  29,  before  m«i- 

the  dead,  how    .  ,'  '^  .  -  .  ^  ,  ,        ,  ^ 

uudcwtood.  tioned,  concerning  baptism  for  the  dead :  out  of 
which  he  concludeth,  first,  that  prayers  for  the 
dead  are  not  unprofitable ;  and  out  of  that,  that 
there  is  a  fire  of  purgatory  :  but  neither  of  them 
rightly.  For  of  many  interpretations  of  the  word 
baptism,  he  approveth  this  in  the  first  place,  that 
by  baptism  is  meant,  metaphorically,  a  baptism  of 
penance ;  and  that  men  are  in  this  sense  baptized, 
when  they  fast,  and  pray,  and  give  alms  :  and  so, 
baptism  for  the  dead,  and  prayer  for  the  dead,  is 
the  same  thing.  But  this  is  a  metaphor,  of  which 
there  is  no  example,  neither  in  the  Scripture,  ncn* 
in  any  other  use  of  language ;  and  which  is  also 
discordant  to  the  harmony,  and  scope  of  the  Scrip- 
ture.    The  word  baptism  is  used  (Mark  x.  38,  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MISINTERPRETATION  OF  SCRIPTURE.        633 

Luhe  xii.  50),  for  being  dipped  in  one's  own  blood,  part  iv. 
as  Christ  was  upon  the  cross,  and  as  most  of  the  .  ^  . 
apostles  were,  for  giving  testimony  of  him.  But  it  Baptism  for 
is  hard  to  say,  that  prayer,  fasting,  and  alms,  have  underaiood!*^ 
any  similitude  with  dipping.  The  same  is  used 
also  Matth.  iii.  1 1  (which  seemeth  to  make  some- 
what for  purgatory)  for  a  purging  with  fire.  But 
it  is  evident  the  fire  and  purging  here  mentioned, 
is  the  same  whereof  the  prophet  Zechariah  speaketh 
(chapter  xiii.  9)  /  loill  bring  the  third  part  throufrh 
the  fire,  and  will  refine  them,  fyc.  And  St.  Peter 
after  him  (1  Epistle  i.  7),  That  the  trial  of  your 
faith,  which  is  much  more  precious  than  of  gold 
that  perisheth,  though  it  he  tried  with  fire,  might 
he  found  unto  praise,  and  honour,  and  glory  at 
tlie  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ;  and  St.  Paul(l  Cor. 
iii.  1 3),  Tlie  fire  shall  try  every  marCs  work  of 
what  sort  it  is.  But  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  speak 
of  the  fire  that  shall  be  at  the  second  appearing  of 
Christ ;  and  the  prophet  Zechariah  of  the  day  of 
judgment.  And  therefore  this  place  of  St.  Matthew 
may  be  interpreted  of  the  same ;  and  then  there 
will  be  no  necessity  of  the  fire  of  purgatory. 

Another  interpretation  of  baptism  for  the  dead, 
is  that  which  I  have  before  mentioned,  which  he 
preferreth  to  the  second  place  of  probability :  and 
thence  also  he  inferreth  the  utility  of  prayer  for 
the  dead.  For  if  after  the  resurrection,  such  as 
have  not  heard  of  Christ,  or  not  believed  in  him, 
may  be  received  into  Christ's  kingdom  ;  it  is  not  in 
vain,  after  their  death,  that  their  friends  should  pray 
for  them,  till  they  should  be  risen.  But  granting 
that  God,  at  the  prayers  of  the  faithftil,  may  con- 
vert unto  him  some  of  those  that  have  not  heard 


Digitized  by 


Google 


634  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.   Christ  preached,  and  consequently  cannot  have  re- 

.    ^    .   jected  Christ,  and  that  the  charity  of  men  in  that 

Baptism  for     point  cannot  be  blamed ;  yet  this  concludeth  no- 

undwM^!^''  thing  for  purgatory ;  because  to  rise  from  death  to 

life,  is  one  thing  ;  to  rise  from  purgatory  to  life  is 

another ;  as  being  a  rising  from  life  to  life,  from  a 

life  in  torments  to  a  life  in  joy. 

A  fourth  place  is  that  of  Matth.  v.  26, 26 :  Agree 
with  thine  adversary  quickly^  whilst  thou  art  in 
the  way  with  him,  lest  at  any  time  the  adversary 
deliver  thee  to  the  judge,  and  the  judge  deliver 
thee  to  the  officer,  and  thou  be  cast  into  prison : 
verily  I  say  unto  thee,  thou  shalt  hy  no  means 
come  out  thence ^  till  thou  hast  paid  the  uttermost 
farthing.  In  which  allegory,  the  oflFender  is  the 
sinner ;  both  the  adversary  and  the  judge  is  God ; 
the  way  is  this  life  ;  the  prison  is  the  grave  ;  the 
officer,  death ;  from  which,  the  sinner  shall  not  rise 
again  to  life  eternal,  but  to  a  second  death,  till  he 
have  paid  the  utmost  farthing,  or  Christ  pay  it  for 
him  by  his  passion,  which  is  a  frdl  ransom  for  all 
manner  of  sins, as  well  lesser  sins,  as  greater  crimes; 
both  being  made  by  the  passion  of  Christ  equally 
venial. 

The  fifth  place,  is  that  of  Matth.  v.  22  :  Whoso- 
ever is  angry  with  his  brotJier  without  a  cause, 
shall  he  guilty  in  judgment:  and  whosoever  shall 
say  to  his  brother,  Raca,  shall  be  guilty  in  the 
council:  but  whosoever  shall  say,  thou  fool,  shaU 
be  guilty  to  hell  fire.  From  which  words  he  in- 
ferreth  three  sorts  of  sins,  and  three  sorts  of  punish- 
ments ;  and  that  none  of  those  sins,  but  the  last, 
shall  be  punished  with  hell  fire ;  and  consequently, 
that  after  this  life,  there  is  punishment  of  lesser 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MISINTERPRETATION  OF  SCRIPTURE.        635 

sins  in  pui^tory.     Of  which  inference,  there  is  part  iv. 
no  colour  in  any  interpretation  that  hath  yet  been    ^  ^'    . 
given  of  them.     Shall  there  be  a  distinction  after  Baptism  for 
this  life  of  courts  of  justice,  as  there  was  amongst  JmUemood.^'' 
the  Jews  in  our  Saviour's  time,  to  hear,  and  deter- 
mine divers  sorts  of  crimes,  as  the  judges,  and  the 
council?     Shall  not  all  judicature  appertain  to 
Christ  and  his  apostles  ?    To  understand  therefore 
this  text,  we  are  not  to  consider  it  solitarily,  but 
jomtly  with  the  words  precedent,  and  subsequent. 
Our  Saviour  in  this  chapter  interpreteth  the  law  of 
Moses ;  which  the  Jews  thought  was  then  fulfilled, 
when  they  had  not  transgressed  the  grammatical 
sense  thereof,  howsoever   they  had  transgressed 
against  the  sentence,  or  meaning  of  the  legislator. 
Therefore  whereas  they  thought  the  sixth  com- 
mandment was  not  broken,  but  by  killing  a  man  : 
nor  the  seventh,  but  when  a  man  lay  with  a  woman, 
not  his  wife ;  our  Saviour  tells  them  the  inward 
anger  of  a  man  against  his  brother,  if  it  be  without 
just  cause,  is  homicide.     You  have  heard,  saith  he, 
the  Law  of  Moses,  TAou  shalt  not  kill^  and  that 
Whosoever  shall  ki//,  shall  be  cofidemned  before 
the  judges,  or  before  the  session  of  the  Seventy : 
but  I  say  unto  you,  to  be  angry  with  one's  brother 
v^dthout  cause,  or  to  say  unto  him  Raca,  or  Fool, 
is  homicide,  and  shall  be  punished  at  the  day  of 
judgment,  and  session  of  Christ,  and  his  apostles, 
with  hell  fire.   So  that  those  words  were  not  used  to 
distinguish  between  divers  crimes,  and  divers  courts 
of  justice,  and  divers  punishments  ;  but  to  tax  the 
distinction  between  sin  and  sin,  which  the  Jews 
drew  not  from  the  diiFerence  of  the  will  in  obeying 
God,  but  from  the   diflference   of  their  temporal 


Digitized  by 


Google 


636  OP  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  courts  of  justice;  and  to  show  them  that  he  that 

^    V' ,-    had  the  will  to  hurt  his  brother,  though  the  effect 

Baptiam  for   appear  but  in  reviling,  or  not  at  all,  shall  be  cast 

uudemo'od!'''  into  hell  fire,  by  the  judges,  and  by  the  session, 

which  shall  be  the  same,  not  different,  courts  at  the 

day  of  judgment.    This  considered,  what  can  be 

drawn  from  this  text,  to  mcdntain  purgatory,  I 

cannot  imagine. 

The  sixth  place  is  Luke  xvi.  9 ;  Make  ye  friends 
of  the  unrighteons  Mammon;  that  when  ye  fail j 
they  may  receive  you  into  everlasting  tabernacles. 
This  he  allies  to  prove  mvocation  of  saints  de- 
parted. But  the  sense  is  plain,  that  we  should 
make  friends  with  our  riches,  of  the  poor;  and 
thereby  obtain  their  prayers  whilst  they  live.  He 
that  giveth  to  the  poor^  lendeth  to  the  Lord. 

The  seventh  is  Luke  xxiii.  42:  Lord^  remember 
mey  when  thou  contest  into  thy  kingdom.  There- 
fore, saith  he,  there  is  remission  of  sins  after  this 
life.  But  the  consequence  is  not  good.  Our  Saviour 
then  forgave  hun;  and  at  his  coming  again  in  glory, 
will  remember  to  raise  him  again  to  life  eternal. 

The  eighth  is  Acts  ii.  24,  where  St.  Peter  saith 
of  Christ,  that  God  had  raised  him  up,  and  loosed 
the  pains  of  death,  because  it  was  not  possible  lie 
should  be  holden  of  it :  which  he  interprets  to  be 
a  descent  of  Christ  into  purgatory,  to  loose  some 
souls  therq  from  their  torments  :  whereas  it  is  ma- 
nifest, that  it  was  Christ  that  was  loosed ;  it  was 
he  that  could  not  be  holden  of  death,  or  the  grave ; 
and  not  the  souls  in  purgatory.  But  if  that  which 
Beza  says,  in  his  notes  on  this  place,  be  well  ob- 
served, there  is  none  that  will  not  see,  that  instead 
of  pains,  it  should  be  bands ;  and  then  there  is 
no  further  cause  to  seek  for  purgatory  in  this  text. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  DEMONOLOGY,  ETC.  637 


CHAPTER  XLV. 

OF  DEMONOLOGY,   AND  OTHER  RELICS  OF  THE 
RELIGION  OF  THE  GENTILES. 

The  impression  made  on  the  organs  of  sight  by  part  iv. 
lucid  bodies,  either  in  one  direct  line,  or  in  many    >^  ^*1' — . 
lines,  reflected  from  opaque,  or  refracted  in  the  The  original 
passage  through  diaphanous  bodies,  produceth  in 
living  creatures,  in  whom  God  hath  placed  such 
organs,  an  imagination  of  the  object,  from  whence 
the  impression  proceedeth;  which  imagination  is 
called  Sight ;  and  seemeth  not  to  be  a  mere  imagi- 
nation, but  the  body  itself  without  us ;  in  the  same 
manner,  as  when  a  man  violently  presseth  his  eye, 
there  appears  to  him  a  light  without,  and  before 
him,  which  no  man  perceiveth  but  himself;  because 
there  is  indeed  no  such  thing  without  him,  but  only 
a  motion  in  the  interior  organs,  pressing  by  re- 
sistance outward,  that  makes  him  think  so.     And 
the  motion  made  by  this  pressure,  continuing  after 
the  object  which  caused  it  is  removed,  is  that  we 
call  imagination  and  memory;  and,  in  sleep,  and 
sometimes  in  great  distemper  of  the  organs  by 
sickness  or  violence,  a  dream ;  of  which  things  I 
have  already  spoken  briefly,  in  the  second  and  third 
chapters. 

This  nature  of  sight  having  never  been  discovered 
by  the  ancient  pretenders  to  natural  knowledge ; 
much  less  by  those  that  consider  not  things  so 
remote,  as  that  knowledge  is,  from  their  present 
use ;  it  was  hard  for  men  to  conceive  of  those  images 
in  the  fancy  and  in  the  sense,  otherwise,  than  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


638  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.    things  really  without  us :  which  some,  because  they 
.    ^f •    .    vanish  away,  they  know  not  whither  nor  how,  will 

The  original  havc  to  bc  absolutcly  incorporeal,  that  is  to  say 
emcmo  gy.  i|rmQg^t^,^aj^  qj.  fonns  without  matter ;  colour  and 
figure,  without  any  coloured  or  figured  body ;  and 
that  they  can  put  on  airy  bodies,  as  a  garment,  to 
make  them  visible  when  they  will  to  our  bodily 
eyes ;  and  others  say,  are  bodies  and  living  creatures, 
but  made  of  air,  or  other  more  subtle  and  ethereal 
matter,  which  is,  then,  when  they  will  be  seen,  con- 
densed. But  both  of  them  agree  on  one  general 
appellation  of  them.  Demons.  As  if  the  dead  of 
whom  they  dreamed,  were  not  inhabitants  of  their 
own  brain,  but  of  the  air,  or  of  heaven,  or  hell ;  not 
phantasms,  but  ghosts  ;  with  just  as  much  reason 
as  if  one  should  say,  he  saw  his  own  ghost  in  a 
looking-glass,  or  the  ghosts  of  the  stars  in  a  river; 
or  call  the  ordinary  apparition  of  the  sun,  of  the 
quantity  of  about  a  foot,  the  demon,  or  ghost  of 
that  great  sun  that  enlighteneth  the  whole  visible 
world:  and  by  that  means  have  feared  them,  as 
things  of  an  unknown,  that  is,  of  an  unlimited  power 
to  do  them  good  or  harm  ;  and  consequently,  given 
occasion  to  the  governors  of  die  heathen  common- 
wealths to  regulate  this  their  fear,  by  establishing 
that  DEMONOLOGY,(in  which  the  poets,  as  principal 
priests  of  the  heathen  religion,  were  specially  em- 
ployed or  reverenced,)  to  the  public  peace,  and  to 
the  obedience  of  subjects  necessary  thereunto ;  and 
to  make  some  of  them  good  demons,  and  others 
evil;  the  one  as  a  spur  to  the  observance,  the  other 
as  reins  to  withhold  them  from  violation  of  the 
laws. 

What  kind  of  things  they  were,  to  whom  they 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  DEMONOLOGY,  ETC.  639 

attributed  the  name  of  demons ^  appeareth  partly  part  iv. 
in  the  genealogy  of  their  gods,  written  by  Hesiod,    .    ^f-    . 
one  of  the  most  ancient  poets  of  the  Grecians  ;  and  wiiat  were 
partly  in  other  histories ;  of  which  I  have  observed  oi  uieTnd'nu. 
some  few  before,  in  the  twelfth  chapter  of  this  dis- 
course. 

The  Grecians,  by  their  colonies  and  conquests,  ^7^^„^J*' 
communicated  their  language  and  writings  into  Asia,  was  spread. 
Egjrpt,  and  Italy ;  and  therein,  by  necessary  con- 
sequence their  demonology^  or,  as  St.  Paul  calls  it, 
( 1  Tim.  iv.  1 )  their  doctrines  of  devils.  And  by  that 
means  the  contagion  was  derived  also  to  the  Jews, 
both  of  Judeaand  Alexandria,  and  other  parts,  where- 
into  they  were  dispersed.   But  the  name  of  demon 
they  did  not,  as  the  Grecians,  attribute  to  spirits 
both  good  and  evil ;  but  to  the  evil  only :  and  to  the 
good  demons  they  gave  the  name  of  the  spirit  of  ^^^.j.^^ 
God  ;  and  esteemed  those  into  whose  bodies  they  f^^j^*^ 
entered  to  be  prophets.     In  sum,  all  singularity,  if 
good,  they  attributed  to  the  spirit  of  God ;  and  if 
evil,  to  some  demon,  but  a  icaicoSai/wwv,  an  evil  demon, 
that  is  a  devil.    And  therefore,  they  called  demo- 
nines  J  that  is  possessed  by  the  devil,  such  as  we 
call  madmen  or  lunatics ;  or  such  as  had  the  falling 
sickness,  or  that  spoke  any  thing  which  they,  for 
want  of  understanding,  thought  absurd.  As  also  of 
an  unclean  person  in  a  notorious  degree,  they  used 
to  say  he  had  an  unclean  spirit ;  of  a  dumb  man, 
that  he  had  a  dumb  devil ;  and  of  John  the  Baptist 
(Matt.  xi.  18),  for  the  singularity  of  his  fasting, 
that  he  had  a  devil ;  and  of  our  Saviour,  because 
he  said,  he  that  keepeth  his  sayings  should  not  see 
death  in  ^eternum,  (John  viii.  52),  Now  we  know 
thou  liast  a  devil ;  Abraham  is  dead,   and  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


640  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PARTiv.  prophets  are  dead:  and  again,  because  he  said 
.  ^^-  .  (John  vii.  20),  They  went  about  to  kill  him^  the 
people  answered,  Thou  hast  a  devil;  who  goeth 
about  to  kill  thee  ?  Whereby  it  is  manifest,  that  the 
Jews  had  the  same  opinions  concerning  phantasms, 
namely,  that  they  were  not  phantasms,  that  is,  idols 
of  the  brain,  but  things  real,  and  independant  on 
the  fancy. 
Why  our  Which  doctriuc,  if  it  be  not  true,  why,  may  some 

Saviour  con-  ,.  _  r^       •  i*        •  ■■  i 

trolled  it  not.  Say,  did  uot  our  Saviour  contradict  it,  and  teach 
the  contrary  ?  Nay,  why  does  he  use  on  divers  oc- 
casions such  forms  of  speech  as  seem  to  confirm  it  ? 
To  this  I  answer,  that  first,  where  Christ  saith,  {Luke 
xxiv.39)  A  spirit  hath  not  flesh  and  bone,  though 
he  show  that  there  be  spirits,  yet  he  denies  not  that 
they  are  bodies.  And  where  St.  Paul  says,(l  Cor.  xv. 
44)  we  shall  rise  spiritual  bodies yhe  acknowledgeth 
the  nature  of  spirits,  but  that  they  are  bodily  spirits ; 
which  is  not  difficult  to  understand.  For  air  and 
many  other  things  are  bodies,  though  not  flesh  and 
bone,  or  any  other  gross  body  to  be  discerned  by  the 
eye.  But  when  our  Saviour  speaketh  to  the  devil, 
and  commandeth  him  to  go  out  of  a  man,  if  by  the 
devil,  he  meant  a  disease,  as  phrensy,  or  lunacy,  or 
a  corporeal  spirit,  is  not  the  speech  improper  ?  Can 
diseases  hear  ?  Or  can  there  be  a  corporeal  spirit 
in  a  body  of  flesh  and  bone,  full  already  of  vital 
and  animal  spirits  ?  Are  there  not,  therefore  spirits, 
that  neither  have  bodies,  nor  are  mere  imaginations? 
To  the  first  I  answer,  that  the  addressing  of  our 
Saviour's  command  to  the  madness,  or  lunacy  he 
cureth,  is  no  more  improper  than  was  his  rebuking 
of  the  fever,  or  of  the  wind  and  sea;  for  neither 
do  these  hear ;  or  than  was  the  command  of  God, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  DBMONOLOGY,  ETC.  641 

to  the  light,  to  the  firmament,  to  the  sun,  and  stars,  part  iv. 
when  he  commanded  them  to  be ;  for  they  conld  -  ^^-  . 
not  hear  before  they  had  a  being.  But  those 
speeches  are  not  improper,  because  they  signify  the 
power  of  God's  word ;  no  more  therefore  is  it  im- 
proper, to  command  madness,  or  lunacy,  under  the 
appeUation  of  devils  by  which  they  were  then 
commonly  understood,  to  depart  out  of  a  man's 
body.  To  the  second,  concerning  their  being  incor- 
poreal,Ihavenotyet  observed  any  place  of  Scripture, 
from  whence  it  can  be  gathered,  that  any  man  was 
ever  possessed  with  any  other  corporeal  spirit,  but 
that  of  hisown,  by  which  his  body  is  naturallymoved. 

Our  Saviour,  immediately  after  the  Holy  Ghost  The  scriptures 
descended  upon  him  in  the  form  of  a  dove,  is  said  that  spirits  are 
by  St.  Matthew  (chapter  iv.  1),  to  have  been  /^rf^^^^^^poreaL 
wp  hy  the  Spirit  into  tlie  wilderness ;  and  the 
same  is  recited  (Luke  iv.  1)  in  these  words,  Jesus 
being  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost y  was  led  in  the 
Spirit  into  the  wilderness  ;  whereby  it  is  evident 
that  by  spirit  there,  is  meant  the  Holy  Ghost. 
This  cannot  be  interpreted  for  a  possession ;  for 
Christ,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  are  but  one  and  the  same 
substance  ;  which  is  no  possession  of  one  substance, 
or  body,  by  another.  And  whereas-  in  the  verses 
following  he  is  said  to  have  been  taken  up  by  the 
devil  into  the  holy  city^  and  set  upon  a  pinnacle 
of  the  temple^  shall  we  conclude  thence  that  he 
was  possessed  of  the  devil,  or  carried  thither  by 
violence  ?  And  again,  carried  thence  by  the  devil 
into  an  exceeding  high  mountain^  who  showed  him 
thence  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world:  where- 
in we  are  not  to  believe  he  was  either  possessed, 
or  forced  by  the  devil ;  nor  that  any  mountain  is 

VOL.  III.  TT 


Digitized  by 


Google 


642  OP  THE  KINGDOM  OP  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  high  enough,  according  to  the  literal  sense,  to  ^ow 

.    ^f  •  ^    him  one  whole  hemisphere.    What  then  can  be  the 

The  Scriptam  meaning  of  this  place,  other  than  that  he  went  of 

thattpintiare  himsclf  into  the  wilderness ;  and  that  this  carrying 

'^'^''P^-     of  him  np  and  down  from  the  wUdemess  to  the 

city,  and  from  thence  into  a  mountain,  was  a  vision  ? 

Conformable  wherennto,  is  also  the  phrase  of  St. 

Luke,  that  he  was  led  into  the  wilderness,  not  by, 

but  f «,  the  Spirit ;  whereas,  concerning  his  being 

taken  up  into  the  mountain,  and  unto  the  pinnacle 

of  the  temple,  he  speaketh  as  St.  Matthew  doth  : 

which  suiteth  with  the  nature  of  a  vision. 

Again,  where  St.  Luke  (chap.  xxii.  3, 4)  says  of 
Judas  Iscariot,  that  Satan  entered  into  him,  and 
thereuponthathewent  and  communed  with  the  chief 
priests  J  and  captains  ^  how  he  might  betray  Christ 
unto  them ;  it  may  be  answered,  that  by  the  entering 
of  Satan,  that  is  the  enemy ^  into  him,  is  meant,  the 
hostile  and  traitorous  intention  of  selling  his  Lord 
and  Master.  For  as  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  is  frequently 
in  Scripture  understood,  the  graces  and  good  in- 
clinations given  by  the  Holy  Ghost ;  so  by  the  en- 
tering of  Satan  may  be  understood  the  wicked 
cogitations,  and  designs  of  the  adversaries  of  Christ, 
and  his  disciples.  For  as  it  is  hard  to  say,  that  the 
devil  was  entered  into  Judas,  before  he  had  any  such 
hostile  design ;  so  it  is  impertinent  to  say,  he  was 
first  Christ's  enemy  in  his  heart,  and  that  the  devil 
entered  into  him  afterwards.  Therefore  the  en- 
tering of  Satan,  and  his  wicked  purpose,  was  one 
and  the  same  thing. 

But  if  there  be  no  immaterial  spirit,  or  any  pos- 
session of  meh*s  bodies  by  any  spirit  corporeal,  it 
may  again  be  asked,  why  our  Saviour  and  his 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  DEMONOtOGT,  ETC.  648 

apostles  did  not  teach  the  people  so ;  and  m  such  part  iv. 
clear  words,  as  they  might  no  more  donbt  thereof,  .  ^'  .  . 
But  such  questions  as  these,  are  more  curious,  than  The  scriptures 
necessary  for  a  Christian  man^s  salvation.  Men  ^.".pirfu are 
may  as  well  ask  why  Christ,  that  could  have  given  ^'^^'p®"^- 
to  all  men  faith,  piety,  and  all  manner  of  moral 
virtues,  gave  it  to  some  only,  and  not  to  all :  and 
why  he  left  the  search  of  natural  causes,  and  sciences, 
to  the  natural  reason  and  industry  of  men,  and  did 
not  reveal  it  to  all,  or  any  man  supematurally ;  and 
many  other  such  questions.  Of  which  nevertheless 
there  may  be  alleged  probable  and  pious  reasons. 
For  as  God,  when  he  brought  the  IsraeUtes  into  the 
land  of  Promise,  did  not  secure  them  therein,  by 
subduing  all  the  nations  round  about  them;  but 
left  many  of  them,  as  thorns  in  their  sides,  to 
awaken  from  time  to  time  their  piety  and  industry: 
so  our  Saviour,  in  conducting  us  toward  his 
heavenly  kingdom,  did  not  destroy  all  the  difficul- 
ties of  natural  questions ;  but  left  them  to  exercise 
our  industry,  and  reason;  the  scope  of  his  preaching, 
being  only  to  show  us  this  plain  and  direct  way  to 
salvation,  namely,  the  belief  of  this  article,  that 
he  was  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God^  sent 
into  the  world  to  sacrifice  himself  for  our  sins^ 
and  at  his  coming  again,  gloriously  to  reign  over 
his  elect,  and  to  save  them  from  their  enemies 
eternally.  To  which,  the  opinion  of  possession  by 
spirits,  or  phantasms,  is  no  impediment  in  the  way  ; 
though  it  be  to  some  an  occasion  of  going  out  of  the 
way,  and  to  follow  their  own  inventions.  If  we  re- 
quire of  the  Scripture  an  account  of  all  questions, 
which  may  be  raised  to  trouble  us  in  the  performance 
of  God's  commands,  we  may  as  well  complain  of 

T  T  2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


644  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.   Moses  for  not  having  set  down  the  time  of  the 
•   ^    ^'  _.    creation  of  such  spirits,  as  well  as  of  the  creation  of 
the  earth  and  sea,  and  of  men  and  beasts.  To  con- 
clnde;  I  find  in  Scripture  that  there  be  angels,  and 
spirits,  good  and  evil ;  but  not  that  they  are  incor- 
poreal, as  are  the  apparitions  men  see  in  the  dark,  or 
in  a  dream,  or  vision ;  which  the  Latins  call  spectra, 
and  took  for  demons.    And  I  find  that  there  are 
spirits  corporeal,  though  subtle  and  invisible ;  but 
not  that  any  man's  body  was  possessed  or  inhabited 
by  them ;  and  that  the  bodies  of  the  saints  shall  be 
such,  namely,  spiritual  bodies,   as  St.  Paul  calls 
them. 
^M^S^t^'       Nevertheless,  the  contrary  doctrine,  namely,  tturt: 
devils,  not  the  there  be  incorporeal  spirits,  hadi  hitherto  so  pre- 
in  theprimi-    vailcd  iu  the  Church,  that  the  use  of  exorcism,  that 
tive  church.     ^  ^^  ^^^  ^^  ejcctiou  of  devils  by  conjun^ion,  is 
thereupon  built;  and,  though  rarely  and  faintly 
practised,  is  not  yet  totally  given  over.    That  there 
were  many  demoniacs  in  the  primitive  Church,  and 
few  madmen,  and  other  such  singular  diseases; 
whereas  in  these  times  we  hear  of,  and  see  many 
madmen,  and  few  demoniacs,  proceeds  not  from  the 
change  of  nature,  but  of  names.    But  how  it  conies 
to  pass  that  whereas  heretofore  the  apostles,  and 
after  them  for  a  time,  the  pastors  of  the  Church, 
did  cure  those  singular  diseases,  which  now  they 
are  not  seen  to  do ;  as  likewise,  why  it  is  not  in  the 
power  of  every  true  believer  now,  to  do  all  that  the 
faithful  did  then,  that  is  to  say,  as  we  read  (Menrk 
xvi.  17,  18),  in  Chris fs  name  to  east  out  detUSy 
to  speak  with  new  tongues,  to  take  up  serpents, 
to  drink  deadly  poison  without  harm-taking,  and 
to  cure  the  sick  by  the  laying  on  of  their  hands. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF    DEMONOLOOY,  ETC.  645 

and  all  this  without  other  words,  but  in  the  name  part  ly, 
qf  Jesu8,  is  another  question.  And  it  is  probable  .  ^'  . 
that  those  extraordinary  gifts  were  given  to  the 
Church,  for  no  longer  a  time,  than  men  trusted 
wholly  to  Christ,  and  looked  for  their  felicity  only 
in  his  kingdom  to  come ;  and  consequently,  that 
when  they  sought  authority,  and  riches,  aud  trusted 
to  their  own  subtlety  for  a  kingdom  of  this  world, 
these  supernatural  gifts  of  God  were  again  taken 
from  them. 

Another  relic  of  Gentilism  is,  the  worship  o/ pother  relic 
images^  neither  mstituted  by  Moses  m  the  Old,  nor  worshipping  of 
by  Christ  in  the  New  Testament ;  nor  yet  brought  Ihe*churdi,not 
in  from  the  Gentiles  ;  but  left  amongst  them  after  ^"°«^*^^**- 
they  had  given  their  names  to  Christ.  Before  our 
Saviour  preached,  it  was  the  general  religion  of  the 
Gentiles  to  worship  for  gods  those  apparences 
that  remain  in  the  brain  from  the  impression  of 
external  bodies  upon  the  organs  of  their  senses, 
which  are  commonly  called  ideas,  idoU,  phantasms y 
conceits y  as  being  representations  of  those  external 
bodies  which  cause  them,  and  have  nothing  in  them 
of  reality,  no  more  than  there  is  in  the  things  that 
seem  to  stand  before  us  in  a  dream.  And  this  is  the 
reason  why  St.  Paul  says,  ( 1  Cor.  viii,4)  we  know  that 
an  idol  is  nothing ;  not  that  he  thought  that  an 
image  of  metal,  stone,  or  wood,  was  nothing ;  but 
that  the  thing  which  they  honoured,  or  feared  in  the 
image,  and  held  for  a  god,  was  a  mere  figment, 
without  place,  habitation,  motion,  or  existence,  but 
in  the  motions  of  the  brain.  And  the  worship  of 
these  with  divine  honour,  is  that  which  is  in  the 
Scripture  called  idolatry,  and  rebellion  against  God. 
For  God  being  King  of  the  Jews,  and  his  lieutenant 


Digitized  by 


Google 


646 


OF  THE  KINGDOM  OP  DARKNESS. 


PART  IV.  being  first  Moses,  and  afterward  the  high-priest ; 
.  ^f'  .  if  the  people  had  been  permitted  to  worship,  and 
pray  to  images,  which  are  representations  of  their 
own  fancies,  they  had  had  no  further  dependance 
on  the  true  God,  of  whom  there  can  be  no  simi- 
litude ;  nor  on  his  prime-ministers,  Moses  and  the 
high-priests ;  but  every  man  had  governed  himself 
according  to  his  own  appetite,  to  the  utter  eversion 
of  the  commonwealth,  and  their  own  destruction 
for  want  of  union.  And  therefore  the  first  law  of 
God  was,  they  should  not  take  for  godsy  Alienos 
Deos,  that  is,  the  gods  of  other  nations^  hut  that 
only  true  God,  who  vouchsafed  to  commune  with 
Moses,  and  hy  him  to  give  them  laws  and  directions , 
for  their  peace,  and  for  their  salvation  from  their 
enemies.  And  the  second  was,  that  they  should 
not  make  to  themselves  any  image  to  worship,  of 
their  own  invention.  For  it  is  the  same  deposing 
of  a  king,  to  submit  to  another  king,  whether  he 
be  set  up  by  a  neighbour  nation,  or  by  ourselves. 
ABiwer  The  places  of  Scripture  pretended  to  countenance 

teeming  texts  the  scttiug  Up  of  imagcs,  to  worship  them  ;  or  to 
for  images.  ^^^  x)[i%xEL  up  at  all  iu  the  placcs  where  God  is  wor- 
shipped, are  first,  two  examples  ;  one  of  the  cheru- 
bims  over  the  ark  of  God ;  the  other  of  the  brazen 
serpent.  Secondly,  some  texts  whereby  we  are 
commanded  to  worship  certain  creatures  for  their 
relation  to  God ;  as  to  worship  his  footstool.  And 
lastly,  some  other  texts,  by  which  is  authorized  a 
religious  honouring  of  holy  things.  But  before  I 
examine  the  force  of  those  places,  to  prove  that 
which  is  pretended,  I  must  first  explain  what  is  to 
be  understood  by  worshipping,  and  what  by  imager 
and  idols. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  DEMONOLOGT,  ETC.  647 

I  have  already  shown  in  the  xxth  chapter  of  this  part  iv. 
discourse,  that  to  hononr,  is  to  value  highly  the    .     ^-   . 
power  of  any  person  :  and  that  such  value  is  mea-    what  is 
sured,  by  our  comparing  him  with  others.     But  be-    ''°"^- 
cause  there  is  nothing  to  be  compared  with  God  in 
power ;  we  honour  him  not,  but  dishonour  him  by 
any  value  less  than  infinite.     And  thus  honoiu-  is 
properly  of  its  own  nature,  secret,  and  internal  in 
the  heart.     But  the  inward  thoughts  of  men,  which 
appear  outwardly  in  their  words  and  actions,  are 
the  signs  of  our  honouring,  and  these  go  by  the 
name  of  worship ;  in  Latin,  cultus.    Therefore,  to 
pray  to,  to  swear  by,  to  obey,  to  be  dihgent  and 
officious  in  serving  :   in  sum,  all  words  and  actions 
that  betoken  fear  to  oflFend,  or  desire  to  please,  is 
worship  J  whether  those  words  and  actions  be  sin- 
cere, or  feigned  :  and  because  they  appear  as  signs 
of  honouring,  are  ordinarily  also  called  honour. 

The  worship  we  exhibit  to  those  we  esteem  to  be  pistmction 

,.  ,  .  ,....,  between  divine 

but  men,  as  to  kmgs,  and  men  m  authority,  is  ctvtl  and  civUwor- 
worship :  but  the  worship  we  exhibit  to  that  which  *^*^* 
we  think  to  be  God,  whatsoever  the  words,  cere- 
monies, gestures  or  other  actions  be,  is  divine  wor- 
ship. To  fall  prostrate  before  a  king,  in  him  that 
thinks  him  but  a  man,  is  but  civil  worship  :  and  he 
that  putteth  off  his  hat  in  the  church,  for  this  cause, 
that  he  thinketh  it  the  house  of  God,  worshippeth 
vnth  divine  worship.  They  that  seek  the  distinction 
of  divine  and  civil  worship,  not  in  the  intention  of 
the  worshipper,  but  in  the  words  SovXc/a  and  Xdrpcca, 
deceive  themselves.  For  whereas  there  be  two 
sorts  of  servants :  that  sort,  which  is  of  those  that 
are  absolutely  in  the  power  of  their  masters,  as 
slaves  taken  in  war,  and  their  issue,  whose  bodies 


Digitized  by 


Google 


648     OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  are  not  in  their  own  power,  (their  lives  dq>ending 

^  ^f  •  .  on  the  will  of  their  masters,  in  such  manner  as  to 
forfeit  them  upon  the  least  disobedience),  and  that 
are  bought  and  sold  as  beasts,  were  called  SovXoc,that 
is,  properly  slaves,  and  their  service  SovX^la :  the  other, 
which  is  of  those  that  serve  (for  hire,  or  in  hope  of 
benefit  from  their  masters)  voluntarily,  are  called 
OriTBg  ;  that  is,  domestic  servants,  to  whose  service 
the  masters  have  no  further  right,  than  is  contained 
in  the  covenants  made  betwixt  them.  These  two 
kinds  of  servants  have  thus  much  common  to  them 
both,  that  their  labour  is  appointed  them  by  another: 
and  the  word  Xarpig^  is  the  general  name  of  both^ 
signifying  him  that  worketh  for  another,  whether 
.  as  a  dave,  or  a  voluntary  servant.  So  that  XarpUa 
signifieth  generally  all  service ;  but  Sot/Xcea  the  ser- 
vice of  bondmen  only,  and  the  condition  of  slavery : 
and  both  are  used  in  Scripture,  (to  signify  our  ser- 
vice of  God)  promiscuously ;  SovXaa,  because  we  are 
God's  slaves  ;  Xarpua^  because  we  serve  him.  And 
in  alt  kinds  of  service  is  contained,  not  only  obedi- 
ence, but  also  worship  ;  that  is,  such  actions,  ges- 
jtures,  and  words,  as  signify  honour. 

An  iraagc,  v  ^  image,  in  the  most  strict  signification  of  the 
word,  is  the  resemblance  of  something  visible :  in 

Phantasms,  which  seusc  thc  phautastical  forms,  apparitions,  or 
seemings  of  visible  bodies  to  the  sight,  are  only 
images  ;  such  as  are  the  show  of  a  man,  or  other 
thing  in  the  water,  by  reflection,  or  r^raction  ;  or 
of  the  sun,  or  stars  by  direct  vision  in  the  air ; 
which  are  nothing  real  in  the  things  seen,  nor  in 
the  place  where  they  seem  to  be ;  nor  are  their 
magnitudes  and  figures  the  same  with  that  of  the 
object ;  but  changeable,  by  the  variation  of  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  DEMONOIiOGY,  ETC. 


649 


organs  of  sight,  or  by  glasses,  and  are  present  often-  part  iv. 
times  in  our  imagination,  and  in  our  dreams,  when    ^   '^'    ^ 
the  object  is  absent ;  or  changed  into  other  colours 
and  shapes,  as  things  that  depend  only  upon  the 
fancy.     And  these  are  the  images,  which  are  ori- 
ginally and  most  properly  called  icleasy  and  idols, 
and  derived  from  the  language  of  the  Grecians, 
with  whom  the  word  ccSw  signifieth /o  see.  They  also 
are  called  phantasms,  which  is  in  the  same  lan-| 
guage,  apparitions.     And  from  these  images  it  is,? 
that  one  of  the  faculties  of  man's  nature,  is  called! 
the  imagination.     And  from  hence  it  is  manifest,% 
that  there  neither  is,  nor  can  be,  any  image  made| 
of  a  thing  invisible. 

It  is  also  evident,  that  there  can  be,  no  image  of 
a  thing  infinite :  for  all  the  images,  and  phantasms 
that  are  made  by  the  impression  of  things  visible, 
are  figured ;  but  figure  is  a  quantity  every  way  de- 
termined. And  therefore  there  can  be  no  image  of 
God ;  nor  of  the  soul  of  man  ;  nor  of  spirits  ;  but 
only  of  bodies  visible ;  that  is,  bodies  that^  have  \ 
light  in  themselves,  or  are  by  such  enlightened.        ,. 

And  whereas  a  man  can  fancy  shapes  he  never 
saw ;  making  up  a  figure  out  of  the  parts  of  divers 
creatures ;  as  the  poets  make  their  centaurs,  chi- 
meras, and  other  monsters  never  seen  :  so  can  he 
also  give  matter  to  those  shapes,  and  make  them  in 
wood,  clay,  or  metal.  And  these  are  also  called 
images,  not  for  the  resemblance  of  any  corporeal 
thing,  but  for  the  resemblance  of  some  phantastical 
inhabitants  of  the  brain  of  the  maker.  But  in  these 
idols,  as  they  are  originally  in  the  brain,  and  as  they 
are  painted,  carved,  moulded,  or  moulten  in  matter, 
there  is  a  similitude  of  the  one  to  the  other,  for 


Fictions. 


Material 
imagea. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


J 


650  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.   which  the  material  body  made  by  art,  may  be  said 
.    ^'    .    to  be  the  image  of  the  fantastical  idol  made  by 
natm*e. 

But  in  a  larger  use  of  the  word  image,  is  con- 
tained also,  any  representation  of  one  thing  by  ano- 
ther. So  an  earthly  sovereign  may  be  called  the 
image  of  God:  and  an  inferior  magistrate,  the 
image  of  an  earthly  sovereign.  And  many  times  in 
the  idolatry  of  the  Gentiles  there  was  little  r^ard 
to  the  similitude  of  their  material  idol  to  the  idol 
in  their  fancy,  and  yet  it  was  called  the  image  of 
it.  For  a  stone  unhewn  has  been  set  up  for  Nep- 
tune, and  divers  other  shapes  far  different  from  the 
shapes  they  conceived  of  their  gods.  And  at  this 
day  we  see  many  images  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  and 
other  saints,  unlike  one  another,  and  without. cor- 
respondence to  any  one  man's  fancy  ;  and  yet  serve 
well  enough  for  the  purpose  they  were  erected  for ; 
which  was  no  more  but  by  the  names  only,  to  re- 
present the  persons  mentioned  in  the  history ;  to 
which  every  man  applieth  a  mental  image  of  his 
own  making,  or  none  at  all.  And  thus  an  image 
1  in  the  largest  sense,  is  either  the  resemblance,  or 
/  the  representation  of  some  thing  visible ;  or  both 
(  together,  as  it  happeneth  for  the  most  part. 

But  the  name  of  idol  is  extended  yet  further  in 
Scripture,  to  signify  also  the  sun,  or  a  star,  or  any 
other  creature,  visible  or  invisible,  when  they  are 
worshipped  for  gods. 
Idolatry,  what  Having  showu  what  is  worship,  and  what  an 
image  ;  I  will  now  put  them  together,  and  examine 
what  that  idolatry  is,  which  is  forbidden  in  the 
second  commandment,  and  other  places  of  the 
Scripture. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  DBMONOLOGY,  ETC.  651 

To  worship  an  image,  is  voluntarily  to  do  those  part  iv. 
external  acts,  which  are  signs  of  honouring  either    .^'   ^ 
the  matter  of  the  image,  which  is  wood,  stone,  idolatry,  what. 
metal,  or  some  other  visible  creature ;  or  the  phan- 
tasm of  the  brain,  for  the  resemblance,  or  repre- 
sentation whereof,   the  matter  was  formed  and 
figured;  or  both  together,  as  one  animate  body, 
composed  of  the  matter  and  the  phantasm,  as  of  a 
body  and  soul. 

To  be  uncovered,  before  a  man  of  power  and  au- 
thority, or  before  the  throne  of  a  prince,  or  in  such 
other  places  as  he  ordaineth  to  that  purpose  in  his 
absence,  is  to  worship  that  man,  or  prince  with  civil 
worship;  as  being  a  sign,  not  of  honouring  the 
stool  or  place,  but  the  person ;  and  is  not  idolatry. 
But  if  he  that  doth  it,  should  suppose  the  soul  of  the 
prince  to  be  in  the  stool,  or  should  present  a  peti- 
tion to  the  stool,  it  were  divine  worship,  and 
idolatry. 

To  pray  to  a  king  for  such  things,  as  he  is  able 
to  do  for  us,  though  we  prostrate  ourselves  before 
him,  is  but  civil  worship  ;  because  we  acknowledge 
no  other  power  in  him,  but  human  :  but  voluntarily 
to  pray  unto  him  for  fair  weather,  or  for  any  thing 
which  God  only  can  do  for  us,  is  divine  worship, 
and  idolatry.  On  the  other  side,  if  a  king  compel 
a  man  to  it  by  the  terror  of  death,  or  other  great 
corporal  punishment,  it  is  not  idolatry :  for  the 
worship  which  the  sovereign  commandeth  to  be 
done  unto  himself  by  the  terror  of  his  laws,  is  not 
a  sign  that  he  that  obeyeth  him,  does  inwardly 
honour  him  as  a  God,  but  that  he  is  desirous  to 
save  himself  from  death,  or  from  a  miserable  life  ;  « 

and  that  which  is  not  a  sign  of  internal  honour,  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


652  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.   no  worship ;  and  therefore  no  idolatry.    Neitfao- 
^    ^'  _     can  it  be  said,  that  he  that  does  it,  seandalizeth,  or 

Idolatry,  wfaat  layeth  any  stumbling  block  before  his  brother  ; 
because  how  wise,  or  learned  soever  he  be  thi^ 
worshippeth  in  that  manner,  another  man  cannot 
from  thence  argue,  that  he  approveth  it ;  but  that 
he  doth  it  for  fear ;  and  that  it  is  not  his  act,  but 
the  act  of  his  sovereign. 

To  worship  God,  in  some  peculiar  place,  or  turn- 
ing a  man's  face  towards  an  image,  or  determinate 
place,  is  not  to  worship,  or  honour  the  place,  or 
image ;  but  to  acknowledge  it  holy,  that  is  to  say, 
to  acknowledge  the  image,  or  the  place  to  be  set 
apart  from  common  use.    For  that  is  the  meaning 
of  the  word  holy ;  which  implies  no  new  quality 
in  the  place  or  image,  but  only  a  new  relation  by 
appropriation  to  God ;  and  therefore  is  not  idolatry ; 
no  more  than  it  was  idolatry  to  worship  God  before 
the  brazen  serpent ;  or  for  the  Jews,  when  they 
were  out  of  their  own  country,  to  turn  their  faces, 
when  they  prayed,  towards  the  temple  of  Jeru- 
\salem  ;  or  for  Moses  to  put  off  his  shoes  when  he 
was  before  the  flaming  bush,  the  ground  appertain- 
ing to  Mount  Sinai,  which  place  God  had  chosen 
to  appear  in,  and  to  give  his  laws  to  tl^e  people  of 
Israel,  and  was  therefore  holy  ground,  not  by  inhe^ 
rent  sanctity,  but  by  separation  to  God's  use ;  or 
for  Christians  to  worship  in  the  churches,  which 
are  once  solemnly  dedicated  to  God  for  that  pur- 
pose, by  the  authority  of  the  king,  or  other  true 
representant  of  the  Church.    But  to  worship  God, 
as  inanimating,  or  inhabiting  such  image,  or  place ; 
that  is  to  say,  in  infinite  substance  in  a  finite  place, 
is  idolatry :  for  such  finite  gods,  are  but  idols  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  i)BM0N0L06Y^  ETC.  653 

the  brain,  nothing  real ;  and  are  commonly  called  part  iv. 
in  the  Scripture  by  the  names  of  vanity,  and  lies,  ,  ^f *  . 
and  nothing.  Also  to  worship  God,  not  as  inani-  idolatry,  what 
mating,  or  present  in  the  place,  or  image ;  but  to 
the  end  to  be  put  in  mind  of  him,  or  of  some  works 
of  his,  in  case  the  place,  or  image  be  dedicated,  or 
set  up  by  priyate  authority,  and  not  by  the  autho- 
rity Off  them  that  are  our  sovereign  pastors,  is  ido- 
latry. For  the  commandment  is,  thou  shalt  not 
m($ke  to  thyself  any  graven  image.  God  com- 
manded Moses  to  set  up  the  brazen  serpent ;  he  did 
not  make  it  to  himself ;  it  was  not  therefore  against 
the  commandment.  But  the  making  of  the  golden 
calf  by  Aaron,  and  the  people,  as  being  done  with- 
out authority  from  God,  was  idolatry;  not  only 
because  they  held  it  for  God,  but  also  because  they 
made  it  for  a  religious  use,  without  wj 
from  God  their  sovereign,  or  from 
his  lieutenant.  '  *^  ^7  '^y  >,  \ 

The  Gentiles  worshipped  for  god^ '^i^t^^  ^' 
others  ;   that  living,  were  men  perhaps 
done  great  and  glorious  acts :  and  for  the  cl 
of  God,  divers  men  and  women,  supposing  them 
gotten  between  an  immortal  deity,  and  a  mortal 
man.    This  was  idolatry,  because  they  made  them 
so  to  themselves,  having  no  authority  from  God, 
neither  in  his  eternal  law  of  reason,  nor  in  his  posi- 
tive and  revealed  will.  But  though  our  Saviour  was 
a  man,  whom  we  also  believe  to  be  God  immortal, 
and  the  Son  of  God,  yet  this  is  no  idolatry;  because 
we  build  not  that  belief  upon  our  own  fancy,  or 
judgment,  but  upon  the  Word  of  God  revealed  in 
the  Scriptures.    And  for  the  adoration  of  the  Eu- 
chiuist,  if  the  words  of  Christ,  this  is  my  body, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


654  OP  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  signify,  that  he  himself,  and  the  seeming  bt^ead  in 
.  ^fv  .  his  handy  and  not  only  so,  but  that  all  the  seem-- 
Idolatry,  what  ing  moTsels  of  bread  that  have  ever  since  been, 
and  any  time  hereafter  shall  be  consecrated  by 
priests,  be  so  many  Christ's  bodies,  and  yet  all 
of  them  but  one  body;  then  is  that  no  idolatry,  be- 
cause it  is  authorized  by  our  Saviour :  but  if  that 
text  do  not  signify  that,  (for  there  is  no  other  that 
can  be  alleged  for  it)  then,  because  it  is  a  worship 
of  human  institution,  it  is  idolatry.  For  it  is  not 
enough  to  say,  God  can  transubstantiate  the  bread 
into  Christ's  body:  for  the  Gentiles  also  held 
God  to  be  omnipotent,  and  might  upon  that  ground 
no  less  excuse  their  idolatry,  by  pretending,  as  wdl 
as  others,  a  transubstantiation  of  their  wood,  and 
stone  into  God  Almighty. 

Whereas  there  be,  that  pretend  divine  inspiration 
to  be  the  supernatural  entering  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
into  a  man,  and  not  an  acquisition  of  God*s  graces, 
by  doctrine,  and  study ;  I  think  they  are  in  a  very 
dangerous  dilemma.  For  if  they  worship  not  the 
man  whom  they  beUeve  to  be  so  inspired,  they  fedl 
into  impiety ;  as  not  adoring  God's  supernatural 
presence.  And  again,  if  they  worship  him,  they 
commit  idolatry ;  for  the  apostles  would  never  per- 
mit themselves  to  be  so  worshipped.  Therefore 
the  safest  way  is  to  believe,  that  by  the  descending 
of  the  dove  upon  the  apostles ;  and  by  Christ's 
breathing  on  them,  when  he  gave  them  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  and  by  the  giving  of  it  by  imposition  of 
hands,  are  understood  the  signs  which  God  has 
been  pleased  to  use,  or  ordain  to  be  used,  of  his 
promise  to  assist  those  persons  in  their  study  to 
preach  his  kingdom,  and  in  their  conversation. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  DBMONOLOGT^  ETC.  655 

that  it  might  not  be  scandalous^  but  edifying  to  part  iv. 
others.  .  /^-    . 

Besides  the  idolatrous  worship  of  images^  there  Scandmions 
is  also  a  scandalous  worship  of  them ;  which  is  also  J^agw?  ° 
a  sin,  but  not  idolatry.  For  idolatry  is  to  worship 
by  signs  of  an  internal,  and  real  honour :  but  scan- 
dalous worship,  is  but  seeming  worship,  and  may 
sometimes  be  joined  with  an  inward,  and  hearty 
detestation,  both  of  the  image,  and  of  the  phantas- 
tical  demon,  or  idol,  to  which  it  is  dedicated ;  and 
proceed  only  from  the  fear  of  death,  or  other  griev- 
ous punishment ;  and  is  nevertheless  a  sin  in  them 
that  so  worship,  in  case  they  be  men  whose  actions 
jure  looked  at  by  others,  as  lights  to  guide  them 
by ;  because  following  their  ways,  they  cannot  but 
stumble,  and  fall  in  the  way  of  religion  :  whereas 
the  example  of  those  we  regard  not,  works  not  on 
us  at  all,  but  leaves  us  to  our  own  diligence  and 
caution ;  and  consequently  are  no  causes  of  our 
falling. 

If  therefore  a  pastor  lawfully  called  to  teach  and 
direct  others,  or  any  other,  of  whose  knowledge 
there  is  a  great  opinion,  do  external  honour  to  an 
idol  for  fear  ;  unless  he  make  his  fear  and  unwil- 
lingness to  it,  as  evident  as  the  worship  ;  he  scan- 
dalizeth  his  brother,  by  seeming  to  approve  idolatry. 
For  his  brother  arguing  from  the  action  of  his 
teacher,  or  of  him  whose  knowledge  he  esteemeth 
great,  concludes  it  to  be  lawftQ  in  itself.  And  this 
scandal  is  sin,  and  a  scandal  given.  But  if  one 
being  no  pastor,  nor  of  eminent  reputation  for 
knowledge  in  Christian  doctrine,  do  the  same,  and 
another  follow  him ;  this  is  no  scandal  given  ;  for 
he  had  no  cause  to  follow  such  example :  but  is  a 


Digitized  by 


Google 


656  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OP  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  pretence  of  scandal^  which  he  taketh  of  himself  for 
.    ^'    .    an  excuse  before  men.    For  an  unlearned  man^  that 
Seandaiout  is  in  the  powcT  of  an  idolatrous  king,  or  state^  if 
J^^age^  °    commanded  on  pain  of  death  to  worship  before  an 
idol,  he  detesteth  the  idol  in  his  heart,  he  doth 
well;  though  if  he  had  the  fortitude  to  suffer  death, 
rather  than  worship  it,  he  should  do  better.     But 
if  a  pastor,  who  as  Christ^s  messenger,  has  under- 
taken to  teach  Christ's  doctrine  to  aD  nations,should 
do  the  same,  it  were  not  only  a  sinful  scandal,  in 
respect  of  other  Christian  men's  consciences,  but  a 
perfidious  forsakii^  of  his  charge. 

The  sum  of  that  which  I  have  said  hitherto,  con- 
eemmg  the  worship  of  images,  is  this,  that  he  that 
worshippeth  in  an  image,  or  any  creature,  either 
the  matter  thereof,  or  any  fancy  of  his  own,  whieh 
he  tbinketh  to  dwell  in  it ;  or  both  together ;  or 
believeth  that  such  tfamgs  hear  his  prayers,  or  see 
his  devotions,  without  ears  or  eyes^  committeth 
idolatry :  and  he  that  counterfeiteth  such  worship 
for  fear  of  punishment,  if  he  be  a  man  whose  ex- 
ample hath  power  amongst  his  brethren,  committeth 
a  sin.  But  he  that  worshippeth  the  Creator  of  the 
world  before  such  an  image,  or  in  such  a  place  as 
he  hath  not  made,  or  chosen  of  himself,  but  taken 
from  the  commandment  of  God*s  word,  as  the  Jews 
did  in  worshipping  God  before  the  cherubims,  and 
before  the  brazen  serpent  for  a  time,  and  in,  or 
towards  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem,  which  was  also 
but  for  a  time,  committeth  not  idolatry. 

Now  for  the  worship  of  saints,  and  inures,  and 
relics,  and  other  things  at  this  day  practised  in  the 
Church  of  Rome,  I  say  they  arc  not  allowed  by  the 
Word  of  God,  nor  brought  into  the  Church  of  Rome, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  DBMONOLOGT,  ETC.  657 

from  the  doctrine  there  taught ;  but  partly  left  m  part  iv. 
it  at  the  first  conversion  of  the  Gentiles ;  and  after*       ^'^ 
wards  conntenanced^    and  confirmed,    and  aug- 
mented by  the  bishops  of  Rome. 

As  for  the  proofs  alleged  out  of  Scripture,  namely,  Answer  to 
those  examples  of  images  appointed  by  God  to  fromX"che- 
be  set  up ;  they  were  not  set  up  for  the  people,  br*^cu  iei^cnt. 
or  any  man  to  worship,  but  that  they  should  wor- 
ship God  himself  before  them ;  as  before  the  che- 
rubims  over  the  ark,  and  the  brazen  serpent.    For 
we  read  not,  that  the  priest,  or  any  other  did 
worship  the  cherubims;  but  contrarily  we  read 
(2  Kings  xviii.  4)  that  Hezekiah  brake  in  pieces 
the  brazen  serpent  which  Moses  had  set  up,  be- 
cause the  people  burnt  incense  to  it.   Besides,  those 
examples  are  not  put  for  our  imitation,  that  we  also 
should  set  up  images,  under  pretence  of  worshipping 
God  before  them ;  because  the  words  of  the  second 
commandment,  thou  shalt  not  make  to  thyself  any 
graven  image^  8fc.  distinguish  between  the  images 
that  God  commanded  to  be  set  up,  and  those  which 
we  set  up  to  ourselves.    And  therefore  from  the 
cherubims  or  brazen  serpent,  1  o  the  images  of  man^s 
devising ;  and  from  the  worship  commanded  by  God, 
to  the  will-worship  of  men,  the  argument  is  not 
good.    This  also  is  to  be  considered,  that  as  Heze- 
kiah brake  in  pieces  the  brazen  serpent,  because 
the  Jews  did  worship  it,  to  the  end  they  should 
do  so  no  more ;  so  also  Christian  sovereigns  ought 
to  break  down  the  images  which  their  subjects  have 
been  accustomed  to  worship,  that  there  be  no  more 
occasion  of  such  idolatry.     For  at  this  day,  the 
ignorant  people,  where  images  are  worshipped,  do 
really  believe  there  is  a  divine  power  in  the  images ; 

VOL.  III.  u  u 


Digitized  by 


Google 


658 


OF  THB  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 


PART  IV.  and  are  told  by  their  pastors,  that  some  of  them 
.  ^'  .  have  spoken ;  and  have  bled ;  and  that  miracles  have 
been  done  by  them ;  which  they  apprehend  as  done 
by  the  saint,  which  they  think  either  is  the  image 
itself,  or  in  it.  The  Israelites,  when  they  worshipped 
the  calf,  did  think  they  worshipped  the  God  that 
brought  them  out  of  Egypt ;  and  yet  it  was  idolatry, 
because  they  thought  the  calf  either  was  that  God,  or 
had  him  in  his  belly.  And  though  some  man  may 
think  it  impossible  for  people  to  be  so  stupid,  as  to 
think  the  image  to  be  God,  or  a  saint ;  or  to  worship 
it  in  that  notion  ;  yet  it  is  manifest  in  Scripture  to 
the  contrary ;  where  when  the  golden  calf  was  made, 
the  people  said,  (Exod.  xxxii.  4)  These  are  thy 
godsy  O  Israel ;  and  where  the  images  of  Laban 
(Gen.  xxxi.  30)  are  called  his  gods.  And  we  see 
daily  by  experience  in  all  sorts  of  people,  that  such 
men  as  study  nothing  but  their  food  and  ease,  are 
content  to  beUeve  any  absurdity,  rather  than  to 
trouble  themselves  to  examine  it ;  holding  their  feuth 
as  it  were  by  entail  imalienable,  except  by  an  ex- 
press and  new  law. 
Punting  of  But  they  infer  from  some  other  places,  that  it  is 
[dohlu^rbut  lawful  to  paint  angels,  and  also  God  himself:  as 
to  rei^^o'Sg"*  ^^^  God's  walking  in  the  garden;  from  Jacob's  see- 
worship  ii.  ing  God  at  the  top  of  the  ladder ;  and  from  other  vi- 
sions, and  dreams.  But  visions,  and  dreams,  whether 
natural,  or  supernatural,  are  but  phantasms  :  and 
he  that  painteth  an  image  of  any  of  them,  maketh 
not  an  image  of  God,  but  of  his  own  phantasm, 
which  is  making  of  an  idol.  I  say  not,  that  to  draw 
a  picture  after  a  fancy,  is  a  sin ;  but  when  it  is 
drawn,  to  hold  it  for  a  representation  of  God,  is 
against  the  second  commandment ;  and  can  be  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  DEMONOLOGY,  BTC.  659 

no  use,  but  to  worship.  And  the  same  may  be  smd  part  iv. 
of  the  images  of  angels,  and  of  men  dead ;  unless  _  ^  - 
as  monuments  of  friends,  or  of  men  worthy  re- 
membrance. For  such  use  of  an  image,  is  not  wor- 
ship of  the  image ;  but  a  civil  honouring  of  the 
person,  not  that  is,  but  that  was.  But  when  it  is 
done  to  the  image  which  we  make  of  a  saint,  for 
no  other  reason,  but  that  we  think  he  heareth  our 
prayers,  and  is  pleased  with  the  honour  we  do  him, 
when  dead,  and  without  sense,  we  attribute  to  him 
more  Ihan  human  power ;  and  therefore  it  is  idolatry. 

Seeing  therefore  there  is  no  authority,  neither  in 
the  law  of  Moses,  nor  in  the  Gospel,  for  the  religious 
worship  of  images,  or  other  representations  of  God, 
which  men  set  up  to  themselves ;  or  for  the  worship 
of  the  image  of  any  creature  in  heaven  or  earth,  or 
under  the  earth  :  and  whereas  Christian  kings,  who 
are  living  representants  of  God,  are  not  to  be  wor- 
shipped by  their  subjects,  by  any  act  that  signifieth 
a  greater  esteem  of  his  power,  than  the  nature  of 
mortal  man  is  capable  of;  it  cannot  be  imagined,  that 
the  religious  worship  now  in  use,  was  brought  into 
the  Church  by  misunderstanding  of  [the  Scripture. 
It  resteth  therefore,  that  it  was  left  in  it,  by  not 
destroying  the  images  themselves,  in  the  conversion 
of  the  Gentiles  that  worshipped  them. 

The  cause  whereof,  was  the  immoderate  esteem,  How  idoi- 
and  prices  set  upon  the  workmanship  of  them,  HiThrchurch. 
which  made  the  owners,  though  converted  from 
worshipping  them  as  they  had  done  religiously  for 
demons,  to  retain  them  still  in  their  houses,  upon 
pretence  of  doing  it  in  the  honour  of  Christ,  of  the 
Virgin  Mary,  and  of  the  Apostles,  and  other  the 
pastors  of  the  primitive  Church ;  as  being  easy,  by 

UU2 

Digitized  by  VjOOQlC  ^ 


660  OF  THB  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

FART  IV.  giving  them  new  names,  to  make  that  an  image  of 
_^'  '  the  Virgin  Mary,  and  of  her  son  our  Saviour,  which 
before  perhaps  was  called  the  image  of  Venus,  and 
Cupid ;  and  so  of  a  Jupiter  to  make  a  Barnabas, 
and  of  Mercury  a  Paul,  and  the  like.  And  as 
worldly  ambition  creeping  by  degrees  into  the  pas- 
tors, cb*ew  them  to  an  endeavour  of  pleasing  the 
new-made  Christians ;  and  also  to  a  liking  of  this 
kind  of  honour,  which  they  also  might  hope  for 
after  their  decease,  as  well  as  those  that  had  sjready 
gained  it:  so  the  worshipping  of  the  images 
of  Christ  and  his  apostles,  grew  more  and  more 
idolatrous ;  save  that  somewhat  after  the  time  of 
Constantine,  divers  emperors,  and  bishops,  and  gene- 
ral councils,  observed  and  opposed  the  unlawfulness 
thereof;  but  too  late,  or  too  weakly. 
Canonizing  Thc  cauouizing  of  saints,  is  anodier  relic  of  Gen- 
tilism:  it  is  neither  a  misunderstanding  of  Scrip- 
ture, nor  a  new  invention  of  the  Roman  CSiurch, 
but  a  custom  as  ancient  as  the  commonwealth  of 
Rome  itself.  The  first  that  ever  was  canonized  at 
Rome,  was  Romulus,  and  that  upon  the  narration  of 
Julius  Proculus,  that  swore  before  the  senate,  he 
spake  with  him  afl;er  his  death,  and  was  assured  by 
him,  he  dwelt  in  heaven,  and  was  there  called 
QuirinuSj  and  would  be  propitious  to  the  state  of 
their  new  city:  and  thereupon  the  senate  gave 
public  testimony  of  his  sanctity.  Julius  Caesar, 
and  other  emperors  after  him,  had  the  like  testis 
many ;  that  is,  were  canonized  for  saints ;  for  by 
such  testimony  is  canonization  now  defined; 
and  is  the  same  with  the  airoBiwnq  of  the  heathen. 
It  is  also  ft*om  the  Roman  Heathen,  that  the 
Popes  have  received  the  name,  and  power  of  pon- 


of  Mints. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  DEMONOLOGY,  ETC-  '661 

TiFEX  MAXiMUS.  This  was  the  name  of  him  that  part  iv. 
in  the  ancient  commonwealth  of  Rome,  had  the  .  ^-  . 
supreme  authority  under  the  senate  and  people,  of  The  nacc 
regulating  all  ceremonies  and  doctrines  concern- 
ing their  religion:  and  when  Augustus  Caesar 
changed  the  state  into  a  monarchy,  he  took  to 
himself  no  more  but  this  office,  and  that  of  tribune 
of  the  people,  that  is  to  say,  the  supreme  power 
both  in  state,  and  religion;  and  the  succeediug 
emperors  enjoyed  the  same.  But  when  the  em- 
peror Constantine  lived,  who  was  the  first  that  pro- 
fessed and  authorized  Christian  religion,  it  was  con- 
sonant to  his  profession,  to  cause  religion  to  be 
regulated,  under  his  authority,  by  the  Bishop  of 
Rome  :  though  it  do  not  appear  they  had  so  soon 
the  name  of  Pontifex ;  but  rather,  that  the  succeed- 
ing bishops  took  it  of  themselves,  to  countenance 
the  power  they  exercised  over  the  bishops  of  the 
Roman  provinces.  For  it  is  not  any  privilege  of 
St.  Peter,  but  the  privilege  of  the  city  of  Rome, 
^hich  the  emperors  were  always  willing  to  uphold, 
that  gave  them  such  authority  over  other  bishops ; 
as  may  be  evidently  seen  by  that,  that  the  bishop 
of  Constantinople,  when  the  emperor  made  that 
€ity  the  seat  of  the  empire,  pretended  to  be  equal 
to  the  bishop  of  Rome;  though  at  last,  not  without 
contention,  the  Pope  carried  it,  and  became  the 
Pontifex  Maximum;  but  in  right  only  of  the  em- 
peror ;  and  not  without  the  bounds  of  the  empire ; 
Tior  any  where,  after  the  emperor  had  lost  his 
power  in  Rome ;  though  it  were  the  Pope  himself 
that  took  his  power  from  him.  From  whence  we 
may  by  the  way  observe,  that  there  is  no  place  for 
the  superiority  of  the  Pope  over  other  bishops,  ex- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


06f  OF  THB  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

FART  iv.  cept  in  the  territories  whereof  he  is  himsdf  the 
.  ^f'  .  civil  sovereign,  and  where  the  emperor  having 
sovereign  power  civil,  hath  expressly  chosen  the 
Pope  for  the  chief  pastor  under  himself,  of  las 
Christian  subjects. 
efT***lr  The  carrying  about  of  images  m  procession^  is 
another  relic  of  the  religion  of  the  Greeks,  and 
Romans.  For  they  also  carried  their  idols  from 
place  to  place,  in  a  kind  of  chariot,  which  was 
peculiarly  dedicated  to  that  use,  which  the  Latins 
called  thensa,  and  vehiculum  Deorum;  and  the 
image  was  placed  in  a  frame,  or  shrine,  which  they 
caUed  ferculum:  and  that  which  they  called 
pompa^  is  the  same  that  now  is  U9im<e6,  procession. 
According  whereunto,  amongst  the  divine  honours 
which  were  given  to  Julius  Caesar  by  the  senate 
this  was  one,  that  in  the  pomp,  or  procession,  at 
the  Circsean  games,  he  should  have  thensam  et 
ferculum  J  a  sacred  chariot  and  a  shrine;  which 
was  as  much,  as  to  be  carried  up  and  down  as  a 
god :  just  as  at  this  day  the  Popes  are  carried  by 
Switzers  under  a  canopy. 
wrtowh^*^  To  these  processions  also  belonged  the  bearing 
lighted.  of  burning  torches,  and  candles,  before  the  images 
of  the  gods,  both  amongst  the  Greeks,  and  Romans. 
For  afterwards  the  emperors  of  Rome  received  the 
same  honour ;  as  we  read  of  Caligula,  that  at  his 
reception  to  the  empire,  he  was  carried  from 
Misenum  to  Rome,  in  the  midst  of  a  throng  <^ 
people,  the  ways  beset  with  altars,  and  beasts  for 
sacrifice,  and  burning  torches :  and  of  Caracalla, 
that  was  received  into  Alexandria  with  incense, 
and  with  casting  of  flowers,  and  SaSovx^^^^  that  is, 
with  torches ;  for  ialov^^i  were  they  that  amongst 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  BBMONOLOGT^  ETC.  663 

the  Greeks  carried  torches  lighted  in  the  proces-  part  iv. 
sions  of  their  gods.    And  in  process  of  time,  the    .    ^-    . 
devout,  but  ignorant  people,  did  many  times  honour  wax  candies, 
their  bishops  with  the  like  pomp  of  wax  candles,  fj^tieT**** 
and  the  images  of  our  Saviour,  and  the  saints, 
constantly,  in  the  church  itself.    And  thus  came  in 
the  use  of  wax  candles ;  and  was  also  established 
by  some  of  the  ancient  Councils. 

The  heathens  had  also  their  aqua  lustralis, 
that  is  to  say,  holy  water.  The  Church  of  Rome 
imitates  them  also  in  their  holy  days.  They  had 
their  bacchanalia ;  and  we  have  our  wakes,  an- 
swering to  them :  they  their  saturnalia,  and  we  our 
carnivals,  and  Shrove-Tuesday's  liberty  of  servants : 
they  their  procession  of  Priapus  ;  we  our  fetching 
in,  erection,  and  dancing  about  May-poles ;  and 
dancing  is  one  kind  of  worship:  they  had  their 
procession  called  Amharvalia ;  and  we  our  pro- 
cession about  the  fields  in  the  Rogation-weeh.  Nor 
do  I  think  that  these  are  all  the  ceremonies  that 
have  been  left  in  the  Church,  from  the  first  conver- 
sion of  the  Gentiles ;  but  they  are  all  that  I  can  for 
the  present  call  to  mind ;  and  if  a  man  would  well 
observe  that  which  is  delivered  in  the  histories, 
concerning  the  religious  rites  of  the  Greeks  and 
Romans,  I  doubt  not  but  he  might  find  many 
more  of  these  old  empty  bottles  of  Gentilism,  which 
the  doctors  of  the  Roman  Church,  either  by  negli- 
gence or  ambition,  have  filled  up  agsun  with  the 
new  wine  of  Christianity,  that  will  not  fjul  in  time 
to  break  them. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


664 


OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 


CHAP.  XLVL 

OF  DARKNESS  FROM  VAIN  PHILOSOPHY,  AND 
FABULOUS  TRADITIONS. 

^^^UL^^'  By  Philosophy  is  understood  the  knowledge  ac^ 
' — . — ^  quired  by  reasoning,  from  the  manner  of  the  ge- 
^byfi^*''  ^*^^'*^  9f^^y  thing,  to  the  properties :  or  from 
the  properties,  to  some  possible  way  (f  generation 
of  the  same  ;  to  the  end  to  be  able  to  produce,  as 
far  as  matter,  and  human  force  permit,  suck 
^ects,  as  human  Ife  requireth.  So  the  geome- 
trician, from  the  construction  of  figures,  findeth  out 
many  properties  thereof;  and  from  the  properties^ 
new  ways  of  their  construction,  by  reasoning ;  to 
the  end  to  be  able  to  measure  land,  and  water ;  and 
for  infinite  other  uses.  So  the  astronomer,  from 
the  rising,  setting,  and  moving  of  the  sun,  and  stars, 
in  divers  parts  of  the  heav^Qs,  findeth  out  the 
causes  of  day,  and  night,  and  of  the  different  sea- 
sons of  the  year  ;  whereby  he  keepeth  an  account  erf 
time ;  and  the  like  of  other  sciences. 

By  which  definition  it  is  evident,  that  we  are  not 
to  account  as  any  part  thereof,  that  original  know- 
, »)  ledge  called  experience,  in  which  consisteth  pru- 
dence :  because  it  is  not  attained  by  reasoning, 
but  found  as  well  in  brute  beasts,  as  in  man ;  and 
is  but  a  memory  of  successions  of  events  in  times 
past,  wherein  the  omission  of  every  little  circum- 
stance altering  the  effect,  frustrateth  the  expecta- 
tion of  the  most  prudent :  whereas  nothing  is  pro- 
duced by  reasoning  aright,  but  general,  eternal, 
and  immutable  truth. 


Prndence 
no  part  of 
philoMpliy. 


.r*^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


VAIN  PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.  665 

Nor  are  we  therefore  to  give  that  name  to  any  part  iv. 
false  conclusions :  for  he  that  reasoneth  aright  in    ._  ^-   . 
words  he  understandeth.  can  never  conclude  an  No  faUc  doo- 

trine  is  part  of 

error :  philosophy. 

Nor  to  that  which  any  man  knows  by  supema-  No  more  is  ro- 

•^        ,       .  •      J    i_     relation  super- 

tural  revelation ;   because  it  is  not  acquired  by  naturau 
reasoning : 

Nor  that  which  is  gotten  by  reasoning  from  the  Nor  learning 

^,       .^        ^v       1  ^  .1.  X  1.  •        takennponcre- 

authonty  of  books ;  because  it  is  not  by  reasomng  dit  of  authors. 
from  the  cause  to  the  effect,  nor  from  the  eflfect  to 
the  cause ;  and  is  not  knowledge  but  faith. 

The  faculty  of  reasoning  being  consequent  to  the  ^!  ^^  ^"- 

,.  -Till  1  nings  and  pro- 

use  of  speech,  it  was  not  possible,  but  that  there  gress  of  pwio- 

should  have  been  some  general  truths  found  out  by  *^^  ^' 
reasoning,  as  ancient  almost  as  language  itself.  The 
savages  of  America,  are  not  without  some  good 
moral  sentences ;  also  they  have  a  little  arithmetic, 
to  add,  and  divide  in  numbers  not  too  great :  but 
they  are  not,  therefore,  philosophers.  For  as  there 
were  plants  of  com  and  wine  in  small  quantity  dis- 
persed in  the  fields  and  woods,  before  men  knew 
their  virtue,  or  made  use  of  them  for  their  nourish- 
ment, or  planted  them  apart  in  fields  and  vineyards ; 
in  which  time  they  fed  on  acorns,  and  drank  water: 
so  also  there  have  been  divers  true,  general,  and 
profitable  speculations  from  the  beginning;  as 
being  the  natural  plants  of  human  reason.  But 
they  were  at  first  but  few  in  number ;  men  lived 
upon  gross  experience ;  there  was  no  method ;  that 
is  to  say,  no  sowing,  nor  planting  of  knowledge  by 
itself,  apart  from  the  weeds,  and  common  plants  of 
error  and  conjecture.  And  the  cause  of  it  being  the 
want  of  leisure  from  procuring  the  necessities  of 
life,  and  defending  themselves  against  their  neigh,- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


666  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  bours,  it  was  impossible,  till  the  erecting  of  great 
.  ^'  .  commonwealths,  it  should  be  otherwise.  Leisure 
is  the  mother  of  philosophy  ;  and  Commonwealth ^ 
the  mother  of  peace  and  leisure.  Where  first  were 
great  and  flourishing  citiesj  there  was  first  the 
study  of  philosophy.  The  Gymnosophists  of  India, 
the  Magi  of  Persia,  and  the  Priests  of  Chaldea 
and  Egypt,  are  counted  the  most  ancient  philoso- 
phers ;  and  those  countries  were  the  most  ancient  of 
kingdoms.  Philosophy  was  not  risen  to  the  Gre- 
cians, and  other  people  of  the  west,  whose  common^ 
wealths y  no  greater  perhaps  than  Lucca  or  Ge- 
neva, had  never  peace ^  but  when  their  fears  of  one 
another  were  equal ;  nor  the  leisure  to  observe 
anything  but  one  another.  At  length,  when  war 
had  united  many  of  these  Grecian  lesser  cities,  into 
fewer,  and  greater ;  then  b^an  seven  men^  of  se- 
veral parts  of  Greece,  to  get  the  reputation  of 
being  wise  ;  some  of  them  for  moral  and  politic 
sentences ;  and  others  for  the  learning  of  the  Chal- 
deans and  Egyptians,  which  was  astronomy j  and 
geometry.  But  we  hear  not  yet  of  any  schools  of 
philosophy. 
Of  the  schools      After  die  Athenians,  by  the  overthrove  of  the 

ofpbilosophj     Tfc.  .  1-I11--  i»i 

amongst  tho  Pcrsiau  anuies,  had  gotten  the  dommion  of  the 
Athcmam.  ^^  ^  ^^ ^  thereby,  of  all  the  islands,  and  maritime 
cities  of  the  Archipelago,  as  well  of  Asia  as  Eu- 
rope ;  and  were  grown  wealthy ;  they  that  had  no 
employment,  neither  at  home  nor  abroad,  had  little 
else  to  employ  themselves  in,  but  either  (as  St.  Luke 
says.  Acts  xvii.  21),  in  telling  and  hearing  news, 
or  in  discoursing  of  philosophy  publicly  to  the 
youth  of  the  city.  Every  master  took  some  place 
for  that  piuT>ose.     Plato,  in  certain  public  walks 


Digitized  by 


Google 


VAIN  PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.  667 

called  Academid,  from  one  Academus:  Aristotle  part  iv. 
in  the  walk  of  the  temple  of  Pan,  called  Lyceum :    .    ^-    . 
others  in  the  6toay  or  covered  walk,  wherein  the  or  the  schools 
merchants'  goods  were  brought  to  land :  others  in  amou'^rtht^ 
other  places;  where  they  spent  the  time  of  their  ^^®"^*°*- 
leisure,  in  teaching  or  in  disputing  of  their  opinions: 
and  some  in  any  place,  where  they  could  get  the 
youth  of  the  city  together  to  hear  them  talk.    And 
this  was  it  which  Cameades  also  did  at  Rome,  when 
he  was  ambassador :  which  caused  Cato  to  advise 
the  senate  to  dispatch  him  quickly,  for  fear  of  cor- 
rupting the  manners  of  the  young  men,  that  de- 
lighted to  hear  him  speaks  as  they  thought,  fine 
things. 

From  this  it  was,  that  the  place  where  any  of 
them  taught,  and  disputed,  was  called  schola, 
which  in  their  tongue  signifieth  leisure ;  and  their 
disputations,  diatrilxe,  that  is  to  say^  passing  of 
the  time.  Also  the  philosophers  themselves  had 
the  name  of  their  sects,  some  of  them  from  these 
their  Schools :  for  they  that  followed  Plato's  doc- 
trine, were  called  Academics;  the  followers  of 
Aristotle  PeripateticSy  from  the  walk  he  taught  in ; 
and  those  that  Zeno  taught  Stoics,  from  the  Stoa; 
as  if  we  should  denominate  men  from  Moor-Jields, 
from  PauVs  Church,  and  from  the  ExchangCy  be- 
cause they  meet  there  often,  to  prate  and  loiter. 

Nevertheless,  men  were  so  much  taken  with  this 
custom,  that  in  time  it  spread  itself  over  all  Europe, 
and  the  best  part  of  Afric;  so  as  there  were  schools 
publicly  erected  and  maintained)  for  lectures  and 
disputations,  almost  in  every  commonwealth. 

There  were  also  schools,  anciently,  both  before 


Digitized  by 


Google 


668  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OP  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  and  after  the  time  of  our  Saviour,  amongst  the 
^    ^V  .    Jews;  but  they  were  schools  of  their  law.    For 

Of  the  Mhoob  though  they  were  called  synagogues y  that  is  to  say, 
congregations  of  the  people ;  yet,  inasmuch  as  the 
law  was  every  sabbath-day  read,  expounded^  and 
disputed  in  them,  they  differed  not  in  nature,  but 
in  name  only,  from  public  schools ;  and  were  not 
only  in  Jerusalem,  but  in  every  city  of  the  Gentiles, 
where  the  Jews  inhabited.  There  was  such  a  school 
at  Damascus,  whereinto  Paul  entered,  to  persecute. 
There  were  others  at  Antioch,  Iconium,  and  Thes- 
salonica,  whereinto  he  entered  to  dispute :  and 
such  was  the  synagogue  of  the  Libertines ,  Cyre- 
nianSy  Alexandrians,  CilicianSj  and  those  of  Asia ; 
that  is  to  say,  the  school  of  Libertines,  and  of  Jews 
that  were  strangers  in  Jerusalem;  and  of  this 
school  they  were  that  disputed  (Acts  vi.  9)  with 
St.  Stephen. 

The  schools  of      But  what  has  been  the  utility  of  those  schools  ? 

unprofi^ie!  What  scicuce  is  there  at  this  day  acquired  by  their 
readings  and  disputings  ?  That  we  have  of  geo- 
metry, which  is  the  mother  of  all  natural  science, 
we  are  not  indebted  for  it  to  the  schools.  Plato, 
that  was  the  best  philosopher  of  the  Greeks,  forbad 
entrance  into  his  school  to  all  that  were  not  already 
in  some  measure  geometricians.  There  were  many 
that  studied  that  science  to  the  great  advantage 
of  mankind:  but  there  is  no  mention  of  their 
schools ;  nor  was  there  any  sect  of  geometricians ; 
nor  did  they  then  pass  under  the  name  of  philo- 
sophers. The  natural  philosophy  of  those  schools 
was  rather  a  dream  than  science,  and  set  forth 
in  senseless  and  insignificant  language ;  which  can- 
not be  avoided  by  those  that  will  teach  philosophy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


VAIN  PHILOSOPHY,  ETa  669 

without  having  first  attained  great  knowledge  in  part  ly. 
geometry.     For  nature  worketh  by  motion ;  the    _  ^'    . 
ways  and  degrees  whereof  cannot  be  known,  with- 
out the  knowledge  of  the  proportions  and  properties 
of  lines  and  figures.    Tlieir  moral  philosophy  is 
but  a  description  of  their  own  passions.    For  the 
rule  of  manners,  without  civil  government,  is  the 
law  of  nature ;  and  in  it,  the  law  civil,  that  de- 
termineth  what  is  hone$t  and  dishonesty  what  is 
just  and  unjust^  and  generally  what  is  good  and 
evil.  Whereas  they  make  the  rules  of  good  and  bad, 
by  their  own  liking  and  disliking:  by  which  means, 
in  so  great  diversity  of  taste,  there  is  nothing  ge- 
nerally agreed  on ;  but  every  one  doth,  as  far  as 
he  dares,   whatsoever  seemeth  good  in  his  own 
eyes,  to  the  subversion  of  commonwealth.    Their 
logic,  which  should  be  the  method  of  reasoning, 
is  nothing  else  but  captions  of  words,  and  inventions 
how  to  puzzle  such  as  should  go  about  to  pose 
them.    To  conclude,  there  is  nothing  so  absurd, 
that  the  old  philosophers,  as  Cicero  saith,  (who  was 
one  of  them,)  have  not  some  of  them  maintained. 
And  I  believe  that  scarce  anything  can  be  more 
absurdly  said  in  natural  philosophy,  than  that  which 
now  is  called  Aristotle^ s  Metaphysics  ;  nor  more 
repugnant  to  government,  than  much  of  that  he 
hath  said  in  his  Politics;  nor  more  ignorantly,  than 
a  great  part  of  his  Ethics. 

The  school  of  the  Jews  was  originally  a  school  ^^^^^^^g 
of  the  law  of  Moses ;  who  commanded  (Deut.  xxxi.  unprofiuue. 
10)  that  at  the  end  of  every  seventh  year,  at  the 
Feast  of  the  Tabernacles,  it  should  be  read  to  all 
the  people,   that  they  might  hear  and  learn  it. 
Therefore  the  reading  of  the  law,  which  was  in 


Digitized  by 


Google 


670  OP  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PAUT  IV.  use  after  the  captivity,  every  Sabbath  day,  ought 
-  ^f'_  to  have  had  no  other  end,  but  the  acquainting  of 
the  people  with  the  Commandments  which  they 
were  to  obey,  and  to  expound  unto  them  the 
writings  of  the  prophets.  But  it  is  manifest,  by 
the  many  reprehensions  of  them  ty  our  Saviour, 
that  they  corrupted  the  text  of  the  law  with  their 
false  commentaries,  and  vain  traditions;  and  so 
little  understood  the  prophets,  that  they  did  neither 
acknowledge  Christ,  nor  the  works  he  did,  of 
which  the  prophets  prophesied.  So  that  by  their 
lectures  and  disputations  in  their  synagogues,  they 
turned  the  doctrine  of  their  law  into  a  fantastical 
kind  of  philosophy,  concerning  the  incomprehen* 
sible  nature  of  God,  and  of  spirits ;  which  they  com- 
pounded of  the  vain  philosophy  and  theology  of 
the  Grecians,  mingled  with  their  own  fancies,  drawn 
from  the  obscurer  places  of  the  Scripture,  and 
which  might  most  easily  be  wrested  to  their  pur- 
pose ;  and  from  the  fabulous  traditions  of  their 
ancestors.  ^ 

UniverMty,  That  which  is  now  called  an  University j  is  a 
joining  together,  and  an  incorporation  under  one 
government,  of  many  public  schools,  in  one  and  the 
same  town  or  city.  In  which,  the  principal  schools 
were  ordained  for  the  three  professions,  that  is  to 
say,  of  the  Roman  religion,  of  the  Roman  law,  and 
of  the  art  of  medicine.  And  for  the  study  of  phi- 
losophy, it  hath  no  otherwise  place,  than  as  a  hand- 
maid to  the  Roman  religion :  and  since  the  au* 
thority  of  Aristotle  is  only  current  there,  that  study 
is  not  properly  philosophy,  (the  nature  whereof  de- 
pendeth  not  on  authors,)  but  Aristotelity.  And  for 
geometry,  till  of  very  late  times  it  had  no  place  at 


what  it  is. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


VAIN  PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.  671 

all ;  as  being  subservient  to  nothing  but  rigid  truth,  part  iv. 
And  if  any  man  by  the  ingenuity  of  his  own  nature,    ,_  ^    . 
had  attained  to  any  degree  of  perfection  therein, 
he  was  commonly  thought  a  magician,  and  his  art 
diabolical. 

Now  to  descend  to  the  particular  tenets  of  vain  Errom  brought 
philosophy,  derived  to  the  Universities,  and  thence  fromAri^utie's 
into  the  Church,  partly  from  Aristotle,  partly  from  "^^^^p^^^"*^ 
blindness  of  understanding ;  I  shall  first  consider 
their  principles.    There  is  a  certain  philosophia 
primuy  on  which  all  other  philosophy  ought  to  de- 
pend ;  and  consisteth  principally,  in  right  limiting 
qi  the  significations  of  such  appellations,  or  names, 
as  are  of  all  others  the  most  universal ;  which  limi- 
tations serve  to  avoid  ambiguity  and  equivocation 
in  reasoning ;  and  are  commonly  called  definitions ; 
such  as  are  the  definitions  of  body,  time,  place, 
matter,  form,  essence,  subject,  substance,  accident, 
power,  act,  finite,  infinite,  quantity,  quality,  motion, 
action,  passion,    and  divers  others,  necessary  to 
the  explaining  of  a  Ihan's  conceptions  concerning 
the  nature  and  generation  of  bodies.    The  expli- 
cation, that  is,v  the  settling  of  the  meaning,  of 
which,  and  the  like  terms,  is  commonly  in  the 
Schools  called  metaphysics ;  as  being  a  part  of  the 
philosophy  of  Aristotle,  which  hath  that  for  title. 
But  it  is  in  another  sense ;  for  there  it  signifieth 
as  much  as   hooks   written  or  placed  after  his 
natural  philosophy :  but  the  schools  take  them 
for  hooks  of  supernatural  philosophy:  for  the 
word  metaphysics  will  bear  both  these  senses. 
And  indeed  that  which  is  there  written,  is  for  the 
most  part  so  far  from  the  possibility  of  being  un- 
derstood, and  so  repugnant  to  natural  reason,  that 


Digitized  by 


Google 


672 


OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 


^^'iii 


/: 


(V^ 


PART  IV.  whosoever  thinketh  there  is  any  thing  to  be  xmder- 
.    ^f'  ,.    stood  by  it,  must  needs  think  it  supernatural. 
Errort  cod-         FVom  these  metaphysics,  which  are  mingled  with 
■u^c  "^nces.  the  Scrfpturc  to  make  school  divinity,  we  are  told, 
there  be  in  the  world  certain  essences  separated 
from  bodies,  which  they  call  abstract  essences^ 
and  substantial  forms.  For  the  interpreting  of 
which  jargon,  there  is  need  of  somewhat  more  than 
ordinary  attention  in  this  place.     Also  I  ask  par- 
don of  those  that  are  not  used  to  this  kind  of  dis- 
course, for  applying  myself  to  those  that  are.   The 
world,  (I  mean  not  the  earth  only,  that  denominates 
the  lovers  of  it  worldly  meUy  but  the  universe,  that 
is,  the  whole  mass  of  all  things  that  are),  is  corpo- 
real, that  is  to  say,  body ;  and  hath  the  dimen- 
sions of  magnitude,  namely,  length,  breadth,  and 
depth :  also  every  part  of  body,  is  likewise  body, 
and  hath  the  like  dimensions;  and  consequently 
every  part  of  the  universe,  is  body,  and  that  which 
is  not  body,  is  no  part  of  the  universe :  and  be- 
cause the  universe  is  all,  that  which  is  no  part  of 
it,  is  nothing  ;  and  consequently  »o  where.     Nor 
does  it  follow  from  hence,  that  spirits  are  nothing : 
for  they  have  dimensions,  and  are  therefore  really 
bodies ;  though  that  name  in  common  speech  be 
given  to  such  bodies  only,  as  are  visible,  or  palpa- 
ble;  that  is,  that  have  some  degree  of  opacity. 
But  for  spirits,  they  call  them  incorporeal ;  which 
is  a  name  of  more  honour,  and  may  therefore  with 
more  piety  be  attributed  to  God  himself;  in  whom 
we  consider  not  what  attribute  expresseth  best  his 
nature,  which  is  incomprehensible ;  but  what  best 
expresseth  our  desire  to  honour  Him. 
To  know  now  upon  what  grounds  they  say  there 


Digitized  by 


Google 


VAIN  PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.  673 

be  essences  abstract,  or  substantial  forms ,  we  are  part  iv. 
to  consider  what  those  words  do  properly  signify.  .  ^^'  . 
The  use  of  words,  is  to  register  to  ourselves,  and  Errors  con- 
make  manifest  to  others  the  thoughts  and  concep-  smct'fssences. 
tions  of  our  minds.  Of  which  words,  some  are  the 
names  of  the  things  conceived ;  as  the  names  of  all 
sorts  of  bodies,  that  work  upon  the  senses,  and 
leave  an  impression  in  the  imagination.  Others  are 
the  names  of  the  imaginations  themselves  ;  that  is 
to  say,  of  those  ideas,  or  mental  images  we  have  of 
all  things  we  see,  or  remember.  And  others  again 
are  names  of  names ;  or  of  different  sorts  of  speech : 
as  universal,  plural,  singular,  are  the  names  of 
names ;  and  definition,  affirmation,  negation,  true, 
false,  syllogism,  interrogation,  promise,  covenant, 
are  the  names  of  certain  forms  of  speech.  Others 
serve  to  show  the  consequence,  or  repugnance  of 
one  name  to  another ;  as  when  one  saith,  a  man  is 
a  body,  he  intendeth  that  the  name  of  body  is  ne- 
cessarily consequent  to  the  name  of  mun  ;  as  being 
but  several  names  of  the  same  thing,  man  ;  which 
consequence  is  signified  by  coupling  them  together 
with  the  word  is.  And  as  we  use  the  verb  is,  so 
the  Latins  use  their  verb  est,  and  the  Greeks  their 
''Etrrc  through  all  its  declinations.  Whether  all  other 
nations  of  the  world  have  in  their  several  languages 
a  word  that  answereth  to  it,  or  not,  I  cannot  tell ; 
but  I  am  sure  they  have  not  need  of  it.  For  the 
placing  of  two  names  in  order  may  serve  to  signify 
their  consequence,  if  it  were  the  custom,  (for  custom 
is  it,  that  gives  words  their  force,)  as  well  as  the 
words  is,  or  be,  or  are,  and  the  like. 

And  if  it  were  so,  that  there  were  a  language 
without  any  verb  answerable  to  est,  or  is,  or  be ; 
VOL.  in.  X  X 

Digitized  by 


6/4  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  yet  the  men  that  used  it  would  be  not  a  jot  the  less 
^  ^'  _.  capable  of  inferring,  concluding,  and  of  all  kind  of 
Errors  oon-  rcasouing,  than  were  the  Greeks,  and  Latins.  But 
^wTfsi^nces.  what  thcu  would  become  of  these  terms,  of  entity, 
essence^  essential^  essentiality^  that  are  derived 
from  it,  and  of  many  more  than  depend  on  these, 
applied  as  most  commonly  they  are  ?  They  are 
therefore  no  names  of  things ;  but  signs,  by  which 
we  make  known,  that  we  conceive  the  consequence 
of  one  name  or  attribute  to  another :  as  when  we 
say,  a  man  is  a  living  body,  we  mean  not  that  the 
nuin  is  one  thing,  the  living  body  another,  and  the 
iSy  or  being  a  third ;  but  that  the  man,  and  the  liv- 
ing body,  is  the  same  thing ;  because  the  conse- 
quence, if  he  be  a  man,  he  is  a  living  body,  is  a 
true  consequence,  signified  by  that  word  is.  There- 
fore, to  be  a  body,  to  walk,  to  be  speaking,  to  live, 
to  see,  and  the  like  infinitives ;  also  corporeity, 
walking,  speaking,  Ijfe,  sight,  and  the  like,  that 
signify  just  the  same,  are  the  names  of  nothing  ;  as 
I  have  elsewhere  more  amply  expressed. 

But  to  what  purpose,  may  some  man  say,  is  such 
subtlety  in  a  work  of  this  nature,  where  I  pretend 
to  nothing  but  what  is  necessary  to  the  doctrine  of 
government  and  obedience  ?  It  is  to  this  purpose, 
that  men  may  no  longer  suflfer  themselves  to  be 
abused,  by  them,  that  by  this  doctrine  of  separated 
essences,  built  on  the  vain  philosophy  of  Aristotle, 
would  fright  them  from  obeying  the  laws  of  their 
country,  with  empty  names ;  as  men  fright  birds 
from  the  com  with  an  empty  doublet,  a  hat,  and  a 
crooked  stick.  For  it  is  upon  this  ground,  that 
when  a  man  is  dead  and  buried,  they  say  his  soul, 
that  is  his  life,  can  walk  separated  from  his  body, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


VAIN  PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.  675 

and  is  seen  by  night  amongst  the  graves.  Upon  the  part  iv. 
same  ground  they  say,  that  the  figure,  and  colour,    ^   ^-    . 
and  taste  of  a  piece  of  bread,  has  a  being,  there.  Errors  con- 
where  they  say  there  is  no  bread.    And  upon  theC^\"fJencei 
same  grotmd  they  say,  that  faith,  and  wisdom,  and  \ 
other  virtues,  are  sometimes  poured  into  a  man,    j 
sometimes  hlovm  into  him  from  Heaven,  as  if  the    / 
virtuous  and  their  virtues  could  be  asunder ;  and  a        * 
great  many  other  things  that  serve  to  lessen  the 
dependance  of  subjects  on  the  sovereign  power  of 
their  country.   For  who  will  endeavour  to  obey  the 
laws,  if  he  expect  obedience  to  be  poured  or  blown 
into  him  ?  Or  who  will  not  obey  a  priest,  that  can 
make  God,  rather  than  his  sovereign,  nay  than  God 
himself?  Or  who,  that  is  in  fear  of  ghosts,  will  not 
bear  great  respect  to  those  that  can  make  the  holy 
water,  that  drives  them  from  him  ?   And  this  shall 
suffice  for  an  example  of  the  errors,  which  are 
brought  into  the  Church,  from  the  entities  and 
essences  of  Aristotle :  which  it  may  be  he  knew  to 
be  false  philosophy ;  but  writ  it  as  a  thing  con- 
sonant to,  and  corroborative  of  their  religion ;  and 
fearing  the  fate  of  Socrates. 

Being  once  fallen  into  this  error  of  separated 
essences y  they  are  thereby  necessarily  involved  in 
many  other  absurdities  that  follow  it.  For  seeing 
they  will  have  these  forms  to  be  real,  they  are 
obliged  to  assign  them  seme  place.  But  because 
they  hold  them  incorporeal,  without  all  dimension 
of  quantity,  and  all  men  know  that  place  is  di- 
mension, and  not  to  be  filled,  but  by  that  which 
is  corporeal ;  they  are  driven  to  uphold  their  credit 
with  a  distinction,  that  they  are  not  indeed  any- 
where circumscriptive y  but  definitive  ;  which  terms 

XX2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


676  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.   being  mere  words,  and  in  this  occasion  insignificant, 
^    t^'  ^    pass  only  in  Latin,  that  the  vanity  of  them  may  be 

Errors  con-     conccalcd.     For  the  circumscription  of  a  thing,  is 

MrTcTfwences.  nothing  clsc  but  the  determination,  or  defining  of 
its  place ;  and  so  both  the  terms  of  the  distinction 
are  the  same.  And  in  particular,  of  the  essence 
of  a  man,  which,  they  say,  is  his  soul,  they  affirm 
it,  to  be  all  of  it  in  his  little  finger,  and  all  of  it  in 
every  other  part,  how  small  soever,  of  his  body  ; 
and  yet  no  more  soul  in  the  whole  body,  than  in 
any  one  of  those  parts.  Can  any  man  think  that 
God  is  served  with  such  absurdities  ?  And  yet  all 
this  is  necessary  to  believe,  to  those  that  vnll  believe 
the  existence  of  an  incorporeal  soul,  separated  from 
the  body. 

And  when  they  come  to  give  account  how  an 
incorporeal  substance  can  be  capable  of  psun^  and 
be  tormented  in  the  fire  of  hell  or  purgatory,  they 
have  nothing  at  all  to  answer,  but  that  it  cannot 
be  known  how  fire  can  bum  souls. 

Again,  whereas  motion  is  change  of  place,  and 
incorporeal  substances  are  not  capable  of  place, 
they  are  troubled  to  make  it  seem  possible,  how  a 
soul  can  go  hence,  vsrithout  the  body,  to  heaven, 
hell,  or  purgatory ;  and  how  the  ghosts  of  men, 
and  I  may  add  of  their  clothes  which  they  appear 
in,  can  walk  by  night  in  churches,  churchyards, 
and  other  places  of  sepulture.  To  which  I  know 
not  what  they  can  answer,  unless  they  will  say, 
they  walk  definitive,  not  circumscriptive,  or  spi- 
ritually,  not  temporally :  for  such  egregious  dis- 
tinctions are  equjally  applicable  to  any  difficulty 
whatsoever. 

Nuncstans.        For  the  meaning  of  eternity,  they  will  not  have 


Digitized  by 


Google 


VAIN  PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.  6/7 

it  to  be  an  endless  succession  of  time ;  for  then  they  part  iv. 
should  not  be  able  to  render  a  reason  how  God's  .  ^^-  . 
will,  and  preordainmg  of  things  to  come,  should 
not  be  before  his  prescience  of  the  same,  as  the 
efficient  cause  before  the  effect,  or  agent  before  the 
action ;  nor  of  many  other  their  bold  opinions  con- 
cerning the  incomprehensible  nature  of  God.  But 
they  will  teach  us,  that  eternity  is  the  standing  still 
of  the  present  time,  a  nuncstans,  as  the  Schools 
call  it;  which  neither  they, nor  any  else  under- 
stand, no  more  than  they  would  a  hicstans  for  an 
infinite  greatness  of  place. 

And  whereas  men  divide  a  body  in  their  thought.  One  body  in 
by  numbering  parts  of  it,  and,  in  numbering  those  ^iTman>X'- 
parts,  number  also  the  parts  of  the  place  it  filled ;  it  place  ai^once. 
cannot  be,  but  in  making  many  parts,  we  make  also 
many  places  of  those  parts  ;  whereby  there  cannot 
be  conceived  in  the  mind  of  any  man,  more,  or 
fewer  parts,  than  there  are  places  for :  yet  they  will 
have  us  believe,  that  by  the  Almighty  power  of  God, 
one  body  may  be  at  one  and  the  same  time  in  many 
places ;  and  many  bodies  at  one  and  the  same  time 
in  one  place  :  as  if  it  were  an  acknowledgment  of 
the  Divine  Power  to  say,  that  which  is,  is  not ;  or 
that  which  has  been,  has  not  been.  And  these  are 
but  a  small  part  of  the  incongruities  they  are  forced 
to,  from  their  disputing  philosophically,  instead  of 
admiring,  and  adoring  of  the  divine  and  incompre- 
hensible  nature;  whose  attributes  cannot  signify 
what  he  is,  but  ought  to  signify  our  desire  to  honour 
him,  with  the  best  appellations  we  can  think  on. 
But  they  that  venture  to  reason  of  his  nature,  from 
these  attributes  of  honour,  losing  their  under- 
standing in  the  very  first  attempt,  fall  from  one  in^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


678  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  convenience  into  another,  widiont  end,  and  without 
.  ^'  _.  number ;  in  the  same  manner,  as  when  a  man  ig- 
norant of  the  ceremonies  of  court,  coming  into  the 
presence  of  a  greater  person  than  he  is  used  to 
speak  to,  and  stumbling  at  his  entrance,  to  save 
himself  from  falling,  lets  slip  his  cloak ;  to  recover 
his  cloak,  lets  fall  his  hat ;  and  with  one  disorder 
after  another,  discovers  his  astonishment  and 
rusticity. 

Absurdities  ia      Thcu  for  phvsicSy  that  is,  the  knowledge  of  Uie 

natural  philo-  ,,.  ^i  i»  i 

sopby,  as  gra-  subordiuatc  and  secondary  causes  of  natural  events ; 
of  hJav^i^M?  they  render  none  at  all,  but  empty  words.     If  you 
desire  to  know  why  some  kind  of  bodies  sink  na- 
turally downwards  toward  the  earth,  and  others 
go  naturally  from  it ;  the  Schools  will  tell  you  out 
of  Aristotle,  that  the  bodies  that  sink  downwards, 
are  heavy  ;  and  that  this  heaviness  is  it  that  causes 
them  to  descend.    But  if  you  ask  what  they  mean 
/  by  heaviness^  they  will  define  it  to  be  an  ^idea- 
f  vour  to  go  to  the  centre  of  the  earth.    So  that  the 
cause  why  things  sink  downward,  is  an  endeavour 
\  to  be  below :  which  is  as  much  as  to  say,  that  bodies 
\  descend,  or  ascend,  because  they  do.  Or  they  will 
jtell  you  the  centre  of  the  earth  is  the  place  of  rest, 
[and  conservation  for  heavy  things  ;  and  therefore 
}  they  endeavour  to  be  there  :  as  if  stones  and  metals 
had  a  desire,  or  could  discern  the  place  they  would 
be  at,  as  man  does ;  or  loved  rest,  as  man  does  not; 
or  that  a  piece  of  glass  were  less  safe  in  the  win- 
dow, than  falling  into  the  street. 
Quantity  put       jf  ^e  would  know  why  the  same  body  seems 

luto  body  aJ-  j  j 

ready  made,  greater,  without  adding  to  it,  one  time,  than  ano- 
ther ;  they  say,  when  it  seems  less,  it  is  condensed; 
when  greater,  rarified.    What  is  that  condensed. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


VAIN  PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.  679 

and  rarified?  Condensed,  is  when  there  is  in  the  part  iv. 
very  same  matter,  less  quantity  than  before ;  and  .  ^f'  _. 
rarilied,  when  more.  As  if  there  could  be  matter, 
that  had  not  some  determined  quantity;  when 
quantity  is  nothing  else  but  the  determination  of 
matter ;  that  is  to  say,  of  body,  by  which  we  say, 
one  body  is  greater^or  lesser  than  another,  by  thus, 
or  thus  much.  Or  as  if  a  body  were  made  without 
any  quantity  at  all,  and  that  afterwards  more  or 
less  were  put  into  it,  according  as  it  is  intended  the 
body  should  be  more  or  less  dense. 

For  the  cause  of  the  soul  of  man,  they  say,  ^^"""k  ^'^ 
creatur  infundendo,  and  creando  infunditur :  that 
is,  it  is  created  hij  pouring  it  in^  and  poured  in  by 
creation. 

For  the  cause  of  sense,  an  ubiquity  of  species ;  ^Wqnity 

..  «,.  ofappantion. 

that  is,  of  the  shows  or  apparitions  of  objects ; 
which  when  they  be  apparitions  to  the  eye,  is  sight; 
when  to  the  t^,  hearing;  to  the  palate,  taste;  to 
the  nostril,  smelling;  and  to  the  rest  of  the  body, 
feeling. 

For  cause  of  the  will,  to  do  any  particular  action,  wiiu  the  cause 
which  is  called  iolitio,  they  assign  the  faculty,  that  ^  "^^ 
is  to  say,  the  capacity  in  general,  that  men  have, 
to  will  sometimes  one  thing,  sometimes  another, 
which  is  called  voluntas;  making  the  power  the 
cause  of  the  act.  As  if  one  should  assign  for  cause 
of  the  good  or  evil  acts  of  men,  their  ability  to  do 
them. 

And  in  many  occasions  they  put  for  cause  of  na-  ignorance  an 
tural  events,  their  own  ignorance ;  but  disguised  in  ^°*^" 
other  words :  as  when  they  say,  fortune  is  the  .cause 
of  things  contingent ;   that  is,  of  things  whereof 
they  know  no  cause :  and  as  when  they  attribute 


Digitized  by 


Google 


680  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  many  eflFects  to  occult  qualities;  that  is,  qualities 
.  ^'  _.  not  known  to  them ;  and  therefore  also,  as  they 
think,  to  no  man  else.  And  to  sympathy^  anti- 
pathy^antiperistasisyspecifical qualities y  and  other 
like  terms,  which  signify  neither  the  agent  that 
produceth  them,  nor  the  operation  by  which  they 
are  produced. 

If  such  metaphysicSy  and  physics  as  this,  be  not 
vain  philosophy y  there  was  never  any ;  nor  needed 
St.  Paul  to  give  us  warning  to  avoid  it. 
theMTin^^*  And  for  their  moral,  and  civil  philosophy,  it  hath 

incongiueot,  thc  samc,  or  greater  absurdities.  If  a  man  do  an 
the  incongruity  actiou  of  iujusticc,  that  is  to  Say,  an  action  contrary 
to  the  law,  God  they  say  is  the  prime  cause  of  the 
law,  and  also  the  prime  cause  of  that,  and  all  other 
actions ;  but  no  cause  at  all  of  the  injustice ;  which 
is  the  inconformity  of  the  action  to  the  law.  This 
is  vain  philosophy.  A  man  might  as  well  say,  that 
one  man  maketh  both  a  straight  line,  and  a  crooked, 
and  another  maketh  their  incongruity.  And  such 
is  the  philosophy  of  all  men  that  resolve  of  their 
conclusions,  before  they  know  their  premises ;  pre- 
tending to  comprehend,  that  which  is  incomprehen- 
sible ;  and  of  attributes  of  honour  to  make  attri- 
butes of  nature ;  as  this  dictinction  was  made  to 
maintain  the  doctrine  of  free-will,  that  is,  of  a  will 
of  man,  not  subject  to  the  will  of  God. 
Private  £ppc-  Arfstotlc,  and  other  heathen  philosophers,  define 
of  pubiic"good.  good  and  evil,  by  the  appetite  of  men ;  and  wdl 
enough,  as  long  as  we  consider  them  governed  every 
one  by  his  own  law ;  for  in  the  condition  of  men 
that  have  no  other  law  but  their  ovm  appetites, 
there  can  be  no  general  rule  of  good,  and  evil  ac- 
tions.    But  in  a  commonwealth  this  measure  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


VAIN  PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.  681 

false :  not  the  appetite  of  private  men,  but  the  law,  part  iv. 
which  is  the  will  and  appetite  of  the  state,  is  the  .  J^'  . 
measure.  And  yet  is  this  doctrine  still  practised ; 
and  men  judge  the  goodness  or  wickedness  of  their 
own,  and  of  other  men's  actions,  and  of  the  actions 
of  the  commonwealth  itself,  by  their  own  passions; 
and  no  man  calleth  good  or  evil,  but  that  which  is 
so  in  his  own  eyes,  without  any  regard  at  all  to  the 
public  laws ;  except  only  monks,  and  friars,  that  are 
bound  by  vow  to  that  simple  obedience  to  their 
superior,  to  which  every  subject  ought  to  tJhink 
himself  bound  by  the  law  of  nature  to  the  civil 
sovereign.  And  this  private  measure  of  good,  is  a 
doctrine,  not  only  vain,  but  also  pernicious  to  the 
public  state. 

It  is  also  vain  and  false  philosophy,  to  say  the  And  that  Uw- 
work  of  marriage  is  repugnant  to  chastity,  or  con-  la^u^hMtity! 
tinence,  and  by  consequence  to  make  them  moral 
vices ;  as  they  do,  that  pretend  chastity,  and  con- 
tinence, for  the  ground  of  denying  marriage  to  the 
clergy.  For  they  confess  it  is  no  more,  but  a  con- 
stitution of  the  Church,  that  requireth  in  those 
holy  orders  that  continually  attend  the  altar  and 
administration  of  the  eucharist,  a  continual  absti- 
nence from  women,  imder  the  name  of  continual 
chastity,  continence,  and  purity.  Therefore  they 
call  the  lawful  use  of  wives,  want  of  chastity  and 
continence ;  and  so  make  marriage  a  sin,  or  at  least 
a  thing  so  impure,  and  unclean,  as  to  render  a  man 
unfit  for  the  altar.  If  the  law  were  made  because 
the  use  of  wives  is  incontinence,  and  contrary  to 
chastity,  then  all  marriage  is  vice :  if  because  it  is 
a  thing  too  impure,  and  unclean,  for  a  man  conse- 
crated to  God ;  much  more  should  other  natural, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


682 


OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 


PART  IV. 

46. 


And  that  all 
government 
but  popular 
is  tyranny. 


necessary,  and  daily  works  which  all  men  do,  render 
men  unworthy  to  be  priests,  because  they  are  more 
unclean. 

But  the  secret  foundation  of  this  prohibition  of 
marriage  of  priests,  is  not  likely  to  have  been  laid 
so  slightly,  as  upon  such  errors  in  moral  philosophy ; 
nor  yet  upon  the  preference  of  single  life,  to  the 
estate  of  matrimony;  which  proceeded  from  the 
wisdom  of  St.  Paul,  who  perceived  how  inconve- 
nient a  thing  it  was,  for  those  that  in  those  times 
of  persecution  were  preachers  of  the  gospel,  and 
forced  to  fly  from  one  country  to  another,  to  be 
clogged  with  the  care  of  wife  and  children ;  but 
upon  the  design  of  the  Popes,  and  priests  of  after 
times,  to  make  themselves  the  clergy,  that  is  to 
say,  sole  heirs  of  the  kingdom  of  God  in  this  world  ; 
to  which  it  was  necessary  to  take  from  them  the 
use  of  marriage ;  because  our  Saviour  saith,  that  at 
the  coming  of  his  kingdom  the  children  of  God 
shall  neither  marry,  nor  he  given  in  marriage^ 
but  shall  be  as  the  angels  in  lieaven ;  that  is  to 
say,  spiritual.  Seeing  then  they  had  taken  on  them 
the  name  of  spiritual,  to  have  allowed  themselves, 
when  there  was  no  need,  the  propriety  of  wives, 
had  been  an  incongruity. 

From  Aristotle's  civil  philosophy,  they  have 
learned,  to  call  all  manner  of  commonwealths  but 
the  popular,  (such  as  was  at  that  time  the  state  of 
Athens),  tyranny.  All  kings  they  called  tj^^unts  ; 
and  the  aristocracy  of  the  thirty  governors  set  up 
there  by  the  Lacedemonians  that  subdued  them, 
the  thirty  tyrants.  As  also  to  call  the  condition  of 
the  people  under  the  democracy,  liberty.  A  tyrant 
originally  signified  no  more  simply,  but  a  monarch. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


VAIN  PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.  683 

But  when  afterwards  in  most  part  of  Greece  that  part  iv. 
kind  of  government  was  abolished,  the  name  began    .    '^'    . 
to  signify,  not  only  the  thing  it  did  before,  but 
with  it,  the  hatred  which  the  popular  states  bare 
towards  it.  As  also  the  name  of  king  became  odious 
after  the  deposing  of  the  kings  in  Rome,  as  being 
a  thing  natural  to  all  men,  to  conceive  some  great 
fault  to  be  signified  in  any  attribute,  that  is  given 
in  despite,  and  to  a  great  enemy.     And  when  the 
same  men  shall  be  displeased  with  those  that  have 
the  administration  of  the  democracy,  or  aristocracy, 
they  are  not  to  seek  for  disgracefiil  names  to  ex- 
press their  anger  in;   but  call  readily  the  one 
anarchy y  and  the  other  oligarchy ,  or  the  tyranny 
of  a  few.     And  that  which  offendeth  the  people, 
is  no  other  thing,  but  that  they  are  governed,  not 
as  every  one  of  them  would  himself,  but  as  the 
public  representant,  be  it  one  man,  or  an  assembly 
of  men,  thinks  fit ;  that  is,  by  an  arbitrary  govern- 
ment :  for  which  they  give  evil  names  to  their  su- 
periors ;   never  knowing,  tDl  perhaps  a  little  after 
a  civil  war,  that  without  such  arbitrary  govern- 
ment, such  war  must  be  perpetual ;   and  that  it  is 
men,  and  arms,  not  words  and  promises,  that  make 
the  force  and  power  of  the  laws. 

And  therefore  this  is  another  error  of  Aristotle's  That  not 
politics,  that  in  a  well-ordered  commonwealth,  not  Uw  governs. 
men  should  govern,  but  the  laws.  What  man,  that 
has  his  natural  senses,  though  he  can  neither  write 
nor  read,  does  not  find  himself  governed  by  them 
he  fears,  and  believes  can  kill  or  hurt  him  when  he 
obeyeth  not  ?  Or  that  believes  the  law  can  hurt 
him  ;  that  is,  words  and  paper,  without  the  hands 
and  swords  of  men  ?    And  this  is  of  the  number  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


684  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OP  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.   pernicious  errors :   for  they  induce  men,  as  oft  as 

.    ^'    .    they  like  not  their  governors,  to  adhere  to  those 

that  call  them  tyrants,  and  to  think  it  lawful  to 

raise  war  against  them :  and  yet  they  are  many 

times  cherished  from  the  pulpit,  by  the  clergy. 

lh^co7^ience.  Th^^^  ^s  auothcr  error  in  their  civil  philosophy, 
which  they  never  learned  of  Aristotle,  nor  Cicero, 
nor  any  other  of  the  heathen,  to  extend  the  power 
of  the  law,  which  is  the  rule  of  actions  only,  to  the 
very  thoughts  and  consciences  of  men,  by  exami- 
nation, and  inquisition  of  what  they  hold,  notwith- 
standing the  conformity  of  their  speech  and  actions. 
By  which,  men  are  either  punished  for  answering 
the  truth  of  their  thoughts,  or  constrained  to  an- 
swer an  untruth  for  fear  of  punishment.  It  is  true, 
that  the  civil  magistrate,  intending  to  employ  a 
minister  in  the  charge  of  teaching,  may  enquire  of 
him,  if  he  be  content  to  preach  such  and  such 
doctrines ;  and  in  case  of  refusal,  may  deny  him 
the  emplojnnent.  But  to  force  him  to  accuse  him- 
self of  opinions,  when  his  actions  are  not  by  law 
forbidden,  is  against  the  law  of  nature ;  and  espe- 
cially in  them,  who  teach,  that  a  man  shall  be 
damned  to  eternal  and  extreme  torments,  if  he  die 
in  a  false  opinion  concerning  an  article  of  the 
Christian  faith.  For  who  is  there,  that  knowing 
there  is  so  great  danger  in  an  error,  whom  the 
natural  care  of  himself,  compelleth  not  to  hazard 
his  soul  upon  his  own  judgment,  rather  than  that 
of  any  other  man  that  is  unconcerned  in  his 
damnation  ? 

Private  For  a  private  man,  without  the  authority  of  the 

Uo^'Srkw.  commonwealth,  that  is  to  say,  without  permission 
from  the  representant  thereof,  to  interpret  the  law 


Digitized  by 


Google 


VAIN  PHILOSOPHY,  ETC.  685 

by  his  own  spirit,  is  another  error  in  the  politics  :   part  iv. 
but  not  drawn  from  Aristotle,  nor  from  any  other    .^f-   ^ 
of  the  heathen  philosophers.     I'or  none  of  them  Private 
deny,  but  that  in  the  power  of  making  laws,  isnon'^naw. 
comprehended  also  the  power  of  explaining  them 
when  there  is  need.     And  are  not  the  Scriptures, 
in  all  places  where  they  are  law,  made  law  by  the 
authority  of  the  commonwealth,  and  consequently, 
a  part  of  the  civil  law  ? 

Of  the  same  kind  it  is  also,  when  any  but  the 
sovereign  restraineth  in  any  man  that  power  which 
the  commonwealtii  hath  not  restrained  ;  as  they  do, 
that  impropriate  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  to  one 
certain  order  of  men,  where  the  laws  have  left  it 
free.  If  the  state  give  me  leave  to  preach,  or  teach ; 
that  is,  if  it  forbid  me  not,  no  man  can  forbid  me. 
If  I  find  myself  amongst  the  idolaters  of  America, 
shall  I  that  am  a  Christian,  though  not  in  orders, 
think  it  a  sin  to  preach  Jesus  Christ,  till  I  have  re- 
ceived orders  from  Rome?  Or  when  I  have  preached, 
shall  not  I  answer  their  doubts,  and  expound  the 
Scriptures  to  them ;  that  is,  shall  I  not  teach  ? 
But  for  this  may  some  say,  as  also  for  administering 
to  them  the  sacraments,  the  necessity  shall  be  es- 
teemed for  a  suflBcient  mission ;  which  is  true :  but 
this  is  true  also,  that  for  whatsoever,  a  dispensation 
is  due  for  the  necessity,  for  the  same  there  needs 
no  dispensation,  when  there  is  no  law  that  forbids 
it.  Therefore  to  deny  these  functions  to  those,  to 
whom  the  civil  sovereign  hath  not  denied  them,  is 
a  taking  away  of  a  lawful  liberty,  which  is  contrary 
to  the  doctrine  of  civil  government. 

More  examples  of  vain  philosophy,  brought  into 
religion  by  the  doctors  of  School-divinity,  might  be 


Digitized  by 


Google 


686  OF  THB  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  produced ;  but  other  men  may  if  they  please  ob- 
^    ^    -    serve  them  of  themselves.     I  shall  only  add  this. 

Language  of  that  the  Writings  o^  School-divines,  are  nothing  else 
ivinea  ^^^  ^^^  ^^^^  pQxt,  but  insignificant  trains  of  strange 
and  barbarous  words,  or  words  otherwise  used, 
than  in  the  common  use  of  the  Latin  tongue  ;  such 
as  would  pose  Cicero,  alid  Varro,  and  all  the  gram- 
marians of  ancient  Rome.  Which  if  any  man 
would  see  proved,  let  him,  as  I  have  said  once  be- 
fore, see  whether  he  can  translate  any  School-divine 
into  any  of  the  modem  tongues,  as  French,  English, 
or  any  other  copious  language:  for  that  which 
cannot  in  most  of  these  be  made  intelligible,  is  not 
intelligible  in  the  Latin.  Which  insignificancy  of 
language,  though  I  cannot  note  it  for  false  philo- 
sophy ;  yet  it  hath  a  quality,  not  only  to  hide  the 
truth,  but  also  to  make  men  think  they  have  it,  and 
desist  from  further  search. 

Erro"  ^. .         Lastly,  for  the  errors  brought  in  from  false,  or 

Irom  tradition.  •  . 

uncertain  history,  what  is  all  the  legend  of  fictitious 
miracles,  in  the  lives  of  the  saints;  and  all  the 
histories  of  apparitions,  and  ghosts,  alleged  by  the 
doctors  of  the  Roman  Church,  to  make  good  their 
doctrines  of  hell,  and  purgatory,  the  power  of  ex- 
orcism, and  other  doctrines  which  have  no  warrant, 
neither  in  reason,  nor  Scripture  ;  as  also  all  those 
traditions  which  they  call  the  unwritten  word  of 
God :  but  old  wives'  fables  ?  Whereof,  though 
they  find  dispersed  somewhat  in  the  writings  of  the 
ancient  fathers  ;  yet  those  fathers  were  men,  that 
might  too  easily  believe  false  reports ;  and  the 
producing  of  their  opinions  for  testimony  of  the 
truth  of  what  they  believed,  hath  no  other  force 
with  them  that,  according  to  the  counsel  of  St. 


1/ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


FABULOUS  TRADITIONS.  687 

John  (I  Epist.  iv.  1),  examine  spirits,  than  in  all  part  iv. 
things  that  concern  the  power  of  the  Roman  Church,  ^  ^'  ^ 
(the  abuse  whereof  either  they  suspected  not,  or 
had  benefit  by  it),  to  discredit  their  testimony,  in 
respect  of  too  rash  belief  of  reports;  which  the 
most  sincere  men,  without  great  knowledge  of  na- 
tural causes,  such  as  the  fathers  were,  are  commonly 
the  most  subject  to.  For  naturally,  the  best  men 
are  the  least  suspicious  of  fraudulent  purposes. 
Gregory  the  Pope,  and  St.  Bernard  have  somewhat 
of  apparitions  of  ghosts,  that  said  they  were  in 
purgatory  ;  and  so  has  our  Bede  :  but  no  where, 
I  believe,  but  by  report  from  others.  But  if  they, 
or  any  other,  relate  any  such  stories  of  their  own 
knowledge,  they  shall  not  thereby  confirm  the  more 
such  vain  reports ;  but  discover  their  own  infirmity, 
or  fraud. 

With  the  introduction  of  false,  we  may  loin  also  Suppresaion 

1  •  n  1-1-111  of  reason. 

the  suppression  of  true  philosophy,  by  such  men, 
as  neither  by  lawful  authority,  nor  sufficient  study, 
are  competent  judges  of  the  truth.  Our  own  navi- 
gations make  manifest,  and  all  men  learned  in 
human  sciences,  now  acknowledge  there  are  anti- 
podes": and  every  day  it  appeareth  more  and  more, 
that  years  and  days  are  determined  by  motions  of 
the  earth.  Nevertheless,  men  that  have  in  their 
writings  but  supposed  such  doctrine,  as  an  occasion 
to  lay  open  the  reasons  for,  and  against  it,  have  been 
punished  for  it  by  authority  ecclesiastical.  But 
what  reason  is  there  for  it  ?  Is  it  because  such 
opinions  are  contrary  to  true  religion  ?  That  cannot 
be,  if  they  be  true.  Lle^ therefore  the  truth  be  first 
examined  by  competent  judges,  or  confuted  by 
them  that  pretend  to  know  the  contrary.     Is  it 


Digitized  by 


Google 


688  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  because  they  be  contrary  to  the  religion  establislied  • 
^  ^'  _^  Let  them  be  silenced  by  the  laws  of  those,  to  whom 
the  teachers  of  them  are  subject ;  that  is,  by  the 
laws  civil.  For  disobedience  may  lawfully  be  pu- 
nished in  them,  that  against  the  laws  teach  even 
true  philosophy.  Is  it  because  they  tend  to  dis- 
order in  government,  as  countenancing  rebellion, 
or  sedition  ?  Then  let  them  be  silenced,  and  the 
teachers  punished  by  virtue  of  his  power  to  whom 
the  care  of  the  public  quiet  is  committed ;  which 
is  the  authority  civil.  For  whatsoever  power  ec- 
clesiastics take  upon  themselves,  (in  any  place  where 
they  are  subject  to  the  state),  in  their  own  right, 
though  they  call  it  God's  right,  is  but  usurpation. 


CHAPTER  XLVIL 

OF  THE  BENEFIT  THAT  PROCEEDETH  FROM  SUCH 
DARKNESS,  AND  TO  WHOM  IT  ACCRUETH. 

He  that  re-     CiCERO  makcth  honourable  mention  of  one  of  the 

ceiTeth  be- 

nefit  by  a  fact,  CassH,  a  scvcrc  judgc  amougst  the  Romans,  for  a 
t^bTSeauihor  custom  hc  had,  in  criminal  causes,  when  the  testi- 
mony of  the  witnesses  was  not  sufficient,  to  ask 
the  accusers,  cut  bono ;  that  is  to  say,  what  profit, 
honour,  or  other  contentment,  the  accused  ob- 
tained, or  expected  by  the  fact.  For  amongst  pre- 
sumptions, there  is  none  that  so  evidently  declareth 
the  author,  as  doth  the  benefit  of  the  action.  By 
the  same  rule  I  intend  in  this  place  to  examine, 
who  they  may  be  that  have  possessed  the  people 
so  long  in  this  part  of  Christendom,  ynth  these 
doctrines,  contrary  to  the  peaceable  societies  of 
mankind. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Ol^  THE  BBNBFIT  FROM  DARKNESS.        689 

And  first,  to  this  error,  that  the  present  Church  part  iv. 
now  militant  on  earthy  is  the  kingdom  of  God,  .  ^^'  ^ 
(that  is,  the  kingdom  of  glory,  or  the  land  of  pro-  That  the 
mise;  not  the  kingdom  of  grace,  which  is  but  atantuth'^king- 
promise  of  the  land),  are  annexed  these  worldly  taTtot^a^ht 
benefits;  first,  that  the  pastors  and  teachers  of^y^e^J»«"'^ 
the  Church,  are  entitled  thereby,  as  God's  public 
ministers,  to  a  right  of  governing  the  Church ;  and 
consequently,  because  the  Church  and  common- 
wealth are  the  same  persons,  to  be  rectors,  and  go- 
vernors of  the  commonwealth.  By  this  title  it  is, 
that  the  Pope  prevailed  with  the  subjects  of  all 
Christian  princes,  to  believe,  that  to  disobey  him, 
was  to  disobey  Christ  himself ;  and  in  all  diflfer- 
ences  between  him  and  other  princes,  (charmed 
with  the  word  power  spiritual),  to  abandon  their 
lawful  sovereigns ;  which  is  in  eflfect  an  universal 
monarchy  over  all  Christendom.  For  though  they 
were  first  invested  in  the  right  of  being  supreme 
teachers  of  Christian  doctrine,  by  and  under  Chris- 
tian emperors,  within  the  limits  of  the  Roman  em- 
pire, as  is  acknowledged  by  themselves,  by  the  title 
of  Pontifex  Maximusy  who  was  an  officer  subject 
to  the  civil  state  ;  yet  after  the  empire  was  divided, 
and  dissolved,  it  was  not  hard  to  obtrude  upon  the 
people  already  subjected  to  them,  another  title, 
namely,  the  right  of  St.  Peter ;  not  only  to  save 
entire  their  pretended  power ;  but  also  to  extend 
the  same  over  the  same  Christian  provinces,  though 
no  more  united  in  the  empire  of  Rome.  This  be- 
nefit of  an  universal  monarchy,  (considering  the 
desire  of  men  to  bear  rule),  is  a  sufficient  presump- 
tion, that  the  Popes  that  pretended  to  it,  and  fpr  a 
loBg  time  enjoyed  it,  were  the  authors  of  the  doc- 

VOL.  III.  Y  Y 


Digitized  by 


Google 


690  OF  THE  KINGDOM  Of  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  trine,  by  which  it  was  obtained  ;  namely,  that  the 

.    ^'^'    .    Church  now  on  earth,  is  the  kingdom  of  Christ. 

For  that  granted,  it  must  be  understood,   that 

Christ  hath  some  lieutenant  amongst  us,  by  whom 

we  are  to  be  told  what  are  his  commandments. 

After  that  certain  Churches  had  renounced  this 
imiversal  power  of  the  Pope,  one  would  expect  in 
reason,  that  the  civil  sovereigns  in  all  those  Churches, 
should  have  recovered  so  much  of  it,  as  before  they 
had  unadvisedly  let  it  go,  was  their  own  right, 
and  in  their  own  hands.  And  in  England  it  was 
so  in  effect ;  saving  that  they,  by  whom  the  kings 
administered  the  government  of  religion,  by  main- 
taining their  employment  to  be  in  God's  right, 
seemed  to  usurp,  if  not  a  supremacy,  yet  an  inde- 
pendency on  the  civil  power  :  and  they  but  seemed 
to  usurp  it,  inasmuch  as  they  acknowledged  a  right 
in  the  king,  to  deprive  them  of  the  exercise  of 
their  functions  at  his  pleasure. 
^°^d™tr  ^^^  ^^  those  places  where  the  presbytery  took 
bythePrcs-  that  officc,  though  many  other  doctrines  of  the 
^^^'  Church  of  Rome  were  forbidden  to  be  taught; 
yet  this  doctrine,  that  the  kingdom  of  Christ  is  al- 
ready come,  and  that  it  began  at  the  resurrection 
of  our  Saviour,  was  still  retained.  But  cut  bono  f 
What  profit  did  they  expect  from  it  ?  The  same 
which  the  Popes  expected :  to  have  a  sovereign 
power  over  the  people.  For  what  is  it  for  men  to 
excommunicate  their  lawftd  king,  but  to  keep  him 
from  all  places  of  God's  public  service  in  his  own 
kingdom ;  and  with  force  to  resist  him,  when  he 
with  force  endeavoureth  to  correct  them  ?  Or  what 
is  it,  without  authority  from  the  civil  sovereign,  to 
excommunicate  any  person,  but  to  take  from  him 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THE  BENEFIT  FBbM  DARKNESS.        691 

his  lawful  liberty,  that  is,  to  usurp  an  unlawful  part  iv. 
power  over  their  brethren  ?    The  authors  therefore    >    ^^-    . 
of  this  darkness  in'religion,  are  the  Roman,  and  the 
presbyterian  clergy. 

To  this  head,  I  refer  also  all  those  doctrines,  i^^^^wiity. 
that  serve  them  to  keep  the  possession  of  this  spi- 
ritual sovereignty  after  it  is  gotten,  As  first,  that 
the  Pope  in  his  public  capacity  cannot  err.  For 
who  is  there,  that  believing  this  to  be  true,  will 
not  readily  obey  him  in  whatsoever  he  commands  ? 

Secondly,  that  all  other  bishops,  in  what  com-  subjwtion 
monwealth  soever,  have  not  their  right,  neither 
immediately  from  G6d,  nor  mediately  from  their 
civil  sovereigns,  but  from  the  Pope,  is  a  doctrine, 
by  which  there  comes  to  be  in  every  Christian  com- 
monwealth many  potent  men,  (for  so  are  bishops), 
that  have  their  dependance  on  the  Pope,  and  owe 
obedience  to  him,  though  he  be  a  foreign  prince  ; 
by  which  means  he  is  able,  as  he  hath  done  many 
times,  to  raise  a  civil  war  against  the  state  that  sub- 
mits not  itself  to  be  governed  accordingly  to  his 
pleasure  and  interest. 

Thirdly,  the  exemption  of  these,  and  of  all  other  ^^^^^^l^^, 
priests,  and  of  all  monks,  and  friars,  from  the  power 
of  the  civil  laws.  For  by  this  means,  there  is  a 
\  great  part  of  every  commonwealth,  that  enjoy  the 
benefit  of  the  laws,  and  are  protected  by  the  power 
of  the  civil  state,  which  nevertheless  pay  no  part  of 
the  public  expense ;  nor  are  liable  to  the  penalties, 
as  other  subjects,  due  to  their  crimes ;  and  conse- 
(quently,  stand  not  in  fear  of  any  man,  but  the 
Pope ;  and  adhere  to  him  only,  to  uphold  his  imi- 
versal  monarchy. 

Fourthly,  the  giving  to  their  priests,  which  is  no 

YY  2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


692 


OP  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNBSS. 


PART  IV. 

47. 

The  names 

ofsaoerdotes, 

aodsacrificen. 


The  sacra- 
mentation 
of  marriage. 


The  single 
life  of  priests* 


Auricular 
confession. 


Canonization 
of  saints,  and 
declaring  of 
martyrs. 


more  in  the  New  Testament  but  presbyters,  that 
is,  elders,  the  name  oisaceTdoteSy  that  is,  sacrificers, 
which  was  the  title  of  the  civil  sovereign,  and  his 
public  ministers,  amongst  the  Jews,  whilst  God  was 
their  king.  Also,  the  making  the  Lord's  Supper  a 
sacrifice,  serveth  to  make  the  people  believe  the 
Pope  hath  the  same  power  over  all  Christians,  that 
Moses  and  Aaron  had  over  the  Jews ;  that  is  to 
say,  all  power,  both  civil  and  ecclesiastical,  as  the 
high-priest  then  had. 

Fifthly,  the  teaching  that  matrimony  is  a  sacra- 
ment, giveth  to  the  clergy  the  judging  of  the  law- 
fulness of  marriages  ;  and  thereby,  of  what  children 
are  legitimate ;  and  consequently,  of  the  right  of 
succession  to  hereditary  kingdoms. 

Sixthly,  the  denial  of  marriage  to  priests,  serveth 
to  assure  this  power  of  the  Pope  over  kings.  For 
if  a  king  be  a  priest,  he  cannot  marry,  and  trans- 
mit his  kingdom  to  his  posterity ;  if  he  be  not  a 
priest,  then  the  Pope  pretendeth  this  authority 
ecclesiastical  over  him,  and  over  his  people. 

Seventhly,  from  auricular  confession,  they  obtain, 
for  the  assurance  of  their  power,  better  inteUigence 
of  the  designs  of  princes,  and  great  persons  in  the 
civil  state,  than  these  can  have  of  the  designs  of 
the  state  ecclesiastical. 

Eighthly,  by  the  canonization  of  saints,  and  de- 
claring who  are  martyrs,  they  assure  their  power, 
in  that  they  induce  simple  men  into  an  obstinacy 
against  the  laws  and  commands  of  their  civil  so- 
vereigns even  to  death,  if  by  the  Pope's  excommu- 
nication, they  be  declared  heretics  or  enemies  to 
the  Church ;  that  is,  as  they  interpret  it,  to  the 
Pope. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THE  BENEFIT  FROM  DARKNESS^    693 

Ninthly,  they  assure  the  same,  by  the  power  they  fart  iv. 
'^  ascribe  to  every  priest,  of  making  Christ ;  and  by     _'*^;    ^ 
the  power  of  ordaining  penaSee ;  and  of  remitting,  '^^^"^*^°g'^' 
and  retaining  of  sins.  abwiutioii. 

Tenthly,  by  the  doctrine  of  purgatory,  of  justifi-  wT^Tes 
cation  by  external  works,  and  of  indulgences,  the  external  works. 
clergy  is  enriched. 

Eleventhly,  by  their  demonology,  and  the  use  of  Demonoiogy 

J     \..i_         ^T--  \^   •    •         xT.        X      and  exorcism. 

exorcism,  and  other  thmgs  appertaining  thereto, 
they  keep,  or  think  they  keep,  the  people  more  in 
awe  of  their  power. 

Lastly,  the  metaphysics,  ethics,  and  politics  of  School  divinity. 
]  Aristotle,    the  ftivolous    distinctions,    barbarous 
i  terms,  and  obscure  language  of  the  Schoolmen, 
/  taught  in  the  universities,  which  have  been  all 
f    erected  and  regulated  by  the  Pope's,  authority,  serve 
*    them  to  keep  these  errors  from  being  detected,  and 
to  make  men  mistake  the  ignis  fatuus  of  vain  phi- 
losophy, for  the  light  of  the  Gospel. 

To  these,  if  they  sufficed  not,  might  be  added  The  authors 
other  of  their  dark  doctrines,  the  profit  whereof  darSTa^  who 
redoimdeth  manifestly,  to  the  setting  up  of  an  un-  ^^  ^®' 
lawful  power  over  the  lawful  sovereigns  of  Christian 
people ;  or  for  the  sustaining  of  the  same,  when  it 
is  set  up  ;  or  to  the  worldly  riches,  honour,  and 
authority  of  those  that  sustain  it.    And  therefore 
by  the  aforesaid  rule,  of  cui  hono^  we  may  justly 
pronoimce  for  the  authors  of  all  this  spiritual  dark- 
ness, the  Pope,  and  Roman  clergy,  and  all  those 
besides  that  endeavour  to  settle  in  the  minds  of 
men  this  erroneous  doctrine,  that  the  Church  now 
on  earth,  is  that  kingdom  of  God  mentioned  in  the 
Old  and  New  Testament. 

But  the  emperors,  and  other  Christian  sovereigns, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


they  be. 


694  OF  THB  KINGDOM  OP  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  under  whose  goyemment  these  errors,  and  the  like 
_  ^f  *  _  -  encroachments  of  ecclesiastics  upon  their  office,  at 
The  Mthon  first  cTcpt  iu,  to  the  disturbance  of  their  possessions, 
dariuieat,  who  and  of  the  tranquillity  of  their  subjccts,  though  they 
suffered  the  same  for  want  of  foresight  of  the  sequel, 
and  of  insight  into  the  designs  of  their  teachers, 
may  nevertheless  be  esteemed  accessories  to  their 
own,  and  the  public  damage.  For  without  their 
authority  there  could  at  first  no  seditious  doctrine 
have  been  publicly  preached.  I  say  they  might 
have  hindered  the  same  in  the  beginning :  but  when 
the  people  were  once  possessed  by  those  spiritual 
men,  there  was  no  human  remedy  to  be  applied, 
that  any  man  could  invent  And  for  the  remedies 
that  God  should  provide,  who  never  faileth  in  his 
good  time  to  destroy  all  the  machinations  of  men 
against  the  truth,  we  are  to  attend  his  good  plea- 
sure, that  suffereth  many  times  the  prosperity  of  his 
enemies,  together  with  their  ambition,  to  grow  to 
such  a  height,  as  the  violence  thereof  openeth  the 
eyes,  which  the  wariness  of  their  predecessors  had 
before  sealed  up,  and  makes  men  by  too  much 
grasping  let  go  all,  as  Peter's  net  was  broken,  by 
the  struggling  of  too  great  a  multitude  of  fishes ; 
whereas  the  impatience  of  those,  that  strive  to  re- 
sist such  encroachment,  before  their  subjects*  eyes 
were  opened,  did  but  increase  the  power  they  re- 
sisted. I  do  not  therefore  blame  the  emperor 
Frederick  for  holding  the  stirrup  to  our  countryman 
Pope  Adrian ;  for  such  was  the  disposition  of  his 
subjects  then,  as  if  he  had  not  done  it,  he  was  not 
likely  to  have  succeeded  in  the  empire.  But  I  blame 
those,  that  in  the  beginning,  when  their  power  was 
entire,  by  suffering  such  doctrines  to  be  forged  in 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THE  BENEFIT  FROM  DARKNESS.    695 

the  universities  of  their  own  dominions,  have  holden  part  iv. 
the  stirrup  to  all  the  succeeding  Popes,  whilst  they    ^    ^'['    . 
mounted  into  the  thrones  of  all  Christian  sovereigns,  The  authors 
to  ride,  and  tire,  both  them,  and  their  people  at  ^rS^M,  who 
heir  pleasure.  thejhe. 

But  as  the  inventions  of  men  are  woven,  so  also 
are  they  ravelled  out ;  the  way  is  the  same,  but  the 
order  is  inverted.  The  web  begins  at  the  first  ele- 
ments of  power,  which  are  wisdom,  humility,  sin- 
cerity, and  other  virtues  of  the  Aposties,  whom  the 
people,  converted,  obeyed  out  of  reverence,  not  by 
obligation.  Their  consciences  were  free,  and  tiieir 
words  and  actions  subject  to  none  but  the  civil 
power.  Afterwards  the  presbyters,  as  the  flocks 
of  Christ  increased,  assembling  to  consider  what  they 
should  teach,  and  thereby  obliging  themselves  to 
teach  nothing  against  the  decrees  of  their  assem- 
blies, made  it  to  be  thought  the  people  were  thereby 
obliged  to  follow  their  doctrine,  and  when  they  re- 
fused, refused  to  keep  them  company,  (that  was  then 
called  excommunication),  not  as  being  infidels,  but  as 
being  disobedient :  and  this  was  the  first  knot  upon 
their  liberty.  And  the  number  of  presbyters  in- 
creasing, the  presbyters  of  the  chief  city  or  province, 
got  themselves  an  authority  over  the  parochial  pres- 
byters, and  appropriated  to  themselves  the  names  of 
bishops :  and  this  was  a  second  knot  on  Christian 
liberty.  Lastly,  the  bishop  of  Rome,  in  regard  of 
the  imperial  city,  took  upon  him  an  authority,  (partiy 
by  the  wills  of  the  emperors  themselves,  and  by 
the  title  of  Pontjfex  MaximuSy  and  at  last  when 
the  emperors  were  grown  weak,  by  the  privil^es 
of  St.  Peter),  over  all  other  bishops  of  the  empire  : 
which  was  the  third  and  last  knot,  and  the  whole 
synthesis  and  construction,  of  the  pontificial  power. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


696  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNB8S. 

PART  IV.  And  therefore  the  analysis,  or  resolution,  is  by 
^  ^1'  •  the  same  way ;  but  b^inneth  with  the  knot  that 
Thewthori  was  last  tied ;  as  we  may  see  in  the  dissolution  of 
dJknMt,  who  the  prssterpolitical  Church  govemment  in  England. 
*i>ej  ^-  First,  the  power  of  the  Popes  was  dissolved  totally 
by  Queen  Elizabeth  ;  and  the  bishops,  who  before 
exercised  their  functions  in  right  of  the  Pope,  did 
afterwards  exercise  the  same  in  right  of  the  Queen 
and  her  successors ;  though  by  retaining  the  phrase 
oijure  divino,  they  were  thought  to  demand  it  by 
immediate  right  from  God :  and  so  was  untied  the 
third  knot.  After  this,  the  presbyterians  lately  in 
England  obtained  the  putting  down  of  episcopacy: 
and  so  was  the  second  knot  dissolved.  And  almost 
at  the  same  time,  the  power  was  taken  also  fit)m 
the  presbyterians :  and  so  we  are  reduced  to  the 
independancy  of  the  primitive  CSiristians,  to  follow 
Paul,  or  Cephas,  or  Apollos,  every  man  as  he  liketh 
best :  which,  if  it  be  without  contention,  and  witii- 
out  measuring  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  by  our  affec- 
tion to  the  person  of  his  minister,  (the  fault  which 
the  apostle  reprehended  in  the  Corinthians),  is  per- 
haps the  best.  First,  because  there  ought  to  be  no 
power  over  the  consciences  of  men,  but  of  the  Word 
itself,  working  faith  in  every  one,  not  always  ac- 
cording to  the  purpose  of  them  that  plant  and 
water,  but  of  God  himself,  that  giveth  the  increase. 
And  secondly,  because  it  is  unreasonable  in  them, 
who  teach  there  is  such  danger  in  every  little  error, 
to  require  of  a  man  endued  with  reason  of  his  own, 
to  follow  the  reason  of  any  other  man,  or  of  the 
most  voices  of  any  other  men,  which  is  little  better 
than  to  venture  his  salvation  at  cross  and  pile.  Nor 
ought  those  teachers  to  be  displeased  with  this  loss 
of  their  ancient  authority.  For  there  is  none  should 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OF  THB  BENEFIT  FROM  DARKNESS.         697 

know  better  than  they,  that  power  is  preserved  by  part  iv. 
the  same  virtues  by  which  it  is  acquired  ;  that  is  to  .  ^^'  . 
say,  by  wisdom,  humility,  clearness  of  doctrine,  and 
sincerity  of  conversation ;  and  not  by  suppression 
of  the  natural  sciences,  and  of  the  morality  of  na- 
tural reason ;  nor  by  obscure  language ;  nor  by 
arrogating  to  themselves  more  knowledge  than  they 
make  appear ;  nor  by  pious  frauds ;  nor  by  such 
other  faults,  as  in  the  pastors  of  God*s  Church  are 
not  only  faults,  but  also  scandals,  apt  to  make  men 
stumble  one  time  or  other  upon  the  suppression  of 
their  authority. 

But  after  this  doctrine,  that  the  Church  now  mi-  Comparison 
litanty  is  the  kingdom  of  God  spoken  of  in  the  Old  with  Uie  king- 
and  New  Testament ^  was  received  in  the  world ;  ^<^™®^^"*'- 
the  ambition,  and  canvassing  for  the  offices  that  be- 
long thereimto,  and  especially  for  that  great  office 
of  being  Christ's  lieutenant,  and  the  pomp  of  them 
that  obtained  therein  the  principal  public  charges, 
became  by  degrees  so  evident,  that  they  lost  the 
inward  reverence  due  to  the  pastoral  function :  in- 
somuch as  the  wisest  men,  of  them  that  had  any 
power  in  the  civil  state,  needed  nothing  but  the 
authority  of  their  princes,  to  deny  them  any  further 
obedience.  For,  from  the  time  that  the  Bishop  of 
Romehad  gotten  to  be  acknowledgedfor  bishop  uni- 
versal, by  pretence  of  succession  to  St.  Peter,  their 
whole  hierarchy,  or  kingdom  of  darkness,  may  be 
compared  not  unfitly  to  the  kingdom  of  fairies  ; 
that  is,  to  the  old  wives*  fables  in  England,  con- 
cerning ghosts  and  spirits y  and  the  feats  they  play 
in  the  night.  And  if  a  man  consider  the  original 
of  this  great  ecclesiastical  dominion,  he  will  easily 
perceive,  that  the  Papacy  is  no  other  than  the  ghost 


Digitized  by 


Google 


608     OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  iv.\  of  the  deceased  Roman  empire^  sitting  crowned 

^    ^^  ,>    upon  the  grave  thereof.  For  so  did  the  Papacy  start 

ComparUon     up  on  a  suddcu  out  of  the  rums  of  that  heathen 

of  the  papacy        * 

with  the  king-   pOWCr. 

dom  of  fairiea.  r^^  language  also,  which  they  use,  both  in  the 
churches,  and  in  their  public  acts,  being  Latiny 
which  is  not  commonly  used  by  any  nation  now  in 
the  world,  what  is  it  but  the  ghost  of  the  old  Roman 
language  ? 

TheyhiriV*  in  what  nation  soever  they  converse, 

have  but  one  universal  king,  which  some  poets  of 

ours  call  King  Oberon;   but  the  Scripture  calls 

Beelzebub,  prince  of  demons.    The  ecclesiastics 

likewise,  in  whose  dominions  soever  they  be  found, 

acknowledge  but  one  universal  king,  the  Pope. 

I      The  ecclesiastics  are  spiritual  men,  and  ghostly 

I  fathers.  The  fairies  are  */>iW/*,  and  ^Ao*/*.  Fairies 

I  and  ghosts  inhabit  darlmess,  solitudes,  and  graves. 

The  ecclesiastics  walk  in  obscurity  of  doctrine,  in 

monasteries,  churches,  and  church-yards. 

The  ecclesiastics  have  their  cathedral  churches, 
which,  in  what  town  soever  they  be  erected,  by 
virtue  of  holy  water,  and  certain  charms  called  ex- 
orcisms, have  the  power  to  make  those  towns, 
cities,  that  is  to  say,  seats  of  empire.  The  Jairies 
also  have  their  enchanted  castles,  and  certain  gigan- 
tic ghosts,  that  domineer  over  the  r^ons  round 
'about  them. 

V      The  fairies  are  not  to  be  seized  on ;  and  brought 
I  to  answer  for  the  hurt  they  do.   So  also  the  eccle- 
f  siastics  vanish  away  from  the  tribunals  of^  civil 
justice.  '* 

The  ecclesiastics  take  from  young  men  the  use 
of  reason,  by  certain  charms  compounded  of  meta- . 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OP  THE  BENEFIT  FROM  DARKNESS.         699 

physics,  and  miracles,  and  traditions,  and  abused  fart  iv. 
Scripture,  whereby  they  are  good  for  nothing  else,    ^V^*    . 
but  to  execute  what  they  command  them.    The  Comparison 
J^airies  likewise  are  said  to  take  young  children  out  Jrith  thTSSg- 
of  their  cradles,  and  to  change  them  into  natural  ^^"'°^*^""' 
fools,  which  common  people  do  therefore  call^/t?^^, 
and  are  apt  to  mischief. 

In  what  shop,  or  operatory  the  fairies  make  their 
enchantment,  the  old  wives  have  not  determined. 
But  the  operatories  of  the  clergy  are  well  enough 
known  to  be  the  universities,  that  received  their 
discipline  from  authority  pontificial. 

When  the  Jairies  are  displeased  with  any  body, 
they  are  said  to  send  their  elves,  to  pinch  them. 
The  ecclesiastics,  when  they  are  displeased  with 
any  civil  state,  make  also  their  elves,  that  is,  super- 
stitious,  enchanted  subjects,  to  pinch  their  princes, 
by  preaching  sedition;  or  one  prince  enchanted 
ynih  promises,  to  pinch  another. 

The  Jairies  marry  not;  but  there  be  amongst 
them  incuhiy  that  have  copulation  with  flesh  and 
blood.    The  priests  also  marry  not. 

The  ecclesiastics  take  the  cream  of  the  land,  by 

donations  of  ignorant  men,  that  stand  in  awe  of 

them,  and  by  tithes.    So  also  it  is  in  the  fable  of 

fairies y  that  they  enter  into  the  dairies,  and  feast 

upon  the  cream,  which  they  skim  from  the  milk. 

What  kind  of  money  is  current  in  the  kingdom 
of  fairies y  is  not  recorded  in  the  story.  But  the 
ecclesiastics  in  their  receipts  accept  of  the  same 
money  that  we  do ;  though  when  they  are  to  make 
any  payment,  it  is  in  canonizations,  indulgencies, 
and  masses. 

To  this,  and  such  like  resemblances  between  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


dom  of  fiuriea. 


700  OF  THB  KINGDOM  OF  DARKNESS. 

PART  IV.  papacy  J  and  the  kingdom  oifairies,  may  be  added 
.    *^'    .    this,  that  as  thejairies  have  no  existence,  but  in 
Compariaon     the  fancies  of  ignorant  people,  rising  from  the 
Jlithu^ES-  traditions  of  old  wives,  or  old  poets:  so  the  spi- 
ritual power  of  the  Pope,  without  the  bounds  of  his 
own  civil  dominion,  consisteth  only  in  the  fear  that 
seduced  people  stand  in,  of  their  excommunica- 
tions ;  upon  hearing  of  false  miracles,  false  tradi- 
tions, and  false  interpretations  of  the  Scripture. 

It  was  not  therefore  a  very  difficult  matter,  for 
Henry  VIII  by  his  exorcism  ;  nor  for  queen  Eliza- 
beth by  hers,  to  cast  them  out.  But  whc^  knows 
that  this  spirit  of  Rome,  now  gone  out,  and  Walking 
by  missions  through  the  dry  places  of  China,  Japan, 
and  the  Indies,^  that  yield  him  little  fruit,  may  not 
return,  or  rather  an  assembly  of  spirits  worse  than 
he,  enter,  and  inhabit  this  clean  swept  house,  and 
make  the  end  thereof  worse  than  the  beginning  ? 
For  it  is  not  the  Roman  clergy  only,  that  pretends 
the  kingdom  of  God  to  be  of  this  world,  and  thereby 
to  have  a  po^er  therein,  distinct  from  that  of  the 
civil  state.  And  this  is  all  I  had  a  design  to  say, 
concerning  the  doctrine  of  the  politics.  Which 
when  I  have  reviewed,  I  shall  willingly  expose  it  to 
the  censure  of  my  country. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


A  REVIEW,  AND  CONCLUSION. 


From  the  contrariety  of  some  of  the  natural  facul-  part  iv. 
ties  of  the  mind,  one  to  another,  as  also  of  one  j^^.^^'  ^a 
passion  to  another,  and  from  their  reference  to  conciudon. 
conversation,  there  has  been  an  argument  taken,  to 
infer  an  impossibility  that  any  one  man  should  be 
sufl&ciently  disposed  to  all  sorts  of  civil  duty.  The  ' 
severity  of  judgment,  they  say,  makes  men  censo- 
rious, and  unapt  to  pardon  the  errors  and  infirmi* 
ties  of  other  men :  and  on  the  other  side,  celerity 
of  fancy,  makes  the  thoughts  less  steady  than  is  ne- 
cessary, to  discern  exactly  between  right  and  wrong.  ^ 
Again,  in  all  deliberations,  and  in  all  pleadings,  the 
faculty  of  solid  reasoning  is  necessary :  for  without 
it,  the  resolutions  of  men  are  rash,  and  their  sen- 
tences unjust :  and  yet  if  there  be  not  powerftil 
eloquence,  which  procureth  attention  and  consent, 
the  eflFect  of  reason  will  be  little.  But  these  are 
contrary  faculties ;  the  former  being  grounded  upon 
principles  of  truth ;  the  other  upon  opinions  already 
received,  true  or  false ;  and  upon  the  passions  and 
interests  of  men,  which  are  different,  and  mutable. 
And  amongst  the  passions,  courage^  (by  which 
I  mean  the  contempt  of  wounds,  and  violent  death) 
inclineth  men  to  private  revenges,  and  sometimes 
to  endeavour  the  unsettling  of  the  public  peace : 
and  timorousnesSy  many  times  disposeth  to  the  de- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


702  A  REVIEW, 

PART  IV.  sertion  of  the  public  defence.  Both  these,  they  say, 
Review  and  ^^*"^^^*  Stand  together  m  the  same  person. 
ooncioaioii.  And  to  considcr  the  contrariety  of  men*s  opinions, 
and  manners,  in  general,  it  is,  they  say,  impossible 
to  entertain  a  constant  civil  amity  with  all  diose, 
with  whom  the  business  of  the  world  constrains  us 
to  converse :  which  business  consisteth  almost  in 
nothing  else  but  a  perpetual  contention  for  honour, 
riches,  and  authority. 

To  which  I  answer,  that  these  are  indeed  great 
difficulties,  but  not  impossibilities :  for  by  educa- 
tion, and  discipline,  they  may  be,  and  are  sometimes 
reconciled.    Judgment  and  fancy  may  have  place 
in  the  same  man ;  but  by  turns ;  bs  the  end  which 
he  aimeth  at  requireth.    As  the  Israelites  in  Egypt, 
were  sometimes  fastened  to  their  labour  of  making 
bricks,  and  other  times  were  ranging  abroad  to 
gather  straw :  so  also  may  the  judgment  sometimes 
be  fixed  upon  one  certain  consideration,  and  tJie 
fancy  at  another  time  wandering  about  the  world. 
So  also  reason,  and  eloquence,  though  not  perhaps 
in  the  natural  sciences,  yet,  in  the  moral,  may  stand 
very  well  together.    For  wheresoever  there  is  place 
for  adorning  and  preferring  of  error,  there  is  much 
more  place  for  adorning  and  preferring  of  truth,  if 
they  have  it  to  adorn.     Nor  is  there  any  repug- 
nancy between  fearing  the  laws,  and  not  fearing 
a  public  enemy ;  nor  between  abstaining  from  in- 
jury, and  pardoning  it  in  others.    There  is  there- 
fore no  such  inconsistence  of  human  nature,  with 
civil  duties,  as  some  think.    I  have  known  clear- 
ness of  judgment,  and  largeness  of  fancy ;  strength 
of  reason,  and  graceful  elocution  ;  a  courage  for 
the  war,  and  a  fear  for  the  laws^  and  all  eminently  in 


Digitized  by 


Google 


AND  CONCLUSION.  703 

one  man;  and  that  was  my  most  noble  and  honoiured  part  iv. 
friend,  Mr.  Sidney  Godolphin ;  who  hating  no  man,  ^^T^^'^ 
nor  hated  of  any,  was  unfortunately  slain  in  the  conciuaion. 
beginning  of  the  late  civil  war,  in  the  public  quarrel, 
by  an  undiscemed  and  an  undisceming  hand.  ^ 

To  the  Laws  of  Nature,  declared  in  Chapter 
XV.  I  would  have  this  added,  that  every  man  is 
hound  hy  nature^  a^  much  as  in  him  lieth^  to 
protect  in  war  the  authority y  hy  which  he  is  him- 
sey^  protected  in  time  of  peace.  For  he  that  pre- 
tendeth  a  right  of  nature  to  preserve  his  own  body, 
cannot  pretend  a  right  of  nature  to  destroy  him, 
by  whose  strength  he  is  preserved :  it  is  a  manifest 
contradiction  of  himself.  And  though  this  law  may 
be  drawn  by  consequence,  from  some  of  those  that 
are  there  already  mentioned ;  yet  the  times  require  / 
to  have  it  inculcated,  and  remembered.  / 

And  because  I  find  by  divers  English  books  lately 
printed,  that  the  civil  wars  have  not  yet  suflSciently 
taught  men  in  what  point  of  time  it  is,  that  a  sub- 
ject becomes  obUged  to  the  conqueror ;  nor  what  I 
is  conquest ;  nor  how  it  comes  about,  that  it  obliges  v^ 
men  to  obey  his  laws :  therefore  for  farther  satis- 
faction of  men  therein,  I  say,  the  point  of  time, 
wherein  a  man  becomes  subject  to  a  conqueror,  is 
that  point,  wherein  having  liberty  to  submit  to  him, 
he  consenteth,  either  by  express  words,  or  by  other 
suflBicient  sign,  to  be  his  subject.  When  it  is  that 
a  man  hath  the  liberty  to  submit,  I  have  showed 
before  in  the  end  of  Chapter  xxi. ;  namely,  that 
for  him  that  hath  no  obligation  to  his  former 
sovereign  but  that  of  an  ordinary  subject,  it  is  then, 
when  the  means  of  his  life  are  within  the  guards 
and  garrisons  of  the  enemy ;  for  it  is  then,  that  he 


Digitized  by 


Google 


704  A  REVIEW, 

PART  IV.  hath  no  longer  protection  from  him,  but  is  pro- 
^^'         tected  by  the  adverse  party  for  his  contribution* 
conciadpD.      Seeing  therefore  such  contribution  is  every  where, 
as  a  thing  inevitable,  notwithstanding  it  be   an 
assistance  to  the  enemy,  esteemed  lawful ;  a  total 
submission,  which  is  but  an  assistance  to  the  enemy, 
cannot  be  esteemed  unlawful.     Besides,  if  a  man 
consider  that  they  who  submit,  assist  the  enemy 
but  with  part  of  their  estates,  whereas  they  that 
refuse,  assist  him  with  the  whole,  there  is  no  reason 
to  call  their  submission,  or  composition,  an  assist- 
ance ;  but  rather  a  detriment  to  the  enemy.     But 
if  a  man,  besides  the  obligation  of  a  subject,  hath 
taken  upon  him  a  new  obligation  of  a  soldier,  then 
he  hath  not  the  liberty  to  submit  to  a  new  power, 
as  long  as  the  old  one  keeps  the  field,  and  giveth 
him  means  of  subsistence,  either  in  his  armies,  or 
garrisons :  for  in  this  case,  he  cannot  complain  of 
want  of  protection,  and  means  to  live  as  a  soldier. 
But  when  that  also  fails,  a  soldier  also  may  seek 
his  protection  wheresoever  he  has  most  hope  to 
have  it ;  and  may  lawfully  submit  himself  to  his 
new  master.    And  so  much  for  the  time  when  he 
may  do  it  lawfully,  if  he  will.     If  therefore  he  do 
it,  he  is  undoubtedly  bound  to  be  a  true  subject : 
for  a  contract  lawftdly  made,  cannot  lawfully  be 
broken. 

By  this  also  a  man  may  understand,  when  it  is, 
that  men  may  be  said  to  be  conquered;  and  in 
what  the  nature  of  conquest,  and  the  right  of  a 
conqueror  consisteth :  for  this  submission  in  itself 
impheth  them  all.  Conquest,  is  not  the  victory  it- 
self;  but  the  acquisition,  by  victory,  of  a  right  over 
the  persons  of  men.     He  therefore  that  s  slain,  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


AND  CONCLUSION.  705 

overcome,  but  not  conquered :  he  that  is  taken,  part  iv, 
and  put  into  prison,  or  chains,  is  not  conquered,  y^  ^ 
though  overcome;  for  he  is  still  an  enemy,  and  condualon, 
may  save  himself  if  he  can :  but  he  that  upon  pro- 
mise of  obedience,  hath  his  life  and  liberty  allowed 
him,  is  then  conquered,  and  a  subject;  and  not 
before.  The  Romans  used  to  say,  that  their  general 
had  pacified  such  a  province,  that  is  to  say,  in 
English,  conquered  it ;  and  that  the  country  was 
pacified  by  victory,  when  the  people  of  it  had  pro- 
mised imperata  Jncere,  that  is,  to  do  what  the 
Roman  people  commanded  them :  this  was  to  be 
conquered.  But  this  promise  may  be  either  express, 
or  tacit:  express,  by  promise:  tacit,  by  other 
signs.  As  for  example,  a  man  that  hath  not  been 
called  to  make  such  an  express  promise,  because 
he  is  one  whose  power  perhaps  is  not  considerable ; 
yet  if  he  live  under  their  protection  openly,  he  is 
understood  to  submit  himself  to  the  government : 
but  if  he  live  there  secretly,  he  is  liable  to  anything 
that  may  be  done  to  a  spy,  and. enemy  of  the  state. 
I  say  not,  he  does  any  injustice;  for  acts  of  open 
hostility  bear  not  that  name  ;  but  that  he  may  be 
justly  put  to  death.  Likewise,  if  a  man,  when  his 
country  is  conquered,  be  out  of  it,  he  is  not  con- 
quered, nor  subject :  but  if  at  his  return,  he  submit 
to  the  government,  he  is  bound  to  obey  it.  So 
that  conquest,  to  define  it,  is  the  acquiring  of  the 
right  of  sovereignty  by  victory.  Which  right,  is 
acquired  in  the  people's  submission,  by  which  they 
contract  with  the  victor,  promising  obedience,  for 
life  and  liberty. 

In  Chapter  xxix,  I  have  set  down  for  one  of  the 
causes  of  the  dissolutions  of  commonwealths,  their 

VOL.  III.  z  z 


Digitized  by 


Google 


706  A  REVIEW, 

PART  IV.  imperfect  generation,  consisting  in  the  want  of  rh 
^~^    '    absolute  and  arbitrary  le^lative  power ;  for  want 
concinaion.    whcrcof,  the  civil  sovcrcign  is  fain  to  handle  the 
sword  of  justice  unconstantly,  and  as  if  it  were  too 
hot  for  him  to  hold.    One  reason  whereof,  which  I 
have  not  there  mentioned,  is  this,  that  they  will  all 
of  them  justify  the  war,  by  which  their  power  was 
at  first  gotten,  and  whereon,  as  they  think,  their 
right  dependeth,  and  not  on  the  possession.    As  if, 
for  example,  the  right  of  the  kings  of  England  did 
depend  on  the  goodness  of  the  cause  of  William  the 
Conqueror,  and  upon  their  lineal,  and  directest  de- 
«  *  scent  from  him ;  by  which  means,  there  would  per- 

haps be  no  tie  of  the  subjects'  obedience  to  their 
sovereign  at  this  day  in  all  the  world:  wherein 
whilst  they  needlessly  think  to  justify  themselves, 
they  jjustify  all  the  successful  rebellions  that  ambi- 
tion shall  at  any  time  raise  against  them,  and  their 
successors.  Therefore  I  put  down  for  one  of  the 
most  effectual  seeds  of  the  death  of  any  state,  that 
the  conquerors  require  not  only  a  submission  of 
men's  actions  to  them  for  the  future,  but  also  an 
approbation  of  all  their  actions  past ;  when  there 
is  scarce  a  commonwealth  in  the  world,  whose  be- 
ginnings can  in  conscience  be  justified. 

And  because  the  name  of  tyranny,  signifieth 
nothing  more,  nor  less,  than  the  name  of  sovereignty, 
be  it  in  one,  or  many  men,  saving  that  they  that 
use  the  former  word,  are  understood  to  be  angry 
with  them  they  call  tyrants ;  I  think  the  toleration 
of  a  professed  hatred  of  tyranny,  is  a  toleration  of 
hatred  to  commonwealth  in  general,  and  another 
evil  seed,  not  differing  much  from  the  former.  For 
to  the  justification  of  the  cause  of  a  conqueror,  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


AND  CONCLUSION.  ^^^ 

reproach  of  the  cause  of  the  conquered,  is  for  the  part  iv. 
most  part  necessary:  but  neither  of  them  necessary    ""T"^     ' 
for  the  obligation  of  the  conquered.     And  thus  concTu!^oD° 
much  I  have  thought  fit  to  say  upon  the  review  of 
the  first  and  second  part  of  this  discourse. 

In  Chapter  xxxv,  I  have  sufficiently  declared 
out  of  the  Scripture,  that  in  the  commonwealth  of 
the  Jews,  God  himself  was  made  the  sovereign,  by 
pact  with  the  people ;  who  were  therefore  called 
his  peculiar  people^  to  distinguish  them  from  the 
rest  of  the  world,  over  whom  God  reigned  not  by 
their  consent,  but  by  his  own  power :  and  that  m 
this  kingdom  Moses  was  God's  lieutenant  on  earth ;  ^  * 
and  that  it  was  he  that  told  them  what  laws  God 
appointed  them  to  be  ruled  by.  But  I  have  omitted 
to  set  down  who  were  the  officers  appointed  to  do 
execution ;  especially  in  capital  punishments  ;  not 
then  thinking  it  a  matter  of  so  necessary  con- 
sideration, as  I  find  it  since.  We  know  that  gene- 
rally in  all  commonwealths,  the  execution  of  cor- 
poral punishments,  was  either  put  upon  the  guards, 
or  other  soldiers  of  the  sovereign  power ;  or  given 
to  those,  in  whom  want  of  means,  contempt  of 
honour,  and  hardness  of  heart,  concurred,  to  make 
them  sue  for  such  an  office.  But  amongst  the  Is- 
raeUtes  it  was  a  positive  law  of  God  their  sovereign, 
that  he  that  was  convicted  of  a  capital  crime,  should 
be  stoned  to  death  by  the  people ;  and  that  the 
witnesses  should  cast  the  first  stone,  and  after  the 
witnesses,  then  the  rest  of  the  people.  This  was  a 
law  that  designed  who  were  to  be  the  executioners ; 
but  not  that  any  one  should  throw  a  stone  at  him 
before  convection  and  sentence,  where  the  congre- 
gation was  judge.  The  witnesses  were  nevertheless 


Digitized  by 


Google 


708  A  REVIEW, 

PART  IV.  to  be  heard  before  they  proceeded  to  execution, 
^  ,  '  -'  unless  the  fact  were  committed  in  the  presence  of 
conciu^on.  the  cougregatiou  itself,  or  in  sight  of  the  lawful 
judges  ;  for  then  there  needed  no  other  witnesses 
but  the  judges  themselves.  Nevertheless,  this  man- 
ner of  proceeding  being  not  thoroughly  understood, 
hath  given  occasion  to  a  dangerous  opinion,  that 
any  man  may  kill  another,  in  some  cases,  by  a 
right  of  zeal ;  as  if  the  executions  done  upon  of- 
fenders in  the  kingdom  of  God  in  old  time,  pro- 
ceeded not  from  the  sovereign  command,  but  from 
the  authority  of  private  zeal :  which,  if  we  consider 
the  texts  that  seem  to  favour  it,  is  quite  contrary. 
First,  where  the  Levites  fell  upon  the  people, 
that  had  made  and  worshipped  the  Golden  Calf,  and 
slew  three  thousand  of  them  ;  it  was  by  the  com- 
mandment of  Moses,  from  the  mouth  of  God ;  as  is 
manifest,  Exod.  xxxii.  27.  And  when  the  son  of 
a  woman  of  Israel  had  blasphemed  God,  they  that 
heard  it,  did  not  kill  him,  but  brought  him  before 
Moses,  who  put  him  under  custody,  till  God  should 
give  sentence  against  him ;  as  appears,  Levit.  xxiv. 
11,  12.  Again,  {Numb.  xxv.  6,  7),  when  Phinehas 
killed  Zimri  and  Cosbi,  it  was  not  by  right  of  pri- 
vate zeal :  their  crime  was  committed  in  the  sight  of 
the  assembly ;  there  needed  no  witness ;  the  law 
was  known,  and  he  the  heir-apparent  to  the  so- 
vereignty ;  and,  which  is  the  principal  point,  the 
lawfulness  of  his  act  depended  wholly  upon  a  sub- 
sequent ratification  by  Moses,  whereof  he  had  no 
cause  to  doubt.  And  this  presumption  of  a  future 
ratification,  is  sometimes  necessary  to  the  safety  of 
a  commonwealth;  as  in  a  sudden  rebellion,  any  man 
that  can  suppress  it  by  his  own  power  in  the  country 


Digitized  by 


Google 


AND  CONCLUSION.  709 

where  it  begins,  without  express  law  or  commis-  p^^T  iv. 
sion,  may  lawfully  do  it,  and  provide  to  have  it  "— ' — 
ratified,  or  pardoned,  whilst  it  is  in  doing,  or  after  coi^^on? 
it  is  done.  Also  Numb.  xxxv.  30,  it  is  expressly 
said,  Whosoever  shall  kill  the  murderer y  shall  kill 
him  upon  the  word  of  witnesses :  but  witnesses 
suppose  a  formal  judicature,  and  consequently  con- 
demn that  pretence  oijus  zelotarum.  The  law  of 
Moses  concerning  him  that  enticeth  to  idolatry, 
that  is  to  say,  in  the  kingdom  of  God  to  a  renoun- 
cing of  his  allegiance,  (Deut.  xiii.  8,  9),  forbids  to 
conceal  him,  and  commands  the  accuser  to  cause  him 
to  be  put  to  death,  and  to  cast  the  first  stone  at  him ; 
but  not  to  kill  him  before  he  be  condemned.  And 
(Deut.  xvii.  4,  6, 6,  7),  the  process  against  idolatry 
is  exactly  set  down :  for  God  there  speaketh  to  the 
people,  as  judge,  and  commandeth  them,  when  a 
man  is  accused  of  idolatry,  to  enquire  diligently  of 
the  fact,  and  finding  it  true,  then  to  stone  him ; 
but  still  the  hand  of  the  witness  throweth  the  first 
stone.  This  is  not  private  zeal,  but  public  con- 
demnation. In  like  manner  when  a  father  hath  a 
rebellious  son,  the  law  is,  {Deut.  xxi.  18-21),  that  he 
shall  bring  him  before  the  judges  of  the  town,  and 
all  the  people  of  the  town  shall  stone  him.  Lastly, 
by  pretence  of  these  laws  it  was,  that  St.  Stephen 
was  stoned,  and  not  by  pretence  of  private  zeal : 
for  before  he  was  carried  away  to  execution,  he  had 
pleaded  his  cause  before  the  high-priest.  There  is 
nothing  in  all  this,  nor  in  any  other  part  of  the 
Bible,  to  countenance  executions  by  private  zeal ; 
which  being  oftentimes  but  a  conjunction  of  igno- 
rance and  passion,  is  against  both  the  justice  and 
peace  of  a  commonwealth. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


710  A  REVIEW, 

PART  IV.  In  chapter  xxxvi,  I  have  said,  that  it  is  not  de- 
^^T^  '  clared  in  what  manner  God  spake  supematurally 
conclusion,  to  Moses :  nor  that  he  spake  not  to  him  sometimes 
by  dreams  and  visions,  and  by  a  supernatural  voice, 
as  to  other  prophets :  for  the  manner  how  he  spake 
unto  him  from  the  mercy-seat,  is  expressly  set 
down.  Numbers  vii.  89,  in  these  words,  From  that 
time  forward^  when  Moses  entered  into  the  Ta- 
bernacle of  the  congregation  to  speak  with  God, 
he  heard  a  voice  which  spake  unto  him  from  over 
the  mercy-seat^  which  is  over  the  Ark  of  tJie  tes- 
tinMny;  from  between  the  cherubims  he  spake  unto 
him.  But  it  is  not  declared  in  what  consisteth  the 
preeminence  of  the  manner  of  God's  speaking  to 
Moses,  above  that  of  his  speaking  to  other  prophets, 
as  to  Samuel,  and  to  Abraham,  to  whom  he  also 
spake  by  a  voice,  (that  is,  by  vision),  unless  the  dif- 
ference consist  in  the  clearness  of  the  vision.  For 
face  to  facCy  and  mouth  to  mouthy  cannot  be  lite- 
rally understood  of  the  infiniteness,  and  incompre- 
hensibility of  the  Divine  nature. 

And  as  to  the  whole  doctrine,  I  see  not  yet,  but 
the  principles  of  it  are  true  and  proper ;  and  the 
ratiocination  solid.  For  I  ground  the  civil  right  of 
sovereigns,  and  both  the  duty  and  liberty  of  sub- 
jects, upon  the  known  natural  inclinations  of  man- 
kind, and  upon  the  articles  of  the  law  of  nature ; 
of  which  no  man,  that  pretends  but  reason  enough 
to  govern  his  private  family,  ought  to  be  ignorant. 
And  for  the  power  ecclesiastical  of  the  same  sove- 
reigns, I  ground  it  on  such  texts,  as  are  both  evident 
in  themselves,  and  consonant  to  the  scope  of  the 
whole  Scripture.  And  therefore  am  persuaded, 
that  he  that  shall  read  it  with  a  purpose  only  to  be 


Digitized  by 


Google 


AND  CONCLUSION.  711 

informed,  shall  be  informed  by  it.    But  for  those  p^R^  iv. 
that  by  writing,  or  public  discourse,  or  by  their   '— ^' — ' 
eminent  actions,  have  already  engaged  themselves  condwi'n. 
to  the  maintaining  of  contrary  opinions,  they  will 
not  be  so  easily  satisfied.     For  in  such  cases,  it  is 
natural  for  men,  at  one  and  the  same  time,  both  to 
proceed  in  reading,  and  to  lose  their  attention,  in 
the  search  of  objections  to  that  they  had  read  before. 
Of  which  in  a  time  wherein  the  interests  of  men 
are  changed,  (seeing  much  of  that  doctrine,  which 
serveth  to  the  establishing  of  a  new  government, 
must  needs  be  contrary  to  that  which  conduced 
to  the  dissolution  of  the  old),  there  cannot  choose 
but  be  very  many. 

In  that  part  which  treateth  of  a  Christian  com- 
monwealth, there  are  some  new  doctrines,  which, 
it  may  be,  in  a  state  where  the  contrary  were  al- 
ready fully  determined,  were  a  fault  for  a  subject 
*  without  leave  to  divulge,  as  being  an  usurpation  of 
the  place  of  a  teacher.  But  in  this  time,  that  men 
call  not  only  for  peace,  but  also  for  truth,  to  oflFer 
such  doctrines  as  I  think  true,  and  that  manifestly 
tend  to  peace  and  loyalty,  to  the  consideration  of 
those  that  are  yet  in  deliberation,  is  no  more,  but 
to  oflFer  new  wine,  to  be  put  into  new  casks,  that 
both  may  be  preserved  together.  And  I  suppose, 
that  then,  when  novelty  can  breed  no  trouble  nor 
disorder  in  a  state,  men  are  not  generally  so  much 
inclined  to  the  reverence  of  antiquity,  as  to  prefer 
ancient  errors,  before  new  and  well-proved  truth. 

There  is  nothing  I  distrust  more  than  my  elocu- 
tion, which  nevertheless  I  am  confident,  excepting 
the  mischances  of  the  press,  is  not  obscure.  That 
I  have  neglected  the  ornament  of  quoting  ancient 
poets,  orators,  and  philosophers,  contrary  to  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


712  A  REVIEW, 

PART  IV.   custom  of  late  time,  whether  I  have  done  well  or 
"-T" — '    ill  in  it,  proceedeth  from  my  judgment,  grounded 
conciuTioD°    on  many  reasons.     For  first,  all  truth  of  doctrine 
dependeth  either  upon  reason^  or  upon  Scripture  ; 
both  which  give  credit  to  many,  but  never  receive 
it  from  any   writer.      Secondly,  the  matters  in 
question  are  not  oifact,  but  of  rights  wherein  there 
is  no  place  for  witnesses.    There  is  scarce  any  of 
those  old  writers,  that  contradicteth  not  sometimes 
both  himself  and  others ;  which  makes  their  testi- 
monies insujfficient.     Fourthly,  such  opinions  as  are 
taken  only  upon  credit  of  antiquity,  are  not  intrin- 
sically the  judgment  of  those,  that  cite  them,  but 
words  that  pass,  like  gaping,  from  mouth  to  mouth. 
Fifthly,  it  is  many  times  with  a  fraudulent  design 
that  men  stick  their   corrupt  doctrine  with   the 
cloves  of  other  men's  wit.     Sixthly,  I  find  not  that 
the  ancients  they  cite,  took  it  for  an  ornament,  to 
do  the  like  with  those  that  wrote  before  them. 
Seventhly,  it  is  an  argument  of  indigestion,  when 
Greek  and  Latin  sentences  unchewed  come  up 
again,  as   they  use    to  do,  unchanged.     Lastly, 
though  I  reverence  those  men  of  ancient  time,  that 
either  have  written  truth  perspicuously,  or  set  us 
in  a  better  way  to  find  it  out  ourselves ;  yet  to 
the  antiquity  itself  I  think  nothing  due.   For  if  we 
will  reverence  the  age,  the  present  is  the  oldest. 
If  the  antiquity  of  the  writer,  I  am  not  sure,  that 
generally  they  to  whom  such  honour  is  given,  were 
more  ancient  when  they  wrote,  than  I  am  that  am 
writing.  But  if  it  be  well  considered,  the  praise  of 
ancient  authors,  proceeds  not  from  the  reverence 
of  the  dead,  but  from  the  competition,  and  mutual 
envy  of  the  living. 

To  conclude,  there  is  nothing  in  this  whole  dis- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


AND  CONCLUSION.  713 

course,  nor  in  that  I  writ  before  of  the  same  sub-  part  iv. 
jeet  in  Latin,  as  far  as  I  can  perceive,  contrary  ^""^     \ 

•  1  1       TXT       i/»/^T  1  Review,  and 

either  to  the  Word  of  God,  or  to  good  manners ;  or  conciusiou. 
to  the  disturbance  of  the  public  tranquillity.  There- 
fore I  think  it  may  be  profitably  printed,  and  more 
profitably  taught  in  the  Universities,  in  case  they 
also  think  so,  to  whom  the  judgment  of  the  same 
belongeth.  For  seeing  the  Universities  are  the  foun- 
tains of  civil  and  moral  doctrine,  from  whence  the 
preachers,  and  the  gentry,  drawing  such  water  as 
they  find,  use  to  sprinkle  the  same  (both  from  the 
pulpit  and  in  their  conversation),  upon  the  people, 
there  ought  certainly  to  be  great  care  taken,  to 
have  it  pure,  both  from  the  venom  of  heathen 
politicians,  and  from  the  incantation  of  deceiving 
spirits.  And  by  that  means  the  most  men,  know- 
ing their  duties,  will  be  the  less  subject  to  serve 
the  ambition  of  a  few  discontented  persons,  in  their 
purposes  against  the  state ;  and  be  the  less  grieved 
with  the  contributions  necessary  for  their  peace, 
and  defence ;  and  the  governors  themselves  have 
the  less  cause,  to  maintain  at  the  common  charge 
any  greater  army,  than  is  necessary  to  make  good 
the  public  liberty,  against  the  invasions  and  en- 
croachments of  foreign  enemies.  ^ 

And  thus  I  have  brought  to  an  end  my  Discourse 
of  Civil  and  Ecclesiastical  Government,  occasioned 
by  the  disorders  of  the  present  time,  without  par- 
tiality, without  application,  and  without  other  de- 
sign than  to  set  before  men's  eyes  the  mutual 
relation  between  protection  and  obedience ;  of 
which  the  condition  of  human  nature,  and  the  laws 
divine,  both  natural  and  positive,  require  an  inviol- 
able observation.   And  though  in  the  revolution  of 

VOL.  III.  AAA 


Digitized  by 


Google 


714  Aj  REVIEW,  AND  CONCLUSION. 

PAiiT  IV.  States,  there  can  be  no  very  good  constellation  for 
^T""^     \  truths  of  this  nature  to  be  born  under,  (as  having 

Review,  and  i  t        ^  \.  i^ 

cuticiuiuoD.  an  angry  aspect  from  the  dissolvers  of  an  old 
government,  and  seeing  but  the  backs  of  them  that 
erect  a  new),  yet  I  cannot  think  it  will  be  con- 
demned at  this  time,  either  by  the  public  judge  of 
doctrine,  or  by  any  that  desires  the  continuance  of 
public  peace.  And  in  this  hope  I  return  to  my  in- 
terrupted speculation  of  bodies  natural ;  wherein, 
if  God  give  me  health  to  finish  it,  I  hope  the  novelty 
will  as  much  please,  as  in  the  doctrine  of  this  arti- 
ficial body  it  useth  to  offend.  For  such  truth,  as 
opposeth  no  man's  profit,  nor  pleasure,  is*  to  all 
men  welcome. 


FINIS. 


C.  RirnARDS,  PBINTEB,ST.  M4BT1N  S  LAME. 


Digitized  by 


Googl 


//i 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^^   '^^ -'.^^K  :^^  c    ^^    ^.-^<^    , 


J:^ 


^a>tA-^LA     \  w  V    /:  /v-.-«-4^  ^  T 


^f.  .vX: 


1^. 


^^^    ^    .^;x. 


O^,-*  Vw-      ^^L     ^.<^        /       /^. 


'? 


I  r  V'>Pi    ^'  '  ^  ^, 


(         '  ( 


I  . 


/ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


RETURN     CIRCULATION  DEPARTMENT 

T0^^»      2C         ""in  Library 
LOAN  PERIOD  1 
HOME  USE 


Q 


ALL  BOOKS  MAY  BE  RECALLED         ■^.. 

1   monih  loans  may  be  renewed  by  calling  6  Jl5 

6-monrh  loom  may  be  rechorqed  by  bf<nginy  /s  to  C<rculor>on  Desk 

ReneA-als  ond  recharges  moy  be  rviade  4  days  ksr  tc  H^.re  dn'p 

JAN  i^^MSST/^MPEdH^ 


T''^ 


flEcciRc  JAN  23^66  0 J  ]99Q 


-j-u. 


9A 


MITQEISGDCCQ?'^ 


REC€JVEDS5 


JAM?  5 -nog; 

HER  CIl     MAY  2 


M_ 


71986 


rTRnrmr 


m.  2  8  1996 


CIRCULATION  DEPT. 


MAY  g  0 198!] 


AUTO.  DISC. 


^ECi71993 


StR- 


■^^^ 


'  fc  t  W- 


trcT 


APR  »  8  19fl9 


DEC  I  5  m4 


CmnULATin  ^ncuuiiON  dept 


NIIIR  OCT  tsTwi    (^|^R20  1994 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA,  BERKilgV 
FORM  NO.  DD6,  60m,  3/80  BERKELEY,  CA  94720 


