=~ 
— “*# 
‘ 


>a a 
ow. 
-_ * 
oem 


\ 


— 


] 


— 


= 
yee Be 
—— 
ae 
= = 
—— 
= 
—a 
— 
2 me 
a—_ 
— I 
or - 
4 
—a 
= f 
= 


nit bib | i amet 
waa TT 


| 
Ot 


ic 


~ a 
— 
oC ae gr eT 
nae — 
aa 3 
ise 
> = 

~ 


ett ae 
> =< + . 
Pa 
oa 
2 


« 
ee | 


vuer : gos 
+” 4 vay use en ae Fon 9 , } Peper} boil 6", -* a s 
7 a 5 ~ | ee > is - J f v} Se -* ita vs ° ' 
s ya —_ a“ *. Oo mt "> . ‘ 7 a oor w Orton rs 
» 4 . ae 7 bd 2 - a ae, me Ties ys -" 7 ey tong . it, eed) - 


Digitized by Google 


> — 


-_ oe 


COM AS 


us 


sy 
jt 


al 


ee 
Sos Lol, 


THE 3o Vb — 
om 
ENGLISH WORKS 


OF 


THOMAS HOBBES 


OF MALMESBURY ; 


NOW FIRST COLLECTED AND EDITED 


BY 


SIR WILLIAM MOLESWORTH, BART. 


LONDON: 


JOHN BOHN, 
HENRIETTA STREET, COVENT GARDEN. 


wa 


4 


MDCCCXX XIX. 


) ie ne Y, 
itt oF Se 


LONDON: 
C. RICHARDS, PRINTER, ST. MARTIN’S LANE. 


TO 


GEORGE GROTE, ESQ. 


M.P. FOR THE CITY OF LONDON. 


Dear Grote, 


I dedicate to you this edition of 
the Works of Hobbes; first, because I know 
you will be well pleased to see a complete 
collection of all the writings of an Author 
for whom you have so high an admiration. 
Secondly, because I am indebted to you for 
my first acquaintance with the speculations of 
one of the greatest and most original thinkers 
in the English language, whose works, I have ~ 
often heard you regret, were so scarce, and so 
much less read and studied than they deserved 


to be. It now, therefore, gives me great satis- 


DEDICATION. 


faction to be able to gratify a wish, you have fre- 
quently expressed, that some person, who had 
time and due reverence for that illustrious 
man, would undertake to edite his works, and 
bring his views again before his countrymen, 
who have so long and so unjustly neglected 
him. And likewise, I am desirous, in some 
way, to express the sincere regard and respect 
that I feel for you, and the gratitude that I 
owe you for the valuable instruction, that I have 
obtained from your society, and from the 
friendship with which you have honoured me, 
during the many years we have been com- 
panions in political life. 


Yours, truly, 


Wiiu1aMm Mo.eswortu. 


February 25th, 1839. 
79, Eaton Square, London. 


ELEMENTS OF PHILOSOPHY. 
THE FIRST SECTION, 


CONCERNING BODY, 


WRITTEN IN LATIN 


BY 
THOMAS HOBBES OF MALMESBURY, 


AND 


TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH. 


THE 


TRANSLATOR TO THE READER. 


Ir, when I had finished my translation of this first section of 
the Elements of Philosophy, I had presently committed the 
same to the press, it might have come to your hands sooner 
than now it doth. But as I undertook it with much diffidence 
of my own ability to perform it well; so I thought fit, before 
I published it, to pray Mr. Hobbes to view, correct, and order 
it according to his own mind and pleasure. Wherefore, though 
you find some places enlarged, others altered, and two chapters, 
xvi and xx, almost wholly changed, you may nevertheless 
remain assured, that as now I present it to you, it doth not at 
all vary from the author’s own sense and meaning. As for 
the Six Lessons to the Savilian Professors at Oxford, they are 
not of my translation, but were written, as here you have 
them in English, by Mr. Hobbes himself; and are joined to 


this book, because they are chiefly in defence of the same.* 


* They will be published in a separate volume, with other works of a 
similar description. W. M. 


THE AUTHOR’S EPISTLE DEDICATORY, 


TO THE 


RIGHT HONORABLE, MY MOST HONORED LORD, 


WILLIAM, EARL OF DEVONSHIRE. 


Tuis first section of the Elements of Philosophy, the 
monument of my service and your Lordship’s bounty, 
though, after the Third Section published, long de- 
ferred, yet at last finished, I now present, my most 
excellent Lord, and dedicate to your Lordship. A 
little book, but full; and great enough, if men count 
well for great ; and to an attentive’ reader versed in 
the demonstrations of mathematicians, that is, to 
your Lordship, clear and easy to understand, and 
almost new throughout, without any offensive novelty. 
I know that that part of philosophy, wherein are 
considered lines and figures, has been delivered to 
us notably improved by the ancients; and withal a 
most perfect pattern of the logic by which they were 
enabled to find out and demonstrate such excellent 
theorems as they have done. I know also that the 


Vill EPISTLE DEDICATORY. 


hypothesis of the earth’s diurnal motion was the 
invention of the ancients; but that both it, and 
astronomy, that is, celestial physics, springing up 
together with it, were by succeeding philosophers 
strangled with the snares of words. And therefore 
the beginning of astronomy, except observations, I 
think is not to be derived from farther time than from 
Nicolaus Copernicus ; who in the age next preceding 
the present revived the opinion of Pythagoras, Aris- 
tarchus, and Philolaus. After him, the doctrine of 
the motion of the earth being now received, and a dif- 
ficult question thereupon arising concerning the de- 
scent of heavy bodies, Galileus in our time, striving 
with that difficulty, was the first that opened to us the 
gate of natural philosophy universal, which is the 
knowledge of the nature of motion. Sothatneither can 
the age of natural philosophy be reckoned higher than 
to him. Lastly, the science of man’s body, the most 
profitable part of natural science, was first discovered 
with admirable sagacity by our countryman Doctor 
Harvey, principal Physician to King James and King 
Charles, in his books of the Motion of the Blood, 
aud of the Generation of Living Creatures ; who is 
the only man I know, that conquering envy, hath 
established a new doctrine in his life-time. Before 


these, there was nothing certain in natural philosophy 


EPISTLE DEDICATORY. 1X 


but every man’s experiments to himself, and the 
natural histories, if they may be called certain, that 
are no certainer than civil histories. But since these, — 
astronomy and natural philosophy in general have, 
for so little time, been extraordinarily advanced by 
Joannes Keplerus, Petrus Gassendus, and Marinus 
Mersennus; and the science of human bodies in 
special by the wit and industry of physicians, the 
only true natural philosophers, especially of our most 
learned men of the College of Physicians in London. 
Natural Philosophy is therefore but young; but 
Civil Philosophy yet much younger, as being no older 
(I say it provoked, and that my detractors may know 
how little they have wrought upon me) than my own 
book De Cire. But what? were there no philoso- 
phers natural nor civil among the ancient Greeks? 
There were men so called; witness Lucian, by whom 
they are derided; witness divers cities, from which 
they have been often by public edicts banished. But 
it follows not that there was philosophy. There 
walked in old Greece a certain phantasm, for super- 
ficial gravity, though full within of fraud and filth, a 
little like philosophy ; which unwary men, thinking 
to be it, adhered to the professors of it, some to one, 
some to another, though they disagreed among them- 


selves, and with great salary put their children to 


X EPISTLE DEDICATORY. 


them to be taught, instead of wisdom, nothing but 
to dispute, and, neglecting the laws, to determine 
every question according to their own fancies. The 
first doctors of the Church, next the Apostles, born 
in those times, whilst they endeavoured to defend 
the Christian faith against the Gentiles by natural 
reason, began also to make use of philosophy, and 
with the decrees of Holy Scripture to mingle the 
sentences of heathen philosophers; and first some 
harmless ones of Plato, but afterwards also many 
foolish and false ones out of the physics and meta- 
physics of Aristotle; and bringing in the enemies, 
betrayed unto them the citadel of Christianity. From 
that time, instead of the worship of God, there entered 
a thing called school divinity, walking on one foot 
firmly, which is the Holy Scripture, but halted on 
the other rotten foot, which the Apostle Paul called 
vain, and might have called pernicious philosophy ; 
for it hath raised an infinite number of controversies 
in the Christian world concerning religion, and from 
those controversies, wars. It is like that Empusa in 
the Athenian comic poet, which was taken in Athens 
for a ghost that changed shapes, having one brazen 
leg, but the other was the leg of an ass, and was sent, 
as was believed, by Hecate, as a sign of some ap- 


proaching evil fortune. Against this Empusa I think 


EPISTLE DEDICATORY. Xl 


there cannot be invented a better exorcism, than to 
distinguish between the rules of religion, that is, the 
rules of honouring God, which we have from the 
laws, and the rules of philosophy, that is, the opi- 
nions of private men; and to yield what is due to 
religion to the Holy Scripture, and what is due to 
philosophy to natural reason. And this I shall do, 
if I but handle the Elements of Philosophy truly and 
clearly, as I endeavour to do. Therefore having in 
the Third Section, which I have published and dedi- 
cated to your Lordship, long since reduced all power 
ecclesiastical and civil by strong arguments of reason, 
without repugnance to God’s word, to one and the 
same sovereign authority ; I intend now, by putting 
into a clear method the true foundations of natural 
philosophy, to fright and drive away this metaphy- 
sical Empusa ; not by skirmish, but by letting in the 
light upon her. For I am confident, if any con- 
fidence of a writing can proceed from the writer’s 
fear, circumspection, and diffidence, that in the 
three former parts of this book all that I have said 
is sufficiently demonstrated from definitions ; and all 
in the fourth part from suppositions not absurd. 
But if there appear to your Lordship anything less 
fully demonstrated than to satisfy every reader, the 


cause was this, that I professed to write not all to 


Xil EPISTLE DEDICATORY. 


all, but some things to geometricians only. But that 
your Lordship will be satisfied, I cannot doubt. 

There remains the second section, which is con- 
cerning Man. That part thereof, where I handle the 
Optics, containing six chapters, together with the 
tables of the figures belonging to them, I have already 
written and engraven lying by me above these six 
years. The rest shall, as soon as I can, be added to 
it; though by the contumelies and petty injuries of 
some unskilful men, I know already, by experience, 
how much greater thanks will be due than paid me, 
for telling men the truth of what men are. But the 
burthen I have taken on me I mean to carry through; 
not striving to appease, but rather to revenge myself 
of envy, by encreasing it. For it contents me that 
I have your Lordship’s favour, which, being all you 
require, I acknowledge; and for which, with my 
prayers to Almighty God for your Lordship’s safety, 
I shall, to my power, be always thankful. 


Your Lordship’s most humble servant, 


THOMAS HOBBES. 
London, 
April 23, 1655. 


THE 


AUTHOR'S EPISTLE TO THE READER. 


TuHink not, Courteous Reader, that the philosophy, the 
elements whereof I am going to set in order, is that which 
makes philosophers’ stones, nor that which is found in the 
metaphysic codes; but that it is the natural reason of man, 
busily flying up and down among the creatures, and bringing 
back a true report of their order, causes and effects. Phi- 
losophy, therefore, the child of the world and your own mind, 
is within yourself; perhaps not fashioned yet, but like the 
world its father, as it was in the beginning, a thing confused. 
Do, therefore, as the statuaries do, who, by hewing off that 
which is superfluous, do not make but find the image. Or imi- 
tate the creation: if you will be a philosopher in good earnest, 
let your reason move upon the deep of your own cogitations 
and experience; those things that lie in confusion must be set 
asunder, distinguished, and every one stamped with its own 
name set in order; that is to say, your method. must. re- 
semble that of the creation. The order of .the creation was, 
light, distinction of day and night, the firmament, the lumi- 
naries, sensible creatures, man; and, after the creation, the 
commandment. Therefore the order of contemplation will 
be, reason, definition, space, the stars, sensible quality, 
man; and after man is grown up, subjection to command. 
In the first part of this section, which is entitled Logic, I set 
up the light of reason. In the second, which hath for title 


AUTHOR'S EPISTLE TO THE READER. 


the Grounds of Philosophy, I distinguish the most common 
notions by accurate definition, for the avoiding of confusion 
and obscurity. The third part concerns the expansion of 
space, that is Geometry. The fourth contains the Motion of 
the Stars, together with the doctrine of sensible qualities. 

In the second section, if it please God, shall be handled 
Man. In the third section, the doctrine of Subjection is handled 
already. This is the method I followed; and if it like you, 
you may use the same; for I do but propound, not commend 
to you anything of mine. But whatsoever shall be the 
method you will like, I would very fain commend philosophy 
to you, that is to say, the study of wisdom, for want of which 
we have all suffered much damage lately. For even they, that 
study wealth, do it out of love to wisdom ; for their treasures 
serve them but for a looking-glass, wherein to behold and 
contemplate their own wisdom. Nor do they, that love to be 
employed in public business, aim at anything but place 
wherein to show their wisdom. Neither do voluptuous men 
neglect philosophy, but only because they know not how great 
a pleasure it is to the mind of man to be ravished in the 
vigorous and perpetual embraces of the most beauteous world. 
Lastly, though for nothing else, yet because the mind of man 
is no less impatient of empty time than nature is of empty 
place, to the end you be not forced for want of what to do, to 
be troublesome to men that have business, or take hurt by 
falling into idle company, but have somewhat of your own 
wherewith to fill up your time, I recommend unto you to 
study philosophy. Farewell. 

6 es F 


TITLES OF THE CHAPTERS. 


PART FIRST, 


OR LOGIC. 

cHaP. PaGk. 
1. Of Philosophy. a a ; 1 

2. Of Names . : : ; ww 2s 

3. Of Proposition .  . : ‘ : ; : - 29 

4. Of Syllogism . . . : b:- te - . 44 

5. Of Erring, Falsity, and Captions : » 6 » 55 

6. Of Method 2 @ a gs Wo me, a ot G5 


PART SECOND, 


OR THE FIRST GROUNDS OF PHILOSOPHY. 


7. Of Plaeand Time . ... — «© « « §1 
8. Of Body and Accident ; a ee -  « 101 
9. Of Cause and Effect . OS i we «& 190 
10. Of Powerand Act . «© . «. «. .«  . 197 
11. Of Identity and Difference . : - 3% - 132 
12, Of Quantity, . . . . .« «. . « 188 
13. Of Analogism, or the Same Proportion -  .«  . 144 


14. Of Strait and Crooked, Angle and Figure. : - 176 


TITLES OF THE CHAPTERS. 


PART THIRD, 

OF THE PROPORTIONS OF MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 
CHAP. PAGE. 

15. Of the Nature, Properties, and divers Considerations of 
Motion and Endeavour. ‘ : : ‘ . 203 

16. Of Motion Accelerated and Uniform, and of Motion by 
Concourse : : ; : : : - 218 
17. Of Figures Deficient . . . . . 246 


18. Of the Equation of Strait Lines with the Crooked Lines 
of Parabolas, and other Figures made in imitation of 
Parabolas : : ’ ; 268 
19. Of Angles of Incidence and Reflection, aa by rn 
sition . , : ; ; ‘ ‘ ; . 273 
20. Of the Dimension of a Circle, and the Division of Angles 


or Arches : : : : é . 287 
21. Of Circular Motion. : ; : . $317 
22. Of other Variety of Motions : ; . - 333 
23. Of the Centre of Equiponderation of Bodies pressing 

downwards in Strait Parallel Lines. : ‘ - 350 
24. Of Refraction and Reflection : ‘ ; : - 374 


PART FOURTH, 


OF PHYSICS, OR THE PHENOMENA OF NATURE. 


25. Of Sense and Animal Motion : ; : ‘ . 387 
26. Of the World and of the Stars. : : : *. 410 
27. Of Light, Heat, and of Colours . : : 445 


28. Of Cold, Wind, Hard, Ice, Restitution of Bodies bent, 
Diaphanous, Lightning and Thunder, and of the 
Heads of Rivers. : ‘ , ; - ‘. 466 

29. Of Sound, Odour, Savour, and Touch ; : - 485 

30. Of Gravity . ; : ; ‘ ‘ ‘ : - 608 


COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


CHAPTER I. 


OF PHILOSOPHY. 


1. The Introduction.—2. The Definition of Philosophy ex- 
plained.—3. Ratiocination of the Mind.—4. Properties, what 
they are.—5. How Properties are known by Generation, and 
contrarily.—6. The Scope of Philosophy.—7. The Utility of 
it.—8. The Subject—9. The Parts of it—10. The Epilogue. 


PHILOSOPHY seems to me to be amongst men now, 
in the same manner as corn and wine are said to 
have been in the world in ancient time. For from 
the beginning there were vines and ears of corn 
growing here and there in the fields; but no care 
was taken for the planting and sowing of them. 
Men lived therefore upon acorns; or if any were 
so bold as to venture upon the eating of those 
unknown and doubtful fruits, they did it with dan- 
ger of their health. In like manner, every man 
brought Philosophy, that is, Natural Reason, into 
the world with him; for all men can reason to 
some degree, and concerning some things: but 
where there is need of a long series of reasons, 
there most men wander out of the way, and fall 
into error for want of method, as it were for want 
VOL. I. B 


PART I. 
1. 


Pe SA 
Introduction. 


2 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


PART I. of sowing and planting, that is, of improving their 

|" reason. And from hence it comes to pass, that 

Introduction. they who content themselves with daily experience, 
which may be likened to feeding upon acorns, and 
either reject, or not much regard philosophy, are 
commonly esteemed, and are, indeed, men of 
sounder judgment than those who, from opinions, 
though not vulgar, yet full of uncertainty, and 
carelessly received, do nothing but dispute and 
wrangle, like men that are not well in their wits. 
I confess, indeed, that that part of philosophy by 
which magnitudes and figures are computed, is 
highly improved. But because I have not observed 
the like advancement in the other parts of it, my 
purpose is, as far forth as I am able, to lay open 
the few and first Elements of Philosophy in gene- 
ral, as so many seeds from which pure and true 
Philosophy may hereafter spring up by little and 
little. 

I am not ignorant how hard a thing it is to 
weed out of men’s minds such inveterate opinions 
as have taken root there, and been confirmed in 
them by the authority of most eloquent writers ; 
especially seeing true (that 1s, accurate) Philosophy 
professedly rejects not only the paint and false 
colours of language, but even the very ornaments 
and graces of the same; and the first grounds of 
all science are not only not beautiful, but poor, 
arid, and, in appearance, deformed. Nevertheless, 
there being certainly some men, though but few, 
who are delighted with truth and strength of rea- 
son in all things, I thought I might do well to take 
this pains for the sake even of those few. I proceed 
therefore to the matter, and take my beginning 


OF PHILOSOPHY. 3 


from the very definition of philosophy, which is PART I. 


this. eee 
2. PHiLosopny ts such knowledge of effects or eee of 
phy 


appearances, as we acquire by true ratiocination explained. 
Jrom the knowledge we have first of their causes 
or generation: A nd again, of such causes or gene- 
rations as may be from knowing first their effects. 

For the better understanding of which definition, 
we must consider, first, that although Sense and 
Memory of things, which are common to man and 
all living creatures, be knowledge, yet because they 
are given us immediately by nature, and not gotten 
by ratiocination, they are not philosophy. 

Secondly, seeing Experience is nothing but me- 
mory ; and Prudence, or prospect into the future 
time, nothing but expectation of such things as 
we have already had experience of, Prudence also 
is not to be esteemed philosophy. 

By RATIOCINATION, I mean computation. Now 
to compute, is either to collect the sum of many 
things that are added together, or to know what 
remains when one thing is taken out of another. 
Rattocination, therefore, 1s the same with addition 
and substraction ; and if any man add multzplica- 
tion and division, I will not be against it, seeing 
multiplication is nothing but addition of equals one 
to another, and division nothing but a substraction 
of equals one from another, as often as is possible. 
So that all ratiocination is comprehended in these 
two operations of the mind, addition and substrac- 
tion. 

3. But how by the ratiocination of our mind, Raticcination 

: ‘ : of the Mind. 
we add and substract in our silent thoughts, with- 
out the use of words, it will be necessary for me 
B 2 


PART I. 
1. 
——_, —” 


Ratiocination 
of the Mind. 


4 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


to make intelligible by an example or two. If 
therefore a man see something afar off and ob- 
scurely, although no appellation had yet been given 
to anything, he will, notwithstanding, have the 
same idea of that thing for which now, by im- 
posing a name on it, we call it body. Again, when, 
by coming nearer, he sees the same thing thus and 
thus, now in one place and now in another, he 
will have a new idea thereof, namely, that for 
which we now call such a thing animated. Thirdly, 
when standing nearer, he perceives the figure, 
hears the voice, and sees other things which are 
signs of a rational mind, he has a third idea, 
though it have yet no appellation, namely, that for 
which we now call anything rational. Lastly, 
when, by looking fully and distinctly upon it, he 
conceives all that he has seen as one thing, the 
idea he has now is compounded of his former ideas, 
which are put together in the mind in the same 
order in which these three single names, body, 
animated, rational, are in speech compounded into 
this one name, body-animated-rational, or man. 
In like manner, of the several conceptions of four 
sides, equality of sides, and right angles, is com- 
pounded the conception of a square. For the 
mind may conceive a figure of four sides without 
any conception of their equality, and of that equa- 
lity without conceiving a right angle; and may 
join together all these single conceptions into one 
conception or one idea of a square. And thus we 
see how the conceptions of the mind are com- 
pounded. Again, whosoever sees a man standing 
near him, conceives the whole idea of that man; 
and if, as he goes away, he follow him with his 


OF PHILOSOPHY. 5 


eyes only, he will lose the idea of those things Part I. 
which were signs of his being rational, whilst, = 
nevertheless, the idea of a body-animated remains 

still before his eyes, so that the idea of rational is 
substracted from the whole idea of man, that is to 

say, of body-animated-rational, and there remains 

that of body-animated; and a while after, at a 

greater distance, the idea of animated will be lost, 

and that of body only will remain; so that at last, 

when nothing at all can be seen, the whole idea 

will vanish out of sight. By which examples, I 

think, it is manifest enough what is the internal 
ratiocination of the mind without words. 

We must not therefore think that computation, 
that is, ratiocination, has place only in numbers, 
as if man were distinguished from other living 
creatures (which is said to have been the opinion 
of Pythagoras ) by nothing but the faculty of num- 
bering ; for magnitude, body, motion, time, degrees 
of quality, action, conception, proportion, speech 
and names (in which all the kinds of philosophy 
consist) are capable of addition and substraction. 

Now such things as we add or substract, that is, 
which we put into an account, we are said to con- 
sider, in Greek AoyiZec8ar, in which language also 
svAXoyiZeoBa signifies to compute, reason, or reckon. 

4. But effects and the appearances of things to Properties, 
sense, are faculties or powers of bodies, which" ““’** 
make us distinguish them from one another ; that 
is to say, conceive one body to be equal or un- 
equal, like or unlike to another body; as in the 
example above, when by coming near enough to 
any body, we perceive the motion and going of 
the same, we distinguish it thereby from a tree, a 


6 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


column, and other fixed bodies ; and so that motion 
or going is the property thereof, as being proper 
to living creatures, and a faculty by which they 
make us distinguish them from other bodies. 

5. How the knowledge of any effect may be 
gotten from the knowledge of the generation 


and contrarily. thereof, may easily be understood by the example 


of acircle: for if there be set before us a plain 
figure, having, as near as may be, the figure of a 
circle, we cannot possibly perceive by sense whe- 
ther it be a true circle or no; than which, never- 
theless, nothing is more easy to be known to him 
that knows first the generation of the propounded 
figure. For let it be known that the figure was 
made by the circumduction of a body whereof one 
end remained unmoved, and we may reason thus ; 
a body carried about, retaining always the same 
length, applies itself first to one radius, then to 
another, to a third, a fourth, and successively to 
all; and, therefore, the same length, from the same 
point, toucheth the circumference in every part 
thereof, which is as much as to say, as all the radiz 
are equal. We know, therefore, that from such 
generation proceeds a figure, from whose one 
middle point all the extreme poimts are reached 
unto by equal radiz. And in lke manner, by 
knowing first what figure is set before us, we may 
come by ratiocination to some generation of the 
same, though perhaps not that by which it was 
made, yet that by which it might have been made; 
for he that knows that a circle has the property 
above declared, will easily know whether a body 
carried about, as is said, will generate a circle or 
no. 


OF PHILOSOPHY. 7 


6. The end or scope of philosophy is, that we Part I. 
may make use to our benefit of effects formerly na 
seen; or that, by application of bodies to one scope of 
another, we may produce the like effects of those ™!°"?"”: 
we conceive in our mind, as far forth as matter, 
strength, and industry, will permit, for the com- 
modity of human life. For the inward glory and 
triumph of mind that a man may have for the mas- 
tering of some difficult and doubtful matter, or for 
the discovery of some hidden truth, is not worth 
so much pains as the study of Philosophy requires ; 
nor need any man care much to teach another 
what he knows himself, if he think that will be the 
only benefit of his labour. The end of knowledge 
is power ; and the use of theorems (which, among 
geometricians, serve for the finding out of proper- 
ties) is for the construction of problems; and, 
lastly, the scope of all speculation is the perform- 
ing of some action, or thing to be done. 

7. But what the wézdity of philosophy is, espe- Utility of 
cially of natural philosophy and geometry, will be saa 
best understood by reckoning up the chief com- 
modities of which mankind is capable, and by 
comparing the manner of life of such as enjoy 
them, with that of others which want the same. 

Now, the greatest commodities of mankind are the 
arts; namely, of measuring matter and motion ; of 
moving ponderous bodies; of architecture; of 
navigation; of making instruments for all uses ; 
of calculating the celestial motions, the aspects of 
the stars, and the parts of time; of geography, &c. 
By which sciences, how great benefits men receive 
is more easily understood than expressed. These 
benefits are enjoyed by almost all the people of 


PART I. 
1, 
ns 

Utility of 
Philosophy. 


8 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


Europe, by most of those of Asia, and by some of 
Africa: but the Americans, and they that live near 
the Poles, do totally want them. But why? Have 
they sharper wits than these? Have not all men 
one kind of soul, and the same faculties of mind r 
What, then, makes this difference, except philo- 
sophy? Philosophy, therefore, is the cause of all 
these benefits. But the utility of moral and civil 
philosophy is to be estimated, not so much by the 
commodities we have by knowing these sciences, 
as by the calamities we receive from not knowing 
them. Now, all such calamities as may be avoided 
by human industry, arise from war, but chiefly 
from civil war ; for from this proceed slaughter, 
solitude, and the want of all things. But the cause 
of war is not that men are willing to have it; for 
the will has nothing for object but good, at least 
that which seemeth good. Nor is it from this, 
that men know not that the effects of war are 
evil; for who is there that thinks not poverty 
and loss of life to be great evils? The cause, 
therefore, of civil war 1s, that men know not the 
causes neither of war nor peace, there being but 
few in the world that have learned those duties 
which unite and keep men in peace, that is to say, 
that have learned the rules of civil life sufficiently. 
Now, the knowledge of these rules is moral philo- 
sophy. But why have they not learned them, 
unless for this reason, that none hitherto have 
taught them inaclear and exact method?’ For 
what shall we say? Could the ancient masters of 
Greece, Egypt, Rome, and others, persuade the 
unskilful multitude to their innumerable opinions 
concerning the nature of their gods, which they 


OF PHILOSOPHY. 9 


themselves knew not whether they were true or paRT I. 
false, and which were indeed manifestly false and — _ 


absurd; and could they not persuade the same Uti 
Philosophy. 


multitude to civil duty, if they themselves had 
understood it? Or shall those few writings of 
geometricians which are extant, be thought suffi- 
cient for the taking away of all controversy in the 
matters they treat of, and shall those innumerable 
and huge volumes of e¢hzcs be thought unsufficient, 
if what they teach had been certain and well de- 
monstrated? What, then, can be imagined to be 
the cause that the writings of those men have 
increased science, and the writings of these have 
increased nothing but words, saving that the for- 
mer were written by men that knew, and the 
latter by such as knew not, the doctrine they 
taught only for ostentation of their wit and elo- 
quence? Nevertheless, I deny not but the reading 
of some such books is very delightful; for they 
are most eloquently written, and contain many 
clear, wholesome and choice sentences, which yet 
are not universally true, though by them univer- 
sally pronounced. From whence it comes to pass, 
that the circumstances of times, places, and per- 
sons being changed, they are no less frequently 
made use of to confirm wicked men in their pur- 
poses, than to make them understand the precepts 
of civil duties. Now that which is chiefly wanting 
in them, is a true and certain rule of our actions, 
by which we might know whether that we under- 
take be just or unjust. For it is to no purpose to 
be bidden in every thing to do right, before there 
be a certain rule and measure of right established, 
which no man hitherto hath established. Seeing, 


tility of 


PART I. 
1 e 


Subject of 
Philosophy. 


10 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


therefore, from the not knowing of civil duties, 
that is, from the want of moral science, proceed 
civil wars, and the greatest calamities of mankind, 
we may very well attribute to such science the 
production of the contrary commodities. And 
thus much is sufficient, to say nothing of the praises 
and other contentment proceeding from philosophy, 
to let you see the utility of the same in every kind 
thereof. 

8. The subject of Philosophy, or the matter it 
treats of, is every body of which we can conceive 
any generation, and which we may, by any consi- 
deration thereof, compare with other bodies, or 
which is capable of composition and resolution ; 
that is to say, every body of whose generation or 
properties we can have any knowledge. And this 
may be deduced from the definition of philosophy, 
whose profession it is to search out the properties 
of bodies from their generation, or their generation 
from their properties ; and, therefore, where there 
is no generation or property, there is no philo- 
sophy. Therefore it excludes Theology, I mean 
the doctrine of God, eternal, ingenerable, incom- 
prehensible, and in whom there is nothing neither 
to divide nor compound, nor any generation to be 
conceived. 

It excludes the doctrine of angels, and all such 
things as are thought to be neither bodies nor 
properties of bodies; there being in them no place 
neither for composition nor division, nor any capa- 
city of more and less, that is to say, no place for 
ratiocination. 

It excludes history, as well natural as political, 
though most useful (nay necessary) to philosophy ; 


OF PHILOSOPHY. ll 


because such knowledge is but experience, or 
authority, and not ratiocination. 

It excludes all such knowledge as is acquired by 
Divine inspiration, or revelation, as not derived to 
us by reason, but by Divine grace in an instant, 
and, as it were, by some sense supernatural. 

It excludes not only all doctrines which are 
false, but such also as are not well-grounded ; for 
whatsoever we know by right ratiocination, can 
neither be false nor doubtful; and, therefore, as- 
trology, as it is now held forth, and all such divi- 
nations rather than sciences, are excluded. 

Lastly, the doctrine of God's worship is excluded 
from philosophy, as being not to be known by 
natural reason, but by the authority of the Church ; 


and as being the object of faith, and not of know- 
ledge. 


PART I. 
1. 


9. The principal parts of philosophy are two. Parts of 


For two chief kinds of bodies, and very different 
from one another, offer themselves to such as 
search after their generation and properties ; one 
whereof being the work of nature, is called a natu- 
ral body, the other is called a commonwealth, and 
is made by the wills and agreement of men. And 
from these spring the two parts of philosophy, 
called natural and civil. But seeing that, for the 
knowledge of the properties of a commonwealth, 
it is necessary first to know the dispositions, affec- 
tions, and manners of men, civil philosophy is again 
commonly divided into two parts, whereof one, 
which treats of men’s dispositions and manners, 1s 
called ethics ; and the other, which takes cogni- 
zance of their civil duties, is called politics, or 
simply czvil philosophy. In the first place, there- 


Philosophy. 


PART I. 
1. 


Epilogue. 


12 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


fore (after I have set down such premises as ap- 
pertain to the nature of philosophy in general), I 
will discourse of bodies natural ; in the second, 
of the dispositions and manners of men; and in 
the third, of the civil duties of subjects. 

10. To conclude; seeing there may be many 
who will not like this my definition of philosophy, 
and will say, that, from the liberty which a man 
may take of so defining as seems best to himself, 
he may conclude any thing from any thing (though 
I think it no hard matter to demonstrate that this 
definition of mine agrees with the sense of all men); 
yet, lest in this point there should be any cause of 
dispute betwixt me and them, I here undertake 
no more than to deliver the elements of that science 
by which the effects of anything may be found out 
from the known generation of the same, or con- 
trarily, the generation from the effects ; to the end 
that they who search after other philosophy, may 
be admonished to seek it from other principles. 


OF NAMES. 13 


CHAPTER II. 


OF NAMES. 


1. The necessity of sensible Moniments or Marks for the help 
of Memory : a Mark defined.—2. The necessity of Marks for 
the signification of the conceptions of the Mind.—3. Names 
supply both those necessities.—4. The Definition of a Name.— 
5. Names are Signs not of Things, but of our Cogitations.— 
6. What it is we give Names to.—7. Names Positive and 
Negative.—8. Contradictory Names.—9. A Common Name.— 
10. Names of the First and Second Intention.—11. Universal, 
Particular, Individual, and Indefinite Names.—12. Names 
Univocal and Equivocal.—13. Absolute and Relative Names.— 
14. Simple and Compounded Names.—15. A Predicament 
described.—16. Some things to be noted concerning Predica- 
ments. 


1. How unconstant and fading men’s thoughts Fane I. 
are, and how much the recovery of them depends —— 
upon chance, there is none but knows by infallible eCENIEY 


of sensible 
experience in himself. For no man is able to re- Mowments 


member quantities without sensible and present for the help 
measures, nor colours without sensible and present penne 
patterns, nor number without the names of num- 
bers disposed in order and learned by heart. So 
that whatsoever a man has put together in his 
mind by ratiocination without such helps, will 
presently slip from him, and not be revocable but 
by beginning his ratiocination anew. From which 
it follows, that, for the acquiring of philosophy, 
some sensible moniments are necessary, by which 
our past thoughts may be not only reduced, but 


14 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


PART I. also registered every one in its own order. These 
—.— moniments I call MARKs, namely, sensible things 
A Max _ taken at pleasure, that, by the sense of them, such 
thoughts may be recalled to our mind as are like 

those thoughts for which we took them. 
Necessity of 9, Again, though some one man, of how excel- 


Marks for the . eee 
signification of lent a wit soever, should spend all his time partly 


the conceptions . ; aon oo F 
oftheMind. 1M reasoning, and partly in inventing marks for 
the help of his memory, and advancing himself in 
learning ; who sees not that the benefit he reaps to 
himself will not be much, and to others none at 
all? For unless he communicate his notes with 
others, his science will perish with him. But if 
the same notes be made common to many, and so 
one man’s inventions be taught to others, sciences 
will thereby be increased to the general good of 
mankind. It is therefore necessary, for the ac- 
quiring of philosophy, that there be certain signs, 
by which what one man finds out may be mani- 
fested and made known to others. Now, those 
things we call signs are the antecedents of their 
consequents, and the consequents of their antece- 
dents, as often as we observe them to go before 
or follow after in the same manner. For example, 
a thick cloud is a sign of rain to follow, and rain a 
sign that a cloud has gone before, for this reason 
only, that we seldom see clouds without the con- 
sequence of rain, nor rain at any time but when a 
cloud has gone before. And of signs, some are 
natural, whereof I have already given an example, 
others are arbitrary, namely, those we make choice 
of at our own pleasure, as a bush hung up, signi- 
fies that wine is to be sold there; a stone set in 
the ground signifies the bound of a field; and 


OF NAMES. 15 


words so and so connected, signify the cogitations 
and motions of our mind. The difference, there- 
fore, betwixt marks and signs is this, that we 
make those for our own use, but these for the use 
of others. 


PART I. 


3. Words so connected as that they become hire 
signs of our thoughts, are called spEEcH, of which jon aie 
every part is a name. But seeing (as is said) both ce" 


marks and signs are necessary for the acquiring of 
philosophy, (marks by which we may remember 
our own thoughts, and signs by which we may 
make our thoughts known to others), names do 
both these offices ; but they serve for marks before 
they be used as signs. For though a man were 
alone in the world, they would be useful to him 
in helping him to remember; but to teach others, 
(unless there were some others to be taught) of 
no use at all. Again, names, though standing 
singly by themselves, are marks, because they serve 
to recal our own thoughts to mind: but they can- 
not be signs, otherwise than by being disposed and 
ordered in speech as parts of the same. For ex- 
ample, a man may begin with a word, whereby the 
hearer may frame an idea of something in his 
mind, which, nevertheless, he cannot conceive to 
be the idea which was in the mind of him that 
spake, but that he would say something which 
began with that word, though perhaps not as by 
itself, but as part of another word. So that the 
nature of a name consists principally in this, that 
it is a mark taken for memory’s sake ; but it serves 
also by accident to signify and make known to 
others what we remember ourselves, and, therefore, 
I will define it thus: 


16 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


PARTI. 4. 4 NAMES a word taken at pleasure to serre 
—— for a mark, which may raise in our mind a thought 
Definition [ike fo some thought we had before, and which 
of a Name. 
being pronounced to others, may be to them a 
sign of what thought the speaker had, or had not 
before in his mind. And it is for brevity’s sake 
that I suppose the original of names to be arbi- 
trary, judging it a thing that may be assumed as 
unquestionable. For considering that new names 
are daily made, and old ones laid aside; that 
diverse nations use different names, and how im- 
possible it is either to observe similitude, or make 
any comparison betwixt a name and a thing, how 
can any man imagine that the names of things 
were imposed from their natures? For though 
some names of living creatures and other things, 
which our first parents used, were taught by God 
himself ; yet they were by him arbitrarily imposed, 
and afterwards, both at the Tower of Babel, and 
since, In process of time, growing everywhere out 
of use, are quite forgotten, and in their room have 
succeeded others, invented and received by men 
at pleasure. Moreover, whatsoever the common 
use of words be, yet philosophers, who were to 
teach their knowledge to others, had always the 
liberty, and sometimes they both had and will have 
a necessity, of taking to themselves such names as 
they please for the signifying of their meaning, if 
they would have it understood. Nor had mathe- 
maticians need to ask leave of any but themselves 
to name the figures they invented, parabolus, hy- 
perboles, cissoeides, quadratices, &c. or to call 
one magnitude A, another B. 


OF NAMES. V7 


5. But seeing names ordered in speech (as is PART I. 
defined) are signs of our conceptions, it is mani- ~—-— 
fest they are not signs of the things themselves ; Soom 
for that the sound of this word stone should be noon tnogs 
the sign of a stone, cannot be understood in any cogitations. 
sense but this, that he that hears it collects that 
he that pronounces it thinks of astone. And, 
therefore, that disputation, whether names signify 
the matter or form, or something compounded of 
both, and other like subtleties of the metaphysics, 
is kept up by erring men, and such as understand 
not the words they dispute about. 

6. Nor, indeed, is it at all necessary that every what it is 
name should be the name of something. For as ¥* sive 
these, a man, a tree, a stone, are the names of the 
things themselves, so the images of a man, of a 
tree, and of a stone, which are represented to men 
sleeping, have their names also, though they be 
not things, but only fictions and phantasms of 
things. For we can remember these; and, there- 
fore, it is no less necessary that they have names 
to mark and signify them, than the things them- 
selves. Also this word fuéure is a name, but no 
future thing has yet any being, nor do we know 
whether that which we call future, shall ever have 
a being orno. Nevertheless, seeing we use in our 
mind to knit together things past with those that 
are present, the name future serves to signify such 
knitting together. Moreover, that which neither 
is, nor has been, nor ever shall, or ever can be, 
has a name, namely, that which neither is nor has 
been, &c.; or more briefly this, zmpossible. To 
conclude; this word zothing is a name, which yet 
cannot be the name of any thing: for when, for 

VOL. I. C 


18 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


PART I. example, we substract 2 and 3 from 5, and so 

——~ nothing remaining, we would call that substrac- 

tion to mind, this speech nothing remains, and in 

it the word nothing is not unuseful. And for the 

same reason we say truly, less than nothing re- 

mains, when we substract more from less; for the 

mind feigns such remains as these for doctrine’s 

sake, and desires, as often as is necessary, to call 

the same to memory. But seeing every name has 

some relation to that which is named, though that 

which we name be not always a thing that has a 

being in nature, yet it 1s lawful for doctrine’s sake 

to apply the word ¢hing to whatsoever we name: 

as if it were all one whether that thing be truly 
existent, or be only feigned. 

NamesPositive 7, The first distinction of names is, that some 

and Negative. eats ° . ‘ 

are positive, or affirmative, others negative, which 

are also called privative and indefinite. Positive 

are such as we impose for the likeness, equality, 

or identity of the things we consider; negative, 

for the diversity, unlikeness, or imequality of the 

same. Examples of the former are, @ man, a 

philosopher ; for a man denotes any one of a 

multitude of men, and a philosopher, any one of 

many philosophers, by reason of their similitude ; 

also, Socrates is a positive name, because it sig- 

nifies always one and thesame man. Examples of 

negatives are such positives as have the negative 

particle no¢ added to them, as not-man, not- 

philosopher. But positives were before negatives ; 

for otherwise there could have been no use at all 

of these. For when the name of white was 

imposed upon certain things, and afterwards upon 

other things, the names of black, blue, trans- 


OF NAMES. 19 


parent, Sc. the infinite dissimilitudes of these PART I. 
with white could not be comprehended j in any one ee 
name, save that which had in it the negation of 
white, that is to say, the name not-white, or some 
other equivalent to it, in which the word white is 
repeated, such as unlike to white, Fc. And by 
these negative names, we take notice ourselves, 
and signify to others what we have not thought of. 

8. Positive and negative names are contra- Contradictory 

dictory to one another, so that they cannot both | 
be the name of the same thing. Besides, of con- 
tradictory names, one is the name of anything 
whatsoever ; for whatsoever 1s, is either man, or 
not-man, white or not-white, and so of the rest. 
And this is so manifest, that it needs no farther 
proof or explication ; for they that say the same 
thing cannot both be, and not be, speak obscurely; 
but they that say, whatsoever is, either is, or ts 
not, speak also absurdly and ridiculously. The 
certainty of this axiom, viz. of two contradictory 
names, one is the name of anything whatsoever, 
the other not, is the original and foundation of all 
ratiocination, that is, of all philosophy; and 
therefore it ought to be so exactly propounded, 
that it may be of itself clear and perspicuous to 
all men; as indeed it 1s, saving to such, as 
reading the long discourses made upon this sub- 
ject by the writers of metaphysics (which they 
believe to be some egregious learning) think they 
understand not, when they do. 

9. Secondly, of names, some are common to A common 

e name. 
many things, as a man, a tree; others proper to 
one thing, as he that writ the Ihad, Homer, this 
man, that man. And a common name, being the 
C2 


PART I, 
2. 


Names 

of the first 
and second 
intention. 


20 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


name of many things severally taken, but not 
collectively of all together (as man 1s not the name 
of all mankind, but of every one, as of Peter, 
John, and the rest severally) is therefore called an 
universal name ; and therefore this word univer- 
sal is never the name of any thing existent in 
nature, nor of any idea or phantasm formed in the 
mind, but always the name of some word or 
name; so that when a living creature, a stone, a 
spirit, or any other thing, is said to be universal, 
it is not to be understood, that any man, stone, 
&c. ever was or can be universal, but only that 
these words, living creature, stone, §c. are uni- 
versal names, that 1s, names common to many 
things ; and the conceptions answering them in 
our mind, are the images and phantasms of 
several living creatures, or other things. And 
therefore, for the understanding of the extent of 
an universal name, we need no other faculty but 
that of our imagination, by which we remember 
that such names bring sometimes one thing, some- 
times another, into our mind. Also of common 


names, some are more, some lesscommon. More 


common, is that which is the name of more 
things; /ess common, the name of fewer things; 
as living creature 1s more common than man, or 
horse, or lion, because it comprehends them all: 
and therefore a more common name, in respect of 
a less common, is called the genus, or a general 
name ; and this in respect of that, the species, or 
a special name. 

10. And from hence proceeds the third distinc- 
tion of names, which is, that some are called 
names of the first, others of the second intention. 


OF NAMES. 21 


Of the jirst intention are the names of things, PART I. 
a man, stone, §c.: of the second are the names —~— 
of names and speeches, as universal, particular, 

genus, species, syllogism, and the like. But it 

is hard to say why those are called names of the 

jirst, and these of the second intention, unless 
perhaps it was first intended by us to give names 

to those things which are of daily use in this life, 

and afterwards to such things as appertain to 
science, that is, that our second intention was to 

give names to names. But whatsoever the cause 

hereof may be, yet this is manifest, that genus, 
species, definition, §c. are names of words and 

names only; and therefore to put genus and 
species for things, and definition for the nature of 

any thing, as the writers of metaphysics have 

done, is not right, seeing they be only signifi- 
cations of what we think of the nature of things. 

11. Fourthly, some names are of certain and Universal, 
determined, others of uncertain and undetermined ae r 
signification. Of determined and certain signifi- *¢ née" 
cation is, first, that name which is given to any 
one thing by itself, and is called an individual 
name ; as Homer, this tree, that living creature, 

&c. Secondly that which has any of these words, 
all, every, both, either, or the like added to it; 
and it is therefore called an universal name, 
because it signifies every one of those things to 
which it is common; and of certain signification 
for this reason, that he which hears, conceives in 
his mind the same thing that he which speaks 
would have him conceive. Of zndefinite significa- 
tion is, first, that name which has the word some, 
or the like added to it, and is called a particular 


PART I. 
2. 


Names 
univocal 
and equivocal. 


22 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


name; secondly, a common name set by itself 
without any note either of universality or particu- 
larity, as man, stone, and is called an indefinite 
name; but both particular and indefinite names 
are of uncertain signification, because the hearer 
knows not what thing it is the speaker would have 
him conceive ; and therefore in speech, particular 
and indefinite names are to be esteemed equivalent 
to one another. But these words, all, every, some, 
§c. which denote universality and particularity, 
are not names, but parts only of names; so that 
every man, and that man which the hearer con- 
ceives in his mind, are all one; and some man, 
and that man which the speaker thought of, signify 
the same. From whence it is evident, that the 
use of signs of this kind, is not for a man’s own 
sake, or for his getting of knowledge by his own 
private meditation (for every man has his own 
thoughts sufficiently determined without such helps 
as these) but for the sake of others; that is, for 
the teaching and signifying of our conceptions to 
others; nor were they invented only to make us 
remember, but to make us able to discourse with 
others. 

12. Fifthly, names are usually distinguished 
into univocal and equivocal. Univocal are those 
which in the same train of discourse signify 
always the same thing; but equzvocal those which 
mean sometimes one thing and sometimes another. 
Thus, the name triangle is said to be univocal, 
because it is always taken in the same sense; and 
parabola to be equivocal, for the signification it 
has sometimes of allegory or similitude, and some- 
times of a certain geometrical figure. Also every 


OF NAMES. 23 


metaphor is by profession equivocal. But this PART I. 
distinction belongs not so much to names, as to ——~— 
those that use names, for some use them properly 

and accurately for the finding out of truth; others 

draw them from their proper sense, for ornament 

or deceit. 

13. Sixthly, of names, some are absolute, others Absolute. 

relative. Relative are such as are imposed for names. 
some comparison, as father, son, cause, effect, 
like, unlike, equal, unequal, master, servant, §c. 
And those that signify no comparison at all are 
absolute names. But, as it was noted above, that 
universality is to be attributed to words and names 
only, and not to things, so the same is to be said 
of other distinctions of names; for no things are 
either univocal or equivocal, or relative or abso- 
lute. There is also another distinction of names 
into concrete and abstract ; but because abstract 
names proceed from proposition, and can have no 
place where there is no affirmation, I shall speak 
of them hereafter. 

14. Lastly, there are semple and compounded Simple and 
names. But here it is to be noted, that a name is ore" 
not taken in philosophy, as in grammar, for one 
single word, but for any number of words put 
together to signify one thing ; for among philoso- 
phers sentient animated body passes but for one 
name, being the name of every living creature, 
which yet, among grammarians, is accounted three 
names. Also a stmple name is not here distin- 
guished from a compounded name by a preposition, 
asin grammar. But I call a simple name, that 
which in every kind is the most common or most 
universal ; and that a compounded name, which 


24 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


PART I. by the joining of another name to it, is made less 
——— universal, and signifies that more conceptions than 


Simple and 
compounded 


hames. 


one were in the mind, for which that latter name 
was added. For example, in the conception of 
man (as 1s shown in the former chapter.) First, 
he is conceived to be something that has exten- 
sion, Which is marked by the word body. Body, 
therefore, 1s a stmple name, being put for that 
first single conception; afterwards, upon the sight 
of such and such motion, another conception 
arises, for which he is called an animated body ; 
and this I here call a compounded name, as 1 do 
also the name animal, which is equivalent to an 
animated body. And, in the same manner, an 
animated rational body, as also a man, which is 
equivalent to it, is a more compounded name. 
And by this we see how the composition of con- 
ceptions in the mind is answerable to the compo- 
sition of names; for, as in the mind one idea or 
phantasm succeeds to another, and to this a 
third; so to one name is added another and 
another successively, and of them all is made one 
compounded name. Nevertheless we must not 
think bodies which are without the mind, are 
compounded in the same manner, namely, that 
there is in nature a body, or any other imaginable 
thing existent, which at the first has no magnitude, 
and then, by the addition of magnitude, comes 
to have quantity, and by more or less quantity to 
have density or rarity; and again, by the addition 
of figure, to be figurate, and after this, by the 
injection of light or colour, to become lucid or 
coloured ; though such has been the philosophy 
of many. 


OF NAMES. 25 


15. The writers of Jogic have endeavoured to BABY 2: 
digest the names of all “the kinds of things into ae 
certain scales or degrees, by the continual subor- 4 Predcsment 
dination of names less common, to names more 
common. In the scale of bodies they put in the 
first and highest place body simply, and in the 
next place under it less common names, by which 
it may be more limited and determined, namely 
animated and inanimated, and so on till they 
come to individuals. In like manner, in the 
scale of quantities, they assign the first place to 
quantity, and the next to dine, superficies, and 
solid, which are names of less latitude; and these 
orders or scales of names they usually call predi- 
caments and categories. And of this ordination 
not only positive, but negative names also are 
capable ; which may be exemplified by such forms 
of the predicaments as follow : 


Tue ForM OF THE PREDICAMENT OF Bopy. 


Not-Body, or 
Accident. 
Not ani- 
mated. 
poay Not living 
Animated | Creature. 
a Not Man. 
Living 
Creature M Not Peter. 
an 
Peter. 


Absolutely, as eserrtai » or so much. 


Both Accident and Body Quality, or such. 


. or 
are considered 


Comparatively, which is called 
their Relation. 


26 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


sats . Tue Form OF THE PREDICAMENT OF QUANTITY. 
—— 
A predicament Not continual, 
described. as Number. 
: Line. 
Quantity Of itself, as Superficies, 
Solid. 


Continual Time, by Line. 


Motion, by Line and 

By accident, as; Time. 
Force, by Motion and 

Solid. 


Where, it is to be noted, that dine, superficies, 
and solid, may be said to be of such and such 
quantity, that is, to be originally and of their 
own nature capable of equality and inequality ; 
but we cannot say there is either majority or 
minority, or equality, or indeed any quantity at 
all, in ¢zme, without the help of dine and motion ; 
nor in motion, without dine and time; nor im 
force, otherwise than by mo?zon and solid. 


Tue ForRM OF THE PREDICAMENT OF QUALITY. 


Seeing. 
Hearing. 
Primary Smelling. 
Tasting. 
Perception Touching. 
by Sense 
Imagination. 


Affection tapes 


Secondary | 
unpleasant. 


Quality 


By Seeing, as Light and Colour. 
By Hearing, as Sound. 
Sensible By Smelling, as Odours. 
Quality By Tasting, as Savours. 
By Touching, as Hardness, Heat, 
Cold, &c. 


OF NAMES. 27 
PART I. 
THE ForM OF THE PREDICAMENT OF RELATION. 2. 


Magnitudes, as Equality and Inequality. 
Qualities, as Likeness and Unlikeness. 


Relation of In Place. 
i {In Time. 
Order Former. 
In Place 
Not together Later. 
tu Time {Ferner 
Later. 


16. Concerning which predicaments it is to be Some things 

noted, in the first place, that as the division is in 
made in the first predicament into contradictory "°°" 
names, so it might have been done in the rest. 
For, as there, body is divided into animated and 
not-animated, so, in the second predicament, 
continual quantity may be divided into line and 
not-line, and again, not-line into superficies and 
not-superficies, and so in the rest; but it was not 
necessary. 

Secondly, it is to be observed, that of positive 
names the former comprehends the latter; but of 
negatives the former is comprehended by the 
latter. For example, /iving-creature is the name 
of every man, and therefore it comprehends the 
name man ; but, on the contrary, not-man is the 
name of everything which is not-living-creature, 
and therefore the name not-living-creature, which 
is put first, is comprehended by the latter name, 
not-man. 

Thirdly, we must take heed that we do not 
think, that as names, so the diversities of things 
themselves may be searched out and determined 
by such distinctions as these; or that arguments 


PART I. 
2. 


——— 
Predicaments. 


28 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


may be taken from hence (as some have done 
ridiculously) to prove that the kinds of things are 
not infinite. 

Fourthly, I would not have any man think I 
deliver the forms above for a true and exact or- 
dination of names ; for this cannot be performed 
as long as philosophy remains imperfect ; nor that 
by placing (for example) /:ght in the predicament 
of qualities, while another places the same in the 
predicament of bodies, I pretend that either of 
us ought for this to be drawn from his opinion ; 
for this is to be done only by arguments and 
ratiocination, and not by disposing of words into 
classes. 

Lastly, I confess I have not yet seen any great 
use of the predicaments in philosophy. I believe 
Aristotle when he saw he could not digest the 
things themselves into such orders, might never- 
theless desire out of his own authority to reduce 
words to such forms, as I have done; but I do it 
only for this end, that it may be understood what 
this ordination of words is, and not to have it 
received for true, till it be demonstrated by good 
reason to be so. 


OF PROPOSITION. 29 


CHAPTER III. 


OF PROPOSITION. 


1. Divers kinds of speech.—2. Proposition defined. —3. Subject, 
predicate, and copula, what they are; and abstract and con- 
crete what. The use and abuse of names abstract.—5. Pro- 
position, universal and particular.—6. Affirmative and negative. 
—7. True and false.—8. True and false belongs to speech, 
and not to things.—9. Proposition, primary, not primary, 
definition, axiom, petition —10. Proposition, necessary and 
contingent.— 11. Categorical and hypothetical. — 12. The 
same proposition diversely pronounced.—18. Propositions that 
may be reduced to the same categorical proposition, are equi- 
pollent.—14. Universal propositions converted by contradic- 
tory names, are equipollent.—15. Negative propositions are 
the same, whether negation be before or after the copula.— 
16. Particular propositions simply converted, are equipollent. 
—17. What are subaltern, contrary, subcontrary, and con- 
tradictory propositions.—18. Consequence, what it is.—19. 
Falsity cannot follow from truth.—20. How one proposition 
is the cause of another. 


1. From the connexion or contexture of names 
arise divers kinds of speech, whereof some signify 
the desires and affections of men ; such are, first, 
interrogations, which denote the desire of know- 
ing: as, Whois a good man? In which speech 
there is one name expressed, and another desired 
and expected from him of whom we ask the same. 
Then prayers, which signify the desire of having 
something ; promises, threats, wishes, commands, 
complaints, and other significations of other 
affections. Speech may also be absurd and in- 
significant ; as when there is a succession of 


PART I. 
3. 


———y ee” 


Divers kinds 
of speech. 


30 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


PART I. words, to which there can be no succession of 

—— thoughts in mind to answer them ; and this hap- 
pens often to such, as, understanding nothing in 
some subtle matter, do, nevertheless, to make 
others believe they understand, speak of the same 
incoherently; for the connection of incoherent 
words, though it want the end of speech (which 
Is signification) yet it is speech; and is used by 
writers of metaphysics almost as frequently as 
speech significative. In philosophy, there is but 
one kind of speech useful, which some call in Latin 
dictum, others enuntiatum et pronunciatum ; but 
most men call it proposition, and 1s the speech of 
those that affirm or deny, and expresseth truth or 
falsity. 

Proposition 2. A PROPOSITION ts a speech consisting of 

efined. ° 
two names copulated, by which he that speaketh 
signifies he conceives the latter name to be the 
name of the same thing whereof the former is 
the name ; or (which is all one) that the former 
name 1s comprehended by the latter. For example, 
this speech, man ts a living creature, in which 
two names are copulated by the verb 2s, is a pro- 
position, for this reason, that he that speaks it 
conceives both living creature and man to be 
names of the same thing, or that the former name, 
man, is comprehended by the latter name, living 
creature. Now the former name is commonly 
called the subject, or antecedent, or the contained 
name, and the latter the predicate, consequent, 
or containing name. The sign of connection 
amongst most nations is either some word, as the 
word zs in the proposition man is a living creature, 
or some case or termination of a word, as in this 


OF PROPOSITION. 3] 


proposition, man walketh (which is equivalent to PART I. 
this, man is walking) ; the termination by which it ——— 
is said he walketh, rather than he ts walking, 
signifieth that those two are understood to be 
copulated, or to be names of the same thing. 

But there are, or certainly may be, some nations 
that have no word which answers to our verb 2s, 
who nevertheless form propositions by the position 
only of one name after another, as if instead of 
man is a living creature, it should be said man 
a living creature; for the very order of the 
names may sufficiently show their connection ; 
and they are as apt and useful in philosophy, as if 
they were copulated by the verb zs. 

3. Wherefore, in every proposition three things Subject, 
are to be considered, viz. the two names, which Pry 


and copula, 


are the subject, and the predicate, and their ire Mee 
copulation ; both which names raise in our mind and conerets 
the thought of one and the same thing; but the ™ 
copulation makes us think of the cause for which 
those names were imposed on that thing. As, for 
example, when we say a body is moveable, though 
we conceive the same thing to be designed by 
both those names, yet our mind rests not there, 
but searches farther what it is ¢o be a body, or to 
be moveable, that is, wherein consists the differ- 
ence betwixt these and other things, for which 
these are so called, others are not so called. 
They, therefore, that seek what it is to be any 
thing, as to be moveable, to be hot, &c. seek in 
things the causes of their names. 

And from hence arises that distinction of names 
(touched in the last chapter) into concrete and 
abstract. For concrete is the name of any thing 


PART I. 
3. 


—~— 
Subject. 


32 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


which we suppose to have a being, and is there- 
fore called the subject, in Latin suppositum, and 
in Greek vzoximevory ; as body, moveable, moved, 
jigurate, a cubit high, hot, cold, like, equal, 
Appius, Lentulus, and the like; and, abstract 
is that which in any subject denotes the cause 
of the concrete name, as to be a body, to be 
moveable, to be moved, to be figurate, to be of 
such quantity, to be hot, to be cold, to be like, 
to be equal, to be Appius, to be Lentulus, $c. 
Or names equivalent to these, which are most 
commonly called abstract names, as corporiety, 
mobility, motion, figure, quantity, heat, cold, 
likeness, equality, and (as Cicero has it) Appiety 
and Lentulity. Of the same kind also are infini- 
tives; for fo dive and fo move are the same with 
life and motion, or to be living and to be moved. 
But abstract names denote only the causes of 
concrete names, and not the things themselves. 
For example, when we see any thing, or conceive 
in our mind any visible thing, that thing appears 
to us, or is conceived by us, not in one point, but 
as having parts distant from one another, that is, 
as being extended and filling some space. Seeing 
therefore we call the thing so conceived body, 
the cause of that name is, that that thing is 
extended, or the extension or corporiecty of it. 
So when we see a thing appear sometimes here, 
sometimes there, and call it moved or removed, 
the cause of that name is that it 7s moved or the 
motion of the same. 

And these causes of names are the same with 
the causes of our conceptions, namely, some 
power of action, or affection of the thing con- 


OF PROPOSITION. 33 


ceived, which some call the manner by which any PART I. 
thing works upon our senses, but by most men —-— 
they are called accidents ; I say accidents, not in 
that sense in which accident is opposed to 
necessary; but so, as being neither the things 
themselves, nor parts thereof, do nevertheless 
accompany the things in such manner, that (saving 
extension) they may all perish, and be destroyed, 
but can never be abstracted. 
4. There is also this difference betwixt concrete The use 

P and abuse of 
and abstract names, that those were invented names abstract. 
before propositions, but these after; for these 
could have no being till there were propositions, 
from whose copula they proceed. Now in all 
matters that concern this life, but chiefly in philo- 
sophy, there is both great use and great abuse of 
abstract names ; and the use consists in this, that 
without them we cannot, for the most part, either 
reason, or compute the properties of bodies ; for 
when we would multiply, divide, add, or substract 
heat, light, or motion, if we should double or add 
them together by concrete names, saying (for 
example) hot is double to hot, light double to 
light, or moved double to moved, we should not 
double the properties, but the bodies themselves 
that are hot, light, moved, &c. which we would 
not do. But the abuse proceeds from this, that 
some men seeing they can consider, that is (as I 
said before) bring into account the increasings 
and decreasings of quantity, heat and other acci- 
dents, without considering their bodies or subjects 
(which they call abstracting, or making to exist 
apart by themselves) they speak of accidents, as 
if they might be separated from all bodies. And 

VOL. I. D 


PART I. 
3. 


Proposition, 
universal and 
particular. 


34 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


from hence proceed the gross errors of writers 
of metaphysics; for, because they can consider 
thought without the consideration of body, they 
infer there is no need of a thinking-body ; and 
because quantity may be considered without con- 
sidering body, they think also that quantity may 
be without body, and body without quantity ; and 
that a body has quantity by the addition of quan- 
tity to it. From the same fountain spring those 
insignificant words, abstract substance, separated 
essence, and the like; as also that confusion of 
words derived from the Latin verb est, as essence, 
essentiality, entity, entitative ; besides reality, 
aliquiddity, quiddity, §c. which could never 
have been heard of among such nations as do not 
copulate their names by the verb zs, but by 
adjective verbs, as runneth, readeth, &c. or by 
the mere placing of one name after another; and 
yet seeing such nations compute and reason, it is 
evident that philosophy has no need of those 
words essence, entity, and other the like barbarous 
terms. 

5. There are many distinctions of propositions, 
whereof the first is, that some are universal, 
others particular, others indefinite, and others 
singular ; and this is commonly called the dis- 
tinction of quantity. An universal proposition is 
that whose subject is affected with the sign of an 
universal name, as every man 1s a living creature. 
Particular, that whose subject is affected with 
the sign of a particular name, as some man ts 
learned. An indefinite proposition has for its 
subject a common name, and put without any 
sign, as man is a living creature, man ts learned. 


OF PROPOSITION. 35 


And a singular proposition is that whose subject PART I. 
is a singular name, as Socrates is a philosopher, —-— 
this man ts black. 

6. The second distinction is into affirmative Affirmative 

° . * 36 : and negative. 
and negative, and is called the distinction of 
quality. An affirmative proposition is that whose 
predicate is a positive name, as man is a living 
creature. Negative, that whose predicate is a 
negative name, as man 1s not a stone. 

7. The third distinction is, that one is true, Truc & false. 
another false. A érue proposition is that, whose 
predicate contains, or comprehends its subject, or 
whose predicate is the name of every thing, of 
which the subject is the name ; as man is a living 
creature is therefore a true proposition, because 
whatsoever is called man, the same is also called 
living creature; and some man is sick, is true, 
because sick is the name of some man. That 
which is not true, or that whose predicate does 
not contain its subject, is called a false proposi- 
tion, as man is a stone. 

Now these words true, truth, and true propo- 
sition, are equivalent to one another; for truth 
consists in speech, and not in the things spoken 
of; and though érve be sometimes opposed to 
apparent or feigned, yet it is always to be referred 
to the truth of proposition ; for the image of a 
man in a glass, or a ghost, is therefore denied to 
be a very man, because this proposition, a ghost 
is a man, is not true; for it cannot be denied but 
that a ghost isa very ghost. And therefore truth 
or verity is not any affection of the thing, but of 
the proposition concerning it. As for that which 
the writers of metaphysics say, that a thing, one 

D 2 


PART L 
3. 


——y—e” 


True & false 
belongs to 

speech, and 
not to things. 


36 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


thing, and a very thing, are equivalent to one 
another, it is but trifling and childish ; for who 
does not know, that a man, one man, and a very 
man, signify the same. 

8. And from hence it is evident, that truth and 
falsity have no place but amongst such living 
creatures as use speech. For though some brute 
creatures, looking upon the image of a man ina 
glass, may be affected with it, as if it were the 
man himself, and for this reason fear it or fawn 
upon it in vain; yet they do not apprehend it as 
true or false, but only as like; and in this they are 
not deceived. Wherefore, as men owe all their 
true ratiocination to the right understanding of 
speech ; so also they owe their errors to the mis- 
understanding of the same ; and as all the orna- 
ments of philosophy proceed only from man, so 
from man also is derived the ugly absurdity of 
false opinions. For speech has something in it 
like to a spider’s web, (as it was said of old of 
Solon’s laws) for by contexture of words tender 
and delicate wits are ensnared and stopped; 
but strong wits break easily through them. 

From hence also this may be deduced, that the 
first truths were arbitrarily made by those that 
first of all imposed names upon things, or received 
them from the imposition of others. For it is 


true (for example) that man is a living creature, 


Proposition, 


but it is for this reason, that it pleased men to 
impose both those names on the same thing. 
9. Fourthly, propositions are distinguished into 


primary, primary and not primary. Primary is that 


not primary, 
definition, . 
axiom, 
petition. 


wherein the subject is explicated by a predicate of 
many names, as man is a body, animated, 


OF PROPOSITION. 37 


rational ; for that which is comprehended in the PARTI. 
name man, is more largely expressed in the names ———— 
body, animated, and rational, joined together ; 
and it is called primary, because it is first in ratio- 
cination; for nothing can be proved, without 
understanding first the name of the thing in 
question. Now primary propositions are nothing 
but definitions, or parts of definitions, and these 
only are the principles of demonstration, being 
truths constituted arbitrarily by the inventors of 
speech, and therefore not to be demonstrated. 
To these propositions, some have added others, 
which they call primary and principles, namely, 
axioms, and common notions ; which, (though 
they be so evident that they need no proof) yet, 
because they may be proved, are not truly prin- 
ciples; and the less to be received for such, in 
regard propositions not intelligible, and some- 
times manifestly false, are thrust on us under the 
name of principles by the clamour of men, who 
obtrude for evident to others, all that they them- 
selves think true. Also certain petitions are com- 
monly received into the number of principles ; as, 
for example, that a straight line may be drawn 
between two points, and other petitions of the 
writers of geometry ; and these are indeed the 
principles of art or construction, but not of science 
and demonstration. 

10. Fifthly, propositions are distinguished into Proposition 
necessary, that is, necessarily true; and true, but Contingeu. 
not necessarily, which they call contingent. A 
necessary proposition is when nothing can at any 
time be conceived or feigned, whereof the subject 
is the name, but the predicate also is the name of 


PART I. 
3. 

—— 

Proposition 


necessary & 
contingent. 


Categorical & 


hypothetical. 


38 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


the same thing ; as man is a living creature isa 
necessary proposition, because at what time 
soever we suppose the name wan agrees with any 
thing, at that time the name /iving-creature also 
agrees with the same. But a contingent proposi- 
tion is that, which at one time may be true, at 
another time false; as every crow is black ; which 
may perhaps be true now, but false hereafter. 
Again, in every necessary proposition, the predi- 
cate is either equivalent to the subject, as in this, 
man tsa rational living creature; or part of an 
equivalent name, as in this, man ts a living crea- 
ture, for the name rational-living-creature, or 
man, 1s compounded of these two, rational and 
living-creature. But in a contingent proposition 
this cannot be; for though this were true, every 
man is a liar, yet because the word /zar is no part 
of a compounded name equivalent to the name 
man, that proposition is not to be called necessary, 
but contingent, though it should happen to be true 
always. And therefore those propositions only 
are necessary, which are of sempiternal truth, that 
is, true at all times. From hence also it is mani- 
fest, that truth adheres not to things, but to 
speech only, for some truths are eternal; for it 
will be eternally true, if man, then living-crea- 
ture; but that any man, or living-creature, should 
exist eternally, is not necessary. 

11. A sixth distinction of propositions is into 
categorical and hypothetical. A categorical 
proposition is that which is simply or absolutely 
pronounced, as every man is a living-creature, 
no man 1s a tree; and hypothetical is that which 
is pronounced conditionally, as, 7f any thing be a 


OF PROPOSITION. 39 


man, the same is also a living-creature, if any- PART 1 
thing be a man, the same is also not-a-stone. —~ 

A categorical proposition, and an hypothe- ene 
tical answering it, do both signify the same, if the 
propositions be necessary ; but not if they be con- 
tingent. For example, if this, every man is a 
liring-creature, be true, this also will be true, 7f 
any thing be a man, the same is also a living- 
creature ; but m contingent propositions, though 
this be true, every crow is black, yet this, if any 
thing be a crow, the same is black, is false. But 
an hypothetical proposition is then rightly said 
to be true, when the consequence is true, as every 
man 18 a living-creature, is rightly said to be a 
true proposition, because of whatsvever it is truly 
said that ts a man, it cannot but be truly said also, 
the same ts a living creature. And therefore 
whensoever an hypothetical proposition is true, 
the categorical answering it, is not only true, but 
also necessary ; which I thought worth the noting, 
as an argument, that philosophers may in most 
things reason more solidly by hypothetical than 
categorical propositions. 

12. But seeing every proposition may be, and The same 
uses to be, pronounced and written in many forms, ec 
and we are obliged to speak in the same manner ™"°*" 
as most men speak, yet they that learn philosophy 
from masters, had need to take heed they be not 
deceived by the variety of expressions. And 
therefore, whensoever they meet with any obscure 
proposition, they ought to reduce it to its most 
simple and categorical form ; in which the copu- 
lative word zs must be expressed by itself, and not 
mingled in any manner either with the subject or 


40 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


PART I. predicate, both which must be separated and 

———— clearly distinguished one from another. For 
example, if this proposition, man can not sin, be 
compared with this, man cannot sin, their dif- 
ference will easily appear if they be reduced to 
these, man is able not to sin, and, man is not able 
to sin, where the predicates are manifestly dif-— 
ferent. But they ought to do this silently by 
themselves, or betwixt them and their masters 
only ; for it will be thought both ridiculous and 
absurd, for a man to use such language publicly. 
Being therefore to speak of equipollent proposi- 
tions, I put in the first place all those for equipol- 
lent, that may be reduced purely to one and the 
same categorical proposition. 

Propositions 13. Secondly, that which is categorical and 

that may be ‘ : ° ° 

reduced to Necessary, is eguipollent to its hypothetical pro- 

eee position; as this categorical, a right-lined tri- 

position, ere angle has its three angles equal to two right 

quipo 
angles, to this hypothetical, if any figure bea 
right-lined triangle, the three angles of it are 
equal to two right angles. 

Universal 14. Also, any two universal propositions, of 

coneried by which the terms of the one (that is, the subject 

cre ae? and predicate) are contradictory to the terms of 

equipollent. the other, and their order inverted, as these, every 
man 1s a living creature, and every thing that is 
not a laving-creature 1s not a man, are equipollent. 
For seeing every man is a living creature isa 
true proposition, the name living creature con- 
tains the name man ; but they are both positive 
names, and therefore (by the last article of the 
precedent chapter) the negative name not man, 


contains the negative name not living-creature ; 


OF PROPOSITION. 4] 


wherefore every thing that ts not a living-crea- PART I. 
ture, is not a man, is a true proposition. Likewise —-— 
these, no man 1s a tree, no tree is a man, are 
equipollent. For if it be true that ¢ree is not the 

name of any man, then no one thing can be signi- 

fied by the two names man and tree, wherefore 

no tree 18 a man is a true proposition. Also to 

this, whatsoever 1s not a living-creature is not a 

man, where both the terms are negative, this 

other proposition is equipollent, only a living crea- 

ture is @ man. 

15. Fourthly, negative propositions, whether Negative 

the particle of negation be set after the copula as Fre ithe sam 


are the same, 


some nations do, or before it, as it is in Latin and Whther he 


egation be 
Greek, if the terms be the same, are equipollent : belore or ater 
as, for example, man 1s not a tree, and, man is 
not-a-tree, are equipollent, though Aristotle deny 
it. Also these, every man is not a tree, and no 
man is a tree, are equipollent, and that so mani- 
festly, as it needs not be demonstrated. 

16. Lastly, all particular propositions that have Particular 
their terms inverted, as these, some man is blind, timmy con. 
some blind thing is a man, are equipollent; for Sacllehe 
either of the two names, is the name of some one 
and the same man ; and therefore in which soever 
of the two orders they be connected, they signify 
the same truth. 

17. Of propositions that have the same terms, What are sub- 
and are placed in the same order, but varied either 2.2", 0", 


° trary, subcon- 
by quantity or quality, some are called subaltern, ™*y: and 


contradictory 
others contrary, others subcontrary, and others propositions. 
contradictory. 

Subaltern, are universal and particular propo- 


sitions of the same quality; as, every man is a 


42 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


PARTE, living creature, some man 18 a living creature ; 

es Or, 20 man is wise, some man 1s not wise. Of 

Propositions. these, if the universal be true, the particular will 
be true also. 

Contrary, are universal propositions of different 
quality ; as, every man 1s happy, no man ts 
happy. And of these, if one be true, the other 
is false: also, they may both be false, as in the 
example given. 

Subcontrary, are particular propositions of 
different quality ; as, some man is learned, some 
man is not learned; which cannot be both false, 
but they may be both true. 

Contradictory are those that differ both in 
quantity and quality; as, every mantis a living 
creature, some man 1s not a living-creature ; 
which can neither be both true, nor both false. 

Coupauente. 18: A proposition is said to follow from two 
other propositions, when these being granted to 
be true, it cannot be denied but the other is true 
also. For example, let these two propositions, 
every man ts a living creature, and, every living 
creature is a body, be supposed true, that is, that 
body is the name of every living creature, and 
living creature the name of every man. Seeing 
therefore, if these be understood to be true, it 
cannot be understood that body is not the name of 
every man, that is, that every mantis a body is 
false, this proposition will be said to follow from 
those two, or to be necessarily znferred from them. 

Falsity 19. That a true proposition may follow from 

cant To” false propositions, may happen sometimes; but 
false from true, never. For if these, every man 
ts a stone, aud every stone ts a living creature, 


OF PROPOSITION. 43 


(which are both false) be granted to be true, it is PART I 
granted also that diving creature is the name of —-— 
every stone, and stone of every man, that is, that 
liring creature is the name of every man; that 
is to say, this proposition every man 1s a living 
creature, is true, as it is indeed true. Wherefore 
a true proposition may sometimes follow from 
false. But if any two propositions be true, a 
false one can never follow from them. For if 
true follow from false, for this reason only, that 
the false are granted to be true, then truth from 
two truths granted will follow in the same manner. 

20. Now, seeing none but a true proposition How one 
will follow from true, and that the understanding Fike cause 
of two propositions to be true, is the cause of % ter 
understanding that also to be true which is 
deduced from them; the two antecedent propo- 
sitions are commonly called the causes of the 
inferred proposition, or conclusion. And from 
hence it is that logicians say, the premises are 
causes of the conclusion ; which may pass, though 
it be not properly spoken ; for though understand- 
ing be the cause of understanding, yet speech is 
not the cause of speech. But when they say, the 
cause of the properties of any thing, is the thing 
itself, they speak absurdly. For example, if a 
figure be propounded which is triangular ; seeing 
every triangle has all its angles together equal 
to two right angles, from whence it follows that 
all the angles of that figure are equal to two right 
angles, they say, for this reason, that that figure 
is the cause of that equality. But seeing the 
figure does not itself make its angles, and there- 
fore cannot be said to be the efficient-cause, they 


PART I. 
3. 
——_ 

How one 
proposition 
is the cause 
of another. 


Definition 
of syllogism. 


44 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


call it the formal-cause ; whereas indeed it is no 
cause at all; nor does the property of any figure 
follow the figure, but has its being at the same 
time with it; only the knowledge of the figure 
goes before the knowledge of the properties ; 
and one knowledge is truly the cause of another 
knowledge, namely the efficzent cause. 

And thus much concerning proposition ; which 
in the progress of philosophy is the first step, 
like the moving towards of one foot. By the 
due addition of another step I shall proceed to 
syllogism, and make a complete pace. Of which 
in the next chapter. 


CHAPTER IV. 


OF SYLLOGISM. 


1. The definition of syllogism.—2. In a syllogism there are but 
three terms.—3. Major, minor, and middle term; also major 
and minor proposition, what they are.—4. The middle term in 
every syllogism ought to be determined in both the propositions 
to one and the same thing.—5. From two particular propo- 
sitions nothing can be concluded.—6. A syllogism is the col- 
lection of two propositions into one sum.—7. The figure of a 
syllogism, what it is—8. What is in the mind answering to a 
syllogism.—9. The first indirect figure, how it is made.— 
10. The second indirect figure, how made.—11. How the third 
indirect figure is made.—12. There are many moods in every 
figure, but most of them useless in philosophy.—13. An 
hypothetical syllogism when equipollent to a categorical. 


1. A SPEECH, consisting of three propositions, 
from two of which the third follows, is called a 
SYLLOGISM ; and that which follows is called the 
conclusion ; the other two premises. For example, 


OF SYLLOGISM. 45 


this speech, every man is a living creature, artes 
every living creature is a body, therefore, every ae 
man 1s a body, is a syllogism, because the third 
proposition follows from the two first ; that is, if 

those be granted to be true, this must also be 
granted to be true. 

2. From two propositions which have not one In a syllogism 

there are but 
term common, no conclusion can follow; and three terms. 
therefore no syllogism can be made of them. 
For let any two premises, a man is a living crea- 
ture, a tree is a plant, be both of them true, yet 
because it cannot be collected from them that 
plant is the name of a man, or man the name of 
a plant, it is not necessary that this conclusion, @ 
mantis a plant, should be true. Corollary: there- 
fore, in the premises of a syllogism there can be 
but three terms. 

Besides, there can be no term in the conclusion, 
which was not in the premises. For let any two 
premises be, a man is a living creature, a living 
creature 1s a body, yet if any other term be put 
in the conclusion, as man is two-footed ; though 
it be true, it cannot follow from the premises, 
because from them it cannot be collected, that 
the name fwo-footed belongs to a man; and 
therefore, again, in every syllogism there can be 
but three ferms. 

3. Of these terms, that which is the predicate Bajon ines 
in the conclusion, is commonly called the major ; amas ie 
that which is the subject in the conclusion, Sai 
the minor, and the other is the middle term; as ¥54 they are. 
in this syllogism, a man is a living creature, a 
living creature is a body, therefore, a man 1s a 
body, body is the mujor, man the minor, and 


46 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


PANE living creature the middle term. Also of the 
eae premises, that in which the major term is found, 
is called the major proposition, and that which 

has the minor term, the minor proposition. 
= ee 4. If the middle term be not in both the pre- 
syllogism to Mises determined to one and the same singular 
pee ned thing, no conclusion will follow, nor syllogism be 


in both pro- 
positions to. made. For let the minor term be man, the middle 


one and the 
same thing. term living creature, and the major term lion ; 
and let the premises be, man is a living creature, 
some living creature is a lion, yet it will not fol- 
low that every or any man tsa lion. By which 
it is manifest, that in every syllogism, that propo- 
sition which has the middle term for its subject, 
ought to be either universal or singular, but not 
particular nor indefinite. For example, this syl- 
logism, every man is a living creature, some living 
creature is four-footed, therefore some man is 
Jour-footed, is therefore faulty, because the middle 
term, lieing creature, is in the first of the premises 
determined only to man, for there the name of 
living creature is given to man only, but in the 
latter premise it may be understood of some other 
living creature besides man. But if the latter 
premise had been uwntversal, as here, every man is 
a living creature, every living creature is a body, 
therefore every manis a body, the syllogism had 
been true; for it would have followed that body 
had been the name of every living creature, that 
is of man ; that is to say, the conclusion every man 
ts a body had been true. Likewise, when the 
middle term is a singular name, a syllogism may 
be made, I say a true syllogism, though useless in 
philosophy, as this, some man is Socrates, Socrates 


OF SYLLOGISM. 47 


is a philosopher, therefore, some man ts a philo- PART I. 
sopher ; for the premises being granted, the con- ae 
clusion cannot be denied. 

5. And therefore of two premises, in both From two 
which the middle term is particular, a syllogism ia 
cannot be made ; for whether the middle term be pons 3", 
the subject in both the premises, or the predicate 
in both, or the subject in one, and the predicate 
in the other, it will not be necessarily determined 


to the same thing. For let the premises be, 


Some man is blind, In both which the middle 
Some man is learned, term is the subject, 


it will not follow that blind is the name of any 
learned man, or learned the name of any blind 
man, seeing the name learned does not contain 
the name db/ind, nor this that ; and therefore it is 
not necessary that both should be names of the 
same man. So from these premises, 


Every man is a living-creature, {" both which the middle 
Every horse is a living-creature,) term is the predicate, 


nothing will follow. For seeing living creature 
is in both of them indefinite, which is equivalent 
to particular, and that man may be one kind of 
living creature, and horse another kind, it is not 
necessary that man should be the name of horse, 
or horse of man. Or if the premises be, 


Every man is a living- \ Jy one of which the middle- 


Patsge creature is { is the subject, and in 
four-footed, the other the predicate, 


the conclusion will not follow, because the name 


48 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


PARTI. living creature being not determined, it may in 
——— one of them be understood of man, in the other of 

not-man. 

reba eiag 6. Now it is manifest from what has been said, 

of two propo- that a syllogism is nothing but a collection of the 

sitions into o,e °° 

onesum, Sum Of two propositions, joined together by a 
common term, which is called the middle term. 
And as proposition is the addition of two names, 
so syllogism is the adding together of three. 

The figureof 7. Syllogismsareusually distinguished according 

wht. to their diversity of figures, that is, by the diverse 
position of the middle term. And again in 
figure there is a distinction of certain moods, 
which consist of the differences of propositions in 
quantity and quality. The first figure is that, in 
which the terms are placed one after another 
according to their latitude of signification; in 
which order the minor term is first, the middle 
term next, and the major last; as, if the minor 
term be man, the middle term, living creature, 
and the major term, body, then, man ts a living- 
creature, ts a body, will be a syllogism in the first 
figure: in which, man is a living creature is the 
minor proposition ; the major, dzving creature is 
a body, and the conclusion, or sum of both, man ts 
a body. Now this figure is called direct, because 
the terms stand in direct order ; and it is varied 
by quantity and quality into four moods: of 
which the first is that wherein all the terms are 
positive, and the minor term universal, as every 
man is a living creature, every living creature ts 
a body : in which all the propositions are affirma- 
tive, and universal. But if the major term be a 
negative name, and the minor an universal name, 


OF SYLLOGISM. 49 


the figure will be in the second mood, as, every PARTI- 
man is a living creature, every living creature is —-— 
not a tree, in which the major proposition and 
conclusion are both universal and negative. To 
these two, are commonly added two more, by 
making the minor term particular. Also it may 
happen that both the major and middle terms 
are negative terms, and then there arises another 
mood, in which all the propositions are negative, 
and yet the syllogism will be good; as, if the 
Ininor term be man, the middle term not a.stone, 
and the major term not a flint, this syllogism, 
no man is a stone, whatsoever is not a stone 1s 
not a flint, therefore, no man isa flint, is true, 
though it consist of three negatives. But in phi- 
losophy, the profession whereof is to establish 
universal rules concerning the properties of things, 
seeing the difference betwixt negatives and affirm- 
atives is only this, that in the former the subject 
is affirmed by a negative name, and by a positive 
in the latter, it is superfluous to consider any other 
mood in direct figure, besides that, in which all 
the propositions are both universal and affirm- 
ative. 

8. The thoughts in the mind answering to a Whatis. 
direct syllogism, proceed in this manner; first, pea 
there is conceived a phantasm of the thing named, * 7'°8"™ 
with that accident or quality thereof, for which it 
is in the minor proposition called by that name 
which is the subject ; next, the mind has a phan- 
tasm of the same thing with that accident, or 
quality, for which it hath the name, that in the 
same proposition is the predicate; thirdly, the 
thought returns of the same thing as having that 

VOL. I. E 


50 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


PARTI. accident in it, for which it is called by the name, 

———— that is the predicate of the major proposition ; 
and lastly, remembering that all those are the acci- 
dents of one and the same thing, it concludes that 
those three names are also names of one and the 
same thing ; that is to say, the conclusion is true. 
For example, when this syllogism is made, man 1s 
a living creature, a living creature 1s a body, 
therefore, man 1s a body, the mind conceives first 
an image of a man speaking or discoursing, and 
remembers that that, which so appears, is called 
man; then it has the image of the same man 
moving, and remembers that that, which appears 
so, is called Living creature ; thirdly, it conceives 
an image of the same man, as filling some place or 
space, and remembers that what appears so is 
called body ; and lastly, when it remembers that 
that thing, which was extended, and moved and 
spake, was one and the same thing, it concludes 
that the three names, man, living creature, and 
body, are names of the same thing, and that there- 
fore man ts a living creature is a true proposition. 
From whence it is manifest, that living creatures 
that have not the use of speech, have no concep- 
tion or thought in the mind, answering to a syllo- 
gism made of universal propositions ; seeing it is 
necessary to think not only of the thing, but also by 
turns to remember the divers names, which for di- 
vers considerations thereof are applied to the same. 

The first in- 9. The rest of the figures arise either from the 

direct tae inflexion, or inversion of the first or direct figure ; 
which is done by changing the major, or minor, 
or both the propositions, into converted proposi- 
tions equipollent to them. 


OF SYLLOGISM. 51 


From whence follow three other figures; of PARTI 
which, two are inflected, and the third inverted. —-— 
The first of these three is made by the conversion inc geees 
of the major proposition. For let the minor, bow made. 
middle, and major terms stand in direct order, 
thus, man 1s a living creature, 1s not a stone, 
which is the first or direct figure; the inflection 
will be by converting the major proposition in this 
manner, man is a living creature, a stone 1s not 
a living creature; and this is the second figure, 
or the first of the indirect figures ; in which the 
conclusion will be, man its not a stone. For 
(having shown in the last chapter, art. 14, that 
universal propositions, converted by contradiction 
of the terms, are equipollent) both those syllogisms 
conclude alike ; so that if the major be read (like 
Hebrew) backwards, thus, a diving creature ts not 
a stone, it will be direct again, as it was before. 

In like manner this direct syllogism, man is not a 
tree, 1s not a pear-tree, will be made indirect by 
converting the major proposition (by contradiction 
of the terms) into another equipollent to it, thus, 
man is not a tree, a pear-tree is a tree; for the 
same conclusion will follow, man is not a pear-tree. 

But for the conversion of the direct figure into 
the first indirect figure, the major term in the 
direct figure ought to be negative. For though 
this direct, man is a living creature, 1s a body, be 
made indirect, by converting the major propo- 
sition, thus, 

Man is a living creature, 
Not a body is not a living creature, 
Therefore, Every man is a body ; 
Yet this conversion appears so obscure, that 


E2 


52 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


PARTI. this mood is of no use at all. By the conversion 

—— of the major proposition, it is manifest, that in this 

| figure, the middle term is always the predicate in 
both the premises. 

oS 10. The second indirect figure is made by con- 

howmade, Verting the minor proposition, so as that the 
middle term is the subject in both. But this 
never concludes universally, and therefore is of no 
use in philosophy. Nevertheless I will set down 


an example of it; by which this direct 


Every man is a living creature, 
Every living creature is a body, 


by conversion of the minor proposition, will stand 


thus, 
Some living creature is a man, 
Every living creature is a body, 
Therefore, Some man is a body. 


For every man is a living creature cannot be 
converted into this, every living creature is a 
man. and therefore if this syllogism be restored 
to its direct form, the minor proposition will be 
some man is a living creature, and consequently 
the conclusion will be some man is u body, seeing 
the minor term man, which is the subject in the 
conclusion, is a particular name. 
ierectfgue il. The third indirect or inverted figure, is 
ismade. made by the conversion of both the premises. 
For example, this direct syllogism, 


Every man is a living creature, 
Every living creature 1s not a stone, 
Therefore, Every man is not a stone, 


being inverted, will stand thus, 


OF SYLLOGISM. 53 


Every stone is not a living creature, 
Whatsoever is not a living creature, is not a man, 
Therefore, E'very stone is not a man ; 


which conclusion is the converse of the direct 
conclusion, and equipollent to the same. 

The figures, therefore, of syllogisms, if they be 
numbered by the diverse situation of the middle 
term only, are but three; in the first whereof, the 
middle term has the middle place; in the second, 
the last ; and in the third, the first place. But if 
they be numbered according to the situation of 
the terms simply, they are four ; for the first may 
be distinguished again into two, namely, into 
direct and inverted. From whence it is evident, 
that the controversy among logicians concerning 
the fourth figure, is a mere Aoydpnayta, or conten- 
tion about the name thereof; for, as for the thing 
itself, it is plain that the situation of the terms 
(not considering the quantity or quality by which 
the moods are distinguished) makes four dif- 
ferences of syllogisms, which may be called 
figures, or have any other name at pleasure. 

12. In every one of these figures there are 
many moods, which are made by varying the pre- 
mises according to all the differences they are 
capable of, by quantity and quality ; as namely, 
in the direct figure there are six moods; in the 
first indirect figure, four; im the second, fourteen; 
and in the third, eighteen. But because from the 
direct figure I rejected as superfluous all moods 
besides that which consists of universal proposi- 
tions, and whose minor proposition is affirmative, 
I do, together with it, reject the moods of the rest 


PART I. 
4. 


There are ma 
ny moods in 
every figure, 
but most of 
them useless 


in philosophy. 


54 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


PARTI. of the figures which are made by conversion of 
—— the premises in the direct figure. 
“ ee 13. As it was showed before, that in necessary 
when equipol- propositions a categorical and hypothetical propo- 
potial. sition are equipollent ; so likewise it is manifest 
that a categorical and hypothetical syllogism are 
equivalent. For every categorical syllogism, as 
this, 
Every man is a living creature, 
Every living creature is a body, 
Therefore, Every man is a body, 


is of equal force with this hypothetical syllogism : 


If any thing be a man, the same is also a living creature, 
If any thing be a living creature, the same is a body, 
Therefore, If any thing be a man, the same is a body. 


In like manner, this categorical syllogism in an 
indirect figure, 

No stone is a living creature, 

Every man is a living creature, 

Therefore, No man is a stone, 

Or, No stone is a man, 


is equivalent to this hypothetical syllogism : 


If any thing be a man, the same is a living creature, 
If any thing be a stone, the same is not a living creature, 
Therefore, If any thing be a stone, the same is not aman, 
Or, If any thing be a man, the same is not a stone. 


And thus much seems sufficient for the nature 
of syllogisms; (for the doctrine of moods and 
figures is clearly delivered by others that have 
written largely and profitably of the same). Nor 
are precepts so necessary as practice for the 
attaining of true ratiocination; and they that 
study the demonstrations of mathematicians, will 


OF SYLLOGISM. 55 


sooner learn true logic, than they that spend time PARTL. 
in reading the rules of syllogizing which logicians ~—— 
have made; no otherwise than little children 
learn to go, not by precepts, but by exercising 
their feet. This, therefore, may serve for the first 
pace in the way to Philosophy. 
In the next place I shall speak of the faults and 
errors into which men that reason unwarily are 
apt to fall ; and of their kinds and causes. 


CHAPTER V. 
OF ERRING, FALSITY, AND CAPTIONS. 


i. Erring and falsity how they differ. Error of the mind by 
itself without the use of words, how it happens.—2. A seven- 
fold incoherency of names, every one of which makes always 
a false proposition.—3. Examples of the first manner of inco- 
herency.—4. Of the second.—5. Of the third.—6. Of the 
fourth.—7. Of the fifth —8. Of the sixth.—9. Of the seventh. 
10. Falsity of propositions detected by resolving the terms 
with definitions continued till they come to simple names, or 
names that are the most general of their kind.—11. Of the 
fault of a syllogism consisting in the implication of the terms 
with the copula.—12. Of the fault which consists in equivo- 
cation.—13. Sophistical captions are oftener faulty in the 
matter than in the form of syllogisms. 


1. MEN are subject to err not only in affirming and Brine & a 
‘ e ° ° ° sit ow t 
denying, but also in perception, and in silent differ, Error 


cogitation. In affirming and denying, when they ie see 


call any thing by a name, which is not the name ‘he use_of 
words, how it 


thereof; as if from seeing the sun first by reflec- happens. 
tion in water, and afterwards again directly in the 


PART L 
3. 


——,—$—— 
Erring and 
falsity how 
they differ. 


56 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


firmament, we should to both those appearances 
give the name of sun, and say there are two suns; 
which none but men can do, for no other living 
creatures have the use of names. This kind of 
error only deserves the name of falsity, as arising, 
not from sense, nor from the things themselves, 
but from pronouncing rashly; for names have 
their constitution, not from the species of things, 
but from the will and consent of men. And hence 
it comes to pass, that men pronounce falsely, by 
their own negligence, in departing from such 
appellations of things as are agreed upon, and are 
not deceived neither by the things, nor by the 
sense ; for they do not perceive that the thing 
they see is called sun, but they give it that name 
from their own will and agreement. Tacit 
errors, or the errors of sense and cogitation, are 
made, by passing from one imagination to the 
imagination of another different thing; or by 
feigning that to be past, or future, which never 
was, nor ever shall be; as when, by seeing the 
image of the sun in water, we imagine the sun 
itself to be there; or by seeing swords, that there 
has been or shall be fighting, because it uses to be 
so for the most part; or when from promises we 
feign the mind of the promiser to be such and such; 
or lastly, when from any sign we vainly imagine 
something to be signified, which is not. And 
errors of this sort are common to all things that 
have sense; and yet the deception proceeds neither 
from our senses, nor from the things we perceive; 
but from ourselves while we feign such things as 
are but mere images to be something more than 
images. But neither things, nor imaginations of 


OF ERRING, FALSITY, ETC. 57 


things, can be said to be false, seeing they are PARTI. 
truly what they are; nor do they, as signs, pro- —-— 
mise any thing which they do not perform; for 
they indeed do not promise at all, but we from 
them; nor do the clouds, but we, from seeing the 
clouds, say it shall rain. The best way, therefore, 
to free ourselves from such errors as arise from 
natural signs, is first of all, before we begin to 
reason concerning such conjectural things, to sup- 
pose ourselves ignorant, and then to make use of 
our ratiocination ; for these errors proceed from 
the want of ratiocination ; whereas, errors which 
consist in affirmation and negation, (that is, the 
falsity of propositions) proceed only from reasoning 
amiss. Of these, therefore, as repugnant to phi- 
losophy, I will speak principally. 
2. Errors which happen in reasoning, that is, A_ sevenfold 
° ee ° ° ° ? incoherency of 
in syllogizing, consist either in the falsity of the names, all of 
premises, or of the inference. In the first of these At ae 
cases, a syllogism is said to be faulty in the Proposition. 
matter of it; and in the second case, in the 
form. Iwill first consider the matter, namely, 
how many ways a proposition may be false; and 
next the form, and how it comes to pass, that 
when the premises are true, the inference is, not- 
withstanding, false. 
Seeing, therefore, that proposition only is true, 
(chap. 111, art. 7) m which are copulated two 
names of one and the same thing; and that always 
false, in which names of different things are copu- 
lated, look how many ways names of different 
things may be copulated, and so many ways a 
false proposition may be made. 
Now, all things to which we give names, may be 


PART I. 
5. 


Examples 
of the first 
manner of 
incoherency. 


58 COMPUTATION OF LOGIC. 


reduced to these four kinds, namely, bodies, acci- 
dents, phantasms, and names themselves; andthere- 
fore, in every true proposition, it is necessary that 
the names copulated, be both of them names of 
bodies, or both names of accidents, or both names of 
phantasms, or both names of names. For names 
otherwise copulated are incoherent, and constitute 
a false proposition. It may happen, also, that the 
name of a body, of an accident, or of a phantasm, 
may be copulated with the name of a speech. So 
that copulated names may be incoherent seven 
manner of ways. 


the name of an Accident. 
the name of a Phantasm. 
the name of a Name. 
the name of a Phantasm. 
the name of a Name. 
the name of a Name. 


1. If the name of a Body 
2. If the name of a Body 

3. 1f the name of a Body 
4. If the name of an Accident 
5. If the name of an Accident 
6. If the name of a Phantasm 
7.If the name of a Body, 


Accident, or Phantasm the name of a Speech. 


qin payejndoo oq 
SSS SS 


Of all which I will give some examples. 

3. After the first of these ways propositions are 
false, when abstract names are copulated with 
concrete names; as (in Latin and Greek) esse est 
ens, essentia est ens, 10 ti nv ava (t.); guidditas 
est ens, and many the like, which are found in 
Aristotle’s Metaphysics. Also, the understanding 
worketh, the understanding understandeth, the 
sight seeth; a body is magnitude, a body is 
quantity, a body is extension; to be a man is a 
man, whiteness is a white thing, &c.; which is 
as if one should say, the runner is the running, 
or the walk walketh. Moreover, essence is sepa- 
rated, substance is abstracted: and others like 
these, or derived from these, (with which common 


OF ERRING, FALSITY, ETC. 59 


philosophy abounds.) For seeing no subject of PANO: 

- an accident (that is, no body) is an accident: no es 
name of an accident ought to be given to a body, 
nor of a body to an accident. 

4. False, in the second manner, are such propo- The second. 
sitions as these; a ghost is a body, or a spirit, 
that is, a thin body; sensible species fly up and 
down in the air, or are moved hither and thither, 
which is proper to bodies; also, a shadow 1s 
moved, or 18 @ body; light is moved, or is @ 
body ; colour is the object of sight, sound of 
hearing ; space or place 1s extended; and innu- 
merable others of this kind. For seeing ghosts, 
sensible species, a shadow, light, colour, sound, 
space, &c. appear to us no less sleeping than 
waking, they cannot be things without us, but 
only phantasms of the mind that imagines them ; 
and therefore the names of these, copulated with 
the names of bodies, cannot constitute a true 
proposition. 

5. False propositions of the third kind, are such 7 ‘4. 
as these; genus est ens, universale est ens, ens 
de ente predicatur. For genus, and universale, 
and predicare, are names of names, and not of 
things. Also, number ts infinite, is a false propo- 
sition ; for no number can be infinite, but only 
the word zumber is then called an indefinite name 
when there is no determined number answering to 
it in the mind. 

6. To the fourth kind belong such false propo- T° "- 
sitions as these, an object ts of such magnitude or 
figure as appears to the beholders ; colour, light, 
sound, are tn the object ; and the like. For the 
same object appears sometimes greater, sometimes 


PART I. 
5. 


The fifth. 


The sixth. 


60 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


lesser, sometimes square, sometimes round, accor- 
ding to the diversity of the distance and medium ; 
but the true magnitude and figure of the thing 
seen is always one and the same; so that the 
magnitude and figure which appears, is not the 
true magnitude and figure of the object, nor any- 
thing but phantasm ; and therefore, in such pro- 
positions as these, the names of accidents are 
copulated with the names of phantasms. 

7. Propositions are false in the fifth manner, 
when it is said that the definition is the essence of 
a thing ; whiteness, or some other accident, is 
the genus, or universal. For definition is not the 
essence of any thing, but a speech signifying 
what we conceive of the essence thereof; and so 
also not whiteness itself, but the word whiteness, 
is a genus, or an universal name. 

8. In the sixth manner they err, that say the 
wdea of anything is universal; as if there could 
be in the mind an image of a man, which were 
not the image of some one man, but a man simply, 
which is impossible ; for every idea is one, and of 


’ one thing; but they are deceived in this, that they 


The seventh. 


put the zame of the thing for the zdea thereof. 

9. They err in the seventh manner, that make 
this distinction between things that have being, 
that some of them exist by themselves, others by 
accident ; namely, because Socrates 1s a man is 
a necessary proposition, and Socraées is a musi- 
cian a contingent proposition, therefore they say 
some things exist necessarily or by themselves, 
others contingently or by accident ; whereby, 
seeing necessary, contingcnt, by itself, by accident, 
are not names of things, but of propositions, they 


OF ERRING, FALSITY, ETC. GI 


that say any thing that has being, exists by acci- PARTI. 
dent, copulate the name of a proposition with the —.— 
name of a thing. In the same manner also, they 
err, which place some ideas in the understanding, 
others in the fancy ; as if from the understanding 
of this proposition, man 1s a living creature, we 
had one idea or image of a man derived from 
sense to the memory, and another to the under- 
standing ; wherein that which deceives them is 
this, that they think one idea should be answerable 
to a name, another to a proposition, which is 
false ; for proposition signifies only the order of 
those things one after another, which we observe 
in the same idea of man; so that this proposition, 
man 1s a living creature raises but one idea in 
us, though in that idea we consider that first, for 
which he is called man, and next that, for which 
he is called living creature. The falsities of pro- 
positions in all these several manners, is to be 
discovered by the definitions of the copulated 
names. 

10. But when names of bodies are copulated Falsity of 
with names of bodies, names of accidents with Hetected by 
names of accidents, names of names with names of "8° 
names, and names of phantasms with names of ‘ftitions. 
phantasms, if we, nevertheless, remain still doubt- 
ful whether such propositions are true, we ought 
then in the first place to find out the definition of 
both those names, and again the definitions of 
such names as are In the former definition, and so 
proceed by a continual resolution till we come to 
a simple name, that is, to the most general or 
most universal name of that kind ; and if after all 


62 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


Rane this, the truth or falsity thereof be not evident, 

—— _ we must search it out by philosophy, and ratioci- 

nation, beginning from definitions. For every 

proposition, universally true, is either a definition, 

or part of a definition, or the evidence of it 
depends upon definitions. 

Of the fault 1). That fault of a syllogism which lies hid in 

ayo the form thereof, will always be found either in 

implication “the implication of the copula with one of the 

the copula terms, or in the equivocation of some word; and 

in either of these ways there will be four terms, 

which (as I have shewn) cannot stand in a true 

syllogism. Now the implication of the copula 

with either term, is easily detected by reducing 

the propositions to plain and clear predication ; 


as (for example) if any man should argue thus, 


The hand toucheth the pen, 
The pen toucheth the paper,. 
Therefore, The hand toucheth the paper ; 
the fallacy will easily appear by reducing it, thus: 
The hand, is, touching the pen, 
The pen, ts, touching the paper, 
Therefore, The hand, is, touching the paper ; 
where there are manifestly these four terms, the 
hand, touching the pen, the pen, and touching the 
the paper. But the danger of being deceived by 
sophisms of this kind, does not seem to be so 
great, as that I need insist longer upon them. 
Of the 12. And though there may be fallacy in equi- 
faut wc’ vocal terms, yet in those that be manifestly such, 
equivocation. there is none at all; nor in metaphors, for they 

profess the transferring of names from one thing 


OF ERRING, FALSITY, ETC. 63 


to another. Nevertheless, sometimes equivocals rents 
(and those not very obscure) may deceive; as in —-— 
this argumentation :—Jt belongs to metaphysics 
to treat of principles ; but the first principle of 
all, 18, that the same thing cannot both exist and 
not exist at the same time ; and therefore tt 
belongs to metaphysics to treat whether the same 
thing may both exist and not exist at the same 
time ; where the fallacy lies in the equivocation 
of the word principle ; for whereas Aristotle in 
the beginning of his Metaphysics, says, that the 
treating of principles belongs to primary science, 
he understands by principles, causes of things, 
and certain existences which he calls primary ; 
but where he says @ primary proposition its a 
principle, by principle, there, he means the 
beginning and cause of knowledge, that is, the 
understanding of words, which, if any man want, 
he is incapable of learning. 

13. But the captions of sophists and sceptics, Sophistical 

° P captions 

by which they were wont, of old, to deride and are oftener 
oppose truth, were faulty for the most part, not oy ne 
in the form, but in the matter of syllogism; and % iit jisms, 
they deceived not others oftener than they were 
themselves deceived. For the force of that famous 
argument of Zeno against motion, consisted in 
this proposition, whatsoever may be divided into 
parts, infinite in number, the same 1s infinite ; 
which he, without doubt, thought to be true, yet 
nevertheless 1s false. For to be divided into infi- 
nite parts, is nothing else but to be divided into 
as many parts as any man will. But it is not 
necessary that a line should have parts infinite in 


PART 1. 
5. 


Conclusion. 


64 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


number, or be infinite, because I can divide and 
subdivide it as often as I please; for how many 
parts soever I make, yet their number is finite; 
but because he that says parts, simply, without 
adding how many, does not limit any number, but 
leaves it to the determination of the hearer, there- 
fore we say commonly, a line may be divided 
infinitely ; which cannot be true in any other 
sense. 

And thus much may suffice concerning syllo- 
gism, which is, as it were, the first pace towards 
philosophy ; in which I have said as much as is 
necessary to teach any man from whence all true 
argumentation has its force. And to enlarge this 
treatise with all that may be heaped together, 
would be as superfluous, as if one should (as I 
said before) give a young child precepts for the 
teaching of him to go; for the art of reasoning is 
not so well learned by precepts as by practice, and 
by the reading of those books in which the con- 
clusions are all made by severe demonstration. 
And so I pass on to the way of philosophy, that is, 
to the method of study. 


OF METHOD. 05 


CHAPTER VI. 


OF METHOD. 


1. Method and science defined.—2. It is more easily known 
concerning singular, than universal things, that they are ; and 
contrarily, it is more easily known concerning universal, than 
singular things, why they are, or what are their causes.— 
3. What it is philosophers seek to know.—4. The first part, 
by which principles are found out, is purely analytical.—5. The 
highest causes, and most universal in every kind, are known 
by themselves.—6. Method from principles found out, tending 
to science simply, what it is—7. That method of civil and 
natural science, which proceeds from sense to principles, 1s 
analytical ; and again, that, which begins at principles, is 
synthetical_—8. The method of searching out, whether any 
thing propounded be matter or accident.—9. The method of 
seeking whether any accident be in this, or in that subject. 
10. The method of searching after the cause of any effect 
propounded.—11. Words serve to invention, as marks; to 
demonstration, as signs.—12. The method of demonstration 
is synthetical.— 13. Definitions only are primary and universal 
propositions.—14. The nature and definition of a definition. 
15. The properties of a definition—16. The nature of a 
demonstration.—17. The properties of a demonstration, and 
order of things to be demonstrated.—18. The faults of a 
demonstration.—19. Why the analytical method of geometri- 
cians cannot be treated of in this place. 


1. For the understanding of method, it will be 
necessary for me to repeat the definition of philo- 
sophy, delivered above (Chap. 1, art. 2.) in this 
manner, Philosophy ts the knowledge we acquire, 
by true ratiocination, of appearances, or apparent 
effects, from the knowledge we have of some pos- 
sible production or generation of the same ; and 
VOL. I. F 


PART I. 
6. 
——$._—_—" 


Method and 
science defined. 


66 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


PART I. of such production, as has been or may be, from 

—— the knowledge we have of the effects. METHOD, 

Method and therefore, in the study of philosophy, zs the 

shortest way of finding out effects by their known 

causes, or of causes by their known effects. But 

we are then said to know any effect, when we 

know that there be causes of the same, and in 

what subject those causes are, and in what sub- 

ject they produce that effect, and in what manner 

they work the same. And this is the science of 

causes, or, as they call it, of the dir. All other 

science, which is called the or, is either percep- 

tion by sense, or the imagination, or memory 
remaining after such perception. 

The first beginnings, therefore, of knowledge, 
are the phantasms of sense and imagination ; and 
that there be such phantasms we know well enough 
by nature ; but to know why they be, or from 
what causes they proceed, is the work of ratioci- 
nation ; which consists (as is said above, in the 
lst Chapter, Art. 2) in composition, and division 
or resolution. ‘There is therefore no method, by 
which we find out the causes of things, but is 
either compositive or resolutive, or partly com- 
positive,and partly resolutive. And the resolutive 
is commonly called analytical method, as the 
compositive is called synthetical. 

It is easier 42° Lt 1S common to all sorts cf method, to pro- 
kuown con- ceed from known things to unknown ; and this is 
jar thea wai manifest from the cited definition of philosophy. 
ee But in knowledge by sense, the whole object is 
andcontarily more known, than any part thereof ; as when we 


it is easier 


known con- see a man, the conception or whole idea of that 


cerning uni- 


versal thansin- aN 1S first or-more known, than the particular 


OF METHOD. 67 


ideas of his being figurate, animate, and rational; Pee 
that is, we first see the whole man, and take —-— 
notice of his being, before we observe in him those peters 
other particulars. And therefore in any know- * "hat are 
ledge of the or, or that any thing zs, the beginning 

of our search is from the whole idea; and con- 

trarily, in our knowledge of the dor, or of the 

causes of any thing, that is, in the sciences, we 

have more knowledge of the causes of the parts 

than of the whole. For the cause of the whole 

is compounded of the causes of the parts ; but it 

Is necessary that we know the things that are to 

be compounded, before we can know the whole 
compound. Now, by parts, I do not here mean 

parts of the thing itself, but parts of its nature ; 

as, by the parts of man, I do not understand his 

head, his shoulders, his arms, &c. but his figure, 
quantity, motion, sense, reason, and the like; 

which accidents being compounded or put together, 
constitute the whole nature of man, but not the 

man himself. And this is the meaning of that 
common saying, namely, that some things are 

more known to us, others more known to nature; 

for I do not think that they, which so distinguish, 

mean that something is known to nature, which 

is known to no man; and therefore, by those 

things, that are more known to us, we are to 
understand things we take notice of by our senses, 

and, by more known to nature, those we acquire 

the knowledge of by reason ; for in this sense it 

is, that the whole, that is, those things that have 
universal names, (which, for brevity’s sake, I call 
universal) are more known to us than the parts, 

that is, such things as have names less universal, 

F 2 


PART I. 
6. 


——,—_— 


What it is 
philosophers 
seek to know. 


The first part, 
by which prin- 
ciples are dis- 
covered, i8 
purely ana- 
lytical. 


68 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


(which I therefore call singular) ; and the causes 
of the parts are more known to nature than the 
cause of the whole; that is, universals than 
singulars. 

3. In the study of philosophy, men search after 
science either simply or indefinitely ; that is, to 
know as much as they can, without propounding 
to themselves any limited question; or they 
enquire into the cause of some determined appear- 
ance, or endeavour to find out the certainty of 
something in question, as what is the cause of 
light, of heat, of gravity, of a figure propounded, 
and the like; or in what subject any propounded 
accident is inherent ; or what may conduce most 
to the generation of some propounded effect from 
many accidents; or in what manner particular 
causes ought to be compounded for the production 
of some certain effect. Now, according to this 
variety of things in question, sometimes the analy- 
tical method is to be used, and sometimes the 
synthetical. 

4. But to those that search after science inde- 
finitely, which consists in the knowledge of the 
causes of all things, as far forth as it may be 
attained, (and the causes of singular things are 
compounded of the causes of universal or simple 
things) it is necessary that they know the causes 
of universal things, or of such accidents as are 
common to all bodies, that 1s, to all matter, before 
they can know the causes of singular things, that 
is, of those accidents by which one thing is distin- 
guished from another. And, again, they must 
know what those universal things are, before they 
can know their causes. Moreover, seeing universal 


OF METHOD. 69 


things are contained in the nature of singular Pee 
things, the knowledge of them is to be acquired ———— 
by reason, that is, by resolution. For example, if 
there be propounded a conception or :dea of some 
singular thing, as of a square, this square is to be 
resolved into a plain, terminated with a certain 
number of equal and straight lines and right 
angles. For by this resolution we have these 
things universal or agreeable to all matter, namely, 
line, plain, (which contains superficies) termi- 
nated, angle, straightness, rectitude, and equality; 
and if we can find out the causes of these, we may 
compound them altogether into the cause of a 
square. Again, if any man propound to himself 
the conception of gold, he may, by resolving, 
come to the ideas of solid, visible, heavy, (that is, 
tending to the centre of the earth, or downwards) 
and many other more universal than gold itself ; 
and these he. may resolve again, till he come to 
such things as are most universal. And in this 
manner, by resolving continually, we may come to 
know what those things are, whose causes being 
first known severally, and afterwards compounded, 
bring us to the knowledge of singular things. 
I conclude, therefore, that the method of attaining 
to the universal knowledge of things, is purely 
analytical. 

5. But the causes of universal things (of those, eee 
at least, that have any cause) are manifest of most universal 
themselves, or (as they say commonly) known to ane 
nature; so that they need no method at all; for ‘emselves. 
they have all but one universal cause, which is 
motion. For the variety of all figures arises out 
of the variety of those motions by which they are 


70 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


PARTI. made; and motion cannot be understood to have 
——— any other cause besides motion; nor has the 
variety of those things we perceive by sense, as of 
colours, sounds, savours, &c. any other cause than 
motion, residing partly in the objects that work 
upon our senses, and partly in ourselves, in such 
manner, as that it is manifestly some kind of 
motion, though we cannot, without ratiocination, 
come to know what kind. For though many 
cannot understand till it be in some sort demon- 
strated to them, that all mutation consists in 
motion; yet this happens not from any obscurity 
in the thing itself, (for it is not intelligible that 
anything can depart either from rest, or from the 
motion it has, except by motion), but either by 
having their natural discourse corrupted with 
former opinions received from their masters, or 
else for this, that they do not at all bend their 

mind to the enquiring out of truth. 
Method from =» 6, By the knowledge therefore of universals, 


principles 


foundout, and of their causes (which are the first principles 
scieneeiraply, Dy Which we know the Sir of things) we have in 
whatitis —_ the first place their definitions, (which are nothing 
but the explication of our simple conceptions.) 
For example, he that has a true conception of 
place, cannot be ignorant of this definition, place 
is that space whichis possessed or filled ade- 
quately by some body ; and so, he that conceives 
motion aright, cannot but know that motion ts 
the privation of one place, and the acquisition of 
another. In the next place, we have their gene- 
rations or descriptions; as (for example) that a 
line 1s made by the motion of a point, superficies 
by the motion of a line, and one motion by another 


OF METHOD. 71 


motion, &c. It remains, that we enquire what PARTI. 
motion begets such and such effects; as, what —~—— 
motion makes a straight line, and what a circular ; yr 
what motion thrusts, what draws, and by what ind out 
way; what makes a thing which is seen or heard, science simply, 
to be seen or heard sometimes in one manner,” *™ 
sometimes in another. Now the method of this 
kind of enquiry, is compositive. For first we are 
to observe what effect a body moved produceth, 
when we consider nothing in it besides its motion; 
and we see presently that this makes a line, or 
length; next, what the motion of a long body 
produces, which we find to be superficies ; and so 
forwards, till we see what the effects of simple 
motion are; and then, in like manner, we are to 
observe what proceeds from the addition, multipli- 
cation, subtraction, and division, of these motions, 
and what effects, what figures, and what properties, 
they produce; from which kind of contemplation 
sprung that part of philosophy which is called 
geometry. 

From this consideration of what is produced by 
simple motion, we are to pass to the consideration 
of what effects one body moved worketh upon 
another ; and because there may be motion in all 
the several parts of a body, yet so as that the 
whole body remain still in the same place, we 
must enquire first, what motion causeth such and 
such motion in the whole, that is, when one body 
invades another body which is either at rest or in 
motion, what way, and with what swiftness, the 
invaded body shall move; and, again, what motion 
this second body will generate in a third, and so 
forwards. From which contemplation shall be 


PART I. 
6. 
——— 


Method from 
principles 
found out, 
tending to 
science simply, 
what it is. 


72 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


drawn that part of philosophy which treats of 
motion. 

In the third place we must proceed to the 
enquiry of such effects as are made by the motion 
of the parts of any body, as, how it comes to 
pass, that things when they are the same, yet 
seem not to be the same, but changed. And here 
the things we search after are sensible qualities, 
such as light, colour, transparency, opacity, 
sound, odour, savour, heat, cold, and the like; 
which because they cannot be known till we 
know the causes of sense itself, therefore the 
consideration of the causes of seeing, hearing, 
smelling, tasting, and touching, belongs to this 
third place; and all those qualities and changes, 
above mentioned, are to be referred to the fourth 
place; which two considerations comprehend 
that part of philosophy which is called physics. 
And in these four parts is contained whatsoever 
in natural philosophy may be explicated by 
demonstration, properly so called. For if a cause 
were to be rendered of natural appearances in 
special, as, what are the motions and influences of 
the heavenly bodies, and of their parts, the reason 
hereof must either be drawn from the parts of the 
sciences above mentioned, or no reason at all will 
be given, but all left to uncertain conjecture. 

After physics we must come to moral philo- 
sophy ; in which we are to consider the motions 
of the mind, namely, appetite, aversion, love, 
benevolence, hope, fear, anger, emulation, envy, 
&c.; what causes they have, and of what they 
be causes. And the reason why these are to 
be considered after physics is, that they have 


OF METHOD. 73 


their causes in sense and imagination, which are PARI I. 
the subject of physical contemplation. Also the —-— 
reason, why all these things are to be searched 
after in the order above-said, is, that physics. 
cannot be understood, except we know first what 
motions are in the smallest parts of bodies; nor 
such motion of parts, till we know what it is that 
makes another body move; nor this, till we know 
what simple motion will effect. And because all 
appearance of things to sense is determined, and 
made to be of such and such quality and quantity 
by compounded motions, every one of which has a 
certain degree of velocity, and a certain and 
determined way ; therefore, in the first place, we 
we are to search out the ways of motion simply 
(in which geometry consists) ; next the ways of 
such generated motions as are manifest; and, 
lastly, the ways of internal and invisible motions 
(which is the enquiry of natural philosophers). 
And, therefore, they that study natural philosophy, 
study in vain, except they begin at geometry ; 
and such writers or disputers thereof, as are 
ignorant of geometry, do but make their readers 
and hearers lose their time. 

7. Cwil and moral philosophy do not so adhere That method 
to one another, but that they may be severed. sel las 
For the causes of the motions of the mind are Proceed" 


from sense to 
known, not only by ratiocination, but also by the feed is 
experience of every man that takes the pains to andagain,that 
observe those motions within himself. And, iueples 
therefore, not only they that have attained the ® het 
knowledge of the passions and perturbations of 
the mind, by the synthetical method, and from 


the very first principles of philosophy, may by 


74 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


PART I. proceeding in the same way, come to the causes 
Berea and necessity of constituting commonwealths, and 
ofeitilasdne to get the knowledge of what is natural right, and 


tural science, * oe . . ; 
proceeding WHat are civil duties; and, in every kind of 


from sense government, what are the rights of the common- 

o principles, ae 

is analytical; Wealth, and all other knowledge appertaining to 

hice hess civil philosophy ; for this reason, that the princi- 

is eenthetear, Ples of the politics consist in the knowledge of 
the motions of the mind, and the knowledge of 
these motions from the knowledge of sense and 
imagination; but even they also that have not 
learned the first part of philosophy, namely, 
geometry and physics, may, notwithstanding, 
attain the principles of civil philosophy, by the 
analytical method. For if a question be pro- 
pounded, as, whether such an action be just or 
unjust; if that unjust be resolved into fact agaist 
law, and that notion /aw into the command of him 
or them that have coercive power; and that 
power be derived from the wz2//s of men that con- 
stitute such power, to the end they may live in 
peace, they may at last come to this, that the 
appetites of men and the passions of their minds 
are such, that, unless they be restrained by some 
power, they will always be making war upon one 
another ; which may be known to be so by any 
man’s experience, that will but examine his own 
mind. And, therefore, from hence he may pro- 
ceed, by compounding, to the determination of 
the justice or injustice of any propounded action. 
So that it is manifest, by what has been said, that 
the method of philosophy, to such as seek science 
simply, without propounding to themselves the 


solution of any particular question, is partly 


OF METHOD. 15 


analytical, and partly synthetical; namely, that PARTI. 
which proceeds from sense to the invention of —-— 
principles, analytical; and the rest synthetical. 

8. To those that seek the cause of some certain The method 
and propounded appearance or effect, it happens, oi "snethe 
sometimes, that they know not whether the thing, *7iiof"\. 
whose cause is sought after, be matter or body, or matter orac- 
some accident of a body. For though in geometry, 
when the cause is sought of magnitude, or propor- 
tion, or figure, it be certainly known that these 
things, namely magnitude, proportion, and figure, 
are accidents ; yet in natural philosophy, where all 
questions are concerning the causes of the phan- 
tasms of sensible things, it is not so easy to 
discern between the things themselves, from which 
those phantasms proceed, and the appearances of 
those things to the sense; which have deceived 
many, especially when the phantasms have been 
made by light. For example, a man that looks 
upon the sun, has a certain shining idea of the 
magnitude of about a foot over, and this he calls 
the sun, though he know the sun to be truly a 
great deal bigger ; and, in like manner, the phan- 
tasm of the same thing appears sometimes round, 
by being seen afar off, and sometimes square, by 
being nearer. Whereupon it may well be doubted, 
whether that phantasm be matter, or some body 
natural, or only some accident of a body ; in the ex- 
amination of which doubt we may use this method. 

The properties of matter and accidents already 
found out by us, by the synthetical method, from 
their definitions, are to be compared with the idea 
we have before us; andif it agree with the pro- 
perties of matter or body, then it is a body ; other- 


PART I, 
6. 


——)-—— 


The method 
of seeking 
whether any 
accident be 
in this or in 
that subject. 


76 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


wise it 1s an accident. Seeing, therefore, matter 
cannot by any endeavour of ours be either made or 
destroyed, or increased, or diminished, or moved 
out of its place, whereas that idea appears, vanishes, 
is increased and diminished, and moved hither and 
thither at pleasure; we may certainly conclude 
that it is not a body, but an accident only. And 
this method is synthetical. 

9. But if there be a doubt made concerning the 
subject of any known accident (for this may be 
doubted sometimes, as in the precedent example, 
doubt may be made in what subject. that splendour 
and apparent magnitude of the sun is), then our 
enquiry must proceed in this manner. First, 
matter in general must be divided into parts, 
as, into object, medium, and the sentient itself, or 
such other parts as seem most conformable to the 
thing propounded. Next, these parts are severally 
to be examined how they agree with the definition 
of the subject; and such of them as are not 
capable of that accident are to be rejected. For 
example, if by any true ratiocination the sun be 
found to be greater than its apparent magnitude, 
then that magnitude is not in the sun; if the sun 
be in one determined straight line, and one deter- 
mined distance, and the magnitude and splendour 
be seen in more lines and distances than one, as it 
is in reflection or refraction, then neither that 
splendour nor apparent magnitude are in the sun 
itself, and, therefore, the body of the sun cannot 
be the subject of that splendour and magnitude. 
And for the same reasons the air and other parts 
will be rejected, till at last nothing remain which 
can be the subject of that splendour and mag- 


OF METHOD. 7/2 


nitude but the sentient itself. And this method, oe 
in regard the subject is divided into parts, is = 
analytical; and in regard the properties, both of 

the subject and accident, are compared with the 
accident concerning whose subject the enquiry is 

made, it 1s synthetical. 

10. But when we seek after the cause of any Method of 
propounded effect, we must in the first place get ama ta 
into our mind an exact notion or idea of that Ee 
which we call cause, namely, that a cause 1s the 
sum or aggregate of all such accidents, both in 
the agents and the patient, as concur to the 
producing of the effect propounded; all which 
existing together, it cannot be understood but 
that the effect existeth with them; or that 
tt can possibly exist if any one of them be 
absent. This being known, in the next place we 
must examine singly every accident that accom- 
panies or precedes the effect, as far forth as it 
seems to conduce in any manner to the production 
of the same, and see whether the propounded 
effect may be conceived to exist, without the 
existence of any of those accidents; and by this 
means separate such accidents, as do not concur, 
from such as concur to produce the said effect ; 
which being done, we are to put together the 
concurring accidents, and consider whether we 
can possibly conceive, that when these are all 
present, the effect propounded will not follow; 
and if it be evident that the effect will follow, 
then that aggregate of accidents is the entire 
cause, otherwise not ; but we must still search out 
and put together other accidents. For example, 
if the cause of light be propounded to be sought 


78 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


PART 1. out; first, we examine things without us, and find 
——-~— that whensoever light appears, there is some prin- 
searchingwr cipal object, as it were the fountain of light, 


searching for 


i a Ms without which we cannot have any perception of 
propounded. light; and, therefore, the concurrence of that 
object is necessary to the generation of light. 
Next we consider the medium, and find, that 
unless it be disposed in a certain manner, namely, 
that it be transparent, though the object remain 
the same, yet the effect will not follow; and, 
therefore, the concurrence of transparency is also 
necessary to the generation of light. Thirdly, we 
observe our own body, and find that by the indis- 
position of the eyes, the brain, the nerves, and the 
heart, that is, by obstructions, stupidity, and 
debility, we are deprived of light, so that a fitting 
disposition of the organs to receive impressions 
from without is likewise a necessary part of the 
cause of light. Again, of all the accidents inherent 
in the object, there is none that can conduce to 
the effecting of light, but only action (or a certain 
motion), which cannot be conceived to be wanting, 
whensoever the effect 1s present ; for, that anything 
may shine, it is not requisite that it be of such or 
such magnitude or figure, or that the whole 
body of it be moved out of the place it is in (unless 
it may perhaps be said, that in the sun, or other 
body, that which causes light is the light it hath 
in itself; which yet is but a trifling exception, 
seeing nothing is meant thereby but the cause of 
light ; as if any man should say that the cause of 
light is that in the sun which produceth it) ; it 
remains, therefore, that the action, by which light 
is generated, is motion only in the parts of the 


OF METHOD. 79 


object. Which being understood, we may easily PART I. 
conceive what it is the medium contributes, ——— 
namely, the continuation of that motion to the 

eye; and, lastly, what the eye and the rest of the 

organs of the sentient contribute, namely, the 
continuation of the same motion to the last organ 

of sense, the heart. And in this manner the cause 

of light may be made up of motion continued 

from the original of the same motion, to the 
original of vital motion, light being nothing but 

the alteration of vital motion, made by the impres- 

sion upon it of motion continued from the object. 

But I give this only for an example, for I shall 

speak more at large of light, and the generation of 

it, in its proper place. In the mean time it is 
manifest, that in the searching out of causes, there 

is need partly of the analytical, and partly of the 
synthetical method; of the analytical, to con- 

ceive how circumstances conduce severally to the 
production of effects; and of the synthetical, for 

the adding together and compounding of what they 

can effect singly by themselves. And thus much 

may serve for the method of invention. It remains 

that I speak of the method of teaching, that is, of 
demonstration, and of the means by which we 
demonstrate. 

11. In the method of mvention, the use of rs serve 


to invention 


words consists in this, that they may serve for 4s marks; to 
; demonstration 

marks, by which, whatsoever we have found out as signs. 

may be recalled to memory ; for without this all 

our inventions perish, nor will it be possible for 

us to go on from principles beyond a syllogism 

or two, by reason of the weakness of memory. 


For example, if any man, by considering a triangle 


PART I, 
6. 


The method of 
demonstration 


is synthetical. 


80 ' COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


set before him, should find that all its angles 
together taken are equal to two right angles, and 
that by thinking of the same tacitly, without any 
use of words either understood or expressed ; and 
it should happen afterwards that another triangle, 
unlike the former, or the same in different situa- 
tion, should be offered to his consideration, he 
would not know readily whether the same pro- 
perty were in this last or no, but would be forced, 
as often as a different triangle were brought before 
him (and the difference of triangles is infinite) to 
begin his contemplation anew; which he would 
have no need to do if he had the use of names, 
for every universal name denotes the conceptions 
we have of infinite singular things. Nevertheless, 
as I said above, they serve as marks for the help 
of our memory, whereby we register to ourselves 
our own inventions; but not as s7gus by which 
we declare the same to others; so that a man may 
be a philosopher alone by himself, without any 
master; Adam had this capacity. But to teach, 
that is, to demonstrate, supposes two at the least, 
and syllogistical speech. 

12. And seeing teaching is nothing but leading 
the mind of him we teach, to the knowledge of 
our inventions, in that track by which we attained 
the same with our own mind; therefore, the same 
method that served for our invention, will serve 
also for demonstration to others, saving that we 
omit the first part of method which proceeded 
from the sense of things to universal principles, 
which, because they are principles, cannot be 
demonstrated ; and seeing they are known by 
nature, (as was said above in the 5th article) they 


OF METHOD. 81 


need no demonstration, though they need expli- PART Fr 
cation. The whole method, therefore, of demon- ———— 
stration, is synthetical, consisting of that order of 
speech which begins from primary or most 
universal propositions, which are manifest of 
themselves, and proceeds by a perpetual com- 
position of propositions into syllogisms, till at 
Jast the learner understand the truth of the 
conclusion sought after. 

13. Now, such principles are nothing but defi- Pa 
nitions, whereof there are two sorts; one of primary, 

° : & universal 
names, that signify such things as have some COn- piopositions. 
ceivable cause, and another of such names as 
signify things of which we can conceive no cause 
at all. Names of the former kind are, body, or 
matter, quantity, or extension, motion, and what- 
soever 1s common to all matter. Of the second 
kind, are such a body, such and so great motion, 
so great magnitude, such figure, and whatsoever 
we can distinguish one body from another by. 
And names of the former kind are well enough 
defined, when, by speech as short as may be, we 
raise in the mind of the hearer perfect and clear 
ideas or conceptions of the things named, as when 
we define motion to be the leaving of one place, 
and the acquiring of another continually ; for 
though no thing moved, nor any cause of motion 
be in that definition, yet, at the hearing of that 
speech, there will come into the mind of the 
hearer an zdea of motion clear enough. But 
definitions of things, which may be understood to 
have some cause, must consist of such names as 
express the cause or manner of their generation, 
as when we define a circle to be a figure made by 
VOL. I. G 


PART I. 
6. 

eee ye 
Definitions 
only are 
primary, 
& universal 
propositions. 


82 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


the circumduction of a straight line in a plane, &c. 
Besides definitions, there is no other proposition 
that ought to be called primary, or (according 
to severe truth) be received into the number of 
principles. For those axioms of Euclid, seeing 
they may be demonstrated, are no principles of 
demonstration, though they have by the consent of 
all men gotten the authority of principles, because 
they need not be demonstrated. Also, those 
petitions, or postulata, (as they call them) though 
they be principles, yet they are not principles of 
demonstration, but of construction only ; that is, 
not of science, but of power; or (which is all one) 
not of theorems, which are speculations, but of 
problems, which belong to practice, or the doing 
of something. But as for those common received 
opinions, Nature abhors vacuity, Nature doth 
nothing in vain, and the like, which are neither 
evident in themselves, nor at all to be demon- 
strated, and which are oftener false than true, 
they are much less to be acknowledged for 
principles. 

To return, therefore, to definitions ; the reason 
why I say that the cause and generation of such 
things, as have any cause or generation, ought to 
enter into their definitions, is this. The end of 
science is the demonstration of the causes and 
generations of things; which if they be not in the 
definitions, they cannot be found in the conclusion 
of the first syllogism, that is made from those 
definitions; and if they be not in the first con- 
clusion, they will not be found in any further 
conclusion deduced from that ; and, therefore, by 
proceeding in this manner, we shall never come to 


OF METHOD. 83 


science ; which is against the scope and intention PART I. 


of demonstration. Srernere 
14. Now, seeing definitions (as I have said) are The nature 
ennition 


principles, or primary propositions, they are there- of a definition. 
fore speeches; and seeing they are used for the 
raising of an zdea of some thing in the mind of 
the learner, whensoever that thing has a name, 
the definition of it can be nothing but the expli- 
. cation of that name by speech ; and if that name 
be given it for some compounded conception, the 
definition is nothing but a resolution of that name 
into its most universal parts. As when we define 
man, saying man 1s a body animated, sentient, 
rational, those names, body animated, §&§c. are 
parts of that whole name man; so that definitions 
of this kind always consist of genus and difference ; 
the former names being all, till the last, general ; 
and the last of all, difference. But if any name 
be the most universal in its kind, then the defini- 
tion of it cannot consist of genus and difference, 
but 1s to be made by such circumlocution, as best 
explicateth the force of that name. Again, it is 
possible, and happens often, that the genus and 
difference are put together, and yet make no 
definition ; as these words, a straight line, contain 
both the genus and difference; but are not a 
definition, unless we should think a straight line 
may be thus defined, a straight line 1s a straight 
line: and yet if there were added another name, 
consisting of different words, but signifying the 
same thing which these signify, then these might 
be the definition of that name. From what has 
been said, it may be understood how a defini- 
tion ought to be defined, namely, that it is a 
G 2 


84 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


PART I. proposition, whose predicate resolves the subject, 
os when tt may; and when it may not, wt exemplifies 
the same. 
Properties of 15. The properties of a definition are: 
a definition. ; ; . ° 
First, that it takes away equivocation, as also 
all that multitude of distinctions, which are used 
by such as think they may learn philosophy by 
disputation. For the nature of a definition is to 
define, that is, to determine the signification of 
the defined name, and to pare from it all other 
signification besides what is contained in the 
definition itself; and therefore one definition does 
as much, as all the distinctions (how many soever) 
that can be used about the name defined. 
Secondly, that it gives an universal notion of 
the thing defined, representing a certain universal 
picture thereof, not to the eye, but to the mind. 
For as when one paints a man, he paints the image 
of some man; so he, that defines the name man, 
makes a representation of some man to the mind. 
Thirdly, that it is not necessary to dispute 
whether definitions are to be admitted or no. For 
when a master is instructing his scholar, if the 
scholar understand all the parts of the thing 
defined, which are resolved in the definition, and 
yet will not admit of the definition, there needs no 
further controversy betwixt them, it being all one 
as if he refused to be taught. But if he under- 
stand nothing, then certainly the definition is 
faulty ; for the nature ofa definition consists in 
this, that it exhibit a clear idea of the thing defined; 
and principles are either known by themselves, or 
else they are not principles. 
Fourthly, that, in philosophy, definitions are 


OF METHOD. : 85 


before defined names. For in teaching philosophy, se a 
the first beginning is from definitions ; and all pro- —-—~ 
gression in the same, till we come to the knowledge P"rerties of 
of the thing compounded, is compositive. Seeing, 
therefore, definition is the explication of a com- 
pounded name by resolution, and the progression 
is from the parts to the compound, definitions 
must be understood before compounded names ; 
nay, when the names of the parts of any speech 
be explicated, it is not necessary that the definition 
should be a name compounded of them. For 
example, when these names, equilateral, quadri- 
lateral, right-angled, are sufficiently understood, 
it is not necessary in geometry that there should 
be at all such a name as square; for defined 
names are received in philosophy for brevity’s 
sake only. 

Fifthly, that compounded names, which are de- 
fined one way in some one part of philosophy, 
may in another part of the same be otherwise 
defined; as a parabola and an hyperbole have 
one definition in geometry, and another in rhetoric; 
for definitions are instituted and serve for the 
understanding of the doctrine which is treated of. 
And, therefore, as in one part of philosophy, a 
definition may have in it some one fit name for 
the more brief explanation of some proposition in 
geometry ; so it may have the same liberty in 
other parts of philosophy; for the use of names is 
particular (even where many agree to the settling 
of them) and arbitrary. 

Sixthly, that no name can be defined by any 
one word ; because no one word is sufficient for 
the resolving of one or more words. 


86 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


oe Seventhly, that a defined name ought not to be 
—— repeated in the definition. For a defined name is 
the whole compound, and a definition is the reso- 
lution of that compound into parts; but no total 

can be part of itself. | 
Nite ha 16. Any two definitions, that may be com- 
demonstration. hounded into a syllogism, produce a conclusion ; 
which, because it is derived from principles, that 
is, from definitions, is said to be demonstrated ; 
and the derivation or composition itself is called a 
demonstration. In like manner, if a syllogism be 
made of two propositions, whereof one is a defi- 
nition, the other a demonstrated conclusion, or 
neither of them is a definition, but both formerly 
demonstrated, that syllogism is also called a de- 
monstration, and so successively. The definition 
therefore of a demonstration is this, a demonstra- 
tion is a syllogism, or series of syllogisms, 
derived and continued, from the definitions of 
names, to the last conclusion. And from hence it 
may be understood, that all true ratiocination, 
which taketh its beginning from true principles, 
produceth science, and is true demonstration. 
For as for the original of the name, although that, 
which the Greeks called amodé&éc, and the Latins 
demonstratio, was understood by them for that 
sort only of ratiocination, in which, by the de- 
scribing of certain lines and figures, they placed 
the thing they were to prove, as it were before 
men’s eyes, which is properly azodexrier, or to 
shew by the figure; yet they seem to have done it 
for this reason, that unless it were in geometry, 
(in which only there is place for such figures) 
there was no ratiocination certain, and ending in 


OF METHOD. 87 


science, their doctrines concerning all other things PART I. 
being nothing but controversy and clamour; ee 
which, nevertheless, happened, not because the 
truth to which they pretended could not be made 
evident without figures, but because they wanted 
true principles, from which they might derive 
their ratiocination; and, therefore, there is no 
reason but that if true definitions were premised 
in all sorts of doctrines, the demonstrations also 
would be true. 
17. It is proper to methodical demonstration, Properties of a 
First, that there be a true succession of one scyonsmations 
reason to another, according to the rules of syllo- Sings tobe | 
gizing delivered above. 
Secondly, that the premises of all syllogisms be 
demonstrated from the first definitions. 
Thirdly, that after definitions, he that teaches 
or demonstrates any thing, proceed in the same 
method by which he found it out; namely, that 
in the first place those things be demonstrated, 
which immediately succeed to universal definitions 
(in which is contained that part of philosophy 
which is called philosophia prima). Next, those 
things which may be demonstrated by simple 
motion (in which geometry consists). After 
geometry, such things as may be taught or shewed 
by manifest action, that is, by thrusting from, or 
pulling towards. And after these, the motion or 
mutation of the invisible parts of things, and the 
doctrine of sense and imaginations, and of the 
internal passions, especially those of men, in which 
are comprehended the grounds of civil duties, or 
civil philosophy ; which takes up the last place. 
And that this method ought to be kept in all sorts of 
philosophy, is evident from hence, that such things 


PART I. 
6. 


Faults of a 
demonstration. 


838 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


as I have said are to be taught last, cannot be de- 
monstrated, till such as are propounded to be first 
treated of, be fully understood. Of which method 
no other example can be given, but that treatise 
of the elements of philosophy, which I shall begin 
in the next chapter, and continue to the end of 
the work. 

18. Besides those paralogisms, whose fault lies 
either in the falsity of the premises, or the want 
of true composition, of which I have spoken in 
the precedent chapter, there are two more, which 
are frequent in demonstration; one whereof is 
commonly called petitio principii; the other 1s 
the supposing of a false cause ; and these do not 
only deceive unskilful learners, but sometimes 
masters themselves, by making them take that for 
well demonstrated, which is not demonstrated at 
all. Petitio principt is, when the conclusion to 
be proved is disguised in other words, and put 
for the definition or principle from whence it is 
to be demonstrated; and thus, by putting for the 
cause of the thing sought, either the thing itself or 
some effect of it, they make a circle in their 
demonstration. As for example, he that would 
demonstrate that the earth stands still in the 
centre of the world, and should suppose the earth’s 
gravity to be the cause thereof, and define gravity 
to be a quality by which every heavy body tends 
towards the centre of the world, would lose his 
labour; for the question is, what is the cause of 
that quality in the earth ¢ and, therefore, he that 
supposes gravity to be the cause, puts the thing 
itself for its own cause. 

Of a false cause I find this example in a cer- 
tain treatise where the thing to be demonstrated 


OF METHOD. — 89 


is the motion of the earth. He begins, therefore, 
with this, that seeing the earth and the sun are 
not always in the same situation, it must needs be 
that one of them be locally moved, which is true ; 
next, he affirms that the vapours, which the sun 
raises from the earth and sea, are, by reason of 
this motion, necessarily moved, which also is true; 
from whence he infers the winds are made, and 
this may pass for granted ; and by these winds he 
says, the waters of the sea are moved, and by 
their motion the bottom of the sea, as if it were 
beaten forwards, moves round; and let this also 
be granted; wherefore, he concludes, the earth is 
moved ; which is, nevertheless, a paralogism. For, 
if that wind were the cause why the earth was, 
from the beginning, moved round, and the motion 
either of the sun or the earth were the cause of 
that wind, then the motion of the sun or the earth 
was before the wind itself; and if the earth were 
moved, before the wind was made, then the wind 
could not be the cause of the earth’s revolution ; 
but, if the sun were moved, and the earth stand 
still, then it is manifest the earth might remain 
unmoved, notwithstanding that wind; and there- 
fore that motion was not made by the cause which 
he allegeth. But paralogisms of this kind are 
very frequent among the writers of physics, 
though none can be more elaborate than this in 
the example given. 

19. It may to some men seem pertinent to treat 


PART I. 


Why the ana- 
lytical inethod 


in this place of that art of the geometricians, of geometri- 


clans cannot 


which they call dogzstica, that is, the art, Dy te treated of 
which, from supposing the thing in question to be ™ '® Plc 


true, they proceed by ratiocination, till either they 
come to something known, by which they may 


PART I. 


——_——— 


Why the ana- 
lytical method 


of geometri- 
cians cannot 


90 COMPUTATION OR LOGIC. 


demonstrate the truth of the thing sought for; or 
to something which is impossible, from whence 
they collect that to be false, which they supposed 
true. But this art cannot be explicated here, for 


be treated of this reason, that the method of it can neither be 


in this place. 


practised, nor understood, unless by such as are 
well versed in geometry; and among geometri- 
cians themselves, they, that have most theorems in 
readiness, are the most ready in the use of this 
logistica ; so that, indeed, it is not a distinct 
thing from geometry itself; for there are, in the 
method of it, three parts; the first whereof con- 
sists in the finding out of equality betwixt known 
and unknown things, which they call equation ; 
and this equation cannot be found out, but by such 
as know perfectly the nature, properties, and 
transpositions of proportion, as also the addition, 
subtraction, multiplication, and division of lines 
and superficies, and the extraction of roots ; which 
are the parts of no mean geometrician. The 
second is, when an equation is found, to be able to 
judge whether the truth or falsity of the question 
may be deduced from it, or no; which yet requires 
greater knowledge. And the third is, when such 
an equation is found, as is fit for the solution of 
the question, to know how to resolve the same in 
such manner, that the truth or falsity may there- 
by manifestly appear; which, in hard questions, 


cannot be done without the knowledge of the 


nature of crooked-lined figures; but he that un- 
derstands readily the nature and properties of 
these, is a complete geometrician. It happens 
besides, that for the finding out of equations, there 
is no certain method, but he is best able to do it, 
that has the best natural wit. 


PART II. 


THE 


FIRST GROUNDS OF PHILOSOPHY. 


CHAPTER VII. 


OF PLACE AND TIME. 


1. Things that have no existence, may nevertheless be under- 
stood aud computed.—2. What is Space.—3. Time.—4. Part. 
5. Division. —6. One.—7. Number.—-8. Composition. — 
9. The whole—10. Spaces and times contiguous, and con- 
tinual.—11. Beginning, end, way, finite, infinite—12. What 
is infinite in power. Nothing infinite can be truly said to be 
either whole, or one; nor infinite spaces or times, many.— 
13. Division proceeds not to the least. 


1. In the teaching of natural philosophy, I cannot PART II. 
begin better (as I have already shewn) than from ~—— 
privation ; that is, from feigning the world to be 7nss that 


have no ex- 


annihilated. But, if such annihilation of all things istence, may 
be supposed, it may perhaps be asked, what would be understood 
remain for any man (whom only I except from“ °"?"*™ 
this universal annihilation of things) to consider 

as the subject of philosophy, or at all to reason 

upon; or what to give names unto for ratiocina- 


tion’s sake. 


PART II. 
7. 

—— 
Things that 
have no ex- 
istence, may 
nevertheless 
be understood 
and computed. 


92 PHILOSOPHY. 


I say, therefore, there would remain to that man 
ideas of the world, and of all such bodies as he 
had, before their annihilation, seen with his eyes, 
or perceived by any other sense; that is to say, 
the memory and imagination of magnitudes, 
motions, sounds, colours, &c. as also of their order 
and parts. All which things, though they be 
nothing but ideas and phantasms, happening in- 
ternally to him that imagineth; yet they will 
appear as if they were external, and not at all 
depending upon any power of the mind. And 
these are the things to which he would give 
names, and subtract them from, and compound 
them with one another. For seeing, that after the 
destruction of all other things, I suppose man 
still remaining, and namely that he thinks, ima- 
gines, and remembers, there can be nothing for 
him to think of but what is past; nay, if we do 
but observe diligently what it is we do when we 
consider and reason, we shall find, that though 
all things be still remaining in the world, yet we 
compute nothing but our own phantasms. For 
when we calculate the magnitude and motions of 
heaven or earth, we do not ascend into heaven 
that we may divide it into parts, or measure the 
motions thereof, but we do it sitting still in our 
closets or in the dark. Now things may be con- 
sidered, that 1s, be brought into account, either as 
internal accidents of our mind, in which manner 
we consider them when the question is about 
some faculty of the mind; or as species of external 
things, not as really existing, but appearing only 
to exist, or to have a being without us. And in 
this manner we are now to consider them. 


- OF PLACE AND TIME. 93 


2. If therefore we remember, or have a phantasm 
of any thing that was in the world before the 
supposed annihilation of the same; and consider, 
not that the thing was such or such, but only that 
it had a being without the mind, we have pre- 
sently a conception of that we call space: an 
imaginary space indeed, because a mere phantasm, 
yet that very thing which all men call so. For no 
man calls it space for being already filled, but 
because it may be filled; nor does any man 
think bodies carry their places away with them, 
but that the same space contains sometimes one, 
sometimes another body; which could not be if 
space should always accompany the body which 1s 
once in it. And this is of itself so manifest, that 
I should not think it needed any explaining at all, 
but that I find space to be falsely defined by 
certain philosophers, who infer from thence, one, 
that the world is infinite (for taking space to be 
the extension of bodies, and thinking extension 
may encrease continually, he infers that bodies 
may be infinitely extended); and, another, from the 
same definition, concludes rashly, that it is im- 
possible even to God himself to create more 
worlds than one; for, if another world were to be 
created, he says, that seeing there is nothing 
without this world, and therefore (according to his 
definition) no space, that new world must be 
placed in nothing; but in nothing nothing can be 
placed ; which he affirms only, without showing 
any reason for the same; whereas the contrary is 
the truth: for more cannot be put into a place 
already filled, so much is empty space fitter than 
that, which is full, for the receiving of new bodies. 


PART II. 
7. 
—— 


What 
is Space. 


PART II. 
7 


—— 


Time. 


94 PHILOSOPHY. 


Having therefore spoken thus much for these 
men’s sakes, and for theirs that assent to them, 
I return to my purpose, and define space thus: 
SPACE 28 the phantasm of a thing existing without 
the mind simply ; that is to say, that phantasm, 
in which we consider no other accident, but only 
that it appears without us. 

3. As a body leaves a phantasm of its magnitude 
in the mind, so also a moved body leaves a 
phantasm of its motion, namely, an idea of that 
body passing out of one space into another by 
continual succession. And this idea, or phantasm, 
is that, which (without receding much from the 
common opinion, or from Aristotle's definition) 
I call Time. For seeing all men confess a year 
to be time, and yet do not think a year to be 
the accident or affection of any body, they must 
needs confess it to be, not in the things without 
us, but only in the thought of the mind. So 
when they speak of the times of their predecessors, 
they do not thmk after their predecessors are 
gone, that their times can be any where else than 
in the memory of those that remember them. 
And as for those that say, days, years, and months 
are the motions of the sun and moon, seeing it is 
all one to say, motion past and motion destroyed, 
and that future motion is the same with motion 
which ts not yet begun, they say that, which they 
do not mean, that there neither is, nor has been, 
nor shall be any time: for of whatsoever it may 
be said, zt has been or it shall be, of the same 
also it might have been said heretofore, or may 
be said hereafter, :¢ 7s. What then can days, 
months, and years, be, but the names of such 


OF PLACE AND TIME. 95 


computations made in our mind? TZme therefore 
is a phantasm, but a phantasm of motion, for if 
we would know by what moments time passes 
away, we make use of some motion or other, as 
of the sun, of a clock, of the sand in an hour. 
glass, or we mark some line upon which we 
imagine something to be moved, there being no 
other means by which we can take notice of any 
time at all. And yet, when I say é:me is a phan- 
tasm of motion, I do not say this is sufficient to 
define it by; for this word ¢zme comprehends the 
notion of former and latter, or of succession 
in the motion of a body, in as much as it is first 
here then there. Wherefore a complete definition 
of ¢zme is such as this, TIME zs the phantasm of 
before and after in motion ; which agrees with 
this definition of Aristotle, time is the number of 
motion according to former and latter ; for that 
numbering is an act of the mind; and therefore 
it is all one to say, ¢zme is the number of motion 
according to former and latter ; and time is a@ 
phantasm of motion numbered. But that other 
definition, éime 1s the measure of motion, is not 
so exact, for we measure time by motion and 
not motion by time. 

4. One space is called part of another space, 
and one time part of another time, when this 
contains that and something besides. From 
whence it may be collected, that nothing can 
rightly be called a PART, but that which is com- 
pared with something that contains it. 

5. And therefore to make parts, or to part or 
DIVIDE space or ézme, is nothing else but to con- 
sider one and another within the same; so that 


PART II. 
7. 
———_—_—” 

Time. 


Part. 


Division. 


PART IT, 
7 


—_—— 
Division, 


Number. 


Composition. 


96 PHILOSOPHY. 


if any man divide space or time, the diverse 
conceptions he has are more, by one, than the 
parts he makes; for his first conception is of that 
which is to be divided, then of some part of it, 
and again of some other part of it, and so 
forwards as long as he goes on in dividing. 

But it is to be noted, that here, by division, I 
do not mean the severing or pulling asunder of 
one space or time from another (for does any 
man think that one hemisphere may be separated 
from the other hemisphere, or the first hour from 
the second?) but diversity of consideration ; so 
that division is not made by the operation of the 
hands but of the mind. 

6. When space or time is considered among 
other spaces or times, it is said to be ONE, namely 
one of them; for except one space might be 
added to another, and subtracted from another 
space, and so of time, it would be sufficient to 
Say space or time simply, and superfluous to say 
one space or one time, if it could not be conceived 
that there were another. The common definition 
of one, namely, that one zs that which 1s undivided, 
is obnoxious to an absurd consequence ; for it may 
thence be inferred, that whatsoever is divided is 
many things, that is, that every divided thing, is 
divided things, which is insignificant. 

7. NUMBER is one and one, or one one and one, 
and so forwards ; namely, one and one make the 
number fwo, and one one and one the number 
three ; so are all other numbers made; which is 
all one as if we should say, number 7s unities. 

8. To COMPOUND space of spaces, or time of 
times, is first to consider them one after another, 


OF PLACE AND TIME. 97 
and then altogether as one; as if one should 
reckon first the head, the feet, the arms, and the 
body, severally, and then for the account of them 
all together put man. And that which is so put 
for all the severals of which it consists, is called 
the WHOLE; and those severals, when by the 
division of the whole they come again to be 
considered singly, are parts thereof; and therefore 
the whole ahd all the parts taken together are 
the same thing. And as I noted above, that in 
division it 1s not necessary to pull the parts 
asunder ; so in composition, it 1s to be understood, 
that for the making up of a whole there is no 
need of putting the parts together, so as to make 
them touch one another, but only of collecting 
them into one sum in the mind. For thus all men, 
being considered together, make up the whole of 
mankind, though never so much dispersed by time 
and place ; and twelve hours, though the hours of 
several days, may be compounded into one number 
of twelve. 

9. This being well understood, it is manifest, 
that nothing can rightly be called a whole, that is 
not conceived to be compounded of parts, and that 
it may be divided into parts; so that if we deny 
that a thing has parts, we deny the same to be a 
whole. For example, if we say the soul can have 
no parts, we affirm that no soul can be a whole 
soul. Also it is manifest, that nothing has parts 
till it be divided; and when a thing is divided, 
the parts are only so many as the division makes 
them. Again, that a part of a part is a part of 
the whole; and thus any part of the number four, 
as two, is a part of the number eight ; for four is 

VOL. I. H 


PART IT. 
7. 


staan enema 


The whole. 


PART II. 
7. 


—_—— 


Spaces and 
times con- 
tizuous and 
continual. 


Beginning, 
end, way, 
finite, iniinite. 


98 PHILOSOPHY. 


made of two and two; but eight is compounded 
of two, two, and four, and therefore two, which 
is a part of the part four, is also a part of the 
whole eight. 

10. Two spaces are said to be conTiGuous, 
when there is no other space betwixt them. But 
two times, betwixt which there is no other time, are 
called immediate, as AB, BC. A B C 
And any two spaces, as well as =——¥-——_—__— 
times, are said to be CONTINUAL, when they have 
one common part, as AC, BD, A BCD 
where the part BC iscommon; ————_- 
and more spaces and times are continual, when 
every two which are next one another are 
continual. 

11. That part which is between two other parts, 
is called a MEAN; and that which is not between 
two other parts, an EXTREME. And of extremes, 
that which is first reckoned is the BEGINNING, 
and that which last, the END; and all the means 
together taken are the way. Also, extreme parts 
and limits are the same thing. And from hence 
it is manifest, that beginning and end depend 
upon the order in which we number them; and 
that to terminate or limit space and time, is the 
same thing with imagining their beginning and 
end; as also that every thing 1s FINITE or INFI- 
NITE, according as we imagine or not imagine it 
limited or terminated every way; and that the 
limits of any number are unites, and of these, 
that which is the first in our numbering is the 
beginning, and that which we number last, is the 
end. When we say number is infinite, we mean 
only that no number is expressed; for when we 


OF PLACE AND TIME. 99 


speak of the numbers fwo, three, a thousand, &c. PART I. 
they are always finite. But when no more is said ~—— 
but this, zumber is infinite, it is to be understood 

as if it were said, this name number is an indefi- 

nite name. 

12. Space or time is said to be finite in power, What is inf- 

or terminable, when there may be assigned a Nothing inf. 
number of finite spaces or times, as of paces OF truly said = 
hours, than which there can be no greater number ( ¢ither whole 
of the same measure in that space or time; and finite spaces 
infinite in power is that space or time, in which eee 
a greater number of the said paces or hours may 
be assigned, than any number that can be given. 
But we must note, that, although in that space or 
time which is infinite in power, there may be 
numbered more paces or hours than any number 
that can be assigned, yet their number will always 
be finite ; for every number is finite. And there- 
fore his ratiocination was not good, that under- 
taking to prove the world to be fimté, reasoned 
thus; If the world be infinite, then there may be 
taken in it some part which is distant from us an 
infinite number of paces: but no such part can 
be taken; wherefore the world is not infinite ; 
because that consequence of the major proposition 
is false; for in an infinite space, whatsoever we take 
or design in our mind, the distance of the same 
from us is a finite space; for in the very designing 
of the place thereof, we put an end to that space, 
of which we ourselves are the beginning; and 
whatsoever any man with his mind cuts off both 
ways from infinite, he determines the same, that 
is, he makes it finite. 

Of infinite space or time, it cannot be said that 

H 2 


100 PHILOSOPHY. 


ss Il. it is a@ whole or one: not a whole, because not 

—— compounded of parts; for seeing parts, how many 
soever they be, are severally finite, they will also, 
when they are all put together, make a whole 
finite: nor one, because nothing can be said to be 
one, except there be another to compare it with; 
but it cannot be conceived that there are two 
spaces, or two times, infinite. Lastly, when we 
make question whether the world be finite or 
infinite, we have nothing in our mind answering 
to the name world ; for whatsoever we imagine, 
is therefore finite, though our computation reach 
the fixed stars, or the ninth or tenth, nay, the 
thousandth sphere. The meaning of the question 
is this only, whether God has actually made so 
great an addition of body to body, as we are able 
to make of space to space. 

Division 13. And, therefore, that which is commonly 

Provera, said, that space and time may be divided infinitely, 
is not to be so understood, as if there might be 
any infinite or eternal division; but rather to be 
taken in this sense, whatsoever is divided, 1s 
divided into such parts as may again be divided ; 
or thus, the least divisible thing 1s not to be 
given; or, as geometricians have it, no quantity 
1s so small, but a less may be taken; which may 
easily be demonstrated in this manner. Let any 
space or time, that which was thought to be the 
least divisible, be divided into two equal parts, A 
and B. I say either of them, as A, may be 
divided again. For suppose the part A to be 
contiguous to the part B of one side, and of the 
other side to some other space equal to B. This. 
whole space, therefore, being greater than the 


OF PLACE AND TIME. 101] 


space given, is divisible. Wherefore, if it be cee 
divided into two equal parts, the part in the —— 
middle, which is A, will be also divided into two 

equal parts ; and therefore A was divisible. 


CHAPTER VIII. 
OF BODY AND ACCIDENT. 


1. Body defined.—2. Accident defined.—3. How an accident 
may be understood to be in its subject.—4. Magnitude, what 
it is—5. Place, what it is, and that it is immovable. — 
6. What is full and empty.—7. Here, there, somewhere, what 
they signify.—8. Many bodies cannot be in one place, nor 
one body in many places.—9. Contiguous and continual, what 
they are.—10. The definition of motion. No motion intelli- 
gible but with time.—11. What it is to be at rest, to have 
been moved, and to be moved. No motion to be conceived, 
without the conception of past and future.—12. A point, a 
line, superficies and solid, what they are—13. Equal, greater, 
and less in bodies and magnitudes, what they are.—14. One 
and the same body has always one and the same magnitude. 
15. Velocity, what it is—16. Equal, greater, and less in times, 
what they are.—17. Equal, greater, and less, in velocity, what. 
18. Equal, greater, and less, in motion, what.—19. That 
which is at rest, will always be at rest, except it be moved by 
some external thing ; and that which is moved, will always be 
moved, unless it be hindered by some external thing.— 
20. Accidents are generated and destroyed, but bodies not so. 
21. An accident cannot depart from its subject.—22. Nor be 
moved. — 23. Essence, form, and matter, what they are. 
24. First matter, what.—25. That the whole is greater than 
any part thereof, why demonstrated. 


1. Havine understood what imaginary space 1s, Body defined. 
in which we supposed nothing remaining without 
us, but all those things to be destroyed, that, by 


PART IT. 
8. 


——— 


Accident 
defined. 


102 PHILOSOPHY. 


existing heretofore, left images of themselves in 
our minds; let us now suppose some one of those 
things to be placed again in the world, or created 
anew. It is necessary, therefore, that this new- 
created or replaced thing do not only fill some 
part of the space above mentioned, or be coinci- 
dent and coextended with it, but also that it have 
no dependance upon our thought. And this is 
that which, for the extension of it, we commonly 
call body ; and because it depends not upon our — 
thought, we say is a thing subsisting of itself ; 
as also existing, because without us; and, lastly, 
it is called the subject, because it is so placed in 
and subjected to imaginary space, that it may be 
understood by reason, as well as perceived by 
sense. The definition, therefore, of body may be 
this, a body ts that, which having no dependance 
upon our thought, 1s coincident or coextended 
with some part of space. 

2. But what an accident is cannot so easily be 
explained by any definition, as by examples. Let 
us imagine, therefore, that a body fills any space, 
or is coextended with it; that coextension is not 
the coextended body: and, in like manner, let us 
imagine that the same body is removed out of its 
place; that removing is not the removed body: or 
let us think the same not removed; that not 
removing or rest is not the resting body. What, 
then, are these things? They are accidents of 
that body. But the thing in question 1s, what ts 
an accident ? which is an enquiry after that which 
we know already, and not that which we should 
enquire after. For who does not always and in 
the same manner understand him that says any 


OF BODY AND ACCIDENT. 103 


thing is extended, or moved, or not moved? But PART IL 
most men will have it be said that an accident is —~— 
something, namely, some part of a natural thing, *cds" 
when, indeed, it is no part of the same. To satisfy 
these men, as well as may be, they answer best 
that define an accident to be the manner by which 
any body 1s conceived ; which is all one as if they 
should say, an accident is that faculty of any 
body, by which it works tn us a conception of 
ttself. Which definition, though it be not an 
answer to the question propounded, yet it is an 
answer to that question which should have been 
propounded, namely, whence does it happen that 
one part of any body appears here, another 
there ? For this 1s well answered thus: «¢ happens 
from the extension of that body. Or, how comes 
tt to pass that the whole body, by succession, is 
seen now here, now there ? and the answer will be, 
by reason of its motion. Or, lastly, whence is tt 
that any body possesseth the same space for 
sometime ? and the answer will be, because it is 
not moved. For if concerning the name of a 
body, that 1s, concerning a concrete name, it be 
asked, what 1s 1¢? the answer must be made by 
definition ; for the question is concerning the 
signification of the name. But if it be asked 
concerning an abstract name, what is it? the 
cause is demanded why a thing appears so or so. 
As if it be asked, what is hard? The answer 
will be, hard is that, whereof no part gives place, 
but when the whole gives place. But if it be 
demanded, what is hardness ? a cause must be 
shewn why a part does not give place, except the 


PART ITI. 
8. 
——~)—_——” 


How an acci- 
dent may be 
understood 
to be in its 
subject. 


104 PHILOSOPHY. 


whole give place. Wherefore, I define an accident 
to be the manner of our conception of body.’ 

3. When an accident is said to be in a body, it 
is not so to be understood, as if any thing were 
contained in that body ; as if, for example, redness 
were in blood, in the same manner, as blood is in 
a bloody cloth, that is, as a part in the whole; 
for so, an accident would be a body also. But, as 


magnitude, or rest, or motion, is in that which is 


great, or which resteth, or which is moved, (which, 
how it is to be understood, every man understands) 
so also, it is to be understood, that every other 
accident zs im its subject. And this, also, is 
explicated by Aristotle no otherwise than nega- 
tively, namely, that an accident 1s in its subject, 
not as any part thereof, but so as that it may be. 
away, the subject still remaining ; which is right, 
saving that there are certain accidents which can 
never perish except the body perish also; for no 
body can be conceived to be without extension, or 
without figure. All other accidents, which are 
not common to all bodies, but peculiar to some 
only, as to be at rest, to be moved, colour, 
hardness, and the like, do perish continually, and 
are succeeded by others; yet so, as that the body 
never perisheth. And as for the opinion that some 
may have, that all other accidents are not in their 
bodies in the same manner that extension, motion, 
rest, or figure, are in the same; for example, that 
colour, heat, odour, virtue, vice, and the like, are 
otherwise in them, and, as they say, inherent ; 
I desire they would suspend their judgment for 
the present, and expect a little, till it be found out 


OF BODY AND ACCIDENT. 105 


by ratiocination, whether these very accidents are PART II. 
not also certain motions either of the mind of the —-— 
perceiver, or of the bodies themselves which are 
perceived ; for in the search of this, a great: part 

of natural philosophy consists. 

4. The extension of a body, is the same thing Bonpitids, 
with the magnitude of it, or that which some call 
real space. But this magnitude does not depend 
upon our cogitation, as imaginary space doth ; for 
this is an effect of our imagination, but magnitude 
is the cause of it; this is an accident of the mind, 
that of a body existing out of the mind. 

5. That space, by which word I here understand Place, what it 
imaginary space, which is coincident with the is immovable. 
magnitude of any body, is called the place of that 
body ; and the body itself is that which we call 
the thing placed. Now place, and the magnitude 
of the thing placed, differ. First in this, that a 
body keeps always the same magnitude, both 
when it is at rest, and when it is moved; but when 
it is moved, it does not keep the same place. 
Secondly in this, that place is a phantasm of any 
body of such and such quantity and figure; but 
magnitude is the peculiar accident of every body ; 
for one body may at several times have several 
places, but has always one and the same magnitude. 
Thirdly in this, that place is nothing out of the 
mind, nor magnitude any thing within it. And 
lastly, place is feigned extension, but magnitude 
true extension; and a placed body is not extension, 
but a thing extended. Besides, place is immovable ; 
for, seeing that which is moved, is understood to 
be carried from place to place, if place were 
moved, it would also be carried from place to 


106 PHILOSOPHY. 


PART Il. place, so that one place must have another place, 
— and that place another place, and so on infinitely, 
ried ate * which is ridiculous. And as for those, that, by 
is immovable. making place to be of the same nature with real 
space, would from thence maintain it to be 
immovable, they also make place, though they do 

not perceive they make it so, to be a mere phan- 

tasm. For whilst one affirms that place is therefore 

said to be immovable, because space in general is 
considered there; if he had remembered that 
nothing is general or universal besides names or 

signs, he would easily have seen that that space, 

which he says is considered in general, is nothing 

but a phantasm, in the mind or the memory, of a 

body of such magnitude and such figure. And 

whilst another says: real space is made immovable 

by the understanding ; as when, under the super- 

ficies of running water, we imagine other and 

other water to come by continual succession, that 
superficies fixed there by the understanding, is the 
immovable place of the river: what else does he 

make it to be but a phantasm, though he do it 
obscurely and in perplexed words? Lastly, the 

nature of place does not consist in the superfictes 

of the ambient, but in solid space ; for the whole 

placed body is coextended with its whole place, 

and every part of it with every answering part of 

_ the same place ; but seeing every placed body 1s a 

solid thing, 1t cannot be understood to be coex- 
tended with superficies. Besides, how can any 

whole body be moved, unless all its parts be 
moved together with it? Or how can the internal 

parts of it be moved, but by leaving their placer 

But the internal parts of a body cannot leave the 


OF BODY AND ACCIDENT. 107 


superficies of an external part contiguous to it; 
and, therefore, it follows, that if place be the 
superficies of the ambient, then the parts of a 
body moved, that is, bodies moved, are not moved. 

6. Space, or place, that is possessed by a body, 
is called full, and that which is not so possessed, 
is called empty. 

7. Here, there, in the country, in the city, and 
other the like names, by which answer is made to 
the question where zs 1¢ ? are not properly names 
of place, nor do they of themselves bring into the 
mind the place that is sought ; for here and there 
signify nothing, unless the thing be shewn at the 
same time with the finger or something else; but 
when the eye of him that seeks, is, by pointing or 
some other sign, directed to the thing sought, the 
place of it is not hereby defined by him that 
answers, but found out by him that asks the ques- 
tion. Now such shewings as are made by words 
only, as when we say, in the country, or in the 
city, are some of greater latitude than others, as 
when we say, in the country, in the city, in sucha 
street, in a house, in the chamber, in bed, &c. 
For these do, by little and little, direct the seeker 
nearer to the proper place; and yet they do not 
determine the same, but only restrain it to a lesser 
space, and signify no more, than that the place of 
the thing is within a certain space designed by 
those words, as a part is in the whole. And all 
such names, by which answer is made to the ques- 
tion where ? have, for their highest genus, the 
name somewhere. From whence it may be under- 
stood, that whatsoever is somewhere, is in some 
place properly so called, which place is part of 


PART II. 


—— 


What is full 
and empty. 


Here, there, 
somewhere, 
what they 
signify. 


108 PHILOSOPHY. 


PART II. that greater space that is signified by some of these 
——— names, in the country, in the city, or the like. 

Many bodies 8, A body, and the magnitude, and the place 

cannot be in oe 

one place, nor thereof, are divided by one and the same act of 

es i the mind ; for, to divide an extended body, and the 
extension thereof, and the idea of that extension, 
which is place, is the same with dividing any one 
of them; because they are coincident, and it 
cannot be done but by the mind, that is by the 
division of space. From whence it is manifest, 
that neither two bodies can be together in the 
same place, nor one body be in two places at the 
same time. Not two bodies in the same place ; 
because when a body that fills its whole place is 
divided into two, the place itself is divided into 
two also, so that there will be two places. Not 
one body in two places ; for the place that a body 
fills being divided into two, the placed body will 
be also divided into two; for, as I said, a place 
and the body that fills that place, are divided both 
together; and so there will be two bodies. 

Contiguous 9. Two bodies are said to be contiguous to one 

and continual, ie ‘ 

what they are. another, and continual, in the same manner as 
spaces are ; namely, those are contiguous, between 
which there is no space. Now, by space I under- 
stand, here as formerly, an idea or phantasm of a 
body. Wherefore, though between two bodies 
there be put no other body, and consequently no 
magnitude, or, as they call it, real space, yet if 
another body may be put between them, that is, if 
there intercede any imagined space which may 
receive another body, then those bodies are not 
contiguous. And this is so easy to be understood, 
that I should wonder at some men, who being 


OF BODY AND ACCIDENT. 109 


otherwise skilful enough in philosophy, are of a 
different opinion, but that I find that most of those 
that affect metaphysical subtleties wander from 
truth, as if they were led out of their way by an 
ignis fatuus. For can any man that has his 
natural senses, think that two bodies must 
therefore necessarily touch one another, because 
no other body is between them? Or that there 
can be no vacuum, because vacuum is nothing, or 
as they call it, 2on ens ? Which is as childish, as 
if one should reason thus; no man can fast, 
because to fast is to eat nothing; but nothing 
cannot be eaten. Continual, are any two bodies 
that have a common part ; and more than two are 
continual, when every two, that are next to one 
another, are continual. 


PART IT. 
8. 


—— << 


10. MoTIon ts a continual relinquishing of The definition 


one place, and acquiring of another ; and that 
place which is relinquished is commonly called the 
terminus a quo, as that which is acquired is called 
the terminus ad quem; 1 say a continual relin- 
quishing, because no body, how little soever, can 
totally and at once go out of its former place into 
another, so, but that some part of it will be in a 
part of a place which is common to both, namely, 
to the relinquished and the acquired places. For 
example, let any body be in the 
place AC BD; the same body can- a 
not come into the place BD EF, | | | 

but it must first be in GHIK, —————— 
whose part G H B D is common to Cae 
both the places A C BD, and GHI K, and 
whose part B D I K, is common to both the places 
GHIK,andBDEF. Now it cannot be con- 


of motion. No 
motion intelli- 
gible but with 
time. 


PART II. 
8. 


——y 


What it is 

to be at rest, 
to have been 
moved, and 

to be moved. 
No motion to 
be conceived 
without the 
conception of 
past and future. 


110 PHILOSOPHY. 


ceived that any thing can be moved without time; 
for time is, by the definition of it, a phantasm, that 
is, aconception of motion; and, therefore, to con- 
ceive that any thing may be moved without time, 
were to conceive motion without motion, which is 
impossible. 

11. That is said to be at rest, which, during 
any time, 1s in one place ; and that to be moved, 
or to have been moved, which, whether it be now 
at rest or moved, was formerly in another place 
than that which it 1s now in. From which defini- 
tions it may be inferred, first, that whatsoever is 
moved, has been moved ; for if it be still in the 
same place in which it was formerly, it is at rest, 
that is, it is not moved, by the definition of rest ; 
but if it be in another place, it has been moved, 
by the definition of moved. Secondly, that what 
7s moved, will yet be moved ; for that which is 
moved, leaveth the place where it is, and therefore 
will be in another place, and consequently will 
be moved still. Thirdly, that whatsoever is 
moved, 1s not in one place during any time, how 
little soever that time be ; for by the definition of 
rest, that which is in one place during any time, 
is at rest. 

There is a certain sophism against motion, which 
seems to spring from the not understanding of 
this last proposition. For they say, that, 7f any 
body be moved, it 1s moved either in the place 
where it 1s, or in the place where itis not ; both 
which are false ; and therefore nothing is moved. 
But the falsity lies in the major proposition; for 
that which is moved, is neither moved in the place 
where it is, nor in the place where is not; but 


OF BODY AND ACCIDENT. lll 


from the place where it is, to the place where it is PART II. 
not. Indeed it cannot be denied but that what- ~~ 
soever is moved, is moved somewhere, that is, 
within some space; but then the place of that 

body is not that whole space, but a part of it, as 

is said above in the seventh article. From what 

is above demonstrated, namely, that whatsoever is 
moved, has also been moved, and will be moved, 

this also may be collected, that there can be no 
conception of motion, without conceiving past 

and future time. 

12. Though there be no body which has not A point,a line, 
some magnitude, yet if, when any body is moved, 23° sig” 
the magnitude of it be not at all considered, the ¥* they are. 
way it makes is called a dime, or one single 
dimension ; and the space, through which it 
passeth, is called length; and the body itself, a 
point ; in which sense the earth is called a point, 
and the way of its yearly revolution, the ecliptic 
line. But if a body, which is moved, be considered 
as long, and be supposed to be so moved, as that 
all the several parts of it be understood to make 
several lines, then the way of every part of that 
body is called breadth, and the space which is 
made is called superficies, consisting of two 
dimensions, one whereof to every several part of 
the other is applied whole. Again, if a body be 
considered as having superficies, and be under- 
stood to be so moved, that all the several parts of 
it describe several lines, then the way of every 
part of that body is called thickness or depth, 
and the space which is made is called solid, 
‘consisting of three dimensions, any two whereof 
are applied whole to every several part of the 
third. 


112 PHILOSOPHY. 


ESET te But if a body be considered as solzd, then it is 
—~~— not possible that all the several parts of it should 

describe several lines; for what way soever it be 
moved, the way of the following part will fall into 
the way of the part before it, so that the same 
solid will still be made which the foremost super- 
ficies would have made by itself. And therefore 
there can be no other dimension in any body, as 
it is a body, than the three which I have now 
described ; though, as it shall be shewed hereafter, 
velocity, which is motion according to length, 
may, by being applied to all the parts of a solid, 
make 4 magnitude of motion, consisting of four 
dimensions; as the goodness of gold, computed 
in all the parts of it, makes the price and value 
thereof. 

Equal, great, 13, Bodies, how many soever they be, that 

greater, and ° 

Jess, in bodies can fill every one the place of every one, are said 

nen ee to be equal every one to every other. Now, one 

theyare. body may fill the same place which another body 
filleth, though it be not of the same figure with 
that other body, if so be that it may be understood 
to be reducible to the same figure, either by 
flexion or transposition of the parts. And one 
body is greater than another body, when a part 
of that 1s equal to all this; and less, when all 
that 1s equal to a part of this. Also, magnitudes 
are equal, or greater, or lesser, than one another, 
for the same consideration, namely, when the 
bodies, of which they are the magnitudes, are 
either equal, or greater, or less, &c. 

One and the 14, One and the same body is always of one 

same body . . 

has always one ANd the same magnitude. For seeing a body 

ar ale and the magnitude and place thereof cannot be 
comprehended in the mind otherwise than as they 


OF BODY AND ACCIDENT. 113 


are coincident, if any body be understood to be at ently 
rest, that is, to remain in the same place during -—-~— 
some time, and the magnitude thereof be in one 

part of that time greater, and in another part less, 

that body’s place, which is one and the same, will 

be coincident sometimes with greater, sometimes 

with less magnitude, that 1s, the same place will be 

greater and less than itself, which is impossible. 

But there would be no need at all of demonstrating 

a thing that is in itself so manifest, if there were 

not some, whose opinion concerning bodies and 

their magnitudes is, that a body may exist separated 

from its magnitude, and have greater or less mag- 

nitude bestowed upon it, making use of this 
principle for the explication of the nature of rarum 

and densum. 

15. Motion, in as much as a certain length may Velocity, 
in a certain time be transmitted by it, is called 
VELOCITY or swiftness: &c. For though swift 
be very often understood with relation to slower 
or less swift, as great is in respect of less, yet 
nevertheless, as magnitude is by philosophers taken 
absolutely for extension, so also velocity or sw1ft- 
ness may be put absolutely for motion according to 
length. 

16. Many motions are said to be made in equal ae we 
times, when every one of them begins and ends less, in times, 
together with some other motion, or if it had Rev vced oe? 
begun together, would also have ended together 
with the same. For time, which is a phantasm of 
motion, cannot be reckoned but by some exposed 
motion ; as in dials by the motion of the sun or of 
the hand; and if two or more motions begin and 
end with this motion, they are said to be made in 

VOL. I. I 


114 PHILOSOPHY. 


PART II. equal times; from whence also it is easy to under- 
—— stand what it is to be moved in greater or longer 
time, and in less time or not so long; namely, 
that that is longer moved, which beginning with 
another, ends later; or ending together, began 
sooner. 
Equal, greater, 17. Motions are said to be equally swift, when 
and less, in ve- 
locity, what. equal lengths are transmitted in equal times; and 
greater swiftness is that, wherein greater length is 
passed in equal time, or equal length in less time. 
Also that swiftness by which equal lengths are 
passed in equal parts of time, is called uniform 
swiftness or motion; and of motions not uniform, 
such as become swifter or slower by equal in- 
creasings or decreasings in equal parts of time, are 
said to be accelerated or retarded uniformly. 
Equal, greater, 18. But motion is said to be greater, less, and 
motion what. equal, not only in regard of the length which is 
transmitted in a certain time, that is, in regard of 
swiftness only, but of swiftness applied to every 
smallest particle of magnitude; for when any 
body is moved, every part of it is also moved ; and 
supposing the parts to be halves, the motions of 
those halves have their swiftness equal to one 
another, and severally equal to that of the whole ; 
but the motion of the whole is equal to those two 
motions, either of which is of equal swiftness with 
it; and therefore it is one thing for two motions 
to be equal to one another, and another thing for 
them to be equally swift. And this is manifest in 
two horses that draw abreast, where the motion of 
both the horses together is of equal swiftness with 
the motion of either of them singly; but the 
motion of both is greater than the motion of one 


OF BODY AND ACCIDENT. 115 


of them, namely, double. Wherefore motions are 
said to be simply equal to one another, when the 
swiftness of one, computed in every part of tts 
magnitude, 1s equal to the swiftness of the other 
computed also in every part of its magnitude: 
and greater than one another, when the swiftness 
of one computed as above, is greater than the 
swiftness of the other so computed ; and less, 
when less. Besides, the magnitude of motion 
computed in this manner is that which is commonly 
called FORCE. 


PART II. 
8. 


ne eee atl 


19. Whatsoever 1s at rest, will always be at That which 


is at rest will 


rest, unless there be some other body besides tt, aiways be at ‘ 


which, by endeavouring to get into tts place by 


rest, except it 
be moved by 


motion, suffers tt no longer to remain at rest. aac 


For suppose that some finite body exist and be at 
rest, and that all space besides be empty ; if now 
this body begin to be moved, it will certainly be 
moved some way; seeing therefore there was 
nothing in that body which did not dispose it to 
rest, the reason why it is moved this way is in 
something out of it; and in like manner, if it had 
been moved any other way, the reason of motion 
that way had also been in something out of it ; but 
seeing it was supposed that nothing is out of it, 
the reason of its motion one way would be the 
same with the reason of its motion every other 
way, wherefore it would be moved alike all ways 
at once; which is impossible. 


In like manner, whatsoever is maved, will That which is 


moved will 


always be moved, except there be some other body waysbe moved, 


ess it be hin- 


besides it, which causeth it to rest. For if we dered by some 
suppose nothing to be without it, there will be no *™™ ‘xs 


reason why it should rest now, rather than at 
I 2 


116 PHILOSOPHY. 


PART II. another time ; wherefore its motion would cease 
“——— in every particle of time alike; which is not 
intelligible. 
Accidents are 20. When we say a living creature, a tree, or any 
generated an ° ° 
destroyed but ‘ other specified body is generated or destroyed, 
bodies not 8. i¢ ig not to be so understood as if there were made 
a body of that which is not-body, or not a body of 
a body, but of a living creature not a living crea- 
ture, of a tree not a tree, &c. that is, that those 
accidents for which we call one thing a living 
creature, another thing a tree, and another by 
some other name, are generated and destroyed ; 
and that therefore the same names are not to be 
given to them now, which were given them before. 
But that magnitude for which we give to any 
thing the name of body is neither generated nor 
destroyed. For thongh we may feign in our mind 
that a point may swell to a huge bulk, and that 
this may again contract itself to a point; that is, 
though we may imagine something to arise where 
before was nothing, and nothing to be there where 
before was something, yet we cannot comprehend 
in our mind how this may possibly be done in 
nature. And therefore philosophers, who tie 
themselves to natural reason, suppose that a body 
can neither be generated nor destroyed, but only 
that it may appear otherwise than it did to us, 
that is, under different species, and consequently 
be called by other and other names; so that that 
which is now called man, may at another time 
have the name of not-man ; but that which is once 
called body, can never be called not-body. But it 
is manifest, that all other accidents besides magni- 
tude or extension may be generated and destroyed ; 


OF BODY AND ACCIDENT. 117 


as when a white thing is made black, the whiteness Panty 
that was in it perisheth, and the blackness that —.— 
was not in it is now generated; and therefore 

bodies, and the accidents under which they appear 
diversely, have this difference, that bodies are 

things, and not generated; accidents are generated, 

and not things. 

21. And therefore, when any thing appears aaa 
otherwise than it did by reason of other and other fromits subject 
accidents, it is not to be thought that an accident 
goes out of one subject into another, (for they are 
not, as I said above, in their subjects as a part in 
the whole, or as a contained thing in that which 
contains it, or as a master of a family in his house,) 
but that one accident perisheth, and another is 
generated. For example, when the hand, being 
moved, moves the pen, motion does not go out of 
the hand into the pen; for so the writing might be 
continued though the hand stood still; but a new 
motion is generated in the pen, and 1s the pen’s 
motion. 

22. And therefore also it is improper to say, an Nor be moved. 
accident is moved; as when, instead of saying, 

Jigure is an accident of a body carried away, we 
say, a body carries away tts figure. 

23. Now that accident for which we give a Essence, form, 
certain name to any body, or the accident which *hat they ae 
denominates its subject, is commonly called the 
ESSENCE thereof; as rationality is the essence of 
a man; whiteness, of any white thing, and exten- 
sion the essence of a body. And the same essence, 
in as much as it is generated, 1s called the ror. 

Again, a body, in respect of any accident, is called 
the suBJECT, and in respect of the form it is 
called the MATTER. 


PART II. 
8. 


First mat- 
ter, what. 


118 PHILOSOPHY. 


Also, the production or perishing of any accident 
makes its subject be said to be changed; only the 
production or perishing of form makes it be said it 
is generated or destroyed ; but in all generation 
and mutation, the name of matter still remains. 
For a table made of wood is not only wooden, but 
wood; and a statue of brass is brass as well as 
brazen ; though Aristotle, in his Metaphysics, says, 
that whatsoever is made of any thing ought not to 
be called éxewo, but exévrvov; as that which is made 
of wood, not Aor, but FiAwor, that is, not wood, 
but wooden. 

24. And as for that matter which is common to 
all things, and which philosophers, following Aris- 
totle, usually call materia prima, that is, first 
matter, it is not any body distinct from all other 
bodies, nor is it one of them. What then is it? 
A mere name; yet a name which is not of vain 
use ; for it signifies a conception of body without 
the consideration of any form or other accident 
except only magnitude or extension, and aptness 
to receive form and other accident. So that when- 
soever we have use of the name body in general, 
if we use that of materia prima, we do well. For 
as when a man not knowing which was first, 
water or ice, would find out which of the two were 
the matter of both, he would be fain to suppose 
some third matter which were neither of these 
two; so he that would find out what is the matter 
of all things, ought to suppose such as is not the 
matter of anything that exists. Wherefore materia 
prima is nothing; and therefore they do not 
attribute to it either form or any other accident 
besides quantity ; whereas all singular things have 
their forms and accidents certain. 


OF BODY AND ACCIDENT. 119 


Materia prima, therefore, is body in general, PART I. 
that is, body considered universally, not as having ~—-—— 
neither form nor any accident, but in which no 
form nor any other accident but quantity are at all 
considered, that is, they are not drawn into argu- 
mentation. 

25. From what has been said, those axioms may ; plateau es 


is greater than 


be demonstrated, which are assumed by Euclid in ied ee 
the beginning of his first element, about the equa- strated. . 
lity and inequality of magnitudes; of which, 
omitting the rest, I will here demonstrate only 

this one, the whole 1s greater than any part 
thereof ; to the end that the reader may know that 
those axioms are not indemonstrable, and therefore 

not principles of demonstration ; and from hence 
learn to be wary how he admits any thing for a 
principle, which is not at least as evident as these . 
are. Greater is defined to be that, whose part is 
equal to the whole of another. Now if we suppose 

any whole to be A, and a part of it to be B; 
seeing the whole B is equal to itself, and the same 

B is a part of A; therefore a part of A will be 
equal to the whole B. Wherefore, by the definition 
above, A is greater than B; which was to be proved. 


PART II. 


ene 
Action 
and passion, 


what they are. 


Action and 
passion, me- 
diate, and 
immediate. 


120 PHILOSOPHY. 


CHAPTER IX. 


OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 


1. Action and passion, what they are.—2. Action and passion 
mediate and immediate.—3. Cause simply taken. Cause 
without which no effect follows, or cause necessary by sup- 
position. —4. Cause efficient and material.—5. An entire 
cause is always sufficient to produce its effect. At the same 
instant that the cause is entire, the effect is produced. Every 
effect has a necessary cause.—6. The generation of effects is 
continual. What is the beginning in causation—7. No cause 
of motion but in a body contiguous and moved.—8. The same 
agents and patients,if alike disposed, produce like effects 
though at different times.—9. All mutation is motion. 
10. Contingent accidents, what they are. 


1. A BoDy is said to work upon or act, that is to 
say, do something to another body, when it either 
generates or destroys some accident in it: and the 
body in which an accident is generated or destroyed 
is said to suffer, that 1s, to have something dove to 
it by another body; as when one body by putting 
forwards another body generates motion in it, it is 
called the AGENT; and the body in which motion 
is so generated, is called the PATIENT; so fire that 
warms the hand is the agent, and the hand, which 
is warmed, is the patient. That accident, which 
is generated in the patient, is called the EFFECT. 

2. When an agent and patient are contiguous to 
one another, their action and passion are then said 
to be immediate, otherwise, mediate ; and when 
another body, lying betwixt the agent and patient, 
is contiguous to them both, it is then itself both an 


OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 121 


agent and a patient; an agent in respect of the zaNt TI. 
body next after it, upon which it works, and a —— 
patient in respect of the body next before it, from 
which it suffers. Also, if many bodies be so 
ordered that every two which are next to one 
another be contiguous, then all those that are 
betwixt the first and the last are both agents and 
patients, and the first is an agent only, and the last 
a patient only. | 
3. An agent is understood to produce its deter- Cause simply 
mined or certain effect in the patient, according to 
some certain accident or accidents, with which 
both it and the patient are affected ; that is to say, 
the agent hath its effect precisely such, not because 
it is a body, but because such a body, or so moved. 
For otherwise all agents, seeing they are all bodies 
alike, would produce like effects in all patients. 
And therefore the fire, for example, does not warm, 
because it 1s a body, but because it is hot; nor 
does one body put forward another body because it 
is a body, but because it is moved into the place 
of that other body. The cause, therefore, of all 
effects consists in certain accidents both in the 
agents and in the patients; which when they are 
all present, the effect is produced ; but if any one 
of them be wanting, it is not produced; and that Cause without 
accident either of the agent or patient, without fisees 
which the effect cannot be produced, is called by caancniiaie 
causa sine qua non, oY cause necessary by sup- 
position, as also the cause requisite for the pro- 
duction of the effect. But a cause simply, or an 
entire cause, 1s the aggregate of all the accidents 
both of the agents how many soever they be, and 
of the patient, put together ; which when they 


PART II, 


—— 


Cause efficient, 
and material. 


122 PHILOSOPHY. 


are all supposed to be present, it cannot be under- 
stood but that the effect is produced at the same 
instant ; and if any one of them be wanting, tt 
cannot be understood but that the effect 1s not 
produced. 

4. The aggregate of accidents in the agent or 
agents, requisite for the production of the effect, 
the effect being produced, is called the effictent 


' cause thereof; and the aggregate of accidents in 


Anentire cause 
is always suf- 
ficient to pro- 
duce its effect. 


the patient, the effect being produced, is usually 
called the material cause ; I say the effect being 
produced ; for where there is no effect, there can 
be no cause; for nothing can be called a cause, 
where there is nothing that can be called an 
effect. But the efficient and material causes are 
both but partial causes, or parts of that cause, which 
in the next precedent article I called an entire 
cause. And from hence it is manifest, that the 
effect we expect, though the agents be not defective 
on their part, may nevertheless be frustrated by a 
defect in the patient; and when the patient is 
sufficient, by a defect in the agents. 

5. An entire cause is always sufficient for the 
production of its effect, if the effect be at all 
possible. For let any effect whatsoever be pro- 
pounded to be produced ; if the same be produced, 
it is manifest that the cause which produced it was 
a sufficient cause ; but if it be not produced, and 
yet be possible, it is evident that something was 
wanting either in some agent, or in the patient, 
without which it could not be produced ; that is, 
that some accident was wanting which was requi- 
site for its production ; and therefore, that cause was 
not entire, which is contrary to what was supposed. 


OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 123 


It follows also from hence, that in whatsoever PART J. 
instant the cause is entire, in the same instant the —— 
effect is produced. For if it be not produced, Atthesamein- 


. ‘ ‘ ‘ : : fae 9 stant that the 
something is still wanting, which is requisite for cause is entire, 


the production of it; and therefore the cause was aia 
not entire, as was supposed. 

And seeing a necessary cause is defined to be Every effect 
that, which being supposed, the effect cannot but Tee 
follow ; this also may be collected, that whatsoever 
effect is produced at any time, the same is produced 
by a necessary cause. For whatsoever is produced, 
in as much as it is produced, had an entire cause, 
that is, had all those things, which being supposed, 
it cannot be understood but that the effect fol- 
lows ; that is, it had a necessary cause. And in the 
same manner it may be shewn, that whatsoever 
effects are hereafter to be produced, shall have a 
necessary cause; so that all the effects that have 
been, or shall be produced, have their necessity in 
things antecedent. 

6. And from this, that whensoever the cause is The genera- 
entire, the effect is produced in the same instant, rong 


9 is contiuual, 
it is manifest that causation and the production beatiaieta 
of effects consist in a certain continual progress ; causation. 
so that as there is a continual mutation in the 

agent or agents, by the working of other agents 

upon them, so also the patient, upon which they 

work, is continually altered and changed. For 
example: as the heat of the fire increases more 

and more, so also the effects thereof, namely, the 

heat of such bodies as are next to it, and again, of 

such other bodies as are next to them, increase 

more and more accordingly; which is already no 

little argument that all mutation consists in motion 


124 PHILOSOPHY. 


PART IL only; the truth whereof shall be further demon- 

“-— strated in the ninth article. But in this progress 

of causation, that is, of action and passion, if any 

man comprehend in his imagination a part thereof, 

and divide the same into parts, the first part or 

beginning of it cannot be considered otherwise 

than as action or cause; for, if it should be consi- 

dered as effect or passion, then it would be neces- 

sary to consider something before it, for its cause 

or action; which cannot be, for nothing can be 

before the beginning. And in like manner, the 

last part is considered only as effect ; for it cannot 

be called cause, if nothing follow it; but after the 

last, nothing follows. And from hence it is, that in 

all action the beginning and cause are taken for 

the same thing. But every one of the intermediate 

parts are both action and passion, and cause and 

effect, according as they are compared with the 
antecedent or subsequent part. 

Nocauseof 7, There can be no cause of motion, except in a 

A asatae body contiguous and moved. For let there be 

ousand moved: any two bodies which are not contiguous, and be- 

twixt which the intermediate space is empty, or, if 

filled, filled with another body which is at rest; 

and let one of the propounded bodies be supposed 

to be at rest; I say it shall always be at rest. For 

if it shall be moved, the cause of that motion, by 

the 8th chapter, article 19, will be some external 

body ; and, therefore, if between it and that ex- 

ternal body there be nothing but empty space, 

then whatsoever the disposition be of that external 

body or of the patient itself, yet if it be supposed 

to be now at rest, we may conceive it will con- 

tinue so till it be touched by some other body. 


OF CAUSE AND EFFECT. 125 


But seeing cause, by the definition, is the aggre- PART II. 
. 9, 

gate of all such accidents, which being supposed ——~— 
to be present, it cannot be conceived but that the 
effect will follow, those accidents, which are either 
in external bodies, or in the patient itself, cannot 
be the cause of future motion. And in like manner, 
seelng we may conceive that whatsoever is at rest 
will still be at rest, though it be touched by some 
other body, except that other body be moved; 
therefore in a contiguous body, which is at rest, 
there can be no cause of motion. Wherefore there 
is no cause of motion in any body, except it be 
contiguous and moved. 

The same reason may serve to prove that what- 
soever is moved, will always be moved on in the 
same way and with the same velocity, except it 
be hindered by some other contiguous and moved 
body; and consequently that no bodies, either 
when they are at rest, or when there is an inter- 
position of vacuum, can generate or extinguish or 
lessen motion in other bodies. There is one that 
has written that things moved are more resisted 
by things at rest, than by things contrarily moved ; 
for this reason, that he conceived motion not to be 
so contrary to motion as rest. That which deceived 
him was, that the words rest and motion are but 
contradictory names; whereas motion, indeed, is 
not resisted by rest, but by contrary motion. 

8. But if a body work upon another body at one The same 
time, and afterwards the same body work upon the s8nn3"4 


patients, if 
same body at another time, so that both the agent ‘ike dispo- 


e e e @ d, d 
and patient, and all their parts, be in all things as like effects, 


7 though at dif- 
they were ; and there be no difference, except Only ferent times. 


in time, that is, that one action be former, the 


PART IT. 
9. 


ee genemeendll 


All mutation 
is motion. 


Contingent 
accidents. 


126 PHILOSOPHY. 


other later in time; it is manifest of itself, that the 
effects will be equal and like, as not differing in 
anything besides time. And as effects themselves 
proceed from their causes, so the diversity of them 
depends upon the diversity of their causes also. 

9. This being true, it is necessary that mutation 
can be nothing else but motion of the parts of that 
body which is changed. For first, we do not say 
anything is changed, but that which appears to our 
senses otherwise than it appeared formerly. Se- 
condly, both those appearances are effects pro- 
duced in the sentient; and, therefore, if they be 
different, it is necessary, by the preceding article, 
that either some part of the agent, which was for- 
merly at rest, is now moved, and so the mutation 
consists in this motion; or some part, which was 
formerly moved, is now otherwise moved, and so 
also the mutation consists in this new motion; or 
which, being formerly moved, is now at rest, 
which, as I have shewn above, cannot come to 
pass without motion; and so again, mutation is 
motion; or lastly, it happens in some of these 
manners to the patient, or some of its parts; so 
that mutation, howsoever it be made, will consist 
in the motion of the parts, either of the body 
which is perceived, or of the sentient body, or of 
both. Mutation therefore is motion, namely, of 
the parts either of the agent or of the patient ; 
which was to be demonstrated. And to this it is 
consequent, that rest cannot be the cause of any- 
thing, nor can any action proceed from it; seeing 
neither motion nor mutation can be caused by it. 

10. Accidents, in respect of other accidents 
which precede them, or are before them in time. 


OF POWER AND ACT. 127 


and upon which they do not depend as upon their PART I. 
causes, are called contingent accidents; I say, in —-— 
respect of those accidents by which they are not 
generated ; for, in respect of their causes, all things 

come to pass with equal necessity; for otherwise 

they would have no causes at all; which, of things 
generated, is not intelligible. 


CHAPTER X. 
OF POWER AND ACT. 


1. Power and cause are the same thing.—2. An act is produced 
at the same instant in which the power is plenary.—3. Active 
and passive power are parts only of plenary power.—4. An 
act, when said to be possible.—5. An act necessary and con- 
tingent, what.—6. Active power consists in motion.—7. Cause, 
formal and final, what they are. 


1. CORRESPONDENT to cause and effect, are Power and 
cause are the 

POWER and ACT; nay, those and these are the same thing. 

same things; though, for divers considerations, 

they have divers names. For whensoever any 

agent has all those accidents which are necessarily 

requisite for the production of some effect in the 

patient, then we say that agent has power to pro- 

duce that effect, if it be applied to a patient. But, 

as I have shewn in the precedent chapter, those 

accidents constitute the efficient cause; and there- 

fore the same accidents, which constitute the 

efficient cause, constitute also the power of the 

agent. Wherefore the power of the agent and 

the efficvent cause are the same thing. But they 

are considered with this difference, that cause is 


128 PHILOSOPHY. 


PANT Hec80 called in respect of the effect already produced, 

—~ and power in respect of the same effect to be pro- 
duced hereafter ; so that cause respects the past, 
power the future time. Also, the power of the 
agent is that which is commonly called active 
power. 

In like manner, whensoever any patient has all 
those accidents which it is requisite it should have, 
for the production of some effect in it, we say it is 
in the power of that patient to produce that effect, 
if it be applied to a fitting agent. But those acci- 
dents, as is defined in the precedent chapter, con- 
stitute the material cause ; and therefore the power 
of the patient, commonly called passive power, 
and material cause, are the same thing; but with 
this different consideration, that in cause the past 
time, and in power the future, is respected. 
Wherefore the power of the agent and patient 
together, which may be called entire or plenary 
power, is the same thing with entire cause ; for 
they both consist in the sum or aggregate of all 
the accidents, as well in the agent as in the patient, 
which are requisite for the production of the effect. 
Lastly, as the accident produced is, in respect of 
the cause, called an effect, so in respect of the 
power, it is called an act. 

Anactispro- 2. As therefore the effect is produced in the 

ae same instant in which the cause is entire, so also 

ae every act that may be produced, is produced in the 

nary. same instant in which the power is plenary. And 
as there can be no effect but from a sufficient and 
necessary cause, so also no act can be produced but 
by sufficient power, or that power by which it 
could not but be produced. 


OF POWER AND ACT. 129 


3. And as it is manifest, as I have shewn, that 


‘PART IT. 


the efficient and material causes are severally and —— 


by themselves parts only of an entire cause, and 


Active and 
passive power 


cannot produce any effect but by being joined * parts only 


of plenary 


together, so-also power, active and passive, are power. 


parts only of plenary and entire power ; nor, except 
they be joined, can any act proceed from them; 
and therefore these powers, as I said in the first 
article, are but conditional, namely, the agent has 
power, if it be applied to a patient; and the 
patient has power, if it be applied to an agent ; 
otherwise neither of them have power, nor can the 
accidents, which are in them severally, be properly 
called powers; nor any action be said to be pos- 
sible for the power of the agent alone or of the 
patient alone. 

4. For that is an impossible act, for the produc- 
tion of which there is no power plenary. For 
seeing plenary power is that in which all things 
concur, which are requisite for the production of 
an act, if the power shall never be plenary, there 
will always be wanting some of those things, with- 
out which the act cannot be produced ; wherefore 
that act shall never be produced ; that is, that act 
iS IMPOSSIBLE: and every act, which is not impos- 
sible, is POSSIBLE. Every act, therefore, which is 
possible, shall at some time be produced ; for if it 
shall never be produced, then those things shall 
never concur which are requisite for the produc- 
tion of it; wherefore that act is zmpossible, by the 
definition ; which is contrary to what was sup- 
posed. 


An act, when 
said to be 
possible. 


5. A necessary act is that, the production An act neces- 


ary and con- 


whereof it is impossible to hinder ; and therefore tinzent, what. 


VOL. I. K 


PART II. 
10. 
—— 
An act neces- 
sary and con- 
tingent, what. ' 


130 PHILOSOPHY. 


every act, that shall be produced, shall necessarily 
be produced ; for, that it shall not be produced, is 
impossible; because, as is already demonstrated, 
every possible act shall at some time be produced ; 
nay, this proposition, what shall be, shall be, is as 
necessary a proposition as this, a man is a man. 
But here, perhaps, some man may ask whether 
those future things, which are commonly called 
contingents, are necessary. I say, therefore, that 
generally all contingents have their necessary 
causes, as is shewn in the preceding chapter; but 
are called contingents in respect of other events, 
upon which they do not depend; as the rain, which 
shall be tomorrow, shall be necessary, that 1s, 
from necessary causes; but we think and say it 
happens by chance, because we do not yet perceive 
the causes thereof, though they exist now ; for men 
commonly call that casual or contingent, whereof 
they do not perceive the necessary cause; and in 
the same manner they used to speak of things past, 
when not knowing whether a thing be done or no, 
they say it 1s possible it never was done. 
Wherefore, all propositions concerning future 
things, contingent or not contingent, as this, z¢ 
will rain tomorrow, or this, tomorrow the sun 
will rise, are either necessarily true, or necessarily 
false ; but we call them contingent, because we do 
not yet know whether they be true or false; 
whereas their verity depends not upon our know- 
ledge, but upon the foregoing of their causes. But 
there are some, who though they confess this whole 


proposition, tomorrow it will either rain, or not — 


rain, to be true, yet they will not acknowledge the 
parts of it, as, tomorrow it will rain, or, tomorrow 


OF POWER AND ACT. 181 


tt will not ratn, to be either of them true by itself ; 
because they say neither this nor that is true deter- 
minately. But what is this determinately true, but 
true upon our knowledge, or evidently true? And 
therefore they say no more but that it is not yet 
known whether it be true or no; but they say it 
more obscurely, and darken the evidence of the 
truth with the same words, with which they endea- 
vour to hide their own ignorance. 

6. In the 9th article of the preceding chapter, I 
have shewn that the efficient cause of all motion 
and mutation consists in the motion of the agent, 
or agents; and in the first article of this chapter, 
that the power of the agent is the same thing with 
the efficient cause. From whence it may be under- 
stood, that all active power consists in motion also ; 
and that power is not a certain accident, which 
differs from all acts, but is, indeed, an act, namely, 
motion, which is therefore called power, because 
another act shall be produced by it afterwards. 
For example, if of three bodies the first put 
forward the second, and this the third, the motion 
of the second, in respect of the first which pro- 
duceth it, is the act of the second body; but, in 
respect of the third, it 1s the active power of the 
same second body. 


PART II, 
10. 


Active power 
consists in 
motion. 


7. The writers of metaphysics reckon up two Canse, formal 
other causes besides the efficient and material, what they are. 


namely, the ESSENCE, which some call the formal 

cause, and the END, or final cause ; both which 

are nevertheless efficient causes. For when it is 

said the essence of a thing is the cause thereof, as 

to be rational 18 the cause of man, it is not intel- 

ligible ; for it is all one, as if it were said, to be @ 
K 2 


PARTII. 
10. 


fnemeenpomneeF 


What it is 
for one thing 
to differ from 
another. 


132 PHILOSOPHY. 


man 18 the cause of man; which is not well said. 
And yet the knowledge of the essence of anything, 
is the cause of the knowledge of the thing itself ; 
for, if I first know that a thing is rational, I know 
from thence, that the same is man; but this is no 
other than an efficient cause. A final cause has no 
place but in such things as have sense and will; 
and this also I shall prove hereafter to be an effi- 
cient cause. 


CHAPTER XI. 


OF IDENTITY AND DIFFERENCE. 


1. What it is for one thing to differ from another.—2. To differ 
in number, magnitude, species, and genus, what.—3. What is 
relation, proportion, and relatives.—4. Proportionals, what.— 
5. The proportion of magnitudes to one another, wherein it 
consists —6. Relation is no new accident, but one of those 
that were in the relative before the relation or comparison was 
made. Also the causes of accidents in the correlatives, are the 
cause of relation.—7. Of the beginning of individuation. 

1. HitHErto I have spoken of body simply, and 
accidents common to all bodies, as magnitude, 
motion, rest, action, passion, power, possible, §c. ; 
and I should now descend to those accidents by 
which one body is distinguished from another, but 
that it is first to be declared what it is to be dis- 
tinct and not distinct, namely, what are the SAME 
and DIFFERENT; for this also is common to all 
bodies, that they may be distinguished and differ- 
enced from one another. Now, two bodies are 
said to differ from one another, when something 
may be said of one of them, which cannot be said 
of the other at the same time. 


OF IDENTITY AND DIFFERENCE. 133 


2. And, first of all, it is manifest that no two at II. 
bodies are the same ; for seeing they are two, they ———— 
are in two places at the same time ; as that, which is Ao aus 
the same, is at the same time in one and the same a 
place. All bodies therefore differ from one another genus, what. 
in number, namely, as one and another; so that 
the same and different in number, are names 
opposed to one another by contradiction. 

In magnitude bodies differ when one is greater 
than another, as a cubit long, and two cubits long, 
of two pound weight, and of three pound weight. 

And to these, equals are opposed. 

Bodies, which differ more than in magnitude, are 
called wnlike ; and those, which differ only in mag- 
nitude, dike. Also, of unlike bodies, some are said 
to differ in the species, others in the genus ; in the 
species, when their difference is perceived by one 
and the same sense, as white and black ; and in the 
genus, when their difference is not perceived but 
by divers senses, as white and hot. 

3. And the likeness, or unlikeness, equality, or What is 
inequality of one body to another, is called their zee 
RELATION ; and the bodies themselves relatives or #4 ™!stves 
correlatives ; Aristotle calls them ra rpoc 71; the 
first whereof is usually named the antecedent, and 
the second the consequent ; and the relation of the 
antecedent to the consequent, according to mag- 
nitude, namely, the equality, the excess or defect 
thereof, is called the PROPORTION of the ante- 
cedent to the consequent; so that proportion is 
nothing but the equality or inequality of the mag- 
nitude of the antecedent compared to the magni- 
tude of the consequent by their difference only, 
or compared also with their difference. For ex- 


134 PHILOSOPHY. 


PART Il. ample, the proportion of three to two consists 

es only in this, that three exceeds two by unity ; and 

the proportion of two to five in this, that two, 

compared with five, is deficient of it by three, 

either simply, or compared with the numbers dif- 

ferent ; and therefore in the proportion of unequals, 

the proportion of the less to the greater, iscalled DE- 

FECT ; and that of the greater to the less, EXCEss. 

Proportions 4, Besides, of unequals, some are more, some 

als, what. ‘ 

less, and some equally unequal; so that there is 

proportion of proportions, as well as of magni- 

tudes ; namely, where two unequals have relation 

to two other unequals; as, when the inequality 

which is between 2 and 3, is compared with the 

inequality which is between 4 and 5. In which 

comparison there are always four magnitudes ; or, 

which is all one, if there be but three, the middle- 

most is twice numbered; and if the proportion of 

the first to the second, be equal to the proportion 

of the third to the fourth, then the four are said 

to be proportionals ; otherwise they are not pro- 
portionals. 

The propor- 5, The proportion of the antecedent to the con- 


ti n of m = e e e e 
nitudesto’ Sequent consists in their difference, not only 


ove anoter simply taken, but also as compared with one of 
consists. the relatives; that is, either in that part of the 
greater, by which it exceeds the less, or in the re- 
mainder, after the less is taken out of the greater ; 
as the proportion of two to five consists in the 
three by which five exceeds two, not in three 
simply only, but also as compared with five or two. 
For though there be the same difference between 
two and five, which is between nine and twelve, 


namely three, yet there is not the same inequality ; 


OF IDENTITY AND DIFFERENCE. 135 


and therefore the proportion of two to five is not PART II. 
in all relation the same with that of nine to twelve, —-— 
but only in that which is called arithmetical. 

6. But we must not so think of relation, as if it Relation is no 
were an accident differing from all the other acci- futone ofthoze 
dents of the relative; but one of them, namely, ee 
that by which the comparison is made. For ex- ‘he epee 
ample, the likeness of one white to another white, made. Also the 
or its unlikeness to black, is the same accident Grttin en, 
with its whiteness ; and equality and inequality, (ve we the 
the same accident with the magnitude of the thing ti 
compared, though under another name: for that 
which is called whzte or great, when it is not com- 
pared with something else, the same when it is 
compared, is called like or unlike, equal or un- 
equal. And from this it follows that the causes 
of the accidents, which are'in relatives, are the 
causes also of likeness, unlikeness, equality and 
mmequality ; namely, that he, that makes two unequal 
bodies, makes also their inequality ; and he, that 
makes a rule and an action, makes also, if the 
action be congruous to the rule, their congruity ; 
if incongruous, their incongruity. And thus much 
concerning comparison of one body with another. 

7. But the same body may at different times be of the begin- 
compared with itself. And from hence springs a aeons 
great controversy among philosophers about the 
beginning of individuation, namely, in what sense 
it may be conceived that a body is at one time the 
same, at another time not the same it was formerly. 

For example, whether a man grown old be the 
same man he was whilst he was young, or another 
man; or whether a city be in different ages the 


same, or another city. Some place :dividuity in 


PART II. 
11. 


nye 
Of the begin- 
ning of indi- 
viduation. 


136 PHILOSOPHY. 


the unity of matter ; others, in the unity of form ; 
and one says it consists in the unity of the aggre- 
gate of all the accidents together. For matter, 
it is pleaded that a lump of wax, whether it be 
spherical or cubical, is the same wax, because the 
same matter. For form, that when a man is grown 
from an infant to be an old man, though his matter 
be changed, yet he is still the same numerical 
man ; for that zdentity, which cannot be attributed 
to the matter, ought probably to be ascribed to the 
form. For the aggregate of accidents, no instance 
can be made ; but because, when any new accident 
is generated, a new name is commonly imposed on 
the thing, therefore he, that assigned this cause of 
individuity, thought the thing itself also was 
become another thing. According to the first 
opinion, he that sins, and he that is punished, 
should not be the same man, by reason of the per- 
petual flux and change of man’s body; nor should 
the city, which makes laws in one age and abro- 
gates them in another, be the same city; which 
were to confound all civil rights. According to 
the second opinion, two bodies existing both at 
once, would be one and the same numerical body. 
For if, for example, that ship of Theseus, concern- 
ing the difference whereof made by continual re- 
paration in taking out the old planks and putting 
in new, the sophisters of Athens were wont to dis- 
pute, were, after all the planks were changed, the 
same numerical ship it was at the beginning; and 
if some man had kept the old planks as they were 
taken out, and by putting them afterwards together 
in the same order, had again made a ship of them, 
this, without doubt, had also been the same nume- 


OF IDENTITY AND DIFFERENCE. 137 


rical ship with that which was at the beginning ; vA 
and so there would have been two ships numerically ~—— 
the same, which is absurd. But, according to the press 
third opinion, nothing would be the same it viduation. 
was; so that a man standing would not be the same 
he was sitting ; nor the water, which is in the vessel, 
the same with that which is poured out of it. 
Wherefore the beginning of individuation is not 
always to be taken either from matter alone, or 
from form alone. 

But we must consider by what name anything 
is called, when we inquire concerning the zdentity 
of it. For it is one thing to ask concerning Socrates, 
whether he be the same man, and another to ask 
whether he be the same body; for his body, when 
he is old, cannot be the same it was when he was 
an infant, by reason of the difference of magnitude ; 
for one body has always one and the same magni- 
tude; yet, nevertheless, he may be the same man. 
And therefore, whensoever the name, by which it 
is asked whether a thing be the same it was, is 
given it for the matter only, then, if the matter be 
the same, the thing also 1s zndividually the same ; 
as the water, which was in the sea, is the same 
which is afterwards in the cloud; and any body is 
the same, whether the parts of it be put together, 
or dispersed; or whether it be congealed, or dis- 
solved. Also, if the name be given for such form 
as is the beginning of motion, then, as long as that 
motion remains, it will be the same zndividual 
thing ; as that man will be always the same, whose 
actions and thoughts proceed all from the same 
beginning of motion, namely, that which was in 
his generation; and that will be the same river 


PART II. 
1). 


beeannnenn aumenenentl 
Of the begin- 
ning of indi- 
viduation. 


Definition 
of quantity. 


138 PHILOSOPHY. 


which flows from one and the same fountain, 
whether the same water, or other water, or some- 
thing else than water, flow from thence; and that 
the same city, whose acts proceed continually from 
the same institution, whether the men be the same 
or no. Lastly, if the name be given for some 
accident, then the zdentity of the thing will depend 
upon the matter; for, by the taking away and 
supplying of matter, the accidents that were, are 
destroyed, and other new ones are generated, 
which cannot be the same numerically ; so that a 
ship, which signifies matter so figured, will be the 
same as long as the matter remains the same; but 
if no part of the matter be the same, then it is 
numerically another ship ; and if part of the matter 
remain and part be changed, then the ship will 
be partly the same, and partly not the same. 


CHAPTER XII. 


OF QUANTITY. 


1, The definition of quantity.—2. The exposition of quantity, 
what it is.—3. How line, superficies, and solid, are exposed. 
4. Howtime is exposed.—5. How number is exposed.—6. How 
velocity is exposed.—7. How weight is exposed.—8. How the 
proportion of magnitudes is exposed.—9. How the proportion 
of times and velocities is exposed. 

1. WHat and how manifold dimension is, has 

been said in the 8th chapter, namely, that there are 

three dimensions, line or length, superficies, and 
solid ; every one of which, if it be determined, that 
is, if the limits of it be made known, is commonly 
called quantity ; for by quantity all 'men under- 


OF QUANTITY. 139 


stand that which is signified by that word, by PART II. 
which answer is made to the question, How much ——— 
1s 2£2 Whensoever, therefore, it is asked, for 
example, How long ts the journey? it is not 
answered indefinitely, length; nor, when it is 
asked, How big is the field? is 1t answered inde- 
finitely, superficies ; nor, if a man ask, How great 
is the bulk ? indefinitely, so/rd : but it is answered 
determinately, the journey is a hundred miles ; the 
field is a hundred acres; the bulk is a hundred 
cubical feet ; or at least in some such manner, that 
the magnitude of the thing enquired after may 
by certain limits be comprehended in the mind. 
QUANTITY, therefore, cannot otherwise be defined, 
than to be a dimension determined, or a dimen- 
sion, whose limits are set out, either by their 
place, or by some comparison. 

2. And quantity is determined two ways; one, The exposi- _ 

. : ° tion of quan- 

by the sense, when some sensible object is set tity, whatitis. 
before it; as when a line, a superficies or solid, 
of a foot or cubit, marked out in some matter, is 
objected to the eyes; which way of determining, 
is called exposition, and the quantity so known 
is called exposed quantity ; the other by memory, 
that 1s, by comparison with some exposed quan- 
tity. In the first manner, when it is asked of what 
quantity a thing is, it is answered, of such quantity 
as you see exposed. In the second manner, answer 
cannot be made but by comparison with some 
exposed quantity; for if it be asked, how long is 
the way? the answer is, so many thousand paces ; 
that is, by comparing the way with a pace, or some 
other measure, determined and known by exposi- 
tion; or the quantity of it is to some other quan- 


PART IT. 
12. 
nye 


Exposition of 
quantity, 
what it is. 


How line, 
superficies, 
and solids, 
are exposed. 


140 PHILOSOPHY. 


tity known by exposition, as the diameter of a 
square is to the side of the same, or by some 
other the like means. But it is to be understood, 
that the quantity exposed must be some standing 
or permanent thing, such as is marked out in 
consistent or durable matter ; or at least something 
which is revocable to sense ; for otherwise no com- 
parison can be made by it. Seeing, therefore, by 
what has been said in the next preceding chapter, 
comparison of one magnitude with another is the 
same thing with proportion; it is manifest, that 
quantity determined in the second manner is 
nothing else but the proportion of a dimension not 
exposed to another which is exposed ; that is, the 
comparison of the equality or inequality thereof 
with an exposed quantity. 

3. Lines, superficies, and solids, are exposed, 
first, by motzon, in such manner as in the 8th 
chapter I have said they are generated; but so as 
that the marks of such motion be permanent ; as 
when they are designed upon some matter, as a 
line upon paper; or graven in some durable 
matter. Secondly, by apposition ; as when one 
line or length is applied to another line or length, 
one breadth to another breadth, and one thickness 
to another thickness; which is as much as to 
describe a line by points, a superficies by lines, 
and a solid by superficies; saving that by points 
in this place are to be understood very short 
lines; and, by superficies, very thin solids. 
Thirdly, lines and superficies may be exposed by 
section, namely, a line may be made by cutting 
an exposed superficies; and a superficies, by the 
cutting of an exposed solid. 


OF QUANTITY. 141 


4. Time is exposed, not only by the exposition 
of a line, but also of some moveable thing, which 
is moved uniformly upon that line, or at least is 
supposed so to be moved. For, seeing time is an 
idea of motion, in which we consider former and 
latter, that is succession, it is not sufficient for the 
exposition of time that a line be described; but 
we must also have in our mind an imagination of 
some moveable thing passing over that line; and 
the motion of it must be uniform, that time may 
be divided and compounded as often as there shall 
be need. And, therefore, when philosophers, in 
their demonstrations, draw a line, and say, Let 
that line be time, it is to be understood as if they 
said, Let the conception of uniform motion upon 
that line, be time. For though the circles in dials 
be lines, yet they are not of themselves sufficient 
to note time by, except also there be, or be sup- 
posed to be, a motion of the shadow or the hand. 

5. Number is exposed, either by the exposition 
of. points, or of the names of number, one, two, 
three, §c.; and those pomts must not be conti- 
guous, so as that they cannot be distinguished by 
notes, but they must be so placed that they may 
be discerned one from another ; for, from this it 
is, that number is called discreet quantity , 
whereas all quantity, which is designed by motion, 
is called continual quantity. But that number 
may be exposed by the names of number, it is 
necessary that they be recited by heart and in 
order, as one, two, three, &c.; for by saying one, 
one, one, and so forward, we know not what 
number we are at beyond two or three; which 
also appear to us in this manner, not as number, 
but as figure. 


PART IT. 
12. 


ed 


How time 
is exposed, 


How number 
is exposed. 


PART IT. 
12. 


a 
How velocity 
is exposed. 


How weight 
is exposed. 


How the pro- 
portion of 
magnitudes 
is exposed, 


142 PHILOSOPHY. 


6. For the exposition of velocity, which, by the 
definition thereof, is a motion which, in a certain 
time, passeth over a certain space, it is requisite, 
not only that time be exposed, but that there be 
also exposed that space which is transmitted by 
the body, whose velocity we would determine ; 
and that a body be understood to be moved in 
that space also ; so that there must be exposed two | 
lines, upon one of which uniform motion must be 
understood to be made, that the time may be de- 
termined; and, upon the other, the 
velocity is to be computed. As if A iB 
we would expose the velocity of the C D 
body A, we draw two lines AB” 
and C D, and place a body in C also; which done, 
we say the velocity of the body A is so great, 
that it passeth over the line A B in the same time 
in which the body C passeth over the line C D 
with uniform motion. 

7. Weight is exposed by any heavy body, of 
what matter soever, so it be always alike heavy. 

8. The proportion of two magnitudes is then 
exposed, when the magnitudes themselves are ex- 
posed, namely, the proportion of equality, when 
the magnitudes are equal ; and of inequality, when 
they are unequal. For seeing, by the 5th article 
of the preceding chapter, the proportion of two 
unequal magnitudes consists in their difference, 
compared with either of them; and when two un- 
equal magnitudes are exposed, their difference is 
also exposed; it follows, that when magnitudes, 
which have proportion to one another, are ex- 
posed, their proportion also is exposed with them ; 
and, in like manner, the proportion of equals, 


OF QUANTITY. 143 


which consists in this, that there is no difference 
of magnitude betwixt them, is exposed at the 
same time when the equal magnitudes themselves 
are exposed. For example, if the exposed lines 
A B and C D be equal, the propor- 

i A B 
tion of equality is exposed in them; -————_—— 
and if the exposed lines, EFandEG © D 

be unequal, the proportion which —F G F 
_ EF has to EG, and that which EG 
has to E F are also exposed in them; for not only 

the lines themselves, but also their difference, G F, 
is exposed. The proportion of unequals is quan- 
tity ; for the difference, G F, in which it consists, 
is quantity. But the proportion of equality is not 
quantity; because, between equals, there is no 
difference ; nor is one equality greater than another, 
as one Inequality is greater than another inequality. 

9. The proportion of two ¢zmes, or of two uni- 
form velocities, is then exposed, when two lines 
are exposed by which two bodies are understood 
to be moved uniformly; and therefore the same 
two lines serve to exhibit both their own propor- 
tion, and that of the times and velocities, accord- 
ing as they are considered to be exposed for the 
magnitudes themselves, or for the times or velo- 
cities. For let the two lines A and B be ex- 
posed; their proportion therefore (by the — 
last foregoing article) is exposed; and if 8B 
they be considered as drawn with equal 
and uniform velocity, then, seeing their times are 
greater, or equal, or less, according us the same 
spaces are transmitted in greater, or equal, or 
less time, the lines A and B will exhibit the 
equality or inequality, that is, the proportion 


PART ITI. 
12. 


we ye 


How the pro- 
portion of 
times and 
velocities 

is exposed. 


144 -PHILOSOPHY. 


PARTI of the times. To conclude, if the same lines, A 
——— and B, be considered as drawn in the same time, 


then, seeing their velocities are greater, or equal, 
or less, according as they pass over in the same 
time longer, or equal, or shorter lines, the same 
lines, A and B, will exhibit the equality, or in- 
equality, that is, the proportion of their velocities. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


OF ANALOGISM, OR THE SAME PROPORTION. 


1, 2,3,4. The nature and definition of proportion, arithmetical 
and geometrical.—5. The definition, and some properties of 
the same arithmetical proportion—6, 7. The definition and 
transmutations of analogism, or the same geometrical propor- 
tion.—8, 9. The definitions of hyperlogism and hypologism, 
that is, of greater and less proportion, and their transmuta- 
tions.—10, 11, 12. Comparison of analogical quantities, ac- 
cording to magnitude.—} 3, 14, 15. Composition of proportions. 
16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. The definition and 
properties of continual proportion.—26, 27, 28, 29. Compa- 

 rison of arithmetical and geometrical proportions. 

[ Note, that in this chapter the sign + signifies that the quantities betwixt 
which it is put, are added together; and this sign— the remuinder after 
the latter quantity is taken out of the former. So that A+B is equal to 
both A and B together; and where you see A—B, there A is the whole, 
B the part taken out of it, and A—B the remainder. Also, two letters, set 


together without any sign, signify, unless they belong to a figure, that one 
of the quantities is multiplied by the other ; as A B signifies the product of 


A multiplied by B.] 
The nature 1, GREAT and little are not intelligible, but by com- 


orenartaa, parison. Now that, to which they are compared, 
Saal is something exposed; that is, some magnitude 
either perceived by sense, or so defined by words, 
that it may be comprehended by the mind. Also 


that, to which any magnitude is compared, is either 


OF ANALOGISM. 145 


greater or less, or equal to it. And therefore pro- 
portion (which, as I have shewn, is the estimation 
or comprehension of magnitudes by comparison, ) 
is threefold, namely, proportion of equality, that 
is, of equal to equal; or of excess, which is of the 
greater to the less ; or of defect, which is the pro- 
portion of the less to the greater. 

Again, every one of these proportions is two- 
fold ; for if it be asked concerning any magnitude 
given, how great it is, the answer may be made 
by comparing it two ways; first, by saying it is 
greater or less than another magnitude, by so 
much ; as seven is less than ten, by three unities ; 
and this is called arithmetical proportion. Se- 
condly, by saying it is greater or less than another 
magnitude, by such a part or parts thereof; as 
seven is less than ten, by three tenth parts of the 
same ten. And though this proportion be not 
always explicable by number, yet it is a deter- 
minate proportion, and of a different kind from 
the former, and called geometrical proportion, 
and most commonly proportion simply. 


PART IL 
1 


2. Proportion, whether it be arithmetical or The nature 


and defini- 


geometrical, cannot be exposed but in two magmi- tion of pro- 


tudes, (of which the former is commonly called the?" 


antecedent, and the latter the consequent of the 
proportion) as I have shewn in the 8th article of 
the preceding chapter. And, therefore, if two 
proportions be to be compared, there must be four 
magnitudes exposed, namely, two antecedents and 
two consequents ; for though it happen sometimes 
that the consequent of the former proportion be 
the same with the antecedent of the latter, yet in 
that double comparison it must of necessity be 
VOL. I. L 


&e. 


PART II. 
18. 


————” 


The nature 
and defini- 
tion of pro- 


portion, &c. 


146 PHILOSOPHY. 


twice numbered ; so that there will be always four 
terms. 

3. Of two proportions, whether they be arith- 
metical or geometrical, when the magnitudes com- 
pared in both (which Euclid, in the fifth definition 
of his sixth book, calls the quantities of propor- 
tions,) are equal, then one of the proportions 
cannot be either greater or less than the other; 
for one equality is neither greater nor less than 
another equality. But of two proportions of in- 
equality, whether they be proportions of excess or 
of defect, one of them may be either greater or less 
than the other, or they may both be equal; for 
though there be propounded two magnitudes that 
are unequal to one another, yet there may be 
other two more unequal, and other two equally 
unequal, and other two less unequal than the two 
which were propounded. And from hence it may 
be understood, that the proportions of excess and 
defect are quantity, being capable of more and 
less; but the proportion of equality is not quan- 
tity, because not capable neither of more, nor of 
less. And therefore proportions of inequality may 
be added together, or subtracted from one another, 
or be multiplied or divided by one another, or by 
number ; but proportions of equality not so. 

4. Two equal proportions are commonly called 
the same proportion; and, it is said, that the 
proportion of the first antecedent to the first 
consequent is the same with that of the second 
antecedent to the second consequent. And when 
four magnitudes are thus to one another in geo- 
metrical proportion, they are called proportionals ; 
and by some, more briefly,analogism. And greater 


OF ANALOGISM. 147 


proportion is the proportion of a greater ante- PARTS 
cedent to the same consequent, or of the same ~—— 
antecedent to a less consequent; and when the 
proportion of the first antecedent to the first con- 

sequent is greater than that of the second ante- 

cedent to the second consequent, the four magni- 

tudes, which are so to one another, may be called 
hyperlogism. 

Less proportion is the proportion of a less ante- 
cedent to the same consequent, or of the same 
antecedent to a greater consequent ; and when the 
proportion of the first antecedent to the first conse- 
quent is less than that of the second to the second, 
the four magnitudes may be called hypologism. 

5. One arithmetical proportion is the same with The definition 
another arithmetical proportion, when one of the scene i 
antecedents exceeds its consequent, or is exceeded Sore 
by it, as much as the other antecedent exceeds its Portion. 
consequent, or is exceeded by it. And therefore, 
in four magnitudes, arithmetically proportional, 
the sum of the extremes is equal to the sum of the 
means. For if A. B:: C. D be arithmetically pro- 
portional, and the difference on both sides be the 
Same excess, or the same defect, E, then B+C (if 
A be greater than B) will be equal to A—E+C; 
and A+D will be equal to A+C—E; but A—E+C 
and A+C—E are equal. Or if A be less than B, 
then B+C will be equal to A+E+C; and A+D 
will be equal to A+C+E; but A+E+C and A+C 
+ E are equal. 

Also, if there be never so many magnitudes, 
arithmetically proportional, the sum of them all 
will be equal to the product of half the number of 
the terms multiplied by the sum of the extremes. 


L 2 


148 PHILOSOPHY. 


PART IL For if A. B:: C. D:: E. F be arithmetically pro- 
“-— portional, the couples A+F, B+E, C+D will be 
pe ae equal to one another ; and their sum will be equal 

perties of, &c. tg A+’, multiplied by the number of their combi- 
nations, that is, by half the number of the terms. 

If, of four unequal magnitudes, any two, together 
taken, be equal to the other two together taken, 
then the greatest and the least of them will be in 
the same combination. Let the unequal magni- 
tudes be A, B, C, D; and let A+B be equal to 
C+D; and let A be the greatest of them all; I say 
B will be the least. For, if it may be, let any of 
the rest, as D, be the least. Seeing therefore A 
is greater than C, and B than D, A+B will be 
greater than C+D; which is contrary to what was 
supposed. 

If there be any four magnitudes, the sum of the 
greatest and least, the sum of the means, the 
difference of the two greatest, and the difference 
of the two least, will be arithmetically propor- 
tional. For, let there be four magnitudes, whereof 
A is the greatest, D the least, and B and C the 
means; I say A+D. B+C:: A—B. C—D are 
arithmetically proportional. For the difference 
between the first antecedent and its consequent is 
this, A+D—B—C; and the difference between 
the second antecedent and its consequent this, 
A—B—C+D,; but these two differences are equal ; 
and therefore, by this 5th article, A+D. B+C:: 
A—B. C—D are arithmetically proportional. 

If, of four magnitudes, two be equal to the other 
two, they will be in reciprocal arithmetical pro- 
portion. For let A+B be equal to C+D, I say 
A.C:: D. B are arithmetically proportional. For 


OF ANALOGISM. 149 


if they be not, let A.C:: D. E (supposing E to be PART IL 
greater or less than B) be arithmetically propor- ——— 
tional, and then A+E will be equal to C+D; 
wherefore A+B and C+D are not equal; which is 
contrary to what was supposed. 

6. One geometrical proportion is the same with a 
another geometrical proportion ; when the same tations of ana- 
cause, producing equal effects in equal times, de- eee 
termines both the proportions. ane” 

If a point uniformly moved describe two lines, 
either with the same, or different velocity, all the 
parts of them which are contemporary, that is, 
which are described in the same time, will be two 
to two, in geometrical proportion, whether the 
antecedents be taken in the same line, or not. 

For, from the point A (in the 10th figure at the 
end of the 14th chapter) let the two lines, A D, 
AG, be described with uniform motion; and let 
there be taken in them two parts A B, AE, and 
again, two other parts, AC, AF; in such man- 
ner, that A B, A E, be contemporary, and likewise 
AC, AF contemporary. I say first (taking the 
antecedents A B, AC in the line A D, and the con- 
quents AE, AF in the line AG) that AB. AC:: 
AE. AF are proportionals. For seeing (by the 
8th chap. and the 15th art.) velocity is motion 
considered as determined by a certain length or 
line, in a certain time transmitted by it, the quan- 
tity of the line AB will be determined by the 
velocity and time by which the same AB is de- 
scribed ; and for the same reason, the quantity of 
the line AC will be determined by the velocity 
and time, by which the same A C is described; | 
and therefore the proportion of A B to AC, whe- 


150 PHILOSOPHY. 


PARTI. ther it be proportion of equality, or of excess or 
—— defect, is determined by the velocities and times 
roe cennition by which A B, AC are described ; but seeing the 
tions of analo- motion of the point A upon AB and A Cis uni- 
e_ form, they are both described with equal velocity ; 
and therefore whether one of them have to the 
other the proportion of majority or of minority, 
the sole cause of that proportion is the difference 
of their times ; and by the same reason it 1s evi- 
dent, that the proportion of AE to AF is deter- 
mined by the difference of their times only. Seeing 
therefore A B, AE, as also AC, AF are contem- 
porary, the difference of the times in which AB 
and AC are described, is the same with that in 
which A E and A F are described. Wherefore the 
proportion of AB to AC, and the proportion of 
AE to AF are both determined by the same cause. 
But the cause, which so determines the proportion 
of both, works equally in equal times, for it is uni- 
form motion; and therefore (by the last precedent 
definition) the proportion of A B to A Cis the same 
with that of AE to AF; and consequently A B. 
AC :: AE.AF are proportionals; which is the 

first. 

Secondly, (taking the antecedents in different 
lines) I say, AB. AE::AC. AF are proportion- 
als ; for seeing A B, A E are described in the same 
time, the difference of the velocities in which they 
are described is the sole cause of the proportion 
they have to one another. And the same may be 
said of the proportion of AC to AF. But seeing 
both the lines AD and AG are passed over by 
uniform motion, the difference of the velocities in 
which A B, AE are described, will be the same 


OF ANALOGISM. 151 


with the difference of the velocities, in which A C, rare 
AF are described. Wherefore the cause which —~— 
determines the proportion of AB to AE, is the 7h definition 
same with that which determines the proportion of tims oe 
ACto AF; and therefore AB. AE::AC. AF,” 

are proportionals ; which remained to be proved. 

Coroll. 1. If four magnitudes be in geometrical 
proportion, they will also be proportionals by per- 
mutation, that is, by transposing the middle terms. 

For I have shown, that not only AB. AC:: AE. 
AF, but also that, by permutation, AB. AE:: 
A C. A F are proportionals. 

Coroll. 11. If there be four proportionals, they 
will also be proportionals by szversion or conver- 
sion, that is, by turning the antecedents into con- 
sequents. For if in the last analogism, 1 had for 
A B, AC, put by inversion AC, A B, and in like 
manner converted AE, AF into AF, AE, yet the 
same demonstration had served. For as well A C, 

A B, as A B, AC are of equal velocity; and AC, 
A F, as well as A F, AC are contemporary. 

Coroll. 111. If proportionals be added to propor- 
tionals, or taken from them, the aggregates, or 
remainders, will be proportionals. For contempo- 
raries, whether they be added to contemporaries, 
or taken from them, make the aggregates or re- 
mainders contemporary, though the addition or 
subtraction be of all the terms, or of the antece- 
dents alone, or of the consequents alone. 

Coroll. 1v. If both the antecedents of four pro- 
portionals, or both the consequents, or all the 
terms, be multiplied or divided by the same num- 
ber or quantity, the products or quotients will be 
proportionals. For the multiplication and division 


152 PHILOSOPHY. 


PARTI. of proportionals, is the same with the addition and 
—— _ subtraction of them. 

The Cefnition 'Coroll. v. If there be four proportionals, they 
pi of analo- will also be proportionals by composition, that is, 
by compounding an antecedent of the antecedent 
and consequent put together, and by taking for 
consequent either the consequent singly, or the 
antecedent singly. For this composition is nothing 
but addition of proportionals, namely, of conse- 
quents to their own antecedents, which by suppo- 

sition are proportionals. 

Coroll. v1. In like manner, if the antecedent 
singly, or consequent singly, be put for antecedent, 
and the consequent be made of both put together, 
these also will be proportionals. For it is the zn- 
version of proportion by composition, 

Coroll. vir. If there be four proportionals, they 
will also be proportionals by division, that is, by 
taking the remainder after the consequent is sub- 
tracted from the antecedent, or the difference 
between the antecedent and consequent for ante- 
cedent, and either the whole or the subtracted for 
consequent; as if A.B::C.D be proportionals, 
they will by division be A—B.B:: C—D.D, and 
A—B.A::C—D.C; and when the consequent is 
greater than the antecedent, B—A. A: : D—C.C, 
and B--A. B:: D—C. D. For in all these divisions, 
proportionals are, by the very supposition of the 
analogism A.B:: C.D, taken from A and B, and 
from C and D. 

Coroll. vi11. If there be four proportionals, they 
will also be proportionals by the conversion of 
proportion, that is, by inverting the divided pro- 
portion, or by taking the whole for antecedent, 
and the difference or remainder for consequent. 


OF ANALOGISM. 153 


As, if A. B:: C.D be proportionals, then A.A—B_ PART II 
::C. C—D, as also B.A—B::D.C—D will be ——— 
proportionals. For seeing these inverted be pro- and cana: 
portionals, they are also themselves proportionals. eo 
Coroll. rx. If there be two analogisms which 
have their quantities equal, the second to the se- 
cond, and the fourth to the fourth, then either the 
sum or difference of the first quantities will be to 
the second, as the sum or difference of the third 
quantities is to the fourth. Let A. B::C.D and 
E. B:: F. D be analogisms; Isay A+E. B::C+F.D 
are proportionals. For the said analogisms will 
by permutation be A.C:: B.D, and E. F:: B.D; 
and therefore A.C ::E.F will be proportionals, 
for they have both the proportion of B to D com- 
mon. Wherefore, if in the permutation of the 
first analogism, there be added E and F to A and 
C, which E and F are proportional to A and C, 
then (by the third coroll.) A+E. B:: C+F. D will 
be proportionals ; which was to be proved. 
Also in the same manner it may be shown, that 
A --E.B: : C—F.D are proportionals. 
7. If there be two analogisms, where four an- 
tecedents make an analogism, their consequents 
also shall make an analogism ; as also the sums of 
their antecedents will be proportional to the sums | 
of their consequents. For if A.B::C.D and 
E. F::G.H be two analogisms, and A. E:: C.G be 
proportionals, then by permutation A.C:: E.G, 
and E.G:: F. H, and A.C: : B. D will be propor- 
tionals ; wherefore B.D: : E.G; that is, B.D:: F.H, 
and by permutation B.F:: D. Hare proportionals; 
which is the first. Secondly, Isay A+E. B+F:: 
C+G.D+H will be proportionals. For seeing 


154 PHILOSOPHY. 


PART Il. A.H::C.G are proportionals, A+E.E::C+G. G 
——~ will also by composition be proportionals, and by 
permutation A+K.C+G::E.G will be propor- 
tionals; wherefore, also A+E.C+G::F. H will 
be proportionals. Again, seeing, as is shown above, 
B. F:: D.H are proportionals, B+ F. F:: D+H.H 
will also by composition be proportionals; and by 
permutation B+F. D+H:: F. H will also be pro- 
portionals ; wherefore A+E. C+G:: B+F. D+H 

are proportionals ; which remained to be proved. 
Coroll. By the same reason, if there be never so 
many analogisms, and the antecedents be propor- 
tional to the antecedents, it may be demonstrated 
also that the consequents will be proportional to 
the consequents, as also the sum of the antece- 

dents to the sum of the consequents. 

The definition 8. In an hyperlogism, that is, where the pro- 
sil portion of the first antecedent to its consequent 


and hypolo- 
gism, that is, is greater than the proportion of the second ante- 


les proportion, cedent to its consequent, the permutation of the 
mutations. | proportionals, and the addition of proportionals to 
proportionals, and substraction of them from one 
another, as also their composition and division, and 
their multiplication and division by the same num- 
ber, produce always an hyperlogism. For suppose 
A.B::C.DandA.C:: E. F be analogisms, A+E. B 
::C+4F.D will also be an analogism; but A+HE. 
B::C. D will be an hyperlogism; wherefore by 
permutation, A+E. C::B.D is an hyperlogism, 
because A. B:: C. D is an analogism. Secondly, if 
to the hyperlogism A+E.B::C.D the propor- 
tionals G and H be added, A+E+G. B::C+H.D 
will be an hyperlogism, by reason A+E+G. 
B:: C+F+H. Dis an analogism. Also, if G and 


OF ANALOGISM. 155 


H be taken away, A+E—G. B:: C—H.D will be ee a 
an hyperlogism; for A+E—G.B::C+F—H.D ——~ 
is an analogism. Thirdly, by composition A+E 37° cemntions 
+B. B:: C+D. D will be an hyperlogism, because hypologism&e, 
A+E+B. B::C+F+D. D is an analogism, and so 
it will be in all the varieties of composition. 
Fourthly, by division, A+E—B. B::C—D. D will 
by an hyperlogism, by reason A E—B. B::C+F 
—D. D is an analogism. Also A+E—B. A+E:: 
C—D. C is an hyperlogism ; for A+E—B. A+E:: 
C+F—D. Cisan analogism. Fifthly, by multipli- 
cation 4A+44E.B::4C. D is an hyperlogism, be- 
cause 4A.B::4C.D is an analogism; and by 
division + A+iE. B::4C.D is an hyperlogism, 
because } A. B::4C. D is an analogism. 

9. But if A+E.B::C.D be an hyperlogism, 
then by inversion B. A+E:: D. C will be an hy- 
pologism, because B.A:: D.C being an analo- 
gism, the first consequent will be too great. Also, 
by conversion of proportion, A+K, A+E—B:: C. 
C—D is an hypologism, because the inversion of 
it, namely A+E—B. A+E:;:C—D. Cis an hyper- 
logism, as I have shown but now. So also B. A+ 
E—B::D.C—D is an hypologism, because, as I 
have newly shown, the inversion of it, namely 
A+E—B.B::C—D. D is an hyperlogism. Note 
that this hypologism A+E. A+E—B: : C. C—D is 
commonly thus expressed; if the proportion of 
the whole, (A+E) to that which is taken out of it 
(B), be greater than the proportion of the whole 
(C) to that which is taken out of it (D), then the 
proportion of the whole (A+E) to the remainder 
(A+E—B) will be less than the proportion of the 
whole (C) to the remainder (C—D). 


PART IT, 
13. 


——— | 
Comparison 
of analogical 
quantities, 
according 
to magnitude. 


156 PHILOSOPHY. 


10. If there be four proportionals, the difference 
of the two first, to the difference of the two last, 
will be as the first antecedent is to the second 
antecedent, or as the first consequent to the second 
consequent. For if A.B::C.D be proportionals, 
then by division A—B.B: :C—D.D will be pro- 
portionals; and by permutation A—B. C—D:: 
B.D; that is, the differences are proportional to 
the consequents, and therefore they are so also to 
the antecedents. 

1]. Of four proportionals, if the first be greater 
than the second, the third also shall be greater 
than the fourth. For seeing the first is greater 
than the second, the proportion of the first to the 
second is the proportion of excess; but the pro- 
portion of the third to the fourth is the same with 
that of the first to the second ; and therefore also 
the proportion of the third to the fourth is the 
proportion of excess ; wherefore the third is greater 
than the fourth. In the same manner it may be 
proved, that whensoever the first 1s less than the 
second, the third also is less than the fourth ; and 
when those are equal, that these also are equal. 

12. If there be four proportionals whatsoever, 
A.B:: C.D, and the first and third be multiplied by 
any one number, as by 2; and again the second and 
fourth be multiplied by any one number, as by 3; 
and the product of the first 2 A, be greater than 
the product of the second 3 B; the product also 
of the third 2 C, will be greater than the product 
of the fourth 3 D. But if the product of the first 
be less than the product of the second, then the 
product of the third will be less than that of the 
fourth. And lastly, if the products of the first 


OF ANALOGISM. 157 


and second be equal, the products of the third and 
fourth shall also be equal. Now this theorem 
is all one with Euclid’s definition of the same 
proportion; and it may be demonstrated thus. 
Seeing A. B::C.D are proportionals, by permu- 
tation also (art. 6, coroll. 1.) A.C::B.D will be 
proportionals ; wherefore (by coroll. 1v. art. 6) 2 A. 
2C::3 B.3D will be proportionals; and again, 
by permutation, 2A.3B::2C. 3D will be pro- 
portionals ; and therefore, by the last article, if 
2 A be greater than 3B, then 2 C will be greater 
than 3 D; if less, less; and if equal, equal; which 
was to be demonstrated. 

13. If any three magnitudes be propounded, or 
three things whatsoever that have any proportion 
one to another, as three numbers, three times, 
three degrees, &c. ; the proportions of the first to 
the second, and of the second to the third, together 
taken, are equal to the proportion of the first to 
the third. Let there be three lines, for any pro- 
portion may be reduced to the proportion of lines, 
AB, AC, AD; and in the first place, let the pro- 
portion as well of the first A B to the second A C, 

as of the second AC to the 
- Pee Z third A D, be the proportion 
of defect, or of less to greater ; I say the propor- 
tions together taken of A B to AC, and of AC to 
A D, are equal to the proportion of AB to A D. 
Suppose the point A to be moved over the whole 
line AD with uniform motion; then the propor- 
tions as well of AB to AC, as of AC to A D, are 
determined by the difference of the times in which 
they are described ; that is, A B has to AC such 
proportion as is determined by the different times 
of their description ; and A C to AD such propor- 


PART IT, 
13. 


ee cee 


Composition 
of proportions. 


PART II, 
13. 
“suns pei 


Composition 
of proportions. 


158 PHILOSOPHY. 


tion as is determined by their times. But the 
proportion of A B to AD is such as is determined 
by the difference of the times in which AB and 
A D are described ; and the difference of the times 
in which AB and AC are described, together with 
the difference of the times in which AC and AD 
are described, is the same with the difference of 
the times in which AB and AD are described. 
And therefore, the same cause which determines 
the two proportions of A B to AC and of AC to 
A D, determines also the proportion of AB to 
AD. Wherefore, by the definition of the same 
proportion, delivered above in the 6th article, the 
proportion of A B to AC together with the pro- 
portion of AC to AD, is the same with the pro- 
portion of A B to A D. 

In the second place, let A D be the first, AC 
the second, and A B the third, and let their pro- 
portion be the proportion of excess, or the greater 
to less ; then, as before, the proportions of A D to 
A C, and of AC to A B, and of A D to AB, will be 
determined by the difference of their times ; which 
in the description of A D and A C, and of AC and 
A B together taken, is the same with the differ- 
ence of the times in the description of AD and 
A B. Wherefore the proportion of AD to AB is 
equal to the two proportions of A D to A C and of 
AC to AB. 

In the last place. If one of the proportions, 
namely of A D to A B, be the proportion of excess, 
and another of them, as of A B to AC be the pro- 
portion of defect, thus also the proportion of A D 
to AC will be equal to the two proportions toge- 
ther taken of AD to AB, and of AB to AC. For 
the difference of the times in which AD and AB 


OF ANALOGISM. 159 


are described, is excess of time; for there goes 
more time to the description of A D than of AB; 
and the difference of the times in which AB and 
A C are described, is defect of time, for less time 
goes to the description of AB than of AC; but 
this excess and defect being added together, make 
D B—BC, which is equal to DC, by which the 
first A D exceeds the third AC; and therefore the 
proportions of the first AD to the second AB, 
and of the second A B to the third AC, are deter- 
mined by the same cause which determines the 
proportion of the first AD to the third AC. 
Wherefore, if any three magnitudes, &c. 

Coroll. 1. If there be never so many magnitudes 
having proportion to one another, the proportion 
of the first to the last is compounded of the pro- 
portions of the first to the second, of the second 
to the third, and so on till you come to the last ; 
or, the proportion of the first to the last is the 
same with the sum of all the intermediate propor- 
tions. For any number of magnitudes having pro- 
portion to one another, as A, B, C, D, E being 
propounded, the proportion of A to E, as is newly 
shown, is compounded of the proportions of A to D 
and of D to E; and again, the proportion of A to 
D, of the proportions of A to C, and of C to D; 
and lastly, the proportion of A to C, of the pro- 
portions of A to B, and of B to C. 

Coroll. 11. From hence it may be understood 
how any two proportions may be compounded. For 
if the proportions of A to B, and of C toD, be 
propounded to be added together, let B have to 
something else, as to E, the same proportion which 
C has to D, and let them be set in this order, 


PART ITI. 
13. 


———— 
Composition 
of proportions. 


PART IT. 
13. 


nd 
Composition 
of proportions. 


160 PHILOSOPHY. 


A, B, E; for so the proportion of A to E will evi- 
dently be the sum of the two proportions of A to B, 
and of B to E, that is, of Cto D. Or let it be as 
D to C, so A to something else, as to E, and let 
them be ordered thus, E, A, B; for the proportion 
of E to B will be compounded of the proportions 
of E to A, that is, of C to D, and of A to B. Also, 
it may be understood how one proportion may be 
taken out of another. For if the proportion of C 
to D be to be subtracted out of the proportion of 
A to B, let it be as C to D, so A to something else, 
as E, and setting them in this order, A, E, B, and 
taking away the proportion of A to E, that is, of 
C to D, there will remain the proportion of E to B. 

Coroll. 111. If there be two orders of magnitudes 
which have proportion to one another, and the 
several proportions of the first order be the same 
and equal in number with the proportions of the 
second order; then, whether the proportions in 
both orders be successively answerable to one ano- 
ther, which is called ordinate proportion, or not 
successively answerable, which is called perturbed 
proportion, the first and the last in both will be pro- 
portionals. For the proportion of the first to the 
last is equal to all the intermediate proportions ; 
which being in both orders the same, and equal in 
number, the aggregates of those proportions will 
also be equal to one another ; but to their aggre- 
gates, the proportions of the first to the last are 
equal ; and therefore the proportion of the first to 
the last in one order, is the same with the propor- 
tion of the first to the last in the other order. 
Wherefore the first and the last in both are pro- 
portionals. 


OF ANALOGISM. 161 


14. If any two quantities be made of the mutual ae, 
multiplication of many quantities, which have pro- eae 


portion to one another, and the efficient quantities 
on both sides be equal in number, the proportion 
of the products will be compounded of the several 
proportions, which the efficient quantities have to 
one another. 

First, let the two products be AB and CD, 
whereof one is made of the multiplication of A 
into B, and the other of the multiplication of C 
into D. I say the proportion of AB to CD is 
compounded of the proportions of the efficient A 
to the efficient C, and of the efficient B to the 
efficient D. For let AB, CB and CD be set in 
order; and as B is to D, so let C be to another 
quantity as E; and let A,C, E be 


set also in order. Then (by ot - 
coroll. rv. of the 6th art.) it will CD. i 


be as AB the first quantity to CB 
the second quantity in the first order, so A to C in 
the second order ; and again, as CB to CD in the 
first order, so B to D, that is, by construction, 
so C to E in the second order; and therefore (by 
the last corollary) A B.C D::A.E will be pro- 
portionals. But the proportion of A to E is com- 
pounded of the proportions of A to C, and of B to 
D; wherefore also the proportion of A B to CD 
is compounded of the same. 

Secondly, let the two products be ABF, and 
CDG, each of them made of three efficients, the 
first of A, B and F, and the second of C,D and 
G; I say, the proportion of ABF to CDG is 
compounded of the proportions of A to C, of B to 
D, and of F toG. For let them be set in order as 

VOL. I. M 


Composition © 
of proportions. 


162 PHILOSOPHY. 


PARTIL before; and as B is to D, so let C be to another 
—— __ quantity E; and again, as F is to G, so let E be to 
oT ropertens, 2H0ther, H; and let the first order stand thus, 
ABF, CBF, CDF and CDG; ABF 
and the second order thus, CB F 
A, C, E, H. Then the propor- CDF. 
tion of ABF toCBF in the CDG. 
first order, will be as A to C in 
the second ; and the proportion of CBF to CDF 
in the first order, as B to D, that is, as C to E (by 
construction) in the second order; and the pro- 
portion of CDF to CDG im the first, as F to G, 
that is, as E to H (by construction) in the second 
order; and therefore ABF. C DG::A.H will be 
proportionals. But the proportion of A to H is 
compounded of the proportions of A to C, B to D, 
and F to G. Wherefore the proportion of the 
product A BF to C DG is also compounded of the 
same. And this operation serves, how many soever 
the efficients be that make the quantities given. 
From hence ariseth another way of compounding 
many proportions into one, namely, that which is 
supposed in the 5th definition of the 6th book of 
Euclid; which is, by multiplying all the antece- 
dents of the proportions into one another, and in 
like manner all the consequents into one another. 
And from hence also it‘is evident, in the first 
place, that the cause why parallelograms, which 
are made by the duction of two straight lines into 
one another, and all solids which are equal to 
figures so made, have their proportions compounded 
of the proportions of the efficients; and in the 
second place, why the multiplication of two or 
more fractions into one another is the same thing 


OP 


OF ANALOGISM. 163 


with the composition of the proportions of their FARE 
several numerators to their several denominators. —— 
For example, if these fractions 3, 3, ¢ be to be ppmpoition 
multiplied into one another, the numerators 1, 2, 3, 

are first to be multiplied into one another, which 

make 6; and next the denominators 2, 3, 4, which 

make 24 ; and these two products make the frac- 

tion zz. In like manner, if the proportions of 1 

to 2, of 2 to 3, and of 3 to 4, be to be compounded, 

by working as I have shown above, the same pro- 

portion of 6 to 24 will be produced. 

15. If any proportion be compounded with itself 
Inverted, the compound will be the proportion of 
equality. For let any proportion be given, as of 
A to B, and let the inverse of it be that of Cto D; 
and as C to D, so let B be to another quantity ; 
for thus they will be compounded (by the second 
coroll. of the 12th art.) Now seeing the propor- 
tion of C to D is the inverse of the proportion of 
A to B, it will be as Cto D, so Bto A; and there- 
fore if they be placed in order, A, B, A, the propor- 
tion compounded of the proportions of A to B, and 
of C to D, will be the proportion of A to A, that 
is, the proportion of equality. And from hence 
the cause is evident why two equal products have 
their efficients reciprocally proportional. For, for 
the making of two products equal, the proportions 
of their efficients must be such, as being com- 
pounded may make the proportion of equality, 
which cannot be except one be the inverse of the 
other ; for if betwixt A and A any other quantity, 
as C, be interposed, their order will be A,C, A, and 
the later proportion of C to A will be the inverse 
of the former proportion of A to C. 

M 2 


PART ITI. 
13. 


—————— 
The definition 
and properties 
of continual 
proportion. 


164 PHILOSOPHY. 


16. A proportion is said to be multiplied by a 
number, when it is so often taken as there be 
unities in that number; and if the proportion be 
of the greater to the less, then shall also the 
quantity of the proportion be increased by the 
multiplication ; but when the proportion is of the 
less to the greater, then as the number increaseth, 
the quantity of the proportion diminisheth ; as in 
these three numbers, 4, 2, 1, the proportion of 4 to 
1 is not only the duplicate of 4 to 2, but also twice 
as great; but inverting the order of those numbers 
thus, 1, 2, 4, the proportion of 1 to 2 is greater 
than that of 1 to 4; and therefore though the 
proportion of 1 to 4 be the duplicate of 1 to 2, yet 
it is not twice so great as that of 1 to 2, but con- 
trarily the half of it. In like manner, a proportion 
is said to he divided, when between two quantities 
are interposed one or more means in continual 
proportion, and then the proportion of the first to 
the second is said to be subduplicate of that of the 
first to the third, and subtriplicate of that of the 
first to the fourth, &c. 

This mixture of proportions, where some are 
proportions of excess, others of defect, as in a 
merchant’s account of debtor and creditor, is not 
so easily reckoned as some think; but maketh the 
composition of proportions sometimes to be addi- 
tion, sometimes substraction ; which soundeth 
absurdly to such as have always by composition 
understood addition, and by diminution substrac- 
tion. Therefore to make this account a little 
clearer, wé are to consider (that which is com- 
monly assumed, and truly) that if there be never 
sO many quantities, the proportion of the first to 


OF ANALOGISM. 165 


‘the last is compounded of the proportions of the a 
first to the second, and of the second to the third, ~——— 
and so on to the last, without regarding their ihy como 
equality, excess, or defect ; so that if two propor- of continual 
tions, one of inequality, the other of equality, ber” 
added together, the proportion is not thereby made 

greater nor less; as for example, if the proportions 

of A to B and of B to B be compounded, the pro- 

portion of the first to the second is as much as the 

sum of both, because proportion of equality, being 

not quantity, neither augmenteth quantity nor 
lesseneth it. But if there be three quantities, 

A, B,C, unequal, and the first be the greatest, the 

last least, then the proportion of B to C is an ad- 

dition to that of A to B, and makes it greater; 

and on the contrary, if A be the least, and C the 
greatest quantity, then doth the addition of the 
proportion of B to C make the compounded pro- 
portion of A to C less than the proportion of A to 

B, that is, the whole less than the part. The com- 
position therefore of proportions is not in this case 

the augmentation of them, but the diminution ; 

for the same quantity (Euclid v. 8) compared with 

two other quantities, hath a greater proportion to 

the lesser of them than to the greater. Likewise, 

when the proportions compounded are one of 

excess, the other of defect, if the first be of excess, 

as in these numbers, 8, 6, 9, the proportion com- 
pounded, namely, of 8 to 9, is less than the pro- 

portion of one of the parts of it, namely, of 8 

to 6; but if the proportion of the first to the 

second be of defect, and that of the second to 

the third be of excess, as in these numbers, 6, 8, 4, 

then shall the proportion of the first to the third 


166 PHILOSOPHY. 


PART IJ. be greater than that of the first to the second, as 

—.— 6 hatha greater proportion to 4 than to 8; the 

and ennition reason whereof is manifestly this, that the less any 

ofcontinual quantity is deficient of another, or the more one 

propor exceedeth another, the proportion of it to that 
other is the greater. 

Suppose now three quantities in continual pro- 
portion, AB 4, AC 6, AD9. Because therefore 
AD is greater than AC, but not greater than AD, 
the proportion of AD to AC will be (by Euclid, 
v. 8) greater than that of AD to AD; and like- 
wise, because the proportions of AD to AC, and 
of AC to A B are the same, the proportions of AD 
to AC and of AC to AB, being both proportions 
of excess, make the whole proportion of AD to 
AB, or of 9 to 4, not only the duplicate of AD to 
AC, that is, of 9 to 6, but also the double, or 
twice so great. On the other side, because the 
proportion of A D to AD, or 9 to 9, being propor- 
tion of equality, is no quantity, and yet greater 
than that of AC to AD, or 6 to 9, it will be as 0O—9 
to 0O—6, so AC to AD, and again, as 0—9 to 0—6, 
so 0—6 to 0—4; but 0—4, 0O—6, 0—9 are in con- 
tinual proportion; and because 0—4 is greater 
than 0—6, the proportion of 0—4 to 0—6 will be 
double to the proportion of 0—4 to 0—9, double I 
say, and yet not duplicate, but subduplicate. 

If any be unsatisfied with this ratiocination, let 
him first consider that (by Euclid v. 8) the propor- 
tion of AB to AC is greater than that of AB to 
AD, wheresoever D be 
placed in the line AC BC D 
prolonged; and the A-———--__-~—__---—_E 
further off the point 


OF ANALOGISM. 167 


D is from C, so much the greater is the proportion Pee 
of AB to AC than that of AB to AD. There is —— 
therefore some point (which suppose be E) in such cae. 
distance from C, as that the proportion of A B to Shell 
A C will be twice as great as that of AB to AE. 
That considered, let him determine the length of 
the line AE, and demonstrate, if he can, that A E 
is greater or less than A D. 

By the same method, if there be more quantities 
than three, as A, B, C, D, in continual proportion, 
and A be the least, it may be made appear that 
the proportion of A to B is triple magnitude, 
though subtriple in multitude, to the proportion of 
A to D. 

17. If there be never so many quantities, the 
number whereof is odd, and their order such, that 
from the middlemost quantity both ways they 
proceed in continual proportion, the proportion of 
the two which are next on either side to the mid- 
dlemost is subduplicate to the proportion of the 
two which are next to these on both sides, and 
subtriplicate of the proportion of the two which 
are yet one place more remote, &c. For let the 
magnitudes be C, B, A, D, E, and let A, B, C, as 
also A, D, E be in continual proportion; I say 
the proportion of D to B is subduplicate of the 
proportion of E to C. For the proportion of D to 
B is compounded of the proportions of D to A, and 
of A to B once taken; but the proportion of E to 
C is compounded of the same twice taken; and 
therefore the proportion of D to B is subduplicate 
of the proportion of E to C. And in the same 
manner, if there were three terms on either side, 
it might be demonstrated that the proportion of 


168 PHILOSOPHY. 


rarT U. D to B would be subtriplicate of that of the ex- 
—— tremes, &c. 
int Groveries 18. If there be never so many continual propor- 
of continual tionals, as the first, second, third, &c. their differ- 
a ences will be proportional to them. For the second, 
third, &c. are severally consequents of the preceding, 
and antecedents of the following proportion. But 
(by art. x.) the difference of the first antecedent 
and consequent, to difference of the second antece- 
dent and consequent, is as the first antecedent to 
the second antecedent, that is, as the first term to 
the second, or as the second to the third, &c. in 
continual proportionals. 

19. If there be three continual proportionals, 
the sum of the extremes, together with the mean 
twice taken, the sum of the mean and either of 
the extremes, and the same extreme, are conti- 
nual proportionals. For let A.B. C be continual 
proportionals. Seeing, therefore, A.B:: B.C are 
proportionals, by composition also A +B. B:: B+C. 
C will be proportionals ; and by permutation A+B. 
B+C:: B. C will also be proportionals ; and again, 
by composition A+2 B+C. B+C::B+C. C; which 
was to be proved. 

20. In four continual proportionals, the greatest 
and the least put together is a greater quantity 
than the other two put together. Let A.B::C.D 
be continual proportionals ; whereof let the great- 
est be A, and the least be D ; I say A+D is greater 
than B+C. For by art. 10, A—B.C—D::A.C 
are proportionals ; and therefore A—B is, by art. 
11, greater than C—D. Add B on both sides, and 
A will be greater than C+B—D. And again, add 
D on both sides, and A+D will be greater than 
B+C; which was to be proved. 


OF ANALOGISM. 169 


21. If there be four proportionals, the extremes eae 
multiplied into one another, and the means multi- W——~ 
plied into one another, will make equal products. Thr tonton 
Let A.B::C.D be proportionals; I say A D 1s of continual 
equal to BC. For the proportion of AD to BC ere 
is compounded, by art. 13, of the proportions of 
A to B, and D to C, that is, its inverse B to A; 
and therefore, by art. 14, this compounded pro- 
portion is the proportion of equality ; and there- 
fore also, the proportion of A D to BC is the pro- 
portion of equality. Wherefore they are equal. 

22. If there be four quantities, and the propor- 

tion of the first to the second be duplicate of the 
proportion of the third to the fourth, the product 
of the extremes to the product of the means, will 
be as the third to the fourth. Let the four quan- 
tities be A, B, C and D; and let the proportion of 
A to B be duplicate of the proportion of C to D, 
I say A D, that is, the product of A into D is to 
BC, that is, to the product of the means, as C to D. 
For seeing the proportion of A to Bis duplicate of 
the proportion of C to D, if it be as C to D, so D 
to another, E, then A.B::C.E will be propor- 
tionals ; for the proportion of A to B is by suppo- 
sition duplicate of the proportion of C to D; and 
C to E duplicate also of that of C to D by the defi- 
nition, art. 15. Wherefore, by the last article, A E 
or A into E is equal to BC or B into C; but, by 
coroll. 1v. art. 6, AD is to AE as D to E, that is, 
as C to D; and therefore A D is to BC, which as 
I have shown is equal to AE, as Cto D; which 
was to be proved. 

Moreover, if the proportion of the first A to 
the second B be triplicate ‘of the proportion of 


PART II. 
13. 


nd 
The definition 
and properties 
of continual 
proportion. 


170 PHILOSOPHY. 


the third C to the fourth D, the product of the 
extremes to the product of the means will be 
duplicate of the proportion of the third to the 
fourth. For if it be asC to D so D to E, and 
again, as D to E soE to another, F, then the 
proportion of C to F will be triplicate of the pro- 
portion of C to D; and consequently, A.B::C.F 
will be proportionals, and AF equal to BC. But 
as AD to AF, so is D to F; and therefore, also, 
as A D to BC, so D to F, that is, so CtoE; but 
the proportion of C to E is duplicate of the pro- 
portion of C to D; wherefore, also, the proportion 
of A D to BC is duplicate of that of C to D, as was 
propounded. 

23. If there be four proportionals, and a mean 
be interposed betwixt the first and second, and 
another betwixt the third and fourth, the first of 
these means will be to the second, as the first of 
the proportionals is to the third, or as the second 
of them is to the fourth. For Jet A.B:: C.D be 
proportionals, and let E be a mean betwixt A and 
B, and F a mean betwixt C and D; I say A.C:: 
E. F are proportionals. For the proportion of A 
to E is subduplicate of the proportion of A to B, 
or of Cto D. Also, the proportion of Cto Fis — 
subduplicate of that of C to D; and therefore 
A.E::C. F are proportionals ; and by permutation 
A. C::E.F are also proportionals; which was to 
be proved. 

24. Any thing is said to be divided into extreme 
and mean proportion, when the whole and the 
parts are in continual proportion. As for example, 
when A+B.A.B are continual proportionals; or 
when the straight line A C is so divided in B, that 


OF ANALOGISM. 171 


AC. AB.BC are in continual proportion. And if PART 11. 
the same line A C be again divided . pq —~ 
in D, so as that AC. CD. AD be ——;—|—— 
continual proportionals; then also 

AC. AB. AD will be continual proportionals ; 

and in like manner, though in contrary order, 

CA. CD. CB will be continual proportionals ; 

which cannot happen in any line otherwise 

divided. 

25. If there be three continual proportionals, and 

again, three other continual proportions, which 
have the same middle term, their extremes will be 
in reciprocal proportion. For let A.B.C and 
D. B. E be continual proportionals, I say A.D:: 
EK. C shall be proportionals. For the proportion of 
A to Dis compounded of the proportions of A to B, 
and of B to D; and the proportion of E to C is 
compounded of those of E to B, that is, of B to D, 
and of B to C, that is, of Ato B. Wherefore, by 
equality, A. D::E. C are proportionals. 

26. If any two unequal quantities be made ex- Comparison of 
tremes, and there be interposed betwixt them any aedeeedert 
number of means in geometrical proportion, and ‘*! Proportion. 
the same number of means in arithmetical propor- 
tion, the several means in geometrical proportion 
will be less than the several means in arithmetical 
proportion. For betwixt A the lesser, and E the 
greater extreme, let there be imterposed three 
means, B, C, D, in geometrical proportion, and as 
many more, F, G, H, in arithmetical proportion ; 

I say B will be less than F, C than G, and D than 
H. For first, the difference between A and F isthe 
same with that between F and G, and with that 
between G and H, by the definition of arithme- 


172 PHILOSOPHY. 


FART YS tical proportion ; and therefore, the difference of 


eee 


the proportionals which stand next to one another, 


Comparison of tg the difference of the extremes, is, when there is 


arithmetical 
and geometri- 
ca] proportions. 


but one mean, half their difference; when two, a 
third part of it ; when three, a quarter, &c. ; so that 
in this example it is a quarter. But the difference 
between D and E, by art. 17, is more than a 
quarter of the difference be- 

tween the extremes, because A A 
the proportion is geometrical, 8B F 
and therefore the difference ¢ “G 
between A and D is less than —— ——= 
three quarters of the same =e _ 
difference of theextremes. In £& E 

like manner, if the difference __ a 
between A and D be understood to be divided 
into three equal parts, it may be proved, that the 
difference between A and C is less than two quar- 
ters of the difference of the extremes A and E. 
And lastly, if the difference between A and C be 
divided into two equal parts, that the difference 
between A and B is Jess than a quarter of the 
difference of the extremes A and E. 

From the consideration hereof, it is manifest, 
that B, that is A together with something else 
which is less than a fourth part of the difference of 
the extremes A and BE, is less than F, that is, than 
the same A with something else which is equal to 
the said fourth part. Also, that C, that is A with 
something else which is less than two fourth parts 
of the said difference, is less than G, that is, than 
A together with the said two-fourths. And lastly, 
that D, which exceeds A by less than three-fourths 
of the said difference, is less than H, which ex- 


OF ANALOGISM. 173 


ceeds the same A by three entire fourths of the pane 
said difference. And in the same manner it would W——~ 
be if there were four means, saving that instead Comparison of 
of fourths of the difference of the extremes we are 2nd geometri” 
to take fifth parts ; and so on. ac 
27. LEMMA. If a quantity being given, first one 
quantity be both added to it and subtracted from 
it, and then another greater or less, the propor- 
tion of the remainder to the aggregate, is greater 
where the less quantity 1s added and substracted, 
than where the greater quantity is added and sub- 
stracted. Let B be added to and substracted from 
the quantity A; so that A—B be the remainder, 
and A+B the aggregate; and again, let C, a 
greater quantity than B, be added to and sub- 
stracted from the same A, so that A—C be the 
remainder and A+C the aggregate ; I say A—B. 
A+B::A—C.A+C will be an hyperlogism. For 
A—B. A::A—C. A is an hyperlogism of a greater 
antecedent to the same consequent; and therefore 
A—B. A+B::A—C. A+C is a much greater hy- 
perlogism, being made of a greater antecedent to 
a less consequent. 
28. If unequal parts be taken from two equal 
quantities, and betwixt the whole and the part of 
each there be interposed two means, one in geome- 
trical, the other in arithmetical proportion; the 
difference betwixt the two means will be greatest, 
where the difference betwixt the whole and its part 
is greatest. Forlet A Band A B be two equal quan- 
tities, from which Jet two unequal parts be taken, 
namely, AE the less, and AF the greater; and 
betwixt AB and AE let AG be a mean in geo- 
metrical proportion, and A H a mean in arithme- 


174 PHILOSOPHY. 


PART II. tical proportion. Also 
18, ' 

—— betwixt A B and AF let A _E G HB 
idee SAI be a mean in geo- AF t K B 
and geometri- metrical proportion, and 
cal proportions. ; . : . 

AK a mean in arithmetical proportion; I say 
H G is greater than K I. 
For in the first place we have 
this analogism - * . . AB. AG::BG. GE, by 
article 18. 


Then by composition we have 
this. . . ..... ABtAG.AB::BG+GE 
that is, B E. BG. 
And by taking the halves of 
the antecedents this third. 4AB+4AG.A B::} BG+ 
iGE, that is, BH. BG. 
And by conversion a fourth. AB.4AB+4AG::BG. BH. 
And by division this fifth . }AB—}AG.4 4 B43AG 
:;HG. BH. 
And by doubling the first an- 
tecedent and the first con- 
sequent. . . .. . . AB—AG.AB+ AG::HG.BH. 


Also by the same method may 
be found out this analogism AB—AI.AB+AI::KI.BK. 
Now seeing the proportion of A Bto AE is 
greater than that of AB to A F, the proportion of 
A B to AG, which is half the greater proportion, 
is greater than the proportion of AB to AI the 
half of the less proportion ; and therefore AI is 
greater than AG. Wherefore the proportion of 
A B—AG to AB+A G, by the precedent lemma, 
will be greater than the proportion of A B—A I to 
A B+AI; and therefore also the proportion of 
HG to BH will be greater than that of KI to BK, 
and much greater than the proportion of KI to 
BH, which is greater than BK; for BH is the 
half of BE, as BK 1s the half of BF, which, by 


OF ANALOGISM. 175 


supposition, is less than BE. Wherefore HG is PART Il. 
greater than K 1; which was to be proved. ee 
Coroll. It is manifest from hence, that if any waneecet 
quantity be supposed to be divided into equal jalpspareene 
parts infinite in number, the difference between 
the arithmetical and geometrical means will .be 
infinitely little, that is, none at all. And upon 
this foundation, chiefly, the art of making those 
numbers, which are called Logarithms, seems to 
have been built. 
29. If any number of quantities be propounded, 
whether they be unequal, or equal toj‘one ano- 
ther ; and there be another quantity, which multi- 
plied by the number of the propounded quantities, 
is equal to them all; that other quantity is a mean 
in arithmetical proportion to all those propounded 
quantities. 


176 PHILOSOPHY. 


CHAP. XIV. 


OF STRAIT AND CROOKED, ANGLE AND 
FIGURE. 


1. The definition and properties of a strait line.—2. The defini- 
tion and properties of a plane superficies.—3. Several sorts of 
crooked lines.—4. The definition and properties of a circular 
line.-— 5. The properties of a strait line taken in a plane. 
6. The definition of tangent lines. — 7. The definition of an 
angle, and the kinds thereof.—8. In concentric circles, arches 
of the same angle are to one another, as the whole circumfer- 
ences are.—9. The quantity of an angle, in what it consists. 
10. The distinction of angles, simply so called.—11. Of strait 
lines from the centre of a circle to a tangent of the same. 
12. The general definition of parallels, and the properties of 
strait parallels—13. The circumferences of circles are to 
one another, as their diameters. are.—14. In triangles, strait 
lines parallel to the bases are to one another, as the parts of 
the sides which they cut off from the vertex.—15. By what 
fraction of a strait line the circumference of a circle is made. 
16. That an angle of contingence is quantity, but of a differ- 
ent kind from that of an angle simply so called ; and that it 
can neither add nor take away any thing from the same. 
17. That the inclination of planes is angle simply so called. © 
18. A solid angle what it is—19. What is the nature of 
asymptotes. — 20. Situation, by what it is determined.— 
21. What is like situation ; what is figure; and what are like 


figures. 
PART II. 1. BETWEEN two points given, the shortest line is 
_'*_ that, whose extreme points cannot be drawn far- 
aad cwoperies ther asunder without altering the quantity, that is, 
of a strait line. without altering the proportion of that line to any 
other line given. For the magnitude of a line is 


computed by the greatest distance which may be 


OF STRAIT AND CROOKED. 177 


between its extreme points; so that any one line, 
whether it be extended or bowed, has always one 
and the same length, because it can have but one 
greatest distance between its extreme points. 

And seeing the action, by which a strait line is 
made crooked, or contrarily a crooked line is made 
strait, is nothing but the bringing of its extreme 
points nearer to one another, or the setting of 
them further asunder, a crooked line may rightly 
be defined to be that, whose extreme points may 
be understood to be drawn further asunder ; 
and a strait line to be that, whose extreme 
points cannot be drawn further asunder ; and 
comparatively, a more crooked, to be that line 
whose extreme points are nearer to one another 
than those of the other, supposing both the lines 
to be of equal length. Now, howsoever a line 
be bowed, it makes always a seus or cavity, some- 
times on one side, sometimes on another; so that 
the same crooked line may either have its whole 
cavity on one side only, or it may have it part on 
one side and part on the other side. Which 
being well understood, it will be easy to under- 
stand the following comparisons of strait and 
crooked lines. 

First, if a strait and a crooked line have their 
extreme points common, the crooked line is longer 


PART ITI. 
14. 
———— 
The definition 


and properties 
of a strait line. 


than the strait line. For if the extreme points of 


the crooked line be drawn out to their greatest 
distance, it will be made a strait line, of which 
that, which was a strait line from the beginning, 
will be but a part; and therefore the strait line 
was shorter than the crooked line, which had the 
same extreme points. And for the same reason, 
VOL. I. N 


178 PHILOSOPHY. 


PART II. if two crooked lines have their extreme points 


os 
The definition 
and properties 
of a strait line. 


common, and both of them have all their cavity on 
one and the same side, the outermost of the two 
will be the longest line. 

Secondly, a strait line and a perpetually crook- 
ed line cannot be coincident, no, not in the least 
part. For if they should, then not only some 
strait line would have its extreme points common 
with some crooked line, but also they would, by . 
reason of their coincidence, be equal to one ano- 
ther ; which, as I have newly shown, cannot be. 

Thirdly, between two points given, there can 
be understood but one strait line; because there 
cannot be more than one least interval or length 
between the same points. For if there may be 
two, they will either be coincident, and so both of 
them will be one strait line; or if they be not 
coincident, then the application of one to the other 
by extension will make the extended line have its 
extreme points at greater distance than the other ; 
and consequently, it was crooked from the begin- 
ning. 

Fourthly, from this last it follows, that two 
strait lines cannot include a superficies. For if 
they have both their extreme points common, they 
are coincident; and if they have but one or neither 
of them common, then at one or both ends the 
extreme points will be disjoined, and include no 
superficies, but leave all open and undetermined. 

Fifthly, every part of a strait line is a strait 
line. For seeing every part of a strait line is the 
least that can be drawn between its own extreme 
points, if all the parts should not constitute a strait 


OF STRAIT AND CROOKED. 179 


line, they would altogether be longer than the as 
whole line. es 

2. A plane or a plane superfictes, is that which The definition 
1s described by a strait line so moved, that all a dine ti: 
the several points thereof describe several strait *""'** 
lines. A strait line, therefore, is necessarily all of 
it in the same plane which it describes. Also the 
strait lines, which are made by the points that 
describe a plane, are all of them in the same plane. 
Moreover, if any line whatsoever be moved in a 
plane, the lines, which are described by it, are all 
of them in the same plane. 

All other superficies, which are not plane, are 
crooked, that is, are either concave or convex. 

And the same comparisons, which were made of 
strait and crooked lines, may also be rae of plane 
and crooked superficies. 

For, first, if a plane and crooked sessilis be ° 
terminated with the same lines, the crooked super- 
ficies is greater than the plane superficies. For if 
the lines, of which the crooked superficies con- 
sists, be extended, they will be found to be longer 
than those of which the plane superficies consists, 
which cannot be extended, because they are strait. 

Secondly, ‘two superficies, whereof the one is 
plane, and the other continually crooked, cannot 
be coincident, no, not in the least part. For if they 
were coincident, they would be equal; nay, the - 
same superficies would be both plane and crooked, 
which is impossible. 

Thirdly, within the same terminating lines 
there can be no more than one plane superficies ; 
because there can be but one least superficies 
within the same. 

N 2 


PART II. 
14. 


ey ee 


Several sorts of 


crooked lines. 


Definition and 
properties of a 
circular line. 


180 PHILOSOPHY. 


Fourthly, no number of plane superficies can 
include a solid, unless more than two of them end 
in a common vertex. For if two planes have both 
the same terminating lines, they are coincident, 
that is, they are but one superficies; and if their 
terminating lines be not the same, they leave one 
or more sides open. 

Fifthly, every part of a plane superficies is a 
plane superficies. For seeing the whole plane 
superficies is the least of all those, that have the 
same terminating lines ; and also every part of the 
same superficies is the least of all those, that are 
terminated with the same lines; if every part 
should not constitute a plane superficies, all the 
parts put together would not be equal to the 
whole. 

3. Of straitness, whether it be in lines or in 
superficies, there is but one kind; but of crooked- 
ness there are many kinds; for of crooked magni- 
tudes, some are congruous, that is, are coincident 
when they are applied to one other; others are 
incongruous. Again, some are opotopepetc OF uni- 
form, that is, have their parts, howsoever taken, 
congruous to one another ; others are avopotopepete 
or of several forms. Moreover, of such as are 
crooked, some are continually crooked, others have 
parts which are not crooked. 

4. If a strait line be moved in a plane, in such 
manner, that while one end of it stands still, the 
whole line be carried round about till it come 
again into the same place from whence it was first 
moved, it will describe a plane superficies, which 
will be terminated every way by that crooked line, 
which is made by that end of the strait line which 


OF STRAIT AND CROOKED. 18] 


was carried round. Now this superficies is called PART Il. 
@ CIRCLE; and of this circle, the unmoved point is ~—— 
the centre; the crooked line which terminates it, acta - 
the perimeter; and every part of that crooked circular line. 
line, a circumference or arch; the strait line, which 
generated the circle, is the semidiameter or ra- 
dius ; and any strait line, which passeth through 
the centre and is terminated on both sides in the 
circumference, is called the diameter. Moreover, 
every point of the radius, which describes the 
circle, describes in the same time its own peri- 
meter, terminating its own circle, which is said to 
be concentric to all the other circles, because this 
and all those have one common centre. 

Wherefore in every circle, all strait lines from 
the centre to the circumference are equal. For 
they are all coincident with the radius which 
generates the circle. 

Also the diameter divides both the perimeter 
and the circle itself into two equal parts. For if 
those two parts be applied to one another, and the 
semiperimeters be coincident, then, seeing they 
have one common diameter, they will be equal; 
and the semicircles will be equal also; for these 
also will be coincident. But if the semiperimeters 
be not coincident, then some one strait line, which 
passes through the centre, which centre is in the 
diameter, will be cut by them in two points. 
Wherefore, seeing all the strait lines from the 
centre to the circumference are equal, a part of 
the same strait line will be equal to the whole; 
which is impossible. 

For the same reason the perimeter of a circle 


182 PHILOSOPHY. 


oe will be uniform, that is, any one part of it will be 
——— coincident with any other equal part of the same. 


The proper- 


ties of a strait 


5. From hence may be collected this property 


line taken in of a strait line, namely, that it is all contained in 


a plane. 


that plane which contains both its extreme points. 
For seeing both its extreme points are in the 
plane, that strait line, which describes the plane, 
will pass through them both; and if one of them 
be made a centre, and at the distance between 
both a circumference be described, whose radius 
is the strait line which describes the plane, that 
circumference will pass through the other point. 
Wherefore between the two propounded points, 
there is one strait line, by the definition of a circle, 
contained wholly in the propounded plane; and 
therefore if another strait line might be drawn 
between the same points, and yet not be contained 
in the same plane, it would follow, that between 
two points two strait lines may be drawn; which 
has been demonstrated to be impossible. 

It may also be collected, that if two planes cut 
one another, their common section will be a strait 
line. For the two extreme points of the inter- 
section are in both the intersecting planes; and 
between those points a strait lme may be drawn ; 
but a strait line between any two points is in the 
same plane, in which the points are; and seeing 
these are in both the planes, the strait line which 
connects them will also be in both the same planes, 
and therefore it is the common section of both. 
And every other line, that can be drawn between 
those points, will be either coincident with that 
line, that is, it will be the same line; or it will not 


OF STRAIT AND CROOKED. 183 


be coincident, and then it will be in neither, or. PART 11. 
but in one of those planes. wekaee 

As a strait line may be understood to be 
moved round about whilst one end thereof remains 
fixed, as the centre; so in like manner it is easy to 
understand, that a plane may be circumduced 
about a strait line, whilst the strait line remains 
still im one and the same place, as the ais of that 
motion. Now from hence it is manifest, that any 
three points are in some one plane. For as any 
two points, if they be connected by a strait line, 
are understood to be in the same plane in which 
the strait line is; so, if that plane be circeumduced 
about the same strait line, it will in its revolution 
take in any third point, howsoever it be situate; 
and then the three points will be all in that plane; 
and consequently the three strait lines which con- 
nect those points, will also be in the same plane. 

6. Two lines are said to fouch one another, Definition of 
which being both drawn to one and the same” si 
point, will not cut one another, though they be 
produced, produced, I say, in the same manner in 
which they were generated. And therefore if two 
strait lines touch one another in any one point, 
they will be contiguous through their whole length. 

Also two lines continually crooked will do the 
same, if they be congruous and be applied to one 
another according to their congruity ; otherwise, 
if they be incongruously applied, they will, as all 
other crooked lines, touch one another, where they 
touch, but in one point only. Which is manifest 
from this, that there can be no congruity between 
a strait line and a line that is continually crooked ; 
for otherwise the same line might be both strait 


184 PHILOSOPHY. 


a Il. and crooked. Besides, when a strait line touches 
—— acrooked line, if the strait line be never so little 
moved about upon the point of contact, it will cut 
the crooked line; for seeing it touches it but in 
one point, if it incline any way, it will do more 
than touch it ; that is, it will either be congruous 
to it, or it will cut it; but it cannot be congruous 
to it; and therefore it will cut it. 
The definition 7. An angle, according to the most general 
of an angle, : 
and the kinds acceptation of the word, may be thus defined; 
when two lines, or many superficies, concur in one 
sole point, and diverge every where else, the 
quantity of that divergence 1s an ANGLE. And an 
angle is of two sorts; for, first, it may be made 
by the concurrence of lines, and then it is a super- 
ficial angle ; or by the concurrence of superficies, 
and then it is called a solid angle. 

Again, from the two ways by which two lines 
may diverge from one another, superficial angles 
are divided into two kinds. For two strait lines, 
which are applied to one another, and are con- 
tiguous in their whole length, may be separated or 
pulled open in such manner, that their concur- 
rence in one point will still remain; and this 
separation or opening may be either by circular 
motion, the centre whereof is their point of con- 
currence, and the lines will still retain their strait- 
ness, the quantity of which separation or divergence 
is an angle simply so called; or they may be 
separated by continual flexion or curvation in every 
imaginable point ; and the quantity of this sepa- 
ration is that, which is called an angle of con- 
tingrence. 

Besides, of superficial angles simply so called, 


OF STRAIT AND CROOKED. 185 


those, which are in a plane superficies, are plane ; Peet 
and those, which are not plane, are denominated ——— 
from the superficies in which they are. 

Lastly, those are strait-lined angles, which are 
made by strait lines; as those which are made by 
crooked lines are crooked-lined ; and those which 
are made both of strait and crooked lines, are 
mixed angles. 

8. Two arches intercepted between two radii of I concentric 
concentric circles, have the same proportion to one of the same 
another, which their whole perimeters have to one a 
another. For let the point A (in the first figure) 2 (re whole 
be the centre of the two circles BCD and EF 4G, te. 
in which the radii AEB and AFC intercept the 
arches BC and EF; I say the proportion of the 
arch BC to the arch E F is the same with that of 
the perimeter BCD to the perimeter EFG. For 
if the radius AFC be understood to be moved 
about the centre A with circular and uniform 
motion, that is, with equal swiftness everywhere, 
the point C will in a certain time describe the 
perimeter BCD, and in a part of that time the 
arch BC; and because the velocities are equal by 
which both the arch and the whole perimeter are 
described, the proportion of the magnitude of the 
perimeter BC D to the magnitude of the arch BC 
is determined by nothing but the difference of the 
times in which the perimeter and the arch are 
described. But both the perimeters are described 
in one and the same time, and both the arches in 
one and the same time; and therefore the propor- 
tions of the perimeter BC D to the arch BC, and 
of the perimeter EFG to the arch EI, are 
both determined by the same cause. Wherefore 


186 PHILOSOPHY. 


parTU. BCD. BC::EF G. EF are proportionals (by the 
—— 6th art. of the last chapter), and by permutation 
BCD.EFG::BC. EF will also be proportionals ; 
which was to be demonstrated. 
stat une, 9. Nothing is contributed towards the quantity 
in what it of an angle, neither by the length, nor by the 
' equality, nor by the inequality of the lines which 
comprehend it. For the lines A B and AC com- 
prehend the same angle which 1s comprehended by 
the lines AE and AF, or ABand AF. Nor is an 
angle either increased or diminished by the abso- 
lute quantity of the arch, which subtends the 
same; for both the greater arch BC and the 
lesser arch EF are subtended to the same angle. 
But the quantity of an angle is estimated by the 
quantity of the subtending arch compared with the 
quantity of the whole perimeter. And therefore 
the quantity of an angle simply so called may be 
thus defined : the quantity of an angle is an arch 
or circumference of a circle, determined by its 
proportion to the whole perimeter. Sothat when 
an arch is intercepted between two strait lines 
drawn from the centre, look how great a portion 
that arch is of the whole perimeter, so great is the 
angle. From whence it may be understood, that 
when the lines which contain an angle are strait 
lines, the quantity of that angle may be taken at 
any distance from the centre. But if one or both 
of the containing lines be crooked, then the quan- 
tity of the angle is to be taken in the least distance 
from the centre, or from their concurrence ; for 
the least distance is to be considered as a strait 
line, seeing no crooked line can be imagined so 
little, but that there may bea less strait line. And 


OF STRAIT AND CROOKED. 187 


although the least strait ine cannot be given, Pes 
because the least given line may still be divided, ———— 
yet we may come to a part so small, as is not at all 
considerable; which we call a poimt. And this 

point may be understood to be in a strait line 

which touches a crooked line; for an angle is 
generated by separating, by circular motion, one 

strait line from another which touches it, as has 

been said above in the 7th article. Wherefore an 

angle, which two crooked lines make, is the same 

with that which is made by two strait lines which 

touch them. 

10. From hence it follows, that vertical angles, The distinction 
such as are ABC, DBF in the second figure, are piyse called.” 
equal to one another. For if, from the two semi- 
perimeters DAC, FDA, which are equal to one 
another, the common arch D A be taken away, the 
remaining arches AC, DF will be equal to one 
another. 

Another distinction of angles is into r7ght and 
oblique. A right angle is that, whose quantity is 
the fourth part of the perimeter. And the lines, 
which make a right angle, are said to be perpen- 
dicular to one another. Also, of oblique angles, 
that which is greater than a right, is called an 
obtuse angle; and that which is less, an acute 
angle. From whence it follows, that all the angles 
that can possibly be made at one and the same 
point, together taken, are equal to four right 
angles; because the quantities of them all put 
together make the whole perimeter. Also, that 
all the angles, which are made on one side of a 
strait line, from any one point taken in the same, 
are equal to two right angles ; for if that point be 


PART II. 
14, 


anne genet 


Of strait lines 
from the cen- 
tre of a circle 
to a tangent 
of the same. 


188 PHILOSOPHY. 


made the centre, that strait line will be the dia- 
meter of a circle, by whose circumference the 
quantity of an angle is determined ; and that dia- 
meter will divide the perimeter into two equal 
parts. 

11. If a tangent be made the diameter of a 
circle, whose centre is the point of contact, a 
strait line drawn from the centre of the former 
circle to the centre of the latter circle, will make 
two angles with the tangent, that is, with the dia- 
meter of the latter circle, equal to two right angles, 
by the last article. And because, by the 6th article, 
the tangent has on both sides equal inclination to 
the circle, each of them will be a right angle; as 
also the semidiameter will be perpendicular to the 
same tangent. Moreover, the semidiameter, inas- 
much as it is the semidiameter, is the least 
strait line which can be drawn from the centre 
to the tangent; and every other strait line, that 
reaches the tangent, will pass out of the circle, 
and will therefore be greater than the semidia- 
meter. In like manner, of all the strait lines, 
which may be drawn from the centre to the tan- 
gent, that is the greatest which makes the greatest 
angle with the perpendicular ; which will be mani- 
fest, if about the same centre another circle be 
described, whose semidiameter is a strait line 
taken nearer to the perpendicular, and there be 
drawn a perpendicular, that is, a tangent, to the 
same. 

From whence it is also manifest, that if two 
strait lines, which make equal angles on either 
side of the perpendicular, be produced to the tan- 
gent, they will be equal. 


OF STRAIT AND CROOKED. 189 


12. There is in Euclid a definition of strait- ass II. 
lined parallels ; but I do not find that parallels in _—~—- 
general are anywhere defined; and therefore for rane Maa 


an universal definition of them, I say that any two fobtee 
lines whatsoever, strait or crooked, as also any tics of strait 
two superficies, are PARALLEL; when two equal Bea 
strait lines, wheresoever they fall upon them, 

make always equal angles with each of them. 

From which definition it follows ; first, that any 
two strait lines, not inclined opposite ways, falling 
upon two other strait lines, which are parallel, and 
intercepting equal parts in both of them, are them- 
selves also equal and parallel. As if A B and CD 
(in the third figure), inclined both the same way, 
fall upon the parallels A C and B D, and A C and 
B D be equal, A B and C D will also be equal and 
parallel. For the perpendiculars BE and DF 
being drawn, the right angles EBD and FDH 
will be equal. Wherefore, seeing E F and B D are 
parallel, the angles E B A and F D C will be equal. 
Now if DC be not equal to B A, let any other 
strait line equal to B A be drawn from the point D ; 
which, seeing it cannot fall upon the point C, let 
it fall upon G. Wherefore AG will be either | 
greater or less than B D; and therefore the angles 
E B A and F D Care not equal, as was supposed. 
Wherefore A B and C D are equal; which is the 
first. 

Again, because they make equal angles with the 
perpendiculars B E and D F; therefore the angle 
CDH will be equal to the angle A BD, and, by 
the definition of parallels, A B and C D will be 
parallel ; which is the second. 

That plane, which 1s included both ways 
within parallel lines,is called a PARALLELOGRAM. 


190 PHILOSOPHY. 


Be II Coroll. 1. From this last it follows, that the 

——— angles ABD andC DH are equal, that is, that 

ye a strait line, as B H, falling upon two parallels, as 

rallels, &. A B and C D, makes the internal angle A B D 
equal to the external and opposite angle C D H. 

Coroll. 11. And from hence again it follows, that. 
a strait line falling upon two parallels, makes the 
alternate angles equal, that is, the angle AG F, in 
the fourth figure, equal to the angleG FD. For 
seeing G F D is equal to the external opposite 
angle E G B, it will be also equal to its vertical 
angle A G F, which is alternate to G F D. 

Coroll. 111. That the internal angles on the 
same side of the line F G are equal to two nght 
angles. For the angles at F, namely, G FC and 
G F D, are equal to two right angles. But G F D 
is equal to its alternate angle AG F. Wherefore 
both the angles G F C and A G F, which are in- 
ternal on the same side of the line F G, are equal 
to two right angles. 

Coroll. 1v. That the three angles of a strait- 
lined plain triangle are equal to two right angles ; 
and any side being produced, the external angle 
will be equal to the two opposite internal angles. 
For if there be drawn by the vertex of the plain 
triangle A BC (fig. 5) a parallel to any of the 
sides, as to A B, the angles A and B will be equal 
to their alternate angles E and F, and the angle C 
is common. But, by the 10th article, the three 
angles E, C and F, are equal to two right angles ; 
and therefore the three angles of the triangle are 
equal to the same; which is the first. Again, 
the two angles B and D are equal to two right 
angles, by the 10th article. Wherefore taking 


OF STRAIT AND CROOKED. 191 


away B, there will remain the angles A and C, PART IL 

equal to the angle D; which is the seeond. —— 
Coroll. v. If the angles A and B be equal, the Frac 

sides A C and C B will also be equal, because A B "allels, &e. 

and E F are parallel ; and, on the contrary, if the 

sides A C and C B be equal, the angles A and B 

will also be equal. For if they be not equal, let 

the angles B and G be equal. Wherefore, seeing 

GB and EF are parallels, and the angles G and B 

equal, the sides G C and C B will also be equal; 

and because C B and A C are equal by supposi- 

tion, C Gand C A will also be equal ; which cannot 

* be, by the 11th article. 

Coroll. v1. From hence it is manifest, that if 
two radii of a circle be connected by a strait line, 
the angles they make with that connecting line 
will be equal to one another; and if there be 
added that segment of the circle, which is sub- 
tended by the same line which connects the radii, 
then the angles, which those radii make with the 
circumference, will also be equal to one another. 

For a strait line, which subtends any arch, makes 
equal angles with the same; because, if the arch 
and the subtense be divided in the middle, the two 
halves of the segment will be congruous to one 
another, by reason of the uniformity both of the 
circumference of the circle, and of the strait line. 

13. Perimeters of circles are to one another, as The circumfe- 
their semidiameters are. For let there be any two cles oo 
circles, as, in the first figure, BC D the greater, snotherastheir 
and E F G the lesser, having their common centre 
at A; and let their semidiameters be A C and A E. 

I say, A C has the same proportion to A E, which 
the perimeter B C D has to the perimeter E F G. 


192 PHILOSOPHY. 


AWE IE: FOr the magnitude of the semidiameters A C and 
—— AE is determined by the distance of the points 
C and E from the centre A; and the same dis- 
tances are acquired by the uniform motion of a 
point from A to C, in such manner, that in equal 
times the distances acquired be equal. But the 
perimeters B C D and EF G are also determined 
by the same distances of the points C and E from 
the centre A; and therefore the perimeters B C D 
and E F G, as well as the semidiameters AC and 
AE, have their magnitudes determined by the 
same cause, which cause makes, in equal times, 
equal spaces. Wherefore, by the 13th chapter and - 
6th article, the perimeters of circles and their 
semidiameters are proportionals ; which was to be 
proved. 
ath a 14. If two strait lines, which constitute an angle, 


strait lines pa- 


rallel to the be cut by strait-lined parallels, the intercepted pa- 


re nu the rallels will be to one another, as the parts which 
ee they cut off from the vertex. Let the strait lines 
rey cut off x, Band A C, in the 6th figure, make an angle at 
A, and be cut by the two strait-lined parallels B C 
and D E, so that the parts cut off from the vertex 
in either of those lines, as in A B, may be A B 
and AD. I say, the parallels B C and D E are to 
one another, as the parts A Band AD. For let 
A B be divided into any number of equal parts, as 
into A F, F D, D B; and by the points F and D, 
let FG and D E be drawn parallel to the base B C, 
and cut A C in G and E; and again, by the points 
G and E, let other strait lines be drawn parallel 
to A B, and cut B Cin H and I. _If now the point 
A be understood to be moved uniformly over A B, 


and in the same time B be moved to C, and all the 


OF STRAIT AND CROOKED. 193 
a 


points F, D, and B be moved uniformly and with PARTII. 
equal swiftness over F G, D E, and BC ; then shall —~— 
B pass over B H, equal to F G, in the same time that 

A passes over AF; and A F and FG will be to one 

another, as their velocities are; and when A is in 

F, D will be in K; when A is in D, D will bein E; 

and in what manner the point A passes by the 

points F, D, and B, in the same manner the point 

B will pass by the points H,I, and C; and the 

strait lines FG, D K, K E, B H, H I, and I C, are 

equal, by reason of their parallelism ; and therefore, 

as the velocity in A B is to the velocity in B C, so 

is AD to DE; but as the velocity in A B is to 

the velocity in B C, so is A B to BC; that is to say, 

all the parallels will be severally to all the parts 

cut off from the vertex, as A F is to F G. Where- 

fore, AF. GF:: AD. DE:: AB. B Care propor- 

tionals. 

The subtenses of equal angles in different circles, 
as the strait lines BC and FE (in fig. 1), are to 
one another as the arches which they subtend. 
For (by art. 8) the arches of equal angles are to 
one another as their perimeters are ; and (by art. 
13) the perimeters as their semidiameters ; but the 
subtenses B C and F E are parallel to one another 
by reason of the equality of the angles which they 
make with the semidiameters ; and therefore the 
same subtenses, by the last precedent article, will 
be proportional to the semidiameters, that is, to 
the perimeters, that is, to the arches which they 
subtend. 

15. If ina circle any number of equal subtenses BY what frac- 


tion of a strait 


be placed immediately after one another, and strait linethe hes 
erence OF & Cir- 


lines be drawn from the extreme point of the first cle is made. 
VOL. I. O 


194 PHILOSOPHY. 


PART II. subtense to the extreme points of all the rest, the 
14. 

—+— first snbtense being produced will make with the 

By what irc’ second subtense an external angle double to that, 


linethecircum- which is made by the same first subtense, and a 
cle ismade. tangent to the circle touching it in the extreme 
points thereof; and if a strait line which subtends 
two of those arches be produced, it will make an 
external angle with the third subtense, triple to 
the angle which is made by the tangent with the 
first subtense ; and so continually. For with the 
radius A B (in fig. 7) let a circle be described, and 
in it let any number of equal subtenses, BC, C D, 
and D E, be placed ; also let B D and B E be drawn ; 
and by producing BC, BD and BE to any dis- 
tance in G, H and I, let them make angles with 
the subtenses which succeed one another, namely, 
the external angles GC D, and HDE. Lastly, let 
the tangent K B be drawn, making with the first 
subtense the angle K BC. I say the angle GCD 
is double to the angle K BC, and the angle H DE 
triple to the same angle K BC. For if AC be 
drawn cutting BD in M, and from the point C 
there be drawn LC perpendicular to the same A C, 
then CL and MD will be parallel, by reason of 
the right angles at C and M; and therefore the 
alterne angles LC D and BDC will be equal: as 
also the angles BDC and CBD will be equal, 
because of the equality of the strait limes BC and 
CD. Wherefore the angle GCD is double to 
either of the angles CBD or CDB; and there- 
fore also the angle GCD is double to the angle 
LCD, that is, to the angle K BC. Again, CD is 
parallel to BE, by reason of the equality of the 
angles CBE and DEB, and of the strait lines 


OF STRAIT AND CROOKED. 195 


C B and DE; and therefore the angles GC D and PART IT. 
GB E are equal; and consequently GBE, as also —— 
D EB is double to the angle K BC. But the ex- tiga of a strat 
ternal angle HDE is equal to the two internal jminecireu 
DEB and DBE; and therefore the angle H D E *!: is made. 
is triple to the angle K BC, &c.; which was to be 
proved. 

Coroll. 1. From hence it is manifest, that the 
angles K B C and CBD, as also, that all the angles 
that are comprehended by two strait lines meeting 
in the circumference of a circle and insisting upon 
equal arches, are equal to one another. 

Coroll. 11. If the tangent BK be moved in the 
circumference with uniform motion about the 
centre B, it will in equal times cut off equal arches ; 
and will pass over the whole perimeter in the same 
time in which itself describes a semiperimeter about 
the centre B. 

Coroll. 111. From hence also we may under- 
stand, what it is that determines the bending or 
curvation of a strait line into the circumference of 
a circle ; namely, that it is fraction continually in- 
creasing in the same manner, as numbers, from 
one upwards, increase by the continual addition of 
unity. For the indefinite strait line K B being 
broken in B according to any angle, as that of 
K BC, and again in C according to a double angle, 
and in D according to an angle which is triple, 
and in E according to an angle which is quadru- 
ple to the first angle, and so continually, there will 
be described a figure which will indeed be recti- 
lineal, if the broken parts be considered as having 
magnitude ; but if they be understood to be the 
least that can be, that is, as so many points, then 

02 


196 PHILOSOPHY. 


PaRTII. the figure described will not be rectilineal, but a 
sees circle, whose circumference will be the broken 
line. 

Coroll. rv. From what has been said in this pre- 
sent article, it may also be demonstrated, that an 
angle in the centre is double to an angle in the 
circumference of the same circle, if the intercepted 
arches be equal. For seeing that strait line, by 
whose motion an angle is determined, passes over 
equal arches in equal times, as well from the centre 
as from the circumference; and while that, which 
is from the circumference, is passing over half its 
own perimeter, it passes in the same time over the 
whole perimeter of that which is from the centre, 
the arches, which it cuts off in the perimeter whose 
centre is A, will be double to those, which it makes 
in its own semiperimeter, whose centre is B. But 
in equal circles, as arches are to one another, so 
also are angles. 

It may also be demonstrated, that the external 
angle made by a subtense produced and the next 
equal subtense is equal to an angle from the centre 
insisting upon the same arch; as in the last dia- 
gram, the angle GC D is equal tothe angle CA D; 
for the external angle GC D is double to the angle 
CBD; and the angle CAD insisting upon the 
same arch CD is also double to the same angle 
CBD or K BC. 

That an angle 16. An angle of contingence, if it be compared 


of ti 2 e e 
is quantity, but With an angle simply so called, how little soever, 


of a different ° ° ° ° 
Bae has such proportion to it as a point has to a line; 


Ae calcd: that is, no proportion at all, nor any quantity. For 
and that it can first, an angle of contingence is made by continual 


ither add 
net" flexion ; so that in the generation of it there is no 


OF STRAIT AND CROOKED. 197 


circular motion at all, in which consists the nature rane 
of an angle simply so called; and therefore it can- Peer 
not be compared with it according to quantity. any nie 
Secondly, seeing the external angle made by a‘ ""* 
subtense produced and the next subtense is equal 
to an angle from the centre insisting upon the 
same arch, as in the last figure the angle GC D is 
equal to the angle CA D, the angle of contingence 
will be equal to that angle from the centre, which 
is made by A B and the same A B;; for no part of 
a tangent can subtend any arch; but as the point 
of contact is to be taken for the subtense, so the 
angle of contingence is to be accounted for the 
external angle, and equal to that angle whose arch 
is the same point B. 
Now, seeing an angle in general is defined to be 
the opening or divergence of two lines, which con- 
cur in one sole point; and seeing one opening is 
greater than another, it cannot be denied, but that 
by the very generation of it, an angle of contin- 
gence is quantity ; for wheresoever there is greater 
and less, there is also quantity ; but this quantity 
consists in greater and less flexion; for how much 
the greater a circle is, so much the nearer comes 
the circumference of it to the nature of a strait 
line; for the circumference of a circle being made 
by the curvation of a strait line, the less that strait 
line is, the greater is the curvation ; and therefore, 
when one strait line is a tangent to many circles, 
the angle of contingence, which it makes witha 
less circle, is greater than that which it makes 
with a greater circle. ; 
Nothing therefore is added to or taken from an 
angle simply so called, by the addition to it or 


198 PHILOSOPHY. 


Bat taking from it of never so many angles of contin- 

“— gence. And as an angle of one sort can never be 
equal to an angle of the other sort, so they cannot 
be either greater or less than one another. 

From whence it follows, that an angle of a seg- 
ment, that is, the angle, which any strait line 
makes with any arch, is equal to the angle which 
is made by the same strait line, and another which 
touches the circle in the point of their concur- 
rence ; as in the last figure, the angle which is 
made between GB and B K is equal to that which 
is made between G B and the arch BC. 

That the incli- 17. An angle, which is made by two planes, is 

eaaetnaee commonly called the inclination of those planes ; 

socalled. § and because planes have equal inclination in all 
their parts, instead of their inclination an angle is 
taken, which is made by two strait lines, one of 
which is in one, the other in the other of those 
planes, but both perpendicular to the common 
section. 

Asolidangle 18. A solid angle may be conceived two ways. 

whatitis. First, for the aggregate of all the angles, which are 
made by the motion of a strait line, while one ex- 
treme point thereof remaining fixed, it is carried 
about any plain figure, in which the fixed point of 
the strait line is not contained. And in this sense, 
it seems to be understood by Euclid. Now it is 
manifest, that the quantity of a solid angle so con- 
ceived is no other, than the aggregate of all the 
angles in a superficies so described, that is, in the 
superficies of a pyramidal solid. Secondly, when 
a pyramis or cone has its vertex in the centre of a 
sphere, a solid angle may be understood to be the 
proportion of a spherical superficies subtending 


OF STRAIT AND CROOKED. 199 


that vertex to the whole superficies of the sphere. PARTII. 
In which sense, solid angles are to one another as ——~ 
the spherical bases of solids, which have their ver- 

tex in the centre of the same sphere. 

19. All the ways, by which two lines respect one What ie the 
another, or all the variety of their position, may ssymptotes. 
be comprehended under four kinds; for any two 
lines whatsoever are either parallels, or being pro- 
duced, if need be, or moved one of them to the 
other parallelly to itself, they make an angle; or 
else, by the like production and motion, they touch 
one another ; or lastly, they are asymptotes. The 
nature of parallels, angles, and tangents, has been 
already declared. It remains that I speak briefly 
of the nature of asymptotes. 

Asvmptosy depends upon this, that quantity is 
infinitely divisible. And from hence it follows, that 
any line being given, and a body supposed to be 
moved from one extreme thereof towards the other, 
it is possible, by taking degrees of velocity always 
less and less, in such proportion as the parts of the 
line are made less by continual division, that the 
same body may be always moved forwards in that 
line, and yet never reach the end of it. For it is 
manifest, that if any strait line, as A F, (in the 8th 
figure) be cut anywhere in B, and again B F be cut 
in C, and C F in D, and D F in BK, and so eternally, 
and there be drawn from the point F, the strait 
line F F at any angle A F F; and lastly, if the strait 
lines AF, BF, CF, DF, EF, &c., having the same 
proportion to one another with the segments of 
the line A F, be set in order and parallel to the 
same A F, the crooked line ABC DE, and the 
strait line F F, will be asymptotes, that is, they 


PART II, 
14. 


* Seay 


200 PHILOSOPHY. 


will always come nearer and nearer together, but 
never touch one another. Now, because any line 
may be cut eternally according to the proportions 
which the segments have to one another, therefore 
the divers kinds of asymptotes are infinite in num- 
ber, and not, necessary to be further spoken of in 
this place. In the nature of asymptotes in general 
there is no more, than that they come still nearer 
and nearer, but never touch. But in special in the 
asymptosy of hyperbolic lines, it is understood 
they should approach to a distance less than any 
given quantity. 


Situation, by = 20. SITUATION i8 the relation of one place to 


what it is 


determined. qnother ; and where there are many places, their 


What is 


like situation ; 


situation is determined by four things; by their 
distances from one another ; by several distances 
Jrom a place assigned; by the order of strait 
lines drawn from a place assigned to the places 
of them all; and by the angles which are made 
by the lines so drawn. For if their distances, 
order, and angles, be given, that is, be certainly 
known, their several places will also be so certainly 
known, as that they can be no other. 

21. Points, how many soever they be, have like 


what is figure; situation with an equal number of other points, 


and what are 
like figures. 


when all the strait lines, that are drawn from some 
one point to all these, have severally the same 
proportion to those, that are drawn in the same 
order and at equal angles from some one point to 
all those. For let there be any number of points 
as A, B, and C, (in the 9th figure) to which from 
some one point D let the strait ines D A, D B, and 
D C be drawn; and let there be an equal number 
of other points, as E, F, and G, and from some 


OF STRAIT AND CROOKED. 201 


point H let the strait lines H E, H F, and H G be sae 
drawn, so that the angles AD B and BDC be -—+~— 
severally and in the same order equal to the angles yret inks 
E HF and F HG, and the strait lines D A, D B, is figure; &c. 
and D C proportional to the strait lines H E, H F, 

and H G;; I say, the three points A, B, and C, have 

like situation with the three points E, F, and G, or 

are placed alike. For if H E be understood to be 

laid upon D A, so that the point H be in JD, the 

point F will be in the strait line D B, by reason of 

the equality of the angles A D B and E H F; and 

the point G will be in the strait line D C, by reason 

of the equality of the angles BD C and FHG; 

and the strait lines A B and E F, as also B C and 

FG, will be parallel, because AD.EH:: BD. 

FH:: CD. G Hare proportionals by construction ; 

and therefore the distances between the points A 

and B, and the points B and C, will be propor- 

tional to the distances between the points E and F, 

and the points F and G. Wherefore, in the situa- 

tion of the points A, B, and C, and the situation 

of the points E, F and G, the angles in the same 

order are equal; so that their situations differ in 
nothing but the inequality of their distances from 

one another, and of their distances from the points 

D and H. Now, in both the orders of points, those 
inequalities are equal; for AB. BC:: EF. FG, 

which are their distances from one another, as 

also DA. DB. DC:: HE. HF. HG, which are 

their distances from the assumed points D and 

H, are proportionals. Their difference, therefore, 
consists solely in the magnitude of their distances. 

But, by the definition of /zke, (chapter 1. article 2) 

those things, which differ only in magnitude, are 

like. Wherefore the points A, B, and C, have to 


202 PHILOSOPHY. 


PART II. one another like situation with the points E, F, 

—-~— and 4G, orare placed alike ; which was to be proved. 

situntoer tat =FIGURE is quantity, determined by the situation 

is figure, &c. or placing of all its extreme points. Now I call 

those points extreme, which are contiguous to the 

place which is without the figure. In lines there- 

fore and superficies, all points may be called ex- 

treme; but in solids only those which are in the 
superficies that includes them. 

Like figures are those, whose extreme points in 
one of them are all placed like all the extreme 
points in the other; for such figures differ in 
nothing but magnitude. 

And like figures are alike placed, when in both 
of them the homologal strait lines, that is, the strait 
lines which connect the points which answer one 
another, are parallel, and have their proportional 
sides inclined the same way. 

And seeing every strait line is like every other 
strait line, and every plane like every other plane, 
when nothing but planeness is considered; if the 
lines, which include planes, or the superficies, 
which include solids, have their proportions known, 
it will not be hard to know whether any figure 
be like or unlike to another propounded figure. 

And thus much concerning the first grounds of 
philosophy. The next place belongs to geometry ; 
in which the quantities of figures are sought out 
from the proportions of lines and angles. Where- 
fore it is necessary for him, that would study geo- 
metry, to know first what is the nature of quantity, 
proportion, angle and figure. Having therefore 
explained these in the three last chapters, I 
thought fit to add them to this part; and so pass 


to the next. 


PART III. 


PROPORTIONS OF MOTIONS 
AND MAGNITUDES. 


CHAPTER XV. 


OF THE NATURE, PROPERTIES, AND DIVERS 
CONSIDERATIONS OF MOTION AND 
ENDEAVOUR. 


oom 


- Repetition of some principles of the doctrine of motion 
formerly set down. — 2. Other principles added to them. 
3. Certain theorems concerning the nature of motion.—4. 
Divers considerations of motion.—5. The way by which the 
first endeavour of bodies moved tendeth.—6. In motion which 
is made by concourse, one of the movents ceasing, the endea- 
vour is made by the way by which the rest tend.—7. All endea- 
vour is propagated in infinitum.—8. How much greater the 
velocity or magnitude is of a movent, so much the greater is 
the efficacy thereof upon any other body in its way. 


1. THE next things in order to be treated of are part IIL. 


MOTION and MAGNITUDE, which are the most —"_ 


common accidents of all bodies. This place there- Repetition 
of some prin- 


fore most properly belongs to the elements of ciples of the 


doctrine of 


geometry. But because this part of philosophy, motion for- 
having been improved by the best wits of all ages, ™¢™!ysetdown. 
has afforded greater plenty of matter than can well 


PART ITT. 
15. 


—_ 
Repetition 
of some 
principles, &c. 


204 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


be thrust together within the narrow limits of this 
discourse, I thought fit to admonish the reader, 
that before he proceed further, he take into his 
hands the works of Euclid, Archimedes, Apollo- 
nius, and other as well ancient as modern writers. 
For to what end is it, to do over again that which 
is already done? The little therefore that I shall 
Say concerning geometry in some of the following 
chapters, shall be such only as is new, and con- 
ducing to natural philosophy. 

I have already delivered some of the principles 
of this doctrine in the eighth and ninth chapters ; 
which I shall briefly put together here, that the 
reader in going on may have their light nearer at 
hand. 

First, therefore, in chap. vill. art. 10, motion is 
defined to be the continual privation of one place, 
and acquisition of another. 

Secondly, it is there shown, that whatsoever is 
moved 1s moved in time. 

Thirdly, i the same chapter, art. 11, I have 
defined rest to be when a body remains for some 
time in one place. 

Fourthly, it is there shown, that whatsoever 18 
moved 1s not in any determined place; as also 
that the same has been moved, is still moved, and 
will yet be moved; so that in every part of that 
space, in which motion is made, we may consider 
three times, namely, the past, the present, and 
the future time. 

Fifthly, in art. 15 of the same chapter, I have 
defined velocity or swiftness to be motion con- 
sidered as power, namely, that power by which a 
body moved may tn a certam time transmit a 


MOTION AND ENDEAVOUR. 205 


certain length; which also may more briefly be PART IIL 
enunciated thus, velocity is the quantity of motion | ——~ 
determined by time and line. bere 

Sixthly, in the same chapter, art. 16, I have Principles, &. 
shown that motion 1s the measure of time. 

Seventhly, in the same chapter, art. 17, I have 
defined motions to be equally swift, when in equal 
times equal lengths are transmitted by them. 

Eighthly, in art. 18 of the same chapter, motions 
are defined to be equal, when the swiftness of one 
moved body, computed in every part of its mag- 
nitude, 1s equal to the swiftness of another, com- 
puted also in every part of its magnitude. From 
whence it is to be noted, that motions equal to 
one another, and motions equally swift, do not 
signify the same thing; for when two horses draw 
abreast, the motion of both is greater than the 
motion of either of them singly; but the swiftness 
of both together is but equal to that of either. 

Ninthly, in art. 19 of the same chapter, I have 
shown, that whatsoever is at rest will always be 
at rest, unless there be some other body besides 
it, which by getting into tts place suffers it no 
longer to remain at rest. And that whatsoever ts 
moved, will always be moved, unless there be some 
other body besides tt, which hinders its motion. 

Tenthly, in chap. 1x. art. 7, I have demonstrated, 
that when any body is moved which was formerly 
at rest, the immediate efficient cause of that motion 
78 in some other moved and contiguous body. 

Eleventhly, I have shown in the same place, that 
whatsoever is moved, will always be moved in the 
same way, and with the same swiftness, if tt be 


206 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PARTI. not hindered by some other moved and contiguous 


ney’ 


Other prin- 
ciples added 
to them. 


body. 

2. To which principles I shall here add those 
that follow. First, I define ENDEAVOUR to be 
motion made in less space and time than can be 
given; that is, less than can be determined or 
assigned by exposition or number ; that is, motion 
made through the length of a point, and in an 
instant or point of time. For the explaining of 
which definition it must be remembered, that by a 
point is not to be understood that which has no 
quantity, or which cannot by any means be 
divided: for there 1s no such thing in nature; 
but that, whose quantity 1s not at all considered, 
that is, whereof neither quantity nor any part is 
computed in demonstration ; so that a point is not 
to be taken for an indivisible, but for an undivided 
thing; as also an instant is to be taken for an 
undivided, and not for an indivisible time. 

In like manner, endeavour is to be conceived as 
motion ; but so as that neither the quantity of the 
time in which, nor of the line in which it is made, 
may in demonstration be at all brought into com- 
parison with the quantity of that time, or of that 
line of which it is a part. And yet, as a point may 
be compared with a point, so one endeavour may 
be compared with another endeavour, and one 
may be found to be greater or less than another. 
For if the vertical points of two angles be com- 
pared, they will be equal or unequal in the same 
proportion which the angles themselves have to 
one another. Or if a strait line cut many circum- 
ferences of concentric circles, the equality of the 
points of intersection will be in the same propor- 


MOTION AND ENDEAVOUR. 207 


tion which the perimeters have to one another. PART III. 
And in the same manner, if two motions begin —~— 
and end both together, their endeavours will be aie vided 
equal or unequal, according to the proportion of ‘them 
their velocities ; as we see a bullet of lead descend 

with greater endeavour than a ball of wool. 

Secondly, I define IMPETUS, or quickness of 
motion, to be the swiftness or velocity of the body 
moved, but considered in the several points of 
that time in which it is moved. In which sense 
impetus zs nothing else but the quantity or velocity 
of endeavour. But considered with the whole 
time, it 1s the whole velocity of the body moved 
taken together throughout all the time, and equal 
to the product of a line representing the time, 
multiplied into a line representing the arith- 
metically mean impetus or quickness. Which 
arithmetical mean, what it is, is defined in the 29th 
article of chapter XIII. 

And because in equal times the ways that are 
passed are as the velocities, and the zmpetus is the 
velocity they go withal, reckoned in all the several 
points of the times, it followeth that during any 
time whatsoever, howsoever the zmpetus be in- 
creased or decreased, the length of the way passed 
over shall be increased or decreased in the same 
proportion; and the same line shall represent 
both the way of the body moved, and the several 
impetus or degrees of swiftness wherewith the way 
is passed over. 

And if the body moved he not a point, but a 
strait line moved so as that every point thereof 
make a several strait line, the plane described by 
its motion, whether uniform, accelerated, or re- 


208 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PARTIIL tarded, shall be greater or less, the time being the 

——~— same, in the same proportion with that of the 

ae Fidea ?mpetus reckoned in one motion to the znpetus 

tothem. —_ reckoned in the other. For the reason is the same 
in parallelograms and their sides. 

For the same cause also, if the body moved be a 
plane, the solid described shall be still greater or 
less in the proportions of the several zmpetus or 
quicknesses reckoned through one line, to the 
several zmpetus reckoned through another. 

This understood, let A BC D, (in figure 1, chap. 
Xvit.) be a parallelogram ; in which suppose the 
side AB to be moved parallelly to the opposite side 
CD, decreasing all the way till it vanish in the 
point C, and so describing the figure ABEFC; 
the point B, as A B decreaseth, will therefore de- 
scribe the line B EFC; and suppose the time of 
this motion designed by the line C D; and in the 
same time CD, suppose the side A C to be moved 
parallel and uniformly to BD. From the point O 
taken at adventure in the line C D, draw O R pa- 
rallel to BD, cutting the line BEFC in E, and 
the side AB mn R. And again, from the point Q 
taken also at adventure in the line CD, draw QS 
parallel to B D, cutting the line BE F C in F, and 
the side AB in 8; and draw EG and F H parallel 
to CD, cutting AC inGand H. Lastly, suppose 
the same construction done in all the points possi- 
ble of the ine BEF C. I say, that as the propor- 
tions of the swiftness wherewith QF, OE, DB, 
and all the rest supposed to be drawn parallel to 
DB and terminated in the line BEFC, are to 
the proportions of their several times designed by 
the several parallels H F, GE, AB, and all the 


MOTION AND ENDEAVOUR. 209 


rest supposed to be drawn parallel to the line of ren DUE 
time CD and terminated in the line BEFC, the —— 
aggregate to the aggregate, so is the area or plane aol A 
DBEFC to the area or plane AC FEB. For them. 
as A B decreasing continually by the lime BE FC 
vanisheth in the time CD into the point C, so in 

the same time the line D C continually decreasing 
vanisheth by the same line C F EB into the point 

B; and the point D describeth in that decreasing 
motion the line D B equal to the line A C described 

by the point A in the decreasing motion of AB; 

and their swiftnesses are therefore equal. Again, 
because in the time G E the point O describeth the 

line OF, and in the same time the point S de- 
scribeth the line SE, the line OE shall be to the 

line SE, as the swiftness wherewith OE is de- 
scribed to the swiftness wherewith SE is described. 

In like manner, because in the same time H F the 
point Q describeth the line QF, and the point R 

the line R F, it shall be as the swiftness by which 

QF is described to the swiftness by which R F is 
described, so the line itself QF to the line itself 
RF;; and so in all the lines that can possibly be 
drawn parallel to BD in the poimts where they 

cut the line BEFC. But all the parallels to BD, 

as SE, RF, AC, and the rest that can possibly be 
drawn from the line A B to the line BE F C, make 

the area of the plane A BE FC; and all the paral- 

lels to the same BD, as QF, OE, DB and the 

rest drawn to the points where they cut the same 

line B E FC, make the area of the plane B E FC D. 

As therefore the aggregate of the swiftnesses 
wherewith the plane BEFCD is described, is 

to the aggregate of the swiftnesses wherewith 

VOL. I. P 


PART III. 
15. 


ee 
Other prin- 
ciples added 
to them. 


210 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


the plane ACFEB is described, so is the plane 
itself BE FCD to the plane itself ACFEB. But 
the aggregate of the times represented by the pa- 
rallels AB, GE, HF and the rest, maketh also 
the area AC FEB. And therefore, as the aggre- 
gate of all the lines Q F, OE, DB and all the rest 
of the lines parallel to B D and terminated in the 
line BEFC, is to the aggregate of all the lines 
HF, GE, AB and all the rest of the lines pa- 
rallel to CD and terminated in the same line 
BEFC; that is, as the aggregate of the lines 
of swiftness to the aggregate of the lines of time, 
or as the whole swiftness in the parallels to D B to 
the whole time in the parallels to C D, so is the 
plane BEF CD to the plane AC FEB. And the 
proportions of QF to F H, and of OF to EG, and 
of DB to BA, and so of all the rest taken toge- 
ther, are the proportions of the plane DBEFC 
to the plane ABEFC. But the lines QF, OF, 
D B and the rest are the lines that design the swift- 
ness; and the lines H F, GE, AB and the rest are 
the lines that design the times of the motions ; 
and therefore the proportion of the plane DBEFC 
to the plane A BEF C is the proportion of all the 
velocities taken together to all the times taken 
together. Wherefore, as the proportions of the 
swiftnesses, &c.; which was to be demonstrated. | 

The same holds also in the diminution of the 
circles, whereof the lines of time are the semidia- 
meters, as may easily be conceived by imagining 
the whole plane ABCD turned round upon the 
axis BD; for the line B EFC will be everywhere 
in the superficies so made, and the lines H F, GE, 
A B, which are here parallelograms, will be there 


MOTION AND ENDEAVOUR. 211 


cylinders, the diameters of whose bases are the 
lines H F, GE, AB, &c. and the altitude a point, 
that is to say, a quantity less than any quantity 
that can possibly be named ; and the lines QF, OE, 
D B, &c. small solids whose lengths and breadths 
are less than any quantity that can be named. 

But this is to be noted, that unless the propor- 
tion of the sum of the swiftnesses to the proportion 
of the sum of the times be determined, the propor- 
tion of the figure DBEFC to the figure ABEFC 
cannot be determined. 

Thirdly, I define RESISTANCE ¢o be the endea- 
vour of one moved body either wholly or in part 
contrary to the endeavour of another moved body, 
which toucheth the same. I say, wholly contrary, 
when the endeavour of two bodies proceeds in the 
same strait line from the opposite extremes, and 
contrary in part, when two bodies have their en- 
deavour in two lines, which, proceeding from the 
extreme points of a strait line, meet without the 
same. 

Fourthly, that I may define what it is to PREss, 
I say, that of two moved bodies one presses the 
other, when with tts endeavour it makes either all 
or part of the other body to go out of its place. 

Fifthly, a body, which is pressed and not 
wholly removed, is said to RESTORE itself, when, 
the pressing body being taken away, the parts 
which were moved do, by reason of the internal 
constitution of the pressed body, return every one 
into 1ts own place. And this we may observe in 
springs, in blown bladders, and in many other 
bodies, whose parts yield more or less to the en- 
deavour which the pressing body makes at the 

P2 


PART III. 
15. 
ye” 
Other prin- 
ciples added 

to them. 


212 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART IIL first arrival; but afterwards, when the presaine 

——— body is removed, they do, by some force within 
them, restore themselves, and give their whole 
body the same figure it had before. 

Sixthly, I define Force to be the impetus or 
quickness of motion multiplied either into ttself, 
or into the magnitude of the movent, by means 
whereof the said movent works more or less upon 
the body that resists it. 

Certain theo. 3. Having premised thus much, I shall now 
ing the nature demonstrate, first, that if a point moved come to 
"touch another point which is at rest, how little 
soever the impetus or quickness of its motion be, 
it shall move that other point. For if by that 
impetus it do not at all move it out of its place, 
neither shall it move it with double the same 
impetus. For nothing doubled is still nothing; 
and for the same reason it shall never move it with 
that impetus, how many times soever it be multi- 
plied, because nothing, however it be multiplied, 
will for ever be nothing. Wherefore, when a 
point is at rest, if it do not yield to the least 
impetus, it will yield to none; and consequently 
it will be impossible that that, which is at rest, 
should ever be moved. 

Secondly, that when a point moved, how little 
soever the impetus thereof be, falls upon a point of 
any body at rest, how hard soever that body be, it 
will at the first touch make it yield a little. For if 
it do not yield to the impetus which is in that 
point, neither will it yield to the impetus of never 
so many points, which have all their impetus seve- 
rally equal to the impetus of that point. For seeing 
all those points together work equally, if any one 


& 


MOTION AND ENDEAVOUR. 213 


of them have no effect, the aggregate of them all PART III. 
together shall have no effect as many times told as ee 
there are points in the whole body, that is, still no 

effect at all; and by consequent there would be 

some bodies so hard that it would be impossible to 

break them ; that is, a finite hardness, or a finite 

force, would not yield to that which is infinite; 

which is absurd. 

Coroll. It is therefore manifest, that rest does 
nothing at all, nor is of any efficacy; and that 
nothing but motion gives motion to such things 
as be at rest, and takes it from things moved. 

Thirdly, that cessation in the movent does not. 

cause cessation in that which was moved by it. 
For (by number 11 of art. 1 of this chapter) what- 
soever is moved perseveres in the same way and 
with the same swiftness, as long as it is not hin- 
dered by something that is moved against it. Now 
it is manifest, that cessation is not contrary mo- 
tion; and therefore it follows that the standing 
still of the movent does not make it necessary that 
the thing moved should also stand still. 

Coroll. They are therefore deceived, that reckon 
the taking away of the impediment or resistance 
for one of the causes of motion. 

4. Motion is brought into account for divers Diem 

respects ; first, as in a body undivided, that is, of motions. 
considered as a point; or, as in a divided body. 
In an undivided body, when we suppose the way, 
by which the motion is made, to be a line; and in 
a divided body, when we compute the motion of 
the several parts of that body, as of parts. 

Secondly, from the diversity of the regulation 
of motion, it is in body, considered as undivided. 


214 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


Pee: sometimes uniform and sometimes multiform. Uni- 
ee form is that by which equal lines are always 
Diver vations tr@DSMitted in equal times; and multzform, when 
ofmotion. in one time more, in another time less space is 
transmitted. Again, of multiform motions, there 
are some in which the degrees of acceleration and 
retardation proceed in the same proportions, which 
the spaces transmitted have, whether duplicate, or 
triplicate, or by whatsoever number multiplied ; 

and others in which it is otherwise. 

Thirdly, from the number of the movents; that 
is, one motion is made by one movent only, and 
another by the concourse of many movents. 

Fourthly, from the position of that line in which 
a body is moved, in respect of some other line; 
and from hence one motion Is called perpendicular, 
another oblique, another parallel. 

Fifthly, from the position of the movent in re- 
spect of the moved body ; from whence one motion 
is pulston ov driving, another ¢raction or drawing. 
Pulsion, when the movent makes the moved body 
go before it; and éraction, when it makes it follow. 
Again, there are two sorts of pulston ; one, when 
the motions of the movent and moved body begin 
both together, which may be called ¢rusion or 
thrusting and vection ; the other, when the movent 
is first moved, and afterwards the moved body, 
which motion is called percussion or stroke. 

Sixthly, motion is considered sometimes from 
the effect only which the movent works in the 
moved body, which is usually called moment. Now 
moment is the excess of motion which the movent 
has above the motion or endeavour of the resisting 
body. 


MOTION AND ENDEAVOUR. 215 


Seventhly, it may be considered from the diver- PART III. 
sity of the medium ; as one motion may be made oS 
in vacuity or empty place ; another in a fluid; 
another in a consistent medium, that is, a medium 
whose parts are by some power so consistent and 
cohering, that no part of the same will yield to the 
movent, unless the whole yield also. 

Eighthly, when a moved body is considered as 
having parts, there arises another distinction of 
motion into semple and compound. Simple, when 
all the several parts describe several equal lines ; 
compounded, when the lines described are unequal. 

5. All endeavour tends towards that part, that is The way by 
to say, in that way which is determined by the tye iy 
motion of the movent, if the movent be but one; Podies moved 
or, if there be many movents, in that way which 
their concourse determines. For example, if a 
moved body have direct motion, its first endeavour 
will be in a strait line; if it have circular motion, 
its first endeavour will be in the circumference of a 
circle. 

6. And whatsoever the line be, in which a In motion, 
body has its motion from the concourse of two da sateniong 
movents, as soon as in any point thereof the force °7e! the m~- 


vents ccasing, 


of one of the movents ceases, there immediately oe 

the former endeavour of that body will be changed way by which 

into an endeavour in the line of the other movent. "°"**‘*** 
Wherefore, when any body is carried on by 

the concourse of two winds, one of those winds 

ceasing, the endeavour and motion of that body 

will be in that line, in which it would have been 

carried by that wind alone which blows still. And 

in the describing of a circle, where that which is 


moved has its motion determined by a movent in a 


216 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART HI. tangent, and by the radius which keeps it in a cer- 
——— tain distance from the centre, if the retention of 
the radius cease, that endeavour, which was ‘in the 
circumference of the circle, will now be in the tan- 
gent, that is, in a strait line. For, seeing endea- 
vour is computed in a less part of the circum- 
ference than can be given, that is, in a point, the 
way by which a body is moved in the circumference 
is compounded of innumerable strait lines, of which 
every one is less than can be given; which are 
therefore called points. Wherefore when any body, 
which is moved in the circumference of a circle, is 
freed from the retention of the radius, it will pro- 
ceed in one of those strait lines, that is, in a 
tangent. 
All endeavour 7. All endeavour, whether strong or weak, is 
8 propagated : ; ; ear ; 
in infinitum. propagated to infinite distance ; for it is motion. If 
therefore the first endeavour of a body be made in 
space which is empty, it will always proceed with 
the same velocity; for it cannot be supposed that 
it can receive any resistance at all from empty 
space; and therefore, (by art. 7, chap. 1x) it will 
always proceed in the same way and with the 
same swiftness. And if its endeavour be in space 
which is filled, yet, seeing endeavour is motion, 
that which stands next in its way shall be removed, 
and endeavour further, and again remove that 
which stands next, and so infinitely. Wherefore 
the propagation of endeavour, from one part of full 
space to another, proceeds infinitely. Besides, it 
reaches in any instant to any distance, how great 
soever. For in the same instant in which the first 
part of the full medium removes that which is next 
it, the second also removes that part which is next 


MOTION AND ENDEAVOUR. 217 


to it; and therefore all endeavour, whether it be in 
empty or in full space, proceeds not only to any 
distance, how great soever, but also in any time, 
how little soever, that is, in an instant. Nor makes 
it any matter, that endeavour, by proceeding, grows 
weaker and weaker, till at last it can no longer be 
perceived by sense ; for motion may be insensible ; 
and I do not here examine things by sense and ex- 
perience, but by reason. 

8. When two movents are of equal magnitude, 
the swifter of them works with greater force than 
the slower, upon a body that resists their motion. 
Also, if two movents have equal velocity, the 
greater of them works with more force than the 
less. For where the magnitude is equal, the movent 
of greater velocity makes the greater impression 
upon that body upon which it falls ; and where the 
velocity is equal, the movent of greater magnitude 
fallmg upon the same point, or an equal part of 
another body, loses less of its velocity, because the 
resisting body works only upon that part of the 
movent which it touches, and therefore abates the 
impetus of that part only; whereas in the mean 
time the parts, which are not touched, proceed, 
and retain their whole force, till they also come to 
be touched; and their force has some effect. 
Wherefore, for example, in batteries a longer than 
a shorter piece of timber of the same thickness and 
velocity, and a thicker than a slenderer piece of 


PART IIT. 
15. 


bE aamenemnatil 


How much 
greater the 
velocity or 
magnitude is 
of a movent, 
so much the 
greater is the 
efficacy there- 
of upon any 
other body 
in its way. 


the same length and velocity, work a greater 


effect upon the wall. 


218 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


OF MOTION ACCELERATED AND UNIFORM, AND 
OF MOTION BY CONCOURSE. 


1. The velocity of any body, in what time soever it be computed, 
is that which is made of the multiplication of the impetus, or 
quickness of its motion into the time.—2-5. In all motion, 
the lengths which are passed through are to one another, as the 
products made by the impetus multiplied into the time.—6. If 
two bodies be moved with uniform motion through two lengths, 
the proportion of those hengths to one another will be com- 
pounded of the proportions of time to time, and impetus to im- 
petus, directly taken.—7. If two bodies pass through two lengths 
with uniform motion, the proportion of their times to one 
another will be compounded of the proportions of length to 
length, and impetus to impetus reciprocally taken; also the 
proportion of their impetus to one another will be compounded 
of the proportions of length to length, and time to time reci- 
procally taken.—8. Ifa body be carried on with uniform motion 
by two movents together, which meet in an angle, the line by 
which it passes will be a strait line, subtending the comple- 
ment of that angle to two right angles.—9, &c. If a body be 
carried by two movents together, one of them being moved 
with uniform, the other with accelerated motion, and the pro- 
portion of their lengths to their times being explicable in 
numbers, how to find out what line that body describes. 


PART Ill. 1, THE velocity of any body, in whatsoever time it 
—— be moved, has its quantity determined by the sum 
any body, in Of all the several quicknesses or impetus, which it 


what time so- hath in the several points of the time of the body’s 
puted, is that motion. For seeing velocity, (by the definition of 
whicnd 18 made - 


of the multi- 1t, Chap. vVII1, art. 15) is that power by which a 


plication of ; 1 1 1 
The impews Ody can in a certain time pass through a certain 


orquickness length; and quickness of motion or impetus, (by 


ACCELERATED AND UNIFORM MOTION. 219 


chap. xv, art. 2, num. 2) is velocity taken in one PART III. 
point of time only, all the impetus, together taken — 
in all the points of time, will be the same thing :"i's motion 
with the mean impetus multiplied into the whole 
time, or which is all one, will be the velocity of the 
whole motion. 

Coroll. If the impetus be the same in every 
point, any strait line representing it may be taken 
for the measure of time: and the quiecknesses or 
impetus applied ordinately to any strait line 
making an angle with it, and representing the way 
of the body’s motion, will design a parallelogram 
which shall represent the velocity of the whole 
motion. But if the impetus or quickness of mo- 
‘tion begin from rest and increase uniformly, that 
is, In the same proportion continually with the 
times which are passed, the whole velocity of the 
motion shall be represented by a triangle, one side 
whereof is the whole time, and the other the 
greatest impetus acquired in that time; or else by 
a parallelogram, one of whose sides is the whole 
time of motion, and the other, half the greatest 
impetus ; or lastly, by a parallelogram having for 
one side a mean proportional between the whole 
time and the half of that time, and for the other 
side the half of the greatest impetus. For both 
these parallelograms are equal to one another, and 
severally equal to the triangle which is made of 
the whole line of time, and of the greatest ac- 
quired impetus; as 1s demonstrated in the ele- 
ments of geometry. 

2. In all uniform motions the lengths which are I all motion, 
transmitted are to one another, as the product of wre.” 


which are pass- 


the mean impetus multiplied into its time, to the ‘4 fous # 


PART III. 
16. 
—— 
to one another, 
as the products 
made by the 
impetus multi- 
plied into time. 


220 | MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


product of the mean impetus multiplied also into 
its time. 

For let A B (in fig. 1) be the time, and AC the 
impetus by which any body passes with uniform 
motion through the length D E; and in any part of 
the time A B, as in the time AF, let another body 
be moved with uniform motion, first, with the same 
impetus AC. This body, therefore, in the time 
AF with the impetus AC will pass through the 
length AF. Seeing, therefore, when bodies are 
moved in the same time, and with the same velo- 
city and impetus in every part of their motion, the 
proportion of one length transmitted to another 
length transmitted, is the same with that of time 
to time, it followeth, that the length transmitted in 
the time AB with the impetus AC will be to the 
length transmitted in the time A F with the same 
impetus A C, as A B itself is to AF, that is, as the 
parallelogram ATI is to the parallelogram AH, 
that is, as the product of the time AB into the 
mean impetus AC is to the product of the time 
AF into the same impetus AC. Again, let it be 
supposed that a body be moved in the time A F, 
not with the same but with some other uniform 
impetus, as AL. Seeing therefore, one of the 
bodies has in all the parts of its motion the impetus 
AC, and the other in like manner the impetus 
AL, the length transmitted by the body moved 
with the impetus AC will be to the length trans- 
mitted by the body moved with the impetus AL, 
as AC itself is to A L, that is, as the parallelogram 
AH is to the parallelogram FL. Wherefore, by 
ordinate proportion it will be, as the parallelogram 
Al to the parallelogram FL, that is, as the pro- 


ACCELERATED AND UNIFORM MOTION. 221 


duct of the mean impetus into the time is to the PART III 
product of the mean impetus into the time, so the ee 
length transmitted in the time A B with the impe- (, active 
tus AC, to the length transmitted in the time A F 
with the impetus AL; which was to be demon- 
strated. 7 

Coroll. Seeing, therefore, in uniform motion, as 
has been shown, the lengths transmitted are to 
one another as the parallelograms which are made 
by the multiplication of the mean impetus into the 
times, that is, by reason of the equality of the im- 
petus all the way, as the times themselves, it will 
also be, by permutation, as time to length, so time 
to length; and in general, to this place are appli- 
cable all the properties and transmutations of ana- 
logisms, which I have set down and demonstrated 
in chapter XIII. 

3. In motion begun from rest and uniformly 
accelerated, that is, where the impetus increaseth 
continually according to the proportion of the 
times, it will also be, as one product made by the 
mean impetus multiplied into the time, to another 
product made likewise by the mean impetus multi- 
plied into the time, so the length transmitted in 
the one time to the length transmitted in the other 
time. 

For let A B (in fig. 1) represent a time; in the 
beginning of which time A, let the impetus be as 
the point A; but as the time goes on, so let the 
impetus increase uniformly, till in the last point of 
that time A B, namely in B, the impetus acquired 
be BI. Again, let AF represent another time, in 
whose beginning A, let the impetus be as the point 
itself A; but as the time proceeds, so let the 1m- 


222 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART Ill, petus increase uniformly, till in the last point F of 

_”— the time AF the impetus acquired be F K; and 

‘Tn all motion, let DE be the length passed through in the time 

e lengths,&c, 

A B with impetus uniformly increased. I say, the 
length D E is to the length transmitted in the time 
A F, as the time A B multiplied into the mean of 
the impetus increasing through the time A B, is to 
the time A F multiplied into the mean of the im- 
petus increasing through the time A F. 

For seeing the triangle A BI is the whole velo- 
city of the body moved in the time A B, till the 
Impetus aequired be BI; and the triangle AF K 
the whole velocity of the body moved in the time 
A F with impetus increasing till there be acquired 
the impetus F K; the length DE to the length 
acquired in the time AF with impetuS increasing 
from rest in A till there be acquired the impetus 
F K, will be as the triangle A BI to the triangle 
A FK, that is, if the triangles A BI and AF K be 
like, in duplicate proportion of the time A B to the 
time AF; but if unlike, in the proportion com- 
pounded of the proportions of AB to AF and of 
BIto FK. Wherefore, as ABI is to AF K, so 
let DE be to DP; for so, the length transmitted 
in the time AB with impetus increasing to BI, 
will be to the length transmitted in the time AF 
with impetus increasing to F K, as the triangle 
ABT is to the triangle AF K; but the triangle 
A Blis made by the multiplication of the time 
A B into the mean of the impetus increasing to 
BI; and the triangle A F K is made by the multi- 
plication of the time AF into the mean of the 
impetus increasing to FK; and therefore the 
length DE which is transmitted in the time AB 


ACCELERATED AND UNIFORM MOTION. 223 


with impetus increasing to BI, to the length D P PAnT 
which is transmitted in the time A F with impetus ~—-— 
increasing to F K, is as the product which is made ff) ttn ac 
of the time A B multiplied into its mean impetus, 

to the product of the time A F multiplied also into © 

its mean impetus ; which was to be proved. 

Coroll. 1. In motion uniformly accelerated, the 
proportion of the lengths transmitted to that of 
their times, 1s compounded of the proportions of 
their times to their times, and impetus to impetus. 

Coroll. 11. In motion uniformly accelerated, the 
lengths transmitted in equal times, taken in conti- 
nual succession from the beginning of motion, are 
as the differences of square numbers beginning 
from unity, namely, as 3, 5, 7, &c. For if in the 
first time the length transmitted be as 1, in the 
first and second times the length transmitted will 
be as 4, which is the square of 2, and in the three 
first times it will be as 9, which is the square of 3, 
and in the four first times as 16, and soon. Now 
the differences of these squares are 3, 5, 7, &c. 

Coroll. 111. In motion uniformly accelerated from 
rest, the length transmitted is to another length 
transmitted uniformly in the same time, but with 
such impetus as was acquired by the accelerated 
motion in the last point of that time, as a triangle 
to a parallelogram, which have their altitude and 
base common. For seeing the length D E (in fig. 1) 
is passed through with velocity as the triangle 
A BI], it is necessary that for the passing through 
of a length which is double to D E, the velocity be 
as the parallelogram ATI; for the parallelogram A I 
is double to the triangle A B I. 

4, In motion, which beginning from rest is so ac- 


224 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART IL erated, that the impetus thereof increases conti- 
eae nually in proportion duplicate to the proportion of 
i uae the times in which it is made, a length transmitted 
in one time will be to a length transmitted in ano- 
ther time, as the product made by the mean impetus 
multiplied into the time of one of those motions, to 
the product of the mean impetus multiplied into 

the time of the other motion. 

For let A B (in fig. 2) represent a time, in whose 
first instant A let the impetus be as the point A; 
but as the time proceeds, so let the impetus in- 
crease continually in duplicate proportion to that 
of the times, till in the last point of time B the 
impetus acquired be BI; then taking the point F 
anywhere in the time AB, let the impetus FK 
acquired in the time AF be ordinately applied to 
that point F. Seeing therefore the proportion of 
F K to BI is supposed to be duplicate to that of 
AF to AB, the proportion of A F to AB will be 
subduplicate to that of FK to BI; and that of 
AB to AF will be (by chap. x111. art 16) dupli- 
cate to that of BI to FK; and consequently the 
point K will be in a parabolical line, whose dia- 
meter is AB and base BI; and for the same 
reason, to what point soever of the time A B the 
impetus acquired in that time be ordinately ap- 
plied, the strait line designing that impetus will be 
in the same parabolical line AKI. Wherefore the 
mean impetus multiplied into the whole time AB 
will be the parabola A K I B, equal to the paralle- 
logram A M, which parallelogram has for one side 
the line of time AB and for the other the line of 
the impetus AL, which is two-thirds of the im- 
petus BI; for every parabola is equal to two- 


ACCELERATED AND UNIFORM MOTION. 225 


thirds of that parallelogram with which it has its PART III. 
altitude and base common. Wherefore the whole ——— 
velocity in A B will be the parallelogram A M, as ieee ee 
being made by the multiplication of the impetus 
AL into the time AB. And in like manner, if 
F N be taken, which is two-thirds of the impetus 
F K, and the parallelogram F O be completed, F O 
will be the whole velocity in the time A F, as being 
made by the uniform impetus AO or FN multi- 
plied into the time AF. Let now the length 
transmitted in the time A B and with the velocity 
AM be the strait line DE; and lastly, let the 
length transmitted in the time A F with the velo- 
city AN be DP; I say that as A M isto AN, oras 
the parabola A KIB to the parabola A K F, so is 
DEtoDP. For as AM isto FL, that is, as AB 
is to AF, so let DE be to DG. Now the propor- 
tion of A M to A N is compounded of the propor- 
tions of AMto FL, andof FLto AN. But as 
AM to FL, so by construction is DE to DG; 
and as F L is to A N (seeing the time in both is the 
same, namely, AF), so is the length DG to the 
length DP; for lengths transmitted in the same 
time are to one another as their velocities are. 
Wherefore by ordinate proportion, as A M is to 
AN, that is, as the mean impetus A L multiplied 
into its time AB, is to the mean impetus AO 
multiplied into AF, sois DE to DP; which was 
to be proved. 

Coroll. 1. Lengths transmitted with motion so 
accelerated, that the impetus increase continually 
in duplicate proportion to that of their times, if 
the base represent the impetus, are in triplicate 
proportion of their impetus acquired in the last 

VOL. I. Q 


PART ITI. 
; 
In all motion 
the lengths,&c. 


226 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. | 


point of their times. For as the length DE is to 
the length DP, so is the parallelogram A M to the 
parallelogram AN, and so the parabola AKIB 
to the parabola AK F. But the proportion of the 
parabola A KIB to the parabola A K F is triplicate 
to the proportion which the base BI has to the 
base FK. Wherefore also the proportion of DE 
to D P is triplicate to that of BI to F K. 

Coroll. 11. Lengths transmitted in equal times 
succeeding one another from the beginning, by 
motion so accelerated, that the proportion of the 
impetus be duplicate to the proportion of the 
times, are to one another as the differences of cubic 
numbers beginning at unity, that is as 7, 19, 37, &c. 
For if in the first time the length transmitted be as 
1, the length at the end of the second time will be 
as 8, at the end of the third time as 27, and at the 
end of the fourth time as 64, &c.; which are cubic 
numbers, whose differences are 7, 19, 37, &c. 

Coroll. 111. In motion so accelerated, as that the 
length transmitted be always to: the length trans- 
mitted in duplicate proportion to their times, the 
length uniformly transmitted in the whole time, 
and with impetus all the way equal to that which 
is last acquired, is as a parabola to a parallelogram 


' of the same altitude and base, that is, as 2 to 3. 


For the parabola AKIB is the impetus increasing 
in the time AB; and the parallelogram AI is the 
greatest uniform impetus multiplied into the same 
time AB. Wherefore the lengths transmitted will 
be as a parabola to a parallelogram, &c., that is, 
as 2 to 3. 

5. If I should proceed to the explication of such 
motions as are made by impetus increasing in pro- 


ACCELERATED AND UNIFORM MOTION. 227 


portion triplicate, quadruplicate, quintuplicateé, &c., PART II. 
to that of their times, it would be a labour infinite ——-— 
and unnecessary. For by the same method by 
which I have computed such lengths, as are trans- 
mitted with impetus increasing in single and dupli- 
cate proportion, any man may compute such as are 
transmitted with impetus increasing in triplicate, 
quadruplicate, or what other proportion he pleases. 

In making which computation he shall find, that 
where the impetus increase in proportion triplicate 
to that of the times, there the whole velocity will 
be designed by the first parabolaster (of which see 
the next chapter); and the lengths transmitted 
will be in proportion quadruplicate to that of 
the times. And in like manner, where the im- 
petus increase in quadruplicate proportion to that 
of the times, that there the whole velocity will be 
designed by the second parabolaster, and the 
lengths transmitted will be in quintuplieate pro- 
portion to that of the times; and so on continually. 

6. If two bodies with uniform motion transmit Ir two hodies 
two lengths, each with its own impetus and time, °,moved with 
the proportion of the lengths transmitted will be tion threvgh 


lengths, 


' compounded of the proportions of time to time, the proportion 
” of those lengths 


and impetus to impetus, directly taken. to one another, 
Let two bodies be moved uniformly (as in fig. 3), ana a 

one in the time AB with the impetus AC, the uns 

other in the time A D with the impetus AE. [and aa ee 

say the lengths transmitted have their proportion directly tak taken. 

to one another compounded of the proportions of 

AB to AD, and of AC to AE. For let any 

length whatsoever, as Z, be transmitted by one of 

the bodies in the time A B with the impetus AC; 

and any other length, as X, be transmitted by the 


Q 2 


228 © - MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART II. other body in the time A D with the impetus A E; 

——— and let the parallelograms AF and AG be com- 

be novel fe, Pleted. Seeing now Z is to X (by art. 2) as the 
impetus A C multiplied into the time A B is to the 
impetus A E multiplied into the time A D, that 1s, 
as AF to AG;; the proportion of Z to X will be 
compounded of the same proportions, of which the 
proportion of A F to AG is compounded; but the 
proportion of AF to AG is compounded of the 
proportions of the side AB to the side AD, and of 
the side AC to the side AE (as is evident by the 
Elements of Euclid), that is, of the proportions of 
the time A B to the time A D, and of the impetus 
AC to the impetus AE. Wherefore also the 
proportion of Z to X is compounded of the same 
proportions of the time A B to the time A D, and 
of the impetus AC to the impetus AE; which was 
to be demonstrated. 

Coroll.:1. When two bodies are moved with 
uniform motion, if the times and impetus be in 
reciprocal proportion, the lengths transmitted shall 
be equal. For if it were as AB to AD (in the 
same fig. 3) so reciprocally AE to AC, the pro- 
portion of AF to AG would be compounded of 
the proportions of A B to AD, and of A C to AE, 
that is, of the proportions of AB to AD, and of 
ADto AB. Wherefore, A F would be to AG as 
AB to AB, that is, equal; and so the two products 
made by the multiplication of impetus into time 
would be equal; and by consequent, Z would be 
equal to X. 

Coroll. 11. If two bodies be moved in the same 
time, but with different impetus, the lengths trans- 
mitted will be as impetus to impetus. For if the 


ACCELERATED AND UNIFORM MOTION. 229 


time of both of them be A D, and their different PART: 
impetus be AE and AC, the proportion of AG to —~— 
DC will be compounded of the proportions of AE | 

to AC and of AD to AD, that is, of the propor- 

tions of AE to AC and of AC to AC; and so 

the proportion of AG to DC, that is, the propor- 

tion of length to length, will be as AE to AC, that 

is, as that of impetus to impetus. In like manner, 

if two bodies be moved uniformly, and both of 

them with the same impetus, but in different 

times, the proportion of the lengths transmitted by 

them will be as that of their times. For if they 

have both the same impetus AC, and their dif- 

ferent times be AB and AD, the proportion of AF 

to DC will be compounded of the proportions of 

AB to AD and of AC to AC; that is, of the 
proportions of AB to AD and of AD to AD; 

and therefore the proportion of A F to DC, that is, 

of length to length, will be the same with that of 

AB to AD, whichis the proportion of time to time. 

7. If two bodies pass through two lengths with If two bodies 
uniform motion, the proportion of the times in oicigan. 
which they are moved will be compounded of the "ior ne” 
proportions of length to length and impetus to Proportion of 


their times to 


impetus reciprocally taken. one another, 
will be come 


For let any two lengths be given, as (in the same pounded of the 


fig. 3) Z and X, and let one of them be transmitted PrP vo™ 


with the impetus AC, the other with the impetus !ensth, and im- 
‘ A 7 4 petus to impe- 

AK. I say the proportion of the times in which tus recipro- 

they are transmitted, will be compounded of the siscthe propor- 


proportions of Z to X,.and of AE, which is the fon oftne" 


J ‘ . . : impetus to one 

impetus with which X is transmitted, to AC, the ae ee o 

impetus with which Z is transmitted. For seeing the proportions. 
of length to 


AF is the product of the impetus AC multiplied tength, and 


PART III. 
16. 


a 
time to time 
reciprocally 
taken. 


230 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


into the time AB, the time of motion through Z 
will be a line, which is made by the application of 
the parallelogram AF to the strait line A C, which 
line is AB; and therefore AB is the time of 
motion through Z. In like manner, seeing A G is 
the product of the impetus AE multiplied into the 
time A D, the time of motion through X will be a 
line which is made by the application of AG to the 
strait line AD; but AD is the time of motion 
through X. Now the proportion of AB to AD 
is compounded of the proportions of the parallelo- 
gram AF to the parallelogram AG, and of the 
impetus A E to the impetus AC; which may be 
demonstrated thus. Put the parallelograms in 
order A F, AG, DC, and it will be manifest that 
the proportion of AF to DC is compounded of the 
proportions of A F to AG and of AG to DC; but 
AF is to DC as ABto AD; wherefore also the 
proportion of A B to AD is compounded of the 
proportions of AF to AG and of AG to DC. 
And because the length Z is to the length X as 
AF is to AG, and the impetus A E to the impetus 
AC as AG to DC, therefore the proportion of 
A B to A D will be compounded of the proportions 


of the length Z to the length X, and of the impetus 


A E to the impetus AC; which was to be demon- 
strated. 

In the same manner it may be proved, that in 
two uniform motions the proportion of the impetus 
is compounded of the proportions of length to 
length and of time to time reciprocally taken. 

For if we suppose A C (in the same fig. 3) to be 
the time, and AB the impetus with which the 
length Z is passed through; and AE to be the. 


ACCELERATED AND UNIFORM MOTION. 231 


time, and A D the impetus with which the length X Pepe 
is passed through, the demonstration will proceed ~——— 
as in the last article. 

8. If a body be carried by two movents toge- If body be 


: i 3 . : carried on with 
ther, which move with strait and uniform motion, nalena eos 
and concur in any given angle, the line by which vents together, 
that body passes will be a strait line. sbametctieteep 


an angie, the 


Let the movent A B (in fig. 4) have strait and line by whichit 


7 : ee : passes will bea 
uniform motion, and be moved till it come into the strait line, sub- 


place CD; and let another movent AC, having ccaplenaat of 
likewise strait and uniform motion, and making ner sie.” 
with the movent AB any given angle CAB, be 
understood to be moved in the same time to DB; 
and let the body be placed in the point of their 
concourse, A. I say the line which that body de- 
scribes with its motion is a strait line. For let the 
parallelogram A BDC be completed, and its dia- 
gonal AD be drawn; and in the strait lime AB 
let any point Ebe taken; and from it let EF be 
drawn parallel to the strait lines AC and BD, 
cutting A D in G; and through the point G let H I 
be drawn parallel to the strait lines A B and CD; 
and lastly, let the measure of the time: be AC. 
Seeing therefore both the motions are made in the 
same time, when AB is in CD, the body also 
will be in C D; and in like manner, when AC 1s 
in BD, the body will be in BD. But AB is in 
CD at the same time when AC is in BD; and 
therefore the body will be in CD and BD at the 
same time; wherefore it will be in the common 
point D. Again, seeing the motion from AC to 
B D is uniform, that is, the spaces transmitted by 
it are in proportion to one another as the times 
in which they are transmitted, when AC is in EF, 


232 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART IIL the proportion of A B to A E will be the same with 
—— that of EF to EG, that is, of the time A C to the 
time AH. Wherefore AB will be in HI in the 
same time in which A C is in EF, so that the body 
will at the same time be in EF and H I, and there- 
fore in their common point G. And in the same 
manner it will be, wheresoever the point E be 
taken between A and B. Wherefore the body will 
always be in the diagonal AD; which was to be 
demonstrated. 
Coroll. From hence it is manifest, that the body 
will be carried through the same strait line A D, 
though the motion be not uniform, provided it 
have like acceleration; for the proportion of A B 
to AE will always be the same with that of AC 
to AH. | 
Ifa body be 9. If a body be carried by two movents toge- 
sera te Ade ther, which meet in any given angle, and are 
ther, one of moved, the one uniformly, the other with motion 


them being 


moved with wyniformly accelerated from rest, that is, that the 
uniform, the 


other with ac- proportion of their impetus be as that of their 
ae ‘the times, that is, that the proportion of their lengths 
Rei ieneta to be duplicate to that of the lines of their times, till 


He ae the line of greatest impetus acquired by accelera- 

innumbers, tion be equal to that of the line of time of the uni- 

whet ae thet’ form motion ; the line in which the body is carried 

body deseribes. wil] be the crooked line of a semiparabola, whose 
base is the impetus last acquired, and vertex the 
point of rest. 

Let the straight line AB (in fig. 5) be under- 
stood to be moved with uniform motion to CD; 
and let another movent in the strait line AC be 
supposed to be moved in the same time to BD, 


but with motion uniformly accelerated, that is, 


ACCELERATED AND UNIFORM MOTION. 233 


with such motion, that the proportion of the PART IIL 
spaces which are transmitted be always duplicate —— 
to that of the times, till the impetus acquired be 3.20") 0° 
BD equal to the strait line AC; and let the 
semiparabola A GD B be described. I say that by 

the concourse of those two movents, the body will 

be carried through the semiparabolical crooked 

line AG D. For let the parallelogram A B DC be 
completed ; and from the point E, taken anywhere 

in the strait line A B, let E F be drawn parallel to 

A C and cutting the crooked line in G ; and lastly, 
through the point G let HI be drawn parallel to 

the strait lines AB and CD. Seeing therefore 

the proportion of AB to AE is by supposition 
duplicate to the proportion of EF to EG, that is, 

of the time A C to the time A H, at the same time 

when AC isin EF, AB willbe in HI; and there- 

fore the moved body will be in the common point 

G. And so it will always be, in what part soever 

of A B the point E be taken. Wherefore the moved 

body will always be found in the parabolical line 

A GD; which was to be demonstrated. 

10. If a body be carried by two movents toge- 
ther, which meet in any given angle, and are 
moved the one uniformly, the other with impetus 
increasing from rest, till it be equal to that of the 
uniform motion, and with such acceleration, that 
the proportion of the lengths transmitted be every 
where triplicate to that of the times in which they 
are transmitted; the line, in which that body is 
moved, will be the crooked line of the first semi- 
parabolaster of two means, whose base is the im- 
petus last acquired. 

Let the strait line AB (in the 6th figure) bemoved 


234 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


a I. uniformly to CD; and let another movent AC be 

——_ moved at the same time to BD with motion so 

ciel ke accelerated, that the proportion of the lengths 
transmitted be everywhere triplicate to the pro- 
portion of their times ; and let the impetus acquired 
in the end of that motion be BD, equal to the 
strait line AC; and lastly, let AG D be the crooked 
line of the first semiparabolaster of two means. I 
say, that by the concourse of the two movents 
together, the body will be always in that crooked 
line AGD. For let the parallelogram A BDC be 
completed ; and from the point E, taken anywhere 
in the strait line A B, let EF be drawn parallel to 
AC, and cutting the crooked line in G; and 
through the point G let HI be drawn parallel to 
the strait lines AB and CD. Seeing therefore the 
proportion of A B to AE is, by supposition, tripli- 
cate to the proportion of EF to EG, that is, of the 
time AC to the time A H, at the same time when 
AC isin EF, AB will be in H]; and therefore 
the moved body will be in the common point G. 
And so it will always be, in what part soever of 
A B the point E be taken; and by consequent, the 
body will always be in the crooked line AGD; 
which was to be demonstrated. 

11. By the same method it may be shown, what 
line it is that 1s made by the motion of a body 
carried by the concourse of any two movents, 
which are moved one of them uniformly, the other 
with acceleration, but in such proportions of spaces 
and times as are explicable by numbers, as dupli- 
cate, triplicate, &c., or such as may be designed 
by any broken number whatsoever. For which 
this is the rule. Let the two numbers of the length 


ACCELERATED AND UNIFORM MOTION. 235 


and time be added together ; and let their sum be PARTE 
the denominator of a fraction, whose numerator —~— 
must be the number of the length. Seek this frac- 97,237" 
tion in the table of the third article of the xviith 
chapter ; and the line sought will be that, which 
denominates the three-sided figure noted on the 

left hand ; and the kind of it will be that, which is 
numbered above over the fraction. For example, 

let there be a concourse of two movents, whereof 

one is moved uniformly, the other with motion so. 
accelerated, that the spaces are to the times as 5 

to 3. Let a fraction be made whose denominator 

is the sum of 5 and 3, and the numerator 5, namely 

the fraction ~. Seek in the table, and you will 

find 3 to be the third in that row, which belongs 

to the three-sided figure of four means. Wherefore 

the line of motion made by the concourse of two 

such movents, as are last of all described, will be 

the crooked line of the third parabolaster of four 

means. 

12. If motion be made by the concourse of two 
movents, whereof one is moved uniformly, the 
other beginning from rest in the angle of concourse 
with any acceleration whatsoever; the movent, 
which is moved uniformly, shall put forward the 
moved body im the several parallel spaces, less 
than if both the movents had uniform motion ; and 
still less and less, as the motion of the other 
movent is more and more accelerated. 

Let the body be placed in A, (in the 7th figure) 
and be moved by two movents, by one with uni- 
form motion from the strait line A B to the strait 
line CD parallel to it; and by the other with any 
acceleration, from the strait line A C to the strait 


PART III. 
16. ° 


——y er” 
If a body be 
carried, &c. 


236 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


line BD parallel to it; and in the parallelogram 
A BDC let a space be taken between any two pa- 
rallels EF and GH. I say, that whilst the movent 
AC passes through the latitude which is between 
E F and GH, the body is less moved forwards from 
A B towards CD, than it would have been, if the 
motion from AC to BD had been uniform. 

For suppose that whilst the body is made to 
descend to the parallel EF by the power of the 
movent from AC towards BD, the same body in 
the same time is moved forwards to any point F 
in the line EF, by the power of the movent from 
AB towards CD; and let the strait line AF be 
drawn and produced indeterminately, cutting GH 
in H. Seeing therefore, it is as AE to AG, so EF 
to GH; if AC should descend towards B D with 
uniform motion, the body in the time GH, (for f 
make AC and its parallels the measure of time,). 
would be found in the point H. But because AC 
is supposed to be moved towards B D with motion 
continually accelerated, that is, in greater propor- 
tion of space to space, than of time to time, in the 
time G H the body will be in some parallel beyond 
it, as between GH and BD. Suppose now that m 
the end of the time GH it be in the parallel IK, 
and in IK let IL be taken equal toGH. When 
therefore the body is in the parallel I K, it will be 
in the point L. Wherefore when it was in the 
parallel G H, it was in some point between G and 
H, as in the point M; but if both the motions had 
been uniform, it had been in the point H; and 
therefore whilst the movent AC passes over the 
latitude which is between E F and G H, the body 1s 
less moved forwards from A B towards C D, than. 


ACCELERATED AND UNIFORM MOTION. 237 


it would have been, if both the motions had been rant IIT. 
uniform ; which was to be demonstrated. <a 

13. Any length being given, which is passed uoca ke’ 
through in a given time with uniform motion, to 
find out what length shall be passed through in the 
same time with motion uniformly accelerated, that 
Is, with such motion that the proportion of the 
lengths passed through be continually duplicate to 
that of their times, and that the line of the impetus 
jast acquired be equal to the line of the whole time 
of the motion. 

Let A B (in the 8th figure) be a length, trans- 
mitted with uniform motion in the time A C; and 
let it be required to find another length, which 
shall be transmitted in the same time with motion 
uniformly accelerated, so that the line of the im- 
petus last acquired be equal to the strait line A C. 

Let the parallelogram ABDC be completed; 
and let BD be divided in the middle at E; and 
between BE and BD let B F be a mean propor- 
tional; and let A F be drawn and produced till it 
meet with C D produced in G; and lastly, let the 
parallelogram A CGH be completed. Isay, AH 
is the length required. 

For as duplicate proportion is to single propor- 
tion, so let AH be to AJ, that is, let AI be the 
half of AH; and let I K be drawn parallel to the 
strait ine A C, and cutting the diagonal A D m K, 
and the strait lime AG in L. Seeing therefore A I 
is the half of A H, I L will also be the half of BD, 
that is, equal to BE; and 1K equal to BF; for 
B D, that is, G H, B F, and B E, that is, I L, being 
continual proportionals, A H, AB and AT will 
also be continual proportionals. But as A B is to 


PART IU. 
16. 


» manne manent 


If a body be 
carried, &c. 


238 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


A I, that is, as A H is to A B, sois BD toI K, and 
so also is GH, that is, BD to BF; and therefore 
B F and I K are equal. Now the proportion of 
AH to AT is duplicate to the proportion of A B 
to AI, that is, to that of B D to I K, or of GH to 
IK. Wherefore the point K will be in a parabola, 
whose diameter is A H, and base G H, which G H 
is equal to AC. The body therefore proceeding 
from rest in A, with motion uniformly accelerated 
in the time AC, when it has passed through the 
length A H, will acquire the impetus G H equal to 
the time A C, that is, such impetus, as that with it 
the body will pass through the length A C in the 
time AC. Wherefore any length being given, &c., 
which was propounded to be done. 

14. Any length being given, which in a given 
time is transmitted with uniform motion, to find 
out what length shall be. transmitted in the same 
time with motion so accelerated, that the lengths 
transmitted be continually in triplicate proportion 
to that of their times, and the line of the impetus 
last of all acquired be equal to the line of time 
given. 

Let the given length A B (in the 9th figure) be 


transmitted with uniform motion in the time A C; 


and let it be required to find what length shall be 
transmitted in the same time with motion so acce- 
lerated, that the lengths transmitted be continually 
in triplicate proportion to that of their times, and 
the impetus last acquired be equal to the time 
given. 

Let the parallelogram ABDC be completed; 
and let B D be so divided in E, that B E be a third 
part of the whole B D; and let B F bea mean pro- 


ACCELERATED AND UNIFORM MOTION. 239 


portional between B D and BE; and let A F be 
drawn and produced till it meet the strait line C D 
in G; and lastly, let the parallelogram A C GH be 
completed. I say, A H is the length required. 
For as triplicate proportion 1s to single propor- 
tion, so let AH be to another line, A I, that is, 
make AI a third part of the whole A H; and let 
I K be drawn parallel to the strait line A C, cutting 
the diagonal A D in K, and the strait line A G in 
L; then, as AB isto AI, so let AI be to another, 
A N;; and from the point N let N Q be drawn pa- 


PART ITT, 
16. 


ey 


If a body be 
carried, &e. 


rallel to A C, cutting A G, A D, and F K produced — 


in P, M, and O; and last of all, let FO and LM 
be drawn, which will be equal and parallel to the 
strait lines B N and IN. By this construction, the 
lengths transmitted A H, A B, AI, and AN, will 
be continual proportionals; and, in like manner, 
the times GH, BF, IL and NP, that is, N Q, 
NO, N M and NP, will be continual proportionals, 
and in the same proportion with AH, AB, Al 
and AN. Wherefore the proportion of AH to 
AN is the same with that of B D, that is, of NQ 
to N P; and the proportion of N Q to N P tripli- 


cate to that of NQto NO, that is, triplicate to. 


that of B D to IK; wherefore also the length A H 
is to the length A N in triplicate proportion to that 
of the time BD, to the time I K; and therefore 
the crooked line of the first three-sided figure of 
two means whose diameter is A H, and base GH 
equal to A C, shall pass through the point O; and 
consequently, A H shall be transmitted in the time 
A C, and shall have its last acquired impetus G H 
equal to AC, and the proportions of the lengths 
acquired in any of the times triplicate to the pro- 


PART IIT. 
16. 


—— oe? 


If a body be 
carried, &c. 


240 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


portions of the times themselves. Wherefore A H 
is the length required to be found out. 

By the same method, if a length be given Sieh 
is transmitted with uniform motion in any given 
time, another length may be found out which shall 
be transmitted in the same time with motion so 
accelerated, that the lengths transmitted shall be 
to the times in which they are transmitted, in pro- 
portion quadruplicate, quintuplicate, and so on 
infinitely. For if B D be divided in E, so that B D 
be to BE as 4 to 1; and there be taken between 


- BD and BE a mean proportional FB; and as 


AH is to AB, so AB be made to a third, and 
again so that third to a fourth, and that fourth to 
a fifth, A N, so that the proportion of A H to AN 
be quadruplicate to that of AH to A B, and the 
parallelogram N B F O be completed, the crooked 
line of the first three-sided figure of three means 
will pass through the point O; and consequently, 
the body moved will acquire the impetus GH 
equal to A Cin the time AC. And so of the rest. 

15. Also, if the proportion of the lengths trans- 
mitted be to that of their times, as any number to 
any number, the same method serves for the find- 
ing out of the length transmitted with such 
impetus, and in such time. 

For let A C (in the 10th figure) be the time in 
which a body is transmitted with uniform motion 
from A to B; and the parallelogram A B D C being 
completed, let it be required to find out a length 
in which that body may be moved in the same time 
AC from A, with motion so accelerated, that the 
proportion of the lengths transmitted to that of 
the times be continually as 3 to 2. 

Let B D be so divided in E, that B D be to BE 


ACCELERATED AND UNIFORM MOTION. 241 


as 3 to 2; and between BD and BE let BF bea PARTIII 
mean proportional ; and let A F be drawn and pro- ——~— 
duced till it meet with C D produced in G; and (2.2°7 fe 
making A M a mean proportional between A H 

and AB, let it be aaAMtoAB,soABtoAI; 

and so the proportion of A H to AI will be to that 

of A H to A B as 3 to 2; for of the proportions, of 

which that of A H to A M is one, that of AH to 

A B is two, and that of AH to AI is three; and 
consequently, as 3 to 2 to that of GH to BF, and 

(F K being drawn parallel to BI and cutting A D 

in K) so likewise to that of GH or BD tol K. 
Wherefore the proportion of the length A H to A I 

is to the proportion of the time B D to I K as 3 to 

2; and therefore if in the time AC the body be 

moved with accelerated motion, as was pro- 
pounded, till it acquire the impetus H G equal to 

A C, the length transmitted in the same time will 

be A H. 

16. But if the proportion of the lengths to that 
of the times. had been as 4 to 3, there should then 
have been taken two mean proportionals between 
AH and AB, and their proportion should have 
been continued one term further, so that A H to 
AB might have three of. the same proportions, 
of which AH to AI has four; and all things else 
should have been done as is already shown. Now 
the way how to interpose any number of means 
between two lines given, is not yet found out. 
Nevertheless this may stand for a general rule; if 
there be a time given, and a length be transmitted 
in that time with uniform motion ; as for example, 
tf the time be AC, and the length AB, the strast 
line AG, which determines the length C G or AH, 

VOL. I. R 


242 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


pena r transmitted in the same time AC with any acce- 

——— lerated motion, shall so cut BD in F, that BF 

Tra bady be shall be a mean proportional between BD and 
BE, BE being so taken in B D, that the propor- 
tion of length to length be everywhere to the pro- 
portion of time to time, as the whole B D 1s to its 
part BE. 

17. If in a given time two lengths be trans- 
mitted, one with uniform motion, the other with 
motion accelerated in any proportion of the lengths 
to the times; and again, in part of the same time, 
parts of the same lengths be transmitted with the 
same motions, the whole length will exceed the 
other length in the same proportion in which one 
part exceeds the other part. 

For example, let AB (in the 8th figure) be a 
length transmitted in the time AC, with uniform 
motion ; and let A H be another length transmitted 
in the same time with motion uniformly accele- 
rated, so that the impetus last acquired be GH 
equal to AC; and in A H let any part AI be taken, 
and transmitted in part of the time A C with uni- 
form motion ; and let another part AB be taken 
and transmitted in the same part of the time A C 
with motion uniformly accelerated ; I say, that as 
AH is to AB, so will AB be to AI. 

Let BD be drawn parallel and equal to HG, 
and divided in the midst at E, and between B D and 
BE let a mean proportional be taken as BF; 
and the strait line AG, by the demonstration of 
art. 13, shall pass through F. And dividing AH. 
in the midst at I, A B shall be a mean proportional 
between AH and AI. Again, because A I and A B 
are described by the same motions, if IK be. 


ACCELERATED AND UNIFORM MOTION. 243 


drawn parallel and equal to BF or AM, and PARTuIr 
divided in the midst at N, and betweenIK and ——~ 
IN be taken the mean proportional I L, the strait °f°.23%y,be 
line A F will, by the demonstration of the same 

art. 13, pass through L. And dividing A B in the 

midst at O, the line A I will be a mean proportional 

between A B and AO. Where AB is divided in 

I and O, in like manner as A H is divided in B and 

I; and as AH to AB, soisABtoAI. Which 

was to be proved. 

Coroll. Also as AH to AB, so is HB to BI; 
and so also BI to IO. 

And as this, where one of the motions is uni- 
formly accelerated, is proved out of the demonstra- 
tion of art. 13; so, when the accelerations are 
in double proportion to the times, the same may be 
proved by the demonstration of art. 14; and by 
the same method in all other accelerations, whose 
proportions to the times are explicable in numbers. 

18. If two sides, which contain an angle in any 
parallelogram, be moved in the same time to the 
sides opposite to them, one of them with uniform 
motion, the other with motion uniformly accele- 
rated ; that side, which is moved uniformly, will 
affect as much with its concourse through the 
whole length transmitted, as it would do if the 
other motion were also uniform, and the length 
transmitted by it in the same time were a mean 
proportional between the whole and the half. 

Let the side AB of the parallelogram A BDC, 
(in the 11th figure) be understood to be moved with 
uniform motion till it be coincident with C D; and 
let the time of that motion be AC or BD. Also 
in the same time let the side AC be understood to 

| : R 2 


244 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PANTIE: be moved with motion uniformly accelerated, till 
—-~— it be coincident with BD; then dividing AB in 
ent the middle in EK, let A F be made a mean propor- 
tional between AB and AE; and drawing FG 
parallel to A C, let the side AC be understood to 
be moved in the same time AC with uniform 
motion till it be coincident with FG. I say, the 
whole A B confers as much to the velocity of the 
body placed in A, when the motion of A C is uni- 
formly accelerated till it comes to B D, as the part 
AF confers to the same, when the side AC is 
moved uniformly and in the same time to FG. 
For seeing A F is a mean proportional between 
the whole AB and its half AE, BD will (by the 
13th article) be the last impetus acquired by A C, 
with motion uniformly accelerated till it come to 
the same BD; and consequently, the strait line 
F B will be the excess, by which the length, trans- 
mitted by AC with motion uniformly accelerated, 
will exceed the length transmitted by the same 
AC in the same time with uniform motion, and 
with impetus every where equal to BD. Where- 
fore, if the whole A B be moved uniformly to C D 
in the same time in which A C is moved uniformly 
to FG, the part F B, seeing it concurs not at all 
with the motion of the side A C which is supposed 
to be moved only to FG, will confer nothing to its 
motion. Again, supposing the side AC to be 
moved to BD with motion uniformly accelerated, 
the side A B with its uniform motion to CD will 
less put forwards the body when it is accelerated 
in all the parallels, than when it is not at all acce- 
lerated ; and by how much the greater the accele- 
ration is, by so much the less it will put it for- 


ACCELERATED AND UNIFORM MOTION. 245 


wards, as is shown in the 12th article. When zane HI. 
therefore AC is in FG with accelerated motion, ——— 
the body will not be in the side C D at the point G, 5 .520°7° 
but at the point D; so that GD will be the excess, 

by which the length transmitted with accelerated 

motion to B D exceeds the length transmitted with 

uniform motion to FG; so that the body by its 
acceleration avoids the action of the part A F, and 

comes to the side C D in the time AC, and makes 

the length C D, which is equal to the length A B. 
Wherefore uniform motion from A B to C D in the 

time A C, works no more im the whole length A B 

upon the body uniformly accelerated from AC to 

BD, than if AC were moved in the same time 

with uniform motion to FG; the difference con- 

, isting only in this, that when A B works upon the 

body uniformly moved from AC to FG, that, by 

which the accelerated motion exceeds the uniform 

motion, is altogether in FB or GD; but when the 

same A B works upon the body accelerated, that, 

by which the accelerated motion exceeds the uni- 

form motion, is dispersed through the whole length 

AB or CD, yet, so that if it were collected and 

put together, it would be equal to the same F B or 

GD. Wherefore, if two sides which contain an 

angle, &c. ; which was to be demonstrated. 

19. If two transmitted lengths have to their 
times any other proportion explicable by number, 
and the side A B be so divided in E, that A B be 
to AE in the same proportion which the lengths 
transmitted have to the times in which they are 
transmitted, and between AB and AE there be 
taken a mean proportional AF; it may be shown 
by the same method, that the side, which is moved 


246 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


pe with uniform motion, works as much with its con- 
——— course through the whole length A B, as it would 
do if the other motion were also uniform, and the 
length transmitted in the same time A C were that 

mean proportional A F. 
And thus much concerning motion by concourse. 


CHAP. XVII. 


OF FIGURES DEFICIENT. 


1. Definitions of a deficient figure; of a complete figure; of the 
complement of a deficient figure; and of proportions which 
are proportional and commensurable to one another.—2. The 
proportion of a deficient figure to its complement.—3. The 
proportions of deficient figures to the parallelograms in which 
they are described, set forth in a table.—4. The description 
and production of the same figures.—5. The drawing of tan- 
gents to them.—6. In what proportion the same figures exceed a 
strait-lined triangle of the same altitude and base.—7. A table 
of solid deficient figures described in a cylinder.—8. In what 
proportion the same figures exceed a cone of the same altitude 
and base.—9. How a plain deficient figure may be described 
in a parallelogram, so that it be to a triangle of the same base 
and altitude, as another deficient figure, plain or solid, twice 
taken, is to the same deficient figure, together with the com- 
plete figure in which it is described.—10. The transferring of 
certain properties of deficient figures described in a parallelo- 
gram to the proportions of the spaces transmitted with several 
degrees of velocity.—11. Of deficient figures described in 
a circle.—12. The proposition demonstrated in art. 2 confirmed 
from the elements of philosophy.—13. An unusual way of 
reasoning concerning the equality between the superficies of a 
portion of a sphere and a circle.—14. How from the descrip- 
tion of deficient figures in a parallelogram, any number of mean 
proportionals may be found out between two given strait lines. 


Deeb a Ne I cALL those deficient figures which may be 
rent gure- understood to be generated by the uniform motion 


OF FIGURES DEFICIENT. 247 


of some quantity, which decreases continually, till PART MI. 
at last it have no magnitude at all. = 
And I call that a complete jigure, answering to  aaleinaa 


a deficient figure, which is generated with the of the comple- 
ment of a defi- 


same motion and in the same time, by a quantity cient figure; 
which retains always its whole magnitude. fone eek ate 

The complement of a deficient figure is that which Proportion’! & 
being added to the deficient figure makes it com- ‘e one another. 
plete. 

Four proportions are said to be proportional, 
when the first of them is to the second as the third 
is to the fourth. For example, if the first propor- 
tion be duplicate to the second, and again, the 
third be duplicate to the fourth, those proportions 
are said to be proportional. 

And commensurable proportions are those, which 
are to one another as number to number. As 
when to a proportion given, one proportion is 
duplicate, another triplicate, the duplicate propor- 
tion will be to the triplicate proportion as 2 to 3; 
but to the given proportion it will be as 2 to 1; 
and therefore I call those three proportions com- 
mensurable. 

2. A deficient figure, which is made by a quantity 1 abe eer 
continually decreasing to nothing by proportions aie to its 
everywhere proportional and commensurable, is to °"?""*"* 
its complement, as the proportion of the whole 
altitude to an altitude diminished in any time is 
to the proportion of the whole quantity, which 
describes the figure, to the same quantity dimi- 
nished in the same time. 

Let the quantity AB (in fig. 1), by its motion 
through the altitude AC, describe the complete . 
figure AD; and again, let the same quantity, by 


248 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


RABUN decreasing continually to nothing in C, describe 
—— the deficient figure A B EFC, whose complement 
Tre proportion will be the figure BDCFE. Now let AB be 
ata toits supposed to be moved till it lie in GK, so that the 
altitude diminished be GC, and AB diminished 
be GE; and let the proportion of the whole alti- 
tude AC to the diminished altitude GC, be, for . 
example, triplicate to the proportion of the whole 
quantity AB or GK to the diminished quantity 
GE. And in like manner, let HI be taken equal 
to GE, and let it be diminished to H F; and let 
the proportion of GC to HC be triplicate to that 
of HI to HF; and let the same be done in as 
many parts of the strait line AC as is possible ; 
and a line be drawn through the points B, E, F 
and C. I say the deficient figure A BEF C is to 
its complement BDC FE as 3 to 1, or as the pro- 
portion of AC to GC is to the proportion of A B, 
that is, of GK to GE. 
For (by art. 2, chapter xv.) the proportion of 
the complement BEFCD to the deficient figure 
A BE FC is all the proportions of DB to BA, 
OE to EG, QF to FH, and of all the lines 
parallel to D B terminated in the lne BEFC, to - 
all the parallels to AB terminated in the same 
points of the lime BEFC. And seeing the pro- 
portions of DB to OF, and of DB to QF &c. 
are everywhere triplicate of the proportions of AB 
to GE, and of A B to HF &c. the proportions of 
H F to AB, and of GE to AB &c. (by art. 16, 
chap. x1l1.), are triplicate of the proportions of 
, QF to DB, and of OF to DB &c. and therefore 
the deficient figure A B E FC, which is the aggre- 


OF FIGURES DEFICIENT. 249 


gate of all the lines H F, GE, AB, &c. is triple BART A: 
to the complement B EFC D made of all the lines -— 
QF, OE, DB, &c.; which was to be proved. ae 
It follows from hence, that the same complement pat ae 
BEFCD is } of the whole parallelogram. And 
by the same method may be calculated in all other 
deficient figures, generated as above declared, the 
proportion of the parallelogram to either of its 
parts; as that when the parallels increase from a 
point in ‘the same proportion, the parallelogram 
will be divided into two equal triangles; when 
one increase is double to the other, it will be 
divided into a semiparabola and its complement, 
or into 2 and 1. 
The same construction standing, the same con- 
clusion may otherwise be demonstrated thus. 
Let the strait line C B be drawn cutting GK in 
L, and through L let MN be drawn parallel to the 
strait lime AC; wherefore the parallelograms GM 
and LD will be equal. Then let LK be divided 
into three equal parts, so that it may be to one of 
those parts in the same proportion which the pro- 
portion of AC to GC, or of GK to GL, hath to 


» the proportion of GK to GE. Therefore LK will 


be to one of those three parts as the arithmetical 
proportion between GK and GLiis to the arith- 
metical proportion between G K and the same GK 
wanting the third part of LK; and K E will be 
somewhat greater than a third of LK. Seeing 
now the altitude AG or M L is, by reason of the 
continual decrease, to be supposed less than any 
quantity that can be given; LK, which is inter- 
cepted between the diagonal BC and the side BD, 


250 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


si will be also less than any quantity that can be 


given; and consequently, if G be put so near to A 


oad in g, as that the difference between Cg and CA 


be less than any quantity that can be assigned, 
the difference also between C/ (removing L to 2) 
and CB, will be less than any quantity that can be 
assigned ; and the line g/ being drawn and pro- 
duced to the line BD in &, cutting the crooked 
line in e, the proportion of G& to GZ will still be 
triplicate to the proportion of G& to Ge, and the 
difference between & and e, the third part of & J, 
will be less than any quantity that can be given ; 
and therefure the parallelogram eD will differ 
from a third part of the parallelogram Ae by a 
less difference than any quantity that can be 
assigned. Again, let HI be drawn parallel and 
equal to G E, cutting C B in P, the crooked line in 
F, and OE in [, and the proportion of Cg to CH 
will be triplicate to the proportion of H F to HP, 
and IF will be greater than the third part of PI. 
But again, setting H in £ so near to g, as that the 
difference between Ch and Cg may be but as a 
point, the point P will also in p be so near to /, 
as that the difference between C » and C/ will be 
but as a point; and drawing / p till it meet with 
BD in zg, cutting the crooked line in f, and having 
drawn ¢o parallel to B D, cutting DC in 9, the pa- 
rallelogram fo will differ less from the third part of 
the parallelogram g /, than by any quantity that 
can be given. And so it will be in all other spaces 
generated in the same manner. Wherefore the 
differences of the arithmetical and geometrical 
means, which are but as so many points B,e, f, &c. 


OF FIGURES DEFICIENT. 251 


(seeing the whole figure is made up of so many Paes 
indivisible spaces) will constitute a certain line, w—-~—~ 
such as is the line BEFC, which will divide the 
complete figure A D into two parts, whereof one, 
namely, AB EFC, which I call a deficient figure, 

is triple to the other, namely, BD CFE, which I 

call the complement thereof. And whereas the 
proportion of the altitudes to one another is in 

this case everywhere triplicate to that of the 
decreasing quantities to one another; in the same 
manner, if the proportion of the altitudes had 

been everywhere quadruplicate to that of the de- 
creasing quantities, it might have been demon- 

strated that the deficient figure had been quadruple 

to its complement ; and so in any other proportion. 
Wherefore, a deficient figure, which is made, &c. 

which was to be demonstrated. 

The same rule holdeth also in the diminution of 
the bases of cylinders, as is demonstrated in the 
second article of chapter xv. 

3. By this proposition, the magnitudes of all The proportion 
deficient figures, when the proportions by which gureststhe pe 
their bases decrease continually are proportional yi? ae 
to those by which their altitudes decrease, may be described, et 
compared with the magnitudes of their comple- 
ments; and consequently, with the magnitudes of 
their complete figures. And they will be found to 
be, as I have set them down in the following 
tables; in which I compare a parallelogram with 
three-sided figures; and first, with a strait-lined 
triangle, made by the base of the parallelogram 
continually decreasing in such manner, that the 
altitudes be always in proportion to one another 


PART Il. 
17. 


————— 
The proportion 
of deficient 
figures, &c. 


252 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


as the bases are, and so the triangle will be equal 
to its complement; or the proportions of the alti- 
tudes and bases will be as 1 to 1, and then the 
triangle will be half the parallelogram. Secondly, 
with that three-sided figure which is made by the 
continual decreasing of the bases in subduplicate 
proportion to that of the altitudes; and so the 
deficient figure will be double to its complement, 
and to the parallelogram as 2 to 3. Then, with 
that where the proportion of the altitudes is tripli- 
cate to that of the bases; and then the deficient 
figure will be triple to its complement, and to the 
parallelogram as 3 to 4. Also the proportion of 
the altitudes to that of the bases may be as 3 to 2; 
and then the deficient figure will be to its comple- 
ment as 3 to 2, and to the parallelogram as 3 to 5; 
and so forwards, according as more mean propor- 
tionals are taken, or as the proportions are more 
multiplied, as may be seen in the following table. 
For example, if the bases decrease so, that the 
proportion of the altitudes to that of the bases be 
always as 5 to 2, and it be demanded what pro- 
portion the figure made has to the parallelogram, 
which is supposed to be unity; then, seeing that 
where the proportion is taken five times, there 
must be four means; look in the table amongst 
the three-sided figures of four means, and seeing 
the proportion was as 5 to 2, look im the upper- 
most row for the number 2, and descending in 
the second column till you meet with that three- 
sided figure, you will find §; which shows that the 
deficient figure is to the parallelogram as § to 1, 
or as 5 to 7. 


OF FIGURES DEFICIENT. 2353 


12 3 4 5 6 7 -PART III. 
Parallelogram . ..... 1| . 17. 


Strait-sided triangle 


ye 


+ 
Three-sided figure of 1 mean rf 
Three-sided figure of 2 means . | 3 
Three-sided figure of 3 means . ra 
Three-sided figure of 4 means . | 
Three-sided figure of 5 means . : : $ {56} 8 


Three-sided figure of 6 means . Vo pr) pe| as 


Three-sided figure of 7 means . neni pub ab ete 


a eee | ce | es 


4. Now for the better understanding of the Description & 
nature of these three-sided figures, I will show ee 
how they may be described by points ; and first, *8""** 
those which are in the first column of the table. 

Any parallelogram being described, as ABCD 
(in figure 2) let the diagonal BD be drawn; 
and the strait-lined triangle BC D will be half the 
parallelogram ; then let any number of lines, as 
E F, be drawn parallel to the side B C, and cutting 
the diagonal B D in G; and let it be everywhere, 
as E F to EG, so EG to another, E H; and through 
all the points H let the line BH HD be drawn; 
and the figure BH H DC willbe that which I call 
a three-sided figure of one mean, because in three 
proportionals, as EF, EG and EH, there is but 
one mean, namely, EG; and this three-sided 
figure will be 2 of the parallelogram, and is called 
a parabola. Again, let it boas EG toE H,soE H 
to another, EI, and let the line BIT D be drawn, 
making the three-sided figure BI IDC; and this 
will be 3 of the parallelogram, and is by many 
called a cubic parabola. In like manner, if the 


PART ITI. 
17. 


—— 
Description & 
production of 
the same 
figures. 


254 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


proportions be further continued in E F, there will 
be made the rest of the three-sided figures of the 
first column ; which I thus demonstrate. Let there 
be drawn strait lines, as H K and G L, parallel to 
the base DC. Seeing therefore the proportion of 
E F to EH is duplicate to that of EF to EG, or of 
BC to BL, that is, of CD to LG, or of K M (pro- 
ducing K H to AD in M) to KH, the proportion 
of BC to BK will be duplicate to that of K M to 
KH; but as BC is to BK, so is DC or KM to 
K N, and therefore the proportion of K M to K N 
is duplicate to that of K M to K H; and so it will 
be wheresoever the parallel K M be placed. Where- 
fore the figure BH H DC is double to its comple- 
ment BH H D A, and consequently § of the whole 
parallelogram. In the same manner, if through I 
be drawn O PT Q parallel and equal to C D, it may 
be demonstrated that the proportion of OQ to 
OP, that is, of BC to BO, is triplicate that of 
O Q to OI, and therefore that the igure BIT DC 
is triple to its complement BII DA, and conse- 
quently = of the whole parallelogram, &c. 
Secondly, such three-sided figures as are in any 
of the transverse rows, may be thus described. 
Let A BCD (in fig. 3) be a parallelogram, whose 
diagonal is BD. I would describe in it such 
figures, as in the preceding table I call three-sided 
figures of three means. Parallel to DC, I draw 
E F as often as is necessary, cutting BD inG; and 
between EF and EG, I take three proportionals 
EH, EI andEK. If now there be drawn lines 
through all the points H, I and K, that through all 
the points H will make the figure BH DC, which 
is the first of those three-sided figures ; and that 


OF FIGURES DEFICIENT. 255 


through all the points I, will make the figure PAR? II. 
BIDC, which is the second; and that which is —-~— 
drawn through all the points K, will make the sicoeh ia 
figure BK DC the third of those three-sided 5°" 
figures. The first of these, seeing the proportion 
of E F to EG is quadruplicate of that EF to EH, 
will be to its complement as 4 to 1, and to the 
parallelogram as 4 to 5. The second, seeing the 
proportion of E F to EG is fo that of EF to EI as 
4 to 2, will be double to its complement, and $ or 
2 of the parallelogram. The third, seeing the pro- 
proportion of E F to EG is that of EF to EK as 
4 to 3, will be to its complement as 4 to 3, and to 
the parallelogram as 4 to 7. 

Any of these figures being described may be 
produced at pleasure, thus ; let A BC D (in fig. 4) 
be a parallelogram, and in it let the figure BK DC 
be described, namely, the third three-sided figure 
of three means. Let BD be produced indefinitely 
to E, and let E F be made parallel to the base DC, 
cutting A D produced in G, and BC produced in 
F ; and in GE let the point H be so taken, that the 
proportion of F E to FG may be quadruplicate to 
that of FE to FH, which may be done by making 
FH the greatest of three proportionals between 
FE and FG; the crooked line BK D produced, 
will pass through the point H. For if the strait 
line BH be drawn, cutting CD in I, and HL be 
drawn parallel to G D, and meeting C D produced 
in L; it will be as FE to FG, so CL to Cl, that 
is, in quadruplicate proportion to that of FE to 
FH, or of CD to CI. Wherefore if the line BK D 
be produced according to its generation, it will 
fall upon the point H. 


256 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PARTI, 5. A strait line may be drawn so as to touch 
Sarees the crooked line of the said figure in any point, in 
of tangents’ this manner. Let it be required to draw a tangent 
tothem. —~_ to the line BK DH (in fig. 4) in the point D. Let 
the points B and D be connected, and drawing 
D A equal and parallel to BC, let B and A be con- 
nected ; and because this figure is by construction 
the third of three means, let there be taken in AB 
three points, so, that by them the same AB be 
divided into four equal parts ; of which take three, 
namely, A M, so that A B may be to AM, as the 
figure BK DC is to its complement. I say, the 
strait line MD will touch the figure in the point 
given D. For let there be drawn anywhere be- 
tween A B and DC a parallel, as RQ, cutting the 
strait line B D, the crooked line BK D, the strait 
line MD, and the strait line AD, in the points 
P, K,O and Q@. RK will therefore, by construc- 
tion, be the least of three means in geometrical 
proportion between RQ and RP. Wherefore (by 
coroll. of art. 28, chapter x111.) RK will be less 
than RO; and therefore M D will fall without the 
figure. Now if M D be produced to N, FN will 
be the greatest of three means in arithmetical pro- 
portion between F E and FG; and FH will be the 
greatest of three means in geometrical proportion 
between the same FE and FG. Wherefore (by 
the same coroll. of art. 28, chapter x11.) FH will 
be less than F N ; and therefore D N will fall with- 
out the figure, and the strait line M N will touch 
the same figure only in the point D. 
Inwhatpropor- 6, The proportion of a deficient figure to its 


tion the same . : 
figures exceed COMPlement being known, it may also be known 


OF FIGURES DEFICIENT. 257 


what proportion a strait-lined triangle has to the PARTY 
excess of the deficient figure above the same tri- —— 
angle; and these proportions I have set down in Saueoae ne 
the following table; where if you seek, for ex- 7% atte 
ample, how much the fourth three-sided figure of 
five means exceeds a triangle of the same altitude 
and base, you will find in the concourse of the 
fourth column with the three-sided figures of five 
means 15; by which is signified, that that three- 
sided figure exceeds the triangle by two-tenths or 
by one-fifth part of the same triangle. 
28 45 6 7 

The triangle .. . yr ghee 
cA three-sided fig. of 1 mean. 
| A three-sided fig. of 2 means 


A three-sided fig. of 8 means 


g A three-sided fig. of 4 means | 


A three-sided fig. of 5 means | § | 4 | % | +5 


ow | eee | eee ee 


A three-sided fig. of 6 means | $! $ vfs ils 


LA three-sided fig. of 7 means rar rts es Ps. Yr x 


The exce 


7. In the next table are set down the proportion A table of solid 
of a cone and the solids of the said three-sided dessrined wwe 
figures, namely, the proportions between them and °""#r- 

a cylinder. As for example, in the concourse of 
the second column with the three-sided figures of 
four means, you have $; which gives you to un- 
derstand, that the solid of the second three-sided 
figure of four means is to the cylinder as ; to 1, or 


as 5 to 9. 


VOL. I. | § 


258 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART III. 
17. A cylinder e e e e e e 


— 
Acone ... +. « e 


cA three-sided fig. of 1 mean | ? 
A three-sided fig. of 2 means | #|#| | 
: A three-sided fig. of 3 means | 4 | 4 | +4 
3 q A three-sided fig. of 4 means | $ | § | +; 1 
A three-sided fig. of 5 means | & | 485) 4%¢! 4°x1 1% 


ee fee ee | | ee OO 


A three-sided fig. of 6 means | Z | 4,14; sts aie ie 


Laie (SEES, PPM icth aa i) Veco) Deen Weare! 


| A three-sided fig. of 7 means |,8,! 58; rary fs! = 


Inwhatpropor- g_ Lastly, the excess of the solids of the said 


figures exceed three-sided figures above a cone of the same alti- 
a cone of the 


same altitude tude and base; are set down in the table which 
and base. 
follows : 


The Cone. . 
Of the solid of a ‘ieee: ‘sided 
{ figure of 1 mean : } 


Ditto ditto, 2 means 


Ditto ditto, 3 means 


+ Ditto ditto, 4 means 
Ditto ditto, 5 means 
| Ditto ditto, 6 means 
LDitto ditto, 7 means . .. . 


The excesses of the solids of these three-sided 
figures above a cone. 


i 9. If any of these deficient fie of which I 
may bedescrib- have now spoken, as A BC D (in the 5th figure) be 
Tate cotliat inscribed within the complete figure BE, having 


na tc *" ADCE for its complement; and there be made 


See ce. upon CB produced the triangle ABI; and the 


othe: dcieient parallelogram A BI K be completed ; and there be 
gure, plain or 


solid, twice ta: drawn parallel to the strait line C1, any number 


ken, is tin, Of lines, as MF, cutting every one of them the 


OF FIGURES DEFICIENT. 259 


crooked line of the deficient figure in D, and the PARTE 
strait lines AC, AB and Al in H,G, and L; and —— 
as GF is to GD, so GL be made to another, GN ; Ssurestogether 


and through all the points N there be drawn the plete figure, in 
line A NI: there will be a deficient figure A N I B, scribed. 
whose complement will be ANIK. I say, the 

figure A NIB isto the triangle A BI, as the de- 

ficient figure ABCD twice taken is to the same 

deficient figure together with the complete figure 

BE. 

For as the proportion of A B to AG, that 1s, of 
GM to GL, is to the proportion of GM to GN, 
so is the magnitude of the figure A NIB to that 
of its complement A NIK, by the second article 
of this chapter. 

But, by the same article, as the proportion of 
AB to AG, that is, of GM to GL, is to the pro- 
portion of GF to GD, that is, by construction, of 
GL to GN, so is the figure A BC D to its comple- 
ment ADCE. 

And by composition, as the proportion of GM 
to GL, together with that of GLto GN, is to the 
proportion of G M to GL, so is the complete figure 
B E to the deficient figure A BC D. 

And by conversion, as the proportion of GM to 
GL is to both the proportions of GM to GL and 
of GL toGN, that is, to the proportion of GM to 
GN, which is the proportion compounded of both, 
so is the deficient figure ABCD to the complete 
figure BE. 

But it was, as the proportion of GM to GL to 
that of GMto GN, so the figure A NIB to its 
complement ANIK. And therefore, ABC D. BE 
:: ANIB. ANIK are proportionals. And by com- 

$2 


260 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PAPA position, ABCD+BE. ABCD:: BK. ANIB 
—~— are proportionals. 

And by doubling the consequents, ABC D+ 
BE. 2ABCD::BK. 2 ANI Bare proportionals. 
And by taking the halves of the third and the 
fourth ABCD+BE.2ABCD::ABI.ANIB 

are also proportionals ; which was to be proved. 
The transfer- 10, From what has been said of deficient figures 
ee tas described in a parallelogram, may be found out 
aa ‘i... what proportions spaces, transmitted with accele- 
cribed in apa- rated motion in determined times, have to the 


rallelogram to 
the propor- times themselves, according as the moved body is 


tensaited accelerated in the several times with one or more 

ae degrees of velocity. 

velocity: For let the parallelogram A BCD, in the 6th 
figure, and in it the three-sided figure DE BC be 
described ; and let FG be drawn anywhere parallel 
to the base, cutting the diagonal BD in H, and 
the crooked line BED in E; and let the propor- 
tion of BC to BF be, for example, triplicate to 
that of FG to FE; whereupon the figure DE BC 
will be triple to its complement BED A; and in 
like manner, IE being drawn parallel to BC, the 
three-sided figure E K B F will be triple to its com- 
plement BK EI. Wherefore the parts of the de- 
ficient figure cut off from the vertex by strait lines 
parallel to the base, namely, DE BC and EK BF, 
will be to one another as the parallelograms A C 
and I F; that is, in proportion compounded of the 
proportions of the altitudes and bases. Seeing 
therefore the proportion of the altitude BC to the 
altitude BF is triplicate to the proportion of the 
base DC to the base F E, the figure DE BC to the 


OF FIGURES DEFICIENT. 261 


figure E K B F will be quadruplicate to the propor- ee 
tion of the same DC to FE. And by the same ——~— 
method, may be found out what proportion any of jP° ret, 


the said three-sided figures has to any part of the Properties 
same, cut off from the vertex by a strait line pa- figures, &. 
rallel to the base. 

Now as the said figures are understood to be 
described by the continual decreasing of the base, 
as of CD, for example, till it end in a point, as in 
B; so also they may be understood to be described 
by the continual increasing of a point, as of B, till 
it acquire any magnitude, as that of C D. 

Suppose now the figure BE DC to be described 
by the increasing of the point B to the magnitude 
CD. Seeing therefore the proportion of BC to 
B F is triplicate to that of C D to F E, the propor- 
tion of FE to CD will, by conversion, as I shall 
presently demonstrate, be triplicate to that BF to 
BC. Wherefore if the strait line BC be taken for 
the measure of the time in which the point B is 
moved, the figure E K B F will represent the sum 
of all the increasing velocities in the time BF; and 
the figure DE BC will in like manner represent 
the sum of all the increasing velocities in the time 
BC. Seeing therefore the proportion of the figure 
EK BF tothe figure DEBC is compounded of 
the proportions of altitude to altitude, and base to 
base ; and seeing the proportion of FE to CD is 
triplicate to that of BF to BC; the proportion of 
the figure EK BF to the figure DEBC will be 
quadruplicate to that of BF to BC; that is, the 
proportion of the sum of the velocities in the time 
BF, to the sum of the velocities in the time BC, 
will be quadruplicate to. the proportion of BF to 


262 “MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PARTIM. BC. Wherefore if a body be moved from B with 
——— velocity so increasing, that the velocity acquired 
a tena in the time BF be to the velocity acquired in the 


properties time BC in triplicate proportion to that of the 

figures, &c. times themselves BF to BC, and the body be 
carried to F in the time BF;; the same body in the 
time BC will be carried through a line equal to 
the fifth proportional from BF in the continual 
proportion of BF to BC. And by the same 
manner of working, we may determine what spaces 
are transmitted by velocities increasing according 
to any other proportions. 

It remains that I demonstrate the proportion of 
FE to CD to be triplicate to that of BF to BC. 
Seeing therefore the proportion of C D, that is, of 
FG to FE is subtriplicate to that of BC to BF; 
the proportion of FG to FE will also be subtripli- 
cate to that of FG to FH. Wherefore the propor- 
tion of FG to F H is triplicate to that of FG, that 
is, of CD to FE. But in four continual propor- 
tionals, of which the least is the first, the propor- 
tion of the first to the fourth, (by the 16th article 
of chapter x111), 1s subtriplicate to the proportion 
of the third to the same fourth. Wherefore the 
proportion of F H to G F is subtriplicate to that of 
FE to CD; and therefore the proportion of F E 
to CD is triplicate to that of F H to FG, that is, of 

"BF to BC; which was to be proved. 

It may from hence be collected, that when the 
velocity of a body is increased in the same propor- 
tion with that of the times, the degrees of velocity 
above one another proceed as numbers do in im- 
mediate succession from unity, namely, as 1, 2, 3, 4, 
&c. And when the velocity is increased in pro- 


OF FIGURES DEFICIENT. 263 


portion duplicate to that of the times, the degrees PART HE 
proceed as numbers from unity, skipping one,as —— 
1, 3,5, 7, &c. Lastly, when the proportions of 

the velocities are triplicate to those of the times, 

the progression of the degrees is as that of num- 

bers from unity, skipping two in every place, as 

1, 4, 7, 10, &c., and so of other proportions. For 
geometrical proportionals, when they are taken in 

every point, are the same with arithmetical pro- 
portionals. 

11. Moreover, it is to be noted that as in quan- Of deficient £- 
tities, which are made by any magnitudes decreas- a ache a 
ing, the proportions of the figures to one another 
are as the proportions of the altitudes to those of 
the bases; so also it is in those, which are made 
with motion decreasing, which motion is nothing 
else but that power by which the described figures 
are greater or less. And therefore in the descrip- 
tion of Archimedes’ spiral, which is done by the 
continual diminution of the semidiameter of a 
circle in the same proportion in which the circum- 
ference is diminished, the space, which is con-. 
tained within the semidiameter and the spiral 
line, is a third part of the whole circle. For the 
semidiameters of circles, inasmuch as circles are 
understood to be made up of the aggregate of 
them, are so many sectors; and therefore in the 
description of a spiral, the sector which describes 
it is diminished in duplicate proportions to the 
diminutions of the circumference of the circle in 
which it is inscribed; so that the complement of 
the spiral, that is, that space in the circle which 
is without the spiral line, is double to the space 
within the spiral line. In the same manner, ff 


264 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART III. there be taken a mean proportional everywhere 
—— between the semidiameter of the circle, which 
contains the spiral, and that part of the semidia- 

meter which is within the same, there will be 

made another figure, which will be half the circle. 

And to conclude, this rule serves for all such 

spaces as may be described by a line or superficies 
decreasing either in magnitude or power; so that 

if the proportions, in which they decrease, be 
commensurable to the proportions of the times in 

which they decrease, the magnitudes of the figures 

they describe will be known. 

The proposi- 12. The truth of that proposition, which I de- 
nee monstrated in art. 2, which is the foundation of all 
from the ele- that has been said concerning deficient figures, 
ae P™ may be derived from the elements of philosophy, 
as having its original in this; that all equality 

and inequality between two effects, that 18s, all 
proportion, proceeds from, and ts determined by, 

the equal and unequal causes of those effects, or 

Jrom the proportion which the causes, concurring 

to one effect, have to the causes which concur to 

the producing of the other effect ; and that there- 

fore the proportions of quantities are the same 

with the proportions of their causes. Seeing, 
therefore, two deficient figures, of which one is 

the complement of the other, are made, one by 

motion decreasing in a certain time and proportion, 

the other by the loss of motion in the same time ; 

the causes, which make and determine the quanti- 

ties of both the figures, so that they can be no 

other than they are, differ only in this, that the 
proportions by which the quantity which generates 

the figure proceeds in describing of the same, that 


OF FIGURES DEFICIENT. 265 


is, the proportions of the remainders of all the Pera 
times and altitudes, may be other proportions than ————~ 
those by which the same generating quantity de- 
creases in making the complement of that figure, 
that is, the proportions of the quantity which gene- 
rates the figure continually diminished. Wherefore, 
as the proportion of the times in which motion is 
lost, is to that of the decreasing quantities by 
which the deficient figure is generated, so will the 
defect or complement be to the figure itself which 
is generated. 

13. There are also other quantities which are A» ia 
determinable from the knowledge of their causes, ing concerning 
namely, from the comparison of the motions by ote ne 


between the 
which they are made; and that more easily than Peracies 


of a portion 
from the common elements of geometry. For of sphere 
example, that the superficies of any portion of a 
sphere is equal to that circle, whose radius is a 
strait line drawn from the pole of the portion to 
the circumference of its base, I may demonstrate 
in thismanner. Let BA C (in fig. 7) be a portion 
of a sphere, whose axis is A E, and whose base is 
BC; and let AB be the strait line drawn from 
the pole A to the base in B; and let AD, equal to 
AB, touch the great circle BAC in the pole A. 
It is to be proved that the circle made by the 
radius AD is equal to the superficies of the portion 
BAC. Let the plan AE BD be understood to 
make a revolution about the axis AE; and it is 
manifest that by the strait line AD a circle will be 
described ; and by the arch A B the superficies of 
a portion of a sphere ; and lastly, by the subtense 
A B the superficies of a right cone. Now seeing 
both the strait lime A B and the arch AB make 


PART ILI. 
17. 


An unusual 
way of reason- 
ing, &c. 


266 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


one and the same revolution, and both of them 
have the same extreme points A and B, the cause 
why the spherical superficies, which is made by 
the arch, is greater than the conical superficies, 
which is made by the subtense, is, that AB the 
arch is greater than AB the subtense; and the 
cause why it is greater consists in this, that 
although they be both drawn from A to B, yet the 
subtense is drawn strait, but the arch angularly, 
namely, according to that angle which the arch 
makes with the subtense, which angle is equal to 
the angle D A B (for an angle of contingence adds 
nothing to an angle of asegment, as has been shown 
in chapter xIv, article 16.) Wherefore the mag- 
nitude of the angle DAB is the cause why the 
superficies of the portion, described by the arch 
AB, is greater than the superficies of the right 
cone described by the subtense A B. 

Again, the cause why the circle described by 
the tangent A D is greater than the superficies of 
the right cone described by the subtense A B (nct- 
withstanding that the tangent and the subtense 
are equal, and both moved round in the same 
time) is this, that AD stands at right angles to 
the axis, but A B obliquely ; which obliquity con- 
sists in the same angle DAB. Seeing therefore 
the quantity of the angle DAB is that which 
makes the excess both of the superficies of the 
portion, and of the circle made by the radius A D, 
above the superficies of the right cone described 
by the subtense AB; it follows, that both the 
superficies of the portion and that of the circle 
do equally exceed the superficies of the cone. 
Wherefore the circle made by AD or AB, and 


OF FIGURES DEFICIENT. 267 


the spherical superficies made by the arch A B, are Pe 

equal to one another; which was to be proved. —— 
14. If these deficient figures, which I have de- How from the 

scribed in a parallelogram, were capable of exact ‘escription of 


deficientfigures 
description, then any number of mean propor- i* 4 parallelo- 


tionals might be found out between two strait lines ber of mean ‘a 
given. For example, in the parallelogram A BCD, Pe? te found 
(in figure 8) let the three-sided figure of two means (\. piveacuait 
be described (which many call a cubical parabola); lines. 
and let R and S be two given strait lines ; between 
which, if it be required to find two mean propor- 
tionals, it may be done thus. Let it be as R toS, 
so BC to BF; and let FE be drawn parallel to 
B A, and cut the crooked line in E; then through 
E let GH be drawn parallel and equal to the strait 
line A D, and cut the diagonal B D in I; for thus 
we have GI the greatest of two means between 
GH and G E, as appears by the description of the 
figure in article 4. Wherefore, if it be as GH to 
GI, so R to another line, T, that T will be the 
greatest of two means between R and S. And 
therefore if it it be again as R to T, so T to ano- 
ther line, X, that will be done which was required. 
In the same manner, four mean proportionals 
may be found out, by the description of a three- 
sided figure of four means ; and so any other num- 
ber of means, &c. 


268 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


OF THE EQUATION OF STRAIT LINES WITH THE 
CROOKED LINES OF PARABOLAS AND OTHER 
FIGURES MADE IN IMITATION OF PARABOLAS. 


fecal 


. To find the strait line equal to the crooked line of a semipa- 
rabola.—2. To find a strait line equal to the crooked line of 
the first semiparabolaster, or to the crooked line of any other 
of the deficient figures of the table of the 3d article of the 
precedent chapter. 


PART IM. 1, A PARABOLA being given, to find a strait line 


Serer equal to the crooked line of the semiparabola. 

lineequal tothe Let the parabolical line given be ABC (in 

cvomiraratol, gure 1), and the diameter found be AD, and the 
base drawn DC; and the parallelogram ADC E 
being completed, draw the strait line AC. Then 
dividing A D into two equal parts in F, draw F H 
equal and parallel to DC, cutting AC in K, and 
the parabolical line in O; and between FH and 
F O take a mean proportional F P, and draw AO, 
AP and PC. I say that the two lines A P and 
PC, taken together as one line, are equal to the 
parabolical line A BOC. 

For the lime A BOC being a parabolical line, is 
generated by the concourse of two motions, one 
uniform from A to E, the other in the same time 
uniformly accelerated from rest in Ato D. And 
because the motion from A to E is uniform, A E 
may represent the times of both those motions 
from the beginning to the end. Let therefore 
AE be the time; and consequently the lines ordi- 


OF EQUATION OF STRAIT LINES, ETC. 269 


nately applied in the semiparabola will design the PART III. 
parts of time wherein the body, that describeth_ ——— 
the line A BOC, is in every point of the same; so eee oe 
that as at the end of the time AE or DC itis in C, 
so at the end of the time F O it willbe inO. And 
because the velocity in A D is increased uniformly, 
that is, in the same proportion with the time, the 
same lines ordinately applied in the semiparabola 
will design also the continual augmentation of the 
impetus, till it be at the greatest, designed by the 
base DC. Therefore supposing uniform motion 
in the line A F, in the time F K the body in A by 
the concourse of the two uniform motions in AF 
and F K will be moved uniformly in the line AK; 
and KO will be the increase of the impetus or 
swiftness gained in the time FK; and the line 
A O will be uniformly described by the concourse 
of the two uniform motions in A F and F O in the 
time FO. From O draw OL parallel to EC, 
cutting AC in L; and draw LN parallel to DC, 
cutting EC in N, and the parabolical line in M; 
and produce it on the other side to AD in I; and 
IN, IM and I L will be, by the construction of a 
parabola, in continual proportion, and equal to 
the three lines FH, FP and FO; and a strait 
line parallel to EC passing through M will fall on 
P; and therefore O P will be the increase of im- 
petus gained in the time FO or IL. Lastly, pro- 
duce PM to CD in Q;; and QC or MN or PH will 
be the increase of impetus proportional to the time 
FP orI Mor DQ. Suppose now uniform motion 
from H to C in thetime PH. Seeing therefore in 
the time F P with uniform motion and the impetus 
increased in proportion to the times, is described 


270 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


Pays th, the straight line AP; and in the rest of the time 
—— and impetus, namely, PH, is described the line 
C P uniformly; it followeth that the whole line 
A PC is described with the whole impetus, and in 
the same time wherewith is described the parabo- 
lical line ABC; and therefore the line A PC, 
made of the two strait lines A P and PC, is equal 
to the parabolical line A BC; which was to be 
proved. | 
oye 2. To find a strait line equal to the crooked line 
thecrookedline Of the first semiparabolaster. 
of the first se- ~~ Let ABC be the crooked line of the first semi- 


miparabolaster 


or to the crook- narabolaster ; AD the diameter; DC the base ; 


ed line of any 


otene hee: and let the parallelogram completed be ADC E, 

of the table of Whose diagonal is AC. Divide the diameter into 

eling thane: two equal parts in F, and draw FH equal and 
parallel to DC, cutting AC in K, the crooked line 
in O, and EC in H. Then draw OL parallel to 
EC, cutting AC in L; and draw LN parallel 
to the base 1D C, cutting the crooked line in M, 
and the strait line EC in N; and produce it on 
the other side to AD inI. Lastly, through the 
point M draw PMQ parallel and equal to HC, 
cutting F H in P; and join CP, AP and AO. 
I say, the two strait lines A P and PC are equal to 
the crooked line A BOC. 

For the line A BOC, being the crooked line of 
the first semiparabolaster, is generated by the 
concourse of two motions, one uniform from A to 
E, the other in the same time accelerated from 
rest in A to D, so as that the impetus increaseth 
in proportion perpetually triplicate to that of the 
increase of the time, or which is all one, the 
lengths transmitted are in proportion triplicate to 


OF EQUATION OF STRAIT LINES, ETC. 27] 


that of the times of their transmission; for as the PART IIT. 
impetus or quicknesses increase, so the lengths ———_ 
transmitted increase also. And because the mo- oe ou 
tion from A to E is uniform, the lme AE may 
serve to represent the time, and consequently the 
lines, ordinately drawn in the semiparabolaster, 
will design the parts of time wherein the body, 
beginning from rest in A, describeth by its 
motion the crooked line ABOC. And because 
DC, which represents the greatest acquired im- 
petus, is equal to A E, the same ordinate lines will 
represent the several augmentations of the impetus 
increasing from rest in A. Therefore, supposing 
uniform motion from A to F, in the time F K there 
will be described, by the concourse of the two 
uniform motions AF and F K, the line AK uni- 
formly, and K O will be the increase of impetus in 
the time FK; and by the concourse of the two 
uniform motions in A F and FO will be described 
the line AO uniformly. Through the point L 
draw the strait line LM N parallel to DC, cutting 
the strait line A D in I, the crooked line A BC in 
M, and the strait line EC in N; and through the 
point M the strait line P M Q parallel and equal to 
HC, cutting DC in Q and FH in P. By the 
concourse therefore of the two uniform motions in 
AF and FP in the time FP will be uniformly 
described the strait ine A P; and LM or OP 
will be the increase of impetus to be added for the 
time FQ. And because the proportion of I N to 
I L is triplicate to the proportion of IN to IM, 
the proportion of FH to FO will also be tripli- 
cate to the proportion of FH to FP; and the 
proportional impetus gained in the time F Pis PH. 


272 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART IIL So that FH being equal to DC, which designed 
—-— the whole impetus acquired by the acceleration, 
ine ge there is no more increase of impetus to be com- 
puted. Now in the time P H suppose an uniform 
motion from H to C; and by the two uniform mo- 
tions in C H and H P will be described uniformly 
the strait line P C. Seeing therefore the two strait 
lines AP and PC are described in the time A E 
with the same increase of impetus, wherewith the 
crooked line A BOC is described in the same 
time A E, that is, seeing the line APC and the 
line A BOC are transmitted by the same body in 
the same time and with equal velocities, the lines 
themselves are equal; which was to be demon- 
strated. 

By the same method (if any of the semipara- 
bolasters in the table of art. 3 of the precedent 
chapter be exhibited) may be found a strait line 
equal to the crooked line thereof, namely, by 
dividing the diameter into two equal parts, and 
proceeding as before. Yet no man hitherto hath 
compared any crooked with any strait line, though 
many geometricians of every age have endeavoured 
it. But the cause, why they have not done it, 
may be this, that there being in Euclid no defini- 
tion of equality, nor any mark by which to judge 
of it besides congruity (which is the 8th axiom of 
the first Book of his Elements) a thing of no use 
at all in the comparing of strait and crooked ; and 
others after Euclid (except Archimedes and Apol- 
lonius, and in our time Bonaventura) thinking the 
industry of the ancients had reached to all that 
was to be done in geometry, thought also, that 
all that could be propounded was either to be 


OF ANGLES OF INCIDENCE, ETC. 273 


deduced from what they had written, or else that PART III. 
it was not at all to be done: it was therefore dis- ——~— 

puted by some of those ancients themselves, whe- jo%si2 ‘tat 
ther there might be any equality at all between 

crooked and strait lines; which question Archi- 

medes, who assumed that some strait line was 

equal to the circumference of a circle, seems to 

have despised, as he had reason. And there is a 

late writer that granteth that between a strait 

and a crooked line there is equality; but now, 

says he, since the fall of Adam, without the spe- 

cial assistance of Divine Grace it is not to be 

found. 


CHAPTER XIX. 


OF ANGLES OF INCIDENCE AN) REFLECTION, 
EQUAL BY SUPPOSITION. 


pend 


. If two strait lines falling upon another strait line be parallel, 
the lines reflected from them shall also be parallel.—2. If two 
strait lines drawn from one point fall upon another strait line, 
the lines reflected from them, if they be drawn out the other 
way, will meet in an angle equal to the angle made by the lines 
of incidence.—3. If two strait parallel lines, drawn not oppo- 
sitely, but from the same parts, fall upon the circumference of 
a circle, the lines reflected from them, if produced they meet 
within the circle, will make an angle double to that which is 
mace by two strait lines drawn from the centre to the points of 
incidence.—4. If two strait lines drawn from the same point 
without a circle fall upon the circumference, and the lines 
reflected from them being produced meet within the circle, 
they will make an angle equal to twice that angle, which is 
made by two strait lines drawn from the centre to the points of 
incidence, together with the angle which the incident lines 
themselves make.—5. If two strait lines drawn from one point 


VOL. I. T 


274 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


fall upon the concave circumference of a circle, and the angle 
they make be less than twice the angle at the centre, the lines 
reflected from them and meeting within the circle will make an 
angle, which being added to the angle of the incident lines will 
be equal to twice the angle at the centre.—6. If through any 
one point two unequal chords be drawn cutting one another, 
and the centre of the circle be not placed between them, and 
the lines reflected from them concur wheresoever, there can- 
not through the point, through which the two former lines 
were drawn, be drawn any other strait line whose reflected 
line shall pass through the common point of the two former 
lines reflected.—7. In equal chords the same is not true. 
8. Two points being given in the circumference of a circle, to 
draw two strait lines to them, so that their reflected lines may 
contain any angle given.—9. If a strait line falling upon the 
circumference of a circle be produced till it reach the semi- 
diameter, and that part of it, which is intercepted between 
the circumference and the semidiameter, be equal to that part 
of the semidiameter which is between the point of concourse 
and the centre, the reflected line will be parallel to the semi- 
diameter.—10. If from a point within a circle, two strait lines 
be drawn to the circumference, and their reflected lines meet 
in the circumference of the same circle, the angle made by the 
reflected lines will be a third part of the angle made by the in- 
cident lines. 


PART IN. WHETHER a@ body falling upon the superficies of 
———— another body and being reflected from it, do make 
Angies of _ equal angles at that superficies, it belongs not to 
and reflection. this place to dispute, bemg a knowledge which 
depends upon the natural causes of reflection; of 
which hitherto nothing has been said, but shall be 

spoken of hereafter. 

In this place, therefore, let it be supposed that 
the angle of incidence is equal to the angle of 
reflection; that our present search may be ap- 
plied, not to the finding out of the causes, but 
some consequences of the same. 

I call an angle of incidence, that which is made 


OF ANGLES OF INCIDENCE, ETC. 275 


oetween a strait line and another line, strait or Pape TI. 
crooked, upon which it falls, and which I call the —-—~— 
line reflecting ; and an angle of reflection equal 
to it, that which is made at the same point between 
_ the strait line which is reflected and the line 
reflecting. 

1. If two strait lines, which fall upon another If two strait 
strait line, be parallel, their reflected lines shall be ae aan 
also parallel. eich ae 


Let the two strait lines A B and C D (in fig, 1), Hines reflected 
which fall upon the strait line EF, at the points shall also be 
B and D, be parallel; and let the lines reflected poe 
from them be BG and DH. Isay, BG and DH 
are also parallel. 

For the angles ABE and CDE are equal by 
reason of the parallelism of A B and CD; and the 
angles G BF and H DF are equal to them by sup- 
position ; for the lines BG and DH are reflected 
from the lines AB and CD. Wherefore BG and 
D H are parallel. 

2. If two strait lines drawn from the same If twostrait 
point fall upon another strait line, the lines re- from one point 
flected from them, if they be drawn out the other ul a line, 
way, will meet in an angle equal to the angle of the jhe ines r- 
incident lines. . en Ls eee 

From the point A (in fig. 2) let the two strait the other way, 
lines A B and AD be drawn; and let them fall ae gt a 
upon the strait line EK at the points B and D; pr iricmae 
and let the lines BI and DG be reflected from tncidence. 
them. Isay, IB and GD do converge, and that if 
they be produced on the other side of the line E K, 
they shall meet, asin F; and that the angle B F D 
shall be equal to the angle BA D. 

For the angle of reflection IB K is equal to the 


T 2 


276 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


ae ae angle of incidence A BE; and to the angle IBK 

——— its vertical angle EBF is equal; and therefore 
the angle ABE is equal to the angle EBF. 
Again, the angle ADE is equal to the angle of 
reflection GDK, that is, to its vertical angle 
EDF; and therefore the two angles ABD and 
A DB of the triangle A B D are one by one equal 
to the two angles F BD and F DB of the triangle 
F BD; wherefore also the third angle BAD is 
equal to the third angle BF D; which was to be 
proved. 

Coroll. 1. If the strait line A F be drawn, it will 
be perpendicular to the strait line EK. For both 
the angles at E will be equal, by reason of the 
equality of the two angles ABE and FBE, and 
of the two sides A B and FB. 

Coroll. 11. If upon any point between B and D 
there fall a strait line, as AC, whose reflected line is 
CH, this also produced beyond C, will fall upon F ; 
which is evident by the demonstration above. 

erlsltine 3. If from two points taken without a circle, 
drawn not op- two Strait parallel lines, drawn not oppositely, but 
fom the same from the same parts, fall upon the circumference ; 
Pee ee" the lines reflected from them, if produced they 
rence of a cir- meet within the circle, will make an angle double 


cle, the lines 


ee a to that which is made by two strait lines drawn 
duced they from the centre to the points of incidence. 

the crcl wilt Let the two strait parallels AB and DC (in 
airport fig. 3) fall upon the circumference BC at the 
ee is made points B and C; and let the centre of the circle be 
lines drawn 4; and let AB reflected be B F, and DC reflected 
to the von be CG; and let the lines FB and GC produced 


incidence. © meet within the circle in H; and let EB and EC 


OF ANGLES OF INCIDENCE, ETC. 277 


be connected. I say the angle F HG is double to PART III. 
the angle BEC. — 
For seeing A B and DC. are parallels, and E B jintet ines 
cuts AB in B, the same EB produced will cut 4», &. 
DC somewhere ; let it cut it in D; and let DC 
be produced howsoever to I, and let the intersec- 
tion of DC and BF be at K. The angle therefore 
IC H, being external to the triangle C K H, will 
be equal to the two opposite angles CK H and 
CHK. Again, IC E being external to the triangle 
CDE, is equal to the two angles at D and E. 
Wherefore the angle IC H, being double to the 
angle IC EK, is equal to the angles at D and E 
twice taken ; and therefore the two angles C K H 
and C H K are equal to the two angles at D and E 
twice taken. But the angle C K H is equal to the 
angles D and A BD, that is, D twice taken ; for 
AB and DC being parallels, the altern angles D 
and ABD are equal. Wherefore CH K, that is 
the angle F HG is also equal to the angle at E 
twice taken ; which was to be proved. 
Coroll. If from two points taken within a circle 
two strait parallels fall upon the circumference, 
the lines reflected from them shall meet in an 
angle, double to that which is made by two strait 
lines drawn from the centre to the points of 
incidence. For the parallels AB and IC falling 
upon the points B and C, are reflected in the lines 
BH and CH, and make the angle at H double to 
the angle at E, as was but now demonstrated. 
4. If two strait lines drawn from the same point f bine: seat 
without a circle fall upon the circumference, and fa the aie 
the lines reflected from them being produced meet Point without a 


circle fall upon 


within the circle, they will make an angle equal to the circumfe- 


278 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


et al twice that angle, which is made by two strait lines 
——-—— drawn from the centre to the points of incidence, 
sence ane ‘Ke together with the angle which the incident lines 


fromthem __ themselves make. 
being produced : 


meet within Let the two strait lines AB and AC (in fig. 4) 
will make an” De drawn from the point A to the circumference 
angle equal to of the circle, whose centre is D; and let the lines 


twice that an- 


gle, which is_ reflected from them be BE and CG, and, being 


made by two Sah . 

strat Lines produced, make within the circle the angle H; 
wn from t °, 1 

centre to the also let the two strait lines D B and D C be drawn 

points of inci- : os 

Fence, tozether OM the centre D to the points of incidence B 


with the angleand C. I say, the angle H is equal to twice the 


racideat "angle at D together with the angle at A. 

x Conan For let AC be produced howsoever toI. There- 
fore the angle ICH, which is external to the 
triangle CK H, will be equal to the two angles 
CKH andCHK. Again, the angle IC D, which 
is external to the triangle CLD, will be equal to 
the two angles CLD and CDL. But the angle 
I CH is double to the angle ICD, and is therefore 
equal to the angles CLD and CDL twice taken. 
Wherefore the angles CKH and CH K are equal 
to the angles CL D and CDL twice taken. But 
the angle CLD, being external to the triangle 
A LB, is equal to the two angles LAB and LBA; 
and consequently C LD twice taken is equal to 
LAB and LBA twice taken. Wherefore C K H 
and CH K are equal to the angle C DL together 
with LAB and LBA twice taken. Also the 
angle C K H is equal to the angle L A B once and 
ABK, that is, LBA twice taken. Wherefore 
the angle CH K is equal to the remaining angle 
C D L, that is, to the angle at D, twice taken, and 


OF ANGLES OF INCIDENCE, ETC. 279 


the angle LAB, that is, the angle at A, once PART Ul. 
taken ; which was to be proved. Sar 

Coroll. If two strait converging lines, as IC and 
MB, fall upon the concave circumference of a 
circle, their reflected lines, as CH and BH, will 
meet in the angle H, equal to twice the angle D, 
together with the angle at A made by the incident 
lines produced. Or, if the incident lines be H B 
and IC, whose reflected lines CH and BM meet 
in the point N, the angle CNB will be equal to 
twice the angle D, together with the angle CK H 
made by the lines of incidence. For the angle 
CN B is equal to the angle H, that is, to twice 
the angle D, together with the two angles A, and 
N BH, that iss K BA. But the angles KBA 
and A are equal to the angle CK H. Wherefore 
the angle C NB is equal to twice the angle D, 
together with the angle CK H made by the lines 
of incidence I C and H B produced to K. 

5. If two strait lines drawn from one point fall If two strait 
upon the concave circumference of a circle, and from one point 
the angle they make be less than twice the angle ee 
at the centre, the lines reflected from them and %™mfrence of 


acircle, and 


meeting within the circle will make an angle, te angle they 
make be less 
which being added to the angle of the incident than twice the 


lines, will be equal to twice the angle at the centre. 28. tne” 


Let the two lines AB and AC (in fig. 5), drawn eed reflected F 
from the point A, fall upon the concave circum- meeting within 


the circle will 


ference of the circle whose centre is D; and let make an angle, 
their reflected lines BE and CE meet in the point fina cue 
E; also let the angle A be less than twice the *zleof the in. 


cident lines will 


angle D. I say, the angles A and E together be equal to A 
taken are equal to twice the angle D. sete conte, 


For let the strait lines AB and EC cut the 


280 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART 111, Strait lines DC and DB in the points G and H; 
—* and the angle BHC will be equal to the two 
adele angles EBH and E; also the same angle BH C 
from one, &. Will be equal to the two angles D and DCH; and 
in like manner the angle BGC will be equal to 
the two angles AC D and A, and the same angle 
BGC will be also equal to the two angles D BG 
and D. Wherefore the four angles EBH, E, 
ACD and A, are equal to the four angles D, DCH, 
DBG and D. If, therefore, equals be taken away 
on both sides, namely, on one side ACD and 
E BH, and on the other side DCH and DBG, 
(for the angle E BH is equal to the angle DBG, 
and the angle AC D equal to the angle DC H), 
the remainders on both sides will be equal, namely, 
on one side the angles A and E, and on the other 
the angle D twice taken. Wherefore the angles 
A and E are equal to twice the angle D. 

Coroll. If the angle A be greater than twice the 
angle D, their reflected lines will diverge. For, by 
the corollary of the third proposition, if the angle 
A be equal to twice the angle D, the reflected lines 
BE and CE will be parallel; and if it be less, 
they will concur, as has now been demonstrated. 
And therefore, if it be greater, the reflected lines 
BE and CE will diverge, and consequently, if 
they be produced the other way, they will concur 
and make an angle equal to the excess of the angle 
A above twice the angle D; as is evident by art. 4. 

If through any 6. If through any one point two unequal chords 
unequal chords De drawn cutting one another, either within the 
ting one ano, circle, or, if they be produced, without it, and the 
ther, and the centre of the circle be not placed between them, 


centre of the 
circle be not and the lines reflected from them concur where- 


OF ANGLES OF INCIDENCE, ETC. 281 


soever ; there cannot, through the point through PART III. 
which the former lines were drawn, be drawn ~—— 
another strait line, whose reflected line shall pass a setts 
through the point where the two former reflected Ree cried 
lines concur. cur whereso- 


Let any two unequal chords, as BK and C H errr there 


cannot through 


(in fig. 6), be drawn through the point A in the fhe point, 

; : g i rough which 
circle BC; and let their reflected lines BD and the two former 
CE meet in F; and let the centre not be between drawn, be 


drawn, be 


AB and AC; and from the point A let any other ¢7¥"*"Y 


other strait line 
strait line, as AG, be drawn to the circumference whos rected 
between B and C. I say, GN, which passes through the. 
through the point F, where the reflected lines BD ¢rihe twe for. 
and CE meet, will not be the reflected line of AG. pl ise 7 
For let the arch BL be taken equal to the arch 
BG, and the strait line BM equal to the strait 
line BA; and LM being drawn, let it be produced 
to the circumference in O. Seeing therefore BA 
and B M are equal, and the arch B L equal to the 
arch BG, and the angle M B L equal to the angle 
ABG, AG and ML will also be equal, and, pro- 
ducing G A to the circumference in I, the whole 
lines LO and GI will in like manner be equal. 
But L O is greater than GFN, as shall presently 
be demonstrated ; and therefore also GI is greater 
than GN. Wherefore the angles NGC and IGB 
are not equal. Wherefore the line GFN is not 
reflected from the line of incidence AG, and con- 
sequently no other strait line, besides AB and 
AC, which is drawn through the point A, and 
falls upon the circumference B C, can be reflected 
to the point F; which was to be demonstrated. 
It remains that I prove LO to be greater than 
GN; which I shall do in this manner. LO and 


‘PART III. 
19. 


Sey 


In equal chords 
the same is not 
true. 


282 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


GN cut one another in P; and P Lis greater than 
PG. Seeing now LP. PG:: PN. PO are propor- 
tionals, therefore the two extremes LP and PO 
together taken, that is LO, are greater than PG 
and PN together taken, that is, GN; which re- 
mained to be proved. 

7. Butif two equal chords be drawn through one 
point within a circle, and the lines reflected from 
them meet in another point, then another strait line 
may be drawn between them through the former 
point, whose reflected line shall pass through the 
latter point. 

Let the two equal chords BC and ED (in the 
7th figure) cut one another in the point A within 
the circle B CD; and let their reflected ines C H 
and DI meet in the point F. Then dividing the 
arch C D equally in G, let the two chords G K and 
G L be drawn through the points Aand F. I say, 
G L will be the line reflected from the chord K G. 
For the four chords BC, C H, ED and DI are by 
supposition all equal to one another; and therefore 
the arch BC H is equal to the arch E DI; as also 
the angle BC H to the angle EDI; and the angle 
AM C to its verticle angle F MD; and the strait 
line D M to the strait line GM; and, in like man- 
ner, the strait line A C to the strait line F D; and 
the chords CG and G D being drawn, will also be 
equal ; and also the angles F D G and ACG, in the 
equal segments GDI andGCB. Wherefore the 
strait lines F G and A G are equal; and, therefore, 
the angle FG D is equal to the angle AGC, that 
is, the angle of incidence equal to the angle of re- 
flection. Wherefore the line GL is reflected from 
the incident line CG; which was to be proved. 


OF ANGLES OF INCIDENCE, ETC. 283 


Coroll. By the very sight of the figure it is mani- PART IIT. 
fest, that if G be not the middle point between C ~—-— 
and D, the reflected line G L will not pass through 
the point F. 

8. Two points in the circumference of a circle le points! be: 
being given to draw two strait lines to them, SO a8 circumference 
that their reflected lines may be parallel, or con- oe eee 
tain any angle given. eet we 


In the circumference of the circle, whose centre deste tines 
is A, (in the 8th figure) let the two points B and a anglegiven 
C be given ; and let it be required to draw to them 
from two points taken without the circle two inci- 
dent lines, so that their reflected lines may, first, 
be parallel. 

Let A B and A C be drawn ; as also any incident 
line DC, with its reflected line CF; and let the 
angle EC D be made double to the angle A; and 
let H B be drawn parallel to EC, and produced 
till it meet with DC produced in I. Lastly, pro- 
ducing A B indefinitely to K, let GB be drawn so 
that the angle GBK may be equal to the angle 
H BK, and then GB will be the reflected line of 
the incident line H B. I say, DC and H B are two 
incident lines, whose reflected lines CF and BG 
are parallel. 

For seeing the angle E C D is double to the angle 
B AC, the angle HIC is also, by reason of the 
parallels EC and HI, double to the same BAC; 
therefore also FC and GB, namely, the lines re- 
flected from the incident lines DC and HB, are 
parallel. Wherefore the first thing required is 
done. 

Secondly, let it be required to draw to the points 
B and C two strait lines of incidence, so that the 


284 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART It. Jines reflected from them may contain the given 
—— angle Z. 
eopeninthe 10 the angle ECD made at the point C, let there 
circumference be added on one side the angle D C L equal to half 
~~ Z, and on the other side the angle EC M eqnal to 
the angle DCL; and let the strait line BN be 
drawn parallel to the strait ime C M; and let the 
angle K B O be made equal to the angle N BK; 
which being done, BO will be the line of reflection 
from the line of incidence N B. Lastly, from the 
incident line LC, let the reflected line CO be 
drawn, cutting BO at O, and making the angle 
COB. I say, the angle COB is equal to the 
angle Z. 

Let N B be produced till it meet with the strait 
line LC produced in P. Seeing, therefore, the 
angle LC M is, by construction, equal to twice the 
angle B AC, together with the angle Z; the angle 
NPL, which is equal to LC M by reason of the 
parallels N P and MC, will also be equal to twice 
the same angle B AC, together with the angle Z. 
And seeing the two strait lines OC and O B fall 
from the point O upon the points C and B; and 
their reflected lines LC and N B meet in the point 
P; the angle N PL will be equal to twice the angle 
BAC together with the angle COB. But I have 
already proved the angle N PL to be equal to twice 
the angle BAC together with the angle Z. There- 
fore the angle COB is equal to the angle Z; where- 
fore, two points in the circumference of a circle 
being given, Ihave drawn, &c.; which was tobe done. 

But if it be required to draw the incident lines 
from a point within the circle, so that the lines re- 
flected from them may contain an angle equal to 


OF ANGLES OF INCIDENCE, ETC. 285 


the angle Z, the same method is to be used, saving PART III. 
that in this case the angle Z is not to be added to —~— 
twice the angle B AC, but to be taken from it. 


9. If a strait line, falling upon the circumference If 2 strait line 
falling upon the 


of a circle, be produced till it reach the semidia. circumference 


of a circle be 


meter, and that part of it which is intercepted be- produced till it 


; es h-the seinis 
tween the circumference and the semidiameter be digmeise see 


equal to that part of the semidiameter which is thet part of it, 


which is inter- 
between the point of concourse and the centre, the cepted between 


the circumfer- 


reflected line will be parallel to the semidiameter. enceand the se- 
Let any line AB (in the 9th figure) be the semi- Maumeter, be 


equal to that 


diameter of the circle whose centre is A ; and upon Pt of the se- 
midiameter 


the circumference B D let the strait line C D fall, which is be- 
and be produced till it cut A B in E, so that ED ite thay 
and E A may be equal; and from the incident line 379 "6 ceny* 
C D let the line DF be reflected. I say, A B and line wi! be pa- 
D F will be parallel. midiameter. 
Let A G be drawn through the point D. Seeing, 
therefore, E D and E A are equal, the angles EDA 
and EAD will also be equal. But the angles FDG 
and EDA are equal; for each of them is half the 
angle EDH or FDC. Wherefore the angles FDG 
and EAD are equal; and consequently DF and 
A B are parallel ; which was to be proved. 
Coroll. If EA be greater then ED, then DF 
and A B being produced will concur; but if EA 
be less than E D, then B A and DH being produced 
will concur. 


10. If from a point within a circle two strait If from a point 


within a circle 


lines be drawn to the circumference, and their re- two strait lines 
j i 1 be d toth 
flected lines meet in the circumference of the same circumference, 


circumference, 


circle, the angle made by the lines of reflection will #4 their te- 


flected lines 


be a third part of the angle made by the lines of meet in the cir. 
incidence. 


286 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PARTIU. From the point B (in the 10th figure) taken 
19. e e e e 

——— within the circle whose centre is A, let the two 

cumference of strait lines BC and BD be drawn to the circum- 


the same circle, 


the angle made ference; and let their reflected lines C E and DE 
by the reflected ‘ ; ‘ 
lines will be a Meet in the circumference of the same circle at the 


sal ade ie point E. I say, the angle C E D will be a third 
ecient part of the angle C BD. 

Let AC and AD be drawn. Seeing, therefore, 
the angles CED and CBD together taken are 
equal to twice the angle C A D (as has been de- 
monstrated in the 5th article); and the angle 
C A D twice taken is quadruple to the angle C E D; 
the angles CED and C BD together taken will 
also be equal to the angle C E D four times taken; 
and therefore if the angle C E D be taken away on 
both sides, there will remain the angle C B D on 
one side, equal to the angle C E D thrice taken on 
the other side ; which was to be demonstrated. 

Coroll. Therefore a point being given within a 
circle, there may be drawn two lines from it to the 
circumference, so as their reflected lines may meet 
in the circumference. For it is but trisecting the 
angle C B D, which how it may be done shall be 
shown in the following chapter. 


DIMENSION OF A CIRCLE, ETC. 287 


CHAPTER XX. 


OF THE DIMENSION OF A CIRCLE, AND THE 
DIVISION OF ANGLES OR ARCHES. 


. The dimension of a circle never determined in numbers by 
Archimedes and others. —2. The first attempt for the finding out 
of the dimension of a circle by lines.—3. The second attempt 
for the finding out of the dimension of a circle from the 
consideration of the nature of crookedness.—4. The third 
attempt; and some things propounded to be further searched 
into.—5. The equation of the spiral of Archimedes with a 
strait line—6, Of the analysis of geometricians by the powers 
of lines. 


1. In the comparing of an arch of a circle with a PART MT 
strait line, many and great geometricians, even —“—~ 
from the most ancient times, have exercised their ip aa aie 
wits; and more had done the same, if they had aes 
not seen their pains, though undertaken for the Archiedes 
common good, if not brought to perfection, vilified 

by those that envy the praises of other men. 
Amongst those ancient writers whose works are 

come to our hands, Archimedes was the first that 

brought the length of the perimeter of a circle 

within the limits of numbers very little differing 

from the truth; demonstrating the same to be 

less than three diameters and a seventh part, but 

greater than three diameters and ten seventy-one 

parts of the diameter. So that supposing the 

radius to consist of 10,000,000 equal parts, the 

arch of a quadrant will be between 15,714,285 

and 15,704,225 of the same parts. In our times, 


Ludovicus Van Cullen and Willebrordus Snellius, 


288 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART III. with joint endeavour, have come yet nearer to 
—-~ the truth; and pronounced from true principles, 
The dimension that the arch of a quadrant, putting, as before, 


of acirclenever 


ee 10,000,000 for radius, differs not one whole unity 
Archimedes from the number 15,707,963; which, if they had 
and others. exhibited their arithmetical operations, and no 
man had discovered any error in that long work 
of theirs, had been demonstrated by them. This 
is the furthest progress that has been made by the 
way of numbers; and they that have proceeded 
thus far deserve the praise of industry. Never- 
theless, if we consider the benefit, which is the 
scope at which all speculation should aim, the 
Improvement they have made has been little or 
none. For any ordinary man may much sooner 
and more accurately find a strait line equal to the 
perimeter of a circle, and consequently square the 
circle, by winding a small thread about a given 
cylinder, than any geometrician shall do the same 
by dividing the radius into 10,000,000 equal parts. 
But though the length of the circumference were 
exactly set out, either by numbers, or mechanically, 
or only by chance, yet this would contribute no 
help at all towards the section of angles, unless 
happily these two problems, ¢o divide a given 
angle according to any proportion assigned, and 
to find a strait line equal to the arch of a circle, 
were reciprocal, and followed one another. Seeing 
therefore the benefit proceeding from the know- 
ledge of the length of the arch of a quadrant 
consists in this, that we may thereby divide an 
angle according to any proportion, either accu- 
rately, or at least accurately enough for common 
use ; and seeing this cannot be done by arithmetic, I 


DIMENSION OF A CIRCLE, ETC. 289 


thought fit to attempt the same by geometry, PART HI. 
and in this chapter to make trial whether it might —— 
not be performed by the drawing of strait and 
circular lines. | 

2. Let the square ABCD (in the first figure) The first 
be described; and with the radii AB, BC, and the auing 
DC, the three arches B D, CA, and AC; of which o"t of ihe 
let the two B D and CA cut one another in E, and ‘itcle by lines. 
the two BD and AC in F. The diagonals there- 
fore BD and AC being drawn will cut one another 
in the centre of the square G, and the two arches 
BD and CA in two equal parts in H and Y; and 
the arch BHD will be trisected in F and E. 
Through the centre G let the two strait lines KGL 
and MGN be drawn parallel and equal to the 
sides of the square A B and AD, cutting the four 
sides of the same square in the points K, L, M, 
and N ; which being done, K L will pass through 
F, and MN through E. Then let OP be drawn 
parallel and equal to the side BC, cutting the 
arch BF D in F, and the sides AB and DC in O 
and P. Therefore OF will be the sine of the arch 
BF, which is an arch of 30 degrees; and the 
same OF will be equal to half the radius. Lastly, 
dividing the arch BF in the middle in Q, let RQ, 
the sine of the arch BQ, be drawn and produced 
to 8, so that QS be equal to RQ, and consequently 
RS be equal to the chord of the arch BF; and 
let FS be drawn and produced to T in the side 
BC. I say, the strait line BT is equal to the 
arch BF; and consequently that BV, the triple of 
BT, 1s equal to the arch of the quadrant B FED. 

Let TF be produced till it meet the side BA 
produced in X ; and dividing OF in the middle 

VOL. I. U 


PART ITI. 
20. 


eye 


The first 
attempt for 
the finding 
out of the 


290 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


in Z, let QZ be drawn and produced till it meet 
with the side BA produced. Seeing therefore the 
strait lines RS and OF are parallel, and divided 
in the midst in Q and Z, QZ produced will fall 


dimension of upon X, and X ZQ produced to the side BC will 


circle by lines. 


cut B T in the midst in a. 

Upon the strait line F Z, the fourth part of the 
radius AB, let the equilateral triangle a ZF be 
constituted ; and upon the centre a, with the 
radius a Z, let the arch ZF be drawn; which arch 
ZF will therefore be equal to the arch QF, the 
half of the arch BF. Again, let the strait line 
ZO be cut in the midst in 6, and the strait line 
6 O in the midst in c; and let the bisection be 
continued in this manner till the last part O c be 
the least that can possibly be taken ; and upon it, 
and all the rest of the parts equal to it into which 
the strait line OF may be cut, let so many equi- 
lateral triangles be understood to be constituted ; 
of which let the last be dO c. If, therefore, upon 
the centre d, with the radius d O, be drawn the 
arch Oc, and upon the rest of the equal parts 
of the strait line OF be drawn in like manner so 
many equal arches, all those arches together taken 
will be equal to the whole arch BF, and the half 
of them, namely, those that are comprehended 
between O and Z, or between Z and F, will be 
equal to the arch BQ or QF, and im sum, 
what part soever the strait line Oc be of the 
strait line OF, the same part will the arch Oc be 
of the arch BF, though both the arch and the 
chord be infinitely bisected. Now seeing the 
arch Oc is more crooked than that part of the 
arch BF which is equal to it; and seeing also 


DIMENSION OF A CIRCLE, ETC. 291 


that the more the strait line X c is produced, the PART 11. 
more it diverges from the strait line XO, if the —-— 
points O and ¢ be understood to be moved for- item for 


wards with strait motion in XO and Xe, the the Shang 
arch Oc will thereby be extended by little and dimension of a 
little, till at the last it come somewhere to have. 
the same crookedness with that part of the arch B F 
which is equal to it. In like manner, if the strait 
line X 5 be drawn, and the point } be understood 
to be moved forwards at the same time, the arch 
c 6 will also by little and little be extended, till 
its crookedness come to be equal to the crooked- 
ness of that part of the arch BF which is equal 
to it. And the same will happen in all those 
small equal arches which are described upon so 
many equal parts of the strait line OF. It is also 
manifest, that by strait motion in XO and XZ 
all those small arches will lie in the arch BF, 
in the points B, Q and F. And though the same 
small equal arches should not be coincident with 
the equal parts of the arch BF in all the other 
points thereof, yet certainly they will constitute 
two crooked lines, not only equal to the two 
arches BQ and QF, and equally crooked, but 
also having their cavity towards the same parts ; 
which how it should be, unless all those small 
arches should be coincident with the arch BF in 
all its points, is not imaginable. They are there- 
fore coincident, and all the strait lines drawn 
from X, and passing through the points of division 
of the strait line OF, will also divide the arch 
BF into the same proportions into which OF is 
divided. 

Now seeing X 6 cuts off from the point B the 

U2 


292 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


Pann fourth part of the arch BF, let that fourth part 
—— be Be; and let the sine thereof, f e, be produced 
as to FT in g, for so fe will be the fourth part of 
the finding —_ the strait line fg, because as O b is to OF, so is 
dimension tafe to fg. But BT is greater than fg; and 
om “7 therefore the same BT is greater than four sines 
of the fourth part of the arch BF. And in like 
manner, if the arch BF be subdivided into any 
number of equal parts whatsoever, it may be 
proved that the strait line BT is greater than the 
sine of one of those small arches, so many times 
taken as there be parts made of the whole arch 
BF. Wherefore the strait line BT is not less 
than thearch BF. But neither can it be greater, 
because if any strait line whatsoever, less than 
BT, be drawn below BT, parallel to it, and ter- 
minated in the strait lines X B and X T, it would 
cut the arch BF; andso the sine of some one of the 
parts of the arch BF, taken so often as that small 
arch is found in the whole arch BF, would be 
greater than so many of the same arches; which 
is absurd. Wherefore the strait line BT is equal 
to the arch BF; and the strait line B V equal to 
the arch of the quadrant BF D; and BV four 
times taken, equal to the perimeter of the circle 
described with the radius AB. Also the arch 
B F and the strait line B T are everywhere divided 
into the same proportions ; and consequently any 
given angle, whether greater or less than BA F, 
may be divided into any proportion given. 

But the strait line BV, though its magnitude 
fall within the terms assigned by Archimedes, is 
found, if computed by the canon of signs, to be 
somewhat greater than that which is exhibited by 


DIMENSION OF A CIRCLE, ETC. 293 


the Rudolphine numbers. Nevertheless, if im the 
place of BT, another strait line, though never so 
little less, be substituted, the division of angles is 
immediately lost, as may by any man be demon- 
strated by this very scheme. 

Howsoever, if any man think this my strait line 
B V to be too great, yet, seeing the arch and all the 
parallels are everywhere so exactly divided, and 
B V comes so near to the truth, I desire he would 
search out the reason, why, granting BV to be 
precisely true, the arches cut off should not be 
equal. 

But some man may yet ask the reason why the 


PART IIT. 
20. 


— ee” 
The first 
attempt for 
the finding 
out of the 
dimension of a 
circle by lines. 


strait lines, drawn from X through the equal parts — 


of the arch BF, should cut off in the tangent BV 
so many strait lines equal to them, seeing the con- 
nected straight line X V passes not through the 
point D, but cuts the strait line A D produced in 7; 
and consequently require some determination of 
this problem. Concerning which, I will say what 
I think to be the reason, namely, that whilst the 
magnitude of the arch doth not exceed the magni- 
tude of the radius, that is, the magnitude of the 
tangent BC, both the arch and the tangent are cut 
alike by the strait lines drawn from X ; otherwise 
not. For A V being connected, cutting the arch 
BHD in I, if XC being drawn should cut the 
same arch in the same point I, it would be as true 
that the arch BI is equal to the radius BC, as it is 
true that the arch B F is equal to the strait line BT ; 
and drawing X K it would cut the arch BI in the 
midst in z; also drawing Az and producing it to the 
tangent BC in &, the strait line B& will be the 


294 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART III. tangent of the arch B i, (which arch is equal to 
—— half the radius) and the same strait line B& will 
be equal to the strait line &I. I say all this is true, 
if the preceding demonstration be true; and con- 
sequently the proportional section of the arch and 
Its tangent proceeds hitherto. But it is manifest 
by the golden rule, that taking B # double to BT, 
the line X & shall not cut off the arch BE, which 
is double to the arch BF, but a much greater. For 
the magnitude of the straight lines X M, X B, and 
M E, being known (in numbers), the magnitude of 
the strait line cut off in the tangent by the strait 
line XE produced to the tangent, may also be 
known; and it will be found to be less than B& ; 
Wherefore the strait line X & being drawn, will cut 
off a part of the arch of the quadrant greater than 
the arch BE. But I shall speak more fully in 
the next article concerning the magnitude of the 
arch BI. 

And let this be the first attempt for the finding 
out of the dimension of a circle by the section of 
the arch BF. 

ane second 3. I shall now attempt the same by arguments 


attempt for the 
finding out of drawn from the nature of the crookedness of the 


the dimension 


of acircle from Circle itself; but I shall first set down some pre- 

ie cons’er- mises necessary for this speculation; and 

ae First, if a strait line be bowed into an arch of 
a circle equal to it, as when a stretched thread, 
which toucheth a rnght cylinder, is so bowed in 
every point, that it be everywhere coincident with 
the perimeter of the base of the cylinder, the 
flexion of that line will be equal, im all its points ; 
and consequently the crookedness of the arch of a 


DIMENSION OF A CIRCLE, ETC. 295 


circle is everywhere uniform ; which needs no other PART II. 
demonstration than this, that the perimeter of a —— 
circle is an uniform line. sae eet 
Secondly, and consequently: if two unequal finding, &c. 
arches of the same circle be made by the bowing of 
two strait lines equal to them, the flexion of the 
longer line, whilst it is bowed into the greater 
arch, is greater than the flexion of the shorter line, 
whilst it is bowed into the lesser arch, according 
to the proportion of the arches themselves; and 
consequently, the crookedness of the greater arch 
is to the crookedness of the lesser arch, as the 
greater arch is to the lesser arch. 
Thirdly : if two unequal circles and a strait line 
touch one another in the same point, the crooked- 
ness of any arch taken in the lesser circle, will be 
greater than the crookedness of an arch equal to it 
taken in the greater circle, in reciprocal proportion 
to that of the radi with which the circles are 
described; or, which is all one, any strait line 
being drawn from the point of contact till it cut 
both the circumferences, as the part of that strait 
line cut off by the circumference of the greater 
circle to that part which is cut off by the circum- 
ference of the lesser circle. 
For let AB and AC (in the second figure) be 
two circles, touching one another, and the strait 
line A D in the point A; and let their centres be 
E and F; and let it be supposed, that as A E is to 
AF, so is the arch A B to the arch AH. I say the 
crookedness of the arch A C is to the crookedness 
of the arch AH, as AE is toAF. For let the 
strait line A D be supposed to be equal to the arch 
‘AB, and the strait line A G to the arch AC; and 


296 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART UL. let AD, for example, be double to AG. There- 
eee fore, by reason of the likeness of the arches AB 
usoet fer the 200 A C, the strait line A B will be double to the 
finding, &c. strait line AC, and the radius AE double to the ra- 
dius A F, and the arch A B double to the arch A H. 
And because the strait line A D is so bowed to be 
coincident with the arch AB equal to it, as the 
strait line AG is bowed to be coincident with the 
arch AC equal also to it, the flexion of the strait 
line A G into the crooked line A C will be equal to 
the flexion of the strait line A D into the crooked 
line AB. But the flexion of the strait line AD 
into the crooked line A B is double to the flexion 
of the strait lime AG into the crooked line AH ; 
and therefore the flexion of the strait line A G into 
the crooked line AC is double to the flexion of 
the same strait line AG into the crooked line 
AH. Wherefore, as the arch AB is to the arch 
AC or AH;; oras the radius A E is to the radius 
AF; or as the chord A B is to the chord AC; so 
reciprocally is the flexion or uniform crookedness 
of the arch A C, to the flexion or uniform crooked- 
ness of the arch AH, namely, here double. And 
this may by the same method be demonstrated in 
circles whose perimeters are to one another triple, 
quadruple, or in whatsoever given proportion. The 
crookedness therefore of two equal arches taken in 
several circles are in proportion reciprocal to that 
of their radii, or like arches, or like chords ; which 
was to be demonstrated. 
Let the square ABC D be again described (in 
the third figure), and in it the quadrants ABD, 
BCA and DAC; and dividing each side of the 
square ABC D in the midst in EK, F, G and H, let 


DIMENSION OF A CIRCLE, ETC. 297 


EG and F H be connected, which will cut one an- a 
other in the centre of the square at I, and divide —-—— 
the arch of the quadrant ABD into three equal re Re the 
parts in K and L. Also the diagonals AC and finding, &. 
B D being drawn will cut one another in I, and 
divide the arches B K D and C LA into two equal 
partsin Mand N. Then with the radius B F let 
the arch F E be drawn, cutting the diagonal BD 
in O; and dividing the arch B M in the midst in P, 
let the strait line E a equal to the chord B P be set 
off from the point E in the arch EF, and let the 
arch a6 be taken equal to the arch Oa, and let 
Ba and Bb be drawn and produced to the arch 
AN ine and d; and lastly, let the strait line Ad 
be drawn. I say the strait line A d is equal to the 
arch AN or BM. 

I have proved in the preceding article, that the 
arch E O is twice as crooked as the arch B P, that 
is to say, that the arch EO is so much more 
crooked than the arch B P, as the arch B P is more 
crooked than the strait line E a. The crookedness 
therefore of the chord Ea, of the arch B P, and of 
the arch EO, are as 0,1,2. Also the difference 
between the arches EO and EO, the difference 
between the arches E O and E a, and the difference 
between the arches EO and E 8, are as0, 1,2. So 
also the difference between the arches AN and 
AN, the difference between the arches AN and 
Ac, and the difference between the arches AN 
and Ad, areas 0, 1,2; and the strait line Ac is 
double to the chord B P or Ea, and the strait line 
A d double to the chord E bd. 

Again, let the strait line B F be divided in the 
midst in Q, and the arch BP in the midst in R; 


PART III. 
20. 
ee 
The second at- 
tempt for the 

finding, &c. 


298 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


and describing the quadrant BQS (whose arch 
QS is a fourth part of the arch of the quadrant 
BMD, as the arch B R is a fourth part of the arch 
B M, which is the arch of the semiquadrant A BM) 
let the chord S e equal to the chord B R be set off 
from the point S in the arch SQ; and let Be be 
drawn and produced to the arch AN inf; which 
being done, the strait line A,f will be quadruple to 
the chord BR orSe. And seeing the crooked- 
ness of the arch Se, or of the arch Ac, is double 
to the crookedness of the arch B R, the excess of 
the crookedness of the arch Af above the crook- 
edness of the arch Ac will be subduple to the 
excess of the crookedness of the arch A c above the 
crookedness of the arch AN; and therefore the 
arch N ¢ will be double to the arch cf. Wherefore 
the arch cd is divided in the midst in f, and the 
arch N fis 2 of the arch Nd. And in like manner 
if the arch BR be bisected in V, and the strait 
line BQ in X, and the quadrant B X Y be de- 
scribed, and the strait line Y g equal to the chord 
BV be set off from the point Y in the arch Y X, 
it may be demonstrated that the strait line Bg 
being drawn and produced to the arch AN, will 
cut the arch fd into two equal parts, and that a 
strait line drawn from A to the point of that sec- 
tion, will be equal to eight chords of the arch B V, 
and so on perpetually ; and consequently, that the 
strait line A d is equal to so many equal chords of 
equal parts of the arch BM, as may be made by 
infinite bisections. Wherefore the strait line Ad 
is equal to the arch BM or AN, that is, to half 
the arch of the quadrant ABD or BCA. 

Coroll. An arch being given not greater than 


DIMENSION OF A CIRCLE, ETC. 299 


the arch of a quadrant (for being made greater, it PARTIE 
comes again towards the radius BA produced, as 
from which it receded before) if a strait line double aan te 
to the chord of half the given arch be adapted fndug, &. 
from the beginning of the arch, and by how much 
the arch that is subtended by it is greater than the 
given arch, by so much a greater arch be sub- 
tended by another strait line, this strait line shall 
be equal to the first given arch. 
Supposing the strait line BV (in fig. 1) be equal 
to the arch of the quadrant BH D, and AV be 
connected cutting the arch BH D in I, it may be 
asked what proportion the arch BI has to the 
arch ID. Let therefore the arch A Y be divided 
in the midst in 0, and in the strait line AD let 
A p be taken equal, and Ag double to the drawn 
chord Ao. Then upon the centre A, with the 
radius Ag, let an arch of a circle be drawn cutting 
the arch A Y in 7, and let the arch Yr be doubled 
at ¢; which being done, the drawn strait line A ¢ 
(by what has been last demonstrated) will be 
equal to the arch AY. Again, upon the centre A 
with the radius Aé let the arch ¢u be drawn 
cutting A D in w; and the strait line Aw will be 
equal to the arch AY. From the point wu let the 
strait line ws be drawn equal and parallel to the 
strait line A B, cutting MN in z, and bisected by 
MN in the same point x. Therefore the strait 
line Az being drawn and produced till it meet 
with BC produced in V, it will cut off B V double 
to Bs, that is, equal to the arch BHD. Now let 
the point, where the strait line A V cuts the arch 
BHD, be I; and let the arch DI be divided in 
the midst in y; and in the strait line DC, let De 


300 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PARTIE be taken equal, and D’s double to the drawn chord 

ae D y; and upon the centre D with the radius Dé 

tempt for the et an arch of a circle be drawn cutting the arch 

finding, &. BH D in the point 2; and let the arch xm be 
taken equal to the arch I”; which being done, 
the strait line Dm will (by the last foregoing 
corollary) be equal to the arch DI. If now the 
strait lines Dm and C V be equal, the arch BI 
will be equal to the radius A B or BC; and con- 
sequently X C being drawn, will pass through the 
point I. Moreover, if the semicircle BHD € being 
completed, the strait lines €I and BI be drawn, 
making a right angle (in the semicircle) at I, and 
the arch BI be divided in the midst at 2, it will 
follow that Az being connected will be parallel to 
the strait line €I, and being produced to BC in &, 
will cut off the strait lime B# equal to the strait 
line #1, and equal also to the strait line A y cut 
off in AD by the strait line 61. All which is 
manifest, supposing the arch BI and the radius 
BC,to be equal. 

But that the arch BI and the radius BC are 
precisely equal, cannot (how true soever it be) be 
demonstrated, unless that be first proved which is 
contained in art. 1, namely, that the strait lines 
drawn from X through the equal parts of OF 
(produced to a certain length) cut off so many 
parts also in the tangent BC severally equal to 
the several arches cut off; which they do most 
exactly as far as BC in the tangent, and BI in the 
arch BE; insomuch that no inequality between 
the arch BI and the radius BC can be discovered 
either by the hand or by ratiocination. It is 
therefore to be further enquired, whether the 


DIMENSION OF A CIRCLE, ETC. 301 


strait line A V cut the arch of the quadrant in | 
in the same proportion as the point C divides the 
strait line BV, which is equal to the arch of the 
quadrant. But however this be, it has been de- 
monstrated that the strait line B V is equal to the 
arch BH D. 

4. I shall now attempt the same dimension of a 


PART III. 
20. 


eye 


The third at- 
tempt; and 


circle another way, assuming the two following some things 


lemmas. 


propounded 
to be further 


Lemma 1. If to the arch of a quadrant, and the **"te4'""* 


radius, there be taken in continual proportion a 
third line Z; then the arch of the semiquadrant, 
half the chord of the quadrant, and Z, will also be 
in continual proportion. 

For seeing the radius is a mean proportional 
between the chord of a quadrant and its semi- 
chord, and the same radius a mean proportional 
between the arch of the quadrant and Z, the 
square of the radius will be equal as well to the 
rectangle made of the chord and semichord of the 
quadrant, as to the rectangle made of the arch of 
the quadrant and Z; and these two rectangles 
will be equal to one another. Wherefore, as the 
arch of a quadrant is to its chord, so reciprocally 
is half the chord of the quadrant to Z. But as the 
arch of the quadrant is to its chord, so is half the 
arch of the quadrant to half the chord of the 
quadrant. Wherefore, as half the arch of the 
quadrant is to half the chord of the quadrant (or 
to the sine of 45 degrees), so is half the chord of 
the quadrant to Z; which was to be proved. 

Lemma 11. The radius, the arch of the semi- 
quadrant, the sine of 45 degrees, and the semi- 
radius, are proportional. 


PART ITI. 
20. 


——— 


The third 
attempt, &c. 


302 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


For seeing the sine of 45 degrees is a mean 
proportional between the radius and the semi- 
radius; and the same sine of 45 degrees is also a 
mean proportional (by the precedent lemma) be- 
tween the arch of 45 degrees and Z; the square 
of the sine of 45 degrees will be equal as well to 
the rectangle made of the radius and semiradius, 
as to the rectangle made of the arch of 45 degrees 
and Z. Wherefore, as the radius is to the arch of 
45 degrees, so reciprocally is Z to the semiradius ; 
which was to be demonstrated. 

Let now ABCD (in fig. 4) be a square; and 
with the radii AB, BC and DA, let the three 
quadrants ABD, BCA and DAC, be described ; 
and let the strait lines E F and GH, drawn parallel 
to the sides BC and AB, divide the square ABCD 
into four equal squares. They will therefore cut 
the arch of the quadrant ABD into three equal 
parts in I and K, and the arch of the quadrant 
BCA into three equal parts in K and L. Also let 
the diagonals AC and BD be drawn, cutting the 
arches BID and ALCin M and N. Then upon 
the centre H with the radius H F equal to half 
the chord of the arch B M D, or to the sine of 45 
degrees, let the arch FO be drawn cutting the 
arch C K in O; and let AO be drawn and pro- 
duced till it meet with BC produced in P; also 
let it cut the arch B M D in Q, and the strait line 
DCin R. If now the strait line H Q be equal to 
the strait line D R, and being produced to DC in 
S, cut off DS equal to half the strait line BP; I 
say then the strait line BP will be equal to the 
arch BM D. 

For seeing PB A and ADR are like triangles, 


DIMENSION OF A CIRCLE, ETC. 303 


it will be as P B to the radius BA or A D, so AD ae III. 
to DR; and therefore as well PB, AD and DR, —~— 
as PB, AD (or AQ) and QH are in continual ny 
proportion ; and producing HO to DC in T, DT 
will be equal to the sine of 45 degrees, as shall by 
and by be demonstrated. Now DS, DT and DR 
are in continual proportion by the first lemma; 
and by the second lemma DC. DS:: DR. DF are 
proportionals. And thus it will be, whether BP 
be equal or not equal to the arch of the quadrant 
BMD. But if they be equal, it will then be, as 
that part of the arch BM D which is equal to the 
radius, is to the remainder of the same arch BMD; 
soAQtoHQ, orso BC toCP. And then will 
B P and the arch BM D be equal. But it is not 
demonstrated that the strait lines HQ and DR 
are equal; though if from the point B there be 
drawn (by the construction of fig. 1) a strait line 
equal to the arch BM D, then DR to H Q, and 
also the half of the strait lime BP to DS, will 
always be so equal, that no inequality can be dis- 
covered between them. I will therefore leave this 
to be further searched into. For though it be 
almost out of doubt, that the strait line B P and 
the arch BMD are equal, yet that may not be 
received without demonstration; and means of 
demonstration the circular line admitteth none 
that is not grounded upon the nature of flexion, or 
of angles. But by that way I have already exhi- 
bited a strait line equal to the arch of a quadrant 
in the first and second aggression. 

It remains that I prove DT to be equal to the 
sine of 45 degrees. 


304 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PARTI. In B A produced let A V be taken equal to the 
—— sine of 45 degrees; and drawing and producing 
eae V H, it will cut the arch of the quadrant C N A in 
the midst in N, and the same arch again in O, and 
the strait line DC in T, so that DT will be equal 
to the sine of 45 degrees, or to the strait hne A V; 
also the strait line V H will be equal to the strait 

line HI, or the sine of 60 degrees. 

For the square of A V is equal to two squares of 
the semiradius ; and consequently the square of 
V H is equal to three squares of the semiradius. 
But HI is a mean proportional between the semi- 
radius and three semiradii; and, therefore, the 
square of H I is equal to three squares of the semi- 
radius. Wherefore HI is equal to HV. But 
because A D is cut in the midst in H, therefore V H 
and H T are equal; and, therefore, also DT is 
equal to the sine of 45 degrees. In the radius 
BA let BX be taken equal to the sine of 45 de- 
grees ; for so V X will be equal to the radius; and 
it will be as V A to A H the semiradius, so V X the 
radius to X N the sine of 45 degrees. Wherefore 
V H produced passes through N. Lastly, upon the 
centre V with the radius V A let the arch of a circle 
be drawn cutting VH in Y; which being done, 
V Y will be equal to HO (for H O is, by construc- 
tion, equal to the sine of 45 degrees) and YH will 
be equal to OT; and, therefore, VT passes through 
QO. All which was to be demonstrated. 

I will here add certain problems, of which if 
any analyst can make the construction, he will 
thereby be able to judge clearly of what I have now 
said concerning the dimension of a circle. Now 


DIMENSION OF A CIRCLE, ETC. 305 


these problems are nothing else (at least to sense) PART III. 
but certain symptoms accompanying the construc- es 
tion of the first and third figure of this chapter. Se nee 

Describing, therefore, again, the square A B C 
(in fig. 5) and the three quadrants ABD, BCA 
and DAC, let the diagonals AC and BD be drawn, 
cutting the arches BH D and CI A in the middle © 
in H and I; and the strait lines EF andGL, di- 
viding the square A BC D into four equal squares, 
and trisecting the arches B H D and CIA, namely, 
BHD in K and M, andCIAinMandO. Then 
dividing the arch B K in the midst in P, let QP 
the sine of the arch B P, be drawn and produced to 
R, so that Q R be double to QP; and, connecting 
K R, let it be produced one way to BC im §, and 
the other way to B A produced in T. Also let B V 
be made triple to BS, and consequently, (by the 
second article of this chapter) equal to the arch 
BD. This construction is the same with that of 
the first figure, which I thought fit to renew dis- 
charged of all lines but such as are necessary for my 
present purpose. 

In the first place, therefore, if A V be drawn, 
cutting the arch B H D in X, and the side DC in 
Z, I desire some analyst would, if he can, give a 
reason why the strait lines T E and TC should cut 
the arch BD, the one im Y, the other in X, so as 
to make the arch B Y equal to the arch Y X;; or if 
they be not equal, that he would determine their 
difference. 

Secondly, if in the side D A, the strait line Da 
be taken equal to DZ, and Va be drawn; why 
Vaand VB should be equal; or if they be not 
equal, what is the GUErenee. 

VOL. I. x 


PART III. 
20. 


ean ae 


The third 
attempt, &c. 


306 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


Thirdly, drawing Z 6 parallel and equal to the 
side C B, cutting the arch BH D ine, and draw- 
ing the strait line Ac, and producing it to B V in 
d; why Ad should be equal and parallel to the 
strait line a V, and consequently equal also to the 


. arch BD. 


Fourthly, drawing e K the sine of the arch B K, 
and taking (in e A produced) ef equal to the dia- 
gonal AC, and connecting fC; why fC should 
pass through a (which point being given, the length 
of the arch BH D is also given) and c; and why 
fe and fe should he equal; or if not, why un- 
equal. 

Fifthly, drawing fZ, I desire he would show, 
why it is equal to BV, or to the arch BD; or if 
they be not equal, what is their difference. 

Sixthly, granting fZ to be equal to the arch 
BD, I desire he would determine whether it fall 
all without the arch BCA, or cut the same, or 
touch it, and in what point. 

Seventhly, the semicircle B D g being completed, 
why gI being drawn and produced, should pass 
through X, by which point X the length of the 
arch BD is determined. And the same g I being 
yet further produced to D C in h, why A d, which 
is equal to the arch BD, should pass through that 
point A. 

Eighthly, upon the centre of the square A BCD, 
which let be &, the arch of the quadrant Ez L being 
drawn, cutting eK produced in 2, why the drawn 
strait line 2 X should be parallel to the side C D. 

Ninthly, in the sides BA and BC taking gl 
and Bm severally equal to half B V, or to the arch 
BH, and drawing mx parallel and equal to the 


DIMENSION OF A CIRCLE, ETC. 307 


side B A, cutting the arch B D in 0, why the strait Part II. 
line which connects V/ should pass through the ——.— 
point o. geeeoee | 

Tenthly, I would know of him why the strait 
line which connects a H should be equal to Bm ; 
or if not, how much it differs from it. 

The analyst that can solve these problems with- 
out knowing first the length of the arch BD, or 
using any other known method than that which 
proceeds by perpetual bisection of an angle, or is 
drawn from the consideration of the nature of 
flexion, shall do more than ordinary geometry is | 
able to perform. But if the dimension of a circle 
cannot be found by any other method, then I have 
either found it, or it is not at all to be found. 

From the known length of the arch of a quad- 
rant, and from the proportional division of the arch 
and of the tangent B C, may be deduced the sec- 
tion of an angle into any given proportion ; as also 
the squaring of the circle, the squaring of a given 
sector, and many the like propositions, which it is 
not necessary here to demonstrate. I will, there- 
fore, only exhibit a strait line equal to the spiral of 
Archimides, and so dismiss this speculation. 

5. The length of the perimeter of a circle being aaa 
found, that strait line is also found, which touches chimedes with 
a spiral at the end of its first conversion. For upon” ~ 
the centre A (in fig.6) let the circle B C D E be de- 
scribed ; and in it let Archimedes’ spiral AFGH B 
be drawn, beginning at A and ending at B. Through 
the centre A let the strait line C E be drawn, cut- 
ting the diameter B D at right angles ; and let it be 
produced to I, so that A I be equal to the perimeter 
BCDEB. Therefore I B being drawn will touch 

| x 2 


308 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


ParT Il. the spiral AF GH B in B; which is demonstrated 
“—~ by Archimedes in his book De Spiralibus. 

rat aiaial And for a strait line equal to the given spiral 

Archimedes _¢ 2 © GHB, it may be found thus. 

Let the strait line A I, which is equal to the pe- 

rimeter BC DE, be bisected in K; and taking K L 

equal to the radius AB, let the rectangle I L be 

completed. Let M Lhe understood to be the axis, 

and K L the base of a parabola, and let MK be 

the crooked line thereof. Now if the point M be 

conceived to be so moved by the concourse of two 

_ mnovents, the one from IM to KL with velocity 

encreasing continually in the same proportion with 

the times, the other from ML to IK uniformly, 

that both those motions begin together in M and 

end in K; Galilzeus has demonstrated that by such 

motion of the point M, the crooked line of a para- 

bola will be described. Again, if the point A be 

conceived to be moved uniformly in the strait line 

A B, and im the same time to be carried round 

upon the centre A by the circular motion of all the 

points between A and B; Archimedes has demon- 

strated that by such motion will be described a 

spiral line. And seeing the circles of all these mo- 

tions are concentric in A; and the interior circle 

is always less than the exterior in the proportion 

of the times in which A B is passed over with uni- 

form motion; the velocity also of the circular mo- 

tion of the point A will continually increase pro- 

portionally to the times. And thus far the gene- 

rations of the parabolical line M K, and of the spiral 

line AFG H B, are like. But the uniform motion 

in A B concurring with circular motion in the peri- 

meters of all the concentric circles, describes that 


DIMENSION OF A CIRCLE, ETC. 309 


circle, whose centre is A, and perimeter BC DE; Petr I: 
and, therefore, that circle is (by the coroll. of art. ——— 
1, chap. xvi) the aggregate of all the velocities to- Seti wpirabot 
gether taken of the point A whilst it describes the Archimedes, 
spiral AFGH B. Also the rectangle IK LM is 

the aggregate of all the velocities together taken 

of the point M, whilst it describes the crooked line 

MK. And, therefore the whole velocity by which 

the parabolical line M K is described, is to the 

whole velocity with which the spiral line AFGHB 

is described in the same time, as the rectangle 

IK LM isto the circle BC DE, that is to the. 
triangle AI B. But because AT is bisected in K, 

and the strait lines IM and A B are equal, there- 

fore the rectangle IK LM and the triangle AIB 

are also equal. Wherefore the spiral line AFGHB, 

and the parabolical line M K, being described with 

equal velocity and in equal times, are equal to one 

another. Now, in the first article of chap. xviil, a 

strait line is found out equal to any parabolical 

line. Wherefore also a strait line is found out equal 

to a given spiral line of the first revolution described 

by Archimedes ; which was to be done. 

6. In the sixth chapter, which is of Method, ws es 
that which I should there have spoken of the ana- cians by the 
lytics of geometricians I thought fit to defer, be- °°" '"** 
cause I could not there have been understood, as 
not having then so much as named dines, superfi- 
cies, solids, equal and unequal, §c. Wherefore I 
will in this place set down my thoughts concern- 
ing it. 

Analysis is continual reasoning from the defini- 
tions of the terms of a proposition we suppose 
true, and again from the definitions of the terms of 


PART ITI, 
20. 


—— 


Of the analysis 
of geometri- 
cians by the 
powers oflines. 


310 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


those definitions, and so on, till we come to some 
things known, the composition whereof is the 
demonstration of the truth or falsity of the first 
supposition ; and this composition or demonstration 
is that we call Synthesis. Analytica, therefore, is 
that art, by which our reason proceeds from some- 
thing supposed, to principles, that is, to prime 
propositions, or to such as are known by these, till 
we have so many known propositions as are suffi- 
cient for the demonstration of the truth or falsity 
of the thing supposed. Synthetica is the art itself 
of demonstration. Synthesis, therefore, and ana- 
lysis, differ in nothing, but in proceeding forwards 
or backwards; and Logistica comprehends both. 
So that in the analysis or synthesis of any question, 
that is to say, of any problem, the terms of all the 
propositions ought to be convertible ; or if they be 
enunciated hypothetically, the truth of the conse- 
quent ought not only to follow out of the truth of 
its antecedent, but contrarily also the truth of the 
antecedent must necessarily be inferred from the 
truth of the consequent. For otherwise, when by 
resolution we are arrived at principles, we cannot 
by composition return directly back to the thing 
sought for. For those terms which are the first in 
analysis, will be the last in synthesis; as for ex- 
ample, when in resolving, we say, these two 
rectangles are equal, and therefore their sides are 
reciprocally proportional, we must necessarily in 
compounding say, the sides of these rectangles are 
reciprocally proportional, and therefore the rect- 
angles themselves are equal; which we could not 
say, unless rectangles have their sides recipro- 


DIMENSION OF A CIRCLE, ETC. 311 


cally proportional, and rectangles are equal, ra 
were terms convertible. eae 

Now in every analysis, that which is sought is ates ee 
the proportion of two quantities; by which pro- cians by ahs 
portion, a figure being described, the quantity pests 
sought for may be exposed to sense. And this 
exposition is the end and solution of the question, 
or the construction of the problem. 

And seeing analysis is reasoning from something 
supposed, till we come to principles, that is, to 
definitions, or to theorems formerly known; and 
seeing the same reasoning tends in the last place to 
some equation, we can therefore make no end of re- 
solving, till we come at last to the causes themselves 
of equality and inequality, or to theorems formerly 
demonstrated from those causes; and so have a 
sufficient number of those theorems for the demon- 
stration of the thing sought for. 

And seeing also, that the end of the analytics is 
either the construction of such a problem as is pos- 
sible, or the detection of the impossibility thereof; 
whensoever the problem may be solved, the analyst 
must not stay, till he come to those things which 
contain the efficient cause of that whereof he is to 
make construction. But he must of necessity stay, 
when he comes to prime propositions; and these 
are definitions. These definitions therefore must 
contain the efficient cause of his construction; I 
say of his construction, not of the conclusion which 
he demonstrates ; for the cause of the conclusion 
is contained in the premised propositions; that is 
to say, the truth of the proposition he proves is 
drawn from the propositions which prove the same. 


312 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PARLIN, But the cause of his construction is in the things 

cee themselves, and consists in motion, or in the con- 

ae course of motions. Wherefore those propositions, 

cee fre. 1 Which analysis ends, are definitions, but such as 

signify in what manner the construction or gene- 

ration of the thing proceeds. For otherwise, when 

he goes back by synthesis to the proof of his 

problem, he will come to no demonstration at all ; 

there being no true demonstration but such as is 

scientifical ; and no demonstration is scientifical, 

but that which proceeds from the knowledge of the 

causes from which the construction of the problem 

is drawn. To collect therefore what has been said 

into few words; ANALYSIS 1s ratiocinatton from 

the supposed construction or generation of a thing 

to the efficient cause or coefficient causes of that 

which ts constructed or generated. And SYN- 

THESIS 78 ratiocination from the first causes of 

the construction, continued through all the middle 

causes till we come to the thing itself which is 
constructed or generated. 

But because there are many means by which the 
same thing may be generated, or the same problem 
be constructed, therefore neither do all geometri- 
cians, nor doth the same geometrician always, use 
one and the same method. For, if to a certain 
quantity given, it be required to construct another 
quantity equal, there may be some that will inquire 
whether this may not be done by means of some 
motion. For there are quantities, whose equality 
and inequality may be argued from motion and 
time, as well as from congruence; and there is 
motion, by which two quantities, whether lines or 
superficies, though one of them be crooked, the 


DIMENSION OF A CIRCLE, ETC. 313 


other strait, may be made congruous or coincident. PART IIL. 
And this method Archimedes made use of in his —-— 
book De Spiralibus. Also the equality or inequa- jf in." 
lity of two quantities may be found out and cians by the 
bs 4 3 powers of lines. 

demonstrated from the consideration of weight, as 

the same Archimedes did in his quadrature of the 
parabola. Besides, equality and inequality are found 

out often by the division of the two quantities into 

parts which are considered as indivisable; as 
Cavallerius Bonaventura has done in our time, and 
Archimedes often. Lastly, the same is performed 

by the consideration of the powers of lines, or the 

roots of those powers, and by the multiplication, 
division, addition, and subtraction, as also by the 
extraction of the roots of those powers, or by find- 

ing where strait lines of the same proportion 
terminate. For example, when any number of 

strait lines, how many soever, are drawn from a 

strait line and pass all through the same point, 

look what proportion they have, and if their parts 
continued from the point retain everywhere the 

same proportion, they shall all terminate in a strait 

line. And the same happens if the point be taken 
between two circles. So that the places of all their 

points of termination make either strait lines, or 
circumferences of circles, and are called plane 

places. So also when strait parallel lines are 

applied to one strait line, if the parts of the strait 

line to which they are applied be to one another in 
proportion duplicate to that of the contiguous 

applied lines, they will all terminate in a conical 
section; which section, being the place of their 
termination, is called a solid place, because it 

serves for the finding out of the quantity of any 


314 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PARTI. equation which consists of three dimensions. There 
~~ are therefore three ways of finding out the cause of 
eae *’ equality or inequality between two given quantities ; 
cians by the namely, first, by the computation of motions ; for 
powers of lines. ; i 
y equal motion, and equal time, equal spaces are 
described ; and ponderation is motion. Secondly, 
by indivisibles: because all the parts together 
taken are equal to the whole. And thirdly, by the 
powers: for when they are equal, their roots also 
are equal; and contrarily, the powers are equal, 
when their roots are equal. But if the question 
be much complicated, there cannot by any of these 
ways be constituted a certain rule, from the sup- 
position of which of the unknown quantities the 
analysis may best begin; nor out of the variety of 
equations, that at first appear, which we were 
best to choose; but the success will depend upon 
dexterity, upon formerly acquired science, and 
many times upon fortune. | 
For no man can ever be a good analyst without 
being first a good geometrician ; nor do the rules 
of analysis make a geometrician, as synthesis doth; 
which begins at the very elements, and proceeds 
by alogical use of thesame. For the true teaching 
of geometry is by synthesis, according to Euclid’s 
method ; and he that hath Euclid for his master, 
may be a geometrician without Vieta, though Vieta 
was a most admirable geometrician; but he that 
has Vieta for his master, not so, without Euclid. 
And as for that part of analysis which works by 
the powers, though it be esteemed by some geo- 
metricians, not the chiefest, to be the best way of 
solving all problems, yet it is a thing of no great 
extent; 1t being all contained in the doctrine of 


DIMENSION OF A CIRCLE, ETC. 315 


rectangles, and rectangled solids. So that although PART IIL. 
they come to an equation which determines the -—-— 
quantity sought, yet they cannot sometimes by eee ~, 
art exhibit that quantity in a plane, but in some sap es, 
conic section; that is, as geometricians say, not 
geometrically, but mechanically. Now such pro- 
blems as these, they call solid; and when they 
cannot exhibit the quantity sought for with the 
help of a conic section, they call it a dimeary pro- 
blem. And therefore in the quantities of angles, 
and of the arches of circles, there is no use at all 
of the analytics which proceed by the powers; so 
that the ancients pronounced it impossible to ex- 
hibit in a plane the division of angles, except 
bisection, and the bisection of the bisected _ parts, 
otherwise than mechanically. For Pappus, (before 
the 3lst proposition of his fourth book) distin- 
guishing and defining the several kinds of pro- 
blems, says that “some are plane, others solid, 
and others /ineary. Those, therefore, which may 
be solved by strait lines and the circumferences of 
circles, (that is, which may be described with the 
rule and compass, without any other instrument), 
are fitly called plane ; for the lines, by which 
such problems are found out, have their generation 
in a plane. But those which are solved by the 
using of some one or more conic sections in their 
construction, are called solid, because their con- 
struction cannot be made without using the super- 
ficies of solid figures, namely, of cones. There 
remains the third kind, which is called leneary, 
because other lines besides those already mentioned 
are made use of in their construction, &c.” Anda 


316 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART III. little after he says, “of this kind are the spiral 

—— lines, the quadratrices, the conchoeides, and the 

ctpecauui cissoeides. And geometricians think it no small 

eared the fault, when for the finding out of a plane problem 

any man makes use of conics, or new lines.” Now 

he ranks the trisection of an angle among solid 

problems, and the quinquesection among lineary. 

But what! are the ancient geometricians to be 

blamed, who made use of the quadratrix for the 

finding out of a strait line equal to the arch of a 

circle? And Pappus himself, was he faulty, when 

he found out the trisection of an angle by the 

help of an hyperbole’ Or am I in the wrong, 

who think I have found out the construction of 

both these problems by the rule and compass only? 

Neither they, nor I. For the ancients made use 

of this analysis which proceeds by the powers; 

and with them it was a fault to do that by a more 

remote power, which might be done by a nearer ; 

as being an argument that they did not sufficiently 
understand the nature of the thing. 

The virtue of this kind of analysis consists in the 
changing and turning and tossing of rectangles and 
analogisms; and the skillof analysts is mere logic, by 
which they are able methodically to find out whatso- 
ever lies hid either in the subject or predicate of the 
conclusion sought for. But this doth not properly 
belong to algebra, or the analytics specious, sym- 
bolical, or cossick ; which are, as I may say, the 
brachygraphy of the analytics, and an art neither 
of teaching nor learning geometry, but of register- 
ing with brevity and celerity the inventions of 
geometricians. For though it be easy to discourse 


OF CIRCULAR MOTION. 317 


by symbols of very remote propositions; yet 
whether such discourse deserve to be thought very 
profitable, when it is made without any ideas of 
the things themselves, I know not. 


CHAPTER XXI. 


OF CIRCULAR MOTION. 


1. In simple motion, every strait line taken in the body moved 
is so carried, that it is always parallel to the places in which it 
formerly was.—2. If circular motion be made about a resting 
centre, and in that circle there be an epicycle, whose revolution 
is made the contrary way, in such manner that in equal 
times it make equal angles, every strait line taken in that 
epicycle will be so carried, that it will always be parallel to the 
places in which it formerly was.—3. The properties of simple 
motion.—4. If a fluid be moved with simple circular motion, 
all the points taken in it will describe their circles in times 
proportional to the distances from the centre.—5. Simple 
motion dissipates heterogeneous and congregates homogeneous 
bodies.—6. If a circle made by a movent moved with simple 
motion be commensurable to another circle made by a point 
which is carried about by the same movent, all the points of 
both the circles will at some time return to the same situation. 
7. If a sphere have simple motion, its motion will more 
dissipate heterogeneous bodies by how much it is more remote 
from the poles.—8. If the simple circular motion of a fluid 
body be hindered by a body which is not fluid, the fluid body 
will spread itself upon the superficies of that body.—9. Cir- 
cular motion about a fixed centre casteth off by the tangent 
such things as lie upon the circumference and stick not to it. 
10. Such things, as are moved with simple circular motion, 
beget simple circular motion.—11. If that which is so moved 
have one side hard and the other side fluid, its motion will not 
be perfectly circular. 


1. I HAVE already defined s¢mple motion to be 
that, in which the several points taken in a moved 


PART III. 
21. 
——_ 


In simple 
motion, &c. 


318 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART III. body do in several equal times describe several 
arene equal arches. And therefore in simple circular 
motion, every Motion it is necessary that every strait line taken 
rein ane ¢ in the moved body be always carried parallel to 


body moved jtself; which I thus demonstrate. 
is so carried, 


thatitisalways First, let A B (in the first figure) be any strait 

Pr elacee line taken in any solid body; and let A D be any 

emiywas, atch drawn upon any centre C and radius CA. 
Let the point B be understood to describe towards 
the same parts the arch BE, like and equal to the 
arch AD. Now in the same time in which the 
point A transmits the arch AD, the point B, 
which by reason of its simple motion is supposed 
to be carried with a velocity equal to that of A, 
will transmit the arch BE; and at the end of 
the same time the whole A B will be in DE; and 
therefore A B and DE are equal. And seeing the 
arches AD and BE are like and equal, their subtend- 
ing strait lines AD and BE will also be equal ; and 
therefore the four-sided figure A BDE will bea 
parallelogram. Wherefore A B is carried parallel 
to itself. And the same may be proved by the 
same method, if any other strait line be taken in 
the same moved body in which the strait line A B 
was taken. So that all strait lines, taken in a 
body moved with simple circular motion, will be 
carried parallel] to themselves. 

Coroll. 1. It is manifest that the same will 
also happen in any body which hath simple motion, 
though not circular. For all the points of any 
strait line whatsoever will describe lines, though 
not circular, yet equal; so that though the crooked 
lines A D and BE were not arches of circles, but 
of parabolas, ellipses, or of any other figures, 


OF CIRCULAR MOTION. 319 


yet both they, and their subtenses, and the strait PART HI. 
lines which join them, would be equal and parallel. —-— 
Coroll. 11. It is also manifest, that the radi 
of the equal circles A D and BE, or the axis of a 
sphere, will be so carried, as to be always parallel 
to the places in which they formerly were. For 
the strait line B F drawn to the centre of the arch 
BE being equal to the radius AC, will also be 
equal to the strait line FE or CD; and the angle 
BFE will be equal to the angle ACD. Now the 
intersection of the strait lines C A and BE being 
at G, the angle CGE (seeing BE and AD are 
parallel) will be equal to the angle DAC. But 
the angle EB F is equal to the same angle DAC; 
and therefore the angles CGE and E BF are also 
equal. Wherefore AC and BF are parallel ; 
which was to be demonstrated. 
2. Let there be acircle given (in the second lf circuler 
figure) whose centre is A, and radius A B; and made about a 


upon the centre B and any radius BC let the pe Fa 


epicycle CDE be described. Let the centre B eieemer be 
be understood to be carried about the centre A, whose revolu- 


tion is made 


and the whole epicycle with it till it be coincident the contrary 
with the circle FGH, whose centre is I; and let 2” "°° 


manner that in 
BAI be any angle given. But in the time that °" aa it 
the centre B is moved to I, let the epicycle CDE ang em every 
have a contrary revolution upon its own centre, taken in that 
namely from E by D to C, according to the same (cena 


be so carried, 


k ; ‘ ° ° that it will 
proportions ; that is, in such manner, that in both siyays be 


the circles, equal angles be made in equal times. pera! to 
e places 


I say EC, the axis of the epicycle, will be always in which it 
carried parallel to itself. Let the angle FIG be“ ™™ 
made equal to the angle BAI; IF and AB will 


320 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


Peer at therefore be parallel; and how much the axis 
aca AG has departed from its former place AC (the 
motion, &. measure of which progression is the angle CAG, 

or CBD, which I suppose equal to it) so much in 
the same time has the axis IG, the same with BC, 
departed from its own former situation. Where- 
fore, in what time BC comes to IG by the motion 
from B to I upon the centre A, in the same time 
G will come to F by the contrary motion of the 
epicycle ; that is, it will be turned backwards to 
F, and IGwill liein IF. But the angles FIG 
and GAC are equal; and therefore AC, that is, 
BC, and IF, (that is the axis, though in different 
places) will be parallel. Wherefore, the axis of 
the epicycle EDC will be carried always parallel 
to itself; which was to be proved. 

Coroll. From hence it is manifest, that those 
two annual motions which Copernicus ascribes 
to the earth, are reducible to this one circular 
simple motion, by which all the points of the 
moved body are carried always with equal velocity, 
that is, in equal times they make equal revolutions 
uniformly. 

This, as it is the most simple, so it is the most 
frequent of all circular motions ; being the same 
which is used by all men when they turn anything 
round with their arms, as they do in grinding or 
sifting. For all the points of the thing moved 
describe lines which are like and equal to one 
another. So that if aman had aruler, in which 
many pens’ points of equal length. were fastened, 
he might with this one motion write many lines 
at once. 


OF CIRCULAR MOTION. 321 


3. Having shown what simple motion is, I will 
here also set down some properties of the same. 

First, when a body is moved with simple motion 
in @ fluid medium which hath no vacuity, it changes 
the situation of all the parts of the fluid ambient 


which resist its motion; I say there are no parts 


so small of the fluid ambient, how far soever it be 
continued, but do change their situation in such 
manner, as that they leave their places continually 
to other small parts that come into the same. 

For (in the same second figure) let any body, 
as KLMN, be understood to be moved with 
simple circular motion; and let the circle, which 
every point thereof describes, have any deter- 
mined quantity, suppose that of the same K LM N. 
Wherefore the centre A and every other point, 
and consequently the moved body itself, will be 
carried sometimes towards the side where is K, 
and sometimes towards the other side where 
is M. When therefore it is carried to K, the 
parts of the fluid medium on that side will go 
back ; and, supposing all space to be full, others 
on the other side will succeed. And so it will be 
when the body is carried to the side M, and to N, 
and every way. Now when the nearest parts of 
the fluid medium go back, it is necessary that the 
parts next to those nearest parts go back also; 
and supposing still all space to be full, other parts 
will come into their places with succession perpe- 
tual and infinite. Wherefore all, even the least 
parts of the fluid medium, change their places, &c. 
Which was to be proved. 

It is evident from hence, that simple motion, 
whether circular or not circular, of bodies which 

VOL. I. Y 


ae ITI. 


sce 


da of 


simple motion: 


$22 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


a make perpetual returns to their former places, 
—~— hath greater or less force to dissipate the parts of 
resisting bodies, as it is more or less swift, and as 
the lines described have greater or less magnitude. 
Now the greatest velocity that can be, may be 
understood to be in the least circuit, and the least 
in the greatest ; and may be so supposed, when 

there is need. 
Ifa fluid be 4, Secondly, supposing the same simple motion 


moved with , ‘ : ° 
simple circular in the air, water, or other fluid medium ; the 


Se cusiia parts of the medium, which adhere to the moved 
it will describe body, will be carried about with the same motion 
ones PE and velocity, so that in what time soever any point 
distances from Of the movent finishes its circle, in the same time 
the centre. every part of the medium, which adheres to the 
movent, shall also describe such a part of its 

circle, as is equal to the whole circle of the 

movent ; I say, it shall describe a part, and not 

the whole circle, because all its parts receive their 

motion from an interior concentric movent, and of 
concentric circles the exterior are always greater 

than the interior; nor can the motion imprinted 

by any movent be of greater velocity than that of 

the movent itself. From whence it follows, that 

the more remote parts of the fluid ambient shall 

finish their circles in times, which have to one 

another the same proportion with their distances 

from the movent. For every point of the fluid 

ambient, as long as it toucheth the body which 

carries it about, is carried about with it, and would 

make the same circle, but that it is left behind so 

much as the exterior circle exceeds the interior. 

So that if we suppose some thing, which is not fluid, 

to float in that part of the fluid ambient which is 


OF CIRCULAR MOTION. 323° 


nearest to the movent, it will together with the PART IIL 
movent be carried about. Now that part of the ae 
fluid ambient, which is not the nearest but almost 
the nearest, receiving its degree of velocity from 
the nearest, which degree cannot be greater than 
it was in the giver, doth therefore in the same 
time make a circular line, not a whole circle, yet 
equal to the whole circle of the nearest. There- 
fore in the same time that the movent describes its 
circle, that which doth not touch it shall not 
describe its circle; yet it shall describe such a part 
of it, as is equal to the whole circle of the movent. 
And after the same manner, the more remote parts 
of the ambient will describe in the same time such 
parts of their circles, as shall be severally equal to 
the whole circle of the movent; and, by consequent, 
they shall finish their whole circles in times pro- 
portional to their distances from the movent; 
which was to be proved. 

5. Thirdly, the same simple motion of a body Simple motion 

° ‘ : dissipates hete- 
placed in a fluid medium, congregates or gathers rogeneous and 
into one place such things as naturally float in that po pcneous 
medium, if they be homogeneous ; and if they be dies. 
heterogeneous, it separates and dissipates them. 
But if such things as be heterogeneous do not 
float, but settle, then the same motion stirs and 
mingles them disorderly together. For seeing 
bodies, which are unlike to one another, that is, 
heterogeneous bodies, are not unlike in that they 
are bodies; for bodies, as bodies, have no differ- 
ence; but only from some special cause, that is, 
from some internal motion, or motions of their 
smallest parts (for I have shown in chap. Ix, art. 9, 
that all mutation is such motion), it remains that 
Y 2 


324 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


se a heterogeneous bodies have their unlikeness or 
—~ difference from one another from their internal or 
esate nee: specifical motions. Now bodies which have such 
rogeneous, &e. difference receive unlike and different motions 
from the same external common movent; and 
therefore they will not be moved together, that is 
to say, they will be dissipated. And being dissi- 
pated they will necessarily at some time or other 
meet with bodies like themselves, and be moved 
alike and together with them; and afterwards 
meeting with more bodies like themselves, they 
will unite and become greater bodies. Wherefore 
homogeneous bodies are congregated, and hetero- 
geneous dissipated by simple motion in a medium 
where they naturally float. Again, such as being 
in a fluid medium do not float, but sink, if the 
motion of the fluid medium be strong enough, 
will be stirred up and carried away by that motion, 
and consequently they will be hindered from re- 
turning to that place to which they sink naturally, 
and in which only they would unite, and out of 
which they are promiscuously carried; that is, 

they are disorderly mingled. 

Now this motion, by which homogeneous bodies 
are congregated and heterogeneous are scattered, 
is that which is commonly called fermentation, 
from the Latin fervere ; as the Greeks have their 
Zinn, Which signifies the same, from Ziw ferveo. 
For seething makes all the parts of the water 
change their places; and the parts of any thing, 
that is thrown into it, will go several ways ac- 
cording to their several natures. And yet all. 

fervour or seething is not caused by fire; for new 
wine and many other things have also their fer- 


OF CIRCULAR MOTION. 325 


mentation and fervour, to which fire contributes sa III. 
little, and sometimes nothing. But when in fer- —~ 
mentation we find heat, it is made by the fer- 
mentation. 

6. Fourthly, in what time soever the movent, !facircle made 


> by a movent 
whose centre is A (in fig. 2) moved in K LN, shall, » moved with 
by any number of revolutions, that is, when the he sommensu. 
perimeters BI and K LN be commensurable, have 7*0* '° sa 


described a line equal to the circle which passes madebya point 


h j a 
through the points B and I; in the same time all ried abate by 
the points of the floating body, whose centre is B, yea an me.” 
shall return to have the same situation in respect Ponts of both 


of the movent, from which they departed. hors a 
seeing it 1s as the distance BA, that is, as the same situation. 
radius of the circle which passes through BI is to 
the perimeter itself BI, so the radius of the circle 
K LN is to the perimeter K LN; and seeing the 
velocities of the points B and K are equal, the 
time also of the revolution in I B to the time of 
one revolution in K LN, will be as the perimeter 
BI to the perimeter K LN; and therefore so 
many revolutions in K LN, as together taken are 
equal to the perimeter BI, will be finished in the 
same time in which the whole perimeter BI is 
finished; and therefore also the points L, N, F 
and H, or any of the rest, will in the same time 
return to the same situation from which they de- 
parted ; and this may be demonstrated, whatsoever 
be the points considered. Wherefore all the points 
shall in that time return to the same situation ; 
which was to be proved. 

From hence it follows, that if the perimeters BI 
and LK N be not commensurable, then all the 


326 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART III. points will never return to have the same situation 


——— or configuration in respect of one another. 
poe can 7. In simple motion, if the body moved be of a 
motion, its mo- § herical figure, it hath less force towards its poles 
tion will m P gu P 
dissipate hee than towards its middle to dissipate heteroge- 
rogeneous bo- P 5 
divs byhow meous, or to congregate homogeneous bodies. 


paula ag Let there be a sphere (as in the third figure) 
the pole. § whose centre is A and diameter BC; and let it be 
| conceived to be moved with simple circular motion; 
of which motion let the axis be the strait line D E, 
cutting the diameter BC at right angles in A. Let 
now the circle, which is described by any point B 
of the sphere, have B F for its diameter ; and taking 
FG equal to BC, and dividing it in the middle in 
H, the centre of the sphere A will, when half a 
revolution is finished, liein H. And seeing H F 
and AB are equal, a circle described upon the 
centre H with the radius HF or HG, will be equal 
to the circle whose centre is A and radius AB. 
And if the same motion be continued, the point B 
will at the end of another half revolution return to 
the place from whence it began to be moved ; and 
therefore at the end of half a revolution, the point B 
will be carried to F, and the whole hemisphere DBE 
into that hemisphere in which are the points L, K 
and F. Wherefore that part of the fluid medium, 
which is contiguous to the point F, will in the same 
time go back the length of the strait line BF; and 
in the return of the point F to B, that is, of G to C, 
the fluid medium will go back as much im a strait 
line from the point C. And this is the effect of 
simple motion in the middle of the sphere, where 
the distance from the poles is greatest. Let now 
the point I be taken in the same sphere nearer to 


OF CIRCULAR MOTION. 327 


the pole E, and through it let the strait line IK be 
drawn parallel to the strait line BF, cutting the 
arch F L in K, and the axis H Lin M;; then con- 
necting H K, upon H F let the perpendicular K N 
be drawn. In the same time therefore that B 
comes to F the point I will come to K, BF and 
IK being equal and described with the same velo- 
city. Now the motion in I K to the fluid medium 
upon which it works, namely, to that part of the 
medium which is contiguous to the poimt K, is 
oblique, whereas if it proceeded in the strait line 
HK it would be perpendicular; and therefore 
the motion which proceeds in I K has less power 
than that which proceeds in HK with the same 
velocity. But the motions in HK and HF do 
equally thrust back the medium; and therefore 
the part of the sphere at K moves the medium 
less than the part at F, namely, so much less as 
K N is less than HF. Wherefore also the same 
motion hath less power to disperse heterogeneous, 
and to congregate homogeneous bodies, when it is 
nearer, than when it is more remote from the 
poles; which was to be proved. 

Coroll. It is also necessary, that in planes which 
are perpendicular to the axis, and more remote 
than the pole itself from the middle of the sphere, 
this simple motion have no effect. For the axis 
D E with simple motion describes the superficies of 
a cylinder; and towards the bases of the cylinder 
there is in this motion no endeavour at all. 

8. If in a fluid medium moved about, as hath 


PART Il. 
21. 


~~ ee” 


If a simple 
circular motion 


been said, with simple motion, there be conceived ofa fluid body 


to float some other spherical body which is not fluid, 
the parts of the medium, which are stopped by that 


hindered by 


a body which is 
not fluid, the 


328 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART II. body, will endeavour to spread themselves every 
—-—__ way upon the superficies of it. And this is manifest 
age enough by. experience, namely, by the spreading 
ae oer of water poured out upon a pavement. But the 
that body. reason of it may be this. Seeing the sphere A (in 
fig. 3) 1s moved towards B, the medium also in 
which it is moved will have the same motion. But 
because in this motion it falls upon a body not 
liquid, as G, so that it cannot go on; and seeing 
the small parts of the medium cannot go forwards, 
nor can they go directly backwards against the 
force of the movent; it remains, therefore, that 
they diffuse themselves upon the superficies of that 
body, as towards O and P; which was to be 

proved. 
Circular mo- = 9, Compounded circular motion, in which all the 


tion about a 


anu parts of the moved body do at once describe cir- 

the tangent Cumferences, some greater, others less, according 

feapontioen: to the proportion of their several distances from 

saa 4 the common centre, carries about with it such 
bodies, as being not fluid, adhere to the body so 
moved; and such as do not adhere, it casteth for- 
wards in a strait line which is a tangent to the 
point from which they are cast off. 

For let there be a circle whose radius is A B (in 
fig. 4); and let a body be placed in the circumfe- 
rence in B, which if it be fixed there, will neces- 
sarily be carried about with it, as is manifest of 
itself. But whilst the motion proceeds, let us sup- 
pose that body to be unfixed in B. I say, the body 
will continue its motion in the tangent BC. For 
let both the radius A B and the sphere B be con- 
ceived to consist of hard matter; and let us sup- 


pose the radius A B to be stricken in the point B 


OF CIRCULAR MOTION. 329 


by some other body which falls upon it in the tan- PART III. 
gent DB. Now, therefore, there will be a motion —— 
made by the concourse of two things, the one, en- 

deavour towards C in the strait line D B produced, 

in which the body B would proceed, if it were not 
retained by the radius AB; the other, the reten- 

tion itself. But the retention alone causeth no 
endeavour towards the centre; and, therefore, the 
retention being taken away, which is done by the 
unfixing of B, there will remain but one endeavour 

in B, namely, that in the tangent BC. Wherefore 

the motion of the body B unfixed will proceed in 

the tangent BC; which was to be proved. 

By this demonstration it is manifest, that cir- 
cular motion about an unmoved axis shakes off and 
puts further from the,.centre of its motion such 
things as touch, but do not stick fast to its super- 
ficies ; and the more, by how much the distance is 
greater from the poles of the circular motion; and 
so much the more also, by how much the things, 
that are shaken off, are less driven towards the 
centre by the fluid ambient, for other causes. 

10. If in a fluid medium a spherical body be Suet things s 
moved with simple circular motion, and in the same simple circular 
medium there float another sphere whose matter is simplecireutar 
not fluid, this sphere also shall be moved with sim- ™"°™ 
ple circular motion. 

Let BC D (in fig. 5) bea circle, whose centre is 
A, and in whose circumference there is a sphere 
so moved, that it describes with simple motion the 
the perimeter BC D. Let also E FG be another 
sphere of consistent matter, whose semidiameter Is 
EH, and centre H; and with the radius AH let 
the circle HI be described. I say, the sphere 


330 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


‘PARTUI. E FG will, by the motion of the body in BC D, 
—~ be moved in the circumference HI with simple 
Senate, Motion. 

For seeing the motion in BCD (by art. 4 of this 
chapter) makes all the points of the fluid medium 
describe in the same time circular lines equal to 
one another, the points E, H and G of the strait 
line EHG will in the same time describe with equal 
radii equal circles. Let EB be drawn equal and 
parallel to the strait lme A H; and let A B be con- 
nected, which will therefore be equal and parallel 
to EH; and therefore also, if upon the centre B 
and radius B E the arch E K be drawn equal to the 
arch HI, and the strait lines AI, B K and IK be 
drawn, BK and AI will be equal; and they will 
also be parallel, because the two arches E K and 
HI, that is, the two angles K BE and [AH are 
equal; and, consequently, the strait lines AB 
and KI, which connect them, will also be equal 
and parallel. Wherefore KI and EH are parallel. 
Seeing, therefore, E and H are carried in the same 
time to K and I, the whole strait line IK will be 
parallel to EH, from whence it departed. And, 
therefore, seeing the sphere E FG is supposed to 
be of consistent matter, so as all its points keep 
always the same situation, it is necessary that every 
other strait line, taken in the same sphere, be car- 
ried always parallel to the places in which it for- 
merly was. Wherefore the sphere EF G is moved 
with simple circular motion; which was to be 
demonstrated. 

Ifthat whichis 11. If in a fluid medium, whose parts are stirred 
50 moved +°¢ by a body moved with simple motion, there float 


one side hard 


and the other another body, which hath its superficies either 


OF CIRCULAR MOTION. 331 


wholly hard, or wholly fluid, the parts of this body PAE 
shall approach the centre equally on all sides ; that ae 
is to say, the motion of the body shall be circular, "¢°, fu, its 


and concentric with the motion of the movent. pe werteetly 
But if it have one side hard, and the other side 
fluid, then both those motions shall not have the 
same centre, nor shall the floating body be moved 
in the circumference of a perfect circle. 

Let a body be moved in the circumference of the 
circle K LM N (in fig 2.) whose centre is A. And 
let there be another body at I, whose superficies is 
either all hard or all fluid. Also let the medium, in 
which both these bodies are placed, be fluid. I 
say, the body at I will be moved im the circle IB 
about the centre A. For this has been demonstrated 
in the last article. 

Wherefore let the superficies of the body at I be 
fluid on one side, and hard on the other. And 
first, let the fluid side be towards the centre. See- 
ing, therefore, the motion of the medium is such, 
as that its parts do continually change their places, 
(as hath been shown in art 5); if this change of 
place be considered in those parts of the medium 
which are contiguous to the fluid superficies, it must 
needs be that the small parts of that superficies 
enter into the places of the small parts of the me- 
dium which are contiguous to them; and the like 
change of place will be made with the next conti- 
guous parts towards A. And if the fluid parts of 
the body at I have any degree at all of tenacity (for 
there are degrees of tenacity, as in the air and 
water) the whole fluid side will be lifted up a little, 
but so much the less, as its parts have less tena- 
city; whereas the hard part of the superficies. 


332 © MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART III. which 1s contiguous to the fluid part, has no cause 
—— at all of elevation, that is to say, no endeavour 
ith wich towards A. 
Secondly, let the hard superficies of the body at 
I be towards A. By reason, therefore, of the said 
change of place of the parts which are contiguous 
to it, the hard superficies must, of necessity, seeing 
by supposition there is no empty space, either come 
nearer to A, or else its smallest parts must supply 
the contiguous places of the medium, which other- 
wise would be empty. But this cannot be, by rea- 
son of the supposed hardness; and, therefore, the 
other must needs be, namely, that the body come 
nearer to A. Wherefore the body at I has greater 
endeavour towards the centre A, when its hard 
side is next it, than when it is averted from it. 
* But the body in I, while it is moving in the circum- 
ference of the circle IB, has sometimes one side, 
sometimes another, turned towards the centre; and, 
therefore, it is sometimes nearer, sometimes fur- 
ther off from the centre A. Wherefore the body 
at [is not carried inthe circumference of a perfect 
circle ; which was to be demonstrated. 


OF OTHER VARIETY OF MOTION. 333 


CHAPTER XXII. 


OF OTHER VARIETY OF MOTION. 


1. Endeavour and pressure how they differ.—2. Two kinds of 
mediums in which bodies are moved.—3. Propagation of mo- 
tion, what it is.—4. What motion bodies have, when they press 
one another.—5. Fluid bodies, when they are pressed together, 
penetrate one another——6. When one body presseth another 
and doth not penetrate it, the action of the pressing body is 
perpendicular to the superficies of the body pressed.—7. When 
a hard body, pressing another body, penetrates the same, it 
doth not penetrate it perpendicularly, unless it fall perpendicu- 
larly upon it—8. Motion sometimes opposite to that of the 
movent.—9. In a full medium, motion is propagated to any 
distance.—10. Dilatation and contraction what they are. 
11. Dilatation and contraction suppose mutation of the smallest 
parts in respect of their situation.—12. All traction is pulsion. 
13. Such things as being pressed or bent restore themselves, 
have motion in their internal parts.—14. Though that which 
carrieth another be stopped, the body carried will proceed. 
15, 16. The effects of percussion not to be compared with 
those of weight.—17, 18. Motion cannot begin first in the 
internal parts of a body.—-19. Action and reaction proceed in 
the same line.—20. Habit, what it is. 


1. I HAVE already (chapter xv. art. 2) defined PART III 
endeavour to be motion through some length, -—~— 
though not considered as length, but as a point. mcwchow 
Whether, therefore, there be resistance or no re- ‘ey differ. 
sistance, the endeavour will still be the same. For 

simply to endeavour isto go. But when two bodies, 

having opposite endeavours, press one another, then 

the endeavour of either of them is that which we 

call pressure, and is mutual when their pressures 

are opposite. 


. mediums jn 


334 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PARI II. 2, Bodies moved, and also the mediums in which 
—— they are moved, are of two kinds. For either they 
Two kinds of have their parts coherent in such manner, as no 
which bedies part of the moved body will easily yield to the 
are moved. 
movent, except the whole body yield also, and such 
are the things we call hard: or else their parts, 
while the whole remains unmoved, will easily yield 
to the movent, and these we call fluid or soft 
bodies. For the words fluid, soft, tough, and hard, 
in the same manner as great and i:ttle, are used 
only comparatively; and are not different kinds, 
but different degrees of quality. 
pi heh 3. To do, and to suffer, is to move and to be 
what itis moved; and nothing is moved but by that which 
toucheth it and is also moved, as has been formerly 
shown. And how great soever the distance be, 
we say the first movent moveth the last moved 
body, but mediately ; namely so, as that the first 
moveth the second, the second the third, and so 
on, till the last of all be touched. When there- 
fore one body, having opposite endeavour to an- 
other body, moveth the same, and that moveth a 
third, and so on, I call that action propagation of 
_ motion. 
What motion 4. When two fluid bodies, which are in a free 
when they Press and Open space, press one another, their parts will 
endeavour, or be moved, towards the sides; not 
only those parts which are there where the mutual 
contact is, but all the other parts. For in the first 
contact, the parts, which are pressed by both the 
endeavouring bodies, have no place either forwards 
or backwards in which they can be moved; and 
therefore they are pressed out towards the sides. 
And this expressure, when the forces are equal, is 


OF OTHER VARIETY OF MOTION. 335 


in a line perpendicular to the bodies pressing. But 
whensoever the foremost parts of both the bodies 
are pressed, the hindermost also must be pressed 
at the same time; for the motion of the hinder- 
most parts cannot in an instant be stopped by the 
resistance of the foremost parts, but proceeds for 
some time; and therefore, seeing they must have 
some place in which they may be moved, and that 
there is no place at all for them forwards, it is neces- 
sary that they be moved into the places which are 
towards the sides every way. And this effect fol- 
lows of necessity, not only in fluid, but in consistent 
and hard bodies, though it be not always manifest 
to sense. For though from the compression of 
two stones we cannot with our eyes discern any 
swelling outwards towards the sides, as we per- 
ceive in two bodies of wax; yet we know well 
enough by reason, that some tumour must needs be 
there, though it be but little. 

5. But when the space is enclosed, and both the 
bodies be fluid, they will, if they be pressed toge- 
ther, penetrate one another, though differently, 
according to their different endeavours. For sup- 
pose a hollow cylinder of hard matter, well 
stopped at both ends, but filled first, below with 
some heavy fluid body, as quicksilver, and above 
with water or air. If now the bottom of the 
cylinder be turned upwards, the heaviest fluid 
body, which is now at the top, having the greatest 
endeavour downwards, and being by the hard 
sides of the vessel hindered from extending itself 
sideways, must of necessity either be received by 
the lighter body, that it may sink through it, or 
else it must open a passage through itself, by 


PART III. 
22. 


ye 


Fluid bodies, 
when they are 
pressed toge- 
ther, penetrate 
one another. 


336 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PARTI. which the lighter body may ascend. For of the 
—— two bodies, that, whose parts are most easily sepa- 
when they te ated, will be the first divided ; which being done, 
pressed toge- it is not necessary that the parts of the other suffer 


eee any separation at all. And therefore when two 
liquors, which are enclosed in the same vessel, 
change their places, there is no need that their 
smallest parts should be mingled with one another; 
for a way being opened through one of them, the 
parts of the other need not be separated. 
Now if a fluid body, which is not enclosed, press 
a hard body, its endeavour will indeed be towards 
the internal parts of that hard body; but being 
excluded by the resistance of it, the parts of the 
fluid body will be moved every way according to 
the superficies of the hard body, and that equally, 
if the pressure be perpendicular ; for when all the 
parts of the cause are equal, the effects will be 
equal also. But if the pressure be not perpendi- 
cular, then the angles of the incidence being un- 
equal, the expansion also will be unequal, namely, 
greater on that side where the angle is greater, 
because that motion is most direct which proceeds 
by the directest line. 
Whenonebody 6, If a body, pressing another body, do not 


athe and dot penetrate it, it will nevertheless give to the part it 

it, theactionof presseth an endeavour to yield, and recede in a 

body ioperten: strait line perpendicular to its superficies in that 

civericiee of Point in which it is pressed. 

the body Let A BCD (in fig. 1) be a hard body, and let 

Pere another body, falling upon it in the strait line E A, 
with any inclination or without inclination, press 
it in the point A. I say the body so pressing, and 


not penetrating it, will give to the part A an 


OF OTHER VARIETY OF MOTION. 337 


endeavour to yield or recede im a strait line per- ue 
pendicular to the line A D. —S 
For let AB be perpendicular to AD, and let yeennye 
BA be produced to F. If therefore A F be coin- 
cident with A E, it is of itself manifest that the 
motion in EA will make A to endeavour in the 
line AB. Let now EA be oblique to AD, and 
from the point E let the strait line EC be drawn, 
cutting AD at right angles in D, and let the 
rectangles ABCD and AD EF be completed. I 
have shown (in the 8th article of chapter xv1) 
that the body will be carried from E to A by the 
concourse of two uniform motions, the one in EF 
and its parallels, the other in E D and its parallels. 
But the motion in EF and its parallels, whereof 
D A is one, contributes nothing to the body in A 
to make it endeavour or press towards B; and 
therefore the whole endeavour, which the body 
hath in the inclined line EA to pass or press the 
strait line A D, it hath it all from the perpendicular 
motion or endeavour in ' A. Wherefore the body 
EK, after it is in A, will have only that perpendicu- 
lar endeavour which proceeds from the motion in 
F A, that is, in AB; which was to be proved. 
7. If a hard body falling upon or pressing an- When a hard 
other body penetrate the same, its endeavour ly; Pys78 


another body, 


after its first penetration will be neither in the penetrates the 


same, it doth 

inclined line produced, nor in the perpendicular, not pecetiate 

° e ° ® erpendicular- 

but sometimes betwixt both, sometimes without a unless it fall 

them rpendicular- 

g ; ; ; y upon it, 

Let E AG (in the same fig. 1) be the inclined 
line produced; and first, let the passage through 
the medium, in which EA is, be easier than the 
passage through the medium in which AGis. As 


VOL. I. Z 


PART III. 
Z2e 


Sanya 


When a hard 
body, &c. 


338 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


soon therefore as the body is within the medium 
in which is AG, it will find greater resistance to 
its motion in DA and its parallels, than it did 
whilst it was above A D; and therefore below A D 
it will proceed with slower motion in the parallels 
of DA, than above it. Wherefore the motion 
which is compounded of the two motions in EF 
and ED will be slower below A D than above it; 
and therefore also, the body will not proceed from 
A in EA produced, but below it. Seeing, there- 
fore, the endeavour in AB is generated by the 
endeavour in F A; if to the endeavour in F A there 
be added the endeavour in D A, which is not all 
taken away by the immersion of the point A into 
the lower medium, the body will not proceed from 
A in the perpendicular A B, but beyond it ; namely, 
in some strait line between A B and A G, as in the 
line A H. 

Secondly, let the passage through the medium EA 
be less easy than that through AG. The motion, 
therefore, which is made by the concourse of the 
motions in EF and FB, 1s slower above A D than 
below it; and consequently, the endeavour will 
not proceed from A in EA produced, but beyond 
it, as in AI, Wherefore, if a hard body falling, 
&c.; which was to be proved. 

This divergency of the strait line A H from the 
strait line AG is that which, the writers of optics 
commonly called refraction, which, when the pas- 
Sage is easier in the first than in the second 
medium, is made by diverging from the line of 
inclination towards the perpendicular; and con- 
trarily, when the passage is not so easy in the 


OF OTHER VARIETY OF MOTION. 339 


first medium, by departing further from the per- PARE 
pendicular. —— 
8. By the 6th theorem it is manifest, that the Motion some- 
force of the movent may be so placed, as that to that af the 
the body moved by it may proceed in a way almost ™°’*"" 
directly contrary to that of the movent, as we see 
in the motion of ships. 
For let AB (in fig. 2) represent a ship, whose 
length from the prow to the poop is AB, and let 
the wind lie upon it in the strait parallel lines C B, 
DE and FG; and let DE and FG be cutin Eand 
and G by a strait line drawn from B perpendicular 
to AB; also let BE and EG be equal, and the 
angle ABC any angle how small soever. Then 
between BC and BA let the strait line BI be 
drawn; and let the sail be conceived to be spread 
in the same line BI, and the wind to fall upon it 
in the points L, M and B; from which points, per- 
pendicular to BI, let BK, MQ and L P be drawn. 
Lastly, let E N and G O be drawn perpendicular to 
BG, and cutting BK in H and K; and let HN 
and K O be made equal to one another, and seve- 
rally equal to BA. I-say, the ship BA, by the 
wind falling upon it in CB, DE, FG, and other 
lines parallel to them, will be carried forwards 
almost opposite to the wind, that is to say, in a 
way almost contrary to the way of the movent. 
For the wind that blows in the line C B will (as 
hath been shown in art.6) give to the point B an en- 
deavour to proceed in a strait line perpendicular to 
the strait line BI, that is, in the strait line BK ; 
and to the points M and L an endeavour to pro- 
ceed in the strait lines MQ and LP, which are 
parallel to BK. Let now the measure of the time 
Z2 


340 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PARTIIL be BG, which is divided in the middle in E : and 
—— let the point B be carried to H in the time B E. 


Motion some- 
' times opposite 


In the same time, therefore, by the wind blowing 


to that of thein I) M and FL, and as many other lines as may 


movent. 


be drawn parallel to them, the whole ship will be 
applied to the strait line H N. Also at the end of 
the second time EG, it will be applied to the strait 
line KO. Wherefore the ship will always go for- 
ward ; and the angle it makes with the wind will 
be equal to the angle A BC, how small soever that 
angle be; and the way it makes will in every time be 
equal to the strait line EH. I say, thus it would 
be, if the ship might be moved with as great 
celerity sideways from B A towards K O, as it may 
be moved forwards in the line BA. But this is 
impossible, by reason of the resistance made by the 
great quantity of water which presseth the side, much 
exceeding the resistance made by the much smaller 
quantity which presseth the prow of the ship; so 
that the way the ship makes sideways is scarce 
sensible; and, therefore, the point B will proceed 
almost in the very line B A, making with the wind 
the angle A BC, how acute soever; that is to say, 
it will proceed almost in the strait line BC, that 
is, In a way almost contrary to the way of the 
movent; which was to be demonstrated. 

But the sail in BI must be so stretched as that 
there be left in it no bosom at all; for otherwise 
the strait lines LP, M Q and B K will not be per- 
pendicular to the plane of the sail, but falling below 
P, Q and K, will drive the ship backwards. But 
by making use of a small board for a sail, a little 
waggon with wheels for the ship, and of a smooth 
pavement for the sea, I have by experience found 


OF OTHER VARIETY OF MOTION. 341 - 


this to be so true, that I could scarce oppose the Eaet II, 
board to the wind in any obliquity, though never —-~— 


Motion some- 


so small, but the waggon was carried forwards jimes opposite 
by it. to that of the 


movent. 


By thesame 6th theorem it may be found, how 
much a stroke, which falls obliquely, is weaker than 
a stroke falling perpendicularly, they being like 
and equal in all other respects. 

Let a stroke fall upon the wall A B obliquely, as 
for example, in the strait line CA (in fig. 3.) Let 
C E be drawn parallel to A B, and D A perpendi- 
cular to the same A B and equal to CA; and let 
both the velocity and time of the motion in C A be 
equal to the velocity and time of the motion in 
DA. I say, the stroke in CA will be weaker than 
that in D A, in the proportion of EA to DA. For 
producing D A howsoever to F, the endeavour of 
both the strokes will (by art.6) proceed from A 
in the perpéndicular AF. But the stroke in CA is 
made by the concourse of two motions in CE and 
E A, of which that in CE contributes nothing to 
the stroke in A, because C E and BA are parallels ; 
and, therefore, the stroke in C A is made by the 
motion which isin EA only. But the velocity or 
force of the perpendicular stroke in EA, to the 
velocity or force of the stroke in D A, is as EA to 
DA. Wherefore the oblique stroke in C A 1s weaker 
than the perpendicular stroke in D A, in the pro- 
portion of EA to DA or CA; which was to be 
proved. 

9. In a full medium, all endeavour proceeds as ie Ol ee 
far as the medium itself reacheth ; that is to say, if is propagated 
the medium be infinite, the endeavour will proceed '*77 “"""°" 
infinitely. 


342 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


eee II. For whatsoever endeavoureth is moved, and 
——— therefore whatsoever standeth in its way it maketh 
ee itn. it yield, at least a little, namely, so far as the movent 
is propesated itself is moved forwards. But that which yieldeth 
y distance, 

is also moved, and consequently maketh that to yield 
which is in its way, and so on successively as long 
as the medium is full; that is to say, infinitely, if 
the full medium be infinite; which was to be 

proved. 

Now although endeavour thus perpetually pro- 
pagated do not always appear to the senses as 
motion, yet it appears as action, or as the efficient 
cause of some mutation. For if there be placed 
before our eyes some very little object, as for 
example, a small grain of sand, which at a certain 
distance is visible; itis manifest that it may be re- 
moved to such a distance as not to be any longer 
seen, though by its action it still work upon the 
organs of sight, as is manifest from that which was 
last proved, that all endeavour proceeds infinitely. 
Let it be conceived therefore to be removed from 
our eyes to any distance how great soever, and a 
sufficient number of other grains of sand of the 
same bigness added to it; it is evident that the 
aggregate of all those sands will be visible; and 
though none of them can be seen when it is single 
and severed from the rest, yet the whole heap or 
hill which they make will manifestly appear to the 
sight; which would be impossible, if some action 
did not proceed from each several part of the whole 
heap. ) 

Dilatation. 10 Between the degrees of hard and soft are 
what they are. those things which we call fough, tough being that 
which may be bent without being altered from 


OF OTHER VARIETY OF MOTION. 343 


what it was; and the bending of a line is either ar 
the adduction or diduction of the extreme parts, —-~— 
that is, a motion from straitness to crookedness, 

or contrarily, whilst the line remains still the same 

it was; for by drawing out the extreme points of 

a line to their greatest distance, the line is made 

strait, which otherwise is crooked. So also the 
bending of a superficies is the diduction or adduc- 

tion of its extreme lines, that is, their dilatation and 
contraction. 

11. Dilatation and contraction,as also all flexion, Dilatation 


& contraction 


supposes necessarily that the internal parts of the scppose at 
ation o e 


body bowed do either come nearer to the external smattest parte 
parts, or go further from them. For though flexion (erect 
be considered only in the length of a body, yet 

when that body is bowed, the line which is made 

on one side will be convex, and the line on the 

other side will be concave; of which the concave, 

being the interior line, will, unless something be 

taken from it and added to the convex line, be the 

more crooked, that is, the greater of the two. 

But they are equal; and, therefore, in flexion there 

ig an accession made from the interior to the ex- 

terior parts ; and, on the contrary, in tension, from 

the exterior to the interior parts. And as for those 

things which do not easily suffer such transposition 

of their parts, they are called brittle; and the 

great force they require to make them yield, makes 

them also with sudden motion to leap asunder, and 

break in pieces. 

12. Also motion is distinguished into pulszon All traction 
and ¢raction. And pulsion, as I have already de- ” fone 
fined it, is when that which is moved goes before 
that which moveth it. But contrarily, in traction 


344 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART III. the movent goes before that which is moved. Never- 
—~— theless, considering it with greater attention, it 
seemeth to be the same with pulsion. For of two 
parts of a hard body, when that which is foremost 
drives before it the medium in which the motion is 
made, at the same time that which is thrust for- 
wards thrusteth the next, and this again the next, 
and so on successively. In which action, if we sup- 
pose that there is no place void, it must needs be, 
that by continual pulsion, namely, when that action 
has gone round, the movent will be behind that 
part, which at the first seemed not to be thrust 
forwards, but to be drawn; so that now the body, 
which was drawn, goes before the body which 
gives it motion ; and its motion is no longer trac- 
tion, but pulsion. 
Such thingsas §=13. Such things as are removed from their 
being pressed ‘ ‘ ° 
or bent restore Places by forcible compression or extension, and, as 
themse'ves, soon as the force is taken away, do presently return 
vais and restore themselves to their former situation, 
have the beginning of their restitution within them- 
selves, namely, a certain motion in their internal 
parts, which was there, when, before the taking 
away of the force, they were compressed, or ex- 
tended. For that restitution is motion, and that 
which is at rest cannot be moved, but by a moved 
and a contiguous movent. Nor doth the cause of 
their restitution proceed from the taking away of 
the force by which they were compressed or ex- 
tended ; for the removing of impediments hath not 
the efficacy of a cause, as has been shown at the 
end of the 3rd article of chap. xv. The cause 
therefore of their restitution 1s some motion either 
of the parts of the ambient, or of the parts of the 


OF OTHER VARIETY OF MOTION. 345 


body compressed or extended. But the parts of PART II. 
the ambient have no endeavour which contributes —-—~— 
to their compression or extension, nor to the set- 

ting of them at liberty, or restitution. It remains 
therefore that from the time of their compression or 
extension there be left some endeavour or motion, 

by which, the impediment being removed, every 

part resumes its former place; that is to say, the 

whole restores itself. 

14. In the carriage of bodies, if that body, which Thong wats 
carries another, hit upon any obstacle, or be by another be 
any means suddenly stopped, and that which is bel cates 
carried be not stopped, it will go on, till its motion ¥!! proceed. 
be by some external impediment taken away. 

For I have demonstrated (chap. vi11, art. 19) 
that motion, unless it be hindered by some external 
resistance, will be continued eternally with the 
same celerity ; and in the 7th article of chap. 1x, 
that the action of an external agent is of no effect 
without contact. When therefore that, which car- 
rieth another thing, is stopped, that stop doth not 
presently take away the motion of that which is 
carried. It will therefore proceed, till its motion 
be by little and little extinguished by some external 
resistance: which was to be proved; though expe- 
rience alone had been sufficient to prove this. 

In like manner, if that body which carrieth 
another be put from rest into sudden motion, that 
which is carried will not be moved forwards toge- 
ther with it, but will be left behind. For the con- 
tiguous part of the body carried hath almost the 
same motion with the body which carries it; and 
the remote parts will receive different velocities 
according to their different distances from the body 


PART III. 
22. 


——~——ae” 


The effects of 
percussion not 
to be compared 
with those o 
weight. 


346 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


that carries them; namely, the more remote the 
parts are, the less will be their degrees of velocity. 
It 1s necessary, therefore, that the body, which is 
carried, be left accordingly more or less behind. 
And this also is manifest by experience, when at 
the starting forward of the horse the rider falleth 
backwards. 

15. In percussion, therefore, when one hard 
body is in some small part of it stricken by another 
with great force, it is not necessary that the whole 
body should yield to the stroke with the same 
celerity with which the stricken part yields. For 
the rest of the parts receive their motion from the 
motion of the part stricken and yielding, which 
motion is less propagated every way towards the 
sides, than it is directly forwards. And hence it 
is, that sometimes very hard bodies, which being 
erected can hardly be made to stand, are more 
easily broken than thrown down by a violent 
stroke; when, nevertheless, if all their parts toge- 
ther were by any weak motion thrust forwards, 
they would easily be cast down. 

16. Though the difference between truston and 
percussion consist only in this, that in trusion the 
motion both of the movent and moved body begin 
both together in their very contact ; and in percus- 
sion the striking body is first moved, and after- 
wards the body stricken; yet their effects are so 
different, that it seems scarce possible to compare 
their forces with one another. I say, any effect of | 
percussion being propounded, as for example, the 
stroke of a beetle of any weight assigned, by 
which a pile of any given length is to be driven 


OF OTHER VARIETY OF MOTION. 347 


into earth of any tenacity given, it seems to me PART III. 
very hard, if not impossible, to define with what —— 
weight, or with what stroke, and in what time, the 

same pile may be driven to a depth assigned into 

the same earth. The cause of which difficulty is 

this, that the velocity of the percutient is to be 
compared with the magnitude of the ponderant. 

Now velocity, seeing it is computed by the length 

of space transmitted, is to be accounted but as one 
dimension; but weight is as a solid thing, being 
measured by the dimension of the whole body. 

And there is no comparison to be made of a solid 

body with a length, that is, with a line. 

17. If the internal parts of a body be at rest, or Motion cannot 

retain the same situation with one another for any the internal 
time how little soever, there cannot in those parts "47 
be generated any new motion or endeavour, whereof 
the efficient cause is not without the body of which 
they are parts. For if any small part, which is 
comprehended within the superficies of the whole 
body, be supposed to be now at rest, and by and 
by to be moved, that part must of necessity receive . 
its motion from some moved and contiguous body. 
But by supposition, there is no such moved and 
contiguous part within the body. Wherefore, if 
there be any endeavour or motion or change of 
situation in the internal parts of that body, it must 
needs arise from some efficient cause that is 
without the body which contains them ; which was 
to be proved. 

18. In hard bodies, therefore, which are com- 
pressed or extended, if, that which compresseth or 
extendeth them being taken away, they restore 


PART III. 
22. 


be eal 


Action and re- 
action proceed 
in the same 
line. 


Habit, 
what it is. 


348 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


themselves to their former place or situation, it 
must needs be that that endeavour or motion of 
their internal parts, by which they were able to 
recover their former places or situations, was not 
extinguished when the force by which they were 
compressed or extended was taken away. There- 
fore, when the lath of a cross-bow bent doth, as 
soon as it is at liberty, restore itself, though to him, 
that judges by sense, both it and all its parts seem 
to be at rest; yet he, that judging by reason doth 
not account the taking away of impediment for an 
efficient cause, nor conceives that without an effi- 
cient cause any thing can pass from rest to motion, 
will conclude that the parts were already in motion 
before they began to restore themselves. 

19. Action and reaction proceed in the same 
line, but from opposite terms. For seeing reaction is 
nothing but endeavour in the patient to restore itself 
to that situation from which it was forced by the 
agent; the endeavour or motion both of the agent 
and patient or reagent will be propagated between 
the same terms; yet so, as that in action the term, 
Jrom which, is in reaction the term ¢o which. And 
seeing all action proceeds in this manner, not only 
between the opposite terms of the whole line in 
which it is propagated, but also in all the parts of 
that line, the terms from which and to which, both 
of the action and reaction, will be in the same line. 
Wherefore action and reaction proceed in the same 
line, &c. 

20. To what has been said of motion, I will add 
what I have to say concerning habit. Habit, 
therefore, is a generation of motion, not of motion 


OF OTHER VARIETY OF MOTION. 349 


simply, but an easy conducting of the moved body 
in a certain and designed way. And seeing it is 
attained by the weakening of such endeavours as 
divert its motion, therefore such endeavours are 
to be weakened by little and little. But this cannot 
be done but by the long continuance of action, or 
by actions often repeated; and therefore custom 
begets that facility, which is commonly and rightly 
called habit ; and it may be defined thus: HABIT 
1s motion made more easy and ready by custom; 
that 1s to say, by perpetual endeavour, or by 
iterated endeavours in a way differing from that 
in which the motion proceeded from the beginning, 
and opposing such endeavours as resist. And to 
make this more perspicuous by example, we may 
observe, that when one that has no skill in music 
first puts his hand to an instrument, he cannot 
after the first stroke carry his hand to the place 
where he would make the second stroke, without 
taking it back by a new endeavour, and, as it were 
beginning again, pass from the first to the second. 
Nor will he be able to go on to the third place 
without another new endeavour; but he will be 
forced to draw back his hand again, and so suc- 
cessively, by renewing his endeavour at every 
stroke ; till at the last, by doing this often, and by 
compounding many interrupted motions or endea- 
vours into one equal endeavour, he be able to make 
his hand go readily on from stroke to stroke in 
that order and way which was at the first designed. 
Nor are habits to be observed in living creatures 
only, but also in bodies inanimate. For we find 
that when the lath of a cross-bow is strongly bent, 


PART III, 
22. 


Sgn yao 
Habit, 
what it is, 


PART III. 
22. 


wy” 
Habit, 
what it is. 


350 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


and would if the impediment were removed return 
again with great force; if it remain a long time 
bent, it will get sucha habit, that when it is loosed 
and left to its own freedom, it will not only not 
restore itself, but will require as much force for 
the bringing of it back to its first posture, as it did 
for the bending of it at the first. 


CHAP. XXIII. 


OF THE CENTRE OF EQUIPONDERATION 5; OF 
BODIES PRESSING DOWNWARDS IN STRAIT 
PARALLEL LINES. 


1. Definitions and suppositions.— 2. Two planes of equipondera- 
tion are not parallel—3. The centre of equiponderation is in 
every plane of equiponderation.—4. The moments of equal 
ponderants are to one another as their distances from the 
centre of the scale-—5, 6. The moments of unequal pon- 
derants have their proportion to one another compounded 
of the proportions of their weights and distances from the 
centre of the scale.—7. If two ponderants have their weights 
and distances from the centre of the scale in reciprocal pro- 
portion, they are equally poised ; and contrarily.—8. If the 
parts of any ponderant press the beams of the scale every 
where equally, all the parts cut off, reckoned from the centre 
of the scale, will have their moments in the same proportion 
with that of the parts of a triangle cut off from the vertex: by 
strait lines parallel to the base.—9. The diameter of equipon- 
deration of figures, which are deficient according to commen- 
surable proportions of their altitudes and bases, divides the 
axis, so that the part taken next the vertex ia to the other part 
of the complete figure to the deficient figure—10. The dia- 
meter of equiponderation of the complement of the half of any 
of the said deficient figures, divides that line which is drawn 
through the vertex parallel to the base, so that the part next 
the vertex is to the other part as the complete figure to the 


CENTRE OF EQUIPONDERATION. 35) 


complement.—11. The centre of equiponderation of the half PART III. 
of any of the deficient figures in the first row of the table of 2: 
art. 3, chap. xvi1, may be found out by the numbers of the 

second row.—12. The centre of equiponderation of the half 

of any of the figures of the second row of the same table, may 

be found out by the numbers of the fourth row.—13. The 

centre of equiponderation of the half of any of the figures in 

the same table being known, the centre of the excess of the 

same figure above a triangle of the same altitude and base is 

also known.—14. The centre of equiponderation of a solid 

sector is in the axis so divided, that the part next the vertex 

be to the whole axis, wanting half the axis of the portion of the 

sphere, as 3 to 4. 


DEFINITIONS. 

1. A scale is a strait line, whose middle point Definitions. 
is immovable, all the rest of its points being at 
liberty ; and that part of the scale, which reaches 
from the centre to either of the weights, is called 
the beam. 

u1. Equiponderation is when the endeavour of 
one body, which presses one of the beams, resists 
the endeavour of another body pressing the other 
beam, so that neither of them is moved; and the 
bodies, when neither of them is moved, are said to 
be equally poised. 

1. Weight is the aggregate of all the endea- 
vours, by which all the points of that body, which 
presses the beam, tend downwards in lines parallel 
to one another; and the body which presses is 
called the ponderant. 

1v. Moment is the power which the ponderant 
has to move the beam, by reason of a determined 
situation. 

v. The plane of equiponderation is that by 
which the ponderant is so divided, that the mo- 
ments on both sides remain equal. 


PART III. 
23. 


———— 
Definitions. 


Suppositions. 


Two planes 
of equiponde- 
ration are 


not parallel. 


352 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


vi. The diameter of equiponderation is the 
common section of the two planes of equipondera- 
tion, and is in the strait line by which the weight 
is hanged. 

vil. The centre of equiponderation is the com- 
mon point of the two diameters of equiponderation. 


SUPPOSITIONS. 

1. When two bodies are equally poised, if weight 
be added to one of them and not to the other, 
their equiponderation ceases. 

11. When two ponderants of equal magnitude, 
and of the same species or matter, press the beam 
on both sides at equal distances from the centre of 
the scale, their moments are equal. Also when 
two bodies endeavour at equal distances from the 
centre of the scale, if they be of equal magnitude 
and of the same species, their moments are equal. 


2. No two planes of equiponderation are parallel. 

Let A BCD (in fig. 1) be any ponderant what- 
soever; and in it let EF be a plane of equipon- 
deration ; parallel to which, let any other plane 
be drawn, asGH. I say, GH is not a plane of 
equiponderation. For seeing the parts AEF D 
and E BC F of the ponderant A BCD are equally 
poised ; and the weight EGHF is added to the 
part AE FD, and nothing is added to the part 
EBCF, but the weight EGHF is taken from 
it; therefore, by the first supposition, the parts 
AGHD and GBCH will not be equally poised ; 
and consequently GH is not a plane of equiponde- 
ration. Wherefore, no two planes of equiponde- 
ration are parallel ; which was to be proved. 


CENTRE OF EQUIPONDERATION. 353 


3. The centre of equiponderation is in every me IIT. 

plane of equiponderation. sei 
: . The centre of 

For if another plane of equiponderation be equipondere- 


taken, it will not, by the last article, be parallel to oo i i | 
the former plane; and therefore both those planes Dandetation 
will cut one another. Now that section (by the 
6th definition) is the diameter of equiponderation. 
Again, if another diameter of equiponderation be 
taken, it will cut that former diameter; and in 
that section (by the 7th definition) is the centre of 
equiponderation. Wherefore the centre of equi- 
ponderation is in that diameter which lies in the 
said plane of equiponderation. 
4. The moment of any ponderant applied to one The moments 
of equal ponde- 
point of the beam, to the moment of the same oF rantsare to one 
an equal ponderant applied to any other point of abo a 
the beam, is as the distance of the former point fhe centre of 
from the centre of the scale, to the distance of the 
latter point from the same centre. Or thus, those 
moments are to one another, as the arches of 
circles which are made upon the centre of the 
scale through those points, in the same time. Or 
lastly thus, they are as the parallel bases of two 
triangles, which have a common angle at the 
centre of the scale. 
Let A (in fig. 2) be the centre of the scale; and 
let the equal ponderants D and E press the beam 
A B in the points B and C;; also let the strait lines 
BD and CE be diameters of equiponderation ; 
and the points D and E in the ponderants D and E 
be their centres of equiponderation. Let AGF be 
drawn howsoever, cutting D B produced in F, and 
E C in G;; and lastly, upon the common centre A, 
let the two arches BH and CI be described, cut- 


VOL. I. AA 


354 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PARTUL ting AGF in H andI. I say, the moment of the 
———— ponderant D to the moment of the ponderant E 
is as AB to AC, or as BH to CI, or as BF to CG. 
For the effect of the ponderant D, in the point B, 
is circular motion in the arch BH; and the effect 
of the ponderant E, in the point C, circular motion 
in the arch CI; and by reason of the equality of 
the ponderants D and E, these motions are to one 
another as the quicknesses or velocities with which 
the points B and C describe the arches BH and 
C I, that is, as the arches themselves B H and CI, 
or as the strait parallels B F and CG, or as the 
parts of the beam AB and AC; forAB.AC:: 
BF. CG:: BH. CI. are proportionals ; and there- 
fore the effects, that is, by the 4th definition, the 
moments of the equal ponderants applied to several 
points of the beam, are to one another as A B and 
A C; or as the distances of those points from the 
centre of the scale ; or as the parallel bases of the 
triangles which have a common angle at A; or as 
the concentric arches BH and CI; which was to 
be demonstrated. ; 
The moments 5, Unequal ponderants, when they are applied 


of unequal pon- 


derants have tO several points of the beam, and hang at liberty, 
tion to one that is, so as the line by which they hang be the 
pointed rhe Glameter of equiponderation, whatsoever be the 


proportions of fioure of the ponderant, have their moments to 
their weights 


and distances OHeE another in proportion compounded of the 

oy aia proportions of their distances from the centre of 
the scale, and of their weights. 

Let A (in fig. 3) be the centre of the scale, and 

AB the beam; to which let the two ponderants 

C and D be applied at the points B and E. Isay, 


the proportion of the moment of the ponderant C 


CENTRE OF EQUIPONDERATION. 355 


to the moment of the ponderant D, is compounded of PARTE 
the proportions of A B to AE, and of the weight —— 
C to the weight D; or, if C and D be of the same 7° momrnns 
species, of the magnitude C to the magnitude D. derants, &c. 
Let either of them, as C, be supposed to be 
bigger than the other, D. If, therefore, by the 
addition of F, F and D together be as one body 
equal to C, the moment of C to the moment of 
F+D will be (by the last article) as BG is to EH. 
Now as F+D is to D, so let EH be to another 
EI; and the moment of F+D, that is of C, to the 
moment of D, will be as BG to EI. But the pro- 
portion of BG to EI is compounded of the propor- 
tions of BG to EH, that is, of AB to AE, and of 
EH to EI, that is, of the weight C to the weight 
D. Wherefore unequal ponderants, when they 
are applied, &c. Which was to be proved. 
6. The same figure remaining, if I K be drawn 
parallel to the beam AB, and cutting AG inK; 
and K L be drawn parallel to BG, cutting AB in 
L, the distances A B and AL from the centre will 
be proportional to the moments of C and D. For 
the moment of C is BG, and the moment of D is 
EI, to which KL 1s equal. But as the distance 
AB from the centre is to the distance AL from 
the centre, so is BG, the moment of the ponderant 
C, to LK, or EI the moment of the ponderant D. 
7. If two ponderants have their weights and If two ponde- 
distances from the centre in reciprocal proportion, abe 
and the centre of the scale be between the points (sts fom 


the centre of 


to which the ponderants are applied, they will be the scale in 


: a? iprocal 
equally poised. And contrarily, if they be equally portion, they 
poised, their weights and distances from the centre ere 4 
of the scale will be in reciprocal proportion. conmanye 


AA 2 


PART III. 


356 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


Let the centre of the scale (in the same third 


“-— figure) be A, the beam AB; and let any ponderant 


If two ponde- 
rants, &c. 


C, having BG for its moment, be applied to the 
point B; also let any other ponderant D, whose 
moment is EI, be applied to the point E. Through 
the point I let I K be drawn parallel to the beam 
AB, cutting AG in K; also let KL be drawn 
parallel to BG, K L will then be the moment of the 
ponderant D; and by the last article, it will be as 
BG, the moment of the ponderant C in the point 
B, to LK the moment of the ponderant D in the 
point E,so ABto AL. Onthe other side of the 
centre of the scale, let A N be taken equal to AL; 
and to the point N let there be applied the ponde- 
rant O, having to the ponderant C the proportion 
of ABtoAN. I say, the ponderants in B and N 
will be equally poised. For the proportion of the 
moment of the ponderant OQ, in the point N, to the 
moment of the ponderant C in the point B, is by 
the 5th article, compounded of the proportions of 
the weight O to the weight C, and of the distance 
from the centre of the scale AN or AL to the 
distance from the centre of the scale AB. But 
seeing we have supposed, that the distance AB 
to the distance AN is in reciprocal propor- 
tion of the weight O to the weight C, the propor- 
tion of the moment of the ponderant O, in the point 
N, to the moment of the ponderant C, in the point 
B, will be compounded of the proportions of A B 
to AN,and of AN to AB. Wherefore, setting in 
order A B, AN, AB, the moment of O to the mo- 
ment of C will be as the first to the last, that is, as 
ABto AB. Their moments therefore are equal ; 
and consequently the plane which passes through 


CENTRE OF EQUIPONDERATION. 357 


A will (by the fifth definition) be a plane of equi- PART ML 
ponderation. Wherefore they will be equally ——~ 
poised ; as was to be proved. 
Now the converse of this is manifest. For if 
there be equiponderation and the proportion of the 
weights and distances be not reciprocal, then both 
the weights will always have the same moments, 
although one of them have more weight added to 
it or its distance changed. 
Coroll. When ponderants are of the same species, 
and their moments be equal ; their magnitudes and 
distances from the centre of the scale will be reci- 
procally proportional. For in homogeneous bodies, 
it is as weight to weight, so magnitude to mag- 
nitude. 
8. If to the whole length of the beam there be If the bees of 
applied a parallelogram, or a parallelopipedum, or press the beaite 
a prisma, or a cylinder, or the superficies of a “ibe se 


ry where 


j = equally, all the 
cylinder, or of a sphere, or of any portion of a ae he 


sphere or prisma; the parts of any of them cut eeckonet ftom 
e e ~ e 

off with planes parallel to the base will have their scale, will have 

moments in the same proportion with the parts of ieee 


: ° ° ° portion with 
a triangle, which has its vertex in the centre of the thatof the parts 


scale, and for one of its sides the beam itself, which ofa trianglecut 

parts are cut off by planes parallel to the base. sesiad be wait 
First, let the rectangled parallelogram A BCD qryparalel te 

(in figure 4) be applied to the whole length of 

the beam A B; and producing C B howsoever to E, 

let the triangle A BE be described. Let now any 

part of the parallelogram, as A F, be cut off by the 

plane F G, parallel to the base C B; and let FG be 

produced to AE in the point H. I say, the mo- 


ment of the whole ABCD to the moment of its 


358 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PARTII. part AF, is as the triangle A BE to the triangle 
——— AG H, that is, in proportion duplicate to that of 


If the parts of 
any ponderant, 
&c. 


the distances from the centre of the scale. 

For, the parallelogram ABCD being divided 
into equal parts, infinite in number, by strait lines 
drawn parallel to the base; and supposing the 
moment of the strait line CB to be BE, the mo- 
ment of the strait line FG will (by the 7th article) 
be GH;; and the moments of all the strait lines of 
that parallelogram will be so many strait lines in 
the triangle A B E drawn parallel to the base B E; 
all which parallels together taken are the moment 
of the whole parallelogram A BCD; and the same 
parallels do also constitute the superficies of the 
triangle ABE. Wherefore the moment of the 
parallelogram A BCD is the triangle ABE; and 
for the same reason, the moment of the parallelo- 
gram A F is the triangle AGH; and therefore the 
moment of the whole parallelogram to the moment 
of a parallelogram which is part of the same, is as 
the triangle ABE to the triangle AGH, or in 
proportion duplicate to that of the beams to which 
they are applied. And what is here demonstrated 
in the case of a parallelogram may be understood 
to serve for that of a cylinder, and of a prisma, 
and their superficies ; as also for the superficies of 
a sphere, of an hemisphere, or any portion of a 
sphere. For the parts of the superficies of a sphere 
have the same proportion with that of the parts of 
the axis cut off by the same parallels, by which the 
parts of the superficies are cut off, as Archimedes 
has demonstrated; and therefore when the parts 
of any of these figures are equal and at equal 


CENTRE OF EQUIPONDERATION. 359 


distances from the centre of the scale, their mo- raet lif. 
ments also are equal, in the same manner as they ——— 
are in parallelograms. 

Secondly, let the parallelogram A KIB not be 
rectangled; the strait line IB will nevertheless 
press the point B perpendicularly in the strait line 
BE; and the strait line LG will press the point 
G perpendicularly in the strait lime GH; and all 
the rest of the strait lines which are parallel toI B 
will do the like. Whatsoever therefore the moment 
be which is assigned to the strait line I B, as here, 
for example, it is supposed to be BE, if AE be 
drawn, the moment of the whole parallelogram A I 
will be the triangle A B E; and the moment of the 
part AL will be the triangle AGH. Wherefore 
the moment of any ponderant, which has its sides 
equally applied to the beam, whether they be 
applied perpendicularly or obliquely, will be always 
to the moment of a part of the same in such pro- 
portion as the whole triangle has to a part of the 
same cut off by a plane which is parallel to the base. 

9. The centre of equiponderation of any figure, Thediameterof 
which is deficient according to commensurable (i Prg™ 


tion of figures 
proportions of the altitude and base diminished, “hich sre def- 


en tas ? cient according 
and whose complete figure is either a parallelogram to commensu- 


. . =e rable propor- 
or acylinder, or a parallelopipedum, divides the tions of their 


axis, so, that the part next the vertex, to the other pares divides 


part, is as the complete figure to the deficient thes, sthat 


the part taken 

figure. next the vertex 
: y is to the other 

For let CIA PE (in fig. 5) be a deficient figure, partas thecom- 
whose axis is AB, and whose complete figure is }°'5,fe0"% 


CDFE;; and let the axis A B beso divided in Z, &""* 
that AZ be to ZBas CDFEisto CIAPE. I 


360 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART IIT. say, the centre of equiponderation of the figure 

—— CIAPE will be in the point Z. 

i ea ra First, that the centre of equiponderation of the 

ration, &. fioyure CI APE is somewhere in the axis AB is 
manifest of itself; and therefore A B is a diameter 
of equiponderation. Let AE be drawn, and let 
B E be put for the moment of the strait line CE; 
the triangle ABE will therefore (by the third 
article) be the moment of the complete figure 
CDFE. Let the axis AB be equally divided in 
L, and let GLH be drawn parallel and equal to 
the strait line CE, cutting the crooked line 
CIAPE in I and P, and the strait lines AC and 
AE in K and M. Moreover, let ZO be drawn 
parallel to the same CE; and let it be, as LG to 
LI, so LM to another, LN ; and let the same be 
done in all the rest of the strait lines possible, 
parallel to the base ; and through all the points N, 
let the line A N E be drawn; the three-sided figure 
A N EB will therefore be the moment of the figure 
CIAPE. Now the triangle ABE is (by the 
9th article of chapter xvi) to the three-sided 
figure AN EB, as ABCD+AICB isto AICB 
twice taken, that is, as CDFE+CIAPE isto 
CIAPE twice taken. But as CIAPE is to 
CDFE, that is, as the weight of the deficient 
figure is to the weight of the complete figure, so is 
CIAPE twice taken to CDFE twice taken. 
Wherefore, setting in order CDFE+CIAPE. 
2CIAPE. 2CDFE; the proportion of CDFE+ 
CIAPE to CDFE twice taken will be com- 
pounded of the proportion of CDFE+CIAPE 
to CIA PE twice taken, that is, of the proportion 


CENTRE OF EQUIPONDERATION. 361 


of the triangle ABE to the three-sided figure PART II. 
ANEB, that is, of the moment of the complete —-— 
figure to the moment of the deficient figure, and of 3) tinmmde. 
the proportion of CIA PE twice taken to C DF E ration, &. 
twice taken, that is, to the proportion reciprocally 

taken of the weight of the deficient figure to the 

weight of the complete figure. 

Again, seeing by supposition A Z.ZB::CDFE. 
CIAPE are proportionals; AB. A Z::CDFE+ 
CIAPE.CDFE will also, by compounding, be 
proportionals. And seeing A L is the half of AB, 
AL.AZ::CDFE+CIAPE. 2CDFE willalso 
be proportionals. But the proportion of CDFE+ 
CIAPE to 2CDFE 1s compounded, as was but 
now shown, of the proportions of moment to mo- 
ment, &c., and therefore the proportion of A L to 
AZ is compounded of the proportion of the mo- 
ment of the complete figure CDFE to the moment 
of the deficient figure CI APE, and of the pro- 
portion of the weight of the deficient figure CIAPE 
to the weight of the complete figure CD FE; but 
the proportion of AL to AZ 1s compounded of the 
proportions of AL to B Z and of BZ to AZ. Now 
the proportion of BZ to AZ is the proportion of 
the weights reciprocally taken, that is to say, of the 
weight CIAPE to the weight CDFE. There- 
fore the remaining proportion of A L to BZ, that 
is, of LB to BZ, is the proportion of the moment 
of the weight CDFE to the moment of the weight 
CIAPE. But the proportion of AL to BZ is 
compounded of the proportions of AL to A Z and 
of A Z to ZB; of which proportions that of AZ to 
Z B is the proportion of the weight C DF E to the 
weight CIAPE. Wherefore (by art. 5 of this 


PART III. 
23. 
a aie ad 
The diameter 


of equiponde- 
ration, &c. 


362 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


chapter) the remaining proportion of AL to AZ is 
the proportion of the distances of the points Z and 
L from the centre of the scale, which is A. And, 
therefore, (by art. 6) the weight CIAPE shall hang 
from O in the strait hne OZ. So that O Z is one 
diameter of equiponderation of the weight CIAPE. 
But the strait line AB is the other diameter of equi- 
ponderation of the same weight CIAPE. Where- 
fore (by the 7th definition) the point Z is the centre 
of the same equiponderation; which point, by con- 
struction, divides the axis so, that the part AZ, 
which is the part next the vertex, is to the other 
part Z B, as the complete figure C D F E is to the 
deficient figure CIAPE; which is that which was 
to be demonstrated. 

Coroll.1. The centre of equiponderation of any of 
those plane three-sided figures, which are compared 
with their complete figures in the table of art. 3, 
chap. XVII, is to be found in the same table, by 
taking the denominator of the fraction for the part 
of the axis cut off next the vertex, and the nume- 
rator for the other part next the base. For example, 
if it be required to find the centre of equipondera- 
tion of the second three-sided figure of four means, 
there is in the concourse of the second column 
with the row of three-sided figures of four means 
this fraction s, which signifies that that figure is 
to its parallelogram or complete figure as + to 
unity, thatis, as | to 7, or as 5 to 7; and, there- 
fore the centre of equiponderation of that figure 
divides the axis, so that the part next the vertex 
is to the other part as 7 to 5. 

Coroll. 11. The centre of equiponderation of any 
of the solids of those figures, which are contained 


CENTRE OF EQUIPONDERATION. 363 


in the table of art. 7 of the same chap. xvii, 1s PART III 
exhibited in the same table. For example, if the —~— 
centre of equiponderation of a cone be sought for, 
the cone will be found to be : of its cylinder ; and, 
therefore, the centre of its equiponderation will so 
divide the axis, that the part next the vertex to 
the other part will be as 3 to 1. Also the solid of 
a three-sided figure of one mean, that is, a para- 
bolical solid, seeing it is 7, that is + of its cylinder, 
will have its centre of equiponderation in that 
point, which divides the axis, so that the part 
towards the vertex be double to the part towards 
the base. 

10. The diameter of equiponderation of the com- The diameter 
plement of the half of any of those figures which ration of the 
are contained in the table of art. 3, chap. xvi1, i eat ate 


the half of any 
divides that line which is drawn through the ver- °! the said de- 


cient figures, 
tex parallel and equal to the base, so that the part a 
next the vertex will be to the other part, as the drawn through 
complete figure to the complement. ee 


For let AICB (in the same fig. 5) be the half base, so that 


of a parabola, or of any other of those three-sided the vertex fe to 
figures which are in the table of art. 3, chap. xv, Beaman 
whose axis is AB, and base BC, having AD (ry oon 
drawn from the vertex, equal and parallel to the 

base BC, and whose complete figure is the pa- 
rallelogram ABCD. Let IQ be drawn at any 

distance from the side C D, but parallel to it; and 

let A D be the altitude of the complement AICD, 

and Q I aline ordinately applied init. Wherefore 

the altitude A L in the deficient figure AIC B is 

equal to Q I the line ordinately applied in its com- 

plement ; and contrarily, LI the line ordinately 


applied in the figure AICB is equal to the altitude 


364 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART III. AQ in its complement; and so in all the rest of 
~———— the ordinate lines and altitudes the mutation is 
beable such, that that line, which is ordinately applied in 
ration, kc. the figure, 1s the altitude of its complement. And, 
therefore, the proportion of the altitudes decreas- 
ing to that of the ordinate lines decreasing, being 
multiplicate according to any number in the defi- 
cient figure, is submultiplicate according to the 
same number in its complement. For example, if 
AICB be a parabola, seeing the proportion of 
A B to A L is duplicate to that of BC to LI, the 
proportion of AD to AQ in the complement AICD, 
which is the same with that of BC to LI, will be 
subduplicate to that of CD to QI, which is the 
same with that of AB to AL; and consequently, 
in a parabola, the complement will be to the paral- 
lelogram as 1 to 3; in a three-sided figure of 
two means, as 1 to 4; in a three-sided figure of 
three means, as 1 to 5, &c. But all the ordinate 
lines together in AICD are its moment; and all 
the ordinate lines in AICB are its moment. Where- 
fore the moments of the complements of the halves 
of deficient figures in the table of art. 3 of chap. 
Xvi1, being compared, are as the deficient figures 
themselves ; and, therefore, the diameter of equi- 
ponderation will divide the strait line A D in such 
proportion, that the part next the vertex be to the 
other part, as the complete figure ABCD is to 

the complement AICD. 
Coroll. The diameter of equiponderation of these 
halves may be found by the table of art. 3 of chap. 
XVII, in this manner. Let there be propounded 
any deficient figure, namely, the second three-sided 
figure of two means. This figure is to the com- 


CENTRE OF EQUIPONDERATION. 365 


plete figure as # to 1, that is 3 to 5. Wherefore ee 
the complement to the same complete figure is as —— 
2 to 5; and, therefore, the diameter of equipon- — 
deration of this complement will cut the strait 
line drawn from the vertex parallel to the base, so 
that the part next the vertex will be to the other 
part as 5 to 2. And, in like manner, any other of 
the said three-sided figures being propounded, if 
the numerator of its fraction found out in the table 
be taken from the denominator, the strait line 
drawn from the vertex is to be divided, so that the 
part next the vertex be to the other part, as the 
denominator is to the remainder which that sub- 
traction leaves. 

11. The centre of equiponderation of the half of The centre of 

i 5 .  equipondera- 

any of those crooked-lined figures, which are im tion of the half 
the first row of the table of art. 3 of chap. Xvi, is duncan i 
in that strait line which, being parallel to the axis, gv in the 


nore first row of the 
divides the base according to the numbers of the tableof art. 3, 


. ree chapter XVII, 
fraction next below it in the second row, so that may be found 
the numerator be answerable to that part which is ere ori 
towards the axis. eee 

For example, let the first figure of three means 
be taken, whose half is A B CD (in fig. 6), and let 
the rectangle A BED be completed. The com- 
plement therefore will be BCDE. And seeing 
A BED is to the figure ABCD (by the table) as 
5 to 4, the same ABED will be to the comple- 
ment BCDE as 5 to 1. Wherefore, if FG be 
drawn parallel to the base D A, cutting the axis so 
that AG be to GB as 4 to 5, the centre of equi- 
ponderation of the figure A BC D will, by the pre- 
cedent article, be somewhere in the same FG. 
Again, seeing, by the same article, the complete 


PART IIT, 
23. 


yee 
The centre of 
equipondera- 
j &ce. 


tion, 


366 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


figure AB ED, is to the complement BCD E as 
5 to 1, therefore if BE and AD be divided in I 
and H as 5 to 1, the centre of equiponderation of 
the complement B C DE will be somewhere in the 
strait lme which connects H and I. Let now the 
strait line L K be drawn through M the centre of 
the complete figure, parallel to the base ; and the 
strait line N O through the same centre M, perpen- 
dicular to it; and let the strait lines LK and FG cut 
the strait hne HI in PandQ. Let PR be taken 
quadruple to PQ; and let RM be drawn and pro- 
duced to FG in 8S. RM therefore will be to MS 
as 4 to 1, that is, as the figure A BC D to its com- 
plement BCDE. Wherefore, seeing M is the 
centre of the complete figure A B E D, and the dis- 
tances of R and S from the centre M be in propor- 
tion reciprocal to that of the weight of the com- 
plement BCDE to the weight of the figure ABCD, 
Rand § will either be the centres of equiponderation 
of their own figures, or those centres will be in some 
other points of the diameters of equiponderation 
HI and FG. But this last is impossible. For no other 
strait line can be drawn through the point M ter- 
minating in the strait lines HI and FG, and retain- 
ing the proportion of M R to MS, that is, of the 
figure ABCD to its complement BCDE. The 
centre, therefore, of equiponderation of the figure 
A BCD is in the point 8. Now, seeing PM hath 
the same proportion to QS which RP hath to RQ, 
QS will be 5 of those parts of which PM is four, 
that is, of which IN is four. But I N or PM is 2 
of those parts of which EB or FG is 6; and, there- 
fore, if it be as 4 to 5, so 2 to a fourth, that fourth 


CENTRE OF EQUIPONDERATION. 367 


will be 24. Wherefore QS is 24 of those parts PART Ml. 
of which FG is 6. But FQ is 1; and, therefore, —-—~— 
FS is 33. Wherefore the remaining part GS 1s 24. 
So that FG is so divided in S, that the part to- 
wards the axis is in proportion to the other part, 
as 23 to 31, that is as 5 to 7; which answereth to 
the fraction $in the second row, next under the 
fraction + in the first row. Wherefore drawing 
ST parallel to the axis, the base will be divided in 
like manner. 
By this method it is manifest, that the base of a 
semiparabola will be divided into 3 and 5 ; and the 
base of the first three-sided figure of two means, 
into 4 and 6; and of the first three-sided figure of 
four means, into 6 and 8. The fractions, there- 
fore, of the second row denote the proportions, 
into which the bases of the figures of the first row 
are divided by the diameters of equiponderation. 
But the first row begins one place higher than the 
second row. 


12. The centre of equiponderation of the half of ee centre of 
uipondera- 


any of the figures in the second row of the same tion of the half 
table of art. 3, chap. xvIt, is in a strait line parallel ¢,.°" ae 


gures of the 
to the axis, and dividing the base according to the sed tow of 
the same table 


numbers of the fraction in the fourth row, two may be found 


out by the 
places lower, so as that the numerator be answer- numbers of the 
able to that part which is next the axis. ee 


Let the half of the second three-sided figure of 
two means be taken; and let it be ABCD (in 
fig. 7); whose complement is BCDE, and the 
rectangle completed ABED. Let this rectangle 
be divided by the two strait lines LK and N O, 
cutting one another in the centre M at right 
angles; and because ABED is to ABCD as 5 to 


368 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


ad mI. 3, let AB be divided in G, so that AG to BG be as 
—— 3to 5; and let FG be drawn parallel to the base. 
cadinaniea, Also because A BED is (by art. 9) to BCDE 
tion, &. as 5 to 2, let BE be divided in the point I, so that 
BI be to IE as 5 to 2; and let IH be drawn 
parallel to the axis, cutting LK and FG in PandQ. 

Let now PR be so taken, that it be to PQ as 3 to 

2, and let RM be drawn and produced to FG in S. 

Seeing, therefore, RP is to PQ, that is, RM to 

MS, as ABCD is to its complement BCDE, 

and the centres of equiponderation of A BCD and 
BCDE are in the strait lines FG and HI, and 

the centre of equiponderation of them both toge- 

ther in the point M; R will be the centre of the 
complement BCDE, and S the centre of the 

figure ABCD. And seeing PM, that is IN, is 

to QS, as RP isto RQ; and IN or PM is 3 of 

those parts, of which B E, that is FG, is 14; there- 

fore QS is 5 of the same parts; and EI, that is 

FQ, 4; and FS, 9; andGS, 5. Wherefore the 

strait line ST being drawn parallel to the axis, 

will divide the base AD into 5 and 9. But the 
fraction $ is found in the fourth row of the table, 

two places below the fraction 3 in the second row. 

By the same method, if in the same second row 

there be taken the second three-sided figure of 

three means, the centre of equiponderation of the 

half of it will be found to be in astrait line parallel 

to the axis, dividing the base according to the 
numbers of the fraction 1%, two places below in 

the fourth row. And the same way serves for all 

the rest of the figures in the second row. In like 
manner, the centre of equiponderation of the third 
three-sided figure of three means will be found to 


CENTRE OF EQUIPONDERATION. 369 


be in a Strait line parallel to the axis, dividing the PART II. 
base, so that the part next the axis be to the other ——— 
part as 7 to 13, &c. 

Coroll. The centres of equiponderation of the 
halves of the said figures are known, seeing they 
are in the intersection of the strait lines S T and 
FG, which are both known. 

13. The centre of equiponderation of the half of The centre of 

‘ equipondera- 

any of the figures, which (in the table of art. 3, tion of the half 
chap. XvII) are compared with their parallelo- oe Me 
grams, being known; the centre of equiponderation *"* "2 


being known, 


of the excess of the same figure above its triangle the centre of 
the excess of 


is also known. the same figure 

For example, let the semiparabola A BCD (in alae oe 
fig. 8) be taken, whose axis is A B; whose com- piieeand 
plete figure is A BED; and whose excess above known. 
its triangle is BCDB. Its centre of equiponde- 
Tration may be found out in this manner. Let FG 
be drawn parallel to the base, so that AF be a 
third part of the axis; and let HI be drawn pa- 
rallel to the axis, so that AH be a third part of 
the base. This being done, the centre of equi- 
ponderation of the triangle ABD will be I. Again, 
let KL be drawn parallel to the base, so that 
AK be to AB as 2 to 5; and M N parallel to the 
axis, so that AM be to AD as 38 to 8; and let 
MN terminate in the strait lime KL. The centre, 
therefore, of equiponderation of the parabola 
ABCD is N; and therefore we have the centres 
of equiponderation of the semiparabola A BC D, 
and of its part the triangle ABD. That we may 
now find the centre of equiponderation of the 
remaining part BCDB, let IN be drawn and 
produced to O, so that N O be triple to IN; and 

VOL. I. BB 


370 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PARTI. Q will be the centre sought for. For seeing the 
ees weight of ABD to the weight of BCDB is in 


The centre of 
equipondera- 


tion of the 
alf, & 


proportion reciprocal to that of the strait line NO 
to the strait line IN; and N is the centre of the 
whole, and I the centre of the triangle ABD; O 
will be the centre of the remaining part, namely, 
of the figure B DC B; which was to be found. 

Coroll. The centre of equiponderation of the 
figure B DCB is in the concourse of two strait 
lines, whereof one is parallel to the base, and 
divides the axis, so that the part next the base be 
4 or xs of the whole axis; the other is parallel to 
the axis, and so divides the base, that the part 
towards the axis be 4, or #4 of the whole base. 
For drawing O P parallel to the base, it will be as 
IN to NO, so F K to KP, that is, so 1 to 3, or 
5 to 15. But AF is +s, or § of the whole AB; 
and AK is x, or #; and FK vs; and KP ¥s;. 
and therefore A P is y's of the axis AB. Also AH 
is 4, or 5; and A M 3, or x% of the whole base; 
and therefore OQ being drawn parallel to the 
axis, MQ, which is triple to HM, will be =%. 
Wherefore A Q is 24, or + of the base A D. 

The excesses of the rest of the three-sided 
figures in the first row of the table of art. 3, chap. 
Xvil, have their centres of equiponderation in two 
strait lines, which divide the axis and base accord- 
ing to those fractions, which add 4 to the nume- 
rators of the fractions of a parabola ;* and34; and 
6 to the denominators, in this manner :— 

In a parabola, the axis 18, the base 3. 


In the first three-sided figure, the axis }f, the base 38. 
In the second three-sided figure, the axis 4}, the base #, &c. 


And by the same method, any man, if it be 


CENTRE OF EQUIPONDERATION. 371 


worth the pains, may find out the centres of equi- PART Ilr. 
ponderation of the excesses above their triangles W—— 
of the rest of the figures in the second and third 

row, &c. 

14, The centre of equiponderation of the sector The centre of 
of a sphere, that is, of a figure compounded of a ‘ion of, ooo 
right cone, whose vertex is the centre of the ee aiviad. 
sphere, and the portion of the sphere whose base that the part 


: é a? , next the vertex 
is the same with that of the cone, divides the strait be to the whole 


line which is made of the axis of the cone and half haif the axis of 
the axis of the portion together taken, so that the ‘° arbi 
part next the vertex be triple to the other part, or 3 ‘+ 

to the whole strait line as 3 to 4. 

For let ABC (in fig. 9) be the sector of a 
sphere, whose vertex is the centre of the sphere A; 
whose axis is AD; and the circle upon BC is the 
common base of the portion of the sphere and of 
the cone whose vertex is A; the axis of which 
portion is E D, and the half thereof FD; and the 
axis of the cone, AE. Lastly, let A G be = of the 
strait line AF. I say, G is the centre of equipon- 
deration of the sector A BC. 

Let the strait line F H be drawn of any length, 
making right angles with AF at F; and drawing 
the strait lme AH, let the triangle AFH be made. 
Then upon the same centre A let any arch I K be 
drawn, cutting AD in L; and its chord, cutting 
AD in M; and dividing ML equally in N, let NO 
be drawn parallel to the strait line FH, and meet- 
ing with the strait lme A H in O. 

Seeing now BD C is the spherical superficies of 
the portion cut off with a plane passing through 
BC, and cutting the axis at mght angles; and 
. seeing F H divides ED, the axis of the portion, 

BB 2 


3/72 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


ee into two equal parts in F; the centre of equipon- 
—~  deration of the superficies BDC will be in F (by 
Sean at art. 8); and for the same reason the centre of 
a solid, &e. equiponderation of the superficies IL K, K being 
in the strait line AC, will bein N. And in like 
manner, if there were drawn, between the centre 
of the sphere A and the outermost spherical super- 
ficies of the sector, arches infinite in number, the 
centres of equiponderation of the spherical super- 
ficies, in which those arches are, would be found 
to be in that part of the axis, which is intercepted 
between the superficies itself and a plane passing 
along by the chord of the arch, and cutting the 

axis in the middle at mght angles. 

Let it now be supposed that the moment of the 
outermost spherical superficies BDC is FH. See- 
ing therefore the superficies B D C is to the super- 
ficies IL K in proportion duplicate to that of the 
arch BDC to the arch ILK, that is, of BE to 
IM, that is, of FH to NO; let it be as FH to 
N O, so N O to another N P; and again, as NO to 
N P, so NP to another N Q;; and let this be done 
in all the strait lines parallel to the base F H that 
that can possibly be drawn between the base and 
the vertex of the triangle AFH. If then through 
all the points Q there be drawn the crooked line 
A QH, the figure AFH QA will be the comple- 
ment of the first three-sided figure of two means ; 
and the same will also be the moment of all the 
spherical superficies, of which the solid sector 
A BCD is compounded; and by consequent, the 
moment of the sector itself. Let now FH be un- 
derstood to be the semidiameter of the base of a 
right cone, whose side is AH, and axis AF © 


CENTRE OF EQUIPONDERATION. 373 


Wherefore, seeing the bases of the cones, which PART III. 
pass through F and N and the rest of the points Soar 
of the axis, are in proportion duplicate to that of Seca 
the strait lines-F H and N O, &c., the moment of # *lid, &c. 
all the bases together, that is, of the whole cone, 
will be the figure itself A F H QA; and therefore 
the centre of equiponder ation of the cone AF H is 
the same with that of the solid sector. Wherefore, 
seeing A G is 3 of the axis A F, the centre of equi- 
ponderation of the cone A F H is in G; and there- 
fore the centre of the solid sector is in G also, and 
divides the part AF of the axis so that AG is 
triple to GF; that is, AG is to AF as 3 to 4; 
which was to be demonstrated. 
Note, that when the sector is a hemisphere, the 
_ axis of the cone vanisheth into that point which 
is the centre of the sphere; and therefore it 
addeth nothing to half the axis of the portion. 
Wherefore, if in the axis of the hemisphere there 
be taken from the centre ? of half the axis, that 1s, 
3 of the semidiameter of the sphere, there will be 
the centre of equiponderation of the hemisphere. 


PART III. 
24. 


———— 
Definitions. 


374 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


OF REFRACTION AND REFLECTION. 


1. Definitions.—2. In perpendicular motion there is no refrac- 
tion.— 3. Things thrown out of a thinner into a thicker me- 
dium are so refracted that the angle refracted is greater than 
the angle of inclination—4. Endeavour, which from one 
point tendeth every way, will be so refracted, as that the sine 
of the angle refracted will be to the sine of the angle of incli- 
nation, as the density of the first medium is to the density of 
the second medium, reciprocally taken.—5. The sine of the 
refracted angle in one inclination is to the sine of the refracted 
angle in another inclination, as the sine of the angle of that 
inclination is to the sine of the angle of this inclination.—6. If 
two lines of incidence, having equal inclination, be the one in 
a thinner, the other in a thicker medium, the sine of the angle | 
of inclination will be a mean proportional between the two 
sines of the refracted angtes.—7. If the angle of inclination 
be semirect, and the line of inclination be in the thicker me- 
dium, and the proportion of their densities be the same with 
that of the diagonal to the side of a square, and the separating 
superficies be plane, the refracted line will be in the separating 
superficies.—8. If a body be carried in a strait line upon 
another body, and do not penetrate the same, but be reflected 
from it, the angle of reflection will be equal to the angle of 
incidence.—9. The same happens in the generation of motion 
in the line of incidence. 


DEFINITIONS. 
I. REFRACTION is the breaking of that strait 


line, in which a body is moved or its action would 


proceed in one and the same medium, into two 
strait lines, by reason of the different natures of 
the two mediums. 

11. The former of these is called the line of 
incidence ; the latter the refracted line. 


OF REFRACTION AND REFLECTION. 375 


11. The point of refraction is the common PART IL 
point of the line of incidence, and of the refracted cee 
line. Definitions. 

iv. The refracting superfictes, which also is 
the separating superficies of the two mediums, is 
that in which is the point of refraction. 

v. The angle refracted is that, which the re- 
fracted line makes in the point of refraction with 
that line, which from the same point is drawn per- 
pendicular to the separating superficies in a diffe- 
rent medium. 

vi. The angle of refraction is that which the 
refracted line makes with the line of incidence 
produced. 

vit. The angle of inclination is that which the 
line of incidence makes with that line, which from 
. the point of refraction is drawn perpendicular to 
the separating superficies. 

vil. The angle of incidence is the complement 
to a right angle of the angle of inclination. 

And so, (in fig. 1) the refraction is made in 
ABF. The refracted Ime is BF. The line of 
incidence is AB. The point of incidence and of 
refraction is B. The refracting or separating su- 
perficies is DBE. The line of incidence produced 
directly is ABC. The perpendicular to the sepa- 
rating superficies is BH. The angle of refraction 
is CBF. The angle refracted is HBF. The 
angle of inclination is A BG or H BC. The angle 
of incidence is AB D. 

1x. Moreover the thinner medium is understood 
to be that in which there is less resistance to mo- 
tion, or to the generation of motion; and the 
thicker that wherein there is greater resistance. 


376 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART UT. x. And that medium in which there is equal re- 
——-—_ sistance everywhere, is a homogeneous medium. 
All other mediums are heterogeneous. 


In perpendi- 2. If a body pass, or there be generation of mo- 

cuar motion tion from one medium to another of different 

refraction. density, in a line perpendicular to the separating 
superficies, there will be no refraction. 

For seeing on every side of the perpendicular 
all things in the mediums are supposed to be like 
and equal, if the motion itself be supposed to be 
perpendicular, the inclinations also will be equal, 
or rather none at all; and therefore there can be 
no cause from which refraction may be inferred to 
be on one side of the perpendicular, which will 
not conclude the same refraction to be on the 
other side. Which being so, refraction on one 
side will destroy refraction on the other side; and 
consequently either the refracted line will be 
everywhere, which is absurd, or there will be no 
refracted line at all; which was to be demonstrated. 

Coroll. It is manifest from hence, that the cause 
of refraction consisteth only in the obliquity of the 
line of incidence, whether the incident body pene- 
trate both the mediums, or without penetrating, 
propagate motion by pressure only. 

Things thrown 3. If a body, without any change of situation of 
out ofathinrer its internal parts, as a stone, be moved obliquely 


into a thicker 


medium are s© out of the thinner medium, and proceed penetrating 
refracted that 


the angle re- the thicker medium, and the thicker medium be 
Fae: aia such, as that its internal parts being moved restore 
the anate of themselves to their former situation; the angle 

refracted will be greater than the angle of incli- 


nation. 


OF REFRACTION AND REFLECTION. 377 


For let DBE (in the same first figure) be the 
separating superficies of two mediums; and let a 
body, as a stone thrown, be understood to be 


let AB be in the thinner medium, as in the arr ; 
and BC in the thicker, as in the water. I say the 
stone, which being thrown, is moved in the line 
A B, will not proceed in the line BC, but in some 
other line, namely, that, with which the perpendi- 
cular B H makes the refracted angle H B F greater 
than the angle of inclination H BC. 

For seeing the stone coming from A, and falling 
upon B, makes that which is at B proceed towards 
H, and that the like is done in all the strait lines 
which are parallel to BH; and seeing the parts 
moved restore themselves by contrary motion in 
the same line; there will be contrary motion gene- 
rated in H B, and in all the strait lines which are 
parallel to it. Wherefore, the motion of the stone 
will be made by the concourse of the motions in 
AG, that is, in DB, and in GB, that is, in BH, 
and lastly, in H B, that is, by the concourse of 
three motions. But by the concourse of the mo- 
tions in AG and BH, the stone will be carried to 
C; and therefore by adding the motion in H B, it 
will be carried higher in some other line, as in 
BF, and make the angle H BF greater than the 
angle HBC. 

And from hence may be derived the cause, why 
bodies which are thrown in a very oblique line, if 
either they be any thing flat, or be thrown with 
great force, will, when they fall upon the water, be 
cast up again from the water into the air. 

For let A B (in fig. 2) be the superficies of the 


ah ITl. 


Aine 


Things thrown 
outofa thinner 


moved as is supposed in the strait line ABC; andi 


to a thicker 
mediuin, &c. 


378 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PART III. water; ito which, from the point C, let a stone be 
24. ; Wee ; 
——— thrown in the strait line C A, making with the line 
B A produced a very little angle C AD; and pro- 
ducing B A indefinitely to D, let C D be drawn per- 
pendicular to it, and A E parallel to CD. The stone 
therefore will be moved in CA by the concourse 
of two motions in CD and DA, whose velocities 
are as the lines themselves C D and D A. And from 
the motion in C D and all its parallels downwards, 
as soon as the stone falls upon A, there will be 
reaction upwards, because the water restores itself 
to its former situation. If now the stone be thrown 
with sufficient obliquity, that is, if the strait line 
C D be short enough, that is, if the endeavour of 
the stone downwards be less than the reaction of 
the water upwards, that is, less than the endeavour 
it hath from its own gravity (for that may be), the 
stone will by reason of the excess of the endeavour 
which the water hath to restore itself, above that 
which the stone hath downwards, be raised again 
above the superficies A B, and be carried higher, 
being reflected in a line which goes higher, as the 
line A G. 
Endeavour, 4. If from a point, whatsoever the medium be, en- 
point tendeth deavour be propagated every way into all the parts 
Satna of that medium; and tothe same endeavour there 
as that the sine he obliquely opposed another medium of a different 


of the angle re- 


tigers will be nature, that is, either thinner or thicker; that 
o the sine oO 


the angle of in- endeavour will be so refracted, that the sine of the 


clination,asthe 


density of the angle refracted, to the sine of the angle of inclina- 
first medium 's tion, will be as the density of the first medium to 
of the second the density of the second medium, reciprocally 


medium, reci- 


procally taken. taken. 
First, let a body be in the thinner medium in A 


OF REFRACTION AND REFLECTION. 3/79 


(fig. 3), and let it be understood to have endeavour a IIL. 
every way, and consequently, that its endeavour ——— 
proceed in the lines AB and AJ; to which let na a 
B 6 the superficies of the thicker medium be 
obliquely opposed in B and 3, so that A B and A b 
be equal; and let the strait line Bb be produced 
both ways. From the points B and 4, let the per- 
pendiculars BC and dc be drawn; and upon the 
centres B and 4, and at the equal distances B A and 
& A, let the circles AC and A c be described, cutting 
BC and 6c in Cand ec, and the same C B and cb 
produced in D and d, as also A B and A b produced 
in Eande. Then from the point A to the strait 
lines BC and bc let the perpendiculars A F and Af 
be drawn. A F therefore will be the sine of the 
angle of inclination of the strait line A B, and Af 
the sine of the angle of inclination of the strait 
line A, which two inclinations are by construc- 
tion made equal. I say, as the density of the 
medium in which are BC and dc is to the density 
of the medium in which are BD and 6d, so is the 
sine of the angle refracted, to the sine of the angle 
of inclination. 

Let the strait lime FG be drawn parallel to the 
strait line A B, meeting with the strait line 6B 
produced in G. 

Seeing therefore A F and BG are also anita 
they will be equal; and consequently, the endea- 
vour in AF 1s propagated in the same time, in 
which the endeavour in BG would be propagated 
if the medium were of the same density. But 
because BG is Jn a thicker medium, that is, in a 
medium which resists the endeavour more than the 
wedtuin In which AT is, the endeavour will be 


PART III. 
4, 
gy ee 
Endeavour, 

which, &c. 


380 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


propagated less in BG than in AF, according to 
the proportion which the density of the medium, in 
which A F is, hath to the density of the medium in 
which BG is. Let therefore the density of the 
medium, in which BG is, be to the density of the 
medium, in which AF is, as BG is to BH; and 
let the measure of the time be the radius of the 
circle. Let HI be drawn parallel to B D, meeting 
with the circumference in I; and from the point 
I let IK be drawn perpendicular to BD; which 
being done, BH and IK will be equal; and 1K 
will be to AF, as the density of the medium in 
which is AF is to the density of the medium in 
which is IK. Seeing therefore in the time A B, 
which is the radius of the circle, the endeavour is 
propagated in AF in the thinner mediun, it will 
be propagated in the same time, that is, in the 
time BI in the thicker medium from K to I. 
Therefore, BI is the refracted line of the line of 
incidence AB; and IK is the sine of the angle 
refracted: and AF the sine of the angle of incli- 
nation. Wherefore, seeing IK isto AF, as the 
density of the medium in which is AF to the 
density of the medium in which is IK; it will be 
as the density of the medium in which is AF or 
BC to the density of the medium in which is 
IK or BD, so the sine of the angle refracted to 
the sine of the angle of inclination. And by the 
same reason it may be shown, that as the density 
of the thinner medium is to the density of the 
thicker medium, so will KI the sine of the angle 
refracted be to AF the sine of the angle of incli- 
nation. 

Secondly, let the body, which endeavoureth every 


OF REFRACTION AND REFLECTION. 381 


way, be in the thicker medium at I. If, therefore, 
loth the mediums were of the same density, the 
endeavour of the body in IB would tend directly 
to L; and the sine of the angle of inclination LM 
would be equal to IK or BH. But because the 
density of the medium, in which is IK, to the 
density of the medium, in which is L M, is as BH 
to BG, that is, to AF, the endeavour will be pro- 
pagated further in. the medium in which LM is, 
than in the medium in which I K is, in the propor- 
tion of density to density, that is, of ML to AF. 
Wherefore, BA being drawn, the angle refracted 
will be CBA, and its sine AF. But LM is the 
sine of the angle of inclination; and therefore 
again, as the density of one medium is to the 
density of the different medium, so reciprocally 
is the sine of the angle refracted to the sine of 
the angle of inclination; which was to be demon- 
strated. 

In this demonstration, I have made the sepa- 
rating superficies B 6 plane by construction. But 
though it were concave or convex, the theorem 
would nevertheless be true. For the refraction 
being made in the point B of the plane separating 
superficies, if a crooked line, as PQ, be drawn, 
touching the separating line in the point B; neither 
the refracted line BI, nor the perpendicular B D, 
will be altered ; and the refracted angle K BI, as 
also its sine K I, will be still the same they were. 


PART JIT. 
24. 
eae 


5. The sine of the angle refracted in one incli- The sine of the 


nation is to the sine of the angle refracted in 
another inclination, as the sine of the angle of that 
inclination to the sine of the angle of this incli- 
nation. 


refracted angle 
in one inclina- 
tion is to the 
sine of the re- 
fracted angle in 
nother incli- 


382 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


PARTI. For seeing the sine of the refracted angle is to 
—— the sine of the angle of inclination, whatsoever 
nation, as the that inclination be, as the density of one medium 


gle of that in-tg the density of the other medium ; the propor- 


clination is to 


the sine of the tion of the sine of the refracted angle, to the sine of 

indination. the angle of inclination, will be compounded of the 
proportions of density to density, and of the sine 
of the angle of one inclination to the sine of the 
angle of the other inclination. But the propor- 
tions of the densities in the same homogeneous 
body are supposed to be the same. Wherefore 
refracted angles in different inclinations are as the 
sines of the angles of those inclinations; which 
was to be demonstrated. 

If two lines 6. If two lines of incidence, having equal incli- 


of incidence, 

having equal, nation, be the one in a thinner, the other in a 
inclination, b 

oneina thinner thicker medium, the sine of the angle of their in- 
the omer ‘8 clination will be a mean proportional between the 


thicker me- 


dium, the sine two sines of their angles refracted. 


of the angle of 


inclination will For let the strait line A B (in fig. 3) have its in- 
portional be- Clination in the thinner medium, and be refracted 
tween ane '¥° in the thicker medium in BI ; and let EB have as 
fracted angles. much inclination in the thicker medium, and be 
refracted in the thinner medium in BS§;; and let 
RS, the sine of the angle refracted, be drawn. I 
say, the strait lines RS, AF, and I K are in con- 
tinual proportion. For it is, as the density of the 
thicker medium to the density of the thinner me- 
dium, soRStoAF. But it is also as the den- 
sity of the same thicker medium to that of the 
same thinner medium, so AF toIK. Wherefore 
RS. AF:: AF. 1K are proportionals ; that is, RS, 
A F, and I K are in continual proportion, and AF 


is the mean proportional; which was to be proved. 


OF REFRACTION AND REFLECTION. 383 


7. If the angle of inclination be semirect, and Pee 
the line of inclination be in the thicker medium, ee 
and the proportion of the densities be as that of a ice a 
diagonal to the side of its square, and the sepa- scmrect and 


the line of in- 


rating superficies be plain, the refracted line will a insnon eee 
be in that separating superficies. dium, and the 
For in the circle A C (fig. 4) let the angle of in- proportion of 


their densitics 


clination A BC be an angle of 45 degrees. Let % ‘he same 


with that of the 
C B be produced to the circumference in D; and diagonal to the 


let C E, the sine of the angle EBC, be drawn, to an eae 
which let BF be taken equal in the separating #12"). anil 
line BG. BCEF will therefore be a parallelo- ec, 
gram, and F E and BC, that is F E and BG equal. the sparse 
Let AG be drawn, namely the diagonal of the 
square whose side is BG, and it will be, as A G to 
EF so BG to BF; and so, by supposition, the 
density of the medium, in which C is, to the den- 
sity of the medium in which D is; and so also the 
sine of the angle refracted to the sine of the angle 
of inclination. Drawing therefore F D, and from 
D the line DH perpendicular to A B produced, 
DH will be the sine of the angle of inclination. 
And seeing the sine of the angle refracted is to 
the sine of the angle of inclination, as the density 
of the medium, in which is C, is to the density of 
the medium in which is D, that is, by supposition, 
as AG is to FE, that is as BG is to DH; and 
seeing D H is the sine of the angle of inclination, 
BG will therefore be the sine of the angle re- 
fracted. Wherefore B G will be the refracted line, 
and lye in the plain separating superficies ; which 
was to be demonstrated. 
Coroll. It is therefore manifest, that when the 


inclination is greater than 45 degrees, as also 


384 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


Pe when it is less, provided the density be greater, it 

———— may happen that the refraction will not enter the 
thinner medium at all. 

If a body be 8. If a body fall in a strait line upon another 

carrie ine po, Dody, and do not penetrate it, but be reflected 


strait line upon 


nase from it, the angle of reflection will be equal to 

netrate tbat be the angle of incidence. 

it, the ancleof | Let there be a body at A (in fig. 5), which fall- 

See i1e ig with strait motion in the line A C upon another 

Ge of incie body at C, passeth no further, but is reflected; and 
let the angle of incidence be any angle, as A C D. 
Let the strait line C E be drawn, making with D C 
produced the angle EC F equal to the angle 
ACD; and let AD be drawn perpendicular to 
the strait line DF. Also in the same strait line 
DF let CG be taken equal to CD; and let the 
perpendicular GE be raised, cutting CE in E. 
This being done, the triangles ACD and ECG 
will be equal and like. Let CH be drawn equal 
and parallel to the strait line AD; and let H C be 
produced indefinitely to I. Lastly let EA be 
drawn, which will pass through H, and be parallel 
and equal to GD. I say the motion from A to C, 
in the strait line of incidence A C, will be reflected 
in the strait line C E. 

For the motion from A to C is made by two co- 
efficient or concurrent motions, the one in AH 
parallel to DG, the other in AD perpendicular to 
the same DG; of whichtwo motions that in AH 
works nothing upon the body A after it has been 
moved as far as C, because, by supposition, it doth 
not pass the strait line DG; whereas the endea- 
vour in AD, that is in H C, worketh further to- 
wards I. But seeing it doth only press and not 


OF REFRACTION AND REFLECTION. 385 


penetrate, there will be reaction in H, which PART IIT. 
causeth motion from C towards H; and in the +—— 
meantime the motion in H E remains the same it 
was in AH; and therefore the body will now be 
moved by the concourse of two motions in CH 
and H E, which are equal to the two motions it 
had formerly in AH and HC. Wherefore it will 
be carried on in CE. The angle therefore of re- 
flection will be ECG, equal, by construction, to 
the angle ACD; which was to be demonstrated. 

Now when the body is considered but as a point, 
it is all one whether the superficies or line in 
which the reflection is made be strait or crooked ; 
for the point of incidence and reflection C is as 
well in the crooked line which toucheth D G in C, 
as in DG itself. 

9. But if we suppose that not a body be moved, The sme hap- 


? pens in the 


but some endeavour only be propagated from A to Beneration of 
C, the demonstration will nevertheless be the tine of inci- 
same. For all endeavour is motion; and when it °"* 
hath reached the solid body in C, it presseth it, 
and endeavoureth further in CI. Wherefore the 
reaction will proceed in CH; and the endeavour 
in CH concurring with the endeavour in H E, 
will generate the endeavour in CE, in the same 
manner as in the repercussion of bodies moved. 

If therefore endeavour be propagated from any 
point to the concave superficies of a spherical body, 
the reflected line with the circumference of a great 
circle in the same sphere will make an angle equal 
to the angle of incidence. 

For if endeavour be propagated from A (in fig. 
6) to the circumference in B, and the centre of 
the sphere be C, and the line CB be drawn, as 

VOL. I. cc 


PART IIL 
24, 
ye 


386 MOTIONS AND MAGNITUDES. 


also the tangent DBE; and lastly if the angle 
F BD be made equal to the angle A BE, the re- 
flection will be made in the line B F, as hath been 
newly shown. Wherefore the angles, which the 
strait lines AB and FB make with the circumfe- 
rence, will also be equal. But it is here to be 
noted, that if CB be produced howsoever to G, 
the endeavour in the line GBC will proceed only 
from the perpendicular reaction in GB; and that 
therefore there will be no other endeavour in the 
point B towards the parts which are within the 
sphere, besides that which tends towards the 
centre. 

And here I put an end to the third part of this 
discourse; in which I have considered motion and 
magnitude by themselves in the abstract. The 
fourth and last part, concerning the phenomena of 
nature, that is to say, concerning the motions and 
magnitudes of the bodies which are parts of the 
world, real and existent, is that which follows. 


PART IV. 


PHYSICS, 
OR THE PHENOMENA OF NATURE. 


CHAPTER XXV. 


OF SENSE AND ANIMAL MOTION. 


1. The connexion of what hath been said with that which fol- 

loweth.—2. The investigation of the nature of sense, and the 

definition of sense.—3. The subject and object of sense. 

4. The organs of sense.—5. All bodies are not indued with 

sense.—6. But one phantasm at one and the same time. 

7. Imagination the remains of past sense, which also is memory. 

Of sleep.—8. How phantasms succeed one another.—9. 

Dreams, whence they proceed.—10. Of the senses, their kinds, 

their organs, and phantasms proper and common.—l1l1. The 

magnitude of images, how and by what it is determined. 

12. Pleasure, pain, appetite and aversion, what they are. 

13. Deliberation and will, what. 
1. I HAVE, in the first chapter, defined philosophy Peny IY; 
to be knowledge of effects acquired by true ratio- —— 
cination, from knowledge first had of their causes The connexion 
and generation; and of such causes or genera- beensaid with 

: . that which 
tions as may be, from former knowledge of their foiloweth. 
effects or appearances. There are, therefore, 
two methods of philosophy; one, from the gene- 
ration of things to their possible effects; and the 

cCc2 


388 PHYSICS. 


PART IV. other, from their effects or appearances to some 

——— possible generation of the same. In the former 

The connexion of these the truth of the first principles of our 

been said with ratiocination, namely definitions, is made and con- 
that which fol- 5 

loweth. stituted by ourselves, whilst we consent and agree 

about the appellations of things. And this part I 

have finished in the foregoing chapters; in which, 

if I am not deceived, I have affirmed nothing, 

saving the definitions themselves, which hath not 

good coherence with the definitions I have given ; 

that is to say, which is not sufficiently demonstrated 

to all those, that agree with me in the use of words’ 

and appellations; for whose sake only I have 

written the same. I now enter upon the other 

part ; which is the finding out by the appearances 

or effects of nature, which we know by sense, some 

ways and means by which they may be, I do not 

say they are, generated. The principles, therefore, 

upon which the following discourse depends, are not 

such as we ourselves make and pronounce in gene- 

ral terms, as definitions ; but such, as being placed 

in the things themselves by the Author of Nature, 

are by us observed in them ; and we make use of 

them in single and particular, not universal propo- 

sitions. Nor do they impose upon us any necessity 

of constituting theorems; their use being only, 

though not without such general propositions as 

have been already demonstrated, to show us the 

possibility of some production or generation. See- 

ing, therefore, the science, which is here taught, 

hath its principles in the appearances of nature, 

and endeth in the attaining of some knowledge of 

natural causes, I have given to this part the title 

of Poysics, or the Phenomena of Nature. Now 


OF SENSE AND ANIMAL MOTION. 389 


such things as appear, or are shown to us by na- PART IV. 
ture, we call phenomena or appearances. =a 

Of all the phenomena or appearances which are pgerebrats 

near us, the most admirable is apparition itself, been std with 
TO paivecOa ; namely, that some natural bodies have loweth. 
in themselves the patterns almost of all things, and 
others of none at all. So that if the appearances 
be the principles by which we know all other 
things, we must needs acknowledge sense to be the 
principle by which we know those principles, and 
that all the knowledge we have is derived from it. 
And as for the causes of sense, we cannot begin 
our search of them from any other phenomenon 
than that of sense itself. But you will say, by what 
sense shall we take notice of sense? I answer, by 
sense itself, namely, by the memory which for some 
time remains in us of things sensible, though they 
themselves pass away. For he that perceives that 
he hath perceived, remembers. 

In the first place, therefore, the causes of our 
perception, that is, the causes of those ideas and 
phantasms which are perpetually generated within us 
whilst we makeuse of our senses, are to be enquired 
into ; and in what manner their generation pro- 
ceeds. To help which inquisition, we may observ 
first of all, that our phantasms or ideas are not 
always the same; but that new ones appear to us, 
and old ones vanish, according as we apply our 
organs of sense, now to one object, now to another. 
Wherefore they are generated, and perish. And 
from hence it is manifest, that they are some 
change or mutation in the sentient. 

2. Now that all mutation or alteration is mo- 
tion or endeavour (and endeavour also is motion) 


PART IV. 
25. 
ee 
The investiga- 
tion of the na- 
ture of sense, 
and the defini- 

tion of sense. 


390 PHYSICS. 


in the internal parts of the thing that is altered, 
hath been proved (in art. 9, chap. vir) from this, 
that whilst even the least parts of any body remain 
in the same situation in respect of one another, it 
cannot be said that any alteration, unless perhaps 
that the whole body together hath been moved, hath 
happened to it; but that it both appeareth and is 
the same it appeared and was before. Sense, 
therefore, in the sentient, can be nothing else but 
motion in some of the internal parts of the sentient ; 
and the parts so moved are parts of the organs of 
sense. For the parts of our body, by which we 
perceive any thing, are those we commonly call 
the organs of sense. And so we find what is the 
subject of our sense, namely, that in which are the 
phantasms; and partly also we have discovered 
the nature of sense, namely, that it is some in- 
ternal motion in the sentient. 

I have shown besides (in chap. 1x, art. 7) that 
no motion is generated but by a body contiguous 
and moved: from whence it is manifest, that the 
immediate cause of sense or perception consists in 
this, that the first organ of sense 1s touched and 
pressed. For when the uttermost part of the organ 
is pressed, it no sooner yields, but the part next 
within it 1s pressed also ; and, in this manner, the 


pressure or motion is propagated through all the 


parts of the organ to the mnermost. And thus 
also the pressure of the uttermost part proceeds 
from the pressure of some more remote body, and 
so continually, till we come to that from which, 
as from its fountain, we derive the phantasm or idea 
that is made in us by our sense. And this, what- 
soever it be, is that we commonly call the object, 


OF SENSE AND ANIMAL MOTION. 391 


Sense; therefore, is some internal motion in the PARE IV. 
sentient, generated by some internal motion of the 
parts of the object, and propagated through all the 

media to the innermost part of the organ. By 

which words I have almost defined what sense is. 

Moreover, I have shown (art. 2, chap. xv) that 

all resistance is endeavour opposite to another en- 
deavour, that is to say, reaction. Seeing, there- 
fore, there is in the whole organ, by reason of its 
own internal natural motion, some resistance or 
reaction against the motion which is propagated 
from the object to the innermost part of the organ, 
there is also in the same organ an endeavour oppo- 
site to the endeavour which proceeds from the 
object ; so that when that endeavour inwards is 
the last action in the act of sense, then from the 
reaction, how little soever the duration of it be, a 
phantasm or idea hath its being ; which, by reason 
that the endeavour is now outwards, doth always 
appear as something situate without the organ. 
So that now I shall give you the whole definition 
of sense, as it is drawn from the explication of the 
causes thereof and the order of its generation, thus: 
SENSE is a phantasm, made by the reaction and 
endeavour outwards in the organ of sense, caused 
by an endeavour inwards from the object, remain- 
ing for some time more or less. 

3. The subject of sense is the sentient itself, thesudjectand 
namely, some living creature ; and we speak more °bie<t of sense. 
correctly, when we say a living creature seeth, 
than when we say the eye seeth. The object is the 
thing received; and it is more accurately said, 
that we see the sun, than that we see the light. 

For light and colour, and heat and sound, and 


PART IV. 
25. 


yee” 
The subject 
and object of 
sense. 


The organs of 


sense. 


392 PHYSICS. 


other qualities which are commonly called sensible, 
are not objects, but phantasms in the sentients. 
For a phantasm is the act of sense, and differs no 
otherwise from sense than fiert, that is, being a 
doing, differs from factum esse, that is, being 
done; which difference, in things that are done in 
an instant, is none at all; and a phantasm is made in 
an instant. For in all motion which proceeds by 
perpetual propagation, the first part being moved 
moves the second, the second the third, and so on 
to the last, and that to any distance, how great 
soever. And in what point of time the first or 
foremost part proceeded to the place of the second, 
which is thrust on, in the same point of time the 
last save one proceeded into the place of the last 
yielding part; which by reaction, in the same 
instant, if the reaction be strong enough, makes a 
phantasm ; and a phantasm being made, perception 
is made together with it. 

4. The organs of sense, which are in the sen- 
tient, are such parts thereof, that if they be hurt, 
the very generation of phantasms is thereby de- 
stroyed, though all the rest of the parts remain 
entire. Now these parts in the most of living 
creatures are found to be certain spirits and mem- 
branes, which, proceeding from the pia mater, 
involve the brain and all the nerves; also the 
brain itself, and the arteries which are in the 
brain ; and such other parts, as being stirred, the 
heart also, which is the fountain of all sense, is 
stirred together with them. For whensoever the 
action of the object reacheth the body of the 
sentient, that action is by some nerve propagated 
to the brain ; and if the nerve leading thither be 


OF SENSE AND ANIMAL MOTION. 393 


so hurt or obstructed, that the motion can be soe 

propagated no further, no sense follows. Also if -—-— 

the motion be intercepted between the brain and 

the heart by the defect of the organ by which the 

action is propagated, there will be no perception 

of the object. | 
5. But though all sense, as I have said, be made All bodies are 

by reaction, nevertheless it is not necessary that with sense. 

every thing that reacteth should have sense. I 

know there have been philosophers, and those 

learned men, who have maintained that all bodies 

are endued with sense. Nor do I see how they 

can be refuted, if the nature of sense be placed in 

reaction only. And, though by the reaction of 

bodies inanimate a phantasm might be made, it 

would nevertheless cease, as soon as ever the 

object were removed. For unless those bodies 

had organs, as living creatures have, fit for the 

retaining of such motion as is made in then, their 

sense would be such, as that they should never 

remember the same. And therefore this hath 

nothing to do with that sense which is the subject 

of my discourse. For by sense, we commonly 

understand the judgment we make of objects by 

their phantasms; namely, by comparing and dis- 

tinguishing those phantasms; which we could 

never do, if that motion in the organ, by which 

the phantasm is made, did not remain there for 

some time, and make the same phantasm return. 

- Wherefore sense, as I here understand it, and 

which is commonly so called, hath necessarily 

some memory adhering to it, by which former and 

later phantasms may be compared together, and 

distinguished from one another. 


394 PHYSICS. 


PaRTIV. Sense, therefore, properly so called, must ne- 
——— cessarily have in it a perpetual variety of phan- 
AM bodies are tasms, that they may be discerned one from 
with sense. another. For if we should suppose a man to be 
made with clear eyes, and all the rest of his organs 
of sight well disposed, but endued with no other 
sense; and that he should look only upon one 
thing, which is always of the same colour and 
figure, without the least appearance of variety, 
he would seem to me, whatsoever others may say, 
to see, no more than I seem to myself to feel the 
bones of my own limbs by my organs of feeling ; 
and yet those bones are always and on all sides 
touched by a most sensible membrane. I might 
perhaps say he were astonished, and looked upon 
it; but I should not say he saw it; it being almost 
all one for a man to be always sensible of one and 
the same thing, and not to be sensible at all of 
any thing. 
Patong plans _°6. And yet such is the nature of sense, that it 
the same tine. does not permit aman to discern many things at 
once. For seeing the nature of sense consists in 
motion; as long as the organs are employed about 
one object, they cannot be so moved by another at 
the same time, as to make by both their motions 
one sincere phantasm of each of them at once. 
And therefore two several phantasms will not be 
made by two objects working together, but only 
one phantasm compounded from the action of both. 
Besides, as when we divide a body, we divide 
its place; and when we reckon many bodies, we 
must necessarily reckon as many places ; and con- 
trarily, as I have shown in the seventh chapter; so 
what number soever we say there be of times, we 


OF SENSE AND ANIMAL MOTION. 395 


must understand the same number of motions PART IV, 
also; and as oft as we count many motions, so oft ~~ 
we reckon many times. For though the object we But one phan. 
look upon be of divers colours, yet with those the same time. 
divers colours it is but one varied object, and not 
variety of objects. 
Moreover, whilst those organs which are com- 
mon to all the senses, such as are those parts of 
every organ which proceed in men from the root 
of the nerves to the heart, are vehemently stirred 
by a strong action from some one object, they are, 
by reason of the contumacy which the motion, 
they have already, gives them against the reception 
of all other motion, made the less fit to receive 
any other impression from whatsoever other ob- 
jects, to what sense soever those objects belong. 
And hence it is, that an earnest studying of one 
object, takes away the sense of all other objects for 
the present. For study is nothing else but a pos- 
session of the mind, that is to say, a vehement 
motion made by some one object in the organs 
of sense, which are stupid to all other motions as 
long as this lasteth ; according to what was said 
by Terence, “ Populus studio stupidus in funam- 
bulo animum occuparat.” For what is stupor but 
that which the Greeks call avatc@noia, that is, a 
cessation from the sense of other thingsr Where- 
‘fore at one and the same time, we cannot by sense 
perceive more than one single object; as in read- 
ing, we see the letters successively one by one, 
and not all together, though the whole page be 
presented to our eye; and though every several 
letter be distinctly written there, yet when we look 
upon the whole page at once, we read nothing. 


PART IV. 
25. 


—_— 


Imagination, 


the remains of 


past sense ; 
which also 
is memory. 
Of sleep. 


396 PHYSICS. 


From hence it is manifest, that every endeavour 
of the organ outwards, is not to be called sense, 
but that only, which at several times is by vehe- 
mence made stronger and more predominant than 
the rest ; which deprives us of the sense of other 
phantasms, no otherwise than the sun deprives 
the rest of the stars of light, not by hindering their 
action, but by obscuring and hiding them with his 
excess of brightness. 

7. But the motion of the organ, by which a 
phantasm is made, is not commonly called sense, 
except the object be present. And the phantasm 
remaining after the object 1s removed or past by, 
is called fancy, and in Latin zmaginatto ;. which 
word, because all phantasms are not images, doth 
not fully answer the signification of the word fancy 
in its general acceptation. Nevertheless I may 
use it safely enough, by understanding it for the 
Greek Pavracia. 

IMAGINATION therefore is nothing else but sense 
decaying, or weakened, by the absence of the 
object. But what may be the cause of this decay 
or weakening? Is the motion the weaker, because 
the object is taken away? If it were, then phan- 
tasms would always and necessarily be less clear 
in the imagination, than they are in sense ; which 
is not true. For in dreams, which are the imagina- 
tions of those that sleep, they are no less clear 
than in sense itself. But the reason why in men 
waking the phantasms of things past are more 
obscure than those of things present, is this, that 
their organs being at the same time moved by 
other present objects, those phantasms are the less 
predominant. Whereas in sleep, the passages 


OF SENSE AND ANIMAL MOTION. 397 


being shut up, external action doth not at all PART IV. 
disturb or hinder internal motion. —— 

If this be true, the next thing to be considered, "°°? 
will be, whether any cause may be found out, from 
the supposition whereof it will follow, that the pas- 
sage is shut up from the external objects of sense 
to the internal organ. I suppose, therefore, that 
by the continual action of objects, to which a re- 
action of the organ, and more especially of the 
spirits, is necessarily consequent, the organ is 
wearied, that is, its parts are no longer moved by 
the spirits without some pain; and consequently 
the nerves being abandoned and grown slack, they 
retire to their fountain, which is the cavity either 
of the brain or of the heart; by which means the 
action which proceeded by the nerves is necessarily 
intercepted. For action upon a patient, that re- 
tires from it, makes but little impression at the 
first; and at last, when the nerves are by little 
and little slackened, none at all. And therefore 
there is no more reaction, that is, no more sense, 
till the organ being refreshed by rest, and by a 
supply of new spirits recovering strength and 
motion, the sentient awaketh. And thus it seems 
to be always, unless some other preternatural 
cause intervene; as heat in the internal parts 
from lassitude, or from some disease stirring the 
spirits and other parts of the organ in some extra- 
ordinary manner. 

8. Now it is not without cause, nor so casual a How phan- 
thing as many perhaps think it, that phantasms in one: adenine 
this their great variety proceed from one another; 
and that the same phantasms sometimes bring into 
the mind other phantasms like themselves, and at 


PART IV. 
25. 
———— 


How phan- 
tasms succeed 
one another. 


398 PHYSICS. 


other times extremely unlike. For in the motion 
of any continued body, one part follows another by 
cohesion ; and therefore, whilst we turn our eyes 
and other organs successively to many objects, the 
motion which was made by every one of them re- 
maining, the phantasms are renewed as often as 
any one of those motions comes to be predominant 
above the rest; and they become predominant in 
the same order in which at any time formerly they 
were generated by sense. So that when by length 
of time very many phantasms have been generated 
within us by sense, then almost any thought may 
arise from any other thought; insomuch that it 
may seem to be a thing indifferent and casual, 
which thought shall follow which. But for the 
most part this is not so uncertain a thing to waking 
as to sleeping men. For the thought or phantasm 
of the desired end brings in all the phantasms, 
that are means conducing to that end, and that in 
order backwards from the last to the first, and 
again forwards from the beginning to the end. 
But this supposes both appetite, and judgment to 
discern what means conduce to the end; which is 
gotten by experience; and experience is store of 
phantasms, arising from the-sense of very many 
things. For gavraZecba and meminisse, fancy and 
memory, differ only in this, that memory supposeth 
the time past, which fancy doth not. In memory, 
the phantasms we consider are as if they were worn 
out with time; but in our fancy we consider them 
as they are; which distinction is not of the things 
themselves, but of the considerations of the sen- 
tient. For there isin memory something like that 
which happens in looking upon things at a great 


OF SENSE AND ANIMAL MOTION. 399 


distance ; in which as the small parts of the object Lt IV. 
are not discerned, by reason of their remoteness; so —-—— 
In memory, many accidents and places and parts 
of things, which were formerly perceived by sense, 
are by length of time decayed and lost. 

The perpetual arising of phantasms, both in 
sense and imagination, is that which we commonly 
call discourse of the mind, and is common to men 
with other living creatures. For he that thinketh, 
compareth the phantasms that pass, that is, taketh 
notice of their likeness or unlikeness to one an- 
other. And as he that observes readily the like- 
nesses of things of different natures, or that are 
very remote from one another, is said to have a 
good fancy ; so he is said to have a good judgment, 
that finds out the unlikenesses or differences of 
things that are like one another. Now this obser- 
vation of differences is not perception made by a 
common organ of sense, distinct from sense or 
perception properly so called, but is memory of the 
differences of particular phantasms remaining for 
some time; as the distinction between hot and 
lucid, is nothing else but the memory both of a 
heating, and of an enlightening object. 

9. The phantasms of men that sleep, are dreams. Dreams, 

‘ ; . whence they 

Concerning which we are taught by experience proceed. 
these five things. First, that for the most part 
there is neither order nor coherence in them. 
Secondly, that we dream of nothing but what is 
compounded and made up of the phantasms of 
sense past. Thirdly, that sometimes they proceed, 
as in those that are drowsy, from the interruption 
of their phantasms by little and little, broken and 
altered through sleepiness; and sometimes also 


‘PART IV. 
25. 
— 
Drearrs, 
whence they 
proceed. 


400 PHYSICS. 


they begin in the midst of sleep. Fourthly, that 
they are clearer than the imaginations of waking 
men, except such as are made by sense itself, to 
which they are equal in clearness. Fifthly, that 
when we dream, we admire neither the places nor 
the looks of the things that appear to us. Now 
from what hath been said, it is not hard to show 
what may be the causes of these phenomena. For 
as for the first, seeing all order and coherence 
proceeds from frequent looking back to the end, 
that is, from consultation; it must needs be, that 
seeing in sleep we lose all thought of the end, our 
phantasms succeed one another, not in that order 
which tends to any end, but as it happeneth, and in 
such manner, as objects present themselves to our 
eyes when we look indifferently upon all things 
before us, and see them, not because we would see 
them, but because we do not shut our eyes; for 
then they appear to us without any order at all. 
The second proceeds from this, that in the silence 
of sense there is no new motion from the objects, 
and therefore no new phantasm, unless we call that 
new, which is compounded of old ones, as a chi- 
mera, a golden mountain, and the like. As for the 
third, why a dream is sometimes as it were the 
continuation of sense, made up of broken phan- 
tasms, as In men distempered with sickness, the 
reason is manifestly this, that in some of the organs 
sense remains, and in others it faileth. But how 
some phantasms may be revived, when all the 
exterior organs are benumbed with sleep, is not 
so easily shown. Nevertheless that, which hath 
already been said, contains the reason of this also. 
For whatsoever strikes the pra mater, reviveth 


OF SENSE AND ANIMAL MOTION. 401: 


some of those phantasms that are still in motion PART Iv.’ 
in the brain; and when any internal motion of the -——— 
heart reacheth that membrane, then the predomi: where: they 
nant motion in the brain makes the phantasm. ?r°eee® 
Now the motions of the heart are appetites and 
aversions, of which I shall presently speak further. 

And as appetites and aversions are generated by 
phantasms, so reciprocally phantasms are gene- 
rated by appetites and aversions. For example, 

heat in the heart proceeds from anger and fight- 

ing ; and again, from heat in the heart, whatsoever 

be the cause of it, is generated anger and the 
image of an enemy, in sleep. And as love and 
beauty stir up heat in certain organs; so heat in 

the same organs, from whatsoever it proceeds, 
often causeth desire and the image of an unresist- 

ing beauty. Lastly, cold doth in the same manner 
generate fear in those that sleep, and causeth them 

to dream of ghosts, and to have phantasms of 
horror and danger; as fear also causeth cold in 
those that wake. So reciprocal are the motions 

of the heart and brain. The fourth, namely, that 

the things we seem to see and feel in sleep, are as 

clear as in sense itself, proceeds from two causes; 

one, that having then no sense of things without 

us, that internal motion which makes the phan- 
tasm, in the absence of all other impressions, is 
predominant ; and the other, that the parts of our 
phantasms which are decayed and worn out by 

time, are made up with other fictitious parts. To 
conclude, when we dream, we do not wonder at 
strange places and the appearances of things un- 
known to us, because admiration requires that the 
things appearing be new and unusual, which can 

VOL. I. DD 


402 PHYSICS. 


Baa NG happen to none but those that remember former 
ae appearances; whereas in sleep, all things appear 
as present. 

But it is here to be observed, that certain dreams, 
especially such as some men have when they are 
between sleeping and waking, and such as happen 
to those that have no knowledge of the nature of 
dreams and are withal superstitious, were not 
heretofore nor are now accounted dreams. For 
the apparitions men thought they saw, and the 
voices they thought they heard in sleep, were not 
believed to be phantasms, but things subsisting of 
themselves, and objects without those that dreamed. 
For to some men, as well sleeping as waking, but 
especially to guilty men, and in the night, and in 
hallowed places, fear alone, helped a little with the 
stories of such apparitions, hath raised in their 
minds terrible phantasms, which have been and 
‘are still deceitfully received for things really true, 
under the names of ghosts and incorporeal sub- 


stances. 


Of the senses, 10. In most living creatures there are observed 
their kinds, 


aL five kinds of senses, which are distinguished by their 
proper and Organs, and by their different kinds of phantasms ; 
“mum namely, sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch ; 
and these have their organs partly peculiar to each 
of them severally, and partly common to them all. 
The organ of sight 1s partly animate, and partly 
inanimate. The inanimate parts are the three 
humours; namely, the watery humour, which by 
the interposition of the membrane called uvea, the 
perforation whereof is called the apple of the eye, 
is contained on one side by the first concave super- 
ficies of the eye, and on the other side by the 


OF SENSE AND ANIMAL MOTION. 403. 


cilary processes, and the coat of the crystalline Panty 
humour; the crystalline, which, hanging in the ee 
midst between the ciliary processes, and being 3) ee" 
almost of spherical figure, and of a thick con- 
sistence, is enclosed on all sides with its own trans- 
parent coat; and the vitreous or glassy humour, 
which filleth all the rest of the cavity of the eye, 
and is somewhat thicker then the watery humour, 
but thinner than the crystalline. The animate part 
of the organ is, first, the membrane choroeides, 
which is a part of the pia mater, saving that it is. 
covered with a coat derived from the marrow of 
the optic nerve, which is called the retina ; and 
this choroeides, seeing it is part of the pia mater, is. 
continued to the beginning of the medulla spinalis 
within the scull, in which all the nerves which are 
within the head have their roots. Wherefore all 
the animal spirits that the nerves receive, enter 
into them there; for it is not imaginable that they 
can enter into them anywhere else. Seeing there- 
fore sense is nothing else but the action of objects 
propagated to the furthest part of the organ; and 
seeing also that animal spirits are nothing but vital 
spirits purified by the heart, and carried from it by 
the arteries; it follows necessarily, that the action 
_is derived from the heart by some of the arteries 
to the roots of the nerves which are im the head, 
whether those arteries be the plexus retiformis, or 
whether they be other arteries which are inserted 
into the substance of the brain. And, therefore, 
those arteries are the complement or the remain- 
ing part of the whole organ of sight. And this 
last part is a common. organ to all the senses ; 
whereas, that which reacheth from the eye to the 
DD2 


PART IV. 
5. 
—_—_——— 
Of the senses, 
their kinds, &c 


404 PHYSICS. 


roots of the nerves is proper only to sight. The 
proper organ of hearing is the tympanum of the 
ear and its own nerve; from which to the heart 
the organ is common. So the proper organs of 
smell and taste are nervous membranes, in the 
palate and tongue for the taste, and in the nostrils 
for the smell; and from the roots of those nerves 
to the heart all is common. Lastly, the proper 
organ of touch are nerves and membranes dispersed 
through the whole body; which membranes are 
derived from the root of the nerves. And all 
things else belonging alike to all the senses seem 
to be administered by the arteries, and not by the 
nerves. 

The proper phantasm of sight is light; and 
under this name of light, colour also, which is 
nothing but perturbed light, is comprehended. 
Wherefore the phantasm of a lucid body is light ; 
and of a coloured body, colour. But the object of 
sight, properly so called, is neither light nor colour, 
but the body itself which is lucid, or enlightened, 
or coloured. For light and colour, being phan- 
tasms of the sentient, cannot be accidents of the 
object. Which is manifest enough from this, that 
visible things appear oftentimes in places in which 
we know assuredly they are not, and that in dif- 
ferent places they are of different colours, and 
may at one and the same time appear in divers 
places. Motion, rest, magnitude, and figure, are 
common both to the sight and touch; and the 
whole appearance together of figure, and light or 
colour, is by the Greeks commonly called «doc, and 
edwAor, and iéa; and by the Latins, species and 


OF SENSE AND ANIMAL MOTION. 405 


tmago ; all which names signify no more but ap- PART IV. 
pearance. ——_~ 
The phantasm, which is made by hearing, is poirkiiese 
sound; by smell, odour; by taste, savour; and by 
touch, hardness and softness, heat and cold, wet- 
ness, oiliness, and many more, which are easier to 
be distinguished by sense than words. Smooth- 
ness, roughness, rarity, and density, refer to figure, 
and are therefore common both to touch and sight. 
And as for the objects of hearing, smell, taste, and 
touch, they are not sound, odour, savour, hard- 
ness, &c., but the bodies themselves from which 
sound, odour, savour, hardness, &c. proceed; of 
the causes of which, and of the manner how they 
are produced, I shall speak hereafter. 
But these phantasms, though they be effects in 
the sentient, as subject, produced by objects work- 
ing upon the organs; yet there are also other’ 
effects besides these, produced by the same objects 
in the same organs; namely certain motions pro- 
ceeding from sense, which are called animal 
motions. For seeing in all sense of external things 
there is mutual action and reaction, that 1s, two 
endeavours opposing one another, it is manifest 
that the motion of both of them together will be 
continued every way, especially to the confines of 
both the bodies. And when this happens in the 
internal organ, the endeavour outwards will pro- 
ceed in a solid angle, which will be greater, and 
consequently the idea greater, than it would have 
been if the impression had been weaker. 
11. From hence the natural cause 1s manifest, Themagnitude - 
first, why those things seem to be greater, which, ane ela 
ceteris paribus, are seen in a greater angie : ‘determined. 


406 . PHYSICS. 


PART IV. secondly, why in a serene cold night, when the 
——~ moon doth not shine, more of the fixed stars ap- 
pear than at another time. For their action is less 
hindered by the serenity of the air, and not ob- 

scured by the greater light of the moon, which is 

then absent; and the cold, making the air more 
pressing, helpeth or strengtheneth the action of the 

stars upon our eyes; in so much as stars may then 

be seen which are seen at no other time. And this 

may suffice to be said in general concerning sense 

made by the reaction of the organ. For, as for 

the place of the image, the deceptions of sight, and 

other things of which we have experience in our- 

selves by sense, seeing they depend for the most 

_ part upon the fabric itself of the eye of man, I shall 

speak of them then when I come to speak of man. 

Pleasure, pain, 12, But there is another kind of sense, of which 
mse what 1 will say something in this place, namely, the 
they are- sense of pleasure and pain, proceeding not from 
the reaction of the heart outwards, but from con- 

tinual action from the outermost part of the organ 

towards the heart. For the original of life being 

in the heart, that motion in the sentient, which is 
‘propagated to the heart, must necessarily make 

some alteration or diversion of vital motion, namely, 

by quickening or slackening, helping or hindering 

the same. Now when it helpeth, it is pleasure; 

and when it hindereth, it is pain, trouble, grief, 

&c. And as phantasms seem to be without, by 

reason of the endeavour outwards, so pleasure and 

pain, by reason of the endeavour of the organ in- 

wards, seem to be within ; namely, there where the 

first cause of the pleasure or pain is ; as when the 


OF SENSE AND ANIMAL MOTION. 407 


pain proceeds from a wound, we think the pain ea 
and the wound are both in the same place. eee 
Now vital motion is the motion of the blood, tretite, fad” 

perpetually circulating (as hath been shown from sip what 
many infallible signs and marks by Doctor Harvey, 

the first observer of it) in the veins and arteries. 

Which motion, when it is hindered by some other 

motion made by the action of sensible objects, may 

be restored again either by bending or setting 

strait the parts of the body; which is done when 

the spirits are carried now into these, now into 

other nerves, till the pain, as far as is possible, be 

quite taken away. But if vital motion be helped 

by motion made by sense, then the parts of the 

organ will be disposed to guide the spirits in such 

manner as conduceth most to the preservation and 
augmentation of that motion, by the help of the 

nerves. And in animal motion this is the very 

first endeavour, and found even in the embryo; 

which while it is in the womb, moveth its limbs 

with voluntary motion, for the avoiding of what- 

soever troubleth it, or for the pursuing of what 
pleaseth it. And this first endeavour, when it 

tends towards such things as are known by expe- 

rience to be pleasant, is called appetite, that is, an 
approaching; and when it shuns what is trouble- 

some, aversion, or flying from it. And little in- 

fants, at the beginning and as soon as they are 

born, have appetite to very few things, as also they 

avoid very few, by reason of their want of experi- 

ence and memory ; and therefore they have not so 

great a variety of animal motion as we see in those 

that are more grown. For it 1s not possible, with- 


RART IV. 
25. 


ee ad 


Deliberation 
and will, what. 


408 PHYSICS. 


out such knowledge as is derived from sense, that 
is, without experience and memory, to know what 
will prove pleasant or hurtful; only there is some 
place for conjecture from the looks or aspects of 
things. And hence it is, that though they do not 
know what may do them good or harm, yet some- 
times they approach and sometimes retire from 
the same thing, as their doubt prompts them. But 
afterwards, by accustoming themselves by little 
and little, they come to know readily what is to be 
pursued and what to be avoided ; and also to have 
a ready use of their nerves and other organs, in 
the pursuing and avoiding of good and bad. 
Wherefore appetite and aversion are the first en- 
deavours of animal motion. 

Consequent to this first endeavour, is the impul- 
sion into the nerves and retraction again of animal 
spirits, of which it is necessary there be some recep- 
tacle or place near the original of the nerves; and 
this motion or endeavour is followed by a swelling 
and relaxation of the muscles; and lastly, these 
are followed by contraction and extension of the 
hmbs, which is animal motion. 

13. The considerations of appetites and aver- 
sions are divers. For seeing living creatures have 
sometimes appetite and sometimes aversion to the 
same thing, as they think it will either be for their 
good or their hurt; while that vicissitude of appe- 
tites and aversions remains in them, they have that 
series of thoughts which is called deliberation ; 
which lasteth as long as they have it in their power 
to obtain that which pleaseth, or to avoid that 
which displeaseth them. Appetite, therefore, and 
aversion are simply so called as long as they follow 


OF SENSE AND ANIMAL MOTION. 409 


not deliberation. But if deliberation have gone PART IV. 
before, then the last act of it, if it be appetite, is —-— 
called will; if aversion, unwillingness. So that Se tee 
the same thing is called both will and appetite ; 

but the consideration of them, namely, before and 

after deliberation, is divers. Nor is that which is 

done within a man whilst he willeth any thing, 
different from that which is done in other living 
creatures, whilst, deliberation having preceded, 

they have appetite. 

- Neither is the freedom of willing or not willing, 

greater in man, than in other living creatures. For 

where there is appetite, the entire cause of appetite 

hath preceded; and, consequently, the act of 
appetite could not choose but follow, that is, hath 

of necessity followed (as is shown in chapter Ix, 

article 5). And therefore such a liberty as is free 

from necessity, is not to be found in the will either 

of men or beasts. But if by liberty we understand 

the faculty or power, not of willing, but of doing 

what they will, then certainly that liberty is to be 

allowed to both, and both may equally have it, 
whensoever it is to be had. 

Again, when appetite and aversion do with cele- 
rity succeed one another, the whole series made by 
them hath its name sometimes from one, some- 
times from the other. For the same deliberation, 
whilst it inclines sometimes to one, sometimes to 
the other, is from appetite called hope, and from 
aversion, fear. For where there is no hope, it is 
not to be called fear, but hate ; and where no fear, 
not hope, but desire. To conclude, all the passions, 
called passions of the mind, consist of appetite and 
aversion, except pure pleasure and pain, which are 


410 PHYSICS. 


PARTIV. a certain fruition of good or evil ; as anger is aver- 
oe sion from some imminent evil, but such as is joined 
dnd will, what, With appetite of avoiding that evil by force. But 

because the passions and perturbations of the mind 
are innumerable, and many of them not to be 
discerned, in any creatures besides men; I will 
speak of them more at large in that section which 
is concerning man. As for those objects, if there 
be any such, which do not at all stir the mind, we 
are said to contemn them. 

And thus much of sense in general. In the next 


place I shall speak of sensible objects. 


CHAPTER XXVI. 


OF THE WORLD AND OF THE STARS. 


1. The magnitude and duration of the world, inscrutable.—2. No 
place in the world empty.—3. The arguments of Lucretius for 

~ vacuum, invalid—4. Other arguments for the establishing of 
vacuum, invalid—5. Six suppositions for the salving of the 
phenomena of nature.—6. Possible causes of the motions 
annual and diurnal; and of the apparent direction, station, and 
retrogradation of the planets—7. The supposition of simple 

- motion, why likely. —8. The cause of the eccentricity of the 
annual motion of the earth.—9. The cause why the moon hath 
always one and the same face turned towards the earth. 
10. The cause of the tides of the ocean.—11. The cause of the 
precession of the equinoxes. 


The magnitude 1, CONSEQUENT to the contemplation of sense is 
es mabe hs the contemplation of bodies, which are the efficient 
scrutable. § causes or objects of sense. Now every object is 
either a part of the whole world, or an aggregate 
of parts. The greatest of all bodies, or sensible 


objects, is the world itself; which we behold when 


THE WORLD AND THE STARS. 411 


we look round about us from this point of the same PART IV. 
which we call the earth. Concerning the world, -—-—— 
as it is one aggregate of many parts, the things ane ene 
that fall under inquiry are but few; and those we the world, in- 
can determine, none. Of the whole world we may 

inquire what is its magnitude, what its duration, 

and how many there be, but nothing else. For as 

for place and time, that is to say, magnitude and 
duration, they are only our own fancy of a body 

simply so called, that is to say, of a body indefi- 

nitely taken, as I have shown before in chapter vit. 

All other phantasms are of bodies or objects, as 

they are distinguished from one another ; as colour, 

the phantasm of coloured bodies ; sound, of bodies 

that move the sense of hearing, &c. The questions 
concerning the magnitude of the world are whether 

it be finite or infinite, full or not full; concerning 

its duration, whether it had a beginning, or be 
eternal; and concerning the number, whether there 

be one or many; though as concerning the num- 

ber, if it were of infinite magnitude, there could 

be no controversy at all. Also if it had a begin- 

ning, then by what cause and of what matter it was 

made ; and again, from whence that cause and 

that matter had their being, will be new questions ; 

till at last we come to one or many eternal cause 

or causes. And the determination of all these 

things belongeth to him that professeth the uni- 

versal doctrine of philosophy, in case as much 

could be known as can be sought. But the know- 

ledge of what is infinite can never be attained bya 

finite inquirer. Whatsoever we know that are men, 

we learn it from our phantasms; and of infinite, 
whether magnitude or time, there is no phantasm 


4}|2 PHYSICS. 


PART Iv. at all; so that it is impossible either for a man or 
— any other creature to have any conception of infi- 
The mastitede nite. And though a man may from some effect 
poe a proceed to the immediate cause thereof, and from 
that to a more remote cause, and so ascend conti- 

nually by right ratiocination from cause to cause ; 

yet he will not be able to proceed eternally, but 
wearied will at last give over, without knowing 
whether it were possible for him to proceed to an 

end or not. But whether we suppose the world to 

be finite or infinite, no absurdity will follow. For 

the same things which now appear, might appear, 
whether the Creator had pleased it should be finite 

or infinite. Besides, though from this, that nothing 

can move itself, it may rightly be inferred that 

there was some first eternal movent; yet it can 

never be inferred, though some used to make such 
inference, that that movent was eternally immove- 

able, but rather eternally moved. For as it is true, 

that nothing is moved by itself; so it is true also 

that nothing is moved but by that which is already 

moved. The questions therefore about the mag- 

nitude and beginning of the world, are rot to be 
determined by philosophers, but by those that are 
lawfully authorized to order the worship of God. 

For as Almighty God, when he had brought his 

people into Judea, allowed the priests the first 

fruits reserved to himself; so when he had delivered 

up the world to the disputations of men, it was his 
pleasure that all opinions concerning the nature of 

infinite and eternal, known only to himself, should, 

as the first fruits of wisdom, be judged by those 

whose ministry he meant to use in the ordering of 
religion. I cannot therefore commend those that 


THE WORLD AND THE STARS. 413 


boast they have demonstrated, by reasons drawn PART Iv. 
from natural things, that the world had a beginning. —-~—— 
They are contemned by idiots, because they under- The magnitude 
stand them not; and by the learned, because they the world, in- 
understand them; by both deservedly. For who 

can commend him that demonstrates thus? “If the 

world be eternal, then an infinite number of days, 

or other measures of time, preceded the birth of 
Abraham. But the birth of Abraham preceded 

the birth of Isaac; and therefore one infinite is 

greater than another infinite, or one eternal than 

another eternal ; which,” he says, “is absurd.” This 
demonstration is like his, who from this, that the 

number of even numbers is infinite, would con- 

clude that there are as many even numbers as there 

are numbers simply, that is to say, the even num- 

bers are aS many as all the even and odd together. 

They, which in this manner take away eternity 

from the world, do they not by the same means 

take away eternity from the Creator of the world? 

From this absurdity therefore they run into another, 

being forced to call eternity zunc stans, a standing 

still of the present time, or an abiding now; and, 

which is much more absurd, to give to the infinite 

number of numbers the name of unity. But why 

should eternity be called an abiding now, rather 

than an abiding then? Wherefore there must 

either be many eternities, or now and then must 

signify the same. With such demonstrators as 

these, that speak in another language, it is im- 
possible to enter into disputation. And the men, 

that reason thus absurdly, are not idiots, but, 

which makes the absurdity unpardonable, geome- 
tricians, and such as take upon them to be judges, 


PART IV, 
26. 


——— yet 


No place in the 
world empty. 


414 PHYSICS. 


impertinent, but severe judges of other men’s 
demonstrations. The reason is this, that as soon 
as they are entangled in the words enjinite and 
eternal, of which we have in our mind no idea, but 
that of our own insufficiency to comprehend them, 
they are forced either to speak something absurd, 
or, which they love worse, to hold their peace. For 
geometry hath in it somewhat like wine, which, 
when new, is windy; but afterwards though less 
pleasant, yet more wholesome. Whatsoever there- 
fore is true, young geometricians think demonstra- 
ble; but elder not. Wherefore I purposely pass 
over the questions of infinite and eternal ; content- 
ing myself with that doctrine concerning the 
beginning and magnitude of the world, which I 
have been persuaded to by the holy Scriptures and 
fame of the miracles which confirm them; and by 
the custom of my country, and reverence due to 
the laws. And so I pass on to such things as it is 
not unlawful to dispute of. 

2. Concerning the world it is further questioned, 
whether the parts thereof be contiguous to one 
another, in such manner as not to admit of the least 
empty space between ; and the disputation both for 
and against it is carried on with probability enough. 
For the taking away of vacuum, I will instance in 
only one experiment, a common one, but I think 
unanswerable. 

Let AB (in fig. 1) represent a vessel, such as 
gardeners use to water their gardens withal ; whose 
bottom B is full of little holes ; and whose mouth 
A may be stopped with one’s finger, when there 
shall be need. If now this vessel be filled with 
water, the hole at the top A being stopped, the 


THE WORLD AND THE STARS. 415 


water will not flow out at any of the holes in the PART Tv. 
bottom B. But if the finger be removed to let in ——— 
the air above, it will run out at them all; and as Sh sete 
soon as the finger is applied to it again, the water 

will suddenly and totally be stayed again from 

running out. The cause whereof seems to be no 

other but this, that the water cannot by its natural 
endeavour to descend drive down the air below it, 

because there is no place for it to go into, unless 

either by thrusting away the next contiguous air, 

it proceed by continual endeavour to the hole A, 

where it may enter and succeed into the place of 

the water that floweth out, or else, by resisting the 
endeavour of the water downwards, penetrate the 

same and pass up throughit. By the first of these 

ways, while the hole at A remains stopped, there 

is no possible passage ; nor by the second, unless 

the holes be so great that the water, flowing out 

at them, can by its own weight force the air at the 

same time to ascend into the vessel by the same 

holes : as we see it does in a vessel whose mouth 

is wide enough, when we turn suddenly the bottom 
upwards to pour out the water; for then the air 

being forced by the weight of the water, enters, as 

is evident by the sobbing and resistance of the 

water, at the sides or circumference of the orifice. - 

And this I take for a sign that all space is full; 

for without this, the natural motion of the water, 

which is a heavy body, downwards, would not be 
hindered. 

3. On the contrary, for the establishing of va- Theargaments 
cuum, many and specious arguments and experi- for vacum | 
ments have been brought. Nevertheless there 
seems to be something wanting in all of them to 


PART IV. 
26. 


ey 


The arguments 
of Lucretius 
for vacuum 
invalid. 


416 PHYSICS. 


conclude it firmly. These arguments for vacuum 
are partly made by the followers of the doctrine 
of Epicurus ; who taught that the world consists 
of very small spaces not filled by any body, and of 
very small bodies that have within them no empty 
space, which by reason of their hardness he calls 
atoms ; and that these small bodies and spaces are 
every where intermingled. Their arguments are 
thus delivered by Lucretius. 

And first he says, that unless it were so, there 
could be no motion. For the office and property 
of bodies is to withstand and hinder motion. If, 
therefore, the universe were filled with body, 
motion would everywhere be hindered, so as to 
have no beginning anywhere ; and consequently 
there would be no motion at all. It is true that in 
whatsoever is full and at rest in all its parts, it is 
not possible motion should have beginning. But 
nothing js drawn from hence for the proving of 
vacuum. For though it should be granted that 
there is vacuum, yet if the bodies which are inter- 
mingled with it, should all at once and together 
be at rest, they would never be moved again. 
For it has been demonstrated above, in chap. 1x, 
art. 7, that nothing can be moved but by that 
which is contiguous and already moved, But 
supposing that all things are at rest together, there 
can be nothing contiguous and moved, and there- 
fore no beginning of motion. Now the denying 
of the beginning of motion, doth not take away 
present motion, unless beginning be taken away 
from body also. For motion may be either co- 
eternal, or concreated with body. Nor doth it 
seem more necessary that bodies were first at rest, 


THE WORLD AND THE STARS. 417 


and afterwards moved, than that they were first PART IV. 
moved, and rested, if ever they rested at all, after- ——— 
wards. Neither doth there appear any cause, why (re orsuments 
the matter of the world should, for the admission sea 
of motion, be intermingled with empty spaces 

rather than full ; I say full, but withal fluid. Nor, 

lastly, is there any reason why those hard atoms 

may not also, by the motion of intermingled fluid 

matter, be congregated and brought together into 
compounded bodies of such bigness as we see. 
Wherefore nothing can by this argument be con- 

cluded, but that motion was either coeternal, or of 

the same duration with that which is moved; 

neither of which conclusions consisteth with the 
doctrine of Epicurus, who allows neither to the 

world nor to motion any beginning at all. The 
necessity, therefore, of vacuum is not hitherto de- 
monstrated. And the cause, as far as I understand 

from them that have discoursed with me of vacuum, 

is this, that whilst they contemplate the nature of 

. fluid, they conceive it to consist, as it were, of 

small grains of hard matter, in such manner as 

meal is fluid, made so by grinding of the corn; 

when nevertheless it 1s possible to conceive fluid 

to be of its own nature as homogeneous as either 

an atom, or as vacuum itself. 

The second of their arguments is taken from 
weight, and is contained in these verses of Lu- 
cretius : 

Corporis officium est quoniam premere omnia deorsum ; 
Contra autem natura manet sine pondere inanis; 
Ergo, quod magnum est eque, leviusque videtur, 
Nimirum plus esse sibi declarat inanis.—I. 363-66. 
‘That is to say, seeing the office and property of 
VOL. I. EE 


418 PHYSICS. 


PART IV. body is to press all things downwards ; and on 


wee 


The arguments 


of Lucretius 
for vacuum 
invalid. 


the contrary, seeing the nature of vacuum ts to 
have no weight at all; therefore when of two 
bodies of equal magnitude, one is lighter than the 
other, it 1s manifest that the lighter body hath in 
wt more vacuum than the other. 

To say nothing of the assumption concerning 
the endeavour of bodies downwards, which is not 
rightly assumed, because the world hath nothing 
to do with downwards, which is a mere fiction of 
ours ; nor of this, that if all things tended to the 
same lowest part of the world, either there would 
be no coalescence at all of bodies, or they would 
all be gathered together into the same place: this 
only is sufficient to take away the force of the 
argument, that air, intermingled with those his 
atoms, had served as well for his purpose as his 
intermingled vacuum. 

The third argument is drawn from this, that 
lightning, sound, heat and cold, do penetrate all 
bodies, except atoms, how solid soever they be. 
But this.reason, except it be first demonstrated 
that the same things cannot happen without va- 
cuum by perpetual generation of motion, 1s alto- 
gether invalid. But that all the same things may 
so happen, shall in due place be demonstrated. 

Lastly, the fourth argument is set down by the 
same Lucretius in these verses: 

Duo de concursu corpora lata 
Si cita dissiliant, nempe aer omne necesse est, 
Inter corpora quod fuerat, possidat inane. 
Is porro quamvis circum celerantibus auris 
Confluat, haud poterit tamen uno tempore totum 


Compleri spatium ; nam primum quemque necesse est 
Occupet ille locum, deinde omnia possideantur.—I. 385-91. 


THE WORLD AND THE STARS. 419 . 


That is, 7f two flat bodies be suddenly pulled PAu 
asunder, of necessity the air must come between ae 
them to fill up the space they left empty. But eens 
with what celerity soever the air flow in, yet tt for vacuum 
cannot in one instant of time fill the whole space, 
but first one part of it, then successively all. 
Which nevertheless is more repugnant to the opi- 
nion of Epicurus, than of those that deny vacuum. 
For though it be true, that if two bodies were of 
infinite hardness, and were joined together by their 
superficies which were most exactly plane, it would 
be impossible to pull them asunder, in regard it 
could not be done but by motion in an instant ; 
yet, if as the greatest of all magnitudes cannot be 
given, nor the swiftest of all motions, so neither 
the hardest of all bodies ; it might be, that by the 
application of very great force, there might be 
place made for a successive flowing in of the air, 
namely, by separating the parts of the joined 
bodies by succession, beginning at the outermost 
and ending at the innermost part. He ought, 
therefore, first to have proved, that there-are some 
bodies extremely hard, not relatively as compared 
with softer bodies, but absolutely, that is to say, 
infinitely hard ; which is not true. But if we sup- 
pose, as Epicurus doth, that atoms are indivisible, 
and yet have small superficies of their own; then 
if two bodies should be joined together by many, 
or but one only small superficies of either of them, 
then I say this argument of Lucretius would be a 
firm demonstration, that no two bodies made up 
of atoms, as he supposes, could ever possibly be 
pulled asunder by any force whatsoever. But this 
is repugnant to daily experience. | 
EE 2 


PART IV. 

eee carey 
Other argu- 
ments for the 


establishing of 
vacuum, invalid 


420 | PHYSICS. 


4. And thus much ofthe arguments of Lucretius. 
Let us now consider the arguments which are 
drawn from the experiments of later writers. 

1. The first experiment is this: that if a hollow 
vessel be thrust into water with the bottom up- 
wards, the water will ascend into it; which they 
say it could not do, unless the air within were thrust 
together into a narrower place ; and that this were 
also impossible, except there were little empty 
places in the air. Also, that when the air is com- 
pressed to a certain degree, it can receive no further 
compression, its small particles not suffering them- 
selves to be pent into less room. This reason, if 
the air could not pass through the water as it 
ascends within the vessel, might seem valid. But 
it is sufficiently known, that air will penetrate 
water by the application of a force equal to the 
gravity of the water. If therefore the force, by 
which the vessel is thrust down, be greater or 
equal to the endeavour by which the water natu- 
rally tendeth downwards, the air will go out that 
way where the resistance is made, namely, towards 
the edges of the vessel. For, by how much the 
deeper is the water which is to be penetrated, so 
much greater must be the depressing force. But 
after the vessel is quite under water, the force by 
which it is depressed, that is to say, the force by 
which the water riseth up, is no longer increased. 
There is therefore such an equilibration between 
them, as that the natural endeavour of the water 
downwards is equal to the endeavour by which 
the same water is to be penetrated to the increased 
depth. 7 
11. The second experiment is, that if a concave 


THE WORLD AND THE STARS. 42) © 


cylinder of sufficient length, made of glass, that PART IV. 
the experiment may be the better seen, having —— 
one end open and the other close shut, be filled ee ee. 
with quicksilver, and the open end being stopped eae 
with one’s finger, be together with the finger 

dipped into a dish or other vessel, in which 

also there is quicksilver, and the cylinder be set 
upright, we shall, the finger being taken away to 

make way for the descent of the quicksilver, see it 
descend into the vessel under it, till there be only 

so much remaining within the cylinder as may fill 

about twenty-six inches of the same; and thus it 

will always happen whatsoever be the cylinder, 
provided that the length be not less than twenty- 

six inches. From whence they conclude that the - 

cavity of the cylinder above the quicksilver remains 

empty of all body. But in this experiment I find 

no necessity at all of vacuum. For when the 
quicksilver which is in the cylinder descends, the 

vessel under it must needs be filled to a greater 

height, and consequently so much of the conti- 

guous air must be thrust away as may make place 

for the quicksilver which is descended. Now if it 

be asked whither that air goes, what can be an- 

swered but this, that it thrusteth away the next 

air, and that the next, and so successively, till 

there be a return to the place where the propulsion 

first began. And there, the last air thus thrust 

on will press the quicksilver in the vessel with the 

same force with which the first air was thrust away; 

and if the force with which the quicksilver descends 

be great enough, which is greater or less as it 
descends from a place of greater or less height, it 

will make the air penetrate the quicksilver in the 


PART IV. 
26. 


Ney! 
Other argu- 


ments for esta- 
blishing of va- 


cuum invalid. 


422 PHYSICS. 


vessel, and go up into the cylinder to fill the place 
which they thought was left empty. But because 
the quicksilver hath not in every degree of height 
force enough to cause such penetration, therefore 
in descending it must. of necessity stay somewhere, 
namely, there, where its endeavour downwards, 
and the resistance of the same to the penetration 
of the air, come to an equilibrium. And by this ex- 
periment it is manifest, that this equilibrium will be 
at the height of twenty-six inches, or thereabouts. 

111. The third experiment is, that when a vessel 
hath as much air in it as it can naturally contain, 
there may nevertheless be forced into it as much 
water as will fill three quarters of the same vessel. 
And the experiment is made in this manner. Into 
the glass bottle, represented (in figure 2) by the 
sphere FG, whose centre is A, let the pipe BAC 
be so fitted, that it may precisely fill the mouth of 
the bottle ; and let the end B be so near the bot- 
tom, that there may be only space enough left for 
the free passage of the water which is thrust in 
above. Let the upper end of this pipe have a 
cover at D, with a spout at E, by which the water, 
when it ascends in the pipe, may run out. Also let 
HC bea cock, for the opening or shutting of the 
passage of the water between B and D, as there 
shall be occasion. Let the cover DE be taken off, 
and the cock HC being opened, let a syringe full 
of water be forced in; and before the syringe be 
taken away, let the cock be turned to hinder the 
going out of the air. And in this manner let the 
injection of water be repeated as often as it shall 
be requisite, till the water rise within the bottle ; 
for example, to GF. Lastly, the cover being 


THE WORLD AND THE STARS. 423 


fastened on again, and the cock HC opened, the PART Iv. 
water will run swiftly out at E, and sink by little —-— 
and little from GF to the bottom of the pipe B. Otter arew 
From this phenomenon, they argue for the neces- blishing of va- 
sity of vacuum in this manner. The bottle, from 
the beginning, was full of air; which air could 
neither go out by penetrating so great a length of 
water as was injected by the pipe, nor by any other 
way. Of necessity, therefore, all the water as high 
as FG, as also all the air that was in the bottle 
before the water was forced in, must now be in the 
same place, which at first was filled by the air 
alone; which were impossible, if all the space 
within the bottle were formerly filled with air pre- 
cisely, that is, without any vacuum. Besides, 
though some man perhaps may think the air, being 
a thin body, may pass through the body of the 
water contained in the pipe, yet from that other 
phenomenon, namely, that all the water which is 
in the space B FG is cast out again by the spout at 
E, for which it seems impossible that any other 
reason can be given besides the force by which the 
air frees itself from compression, it follows, that 
either there was in the bottle some space empty, 
or that many bodies may be together in the same 
place. But this last is absurd; and therefore the 
former is true, namely, that there was vacuum. 
This argument is infirm in two places. For first, 
that is assumed which is not to be granted; and 
in the second place, an experiment is brought, 
which I think is repugnant to vacuum. That 
which is assumed is, that the air can have no pas- 
sage out through the pipe. Nevertheless, we see 
daily that air easily ascends from the bottom to the 


424 PHYSICS. 


es ae superficies of a river, as is manifest by the bubbles 
“— that rise; nor doth it need any other cause to give 
Other argu: it this motion, than the natural endeavour down- 
blishing of ve wards of the water. Why, therefore, may not the 
endeavour upwards of the same water, acquired by 
the injection, which endeavour upwards is greater 
than the natural endeavour of the water down- 
wards, cause the air in the bottle to penetrate in 
like manner the water that presseth it downwards ; 
especially, seeing the water, as it riseth in the 
bottle, doth so press the air that is above it, as that 
it generateth in every part thereof an endeavour 
towards the external superficies of the pipe, and 
consequently maketh all the parts of the enclosed 
air to tend directly towards the passage at Br? I 
say, this is no less manifest, than that the air which 
riseth up from the bottom of a river should pene- 
trate the water, how deep soever it be. Wherefore 
I do not yet see any cause why the force, by which 
the water is injected, should not at the same time 
eject the air. 

And as for their arguing the necessity of vacuum 
from the rejection of the water; in the first place, 
supposing there is vacuum, I demand by what 
principle of motion that ejection is made. Certainly, 
seeing this motion is from within outwards, it must 
needs be caused by some agent within the bottle ; 
that is to say, by the air itself. Now the motion 
of that air, being caused by the rising of the water, 
begins at the bottom, and tends upwards ; whereas 
the motion by which it ejecteth the water ought to 
begin above, and tend downwards. From whence 
therefore hath the enclosed air this endeavour to- 
wards the bottom: To this question I know not 


THE WORLD AND THE STARS. 425. 


what answer can be given, unless it be said, that RARDIN: 
the air descends of its own accord to expel the —~— 
water. Which, because it is absurd, and that the Other seu. 
air, after the water is forced in, hath as much room Bens hm 
as its magnitude requires, there will remain no 

cause at all why the water should be forced out. 
Wherefore the assertion of vacuum is repugnant 

to the very experiment which is here brought to 

establish it. 

Many other phenomena are usually brought for 
vacuum, as those of weather-glasses, eolipyles, 
wind-guns, &c. which would all be very hard to be 
salved, unless water be penetrable by air, without 
the intermixture of empty space. But now, seeing 
air may with no great endeavour pass through not 
only water, but any other fluid body though never 
so stubborn, as quicksilver, these phenomena prove 
nothing. Nevertheless, it might in reason be 
expected, that he that would take away vacuum, 
should without vacuum show us such causes of 
these phenomena, as should be at least of equal, if 
not greater probability. This therefore shall be 
done in the following discourse, when I come. to 
speak of these phenomena in their proper places. 

But first, the most general hypotheses of natural 
philosophy are to be premised. 

And seeing that suppositions are put for the true 
causes of apparent effects, every supposition, except 
such as be absurd, must of necessity consist of 
some supposed possible motion ; for rest can never 
be the efficient cause of anything ; and motion sup- 
poseth bodies moveable ; of which there are three 
kinds, fluzd, consistent, and mixed of both. Fluid 
are those, whose parts may by very weak endeavour 


PART IV. 
26. 


am eet 


Six supposi- 

tions for the 
salving of the 
phenomena of 


' Mature. 


426 PHYSICS. 


be separated from one another; and consistent 
those for the separation of whose parts greater 
force 1s to be applied. There are therefore de- 
grees of consistency; which degrees, by com- 
parison with more or less consistent, have the 
names of hardness or softness. Wherefore a fluid 
body is always divisible into bodies equally fluid, 
as quantity into quantities; and soft bodies, of 
whatsoever degree of softness, into soft bodies of 
the same degree. And though many men seem to 
conceive no other difference of fluzdity, but such 
as ariseth from the different magnitudes of the 
parts, in which sense dust, though of diamonds, 
may be called fluid; yet I understand by fluidity, 
that which is made such by nature equally in every 
part of the fluid body; not as dust is fluid, for so 
a house which is falling in pieces may be called 
fluid; but in such manner as water seems fluid, 
and to divide itself into parts perpetually fluid. 
And this being well understood, I come to my 
suppositions. 

5. First, therefore, | suppose that the immense 
space, which we call the world, is the aggregate of 
all bodies which are either consistent and visible, 
as the earth and the stars; or imvisible, as the 
small atoms which are disseminated through the 
whole space between the earth and the stars; and 
lastly, that most fluid ether, which so fills all the 
rest of the universe, as that it leaves in it no empty 
place at all. . 

Secondly, I suppose with Copernicus, that the 
greater bodies of the world, which are both con- 
sistent and permanent, have such order amongst 
themselves, as that the sun hath the first place, 


THE WORLD AND THE STARS. 427 


Mercury the second, Venus the third, the Earth a ea 
with the moon going about it the fourth, Mars the w+¥~ 
fifth, Jupiter with his attendants the sixth, Saturn 
the seventh; and after these, the fixed stars have 
their several distances from the sun. 
Thirdly, I suppose that in the sun and the rest 
of the planets there is and always has been a 
simple circular motion. 
Fourthly, I suppose that in the body of the air 
there are certain other bodies intermingled, which 
are not fluid; but withal that they are so small, 
that they are not perceptible by sense; and that 
these also have their proper simple motion, and 
are some of them more, some less hard or con- 
sistent. 
Fifthly, I suppose with Kepler that as the dis- 
tance between the sun and the earth is to the 
distance between the moon and the earth, so the 
distance between the moon and the earth is to the 
semidiameter of the earth. 
As for the magnitude of the circles, and the 
times in which they are described by the bodies 
which are in them, I will suppose them to be such 
as shall seem most agreeable to the phenomena in 
question. 
6. The causes of the different seasons of the Possible causes 
° 4s of the motions 
year, and of the several variations of days and annual and di- 
nights ‘in all the parts of the superficies of the U9: and of 


the apparent 
earth, have been demonstrated, first by Coper- direction, sta. 


nicus, and since by Kepler, Galileus, and others, Paautanotiti 
from the supposition of the earth’s diurnal revolu-?"“"™ 

tion about its own axis, together with its annual 

motion about the sun in the ecliptic according to 


the order of the signs; and thirdly, by the annual 


428 PHYSICS. 


a a revolution of the same earth about its own centre, 
—-~—_ contrary to the order of the signs. I suppose with 
Zh ie ied Copernicus, that the diurnal revolution is from the 
Ter motion of the earth, by which the equinoctial 
circle is described about it. And as for the other 
two annual motions, they are the efficient cause of 
the earth’s being carried about in the ecliptic in 
such manner, as that its axis is always kept parallel 
to itself. Which parallelism was for this reason 
introduced, lest by the earth’s annual revolution 
its poles should seem to be necessarily carried 
about the sun, contrary to experience. I have, in 
art. 10, chap. xx1, demonstrated, from the suppo- 
sition of simple circular motion in the sun, that the 
earth is so carried about the sun, as that its axis is 
thereby kept always parallel to itself. Wherefore, 
from these two supposed motions in the sun, the 
one simple circular motion, the other circular 
motion about its own centre, it may be demon- 
strated that the year hath both the same variations 
of days and nights, as have been demonstrated by 
Copernicus. 
~ For if the circle adc d (in fig. 3) be the ecliptic, 
whose centre is e, and diameter aec; and the 
earth be placed in a, and the sun be moved in the 
little circle fg 1, namely, according to the order 
J; g, h, and tz, it hath been demonstrated, that a 
body placed in a will be moved in the same order 
through the points of the ecliptic a, 6, c, and d, 
and will always keep its axis parallel to itself. 

But if, as I have supposed, the earth also be 
moved with simple circular motion in a plane that 
passeth through a, cutting the plane of the ecliptic 
so as that the common section of both the planes 


THE WORLD AND THE STARS. — 429 


be in ac, thus also the axis of the earth will be ee IV. 
kept always parallel to itself. For let the centre ——— 
of the earth be moved about in the circumference 
of the epicycle, whose diameter is /a k, which is a 
part of the strait line Jac; therefore /ak, the 
diameter of the epicycle, passing through the 
centre of the earth, will be in the plane of the 
ecliptic. Wherefore seeing that by reason of the 
earth’s simple motion both in the ecliptic and in 
its epicycle, the strait line /ak is kept always © 
parallel to itself, every other strait line also taken 
in the body of the earth, and consequently its axis, 
will in like manner be kept always parallel to 
itself; so that in what part soever of the ecliptic 
the centre of the epicycle be found, and in what 
part soever of the epicycle the centre of the earth 
be found at the same time, the axis of the earth 
will be parallel to the place where the same axis 
would have been, if the centre of the earth had 
never gone out of the ecliptic. 

Now as I have demonstrated the simple canal 
motion of the earth from the supposition of simple | 
motion in the sun; so from the supposition of 
simple motion in the earth may be demonstrated 
the monthly simple motion of the moon. For if 
the names be but changed, the demonstration will 
be the same, and therefore need not be repeated. 

7. That which makes this supposition of the The supposi- 

tion of simple 

sun's simple motion in the epicycle fg hz pro- motion, why 
bable, is first, that the periods of all the planets “"™ 
are not only described about the sun, but so de- 
scribed, as that they are all contained within the 
zodiac, that is to say, within the latitude of about 
sixteen degrees; for the cause of this seems to 


430 PHYSICS. 


PART IV. depend upon some power in the sun, especially in 
—~ that part of the sun which respects the zodiac. 
ies poate Secondly, that in the whole compass of the heavens 
motion, why there appears no other body from which the cause 
y- 

of this phenomenon can in probability be derived. 
Besides, I could not imagine that so many and such 

various motions of the planets should have no 
dependance at all upon one another. But, by sup- 

posing motive power in the sun, we suppose mo- 

tion also ; for power to move without motion is no 

power at all. I have therefore supposed that there 

is in the sun for the governing of the primary 
planets, and in the earth for the governing of the 

moon, such motion, as being received by the pri- 

mary planets and by the moon, makes them neces- 

sarily appear to us in such manner as we see them. 
Whereas, that circular motion, which is commonly 
attributed to them, about a fixed axis, which is 

called conversion, being a motion of their parts 

only, and not of their whole bodies, is insufficient 

to salve their appearances. For seeing whatsoever 

is so moved, hath no endeavour at all towards those 

parts which are without the circle, they have no 

power to propagate any endeavour to such bodies 

as are placed. without it. And as for them that 
suppose this may be done by magnetical virtue, or 

by incorporeal and immaterial species, they sup- 

pose no natural cause ; nay, no cause at all. For 

there is no such thing as an incorporeal movent, 

and magnetical virtue is a thing altogether un- 

known ; and whensoever it shall be known, it will 

be found to be a motion of body. It remains, 
therefore, that if the primary planets be carried 

about by the sun, and the moon by the earth, they 


THE WORLD AND THE STARS. 431 


have the simple circular motions of the sun and PART IV. 
the earth for the causes of their circulations. ——— 
Otherwise, if they be not carried about by the sun rand of simple 
and the earth, but that every planet hath been ely” why 
moved, as it is now moved, ever since it was 
made, there will be of their motions no cause 
natural. For either these motions were concreated 
with their bodies, and their cause is supernatural ; 
or they are coeternal with them, and so they have 
no cause at all. For whatsoever is eternal was 
never generated. 
I may add besides, to confirm tbe probability of 
this simple motion, that as almost all learned men 
are now of the same opinion with Copernicus con- 
cerning the parallelism of the axis of the earth, it 
seemed to me to be more agreeable to truth, or at 
least more handsome, that it should be caused by 
simple circular motion alone, than by two motions, 
one in the ecliptic, and the other about the earth's 
own axis the contrary way, neither of them simple, 
nor either of them such as might be produced by 
any motion of the sun. I thought best therefore 
to retain this hypothesis of simple motion, and 
from it to derive the causes of as many of the 
phenomena as I could, and to let such alone as I 
could not deduce from thence. 
It will perhaps be objected, that although by 
this supposition the reason may be given of the 
parallelism of the axis of the earth, and of many 
other appearances, nevertheless, seeing it is done 
by placing the body of the sun in the centre of that 
orb which the earth describes with its annual mo- 
tion, the supposition itself 1s false; because this 
annual orb is eccentric to the sun. In the first 


432. PHYSICS. 


ran WY place, therefore, let us examine what that eccen- 
——— tricity is, and whence it proceeds. 

oe 8. Let the annual circle of the earth abcd (in 
of the annual fig. 3) be divided into four equal parts by the strait 
motion of the dines ac and bd, cutting one another in the centre 
e; and let a be the beginning of Libra, 5 of Ca- 

pricorn, c of Aries and d of Cancer; and let the 

whole orb a bcd be understood, according to Co- 
pernicus, to have every way so great distance from 

the zodiac of the fixed stars, that it be in compa- 

rison with it but as a point. Let the earth be now 
supposed to be in the beginning of Libra at a. 

The sun, therefore, will appear in the beginning 

of Aries atc. Wherefore, if the earth be moved 

from a to 6, the apparent motion of the sun will be 

from c to the beginning of Cancer in d ; and the 

earth being moved forwards from 6 to c, the sun 

also will appear to be moved forwards to the be- 

ginning of Libra in a; wherefore cda will be the 

summer arch, and the winter arch will be adc. 

Now, in the time of the sun’s apparent motion in 

the summer arch, there are numbered 186? days ; 

and, consequently, the earth makes in the same 

time the same number of diurnal conversions in 

the arch a bc; and, therefore, the earth in its mo- 

tion through the arch cda will make only 1784 

diurnal conversions. Wherefore the arch abe 

ought to be greater than the arch c da by 8} days, 

that is to say, by almost so many degrees. Let 

the arch ar, as also cs, be each of them an arch 

of two degrees and ys. Wherefore the arch 

rbs will be greater than the semicircle abe 

by 44 degrees, and greater than the arch sdr 

by 8t degrees. The equinoxes, therefore, will be 


THE WORLD AND THE STARS. 433 


in the points r ands; and therefore also, when 
the earth is in 7, the sun will appear in s. Where- 
fore the true place of the sun will be in #¢, that is 
to say, without the centre of the earth’s annual 
motion by the quantity of the sine of the arch a7, 
or the sine of two degrees and 16 minutes. Now 
this sine, putting 100,000 for the radius, will be 
near 3580 parts thereof. And so much is the ec- 
centricity of the earth’s annual motion, provided 
that that motion be in a perfect circle; and s and 
r are the equinoctial parts. And the strait lines 
sr and c a, produced both ways till they reach the 
zodiac of the fixed stars, will fall still upon the same 
fixed stars ; because the whole orb a bcd is sup- 
posed to have no maguitude at all in respect of 
the great distance of the fixed stars. 

Supposing now the sun to be in e, it remains 
that I show the cause why the earth is nearer to 
the sun, when in its annual motion it is found to 
be in d, than when it isin 6. And I take the cause 
to be this. When the earth is in the beginning of 
Capricorn at 5, the sun appears in the beginning 
of Cancer at d; and then is the midst of summer. 
But in the midst of summer, the northern parts of 
the earth are towards the sun, which is almost all 
dry land, containing all Europe and much the 
greatest part of Asiaand America. But when the 
earth is in the beginning of Cancer at d, it is the 
midst of winter, and that part of the earth is towards 
the sun, which contains those great seas called the 
South Sea and the Indian Sea, which are of far 
greater extent than all the dry land in that hemi- 
sphere. Wherefore by the last article of chapter 
XXI, when the earth is in d, it will come nearer to 

VOL. I. | FF 


ar IV. 


ae 


The cause of 
the eccentricity 
of the annual 
motion of the 
earth. 


PART IV. 


434 | PHYSICS. 


its first movent, that is, to the sun which is in ¢; 


—~— that is to say, the earth is nearer to the sun in the 


The cause of 


the eccentricity 
&c. 


midst of winter when it is in d, than in the midst 
of summer when it is in } ; and, therefore, during 
the winter the sun is in its Perigeum, and in its 
Apogeum during the summer. And thus I have 
shown a possible cause of the eccentricity of the 
earth ; which was to be done. 

I am, therefore, of Kepler’s opinion in this, that 
he attributes the eccentricity of the earth to the 
difference of the parts thereof, and supposes one 
part to be affected, and another disaffected to the 
sun. And I dissent from him in this, that he thinks 
it to be by magnetio virtue, and that this magnetic 
virtue or attraction and thrusting back of the earth 
is wrought by immateriate species ; which cannot 
be, because nothing can give motion but a body 
moved and contiguous. For if those bodies be not 
moved which are contiguous to a body unmoved, 
how this body should begin to be moved is not 
imaginable; as has been demonstrated in art. 7, 
chap. 1x, and often inculcated in other places, to 
the end that philosophers might at last abstain from 
the use of such unconceivable connexions of words. 
I dissent also from him in this, that he says the 
similitude of bodies is the cause of their mutual 
attraction. For if it were so, I see no reason why 
one egg should not be attracted by another. If, 
therefore, one part of the earth be more affected 
by the sun than another part, it proceeds from 
this, that one part hath more water, the other more 
dry land. And from hence it is, as I showed above, 
that the earth comes nearer to the sun when it 
shines upon that part where there is more water, 


THE WORLD AND THE STARS. 435 


than when it shines upon that where there is more PART IV. 
dry land. ——— 
9. This eccentricity of the earth is the cause The cause wh 
why the way of its annual motion is not a perfect always one and 
circle, but either an elliptical, or almost an ellip- turnea penis 
tical line ; as also why the axis of the earth is not te c=". 
kept exactly parallel to itself in all places, but only 
in the equinoctial points. 
Now seeing I have said that the moon is carried 
about by the earth, in the same manner that the 
earth is by the sun ; and that the earth goeth about 
the sun in such manner as that it shows sometimes 
one hemisphere, sometimes the other to the sun ; 
it remains to be enquired, why the moon has 
always one and the same face turned towards the 
earth. . 
Suppose, therefore, the sun to be moved with 
simple motion in the little circle fg A 1, (in fig. 4) 
whose centre is ¢; and let yav be the annual 
circle of the earth; and a@ the beginning of Libra. 
About the point a let the little circle /k be de- 
scribed ; and in it let the centre of the earth be 
understood to be moved with simple motion; and 
both the sun and the earth to be moved according 
to the order of the signs. Upon the centre a let the 
way of the moon mn op be described; and let gr 
be the diameter of a circle cutting the globe of the 
moon into two hemispheres, whereof one is seen by 
us when the moon is at the full, and the other 1s 
turned from us. 
The diameter therefore of the moon g o7 will be 
perpendicular to the strait line #a@. Wherefore the 
moon is carried, by reason of the motion of the 
earth, from o towards p. But by reason of the 
FF 2 


436 _ PHYSICS. 


PART Iv. motion of the sun, if it were in p it would at the 
“———__ same time be carried from p towards o ; and by 


The cause why 
the moon hath 


&e. 


these two contrary movents the strait line gr will 
be turned about; and, in a quadrant of the circle 
mnop, it will be turned so much as makes the 
fourth part of its whole conversion. Wherefore 
when the moon is in p, gr will be parallel to the 
strait line mo. Secondly, when the moon is in m, 
the strait line g7 will, by reason of the motion 
of the earth, be in mo. But by the working of the 
sun's motion upon it in the quadrant p m, the same 
qr will be turned so much as makes another quarter 
of its whole conversion. When, therefore, the moon 
is in m, qr will be perpendicular to the strait line 
om. By the same reason, when the moon is in 2, 
qr will be parallel to the strait line mo; and, the 
moon returning to 0, the same qr will return to 
its first place; and the body of the moon will in 
one entire period make also one entire conversion 
upon her own axis. In the making of which, it is 
manifest, that one and the same face of the moon 
is always turned towards the earth. And if any 
diameter were taken in that little circle, in which 
the moon were supposed to be carried about with 
simple motion, the same effect would follow; 
for if there were no action from the sun, every 
diameter of the moon would be carried about 
always parallel to itself. Wherefore I have given 
a possible cause why one and the same face of the 
moon is always turned towards the earth. 

But it is to be noted, that when the moon is 
without the ecliptic, we do not always see the same 
face precisely. For wesee only that part which is 
illuminated. But when the moon is without the 


THE WORLD AND THE STARS. 437 


ecliptic, that part which is towards us is not exactly PART Iv. 
the same with that which is illuminated. — 
10. To these three simple motions, one of the 776°", 
sun, another of the moon, and the third of the °f the ocean. 
earth, in their own little circles fg hi, 7k, and 
qr, together with the diurnal conversion of the 
earth, by which conversion all things that adhere 
to its superficies are necessarily carried about with 
it, may be referred the three phenomena concern- 
ing the tides of the ocean. Whereof the first is 
the alternate elevation and depression of the water 
at the shores, twice in the space of twenty-four hours 
and near upon fifty-two minutes; for so it has 
constantly continued in allages. The second, that 
at the new and full moons, the elevations of the 
water are greater than at other times between. 
And the third, that when the sun is in the equi- 
noctial, they are yet greater than at any other 
time. For the salving of which phenomena, we 
have already the four above-mentioned motions ; 
to which I assume also this, that the part of the | 
earth which is called America, being higher than 
the water, and extended almost the space of a 
whole semicircle from north to south, gives a stop 
to the motion of the water. 
This being granted, in the same 4th figure, where 
lbkc is supposed to be in the plane of the moon's | 
monthly motion, let the little circle 7dke be de- 
scribed about the same centre a in the plane of the 
equinoctial. This circle therefore will decline from 
the circle /6#c in an angle of almost 283 degrees ; 
for the greatest declination of the ecliptic is 233, | 
to which adding 5 for the greatest declination of 
the moon from the ecliptic, the sum will be 283 


PART IV. 
26. 


Seay 
The cause 
of the tides 
of the ocean. 


438 PHYSICS. 


degrees. Seeing now the waters, which are 
under the circle of the moon’s course, are by 
reason of the earth’s simple motion in the plane of 
the same circle moved together with the earth, that 
is to say, together with their own bottoms, neither 
outgoing nor outgone; if we add the diurnal 
motion, by which the other waters which are under 
the equinoctial are moved in the same order, and 
consider withal that the circles of the moon and 
of the equinoctial intersect one another ; it will be 
manifest, that both those waters, which are under 
the circle of the moon, and under the equinoctial, 
will run together under the equinoctial ; and con- 
sequently, that their motion will not only be swifter 
than the ground that carries them; but also that 
the waters themselves will have greater elevation 
whensoever the earth is in the equinoctial. Where- 
fore, whatsoever the cause of the tides may be, 
this may be the cause of their augmentation at 
that time. 

Again, seeing I have supposed the moon to be 
carried about by the simple motion of the earth in 
the little circle 7b 4c; and demonstrated, at the 
4th article of chapter xx1, that whatsoever is 
moved by a movent that hath simple motion, will 
be moved always with the same velocity ; it follows, 
that the centre of the earth will be carried in the 
circumference /b%c with the same velocity with 
which the moon is carried in the circumference 
mnop. Wherefore the time, in which the moon 
is carried about in mn 09, is to the time, in which 
the earth is carried about in /b& c, as one circum- 
ference to the other, that 1s, as ao to ak. But 
ao is observed to be to the semidiameter of the 


THE WORLD AND THE STARS. 439 


earth as 59 to 1 ; and therefore the earth, if ak be | IV. 
put for its semidiameter, will make fifty-nine revo- ——~—— 
tions in Zb#c in the time that the moon makes 747s, 
one monthly circuit in mnzop. But the moon te cess 
makes her monthly circuit in little more than 
twenty-nine days. Wherefore the earth shall make 
its circuit in the circumference /bke in twelve 
hours and a little more, namely, about twenty-six 
minutes more; that is to say, it shall make two 
circuits in tw enty-four hours and almost fifty-two 
minutes ; which is observed to be the time between 
the high-water of one day and the high-water of 
the day following. Now the course of the waters 
being hindered by the southern part of America, 
their motion will be interrupted there; and con- 
sequently, they will be elevated in those places, 
and sink down again by their own weight, twice in 
the space of twenty-four hours and fifty-two mi- | 
nutes. And thus I have given a possible cause of 
the diurnal reciprocation of the ocean. 

Now from this swelling of the ocean in those 
parts of the earth, proceed the flowings and ebbings 
in the Atlantic, Spanish, British, and German seas; 
which though they have their set times, yet upon 
several shores they happen at several hours of the 
day. And they receive some augmentation from 
the north, by reason that the shores of China and 
Tartary, hindering the general course of the waters, 
make them swell there, and discharge themselves 
in part through the strait of Anian into the 
Northern Ocean, and so into the German Sea. 

As for the spring tides which happen at the 
time of the new and full moons, they are caused 
by that simple motion, which at the beginning I 


440 PHYSICS. 


PARTIV. supposed to be always in the moon. For as, when 
—— I showed the cause of the eccentricity of the earth, 
The cause I derived the elevation of the waters from the 
of the ocean. simple motion of the sun; so the same may here be 
derived from the simple motion of the moon. For 
though from the generation of clouds, there appear 
in the sun a more manifest power of elevating the 
waters than in the moon; yet the power of in- 
creasing moisture in vegetables and living creatures 
appears more manifestly in the moon than in the 
sun; which may perhaps proceed from this, that 
the sun raiseth up greater, and the moon lesser 
drops of water. Nevertheless, it is more likely, 
and more agreeable to common observation, that 
rain is raised not only by the sun, but also by the 
moon; for almost all men expect change of weather 
at the time of the conjunctions of the sun and 
moon with one another and with the earth, more 
than in the time of their quarters. 
In the last place, the cause why the spring tides 
are greater at the time of the equinoxes hath been 
already sufficiently declared in this article, where I 
have demonstrated, that the two motions of the 
earth, namely, its simple motion in the little circle 
Lbke, and its diurnal motion in /dke, cause 
necessarily a greater elevation of waters when the 
sun is about the equinoxes, than when he is in 
other places. I have therefore given possible causes 
of the phenomenon of the flowing and ebbing of 
the ocean. 
Cause of the 11. As for the explication of the yearly preces- 
precession of : ° ° ° 
the equinoxes, $202 Of the equinoctial points, we must remember 
that, as I have already shown, the annual motion 
of the earth is not in the circumference of a circle, 


THE WORLD AND THE STARS. 441 


but of an ellipsis, or a line not considerably dif- PART IV. 

ferent from that of an ellipsis. In the first place, ——-—— 

therefore, this elliptical line is to be described. balan oy 
Let the ecliptic « vp y @ (in fig. 5) be divided te equinoxes. 

into four equal parts by the two strait lines a 6 and 

ve @, cutting one another at right angles in the 

centre c. And taking the arch bd of two degrees 

and sixteen minutes, let the strait line de be 

drawn parallel to a 6, and cutting vs «= inf; which 

being done, the eccentricity of the earth will be 

cf. Seeing therefore the annual motion of the 

earth is in the circumference of an ellipsis, of 

which vp @ is the greater axis, ab cannot be the 

lesser axis; for a6 and vy 3 are equal. Where- 

fore the earth passing through a and 34, will either 

pass above yp, as through g, or passing through vs, 

will fall between c and a; it is no matter which. 

Let it pass therefore through g; and let g/ be 

taken equal to the strait line wo; and dividing 

gl equally inz, gz will be equal to wf, and z/ 

equal to fa ; and consequently the point z will 

cut the eccentricity cf into two equal parts; and 

taking 2h equal to zf, hz will be the whole 

eccentricity. If now a strait line, namely, the 

line 22, be drawn through : parallel to the 

strait lines ab and ed, the way of the sun in 

summer, namely, the arch = g y, will be greater 

than his way in winter, by 8) degrees. Where- 

fore the true equinoxes will be in the strait line 

=i; and therefore the ellipsis of the earth’s 

annual motion will not pass through a, g, b, and J; 

but through « g, v and /. Wherefore the annual 

motion of the earth is in the ellipsis  g y 2; and 

cannot be, the eccentricity being salved, in any 


442 PHYSICS. 


a other line. And this perhaps is the reason, why 
—— Kepler, against the opinion of all the astronomers 
vneiion of Of former time, thought fit to bisect the eccentri- 
the equinoxes. city of the earth, or, according to the ancients, of 
the sun, not by diminishing the quantity of the 

same eccentricity, (because the true measure of that 

quantity is the difference by which the summer 

arch exceeds the winter arch), but by taking for 

the centre of the ecliptic of the great orb the point 

c nearer to jf, and so placing the whole great orb 

as much nearer to the ecliptic of the fixed stars 
towards a, as is the distance between c and #. 

For seeing the whole great orb is but as a point in 

respect of the immense distance of the fixed stars, 

the two strait limes + y and ab, being produced 

both ways to the beginnings of Aries and Libra, 

will fall upon the same points of the sphere of the 

fixed stars. Let therefore the diameter of the 

earth mn be in the plane of the earth’s annual 

motion. If now the earth be moved by the sun’s 

simple motion in the circumference of the ecliptic 

about the centre 2, this diameter will be kept 

always parallel to itself and to the strait line g 7. 

But seeing the earth is moved in the circumference 

of an ellipsis without the ecliptic, the point 2, 

whilst it passeth through = v y, will go in a lesser 
circumference than the point m; and consequently, 

as soon as ever it begins to be moved, it will 

lose its parallelism with the strait line w=; so 

that man produced will at last cut the strait line 

gl produced. And contrarily, as soon as mn is 

past op, the earth making its way in the internal 
elliptical line v / 4, the same mn produced to- 

wards m, will cut /g produced. And when the 


THE WORLD AND THE STARS. 443 
PART IV. 
earth hath almost finished its whole circumfer- —7*_ 
ence, the same mn shall again make a right angle Cause of the 
with a line drawn from the centre 2, a little short the uineaea: 
of the point from which the earth began its motion. 
And there the next year shall be one of the equi- 
noctial points, namely, near the end of m; the 
other shall be opposite to it near the end of x. 
And thus the points in which the days and nights 
are made equal do every year fall back; but with 
so slow a motion, that, in a whole year, it makes but 
51 first minutes. And this relapse being contrary 
to the order of the signs, is commonly called the 
precession of the equinoxes. Of which I have 
from my former suppositions deduced a possible 
cause; which was to be done. 
According to what I have said concerning the 
cause of the eccentricity of the earth; and according 
to Kepler, who for the cause thereof supposeth one 
part of the earth to be affected to the sun, the other 
part to be disaffected ; the apogeeum and _ peri- 
geeum of the sun should be moved every year in 
the same order, and with the same velocity, with 
which the equinoctial points are moved ; and their 
distance from them should always be the quadrant 
of a circle; which seems to be otherwise. For 
astronomers say, that the equinoxes are now, the 
one about 28 degrees gone back from the first star 
of Aries, the other as much from the beginning of 
Libra; so that the apogeeum of the sun or the 
aphelium of the earth ought to be about the 28th 
degree of Cancer. But it is reckoned to be in the 
7th degree. Seeing, therefore, we have not suffi- 
cient evidence of the ori (that so it is,) it is in vain 
to seek for the dtort (why it is so.) Wherefore, as 


PART IY, 
26. 


way ae 
Cause of the 
precession of 
the equinoxes. 


444 PHYSICS. 


long as the motion of the apogzeum is not observ - 
able by reason of the slowness thereof, and as long 
as it remains doubtful whether their distance from 
the equinoctial points be more or less than a 
quadrant precisely; so long it may be lawful for 
me to think they proceed both of them with equal 
velocity. 

Also, I do not at all meddle with the causes 
of the eccentricities of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and 
Mercury. Nevertheless, seeing the eccentricity of 
the earth may, as I have shewn, be caused by the 
unlike constitution of the several parts of the earth 
which are alternately turned towards the sun, it 
is credible also, that like effects may be produced 
in these other planets from their having their su- 
perficies of unlike parts. 

And this is all I shall say concerning Sidereal 
Philosophy. And, though the causes I have here 
supposed be not the true causes of these phe- 
nomena, yet I have demonstrated that they are 
sufficient to produce them, according to what I at 
first propounded. 


LIGHT, HEAT, AND COLOURS. 445 


CHAPTER XXVII. 
OF LIGHT, HEAT, AND OF COLOURS. 


1. Of the immense magnitude of some bodies, and the unspeak- 
able littleness of others—2. Of the cause of the light of the 
sun.—3. How light heateth—4. The generation of fire from 
the sun.—5. The generation of fire from collision.—6. The 
cause of light in glow-worms, rotten wood, and the Bolognan 
stone. —6. The cause of light in the concussion of sea 
water.—8. The cause of flame, sparks, and colliquation.—9. 
The cause why wet hay sometimes burns of its own accord ; 
also the cause of lightning—10. The cause of the force of 
gunpowder ; and what is to be ascribed to the coals, what to 
the brimstone, and what to the nitre.—11. How heat is caused 
by attrition. —12. The distinction of light into first, second, 
&c.—13. The causes of the colours we see in looking through 
a prisma of glass, namely, of red, yellow, blue, and violet colour. 
14. Why the moon and the stars appear redder in the hori- 
zon than in the midst of the heaven.—15. The cause of 
whiteness.—16. The cause of blackness. 


1. BrsipDEs the stars, of which I have spoken in 
the last chapter, whatsoever other bodies there be 
in the world, they may be all comprehended under 


PART IV. 
27. 


—Se 
Of theimmense 
magnitude of 
some bodies, 
and the un- 
speakable little. 


the name of intersidereal bodies. And these I have "** °f other. 


already supposed to be either the most fluid ether, 
or such bodies whose parts have some degree of 
cohesion. Now, these differ from one another in 
their several consistencies, magnitudes, motions, 
and figures. Inconsistency, I suppose some bodies 
to be harder, others softer through all the several 
degrees of tenacity. In magnitude, some to be 
greater, others less, and many unspeakably little. 
For we must remember that, by the understanding, 


446 PHYSICS. 


eee quantity is divisible into divisibles perpetually. 
——— And, therefore, if a man could do as much with his 
rae hands as he can with his understanding, he would 
_ be able to take from any given magnitude a part 
which should be less than any other magnitude 
given. But the Omnipotent Creator of the world 
can actually from a part of any thing take another 
part, as far as we by our understanding can con- 
ceive the same to be divisible. Wherefore there is 
no impossible smallness of bodies. And what 
hinders but that we may think this likely? For we 
know there are some living creatures so small 
that we can scarce see their whole bodies. Yet 
even these have their young ones; their little veins 
and other vessels, and their eyes so small as that 
no microscope can make them visible. So that we 
cannot suppose any magnitude so little, but that 
our very supposition is actually exceeded by nature. 
Besides, there are now such microscopes com- 
monly made, that the things we see with them ap- 
pear a hundred thousand times bigger than they 
would do if we looked upon them with our bare 
eyes. Nor is there any doubt but that by aug- 
menting the power of these microscopes (for it 
may be augmented as long as neither matter nor 
the hands of workmen are wanting) every one of 
those hundred thousandth parts might yet appear 

a hundred thousand times greater than they did 
before. Neither is the smallness of some bodies 
to be more admired than the vast greatness of 
others. For it belongs to the same Infinite Power, 

as well to augment infinitely as infinitely to dimi- 
nish. To make the great orb, namely, that whose 
radius reacheth from the earth to the sun, but as a 


LIGHT, HEAT, AND COLOURS. 447 


point in respect of the distance between the sun PART Iv. 
and the fixed stars; and, on the contrary, to make —— 
° : ° Oftheimmense 

a body so little, as to be in the same proportion jagnitude, &e. 
less than any other visible body, proceeds equally 
from one and the same Author of Nature. But this 
of the immense distance of the fixed stars, which 
for a long time was accounted an incredible thing, 
is now believed by almost all the learned. Why 
then should not that other, of the smallness of some 
bodies, become credible at some time or other’ 
For the Majesty of God appears no less in small 
things than in great; and as it exceedeth human 
sense in the immense greatness of the universe, 
so also it doth in the smallness of the parts thereof. 
Nor are the first elements of compositions, nor the 
first beginnings of actions, nor the first moments 
of times more credible, than that which is now 
believed of the vast distance of the fixed stars. 

Some things are acknowledged by mortal men 
to be very great, though finite, as seeing them to 
be such. They acknowledge also that some things, 
which they do not see, may be of infinite magni- 
tude. But they are not presently nor without great 
study persuaded, that there is any mean between 
infinite and the greatest of those things which 
either they see or imagine. Nevertheless, when 
after meditation and contemplation many things 
which we wondered at before are now grown more 
familiar to us, we then believe them, and transfer 
our admiration from the creatures to the Creator. 
But how little soever some bodies may be, yet I 
will not suppose their quantity to be less than is 
requisite for the salving of the phenomena. And 
in like manner I shall suppose their motion, namely, 


PART IV. 
27. 


Sees pores? 


Of the cause 
of the light 
of the sun. 


How light 


- heateth. 


448 PHYSICS. 


their velocity and slowness, and the variety of their 
figures, to be only such as the explication of their 
natural causes requires. And lastly, I suppose, 
that the parts of the pure ether, as if it were the 
first matter, have no motion at all but what they 
receive from bodies which float in them, and are 
not themselves fluid. 

2. Having laid these grounds, let us come to speak 
of causes ; and in the first place let us inquire what 
may be the cause of the light of the sun. Seeing, 
therefore, the body of the sun doth by its simple 
circular motion thrust away the ambient ethereal 
substance sometimes one way sometimes another, 
so that those parts, which are next the sun, being 
moved by it, do propagate that motion to the next 
remote parts, and these to the next, and so on 
continually ; it must needs be that, notwithstand- 
ing any distance, the foremost part of the eye 
will at last be pressed; and by the pressure of 
that part, the motion will be propagated to the 
innermost part of the organ of sight, namely, to 
the heart ; and from the reaction of the heart, there 
will proceed an endeavour back by the same way, 
ending in the endeavour outwards of the coat of 
the eye, called the retina. But this endeavour 
outwards, as has been defined in chapter xxv, is 
the thing which is called light, or the phantasm 
of a lucid body. For it is by reason of this phan- 
tasm that an object is called lucid. Wherefore 
we have a possible cause of the light of the sun ; 
which I undertook to find. 

3. The generation of the light of the sun is ac- 
companied with the generation of heat. Now 
every man knows what heat is in himself, by feeling 


LIGHT, HEAT, AND COLOURS. 449 


it when he grows hot; but what it is in other PARTIV. 
things, he knows only by ratiocination. For it is oe 
one thing to grow hot, and another thing to heat heateth. 
or make hot. And therefore though we perceive 
that the fire or the sun heateth, yet we do not 
perceive that it is itself hot. That other living 
creatures, whilst they make other things hot, are 

hot themselves, we infer by reasoning from the 
like sense in ourselves. But this is not a necessary 
inference. For though it may truly be said of 
living creatures, that they heat, therefore they 
are themselves hot ; yet it cannot from hence be 
truly inferred that fire heateth, therefore it 1s 
itself hot ; no more than this, fire causeth pain, 
therefore it is itself in pain. Wherefore, that is 
only and properly called hot, which when we feel 

we are necessarily hot. 

- Now when we grow hot, we find that our spirits 

and blood, and whatsoever is fluid within us, is 
called out from the internal to the external parts 

of our bodies, more or less, according to the degree 

of the heat; and that our skin swelleth. He, 
therefore, that can give a possible cause of this 
evocation and swelling, and such as agrees with 

the rest of the phenomena of heat, may be thought 

to have given the cause of the heat of the sun. 

It hath been shown, in the 5th article of chapter 
XxI, that the fluid medium, which we call the air, 
is so moved by the simple circular motion of the 
sun, as that all its parts, even the least, do per- 
petually change places with one another ; which 
change of places is that which there I called fer- 
mentation. From this fermentation of the air, I 
have, in the 8th article of the last chapter, demon- 

VOL. I. GG 


450 PHYSICS. 


PARTIV. strated that the water may be drawn up into the 
—— clouds. 

And I shall now show that the fluid parts may, 
in like manner, by the same fermentation, be drawn 
out from the internal to the external parts of our 
bodies. For seeing that wheresoever the fluid 
medium is contiguous to the body of any living 
creature, there the parts of that medium are, by 
perpetual change of place, separated from one 
another ; the contiguous parts of the living creature 
must, of necessity, endeavour to enter into thespaces 
of the separated parts. For otherwise those parts, 
supposing there is no vacuum, would have no place 
togo into. And therefore that, which is most fluid 
and separable in the parts of the living creature 
which are contiguous to the medium, will go first 
out; and into the place thereof will succeed such 
other parts as can most easily transpire through 
the pores of the skin. And from hence it is ne- 
cessary that the rest of the parts, which are not 
separated, must altogether be moved outwards, for 
the keeping of all places full. But this motion 
outwards of all parts together must, of necessity, 
press those parts of the ambient air which are 
ready to leave their places; and therefore all the 
parts of the body, endeavouring at once that way, 
make the body swell. Wherefore a possible cause 
is given of heat from the sun; which was to be 
done. 

hence. 4, We have now seen how light and heat are 
se generated ; heat by the simple motion of the me- 
dium, making the parts perpetually change places 
with one another; and light by this, that by the 
same simple motion action is propagated in a 


LIGHT, HEAT, AND COLOURS. 451 


strait line. But when a body hath its parts so sa 
moved, that it sensibly both heats and shines at end 
the same time, then it is that we say fire is j¢sremtr 
generated. ann: 

Now by fire I do not understand a body distinct 
from matter combustible or glowing, as wood or 
iron, but the matter itself, not simply and always, 
but then only when it shineth and heateth. He, 
therefore, that renders a cause possible and agree- 
able to the rest of the phenomena, namely, whence, 
and from what action, both the shining and heating 
proceed, may be thought to have given a possible 
cause of the generation of jire. 

Let, therefore, ABC (in the first figure) be a 
sphere, or the portion of a sphere, whose centre is 
D; and let it be transparent and homogeneous, as 
crystal, glass, or water, and objected to the sun. 
Wherefore, the foremost part ABC will, by the 
simple motion of the sun, by which it thrusts 
forwards the medium, be wrought upon by the 
sunbeams in the strait lines E A, FB, and GC; 
which strait lines may, in respect of the great dis- 
tance of the sun, be taken for parallels. And 
seeing the medium within the sphere is thicker 
than the medium without it, those beams will be 
refracted towards the perpendiculars. Let the 
strait lines E A and GC be produced till they cut 
the sphere in H and I; and drawing the perpen- 
diculars A D and CD, the refracted beams E A and 
GC will of necessity fall, the one between AH 
and AD, the other between CI and CD. Let 
those refracted beams be AK andCL. And again, 
let the ines DK M and DLN be drawn perpen- 
dicular to the sphere; and let AK and CL be 

GG2 


452 PHYSICS. 


paRT Iv. produced till they meet with the strait line BD 
Se produced in O. Seeing, therefore, the medium 
wre generation ithin the sphere is thicker than that without it, 
bi the refracted line A K will recede further from the 
perpendicular K M than K O will recede from the 
same. Wherefore K O will fall between the re- 

fracted line and the perpendicular. Let, therefore, 

the refracted line be K P, cutting FO in P; and 

for the same reason the strait line LP will be the 
refracted line of the strait line CL. Wherefore, 

seeing the beams are nothing else but the ways in 

which the motion is propagated, the motion about 

P will be so much more vehement than the motion 

about A BC, by how much the base of the portion 

A B C is greater than the base of a like portion in 

the sphere, whose centre is P, and whose magnitude 

is equal to that of the little circle about P, which 
comprehendeth all the beams that are propagated 

from A BC; and this sphere being much less than 

the sphere A BC, the parts of the medium, that is, 

of the air about P, will change places with one 
another with much greater celerity than those 

about ABC. If, therefore, any matter combustible, 

that is to say, such as may be easily dissipated, be 

placed in P, the parts of that matter, if the pro- 

portion be great enough between AC and a like 

portion of the little circle about P, will be freed 

from their mutual cohesion, and being separated 

will acquire simple motion. But vehement simple 

motion generates in the beholder a phantasm of 

lucid and hot, as I have before demonstrated of 

the simple motion of the sun; and therefore the 
combustible matter which is placed in P will be 

made lucid and hot, that is to say, will be fire. 


LIGHT, HEAT, AND COLOURS. 453 


Wherefore I have rendered a possible cause of fire ; sea IV. 

which was to be done. —— 
5. From the manner by which the sun generateth Te seneration 

fire, it is easy to explain the manner by which fire lision. 

may be generated by the collision of two flints. 

For by that collision some of those particles of 

which the stone is compacted, are violently sepa- 

rated and thrown off; and being withal swiftly 

turned round, the eye is moved by them, as it is in 

the generation of light by the sun. Wherefore they 

shine ; and falling upon matter which is already half 

dissipated, such as is tinder, they thoroughly dis- 

sipate the parts thereof, and make them turn round. 

From whence, as I have newly shown, light and 

heat, that is to say fire, is generated. | 
6. The shining of glow-worms, some kinds of The cause of 

‘ ight in glow- 

rotten wood, and of a kind of stone made at Bo- worms, rotten 

logna, may have one common cause, namely, the Cee 

exposing of them to the hot sun. We find by expe- 

rience that the Bologna stone shines not, unlessit be 

so exposed ; and after it has been exposed it shines 

but for a little time, namely, as long as it retains 

a certain degree of heat. And the cause may be 

that the parts, of which it is made, may together 

with heat have simple motion imprinted in them 

by the sun. Which if it be so, it is necessary that 

it shine in the dark, as long as there is sufficient heat 

in it; but this ceasing, it will shine no longer. 

Also we find by experience that in the glow-worm 

there is a certain thick humour, like the crystalline 

humour of the eye; which if it be taken out and 

held long enough in one’s fingers, and then be 

carried into the dark, it will shine by reason of the 

warmth it received from the fingers; but as soon 


PART IV. 
27. 


Sennen? 


The cause of 
light in the con- 


cussion of sea 
water. 


The cause of 


flame, sparks, 
& colliquation. 


454 PHYSICS. 


as it is cold it will cease shining. From whence, 
therefore, can these creatures have their light, but 
from lying all day in the sunshine in the hottest 
time of summer? In the same manner, rotten 
wood, except it grow rotten in the sunshine, or be 
afterwards long enough exposed to the sun, will 
not shine. That this doth not happen in every 
worm, nor in all kinds of rotten wood, nor in all 
calcined stones, the cause may be that the parts, 
of which the bodies are made, are different both 
in motion and figure from the parts of bodies of 
other kinds. 

7. Also the sea water shineth when it is either 
dashed with the strokes of oars, or when a ship in 
its course breaks strongly through it; but more or 
less, according as the wind blows from different 
points. The cause whereof may be this, that the 
particles of salt, though they never shine in the 
salt-pits, where they are but slowly drawn up by 
the sun, being here beaten up into the air in greater 
quantities and with more force, are withal made 
to turn round, and consequently to shine, though 
weakly. I have, therefore, given a possible cause 
of this phenomenon. 

8. If such matter as is compounded of hard little 
bodies be set on fire, 1t must needs be, that, as they 
fly out in greater or less quantities, the flame which 
is made by them will be greater or less. And if 
the ethereal or fluid part of that matter fly out 
together with them, their motion will be the 
swifter, as it is in wood and other things which 
flame with a manifest mixture of wind. When, 
therefore, these hard particles by their flying out 
move the eye strongly, they shine bnght; and a 


LIGHT, HEAT, AND COLOURS. 455 


great quantity of them flying out together, they Ean Ns 
make a great shining body. For flame being ~— 
nothing but an aggregate of shining particles, the ee 
greater the aggregate is, the greater and more & colliquation. 
manifest will be the flame. I have, therefore, 
shown a possible cause of flame. And from hence 
the cause appears evidently, why glass is so easily 
and quickly melted by the small flame of a candle 
blown, which will not be melted without blowing 
but by a very strong fire. 
Now, if from the same matter there be a part 
broken off, namely, such a part as consisteth of 
many of the small particles, of this is made a spark. 
For from the breaking off it hath a violent turning 
round, and from hence it shines. But though 
from this matter there fly neither flame nor sparks, 
yet some of the smallest parts of it may be carried 
out as far as to the superficies, and remain there 
as ashes ; the parts whereof are so extremely small, 
that it cannot any longer be doubted how far na- 
ture may proceed in dividing. 
Lastly, though by the application of fire to this 
matter there fly little or nothing from it, yet 
there will be in the parts an endeavour to simple 
motion; by which the whole body will either be 
melted, or, which is a degree of melting, softened. 
For all motion has some effect upon all matter 
whatsoever, as has been shown at art. 3, chap. xv. 
Now if it be softened to such a degree, as that the 
stubbornness of the parts be exceeded by their 
gravity, then we say it is melted; otherwise, soft- 
ened and made pliant and ductile. 
Again, the matter having in it some particles 
hard, others ethereal or watery; if, by the appli- 


PART IV. 
27. 


eye 


The cause why 


wet hay some- 


456 PHYSICS. 


cation of fire, these latter be called out, the former 
will thereby come to a more full contact with one 
another; and, consequently, will not be so easily 
separated ; that is to say, the whole body will be 
made harder. And this may be the cause why the 
same fire makes some things soft, others hard. 

9. It is known by experience that if hay be laid 


times burns of wet together in a heap, it will after a time begin 


its own accord ; 


also the cause tO Smoke, and then burn as it were of itself. The 


of lightning. 


cause whereof seems to be this, that in the air, 
which is enclosed within the hay, there are those 
little bodies, which, as I have supposed, are moved 
freely with simple motion. But this motion being 
by degrees hindered more and more by the de- 
scending moisture, which at the last fills and stops 
all the passages, the thinner parts of the air ascend 
by penetrating the water; and those hard little 
bodies, being so thrust together that they touch 
and press one another, acquire stronger motion ; 
till at last by the increased strength of this motion 
the watery parts are first driven outwards, from 
whence appears vapour; and by the continued 
increase of this motion, the smallest particles of 
the dried hay are forced out, and recovering their 
natural simple motion, they grow hot and shine, 
that is to say, they are set on fire. 

The same also may be the cause of lightning, 
which happens in the hottest time of the year, 
when the water is raised up in greatest quantity 
and carried highest. For after the first clouds are 
raised, others after others follow them ; and being 
congealed above, they happen, whilst some of them 
ascend and others descend, to fall one upon another 
insuch manner, as that in some places all their parts 


LIGHT, HEAT, AND COLOURS. 457 


are joined together, in others they leave hollow ESET 
spaces between them; and into these spaces, the eke 
ethereal parts being forced out by the compressure 

of the clouds, many of the harder little bodies are 

so pent together, as they have not the liberty of 

such motion as is natural to the air. Wherefore 

their endeavour grows more vehement, till at last 

they force their way through the clouds, sometimes 

in one place, sometimes in another ; and, breaking 

through with great noise, they move the air vio- 

lently, and striking our eyes, generate light, that 

is to say, they shine. And this shining is that we 

call lightning. 

10. The most common phenomenon proceeding 7*, cae 


of the force 


from fire, and yet the most admirable of all others, of gunpowder ; 
is the force of gunpowder fired ; which being com- eat 
pounded of nitre, brimstone and coals, beaten small, (°,o),7""* 
hath from the coals its first taking fire ; from the stove aud what 
brimstone its nourishment and flame, that is to say, 

light and motion, and from the nitre the vehe- 

mence of both. Now if a piece of nitre, before it 

is beaten, be laid upon a burning coal, first it melts, 

and, like water, quencheth that part of the coal it 

toucheth. Then vapour or air, flying out where the 

coal and nitre join, bloweth the coal with great 

swiftness and vehemence on all sides. And from 

hence it comes to pass, that by two contrary mo- 

tions, the one, of the particles which go out of the 

burning coal, the other, of those of the ethereal 

and watery substance of the nitre, is generated 

that vehement motion and inflammation. And, 

lastly, when there is no more action from the nitre, 

that is to say, when the volatile parts of the nitre 


are flown out, there is found about the sides a cer- 


PART IV. 
27. 


——— 
The cause of 
the force of 
gunpowder, &e. 


4.58 PHYSICS. 


tain white substance, which being thrown again 
into the fire, will grow red-hot again, but will not 
be dissipated, at least unless the fire be augmented. 
If now a possible cause of this be found out, the 
same will also be a possible cause why a grain of 
gunpowder set on fire doth expand itself with 
such vehement motion, and shine. And it may be 
caused in this manner. 

Let the particles, of which nitre consisteth, be 
supposed to be some of them hard, others watery, 
and the rest ethereal. Also let the hard particles 
be supposed to be spherically hollow, like small 
bubbles, so that many of them growing together 
may constitute a body, whose little caverns are 
filled with a substance which is either watery, or 
ethereal, or both. As soon, therefore, as the hard 
particles are dissipated, the watery and ethereal 
particles will necessarily fly out ; and as they fly, 
of necessity blow strongly the burning coals and 
brimstone which are mingled together ; whereupon 
there will follow a great expansion of light, with 
vehement flame, and a violent dissipation of the 
particles of the nitre, the brimstone and the coals. 
Wherefore I have given a possible cause of the 
force of fired gunpowder. 

Itis manifest from hence, that for the rendering 
of the cause why a bullet of lead or iron, shot from 
a piece of ordnance, flies with so great velocity, 
there is no necessity to introduce such rarefaction, 
as, by the common definition of it, makes the 
same matter to have sometimes more, sometimes 
less quantity ; which is inconceivable. For every 
thing is said to be greater or less, as it hath more 
or less quantity. The violence with which a bullet 


LIGHT, HEAT, AND COLOURS. 459 


is thrust out of a gun, proceeds from the swiftness PART IV. 
of the small particles of the fired powder ; at least W-+~ 
it may proceed from that cause without the suppo- 

sition of any empty space. 

11. Besides, by the attrition or rubbing of one How heat 
body against another, as of wood against wood, we area 
find that not only a certain degree of heat, but fire 
itself is sometimes generated. For such motion 
is the reciprocation of pressure, sometimes one way, 
sometimes the other; and by this reciprocation 
whatsoever is fluid in both the pieces of wood is 
forced hither and thither; and consequently, to an 
endeavour of getting out; and at last by breaking 
out makes fire. 

12. Now light is distinguished into, first, second, ‘The distinction 
third, and so on infinitely. And we call that first pee 
light, which is in the first lucid body; as the sun, 
fire, &c. : second, that which is in such bodies, as 
being not transparent are illuminated by the sun; 
as the moon, a wall, &c.: and third, that which is in 
bodies not transparent, but illuminated by second 
light, &c. 

13. Colour is light, but troubled light, namely, The causes oF 
such as is generated by perturbed motion; as shall sce in looking 
be made manifest by the red, yellow, blue and pur- roe nn P"™ 


ma of glass, 


ple, which are generated by the interposition of a ine ee 
diaphanous prisma, whose opposite bases are violet colour, 
triangular, between the light and that which is 
enlightened. 

For let there be a prisma of glass, or of any other 
transparent matter which Is of greater density than 
air; and let the triangle A BC be the base of this 
prisma. Also let the strait line DE be the dia- 


meter of the sun's body, having oblique position to 


PART IV. 
27. 
ey 
The causes of 
the colours, &e. 


460 PHYSICS. 


the strait lime A B; and let the sunbeams pass in’ 
the lines DA and EBC. And lastly, let the strait 
lines DA and EC be produced indefinitely to F 
and G. Seeing therefore the strait line D A, by 
reason of the density of the glass, is refracted to- 
wards the perpendicular; let the line refracted at 
the point A be the strait line AH. And again, 
seeing the medium below A C is thinner than that 
above it, the other refraction, which will be made 
there, will diverge from the perpendicular. Let 
therefore, this second refracted line be AI. Also 
let the same be done at the poimt C, by making the 
first refracted line to be C K, and the second C L. 
Seeing therefore the cause of the refraction in the 
point A of the strait line of A B is the excess of the 
resistance of the medium in A B above the resist- 
ance of the air, there must of necessity be reaction 
from the point A towards the point B; and conse- 
quently the medium at A within the triangle A B C 
will have its motion troubled, that is to say, the 
strait motion in AF and AH will be mixed with 
the transverse motion between the same A F and 
AH, represented by the short transverse lines in 
the triangle AFH. Again, seeing at the point A 
of the strait line AC there is a second refraction 
from AH in AI, the motion of the medium will 
again be perturbed by reason of the transverse re- 
action from A towards C, represented likewise by 
the short transverse lines in the triangle AHI. 
And in the same manner there is a double pertur- 
bation represented by the transverse lines in the 
triangles CG K and CK L. But as for the light 
between AI and CG, it will not be perturbed ; 
because, if there were in all the points of the strait 


LIGHT, HEAT, AND COLOURS. 461 


lines A B and AC the same action which is in the Pee IV. 
points A and C, then the plane of the triangle CGK —— 
would be everywhere coincident with the plane of {hvcciour, se. 
the triangle AFH; by which means all would ap- 
pear alike between A and C. Besides, it is to be 
observed, that all the reaction at A tends towards 
the illuminated parts which are between A and C, 
and consequently perturbeth the first light. And 
on the contrary, that all the reaction at C tends 
towards the parts without the triangle or without 
the prisma A BC, where there is none but second 
light ; and that the triangle A F H shows that per- 
turbation of light which is made in the glass itself ; 
as the triangle AHI shows that perturbation of 
light which is made below theglass. In like manner, 
that CG K shows the perturbation of light within 
the glass ; and C K L that which is below the glass. 
From whence there are four divers motions, or four 
different illuminations or colours, whose differences 
appear most manifestly to the sense in a prisma, 
whose base is an equilateral triangle, when the 
sunbeams that pass through it are received upon a 
white paper. For the triangle AFH appears red 
to the sense; the triangle AHI yellow; the tn- 
angle CGK green, and approaching to blue; and 
lastly, the triangle CK L appears purple. It is 
therefore evident that when weak but first lhght 
passeth through a more resisting diaphanous body, 
as glass, the beams, which fall upon it transversely, 
make redness; and when the same first light is 
stronger, as it is in the thinner medium below the 
strait line A C, the transverse beams make yellow- 
ness. Also when second light is strong, as it is in 
the triangle CGK, which is nearest to the first 


462 PHYSICS. 


Ee TAN: light, the transverse beams make greenness; and 

——— when the same second light is weaker, as in the 
triangle C K L, they make a purple colour. 

Wey hemeon:. V4. From hence may be deduced a cause, why 

appear redder. the moon and stars appear bigger and redder near 

im the herizon’_ the horizon than in the mid-heaven. For between 

midst ofthe the eye and the apparent horizon there is more 

impure air, such as is mingled with watery and 

earthy little bodies, than is between the same eye 

and the more elevated part of heaven. But vision 

is made by beams which constitute a cone,’ whose 

base, if we look upon the moon, is the moon’s face, 

and whose vertex is in the eye; and therefore, 

many beams from the moon must needs fall upon 

little bodies that are without the visual cone, and 

be by them reflected to the eye. But these reflected 

beams tend all in lines which are transverse to the 

visual cone, and make at the eye an angle which 1s 

greater than the angle of the cone. Wherefore, 

the moon appears greater in the horizon, than when 

she is more elevated. And because those reflected 

beams go transversely, there will be generated, by 

the last article, redness. A possible cause there- 

fore is shown, why the moon as also the stars ap- 

pear greater and redder in the horizon, than in the 

midst of heaven. The same also may be the cause, 

why the sun appears in the horizon greater and of 

a colour more degenerating to yellow, than when 

he is higher elevated. For the reflection from the 

little bodies between, and the transverse motion of 

the medium, are still the same. But the light of 

the sun is much stronger than that of the moon ; 

and therefore, by the last article, his splendour 


LIGHT, HEAT, AND COLOURS. 463 


must needs by this perturbation degenerate into PART IV. 
yellowness. ae ae 

But for the generation of these four colours, it is 
not necessary that the figure of the glass be a 
prisma; for if it were spherical it would do the 
same. For in a sphere the sunbeams are twice 
refracted and twice reflected. And this being ob- 
served by Des Cartes, and withal that a rainbow 
never appears but when it rains; as also, that the 
drops of rain have their figures almost spherical ; he 
hath shown from thence the cause of the colours 
in the rainbow; which therefore need not be 
repeated. 

15. Whiteness is light, but light perturbed by The cause of 
the reflections of many beams af light coming to” ee 
the eye together within a little space. For if glass 
or any other diaphanous body be reduced to very 
small parts by contusion or concussion, every one 
of those parts, if the beams of a lucid body be 
from any one point of the same reflected to the eye, 
will represent to the beholder an idea or image of 
the whole lucid body, that is to say, a phantasm 
of white. For the strongest light is the most white; 
and therefore many such parts will make many 
such images. Wherefore, if those parts lie thick 
and close together, those many images will appear 
confusedly, and will by reason of the confused light 
represent a white colour. So that from hence 
may be deduced a possible cause, why glass beaten, 
that 1s, reduced to powder, looks white. Also why 
water and snow are white; they being nothing but 
a heap of very small diaphanous bodies, namely, of 
little bubbles, from whose several convex superficies 
there are by reflection made several confused phan- 


464 PHYSICS. 


PART IV. tasms of the whole lucid body, that is to say, white- 
—.— ness. For the same reason, salt and nitre are white, 
as consisting of small bubbles which contain within 
them water and air; as is manifest in nitre, from 
this, that being thrown into the fire it violently 
blows the same; which salt also doth, but with less 
violence. But if a white body be exposed, not to 
the light of the day, but to that of the fire or of a 
candle, it will not at the first sight be easily judged 
whether it be white or yellow; the cause whereof 
may be this, that the light of those things, which 
burn and flame, is almost of a middle colour between 
whiteness and yellowness. 
the causeef 16. As whiteness is light, so blackness is the pri- 
' vation of light, or darkness. And, from hence it is, 
first, that all holes, from which no light can be re- 
flected to the eye, appear black. Secondly, that 
when a body hath little eminent particles erected 
straight up from the superficies, so that the beams 
of light which fall upon them are reflected not to 
the eye but to the body itself, that superficies 
appears black; in the same manner as the sea 
appears back when ruffled bythe wind. Thirdly, 
that any combustible matter is by the fire made to 
look black before it shines. For the endeavour of 
the fire being to dissipate the smallest parts of such 
bodies as are thrown Into it, it must first raise and 
erect those parts before it can work their dissipa- 
tion. If, therefore, the fire be put out before the 
parts are totally dissipated, the coal will appear 
black ; for the parts being only erected, the beams 
of light falling upon them will not be reflected to 
the eye, but to the coal itself. Fourthly, that burn- 
ing glasses do more easily burn black things than 


LIGHT, HEAT, AND COLOURS. ' 465 


white. For in a white superficies the eminent PART Iv. 
parts are convex, like little bubbles; and there- ~~ 
fore the beams of light, which fall upon them, are (°° * 
reflected every way from the reflecting body. But 

in a black superficies, where the eminent particles 

are more erected, the beams of light falling upon 

them are all necessarily reflected towards the body 

itself; and, therefore, bodies that are black are 

more easily set on fire by the sun beams, than 

those that are white. Fifthly, that all colours 

that are made of the mixture of white and black 
proceed from the different position of the particles 

‘that rise above the superficies, and their different 

forms of asperity. For, according to these differ- 

ences, more or fewer beams of light are reflected 

from several bodies to the eye. But in regard 

those differences are innumerable, and the bodies 
themselves so small that we cannot perceive them ; 

the explication and precise determination of the 

causes of all colours is a thing of so great difficulty, 

that I dare not undertake it. 


VOL. I. H H 


466 PHYSICS. 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


OF COLD, WIND, HARD, ICE, RESTITUTION OF 
BODIES BENT, DIAPHANOUS, LIGHTNING AND 
THUNDER; AND OF THE HEADS OF RIVERS. 


1. Why breath from the same mouth sometimes heats and some- 
times cools.—2. Wind, and the inconstancy of winds, whence. 
8. Why there is a constant, though not a great wind, from 
east to west, near the equator.—4. What is the effect of air 
pent in between the clouds.—5. No change from soft to hard, 
but by motion.—6. What is the cause of cold near the poles. 
7. The cause of ice ; and why the cold is more remiss in rainy 
than in clear weather. Why water doth not freeze in deep 
wells as it doth near the superficies of the earth. Why ice is 
not so heavy as water; and why wine is not so easily frozen 
as water.—8. Another cause of hardness from the fuller con- 
tact of atoms; also, how hard things are broken.—9. A third 
cause of hardness from heat.—10. A fourth cause of hardness 
from the motion of atoms enclosed in a narrow space.—11. 
How hard things are softened.— 12. Whence proceed the 
spontaneous restitution of things bent.—13. Diaphanous and 
opacous, what they are, and whence.—14. The cause of light- 
ning and thunder.—15. Whence it proceeds that clouds can 
fall again after they are once elevated and frozen.—16. How 
it could be that the moon was eclipsed, when she was not dia- 
metrically opposite to the sun.—17. By what means many 
suns may appear at once.—18. Of the heads of rivers. 


PART IV. 1, As, when the motion of the ambient ethereal 


Pnneens substance makes the spirits and fluid parts of our 
rea 

from the same bodies tend outwards, we acknowledge heat; so, 
mouth some- 


timesheats. DY the endeavour inwards of the same spirits and 
and some- humours, we feel cold. So that to cool is to make 


times cools. : 
the exterior parts of the body endeavour inwards, 


OF COLD, WIND, ETC. 467 


by a motion contrary to that of calefaction, by PARTI. 
which the internal parts are called outwards. He, —-~— 
therefore, that would know the cause of cold, must 
find by what motion or motions the exterior parts 
of any body endeavour to retire inwards. To 
begin with those phenomena which are the most 
familiar. There is almost no man but knows, that 
breath blown strongly, and which comes from the 
mouth with violence, that is to say, the passage 
being strait, will cool the hand; and that the 
same breath blown gently, that is to say, through 
a greater aperture, will warm the same. The 
cause of which phenomenon may be this, the breath 
going out hath two motions; the one, of the whole 
and direct, by which the foremost parts of the 
hand are driven inwards ; the other, simple motion 
of the small particles of the same breath, which, 
(as I have shown in the 3rd article of the last 
chapter, causeth heat. According, therefore, as 
elther of these motions 1s predominant, so there is 
the sense sometimes of cold, sometimes of heat. 
Wherefore, when the breath is softly breathed out 
at a large passage, that simple motion which causeth 
heat prevaileth, and consequently heat is felt ; and 
when, by compressing the lips, the breath is more 
strongly blown out, then is the direct motion pre- 
valent, which makes us feel cold. For, the direct 
motion of the breath or air is wind; and all wind 
cools or diminisheth former heat. 

2. And seeing not only great wind, but almost Wind, and the 
any ventilation and stirring of the air, doth refri- wists whence 
gerate ; the reason of many experiments concern- 
ing cold cannot well be given without finding first 
what are the causes of wind. Now, wind is 

HH2 


468 PHYSICS. 


ae nothing else but the direct motion of the air thrust 
———— forwards; which, nevertheless, when many winds 
Het concur, may be circular or otherwise indirect, as 
winds, whence. if ig in whirlwinds. Wherefore, in the first place 
we are to enquire into the causes of winds. Wind 
is air moved in a considerable quantity, and that 
either in the manner of waves, which is both for- 
wards and also up and down, or else forwards 

only. 

Supposing, therefore, the air both clear and 
calm for any time how little soever, yet, the 
greater bodies of the world being so disposed and 
ordered as has been said, it will be necessary that 
a wind presently arise somewhere. For, seeing 
that motion of the parts of the air, which is made 
by the simple motion of the sun in his own epicycle, 
causeth an exhalation of the particles of water 
from the seas and all other moist bodies, and those 
particles make clouds; it must needs follow, that, 
whilst the particles of water pass upwards, the 
particles of air, for the keeping of all spaces full, 
be jostled out on every side, and urge the next par- 
ticles, and these the next; till having made their 
circuit, there comes continually so much air to the 
hinder parts of the earth as there went water from 
before it.. Wherefore, the ascending vapours move 
the air towards the sides every way; and all direct 
motion of the air being wind, they make a wind. 
And if this wind meet often with other vapours 
which arise in other places, it is manifest that the 
force thereof will be augmented, and the way or 
course of it, changed. Besides, according as the 
earth, by its diurnal motion, turns sometimes the 
drier, sometimes the moister part towards the sun, 


OF COLD, WIND, ETC. 469 


so sometimes a greater, sometimes a less, quantity a IV. 
of vapours will be raised ; that is to say, sometimes —,— 
there will be a less, sometimes a greater wind. 
Wherefore, I have rendered a possible cause of 
such winds as are generated by vapours ; and also 
of their inconstancy. 

From hence it follows that these winds cannot 
be made in any place, which is higher than that to 
which vapours may ascend. Nor is that incredible 
which is reported of the highest mountains, as the 
Peak of Teneriffe and the Andes of Peru, namely, 
that they are not at all troubled with these incon- 
stant winds. And if it were certain that neither 
rain nor snow were ever seen in the highest tops 
of those mountains, it could not be doubted but 
that they are higher than any place to which 
vapours use to ascend. 

3. Nevertheless, there may be wind there, though Why there 

is a constant, 

not that which is made by the ascent of vapours, though not a 
yet a less and more constant wind, like the con- "0" | 
tinued blast of a pair of bellows, blowing from the yes,2e" me 
east. And this may have a double cause; the one, 
the diurnal motion of the earth; the other, its 
simple. motion in its own epicycle. For these 
mountains being, by reason of their height, more 
eminent than all the rest of the parts of the earth, 
do by both these motions drive the air from the 
west eastwards. To which, though the diurnal 
motion contribute but little, yet seeing I have 
supposed that the simple motion of the earth, in its 
- own epicycle, makes two revolutions in the same 
time in which the diurnal motion makes but one, 
and that the semidiameter of the epicycle 1s double 
to the semidiameter of the diurnal conversion, the 


470 PHYSICS. 


PART IV. motion of every point of the earth in its own 
—— epicycle will have its velocity quadruple to that of 
the diurnal motion; so that by both these motions 
together, the tops of those hills will sensibly be 
moved against the air; and consequently a wind 
will be felt. For whether the air strike the sen- 
tient, or the sentient the air, the perception of 
motion will be the same. But this wind, seeing it 
is not caused by the ascent of vapours, must neces- 
sarily be very constant. 
fect of av geat 4+ When one cloud is already ascended into the 
in between the air, if another cloud ascend towards it, that part of 
clouds. 
the air, which is intercepted between them both, 
must of necessity be pressed out every way. Also 
when both of them, whilst the one ascends and 
the other either stays or descends, come to be 
joined in such manner as that the ethereal sub- 
stance be shut within them on every side, it will 
by this compression also go out by penetrating the 
water. But in the meantime, the hard particles, 
which are mingled with the air and are agitated, 
as I have supposed, with simple motion, will not 
pass through the water of the clouds, but be more 
straitly compressed within their cavities. And 
this I have demonstrated at the 4th and 5th articles 
of chapter xx11. Besides, seeing the globe of the 
earth floateth in the air which is agitated by the 
sun’s motion, the parts of the air resisted by the 
earth will spread themselves every way upon the 
earth's superficies; as I have shown at the 8th 
article of chapter xx1. 
pee. os We perceive a body to be hard, from this, 
herd at by that, when touching it, we would thrust forwards 
that part of the same which we touch, we cannot 


OF COLD, WIND, ETC.. 471 
do it otherwise than by thrusting forwards the PART Iv. 
whole body. We may indeed easily and sensibly —-—~ 
thrust forwards any particle of the air or water 
which we touch, whilst yet the rest of its parts 
remain to sense unmoved. But we cannot do so 
to any part of a stone. Wherefore I define a hard 
body to be that whereof no part can be sensibly 
moved, unless the whole be moved. Whatsoever 
therefore is soft or fluid, the same can never be 
made hard but by such motion as makes many of 
the parts together stop the motion of some one 
part, by resisting the same. 
6. Those things premised, I shall show a possible What is the 
f : cause of cold 
cause why there is greater cold near the poles of near the poles. 
the earth, than further from them. The motion 
of the sun between the tropics, driving the air 
towards that part of the earth’s superficies which 
is perpendicularly under it, makes it spread itself 
every way; and the velocity of this expansion of 
the air grows greater and greater, as the superficies 
of the earth comes to be more and more straitened, 
that is to say, as the circles which are parallel to 
the equator come to be less and less. Wherefore 
this expansive motion of the air drives before it 
the parts of the air, which are in its way, con- 
tinually towards the poles more and more strongly, 
as its force comes to be more and more united, 
- that is to say, as the circles which are parallel to 
the equator are less and less; that is, so much the 
more, by how much they are nearer to the poles 
of the earth. In those places, therefore, which are 
nearer to the poles, there is greater cold than in 
those which are more remote from them. Now this 
expansion of the air upon the superficies of the 


472 | PHYSICS. 


PART IV.’ earth, from east to west, doth, by reason of the 
“—_ sun’s perpetual accession to the places which are 
successively under it, make it cold at the time of 

the sun’s rising and setting ; but as the sun comes 

to be continually more and more perpendicular to 

those cooled places, so by the heat, which is gene- 

rated by the supervening simple motion of the 

sun, that cold is again remitted ; and can never be 

great, because the action by which it was generated 

is not permanent. Wherefore I have rendered a 

possible cause of cold in those places that are near 

the poles, or where the obliquity of the sun 1s great. 

The cause of | 7, How water may be congealed by cold, may 


ice; and why 


thecoldismore be explained in this manner. Let A (in figure 1) 


than in clear” represent the sun, and B the earth. A will there- 
weather.) fore be much greater than B. Let EF be in the 
freeze in deep nlane of the equinoctial; to which let GH, IK, 


wells, asit doth 


near the super- and LC be parallel. Lastly, let C and D be the 


AaE Wie poles of the earth. The air, therefore, by its 
a arn action in those parallels, will rake the superficies 
ee of the earth; and that with motion so much the 
as water. stronger, by how much the parallel circles towards 
the poles grow less and less. From whence must 
arise a wind, which will force together the upper- 
most parts of the water, and withal raise them a 
little, weakening their endeavour towards the 
centre of the earth. And from their endeavour. 
towards the centre of the earth, joined with the 
endeavour of the said wind, the uppermost parts 
of the water will be pressed together and coagu- 
lated, that is to say, the top of the water will be 
skinned over and hardened. And so again, the 
water next the top will be hardened in the same 


manner, till at length the ice be thick. And this 


OF COLD, WIND, ETC. 473 


ice, beimg now compacted of little hard bodies, 
must also contain many particles of air received 
into it. , 

As rivers and seas, so also in the same manner 
may the clouds be frozen. For when, by the 
ascending and descending of several clouds at the 
same time, the air intercepted between them is by 
compression furced out, it rakes, and by little and 
little hardens them. And though those small drops, 
which usually make clouds, be not yet united into 
greater bodies, yet the same wind will be made; 
and by it, as water is congealed into ice, so will 
vapours in the same manner be congealed into 
snow. From the same cause it is that ice may be 
made by art, and that not far from the fire. For 
it is done by the mingling of snow and salt 
together, and by burying in it a small vessel full of 
water. Now while the snow and salt, which have 
in them a great deal of air, are melting, the air, 
which is pressed out every way in wind, rakes the 
sides of the vessel; and as the wind by its motion 
rakes the vessel, so the vessel by the same motion 
and action congeals the water within it. 

We find by experience, that cold is always more 
remiss in places where it rains, or where the 
weather is cloudy, things being alike in all other 


respects, than where the. air is clear. And this 


agreeth very well with what I have said before. 
For in clear weather, the course of the wind which, 


as I said even now, rakes the superficies of the 


earth, as it is free from all interruption, so also it 
is very strong. But when small drops of water 
are either rising or falling, that wind is repelled, 


PART IV.- 
28. 
—— 


The cause 
of ice, &c. | 


PART IV. 
28. 
———— 


Another cause 
of hardness 
from the fuller 
contact of 
atoms. Also 
how hard things 
are broken. 


474 PHYSICS. 


broken, and dissipated by them; and the less the 
wind is, the less is the cold. 

We find also by experience, that in deep wells 
the water freezeth not so much as it doth upon the 
superficies of the earth. For the wind, by which 
ice is made, entering into the earth by reason of 
the laxity of its parts, more or less, loseth some of 
its force, though not much. So that if the well be 
not deep, it will freeze ; whereas if it be so deep, 
as that the wind which causeth cold cannot reach 
it, it will not freeze. | 

We find moreover by experience, that ice is. 
lighter than water. The cause whereof is manifest 
from that which I have already shown, namely, that 
air is received in and mingled with the particles of 
the water whilst it is congealing. 

Lastly, wine is not so easily congealed as water, 
because m wine there are particles, which, being 
not fluid, are moved very swiftly, and by their 
motion congelation is retarded. But if the cold 
prevail against this motion, then the outermost 
parts of the wine will be first frozen, and after- 
wards the inner parts; whereof this is a sign, that. 
the wine which remains unfrozen in the midst will 
be very strong. 

8. We have seen one way of making things hard, 
namely, by congelation. Another way is thus. 
Having already supposed that innumerable atoms, 
some harder than others and that have several 
simple motions of their own, are intermingled with. 
the ethereal substance; it follows necessarily from. 
hence, that by reason of the fermentation of the 
whole air, of which I have spoken in chapter xx1,, 
some of those atoms meeting with others will 


OF COLD, WIND, ETC. 475 


eleave together, by applying themselves to one PART Iv. 
another in such manner as is agreeable to their w~—— 
motions and mutual contacts ; and, seeing there is {yoy cage 
no vacuum, cannot be pulled asunder, but by 
so much force as is sufficient to overcome their 
hardness. 

Now there are innumerable degrees of hardness. 
As for example, there is a degree of it in water, 
as Is manifest from this, that upon a plane it may 
be drawn any way at pleasure by one’s finger. 
There is a greater degree of it in clammy liquors, 
which, when they are poured out, do in falling 
downwards dispose themselves into one continued 
thread; which thread, before it be broken, will by 
little and little diminish its thickness, till at last it 
be so small, as that it seems to break only in a 
point; and in their separation the external parts 
break first from one another, and then the more 
internal parts successively one after another. In 
wax there is yet a greater degree of hardness. For 
when we would pull one part of it from another, 
we first make the whole mass slenderer, before we 
can pull it asunder. And how much the harder 
anything is which we would break, so much the 
more force we must apply to it. Wherefore, if we 
go on to harder things, as ropes, wood, metals, 
stones, &c., reason prompteth us to believe that the 
same, though not always sensibly, will necessarily 
happen ;. and that even the hardest things are 
broken asunder in the same manner, namely, by 
solution of their continuity begun in the outermost 
superficies, and proceeding successively to the 
innermost parts. In like manner, when the parts 
of bodies are to be separated, not by pulling them 


PART IV. 
28. 


—_———/ 


A third cause 
of hardness, 
from heat. 


A fourth cause | 


of hardness, 
from the mo- 
tion of atoms 


476 PHYSICS. 


asunder, but by breaking them, the first separation 
will necessarily be in the convex superficies of the 
bowed part of the body, and afterwards in the 
concave superficies. For in all bowing there is in 
the convex superficies an endeavour in the parts to 
go one from another, and in the concave superficies 
to penetrate one another. 

This being well understood, a reason may be 
given how two bodies, which are contiguous in one 
eommon superficies, may by force be separated 
without the introduction of vacuum; though 
Lucretius thought otherwise, believing that such 
separation was a strong establishment of vacuum. 
For a marble pillar being made to hang by one of 
its bases, if it be long enough, it will by its own 
weight be broken asunder ; and yet it will not 
necessarily follow that there should be vacuum, 
seeing the solution of its continuity may begin in 
the circumference, and proceed successively to the 
midst thereof. 

9. Another cause of hardness in some things 
may be in this manner. If a soft body consist of 
many hard particles, which by-the intermixture of 
many other fluid particles cohere but loosely to- 
gether, those fluid parts, as hath been shown in 
the last article of chapter xx1, will be exhaled ; 
by which means each hard particle will apply itself 
to the next to it according to a greater superficies, 
and consequently they will cohere more closely to 
one another, that is to say, the whole mass will be 
made harder. 

10. Again, in some things hardness may be made 
to a certain degree in this manner. When any 
fluid substance hath in it certain very small bodies 


OF COLD, WIND, ETC. 477 


intermingled, which, being moved with simple mo-. PART IV. 
tion of their own, contribute like motion to the a 
parts of the fluid substance, and this be done in a eee. 
small enclosed space, as in the hollow of a little 

sphere, or a very slender pipe, if the motion be 
vehement and there be a great number of these 

small enclosed bodies, two things will happen ; the 

one, that the fluid substance will have an endeavour 

of dilating itself at once every way ; the other, 

that if those small bodies can nowhere get out, 

then from their reflection it will follow, that the 

motion of the parts of the enclosed fluid substance, 

which was vehement before, will now be much 

more vehement. Wherefore, if any one particle 

of that fluid substance should be touched and 
pressed by some external movent, it could not yield 

but by the application of very sensible force. 
Wherefore the fluid substance, which is enclosed 

and so moved, hath some degree of hardness. 

Now, greater and less degree of hardness depends 

upon the quantity and velocity of those small 

bodies, and upon the narrowness of the place both 
together. 

11. Such things as are made hard by sudden Fhideaed 
heat, namely such as are hardened by fire, are softened. 
commonly reduced to their former soft form by 
maceration. For fire hardens by evaporation, and 
therefore if the evaporated moisture be restored 
again, the former nature and form is restored 
together with it. And such things as are frozen 
with cold, if the wind by which they were frozen 
change into the opposite quarter, they will be un- 
frozen again, unless they have gotten a habit. of 
new mofion or endeavour by long continuance in 


478 PHYSICS. 


PART Iv. that hardness. Nor is it enough to cause thawing; 

——— that there be a cessation of the freezing wind ; for 

the taking away of the cause doth not destroy a 

produced effect ; but the thawing also must have 

its proper cause, namely, a contrary wind, or at 

least a wind opposite in some degree. And this 

we find to be true by experience. For, if ice be 

laid in a place so well enclosed that the motion of 

the air cannot get to it, that ice will remain un- 
changed, though the place be not sensibly cold. 

Nedetheren. 12- Of hard bodies, some may manifestly be 

rer bowed ; others not, but are broken in the very 

bent. first moment of their bending. And of such 

bodies as may manifestly be bended, some being 

bent, do, as soon as ever they are set at liberty, 

restore themselves to their former posture; others 

remain still bent. Now if the cause of this resti- 

tution be asked, I say, it may be in this manner, 

namely, that the particles of the bended body, 

whilst it is held bent, do nevertheless retain their 

motion; and by this motion they restore it as soon 

as the force is removed by which it was bent. For 

when any thing is bent, as a plate of steel, and, as 

soon as the force is removed, restores itself again, it 

is evident that the cause of its restitution cannot be 

referred to the ambient air ; nor can it be referred 

to the removal of the force by which it was bent ; 

for in things that are at rest the taking away of 

Impediments is not a sufficient cause of their future 

motion ; there being no other cause of motion, but 

motion. The cause therefore of such restitution is 

in the parts of the steel itself. Wherefore, whilst 

it remains bent, there is in the parts, of which it 

consisteth, some motion though invisible ; that is to 


OF COLD, WIND, ETC. 479 


.$ay, some endeavour at least that way by which PART IV. 
the restitution is to be made; and therefore this ——— 
endeavour of all the parts together is the first eae: 
beginning of restitution ; so that the impediment ‘arco ta 


tution of things 

being removed, that is to say, the force by which bent. 
it was held bent, it will be restored again. Now 
the motion of the parts, by which this done, 1s 
that which I called simple motion, or motion 
returning into itself. When therefore in the bend- 
ing of a plate the ends are drawn together, there 

is on one side a mutual compression of the parts ; 
which compression is one endeavour opposite to 
another endeavour: and on the other side a divul- 
sion of the parts. The endeavour therefore of the 
parts on one side tends to the restitution of the 
plate from the middle towards the ends; and on 
the other side, from the ends towards the middle. 
Wherefore the impediment being taken away, this 
endeavour, which is the beginning of restitution, 
will restore the plate to its former posture. And 
thus I have given a possible cause why some bodies, 
when they are bent, restore themselves again; 
which was to be done. 

As for stones, seeing they are made by the 
accretion of many very hard particles within the 
earth; which particles have no great coherence, 
that is to say, touch one another in small latitude, 
and consequently admit many particles of air; it 
must needs be that, in bending of them, their 
internal parts will not easily be compressed, by 
reason of their hardness. And because their co- 
‘herence is not firm, as soon as the external hard 
particles are disjoined, the ethereal parts will 


480 : PHYSICS. 


Poel necessarily break out, and so the body will sud- 
-~— denly be broken. 
snd, 18. Those bodies are called diaphanous, upon 
what they are, which, whilst the beams of a lucid body do work, 
.and whence. ; ° 
_ the action of every one of those beams is propa- 
gated in them in such manner, as that they still 
retain the same order amongst themselves, or the 
inversion of that order; and therefore bodies, 
which are perfectly diaphanous, are also perfectly 
homogeneous. On the contrary, an opacous body 
is that, which, by reason of its heterogeneous 
nature, doth by innumerable reflections and refrac- 
tions in particles of different figures and unequal 
hardness, weaken the beams that fall upon it before 
they reach the eye. And of diaphanous bodies, 
some are made such by nature from the beginning ; 
as the substance of the air, and of the water, and 
perhaps also some parts of stones, unless these 
also be water that has been long congealed. Others 
are made so by the power of heat, which congre- 
gates homogeneous bodies. But such, as are made 
diaphanous in this manner, consist of parts vce 
were formerly diaphanous. 
The cause of 14. In what manner clouds are made by the 
ightning and 
thunde. | motion of the sun, elevating the particles of water 
from the sea and other moist places, hath been 
explained in chapter xxvi. Also how clouds come 
to be frozen, hath been shown above at the 7th 
article. Now from this, that air may be enclosed 
as it were in caverns, and pent together more and 
more by the meeting of ascending and descending 
clouds, may be deduced a possible cause of thunder 
and lightning. For seeing the air consists of two 


OF COLD, WIND, ETC. 481 


parts, the one ethereal, which has no proper mo-' sara 
tion of its own, as being a thing divisible into the ——-—~ 
least parts; the other hard, namely, consisting of 

many hard atoms, which have every one of them 

a very swift simple motion of its own: whilst the 

clouds by their meeting do more and more straiten 

such cavities as they intercept, the ethereal parts 

will penetrate and pass through their watery sub- 
stance; but the hard parts will in the meantime 

be the more thrust together, and press one another; 

and consequently, by reason of their vehement 
motions, they will have an endeavour to rebound 

from each other. Whensoever, therefore, the com- 
pression is great enough, and the concave parts of 

the clouds are, for the cause I have already given, 
congealed into ice, the cloud will necessarily be 
broken; and this breaking of the cloud produceth 

the first clap of thunder. Afterwards the air, 

which was pent in, having now broken through, 
makes a concussion of the air without, and from 

hence proceeds the roaring and murmur which 
follows; and both the first clap and the murmur 

that follows it make that noise which 1s called 
thunder. Also, from the same air breaking through 

the clouds and with concussion falling upon the 

eye, proceeds that action upon our eye, which 
causeth in us a perception of that light, which we 

call ightning. Wherefore I have given a possible 

cause of thunder and lightning. 

15. But if the vapours, which are raised into Whence it 

clouds, do run together again into water or be cs emn'a 


clouds can fall 
, oa 3 : again, after 
congealed into ice, from whence is it, seeing both frog are once 
ice and water are heavy, that they are sustained in elevated and 
° zen. 
the air? Or rather, what may the cause be, that 


VOL. I. IT 


482 | PHYSICS. 


PART IV. being once elevated, they fall down again? For 


eyo 


Whence it 
proceeds that 
clouds, &c. 


there is no doubt but the same force which could 
carry up that water, could also sustain it there. 
Why therefore being once carried up, doth it fall 
again? I say it proceeds from the same simple 
motion of the sun, both that vapours are forced to 


_ ascend, and that water gathered into clouds is 


forced to descend. For in chapter xx1, article 
11, I have shown how vapours are elevated ; 
and in the same chapter, article 5, I have also 
shown how by the same motion homogeneous 
bodies are congregated, and heterogeneous dissi- 
pated; that is to say, how such things, as have a 
like nature to that of the earth, are driven towards 
the earth; that is to say, what is the cause of the 
descent of heavy bodies. Now if the action of the 
sun be hindered in the raising of vapours, and be 
not at all hindered in the casting of them down, the 
water will descend. But a cloud cannot hinder 
the action of the sun in making things of an 
earthly nature descend to the earth, though it may 
hinder it in making vapours ascend. For the 
lower part of a thick cloud is so covered by its 
upper part, as that it cannot receive that action of 
the sun by which vapours are carried up ; because 
vapours are raised by the perpetual fermentation 
of the air, or by the separating of its smallest parts 
from one another, which is much weaker when a 
thick cloud is interposed, than when the sky is 
clear. And therefore, whensoever a cloud is made 
thick enough, the water, which would not descend 
before, will then descend, unless it be kept up by 
the agitation of the wind. Wherefore | have ren- 
dered a possible cause, both why the clouds may 


OF COLD, WIND, ETC. 483 


be sustained in the air, and also why they may fall Ee IV. 
down again to the earth; which was propounded ——~— 
to be done. 

16. Granting that the clouds may be frozen, it is How it could 


; ; be that the 
no wonder if the moon have been seen eclipsed at moon was 


such time as she hath been almost two degrees joer 
above the horizon, the sun at the same time appear- Smcinen 
ing in the horizon; for such an eclipse was ob- the sun. 
served by Meestlin, at Tubingen, in the year 1590. 

For it might happen that a frozen cloud was then 
interposed between the sun and the eye of the 
observer. And if it were so, the sun, which was 

then almost two degrees below the horizon, might 

appear to be in it, by reason of the passing of his 

beams through the ice. And it is to be noted that 

those, that attribute such refractions to the atmos- 

phere, cannot attribute to it so great a refraction 

as this. Wherefore not the atmosphere, but either 

water in a continued body, or else ice, must be the 

cause of that refraction. 

17. Again, granting that there may be ice in the By what means 
clouds, it will be no longer a wonder that many peer at onee: 
suns have sometimes appeared at once. For look- 
ing-glasses may be so placed, as by reflections to 
show the same object in many places. And. may 
not so many frozen clouds serve for so many look- 
ing-glasses ? And may they not be fitly disposed for 
that purpose ? Besides, the number of appearances 
may be increased by refractions also; and there- 
fore it would be a greater wonder to me, if such 
phenomena as these should never happen. 

And were it not for that one phenomenon of the 
new star which was seen in Cassiopea, I should 
think comets were made in the same manner, 

112 


PART IV. 
28. 
Ny —nee 


Of the heads 
of rivers. 


484 PHYSICS. 


namely, by vapours drawn not only from the earth 
but from the rest of the planets also, and congealed 
into one continued body. For I could very well 
from hence give a reason both of their hair, and of 
their motions. But seeing that star remained 
sixteen whole months in the same place amongst 
the fixed stars, I cannot believe the matter of. it 
was ice. Wherefore I leave to others the disquisi- 
tion of the cause of comets; concerning which 
nothing that hath hitherto been published, besides 
the hare histories of them, is worth considering. 

18. The heads of rivers may be deduced from 
rain-water, or from melted snows, very easily ; but 
from other causes, very hardly, or not at all. For 
both rain-water and melted snows run down the 
descents of mountains; and if they descend only 
by the outward superficies, the showers or snows 
themselves may be accounted the springs or foun- 
tains; but if they enter the earth and descend 
within it, then, wheresoever they break out, there 
are their springs. And as these springs make 
small streams, so, many small streams running 
together make rivers. Now, there was never any 
spring found, but where the water which flowed to 
it, was either further, or at least as far from the 
centre of the earth, as the spring itself. And 
whereas it has been objected by a great philoso- 
pher, that in the top of Mount Cenis, which parts 
Savoy from Piedmont, there springs a river which 
runs down by Susa; it is not true. For there are 
above that river, for two miles length, very high 
hills on both sides, which are almost perpetually 
covered with snow; from which innumerable little 
streams running down do manifestly supply that 
river with water sufficient for its magnitude. 


SOUND, ODOUR, ETC. 489 


CHAP. XXIX. 
4 e 
OF SOUND, ODOUR, SAVOUR, AND TOUCH. 


1. The definition of sound, and the distinctions of sounds. 
2. The cause of the degrees of sounds.—3. The difference be- 
tween sounds acute and grave.—4. The difference between 
clear and hoarse sounds, whence.—5. The sound of thunder 
and of a gun, whence it proceeds.—6. Whence it is that pipes, 
by blowing into them, have a clear sound—-7. Of reflected 
sound.—8. From whence it is that sound is uniform and last- 
ing—9. How sound may be helped and hindered by the wind. 
10. Not only air, but other bodies how hard soever they be, 
convey sound.—11. The causes of grave and acute sounds, 
and of concent.—12. Phenomena for smelling.—13. The first 
organ and the generation of smelling.—14. How it is helped 
by heat and by wind.—15. Why such bodies are least smelt, 
which have least intermixture of air in them.—16. Why odo- 
rous things become more odorous by being bruised.—17. The 
first organ of tasting; and why some savours cause nauseous- 
ness.— 18. The first organ of feeling; and how we come to the 
knowledge of such objects as are common to the touch and 
other senses. 


1. SOUND 78 sense generated by the action of the Peete 
medium, when its motion reacheth the éar and the —~-— 
rest of the organs of sense. Now, the motion of The definition 
the medium is not the sound itself, but the cause thedistinction 
of it. For the phantasm which is made in us, that aca 
is to say, the reaction of the organ, e: properly that 
which we call sound. 

The principal distinctions of sounds are these ; 
first, that one sound is stronger, another weaker. 
Secondly, that one is more grave, another more 
acute. Thirdly, that one is clear, another hoarse. 


Fourthly, that one is primary, another derivative. 


486 PHYSICS. 


PART Iv. Fifthly, that one is uniform, another not. Sixthly, 
—— that one is more durable, another less durable. Of 
all which distinctions the members may be sub- 
distinguished into parts distinguishable almost in- 
finitely. For the variety of sounds seems to be not 

much less than that of colours. 

As vision, so hearing 1s generated by the motion 
of the medium, but not in the same manner. For 
sight is from pressure, that is, from an endeavour ; 
in which there is no perceptible progression of any 
of the parts of the medium; but one part urging 
or thrusting on another propagateth that action 
successively to any distance whatsoever; whereas 
the motion of the medium, by which sound is made, 
is a stroke. For when we hear, the drum of the 
ear, which is the first organ of hearing, is stricken; 
and the drum being stricken, the pia mater is also 
shaken, and with it the arteries which are inserted 
into it; by which the action being propagated to 
the heart itself, by the reaction of the heart a phan- 
tasm is made which we call sound; and because 
the reaction tendeth outwards, we think it ‘is 
without. 

Thecauseof 2. And seeing the effects produced by motion 
ee” are greater or less, not only when the velocity is 
greater or less, but also when the body hath greater 
or less magnitude though the velocity be the same ; 
a sound may be greater or less both these ways. 
And because neither the greatest nor the least 
magnitude or velocity can be given, it may happen 
that either the motion may be of so small velocity, 
or the body itself of so small magnitude, as to pro- 
duce no sound at all; or either of them may be so 


SOUND, ODOUR, ETC. 487 


great, as to take away the faculty of sense by PARTIy. 
hurting the organ. — 

From hence may be deduced possible causes of (0° fart 
the strength and weakness of sounds in the follow- sunds. 
ing phenomena. 

The first whereof is this, that if a man speak 
through a trunk which hath one end applied to the 
mouth of the speaker, and the other to the ear of 
the hearer, the sound will come stronger than it 
would do through the open air. And the cause, 
not only the possible, but the certain and manifest 
cause is this, that the air which is moved by the 
first breath and carried forwards in the trunk, is 
not diffused as it would be in the open air, and is 
consequently brought to the ear almost with the 
same velocity with which it was first breathed out. 
Whereas, in the open air, the first motion diffuseth 
itself every way into circles, such as are made by 
the throwing of a stone into a standing water, 
where the velocity grows less and less as the undu- 
lation proceeds further and further from the be- 
ginning of its motion. 

The second is this, that if the trunk be short, 
and the end which is applied to the mouth be wider 
than that which is applied to the ear, thus also the 
sound will be stronger than if it were made in the 
open air. And the cause is the same, namely, that 
by how much the wider end of the trunk is less 
distant from the beginning of the sound, by so 
much the less is the diffusion. 

The third, that it is easier for one, that is within 
a chamber, to hear what is spoken without, than 
for him, that stands without, to hear what is spoken 
within. For the windows and other inlets of the 


<~ 


488 PHYSICS. 


PART IV. moved air are as the wide end of the trunk. And 

~—— for this reason some creatures seem to hear the 
better, because nature has bestowed upon them 
wide and capacious ears. 

The fourth is this, that though he, which standeth 
upon the sea-shore, cannot hear the collision of 
the two nearest waves, yet nevertheless he hears 
the roaring of the whole sea. And the cause seems 
to be this, that though the several collisions move 
the organ, yet they are not severally great enough 
to cause sense ; whereas nothing hinders but that 
all of them together may make sound. 

The difference 3. That bodies when they are stricken do yield 

polity pla some a more grave, others a more acute sound, the 
cause may consist in the difference of the times in 
which the parts stricken and forced out of their 
places return to the same places again. For in 
some bodies, the restitution of the moved parts is 
quick, in others slow. And this also may be the 
cause, why the parts of the organ, which are moved 
by the medium, return to their rest again, some- 
times sooner, sometimes later. Now, by how much 
the vibrations or the reciprocal motions of the 
parts are more frequent, by so much doth the 
whole sound made at the same time by one stroke 
consist of more, and consequently of smaller parts. 
For what is acute in sound, the same is subtle in 
matter ; und both of them, namely acute sound 
and subtle matter, consist of very small parts, that 
of time, and this of the matter itself. 

The third distinction of sounds cannot be con- 
ceived clearly enough by the names I have used of 
clear and hoarse, nor by any other that I know; 
and therefore it is needful to explain them by 


SOUND, ODOUR, ETC. 489 


examples. When I say hoarse, I understand whis- PART Iv. 
pering and hissing, and whatsoever is like to these, ~—~ 
by what appellation soever it be expressed. And {ne diterence 
sounds of this kind seem to be made by the force acute andgrave 
of some strong wind, raking rather than striking 

such hard bodies as it falls upon. On the con- 

trary, when I use the word clear, I do not under- 

stand such a sound as may be easily and distinctly 

heard; for so whispers would be clear; but such 

as is made by somewhat that is broken, and such 

as is clamour, tinkling, the sound of a trumpet, &c. 

and to express it significantly in one word, noise. 

And seeing no sound is made but by the concourse 

of two bodies at the least, by which concourse it is 
necessary that there be as well reaction as action, 

that is to say, one motion opposite to another; it 

follows that according as the proportion between 

those two opposite motions is diversified, so the 

sounds which are made will be different from one 
another. And whensoever the proportion between 

them is so great, as that the motion of one of the 

bodies be insensible if compared with the motion 

of the other, then the sound will not be of the same 

kind; as when the wind falls very obliquely upon 

a hard body, or when a hard body is carried swiftly 
through the air; for then there is made that sound 

which I call a hoarse sound, in Greek svprypoc. 
Therefore the breath blown with violence from the 

mouth makes a hissing, because in going out it 

rakes the superficies of the lips, whose reaction 
against the force of the breath is not sensible. 

And this is the cause why the winds have that 

hoarse sound. Also if two bodies, how hard soever, 

be rubbed together with no great pressure, they 


PART IV. 
29. 
eye 


The difference 


betweenclear & 


490 PHYSICS. 


make a hoarse sound. And this hoarse sound, 
when it 1s made, as I have said, by the air raking 
the superficies of a hard body, seemeth to be 
nothing but the dividing of the air into innumera- 
ble and very small files. For the asperity of the 
superficies doth, by the eminences of its innumera- 
ble parts, divide or cut in pieces the air that slides 
upon it. 

4. Noise, or that which I call clear sound, is 


hoarse sounds, Made two ways; one, by two hoarse sounds made 


whence. 


The sound of 
thunder and of 
a gun, whence 
it proceeds. 


by opposite motions; the other, by collision, or by 
the sudden pulling asunder of two bodies, whereby 
their small particles are put into commotion, or 
being already in commotion suddenly restore 
themselves again; which motion, making impres- 
sion upon the medium, is propagated to the organ 
of hearing. And seeing there is in this collision 
or divulsion an endeavour in the particles of one 
body, opposite to the endeavour of the particles of 
the other body, there will also be made in the 
organ of hearing a like opposition of endeavours, 
that is to say, of motions; and consequently the 
sound arising from thence will be made by two 
opposite motions, that is to say, by two opposite 
hoarse sounds in one and the same part of the 
organ. For, as I have already said, a hoarse sound 
supposeth the sensible motion of but one of the 
bodies. And this opposition of motions in the 
organ is the cause why two bodies make a noise, 
when they are either suddenly stricken against one 
another, or suddenly broken asunder. 

5. This being granted, and seeing withal that 
thunder is made by the vehement eruption of the 
air out of the cavities of congealed clouds, the 


SOUND, ODOUR, ETC. 491 


~ cause of the great noise or clap may be the sudden PART IV. 
breaking asunder of the ice. For in this action it ——~ 
is necessary that there be not only a great concus- jr. su"s oF 
sion of the small particles of the broken parts, but eee 
also that this concussion, by being communicate 
to the air, be carried to the organ of hearing, and 
make impression upon it. And then, from the 
first reaction of the organ proceeds that first and 
greatest sound, which is made by the collision of 
the parts whilst they restore themselves. And 
seeing there is in all concussion a reciprocation 
of motion forwards and backwards in the parts 
stricken; for opposite motions cannot extinguish 
one another in an instant, as I have shown in the 
11th article of chapter vi11; it follows necessarily 
that the sound will both continue, and grow weaker 
and weaker, till at last the action of the recipro- 
cating air grow so weak, as to be imperceptible. 
Wherefore a possible cause is given both of the 
first fierce noise of the thunder, and also of the 
murmur that follows it. 

The cause of the great sound from a discharged 
piece of ordnance is like that of a clap of thunder. 
For the gunpowder being fired doth, in its en- 
deavour to go out, attempt every way the sides of 
the metal in such manner, as that it enlargeth the 
circumference all along, and withal shorteneth the 
axis; so that whilst the piece of ordnance is in 
discharging, it is made both wider and shorter 
than it was before; and therefore also presently 
after it 1s discharged its wideness will be dimi- 
nished, and its length increased again by the resti- 
tution of all the particles of the matter, of which it 
consisteth, tq their former position. And this is 


PART IV. 
29. 
Ces eon? 


Whence it is 
that pipes, by 
blowing into 
them, have a 
clear sound. 


492 PHYSICS. 


done with such motions of the parts, as are not 
only very vehement, but also opposite to one 
another ; which motions, being communicated to 
the air, make impression upon the organ, and by 
the reaction of the organ create a sound, which 
lasteth for some time; as I have already shown in 
this article. 

I note by the way, as not belonging to this 
place, that the possible cause why a gun recoils 
when it is shot off, may be this; that being first 
swollen by the force of the fire, and afterwards 
restoring itself, from this restitution there pro- 
ceeds an endeavour from all the sides towards the 
cavity; and consequently this endeavour is in 
those parts which are next the breech; which 
being not hollow, but solid, the effect of the resti- 
tution is by it hindered and diverted into fhe 
length; and by this means both the breech and 
the whole gun is thrust backwards ; and the more 
forcibly by how much the force is greater, by 
which the part next the breech is restored to its 
former posture, that is to say, by how much the 
thinner is that part. The cause, therefore, why 
guns recoil, some more some less, is the difference 
of their thickness towards the breech; and the 
greater that thickness is, the less they recoil ; and 
contrarily. 

6. Also the cause why the sound of a pipe, which 
is made by blowing into it, is nevertheless clear, is 
the same with that of the sound which is made by 
collision. For if the breath, when it is blown into 
a pipe, do only rake its concave superficies, or fall 
upon it with a very sharp angle of incidence, the 
sound will not be clear, but hoarse. But if the 


SOUND, ODOUR, ETC. 493 


angle be great enough, the percussion, which is 
made against one of the hollow sides, will be re- 
verberated to the opposite side; and so successive 
repercussions will be made from side to side, till at 
last the whole concave superficies of the pipe be 
put into motion; which motion will be recipro- 
cated, as it is in collision; and this reciprocation 
being propagated to the organ, from the reaction 
of the organ will arise a clear sound, such as is 
made by collision, or by breaking asunder of hard 
bodies. 

In the same manner it is with the sound of a 
man’s voice. For when the breath passeth out 
without interruption, and doth but lightly touch 
the cavities through which it is sent, the sound it 
maketh is a hoarse sound. But if in going out it 
strike strongly upon the larynx, then a clear 
sound is made, as in a pipe. And the same 
breath, as it comes in divers manners to the palate, 
the tongue, the lips, the teeth, and other organs of 
speech, so the sounds into which it is articulated 
become different from one another. 


PART IV. 
29. 


eee ae cal 


7. I call that primary sound, which is generated on ee 


by motion from the sounding body to the organ in 
a strait line without reflection; and I call that 
reflected sound, whichis generated by one or more 
reflections, being the same with that we call echo, 
and is iterated as often as there are reflections 
made from the object to the ear. And these re- 
flections are made by hills, walls, and other resist- 
ing bodies, so placed as that they make more or 
fewer reflections of the motion, according as they 
are themselves more or fewer in number; and 


they make them more or less frequently, according 


PART IV. 
29. 


—— 


From whence 


it is that sound 


494 PHYSICS. 


as they are more or less distant from one another. 
Now the cause of both these things is to be sought 
for in the situation of the reflecting bodies, as is 
usually done in sight. For the laws of reflection 
are the same in both, namely, that the angles of 
incidence and reflection be equal to one another. 
If, therefore, in a hollow elliptic body, whose in- 
side is well polished, or in two right parabolical 
solids, which are joined together by one common 
base, there be placed a sounding body in one of 
the burning points, and the ear in the other, there 
will be heard a sound by many degrees greater 
than in the open air; and both this, and the burn- 
ing of such combustible things, as being put in 
the same places are set on fire by the sun-beams, 
are effects of one and the same cause. But, as 
when the visible object is placed in one of the 
burning points, it is not distinctly seen in the other, 
because every part of the object being seen in 
every line, which is reflected from the concave 
superficies to the eye, makes a confusion in the 
sight; so neither is sound heard articulately and 
distinctly when it comes to the ear im all those 
reflected lines. And this may be the reason why 
in churches which have arched roofs, though they 
be neither elliptical nor parabolical, yet because 
their figure is not much different from these, the 
voice from the pulpit will not be heard so articu- 
lately as it would be, if there were no vaulting at all. 

8. Concerning the wnjformity and duration of 


is uniform and SOUNdS, both which have one common cause, we 


lasting. 


° 


may observe, that such bodies as being stricken 
yield an unequal or harsh sound, are very hetero- 
geneous, that is to say, they consist of parts which 


SOUND, ODOUR, ETC. 495 


are very unlike both in figure and hardness, such PART IV. 
as are wood, stones, and others not a few. When ~——— 
these are stricken, there follows a concussion of Fm vence , 
their internal particles, and a restitution of them i uniform and 
° ‘ , asting. 
again. But they are neither moved alike, nor 
have they the same action upon one another; 
some of them recoiling from the stroke, whilst 
others which have already finished their recoilings 
are now returning; by which means they hinder 
and stop one another. And from hence it is that 
their motions are not only unequal and harsh, but 
also that their reciprocations come to be quickly 
extinguished. Whensoever, therefore, this motion 
is propagated to the ear, the sound it makes 1s 
unequal and of small duration. On the contrary, 
if a body that is stricken be not only sufficiently 
hard, but have also the particles of which it con- 
sisteth like to one another both in hardness and 
figure, such as are the particles of glass and metals, 
which being first melted do afterwards settle and 
harden; the sound it yieldeth will, because the 
motions of its parts and their reciprocations are 
like and uniform, be uniform and pleasant, and be 
more or less lasting, according as the body stricken 
hath greater or less magnitude. The possible 
cause, therefore, of sounds uniform and harsh, and 
of their longer or shorter duration, may be one 
and the same likeness and unlikeness of the inter- 
nal parts of the sounding body, in respect both of 
their figure and hardness. 
Besides, if two plane bodies of the same matter 
and of equal thickness, do both yield an uniform 
sound, the sound of that body, which hath the 
greatest extent of length, will be the longest heard. 


496 | PHYSICS. 


PARTIV. For the motion, which in both of them hath its 
——— beginning from the point of percussion, is to be 


From whence 
it is that sound 
is uniform and 


lasting. 


propagated in the greater body through a greater 
space, and consequently that propagation will re- 
quire more time; and therefore also the parts 
which are moved, will require more time for their 
return. Wherefore all the reciprocations cannot 
be finished but in longer time; and being carried 
to the ear, will make the sound last the longer. 
And from hence it is manifest, that of hard bodies 
which yield an uniform sound, the sound lasteth 
longer which comes from those that are round and 
hollow, than from those that are plane, if they be 
like in all other respects. For in circular lines 
the action, which begins at any point, hath not 
from the figure any end of its propagation, because 
the line in which it is propagated returns again to 
its beginning ; so that the figure hinders not but 
that the motion may have infinite progression. 
Whereas in a plane, every line hath its magnitude 
finite, beyond which the action cannot proceed. 


‘Tf, therefore, the matter be the same, the motion 


of the parts of that body whose figure is round 
and hollow, will last longer than of that which is 
plane. 

Also, if a string which is stretched be fastened 
at both ends to a hollow body, and be stricken, the 
sound will last longer than if it were not so fas- 
tened; because the trembling or reciprocation 
which it receives from the stroke, 1s by reason of 
the connection communicated to the hollow body ; 
and this trembling, if the hollow body be great, will 
last the longer by reason of that greatness. Where- 


SOUND, ODOUR, ETC. 497 


fore also, for the reason above mentioned, the PARTI: 
sound will last the longer. — 
9. In hearing it happens, otherwise than in How sound 

seeing, that the action of the medium is made and hindered 
stronger by the wind when it blows the same ' “wind 
way, and weaker when it blows the contrary way. 

The cause whereof cannot proceed from anything 

but the different generation of sound and light. 

For in the generation of light, none of the parts 

of the medium between the object and the eye are 

moved from their own places to other places sen- 

sibly distant; but the action is propagated in 

spaces imperceptible; so that no contrary wind 

can diminish, nor favourable wind encrease the 

light, unless it be so strong as to remove the 

object further off or bring it nearer to the eye. 

For the wind, that is to say the air moved, doth 

not by its interposition between the object and the 

eye work otherwise than it would do, if it were 

still and calm. For, where the pressure is perpetual, 

one part of the air is no sooner carried away, but 
another, by succeeding it, receives the same impres- 
sion,which the part carriedaway hadreceived before. 

But in the generation of sound, the first collision 

or breaking asunder beateth away and driveth out 

of its place the nearest part of the air, and that to 

a considerable distance, and with considerable 
velocity ; and as the circles grow by their remote- 

ness wider and wider, so the air being more and 

more dissipated, hath also its motion more and 

more weakened. Whensoever therefore the air is 

so stricken as to cause sound, if the wind fall upon 

it, it will move it all nearer to the ear, if it blow 

VOL. 1. K K 


PART IV. 
20. 


Serre 


Not only air, 


but other bo- 
dies, how hard 
soever they be, 
convey sound, 


498 | PHYSICS. 


that way, and further from it if it blow the con- 
trary way; so that according as it blows from or 
towards the object, so the sound which is heard 
will seem to come from a nearer or remoter place; 
and the reaction, by reason of the unequal distances, 
be strengthened or debilitated. 

From hence may be understood the reason why 
the voice of such as are said to speak in their bel- 
lies, though it be uttered near hand, is neverthe- 
less heard, by those that suspect nothing, as if it 
were a great way off. For having no former thought 
of any determined place from which the voice 
should proceed, and judging according to the 
greatness, if it be weak they think it a great way 
off, if strong near. These ventriloqui, therefore, 
by forming their voice, not as others by the emis- 
sion of their breath, but by drawing it inwards, 
do make the same appear small and weak; which 
weakness of the voice deceives those, that neither 
suspect thé artifice nor observe the endeavour 
which they use in speaking; and so, instead of 
thinking it weak, they think it far off. 

10. As for the medium, which conveys sound, 
it is not air only. For water, or any other body 
how hard soever, may be that medium. For the 
motion may be propagated perpetually in any hard 
continuous body; but by reason of the difficulty, 
with which the parts of hard bodies are moved, the 
motion in going out of hard matter makes but a 
weak impression upon the air. Nevertheless, if one 
end of a very long and hard beam be stricken, and 
the ear be applied at the same time to the other end, 
so that, when the action goeth out of the beam, the 


SOUND, ODOUR, ETC. 499 


air, which it striketh, may immediately be received PART IV. 
by the ear, and be carried to the tympanum, the —-— 
sound will be considerably strong. 

In like manner, if in the night, when all other 
noise which may hinder sound ceaseth, a man lay 
his ear to the ground, he will hear the sound of 
the steps of passengers, though at a great distance ; 
because the motion, which by their treading they 
communicate to the earth, is propagated to the ear 
by the uppermost parts of the earth which receiveth 
it from their feet. 

11. I have shown above, that the difference be- Laas 
tween grave and acute sounds consisteth in this, sounds /andol 
that by how much the shorter the time is, in which “""" 
the reciprocations of the parts of a body stricken 
are made, by so much the more acute will be the 
sound. Now by how much a body of the same 
bigness is either more heavy or less stretched, by 
so much the longer will the reciprocations last ; 
and therefore heavier and less stretched bodies, 
if they be like in all other respects, will yield a 
graver sound than such as be lighter and more 
stretched. 

As for the concent of sounds, it is to be con- 
sidered that the reciprocation or vibration of the 
air, by which sound is made, after it hath reached 
the drum of the ear, imprinteth a like vibration 
upon the air that is inclosed within it; by which 
means the sides of the drum within are stricken 
alternately. Now the concent of two sounds 
consists in this, that the tympanum receives its 
sounding stroke from both the sounding bodies in 
equal and equally frequent spaces of time ; so that 
when two strings make their vibrations in the same 

KK 2 


500 PHYSICS. 


PARTIV. times, the concent they produce is the most exqui- 
—— site of all other. For the sides of the tympanum, 


The causes of 
grave and acute 


that is to say of the organ of hearing, will be 


sounds, and of stricken by both those vibrations together at once, 


cencent. 


on one side or other. For example, if the two 
equal strings A B and C D be stricken together, and 
the latitudes of their vibrations E F and G H be 
also equal, and the points E, G, F and H be in the 
concave superficies of the tympanum, so that it 
receive strokes from both the strings together in E 
and G, and again together in F and H, the sound, 


which is made by the vibrations A——————B 
of each string, will be so like, C—————D 
that it may be taken for the G E 
same sound, and is called wnz- 

son ; which is the greatest con- K 


cord. Again, the string AB 
retaining still its former vibra- 
tion EF, let the string CD be L 
stretched till its vibration have 

double the swiftness it had be- H F 
fore, and let EF be divided equally in I. In what 
time therefore the string C D makes one part of 
its vibration from G to H, in the same time the 
string A B will make one part of its vibration from 
E to I; and in what time the string CD hath made 
the other part of its vibration back from H to G, 
in the same time another part of the vibration of 
the string AB will be made from Ito F. But the 
points F and G are both in the sides of the organ, 
and therefore they will strike the organ both to- 
gether, not at every stroke, but at every other 
stroke. And this 1s the nearest concord to unison, 
and makes that sound which is called an erghth. 


SOUND, ODOUR, ETC. 501 


Again, the vibration of the string A B remaiming 
still the same it was, let C D be stretched till its 
vibration be swifter than that of the string A B in 
the proportion of 3 to 2, and let EF be divided 
into three equal parts in K and L. In what time 
therefore the string C D makes one third part of 
its vibration, which third part is from G to H, the 
string A B will make one third part of its vibra- 
tion, that is to say, two-thirds of EF, namely, EL. 
And in what time the string C D makes another 
third part of its vibration, namely H G, the string 
A B will make another third part of its vibration, 
namely from L to F, and back again from F to L. 
Lastly, whilst the string C D makes the last third 
part of its vibration, that is from G to H, the 
string AB will make the last third part of its 
vibration from L to E. But the points E and H 
are both im the sides of the organ. Wherefore, at 
every third time, the organ will be stricken by the 
vibration of both the strings together, and make 
that concord which is called a fifth. 


PART IV. 
29. 


12. For the finding out the cause of smells, I Phenomena 


shall make use of the evidence of these following 
phenomena. First, that smelling is hindered by 
cold, and helped by heat. Secondly, that when 
the wind bloweth from the object, the smell is the 
stronger ; and, contrarily, when it bloweth from 
the sentient towards the object, the weaker ; both 
which phenomena are, by experience, manifestly 
found to be true in dogs, which follow the track 
of beasts by the scent. Thirdly, that such bodies, 
as are less pervious to the fluid medium, yield less 
smell than such as are more pervious; as may be 
seen in stones and metals, which, compared with 


of smelling. 


502 PHYSICS. 


PART IV. plants and living creatures, and their parts, fruits 
“and excretions, have very little or no smell at all. 

Fourthly, that such bodies, as are of their own 
nature odorous, become yet more odorous when 
they are bruised. Fifthly, that when the breath 
is stopped, at least in men, nothing can be smelt. 
Sixthly, that the sense of smelling is also taken 
away by the stopping of the nostrils, though the 
mouth be left open. 

The first organ 13. By the fifth and sixth phenomenon it is 

aes ae ifest, that the first and immediate organ of 

ration of maniest, a g 

smelling. —_ smelling is the innermost cuticle of the nostrils, and 
that part of it, which is below the passage common 
to the nostrils and the palate. For when we draw 
breath by the nostrils we draw it into the lungs. 
That breath, therefore, which conveys smells is in 
the way which passeth to the lungs, that is to say, 
in that part of the nostrils which is below the pas- 
sage through which the breath goeth. For, nothing 
is smelt, neither beyond the passage of the breath 
within, nor at all without the nostrils. 

And seeing that from different smells there must 
necessarily proceed some mutation in the organ, 
and all mutation is motion ; it is therefore also ne- 
cessary that, in smelling, the parts of the organ, 
that is to say of that internal cuticle and the 
nerves that are inserted into it, must be diversely 
moved by different smells. And seeing also, that 
it hath been demonstrated, that nothing can be 
moved but by a body that is already moved and 
contiguous; and that there is no other body con- 
tiguous to the internal membrane of the nostrils 
but breath, that is to say attracted air, and such 
little solid invisible bodies, if there be any such, as 


SOUND, ODOUR, ETC. 503 


are intermingled with the air; it follows neces- PARTIV. 
sarily, that the cause of smelling is either the ~—+— 
motion of that pure air or ethereal substance, or Je Store" 
’ and the ge- 
the motion of those small bodies. But this motion cine 
is an effect proceeding from the object of smell, 
and, therefore, either the whole object itself or its 
several parts must necessarily be moved. Now, 
we know that odorous bodies make odour, though 
their whole bulk be not moved. Wherefore the 
cause of odour is the motion of the invisible parts 
of the odorous body. And these invisible parts do 
either go out of the object, or else, retaining their 
former situation with the rest of the parts, are 
moved together with them, that is to say, they have 
simple and invisible motion. They that say, there 
goes something out of the odorous body, call it 
an effluvium; which effluvium is either of the 
ethereal substance, or of the small bodies that are 
intermingled with it. But, that all variety of 
odours should proceed from the effluvia of those 
small bodies that are intermingled with the ethe- 
real substance, is altogether incredible, for these 
considerations ; first, that certain unguents, though 
very little in quantity, do nevertheless send forth 
very strong odours, not only to a great distance of 
place, but also for a great continuance of time, and 
are to be smelt in every point both of that place 
and time; so that the parts issued out are sufficient 
to fill ten thousand times more space, than the 
whole odorous body is able to fill; which is impos- 
sible. Secondly, that whether that issuing out be 
with strait or with crooked motion, if the same 
quantity should flow from any other odorotis body 
with the same motion, it would follow that all 
odorous bodies would yield the same smell. Thirdly, 


PART IV. 
29. 


Howsmellingis 
helped by heat 


and by wind. 


504 PHYSICS. 


that seeing those effluvia have great velocity of 
motion (as is manifest from this, that noisome 
odours proceeding from caverns are presently 
smelt at a great distance) it would follow, that, by 
reason there is nothing to hinder the passage of 
those effluvia to the organ, such motion alone 
were sufficient to cause smelling; which is not so; 
for we cannot smell at all, unless we draw in our 
breath through our nostrils. Smelling, therefore, 
is not caused by the effluvium of atoms; nor, 
for the same reason, is it caused by the effuvium 
of ethereal substance; for so also we should smell 
without the drawing in of our breath. Besides, 
the ethereal substance being the same in all odo- 
rous bodies, they would always affect the organ in 
the same manner; and, consequently, the odours of 
all things would be alike. 

It remains, therefore, that the cause of smelling 
must consist in the simple motion of the parts of 
odorous bodies without any efflux or diminution 
of their whole substance. And by this motion 
there is propagated to the organ, by the interme- 
diate air, the like motion, but not-strong enough 
to excite sense of itself without the attraction of 
air by respiration. And this is a possible cause of 
smelling. 

14. The cause why smelling is hindered by cold 
and helped by heat may be this ; that heat, as hath 
been shown in chapter xx1, generateth simple 
motion; and therefore also, wheresoever it is 
already, there it will increase 1t; and the cause of 
smelling being increased, the smell itself will also 
be increased. As for the cause why the wind 
blowing from the object makes the smell the 
stronger, it is all one with that for which the at- 


SOUND, ODOUR, ETC. 505 


traction of air in respiration doth the same. For, We 
he that draws in the air next to him, draws with it ———~ 
by succession that air in which is the object. 

Now, this motion of the air is wind, and, when 
another wind bloweth from the object, will be in-. 

creased by it. 

15. That bodies which contain the least quan- Why such bo- 

tity of air, as stones and metals, yield less smell cole hich 
than plants and living creatures ; the cause may }#*° te '<ast 
be, that the motion, which causeth smelling, is a °f ir in them. 
motion of the fluid parts only; which parts, if 
they have any motion from the hard parts in which 
they are contained, they communicate the same to 
the open air, by which it is propagated to the 
organ. Where, therefore, there are no fluid parts 
as in metals, or where the fluid parts receive no 
motion from the hard parts, as in stones, which 
are made hard by accretion, there can be no smell. 
And therefore also the water, whose parts have 
little or no motion, yieldeth no smell. But, if the 
same water, by seeds and the heat of the sun, be 
together with particles of earth raised into a plant, 
and be afterwards pressed out again, it will be 
odorous, as wine from the vine. And as water 
passing through plants is by the motion of the 
parts of those plants made an odorous liquor; so 
also of air, passing through the same plants whilst 
they are growing, are made odorous airs. And 
thus also it is with the juices and spirits, which are 
bred in living creatures. 

16. That odorous bodies may be made more Why odorous 
odorous by contrition proceeds from this, that sae 
being broken into many parts, which are all odor- *"" "#4 
ous, the air, which by respiration is drawn from 
the object towards the organ, doth in its passage 


PART IY, 
29, 
cen ee all 


The first organ 
of tasting ; and 


why some sa- 
vours cause 
nauseousness, 


506 PHYSICS. 


touch upon all those parts, and receive their motion. 
Now, the air toucheth the superficies only ; anda 
body having less superficies whilst it is whole, than 
all its parts together have after it is reduced to 
powder, it follows that the same odorous body 
yieldeth less smell whilst it is whole, than it will do 
after it is broken into smaller parts. And thus 
much of smells. 

17. The taste follows; whose generation hath 
this difference from that of the sight, hearing, and 
smelling, that by these we have sense of remote 
objects ; whereas, we taste nothing but what is 
contiguous, and doth immediately touch either the 
tongue or palate, or both. From whence it is evi- 
dent, that the cuticles of the tongue and palate, 
and the nerves inserted into them are the first 
organ of taste; and (because from the conctssion 
of the parts of these, there followeth necessarily a 
concussion of the pia mater) that the action com- 
municated to these is propagated to the brain, and 
from thence to the farthest orgar, namely, the 
heart, in whose reaction consisteth the nature of 
sense. | 
Now, that savours, as well as odours, do not 
only move the brain but the stomach also, as is 
manifest by the loathings that are caused by them 
both; they, that consider the organ of both these 
senses, will not wonder at all; seeing the tongue, 
the palate and the nostrils, have one and the same 
continued cuticle, derived from the dura mater. 

And that effluvia have nothing to do in the 
sense of tasting, is manifest from this, that there 
is no taste where the organ and the object are not 
contiguous. 


SOUND, ODOUR, ETC. 507 


By what variety of motions the different kinds PART IV. 
of tastes, which are innumerable, may be distin- ~—-—~ 
guished, I know not. I might with others derive 
them from the divers figures of those atoms, of 
which whatsoever may be tasted consisteth; or 
from the diverse motions which I might, by way of 
supposition, attribute to those atoms; conjecturing, 
not without some likelihood of truth, that such things 
as taste sweet have their particles moved with slow 
circular motion, and their figures spherical; which 
makes them smooth and pleasing to the organ; 
that bitter things have circular motion, but vehe- 
ment, and their figures full of angles, by which 
they trouble the organ; and that sour things have 
strait and reciprocal motion, and their figures long 
and small, so that they cut and wound the organ. 

And in like manner I might assign for the causes 
of other tastes such several motions and figures of 
atoms, as might in probability seem to be the true 
causes. But this would be to revolt from philoso- 
phy to divination. 
18. By the touch, we feel what bodies are cold The first organ 
° of feeling ; and 
or hot, though they be distant from us. Others, how we came 
as hard, soft, rough, and smooth, we cannot feel ica oh 
unless they be contiguous. The organ of touch is ects as se 
every one of those membranes, which being con- touch and to 
; ° , other senses. 
tinued from the pza mater are so diffused through- 
out the whole body, as that no part of it can be 
pressed, but the pia mater is pressed together with 
it. Whatsoever therefore presseth it, is felt as 
hard or soft, that is to say, as more or less hard. 
And as for the sense of rough, it is nothing else 
but innumerable perceptions of hard and hard 
succeeding one another by short intervals both of 


508 PHYSICS. 


PARTIV. time and place. For we take notice of rough and 

—-—— smooth, as also of magnitude and figure, not only 
by the touch, but also by memory. For though 
some things are touched in one point, yet rough 
and smooth, like quantity and figure, are not per- 
ceived but by the flux of a point, that is to say, 
we have no sense of them without time; and we 
can have no sense of time without memory. 


~ CHAPTER XXX. 
OF GRAVITY. 


1. A thick body doth not contain more matter, unless also more 
place, than a thin.—2. That the descent of heavy bodies pro- 
ceeds not from their own appetite, but from some power of 
the earth.—3. The difference of gravities proceedeth from the 
difference of the impetus with which the elements, whereof 
heavy bodies are made, do fall upon the earth—4. The cause 
of the descent of heavy bodies.—5. In what proportion the 
descent of heavy bodies is accelerated—6. Why those that 
dive do not, when they are under water, feel the weight of the 
water above them.—7. The weight of a body that floateth, is 
equal to the weight of so much water as would fill the space, 
which the immersed part of the body takes up within the 
water.—8. If a body be lighter than water, then how big 
soever that body be, it may float upon any quantity of water, 
how little soever.—9. How water may be lifted up and forced 
out of a vessel by air—10. Why a bladder is heavier when 
blown full of air, than when it is empty.—11. The cause of 
the ejection upwards of heavy bodies from a wind-gun. 
12. The cause of the ascent of water in a weather-glass. 
13. The cause of motion upwards in living creatures.—14. That 
there is in nature a kind of body heavier than air, which never- 
theless is not by sense distinguishable from it—15. Of the 
cause of magnetical virtue. | 

A thick body ], IN chapter xx1.1 have defined thick and thin, 


h é ; ; 
i cane mat. as that place required, so, as that by thick was 


OF GRAVITY. | 509 


signified a more resisting body, and by thin, a body PART Iv. 
less resisting ; following the custom of those that ~~ 
have before me discoursed of refraction. Now if tronet 
we consider the true and vulgar signification of than « thin. 
those words, we shall find them to be names col- 
lective, that is to say, names of multitude ; as ¢hick 
to be that, which takes up more parts of a space 
given, and ¢hzn that, which contains fewer parts of 
the same magnitude in the same space, or in a 
space equal to it. Thick therefore is the same 
with frequent, as a thick troop; and thin the same 
with unfrequent, as a thin rank, thin of houses; 
not that there is more matter in one place than in 
another equal place, but a greater quantity of some 
named body. For there is not less matter or body, 
indefinitely taken, in a desert, than there is in a 
city; but fewer houses, or fewer men. Nor is 
there in a thick rank a greater quantity of body, 
but a greater number of soldiers, than in a thin. 
Wherefore the multitude and paucity of the parts 
contained within the same space do constitute 
density and rarity, whether those parts be sepa- 
rated by vacuum or by air. But the consideration 
of this is not of any great moment in philosophy ; 
and therefore I let it alone, and pass on to the 
search of the causes of gravity. 
2. Now we call those bodies heavy, which, Ts the de- 

: : scent of heavy 
unless they be hindered by some force, are carried bodies proceeds 
towards the centre of the earth, and that by their own spreite. 
own accord, for aught we can by sense perceive to poyerer the 
the contrary. Some philosophers therefore have cath. 
been of opinion, that the descent of heavy bodies 
proceeded from some internal appetite, by which, 
when they were cast upwards, they descended 


PART IV, 
30. 


an gama 


The difference 
of gravities 
proceedeth 


510 PHYSICS. 


again, as moved by themselves, to such place as 
was agreeable to their nature. . Others thought 
they were attracted by the earth. To the former 
I cannot assent, because I think I have already 
clearly enough demonstrated that there can be no 
beginning of motion, but from an external and 
moved body; and consequently, that whatsoever 
hath motion or endeavour towards any place, will 
always move or endeavour towards that same place, 
unless it be hindered by the reaction of some 
external body. Heavy bodies, therefore, being 
once cast upwards, cannot be cast down again 
but by external motion. Besides, seeing inanimate 
bodies have no appetite at all, it is ridiculous to 
think that by their own innate appetite they should, 
to preserve themselves, not understanding what 
preserves them, forsake the place they are in, and 
transfer themselves to another place; whereas 
man, who hath both appetite and understanding, 
cannot, for the preservation of his own life, raise 
himself by leaping above three or four feet from 
the ground. Lastly, to attribute to created bodies 
the power to move themselves, what is it else than 
to say that there be creatures which have no 
dependance upon the Creator? To the latter, who 
attribute the descent of heavy bodies to the attrac- 
tion of the earth, I assent. But by what motion 
this is done, hath not as yet been explained by any 
man. I shall therefore in this place say some- 
what of the manner and of the way by which the 


_earth by its action attracteth heavy bodies. 


3. That by the supposition of simple motion in 
the sun, homogeneous bodies are congregated and 


from the differ- heterogeneous dissipated, has already been demon- 


OF GRAVITY. 51} 


strated in the 5th article of chapter xxt. I have PART IV. 
also supposed, that there are intermingled with the ~——— 
pure air certain little bodies, or, as others call them, facia ae 
atoms ; which by reason of their extreme small]- which the cle- 


ness are invisible, and differmg from one another heary bodies 
in consistence, figure, motion, and magnitude ; fall spat ihe: 
from whence it comes to pass that some of them‘ 
are congregated to the earth, others to other 
planets, and others are carried up and down in the 
spaces between. And seeing those, which are car- 
ried to the earth, differ from one another in figure, 
motion, and magnitude, they will fall upon the 
earth, some with greater, others with less impetus. 
And seeing also that we compute the several 
degrees of gravity no otherwise than by this their 
falling upon the earth with greater or less impetus; 

it follows, that we conclude those to be the more 
heavy that have the greater impetus, and those to be 

less heavy that have the less impetus. Our inquiry 
therefore must be, by what means it may come to 
pass, that of bodies, which descend from above to 

the earth, some are carried with greater, others 
with less impetus; that is to say, some are more 
heavy than others. We must also inquire, by what 
means such bodies, as settle upon the earth, may 

by the earth itself be forced to ascend. 

4. Let the circle made upon the centre C (in The cause of 
fig. 2) be a great circle in the superficies of the Aes badiew, 
earth, passing through the points A and B. Also 
let any heavy body, as the stone AD, be placed 
anywhere in the plane of the equator; and let it 
be conceived to be cast up from AD _ perpendicu- 
larly, or to be carried in any other line to E, and 
supposed to rest there. Therefore, how much 


PART IV. 
30. 
——— 
The cause of 
the descent of 
heavy bodies, 


512 PHYSICS. 


space soever the stone took up in AD, so much 
space it takes up now in E. And because all place 
is supposed to be full, the space A D will be filled 
by the air which flows into it first from the nearest 
places of the earth, and afterwards successively 
from more remote places. Upon the centre C let 
a circle be understood to be drawn through E; and 
let the plane space, which is between the superficies 
of the earth and that circle, be divided into plane 
orbs equal and concentric ; of which let that be the 
first, which is contained by the two perimeters that 
pass through A and D. Whilst therefore the air, 
which is in the first orb, filleth the place AD, the 
orb itself is made so much less, and consequently 
its latitude is less than the strait line A D. Where- 
fore there will necessarily descend so much air 
from the orb next above. In like manner, for the 
same cause, there will also be a descent of air from 
the orb next above that; and so by succession 
from the orb in which the stone is at rest in E. 
Either therefore the stone itself, or so much air, 
will descend. And seeing air is by the diurnal 
revolution of the earth more easily thrust away 
than the stone, the air, which is in the orb that 
contains the stone, will be forced further upwards 
than the stone. But this, without the admission 
of vacuum, cannot be, unless so much air descend 
to E from the place next above ; which being done, 
the stone will be thrust downwards. By this 
means therefore the stone now receives the begin- 
ning of its descent, that is to say, of its gravity. 
Furthermore, whatsoever is once moved, will be 
moved continually (as hath been shown in the 
19th article of chapter vi11) in the same way, and 


OF GRAVITY. 513 


‘with the same celerity, except it be retarded or PARTIV. 
accelerated by some external movent. Now the -—~— 
air, which is the only body that is interposed be- lat cnage 
tween the earth A and the stone above it E, will bevy bodes. 
have the same action in every point of the strait 
line E A, which it hathin E. But it depressed the 
stone in E; and therefore also it will depress it 
equally in every point of the strait line E A. Where- 
fore the stone will.descend from E to A with acce- 
lerated motion. The possible cause therefore of 
the descent of heavy bodies under the equator, is 
the diurnal motion of the earth. And the same 
demonstration will serve, if the stone be placed in 
the plane of any other circle parallel to the equator. 
But because this motion hath, by reason of its 
greater slowness, less force to thrust off the air in 
the parallel circles than in the equator, and no 
force at all at the poles, it may well be thought 
(for it is a certain consequent) that heavy bodies 
descend with less and less velocity, as they are 
more and more remote from the equator ; and that 
at the poles themselves, they will either not descend 
at all, or not descend by the axis; which whether 
it be true or false, experience must determine. But 
it is hard to make the experiment, both because 
the times of their descents cannot be easily mea- 
sured with sufficient exactness, and also because 
the places near the poles are inaccessible. Never- 
theless, this we know, that by how much the 
nearer we come to the poles, by so much the 
greater are the flakes of the snow that falls; and 
by how much the more swiftly such bodies descend 
as are fluid and dissipable, by so much the smaller 
are the particles into which they are dissipated. 
VOL. I. LL 


PART IV. 
0. 
ye 
In what pro- 


portion the de- 


scent of heavy 
bodies is accele- 
rated, 


514 PHYSICS. 


5. Supposing, therefore, this to be the cause of 
the descent of heavy bodies, it will follow that 
their motion will be accelerated in such manner, 
as that the spaces, which are transmitted by them 
in the several times, will have to one another the 
same proportion which the odd numbers have in 
succession from unity. For if the strait line EA 
be divided into any number of equal parts, the 
heavy body descending will, by reason of the per- 
petual action of the diurnal motion, receive from 
the air in every one of those times, in every several 
point of the strait line E A, a several new and 
equal impulsion ; and therefore also in every one 
of those times, it will acquire a several and equal 
degree of celerity. And from hence it follows, by 
that which Galileus hath in his Dialogues of Mo- 
tion demonstrated, that heavy bodies descend in 
the several times with such differences of trans- 
mitted spaces, as are equal to the differences of 
the square numbers that succeed one another from 
unity; which square numbers being 1, 4, 9, 16, 
&c. their differences are 3, 5, 7, &c.; that is to say, 
the odd numbers which succeed one another from 
unity. Against this cause of gravity which I have 
given, it will perhaps be objected, that if a heavy 
body be placed in the bottom of some hollow 
cylinder of iron or adamant, and the bottom be 
turned upwards, the body will descend, though the 
air above cannot depress it, much less accelerate 
its motion. But it is to be considered that there 
can be no cylinder or cavern, but such as is sup- 
ported by the earth, and being so supported is, 
together with the earth, carried about by its 
diurnal motion. For by this means the bottom of 


OF GRAVITY. 515 


the cylinder will be as the superficies of the earth; BPE: 
and by thrusting off the next and lowest air, will —-— 
make the uppermost air depress the heavy body, 

which is at the top of the cylinder, in such manner 

as 1s above explicated. 

6. The gravity of water being so great as by pede ee a 
experience we find it is, the reason is demanded by when they are 
many, why those that dive, how deep soever they feel the weight 
go under water, do not at all feel the weight of the rater 
the water which lies upon them. And the cause 
seems to be this, that all bodies by how much the 
heavier they are, by so much the greater is the 
endeavour by which they tend downwards. But 
the body of a man is heavier than so much water 
as is equal to it in magnitude, and therefore the 
endeavour downwards of a man’s body is greater 
than that of water. And seeing all endeavour is 
motion, the body also of a man will be carried 
towards the bottom with greater velocity than so 
much water. Wherefore there is greater reaction 
from the bottom; and the endeavour upwards is 
equal to the endeavour downwards, whether the 
water be pressed by water, or by another body 
which is heavier than water. And therefore by 
these two opposite equal endeavours, the endeavour 
both ways in the water is taken away; and con- 
sequently, those that dive are not at all pressed 
by it. 

Coroll. From hence also it is manifest, that 
water in water hath no weight at all, because all 
the parts of water, both the parts above, and the 
parts that are directly under, tend towards the 
bottom with equal endeavour and in the same 
strait lines. 

LL 2 


516 PHYSICS. 


PARTiY. 7. [fa body float upon the water, the weight of 

—— that body is equal to the weight of so much water 
body thetfoat, 28 Would fill the place which the immersed part of 
eth, is equal to the body takes up within the water. 


the weight of so 


much water a Let EF (in fig. 3) be a body floating in the water 
apace whichthe A BCD; and let the part E be above, and the 


wT ihe beiy’ Other part F under the water. I say, the weight 

takes up within of the whole body EF is equal to the weight of so 
much water as the space F will receive. For 
seeing the weight of the body EF forceth the 
water out of the space F, and placeth it upon the 
superficies A B, where it presseth downwards; it 
follows, that from the resistance of the bottom 
there will also be an endeavour upwards. And 
seeing again, that by this endeavour of the water 
upwards, the body EF is lifted up, it follows, that 
if the endeavour of the body downwards be not 
equal to the endeavour of the water upwards, 
either the whole body EF will, by reason of that 
inequality of their endeavours or moments, be 
raised out of the water, or else it will descend to 
the bottom. But it is supposed to stand so, as 
neither to ascend nor descend. Wherefore there 
is an equilibrium between the two endeavours ; 
that is to say, the weight of the body E F is equal 
to the weight of so much water as the space F will 
receive ; which was to be proved. 

af a body ve 8. From hence it follows, that any body, of how 


lighter than : ‘ ° : 
water, thenhow great magnitude soever, provided it consist of 


hig soever that 


body be, it may Matter less heavy than water, may nevertheless 
quantity of float upon any quantity of water, how little soever- 
bole Let A BCD (in fig. 4): be a vessel ; and in it let 

EFGH be a body consisting of matter which is 


less heavy than water; and let the space AGCF 


> hn A 


OF GRAVITY. | 517 


be filled with water. I say, the body EFGH will Parr Iv. 
not sink to the bottom DC. For seeing the matter ~——— 
of the body EFGH is less heavy than water, if the 

whole space without ABCD were full of water, 

yet some part of the body EFGH, as EFIK, 

would be above the water; and the weight of so 

much water as would fill the space IGH K would 

be equal to the weight of the whole body EFGH; 

and consequently G H would not touch the bottom 

DC. As for the sides of the vessel, it 1s no 

matter whether they be hard or fluid; for they 

serve only to terminate the water; which may be 

done as well by water as by any other matter how 

hard soever; and the water without the vessel is" 
terminated somewhere, so as that it can spread no 

farther. The part therefore EF IK will be extant 

above the water AGC F which is contained in the 

vessel. Wherefore the body EFGH will also 

float upon the water AGCF, how little soever 

that water be; which was to be demonstrated. 

9, In the 4th article of chapter xxvi, there is pale 
brought for the proving of vacuum the experiment forced out of a 
of water enclosed in a vessel; which water, the "*°Y 
orifice above being opened, is ejected upwards by 
the impulsion of the air. It is therefore demanded, 
seeing water is heavier than air, how that can be 
done. Let the second figure of the same, chapter 
xxvi be considered, where the water is with great 
force injected by a syringe into the space FGB. 

In that injection, the air (but pure air) goeth 
with the same force out of the vessel through the 
injected water. But as for those small bodies, 
which formerly I supposed to be intermingled with 
air and to be moved with simple motion, they 


a18 PHYSICS. 


PART IV. cannot, together with the pure air, penetrate the 
water; but remaining behind are necessarily thrust 
A “lifted up ana COSether into a narrower place, namely into the 
et a of « space which is above the water FG. The mo- 
" tions therefore of those small bodies will be less 

and less free, by how much the quantity of the 
injected water is greater and greater; so that by 

their motions falling upon one another, the same 

small bodies will mutually compress each other, 

and have a perpetual endeavour of regaining their 

liberty, and of depressing the water that hinders 

them. Wherefore, as soon as the orifice above is 
opened, the water which is next it will have an 
endeavour to ascend, and will therefore necessarily 

go out. But it cannot go out, unless at the same 

time there enter in as much air; and therefore 

both the water will go out, and the air enter in, 

till those small bodies which were left within the 

vessel have recovered their former liberty of mo- 

tion; that is to say, till the vessel be again filled 

with air, and no water be left of sufficient height 

to stop the passage at B. Wherefore I have shown 

a possible cause of this phenomenon, namely, the 

same with that of thunder. For as in the gene- 

ration of thunder, the small bodies enclosed within 

the clouds, by being too closely pent together, do 

by their motion break the clouds, and restore them- 

selves to their natural liberty; so here also the 

small bodies enclosed within the space which is 

above the strait line FG, do by their own motion 

expel the water as soon as the passage is opened 

above. And if the passage be kept stopped, and 

these small bodies be more vehemently compressed 


OF GRAVITY. 519 


by the perpetual forcing in of more water, they rary: 
will at last break the vessel itself with great noise. Sane 
10. If air be blown into a hollow cylinder, or Why « bladder 


is heavier when 


into a bladder, it will increase the weight of either blown fall of 
of them a little, as many have found by experience, j, j, rg hpeee a 
who with great accurateness have tried the same. 

And it is no wonder, seeing, as 1 have supposed, 

there are intermingled with the common air a great 

number of small hard bodies, which are heavier 

than the pure air. For, the ethereal substance, 

being on all sides equally agitated by the motion of 

the sun, hath an equal endeavour towards all the 

parts of the universe; and, therefore, it hath no 

gravity at all. 

11. We find also by experience, that, by the The cause of 
force of air enclosed in a hollow cannon, a bullet ees ot nea 
of lead may with considerable violence be shot out =i 
of a gun of late invention, called the wind-gun. In 
the end of this cannon there are two holes, with 
their valves on the inside, to shut them close; one 
of them serving for the admission of air, and the 
other for the letting of it out. Also, to that end 
which serves for the receiving in of air, there is 
joined another cannon of the same metal and big- 
ness, in which there is fitted a rammer which is 
perforated, and hath also a valve opening towards 
the former cannon. By the help of this valve the 
rammer is easily drawn back, and letteth in air 
from without; and being often drawn back and 
returned again with violent strokes, it forceth some 
part of that air mto the former cannon, so long, 
till at last the resistance of the enclosed air is 
greater than the force of the stroke. And by this 


PART IV. 
30. 


——— 


The cause of 
the ejection, &c. 


520 PHYSICS. 


means men think there is now a greater quantity of 
air in the cannon than there was formerly, though 
it were full before. Also, the air thus forced in, 
how much soever it be, is hindered from getting 
out again by the aforesaid valves, which the very 
endeavour of the air to get out doth necessarily 
shut. Lastly, that valve being opened which was 
made for the letting out of the air, it presently 
breaketh out. with violence, and driveth the bullet 
before it with great force and velocity. 

As for the cause of this, I could easily attribute 
it, as most men do, to condensation, and think 
that the air, which had at the first but its ordinary 
degree of rarity, was afterwards, by the forcing in 
of more air, condensed, and last of all, rarified 
again by being let out and restored to its natural 
liberty. But I cannot imagine how the same place 
can be always full, and, nevertheless, contain some 
times a greater, sometimes a less quantity of matter; 
that is to say, that it can be fuller than full. Nor 
can I conceive how fulness can of itself be an effi- 
cient cause of motion. For both these are impos- 
sible. Wherefore we must seek out some other 
possible cause of this phenomenon. Whilst, there- 
fore, the valve which serves for the letting in of 
air, is opened by the first stroke of the rammer, 
the air within doth with equal force resist the enter- 
ing of the air from without; so that the endeavours 
between the internal and external air are opposite, 
that is, there are two opposite motions whilst the 
one goeth in and the other cometh out; but no 
augmentation at all ofair within the cannon. For 
there is driven out by the stroke as much pure air, 
which passeth between the rammer and the sides 


OF GRAVITY. 521 


of the cannon, as there is forced in of air impure by eae dy. 
the same stroke. And thus, by many forcible —— 
strokes, the quantity of small hard bodies will be 
increased within the cannon, and their motions also 

will grow stronger and stronger, as long as the 

matter of the cannon is able to endure their force ; 

by which, if it be not broken, it will at least be 

urged every way by their endeavour to free them- 

selves; and as soon as the valve, which serves to 

let them out, is opened, they will fly out with 

violent motion, and carry with them the bullet 

which is in their way. Wherefore, I have given 

a possible cause of this phenomenon. 

12. Water, contrary to the custom of heavy The case 
bodies, ascendeth in the weather-glass ; but it doth of water ina 
it when the air is cold: for when it is warm it des- "°"*" 8! 
cendeth again. And this organ is called a ther- 
mometer or thermoscope, because the degrees of 
heat and cold are measured and marked by it. It is 
made in this manner. Let ABCD (in fig. 5) be 
a vessel full of water, and EF G a hollow cylinder 
of glass, closed at E and open at G. [yet it be 
heated, and set upright within the water to F; and 
let the open end reach to G. This being done, as the 
air by little and little grows colder, the water will 
ascend slowly within the cylinder from F towards 
E; till at last the external and internal air coming 
to be both of the same temper, it will neither as- 
cend higher nor descend lower, till the temper of 
the air be changed. Suppose it, therefore, to be 
settled anywhere, as at H. If now the heat of the 
air be augmented, the water will descend below H ; 
and if the heat be diminished, it will ascend above 


522 PHYSICS. 


PART Iv. it. Which, though it be certainly known to be 
—— true by experience, the cause, nevertheless, hath 
not as yet been discovered. 
In the sixth and seventh articles of chapter 
XXvi11, where I consider the cause of cold, I have 
shown, that fluid bodies are made colder by the 
pressure of the air, that is to say, by a constant 
wind that presseth them. For the same cause it 
is, that the superficies of the water is pressed at F ; 
and having no place, to which it may retire from 
this pressure, besides the cavity of the cylinder 
between H and E, it is therefore necessarily forced 
thither by the cold, and consequently it ascendeth 
more or less, according as the cold is more or 
less increased. And again, as the heat is more in- 
tense or the cold more remiss, the same water 
will be depressed more or less by its own gravity, 
that is to say, by the cause of gravity above expli- 
cated. 
Cause of mo- 13. Also living creatures, though they be heavy, 
tion upwards in 
living creatures can by leaping, swimming and flying, raise them- 
selves to a certain degree of height. But they 
cannot do this except they be supported by some 
resisting body, asthe earth, the water and the air. 
For these motions have their beginning from the 
contraction, by the help of the muscles, of the body 
animate. For to this contraction there succeedeth 
a distension of their whole bodies; by which dis- 
tension, the earth, the water, or the air, which sup- 
porteth them, is pressed ; and from hence, by the 
reaction of those pressed bodies, living creatures 
acquire an endeavour upwards, but such as by 
reason of the gravity of their bodies is presently 


OF GRAVITY. 523 


lost again. By this endeavour, therefore, it is, that PART Iv. 
living creatures raise themselves up a little way by ———— 
leaping, but to no great purpose : but by swimming 
and flying they raise themselves to a greater height; 
because, before the effect of their endeavour is quite 
extinguished by the gravity of their bodies, they 
can renew the same endeavour again. 
That by the power of the soul, without any ante- 
cedent contraction of the muscles or the help of 
something to support him, any man can be able to 
raise his body upwards, is a childish conceit. For 
if it were true, a man might raise himself to what 
height he pleased. 
14. The diaphanous medium, which surrounds Tht there isin 
P faa es oa a “ nature a kind of 
the eye on all sides, is invisible; nor is air to be body heavier 
seen in air, nor water in water, nor anything but epeoaterit onde 
that which is more opacous. But in the confines 70>” sens, 
of two diaphanous bodies, one of them may be dis- from tt. 
tinguished from the other. It is not therefore a 
thing so very ridiculous for ordinary people to 
think all that space empty, in which we say is air; 
it being the work of reason to make us conceive 
that the air is anything. For by which of our 
senses is It, that we take notice of the air, seeing 
we neither see, nor hear, nor taste, nor smell, nor 
feel it to be anything ? When we feel heat, we do 
not impute it to the air, but to the fire: nor do we 
say the air is cold, but we ourselves are cold ; and 
when we feel the wind, we rather think something 
is coming, than that any thing is already come. 
Also, we do not at all feel the weight of water in 
water, much less of air in air. That we come to 


know that to be a body, which we call air, it is by 


524 PHYSICS. 


PARTIV. reasoning ; but it is from one reason only, namely, 
30. 

—— because it is impossible for remote bodies to work 
That therejsin ypon our organs of sense but by the help of 
bodies intermediate, without which we could have 
no sense of them, till they come to be contiguous. 
Wherefore, from the senses alone, without reason- 
ing from effects, we cannot have sufficient evidence 

of the nature of bodies. 
For there is underground, in some mines of coals, 
a certain matter of a middle nature between water 
and air, which nevertheless cannot by sense be 
distinguished from air; for it is as diaphanous as 
the purest air; and, as far as sense can judge, 
equally penetrable. But if we look upon the effect, 
it is like that of water. For. when that matter 
breaks out of the earth into one of those pits, it 
fills the same either totally or to some degree ; and 
if a man or fire be then let down in it, it extin- 
guishes them in almost as little time as water would 
do. But for the better understanding of this phe- 
nomenon, I shall describe the 6th figure. In which 
let A B represent the pit of the mine; and let part 
thereof, namely C B, be supposed to be filled with 
that matter. If now a lighted candle be let down 
into it below C, it will as suddenly be extinguished 
as if it were thrust into water. Also, ifa grate filled 
with coals thoroughly kindled and burning never 
so brightly, be let down, as soon as ever it is below 
C, the fire will begin to grow pale, and shortly 
after, losing its light, be extinguished, no otherwise 
than if it were quenched in water. But if the grate 
be drawn up again presently, whilst the coals are still 
very hot, the fire will, by little and little, be kindled 


OF GRAVITY. 525 


again, and shine as before. There is, indeed, be- PART IV. 
tween this matter and water this considerable dif- —— 
ference, that it neither wetteth, nor sticketh to such Tht hes '#! 
things as are put down into it, as water doth; 
which, by the moisture it leaveth, hindereth the 
kindling again of the matter once extinguished. 
In like manner, if a man be let down below C, he 
will presently fall into a great difficulty of breath- 
ing, and immediately after into a swoon, and die 
unless he be suddenly drawn up again. They, 
therefore, that go down into these pits, have this 
custom, that as soon as ever they feel themselves 
sick, they shake the rope by which they were let 
down, to signify they are not well, and to the end 
that they may speedily be pulled up again. For 
if a man be drawn out too late, void of sense and 
motion, they dig up a turf, and put his face and 
mouth into the fresh earth; by which means, 
unless he be quite dead, he comes to himself again, 
by little and little, and recovers life by breathing 
out, as it were, of that suffocating matter, which he 
had sucked in whilst he was in the pit; almost in 
the same manner as they that are drowned come 
to themselves again by vomiting up the water. But 
this doth not happen in all mines, but in some only ; 
and in those not always, hut often. In such pits 
as are subject to it, they use this remedy. They 
dig another pit, as DE, close by it, of equal depth, 
and joining them both together with one common 
channel, E B, they make a fire in the bottom E, 
which carries out at D the air contained in the pit 
DE;; and this draws with it the air contained in 
the channel EB; which, in like manner, is fol- 


526 PHYSICS. 


EAM: lowed by the noxious matter contained in C B; and, 
—— by this means, the pit is for that time made health- 
ful. Out of this history, which I write only to 
such as have had experience of the truth of it, 
without any design to support my philosophy with 
stories of doubtful credit, may be collected the fol- 
lowing possible cause of this phenomenon ; namely, 
that there is a certain matter fluid and most trans- 
parent, and not much lighter than water, which, 
breaking out of the earth, fills the pit to C; and 
that in this matter, as in water, both fire and 

living creatures are extinguished. 
es ne cause _-'15. About the nature of heavy bodies, the greatest 
virtue. difficulty ariseth from the contemplation of those 
things which make other heavy bodies ascend to 
them ; such as jet, amber, and the loadstone. But 
that which troubles men most is the loadstone, 
which is also called Lapis Herculeus ; a stone, 
though otherwise despicable, yet of so great power 
that it taketh up iron from the earth, and holds it 
suspended in the air, as Hercules did Anteus. 
Nevertheless, we wonder at it somewhat the less, 
because we see jet draw up straws, which are heavy 
bodies, though not so heavy as iron. But as for 
jet, it must first be excited by rubbing, that is to 
say, by motion to and fro; whereas the loadstone 
hath sufficient excitation from its own nature, that 
is to say, from some internal principle of motion 
peculiar to itself. Now, whatsoever is moved, is 
moved by some contiguous and moved body, as 
hath been formerly demonstrated. And from hence 
it follows evidently, that the first endeavour, which 
iron hath towards the loadstone, is caused by the 


OF GRAVITY. 527 


motion of that air which is contiguous to the iron: PART Iv. 
also, that this motion is generated by the motion of —~ 
the next air, and so on successively, till by this of nvrcetica 
succession we find that the motion of all the inter- virtue. 
mediate air taketh its beginning from some motion 
which is in the loadstone itself; which motion, 
because the loadstone seems to be at rest, is in- 
visible. It is therefore certain, that the attractive 
power of the loadstone is nothing else but some 
motion of the smallest particles thereof. Sup- 
posing, therefore, that those small bodies, of which 
the loadstone is in the bowels of the earth com- 
posed, have by nature such motion or endeavour 
as was above attributed to jet, namely, a reciprocal 
motion in a line too short to be seen, both those 
stones will have one and the same cause of attrac- 
tion. Now in what manner and in what order of 
working this cause produceth the effect of attrac- 
tion, is the thing to be enquired. And first we 
know, that when the string of a lute or viol is 
stricken, the vibration, that is, the reciprocal mo- 
tion of that string in the same strait line, causeth 
like vibration in another string which hath like 
tension. We know also, that the dregs or small 
sands, which sink to the bottom of a vessel, will 
be raised up from the bottom by any strong and 
‘reciprocal agitation of the water, stirred with the 
hand or with a staff. Why, therefore, should not 
reciprocal motion of the parts of the loadstone con- 
tribute as much towards the moving of iron; For, 
if in the loadstone there be supposed such reciprocal 
motion, or motion of the parts forwards and back- 
wards, it will follow that the like motion will be 


528 . PHYSICS. 


FART TY, propagated by the air to the iron, and consequently 
—— that there will be in all the parts of the iron the 
of masetiea Same reciprocations or motions forwards and back- 
virtue. . wards. And from hence also it will follow, that 
the intermediate air between the stone and the 
iron will, by little and little, be thrust away; and 
the air being thrust away, the bodies of the load- 
stone and the iron will necessarily come together. 
The possible cause therefore why the loadstone 
and jet draw to them, the one iron, the other 
straws, may be this, that those attracting bodies 
have reciprocal motion either in a strait line, or in 
an elliptical line, when there is nothing in the na- 
ture of the attracted bodies which is repugnant to 
such a motion. 

But why the loadstone, if with the help of cork 
it float at liberty upon the top of the water, should 
from any position whatsoever so place itself in the 
plane of the meridian, as that the same points, 
which at one time of its being at rest respect the 
poles of the earth, should at all other times respect 
the same poles, the cause may be this ; that the reci- 
procal motion, which I supposed to be in the parts 
of the stone, is made in a line parallel to the axis 
of the earth, and has been in those parts ever since 
the stone was generated. Seeing therefore, the 
stone, whilst it remains in the mine, and is carried 
about together with the earth by its diurnal mo- 
tion, doth by length of time get a habit of being 
moved in a line which is perpendicular to the line 
of its reciprocal motion, it will afterwards, though 
its. axis be removed from the parallel situation it 
had with the axis of the earth, retain its endeavour 


OF GRAVITY. 529 
of returning to that situation again; and all en- PARTY: 
deavour being the beginning of motion, and nothing —§ —— 
. . : Of the cause 
intervening that may hinder the same, the load- of magnetical 
stone will therefore return to its former situation. “""* 
For, any piece of iron that has for a long time rested 
in the plane of the meridian, whensoever it is forced 
from that situation and afterwards left to its own 
liberty again, will of itself return to lie in the 
meridian again; which return is caused by the 
endeavour it acquired from the diurnal motion of 
the earth in the parallel circles which are perpen- 
dicular to the meridians. 

If iron be rubbed by the loadstone drawn from 
one pole to the other, two things will happen ; one, 
that the iron will acquire the same direction with 
the loadstone, that is to say, that it will lie in the 
meridian, and have its axis and poles in the same 
position with those of the stone; the other, that 
the like poles of the stone and of the iron will 
avoid one another, and the unlike poles approach 
one another. And the cause of the former may be 
this, that iron being touched by motion which is 
not reciprocal, but drawn the same way from pole 
to pole, there will be imprinted in the iron also an 
endeavour from the same pole to the same pole. 
For seeing the loadstone differs from iron no other- 
wise than as ore from metal, there will be no 
repugnance at all in the iron to receive the same 
motion which is in the stone. From whence it 
follows, that seeing they are both affected alike by 
the diurnal motion of the earth, they will both 
equally return to their situation in the meridian, 
whensoever they are put from the same. Also, of 

VOL. I. | MM 


PART IV. 
30. 


ee 


Of the cause 


of magnetical 
virtue, 


530 PHYSICS. 


the latter this may be the cause, that as the load- 
stone in touching the iron doth by its action im- 
print in the iron an endeavour towards one of the 
poles, suppose towards the North Pole; so reci- 
procally, the iron by its action upon the loadstone 
doth imprint in it an endeavour towards the other 
pole, namely towards the South Pole. It happens 
therefore in these reciprocations or motions for- 
wards and backwards of the particles of the stone 
and of the iron betwixt the north and the south, 
that whilst in one of them the motion is from north 
to south, and the return from south to north, in 
the other the motion will be from south to north, 
and the return from north to south ; which motions 
being opposite to one another, and communicated 
to the air, the north pole of the iron, whilst the 
attraction is working, will be depressed towards 
the south pole of the loadstone ; or contrarily, the 
north pole of the loadstone will be depressed 
towards the south pole of the iron; and the axis 
both of the loadstone and of the iron will be situate 
in the same strait line. The truth whereof is 
taught us by experience. 

As for the propagation of this magnetical virtue, 
not only through the air, but through any other 
bodies how hard soever, it is not to be wondered 
at, seeing no motion can be so weak, but that it 
may be propagated infinitely through a space filled 
with body of any hardness whatsoever. For in a 
full medium, there can be no motion which doth 
not make the next part yield, and that the next, 
and so successively without end; so that there is 
no effect whatsoever, but to the production thereof 


OF GRAVITY. 531 


something is necessarily contributed by the several 
motions of all the several things that are in the 
world. 

And thus much concerning the nature of body 
in general ; with which I conclude this my first 
section of the Elements of Philosophy. In the 
first, second, and third parts, where the principles 
of ratiocination consist in our own understanding, 
that is to say, in the legitimate use of such words 
as we ourselves constitute, all the theorems, if I be 
not deceived, are rightly demonstrated. The fourth 
part depends upon hypotheses; which unless we 
know them to be true, it 1s impossible for us to 
demonstrate that those causes, which I have there 
explicated, are the true causes of the things whose 
productions I have derived from them. 

Nevertheless, seeing I have assumed no hypo- 
thesis, which is not both possible and easy to be 
comprehended ; and seeing also that I have rea- 
soned aright from those assumptions, I have withal 
sufficiently demonstrated that they may be the true 
causes ; which is the end of physical contempla- 
tion. If any other man from other hypotheses 
shall demonstrate the same or greater things, 
there will be greater praise and thanks due to him 
than I demand for myself, provided his hypotheses 
be such as are conceivable. For as for those that 
say anything may be moved or produced by iésef, 
by species, by its own power, by substantial forms, 
by incorporeal substances, by instinct, by anti- 
peristasis, by antipathy, sympathy, occult quality, 
and other empty words of schoolmen, their saying 
so is to no purpose. 


PART IV. 
30. 


————” 


Conclusion. 


532 . PHYSICS. 


PART IY. And now I proceed to the phenomena of man’s 
—— body; where I shall speak of the optics, and of 
Conclusion. the dispositions, affections, and manners of men, 
if it shall please God to give me life, and show 


their causes. 


END OF VOL. I. 


LONDON : 
C. RICHARDS, ST, MARTIN'S LANE, CHARING CROSS, 


Digitized by Google 


