THE 

METAPHYSIC OF ETHICS. 



THE 

METAPHYSIC OF ETHICS. 



BY 



IMMANUEL KANT, 

PROFESSOR OF LOGIC AND METAPHYSIO IN THE UNIVERSITY OF KONIGSBERG, 



TRANSLATED BY 

J. W. SEMPLE, Advocate. 

THIRD EDITION. 



REV. HENRY CALDERWOOD, LL.D. 

PROFESSOR OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY, UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH. 



EDINBURGH: 

T. & T. CLARK, 38 GEORGE STREET. 

1871. 



LORIMBR AND GILLIES, PBINTERS, CLYDE STREET, EDINBURGH. 



CONTENTS. 



Page 

List of Kant's Works, .... vii 

Preface to Third Edition, . . . ix 

Introduction, ..... xi 

BOOK I. 

GROUNDWORK OF THE METAPHYSIC OF ETHICS. 

Chap. I. Transit from the Common Notions of Morality 

to tlie PMlosopMcal, .... 3 

Chap. II. Transit from Common Moral Philosophy to 

the Metaphysic of Ethics, . . .18 

Categorical Imperative, 29 ; Autonomy of WiU, the 
Supreme Principle of Morality, 55. 

Chap. III. Transit from the Metaphysic of Ethics to 
an Inquiry into the a priori Operations of the 

Will, 57 

The idea Freedom explains that of Autonomy, 57; 
Freedom must be postulated as a Property of the 
Will of every Intelligent whatsoever, 58 ; Of the 
Interest attaching to the idea of MoraKty, 59 ; 
. How is a Categorical Imperative possible "l 65 ; 
Of the extreme verge of all Practical Philosophy, 
68 ; Conclusion of the Groundwork, 77. 

BOOK II. 

INQUIRY INTO THE A PRIORI OPERATIONS OF 
THE WILL. 

(Extracted from the " Critih of Practical Reason,^^) 

Chap. I. Analytic of the Principles of Practical Kea- 

son, ...... 81 



vi Contents, 



Page 



8ec, 1. Exposition of the notions, Principle, Rule, 
Maxim, Law, 81 ; Bee. 2. Position 1. Every 
mctterial principle whatsoever is a posteriori, and 
so can beget no practical law, 84 ; Sec, 3. 
Position 2. All material practical principles howj 
different soever, agree in this, that they belong to ■ 
ONE and the same SYSTEM, whether distinguished i 
or disguised by the names of Epicureanism, 
EuDAiMONisM, Benthamry, or Utilitarianism, 
and rest on self-love, 85 ; Sec. 4. Position 3. 
Under what condition maxims and laws stand,92 ; 
Sec. 5, Problem 1. The Will's Freedom demon- 
strated, 94 ; Sec. 6. Problem 2. On the hypothesis 
that a Will is free, to assign a Formula for the 
LAW regulating its causality, 94 ; Sec. 7. Funda- 
mental Law of Reason, 97; Sec. 8. Position 4. 
'^Wherein the Ethical Nature of Man consists, 99. 
Chap. IL On the d priori Spring of the Will, * 109 

Chap. III. Further Explanation of the Will's causal 

Freedom, . . . . .130 

BOOK III 

INTRODUCTION TO THE METAPHYSICAL ELEMENTS OF 
JUKISPRUDENCE. 

Preface, . . , . . .153 

Introduction, . . . . .158 

1. Of the Eelation subsisting betwixt the Powers 
of the Human Mind and the Moral Law, 158 ; 
2. On the Idea and the Necessity of having a 
Metaphysic of Ethics, 162; 3. Of the Division 
of a System of the Metaphysic of Ethics, 166; 
4. Preliminary Ideas entering into the Metaphysic 
of Ethics, 169. 



Contents, vii 

Page 
INTKODUCTION TO THE METAPHYSIC OF LAW. 

^ec, A. What the Science of Law is, . . . 177 

A^6c. B. What is Law? . . . .177 

Bee, C. Supreme principle of Law, . . .178 

Sec. D. Law carries with it a title of Co-action, . 1 79 

Bee, E. Law defined as that by which mutual Co- 
action is made consistent with Universal 
Freedom, . . . . .180 

APPENDIX TO THE INTRODUCTION. 
OF LAW EQUIVOCAL. 

1. Equity, ...... 182 

2. Necessity, . . . . .183 

GENERAL DIVISION OF JURISPRUDENCE. 

A. Division of Juridical Offices, . . .184 

B. Division of Eights, . . . .185 

BOOK IV. 

THE METAPHYSICAL ELEMENTS OF THE DOCTRINE OF 
VIRTUE. 

The notion "Virtue,'' 193; The notion of an End 
which is at the same time a Duty, 197; The ground 
upon which Man represents to himself an End 
which is at the same time a Duty, 200; What Ends 
they are, the very essence whereof it is to be 
Duties, 201; Explanation of these two notions, 
201 ; Morals contain no Law for Actions, 204 ; 
Moral Duty is of Indeterminate Obligation, but ^ 
the Juridical Offices are strict, 206; Exposition 
of the Moral Duties as Duties of Indeterminate •^ 
Obligation, 208; What a Moral Duty (or Virtuous 
Office) is, 211; The supreme principle of Law 
was Analytic — that of Morals is Synthetic, 213; 
Table of Moral Duties, 215; Prerequisites to- 
wards constituting Man a Moral Agent, 215; 
General principles of the Metaphysic of Ethics, 



viii Contents. 



Page 



220; Of Virtue in genere, 222 ; Of the principle 
distinguishing betwixt Morals and Law, 224; 
Virtue, as it is based upon a principle of Inward 
Freedom, demands, first (positively), Man's Self- 
command, 225 ; Virtue, as based on a principle of 
Inward Freedom, demands, second (negatively), 
Apathy, considered as Force of Will, 226; Of the 
Subdivision of Morals, 228 ; Twofold principle of 
Division, 230. 

ELEMENTOLOGY OF ETHICS. 
i. — on the duties owed by man to himself. 
Introduction, ..... 232 

Pabt I. Of the Duties of Perfect and Determinate 

Obligation, . . . . .237 

Chap. I. Of the Vices opposed to the Duty owed by 

Man to himself as an Animal, , . .237 

Chap, II. Of the Vices opposed to the Duty owed 

by Man to himself as a Moral Being singly, . 244 
Chap. III. Of the Duty owed by Man to himself as 
his own Judge, .... 254 

Part II. Of the Indeterminate Moral Duties owed by 

Man to himself in regard of his End, . . 261 

II. — OF the duties owed to others. 

Chap. I. Of the Duty owed to others considered simply 

as Men, . . . . . .266 

Part I. Of the Offices of Charity, . . 266 

Of the Vices contrary to Charity, . 277 

^ Part II. Of the Duty of Reverence, . . 281 

\ Conclusion. — Of the Union of Love with Reverence 

in Friendship, ..... 288 

Appendix. — Of the Social Virtues, . . .293 

METHODOLOGY OF ETHICS. 

Part I. Ethical Didactics, .... 295 

Part IL The Ascetic Exercise of Ethics, . . 303 

Conclusion of the Metaphysic of Ethics, * . 306 



LIST OF WOEKS COIPEISING lANT'S SYSTEM. 



I. Critik der reinen Vernunft; that is, Inquiry into the Reach 
and Extent of the A pktoki Operations of the Human Under- 
standing : first published at Riga in 1781. 

II. In 1783 Kant published a defence of the Critih, entitled 
Metaphysical Prolegomena. At the same time the first part of 
the Ethics appeared, under the title of Grundlegung zur Meta- 
physih der Sitten; i. e., Groundwork of the Metaphysic of 
Ethics. Both works have been translated into English : the 
first by Mr. Richardson, in 1819 ; the second by an anonymous 
writer, who published two miscellaneous volumes in 1799, 
under the title of Kant's Essays. The work of Mr. Richardson 
is to be had at any bookseller's. The Essays are apparently 
rendered by a foreigner, and printed abroad, although graced 
with a London title-page. The only copy of this Miscellany I 
have been ever able to procure, is the copy in the Advocate's 
Library. No translation of any other part of Kant's Philo- 
sophy has hitherto been attempted in this country. 

III. In 1786, The Metaphysic of Physics. This expounds 
the metaphysical foundations of natural philosophy. 

lY. In 1788, Gritih der Prahtischen Vernunft; that is. 
Inquiry into the ci priori Functions and Operations of the Will, 
or, as we might say, a Dissertation on the Active and Moral 
Powers of Man. This is the superstructure reared upon the 
GROUNDWORK. It treats of the Causality and Spring of the 
Will, and of the Summum Bonum. Three chapters in this 
work will be found in the following sheets, under the title of 
" Inquiry into the ^ priori Operations of the Will." 



X List of Works. 

Y. CritiTc der Urtheilslcraft, at Berlin, in 1790 ; which is a 
Dissertation on the Emotions of Beauty and Sublimity, and 
on the Adaptation of the Material Universe to itseK, and to 
the Logical Functions of the Human Intellect. 

VI. In 1796-97 there appeared the Metaphysic of Ethics — 
a work which bears evident traces of the great age of the author. 
He died seven years afterwards, at the advanced age of eighty. 
In translating this book, I have derived great assistance from 
the Latin translation of Konig, 1799, and from the French 
version of M. Tissot, 1833. 

These six works constitute aU that, in strict propriety of 
speech, can be called Kant^s System of Philosophy, 

In intimate connection with this system, however, stand — 
YII. His Theory of Religion. Religion innerhalb der 
Grdnzen der reinen Vernunft, Konigsberg, 1793. 

VIII. Der Streit der Facultdten^ Konigsberg, 1798. 
These two works contain the germ of the Rationalism of 

Germany. 
Lastly — 

IX. Anthropologie, 1799. 

The extreme abstruseness and difficulty of Kant^s speculations 
afforded ample room for the ingenuity of commentators, who 
with various success have alternately elucidated and darkened 
the text. Some comments are mere catchpennies and bare- 
faced impositions on the public. Others may be consulted 
with great advantage. The best expositions are those of Beck, 
Kiesewetter, and Buhle.^ To their labours I have been much 
indebted in preparing the Synopsis of the Gritik prefixed to 
this version of the Ethic. I have taken from them, without 
scruple, whatever seemed needful for my purpose.— Te. 

^ Beck, Einzig-moglicher Standpunht zur Beurtheilung der Critischen 
Philosophie, Riga, 1796. 

Kiesewetter, Darstellung der wichtigsten Wahrheiten der Kritischen 
Philosnphiey Berlin, v. Y. 

Buhle, Entwurf der Transscendental Philosophic, Gottingen, 1798, re- 
produced in the eighth volume of his History of Philosophy, 1804. 



PEEFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION. 



A Third Edition of Kant's Metapliysic of Ethics being 
called for within two years from the publication of the 
former, opportunity has been taken to make the book 
increasingly suitable for students. 

Mr. Semple's translation is given as before, with only 
slight verbal alterations, his lengthy Introduction and his 
Appendix being withheld as formerly. 

The brief Introduction here supplied has been recast, to 
admit of the insertion of an outline of the intellectual system 
of Kant, and also of a Plan of Study. Other parts have been 
abbreviated to secure space for these additions. 

Throughout the text, leading terms have been printed in 
capitals, and also the more important propositions. 

Einally, a series of notes has been given, to facilitate the 
work of the student in instituting a careful comparison of 



H. 0. 
University of Edinburgh, 
16th Octoher, 1871. 



INTRODUCTION. 



THE special value of the writings of Kant is so fully 
acknowledged, that there is no need to insist upon it 
here. In the literature of Moral Philosophy there is certainly 
nothing more important than the contributions which Kant has 
made to Ethical Science. Even those who hold a Utilitarian 
theory of morals, must wish to see the works of the great 
upholder of Intuitionalism placed within the reach of students. 
This may be readily believed when a leading representative, 
Mr. John S. Mill, allows that Kant " has become one of the 
turning points in the history of Philosophy." 

The chief significance of the ethical writings of Kant is 
found in the prominence given to these two positions : — the 
a priori source of Moral Law, — and Freedom of Will, as 
essential to morality. 

In making such a work as the present accessible to students, 
a few introductory observations, explanatory of Kant's system, 
may be desirable, for the guidance of those who are just begin- 
ning the study of Moral Philosophy. 

I. STRUCTUEE OF KANT's PHILOSOPHY. 

Kant's Philosophy is known as critical and transcendental. 
The former designation has reference to the method ; the latter 
applies to the matter or materials of the system. As he insists 
that philosophy must proceed by a critique of the mental 



xiv Introdttction. 

powers, the result is a critical pHlosophy ; and as, in prose- 
cuting this critique, he finds everywhere certain elements 
superior to experience which constitute the main features 
of his philosophy, it is denominated transcendental. Thus, 
in the terminology of Kant, the transcendental is that which 
transcends experience, being h ^priori in origin, in contrast to 
empirical. 

When from these general features we pass to more minute 
examination of the philosophic system, there is a marked 
distinction between the Intellectual, or theoretic part, and the 
Moral, or practical part. The system is not a unity, which 
must be wholly accepted or ^entirely rejected. If one part of 
the system fall, the whole is not thereby laid in ruins. In 
this will be found the permanent gain to philosophy which 
attends upon the use of the critical method, in contrast to the 
dialectic. The speculative or theoretic part of Kant's phi- 
losophy, full as it is of the most valuable contributions to 
mental philosophy, ends in* a negative result. The moral or 
practical part takes a form altogether different, and ends in 
high positive results, affording to the Kantian system the 
only deliverance from scepticism. Nothing more than a bare 
outline of the intellectual system can be given here. 

The main feature of Kant's philosophy is the affirmation of 
the presence of an h, 'priori element in all knowledge. He 
holds that while all knowledge begins with experience, it 
always includes what is superior to experience. Knowledge 
thus involves two elements, the one empirical, the other pure 
or a priori^ — ^the one the matter, the other the form. Know- 
ledge is obtained through the senses, through the understand- 
ing, or through the reason \ and there is an a priori element 
connected with all the three. The product of the sensory is 
intuition; of the understanding, conception; of the reason, 
idea. The h 'priori forms belonging to the senses are the 
intuitions of space and time ; the a priori element belonging 
to the understanding consists in pure conceptions, which are 
the categories ; and highest of all are the ideas of pure reason. 



Introdtcction. xv 

Beginning, then, with the lowest, the senses give us empirical 
knowledge, but this they do only under the a priori forms of 
time and space provided by the intellect. Eising above this, 
we come to judgments, among which there is an essential 
distinction between analytic and synthetic judgments. Ana- 
lytic judgments may be described as identical judgments, 
gained by explication or analysis of a knowledge already pos- 
sessed, as all body is extended, the notion body clearly involv- 
ing the notion extended. Synthetical judgments are such 
as add to our knowledge, and are either a posteriori or a priori^ 
that is to say, they are obtained either from a wider ex- 
perience, e.g., some body is heavy, or from the pure reason, 
e.g., the law of causality. In all this it is apparent to 
what admirable purpose Kant has employed the critical 
method. 

When, however, we consider the bearing of this theory on 
the grand question as to the certainty of our knowledge, the 
negative and sceptical result is painfully evident. Holding 
thafc knowledge cannot be obtained except under the forms 
which reason supplies, Kant accounts this as proving that know- 
ledge is only what appears to us as beings subjected to these 
conditions, that is, knowledge is only of the phenomenal. 
What we regard as objects of our experience have no existence 
apart from our experience. Consequently, we can have no 
knowledge of things-in-themselves (noumena). Even the d, 
priori discoveries of pure reason are only regulative of thought, 
not assertive of reality. Essential as they are for the exercise 
of human intellect, they lead into a series of paralogisms and 
antinomies from which there is no escape. These are the 
avowed negative results of Kant's Critique of Pure Eeason, 

From this Critique, Kant passes to another, the Critique of 
Practical Reason, by means of which he reaches a certainty 
unattained in the earlier. Practical Keason reveals the Moral 
Law as a categorical imperative, discovering the dignity of 
man as a Person. From this Categorical Imperative, by trans- 
cendental deduction, and not as a thing known in conscious- 



xvi Introduction, 

ness, lie readies the Freedom of the Will. In this relation it 
is discovered that man is both phenomenon and noumenon, — 
he belongs at once to the sensible state, and to the super- 
sensible or cogitable, — in the former he is necessitated, in the 
latter he is free, — a moral being, — -a personality. In all this, 
we have a philosophy rich in critical results, and full of the 
most suggestive thought, though not cleared of the evil influ- 
ence of those negative elements which cling to the preceding 
intellectual system. Into this Practical Philosophy of Kant, 
the student is here introduced. 



II. CHARACTER OF KANT S ETHICAL WRITINGS. 

The tone of Kant's ethical writings is of the loftiest kind. 
A perusal of the present volume may explain how it should 
have happened, that in his own country he was charged with 
writing in a manner too abstruse, and at the same time 
developing a system of morals too lofty and stern. The 
general character of his Moral Philosophy may be inferred 
from such afiirmations as these : — -A good will is the only 
thing which is absolutely and altogether good. Nothing is 
dutifully done which is not done under a regard to duty. 
The moral law is a categorical imperative, leaving no option 
to the will. The moral law has no exceptions. The moral 
law makes self-esteem dependent on morality ; it elevates our 
worth as intelligences, and yet derogates infinitely from self- 
conceit, inevitably humbling every man. 

The fundamental positions of Kant's Moral Philosophy 
may be stated in these three propositions : — First, Goodness 
of Will is the only absolute good on earth ; Second, Practical 
Eeason, as the revealer of moral law, is the governor of will 
to constitute it good ; Third, Will is essentially free in order 
to goodness. From these positions it will be seen, that with 
Kant freedom of will is the grand essential for morality. 



Introduction. xvii 



III. CONTENTS OF THE PRESENT VOLUME. 

The work now reprinted under the name of Metaphysic of 
Ethics was not published by Kant in the form in which the 
translator presented it to English readers. The first part, 
Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Ethics (Grundlegung zur 
Metaphysik der Sitten, Sammtliche Werke, Kosencranz, Th. 
viii.), was published in 1785. The second portion of the 
book, that on the Will, constitutes part of the Critique of 
Practical Reason (Kritik der Praktischen Yernunft, Sammt- 
liche Werke, Eosencranz, Th. viii.), published in 1788. The 
third part is the Introduction to the Metaphysical Elements 
of Jurisprudence (Metaphysische Anfangsgriinde der Eechts- 
lehre, S. W. Eosencranz, Th. ix.) published in 1797. The 
last portion is the Metaphysical Elements of the Doctrine 
of Virtue (Metaphysische Anfangsgrunde der Tugundlehre, 
S. W. Eosencranz, Th. ix.), also published in 1797. 

As a consequence of gathering into one volume portions of 
the writings of Kant, published so far apart from each other, 
there will be found at times a repetition of arguments and 
doctrines. This, which is apt to be disagreeable to a mere 
reader, will not prove unsatisfactory to students who wish to 
compare different statements made by the same author on the 
same questions. 

The translation is reprinted as it at first appeared, with the 
exception of slight verbal alterations. 

IV. rant's place in the history of philosophy. 

The position of Kant in the history of philosophy may be 
briefly indicated. 

In the seventeenth century Hobbes had reduced morality 
to political expediency, and Locke, despite the valuable labours 
of Descartes, regarded all knowledge as empirical. On the 
other hand, Malebranche, stimulated by the writings of 
Descartes, was developing a higher philosophy, in which work 

h 



xviii Introduction. 

lie was followed by Leibnitz, who rejected tbe philosophy 
of Locke. The systems of Malebranche and Leibnitz were, 
however, burdened with hypotheses which ensured their 
downfall. 

In the early part of the eighteenth century the philosophy 
of Locke was triumphant in Britain. Condillac was pro- 
mulgating the same philosophy in France ; while Leibnitz, 
under serious and self-created difficulties, was supporting 
in Germany a philosophy of a different type. In Britain, 
Shaftesbury, Butler, and Hutcheson maintained a Moral Phi- 
losophy based on a foundation antagonistic to the psychology of 
Locke. But the writings of these philosophers contained little 
more than a protest from the ethical side of mental science, 
against the results of Locke's system. Then it was that 
Hume appeared to apply sceptical tests to the popular 
philosophy. Hume's success occasioned temporary dismay. 
Scepticism proved potent to raze the Sensational Philosophy 
to its foundations. Occasioning thus, however, a demand for 
something more durable, it prepared the way for the most 
important contributions to mental science of which recent 
times can boast. Keid set himself in a plain, common-sense 
way to meet the claim. With philosophical caution, high 
ability, and much sagacity, to which the criticisms of Kant 
hardly do justice, he performed his task, though within a 
limited area, and in a manner singularly unsystematic. Kant, 
according to his own express acknowledgment, was awakened 
from dogmatic slumber by Hume's criticism of the common 
philosophic faith. Thus awakened, he gave himself to pro- 
found thought, the results of which were poured from the 
press with amazing rapidity. In a series of volumes, wonder- 
ful for their rigidly philosophic style, and far-reaching insight, 
Kant has given us at once more to be rejected, and more to 
be retained, both in method and in doctrine, than any other 
thinker of modern times. 

In the line of antagonism to a philosophy based exclusively 
on experience, there have followed, Stewart, Hamilton, and 



Introduction, xix 

Cousin, — Stewart expounding and amplifying the teaching 
of Keid ; Hamilton blending the doctrines of Eeid and Kant, 
thereby complicating the discussion, as by independent research 
he has cleared it ; Cousin supporting Eeid, and at one time 
criticising, at another time upholding, both Kant and Hamil- 
ton. In the line taken by Kant in his speculative writings as 
to the relation of the subjective and objective, and specially as 
to the absolute, there have followed him in Germany, Fichte, 
Schelling, and Hegel. The theories of these philosophers come 
directly and visibly as developments out of the speculative 
philosophy of Kant. In these successive theories, as I venture 
to think, philosophy runs itself out, by running up to abstrac- 
tions in the effort to attain a philosophy of real existence. 
Germany, in order to make a fresh start in philosophy, must 
return upon the way by which she has recently advanced, 
and abandon the dialectic method of Hegel, notwithstanding 
the splendid combinations which the Hegelian Logic presents. 
From Hegel, we must, I think, still return upon Kant, 
seeking fresh hope for Philosophy in a continued use of the 
critical method. 

v. QUESTIONS SUGGESTED BY THE WRITmGS OF KANT. 

The leading questions which the student of Kant's works 
must endeavour to answer are these : — How far has Kant, 
in the Critique of Pure Reason^ been successful in seeking a 
philosophy capable of resisting the assaults of scepticism? 
In the search for a Moral Philosophy, how far has he escaped 
the negative result of his intellectual system? Is Practical 
Keason not also Pure Eeason; and if it be, how does the 
ethical theory of Kant stand related to the speculative? (v. pp. 
130-132.) If Freedom of Will is by Kant set in its proper 
place in Moral Philosophy, is the doctrine legitimately estab- 
lished by him? And, as fundamental to all, what is the 
true doctrine of Consciousness? Such questions as these 
remain to be answered by the student, who may set to 



XX Introduction. 

work on the writings of Kant, with the assurance of being 
amply repaid for all the labour required in subjecting them to 
rigid scrutiny. 

VI. PLAN OF STUDY FOR THIS VOLUME. 

For explanation of terms, and general guidance towards an 
accurate understanding of the author, the student may turn 
first to the Introduction to the Metaphysical Elements of the 
Doctrine of Virtue, from page 158 to page 176 ; and, in con- 
junction with this, to the Prerequisites of a Moral Nature, 
from page 215 to page 220. In the last-named passage, spe- 
cial attention should be given to the explanation of the nature 
of Moral Sense and of Conscience, 

After these preliminary portions have been taken, the main 
points in the theoretic part of the work are the Categorical 
Imperative, or the Moral Law ; and the Freedom of the Will, 
as the essential feature of a moral nature. These are to be 
studied as developed first in the Groundwork, Book I. ; 
next in the extract from the Critique of Practical Eeason, 
Book II. ; and lastly, in the Metaphysical Elements of the 
Doctrine of Virtue, Book IV., 193-231. These should be 
taken successively in the order named ; and, as they were pub- 
lished at different dates, it will be of consequence to compare 
carefully the statements bearing on the leading features of the 
theory. 

After these parts, with the addition of the portion treating 
of Law and Jurisprudence, the more simple and popular 
division of the book, dealing with Applied Ethics, under the 
heads Elementology and Methodology, will be found very 
valuable, not only in itself, but as throwing fresh light on 
the more abstruse theoretical dissertations. 

H. C. 



Metaphy sic of Ethics, 21 

to found it on examples ; for every example ^given to me of 
it must first be compared with the principle and standard of 
morality, to know if it be worthy of being elevated to the 
rank of an archetype or pattern, and so of course cannot 
originate in us the notion. Even the Holy One in the gospel 
is only recognised to be so when compared with our ideal of 
moral excellence. So much is this the case, that He Him- 
self said, "Why call ye me (whom ye see) good*? there is none 
good (the archetype of it), but God only (whom ye do not 
see). Whence this idea God, as the supreme archetypal 
good % Singly from that idea of ethical perfection, evolved 
by reason h prioriy and connected by it indissolubly to the 
notion of a free will. Imitation has no place in mobals. 
Examples serve only to encourage to moral practice — ^to put 
beyond doubt the possibility of performing those duties 
unremittingly commanded by the law, — and to exhibit to 
sense, in a tangible and outward substance, what the legis- 
lation of reason expresses only in the abstract and general ; 
but their use is perverted when their origiaal in reason 
is overlooked, and conduct regulated upon the model of the 
example. 

If there be no genuine and supreme principle of morality 
given apart from all observation and experience, and resting 
upon reason only, then I think it were idle so much as to 
inquire if it were good to treat these ct priori notions, and 
to deliver their principles in the abstract ; unless indeed we 
merely wished to separate betwixt the common ethic notions 
of the unlettered, and a system of them which might aspire 
to be called philosophical. And yet in the present age this 
last may well be necessary ; for were we to collect voices as 
to whether a popular practical philosophy or metaphysic of 
ethics (i. e., rational cognition divested of every d posteriori 
part)* were more eligible, I know full well on which side I 
should find most votes. 

* Ref. 1, from p. 3.— C. 



22 Groundwork of the 

To accommodate a science to the common conceptions of 
the people is highly laudable, when once the science has been 
established on first principles ; and that, in the present case, 
■would amount to founding ethics on their true basis, meta- 
physics ; after which a popular dress may carry and spread 
the science more widely : but to attempt such a thing in a 
first investigation is folly. Not only would such procedure 
have no claim to the signal and rare merit of true philosophic 
popularity, but it would lie open to the objection of amount- 
ing to no more than an odious and revolting mixture of 
random remarks, crude and half-fledged opinions, — a mad 
attempt, which would furnish the shallow with materials to 
talk of and quote in conversation, but which could only 
embarrass the more profound, who, dissatisfied, avert their 
eyes, and remain unaided ; although those who see through 
the illusion are little listened to when they insist on the 
abandonment of a futile popularity, in order to become then 
only popular when clear and definite insight has been at- 
tained. 

To illustrate this remark, it were only requisite to examine 
popular modern treatises which have been got up in this 
taste, and we find at one time the destiny of man, which is 
particular, at another, the idea of an intelligent nature, which 
is general, — here perfection, there happiness, — then some- 
what of the moral sense, and of the fear of God, — all mixed 
up in one huge heterogeneous mass. But nowhere do the 
authors seem to have impinged upon the cardinal question, 
whether principles of morality were to be sought for in the 
psychology of human nature? (which we know only from 
experience and observation,) — or whether, if this be not the 
case, they are not to be met with wholly a priori in pure 
IDEAS OF REASON, and nowhere else % Nor did it ever occur 
to'them, in this last event, to commence an investigation of 
these first principles, as a particular and separate department 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 23 

of philosophic science, called, if I may be allowed the expres- 
sion, "metaphysic* of ethics," — ^to isolate and keep it by 
itself, in orde:p to exhaust 'and complete its entire circuit and 
extent,-- -diverting in the meantime a public impatient for 
popularity till the issue and conclusion of the investigation. 

Such a system of metaphysic ethics, isolated and cleared 
of all theology, anthropology, physics, hyperphysics, and 
occult qualities, which I may call hypophysics, is not merely 
^ substratum indispensable for all theoretic knowledge in the 
department of duty, but is likewise a main desideratum to- 
wards the actual fulfilment of its law ; for the naked repre- 
sentation Duty, unadulterated with any foreign charms, — ^in 
short, the moral law itself, — is so much stronger a mobile to 
the will than any other motive, that reason first learns by 
this method her own causal-force and independency on every 
sensitive determinator ; until at length, awaking fully to the 
consciousness of her own supremacy and dignity, she scorns 
to act from any such, and comes in the sequel to be able to 
control and to command them : which things a system of 
ethics, not distinguished from the emotions of the sensory, 
cannot effect ; for there the mind is at once perturbed by 
opposing causes, and is forced to waver betwixt feelings and 
ideas which cannot be reduced to any common principle, and 
is accordingly, owing to its instability and uncertainty, led 
sometimes wrong, sometimes right. 

From the above it is clear that all ethical ideas have their 
origin and seat altogether h 'priori in reason (in the reason of 

* As pure mathematics and logic are distinguished from the same 
sciences when mixed, the pure philosophy of morals (metaphysic of 
€thics) may be distinguished from the ** mixedy' i. €., when applied to 
human nature and its phenomena. Such an appellative reminds us that 
the principles of ethics cannot be founded on any peculiarity in man's 
nature, but must demand an establishment d priori, whence wiU flow a 
practical rule of life valid for all Intelligents, and so for man likewise. — 
<Ref. 1, from p. 3.— C.) 



2'4 Groundwork of the 

the unlettered, of course, as mucli as in that of the most 
finished sage) ; that they are not susceptible of explanation 
upon any a posteriori system ; that j|i this high priori source 
consists their dignity and title to be supreme practical prin- 
ciples of life; that the addition of any posteriori motive 
lessens their native force upon the will, and destroys to that 
extent the absolute unconditioned worth of the action ; and 
that it is absolutely necessary, in adjusting the speculative 
theory of ethics, as well as of the last practical importance in 
the conduct of life, to deduce the laws and ideas of morality 
from naked reason, to deliver these pure and unmixed, and 
to examine and exhaust the whole circuit of this originary 
science of reason {i. e., to investigate the a priori functions, 
and operations of reason, as a practical faculty of action) : in 
which investigation we cannot, as in speculative philosophy^ 
examine the particular operations of the human reason, but 
are forced to examine reason as such, abstractedly and apart 
from the nature of man; the moral law having ethical virtue 
to oblige all will whatsoever, and so demanding a deduction 
from the abstract notion of intelligent existence. And^in 
this way alone can ethics (which in their application to man 
stand in need of anthropology) be fully cleared and purged 
of this last, rendered a pure philosophy, and so fit to be pre- 
lected on as an entire metaphysic science ; bearing the while 
well in mind, that, apart from possessing such metaphysic^ 
not only is it vain to attempt to detect speculatively the 
ethical part of given actions, but that it is impossible, in 
ethical instruction (i. e., in the most common practical case), 
to base morality on its true foundation, to effectuate genuine 
moral sentiments, and determine the mind, by the idea of the 
summum honum, to exert itself onwards toward the advance- 
ment of the general welfare of humanity. 

Now, to advance in this investigation from the common 
opinions — ^which are highly venerable — to the philosophical^ 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 25 

as was done in- the former chapter, and from that popular 
tentative philosophy which T have just denounced, up to a 
system of metaphysics containing no a posteriori part, and 
rising in its course even to ideas where all examples fall 
away, it is needful to pursue reason in its active function, 
from its general law of determination up to that point where 
the notion Duty is evolved. 

Everything in the world acts according to laws; an 
Intelligent alone has the prerogative of acting accord- 
ing TO THE representation OF LAWS, i. e., HAS A WILL: and 
since, to deduce actions from lawfe, reason is required, it 
follows that will is nothing else than practical reason.^ *^ 
When reason invariably determines the will, then the agent's^ 
actions which are recognised as objectively necessary, are 
subjectively necessary too ; that is, the will is then a faculty 
to choose that only which reason, independently on appetite,, 
recognises to be practically necessary, i. e., good.t But if reason 
do not itself alone determine the will, and the will be subjected 
to inward impediments and stimuli not always in unison 
with„the law, — in one word, if reason and the will do not ex- 
actly tally (as is the case with man), — then are the actions 
recognised as objectively necessary, subjectively contingent ; 
and the determination of such a will, conformably to objective 
laws, is necessitation; that is, the relation obtaining betwixt 
objective laws and a will not altogether good is represented as- 
the determining an Intelligent's will upon grounds of reason^ 
but to which the will is not by its nature necessarily conformed. 

The representation of an objective principle, so far as it 
necessitates the will, is called A commandment (of reason) ; 
and a formula expressing such is called an imperative. 

3 One of the greatest difficulties in the study of Kant's Practical 
Philosophy is, to determine how far he distinguishes Beason from Will> 
and how far he identifies them. Eef erences are given on p. 40, and on p. 
46.— 0. * Eef. 5, from p. 45.— C. f Eef. 4, from p. 40.— C. 



26 Groundwork of the 

All imperatives are expressed by the words *' shall or ought," 
and thus denote the relation obtaining betwixt an objective 
law of reason, and a will so constituted as not to be neces- 
sarily determined by it (necessitation). They say that some- 
what were good to be pursued or avoided, but they say so 
to a will not always acting because it is represented to him 
that somewhat is good. That is practically good which de- 
termines the will by the intervention of a representation of 
reason; ^. e., not by force of subjective stimulants, but objec- 
tively, i. e.y upon grounds valid for every Intelligent as such. 
In this respect the good differs from the agreeable;^ which last 
affects the will by means of subjective sensations, valid for 
the particular taste of individuals only, — not like a principle 
of reason, which is possessed of universal validity. 

A. perfectly good will would, equally with a defective one, 
come to stand under objective laws (of good) ; but with this 
difference, that it cannot be regarded as necessitated by the 
law to the legal action, — its very nature being such as to 
render it capable of determination only by the representation 
of what is good. Hence no imperative is valid for the Divine 
Will, nor indeed for any will figured to be Holy. Thou shalt 

* The dependency of the will on sense is called appetite, arid it always 
indicates a want or need ; but the dependency of the will on principles of 
reason is called an interest. This last obtains, therefore, only in a de- 
pendent will, not spontaneously conformed to reason. To the Divine 
WiU no interest can be ascribed ; the human will may take an interest 
in an action, without on that account acting out of interest : the first is 
the practical interest taken in an action ; the second would be the patho- 
logical interest taken in the end aimed at by the action. The former 
indicates merely the dependency of the will on reason as such; the 
second, dependency on rational principles subserving an appetite, i. e., 
where reason assigns a rule how the wants of appetite may be best 
iippeased. In the first case, the action interests me ; in the second, the 
object of the action (in so far as agreeable.) We saw, in the former 
section, that in an action out of duty the interest lay not in the object 
and end attained by the action, but singly in the act itself, and its 
principle in reason {i. e., the law). 



MetaphysiZ of Ethics. 2 7 

•were misapplied to sucli a will, — ^the will being already spon- 
taneously in harmony with the law. An imperative is then 
no more than a formula, expressing the relation betwixt 
objective laws of volition and the subjective imperfection of 
particular wills (e. ^., the human). 

An imperative commands either hypothetically or 
CATEGORICALLY. The former expresses that an action is 
necessary as a mean toward somewhat farther ; but the latter 
is such an imperative as represents an action to be in itself 
necessary, and without regard to any what out of and beyond 
it, i, e.y objectively necessary, 

Because every practical law represents some action or 
another as good, it represents it to a being determinable by 
reason, as in so far necessary ; and hence, upon this account, 
an imperative may be further explained to be a formula 
potentially determining an action deemed necessary by a will 
^ood in any sort of way. If the action be good only for 
somewhat else, i. e., as a mean, then the imperative is hypo- 
thetical ; but if represented as good in itself, i. e,, necessary 
according to the principles of a will self-conformed to its-<5wn 
reason, then it is categorical. 

An imperative, then, declares which of the actions I may 
have it in my power to perform is good; and it presents to 
view a practical rule taken in connection' with a will, not 
constantly choosing an action because it is good, and this 
for two reasons : in part, that it often does not know what 
action is good; and also in part, because, when it knows 
this, its maxims militate against the law objected to the 
mind by reason. 

A HYPOTHETICAL IMPERATIVE exprosses merely the relative 
goodness of an act, viz., as good for some ulterior end, re- 
garded either as in posse or in esse. In the prior case it is 
a problematic, in the latter an assertive, position. But the 
CATEGORICAL IMPERATIVE which propounds an act as in itself 



28 Groundwork of the 

objectively necessary, independently of every further end or 
aim, is an apodictic practical position. 

But as it may be needful to investigate more in detail the 
nature and constitution of these three kinds of imperatives, 
I observe — 

Firs% We may consider whatever the power of an agent 
may accomplish, as the potential end of his will; whence 
there spring as many pkinciples of action as ends, which 
the being may regard as necessary in order to gain som^ given 
purposes. Even the sciences have a practical part, consisting 
of problems demanding a solution, and of imperatives an- 
nouncing how such solution (the end) is to be eiFected ; and 
imperatives of this kind are imperatives of art. "Whether the 
end be good or rational is no element of the investigation, 
but simply this : what it is requisite to do in order to reach 
it. The recipe of a physician for thoroughly re-establishing 
his patient, and that of an assassin for poisoning him, have 
this value in common, viz., that of teaching surely how each 
may gain his end ; and since mankind do not know what 
ends may occur in life, youth is taught as many things as 
possible, and care is taken to advance his skill and accomplish- 
ments so as to facilitate the practice of various ends, though 
no end can yet be fixed on as the fit choice of the youth 
himself, — among which ends he is left to choose, since it may 
be presumed that some one of them will be his. Nay, this 
care is frequently so great, that mankind neglect to instruct 
their youth how to estimate the worth of those things they 
have ultimately to accept or decline as ends. 

Secondly, There is, however, one end, which we conclude 
THAT EVEKY FINITE BEING HAS, and that by the physical ne- 
cessity of his nature, viz., the end and aim called happiness. 
The hypothetical imperative announcing the practical neces- 
sity of an act as a mean for advancing one's own happiness 
is assertive. The imperative is necessary, not for any vague. 



Metaphysic of Ethics, 29 

indefinite, unknown end, but for one wLicli we can certainly 
presuppose in the case of every man, such end being engrafted 
into his very being. Now, adroitness in choosing the means 
conducing to the greatest amount of one's personal happiness 
is prudence (in the limited sense of that term); whence it 
follows that the imperative of prudence, referring to the choice 
of such means, is hypothetical, i, e., the action is ordained, not 
absolutely on its own account, but as a mean toward some- 
what ulterior. 

Lastly, There is an imperative, which, irrespective of 

EVERY ULTERIOR END OR AIM, COMMANDS CATEGORICALLY. 

Such imperative concerns not the matter of action, nor that 
which may flow from it, but its form and principle; and the 
act's essential goodness consists in the formality of its intent, 
be the result what it may. This last imperative may be 
called one of morality. 

The difference of the volition in these threefold imperatives 
is perceptible when we attend to the dissimilar grades of 
necessitation expressed by the imperative; and in this point 
of view they might, I think,- be fitly called; 1. E-ules of art; 
2. Dictates of prudence; 3. Laws (commandments) of 
MORALITY : for law alone involves the conception of an un- 
conditionate, and objective, and universally valid necessity; 
and a commandment is a law to which, even with violence 
to inclination, obedience must be yielded. A dictate expresses 
likewise a necessity, but then it is no more than a subjective 
and conditioned one ; whereas the categorical imperative is 
restrained to no condition, and it can alone, as absolutely 
necessary, be a commandment. The first sort are technical, 
the second pragmatic, the third ethical imperatives. 

This brings us to the question, how all these imperatives 
are possible, — a question which asks, not how they may be 
reduced to practice, but how the necessitation expressed in 
each imperative can be depicted to the mind. How an im- 



30 Grotmdwork of the 

perative of art is possible, requires no farther explanation. 
Wlioso wills the end aimed at, wills also the means indis- 
pensably requisite for attaining it. This position is analytic, 
for in willing an object as my own effect, I represent my own 
causality as employing the means toward it; and the impera- 
tive merely develops the conception of acts necessary to this 
end, out of the conception "willing that end itself." To 
determine the means requisite for attaining the end, may no 
doubt be difficult, and will require synthetic propositions; 
but these do not concern the ground, the originary act of 
will, but respect singly the act of realization of its object. 
That in order to bisect a line with certainty I must describe 
from its extremities segments of intersecting circles, is taught 
in the mathematics by synthetic propositions only; but when 
I know that these steps must take place in order to that end, 
then it is an analytic proposition to say, that when I will the 
end, I will also the intervening steps; for to represent some- 
what as an effect possible by me in a given way, and to re- 
present myself as acting in that way toward the effect, are 
quite identical. 

The imperatives of prudence would stand exactly in the 
same situation with those of art, were it alike easy to frame 
a definite conception of what is happiness; and in either 
case we should say, he who wills the end, wills likewise all 
the means toward it which are within his power. But unfor- 
tunately THE coNCEPTioisr HAPPINESS is SO vaguc, that although 
all wish to attain it, yet no one is ever able to state distinctly 
to himself what the object willed is; the reason whereof is, 
that the elements constituting the conception happiness are 
cognisable a posteriori only, and must be inferred inductively 
from experience and observation; while at the same time, as 
an ideal of imagination, happiness demands an absolute whole, 
i. e.,2i maximum of well-being, both in my present and every 
future state; and what this may in real fact and event amount 



Metaphysic of Ethics, 31 

to, no finite Intelligent can explain, nor can he tell what it is 
he chooses in such a volition. Is wealth the object of his 
desire? how much envy and detraction may that not entail 
upon him? in what perturbations may that not involve him? 
Are superior parts and vast learning the object of his choice? 
Such advantages might prove but a sad eminence whence to 
descry evils at present hidden from his sight, or they might 
become a source of new and previously unknown wants; and 
he who should increase in knowledge might eminently increase 
in sorrow. Does he choose long life? what if it should turn 
out a long misery? Or even if health were his chosen object, 
must he not admit that indisposition has often guarded from 
excess and screened from temptations, into which exuberant 
health might have misled him? In short, it is quite beyond 
man's power to determine with certainty what would make 
him happy. Omniscience alone could solve this question for 
him. In these circumstances, man can ^s. on no determinate 
principles of conduct issuing in happiness, but is forced to 
adopt such dictates of prudence, ^. e., such maxims of economy, 
politeness, and reserve, as experience and observation show 
on an average to promote the greatest quantum of well- 
being. From all which we infer that, strictly speaking, 
IMPERATIVES OF PRUDENCE DO NOT COMMAND, actions not being 
represented by them as objectively necessary; and that they 
are rather to be regarded as suggestions (consilia) than as 
decrees of reason. The question, what action would infallibly 
promote the happiness of a reasonable agent, is altogether 
unanswerable; and there can consequently be no imperative 
at all with regard to it. However, if the mean toward 
happiness could be successfully assigned, the imperative of 
prudence would, like the technical, be an analytic proposition; 
for it differs from the imperative of art in this singly, that 
in the latter the end is potential, in the former, given, — ^both 
enjoining merely the means necessary for reaching somewhat 



32 Groundwork of the 

already willed as end; but where this is done, the position is 
analytic : there can therefore be no difficulty in comprehend- 
ing how this imperative is possible. 

But HOW THE IMPERATIVE OF MORALITY COMES TO BE POS- 
SIBLE, is beyond doubt a very difficult question, and is in fact 
the only problem requiring a solution ; the imperative not 
being hypothetic, and its objective, absolute necessity not ad- 
mitting any explanation from suppositions. Neither can we 
in this investigation aid ourselves by examples; for experience 
and observation would always leave us in doubt whether the 
imperative were not hypothetic, although appearing apodictic : 
thus, when it is said, " Thou shalt not make any false pro- 
mise," and the necessity announced in such an imperative is 
understood to be unconditional, so that it could not have 
been expressed thus, " Make no false promise, lest thou 
destroy thy credit," then it is plain that no example can 
make exhibitive such categoric determination of will; for 
the example cannot satisfy us that every other mobile was 
excluded from the will, and that the law was itself alone, 
abstracted from all other considerations, the only spring of 
action ; and it is quite conceivable that some secret fear of 
shame, or apprehension of other evils, may have co-operated 
with it. Nor can we establish the non-existence of such 
motive-causes by any experience, this showing nowhat 
further than that we have not observed them; and should 
this turn out to be the case with our example, then the ethic 
imperative, while apparently categorical and unconditional, 
would be at bottom no more than a dictate of expediency, 
making us attentive to our own advantage, and teaching how 
to keep it in view. 

The possibility of a categorical imperative must therefore 
be investigated altogether ct priori, its reality not being 
susceptible of illustration by examples ; — a circumstance 
Tendering the theory of its possibility requisite, not only 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 2i?> 

for its explanation, but a preliminary indispensable for its 
establishment. This, however, is plain, that the categorical 
imperative alone announces itself as law j the other impera- 
tives may be principles, but they never can be laws of volition; 
and what is necessary to attain some given end may yet in 
itself be contingent, and man may detach himself from the im- 
perative whenever he renounces the end it rests upon, whereas 
the unconditioned command leaves no option to the will, and 
has alone that necessity which is of the essence of a law. 

Again, the ground of the difficulty of comprehending the 
possibility of the categorical imperative, i.e.^ of the moral law, 
is very great : the imperative is a synthetical proposition 
A priori ; and as we felt so much difficulty in comprehend- 
ing the possibility of this kind of proposition in speculative 
metaphysics, we may presume the difficulty will be no less in 
the practical. 

In this inquiry we ^all examine whether or not the mere 
conception of a categorical imperative may not involve in it 
a general formula, furnishing us with that expression which 
can alone be valid as a categorical imperative ; for how such 
an absolute commandment can be possible, even after we 
know its tenor, will demand a peculiar and laborious dis- 
quisition, which we defer till the third chapter. 

When I represent to myself a hypothetical imperative, I 
do not know beforehand what it contains, till the ulterior 
condition on which it rests is put in my possession j but with 
the very conception of a categorical imperative is given also 
its contents, for the imperative can in this case contain only 
the law ordaining the necessity of a maxim to be conformed 
to this law ; and since the law is attached to no condition 
which could particularize it, there remains nowhat except 
the form of law in genere, to which the maxim of an act is 
to be conformed j and this conformity is, properly speaking, 
what the imperative represents as necessary. 

D 



34 Groundwork of the 

The categorical imperative is therefore single and one : 
*^Act from that maxim only when thou canst will law 
universal." 

If, then, we are in a condition, from this single imperative, 
to derive all imperatives of duty, then we have ascertained 
the import and content of the idea, and understand what it 
is we think of when we name it ; although we still, for the 
present, leave undecided whether duty may not, after all, 
turn out an imaginary and blank idea. 

Because the unvariedness of the laws by which events 
take place, is the formal notion of what is called Nature, i. 6., 
an order of things determined according to an unvaried, 
universal law, the formula of the ethical imperative might be 
expressed thus : "Act as if the maxim of thy will were to 
biecome, by thy adopting it, a universal law of nature." 

In illustration of this last formula, I shall take a few 
examples, according to the popular and received division of 
duties into that of duties of determinate and indeterminate 
obligation toward ourselves and others.^ 

1. An individual harassed by a series of evils, and sickened 
with the tedium of life, proposes to commit self-murder ; but 
first inquires within himself to know if the maxim regulating 
such an act would be fit for law universal. His intended 
maxim would be, to deprive himself of life whenever existence 
promised more of misery than of pleasure ; and the question 
is. Can such a principle of self-love be regarded as fit for a 
universal law of nature % and it is instantly observable, that 
an order of things whose law it were to destroy life, by force 

* The systematic division of the duties I postpone to the metaphysic 
of ethics, and the above division is merely adopted in order to arrange 
my examples. By a determinate duty, however, I understand such a 
one as admits of no exceptions in favour of appetite ; whence I arrive 
at both external and internal determinate obligations : and though this 
run counter to the common terminology of the schools, it is inmaaterial 
to my present purpose whether this be conceded to me or not. 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 35 

of the seriKsation intended for its continuance, could not be 
upheld, but must return to chaos. "Whence it results that 
such maxim cannot possibly be regarded as fit for an unvaried 
law of nature, but is repugnant to the supreme principle of 
duty. 

2. A second finds himself under the necessity of borrow- 
ing money. He knows he cannot repay j but he foresees 
that nothing will be lent to him if he do not stoutly promise 
to repay within a given time. He intends giving such a 
promise, but has so much conscience left as to put the ques- 
tion, whether it be not inconsistent with his duty to have 
recourse to such shifts for his relief? Suppose, however, 
that he notwithstanding adopts this resolution, then his 
maxim would sound as follows : " As soon as I fancy myself 
in want of money, I will borrow it upon a promise to repay, 
although I well know I never will or can." Such a principle 
of self-love may be easily brought into accommodation with 
one's other desires and wishes. But when the question is 
put as to the integrity of such conduct, I convert my maxim 
into law universal, and inquire how it would suit if such a 
principle were everywhere adopted? WhereuiJon I imme- 
diately observe, that it is quite unfit for a universal law of 
nature, and would become contradictory to itself, and self- 
destructive, if made so; for a uniform practice, by which 
every one should be entitled to promise what he liked, and 
not to keep it, would defeat the intent and end for which 
such promises might be made — these becoming by such a 
law incredible, and not possible to be acted on. 

3. A third finds himself possessed of certain powers of 
mind, which, with some slight culture, might render him a 
highly useful member of society; but he is in easy circum- 
stances, and prefers amusement to the thankless toil of culti- 
vating his understanding and perfecting his nature. But 
suppose him to put the question, whether this sluggish maxim, 



36 . Groundwork of the 

so mucli in Barmony witli his appetite for pleasure, harmonize 
equally with duty 3 and he observes that an order of tilings 
might continue to exist under a law enjoining men to let 
their talents rust, and to devote their lives to amusement. 
But it is impossible for any one to will that such should 
become an universal law of nature, or were by an instinct 
implanted in his system ; for he, as Intelligent, of necessity 
wills all his faculties to become developed, such being given 
hitn in order that they may subserve his various and mani- 
fold ends and purposes. 

4. A fourth, possessing wealth, observes others struggling 
with difficulties ; and though he might easily assist them, he 
says. What concern is it of mine % Let every one be as happy 
as he can. I neither hinder nor envy any one; nor can I 
take the trouble to exert myself to advance his welfare, nor 
to redress his sorrows. Now, unquestionably, were such 
sentiments constituted universal laws of nature, our species 
might still continue to exist, and in fact might advance 
better than when people merely talk of sympathy and charity, 
or even than when they exercise such virtues, but at the 
same time, and by the by, deceive and otherways invade the 
rights of man. Now, although an order of things might 
subsist under such a universal law, yet reason cannot will 
that this should be the case ; for a will ordaining such would 
contradict itself, when, in the course of events, it would 
willingly avail itself of the compassion and kindness of others, 
and yet would see itself deprived of these by the harsh law 
emanating from its own maxim. 

These are some few of what man deems his duties, 
evolved clearly from the foregoing formula. An Intelligent 
must be able to will his maxims of conduct laws of catholic 
extent. Such is the canon of ethical volition. Some actions 
are of such a stamp that they cannot be presented to the 
mind even in thought, without their unfitness for law being 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 3 7 

flagrant ; and in other cases, where no sucli internal impro- 
priety existed, it was out of the question that an Intelligent 
should will his maxim to become a universal law of nature. 
The first kind of duties are those of strict and determinate 
obligation, the second those which are indeterminate, and 
admit a certain latitude; whence we see that all kinds of 
duties are exhjibited by the above examples in their connec- 
tion and dependence on the single principle previously stated. 

When we attend to what passes in our own minds when 
we overstep the bounds of duty, we find that we do not really 
will our maxim to become a law of catholic extent ; for that 
is impossible, and the contrary is inevitably willed : however, 
we sometimes assume the licence, for a single time as we 
think, to make an exception from this universality. And 
were we to examine things singly from the vantage-ground 
of reason, we should descry contradiction in our own will in 
not adhering to duty, viz., that a certain principle should be 
regarded as a law objectively necessary and of catholic extent, 
and yet at the same time as subjectively not of universal 
validity, but admitting exceptions; the reason whereof is, 
that in the one case reason guides our choice, in the other 
our will is biassed by an appetite ; so that in truth there is 
no contradiction in the mind itself, but only an opposition 
from the part of inclination against the dictates of reason : by 
all which the universality of the law is frittered down to a 
mere generality, and reason constrained to meet the appetites 
half way. But, on impartial self-examination, we cannot 
justify to ourselves this departure ; which shows that the 
mind does in fact recognise and acknowledge the categorical 
imperative as possessing ethical virtue to oblige its will ; and 
it is in spite of all our reverence for it that we allow ourselves 
a few occasional exceptions. 

We have pursued this investigation so far as to establish, 
that if duty be a conception of any import, and contain laws 



38 Groundwork of the 

applicable to human conduct, these laws are expressed in 
categorical imperatives, not in liypotKetical. "We have like- 
wise, which is no small matter, determined the expression of 
the formula of the categorical imperative, which ought to be 
susceptible of expansion in terms applicable to every duty 
(if there be at all any such). But we have not yet been able 
to show h priori that there is any such imperative, that there 
is a practical law commanding absolutely and independently 
of every sensitive determinator, and that the observance of 
this law is duty. 

In prosecuting our attempt to achieve such a demonstra- 
tion, it is of the last moment to bear constantly in mind that 
the reality of this law cannot be deduced from any peculiari- 
ties incident to human nature ; for duty is to be the uncon- 
ditionate necessity of an act, and must have force to oblige 
all Intelligents whatsoever, and upon this account alone, there- 
fore, also man. But whatever is derived from the particular 
structure of human nature — ^from given feelings or emotions, 
or from any bias adhering to our reason, but not essentially 
biassing all wills whatever — may be a maxim for conduct, 
but never can be a law, i. e., may be a subjective principle we 
like to follow, but never can be an objective law, ordaining 
how to act, even although appetite, the vis inertice of our 
constitution, and an original bias in the will itself, were all 
thwarting its behest; which opposing circumstances would 
in fact only show the high supremacy and internal dignity 
of the law of duty, the less they proved able to effect any 
diminution of its ethical necessitation. 

And now philosophy seems placed in a very perilous situa- 
tion, since she is allowed no peg either in heaven or in earth 
from which to suspend her principles. Now she has to show 
her integrity, as self-upholder of her own laws, not as the 
herald of those which some innate sense or guardian nature 
had whispered in her ear, and which, though better than 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 39 

nothing, never afford statutes of conduct, ordained by reason 
from a source altogether h priori : statutes which have thence 
alone their authority to command mankind, to expect nowhat 
from the solicitations of his sensory, but all from the supre- 
macy of the law and. the reverence he owes it, or, if he fail 
to do so, to hand him over to his own contempt and inward 
detestation. 

Any a posteriori part, added to the principle of morality, 
is not only no improvement, but is in fact highly detrimen- 
tal to the purity /of morals ; for the proper worth of an abso- 
lutely good will consists just in this, that the principles of 
action are thoroaghly abstracted from every admixture of 
foreign and adventitious grounds. Kor can I sufficiently 
warn against the sluggishness, or, I would even say, low cast 
of thinking, which seeks its motives of action ct 'posteriori, 
whereon reason, when fatigued, willingly reclines, and sub- 
stitutes to morality a changeling bastard, which looks like 
anything you please, except virtue, in the eye of him who 
has once beheld her in her true form.* 

The question amounts, then, to this : Is it A LAW incumbent 

UPON EVERY RATIONAL NATURE WHATSOEVER, TO ORDER AND 
ARRANGE ITS ACTIONS CONFORMABLY TO SUCH MAXIMS AS IT 
COULD WILL ELEVATED TO THE RANK OF LAW IN A SYSTEM OF 

GENERAL MOR,iL LEGISLATION 1 If this be SO, then sucli a law 
must needs be inseparably connected cl priori with the very 
idea of the is:iM of a reasonable agent j but to obtain a view of 
this connection, we must enter the domain of metaphysic 
reason, and. quitting speculative philosophy, betake ourselves 
to a disquisition in the metaphysic of ethics^ In practical 
philosophy we have not to do with that which happens, nor 

* To behf>ld virtue in her proper form, is just to exhibit morality- 
divested of >ill false ornaments of reward or self-love. How she then 
eclipses whatever seems charming to sense, every man of uncorrupted 
reason at oiice perceives. 



40 Groundwork of the 

to take our principles from it, but w\\h an objective practi- 
cal law, announcing what ought and should happen, althougli 
in fact and event it may never be so. Accordingly we do not 
bere inquire why something pleases oi' displeases, as in the 
case of taste, nor yet whether this satisfaction may differ 
from a complacency of reason ; neither do we investigate on 
what the feeling of pleasure and pain may depend, nor how 
desire and its concurring with reason may give birth to 
maxims ; for these all belong to psychology, and are h pos- 
teriori^ and to be solved by an induction. "jBut we are going 
to inquire of objective necessary laws, i. k, regarding the 
relation of the will to itself, in so far as it is determined by 
reason, and where everything relating to experience and 
observation is overlooked; because, if reason of itself deter- 
y mine the practical conduct of life, it must needs do so alto- 
gether ct priori^ the possibility whereof we now set ourselves 
to examine. ' 

The will is cogitated as a faculty to detbumine itself 
to act confoemably to the repkesentation of given laws; 
and such a power can be met with in reasonable agents only. 
Kow what serves the will for the ground of its self-deter- 
mination is called the end ; and such end, if presented by 
reason only, must extend equally to every reasonable being. ^ 
What, on the other hand, contains no more th^m the ground 
of tho possibility of an act, the ulterior effect of which last, is 
. the end, is called the mean. The subjective groUnd of desire 
, is a SPRING, the objective ground of volition is'^LAW : hence 
the distinction betwixt subjective ends which rest upon 
springs, and objective ones which attach themselves to laws, 
and are valid for every Intelligent whatsoever. Practical 

^ For evidence that Kant seems often to distinguish -Reason from 
Will, as in this case, compare the following passages, pp. 5,'T, 11, 20, 25, 
74, 81, 89, 120, 192, 230. The explanation of the nature or Eeason, on 
p. 64, may be taken for guidance in the comparison. — C. ) 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 41 

principles 20cq formal when they abstract from all subjective 
ends; they are material when they presuppose these last and 
their springs. The ends which an Intelligent may regard as 
the product of his own activity, and which it is in his option 
to pursue or to decline, are not absolute ends, but relative 
and adventitious merely; for their value depends upon the 
relation obtaining betwixt them and the appetitive faculty 
of the thinking subject, and so they cannot found necessary 
principles of volition, nor laws of catholic extent : thus rela- 
tive ends can be the ground of hypothetical imperatives, 
singly. 

Let there, however, be granted somewhat whose existence 
has in itself an absolute worth, and which, as in itself an endy 
is itself the ground of its own given laws. Then herein, and 
here alone, would lie the ground of the possibility of a cate- 
gorical imperative, i. e,, of a practical law. 

Kow I say that man and every reasonable agent exists 
AS AN end in himself, and not as a mere mean or instru- 
mental to be employed by any will whatsoever, not even by 
his own, but must in every action regard his existence, and 
that of every other Intelligent, as an end in itself. Objects 
of appetite and inclination have a conditioned value only ; 
for, apart from the appetite, and the want felt as springing 
from it, its object would be regarded as entirely worthless ; 
and appetite itself, so far from possessing any absolute worth 
to make it desirable, is, on the contrary, as the source of all 
our wants, what every Intelligent must wish to be freed from. 
Upon this account the value of everything produced by our 
own exertions is conditioned. Even those external things 
whereof the existence rests not on our will, but depends on 
nature, have, as irrationals^ a relative value only, and are 
used as means and instruments for our behoof, and are there- 
fore called things; whereas an Intelligent is called a person, 
he being by the constitution of his system distinguished as an 



,42 Groundwork of the 

end in himself, ^.e., as somewhat which may not be used as a 
mere mean, and as restraining to his extent the arbitrary- 
use which other wills might make of him, and becoming, by 
force of such restraint, an object of reverence. Persons are 
therefore not subjective ends, whose existence is valued by 
us as an effect resulting from our active exertion; but are 
objective ends, whose very existence is itself an end, and that 
too of so eminent a sort, that no other end can be assigned 
to which they could be subordinated as means. For if this 
were not the case, then were no absolute and unconditioned 
value given; and if all value were merely hypothetic and 
fortuitous, it would be impossible to discover any supreme 
practical position on which to ground the operations of 
reason. 

Thus it is seen, that if there is to be a supreme practical 
position, and in respect of the human will a categorical im- 
perative, it must be such a principle as may constitute a law 
by the bare representation of that which is an end for every 
man because it is an end in itself; the ground of the prin- 
ciple is, " Every intelligent nature exists as an end in itself."* 
All mankind must of necessity thus figure to themselves their 
own existence, and to this extent it is a subjective principle 
of conduct. Again, in the very same way, all other rationals 
thu^ cogitate their own existence, by force of the same grounds 
of I'eason which determine man to think so ; wherefore the 
above is likewise an objective principle, and from it, as the 
supreme practical position, all laws of the will must be cap- 
able of being deduced. In this way the practical imperative 
may sound as follows : ^^ So act that humanity, both in thy 
own person and that of others, be used as an end in itself, 
and never as a mere mean." 

This formula we shall now illustrate, to see how it holds, 

* This position is here stated as a postulate. Its ground is assigned 
in the next chapter. 



Metaphysic of Ethics, 43 

and whether it tallies with the former. We shall instance 
again in the above examples. 

Firs% In the case of duty owed toward ourselves. He who 
proposes to commit suicide, has to ask himself if his action 
be consistent with the idea of humanity as an end in itself. 
The man who destroys his organic system to escape from 
sorrow and distress, makes use of his person as a mean toward 
the supporting himself in a state of comfort and ease until 
the end of life. But humanity is not a thing, ^. e., is not that 
which can be dealt with as a mean singly, but is that which 
must at all times be regarded as an end in itself. I am 
therefore not at liberty to dispose of that humanity which 
constitutes my person, either by killing, maiming, or muti- 
lating it. 

Second^ In reference to the duty owed to others. He who 
intends to promise deceitfully, must at once perceive that he 
makes use of his neighbour as a mere mean, not regarding 
him as an end in himself (not making him, at the same time, 
the end and aim of his conduct) ; for he who is thus misused 
to a private and by-end, cannot possibly approve of such a 
line of conduct, nor can he contain in himself the end of such 
a promise. This repugnancy to the position that humanity 
is its own end, comes out more prominently when we take 
examples of inroads made on personal freedom or property. 
In such cases it is palpable that the violator 6f the rights of 
man serves himself of the personality of his fellow as a mere 
mean, not taking into account that an Intelligent must, if a 
mean, be notwithstanding the end of any given action {i. 6., 
be regarded as such a mean as may also be the end of the 
action). 

Thirdly^ In respect of the indeterminate duties we owe to 
ourselves it is not enough that the action do not subvert 
one's own humanity ; it must coincide with it, so as to ad- 
vance it as its own end. Now, every person possesses sundry 



44 Gro^tndwork of the 

dispositions and endowments capable of being indefinitely 
perfected, and which obviously belong and conduce to the 
end aimed at by nature, in constituting the humanity of our 
person : to disregard these indications might no doubt con- 
sist with the physical preservation of mankind, but not with 
its advancement as an end. 

FourtJily, With regard to the indeterminate obligations due 
from us to others, the physical end which all men have is 
happiness. Now, it cannot be doubted that humanity could 
consist, although each man left indifferent the happiness of 
his fellow, and was concerned merely not to offer to it any 
detriment ; but then this would be a mere negative, and no 
positive coincidence of actions with humanity as an end in 
itself, so long as no one endeavoured to advance the ends 
and interests of others ; for the ends of that subject who is 
in himself an end, must of necessity be my ends too if the 
representation of humanity as an end in itself is the all- 
effective mobile of my will. 

This position, that humanity and every Intelligent is an 
end in itself, is not established by any observation or ex- 
perience, as is seen, first, from the generality by which we 
have extended it to every rational whatsoever \ and, second, 
because humanity was exhibited, not as a subjective end of 
mankind (^. 6., not as an object which it stood in their option 
to pursue or to decline), but as their objective end, which, 
whatever other ends mankind may have, does, as law, con- 
stitute the supreme limiting condition of snch subjective ends, 
and which must consequently take its rise from reason a priori, 
Now, the ground of all practical legislation lies objectively in 
the rule, and its form of universality, whereby it is fitted for 
law, agreeably to the first formula. But subjectively in the 
end; and the subject of all ends is each Intelligent himself, 
as an ultimate or last end, according to the second formula ; 
from -which two, when combined, there emerges a third ex- 



Metaphysic of Ethics, 45 

pression, wliicli comprises at once the form and tlie matter of 
the suprepie practical law, and presents us with the idea of 
the will of every Intelligent as universally legislative. 

Agreeably to this formula, all maxims are objectionable 
which do not harmonize with the universal legislation of 
man's own will. His will is therefore to be regarded as not 
subjected to the^ law simply, but so subjected as to be self- 
legislative, and, upon this account alone, subjected to the 
law of which himself is the author. 

The imperative, as above represented, viz., as importing a 
uniform sequence of actions similar to the uniformity of 
events in the physic system, or as founded on that prerogative 
of an Intelligent whereby he is an end in himself, excluded 
from its authority the co-operation of any interest as a 
spring ; an exclusion understood from the very categorical 
exhibition of it. The imperative was postulated as cate- 
gorical, since without this the idea Duty could not be 
explained; but that there really are practical principles 
a prion, containing a categorical commandment, could not 
yet be proved, nor can we attempt it in this chapter ; but 
this one thing still remained to be done, to show that (self- 
detachment from interest) disinterestedness is, in a duteous 
volition, that which constitutes the specific difierence betwixt 
a categorical and hypothetical imperative, a notion which 
ought to be denoted by the imperative itself; and this is 
now done in the last formula, viz., the idea of the will of 
every Intelligent as a will universally legislative.^ 

For when we figure to ourselves a will supremely legisla- 
tive, it is clear that it cannot be dependent upon any interest 
(although a will subjected to a law .simply may be attached 
to it by the intervention of an interest) ; for then the will 

^ As examples of passages in which Kant seems to identify Eeason 
and Will, take pp. 25, 65, 57, 71, 72, 100, 169, 174. The description of 
Will, given, in p. 57, may be taken as guiding the comparison. — 0. 



4-6 Groundwork of the 

universally legislative, and yet dependent, would require a 
further law, restricting its private interest to tlie .condition 
of being fit for law in a system of universal moral legis- 
lation. 

It is now obvious tbat tbe position of a will, universally 
legislative by all its maxims (supposing such a thing were 
established), would suit very well for a categorical impera- 
tive j because, being rested on the idea of a universal legisla- 
tion, it is not founded on any interest; and thus, amidst 
many imperatives, is the only unconditioned one. Or, by 
converting the proposition, if there be a categorical impera- 
tive, it can only ordain to act according to that maxim of 
a will which could at the same time regard itself as univer- 
sally legislative ; for then the practical principle and im- 
perative which it obeys are unconditional, being founded 
upon no interest. 

And now we may cease to wonder how all former attempts 
to investigate the ultimate principle of morals should have 
proved unsuccessful. The inquirers saw that man was bound 
to law by the idea Duty ; but it did not occur to them that 
he was bound singly by his own law universal, the preroga- 
tive of his nature fitting him for a universal legislator, and so 
subjecting him to the law emanating from his own will. For, 
so soon as we regard him subjected to law simply (no matter 
of what sort), then this law must have carried some interest, 
whereby either to allure or to co-act ; for, not springing from 
his own will, the will was legally necessitated by somewhat 
else to act in a given manner. This inevitable conclusion 
rendered fruitless and abortive every attempt to establish a 
supreme principle of duty ; for there resulted, never duty, 
but the necessity of an action conformably to some given 
interest. This might be either a proper or a foreign interest, 
but in either case the imperative was conditioned ; and this, 
we have seen, is invalid for a moral law. I shall therefore 



Metaphysic of Ethics, 47 

call this fundamental position tlie principle of the autonomy 
or THE WILL, in contradistinction to every other, which I call 
heteronomy. 

This principle, that every Intelligent ought to regard him- 
self as legislating (by his maxims) throughout the universe 
of Intelligents, in order, from this vantage-ground, to pass 
judgment upon himself and his own actions, leads to this 
very important and fruitful consideration, — ^the representa- 
tion of all things whatsoever, under this character of ends, 
constituting one vast whole of ends, which, from its analogy 
to what we call " the realm of nature," may be styled " the 
realm of ends." 

By k realm I understand the systematic conjunction of all 
intelligent nature under a uniform and common law. But 
since the law admits those ends singly which be valid univer- 
sally as ends for all, we shall have, by abstracting from the 
personal difference which may exist between Intelligents, and 
also from their peculiar and personal ends, an aggregate of 
ends (comprising both the Intelligents as ends in themselves, 
and likewise their own further ends) in systematic union ; 
that is, a realm of ends is cogitable, and is, by virtue of the 
foregoing principles, possible. 

For Intelligents stand one and all under this common law : 
" Never to employ himself or others as a mean, but always 
as an end in himself." But from this common objective law 
arises a systematic conjunction of Intelligents, i.e.^ a realm, 
which, though extant in idea only, may, because these laws 
regard the relation of Intelligents to one another as means 
and ends, be called *^ the realm of ends." 

An Intelligent is a member of the realm of ends, when he 
is, in addition to being universally legislative, himself sub- 
jected to these laws. But he belongs to it as its sovereign, 
when, in legislating, he is not subjected to the will of any 
other. 



48 Groundwork of the 

Every Intelligent must therefore at all times regard him- 
self as legislating in a potential realm of ends, realizable by 
bis freedom of will, and that too eitber as its member or as 
its sovereign ; but tbe room of tbis last be cannot occupy 
merely by force of tbe maxims of bis will, but only tben, 
wben be is altogetber independent, exempt from wants, and 
endowed witb power commensurate to bis will. 

Morality, tberefore, consists in referring all action to tbat 
legislation wbereby tbe realm of ends is possible. Tbis legis- 
lation, bowever, must be met witb in every Intelligent, and 
take its rise from bis will wbose principle is, never to act 
from any maxim wbicb it could not will a universal law ; 
or tbis, always so to act tbat tbe will may regard itself 
as enouncing its maxim a universal law, i. e., as universally 
legislative. Wben an Intelligent's maxims are not, by tbe 
constitution of bis system, necessarily conformed to tbis prin- 
ciple, tben is tbe necessity of acting agreeably to tbis prin- 
ciple, practical necessitation, L e., duty. Duty cannot be pre- 
dicated of tbe SOVEREIGN" in tbe realm of ends ; but it can of 
every member, and of all equally in degree. 

Tbe practical necessity of acting conformably to tbis prin- 
€iple, i. e., duty, rests not on feelings, interests, or inclination, 
but singly on tbe relation betwixt Intelligents, wbere tbe 
will of eacb must be regarded as universally legislative, apart 
from wbicb be could not be figured as an end in bimself. 
E-eason applies every maxim of will as universally legislative 
to every otber will, and also to every action wbereby it is 
affected; and tbis not but of any regard bad to its own future 
advantage, or to any otber private end, but singly on account 
of its idea of tbe dignity of an Intelligent, obeying no law 
except tbat wbicb itself originates. 

Everything in tbe realm of ends bas eitber a ^^price'^ or a 
" dignity f^ Tbat bas a price in tbe room of wbicb something 
:as an equivalent may be put; but tbat wbicb is above all 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 49 

price, and admits not substitution by an equivalent, has a 

DIGNITY. 

What is subservient to human wants and wishes has a 
market-price ; and what, when there is no want, serves only 
to gratify a taste (i. e., a complacency in stimulating the aim- 
less play of fancy), has a fancy-price. But that which con- 
stitutes the condition, under which alone anywhat can be an 
end in itself, has not merely a relative value, ^. e., a price, but 
has an inward worth, i. e., a dignity. 

ISTow, morality is the condition under which alone an In- 
telligent can be figured as an end in himself, since by it alone 
can he become a legislator in the realm of ends. Wherefore 
morality, and humanity in so far as it is susceptible of that 
morality, is alone that which has the dignity. Diligence, 
attention, and adroitness have their market-price; wit, gaiety, 
and good temper have a price of affection ; but incorruptible 
justice, charity, and unbroken faith have an inward worth. 
N^either nature nor art contain, in their vast domain, what, 
if those were awanting, could be brought to supply the void; 
for their worth consists not in their conduciveness to any 
end, not in their profit or advantage, but in the sentiments, 
L 6., in the maxims of the will in which they are causally 
in seated, although opportunity should now prevent such will 
from stepping forth to act. Actions of this sort need no 
recommendation from the part of taste, nor do they require 
any propensity or sense to cause them to be beheld with 
inward favour and approbation, nor do they address them- 
selves to any adventitious whim or caprice : they exhibit 
the will giving them birth as the object of an immediate 
reverence, and are actions to which reason summons up, de- 
manding them from the will, — whereto she invites, by no 
flattery or blandishment, which last militate with the very 
idea of a duty. Such' reverence enables us to estimate the 
inward worth of such a frame of mind as a dignity, as in- 



50 Groundwork of the 

computably advanced above all price; nor can we compare 
or liken it to such barter without in a manner violating its 
sanctity. 

What, then, is it which entitles the morally good senti- 
ment, Le.^ virtue, to make a claim so lofty? It is nothing 
else than the share imparted thereby to the Intelligent in the 
universal legislation, making him fit to become a member of 
the realm of ends, for which indeed the constitution of his 
nature destined him, making him an end in himself, and 
upon that account a legislator in that realm— absolved from 
every physical law, and obedient to those only which he 
gives himself — by which laws also his maxims may pertain 
to that universal legislation, whereunto at the same time he 
subjects himself; for nothing has any worth except that 
assigned to it by the law. But that law which determines, 
and is the standard of all worth, must upon that account 
have a dignity, i. e., an unconditioned, incomparable worth ; 
and reverence is the only beseeming expression whereby to 
state that estimation in which an Intelligent ought to hold 
it. Autonomy is therefore the ground qf the dignity 
OF humanity, and also of every other intelligent nature 
whatsoever. 

The thre'e expressions just adopted, enouncing the prin- 
ciple of morality, are no more than three formuloe of one 
and the same law, each involving in it the other two ; and 
any difference is subjectively, not objectively, practical. 
They vary by giving a sensible delineation, according to 
different analogies, to an idea of reason, approaching it 
thereby to the mental vision and its feelings. Accordingly 
all maxims have — 

I. A FORM, consisting in their universality ; and here the 
tenor of the categorical imperative was, "All maxims shall 
be such only as are fit for law universal. '' 

II. A MATTER, L 6., an end ; where the formula ordained 



Metaphysic of Ethics, 5 1 

that eacli Intelligent, being by bis nature an end in himself 
should subordinate to this end the maxims of all his causal 
and arbitrary ends. 

III. An aggregate determination, by the formula that 
all maxims of the self-legislative will must be totally sub- 
ordinated to and resolved into the potential idea of the realm 
of ends, like as if it were the realm of nature. The three 
formulae advance in the order of the categories, from the 
unity of the form of the will {i. e., its universality) to the 
plurality of its matter (^. 6., of the objects willed — ^the ends), 
and thence to the aggregate or totality of the system of its 
ends. It is better, however, to adhere to the stricter formula 
of the categorical imperative : " Act according to that maxim 
which thou couldst at the same time will an universal law." 
But when the law has to be conveyed into the mind, it is 
extremely useful to avail one's self of these different ex- 
pressions. 

And now we have arrived at the point from which we 
first set out, — namely, the conception of a good will, That, 
we now know, is a good will whose maxim, if made law 

UNIVERSAL, WOULD NOT BE REPUGNANT TO ITSELF. This 

principle is its supreme law : " Act according to that maxim 
whose universality, as law, thou canst at the same time will." 
This is the sole condition upon which a will can never con- 
tradict itself^ and this imperative is categoric. And since 
such a will, if considered as realizing its maxims, is analogous 
to that uniform and systematic order of events in the physical 
system which we call nature, the categorical imperative might 
be couched thus : '^ Act from maxims fit to be regarded as 
universal laws of nature." These are the formulae indicating 
what an absolutely good will is. 

An Intelligent has this prerogative over every other being, 
that he can assign to himself and %^ his own end. Such end 
would be the matter chosen by every good will ; but since , 



5 2 Groundwork of the 

in the idea of a will absolutely and unconditionally good, we 
must abstract from all ends to be effectuated, (which ends 
could make a will relatively good only), this end must be 
cogitated, not as one to be effected, but as an independent 
self-subsisting end, that is, negatively only ; in other words, 
as an end against which no action dare militate, and which 
must, in every volition, be stated, not as a bare instrumental 
or means, but always as an end. This, however, can be 
nothing else than the subject of all possible ends himself; 
he being likewise the potential subject of an absolutely good 
will, which will cannot be postponed to any other object 
without an inconsistency. And the position, " So act in 
reference to all Intelligents (thyself and others), that they 
may enter as ends into the constitution of thy maxim," is 
virtually identic with the former, "Act according to a 
maxim possessed of universal validity for all Intelligents ; " 
for that I ought, when employing means to any end, so to 
limit and condition my maxim that it may be valid to oblige 
as law every thinking subject, says exactly the same thing 
with this, that the subject of all ends, i. 6., the Intelligent 
himself, may never be employed as a means, but must, as the 
supreme condition limiting all use of means, enter as end 
into the constitution of all maxims of acting. 

From all this we infer that every Intelligent must, as end 
in himself, be able to regard himself as universally legislative, 
in respect of all laws to which he may at the same time be 
subjected, — this fitness of his maxims for law universal being 
= exactly that which indicates him to be an end in himself; 
and we infer further, that this his dignity and excellency 
above every other creature forces him to construct his 
maxims, from the consideration of himself and other Intelli- 
gents as legislators (called upon this account persons). In 
this way, a world of Intelligents {mundus intelligihilis) may 
be cogitated, — and that ideal, which we have denominated 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 5 3 

'^ the realm of ends," is possible by tbe self-legislation of all 
its members. Consequently, every Intelligent ought so to 
act as if lie were by Hs maxims a person legislating for the 
universal empire of ends in themselves. The formal principle 
of these maxims is, '^ Act as if thy maxim were to become 
law universal " (for a universe of Intelligents). The realm 
of ends can only be figured as possible from its analogy to 
the realm of nature, — that proceeding upon maxims, ^. e., self- 
imposed laws, this by virtue of the law of the necessary- 
nexus ; and yet this physical system itself, although, so far 
as we know, a mere machine, is, when viewed in its connec- 
tion with Intelligents, as the end why it is there, called, 
upon this very account, the realm of nature. The realm of 
ends would likewise really come into existence were every 
Intelligent to adhere to the maxims dictated by the cate- 
gorical imperative \ and although an Intelligent cannot infer 
that, even were he punctually to adhere to the categoric 
maxims, all others would do so too ; nor yet, that the realm 
of nature, and the uniformity of its sequences, might be so 
found in harmony with his endeavours to realize the realm 
of ends, as to answer his expectation of happiness : the law 
does nevertheless ordain with undiminished force, for the 
command is categorical, " Act agreeably to the maxims of a 
person ordaining law universal in the realm of ends." Nor 
can this paradox cease to astonish us, that the mere dignity 
of humanity as an Intelligent entity, abstracted from all by- 
views or ulterior considerations, that is, in other words, that 
reverence for a bare idea, should furnish the will with an 
unchanging and inexorable law, and that just in this inde- 
pendency of the will's maxim on all such outward motives 
should consist its majesty and augustness, and the worthiness 
of every thinking subject to occupy the station of a legislator 
in the realm of ends, — since, apart from this independency, 
the Intelligent must needs be subjected to the mechanic law 



54 Groundwork of the 

Q)i Ms physical wants. And even if we were to figure to 
ourselves tlie realms of nature brought into union wibh. the 
realms , of ends under the sovereignty of a Supreme Head, 
whereby the latter state would cease to be a mere idea, but 
would become reality, then would the idea Dignity gain force 
from the addition of so strong a spring, but it could receive 
no augmentation of its intrinsic worth ; for, notwithstanding 
all this, the Sovereign Lawgiver must Himself be cogitated 
as judging of the worth of Intelligents only according to their 
disinterested adherence to the line of conduct prescribed to 
them by that idea. The essence of things cannot be altered 
by any external circumstance \ and that which, independently 
of this last, constitutes the absolute worth of man, must 
serve as the standard by which to judge him. Morality is, 

THEN, the relation OBTAINING BETWIXT ACTION AND THE 

AUTONOMY OF THE WILL : actions in harmony with autonomy 
of will are allowed and lawful ; what actions are incompatible 
with it are disallowed and unlawful. A will whose maxims 
coincide of necessity with the laws of autonomy, is a Holy 
Will, or an absolutely good will ; the dependency of a will 
not altogether good, on the principle of autonomy, is ethical 
necessitation, and is called obligation. Obligation cannot, 
upon this account, be predicated of a Holy Will ; the objec- 
tive necessity of an action, on account of this obligation, is 
what is called duty. 

These observations enable us to understand how, while 
the idea Duty imports subordination to law, we yet conceive 
a certain elevation and dignity to belong to that Intel- 
ligent who discharges all his duties ; for to this extent there 
is no ground of elevation that the will is subjected to 
law ; but herein consists the elevation, that the person 
is himself the legislator, and on this account alone bound 
to subject himself to it. We likewise explained above, 
how neither fear, nor inclination, but only reverence for 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 55 

the law, could be the spring conferring on any action 
moral worth. Our own will, in so far as it acts only under 
the condition required to fit its maxims for law universal 
— such potential state of will — is, I say, the proper object 
of reverence ; and the dignity of man jnst consists in the 
ability to be universally legislative, although upon this 
condition to be at the same time subjected to his own legis- 
lation. 

Autonomy of Will is the Supreme Principle of Morality, 

Autonomy of Will is that quality of will by which a 
WILL (independently of any object willed) is A law to itself.'^ 
The principle of autonomy, therefore, is to choose such maxims 
singly as may be willed law universal. That this practical 
rule is an imperative — i. e., that the will of every Intelligent 
is necessarily attached to this condition — cannot be evinced 
hj merely analyzing the notions contained in the position, for 
it is a synthetic a priori proposition. We must, in short, 
pass from the investigation of the object to an investigation of 
the subject — L e., to an inquiry into the functions of practical 
reason itself; for this synthetic position, which commands 
apodictically, must be cognisable altogether a priori. But 
this inquiry is not within the limits of the present chapter. 
However, that this principle of autonomy is the alone principle 
of ethics, can be sufficiently evinced from a bare analysis of 
the current notions regarding morality; and we found that 
its supreme principle must needs be a categorical imperative, 
and that the imperative again ordained just this autonomy. 
How such a synthetic practical position d> priori is possible, 
and WHY it is necessary, is a problem beyond the limits of 
the Metaphysic of Ethics. However, whoso admits morality 
to be anywhat, and not a mere fantastical conceit^ must admit 
at the same time the above principle. But that morality is 
* Ref. 5, from p. 45.— C. 



56 Groundwork of the 

NO CHIMERA, will follow, then, when the categorical impera- 
tive, and the autonomy it enjoins, is true, and absolutely 
necessary as a position cb priori. But this requires a potential 
synthetic use of practical reason cb priori,— s^n assertion 
we cannot hazard, without first premising an inquiry into 
the causal functions of that faculty, which we shall now 
do in the next chapter, at least so far as to satisfy this 
purpose. 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 5 7 



CHAPTEE III. 

TRANSIT FROM THE METAPHYSIC OF ETHICS TO AN INQUIRY INTO 
THE A PRIORI OPERATIONS OF THE WILL. 

TJiQ Idea Freedom explains that of Autonomy of Will. 

WILL^ IS THAT KIND OF CAUSALITY ATTRIBUTED TO LIVING 
AGENTS, IN SO FAR AS THEY ARE POSSESSED OF REASON; 
AND FREEDOM IS SUCH A PROPERTY OF THAT CAUSALITY AS 
ENABLES THEM TO ORIGINATE EVENTS, INDEPENDENTLY OF 

FOREIGN DETERMINING CAUSES; as, Oil the other hand, (me- 
chanical) necessity is that property of the causality of irra- 
tionals, whereby their activity is excited and determined by 
the influence of foreign causes: 

This explanation of freedom is negative, and therefore 
unavailing to aid our insight into its essence and nature; but 
there emerges from it a positive idea of freedom, much more 
fruitful : for since causality brings with it the notion of law, 
conformably to which an antecedent gives of necessity the 
existence of somewhat else, its sequent; the idea freedom, 
though unconnected with mechanic laws, is not cogitated for 
that reason as altogether devoid of law, but merely as A 
causality different in kind, and carrying with it laws 
suited to that generic difference ; for if otherwise, a free 
will were a chimera.^ The mechanical necessity observed in 

* Kef. 5, from page 45. — C. 

^ For a full view of Kant's theory of the Freedom of the Will, the 
passage on pp. 63, 64, distinguishing between the sensible and super- 
sensible or cogitable systems, must be taken as fundamental. Then 
compare pp. 63, 64, 68, 69, 72, 73, 95, 135, 137, 139, 161, 169, 175. -G. 



58 Groundwork of the 

the physical system is heteronomy in causation, where each 
event happens only by virtue of somewhat else foreign to the 
cause determining its efficiency. On the contrary, fkeedom 
OF WILL IS AUTONOMY, ^. 6., THAT PROPERTY OF WILL BY WHICH 
IT DETERMINES ITS OWN CAUSALITY, AND GIVES ITSELF ITS OWN 

LAW. But the position, the will is in every action a law to 
itself, is equivalent to the position that it acts from no maxim 
unfit to be objectively regarded as law universal. This, how- 
ever, tallies with the formula of the categorical imperative, 
i. e., with the supreme principle of morality. Whence it 
results that a free will, and a will subjected to the moral 
law, are one and identic. 

Upon the hypothesis, then, of freedom of will, morality 
and its formula are arrived at by a mere analysis of the idea. 
The formula is, however, a pure synthetic proposition h 
priori, viz., a good will is one whose maxim can always be 
regarded as law universal; and no analysis of the notion 
Good Will can guide to this further one of that property of 
the maxim. Such synthetic propositions are alone possible 
when there is a common and middle term combining the 
extremes which meet in the synthesis. The positive idea 
Freedom is this, middle term, which cannot, as in physic 
causes, be any part of the system presented to the sensory. 
Now, what this is to which freedom points, and of which we 
have an idea d, priori, requires elucidation ; and to make 
comprehensible the deduction of the idea Freedom, together 
with the grounds of the possibility of freedom and a cate- 
gorical imperative, requires still a little preparation. 

Freedom must he postulated as a Property of the Will of 
every Intelligent whatsoever. 

It is not enough to attribute freedom to our will, unless 
we have sufficient grounds to ascribe it likewise to every 
reasonable being ; for, since morality is our law, only in so 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 59 

far as we are Intelligents, it must be so also for every other 
being endowed witli reason : and since it can be evolved 
only from the idea Freedom, freedom must be represented as 
the property of every Intelligent's will whatsoever. It is 
not enough to deduce it from experience of human nature 
(although this is impossible, for it demands an investigation 
a priori)] but it must be evinced as indissolubly attached to 
the energy of all beings possessed of reason and will. Now, 
I say that every being who can only act under the idea 
Freedom, is for that reason to all practical ends really 
FREE ; i. 6., all laws bind him, which go hand in hand with 
the idea Freedom, just as much as if his will had been in 
speculative philosophy ascertained to be free j and I assert 
further, that we must ascribe to every Intelligent possessed 
of will the idea Freedom, under which idea he can alone act. 
For in such Intelligent we figure to ourselves a reason which 
is practical, i. e., has causality in respect of its objects. Now, 
it is impossible to figure to ourselves any_reason conscious of 
receiving- any foreign bias in constituting its judgments and 
notions ; for then the person would ascribe the determination 
of his judgments, not to his reason, but to an extraneous 
impulse. Keason must therefore regard herself as the author 
of her own principles, independently of foreign influences : 
consequently she has as practical reason, i. 6., as will of an 
Intelligent, to regard herself as free ; that is to say, the will 
of. an Intelligent can be his own will only by presupposing 
freedom ; and this must therefore, for a practical behoof, be 
ascribed to all Intelligents whatsoever. 

Of the Interest indissolubly connected with the Idea of 
Morality. 

We HAVE now reduced the idea of morality to that 
OF FREEDOM OF WILL j but WO have not yet shown such 
freedom to exist as real in human nature. We only saw 



6o Groundwork of the 

that we must presuppose freedom when we try to figure to 
ourselves an Intelligent conscious of its own causality with 
reference to its own actions, i. e., endowed with will. Upon 
the same grounds, it was requisite to attribute to every 
agent endowed with intelligence and will a property of 
determining its own agency by virtue of the idea of its own 
freedom. 

Upon the presupposition of those ideas, there resulted 
further the consciousness of a law making it imperative how 
to act, viz., that the subjective rules of conduct ought always 
to be so constituted as to be objectively, i. e., universally 
valid, and so fit for proper catholic legislation. But still a 
question may be raised. Why am I bound to subject 
MYSELF TO THIS PKINCIPLE ? and that too so sheerly as In- 
telligent, that every other Intelligent must be figured as 
standing in the same situation. I admit that no interest 
urges to this subjection; otherwise the categorical imperative 
were abrogated. Still I cannot be devoid of all interest to 
do so, nor without interest to comprehend on what such 
interest is based; for this word shall denotes properly a 
state of WILL valid for all Intelligents, which would alone 
obtain, if reason, unimpeded, were the alone actor. For 
beings like ourselves, afiected by sensitive excitements, 
totally difierent in kind from the causal laws of reason, and 
whose actions fall out, vastly discrepant from what naked 
unimpeded reason would have done, such abstract necessity 
of acting is spoken of as what one should or ought, and the 
subjective is distinguished from the objective necessity. 

It looks very like as if we set out with the idea Freedom 
for a vehicle to jihe moral law, and the principle of the 
autonomy of the will, but could not, apart from this pre- 
supposition, prove the law's reality and proper objective 
necessity. However, even were it so, we should gain a very 
considerable end, viz., the fixing more closely than hereto- 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 6 1 

fore the true foundation of morality, even althougli we 
should not yet have succeeded in establishing its validity, 
and the practical necessity incumbent on ^an to subject 
himself to it. And this really has been done, although we 
should never be able to answer satisfactorily the question 
why the universal validity of our maxims for laws should be 
a condition limitary of our conduct ; nor yet be able to tell 
whereon we base that worth, figured to attach to this mode 
of conduct, and which is alleged to run so high, that no 
higher interest is at all conceivable ; nor whence it happens 
that man in these circumstances alone learns to feel his 
personal worth, in exchange with which a painful or a happy 
state shrinks equally to nothing. 

It is found, indeed, that mankind are susceptible of an 
interest in a personal property, unconnected with any plea- 
surable state, provided such personaljqualification may make 
us capable of the latter, in the event of a reason coming to 
distribute it ; i. e., that the mere worthiness to become happy 
has an interest abstracted from any regard had to such 
happiness itself But then this judgment and this suscepti- 
bility is itself a product of the admitted weight and import- 
ance of the moral law (when we, by force of the idea 
Freedom, detach ourselves from every sensitive excitement 
and emotion) ; but how we are at all able thus to detach 
ourselves, ^. e., to cogitate ourselves as free, and why, in 
doing so, we ought to find an increased worth in our per- 
sonality, requiting us for every loss we otherwise undergo, 
i. e., upon what grounds the moral law has virtue to oblige, 
cannot be comprehended by dint of the foregoing remarks. 

It seems, I confess, as if the whole argument moved in 
a circle, from which there is no escaping. "We assume our- 
selves free to explain our subjection to the moral law, and 
then we figure ourselves subjected to this law, because we 
have attributed to ourselves this property of freedom ; for 



62 Groundwork of the 

freedom and self-legislation issue both in autonomy of will, 
and so are convertible ideas; from which, cause it comes 
that the one cannot be used to explain the other, nor can 
be assigned as its ground, but at the furthest may be put to 
the logical use of reducing seemingly different representations 
of the same object to one single notion (as in the mathe- 
matics, fractions equal, but with different denominators, are 
reduced to similar expressions by their common measure). 

Only one escape remains to us from this labyrinth, 
namely, to inquire if we do not occupy an entirely different 
station, when we regard ourselves, as by means of freedom, 
spontaneous a "priori causes, from that station which we 
hold when we represent to ourselves our actions as events 
in the system we see presented to our senses. 

It is a remark, not calling for much subtle penetration, 
but one made from yore by the most common understanding, 
that the representations we are possessed of through the 
intervention of the sensory, never teach knowledge of objects 
otherwise than how they affect us ; and so, what they are in 
themselves remains latent and undiscovered : consequently 
that, notwithstanding the greatest efforts of the understand- 
ing with regard to such representations, we arrive at know- 
ledge of the APPEARANCES OF THINGS only, and can attain 
none of things in themselves. So soon as this distinction 
has been made (even did it merely spring from the observed 
difference between the representations given us from with- 
out, and in receiving which we are passive, and those which 
we produce entirely within ourselves, and exert our own 
self-activity upon them), it follows at once that something- 
must be assumed, lying at the bottom of phenomena, which 
cannot itself again be a phenomenon, viz., the thing itself, 
although we are at the same time perfectly aware that, since 
we never can know it further than how we are affected by 
it, we can come no nearer to it, nor detect its real natuie 



Metaphysic of Ethics, 63 

and being. This may be the first separation made by man 
betwixt a cogitable world and tbe world presented to 
HIS SENSES, whicb sensible system may differ continually 
witb the differing sensories of different percipients, although 
the supersensible system, its groundwork, remain unaltered 
and the same.* H^ay, even what man knows of his own 
nature and constitution by his inward senses, is an appear- 
ance only, and no acquaintance with what he is in himself ; 
for his perceptipn of himself coming through the sensory is a 
mere phenomenon in nature, and can only take notice of the 
mode in which his consciousness is affected ; and yet at the 
same time he must of necessity pass from this phenomenal 
composition of himself to that which lies at the bottom of it, 
viz., HIS I, figured as a thing in itself This man, in regard 
of his sensory and receptive faculties, deems himself a part 
of the SENSIBLE system ; but in regard of that within him, 
which may be his own pure spontaneity (^. e., that which is 
immediately present to consciousness, without any modifica- 
tion of the sensory), he deems himself likewise a member of 
a cogitable and unseen system, of which he has, however, 
no knowledge. 

This conclusion must follow and hold with regard to 
everything presenting itself to man : probably it obtains to 
some extent in every human understanding; for the most 
untutored have always been inclined to figure to themselves 
an invisible and unknown at the back of the objects im- 
pinging on their sensory, and have expected to find there, 
somewhat self-active ; but then they immediately ruin this 
discovery by giving this invisible an external and tangible 
configuration, and so halt on the threshold of discovery. 

iN'ow, in point of fact, man finds himself endowed with 
a function, by which he distinguishes himself from all 
OTHER OBJECTS, nay, even from himself, in so far as he is 
* Kef. 6, from page 57.— C. 



64 Groundwork of the 

affectable through the sensory; and this function or power 
IS reason.* This, as pure self-activity, transcends in excel- 
lence even the faculty of understanding \ for though this 
last is likewise self-activity, and does not, like the sensory, 
€ontain mere representations which result from its reaction, 
when impressed by things, yet it begets no conceptions, ex- 
cepting only such as serve to regulate and order the impres- 
sions of the sensory, and so to combine them in the identity 
of self-consciousness, without which union and combination 
of perceptibles the intellect could furnish no thought. 
Whereas reason, in supplying the ideas, shows so original 
and high a power of pure spontaneity, that it passes alto- 
gether beyond the field of the sensory, and has for its most 
principal and chief function, to separate and disjoin the 
sensible and cogitable systems ; and, by assigning the limits 
and boundaries of these respectively, to ^^ at"i;he same time 
those laws beyond which the understanding cannot pass. 

Hence it happens, that a reasonable agent must, as 
Intelligent, cogitate himself a member^ mot so much of the 
sensible, but rather of the supersensible system, t He has 
therefore two stations from which to regard himself, and a 
TWOFOLD set OF LAWS regulating the conduct and exercise of 
his powers. The one kind of laws import heteronomy, 
and subjection to the mechanism and necessity of the phy- 
sical system. The second connect him with a cogitable 
system, are quite independent on mechanic influences, and 
have their grounds in nowise in the physical system, but in 
reason only. 

As Intelligent, and member of a cogitable world, man can 
represent to himself his proper causality only by force of 
the idea Freedom; for independence on the determining 
causes of the physical system (which independency reason 

*• Eef. 2, from p. 6 ; and Ref. 4, from p. 40.— C. 
t Ref. 6, from p. 57.— C. 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 65 

must always attribute to itself) is freedom ; but to tbe idea 
Freedom that of autonomy is indissolubly attached; and with 
this last there goes hand in hand the principle of morality, 
which does in idea lie at the bottom of the actions of every 
EATiONAL, in exactly the same way as laws of nature lie at 
the bottom and are the groundwork of all phenomena. 

And now the suspicion previously stated is removed, as if 
there were a latent and vicious circle in our concluding from 
freedom upon autonomy, and from autonomy upon the moral 
law ; as if we set out with the idea Freedom merely for the 
sake of the moral law, and in order to deduce this law from 
it, and so could give no account, and could assign no grounds 
for this idea, but had begged it merely as a principle, which 
the charitable might kindly grant us, but which could never 
be set up as a position resting on its own independent grounds. 
For now we see that, cogitated as free, we transplant our- 
selves into a supersensible system, whereof we recognise the 
law of autonomy, and its sequel morality 3 but that again, 
when we figure ourselves obliged or beholden to an act, we 
regard ourselves as members at once both of the sensible and 
of the cogitable systems. 

How is a Categorical Imperative possible ? 

Every reasonable being reckons himself on the one hand 
as Intelligent iri a cogitable system ; and merely as an effi- 
cient in this system does he call his causality a will. On the 
other hand, he is conscious that he is a part of the physical 
or sensible system into which actions step forth, as the mere 
appearances or phenomena of that causality, the possibility 
of which, however, cannot be understood, as tjiey have a 
descent from sources we know nothing of; but which appear- 
ances must, on the contrary, be regarded as determined by 
other and antecedent phenomena, namely, appetites and 
desires obtaining in the physical system. Regarded purely 



66 , Groundwork of the 

as an inhabitant of the cogitable world, all man's actions 
•would exactly tally with the autonomy of a pure will ; while, 
again, regarded as a mere link in the chain of causes and 
events, all human actions are locked up under mechanic laws 
(heteronomy), and would ensue exactly according to the 
physical impulses given by instincts and solicitations in the 
sensory. But because the world of Koumena contains 

WITHIN IT THE LAST GROUND, NOT ONLY OF THE WORLD OF 

Phenomena, but also of this last's laws, I, as Intelligent, 
though likewise a phenomenon, must recognise myself as 
immediately attached to the intellectual law of the first, i.e.^ 
of reason, which by the idea Freedom gives ^ law, and ordains 
autonomy of will; from which it follows, that the laws 
of the cogitable and noumenal world are immediate and 
categorical imperatives ; and the actions flowing from these 
principles it behoves me to judge of as duties. 

Thus categorical imperatives are seen and comprehencted 
to be possible, the idea Freedom making me an inhabitant of 
a cogitable system ; where, were I such alone, my every 
action would fall out in harmony with autonomy of will, and, 
so far as I am likewise connected with a different but depen- 
dent system, ought and should so harmonize ; which cate- 
gorical " SHOULD," EX1>RESSES A SYNTHETIC PROPOSITION 

A PRIORI j the constitution and origin of which synthesis is 
understood and comprehended, when we understand, that 
over and above my consciousness "^ of a will, stimulated by 
sensitive instincts and wants, there is superadded an idea of 
the very same will, but figured to be in a cogitable system, 
as pure self-active will, which likewise contains in it the 
last grounds and supreme conditions of the other, — pretty 
much as where, over and above the intuitions of the sensory, 
there are superadded notions of the understanding, which 
notions are in themselves nothing but legislative forms, and 
yet constitute, by the conjunction, synthetic propositions 
* See note on next page. — C, 



'sic of Ethics. 67 

a priori, on whicli all knowledge of physics and of tlie laws 
of nature rests. 

The practical use of the plainest understanding corrobo- 
rates the accuracy of this investigation. No one, not even 
the most hardened ruffian, can fail to wish a change of state 
and character, when he has laid before his mental vision 
examples of sincerity and plain dealing, of unwavering stead- 
fastness in adhering to good resolutions, of active sympathy, 
of inward good will, and universal benevolence. Such he 
too would willingly become ; but he finds he cannot, in con- 
sequence of appetites and perturbations obtaining in his 
sensory; and this forces from him the further wish that he 
were disenthralled from the bondage of a servitude now felt 
to be intolerable. He therefore demonstrates that he, by 
force of the idea of a will separated from the perturbations 
of the sensory, does in thought waft himself into an order of 
things where none such intrude, and where he expects no 
real or imaginary gratification, but expects singly an advance- 
meiit of the inward worth of his personality. This better 
person, however, man figures himself to be, when he regards 
himself, in his station, as an inhabitant of the cogitable ^ 
system, whitherwards the idea Freedom (^. e., independency 
on the determinators of the physical system) must of neces- 
sity transplant him. There he is conscious of a good will,*^ 
and recognises it as the law and standard for his wayward 
and phenomenal one. What he therefore morally should 
and ought, he sees to be his own proper necessary will, as 
member of a cogitable world ; and he speaks of this his 
necessary will under the term shall, when, recognising its 
authority, he considers himself at the same time as residing 
in the system presented to his senses. 

^ For such occasional references to Consciousness as occur in discuss- 
ing the Freedom of the Will, v. pp. 70, 72, 75, 96, with which, by way 
of contrast, may he taken p. 175. — C. 



68 Groundwork of the 

Of the Extreme Verge of all Practical Philosophy, 

All men regard themselves, quoad their wills, as 
free:* hence come those judgments passed with regard to 
actions, that they ought to have happened, although in 
fact and event they happen not. This freedom is no con- 
ception taken from experience and observation, for it remains 
unaltered, even while all experience exhibits the very con- 
trary of what, according to laws of freedom, ought to be; 
and yet, on the other hand, it is equally necessary to think 
of every event as inevitably determined by laws of nature. 
And this necessity in the physical sequences is no conception 
either, borrowed from observation and experience; for it is 
the notion of a necessity, and is part of knowledge a priori, 
Now this conception of a necessary-nexus in the physical 
system is substantiated by experience, nay, behoved to bo 
presupposed if experience and observation (^. e., regular and 
uniform knowledge of the objects of sense) are to be possible. 
Hence freedom is only an idea of reason, and the 

objective reality op it is doubtful, but THE MECHANIC 
NEXUS IS A NOTION OF THE UNDERSTANDING, and prOVeS itS 

reality in experience and observation, and must prove it."^ 

Thus reason finds itself involved in a dialectic, for the 
freedom attributed to it seems to collide with the necessity 
obtaining in the physical system. And although, in this 
dilemma, reason, for speculative purposes, finds the path 
of mechanical necessity much smoother, and more unim- 
peded, yet, FOR ALL PRACTICAL ENDS, sho finds the narrow 
path of freedom the alone and single, along which she can 
exert herself in action. Hence the most subtle philosophy 
and the plainest understanding have both found it alike 
impossible to quibble themselves out of freedom : they have 
therefore been both conscious at bottom, that there was no 
* Eef. 6, from p. 57.— C. 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 69 

real contradiction betwixt freedom and the laws of nature, 
considered both as regulating human actions; for reason 
can no more give up the notion of nature, than she can 
divest herself of the idea of freedom. 

But a.t any rate, the appearance of contradiction must be 
removed, although how freedom is possible remains 
TOTALLY incomprehensible;''^ for if the idea Freedom be 
repugnant to itself, or the causal laws of nature, which are just 
as necessary, it must be abandoned for the sake of the latter. 

But this contradiction cannot be avoided, unless the 
subject attributing to itself freedom thinks itself under 
different relations, when it at one time calls itself free, 
and yet regards the same action as fixed and subjected to 
the causal mechanic law determining phenomena. The pro- 
blem is one which cannot be declined by reason, at least to 
show that the deceptive appearance of contradiction consists 
in this, that we cogitate mankind in a totally different point 
of view when we deem him free from what we regard him 
in when, as a phenomenon in space and time, we deem him 
subjected to their laws. N'ay, to show further, that these 
two are not only consistent, but must of necessity be com- 
bined in the same subject, since we could not otherwise assign 
a ground why reason is to be embarrassed with an idea, 
not perhaps giving the lie direct to an old and well-estab- 
lished notion, but which idea exposes her to a very unneces- 
sary and needless dilemma. This duty is incumbent on 
speculative philosophy, that it may prepare the way for the 
practical : there is therefore no option left to the philosopher, 
whether he will solve this seeming enigma, or leave it un- 
investigated ; for if he do this last, he leaves the theory 
concei-ning freedom a honum vacans, which the first coming 
fatalist may seize on as unoccupied, and expel morals, as 
usurping grounds to which she can show no title. 
* Eef. 6, from p. 57.— C. 



70 Groundwork of the 

However, it is not here tlie outer verge and border of 
practical philosopliy is descried, for the difficulty just men- 
tioned does not fall under its province, but is for speculative 
reason to make an end of, that it may warrant to practical 
reason secure and easy possession against all assailants of the 
domain on which she intends to erect her seat. 

The legal title on which reason claims her freedom 
OF WILL is grounded on the consciousness '^ and admitted 
presupposition of reason's independency on merely subjec- 
tively determined causes, which aggregately compose what- 
ever is of the nature of sensation, and passes under the 
general name of sensory. Man, considered as thus indepen- 
dent and intelligent, wafts himself, when he does so, into 
another order of things, and into a relationship with deter- 
mining grounds of quite another kind (as intelligence en- 
dowed with will, i. e., causality) from those with which he is 
connected when he perceives himself a phenomenon objected 
to his senses (which likewise he most certainly is), and finds 
his causality subjected to foreign deter minators, according to 
mechanic laws. ISTow he immediately becomes aware that 
both states may co-exist, nay, that in point of fact they 
must do so ; for that A thing as it appears, and as part of 
sensible phenomena, is afiected by certain laws, on which it, 
the same thing, not as appearance, but as a real, actual 
thing in itself, is independent, is in nowise a contradiction ; 
and that man must reflect of himself in this twofold light, 
rests first on his consciousness of his being an object in the 
sensible system, and then, second, on his consciousness of 
himself as Intelligent, i. e., as in his originary use of reason, 
independent on sensitive impressions, i. e., detached from 
them, and in a cogitable state.* 

Hence also it happens that man deems himself the poten- 
tial possessor of a will which tramples under foot whatever 
*Ref.^7^fromp. 67.— C. 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 7 1 

is the mere progeny of appetite and want, and represents 
actions to be by it not only possible, but necessary, wMcli 
can alone be performed by casting behind-back and discard- 
ing every inclination and excitement of the sensory. This 
will's causality resides within him as Intelligent, and has its 
origin and seat in the laws of a cogitable world j of which 
world, however, man knows nothing further than that 
therein reason, naked reason, i, e., reason separated from 
every perturbation of the sensory, has alone the sway; and 
since it is there alone that, as Intelligent, man is properly 
himself (whereas here he is but an appearance of that self), 
that sway and dominion of reason concern him immediately 
and categorically. Nor can the whole stimulants in the 
phenomenal system affect or impair in any way the laws of 
his intellectual will; so much so, that he counts not these 
stimulants as his, but acquits himself of them as irresponsible. 
These he imputes not to his proper self, i. 6., his will; but to 
himself alone any indulgence whereby he may incline to 
them, and allow them any influence derogatory to the 
authority of the law presented by reason to his will.* 

Nor does reason overstep her bounds, in cogitating her- 
self into a supersensible state; but she would then, when she 
pretended to feel herself into it, or by intuition to envisage 
herself there. Such supersensible is a mere idea, negative of 
the sensible world, which gives no laws to determine reason; 
and is in this point alone positive, that freedom, although 
a negative quality, carries with it a positive function and 
causality of reason called will,t enabling man so to act that 
the principle of his conduct may tally with the essential 
constitution of all causal reasons ; ^. e., the condition, that a 
reasonable agent's maxims of conduct should be at all times 
fit for law universal. But when reason attempts to draw 
down an object of will from the cogitable world, then she 
* Bef . 4, from p. 40.— 0. f Ref. 5, from p. 45.— G. 



7 2 Groundwork of the 

oversteps Iter limits, and affects a knowledge where slie knows 
nothing. The notion of a cogitable system is a mere 
STATION WHICH REASON NEEDS for a fulcrum to lift itself out 
of the mass of appearances, and cogitate itself as sui- 
ACTIVE. This, however, mankind could not at all do, if 
sensitive excitements necessarily determined the human will ; 
but which he must inevitably do, unless self-consciousness, as 
intelligent and spontaneous reason, is to be denied.^ This 
conception leads, no doubt, to the idea of a different order of 
things, and of a legislation totally diverse from laws obtain- 
ing over the mechanic events in nature, and renders the 
representation of a cogitable world (i. e., the aggregate of In- 
telligents as things-in-them selves) necessary and inevitable. 
But all this takes place without the smallest pretence to 
know anything of the laws obtaining there, excepting only 
the FORMAL condition of them, viz., the potential universality 
of the maxims of their wills for law — ^that is, their autonomy, 
which alone can consist with freedom; whereas all laws 
whatsoever grounded on an object beget heteronomy, and can 
take place singly in mechanic nexus and a physical system. 

But REASON WOULD INDEED OVERSTEP ALL BOUNDS AND 
LIMITS WERE SHE TO UNDERTAKE AN EXPLANATION, HOW PURE 
REASON CAN BE SPONTANEOUS AND SELF-PRACTICAL? a 

problem perfectly identic with this one, to explain how 

FREEDOM OF WILL IS POSSIBLE.f 

Eor we can explain nothing which we cannot reduce to 
laws, the object of which is given, or at least may be given, 
in observation and experience ; whereas freedom is a bare 
idea, and its objective reality cannot be exhibited or explained 
by laws of the physical system, i. e., is nowhere found in 
observation and experience; and since no example or analogy 
can be supplied to it, its reality can never become either 

* Ref. 7, from p. 67.— C. 

f Ref. 5, from p. 45 ; and Ref. 6, from p. 57. — C 



Metaphysic of Ethics, 73 

comprehended or -understood. It is valid merely as a neces- 
sary hypothesis for that reason which believes itself possessed 
of will, L e.<i of a function superior to mere powers of desire ;* 
namely, a function to determine itself to act as pure intelli- 
gence, upon grounds of reason, and independently on physical 
instincts. Now, where events cease to be regulated by 
physic laws, there explanation is at end j and all that remains 
is to defend our possession of the idea, that is, to repel the 
attacks of those who pretend to see further into the nature 
of things than others, and who boldly pronounce freedom an 
absurdity. And we can show them, that the contradiction 
they imagine they have found out lies only in their refusing 
to regard man in his twofold character j and that when, in 
order to support the unvariedness of the causal law in respect 
of human actions, they consider man of necessity as a pheno- 
menon in the physical system, and are then further required 
to figure to themselves man as Intelligent, and not as an 
appearance, but a thing in itself, they still persist in re- 
garding him as in space and time : in which case, indeed, to 
separate his causality (^. e., his will) from the laws obtaining 
there, is impossible, and an absurdity; which difficulty van- 
ishes entirely if they would bethink themselves, as reason 
calls on them to do, that beyond phenomena must needs be 
things-in-themselves, although latent, — the laws of which 
last cannot be expected to turn out identic with the laws 
under which their appearances rank. - 

This subjective impossibility to explain the freedom of the 
will is identic with the impossibility to investigate or explain 
THE INTEREST t mankind takes in the moral law; and although 

* Ref. 6, from p. 57.— C. 

+ Interest is that whereby reason becomes a cause practically deter- 
mining the will. Hence we say of rationals only, that they have an 
interest in anywhat ; irrationals have no more than an appetite or in- 
stinct. Reason takes an immediate interest in an action only then, 
when the universal validity of its maxim is the exclnsive determinative 



74 Groundwork of the 

he lias sucli interest, the groundwork of whicli is called the 
MORAL SENSE, no further account of it can be given. The 
feeling itself has been falsely declared to be the standard and 
guide of our ethical judgments, whereas it is the inward 
effect exercised by the law upon the will, the objective 
grounds of which reside in reason. 

In order to will what reason ordains"^ that man ought and 
should, this last must have a function enabling it to beget A 
FEELING OF AMENITY, in the Carrying its law into execution 
— in other words, in discharging duty; consequently, reason 

MUST HAVE A CAUSALITY OP ITS OWN, ADAPTED FOR DETERMIN- 
ING THE SENSORY ACCORDING TO ITS OWN PRINCIPLES. It is, 

however, altogether impossible to comprehend how a naked 
thought, containing in it nothing of the sensory, can bring 
forth an emotion of pleasure or pain; for it is a peculiar kind 
of causality, and of it, like every other kind of causality, we 
can predicate nothing a 'priori^ but see ourselves compelled 
to interrogate experience. Observation and experience, how- 
ever, teach no other relation betwixt cause and effect, than 
the relation obtaining betwixt one phenomenon and another ; 
and in the case we are considering, reason is, by its ideas 
(which no experience reaches), the cause of an effect, which 
last alone lies within observation and experience ; whence 
we see that ant explanation, how and why the universal 

VALIDITY OF A MAXIM FOR LAW (^. 6., MORALITY) SHOULD IN- 

of the will. * ' Such an interest is the alone pure. Again, the interest 
taken by reason in an action is then indirect and oblique, when some 
object of desire or particular feeling of the subject is pre-required to 
determine the choice ; and since abstract reason cannot assign any 
objects of desire, nor beget any feeling pointing to such object, but these 
arise from observation and experience singly, such latter interest is no 
pure interest of reason, but is one adulterated with (t posteriori grounds. 
Even the logical interest of reason is not immediate, but rests on the end 
and aim it may have of advancing its speculative extent. 
* Kef. 4, from p. 40.— C. 



Metaphysic of Ethics, 75 

tTEREST MANKIND, IS QUITE UNATTAINABLE. Only thuS mucll 

is certain, tliat morality is not valid for man because it 
INTERESTS HIM (for that were heteronomy and dependency of 
the will on sense), but that it interests because it has validity 
for man — ^because its law springs from our very intellectual 
being, and from what is man's proper self : no w, whatever (e. ^., 
the interest) is among the appearances, must needs be subordi- 
nated by reason to the essential constitution of the thing itsel£ 
The question, how a categorical imperative is possible, 

MAY THEREFORE BE THUS FAR REPLIED TO, that we Can aSSign 

the alone hypothesis on which such imperative can be founded, 
viz., freedom ; and it is replied to, in so far as we can com- 
prehend the necessity of this postulate freedom, which is 
sufficient for the practical conduct of reason, i. e., to a 
practical conviction of the authority and validity of the 
imperative, that is, generally of the moral law. But how the 
hypothesis itself comes to be possible, is what no human 
reason can comprehend. Upon the hypothesis of freedom of 
will, AUTONOMY, the formal condition of its determination was 
inferred as a necessary sequel; to postulate which freedom of 
will, is not only possible, but is unconditionally necessary, 
for a being conscious of its intellectual causality, that is, of a 
will, which it distinguishes from its desires^; which postulate 
it must likewise apply to the practical use of every voluntary 
action. But how naked reason, independently of every other 
spring, can be itself active and spontaneous, i, e., how the 
mere principle of the validity of its maxims for universal 
laWs, independently on every object man may be interested 
idj can be itself a spring to action, and beget an interest 
which is purely ethical; to explain this, I say, how reason 
can be thus practical, is quite beyond the reach and grasp of 
all human thought, and the labour and toil bestowed on any 
such inquiry is fruitless, and thrown away. 
* Eef. 7, from p. 67.— C. 



76 Groundwork of the 

An inquiry instituted to this effect would be just the same 
as if I were to try to fathom how freedom is, as a causality of 
will, possible; for I then quit all philosophic grounds of 
explanation, and have none other. I might no doubt give 
my fancy reins, and let it run riot through a cogitable region 
which still remains. But though I have a well-grounded 
IDEA of such a state, I have no knowledge of it whatever, 
and can acquire none by any stretch of thought. The idea 
denotes a mere somewhat (cogitable) which remains when 
every sensitive excitement is excluded from the will; and 
this exclusion is had recourse to, in order to show that the 
sensible system is not all in all, but that beyond lies some- 
what ulterior. But this ulterior is a vast unknown and 
blank. When reason thinks of such an ideal state, and 
abstracts from all known objects, there remains nothing 
except the form (of reason itself), viz., the law of the univer- 
sal validity of its maxims; and in harmony with this, reason, 
as therein an agent, ^. e., a cause determining volition. Every 
spring is here awanting and abstracted from, unless indeed 
the idea of this cogitable state be itself the spring, i. e., that 
in which reason takes its original interest ; but to make this 
comprehensible, is just the problem we have declared in- 
soluble. 

Here, then, is the utmost verge of all ethical inquiry, 
to %.iL the just bounds and limits of which is of very great 
importance ; for it provides reason with a guard against seek- 
ing in the sensible system for its last determinator, and find- 
ing there, to the utter ruin of all morality, a physical and 
comprehensible interest; and it likewise furnishes a guard 
whereby reason is prevented from impotently flapping its 
wings and attempting to soar in the blank void of impossible 
ideas, and, without moving from the spot, disorienting itself 
amid chimeras. The idea of a pure cogitable world, as an 
aggregate of reasonable beings, to which ourselves belong 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 77 

(althougli still parts in a physical system), is a most fertile 
and allowed idea for the behoof of a reasonable faith, all 
knowledge falling short on this side of it. ISTor can the august 
ideal of a universal kingdom of ends in themselves fail to 
excite in man a lively interest in the moral law, since man- 
kind can only then figure themselves its inhabitants, when 
they most industriously adhere to the imperatives of freedom, 
as if they were necessary laws of the physical system. 

Conclusion of the Groundwork. 
Speculative reason, when examining the physical system, 
arrived at the idea of an absolute necessity contained in some 
last and supreme cause of the world. Practical reason, re- 
flecting on its actions, arrives also at an absolute necessity 
(in freedom), — a necessity extending no farther than to the 
LAWS OF THE ACTIONS of a reasonable being considered as such. 
E"ow it is a fundamental principle of all use of reason, to 
carry back all knowledge to a consciousness of its necessity 
(and where this is not done, the knowledge does not rest on 
grounds of reason) ; and yet it is a limit as invariably put to 
it, that cannot comprehend this necessity, either of what 
happens, or of what ought to happen, unless it is able to 
assign some condition as a ground upon which somewhat 
either is or ought to be. In this way, by continually requir- 
ing further and further conditions, the insight and satisfac- 
tion of reason is postponed. In this restless state reason is 
driven on the unconditionally necessary, and is forced upon 
it, although it cannot by any means comprehend such uncon- 
ditionate necessity, and deems itself happy when it impinges 
on an idea able to support the load of such a hypothesis. It 
is therefore no fault of this deduction and inquiry into the 
supreme and last principle of morality, but an objection which 
• it behoved to make to human reason itself, that it cannot 
make comprehensible the absolute necessity of an uncondi- 



78 Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Ethics, 

tioned practical law, wliicli unconditionate necessity tlie cate- 
gorical imperative must have ; for that reason refuses to 
explain it by adopting the further condition of an interest 
attaching to it, can be no reproach to reason, since in such 
event the imperative would cease to be a moral, i. e., supreme 
law of freedom, and so we cannot comprehend the uncon- 
ditionate practical necessity of the ethical imperative, but we 
comprehend why it is incomprehensible; and this is as much 
as can be reasonably demanded from a system of philosophy 
which has for its object to investigate the reach and extent 
of the faculty of reason. 



BOOK II. 

EXTEACT FEOM 
"CRITIK OF PRACTICAL REASON." 



BOOK II. 

INQUIRY INTO THE A PEIOBl OPERATIONS 
OF THE WILL. 



{Extracted from the " Critik of Practical Reason''') 



CHAPTER I. 

ANALYTIC OF PRINCIPLES. 

PRACTICAL PRINCIPLES are propositions containing dif- 
ferent RULES, subordinate to tliem, wMcli may be 
grounds of determining the Will. They are either subjective^, 
:and are called maxims, when the rule is considered as of force 
only in reference to the thinking subject himself; or they 
are objective, and are called laws, when reason pronounces 
the rule to have an ethical virtue of obliging all reasonable 

beings.* 

Remark, 

If it be admitted that reason contains in itself practical 
grounds sufficient for determining the will, then there are 
practical laws ; but if otherwise, then are there no more than 
practical maxims. Where a will is pathologically affected, 
there a collision of maxims is conceivable ; nay, they may 
<even militate against laws which the thinking subject him- 
. * Ref. 4, from p. 40.— C. 

G 



82 Analytic of Principles, 

self admits to be presented to Lis will by reason. Thus, an 
individual may adopt tlie maxim to let no injury pass un- 
avenged, and at the same time lie may see very clearly that 
that principle is no law, but simply a maxim of his own ; and 
that if such a maxim were raised to the rank of a law in a 
general code or system of moral legislation, it would become 
self-destructory, and inconsistent with itself. In natural phi- 
losophy, principles regulating what happens (events) (e, g.y the 
principle of the equality of action and reaction in commu-^ 
nicating motion) are also laws of nature ; for in physics the 
use of reason is theoretic, and determined by the nature of 
the object. But in moral philosophy, where determinators of 
volition are alone inquired into, the rules or principles which 
a person may adopt to regulate what happens (actions) are 
not in any sense laws inevitably put upon him ; for reason is 
here practical, and has to do with the appetitive faculty of 
the subject, according to the nature and qualities of which, 
the rule may be variously modified. Every practical rule is 
a product of reason, for it prescribes an act as a mean toward 
an end, which is intended. But such a rule is, in the case- 
of a being whose reason is not the sole determinator of his 
choice, AN IMPERATIVE, i, 6., a rule expressed by the word 
SHALL or OUGHT, and it denotes the objective necessity of an 
action, and implies that, if the will were guided by reason 
singly, the action would follow according to the rule. Im- 
peratives have therefore an objective import, and so differ 
totally from maxims, which are subjective singly. They 
determine the causality of an agent either in regard of the 
effect or purpose to be reached, or they determine the causality 
simpliciter. In the first case, the imperatives are hypo- 
thetical, and are no more than rules of art ; but, in the second,, 
they are categoric and absolute, and these alone are practical 
laws regulating conduct. While, then, maxims may be re- 
garded as rules, they never can be considered as imperativeSo 



Analytic of Principles, 83 

Even imperatives, when no more than conditional determina- 
tors of the will, ^. e.^ when they determine the will, not as such 
simply, hut as a mean toward some desired effect, are not 
laws, but practical precepts only. Laws must determine the 
will, as will, and do not even depend on the question whether 
the subject possess the power requisite for some desired 
end : they are equally independent of the particular line of 
conduct conducive to ifc, ^. 6., they are categbric ; and if they 
were not so, they would not be laws, being deficient in neces- 
sity, — a practical necessity, being only possible to be conceived 
where the will is separated thoroughly from all pathological 
and contingent circumstances which may attach to it. When 
it is said that a man must exert himself in youth, and be 
thrifty, that he may not starve when he is old, a true and 
important rule of conduct is advanced ; but what is to be ob- 
served with regard to this rule is, that the will is referred to 
somewhat out of and beyond itself, of which it is presumed it 
makes a choice ; and it must be left to the individual himself 
whether he so choose or no ; whether he may expect funds 
from other sources than his own industry ; whether he think 
he may live to old age ; or whether he may keep himself by 
stealing when he comes to want. Reason, from which alone 
a rule expressive of necessity can emanate, lends a necessity 
to the foregoing precept (for, apart from its necessity, it were 
no imperative); but such necessity is subjectively conditional, 
and cannot be supposed of all thinkiag beings equally. But 
for a legislation of reason, nothing further can be required 
than that it presuppose itself, since, in this event alone, 
can a rule be objectively and universally valid, no subjective 
contingent circumstances being introduced distinguishing 
one reasonable being from another. Now, let it be said that 
NONE OUGHT TO PKOMiSE DECEITFULLY, and we havo a rule 
which respects the will singly, and takes no cognisance of 
any ulterior aim or intention which a man may have, and 



84 Analytic of Principles, 

is hence independent of the consideration of any sucli aim 
being attainable or not. It is the naked volition which is 
given as determined a 'priori by the rule. Again, suppose 
that the above rule be correct and true, then it is law ; for 
the imperative it expresses is categoric. All practical laws 
refer to will, quite irrespective of any effects which its cau- 
sality may produce, whence abstracting from " thosey^ we may 
consider " ^/m" as it is a priori. 

Sec. 2. — Position I. 

All practical principles which presuppose an object, or 
matter chosen, as a determinator of the will, are one and all 
of them taken from experience and observation, and, being ^ 
posteriorly cannot supply a law of acting. 

Remarks, 

By the matter of a choice, I understand an object, the ex- 
istence of which is desired. When the desire of this object 
goes before the practical rule, and is the condition determin- 
ing it, then I say, first, such rule is always a posteriori ; for 
the determinator of choice is then the representation of an 
object, and the relation subsisting between the representation 
and the subject, whereby the choice is determined to realise 
the object. This relation, however, is called pleasure in the 
existence of the object. This pleasure must therefore be 
presupposed as a condition precedent to the possibility of 
such determination of the choice. Now, it is impossible to 
know a priori, in any case, whether the representation of an 
object is to be accompanied with pleasure or not ; whence it 
follows that the determinator of the choice is a posteriori in 
such event, as is likewise the material princi^Dle of acting 
which rests on ifc as a condition. 



Analytic of Principles. 85 

Again, I say, secondly, that since a principle wHcli is 
based on the susceptibility of an individual for pleasure or 
pain is known only by an induction a 'posteriori^ and cannot 
be extended to other agents perhaps not endowed with any 
similar or the same capacity, it may become a maxim, but can 
never be law, not even for this individual ; for it is devoid 
of objective necessity, which is always a priori. A material 
principle can therefore never yield a practical law regulating 
conduct. 

Sec. 3. — Position II. 

All material practical principles, however different, 
agree in this, that they belong to one general system of 

EUDAIMONISM, AND REST ON SELF-LOVE. 

The pleasure arising from the representation of the ex- 
istence of a thing, when a determinator of the choice 
towards that thing, rests on the susceptibility of the indi- 
vidual, and depends on the existence of the thing, and 
belongs for this reason to the sensory and not to the 
understanding, because this last refers a representation to 
the object by the intervention of a notion, and does not 
refer it to the subject by the intervention of a feeling. 
The pleasure is consequently only in so far practical, as 
the agreeable sensation expected by the individual from 
the object determines his choice. But the consciousness 
of agreeable sensations, regarded as uninterrupted through 
the whole course of life, constitutes happiness ; and the 
ruling principle to make regard to one's own happiness 
the supreme and single determination to action, is the 
• principle which is justly called self-love : consequently all 



86 Analytic of Principles. 

material principles which put the determinator of choice in 
the pleasure or pain resulting from the existence of an object, 
are to this extent all of the same kind — that they belong to 
a system of Eudaimonism, and rest on one's own self-love. 

Corollary. — Every material rule assigns a determina- 
tion of choice taken from the lower powers of desire 
singly ; and were there no formal law of the will sufficient 
to determine itj it would needs follow that there existed 

no SUPERIOR POWER OF DESIRE at all. 

Remarh I. 

It is quite surprising that men, otherwise acute, should 
have imagined that they had detected the difference betwixt 
the HIGHER and inferior powers of desire, by observing 
whether the representation productive of pleasure sprang 
from the sensory, or from the understanding; for when 
inquiry is made as to the determinator of a choice, and 
the grounds of that determination be put in the agreeable 
sensation expected from an object, it is of no moment from 
what faculty the representation springs, but this alone is 
to be considered, how much the representation pleases or 
delights. If a representation, which may have its seat in 
the understanding, is only able to determine the choice by 
presupposing a pleasurable sensation in the subject, then 
it is clear that the determination depends on the peculiar 
constitution of the sensory, and its susceptibility for an emo- 
tion of delight. It is of no consequence to insist that the 
representations of objects are widely different, according as 
they are, of the understanding, of reason, or of the sensory ; 
for the feeling of pleasure, by which the will is put into 
motion, is in either of these three cases exactly of the same 



Analytic of Principles, 87 

kind, both by being known only a 'posteriori^ and by its 
stimulating the same vital function. The different agreeable 
sensations which may therefore determine the will, differ 
merely in degree; and if this were not so, it were impossible 
that any man could compare different representations, spring- 
ing from different faculties, so as to prefer one before the 
other ; and yet an individual may throw aside a useful book 
not to neglect a hunting match; the very same man may 
quit listening to a most pathetic harangue, not to be too late 
for dinner, or leave a most interesting party, and for whom 
he has the highest esteem, to adjourn to a gaming table; 
nay, a benevolent man, otherwise fond of giving alms, may 
turn away a poor object because he has just so much money 
in his pocket as will pay his entrance into the theatre. If 
the motive determining the will turn on the pleasure or 
pain expected from a representation, it must be quite in- 
different to the individual what kind of representation affects 
him; his sole concern in determining his choice must be 
how intense, how durable, how easily acquired and repeated, 
may be the gratification, — just as it is indifferent to the 
man who is about to pay away his money, whether the gold 
of which his coin consists has been dug out of a mine or 
washed from the sand, provided it pass current in either case 
for the same value. A man, therefore, whose concern rises 
no further than to pass happily through life, is perfectly 
indifferent whether a representation of the sensory or of 
the understanding delight him, provided the enjoyment be 
equally great and equally durable in both cases. But, clear 
though this be, those who deny the power of reason to 
determine by itself the will, have continually embarrassed 
this matter by their bad definitions, — first holding certain 
sensations to be pleasures, and then pronouncing them 
somewhat totally diverse. Thus they observe that sustained 
^exertion, that consciousness of force of will in overcoming 



88 Analytic of Principles. 

great obstacles presented to tlie execution of our resolveSj, 
that the culture of the mind, impart high degrees of gratifi- 
cation ; and that mankind deem them more refined, because 
"they are more in our own power, do not wear out by usage, 
but rather strengthen our susceptibility for such enjoyment,, 
and so expand the mind while they delight it : upon these 
grounds, they conclude that such pleasures determine the 
will in a totally difierent manner from the pleasure of the^ 
senses, and support themselves in this belief by inventing a 
peculiar sense (a moral sense, or sense of taste) for their 
vehicle ; — a style this of arguing, which i^eminds one of those 
metaphysic quacks who keep cogitating at matter till it 
becomes so fine and suprafine, that they at length fancy it 
subtilized into spirit. If, like Epicurus, we rest virtue on 
the pleasure it may promise us, it is quite inconsistent to- 
tax that philosopher with sottishness when he holds the 
pleasures of virtue as exactly the same in kind with the 
coarsest sensual enjoyment. And it is mistaking his system 
altogether to say, that the representations by which he ex- 
pected to be delighted have their origin alone in the organs 
of the body. On the contrary, so far as we can understand 
him, he placed many pleasures in the culture and use of the 
intellectual powers ; but this ought not, and did not, hinder 
him from regarding pleasures, when stimulating the will>, 
as exactly alike and the same in nature. To be rigidly 
consistent, is the highest duty of a philosopher ; and of this- 
we find better examples in the old Greek schools than now- 
a-days, when the most discordant systems are often forced, 
by the shallowness of their abettors, into a disgraceful coali- 
tion, in the hope of pleasing the public by giving them a 
little of everything. A system the principles of which turn 
on one's own happiness, no matter how intellectually soever 
the understanding may be employed on it, can never furnish 
iiny further motive, than such as excite and stimulate th& 



Analytic of Principles. 89 

inferior powers of desire. Either, then, a superior power of 
desire is to be abandoned, or else reason must itself be a 
practical or active faculty ; i. e., such a one as can by the 
bare form of its rule determine a volition, and that abstracted 
from all feelings of the agreeable or disagreeable which may 
follow or compose the matter of a choice. And if reason 
be such a faculty, then it is not in anywise in the service of 
the sensory, but does itself alone determine a volition, and 
is a superior or supreme power of desire, generically distinct 
from the lower, and claiming the supremacy over it. Ta 
adulterate the legislation of reason with motives borrowed 
from the sensory, is to impair its strength, and derogate^ 
from its pre-eminence, in the same way as a geometric de- 
monstration would be ruined if attempted to be assisted by^ 
an induction ; for instead of being supported, it would lose 
its certainty and self-evidencing power. 

Eeason determines the will simpliciter by its law,"^ and not 
indirectly by the intervention of an emotion, — -not even by 
means of pleasure felt in the contemplation of the law itself; 
and it is only because reason is an active faculty, that it is 
possible for it to legislate over the will. 

Remark II, 
To be happy, is a desire entertained of necessity by every 
finite intelligence, and is therefore inevitably a determinator 
of choice. Contentment with our state of existence is no- 
birthright of man. If it were, it would be fitly termed 
BLESSEDNESS, and would consist in the consciousness of man's- 
all-sufficiency and independent self-contentment. On the 
contrary, happiness is a problem urged upon man's notice by 
the wants and insufficiency of his finite nature. These wants^ 
point to the matter of desire, i, e., to something afiecting 
man's subjective feelings of pleasure and pain; and these feel- 
* Kef. 4, from p. 40.— 0. 



90 Analytic of Principles, 

ings determine what a man considers wanting for his happi- 
ness and contentment with his situation. But because such 
a material determinator is subjective singly, and known only 
by observation and experience, it is impossible to regard this 
question of happiness as founding any law or obligation j a 
law being, as we have seen, objective, and containing a 
determinator of will, valid for all cases and for all intelligents 
whatever. And though the notion Happiness establishes a 
connection and relation betwixt objects and the powers of 
desire, still happiness is only a general denomination for all 
subjective determinators, and nothing is fixed by it specifi- 
cally, which, however, is indispensable towards the solution 
of any problem, and therefore also toward the solution of the 
question of happiness. What different individuals may find 
conducive to their happiness, depends entirely on their 
peculiar tastes and feelings ; and even in the same individual 
his conceptions of happiness vary and alter with circum- 
stances, and with the emotions stimulating his sensory. So 
that such subjective laws (although necessary as parts of the 
physical system) are subjectively contingent (considered as 
practical principles of conduct), and unfit for law universal, 
in so far as the appetite for happiness disregards entirely the 
formal fitness, and considers singly the material fitness of an 
action to produce the greatest amount of pleasure. Principles 
of self-love contain general rules for adapting means to an 
-end, and so are merely theoretic or technical principles; e. g,^ 
how he who would like to eat bread has to construct a mill. 
But no practical principle founded on them can be necessary, 
or of catholic extent; for when the will acts from maxims 
of self-love, the determinator of choice is based on feelings in 
the sensory; and it is uncertain that these feelings are uni- 
versal, not even certain that they are unalterable in respect 
of the same external objects. 

But even supposing that finite Intelligents were at one as 



A nalytic of Principles, g i 

to their opinions of the agreeable and unpleasant, and that 
they coincided as to the lines of conduct expedient to be 
taken in order to compass the one and avoid the other, still 
the principle of self-love could not be announced as a law for 
practical conduct; for this uniformity would itself be con- 
tingent; the determinator of choice would be given and 
known from observation and experience singly, and could 
not contain that necessity which is of the essence of law, i. e., 
a necessity presented to the mind by reason a priori: at least, 
if such principles were called laws, their necessity must be 
understood to mean, not a practical, but a physical necessita- 
tion, and would import that human actions followed on the 
appetites and passions by a determinate and fixed mechanism 
of our frame. But, rather than take refuge in such a base- 
less absurdity, it would be more judicious to maintain that 
there were no practical laws at all; for the utilitarian position 
•elevates subjective principles to the rank of objective laws: 
in which case, however, their objective necessity behoved to 
be understood from grounds of reason ct priori. Even in the 
physical system, the uniform sequences of its phenomena are 
alone called laws, because seen to be so a priori; or when, as 
in chemistry, they are postulated as such, because it is pre- 
sumed they should be so recognised if our faculties reached 
further. But in the case of principles taken from the con- 
ceptions of self-love (one's own happiness), no such hypothesis 
or postulate is admissible, since it is of the very essence of 
the theory that it rests on subjective and not on objective 
conditions : consequently, that the principles it yields can 
never be more than maxims, and are not, without contra- 
diction, cogitable as laws. This may seem to a hasty reader 
a mere subtilizing upon words; however, it concerns the 
assigning in terms an exact formula for the most important 
■distinction which enters into the consideration of ethical 
philosophy. 



92 Analytic of Principles. 

Sec. 4. — Position III. 

If an Intelligent cogitate his maxims as practical laws of 
catholic extent, he can do so singly when his maxim is, not 
by its matter, but by its form, the determinator of volition. 

The matter of any practical principle is the object or end 
willed ; and this end either determines the will, or it does, 
not. If the matter chosen regulate the choice, then the rule 
depends on the relation subsisting betwixt the feelings of 
pleasure and pain, and the end represented, i. e., on an d, 
posteriori condition; and so the rule is unfit for a practical 
law. But when the matter of a law is taken away, there 
remains nothing except the form of law in general : therefore 
an Intelligent either cannot in any event cogitate his maxims 
as fit for laws in a code of general moral legislation, or he 
must figure to himself that the bare form of law by which 
his maxims fit and are suited for catholic legislation, is what 
can alone render them practical laws. 

Remarh. 

What kind of maxim is fit for law universal, and what not^ 
is plain to the mo^t untutored understanding : for instance, a 
man resolves (^^ e., adopts as maxim) to augment his income 
in every secure way. He holds in his hands a deposit 
entrusted to him by one who has just died intestate; and 
he proposes to apply his maxim to the sum in his trust. I 
now put the question, and ask if such maxim would be 
valid for a law of catholic extent, i. e., if his maxim can be 
announced in the form of a law; and it is directly j)erceptible 
that a law, ordaining every one to detain sums committed to 
his trust, when he safely can do so, is absurd and self 



Analytic of Principles. 93 

destructory ; for it would tend to this issue, that no deposit 
would at any time be made, and so the law to break trust 
would effect its own avoidance. Wli^t reason recognises as 
a practical law, however, must be fit for law universal (for 
^11 agents). The proposition rs identic, and cannot be made 
plainer. So that, if the will be subjected to a practical law, 
the depository cannot found on his appetite for hoarding as 
a determinator of choice fit for law universal. For, so far 
from being fit for that, it was seen, when considered under 
the form of a universal law, to be incompatible with itself, 
a-nd self-annihilating. 

Although the tendency to happiness is universal, as is also 
the maxim by which that tendency is made a determinator 
of choice, yet it is surprising that men of understanding 
should for that reason announce this want, as a foundation 
for a universal practical law. For while every other law 
effects uniformity as its result, the law taken from a maxim 
to make one's self happy would not only exhibit the veriest 
counterpart of such harmony, but would annihilate the 
maxim itself, and frustrate the end designed, in making it 
a., law. In the case of utilitarian (greatest happiness) prin- 
ciples, all wills have not the same end, but each will has 
its own (its own welfare), which may perhaps accord with 
others, perhaps not, but which at any rate gives no certain 
determinate law, the possible exceptions being innumerable ; 
and that sort of harmony might emerge which a satiric poet 
describes as the concord of spouses who mutually ruin one 
another by their extravagance — 

How wonderful their harmony ! 

For what he wills, that wills eke she ; 

Or that sort expressed by the message from Francis I. to 
Charles Y. : *^ Whatever my brother Charles chooses (Lom- 
bardy), that assure him I choose also." In short, principles 



94 Analytic of Principles. 

founded on observation and experience never can become 
tlie groundwork of any law ; for, to invent one capable of 
reducing to harmony all tbe appetites and by-ends of man- 
kind, and at tbe same time founded on them, is altogether 
impossible. 

Sec. 5. — Pkoblem I. 

Upon the hypothesis that a maxim is, by its legislative 
form singly, the alone valid determinator of choice, — to find 
the nature of a will so determinable. 

Since the abstract form of law in genere is cogitable by 
the force of reason singly, it is nowhat presented to the 
senses, and so no phenomenon occurring in space and 
time; and the idea of it, considered as a determinator of 
will, is wholly different in kind, from the determinators 
of phenomena in the physical system, because in this last 
the determinator of a phenomenon is, by the law of the 
causal-nexus, itself also always a phenomenon. Again, 
since by hypothesis no determinator of will was valid as 
law, except the universal legislative form, it follows that 
such a will is quite independent of the causal law by which 
phenomena are regulated. But to be independent of the 
law of cause and effect, and of the mechanism of the physical 
system, is freedom, in the strictest sense of the word. A 
will, therefore, whose alone law is the legislative form of its 
maxims, is a free will. 

Sec. 6. — Problem II. 

Conversely : Upon the hypothesis that a will is free, to 
fmd the law, alone fit for its necessary determinator. 



Analytic of Principles, 95 

Since the liiatter of any practical law (i, e., the object 

of a maxim) can only be given d> posteriori^ and the will is, 

by the supposition, nnaffected by any conditions a posteriori^ 

and free, and yet cannot be cogitated as devoid of all law, 

it remains that a free will must find in the law somewhat 

fit for its regulation, irrespective of the matter of the law. But 

when the matter of a law is taken away, there remains nothing 

except its legislative form. The legislative form, therefore, 

contained in a maxim, is that which can alone determine 

a free will. 

Eemark. 

Ereedom, and an imperative practical law, reciprocally 
point to one another. I do not here raise the question if 
they really differ, or if the unconditioned law is not iden- 
tically the same with self-consciousness of pure practical 
reason, and this last again identic with the positive idea 
Freedom ; but I only examine from what our knowledge of 
an unconditioned practical necessity takes its rise, — if from 
the idea Freedom, or from the law. That it should begin 
from the former is impossible ; for we are conscious of it not 
immediately, as is seen by our first conception of it being 
negative only.^ Neither do we know our freedom from 
observation and experience, experience teaching only that 
mechanic law of the causal-nexus which is the veriest anti- 
part of freedom. It is therefore from the moral law alone 
that its original is to be deduced ; for of it we are instantly 
conscious, as soon as we adopt maxims or resolutions of 
conduct '/'' and reason, by representing this as a determinator, 
far outweighing all sensitive considerations, and totally uncon- 
nected and independent of them, leads to the idea Freedom, t 
And if the question is further put. How do we arrive at the 
* Ref. 7, from p. 67.— C. f Ref. 6, from p. 57. -C. 



g6 Analytic of Principles. 

consciousness of tlie moral law % the answer is the same as in 
the case of any other proposition h ;?nor^,— that we are cpn- 
scions of a practical law h 'priori, as we are conscious of 
theoretic ones, by attending to the necessity with which 
reason obtrudes them on the mind ; and by separating from 
them all <^ posteriori conditions, we arrive, from the first, at 
the idea of a pure will, as, from the last, at the notion of a 
pure understanding. That this is indeed the order in which 
these ideas are ushered into the mind, and that morality 
first reveals to man his inward freedom, and that practical 
reason first proposes to speculative reason its insoluble pro- 
blems, is plain from this, that since no phenomenon can be 
explained by help of the idea Freedom, and since speculative 
reason was lost in the embarrass arising from its Antinomies, 
no one could have hazarded the introduction of such an idea 
into science, had not the moral law obtruded and flung it 
before the mind. This opinion is further strengthened by its 
consistency with what experience teaches ; for let any one 
allege that his sexual appetite is so strong as to be quite 
ungovernable, and put the case to him, whether he could not 
refuse to give his passions vent if he knew he were to be led 
to instant execution if he did so, and there can be no doubt 
as to what his love of life would prompt him to answer ; but 
^sk him further, if his sovereign were to order him, upon pain 
of the same death, falsely to swear away the life of an ob- 
noxious noble, whether his love of life would induce him 
to do so, or if he thought he could disobey the unjust man- 
date. Wliether he would do so or not, he might not have 
Qon^diQiiGQ in himself to assert, but that he could, must be 
admitted by him without hesitation ; that is, man judges it 
possible for him to do an act because he is conscious that he 
ought to do it ; and so recognises his inward freedom, which, 
apart from the moral law, would have remained latent and 
undiscovered. 



Analytic of Principles, 97 

Sec. 7. — Fundamental Law of Reason. 
So act that thy maxims of will might become law in 

A SYSTEM OF UNIVERSAL MORAL LEGISLATION. 

Remark, 

Greometry begins witli postulates concerning tlie drawing 
of lines and the fixing of points, and these are practical pro- 
j)ositionSj containing nothing further than the supposition 
that an operation may be performed when science requires 
it; and they are the sole propositions of the mathematics 
which refer to the existence or non-existence of a phenome- 
non. They are therefore practical positions, standing under 
a problematic state of will. But in Ethics the practical 
rule is absolute, and ordains somewhat to be done, whereby 
the will is objectively determined. Pure self-active (spon- 
taneous) reason being immediately legislative, the will is 
cogitated as independent on conditions h posteriori ; i. e., as 
pure will determinable by the bare form of law. The fact 
is startling, and without any parallel j for the a priori idea 
of a potential legislation is unconditionally announced as 
law, without having its possibility established from any 
observation or experience, or supported by the fiat of any 
foreign or exterior will. 

Our consciousness of this fundamental law is an ultimate 
fact of reason, for it issues from no preceding data, e. g., the 
consciousness of freedom, but is thrust upon the mind 
directly as a synthetic a priori proposition, and is bottomed 
on no intuition whatsoever, whether <^ priori or a posteriori. 
But if the idea Freedom were given, then would the law 
be analytic. But the idea is in the first instance negative 
singly ; and if it were positive, would require an intellectual 
intuition, as to which there can be no question. Lastly, 

h 



98 Analytic of Principles. 

■when it is said that this law is given, I beg it may be 
understood that it is not known by observation and experi- 
ence, but that it is the single isolated fact of practical reason, 
announcing itself as originally legislative. Sic volo, sic juheo. 

Corollary. — E-eason is spontaneously practical, and gives 
that universal law (to man) which is called the moral law. 

Remark. 

This fact is undoubted. One needs only to analyze the 
judgments passed by mankind on the lawfulness of their own 
actions, in order to become aware with what unchanging 
necessity reason contrasts every maxim of conduct with the 
idea of a pure will, i. e., holds up, as a standard, itself repre- 
sented as d, priori causal. The above principle of morality 
is authentically announced by reason as law for all Intelli- 
gents, L e., for all who have a faculty of determining their 
own causality by the representation of a rule, i. e., in so far as 
they are susceptible of actions upon system, and so suscep- 
tible of practical principles d, priori; which last have alone 
that necessity which reason demands in an ultimate position. 
The moral law is therefore not confined to man, but extends 
over all, even to the Most High and Supreme Himself; 
but, in the former case, the law is expressed in the formula 
of an imperative ; for although man is cogitated as the pos- 
sessor of a pure will, yet, since he is susceptible of emotions 
and wants, inseparable from his finite state, he has by no 
means a holy will, i, e., a will incapable of adopting maxims 
incompatible with the law. The moral law is hence to 
finite Intelligents an imperative, expressing a categoric 
command. 

The relation of such a will to the law is called obligatioNj 
which signifies necessitation by reason to an act, which act, 
again, is called duty. A will pathologically afiected is in the 



Analytic of Principles. 99 

state of wish, a state springing from subjective emotions, and 
therefore often not in harmony with the objective determi- 
nator, and so requires an inward intellectual co- action, i. e., 
moral necessitation. In the case, however, of the Most High 
and Supreme, His will is rightly cogitated as incapable of 
any maxim not fit for law universal. And the idea HolinesSj 
which therefore becomes His attribute, excludes all limitary 
or negative laws, and so exalts Him far beyond the concep- 
tions of obligation and duty. This Holiness of Will is, 
however, nothing more than a practical idea, — an infinite 
approximation towards which is all that is possible for man 
or any other finite being, and which ideal standard is con- 
stantly held up to man by the Moral Law, called for that 
reason itself Holy. Steadfastness in this continual advance- 
ment, and Hope in the unchangeableness of a man's resolves 
to do so, or, in one word, virtue, is the utmost a finite reason 
can accomplish ; and since this practical power is developed 
by exercise, and known by observation and experience, it 
can never be fully attained or secured, and the confident 
over-persuasion of such would militate to the prejudice of 
morality. 

Sec. 8.— Position IY. 

Autonomy of will is the alone foundation of mo- 
rality, and of the duties springing from it; and every 
other principle whatsoever, not only cannot found laws of 
necessary obligation and catholic extent, but is in fact sub- 
versive of morality. In being independent of the matter of 
any law (a desired object), and being determinable by the 
legislative form of his own maxims, consists the ethical 
nature of man, and that which renders him a subject for 
morality; that independence is freedom negatively, while 



lOO Analytic of Principles. 

this self-legislation is freedom positively. The moral law 

expresses, therefore, nothing else than just the autonomy 

of reason, {. e., of a man^s freedom or spontaneity ;* and this 

autonomy or freedom is a condition which must qualify 

every maxim, if these last are to harmonize with the moral 

law itself. On the contrary, when the matter of a volition, 

which can be nothing else than the object of a desire, is 

made of the practical law, and represented as a condition 

prerequisite to its possibility, then Heteronomy (a false 

principle of morals) results ; and the will ceases to prescribe 

to itself its own law, and is left exposed to laws taken from 

pathological phenomena. In this case, however, the maxim 

adopted by the will is formally unfit for law universal, and 

not only founds no obligation, but goes to subvert the 

principles of practical reason itself, and so militates against 

genuine moral sentiments, even while the actions emanating 

from such heteronomy are not wanting in conformity to 

the law. 

Remark /. 

Practical rules, based on accidental and contingent circum- 
stances, can never be regarded as laws for conduct. The will's 
proper law wafts it from this visible system into another 
order of things ; and that necessity it expresses, having no 
common part with the mechanic necessity expressed by laws 
of nature, can consist alone in the formal conditions requisite 
to the possibility of law in general. The matter of every 
practical rule depends on subjective facts not extending to 
all agents whatsoever, and hinges on the principle of one's 
own happiness. And although it cannot be questioned that 

* Eef. 5, from p. 45.— C. 



Analytic of Principles. i o i 

every volition has an end aimed at (^. e., a matter), yet tHat 
by no means warrants the conclusion that such matter is the 
condition and determinator of the maxim; for if so, then 
maxims could not be elevated to the rank of law in a system 
of universal moral legislation, as they would rest on acci- 
dental, and not on necessary circumstances. Thus it is quite 
possible that the happiness of others may be the object of the 
will of an Intelligent ; but if regarded as the determinator of 
the maxim, then it mast be supposed that we not merely feel 
a secret gratification on perceiving the happiness of others, 
but that we are stimulated by a physical want or appetite to 
act towards it, as in the case of compassion ; and so there 
would be no law of benevolence, that physical feeling not 
reaching all persons whatever (e. ^., God). However, there 
may be a law enjoining universal love, and the matter of 
benevolent maxims may remain, provided it is not figured as 
their prerequisite condition ; and it is the form of law which, 
by moulding the matter chosen, is the ground of adding such 
matter to the will. To make this as clear as may be, let the 
object-matter of my choice be my own happiness, then a 
maxim expressing such volition can only be fit for law uni- 
versal (i. e., be moral), when I involve in it the happiness of 
every other Intelligent throughout the universe. And a 
law ordaining me to promote universal happiness is there- 
fore quite independent of the supposition that happiness is 
the choice of all wills, and rests singly on its own formal 
universality. This satisfies the demands of reason, and gives 
to what would else be a mere selfish maxim, a qualification 
fitting it for law. In this way it is observable that a pure 
will is not determined by a desire of happiness, but is so 
singly by the form of legality; this form again — adapting 
the maxim founded on the appetite for happiness for law 
universal — is that alone which allows me to act upon it, for 
on no other condition can this appetite be brought into har- 



I02 Analytic of Principles. 

mony with the requisitions of reason. On this is based the 
obligation to extend my private selfish choice of happiness, 
so as to include at the same time that of others. 

Eemarh II, 

The antipart of this principle of morality is that of self- 
love, on which, I have already shown, every system must be 
based, when the determinator regulating the choice is sought 
for elsewhere than in the legislative form of the maxim ; and 
this Contrariety is not logical merely, but practical, and would 
infallibly overthrow all morality, were not the voice of reason 
at all times too audible, and its native force to determine the 
will too strong to be affected by dark and deceitful subtleties 
of the schools, as may be made palpable by the following 
examples : — 

If a person were to attempt to justify his having borne 
false witness, by alleging to his friend the sacred obligation 
he lay under of consulting his own happiness, by enumerat- 
ing the profits and advantages accruing from this falsehood ; 
and if he were, in conclusion, to point out the extreme 
cunning he had employed in the whole matter, to fortify 
himself against detection, and to add, that although he now 
entrusted to his friend this secret, yet he was ready to deny 
it stoutly at any future occasion, and that in all this he was 
discharging a humane and reasonable duty, — certainly his 
friend must either laugh him to scorn, or turn from him with 
disgust; although, if maxims are to be constructed singly 
with respect to one's own advantage, nothing of moment can 
be urged against such a line of conduct. Or, however, to 
take a second case, if somebody were to recommend an over- 
seer or factor to you, and were to say that he was an exceed- 
ingly clever man, — most restlessly active in securing his own 
interest, quite unembarrassed by any scruples as to any mode 
conducive to this end, and perfectly indifferent whether the 



Analytic of Principles. 103 

money he had occasion to disburse was his own or another's, 
— ^you would either conclude that there was an attempt to 
make a fool of you, or that the person who could give such 
a recommendation had lost his understanding. Thus widely 
separated are the confines of self-love from those of morality. 
A gulf impassable lies betwixt their maxims. Self-love 
(prudence) advises by its maxims, but the moral law com- 
mands; and the difference is unspeakably great betwixt 
what is expedient and what is imperative to be done. 

The action called for by autonomy is always known and 
undoubted, but that demanded by a heteronomous principle 
is uncertain, and requires extended experience and acquaint- 
ance with the world; in other words, every man knows 
WITHIN HIMSELF WHAT IS " DUTY;" but what is to found one's 
prosperity and happiness is matter of inextricable doubt, and 
it demands extreme dexterity, even to apply such selfish 
rules to the conduct of life, for the exceptions they make 
upon one another are endless. The moral law has no excep- 
tions, but demands from every one punctual observance, and 
must therefore be so plain and obvious in its requirements, 
that the most common understanding can advance along it, 
without any study of the intricate ways of the world. 

To OBEY THE CATEGORICAL LAW OF MORALS, IS AT ALL TIMES 

IN EVERY one's POWER ; but it is not practicable for all to act 
upon dictates of expediency : the reason is, that the first 
demands singly a pure and unadulterated will (maxim), but 
the latter calls further for ability and physical power to gain 
the end aimed at. A law to pursue one's own happiness 
were absurd ; for it is superfluous to ordain any one to choose 
what the constitution of his nature inevitably forces him to 
will, and it were more fit to instruct him as to those measures 
calculated to carry his choice into effect. But to command 
morality under the name of duty, is quite rational, for we do 
not willingly yield obedience to its law ; and as to the steps 



I04 Analytic of Principles, 

requisite to be taken in order to adhere to it, that is ex- 
plained in the methodology of ethics. What is here wanted, 
is alone the original bent or cast of the volition to do so ; 
for whenever any one wills, that also gives him the power to 
carry the law into effect, i. e., to act upon it. 

To carry as far as may be this difference between principles 
of utilitarianism and morality, I observe further : 

He who has lost at play may be vexed at his imprudence 
and want of skill ; but he who is conscious within himself of 
having cheated, must despise himself as soon as he compares 
his conduct with the moral law, and that too, although he 
have won treasures. The moral law must therefore be some- 
what widely distinct from principles of self-aggrandisement. 
And for any one to be obliged to say to himself, I am worth- 
less and a villain, though wealthy, and to say, I am clever and 
cunning, for I have amassed riches, are judgments founded on 
standards of conduct totally incompatible. 

Again, the idea of blameworthiness and punishment, 
which reason invariably attaches to that of guilt, makes a 
singular contrast with the Eudaimonistic system; for 
although he who appoints a punishment may do so with a 
view to the ulterior happiness of the delinquent, yet punish- 
ment, as actual pain or evil added to the offender, must be 
justified as such, so as to constrain even the guilty to 
acknowledge that the severity is just, and that his evil lot 
answers to his ill desert. Every punishment must be rigidly 
just, for justice is of the very essence of this idea. Benignity 
is not contrary to justice, and may in union with justice deal 
out punishment; but for kindness or mercy, the blame- 
worthy has no claim : and so it is clear that punishment is 
a physical evil, which it behoved should be annexed to moral 
evil (according to the ethical legislation of reason), even if it 
were not already so. If, then, every crime is a fit object of 
punishment, and infers to some extent a forfeiture of happi- 



Analytic of Principles. 105 

ness, it is a contradiction and absurdity to say tliat a crime 
requires punishment because the transgressor has injured bis 
own happiness; for this is the whole conception of crime 
according to the Utilitarian System ; for then physical evil, 
^. e., punishment, would be the ground and reason of con- 
sideriQg any action as a transgression, and justice would come 
to consist in avoiding all pains and penalties (threatened by 
law), and in preventing those which come of themselves, 
which, when fully done, there would cease to be any evil in 
an action, — those evils consequent on a bad action, and 
which alone make it so, being henceforward removed. It 
were idle to examine the statement that rewards and punish- 
ments are stimulant forces applied by a supreme power to 
man, in order to lead him towards true felicity ; the fancy 
of such mechanism of will being quite destructory of all 
freedom. 

The intervention of a moral sense, as a foundation 
FOR ETHIC SCIENCE, is a somewhat more refined theory, but 
as untrue as the former ; for it alleges that this feeling, not 
reason, promulgates the moral law; and further, since the 
consciousness of virtue is immediately connected, owing to 
this feeling, with enjoyment and pleasure, and that of vice 
with uneasiness and pain, it virtually runs up into a sui- 
felicity or greatest-happiness system. Not to insist again on 
those objections which are amply set forth in former para- 
graphs, I merely stop to point out a mistake which pervades 
the whole theory. Before we can figure to ourselves the 
vicious as haunted with an uneasy recollection of his mis- 
deeds, he must be cogitated as already in some degree morally 
good ; as must likewise he who is to be gratified from reflect- 
ing on the integrity of his conduct. So that the ideas of 
morality and duty are presupposed to explain the existence 
of such a feeling, and cannot be derived from it. It is 
absolutely necessary that a person have estimated the high 



io6 Analytic of Principles, 

importance of duty, the authority of the moral law, and the 
immediate unconditioned worth which the observance of it 
imparts to man in his own eyes, antecedently to his being 
able to feel that contentment springing from the conscious- 
ness of a moral character, or that bitter reproach springing 
from the conviction of the want of it. This moral felicity 
cannot precede the idea Obligation, much less found it ; and 
it is requisite that an individual have some notions of 
morality and honour, before he can ever figure to himself 
what is meant by such emotions. This, however, is so far 
from inclining me to deny that a standing determination to 
act upon the representation of the moral law, and unswerving 
constancy in doing so, will eventually establish this feeling 
of self-contentment, that I rather deem it a duty to cultivate 
such a state of mind, which state alone ought rigidly to be 
termed "a moral sensed However, to deduce thence the 
idea Duty is impossible, for we would require a feeling of the 
law as such, so as to make that an object of sensation which 
can be represented to the mind by reason singly ; a statement 
which, if not a downright contradiction, goes to substitute 
in the room of duty a mechanic play of refined and more 
subtilized emotions, sometimes thwarting, sometimes har- 
monizing with the coarser feelings of our system. 

We are now in a condition to exhibit and contrast our 

FORMAL POSITION, THE AUTONOMY OF THE WILL, with every 

other MATERIAL principle of morals hitherto advanced, and 
so to make it evident from a glance that these, and through 
them every other conceivable foundation, are exhausted, and 
that henceforth the attempt must be fruitless to base morality 
on any other ground than the one on which it has been now 
rested. Every possible determinator of the will is either 
subjective, and borrowed from observation and experience, or 
else objective, and based on reason ; and these, again, whether 
rational Or inductive, are either external or internal. 



Analytic of Principles. 107 

Material Determinators in Ethical Systems are — 

SUBJECTIVE. OBJECTIVE. 



External. Internal. Internal. External. 



Education as Civil Polity. Physical Moral Perfection. Will of God. 
founding Molality. Mandeville. feeling. feeling. Wolf and Crusius and Theo- 
Montaigne. Epicurus. Hutcheson. the Stoics, logical Moralists. 

Those on the left are all inductive, and plainly unfit for 
founding laws of catholic extent. Those on the right hand, 
however, have their origin and seat in reason (for perfection 
as a quality, and supreme perfection cogitated in substance, 
i. e., God, can only be figured to the mind by reason). But 
the first notion can mean only either perfection in a theoretic 
or in a practical sense : in the first it signifies completeness 
(i. e., quantitative perfectness), which can have no reference 
to what we are here talking of ; or else it signifies (qualitative 
perfection) the practical fitness of man for accomplishing all 
possible variety of ends. Such an inward perfection is talent; 
and whatever adds to or serves as complement to that, is 
called SKILL. 

Supreme perfection hypostatized, or in substance (i. e., God), 
consequently external perfection considered practically, is the 
all-sufiiciency of the Supreme Being for every end whatso- 
ever. 

Now, if ends must be given in order to fix the notion of 
perfection, so that the representation of a perfection in our- 
selves, or an external perfection in God, may determine a 
volition towards them j then, since such matter of choice 
precedes the volition, and is the condition of its practical 
rule, it follows that the will is determined as on the Epicurean 
system. For the notion Perfection determines the will by the 
gratification expected from our own accomplishments ; and 
the will of God, when harmony with it is chosen, apart from 
any prior investigation of. what is a perfect and absolutely 



io8 Analytic of Principles. 

good will, can only move the will by an expectation of hap- 
piness awaited from Him. 

Therefore, \st, All principles in this schedule are material; 
2ndly^ they represent all such conceivable principles whatso- 
ever ; and, ^rdly, because material principles are quite unlit 
for law universal, it results that the formal practical principle 
of reason (according to which the bare form of a potential 
legislation served for the supreme and immediate determina- 
tor of choice) is the alone possible which can found categori- 
cal imperatives, i. e., practical laws, and is thus at once the 
sole standard for estimating deportment, and the sole ethical 
determinator of the will. 



On the a priori Spring of the Will. 1 09 



CHAPTER II. 

ON THE A PRIORI SPRING OF THE WILL, 

THE ESSENCE OF ALL MORAL WORTH IN ACTING CONSISTS IN 
THIS, THAT THE MORAL LAW BE THE IMMEDIATE DETER- 

MiNATOR OF THE WILL. If the will be determined so as to 
be ill barmony with tbe law, but only mediately, and by the 
intervention of an emotion or feeling, no matter of wbat kind 
soever this last may be, which emotion must be presupposed 
before the law becomes the sufficient determinator; L e., when 
the determination is not out of single reverence for the law, 
then the action is possessed of legality, but it contains no 
morality. Further, if by a sjDring is meant the subjective 
determinator of tlie will of an Intelligent, who is not of 
necessity conformed to the objective law, then, from such 
explanation we conclude, first, that to a divine will no springs 
can be figured as attached; and, second, that in the case of 
the human, or of any other being, these can be none other 
than the moral law itself, i. e., that the objective determina- 
tor must be also at the same time the always and single sub- 
jectively-sufficient determinator of an act, — if the act is to 
fulfil, not the bare letter, but likewise the spirit of the law.* 
Since, then, no further spring is to be sought for as a 
medium to the moral law, in procuring it control and purchase 
on ,the will, which would be a dispensing with and supplant- 

* It may be said of every act outwardly in harmony with the law, 
but which has not been performed out of naked regard had to it, that it 
is morally good after the letter, but not so according to the spirit, of 
the LAW. 



no On the a priori 

ing of tlie moral law, and could produce nothing but an un- 
stable hypocrisy, — nay, since it were even hazardous to call 
on any other spring for aid (e. ^., utilitarian incitements), to 
work alongside of and co-operate with the law, — we can 
have no further task than carefully to inquire, How the 
ETHICAL LAW ACTS AS SPRING'? and what changes of state 
happen in the mind and man's powers of desire, as effects of 
its determining causality % For how a law should be itself 
the alone and immediate determinator of the will (wherein 
the essence of all morality, consists), is a problem not solvable 
by human reason, and quite identic with the question, how a 
free will is possible % What we therefore have to show h 
priori, is not the ground, by force of which the moral law is 
a spring, but merely, when it is so, what it effects, and in- 
deed must effect, upon the mind. 

The essence of all determination of will by the moral 
LAW lies in this, that it, as free will, be determined, not only 
without any co-operations from sensitive excitements, but 
that it even cast all such behind-back, and discard them, in 
so far as they may infringe upon the law, and be determined 
by it singly. Thus far the action of the moral law, as a 
spring, is no more than negative, and is known as such d, 
priori. For every appetite and every sensitive excitement 
is based on feeling, and the negative action of the law on the 
sensory (when castiQg out all appetitive stimuli) is again it- 
self a feeling. Consequently we understand a priori, that 
the moral law, the ground determining the will, must pro- 
duce A FEELING WHEN IT CIRCUMSCRIBES AND DISCARDS THE 

solicitations of THE SENSORY. This feeling may be called 
PAIN, and is the first, probably the only case, where we have 
been able to assign, upon grounds h priori, the relation obtain- 
ing betwixt knowledge (here of pure practical reason) and a 
feeling of pleasure or pain. The aggregate of the appetites 
(which easily admit of being brought into a very tolerable 



spring of the Will, in 

system, and wliereof the gratification is then one's own hap- 
piness) make up and compose what is called selfishness or 
solipsism; and this selfishness is either that of self-love or 
that of self-conceit : the solipsism of the first resides in over- 
strained fondness and good will to a man's own self, and is 
sometimes called vanity ; the solipsism of the other is an ex- 
travagant self-complacency, and is particularized by the name 
of ARROGANCE or VAINGLORY.* Practical reason circumscribes 
the claims of self-love, but allows them bo be plausible, as 
they are astir in the mind even before the law itself; and 
limits them to the condition of being in harmony with the 
law, after which self-love is equitable ; but the high thoughts 
of self-conceit it overthrows entirely, and declares all preten- 
sions to self-esteem, prior to conformity with the law, void 
and empty; because the certain consciousness of being so 
conformed is the supreme condition fixing all moral worth of 
the person ; and all assumption of any — where there is not 
yet such conformity — is false and illegal. Now, the propen- 
sity to esteem one's self is one of those appetitive instincts 
infringed upon by reason to this extent, that it makes self- 
esteem DEPEND UPON MORALITY. Thus the moral law casts 
down all self-conceit; but since the law is in fact somewhat 
positive, — namely, the form of an intellectual causality, {. e., 
of freedom, — it becomes, by contrast with the appetites it 
weakens and invades, an object of reverence; and in so far as 
it altogether prostrates self-conceit — ^. e., humbles — an object 
of the most awful reverence, that is, that it is the ground of a 
positive feeling, not begotten by any what sensitive, and which 
can be recognised a priori. Reverence for the moral law 
is therefore a feeling of emotion, caused by an intellectual 
GROUND, and is the only feeling capable of being recognised a 
prioriy and the necessity of which we are able to comprehend. 

* Pride {superhia) differs from all these. It is treated of as a vice^ 
Met. Eth. 



112 On the a priori 

In tlie former chapter '^ it was shown that everything which 
€onld be presented as an object to the will before the moral 
law, was excluded by that law from the grounds determining 
;a will which is to be unconditionally good; and that nothing 
but the naked practical form, which consists in the fitness 
of maxims for law universal, establishes what is in itself 
absolutely good, and founds maxims of a will good at all 
points. But we now find that our system is so constituted, 
that the matter of desire first obtrudes itself on the sensory; 
and our pathological a 'posteriori self, although its maxims 
are quite unfit for law universal, immediately endeavours, as 
if it were our whole and proper self, to make its claims valid, 
as the originary and prior. This deflective tendeji^ct t to 
make a man's subjective self the objective determinator of his 
will, may be called self-love ; and when dominant and ele- 
vated to the rank of an unconditional practical law, may be 
styled SELF-co]srcEiT. The moral law excludes, as the alone 
true objective law, the influence of self-love from any share in 
the legislation, and derogates infinitely from self-conceit, when 
it announces the subjective conditions of the other as laws ; 
but whatsoever does diminution in man's own eyes to his 
«elf -conceit, humbles. The moral law, therefore, inevit- 
ably HUMBLES EVERY MAN, whcu he compares with it the 
deflective tendency of his sensitive system ; again, that which^ 
when represented as the determinator of the will, humbles 
man in his own consciousness, does, in so far as it is positive^ 
and a determinator, beget for itself reverence. The moral 
LAW is therefore subjectively the ground of reverence ; and 
«ince all the parts of self-love belong and refer to appetite 
and inclination, and these latter rest on feeling, and anything 

* Not translated. 

t Althougli the will deflect originally from the law, it is not necessary 
i;o say anything of such causality here ; for the duties imposed by the 
law remain the same, whatever bias a will may labour under. 



spring of the Will. 113 

which curbs and reins up the impetuosity of self-love must, 
by doing so, of necessity take effect upon the feelings, we 
thoroughly comprehend how it is that we know a priori that 
the moral law exercises an effect on the sensory, by excluding 
appetite, and the bias to elevate it to the rank of a supreme 
practical condition; which effect, in one point of view, is 
negative only (humility); but in another, and when regard is 
had to the limitary ground — ^pure spontaneity of reason — ^is 
positive (reverence); and this effect does not admit or require 
us to assume any particular kind of feeling under the name 
of a practical or Tnoral or internal sense, as if it were ante- 
cedent to the moral law, and the groundwork of it. 

The negative effect wrought upon the sensory (displacency) 
is, like every other action on the feelings, and indeed, as is 
also every feeling, pathological. Considered, however, as the 
effect springing from the consciousness of the moral law, i. e., 
considered in reference to its intellectual cause — a personality 
of pure practical reason as supreme legislatrix — ^this feeling 
of a reasonable subject, perturbed by appetite and inclina- 
tion, is called, no doubt, humility : but again, when referred 
to its positive ground — the law — it is called reverence felt 
toward it ; which law itself cannot be felt indeed ; but when 
impediments in the sensory, which hindered the law from 
being carried into effect, are cleared out of the way, Keason 
deems the removal of such obstacle tantamount to a positive 
advancement of her causality ; and hence this feeling may be 
further called a feeling or emotion of reverence toward the 
law, and, upon both these grounds together, may be called 

THE MORAL SENSE. 

Hence, as the moral law is at once the formal determinator 
of an act by pure practical reason, and is likewise the 
material and yet objective determinator of the object-matter 
of an act as good or evil, so it becomes at the same time the 
subjective determinator to such an act, by operating upon 

I 



114 On the a priori 

the morality of tlie subject, and effectuating an emotion 
which advances the force of the law upon the will. But iii 
all this there is no antecedent feeling given in the subject 
himself, pointing to morality; which last hypothesis is a 
downright impossibility, every feeling being of the sensory ; 
whereas the spring of ethical volitions must be quite abstracted 
from every sensitive condition. ISTay, that sensitive state- 
feeling — which lies at the bottom of all appetite and emotion^ 
is the condition of that specific state of mind we have called 
reverence ; but the cause of such state lies in pure practical 
reason ; and the emotion in this respect, and on account of 
whence it has its origin, cannot be regarded as a pathog- 
nomonjc, but ought to be regarded as a practical or active 
emotion; an emotion practically effectuated, when the repre- 
sentation of the law, having curbed the licentiousness of self- 
love, and beaten down the overweenings of self-conceit, takes 
away the hindrance obstructing the action of pure practical 
reason, and exhibits the superiority of her objective law to 
the solicitations of the sensory, and so gives, in the scales of 
reason, weight to the former, by removing the counterpoise 
pressing upon the will from the latter. Beverence toward 
THE LAW is therefore not a spring advancing morality, but is 

MORALITY ITSELF CONSIDERED SUBJECTIVELY AS A SPRING; i, 6., 

in so far as in this state of mind the appetencies of the sen- 
sory are silenced, and an inlet is afforded for advancing the 
authority of the law. To all which is to be added, that since 
such reverence is an effect wrought upon the sensory, it in- 
volves the supposition of the sensitive, and so of the finite 
nature of those Intelligents whom the moral law thus inspires 
with reverence ; but in the case of a Supreme Intelligent, or 
even of one not percipient by the intervention of a sensory — 
where, therefore, no obstacle is presented to practical reason 
—no reverence can exist. 

This feeling (called the Moral Sense) is the pure pro- 



spring of the Will, 1 1 5 

DUCT AND EFFECT OP REASON. It is of HO Service in judging 
of conduct, nor yet in founding tlie moral law, but is a mere 
spring, making the lawman's practical maxim in life; nor is 
there any name more appropriate for so strange a feeling, 
which has no analogy to any pathological emotion, but is 
entirely of its own kind, and seems to stand at the command 
of pure practical reason only. 

Reverence is bestowed on Persons only, never on Things. 
The latter may be objects of affection ; and when they are 
animals, may awaken in us even love or fear. Yolcanoes 
and the ocean may be regarded with dread, but cannot with 
reverence. What approaches nearer to this last, is wonder, 
which, when impassioned, may rise to admiration, astonish- 
ment, or amazement ; as when we contemplate the summits 
of lofty mountains, storms, the extent of the firmament, the 
strength and velocity of some animals, etc., and so of the 
rest j but all this is not reverence. A man may be an object 
of my love, my fear, or my admiration, up to the highest 
grade of wonder, and still he may be no object of reverence. 
His jocose humour, his strength and courage, his power and 
authority, from the rank he has, may give me such emotions, 
but they all fall short of reverence. Fontelle says, "/i5 is 
my hody, not my mind^ which hows to my superiorJ^ I may 
add, that to any plain man in whom I may discover probity 
of manners in a grade superior to my own, my mind must 
bow whether I will or not. To what is this owing % His 
example presents to me a law which casts down my self- 
conceit when it is compared with my own deportment ; the 
execution of which law — that is, its practicability — I see 
proved to me by real fact and event. Nay, even if I were 
conscious of like honesty to his, my reverence for him would 
continue ; the reason whereof is, that all good in man being 
defective, the law, made exhibitive by an example, prostrates 
my conceit, which exemplar is furnished by a person whose 



1 1 6 On the a priori 

imperfections — which must still attach, to him — -I do not 
know as I do my own, and who therefore appears to me in a 
better light. E-everence is a tribute which cannot be refused 
to merit, whether we choose or not. We may decline out- 
wardly to express it, but we cannot avoid inwardly to feel it. 
So far is reverence from being a pleasurable feeling, that 
we entertain it unwillingly toward any man, and begin in- 
stantly to cast about for some fault which may lighten us 
from its burden, and give indemnity against the humiliation 
otherwise put upon us by his example. Even the dead, 
especially when their example seems to surpass all power of 
imitation, are not exempt from this sifting scrutiny. Nay, 
the moral law itself, in its solemn majesty, is open to this 
endeavour to screen one's self from the reverence owed it; or 
do we think that it is upon some other account that mankind 
would fain have the law frittered down to an object of his 
love, and that it is upon quite different and contrary grounds 
that he exerts himself to find in it nothing more than the 
amiable precepts of his own well-understood advantage ; and 
not upon this single and only one, that he would willingly be 
rid of that deterring reverence which unremittingly shows 
him his own unworthiness % And yet there is in reverence 
so little of dislike or disinclination, that when once mankind 
has laid aside his self-conceit, and allowed that reverence to 
take its practical effect, he cannot become sated with con- 
templating the glory of the law, and his soul believes itself 
exalted in proportion as he sees the holy law advanced above 
him and the frailty of his system. Unquestionably great 
talents, when accompanied by commensurate and suitable 
activity, beget reverence, or a feeling bearing a strong like- 
ness to it ; and it is in truth quite becoming and decorous to 
show them such ; and here it would seem that wonder and 
reverence were the same. But, on stricter analysis, it is 
observed, that since we do not know how much innate force 



spring of the Will, 117 

of talent, and how much study and industrious self-culture, 
conduce to the effect wondered at and admired, reason 
represents this last as probably the fruit of study, ^. 6., as a 
kind of merit which strikes directly at one's own self-conceit, 
hands the bystander over to his own reproach, or imposes on 
him an obligation to follow snch example. This reverence 
or admiration is, then, not mere wonder, but is reverence 
toward the person (or, properly speaking, toward the law 
exhibited in his example). A matter confirmed by this, that 
when the general mass of admirers discover, from some 
quarter or another, the depravity of their admired's morals 
(e. g.^ Yoltaire), all reverence for him is immediately aban- 
doned. But one who is a member of the literary republic 
continues to feel some regard still when weighing his talents, 
because he finds himself engaged in a profession and calling 
which makes it imperative upon him to imitate in some 
respect his example. 

Beverence toward the moral law is, then, the only and 
undoubted ethic spring, and is an emotion directed to no 
object except upon grounds of the law. First, the moral 
law determines objectively and immediately the will. Free- 
dom, whose causality is alone determinable by the law, con- 
sists in this very matter, that all appetite and emotion, and 
so also the affection of self-esteem, is restrained by it to the 
prior condition of having executed its pure law. This 
control takes effect upon the sensory, and produces there a 
feeling of pain or displacency, which can be recognised b, 
priori, when eyed from the vantage-ground of the moral law. 
But since this is a negative effect only, resulting from the 
agency of reason (i, e., the spontaneity of the person when he 
withstands the solicitations of his sensory, and strips off the 
overweening fancy of his personal worth, which, where there 
is no harmony with the law, shrinks at once to zero), such 
action of the law begets no more than a feeling of humility, 



1 1 8 On the a priori 

which we comprehend h 'priori ; but in this we do not see, 
wherein consists the force of the pure practical law as spring, 
but only its withstanding the springs of the sensory. But, 
SECOND, since this same law is further objectively (^. e., ac- 
cording to the representation of pure reason) an immediate 
determinator of will, and this humiliation is effected only 
relatively to the purity of the law, it follows that this depres- 
sion of man's claim to his own ethical reverence (i e., his 
humiliation from the part of his sentient economy) is an 
exaltation (from his intelligent part) of the ethical, i. e., prac- 
tical reverence for the law itself, — in other words, is just 
that reverence itself; consequently a positive feeling con- 
sidered with respect to its intellectual ground, which feeling 
also is cognisable ct> priori. For every diminution of the 
obstacles opposed to an activity is in plain fact an advance- 
ment of that activity itself. The acknowledgment of the 
moral law, however, is the consciousness of an activity of 
pure reason from objective grounds : which activity does not 
always pass into action, merely because subjective causes 
stop and hinder it. Heverence for the moral law must 
therefore be regarded as the law's positive though indirect 
effect upon the sensory, when it weakens the impeding forces 
of appetite and inclination, by casting down all self-conceit ; 
that is, reverence is the subjective ground of such activity, 
or, in other words, is the spring towards the executing of 
the law, and the ground of adopting maxims of conduct 
which harmonize with its requirements. Upon this notion 
of a spring rests this further one of an interest, which 
cannot be attributed to any being not endowed with reason ; 
and it denotes a spring towards volition, in so far as that 
SPRING is begotten BY REASON ONLY. Again, because the 
law must be the spring where the will is morally good, the 

ETHICAL INTEREST is a PURE INSENSITIVE INTEREST OF NAKED 

PRACTICAL REASON. Upon this notion of an interest rests 



spring of the Will. 119 

^igain that of a maxim j and this is only truly genuine when 
it is based on the naked interest taken by man in the execu- 
tion of the law. These three notions, however — ^spring, 
IN^TEREST, and MAXIM ; are applicable only to finite beings ; 
they all presuppose bounds and limits put to the nature of 
the person, and intimate that the subjective structure of his 
choice does not spontaneously and of its own accord harmonize 
with the objective law of practical reason, and imply a need 
ip be urged by somewhat to activity, that activity being ob- 
sfcructed by an inward hindrance. 

There is somewhat so strange in this unbounded reverence 
for the pure moral law, divested of all by-views of advantage 
a' expediency, and exhibited as practical reason holds it up 
t) mankind for his execution, whose voice makes the most 
daring scoffer tremble, and forces him to hide himself from 
fcis own view, that one ought not to be surprised at find- 
ing THIS energy of a NAKED INTELLECTUAL IDEA UPON THE 
SENSORY QUITE UNINVESTIGABLE BY REASON, and that man 

must content himself with comprehending h 'priori thus 
much, that such a feeling attaches inseparably to the repre- 
sentation of the law by every finite Intelligent. "Were this 
amotion of reverence pathologic, and bottomed to the internal 
sense of pleasure, then were it vain to attempt to track out 
the alliance obtaining betwixt it and an idea a priori. But 
an emotion pointed only to a practical end, and attached to 
the bare, formal representation of a law, quite abstractedly 
from any object, and which therefore pertains neither to 
pleasure nor pain, and yet establishes an interest in that 
law^s execution, is what we properly call a moral one ; and 
the susceptibility to take such an interest in the law — ^in 
other words, to have reverence for the moral law itself — is 
what we, properly speaking, call the moral sense. 

The consciousness of man's free submission of his will ta 
the law, going, however, hand in hand with a necessary 



1 20 On the a priori 

control and constraint put bj reason on every appetite and 
inclination, is reverence toward tlie law."^ The law, which 
at once calls for and inspires this reverence, is, as we have 
seen, no other than the moral, no other law excluding appe- 
tite and inclination from the immediateness of its own action 
on the will. An act objectively incumbent to be done in 
conformity with this law, and with the postponement of 
every appetitive determinator, is what is called duty, and 
involves in the very conception of it, on account of this 
postponement, practical necessitation, i. e., determination 
to an act, how unwillingly soever, — the emotion arising from 
the consciousness of this co-action or necessitation is not 
pathological (is unlike those eifected by an object of sense]^ 
but is practical, i. e., is only possible by an antecedent 
causality of reason and objective determination of will. lb 
contains, therefore, as subordination to law (^. e., a command- 
ment which announces restraint to a person affected by a 
sensory), no pleasure, but rather dislike to that extent to 
the act itself; while yet, on the other hand, since this re- 
straint is enforced singly by the legislation of man's own 
reason, it brings with it exaltation ; and the subjective effect 
upon the sensory, when pure practical reason produces it^ 
can be called no more than self-approbation in respect of 
such exaltation, mankind disinterestedly recognising himself 
destined by the law to such subordination, and becoming 
then aware of a new and another interest purely practical 
and free ; to take which disinterested interest in acts of duty 
no appetite invites, but reason, by its practical law, im- 
peratively ordains, and also produces, upon which accounts, 
the interest bears a quite peculiar name — that of Reverence. 
Upon these accounts, therefore, the notion Duty demands, 
in the act, objectively, Conformity to the Law, and sub- 
jectively, in the maxim from which it flows, Reverence for 
* Kef. 4, from p. 40.— C. 



spring of the Will, 121 

the Law, sucH being tlie only method of determining the 
will by it; and on this rests the difference betwixt those 
states of consciousness, — ^that of acting in harmony with 
what is duty, and doing so from a principle of duty, i. e., out 
of reverence for the law. The first case (legality) is possible 
when mere appetites determine to volition j but the second 
(morality), the moral worth, can be placed in this only, that 
the act has been performed out of duty, ^. 6., out of naked 
regard had to the law. 

It is of the greatest consequence, in all ethical judgments, 
to attend with most scrupulous exactness to the subjective 
principle of the maxims, in order that the whole morality of 
an act be put in the necessity of it, out of duty and out of 
reverence for the law, not in love and inclination towards 
what may be consequent upon the act : for man and every 
created Intelligent, the ethical necessity is necessitation, i. e., 
obligation, and every act proceeding thereupon is duty, and 
cannot be represented as a way of conduct already dear to 
us j or which may in time become endeared to us, as if man 
could at any time ever get the length of dispensing with 
reverence towards the law (which emotion is attended always 
with dread, or at least with active apprehension, lest he 
transgress) ; and so, like the independent Godhead, find 
himself — as it were, by force of an unchanging harmony of 
will with the law, now at length grown into a second nature 
— in possession of a holy will ; which would be the case, the 
law having ceased to be a commandment, when man could 
be no longer tempted to prove untrue to it. 

The moral law is, for the will of the Supreme Beijs^g, 

A LAW OF holiness j BUT FOR THE WILL OF EVERY FINITE IN- 
TELLIGENT, A LAW OF DUTY, a law of ethical constraint and 
determination of his actions by reverence toward the law, 
and out of awe for what is duty. No other subjective 
j^rinciple can be assumed as a spring ; for while the act then 



122 On the a priori 

falls out as tlie law requires, and is outwardly in conformity 
with the law, yet it is not done out of duty ; the bent and 
ply of the mind is not moral, which, however, is of the 
essence of this legislation. 

It is very well to show kindness to mankind from love 
and compassionate benevolence, as it is likewise to act justly 
from a love of order and method ; but such cannot be the 
genuine ethic principles regulating man's deportment: nor 
is it quite congruous and suited to our station among the 
ranks of Intelligents as men, when we presume to propose 
ourselves as volunteers, and set ourselves loftily above the 
idea Duty j and when, as if mankind were independent on 
the law, he proposes to do out of his own good pleasure what 
he needs no commandment to enjoin. Man stands, however, 
under a discipline and probation of reason, and ought never 
to forget his subjection to its authority, — never to with- 
draw anywhat from it, or impair the supremacy of the law 
(although announced by his own reason), by the fond and 
vain imagination that he can put the ground determining 
his will elsewhere than in the law and reverence toward it. 
Duty, and what we owe, are the only denominations 
under which to state our relation to the moral law. 
We are, no doubt, legislative members of an ethical kingdom, 
realizable by freedom of will, and held up by practical reason 
to our reverence ; but in it we are subjects, not the sove- 
reign j and to mistake our lower rank as creatures, and to 
back our self-conceit against the authority of the holy law, 
is already to swerve from its spirit, even while its letter is 
not unfulfilled. 

With all this the commandment is in perfect unison. 
Love God above all, and thy neighbour as thyself; for, being 
a commandment, it calls for reverence toward a law enjoin- 
ing love, and leaves man no option whether or not to make 
such love a principle of active conduct. Love to God, how- 



spring of the Will. 123 

ever, as an affection (patliognomic liking), is an impossibility, 
God being no object of sense ; and althongli, in the case of 
mankind, sach pathological excitement is possible, yet it can- 
not be commanded, for it stands in no one's power to love 
upon command. It is, therefore, practical benevolence alone 
which is intended in that sum of all commandments. Under- 
stood in this signification, to love God means cheerfully to 
obey His law; to love our neighbour, to perform willingly 
all duties towards him. The commandment, however, estab- 
lishing such a rule cannot enjoin us to have this sentiment 
in discharging our incumbent duties, but can enjoin only 
to ENDEAVOUR after it ; for a commandment to do any what 
willingly is self-contradictory : for if we are once let know 
what is suitable for us to do, and are conscious we should 
like to do so, a commandment to such effect would be super- 
fluous; and do we the act notwithstanding, but only unwil- 
lingly and out of reverence toward the law, a commandment 
making such reverence the spring of the will, would thereby 
subvert and overturn the desiderated sentiment love. That 
summary of the nioral law does therefore, like every other 
precept in the Gospel, represent the perfection of the moral 
sentiment in an ideal of holiness not attainable by any crea- 
ture, but which is the archetype toward which it behoves us 
to approximate, and to exert ourselves onward thitherward 
in an unbroken and perpetual progression. Could at any 
time any intelligent creature ever attain this point of dis- 
charging willingly all moral laws, then that would imply that 
he felt , no longer within himself the possibility of a desire 
seducing him to swerve from them (for the overcoming any such 
incentive always costs the subject some sacrifice, and stands 
in need of self constraint, ^. e., inward necessitation toward 
somewhat done not altogether willingly). But this grade of 
ethic sentiment no creature can at anytime attain; for, being 
a creature, and so dependent in regard of what he wants to 



124 On the a priori 

make Mm thoroughly contented with his situation, he can 
never be fully disenthralled from appetite and want, whicli 
rest on physical causes not always harmonizing with the moral 
law; the physical and moral systems proceeding on causalities 
of different kinds, — a circumstance making it always neces- 
sary to establish the posture of a man's maxims with regard 
to the former, upon ethical constraint, not upon free- willed 
devotedness, — ^upon reference calling for the execution of the 
law, how unwillingly soever, not upon love, which appre- 
hends no inward demurring of the will against the law, 
although this last, the mere love of the law (which would 
then cease to be a commandment, and morality, now subjec- 
tively transformed into holiness, would cease to be virtue), 
is to be the unremitting although unattainable aim of exer- 
tion; for toward that which we ethically admire, and yet 
(upon account of the consciousness of our defects) partly 
dread, such reverential dread passes, with thp increasing ease 
whereby we become conformed to the standard dreaded, into 
affection, and the reverence into love; at least this would be 
the completent of a sentiment fully devoted to the law, if to 
attain it were at any time possible for any creature. 

These remarks are not intended so much to explain the 
above precept of the Gospel, with a view to guard against 
BELiGious FANATICISM upon the question of the love of God, 
but rather to ^:l exactly the moral sentiments with which we 
ought to discharge our duties toward our fellow-men, and to 
guard against, and if possible cut up by the roots, a kind of 
ETHICAL FANATICISM, wherewith the heads of many are be- 
sotted. The grade on the ethic scale where mankind finds 
himself (as is also the case with every created Intelligent, so 
far as we can comprehend) is that of reverence toward the 
law* The sentiment incumbent upon him to entertain in 
obeying, is to do so out of regard to duty; not, as a volun- 
teer, from affection, to go through uncommanded and spon- 



spring of the Will, 125 

taneonsly undertaken tasks; and liis moral state, wherein lie 
always must be found, is virtue, i, e., the moral sentiment 
MILITANT, not HOLINESS, wliere lie would be in possession of 
full purity in the sentiment of Ms will. It is nothing but 
downright ethical fanaticism, and an advancement of self- 
conceit, when the mind is spirited on to actions as were they 
noble, sublime, or magnanimous, whereby men fall into the 
imagination that it is not duty (whose yoke, v/hicli, though 
easy, because put upon us by our own reason, must be borne, 
however unwillingly) that claims to be the ground deter- 
minative of conduct, and which, even while they obey, always 
humbles, but that actions are expected from them, not out of 
duty, but as parts of merit. For, not to insist on this, that 
by imitating such deeds, ^. e., performing them upon such a 
principle, no satisfaction is given to the spirit of the law, 
which consists in the sabordinating of the will to the law, 
and not in the legality of the act, when the act proceeds upon 
other grounds (be these what they may), this fanaticism does, 
by putting the spring of action pathologically in sympathy or 
solipsism, and not ethically in the law, beget in this way a 
windy, overweening, and fantastical cast of thought, which 
flatters itself with having so spontaneously good-natured a 
temperament, as to require neither spur nor rein, and to be 
able to dispense altogether with a commandment; by all 
whicli, duty is lost sight of, although it ought to be more 
thought upon than merit should. Other people's actions, 
when performed with great sacrifices, and out of naked 
reverence for duty, may very fitly be praised as noble and 
exalted deeds; which, however, can only be done in so far as 
there is no ground to think that they flowed from any fits 
and starts of sensitive excitement, but proceeded singly from 
reverence for duty; and if these deeds are to be held up to 
any one as exemplars to be followed, reverence for duty, as 
the alone genuine moral emotion, must indispensably be em- 



126 On the a priori 

ployed as tlie spring. The solemn holy precept does not 
allow our frivolous self-love to toy with pathognomic excite- 
ment, which may bear some likeness to morality, and to 
plume ourselves upon meritorious worth. Yery little inves- 
tigation will suffice to find for any praiseworthy action a law 
of duty which commands, and takes away all option, whether 
it fall in with our propensities or not; this is the only 
method of exhibition capable of giving an ethic training to 
the soul, it being alone capable of fixed and rigidly defined 
maxims. 

Fai^aticism, in its most extensive sense, may be defined an 
overstepping, upon system, of the limits and barriers of 
human reason; and if this be so, then ethical fanaticism 
will be the overstepping of those limits put by pure practical 
reason to humanity, when she forbids man to place the sub- 
jective determinator of his will, i, e., the ethical spring to 
dutiful actions, anywhere else than in the law, or to entertain 
sentiments in his maxims other than reverence toward this 
law : consequently ordaining man not to forget to make duty 
his supreme practical principle of conduct, — a conception 
which at once dashes both arrogance and self-love. 

Upon this same account, not only novel-writers and sen- 
timental pedagogues (however these last declaim at senti- 
mentalism), but even philosophers, nay, the most rigid of all 
the Stoic sages, have helped to introduce ethical fanaticism 
instead of a sober and wise gymnastic discipline of ethics ; 
nor can we here regard this distinction, that the fanaticism of 
these sages was heroic, whereas that of the others was of a 
more effeminate and shallow kind; and it can be affirmed 
without the least hypocrisy, that the moral precepts of the 
Gospel were what first introduced purity of moral principle, 
and that they did at the same time, by their adaptation and 
fitness to the limits of finite beings, in placing all good con- 
duct in man's subordination and subjection of his will to the 



spring of the Will. 127 

discipline and training of a duty laid before his mental 
vision, first prevent him from fanatically disorienting him- 
self among imagined moral excellencies ; and did, by thus 
putting a stop to ethical fanaticism, first assign limits of 
humility (i, e., of self-knowledge), equally to self-love and to 
self-conceit, both of which are apt to overstep their barriers. 

Duty ! Thou great, thou exalted name ! "Wondrous 
thought, that workest neither by fond insinuation, flattery, 
nor by any threat, but merely by holding up thy naked law 
in the soul, and so extorting for thyself always reverence, if 
not always obedience, — ^before whom all appetites are dumb, 
however secretly they rebel, — whence thy original*? and 
where find we the root of thy august descent, thus loftily 
disclaiming all kindred with appetite and want] to be in 
like manner descended from which root, is the unchanging 
condition of that worth which mankind can alone impart to 
themselves *? 

Yerily it can be nothing less than what advances man, as 
part of the physical system, above himself, — connecting him 
with an order of things unapproached by sense, into which 
the force of reason can alone pierce ; which supeesensible 
has beneath it the phenomenal system, wherewith man has 
only a fortuitous and contingent connection, and so along 
with it the whole of his adventitiously determinable existence 
in space and time. It is in fact nothing else than person- 
ality, i. e.y freedom and independency on the mechanism of 
the whole physical system, — always, however, considered as 
the property of a being subjected to peculiar laws emerging 
from his own reason, where the person, as belonging to the 
sensitive system, has imposed on him his own personality, in 
so far as this last is figured to reside in a cogitable system ; 
upon which account we need not v/onder how man, an in- 
habitant of both systems, cannot fail to venerate his higher 
nature, and to regard its laws with the greatest reverence. 



128 On the a priori 

On tliis celestial descent are founded many expressions 
denoting the worth of the objects of ethical ideas. The 
moral law is holy. Man do doubt is unholy enough, but 
the humanity inhabiting his person must be holy. In the 
whole creation everything may be used as an end, man 
alone excepted. He is alone an end-in-himself. He is the 
subject of the moral law, by force of the autonomy of his 
freedom, which law is holy. Upon the same account, every 
will, nay, every person's will when referring merely to him- 
self, is restrained to the condition of its coincidence with the 
autonomy of an Intelligent Being, viz., that it be subjected to 
no end not possible under a law fit to emanate from the will 
of the subject himself, consequently to the condition of never 
using himself as a mean, but always as an end. Such a 
condition is ascribed even to the divine will in respect of the 
Intelligents in this world, who are His creatures, in so far as 
that condition rests on their personality, by force of which 
alone they are ends-in-themselves. 

This reverence-arousing idea of Personality, showing us 
the august and sublime of our natural destiny, but showing 
us also the want of the adaptation of our deportment to it, 
and so casting down all self-conceit, is natural, and thrusts 
itself upon the most untutored reason, and is easily observ- 
able. Every tolerably honest man must at some time or 
another have felt that he emitted a harmless untruth, singly 
not to despise himself in his own eyes, although that lie 
might have produced signal advantages to a dear and well- 
deserving friend ; and in the extremest exigencies of life, an 
upright, straightforward man, conscience sustains, by telling 
him that he declined to avoid these miseries by bartering 
his duty, that he never prostituted his humanity, that he 
honoured the inhabitancy of reason in his own person, so 
that he needs not to blush before himself, and has no cause 
to shun his own inward self-examination. This consolation 



spring of the WilL 1 29 

is not happiness, — is nothing like happiness, — and no one 
would wish to be so situated, nor for a life in such conjunc- 
tures. But so long as man lives, he cannot endure to be 
in his own eyes unworthy of life. This inward peace is 
therefore merely negative, and contains nowhat positive to 
mate life happy; it is merely a defence, warding off the 
danger man runs of sinking in the worth of his person, long 
after he has been despoiled of all worth in situation. This 
PEACE is the effect of reverence for somewhat quite different 
from life, in comparison and contrast with which, life, with all 
its amenities, has no value. Man in such case continues to live 
singly out of duty, not because he has the least taste for life. 
Thus does the genuine spring of pure practical reason act. 
The spring is no other than the law itself letting us have a 
vista of the loftiness of our own supersensible existence, and 
so subjectively effecting in man, who is conscious of his sensi- 
tively affected and dependent nature, reverence for his higher 
destiny. Along with this spring may no doubt be combined 
so many graces and amenities of life, that, for the sake of 
these last alone, the most prudent choice of a judicious Epicu- 
rean might be given in favour of ethical deportment. And 
it may be advisable to combine the prospect of enjoying life 
with that other and prior and singly sufficient determinator 
of the will : and yet, merely in order to counterbalance the 
incentives which vice ceases not to offer, not to use it as a 
spring, no, not in any wise, when question is made as to 
duty j for if otherwise, then is the moral sentiment polluted 
in its source. The awe of duty has nowhat in common with 
the enjoyment of life ; and although they were to be taken 
and well shaken, and so handed mixed as an opiate for the 
sick soul, yet they would soon separate ; or were this last 
not to happen, the former part would take no effect; and 
while man's physical existence might gain in force, his 
ethical would without stop fade away. 

K 



130 On Freedom and Necessity. 



CHAPTER III. 

DILUCIDATION OF THE FOREGOING ANALYTIC. — ON FREEDOM 
AND NECESSITY. 

BY the critical dilucidation of a science, or of a portion 
of it, I understand tlie inquiring and showing why 

IT MUST ASSUME PRECISELY THIS AND NO OTHER FORM whcn 

contrasted with some other system based on a like power of 
knowledge. Now the Practical Reason and Speculative are 
at bottom identic^ in so far as both are pure reason ; whence 
it will result, that the diiference obtaining betwixt their 
systematic forms will be found, as to its last ground, by 
comparing them both together. 

The analytic of pure Theoretic Reason was conversant with 
the knowledge of objects given to the understanding, and so 
began at the intuitions ; and since intuition is always sensi- 
tive, it started with the sensory, and arrived next at the 
notions (of the objects of intuition)^ and so, after premising 
both, ended with the principles. But since, on the contrary, 
Practical Reason is not occupied about the knowledge of 
objects, but about her own power to make such objects 
real^ i. e., with a will, which is a cause so far forth as reason 
contains in itself the ground of its determination, and so has 
consequently to treat of no object of intuition, but of a law 
(because it is of the very essence of the notion causality 
to refer to law, fixing and determining the relative exist- 
ence of the multifarious), a Critique of Practical Reason has, 
upon these grounds (if it is to be a practical reason at all). 
to set out with the possibility of practical principles ^ priori, 



On Freedom and Necessity. 131 

Thence we descended to notions of the objects of a practical 
reason, viz., to the notions of the good and evil,* in order to 
assign them conformably to those principles (for it is impos- 
sible, prior to such principles, to ^-^l. by any power of know- 
ledge what is good or evil) j and then, only then, could the 
last chapter conclude by investigating the relation obtaining 
betwixt pure practical reason and the sensory, and the 
necessary effect, cognisable h 'priori thereon, which effect we 
called the moral sense. Thus the analytic of pure practical 
reason is divided quite analogously to the theoretical, through- 
out the whole extent of the conditions of its use, but in a 
reverse order. The analytic of pure theoretic reason was 
divided into Esthetics and Logic; that of practical, again, in- 
vertedly into Logic and Esthetics of Pure Practical Peason, 
if I may be allowed to misapply these words, merely for the 
sake of the analogy : there. Logic branched out into the 
analytic of notions and then of principles; but here, into 
that of principles and then of notions. There iEsthetics 
had two parts, owing to the twofold sorts of sensitive intui- 
tion; here the sensory is not regarded as the intuitive 
faculty, but as a bare feeling (fit to become the subjective 
ground of desire), which, however, is not susceptible of any 
further subdivision. 

Purther, that this division into two under-parts (as might 
have been expected, from the instance of the former Critique) 
was not attempted by me in this work, arose from this special 
ground. Por since it is practical reason we are talking of, 
which begins with a principle a 'priori^ and not with experi- 
mental determinators, it follows that the division of the 
analytic of pure practical reason will be like that of a syllo- 
gism, viz., first, the universal in the major (the moral prin- 
ciple) ; second, a subsumption in the minor, of possible acts, 
as good or bad ; and then, lastly, the conclusion, when we 
* In the chapter not translated. — Tr. 



132 On Freedom and Necessity, 

advance to the subjective determinator of the will, (an in- 
terest in the practically-possible good, and the maxim based 
on such interest). Such comparisons will infallibly gratify 
those who are convinced of the truth of the position laid 
down in the analytic ; for they nourish the expectation that 
we may one day attain a thorough insight into the unity of 
the whole rational faculty, and be able to deduce it all from 
one principle, an unavoidable demand made by human 
reason, which finds only in a completely systematic unity 
of its knowledge, rest and satisfaction. 

If now we consider further the content of the knowledge 
we possess, either concerning, or by means of pure practical 
reason, as just expounded in the analytic, then there are 
observable, notwithstanding the marvellous analogy obtaining 
betwixt them, no less extraordinary and signal differences. 
Theoretic reason was able to exhibit the power of pure 
rational knowledge a 'priori^ easily and evidently by ex- 
amples of the sciences ; but that pure reason, without any 
admixture of experimental grounds, could be for itself prac- 
tical, behoved to be exhibited by the common practical use 
of every man's reason, whereby to authenticate the supreme 
practical principle, as one which every common reason re- 
cognised as quite a priori, independent on any sensitive data, 
and the supreme law of the will. It was necessary to this 
end, first to establish and evince this principle, quoad the 
purity of its origin, by the judgment of the most common 
reason, before science could receive it, or make any use of 
it j just like a fact, antecedent to all quibbling about its 
possibility, or about the results possible to be extracted from 
it. This circumstance, however, could easily be explained 
from what has been just alleged, since practical reason must 
of necessity begin with principles, which, as data, were to 
lie at the bottom of all science, and so could not be derived 
from it; and the justification of the moral principles, as 



On Freedom and Necessity. 133 

positions of pure reason, could very well be managed bj an 
appeal to the judgment of mankind's common sense; because 
everything experimental, which could insinuate itself as a 
determinator into our maxims, becomes forthwith perceptible 
by the feeling of pleasure or pain, inevitably attaching to it, 
so far forth as it excites desire ; whereas that pure practical 
principle directly counterworks all such, and refuses to adopt 
any feeling, as a condition, into its principle. The dissimi- 
larity of the determinators (experimental or rational) is 
pointed out so prominently, and in such relief — when this 
antagonism of a practically-legislative reason withstands every 
appetite — by a peculiar kind of sensation, not antecedent to 
the legislation of practical reason, but rather effectuated alone 
by it, viz., the feeling of reverence, the which no man has for 
any appetite, be they of what kind they may, but has invariably 
for law, that no one of the most common understanding can 
fail, on the instant, to become aware, in any example, that he 
may indeed be advised to follow an experimental stimulant of 
volition, but that it cannot be expected he should be required 
to obey any what except reason's pure practical law. 

To distinguish betwixt utilitarianism and morality, where 
experimental principles are the foundation of the first, and 
no part at all of the foundation of the second, is the prime 
and the weighty business of the analytic of pure practical 
reason, and imposes on the author a procedure as punctual 
and painful as is the method in geometry. And here the 
philosopher stands in pretty much the same situation as the 
chemist, for he institutes at all times an experiment with 
every man's practical reason, in order to separate the pure 
(moral) determinator from the experimental. Suppose that 
he superadd to the will of one sensitively affected (who 
would like to lie, because somewhat may be earned by it), 
the moral law. Then it is as when the experimenter adds an 
alkali to a solution of muriate of lime : the acid deserts the 



134 On Freedom and Necessity, 

lime, combines with tlie alkali, and the earth is precipitated. 
In like manner, present to an honest man the moral law, by 
which standard he observes the vileness of a liar, and his 
practical reason deserts straightway the prospect of advan- 
tage, and combines itself with that which upholds for him 
the reverence for his own person. 

But this distinction betwixt utility and morality is not in 
any wise their contrariety ; and pure practical reason does 
not by any means demand that the claim to happiness be 
abandoned, but only, whenever question is made as to duty, 
that then no account at all be made of it. N^ay, it in some 
cases may be a duty to look sharp after one^s own hapj)iriess, 
partly because the elements of happiness (skill, health, wealth) 
contain means toward the execution of duty, partly because 
the want of them (e. ^., poverty) may present temptations to 
transgress the law. However, to study one's own happi- 
ness NEVER CAN BE DUTIFUL DIRECTLY AND STILL LESS A 
PRINCIPLE OF DUTY. Again, since every determinator of will, 
except the single moral law, is experimental, and as such 
pertains to the utilitarian system, it results that all these 
must be detached from the supreme ethical principle, and 
never welded up with it as a condition; since this would 
destroy all moral worth, just as any tentative experimenting 
with geometric theorems would annihilate their self-evidenc- 
ing certainty — the chief pre-eminency (according to Plato) 
which the mathematics have; an excellency to be prized higher 
than any utility to which geometry may accidentally conduce. 

Out of and beyond a deduction of the supreme principle 
of pure practical reason, ^. e., the explanation of the possibility 
of such a 'priori knowledge, nothing further could be done 
except to state, that if we could comprehend the possibility 
of the freedom of an active cause, then we should comprehend 
not only the possibility, but likewise the very necessity of 
the moral law, i, e., of the supreme practical law of Intelli- 



On Freedom and Necessity. 135 

gents, to wliom freedom of causality of will is ascribed ; both 
notions being so inseparably linked together, that freedom 
might be defined by saying that it is independency on every- 
thing except the moral law itself. But the freedom of an 
active cause, especially of a cause acting in upon the world 
of phenomena, cannot be comprehended, even as to its possi- 
hility; and we must deem ourselves happy that its impossi- 
bility cannot be evinced, and that we are necessitated by the 
law which postulates this freedom, and so entitled, to assume 
it.''^ But as there are some who still think they can explain 
this freedom by help of observation and experience, like any 
other physical energy, and regard it as a mere psychological 
quality, whereof the exposition rests singly on a more sifting 
-scrutiny into the springs of will, not as the unconditioned 
and supersensible predicate of the causality of an agent 
appertaining at the same time to the sensible world (on 
which last it alone depends) ; and since these philosophasters 
do by such assumption cut short the vista gloriously afforded 
us by pure practical reason, through the intervention of the 
moral law (viz., the vista into a cogitable world, — alone 
realizing to us the otherwise transcendent notion Freedom, 
and by consequence the moral law itself), it will be requisite 
to adduce a few remarks, as a guard against this quackery, 
and to' show it up in its full nakedness and deformity. 

The notion Causality, considered as involving that of 
necessary mechanism, and contradistinguished from the same 
notion as that of freedom, concerns only the existence of 
things, so far forth as they are determinable in^ time, i. e., as 
phenomena, and so is different from their causation, as things- 
in-themselves ; so that if now we mistake (as is most com- 
monly done) the determinations of the existence of things in 
time, for determinations of the existence of things-in-them- 
selves, then the necessity cogitated in the causal-nexus can 
* Eef. 6, from p. 57.— C. 



136 On Freedom and Necessity. 

never be brought into harmony with freedom, but they remain 
stated the one contrary to the other ; for from the first can 
be inferred, that every event, and therefore every action, 
exhibitive in time, is necessary, under the conditions of what 
happened in some prior time : and since time elapsed, and its 
contents, are no longer within my power, it will follow that 
every action which I perform is necessary by force of deter- 
mining grounds no longer within my power, ^. e., I am, at any 
point of time wherein I act, never free. Nay, even were I 
to assume my whole existence, as independent on any foreign 
grounds (e. ^., God), so that the determinators of my causality, 
and even of my whole existence, did not lie out of and beyond 
myself, still all this could not transmute the mechanical neces- 
sity of the physical system into freedom. For at each point 
of time I should always stand under the necessity of being 
determined to act, by somewhat no longer within my power, 
and the a 'parte priori infinite series of events would still be 
a standing chain of natural sequents which I could only con- 
tinue, not commence; and so my causality never would be free. 
If, then, we ascribe to an Intelligent, whose existence is 
determined in time, freedom, still we cannot upon that 
account exempt him from the law of physical necessity regu- 
lating all events in his existence, and so also all his actions, 
for that would be to hand them over to blind chance j but 
since this law infallibly refers to all causality of things, so 
far as their existence is determinable in time, it would follow 
that freedom behoved to be rejected as a blank and impossible 
idea, were this the mode according to which we had to cogitate 
the existence of these things-in-themselves. Are we then 
seriously intent on rescuing this freedom, there remains this 
only mode, to attribute to the existence of things-in-time, ^.e., 
to the phenomenon, a causality according to the law of the 
mechanic nexus, and to attribute to it freedom as a thing-in- 
itself ; and this is our inevitable ultimatum, if we wish to 



On Freedom and Necessity, 137 

preserve tlie two contrary notions ; although even then there 
present themselves very formidable difficulties, when we try 
to explain how they can be combined in one and the same 
action j nay, difficulties so great as would seem to lead us to 
infer that any such combination must be impracticable."^ 

If I say of any man who has just perpetrated a theft, that 
the act was a necessary result, from determinators contained 
in the antecedent time, according to the law of the causal- 
nexus, then it was impossible that the act should not have 
happened; how then can any judgment, according to the 
moral law, change this opinion, and beget the supposition 
that the act might nevertheless 'have been left undone, 
simply because the law says it ought so to have been 
avoided^ ^. e., how can any man, at the very same point of 
time, and with regard to the same action, be quite free, 
when he is under an inevitable necessity of nature? To 
seek an evasion in this, by fitting on a comparative notion of 
freedom to the mode in which man's causality is determined 
by the laws of nature, is a wretched subterfuge, by which, 
however, some still suffer themselves to be deluded ; and an 
intricate problem, at whose solution centuries have laboured, 
is not to be figured as solved by a mere jargon of words, 
since it is not likely, in any event, that the solution lies so 
near the surface. The inquiry after that freedom, which lies 
at the bottom of the moral law, and of our accountability, 
does not depend on this, — whether the causality governed by 
a law of nature be determined by grounds within or without 
the person'? nor yet on this, whether — on the former sup- 
position — ^the determination be necessary by force of instinct 
of of reason % so long as, agreeably to the confession of such 
supposers, these determining representations have the ground 
of their existence in time, and in its elapsed state, and so 
backwards to prior and antecedent states of time. For, be 
* Eef. 6, from p. 57.— C. 



138 On Freedom and Necessity. 

tliose determinations ever so inward^ and be their causality 
called ever so psychological instead of mechanical, i. e., 
though such causality produce its act by dint of perceptions, 
and not by motion or matter, still such are determinations of 
the causality of an agent, so far forth as his existence is de- 
terminable in time : consequently, determinations rendered 
necessary by conditions contained in prior times, which are 
therefore, when the subject comes to act, no longer in his 
power ; and such psychological freedom is in nowise to be 
distinguished from physical necessity. No room is left 'for 

TRANSCENDENTAL FREEDOM, WHICH MUST BE COGITATED AS 
INDEPENDENCY ON THE WHOLE PHYSICAL SYSTEM, whether aS 

object of the internal senses merely in time, or as also object 
of the external senses both in space and time at once ; apart 
from which freedom, which alone is a "priori practical, no 
moral law and no responsibility can be supported. Gn these 
accounts, the necessity of events in time, agreeably to the 
law of the causal-nexus, is part of the mechanism of nature, 
although we do not assert that the things affected by such 
necessary nexus are material machines. Regard is in such 
denomination had only to the sequences of events in time, 
whether the subject in which such flux occur be automaton 
onateriale, or, as Leibnitz had it, spirituale, impelled by per- 
ceptions ; for, in truth, were the freedom of our will of this 
comparative and psychological sort only, then it were no 
more than the freedom of a turnspit, which, once wound up, 
continues of itself in motion. 

Now, to clear up this seeming antagonism between the 
mechanism of nature, and freedom in one and the same 
given action, we must refer to what was advanced in the 
Critique of Pure Reason, or what at least is a corollary from 
it, viz., that that necessity of nature, which may not 

CONSORT with THE FREEDOM OF THE SUBJECT, ATTACHES 
SINGLY TO THE MODIFICATIONS OF A THING STANDING UNDER 



On Freedom and Necessity, 139 

CONDITIONS OF TIME, i. e., TO THE MODIFICATIONS OF THE 

ACTING SUBJECT AS PHENOMENON j and that, therefore, so far 
(^. e., as phenomenon) the determinators of each act lie in 
the foregoing elapsed time, and are quite beyond his power 
(part of which are the actions man has already performed, 
and the phenomenal character he has given himself in his 
own eyes), yet, e contra^ the self-same subject, being self- 
conscious of itself as a thing in itself, considers its existence 
AS somewhat, detached from conditions of time, and 

ITSELF, so far FORTH, AS ONLY DETERMINABLE BY LAWS 

GIVEN IT BY ITS OWN REASON ; and in this existence nothing 
precedes its own voluntary act, every action, and generally 
every determination of its being, changing conformably to 
its internal sense ; nay, the entire series of its existence as 
a sensible being, is, in its consciousness of an intelligible 
cogitable existence, nothing but a mere sequent of its 
causality, never its determinator, as noumbnon.^ Under this 
aspect, an Intelligent may rightly say of every illegal act he 
perpetrates, he could very well have omitted it, although such 
act is as phenomenon sufficiently determined by the elapsed 
in time, and so far forth infallibly necessary ; for this act, 
together with all prior ones, belong to one single phenomenon, 
his character, which character he has begotten for himself, and 
by force of which he, as a cause, independent on all sense, 
imputes to himself the causality of these phenomena. 

In accordance with this are the decrees of that marvellous 
power within us which we call Conscience. A man may try 
never so much to paint some immoral conduct, which memory 
reminds him of, as unpremeditated accident, as a mere in- 
caution, never at all times to be avoided, and so as somewhat 
where he was hurried forward by the stream of necessity, 
and wherein by consequence he was guiltless ; but still, not- 
withstanding, he finds that the advocate who pleads in his 
* Ref. 6, from p. 67, taken with all that follows in this chapter. — C. 



140 On Freedom and Necessity, 

behalf can by no means bring Ms inward accuser into silence, 
so long as he is conscious that at the time when he perpe- 
trated the injustice he was master of his senses (^. e., free) : 
although he even then explains to himself his crime from 
sundry bad habits entailed through want of active attention 
to himself, — habits which he had suffered to augment up to 
that degree that he can regard the act as their natural result, 
without being able thereby to escape the self-reproach and 
blame he is forced to put upon himself. On this part of our 
nature is bottomed the contrition felt for a long-committed 
deed, on every recollection of it j which compunction is a 
painful feeling, begotten by the moral sentiment, and is so 
far practically void, as it cannot serve to make the done 
undone, and would even be absurd (as Priestley, like a con- 
sistent fatalist, has asserted), were it not that it, as pain, is 
quite legitimate, — reason knowing no relations of time, when 
question is made as to the law (moral) of our cogitable exist- 
ence, but inquiring singly if the event belongs to me as my 
act, and then connecting with it ethically just the same 
sensation whether it happened now or long ago. For a 
man's sentient existence is, in respect of his intelligible con- 
sciousness of existence (freedom), the absolute unity of one 
phenomenon, which, so far forth as it contains what are only 
phenomena of his sentiments, he judges of, not according to 
that necessity he is fettered by, as a part of the physical 
system, but according to the absolute spontaneity of his free- 
dom. It may therefore be very well admitted, that could 
we have so deep an insight into a man's cast of thinking, as 
it exhibits itself in inward and outward act, — that could we 
know every the smallest spring, and at the same time every 
external circumstance impinging upon such spring, — that 
then we could calculate a man's future conduct with the 
same exactness with which we now compute eclipses, and 
still affirm that such man was free. 



On Freedom and Necessity, 141 

"Were we capable of an intellectual intuition of this self- 
same subject, we should then observe, that this whole chain 
of appearances, so far forth as the moral law is concerned, 
emanates from the spontaneity of the subject, as a 
THiNG'iN-HiMSELF, of whoso determinations no physical ex- 
planation is at all possible. In default, however, of such 
intuition, the moral law assures us of the actuality of this 
distinction, when we refer our acts as phenomena to the sen- 
sitive existence of the subject, and when, on the other hand, 
we refer the sensitive itself to the cogitable substratum within 
us. A reference to this distinction, which is natural to reason, 
although quite inexplicable, enables us to justify opinions 
uttered with the greatest conscientiousness, and which yet, 
at their first appearance, seem repugnant to all equity. 
There are cases where individuals from youth up, notwith- 
standing an education whereby others have been benefited, 
show so early a wickedness, and persist in it up to man's 
estate, that one may be led to deem them innate villains, and 
declare their whole cast of thinking unsusceptible of any 
amelioration ; and yet, at the same time, so condemn them 
in everything they compass or avoid, as if they continued as 
responsible as any other person, notwithstanding that hope- 
less quality of mind attributed to them. But this could not 
happen, did we not suppose that everything arising from 
man's choice depended on a free causality at bottom, which 
causality impresses, from youth up, its character upon the 
phenomena : these phenomena do by their uniformity make 
a sequence in the physical system visible, but do not make 
the wick-ed quality of will necessary, but rather such sequence 
follows the freely adopted evil and unchanging maxims, 
which do therefore make him the more reprobate and the 
more blameworthy. 

But ANOTHER DIFFICULTY ATTENDS FREEDOM, SO far aS it is to 

be regarded AS combined in harmony with the mechanism 



142 On Freedom and Necessity, 

OF THE PHYSICAL SYSTEM, 111 the person of a being wlio is 
himself a part of that system ; a dij6S.culty so great, as even, 
when all the foregoing is admitted, threatens freedom with 
its entire destruction. But, notwithstanding this danger, there 
is a circumstance which gives hope of an exit issuing in favour 
of freedom, viz., the circumstance that the same difficulty 
presses upon every other, nay, as we shall soon see, presses 
alone upon that theory which takes the entities in time and 
space for existences of things in themselves ; and so we need 
not depart from our main theory regarding the ideality of 
time as a mere form of sensitive intuition, i.e., as a mere 
mode of perceiving, peculiar to a person who is part of a 
sensible world, but need only to unite the idea Freedom with 
this other part of the theory. 

When it is admitted that the intelligible person may, in 
regard of any given act, be free, even while he, as a person 
belonging in part to the world of sense, is mechanically con- 
ditioned, it still seems as if we must admit that the actions 
of mankind have their determining ground in somewhat 
entirely beyond their power, so soon as we admit that God, 
as the author of all things, is the cause of the existence of 
substance (a position which cannot be deserted without 
abandoning all theology). Here it would seem that all 
man's actions have their last ground in the causality of 
A Supreme Being different from himself ; and in truth, if 
the actions of man, which belong to his modifications in 
time, be not mere determinations of him as phenomena, but 
of him as a thing-in-itself, then freedom would irrecoverably 
be lost, — man would be an automaton, wound up and set 
agoing by some supreme artist. His self-consciousness would 
no doubt make him a thinking automaton, where, however, 
the consciousness of his spontaneity, if deemed freedom, were 
illusory, as it could only be called so, comparatively speaking, 
since the next determinators of his movements, and their 



On Freedom and Necessity, 143 

series up to their last cause would, it is true, be internal, but 
the last and highest would be met with in a different hand. 
In consequence of this, I cannot see how they who insist on 
regarding space and time as modes pertaining to the existence 
of the things in themselves, can escape the fatality of actions. 
Or if (as Mendelsohn did) they declare them requisite only 
to the existence of finite and derived beings, but no condi- 
tions of an Infinite and Illimitable Supreme, then, first, it is 
incomprehensible upon what title this distinction is asserted; 
and second, how they propose to escape the contradiction of 
making existence in time a necessary modification of Finites ; 
God being the cause of their existence, while He yet cannot 
be the cause of the existence of time and space, these being, 
on this assumption, necessary a priori conditions of the 
existence of things themselves. And so His causality would 
be conditioned in regard of the existence of things ; after 
which, all the objections to God's Infinitude and Indepen- 
dency must again enter; whereas, on the contrary, the 
determining the Divine Existence as independent on any con- 
ditions of time, as contradistinguished from that of a being 
of tbe sensible world, is quite easy upon our theory, as it is 
just the discriminating betwixt the existence of a being-in-r 
itself, and its existence phenomenally. So that if the Ideality 
of space and time be not admitted, Spinozism is the only 
alternative, where space and time are taken for essential 
modes of the Supreme Being ; and the things which depend 
on Him (^. e., we ourselves) are nob substances, but accidents 
inhering in Him, because, if these things exist only as His 
effects in time, which time conditions their existence-in- 
itself, then all actions of such a product would be just actions 
of this Supreme, which He performed somewhere and some- 
when. Spinozism, therefore, notwithstanding the absurdity 
of its main idea, concludes more logically than the ceeation- 
THEORY can, when beings in time are stated as substances, 



144 On Freedom and Necessity. 

and as effects of Supreme Cause, and yet denied to belong to 
Ood and His actions. 

The solution of tlie said difficulty can be effected shortly 
and clearly as follows : — If existence-in-time is a mere sen- 
sitive kind of representing, appertaining to the thinking 
subjects in the world, and so quite unrelated to things-in- 
themselves, then the creaiing of these latter beings is a 
creating of things-in-themselves, because the notion of crea- 
tion has nowhat to do with the sensitive representing of an 
entity, but refers to Noumena. "When, then, I say of beings 
in the sensible world, " they are created^^ so far I regard them 
as Koumena. And as it would import a contradiction to 
affirm that God is the originator of the Phenomena, so it 
is likewise a contradiction to affirm that He is, as Creator, 
cause of the actions which, as phenomena, are exhibited in 
the sensible world, although He is cause of the existence of 
the agent as a Noumenon. And if now it is possible to 
assert freedom without prejudice to the mechanism of the 
system of actions as phenomena, then it cannot make the 
least difference that the agent is regarded as created, since 

€REATION REFERS TO INTELLIGIBLE, NOT TO SENSIBLE EXIST- 
ENCE, AND SO CANNOT BE FIGURED AS A GROUND OP THE 

DETERMINATION OP PHENOMENA; which result, howovor, would 
fall out the other way if the finite beings existed in time 
as things-in-themselves, since then the Creator of the sub- 
stance would be the author of all the machinery attaching 
to the substance. 

Of so vast importance is the separation of time from the 
existence of real entities, effected in the Critique, 

The solution op this difficulty here advanced is ex- 
ceedingly DIFFICULT ITSELF, IT WILL BE SAID, AND APPEARS 
HARDLY SUSCEPTIBLE OF A LUCID EXPLANATION j but is there 

any other which has been yet attempted more easy and more 
comprehensible % It would be better to say, and more true, 



On Freedom and Necessity, 145 

that the dogmatic teachers of metaphysic rather showed their 
cunning than their sincerity, by removing this difficulty out 
of sight, in the hope that, if they said nothing of it, it would 
occur to nobody. But if effective aid is to be given to science, 
every difficulty must be exposed, and even sought for, if per- 
ad venture any lurk in secret ; for every difficulty evokes a 
mean of help, which cannot be found without giving science 
an increase in extent or in precision; and so difficulties 
advance the groundworks of science. But when difficulties 
are disingenuously concealed, or obviated by palliatives, they 
burst out by and by into incurable evils, and science is lost 
in absolute scepticism. 

Since it is, pkoperly speaking, the idea Freedom 
WHICH ALONE PROCURES US (of all ideas of pure speculative 
reason) so great an extension in the fields of the super- 
sensible, although only in order to a practical behoof, I ask 

HOW IT has exclusively SO GREAT AND SIGNAL A FERTILITY, 

while the rest denote undoubtedly the vacant spot for pos- 
sible objects of the understanding, but cannot determine by 
any what the- notion of them. ' I soon comprehend that since 
I can think nothing without a category, this category must 
first of all be sought, even for the idea Freedom. Here it is 
the category Causality; and I am aware that I cannot give to 
the idea Freedom, as a transcendent one, any corresponding 
intuition, yet that to the representation Causality a sensible 
intuition must first of all be given, in order that objective 
reality may be secured to it. Again, all the categories 
fall into two classes — the mathematic, which tend only to 
the unity of the synthesis in the representing of objects, and 
the dynamic, which refer to the unity in the representing 
the existence of objects. The first kind, those of quantity 
andvquality, contain always a synthesis of the homogeneous, 
where the unconditioned, belonging to the given conditioned 
in a sensible intuition in space and time, could not at 

L 



146 On Freedom and Necessity, 

all be found, as it behoved itself to belong to space and time, 
and so was always still conditioned. Hence, too, it came, 
that in this part of the dialectic of speculative reason, the 
antagonistic modes of finding the unconditionate, and the 
totality of their conditions, were both false. The cate- 
gories OF THE SECOND CLASS (thoSO of the CAUSALITY and of 

THE NECESSITY OF A thing) demanded not in their synthesis 
this homogeneousness of the conditioned and unconditionate, 
because here, not the intuition, and how it was originated and 
compounded out of the multifarious, behoves to be represented, 
but only how the existence of the conditioned object corre- 
sponding to the intuition was added to the existence of the 
condition ; and there it was allowable to place the uncondi- 
tioned of the every-way-conditioned in the sensible world 
(both in regard of the causality and the contingent existence 
of the things) in the cogitable world, and to make the syn- 
thesis transcendent : and so we found, in the dialectic of 
pure reason, that both the " seemingly" antagonist modes 
of finding the unconditioned for the conditioned — e.g,^ in 
the synthesis of causality for the conditioned sequences of 
causation and effect in the sensible world — did not contradict 
one another, when a causality was cogitated no longer sensi- 
tively conditioned, and that the very same action, which, as 
pertaining to the sensible world, was always sensitively con- 
ditioned, i. e., mechanically necessary, could yet have at 
bottom a causality independent on the sensory, as causality 
of the actor, so far forth as he belonged to the intelligible 
world, and so be cogitated as free. All depended upon this, 
to change this can into existence, which, as it were, one 
could prove in some one instance by a fact, and to show 
that certain actions presupposed such a causality (viz., the 
intellectual, unconditioned by sense), whether such actions 
were actual or commanded, ^. e., were objectively and prac- 
tically necessary. In actually experienced and observed 



On Freedom and Necessity, 147 

actions, as events in the sensible world, we never could hope 
to attain this connection, because the causality of freedom 
must be sought always beyond the sensible world, in the 
cogitable. But nowhat is presented to our perception, except 
sensible entities. There remained by consequence no alter- 
native, except that an incontrovertible and objective law of 
the causality, secluding all sensitive conditions from its 
determinators, should be found ; ^. e., such a law, wherein 
reason appealed, to nowhat else and ulterior, as a determi- 
nator of causation, but which determinator reason herself 
contains by means of that law, and where she is accordingly 
as pure reason self-practical. But this principle needs no 
seeking and no finding, but is from days of yore interwoven 
with the reason and substance of all men, and this is the 
2orinciple of morality. Consequently, an unconditioned cau- 
-sality, and our power of having it, freedom^ and along with 
it, my being, belonging to the sensible world, and also at the 
same time to the cogitable, is not merely indefinitely and 
problematically thought, but is, in regard of the law of its 
causality, precisely and assertively known; and this fixes 
for us, and states, the reality of the cogitable world in a 
practical point of view; and this fixing, which in a theoretic 
point of view would be transcendent,'^ is, in a practical, 
IMMANENT. But this step we could not take in reference 
t)0 the second dynamical idea, viz., that of a Necessary 
Being; we could not arrive at him beyond the sensible 
world, without the intermediation of the first dynamic idea.^ 
For had we hazarded any such step, we must have quitted 
^11 data, and soared up to that, whereof nothing was given, 

* Kant distinguishes between transcendental and transcendent. The 
former is that which, as d 'priori, transcends experience ; the latter is 
that which transcends all knowledge, or, according to the terminology 
of his system, transcends both the sensible and the cogitable. — C. 

^ For Kant's -vdews as to recognition of God, compare with this pas- 
sage pp. 301, 306, 307,— G. 



148 On Freedom and Necessity, 

l)y means of wMch we miglit make out tlie connection of such 
, an intelligible person with tlie world of phenomena (since the 
Unoriginated and Necessary behoved to be known as given 
without lis), while yet this was quite possible in regard of 
our own subject, so far as, on the one hand, it determines 
itself by the moral law as a cogitable being by means of 
freedom, and, on the other hand, recognises itself as acting 
in the sensible world, conformably to this destination, as 
indeed every day's experience may prove. 

The idea Freedom alone permits that we quit the datum 
SELF, to find the unconditioned and cogitable for the con- 
ditioned and sensible. Yet it is our reason itself, which, by 
its supreme and unconditioned practical law, recognises itself,, 
and the being conscious of this law (our own person), as per- 
taining to the cogitable system, and that too with a deter- 
mination of the mode how it as such may be active. Thus, 
we understand how it is the pkactical faculties alone 

WHICH CAN HELP US BEYOND THE SENSIBLE WORLD, AND 
PROCURE US A KNOWLEDGE OF A SUPERSENSIBLE ORDER AND 

COMBINATION OF THINGS j which knowledge can, however, be 
extended only so far as is just requisite for a pure practical 
purpose. 

There is only one remark behind, viz., that every step 
taken by pure reason, even in a practical department where 
regard is not had to subtlety of speculation, does of itself 
most minutely coincide with the whole progress and march 
of the Critique of Pure Speculative E,eason, — nay, as exactly 
as if each step were taken just to procure this establishment 
and confirmation. Such an unsought and self-presenting 
arrival of the most important passages of pure practical 
reason at the same goal, with the exceeding subtle and often 
needless-seeming remarks in the critique of pure speculative, 
surprises and corroborates and reinforces, the maxim already 
known and lauded by others, to prosecute with all frankness. 



On Freedom and Necessity. 1 49 

and exactness a man's research in every scientific undertak- 
ing, without caring in the least against what extraneous 
matters it may offend or collide, but to go on to execute it 
completely by and for itself alone. Repeated observation 
has shown me, that when a work of this sort is ended, some 
things which in the middle of the investigation looked ex- 
oeedingly doubtful, came, notwithstanding, to a final coinci- 
dence and harmony in the most unexpected manner, with 
dogmas obtained without any reference to these results, or 
any partiality or fondness for them. Writers might spare 
themselves many blunders, and much lost toil (since they 
aimed at a dazzling result), could they but resolve to go more 
openly to work. 



BOOK III. 



INTRODUCTION 



METAPHYSICAL ELEMENTS OF 
JURISPRUDENCE. 



PREFACE. 



^r'HE Metaphysic of EtMcs was intended to follow tlie 
JL dissertation on the a priori operations of the will. It 
divides itself into the metaphysical elements of law and the 
metaphysical elements of morals (ethics in the stricter sense), 
and constitutes the anti-part to my previous work, the meta- 
physical elements of natural philosophy. 

Jurisprudence is the first part of general ethics. The 
desideratum with regard to it, is to have a system evolved 
by pure reason from principles a priori, and such a system 
would be THE METAPHYSic OF LAW. But since law, although 
a pure notion, is intended to apply to cases presented in 
observation and experience, a metaphysic system of it must 
embrace the cb posteriori diversities of such cases, to render it 
complete. Again, since no classification of what is merely 
a posteriori and contingent can be complete or certainly pro- 
nounced such, and an approximation only to systematic unity 
is possible, the a posteriori conceptions cannot be introduced 
as integral parts of the system, but can only be adduced by 
way of example in notes. This circumstance, however, in- 
duces me to term the first part of the Metaphysic of Ethics, 
the Metaphysical elements of Law only, because, in reference 
to such practical cases, no system, but merely an approxima- 
tion to it, is to be looked for. I shall therefore here, as for- 
merly in the Metaphysic Elements of Natural Philosophy, 
print in the text that part of law which is strictly systematic 
and a priori; and that part which regards given cases in 



154 Preface, 

experience, I sliall discuss in notes, since otherwise it would 
not be clear wliat ought to be considered as metaphysics, and 
what as practical law. 

I do not know how I can remove, or how better anticipate, 
the reproach of obscurity with which I am so often taunted, 
and not simply of obscurity, but of a studied and affected 
depth of thought, than by using the words of Professor Garve, 
a philosopher in the true sense of the word, in whose opinion 
I heartily concur, and whose rule I will endeavour to follow, 
in so far as the nature of my subject may permit. 

Professor Gar^e desires {Vermischte Aufsdtze, p. 352) 
that every philosophic doctrine be made capable of a popular 
exposition, otherwise the author is to be deemed chargeable 
with confusion in his own ideas. This I willingly admit, 
except with regard to an investigation into the reach and 
extent of the faculty of reason itself, and of such cognate 
inquiries as rest on the originary function and use of reason ; 
for there the inquiry always turns on exactly discriminating 
betwixt the sensible and the supersensible, in so far as this 
last may be the product of reason. Distinctions like these 
can never be made popular, nor indeed any formal meta- 
physic, although the results and conclusions arrived at may 
be made quite apparent to every sound understanding. In 
such an investigation, popularity, i. e., talking to the people 
in their own language and way of thinking, is quite out of 
the question. Scholastic exactness is indispensable, for the 
author is talking in the Schools ; and, without such rigid 
terminology, we cannot advance a step in an analysis of 
reason. 

But when pedants have the effrontery to address the 
public from the pulpit or the chair, in technical phraseology, 
calculated singly for the school, that cannot be properly 
charged on any philosophic system, any more than the follies 
of- a logodsedalist are to be charged on grammar. The 



Preface. 155 

absurdity attaches to the individual, not to the science he 
perverts. 

It is objected that it is extremely arrogant, egotistical, 
nay, contemptuous, to the followers of the old systems, to 
assert, that^ 'previous to the publication of my own system, there 
was no metaphysic science. But, to give due weight to this 
plausible objection, I desire that it be considered, " Whether 
or no there can be more than one single system of metaphysic 
science." There are no doubt different modes of philoso- 
phizing, and various ways of retracing the first principles of 
thought, upon which afterwards, with more or less success, 
systems are erected, all which prepare the way, and have 
contributed to the establishment, of my own. But since, in 
the nature of things, human reason is but one, there cannot 
be various systems of philosophy. In other words, there is 
in the nature of things only one true system possible, how- 
ever different and contradictory the assertions may have been 
with regard to each proposition in it. In the same way, the 
moralist asserts, and with justice, there is but one virtue, 
and only one doctrine of it, i. e., a single and alone system, 
establishing all virtues in one common principle. In like 
manner, the chemist maintains that there is but one chemistry; 
the physician, there is one alone principle of classifying 
diseases (that according to Brown) ; and each of these, 
although excluding the prior and elder systems, does not 
deny the intrinsic merits of former moralists, chemists, and 
physicians, — since, without their discoveries and unsuccessful 
essays at system, no one could have arrived at a true prin- 
ciple, giving systematic unity to the whole philosophy. 
"Whenever, therefore, any one announces a system of meta- 
physic as the result of his own excogitation, it is exactly the 
same thing as if he were to say, hitherto there has been no 
true system ; for, were he to admit a second and true system, 
then would there be two systems of opinion on the same 



156 Preface, 

subject; — different and yet true propositions — which, is a 
contradiction. So that, when the Kantic system announces 
itself as that before which there was no real true philosophy, 
it is merely in the situation of every new system, and pre- 
tends to no more than every person must in fact pretend to, 
who projects a system according to his own plan. 

There is an objection of still less moment, and yet not 
entirely to be passed over, that one of the leading features 
of the Kantic system is not its own, but borrowed from 
some cognate system of philosophy (or mathematics) ; for 
such is the discovery proclaimed by the Tubingen reviewer 
concerning the author's definition of philosophy, which he 
had proposed as his own, and as very important, but which, 
it seems, had been given long ago by another in almost the 
same words.'"* I must here leave it to the private judgment 
of each, whether or not the words intellectualis qucedam con- 
structio could have suggested my doctrine of Time and Space, 
by which I distinguish so broadly betwixt mathematics and 
philosophy. I am confident Hansen would himself have 
refused to acknowledge this interpretation of his words ; for 
the possibility of intuitions a priori, and that space is such 
intuition, are positions he would willingly have avoided, as, 
in consequence, he would have felt himself entangled in 
labyrinthic questions of unknown and sight-outrunning 
extent and intricacy. A representation made, as it were, by 
the understanding, was intended by this learned mathe- 
matician to signify nothing else than the drawing of lines 
corresponding to the conception, — where the rule alone is 
attended to, and the trivial errors which must be made in 
the actual construction are totally abstracted from, as every 

* Porro de actuali constructione hie non quseritur, cum ne possint 
quidem sensibiles figurse ad rigorem definitionum effingi ; sed requiritur 
cognitio eorum, quibus absolvitur formatio, quae intellectualis quEedam 
constructio est. (C. A. Hausen, Elem. Matliem. pars i. p. 86, A. 1734.) 



Preface, 157 

one may understand who considers the making lines equal 
in geometry. 

Least of all is that objection worthy of regard which 
attacks the spirit of my system, by considerations drawn from 
the confusion wrought by those who attempt to ape it, by 
using some of those peculiar words which are really not 
capable of being supplied by any others in more common 
use; for the using them in common conversation deserves 
high reprehension, and such castigation has been administered 
by Mr. Nicolai, although I cannot agree with his remark^ 
that they are to be dispensed with even in their proper field, 
as being a mere disguise for poverty of thought. However^ 
the unpopular pedant is a better object of sarcasm than an 
ignorant dogmatist ; for, in truth, the metaphysician who is 
strictly wedded to his system, belongs to the latter class, 
even though he is willingly ignorant of everything not be- 
longing to his own school. But if, according to Shaftesbury, 
it is no small test of truth, that a system, particularly a 
practical one, can hold out against the assaults of ridicule, 
then, I think, the time will come when the Kantic system 
inay laugh in turn, and with the greater justice, when it 
beholds the fair but airy castles of its opponents crumble to 
])ieces at its touch, and their defenders taking fright amidst 
the ruins, — a destiny which inevitably awaits them. 



BOOK III. 

INTEODUOTION TO 
THE METAPHYSIO OF ETHICS. 



I. — OF THE KELATION SUBSISTING BETWIXT THE POWERS OF 
THE HUMAN MIND AND THE MORAL LAW. 

THE power of desire, or appetitive faculty, is tlie power 
man has of becoming, by his representations, the canse 
of the existence of the object represented. The ability of 
any being to act conformably to its representations, is called 

LIFE. 

With desire or aversion is invariably connected, first, 
PLEASURE or DISLIKE, the Susceptibility for which is called 
FEELING ; but these last may be unattended by the former ; 
for there are pleasures {e. g., of taste) independent of desire, 
originating from the bare representation, formed in the mind, 
of an object, while the percipient may be indifferent to its 
■existence. Secondly, the liking or dislike of an object 
desired need not precede the desire, and cannot always be 
regarded as the cause, but must sometimes as the effect, of 
the appetition. 

Pleasure or dislike accompanying a representation is, for 
this reason, called feeling, that it is merely subjective, and 
has no relation to an object so as to beget any knowledge of 
it, nay, not even a knowledge of our own state ; whereas 



Introduction to the Metaphysic of Ethics. 159 

even sensations, when considered apart from the peculiar 
modifications of our own subject (as red, sweet, etc.), refer, 
as elements of knowledge, to an object. But the pleasure or 
dislike we have at red or sweet denotes nothing whatever 
with regard to the object,^ but simply its relation to my 
own subject. This is also the reason why the phenomena, 
pleasure and dislike, admit of no further explanation ; and 
the utmost that can be done is to register and classify the 
consequences they may produce, in order to apply these to 
use in practice. 

That pleasure which is necessarily connected with desiring, 
may be called practical pleasure, irrespective of its being 
cause or effect of the desire. On the other hand, that pleasure 
which is not necessarily connected with the desire of the 
object represented,' and which, therefore, is no pleasure in 
the existence of the object of the representation, but singly 
in the representation itself, may be called contemplative 
pleasure, or inactive complacency. A pleasurable feeling 
of this latter sort is called taste : this last is properly no 
part of a practical system, but may episodically be introduced. 
The practical pleasure, however, which, as a cause, precedes 
and determines the power of desire, is itself called desire in 

* The sensoey may be defined the subjective op our representa- 
tions, for it is the understanding which refers these representations to 
an object, i. e., it alone thinks to itself somewhat by means of them. 
Now, the subjective of a representation may be of such a sort as to be 
capable of being referred to an object, so as to constitute knowledge of 
it, and that with respect either to the form, or to the matter. In the 
first case it is called intuition d priori; in the second, sensation. In 
these cases, the receptivity is called the sensory, and is divided into 
the internal sense and the external. Or, otherwise, the subjective of a 
representation cannot become any element of knowledge, but refers 
singly to the subject, in which case the receptivity is called ebeling. 
Feeling, then, is the effect of a representation, and is of the sensory, no 
matter whether or not the representation causing it belong to the 
intellect or the sensory. 



i6o Introdtiction to the 

the strictest sense. A habitual desire is called appetite or 
inclination; and since the combination of pleasure with the 
power of desire is called (in so far as this conjunction is 
deemed by the understanding subjectively valid according to 
a general rule) interest, the practical pleasure is in such a 
case AN appetitive interest. But, on the contrary, when 
pleasure is of such a sort as can follow solely upon a pre- 
vious determination of the appetitive faculty, it is intellectual, 
and not sensitive ; and the interest taken in the object re- 
presented is an interest of reason j for, were the interest 
sensitive, and did it not rest exclusively on principles of 
reason, then sensation must be connected with the pleasure, 
so as to determine the power of appetition. Further, 
although, when a pure interest of reason is granted, no ap- 
petitive interest is allowed to be surreptitiously introduced, 
yet we may, out of compliance with common parlance, speak 
of an INCLINATION, — a habitual desire, — even towards that 
which can alone be an object of intellectual complacency : 
yet such habitual desire must not be mistaken for the cause, 
but must be taken for the effect, of the rational interest ; in 
which case, the appetite is liberal and free, and is called A 

PURE insensitive INCLINATION.^ 

Concupiscence — or lusting after — ^is different from desir- 
ing, and is a stimuKis tending to awaken it; it is always 
sensitive, but is a state of mind short of producing any act 
on the part of the appetitive faculty. 

The power of desiring, conformably to intellectual represen- 
tations, is, in so far as the grounds of the determination to act 
exist in the mind itself, and not in the object, called a power 

* Inclination is' here obviously used figuratively ^ and a distinction 
may be taken betwixt physical and ethical inclination {Neigung), An 
inclination to do what the law commands is no doubt morally possible, 
but then it must not be figured as antecedent to the law ; it can only 
follow upon the representation of the law, when the law has determined 
the will. 



Metaphysic of Ethics. i6i 

OF OPTIONAL PURSUIT OR AVOIDANCE. When the appetitive 
faculty is combined with the consciousness of this ability of 
its own act to produce the object represented, it is called 
choice; if such consciousness is awanting, the act of the 
faculty is a mere wish. Appetition, when its inward ground 
of determination, consequently when the option, depends 
upon the reason of the subject himself, is called will.^ Will 
is therefore the appetitive faculty, not so much in respect of 
the action, (that was choice), as in respect of the ground de- 
termining the choice of the action; and it has itself no prior 
determinative, but is, in so far as it determines choice, 

PRACTICAL REASON ITSELF. 

Subordinate to Will, may be classed choice and wish, in so 
far as reason can determine the power of desire. Choice, 
when determined by pure reason, is a liberal, a free choice; 
whereas that determinable singly by sensitive excitement is 
a mechanical or brute choice. The human choice is one 
affected by such stimuli, but not determined by them, and 
is therefore in itself, although it may be determined to actions 
emanating from pure will, prior to such acquired facility, 
impure, t Freedom of choice is the independency of its 
determination on sensitive stimulants. This is the negative 
conception of freedom; the 'positive^ the power of pure reason 
to be itself practical or active. But this is no otherwise possible 
than by subordinating the maxim of every action to the con- 
dition of its fitness for law universal; and since the maxims 
of men do not always coincide with this requisition, reason 
can only prescribe this law by an imperative ordaining or 
forbidding. 

This Law of Freedom is, in contradistinction to physical 
laws of nature, called moral. When directed to external 
actions and their legitimateness, it founds jurisprudence; 
but when this law is applied to human conduct, and is itself 

^ Eef. 6, from p. 57. + Not morally, but psychologically, as mixed. — 0, 

M 



1 62 Introduction to the 

the ground determining an action, so as to ascertain and ^-k. 
its inward, and therefore also its outward, conformity to fhe 
law, tlien tlie knowledge h priori resulting from this formal 
determination of the maxims of the will is the sciEisrcE of 
ethics; and this is what is meant when it is said that actions 
in harmony with the first are legal, while actions in harmony 
with the last are moral. The freedom regarded in the first 
is external, i. e,, personal liberty, singly; but that freedom 
concerned in the last, embraces both a man's external free- 
dom (of body) and internal freedom (of choice), in so far as 
both his phenomenal and real freedom are subjected to a law 
of reason. Thus, in our inquiry into the reach and extent of 
the faculty of reason, we said objects of the external senses 
are in Space, but in Time, all whatever, whether of the inter- 
nal or external senses, the representations of both being per- 
ceptions embraced under the conditions of the faculty of 
internal intuitions. In fche same way may freedom be re- 
garded as modifying the external or internal use of choice; 
but still its law, as a pure practical principle, must be always 
valid as its inward determinator, although not always con- : 
templated in that particular point of view. 

II. — ON THE idea and THE NECESSITY OF HAVING A 
METAPHYSIC OP ETHICS. 

That a system of the metaphysical principles of natural 
philosophy is possible ct> priori, and that such a system should 
precede that mixed physics which is applied to observation 
and experience, has been shown elsewhere. But natural 
philosophy can receive many propositions, on the evidence 
of experience, as quite general, and admitting no exception, 
although such universality of extent ought strictly to be 
deduced from positions ^ priori. As an instance of this 
ITewton adopted, as founded on experience, the principle ot 



Metaphysic of Ethics, 163 

the equality of action and reaction, and yet he extended it 
over the whole material universe. Chemistry goes still fur- 
ther, and founds its laws of combination and solution singly 
on experience, and yet relies on their universality and neces- 
sity so as to apprehend error impossible. • 

But with THE LAWS OF MORALS the caso is different, — they 

ARE VALID AS LAWS ONLY IN SO FAR AS THEY ARE FOUNDED 

h priori, and are seen to be soj nay, our judgments and 
opinions of ourselves and our actions are quite devoid of 
ethic import if they contain singly what experience teaches 
of them; and if any one allowed himself to make anything 
taken from experience a moral rule of acting, he would be in 
danger of the most ruinous errors. 

If Ethics were a mere doctrine of Eudaimonism, then it 
would be absurd to support it on principles a priori. For 
how plausible soever it may seem to say that reason could 
have investigated beforehand the means of attaining a per- 
manent enjoyment of real happiness and of the amenities of 
life, still experience lias shown that all theories cb priori on 
that subject are either , tautological, or void of foundation. 
Experience and observation alone show in what delight is 
taken. The natural instincts — ^the desire of rest^of motion 
— the love of fame- — of knowledge — teach each individual 
separately what he is to look to for his chief gratification; « 
and from these instincts he learns the means of reaching what 
he likes. All reasoning db priori towards founding a theory 
of general happiness is, when narrowly examined, no more 
than general observations founded on induction; and since 
generals are not universals, the propositions admit of so many 
exceptions in order to adapt the choice to each man's likings, 
that, after all, the individual is left to grow wise by experi- 
ence of his own or his neighbour's damage. 

The constitution of the precepts of morals is totally, 
different : they are laws for every one, and have no respect 



164 Introduction to the 

for Ms appetites or inclinations; and that simply because 
man is free, and reason is practical. The instruction given 
in its laws is not drawn from inductive observations of him- 
self and his animal part — not from considering the causes of 
the physical system, or taking heed to that which happens 
and is acted. But reason commands how man is to act, 
although no example of such action could be adduced. It 
also disregards the advantage resulting from our conduct, 
which indeed experience can alone teach. For although 
reason allows and approves our seeking our advantage in 
every possible way, and does, moreover, supported by experi- 
ence, lead us to hope, especially if we go hand in hand with 
prudence, upon the whole, for greater advantages than can 
probably be counted on from violating her laws; still the 
authority of her behests, as Law, does not depend on any 
such contingency, and she uses such facts merely as a counter- 
poise to weigh against the inducements leading to an opposite 
course, in order, by thus adjusting the equilibrium of an 
otherwise undue balance, to secure for herself the full weight 
of her h priori reason. 

And since A system of a priori kitowledge deduced 
FROM NOTIONS IS CALLED METAPHYSic,* Practical Philosophy, 
which treats not of the physical system, but of the cogitable, 
would require and presuppose a metapliysic of freedom, or 
of the moral system. To have such a system is therefore 
itself a duty ; nor is any man destitute of this first Philo- 
sophy , however darkly conscious of it he may be to himself; 
for how could he, if destitute of c(, priori principles, fancy 
himself possessed of the ground of a law fit for all Intelligents? 
But as, in the metaphysic of the physical system, there were 
principles required for applying the supreme a priori positions 
to objects of experience ; so, in the metaphysic of the moral 
system, the particular nature of man comes to be considered, 
* Kef. 1 from p. 3.— C. 



Metaphysic of Ethics, 165 

•whicli is known singly from experience, in order, on it, to 
indicate the conclusions resulting from the supreme moral law; 
by all which the purity of this last is noways affected, nor is 
its a 'priori original rendered at all doubtful : in other words, 
the metaphysic of ethics cannot rest on anthropology, but it 
must apply to it. 

The anti-part of a metaphysic of ethics, as the second mem- 
ber of a division of practical philosophy in general, would be 
MORAL ANTHROPOLOGY, which would contain the subjective 
obstacles or assistances the moral law might meet with in the 
human constitution. It would treat of the founding moral 
maxims in the individual; of propagating them, and strength- 
ening their action among the people ; and such other matters 
as rest on experience, and indeed cannot be dispensed with, 
but which must not precede the first elements, or be mixed 
up with them : since then great risk is run of extracting false 
or at least indulgent moral laws, which give out that to be 
unattainable which for this very reason is not attained, the 
law not being held up in its purity, in which alone its strength 
consists ; or is not attained, because ungenuine and sophisti- 
cated motives towards good and duty are employed, which 
ultimately sap and overthrow morality. Moral Anthropology 
dare not, therefore, be employed as any standard of judging 
in morals, nor as a discipline for the mind in assisting it to 
discharge its duty. Here the law itself must be resorted to, 
as it emanates directly from pure reason. 

With regard to the division, just mentioned, of philosophy 
into theoretical and practical, and that this last could be no 
other than moral science, I have elsewhere explained myself 
at length (Disquisition on the a priori Functions of the Judg- 
ment). Every practical investigation, teaching what may 
possibly be reached, by help of the physical system, is art, 
and depends singly on mechanic forces and their laws ; only 
those practical investigations which rest on laws of freedom 



1,66 Introduction to the 

can liave principles independent on any prior theory. For as 
to wliat transcends nature, there is no theory. Philosophy, 
therefore, can contain no technical, but singly a moral- 
practical part ; and if the acquired facility of the choice, 
conformable to laws of freedom, should, in contradistinction 
to nature, be here called art, it would be such art as behoved 
to be establishable in a system of freedom analogous to that 
of nature ; and, in truth, a divine art, were we always to 
exactly perform what reason enjoins, and to realize its Ideal. 



III. — OF THE DIVISION OF A SYSTEM OF THE METAPHYSIC 
OF ETHICS.^ 

To all legislation (which may prescribe inward or outward 
actions, and these either h 'priori by pure reason, or by the 
will of another), there are two things requisite : first^ a Law 
representiag the action as objectively necessary, ^. e., making 
it a duty j secondly^ a spring of action, which subjectively 
connects the determination of the choice with the representa- 
tion of the law. By the first, the action is represented as 
duty, and is a mere theoretic acquaintance with a possible 
determination of choice ; but, by the second, the obligation 
so to act is conjoined with a subjective ground of the deter- 
mination of choice. 

Every legislation, therefore (no matter whether the action 

* The DEDUCTION of the division of a system, ^^e., the proof of its com- 
pleteness, and also of its continuity, i. e., that the transition from the 
divided notion to its subdivisions be not ^er saltum, is one of the most 
difficult tasks imposed on the architect of a system. And there is room 
for hesitation as to the ultimate notion, which is divided into eight 
and WEONG. It is, however, that of an act of feee choice in geneeal. 
Teachers of ontology generally begin with the representations, some- 
thing, — NOTHING, — not adverting to the circumstance that these op- 
posed conceptions are already members of a division, and presuppose 
a higher notion, which can be no other than that of ant object 
whatsoevee. 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 167 

prescribed be tbe same or not), may be divided, in respect of 
the spring of action employed. That legislation, constitut- 
ing an action Duty, and making the representation Duty 
itself the spring, is ethical. But that legislation which does 
not include this last in the law, and admits of other springs 
than the naked idea Duty, is juridical. As to what such 
springs may be, it is quite obvious, that since they diJffer from 
the idea Duty, they must be taken from pathological inclina- 
tions and aversions bearing on the human choice, and more 
particularly from the latter, singly because the legislation 
necessitates, and does not persuade. 

The coincidence of an action with the law, abstracted 
from any regard to the motive whence it sprang, is its 
LEGALITY. But such Coincidence — when' the idea Duty, 
founded on the law, is at the same time the inward spring — 
forms its morality. 

The duties of forensic obligation are outward only; for 
the juridical legislation does not require that the idea Duty, 
which is inward, should become likewise the determinator of 
the choice of the agent ; and yet, since a motive is required, 
adequate, and calculated to give purchase to the law, the 
motives to be combined with the law can, from the nature of 
the case, be external singly. The ethical legislation takes 
under its cognisance inward mental acts; but it compre- 
hends also all outward ones, and so is extended over every- 
thing that can be called Duty. But, upon this very account, 
since ethical legislation includes in its law the inward spring 
of acting (viz. the idea Duty), a particular noway entering 
into any external legislation, it follows that ethical legisla- 
tion cannot be externaP (not even that of a divine will), 
although it may adopt actions prescribed by other systems of 
legislation into its own, as duties, and make the consideration 
of them, as such, a spring of conduct. 

9 As to the possibility of external legislation, v. p. 173.— 0. 



i68> Introduction to the 

Prom tMs it is evident that all duties must fall under the 
head of Ethics, even while the law giving them birth may 
not. Thus ethic requires that 1 fulfil a promise, although 
the other party could not compel me to do so. Ethics 
adopts the law 'pacta sunt servanda, and adopts also the 
thence arising duty. It is therefore not in ethics, but in 
law, that the legislation enjoining fidelity to one's promise is 
contained. Ethics only teaches that, even if the external 
coercion connected juridically with the action were awanting, 
the ide,a of its being duty were still sufficient as a spring ; 
for, were it not so, and the legislation not juridical, and the 
duty not one of law, but one of conscience, then fidelity in 
adhering to engagements would come to be classed with 
duties of benevolence, which is very wide of truth. It is 
essentially a legal obligation to which a man can be exter- 
nally compelled; yet it is a virtuous action (a proof of 
virtuous sentiments) to act in that manner, even when no 
force can be apprehended. Law and morals are therefore 
not so much distinguished by the duties they enjoin, as 
by the different genius of the legislation connecting this or 
the other motive with the injunction. 

Ethical legislation is that which cannot be external, 
although the duties may be so. Juridical is that which can 
also be external. Thus it is an external duty to keep one's 
promise ; but the commandment to do so singly because it is 
duty, and disregarding every other motive, belongs simply 
to an inward legislation. It is therefore not as a particular 
act of duty (a peculiar kind of act, to which we are bound), 
— for, both in ethics and law, question is made of external 
duties, — but because in the given case the legislation is in- 
ward, and can have no external lawgiver, that therefore the 
obligation is deemed ethical. For the same reason, the 
duties of benevolence, in so far as they consist of external 
actions (or rather of obligations thereunto), are reckoned to 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 1 69 

belong to ethics, — tlie legislation being internal singly. 
Ethics has no doubt its peculiar duties, e. g., those towards 
one's self; but it has also several in common with law, only 
the mode of the obligation is different ; for to do actions 
barely because they are duties, and to make the principle of 
duty, no matter whence that duty spring, the all-sufficient 
spring of the will, is the peculiar characteristic of ethical 
obligation. Hence there are direct-ethical duties, but 
indirectly all others come to be so too. 

IV. — PHELIMINARY IDEAS ENTERING INTO THE METAPHYSIC 
OF ETHICS. 

{Philosophia practica universalis.) 

The idea Freedom is a product of pure reason,*" and, 
owing to that very circumstance, transcends the grasp of 
speculative philosophy ; i. e,, is such a conception as has no 
example in the course of experience and observation, — ^is 
therefore no object of theoretic knowledge : it is not a con- 
stitutive, but simply regulative, and, moreover, negative 
principle of speculative reason. But, in the use of reason as 
a practical or active faculty, the reality of this idea is evinced 
in practical propositions, which, being laws, point to a 
causality of reason, independent on any sensitive condition 
■ — determine the choice — and show A pure will, in which 
the moral ideas and laws have their seat.t 

Upon this idea of freedom, which is positive in so far as 
practice is concerned, are founded unconditional practical 
laws, called moral, which, in respect of us, who are aifected 
by sensitive determinatives, and whose choice therefore 
swerves from pure will, are imperatives (categorical com- 
mands or prohibitions); and this it is which distinguishes 
them from mere technical rules, which last are valid on cer- 
* Ref. 6, from p. 57. f Eef. 5, from p. 45.— C. 



170 Introdtcction to the 

tain conditions singly. By these imperatives some actions 
are allowed or disallowed, i. e., are morally possible or im- 
possible ; others, again, are morally necessary, i. e., obligatory, 
whence arises the idea of duty, the adhering to or trans- 
gressing which is connected with a peculiar feeling of pain 
or pleasure (the moral sense) : this feeling, however, since it 
is not the foundation of the practical lawsj but only an effect 
produced in our mind when the choice is determined by 
them, which may be very different in different individuals, 
without affecting the truth of any moral judgment, cannot be 
taken notice of in a system treating of the mere practical 
laws of reason. 

The following notions are common to both parts of ethics. 

Obligation is the necessity of a free action, falling under 
a categorical imperative of reason. 

An IMPERATIVE is a practical rule, by which an action, in 
itself contingent, is rendered necessary, and differs in this 
point from a practical law, that whereas this last represents 
the necessity of an action, yet it does so irrespective of the 
consideration that such action may, of inward necessity, 
belong to an agent (e. ^., a holy one), and yet, in the case of 
man, be merely fortuitous ; for, where the action is already 
necessary, there no imperative can be expressed. An im- 
perative is therefore a rule making necessary a subjectively 
contingent action, and thereby representing the subject 
affected by it as one who must necessitate his actions to har- 
monize with the rule. The categorical (i. 6., absolute or 
unconditional) imperative is not one which commands medi- 
ately, or by the representation of any ulterior end whither- 
ward the action might point, but is one which, by the bare 
representation of the act, cogitates it as immediately-incum- 
bent, and makes it objectively-necessary. Imperatives of 
this sort, no practical doctrine, which treats of obligations, 
save Ethic singly, can present. All other imperatives are 



Met dp ky sic of Ethics. lyi 

TECHNICAL and conditioned. The ground of tlie possi- 
bility of categorical imperatives is this, that they rest on 
no determinator of choice, which would require an ulterior 
end to be had in view, but on its originary freedom 
singly. 

An action is allowed which is not contrary to obligation; 
and this freedom, limited by no opposing imperative, is a 
moral title or faculty : from this is obvious what is dis- 
allowed. 

Duty is that action to which a person is bound. Duty is 
hence the matter of obligation ; and there may be one duty, 
in so far as the act is concerned, although different modes in 
which the obligation may be constituted, i. e., juridical or 
ethical. 

The Categorical Imperative, expressing obligation in re- 
gard of a given action, is a moral practical law. But since 
obligation implies not merely practical necessity (that being 
expressed by all law), but necessitation, the imperative is 
EITHER A command OR A PROHiBiTioi^, as it may happen. An 
action neither commanded nor forbidden is allowed, merely 
because, with regard to it, there exists no law limiting the free- 
dom of the subject, and therefore no duty : such an action is 
morally indifferent. A further question may be moved. If 
there are any such adiaphorous actions ? and if so, is it open 
to any one to will or eschew them at pleasure, without a 
particular permissive law? Were this question answered 
negatively, then would the faculty of acting not respect an 
action indifferent, for to such, morally considered, no par- 
ticular law can be required. 

A DEED OR action is an event falling under the laws of 
obligation, i. e., it is called an act, when regard is had to its 
originator, — the freedom of the acting xsubject. The actor 
is considered the author of the event ; and when he is sup- 
posed to know the law applying to his conduct, and by virtue 



172 Introduction to the 

of whicli law lie is bound, both tbe act and its consequences 
can be imputed to Mm. 

He to whom actions can be imputed is called peeson ; 
MORAL personality, man's independent individuality, is no- 
thing else than the freedom of agent-intelligents, who rank 
under moral laws. Whence it is evident that a person is sub- 
jected to no law except such as he, either alone, or some- 
times in conjunction with others, imposes on himself. 

That is called a thing to which no event can be imputed 
as an action. Hence every object devoid of freedom is re- 
garded as a thing. 

E/IGHT, wrong, denote actions consistent or inconsistent 
with duty j and these terms are so applied in whatever way 
the duty may have been constituted : an act repugnant to 
duty is called transgression. 

An unintentional transgression is called (for it is im- 
putable) a fault; but a deliberate transgression {e.g.^ 
one accompanied with the consciousness of its being so) is a 
crime or SIN : whatever coincides juridically with the ex- 
ternal requirements of law is called just ; what is not so, 
unjust. 

A COLLISION OF DUTIES would imply such a condition of 
ethical obligation, that one duty annihilated the other. But 
because duty and obligation are ideas involving the objective 
practical necessity of certain actions, and since two contra- 
dictory and inconsistent imperatives cannot both be necessary, 
it follows that a collision of duties is perfectly inconceivable. 
There may, however, be different grounds towards an obliga- 
tion, one or other or all of which may be insufficient to beget 
a perfect obligation (rationes obligandi non obligantes), and 
one and the same individual may come to be affected by the 
rule prescribed by them, but duty is not established in such 
a case. Whence practical philosophers express themselves 
by saying, not that the major obligation retains its place, 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 1 73 

but tlie more extensive ground towards that obligation takes 
precedence of the less. 

External Laws are understood to comprehend and include 
these obligations which are recognised by reason a 'priori; 
and although not promulgated, they are held to be so, and 
compose what is called the law of nature. Those, again, 
which, until promulgated, have no force, and which could 
not oblige but by reason of their proceeding from the legis- 
lator, are, in contradistinction, called positive or statutable 
LAW. An external legislation is therefore possible, contain- 
ing simply the law of nature; but then this natural law 
must antecede and establish the authority of the lawgiver 
{i, e., his title to oblige).'^ 

An ultimate principle of reason, binding us to certain 
actions, is a practical law, The rule an agent chooses him- 
self to follow is his PECULIAR MAXIM OP CONDUCT, and of such 
maxims the variety is plainly endless. 

The categorical imperative, which is merely a general 
formula expressing what obligation is announced, is the 
necessity of adopting such maxims as might serve for common 
laws for all. Conduct is therefore to be examined so as to 
detect the private maxim from which it sprang; and whether 
it be a principle possessed of objective validity, can only be 
recognised by inquiring if reason can represent itself as 
pronouncing law universal by means of it. 

The simplicity of this law, contrasted with the variety and 
gravity of the consequences following upon it, as also its 
majesty and supremacy, unattended by any visible sanctions, 
is at first exceedingly surprising. But when, in the midst of 
this admiration, the power of reason is pointed out to sway 
our choice by the idea of a formal law, and we are guided by 
it to the further cogitation of that property of will, its free- 
dom, which no force of speculation, no train of experience, 
* Eef. 9, from p. 167.— C. 



1 74 Introduction to the 

could have reached, we then, observe how it is that this law 
should, like mathematic postulates, be indemonstrable, and 
yet most apodictically certain, and, like them, open up a 
vista into a long and spacious field of scientific practical pro- 
positions, — a field where, tlieoretically^ reason found every 
avenue barred up, and saw the idea Freedom, together with 
every other idea of the supersensible, removed to a distance 
altogether inaccessible. 

The harmony of an action with the Law of Duty is its 
legality; that of its maxim, with the law is its morality. 
Maxim is the subjective principle of acting, and is made by 
the Subject his own rule, viz., how he wills to act ; whereas, 
on the contrary, the Law of Duty commands objectively, 
viz., how he ought to act. 

The supreme principle of ethics therefore is: Act 
upon a maxim at all times fit for law universal. Every 
maxim repugnant to the above is immoral. 

The law proceeds from will, maxims from choice, which 
in mankind is free."^ Will, with respect singly to the 
relation obtaining betwixt it and the law, is, properly speak- 
ing, neither free nor unfree, for it does not regard actions, 
but the ideal legislation itself, i. e., is itself practical reason. f 
Choice alone is, strictly speaking, free. 

Liberty of choice cannot be explained to be a power of 
adhering to or deserting the law, although, as phenomenon, 
this is often the fact ; we only mean by liberty that negative 
property of our thinking frame not to be determined to act 
by physical excitements. "What it is really, and how free- 
dom positively co-acts the sensory, is beyond the bounds of 

* Eef. 5, from p. 45.— C. 

+ The meaning is, practical reason or pure will is the substratum of 
man's moral nature, i. e., is the ground of the possibility of his freedom 
and independency on every sensitive determinator, and therefore pkee- 
noM is not so much a pbedicate, as a consequence, of will. (Eef. 6, 
from p. 45.— 0.) 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 1 75 

human speculation; and the phenomenal observance or trans- 
gression of the law can never serve to give any insight into 
the nature and essence of a supersensible object.* It is one 
thing to note as true what experience has taught ; another 
to make such experience and observation the principle of a 
definition, and the mark and general criterion by which to 
distinguish free and mechanic choice; for experience and 
observation do not inform us that the mark defined by, neces- 
sarily adheres to the notion, which, however, is essential for 
a sound and unerring criterion. Finally, liberty cogitated 
as an ability of acting on the representation of the law, is 
alone a power, and to swerve from the law is not a power, 
but weakness ; and it is clearly absurd to explain the former 
by the latter, — a power by the want of it. 

A LAW is a proposition enouncing a categorical impera- 
tive. He who commands by law is a lawgiver, and is the 
author of juridical obligation, although not necessarily the 
author of the law itself; for if he is, then it is a positive and 
arbitrary enactment. That law which imposes on us its un- 
conditioned obligation h priori, may be cogitated as emanat- 
ing from the will of a supreme lawgiver, i. e,, of God (to 
whom rights are owed, but of whom no duty can be pre- 
dicated) ; but this is merely the idea of a moral agent, whose 
will is law for all, and does not mean that he is the author 
of the law itself. 

Imputation, in a moral sense, is that judgment whereby 
some one is stated to be the author of an event, which is then 
called his act or deed; and if such judgment is accompanied 
by legal sequents, then the imputation is juxjiciary. If na 
legal effects follow, then the judgment is no more than a 
private judgment, and the imputation is invalid or dijudi- 
catory only. That person who has a title to pronounce j udici- 
ary imputation is called the judge or court (forum, tribunal). 
* Ref. 6, from p. 57 ; and Ret 7, from p. 67.— 0. 



176 Introduction to the Metaphysic of Ethics. 

What any one does over and above wliat lie can be com- 
pelled to, is MERITORIOUS, or of well-desert; what actions do 
no more tban tally with, the legal standard are of debt singly, 
a.nd when they fall short of it are of demerit or ill-desert. 
The LEGAL consequence of demerit or guilt is punishment ; 
that of merit is reward, provided the reward promised in the 
law was the motive inciting to action. Conduct precisely 
exhaustive of what we were indebted to, is unattended by 
^ny judicial effect. Benignity or favour stands in no legal 
relationship to any action. 

The good or evil results consequent on an indebted action, 
likewise the consequences of neglecting a meritorious, cannot 
be imputed to the agent. They may tell upon the actor, but 
cannot be deemed effects of the law. 

The good springing from an action of well-desert, and the 
>evil following on an unjust action, are imputable. 

However, subjectively, the grade of the imputability of an 
action is to be estimated by the magnitude of the obstacles 
overcome. The greater hindrance from without, and the less 
the hindrance to duty from within, so much the higher rises 
the moral honesty and well-deservingness of the act j e,g.^ if 
I rescue from great wretchedness one who is a stranger a-nd 
unknown to me, and that at great personal inconvenience to 
myself. 

Conversely : The less the impediment is from without, and 
the greater the obstacles are within, so much greater is the 
demerit in the scale of guilt. The state of mind, therefore, 
in which a bad action is perpetrated, whether unagitated or 
inflamed, will greatly change the imputation both of the deed 
-and its consequences. 



INTRODUCTION 



THE METAPHYSIC OF LAW. 



SEC. A. — WHAT THE SCIENCE QF LAW IS. 

THE aggregate of those laws which may be externally 
promulgated is law (jus). If really so announced by 
a lawgiver, such legislation becomes real, and composes 
POSITIVE LAW (jus scriptum). He who knows this, is a juris- 
consult; and is even jurisperitus when he can dexterously 
apply the law to occurring cases, — a skill which, if great, 
may even entitle a man to rank among the jurisprudents. 
When, however, we abstract from suoh jurisperitia smdjuris- 
prudentia, what remains is merely the scientific theory of law. 
By THE science of law is meant the systematic knowledge 
of the principles of the law of nature (from which positive 
law takes its rise), which is for ever the same, and carries its 
sure and unchanging obligations over all nations and through- 
out all ages. 

SEC. B. WHAT IS LAW? 

This is a question which may embarrass the lawyer as 
much as the celebrated question, '' What is truth 1 " does 
the logician ; for he must avoid tautology, and give a general 

N 



1 78 Introduction to the 

explanation abstracted from the particular legislation obtain- 
ing in any one country. What the law in any instance is 
{quid sit juris), the jurisconsult can easily tell; but whether 
it is RIGHT or JUST that it should be so, is what he wants a 
criterion to determine. But this criterion can only then be 
found when, abandoning all posteriori principles, he ascends 
to the sources of reason, and discovers on what all legislation 
whatsoever can alone be based; in which analysis positive 
law is doubtless a great help and guide. But laws founded 
singly on experience, are like the mask in the fable, beauti- 
ful, biit hollow. 

The notion of law, in so far as it imports obligation — 
i. 6., annexes the predicate, ^^forhidden^^ or '^ allowed^^ to an 
action — regards, first, the external practical relation of person 
to person, in so far as the actions of one may affect or influ- 
ence another ; second, it does not regard the relation betwixt 
the choice of one and the wishes or wants of another, as in 
deeds of benevolence or severity, but merely respects the rela- 
tionship of choice to choice ; thirdly, in this reciprocal rela- 
tionship of choices, no question is made as to the matter 
chosen. The form of the choice, i. e., the choice considered 
as free, is alone regarded, i. 6., whether the action of one man 
is consistent with, and does not impair, the free choice of 
another. 

Law — the rule of right — is therefore the aggregate of those 
conditions, according to which personal choices may har- 
monize and not destroy one another by being subordinated 
to freedom's law universal. 

SEC. C. — SUPREME PRINCIPLE OF LAW. 

Every action is right and just, the maxim of which allows 
the agents freedom of choice to harmonize with the freedom of 
every other, according to a universal law. 



Metaphysic of Law. 1 79 

If, therefore, my deportment, or, generally, my condition, 
is not inconsistent with the universal freedom of every other 
person, he does me a wrong who hinders such state, or ob- 
structs my actions ; for such obstruction is inconsistent with 
a universal law of liberty. 

From this it follows, that no one is legally entitled to 
demand that I make this principle of universal legality the 
maxim or spring of my conduct. Another's freedom may be 
indifferent to me, — nay, I may wish to evade it; but so long 
as I do it not, I am juridically just. That justice should be 
itself my maxim, belongs to the second part of Ethics. 

The law or universal rule of right is, So act that the use of 
thy freedom may not circumscribe the freedom of any other (i, e., 
if thy act or maxim were made imperative on all), — a law 
imposing no doubt obligation, but which does not exact the 
determination of choice by the contemplation of the obliga- 
tion. Reason singly announces, that it in idea so limits free- 
dom, and that others may in real fact and event co-act such 
limitation; and this it announces as a postulate incapable of 
further proof. As we here treat not of offices of virtue, but 
explain what is just and right, it is impossible to represent 
this law as the spring moving us to action. 

SEC. D. — LAW CARRIES WITH IT A TITLE OF CO-ACTlOISr. 

An obstacle opposed to that which hinders an effect, ad- 
vances that effect, and tends to that end. But everything 
unjust is a hindrance to freedom, according to law universal. 
Again, co-action is a hindrance put upon freedom. There- 
fore, if a certain use of freedom is a hindrance to freedom 
universal, i. e., unjust and wrong, then co-action preventing 
such misuse of freedom goes to establish freedom according 
to a universal law, i.e., is just or right; and consequently law 
has in itself a right to co-act him who attempts to violate it. 



i8o Introduction to the 

SEC. E. — LAW MAY LIKEWISE BE STRICTLY DEFINED AS THAT BY 
WHICH MUTUAL CO-ACTION IS MADE CONSISTENT WITH UNI- 
VERSAL FREEDOM. 

The purport of this sentence is, that Law is not to be re- 
garded as made up of two parts, the one obligation, the other 
a title to co-act ; but that the very notion of law consists in 
that of the possibility of combining universal mutual co- 
action with every person's freedom. 

For since law respects that only which is external and 
phenomenal in an action, strict law, i. e,, law in which no 
ethical consideration is introduced, can require no internal, 
bnt merely external, determinators of choice, even although 
co-action be required to do so. All law whatever rests, it is 
true, on the consciousness of obligation under the moral law 
itself ; but pure or strict law, in the sense now taken, does 
not expect that this consciousness should be the spring of 
conduct; but supports itself as a legislation for external 
actions, on its principle of co-action. When, therefore, it is 
said a creditor is entitled to demand payment from his debtor, 
that never implies that he may represent to the latter that 
his own reason imposes that obligation ; but it signifies that 
external co-action physically forcing the payment of debt con- 
sists with universal freedom, and so even with the debtor's. 
This position of reciprocal action and co-action throughout 
the- whole system of Intelligents, gives, if I may so speak, a 
lively image of the notion Law in a sensible figure a priori, 
and carries us by analogy to the law of action a,nd reaction 
in the communicating of external motion ; and as by virtue 
of it the quantity of motion remained undiminished, so here, 
by virtue of this reciprocal co-active mechanism, the quantum 
OP PERSONAL FREEDOM is preserved undiminished throughout 
the system, in the intercourse and exchange of man with 
miin. 



Metaphysic of Law. 1 8 1 

Again, as in the Mathematics, the truths of that science 
are not deduced from the naked notion, but by help of the 
configurations of space answering to the given notion ; so it 
is not so much the notion Law, as that equal and mutual co- 
action corresponding to the idea, by means of which a deduc- 
tion, and, as I may say, delineation of its truths are possible 
(^. e., the propositions are not taken from the originary moral 
idea of the law, but from this subjected mechanism). (Beck. 
Com. 107.) And because to this dynamic notion co- action 
three corresponds a formal one, taken, from the Mathematics 
previously spoken of, it comes to pass, that what is right 
is cogitated, and spoken of as we do of right lines, where 
^^ right" the rectilineal, are opposed to ^^ curves'*'' and oblique 
lines. That kind of rightness which is opposed to " curve" 
is that inward property of a line, whereby it is the only one 
possible betwixt two points ; and that rightness opposed to 
obliquity takes place where, betwixt two intersecting seg- 
ments, one only perpendicular can be drawn, inclining to 
neither segment, but dividing equally the enclosed space. 

In like manner, law insists that there be rigidly and equally 
given to every man his own ; a mathematical precision not 
exigible in the offices of virtue, these last often admitting a 
certain latitude of application. However^ without wandering 
into the domain of Ethics, there are two cases demanding 
solution, but which no (Edipus seems willing to resolve, and 
look as if they belonged to the " Intermundia " of Epicurus. 
Such two stumblingblocks^ must forthwith be removed from 
the domain of jurisprudence proper, lest their uncertainties 
should be imagined to have any common part with the firm 
and stable principles of law. 

1 Viz. , Equity and Necessity. 



1 82 Introduction to the 

APPENDIX TO THE INTEODUCTION. 



OF LAW EQUIVOCAL. 

Law, strictly so called, always implies the power to co-act. 
But people have fancied to themselves law in some broader 
sense, where the title to co-act is indefinite, and quite inde- 
terminable. Of this kind there have been usurped two 
sorts, EQUITY and necessity : the former is alleged to be a 
law which has no co-action, but the latter is a co-action 
(necessity) which has no law ; and the difficulty springs from 
this, that they are cases of opaque law, to decide which, no* 
judge can be constituted. 

I. EQUITY. 

Equity, considered in itself, does not in any wise address 
itself to the ethical duty of another ; for he who vindicates 
his property on this head, stands upon his own right ; but 
he is unable to assign the data which would empower the 
judge to decide his cause : for example, a servant who has 
contracted with his superior for a certain hire, may, at the 
expiry of his service, come to receive wages in coin greatly 
depreciated, though nominally the same in value ; and the 
same would occur in loans, or in any other money contract, 
where the debtor holds himself entitled to exact payment 
higher in proportion to the depreciation of the currency \ 
but he has no claim in law, and sees himself forced to call 
on EQUITY for aid, a mute goddess, who returns no response : 
and unless parties have guarded against contingencies by the 
specific stipulations of their contract, a judge can give no 
relief, for he cannot pronounce sentence upon vague and 
indefinite conditions. 

Hence it follows, that a court of equity (in a question 
about the rights of man) is a contradiction and absurdity 



Metaphysic of Law, 183 

There alone, where the proper rights of the judge are in- 
volved, ought he to give ear to the dictates of equity. Thus 
the Crown may equitably take upon itself the losses sustained 
hy others on its behalf, and ought, when called upon to do 
so, to idemnify the subject ; although, in point of law, the 
Crown might urge that the subject had, at his own risk 
singly, undertaken its defence. 

The motto of equity is, Summum jus summa injuria^ ex- 
treme law is extreme injustice; but this inconvenience cannot 
be remedied by law, although the claim is a claim of right. 
The other part of Ethic alone teaches, to deem the rights of 
man sacred and inviolable. 

II. NECESSITY. 

This alleged right is that title which a man is supposed to 
have, of killing another who has done him no harm, pro- 
vidid he cannot otherwise extricate himself from danger. 
And here it seems that law is repugnant to itself. For this 
is not the case of an assassin whom I am allowed to antici- 
pate, by consigning him to death ; but of alleged violence 
which I am entitled to use against another from whom I 
have received no wrong. 

This assertion, it is plain, does not refer to any given law, 
but respects the sentence which judges must pronounce when 
such a case of necessity is carried before them ; for there can 
be no law adjudging death to him who in a case of shipwreck 
knocks another from an oar, which is barely sufficient to save 
himself. The punishment threatened by the law cannot be 
made higher than the loss of life, already impending over 
him. A statute can, therefore, have no effect in such a 
crisis j for the punishment being uncertain, cannot outweigh 
the dread of death, which is instant and certain. The law 
sees itself in this way forced to consider violent self-preser- 
vation, not as devoid of blame, but as incapable of being 



184 Introduction to the 

punished. And this impunity, resulting entirely from the 
accidental nature of the case, has been constantly mistaken 
by jurists for an impunity founded in the nature of the law 
itself, i. 6., the action has been regarded as just and blameless. 
The motto of necessity is, Necessity has no law. However, 
there never can be any case, making the unjust and wrong 
justifiable before the law. 

GENEEAL DIVISION OF JUEISPEUDENCE. 

A. — DIVISION OF JURIDICAL OFFICES. 

In this division we may follow Ulpian, by slightly modi- 
fying our understanding of his legal formulce^ — a meaning 
l)erhaps darkly present to his own mind, and which can be 
evolved from them with great ease and elegance. 

1. HoNESTE VIVE — (he an honest man) — Juridical honesty 
or uprightness consists in upholding one's personal worth, as 
a man, against all others, — an obligation capable of being 
expressed by the following formula : — " Suffer thyself not to 
hecom^e the hare mean of others ; and if thou serve them., he also 
their end.''^ This obligation is afterwards explained, as founded 
on the rights of humanity in a man's own person — (lex justi). 

2. I^^EMINEM L^DE — (do no man wrong) — even though as 
a consequence thou musb abandon all connections with 
others, and go out of society — (lex juridica). 

3. SuuM cuiQUE TRiBUE— (^^'-ye each man his own). — 
Understood literally, these words are void of meaning, for 
that cannot be given to another which he already has. 
The formula can therefore alone signify. Enter with thy 
fellow-men into that state— society — ^where each man's own 
is defended from the violence of his neighbour — (lex justitise). 

These three classical formulae make up one entire division 
of the principles of law, and found a division of juridical 
obligation into internal — external — and that composite obli- 



Metaphysic of Law, 185 

gation, which is constituted by subsuming the second under 
the principle of the first. 

B. — DIVISION OF RIGHTS. 

A SYSTEM OF RIGHTS is Called LAW, and is either natural, 
or STATUTABLE AND POSITIVE. In the first case, law rests 
entirely on pure principles a "priori ; in the latter, it is con- 
sidered as based on the will of a lawgiver. 

2. KiGHT is the ethical faculty or title of obliging another, 
and is the legal ground on which the latter sort of law is 
based ; and of such right there are two kinds, originary and 
DERIVED : the first is that birthright of man which subsists 
independently of any legal act ; the second is that which is 
ACQUIRED to him by such an act. 

The congenital mine and thine may be also called the 
INWARD or intrinsic right, for external right must always 
be acquired. 

There is but one Birthright, Freedom, 

Freedom is the alone unoriginated birthright of man, 
and belongs to him by force of his humanity ; and is inde - 
pendence on the will and co-action of every other in so far 
as this consists with every other person's freedom. Subor- 
dinate to this supreme idea, and included under it, are the 
rights, — 1. of Equality, i. e., the title not to be held bound 
to others beyond what they are in their turn bound to ; con- 
sequently the right of every one to be His own master (sui 
juris) : 2. The right to be regarded as legally innocent and 
guiltless, in so far as no one has been injured by his use 
of his freedom : 3. Lastly, the right to do to every man 
whatever implies nothing derogatory to that other's rights, 
as, for example, to exchange one's ideas and opinions with 
another, to tell or promise somewhat, and that whether true 
or untrue, whether sincerely or insincerely ; for it is the pro- 



1 86 Introdttction to the Metaphysic of Law. 

viiice of the other to believe or discredit what is said — to 
accept or decline what is promised.* The reason why this 
division, breaking up the conception Freedom into its sub- 
ordinate parts, has obtained among systems of natural law, 
is this, that when a question arises as to any derived right, 
and the question arises on whom the burden lies to prove 
either the fact, or to establish the law of his case, the party 
who declines the obligation, and asserts it to be with the 
other, does in fact appeal to his birthright, and so declares, 
that to impute to him an obligation to prove, is inconsistent 
with some part or other {e. g.^, equality, innocence) of his 
character freedom ; and this may be carried through all the 
different relations into which freedom can specifically enter. 
Further, because this birthright is one and indivisible, the 
division of rights consists of two members of most unequal 
dimensions ; and therefore this right is discussed now in the 
introduction, and the subdivisions of natural law restrained 
to the external rights of mine and thine. 

FUNDAMENTAL DIVISION OF THE METAPHYSIC 
OF ETHICS. 

I. All obligatious incumbent on man to fulfil, are either 
juridical, for which outward laws are admissible to co-act 

* To utter a deliberate untruth is in common speech called lying or 
falsehood ; for it may injure the person to whom it is told, if he good- 
naturedly repeat it, and so render himself the laughing-stock of others. 
But, juridically, that alone is falsehood which directly violates the 
rights of man, e. g., the false narrative of a contract, instituted for the 
purpose of attaching the property of another. Nor is this distinction 
between these two kindred conceptions ill-founded ; for, in any state-^ 
ment made by one man to another, it is entirely at the option of this 
last what weight he will give to what he hears. And yet, to say of any 
one that he is a man not to be believed, borders so near on the charge 
that he is a liar, that the line marking out what falls within the domain 
of law and what within that of ethics, is all but imperceptible. 



Metapkysic of Ethics, 1 8 7 

their observance, or ethical, where no such legislation is con- 
ceivable; and these ethical offices cannot fall under any 
outward co-active legislation, because such offices depend on 
certain ends and designs which it is the imperative duty of 
man to propose to himself. But no outward compulsion can 
give any person certain intentions, for these depend on 
himself alone; for even though outward actions can be 
extorted, tending to that end, still the subject himself may 
be disinclined to it. 

II. Man, as a subject of obligation, is considered singly 
with reference to his freedom, which is supersensible, that 
is, his humanity, in which consists his personality, exempting 
him from every phenomenal determinator (liomo noumenon)^ 
and requires to be contradistinguished from himself, as the 
same person subjected to the conditions of time and space 
{homo phenomenon) ', and these, when applied to those two 
kinds of offices, resting on the notions right and end, give 
birth to the following division of all moral science, and is a 
division founded on the relations subsisting betwixt the law 
and the matter of obligation. 

Offices of perfect or determinate obligation. 

f 

I. II. 

The rights of humanity ) Juridical ( ^, . , , 

, \ OK \ The rights of man. 

m a man s own person. ) omces. ( ^ 



h' 



o 



III. IV. 

The ends of humanity ) Ethical ( The ends of other 
in one's own person. ( offices. ( men. 



Offices of indeterminate obligation. 



1 88 Fundamental Division of the 

Besides the above division, the subjects mutually obliging 
one another may stand in different relations, and these 
relationships would afford the ground-plan of another 
division, according to the relation betwixt the obliger and 
the obliged. 



The legal relation betwixt man 
and beings possessed neither of 
rights nor obligations. 



The legal relation of man to 
beings possessed both of rights 
and subjected to obligation. 



VACAT. 

For these are irrational beings, 
devoid of power to oblige, and 
towards whom no obligation can 
be constituted. 



ADEST. 

For that is a relation betwixt 
man and man. 



The relation betwixt man and 
that being who has rights, but 
is subjected to no duties. 



The legal relation subsisting 
betwixt man and beings sub- 
jected to obligations, but devoid 
of rights. 

VACAT. VACAT. 

For these would be men devoid In a system of pure philoso- 
of personality (slaves). phy ; for such a being is no ob- 

ject of possible experience. 



Division of Ethic as a general System of Human Offices 
or Duties. 



Elementology. 



Methodology. 



Juridical offices. 



Ethical offices. 



Didactics. 



Ascetics. 



Private 
law. 



Public 
law. 



Where we have exhibited at once the materials and the 
architectonic form of the science. 



Metaphysic of Ethics, 189 

The law of nature ought not to be divided, as is often 
done, into natural and social, but into natural and civil 
OR MUNICIPAL : the first is called private, the second public 
law ; for to the state of nature, not social institutions, but 
the civil or municipal, are to be opposed. In the state of 
nature, society need not be awanting, but only that civil 
society, securing by public institutions the rights of man ; 
and that is the reason why the natural is called private 
law (jus privatum) ."^^ 

* After this follows a course of theoebtic law, which omitting, we 
arrive at ethics or moeals strictly so called. — Tr. 



BOOK IV. 



THE METAPHYSICAL ELEMENTS 



DOCTRINE OF VIRTUE. 



BOOK IV. 

THE METAPHYSICAL ELEMENTS OE THE 
DOCTEmE OE YIETUE. 



IJSTTEODUCTIOK 

ETHICS signified of old tlie whole of Moral Philosophy in 
general, and this was also called the system of the offices 
(de officiis). But in modern times the name Ethics came to 
be confined to that part of Moral Philosophy which treats of 
duties not cognisable by an external and positive legislation. 
Whence it has come that the general system of the offices 
falls into Jurisprudence, treating of law external ; and into 
Moral Philosophy, which is independent on any outward 
legislation. 

I. — ^EXPOSITION OF THE NOTION " VIRTUE." 

The notion Duty implies, in the very essence of it, the 
further notion ISTecessitation, i. e., co-action exercised by 
the law upon the choice ; and this co-action may be either 
foreign or proper (self-command). The ethical imperative 
announced, by its categorical behest (an absolutely uncondi- 
tioned shall), this co-action, which, however, cannot be ex- 
tended to all Intelligents whatsoever (for of these some may 
be *' holy ") ; but is valid for mankind only, as physical beings 
endowed with reason, who are unholy '"' enough to be seduced 

* And yet man, as a moral being, does, when he considers himself ob- 
jectively, and beholds in an intellectual apprehension the destiny whither- 

O 



194 On the Notion Virtue, 

into tlie transgression of the law, even while they recognise 
and acknowledge its authority, and, when they do obey it, 
obey unwillingly (i. e., by withstanding inclination); in which 
point indeed self co-action properly consists. But since man 
is at the same time a free (moral) agent, the notion " duty " 
can involve no more than self-co-action (i. e., by the naked 
representation of the law), at least when regard is had to the 
inward mobile of the will ; for, if the case were otherwise, it 
would be impossible to reconcile any such co-action with 
man's liberty of choice. But where the constraint is inward, 
the notion "duty" comes within the sphere of morals. 

The instincts of man's physical nature give birth to ob- 
stacles which hinder and impede him in the execution of his 
duty. They are in fact mighty opposing forces, which he 
has to go forth and encounter : these he must deem himself 
able to overcome by his reason, and that not at some future 
period, but even now, — not bit by bit, but to beat all down at 
one single blow. He must judge that he can do, what things 
soever the law ordains that he ought and should. 

But the consciousness of the power, and the predeterminate 
resolve, to withstand a strong and unjust enemy, is valour ; 
and, in regard of that which opposes the advancement of the 
moral sentiments within us, moeal valour, i. e., virtue. 

ward his reason calls him, deem himself enough holy, to violate his law 
only imwillingly and with compunction : nor can there exist any one so 
irrecoverably far gone and decayed in ethical apostasy, as not to feel, in 
any instance of transgression, an inward warfare and self-dislike, against 
which he is compelled to struggle. This phenomenon, that mankind 
should at this conjuncture (where the fable represents Hercules be- 
twixt Virtue and Voluptuousness) give ear rather to his appetites than 
to the law, is quite inexplicable ; for we can explain events only by as- 
signing a cause agreeably to the laws regulating the mechanism of the 
physical system ; and were we to do so here, then were the will not free. 
Whereas it is just this double and contrary self co-action, and its inev- 
ITABILITT, that first of all reveals to mankind that amazing quality of 
his nature, moral freedom. 



On the Notion Virtue. 195 

Whence it has resulted, that the general system of the offices 
is^ in that part which brings not the outward but the inward 
freedom under control, a doctrine or theory of virtue. 

Jurisprudence treated singly of the formal conditions of 
man's outward freedom (viz., that freedom should remain 
consistent with itself, in the event of its maxims being 
elevated to the rank of law universal), i. e., it investigated Law 
only. But Ethic presents matter to man's free choice, an end 
given by pure reason for him to aim at, and which is repre- 
sented as an objectively-necessary end, and so, consequently, 
as a " duty." For since the appetites and instincts of the 
sensory mislead the will to ends subversive of morality, legis- 
lative reason can in no other manner guard against their 
inroad, than by presenting to the will an opposite and contrary 
and moral end, given independently of the sensory, and so 
a priori.'^ 

An end is the object of the choice of a reasonable being ; 
hj the representation of which, the Intelligent is determined 
to an act tending to olbtain and realize such object. Now, it 
is undoubted that I may be forced to act so as to be merely 
an instrument towards some ulterior and foreign end j but I 
never can in any event be constrained to propose to myself 
my end. I alone can assign and ^^ to myself the, end I will 
to aim at. But, on the hypothesis that I stand under an 
obligation to constitute, as my end, somewhat presented by 
reason to my intellectual regards, that is, that I ought, over 
and above the formal determination of will (treated of in law), 
to superadd' to it a material determinator, i. e., an end, con- 
trary and opposed to the ends brought forth by sensitive 
excitement ; then there emerges the notion of an end, which 
is in itself a ground of duty; and the doctrine of such an end 
cannot fall under the sphere of law, but it belongs to morals, 
which alone involve in their very notion that of self-co-action, 
according to ethic laws. 

* Ref . 4, from p. 40.— 0. 



196 On the Notion Virtue, 

Upoii this account Ethics may, in this part, be defined to 
be THE SYSTEM OF THE ENDS of pure practical reason. Physi- 
cal co-action and self-co-action mark or determine the boun- 
dary obtaining betwixt Law and Morals, the fcwo grand stems 
of the science of Ethics ; and that Ethics must comprehend 
duty, to observe which, no one can be constrained physically 
by others, is just a corollary from the position, that it is a 
doctrine of the ends of reason ; it being absurd to talk of 
force, when question is made of the practical autonomy of 
the agent himself. 

Again, that Ethics is a doctrine of the offices of virtue, 
results from the definition given above of virtue, taken in 
conjunction with that peculiar obligation, the nature of which 
has just been stated. In fact, there is no other determina- 
tion of will, except the determination and design to adopt an 
end, which carries already in the very notion of it, that the 
person cannot be co-acted to it physically by the will of 
another. No doubt another person may force me to do what 
is contrary to my own design, and such deed may be a mere 
mean or instrumental toward gaining the ends of that other 
person ; but this he cannot force me to, that I should make 
his ends my own ; and it is clear that no end can be mine, 
unless I make it so by proposing it to myself. Indeed, an 
end imposed by any other would be a contradiction — an act 
of freedom devoid of liberty : but there is no contradiction 
in designing an end, to have which end is the person's duty ; 
for here I co-act myself, and this is quite consistent with 
my freedom. 

But now the question arises, How is such an end pos- 
sible*? for the logical possibility of the notion of a thing 
is insufficient to enable us to conclude upon the objective 
reality of the thing itself.^ 

* This principle carries the refutation of much of the later G-erman 
speculation, closely connected with the system of Kant. — C. 



An End which is at the same time a Duty, 197 

II. — EXPOSITION OF THE NOTION OF AN END WHICH IS AT 
THE SAME TIME A DUTY. 

The RELATION OF AN END TO DUTY may be cogitated in a 
twofold manner, — either beginning witb tbe end to assign ^ 
the maxim of actions in barmony with duty, or beginning 
with, the maxim to determine that end, which it is a duty 
incumbent on mankind to propose to himself. Jurispru- 
dence advances by the first method. Every one is free to 
give his actions what end he will, but the principle regulating 
the causality of the will is fixed a priori, viz., that the free- 
dom of the agent must be exercised in such a manner as to 
consist with the freedom of every other person, conformably 
to law universal. 

But Moral Philosophy strikes into an opposite march : here 
we cannot commence with the ends man may design, and from 
them determine and statute^ the maxims he has to take, ^.e., 
statute the duty he has to follow ; for in this latter event the 
grounds of his maxims would be experimental, which we 
know beget no obligation, the idea Duty and its categorical 
imperative taking their rise in pure reason only. Nor could 
we indeed even talk of duty, were the will's inward princi- 
ples based on tentative and experimental ends, these being 
all selfish and egotistical. In this branch of Ethics, then, the 
idea Obligation must guide to ends which we ought to aim. 
a-t, and constitute maxims pointing to those ends conform- 
ably to ethic laws. 

Postponing for the present the investigation into what these 
ends are which man ought to propose to himself, and how such 
ends come to be possible, we must remark, that a material 
duty of this kind is called a moral duty or virtuous office ; 
and it may be requisite to state upon what accounts it is so. 

To EVERY DUTY THERE CORRESPONDS A RIGHT, considered 

as a TITLE in general ] but every duty does not import that 



igS Of an End which is 

the other has a right (a legal title) juridically to co-act the 
execution of duty from the obliged ; but where duties are 
coercible, they are, strictly speaking, legal duties (duty-in- 
law)^ Exactly in the same way, to every obligation there 
corresponds the notion Virtue ; but every ethic duty is not 
upon that account one of the offices of virtue : that obliga- 
tion, for instance, is not, which abstracts from all given 
ends, and regards the bare formal of the will's determina- 
tion, viz., that the incumbent action be performed out of 
regard had to duty. It is only in the case where an action 
is at once both an end and a duty, that a virtuous office can 
be constituted : of this latter sort there may be several, and 
so diiFerent virtues ; whereas of the former, as there can be 
but one ethical obligement, so only one duty, i. 6., one 
virtuous sentiment extending to all actions, of whatever kind. 
Further, another essential distinction obtaining betwixt 
juridical and moral obligement s is, that the former are 
coercible, whereas the latter depend singly upon free self-co- 
action. Further, for finite holy beings (incapable of being 
tempted to swerve from duty), there can be no Doctrine of 
Virtue, but a Science of Ethics singly, which is an autonomy 
of practical reason ; whereas a system of virtues treats not 
only of the autonomy, but also, at the same time, of the 
AUTOKRATY OF THE WILL, ^. 6., is a doctrine of the force reason 
has to vanquish and beat down all the appetites which oppose 
the execution of the law. A force not, indeed, immediately 
given in an intuition, but rightly inferred from the categorical 
imperative. Whence it results, that man's morality is, at 
ITS highest grade, nothing more than virtue, even ad- 
mitting that such morality were altogether pure {L e., separ- 
ated thoroughly from every admixture of foreign springs) ; 
a state and tone of soul which fancy has impersonated in the 
character of the sage, an ideal whitherwards mankind ought 
in unremitting progression to advance. 



at the same time a Dttty. 199 

ITOR CAN VIRTUE BE EXPLAINED TO BE A HABIT, aS CocHuS 

has done in his prize essay, where he treats of it as an apti- 
tude in morally good actions, acquired by long-continued 
custom ; for when such use and wont is not effectuated by 
stable, firm, and ever more and more clarified first principles, 
then is the habitude — ^like any other mechanism brought 
about by technical reason — neither fortified against all assail- 
ants, nor has it any guard against the sudden fits and starts 
new enticements and unforeseen circumstances may occasion. 
Remark. — Yirtue=-f c«, is opposed to non- virtue (moral 
weakness) = 0, as its logical antipart ; but to vice=-<^, as its 
real antagonist. And it is a question not only devoid of 
meaning, but even offensive, to inquire if great crimes may 
not demand and display more strength of soul than even 
great virtues; for by strength of soul we understand the 
steadfastness of man's will, as a being endowed with freedom, 
i.e., in so far as he is in a healthy state of intellect, and 
retains his command over himself. Great crimes are on the 
contrary paroxysms, at whose aspect the sane part of man- 
kind stand aghast. In fine, this sort of question may be 
compared to the question, whether a person may not have 
greater physical power in a fit of frenzy than when in his 
right wits ; and this question may be answered in the affirma- 
tive, without allowing him upon that account to be possessed 
of greater strength of soul : for as crimes take their rise from 
the inverted domination of the passions and appetites over 
reason, where no strength of soul is at all conceivable, this 
question is like asking if a man in a fever may not exhibit 
more strength than when in health, which may unhesitatingly 
be denied, because the want of health, which last consists in 
the due equilibrium and adjustment of all a man's bodily 
powers, is a weakening of the system of his forces, according 
to which system only it is, however, that we can state any 
estimate of his absolute health. 



200 Why some Ends are Duties. 

III. — OF THE GKOUND UPON WHICH MAN REPRESENTS TO HIM- 
SELF AN END WHICH IS AT THE SAME TIME A DUTY. 

End IS AN OBJECT OF FREE CHOICE, wMcli determines itself 
by the representation of this object to an action whereby this 
end is brought forth. Every action has consequently its own 
end ; and since no one can design an end except by himself 
constituting the object chosen his end, it results that man's 
aiming at any particular end is an act of his own freedom, 
and no effect operated by constitutional mechanism of his 
system. But because an act fixing an end is a practical 
principle, ordaining not a means (which were a hypothetical 
commandment), but the end itself (^. e., unconditionally), it 
follows that there is a categorical imperative of pure practical 
reason, connecting the idea Duty with that of an End in 
general. 

That there must be such an end, and a categorical impera- 
tive corresponding to it, is apparent from this, that where 
there are free actions, there must also be ends, whitherwards 
they tend, as their object ; and among these ends, there must 
be some, whereof it is of the very essence to be duties. For 
were none such given, then, because no action can be aimless, 
would every end be only valid in the eye of reason as a 
means instrumental and conducive towards some further end, 
and a categorical imperative would be impossible ; a position 
which would overthrow all Ethics. 

Accordingly we do not here treat of ends which mankind 
proposes to himself by force of the physical instincts of his 
system, but of such ends as he ought to aim at. The former 
might be found a technical (subjective) doctrine of ends, and 
would contain the dictates of prudence in choosing one's 
ends ; but the latter must be called the ethical (objective) 
doctrine of ends, — a distinction which we do not insist upon, 
because the science of ethics is in its very notion contradis- 



What Ends are Dttties, 201 

tinguislied from anthropology, the latter rising upon experi- 
mental principles, the former again, ^. e., the ethical doctrine 
of ends, treating of duties founded upon a 'priori principles of 
pure practical reason. 

IV. — WHAT ENDS THEY ARE, THE VERY ESSENCE WHERE OFIT 
IS TO BE DUTIES. 

Such ends are one's own perfection, — our neighbour's 

HAPPINESS. 

These ends cannot be inverted, and we cannot state as 
such, — one's own happiness, — our neighbour's perfection. 

For his own happiness is an end which all mankind has 
by force of the physical constitution of his system ; conse- 
quently this end cannot be regarded as a duty, without stating 
a contradiction. What every one inevitably wills, cannot 
fall under the notion duty, — duty importing necessitation 
to an end unwillingly adopted. So that it is a contradiction 
to say a man is obliged to advance his own happiness with 
all his might. 

And there is the like contradiction in saying that we ought 
to design the perfection of another, and to hold ourselves 
obliged to further it ; for the perfectness of another, when 
considered as a person, consists in this, that he can impose 
upon himself his own end, agreeably to his own understand- 
ing of his duty; and it is a repugnancy to impose on me, 
as a duty, the doing that which singly the other person can 
accomplish. 

v.— explanation of these two notions. 

(a.) On^s own Perfection, 

The word perfection is open to many an interpretation. 
Thus, when used in ontology, perfection denotes the totality 



202 What Ends are Duties, 

of the multifarious, which, taken together, do in the aggre- 
gate compose one thing. Then, again, when used in tele- 
ology, ifc is so understood as to signify the exact proportion- 
ATENESS OF MEANS TO ENDS. Perfection, taken in the first 
sense, might be called quantitative, in the second qualita- 
tive {formal). The material and quantitative perfection is 
one only (for the total of the parts of anywhat is one whole) ; 
but of the formal there may be many sorts in the same thing, 
and it is of this last alone that we here treat. 

When it is said that the perfecting of his nature is an 
end which it is man's duty to propose to himself, this per- 
fection must be placed in that which is the effect of his 
OWN ACTIVITY, not any gift of nature, upon which account 
this duty can be nothing else than the culture of his natural 
faculties, the principal whereof is the understanding, as the 
power of dealing with notions and ideas, — among others, 
with the ideas of duty; and then, next, of his will to dis- 
charge all his duty. 

It is, then, a duty incumbent upon mankind, — 

I. To develop himself more and more from the animal char- 
acters stamped upon him by his brute nature, and to advance 
and evolve his humanity, which alone renders him capable 
of designing anywhat as his end. He ought to strip off his 
ignorance, by learning to correct and renounce his errors ; 
and this is not a counsel given him by technically practical 
reason, but ethico-active reason ordains it uncondition- 
ally, in order that he may be worthy of the humanity he 
represents. 

II. To clarify, and to carry the culture of his will to the 
purest grade of ethic sentiment, a state and tone of soul 
where the law itself is the immediate mobile of the will, and 
where duty is discharged because it is so. And this state 
and tone of soul is an inward ethical perfection, and is called 
THE MORAL SENSE, because it is a feeling of the effect wrought 



What Ends are Duties. 203 

by legislative reason upon man's active power of conforming 
to the law. And although this feeling has been too often 
fanatically abused, as if it were a peculiar emotion astir in 
the mind antecedently to reason, and able (like the genius 
of Socrates) to dispense with her tardy determinations, it is 
notwithstanding an ethical accomplishment, enabling man- 
kind to make every end his own, when that end is also 
his duty. 

(6.) My Neighbour's Happiness, 

Happiness, i, e., contentment and satisfaction with one's 
external lot, in so far as its permanence is secured, is the 
inevitable desire and wish of every human nature; but it 
is not upon that account an end affording the groundwork 
of any duty. Again, since a distinction has been made by 
some, betwixt what they term physical and moral happiness, 
whereof the former is stated to consist in man's enjoyment 
and acquiescence in the goods and bounties bestowed on him, 
in free gift, by nature, but the latter in his own self-content- 
ment and acquiescence in his own ethical deportment, it is 
needful for me to remark (omitting all censure of the misuse 
of such terms, which enclose a contradiction) that the latter 
kind of state belongs to the other head, that of perfection ; 
for he who is to be happy in the bare consciousness of his 
honesty, possesses that very perfection treated of in the 
former title, as that end which it was man's duty to pursue. 

That happiness, then, which it is my end and my duty to 
further, can be the happiness of another singly, whose ends 
AND INTERESTS I OUGHT TO MAKE MY OWN. "What others may 
deem most conducive to their interests and happiness, rests 
upon their determination ; it stands, however, always at my 
option to decline the pursuit of ends others would willingly 
obtain, if I hold them hurtful and pernicious. But to resist 
or evade this virtuous office of beneficence, by alleging a 



204 Moral Dtcty is of 

pretended obligation incumbent on me to studj my own 
physical happiness, is in plain fact just to convert my private 
and subjective end into an objective one ; and yet such, pre- 
tended obligation has repeatedly been urged as an objection 
to the foregoing division of duties (No. TV.) : the objection 
is merely plausible and apparent, and the following remark 
may serve to clear the matter up. . 

Grief, poverty, want, and pain, are unquestionably mighty 
temptations to the transgression of one's duty ; and hence it 
seems as if wealth, streng-th, health, which keep out the 
inroad of the first, were ends incumbent on mankind to 
pursue, i. e., it looks very like as if it were his duty to ad- 
vance and study his own interests as much as those of others. 
But what is overlooked is this, that in such event a man's 
general welfare is not the end aimed at, but is no more than 
a means allowed as instrumental towards removing the 
obstacles which might stand in the way of the person's own 
morality ; and this last it is which is the true and real end 
of his exertions, and must needs be permitted, no one having 
a right to demand that I should sacrifice for him my proper 
end. To acquire wealth is thence directly and in itself no 
duty; but indirectly it may become so, viz., in order to 
guard against poverty, and that wretchedness which might 
come accompanied by vice. But then it is not my happiness, 
but my morality, which, to uphold in its integrity, is at once 
my end and my duty. 

VI.— -MORALS CONTAIN NO LAW FOR ACTIONS (tHAT WERE 
^ jurisprudence), but only for the MAXIMS WHENCE 
ACTIONS TAKE THEIR RISE. 

The notion Duty relates immediately to Law, even when 
I abstract from every end which might become the matter 
of it. This indeed was indicated by the supreme formal 



Indeterminate Obligation, 205 

principle of ethics expressed in the categorical imperative : 
" So act that the maxim of thy conduct might be announced 
as law universal." But in this part of ethics this formula 
denotes the law of thy own special individual will, not the 
law emanating from will in genere ; in which latter case 
there would be room for the will of some other person, and 
the duty resulting from it would be a juridical obligation, 
and so fall [beyond the domain of morals. / In this part of 
ethics the maxims are regarded as such subjective principles 
as are not unfit to be elevated to the rank of law in a system 
of universal moral legislation ; but this gives them only a 
negative character,''^ viz., not to be repugnant to law in 
genere. The question, therefore, is, How can there be a law 
ordaining positive maxims of conduct % 

The notion of an ei^d in itself a duty — peculiar to this 
branch of ethics — is what founds a law commanding maxims 
of conduct, by subordinating the ends which all mankind 
have to the objective ends which all mankind ought to 
have. The imperative, Thou shalt make to thyself, this or 
that, thy end, points to the matter (the object) of choice ; 
and since no free action is possible, where the agent does not 
design by it some end as the object chosen, a maxim tending 
to such end need oiily be fit for law universal ; whereas, if 
that end be in itself a duty, such end-duty would found a 
law ordaining me to adopt the maxim taken from and be- 
longing to it. For man's practical maxims may be adopted 
arbitrarily, and it is always in his option to execute them or 
not, they being no otherwise fettered than by standing under 
the restrictive condition of being fit for law universal, Ithis 
being the formal principle regulating the whole conduct of 

* Duty is a negative conception only, i. e., it expresses that the will 
is limited to the condition of not being repugnant to a potential legisla- 
tion universal ; but since no will can be devoid of ends, the assigning of 
an end a priori, upon grounds of practical reason, is the ordaining of a. 
maxim to act toward such end. — Tr. 



2o6 Moral Duty is of 

life. But a law takes away tlie wliole optional part of action, 
and so differs widely from all expediential dictates, wHcIl 
■counsel what means conduce best to certain ends. 



VII. MORAL DUTY IS OF INDETERMINATE OBLIGATION, BUT THE 

JURIDICAL OFFICES ARE STRICT. 

This position is a corollary from the foregoing (No. YI.); 
for where the law ordains not the action, but its maxim only, 
that implies that it leaves to free choice a latitude in the 
execution of it, that is to say, that the law does not rigidly 
determine how much ought to be done toward the end which 
is our duty, but an indeterminate obligation must not be 
so understood as if it left a space open for exceptions from 
the maxim itself; it means only our title to limit one rule 
of duty by another {e. ^., to^ limit the general social duty by 
the fraternal or filial), which virtually enlarges the field for 
the practical exercise of virtue. The more an obligation is 
extensive, the more indeterminate is the person's obligement 
to act j nevertheless, the more he narrows the maxim of its 
observance, so as to make it approach to the nature of a strict 
and forensic obligation^ the more complete is the virtue of 
his conduct. 

Duties of indeterminate obligation are therfore the 
only offices of virtue. To discharge them is merit := + a/ 
their transgression is not straightway guilt = -a, but simply 
moral unworth = 0. Unless, indeed, the person omitted 
upon system the observance of these duties. Steadfastness of 
purpose in carrying the first of these into action is what is 
properly styled virtue. Weakness in the second is not so 
much vice, as rather non-virtue, %, e., want of moral strength 
(defectus moralis). Every action repugnant to duty is trans- 
gression ) but deliberate transgression, done upon system, is 
that only which properly is to be termed vice. 



Indeterminate Odligatmt. 207 

Altliougli the conformity of a man's actions to the law is 
nothing meritorious, yet to observe one's juridical obligations 
as duties is ; i.e., reverence for the rights of mankind is 
meritorious, for hereby a person makes the rights of man his 
end, and so extends his notion of obligation beyond that of 
mere debt (officium debiti). Another may, in consequence 
of his rights, demand from me actions tallying with the law, 
but he cannot likewise insist that the representation of the 
law should itself be the ground determining my will to action. 
A similar remark holds good of that more general ethic 
precept. Act duteously out of regard had to duty. To engrave 
such a sentiment deep in one's heart, and often to revivify 
its impression, is meritorious, for it goes beyond the mere act 
incumbent to be done, and makes the law itself the spring of 
conduct. 

Upon the same account, those duties must be reckoned as 
of indeterminate obligation, which are observed to be attended 
by an inward ethical reward ; or rather, to bring the parallel 
yet nearer to the case of forensic obligations, — ^followed by a 
susceptibility for such rewards according to the moral law j 
viz., a susceptibility for an ethical complacency, surpassing 
the mere simple self-approbation (which is only negative) 
consequent on the fulfilment of the law ; and this complacency 
it is which is meant when it is said that virtue is by such a 
consciousness her own reward. 

This merit, which a man may have in regard of his kind, 
by advancing their common and known ends, and so making 
their happiness constitute his, may be called a sweet merit, 
and the consciousness of it brings forth an ethical delight, at 
which ecstatic banquet others may even sympathetically feast. 
"Whereas the bitter merit of advancing the true weal of the 
ignorant and unthankful has in general no such reaction, and 
brings forth no more than SELF-APPROBATioisr, although this 
last is in such a case likely to be more pure and more exalted. 



2o8 Moral Duty is of 



VII. — EXPOSITION OF THE MORAL DUTIES AS DUTIES OF 
INDETERMINATE OBLIGATION. 

1. My own Perfection^ as End and Duty. 

A. Physical Perfection, L e., culture of all our faculties 
in general, in order to attain tlie ends presented to us by 
reason. That this is our duty, and an end of our being, and 
that this culture rises on an unconditionate imperative, 
independently of any advantages to wMch. such culture may 
perhaps conduce, may appear from what follows. The ability 
to propose to one's self an end, is the characteristic of 
humanity, and distinguishes it from his brute nature. Along 
with the ends of the humanitj'- subsisting in our person, goes 
hand in hand the rational will, and, together with that, the 
obligation to make one's self well-deserving of mankind by 
general culture, in carrying to higher and higher degrees of 
perfection the powers entrusted to him, i. e., to develop the 
latent energies dormant in the unhewn substratum of his 
nature, whereby the brute animal is first of all changed and 
transformed into the man ; all which is in itself an impera- 
tive duty. 

But this duty is simply moral, i, e., of indeterminate obli- 
gation : how far any one ought to carry the improvement 
and the progression of his faculties, is left undetermined 
by reason. Besides, the difference of occasions and circum- 
stances one may come into, renders quite arbitrary the choice 
of the kind of calling to which he will devote his talent ; so 
that there can be no commandment of reason ordaining given 
actions, but ordaining only a maxim regulative of conduct ; 
the tenor of which principle may be thus conceived : " Evolve 
betimes thy corporeal and mental faculties, that thou mayest 
be fitted for any kind of ends, it being uncertain which of 
them may come one day to be adopted by thee." 



Indeterminate Obligation. 209 

B. Ethical Perfection. The higliest grade of ethical 
perfection possible to be attained by man, is to discharge his 
duty because it is so,— where the law is at once the rule and 
the mobile of the will. Now, at first sight, it seems as if 
this were a strict obligation, and that the supreme principle 
of duty called, not only for the legality, but likewise for 
the morality of every act, and that it must do so with the 
whole rigour and severity of law. But in fact the law con- 
cerns itself only with the maxims of conduct, and ordains 
man to seek the ground of his practical maxims in the law 
itself, not in any sensitive instinct or by-views and ends of 
prejudice and advantage. No individual act, then, is spe- 
cially ordained. Besides, it is impossible for any one so to 
behold or fathom the abysses of his heart as to become fully 
convinced of the purity of his moral intentions, and of his 
sincerity, even in one single act, however clear he may be 
as to its legality. Imbecility, oftener than any other cause, 
deters a man from the hardihood of crime, and so passes with 
him for virtue, which, however, implies a certain grade of 
strength. And how many may there be who have long lived 
lives blameless and unrebukable, who are, after all, only lucky 
in having escaped temptation? How much ethical content may 
belong to any action, cannot be explored even by themselves. 

We inferj then, that the duty of estimating the worth of 
one's actions, not legally simply, but likewise according to 
their morality, is one of indeterminate obligation; that, in 
other words, the law does not ordain any such inward mental 
act, but merely that it ought to be our maxim to endeavour, 
by unremitted assiduity, to make the consciousness of duty 
sufficient by itself to stir the will to action. 

2. My Neighbour's Happiness as End and Duty, 

A. Physical wellbeing. General benevolence may be 
unlimited, for in all this nothing need be done; but the case 



2IO Moral Duty is of Indeterminate Obligation, 

is different when we come to beneficence, more especially 
wlien actions have to be performed, not out of love to others, 
but out of duty, with the mortification and sacrifice of our 
own ends. That this beneficence is duty, results from this, 
\st^ That because our self-love goes inseparably linked hand 
in hand with the appetite to be loved by others, and, in case 
of need, to be assisted by them, — a state of things in which 
we make ourselves the end of others; and, ^nd. That since a 
maxim of this kind can only have ethical virtue to oblige 
the will of others, when it is potentially fitted for law uni- 
versal : it follows that we must state others as the ends of 
our will, in adopting our maxims of practical conduct ; ^. e., 
the happiness of others is an end incumbent on us as a 
duty. r 

It is my duty, then, to yield a part of my wellbeing in 
sacrifice for others, without hoping any indemnity, because 
it is my duty; and it is impossible to assign indefinite bound- 
aries, whither and how far this duty shall extend. Its 
extent will always rest on the peculiar wants of each, and 
these wants and needs each particular must determine for 
himself. Nor can it, in any event, be expected that I 
should abandon my own real happiness and proper needs, in 
order to study that of another; for a maxim containing such 
a rule would be found repugnant to itself, if elevated to the 
rank of law universal. This duty, then, is indeterminate 
only, and there is a latitude of doing more or less towards 
discharging it. The law embraces the maxim only, — it 
cannot be extended to special actions. 

B. The moral welfare of our neighbour is no doubt an 
integral part of his general felicity (prosperity), and it is 
incumbent on us to promote it ; but this obligation begets a 
negative duty only. The compunction a man feels from the 
stings of conscience is, although of ethical origin, yet phy- 
sical in its results, just like grief, fear, and every other sickly 



What Moral Duty is. 211 

iabitude of mind. To take heed, tliat no one fall under his 
own contempt, cannot indeed be my duty, for that exclusively 
is Ms concern. However, I ought to do nothing which I 
know may, from the constitution of our nature, become a 
temptation, seducing others to deeds which conscience may 
afterwards condemn them for. There are, however, no limits 
a^ssignable, within which our care of the moral tranquillity of 
our neighbour is to range; the obligation consequently is in- 
determinate. 

ix. what a moral duty (or virtuous office) is. 

Virtue is the strength of the human will in the 
execution of duty. All strength is ascertained singly by 
the obstacles it is able to overcome. Yirtue has to combat 
against the physical instincts of our system, when these 
thwart and collide with man's ethical resolves. And because 
it is the' person liimself who lays these impediments in the 
way of his own maxims, virtue is not only a self-co-action 
(for then one physical instinct might wage war upon another), 
but a command conducted upon a principle of inward freedom; 
that is, a self- co-action, by force of the naked idea Duty, and 
the law. 

Every duty, of whatever kind, involves the notion of ne- 
cessitation by law; and the moral, that necessitation which 
an inward legislation can alone effect; but the juridical, one 
possible also by an external and foreign legislation. Either 
kind imports the notion of a co-active power, and this co- 
action may be proper or foreign. The ethical force of the for- 
mer is virtue; and the action rising upon such a sentiment 
(reverence for law) may be fitly termed an act of virtue, 
€ven although the law should announce a juridical duty 
only; for morals alone teach to keep inviolate the rights of 
mankind. 



212 What Moral Duty is. 

But that, the practice whereof is virtue, is not upon that 
account one of the offices of virtue — in the proper sense of 
the words — the first referring to the formal of the maxims, 
the second to their matter y that is, to an end which is cogi- 
tated as duty. But because the ethical obligement to ends, 
whereof there may be several, is indefinite, — the law ordain- 
ing a rule of deportment only, — it results that there may be 
(differing with the nature of the legitimate ends they tend to) 
several different duties, which may all be called duties in 
morality, or offices of virtue, because they are subjected to 
voluntary self co-action only, are unsusceptible of coercive 
measures from without, and spring from ends which are in 
themselves duties. 

Yirtue, considered as the wilFs unshaken constancy in 
adhering to the decrees of duty, can, like every formal, be 

ONLY ONE, IDENTIC, AND ALWAYS THE SAME WITH ITSELF; but 

in respect of the incumbent ends of action, i. e., the materials 
ma^n has to work upon, there may be several virtues ; and 
since the obligement to adopt maxims or rules of life, resting 
on such materials, was called a moral duty, or virtuous office, 
it follows that the offices of virtue may be several and 

DISTINCT. 

The supreme principle of this division of Ethics therefore 
is, " Adopt such ends in thy maxims as may be made impera- 
tive on all mankind to design. '^ By force of this principle, 
each man is stated as his own and every other's end ; and it 
is now not enough to abstain from employing them or himself 
as means to his own end, — a case which would leave him 
quite indifferent to his fellows, — but he is beholden to make 
all mankind his end. 

This position in morals admits, being a categorical impera- 
tive, of no proof; but some account may be given of it, i. e., 
a, deduction from the nature of pure practical reason itself. 
What thing soever stands so related to humanity, one's self 



How Law and Morals Differ, 213 

or others, as possibly to be an end, must be declared an end, 
reason being judge, for practical reason is the power of de- 
signing ends j and to assert that reason were indifferent in 
regard of any such, ^. e., to maintain that reason took no inte- 
rest in them, is an absurdity ; for then reason would miss of 
her function in determining the maxims and rules of life, 
which maxims rest always on an end; that is, in other 
words. Would be no practical reason at all. But when pure 
reason announces any end a priori^ it announces at the same 
time that end as a duty incumbent on all mankind ; and this 
is the kind of duty termed a virtuous office or moral duty. 

X. THE SUPREME PRINCIPLE OP LAW WAS ANALYTIC 

THAT OF MoilALS IS SYNTHETIC. 

It was evinced in Law that the outward co-active power, 
so far forth as it withstands whatever would let and hinder 
the mutual freedom of the subject, could be made consistent 
with ends in general; and that this position holds good, 
results from the principle of contradiction. I need not quit 
the idea of Freedom, but need only to evolve the principle 
analytically out of it, while the end each person may propose 
to himself may be what it will: so then the supreme prin- 
ciple of law was analytical. 

On the contrary, the principle of Morals goes out of and 
beyond the notion of external freedom, and conjoins with it, 
conformably to law universal, an end which it constitutes a 
duty; and this principle is synthetic: the possibility of the 
synthesis of the notions contained in it is explored in the 
deduction at the close of No. IX. 

This extension of the notion Duty beyond that of outward 
liberty, and the limiting of this last to the bare formal con- 
dition of constantly harmonizing with every other person's 
freedom, depends upon the fact that here ends are drawn 



214 How Law and Morals Differ. 

into consideration from wliicli Law altogether abstracts, and 
inward freedom, put in room of outward co-action; and the 
power of self-command not by force of other instincts, but 
by force of pure practical reason, which disdains all such 
intermediaries. 

To constitute the juridical imperative, the law, the power 
to execute it, and the will regulating the maxims, were 
the elements required. But whoso prescribes to himself a 
moral duty, has, over and above the notion of his self- 
co-action, the further notion of an end, not which he already 
has, but which he ought to have; which end, therefore, goes 
hand in hand with practical reason, whose last, chief, and 
unconditioned end (which, however, never ceases fco be duty) 
consists in this, that virtue is its own end, and is, by its own 
good desert, its own reward. By all which, virtue so shines, 
that it seems even to eclipse the lustre of holiness itself, 
which cannot so much as be solicited to swerve from the 
law. . This, however, is a deception, and arises in this 
manner, that, owing to our having no standard whereby to 
measure the grades of a strength except the magnitude of tho 
obstacles (in us the appetites and instincts of the sensory) it 
has been able to subdue and overcome, we are led into the 
mistake of holding the subjective conditions, whereby we 
estimate a force, tantamount to the objective grounds of the 
force itself. But when virtue is compared with other human 
ends, each of which may have its own several obstacles to 
overcome, it is quite true that the inward worth of virtue as 
its own end far outweighs the value of all utilitarian and ex- 
perimental ends, which last may notwithstanding go hand in 
hand with it. 

It is quite a correct expression to say that man is under 

AN OBLIGEMENT TO VIRTUE, AS ETHIC STRENGTH; for although 

the power of mastering every opposing excitement of the 
sensory may, and indeed must, be absolutely postulated — the 



^ 



Prerequisites of a Moral Matter e. 215 

TvilFs causality being free — nevertheless tliis power is in its 
strength (rohur) a matter of acquisition, viz., where the force 
of the ethical spring has been advanced by the contemplation 
of the dignity of our pure rational law, and at the same time 
by unremittingly carrying its decrees into execution. 

XI. TABLE OF MORAL DUTIES. 

A table of all moral duties may, agreeably to what has 
been just advanced, be drawn out in the following manner: — 

The matter of moral duty. 

A .- 

I. II. 

My own end, which is like- Other's ends, to advance 

wise my duty. which is my duty. 

(The perfecting of my na- (My neighbour's happiness.) 
ture.) 

III. lY. 

The law, which is likewise The end, which is the deter- 
the motile of action. minator of the will to act. 

Whereon depends all the Whereon depends all the 
morality legality 

Of all free determination of will. 

v .^ , y 

The formal of duty. 

Xli. PREREQUISITES TOWARDS CONSTITUTING MAN A MORAL 

AGENT. 

There are such ethical predispositions, that where a man 
has them not, neither can he be obliged to acquire them. 
These are— (1) the moral sense; (2) conscience; (3) love of 
our neighbour; and (4) reverence for one's self. There can 
exist no obligation to endeavour to acquire these, because 
they are subjective conditions of man's susceptibility for 
ethical conceptions, not objective grounds of morality. They 



1^ 



2 1 6 Prerequisites of a Moral Nahire. 

are every one of them sesthetical, and given antecedently in 
tlie mind, as natural predispositions, fitting man for becom- 
ing a partaker of ethic notions, — predispositions given and 
subsisting in the substratum of bis person, wbicb therefore 
cannot be said to be any one's duty to acquire; for it is first 
of all by these that he is rendered the subject of ethical 
obligement. Man's consciousness of them is not originated 
by experience and observation, but they must be deemed 
the effects of the moral law itself upon the mind. 

A. The moral sense. This feeling is the susceptibility 
for pleasure or displacency, upon the bare consciousness of 
the harmony or of the discrepancy of our actions with the 
law. All determination of choice whatsoever begins with the 
representation of the intended act, and passes through the 
feeling of pleasure or pain, by taking an interest in the act, 
or its ulterior end, and so becomes event; and this internal 
determination of the sensory (liking or disliking) is either a 
pathognomic or an ethical emotion : the former is that sensa- 
tion of pleasure which may exist antecedently to the repre- 
sentation of the law; the latter is that complacency brought 
forth by its representation, and which can only follow after it. 

Now there can be no duty either to have or to acquire 
any such feeling; for all consciousness of obligation pre- 
supposes it, and, apart from it, no man could feel the neces- 
sitation accompanying the idea Duty; and every one must, 
as a moral being, have such originarily within him : an 
obligement in regard to it can only ordain that this sensible 
effect of the law be cultivated and invigorated by the admira- 
tion of its unknown and inscrutable original, which can be 
effected by showing that this emotion, when separated from 
all admixture of pathognomic attractions, is then most en- 
livened by the naked energies of reason. 

No man is destitute of this feeling; and were he deprived 
of ail capacity for being thus affected, he would be ethically 



Prerequisites of a Moral Nature, 217 

dead; and when, to speak in medical language, his moral 
vitality; could no longer stimulate this feeling, then would 
his humanity be decomposed, and resolved into his animality, 
and he could not be distinguished from the common herd of 
brute natiu^es. We have no specific and individual sense of 
moral good and evil, any more than we have a sense of 
truth, although such expressions are not unfrequently em- 
ployed; but we have an original susceptibility for having 
our free choice impelled by pure practical reason and her 
law; and this it is which is termed the moral feeling. 

B. Of conscience. Conscience is original, and no addita- 
mentum to our person ; and there can be no duty to procure 
one ; but every man has, as a moral being, a conscience. 
To be obliged to have a conscience, would be tantamount to 
saying, man stands under the obligation of acknowledging 
that he is obliged. jOonscience is man's practical reason, 
which does, in all circumstances, hold before him his law of 
duty, in order to absolve or to condemn him. It has accord- 
ingly no objective import; and refers only to the subject, 
affecting his moral sense by its own intrinsic action. The 
phenomenon of conscience is accordingly an inevitable event, 
and no obligement or duty ; and when it is said in common 
parlance, that such a one has no conscience, that means 
merely that he disregards its dictates ; for had he none in real 
fact, then he could impute to himself no action, as either con- 
formable or repugnant to the law, and so would be unable 
to cogitate to himself the duty of having conscience. 

Omitting all the various divisions of conscience, I remark 
merely that an erring conscience is a chimera; for al- 
though, in the objective judgment, whether or not anything 
be a duty, mankind may very easily go wrong, — yet, subjec- 
tively, whether T have compared an action with my practical 
(here judiciary) reason, for the behoof of such objective judg- 
ment, does not admit of any mistake ; and if there were any, 



2 1 8 Prereqtiisites of a Moral Nature, 

then would no practical judgment have been pronounced, — a 
case excluding alike the possibility of error or of truth. He 
who knows within himself that he has conducted himself 
agreeably to his conscience, has done all that can be demanded 
of him, relatively to guilt or innocence. His obligement 
can extend only to the illuminating his understanding as to 
what things are duty, what Aot. But when it comes to the 
act, or when a man has acted, conscience speaks inevitably. 
"We cannot, for these reasons, say that man ought to obey 
his conscience ; a case where he would require a supple- 
mental conscience to control, and take cognisance of the acts 
of the first. 

The only duty there is here room for, is to cultivate 
one's conscience, and to quicken the attention due to the 
voice of a man's inward monitor, and to strain every exer- 
tion (i,e.^ indirectly a duty) to procure obedience to what he 



C. Love of our neighbour. Love is an affair of senti- 
ment, not of will ; and I cannot love when I will, and still 
less when I ought. A duty to love is therefore chimerical. 
Eenevolence, however, considered as practical, may very well 
stand under a law of duty. Sometimes disinterested wishes 
for the good of our neighbour is called love; but this is 
improper. Sometimes even when the welfare of the other 
person is not concerned, but when we devotedly surrender all 
our ends to the ends of another (superhuman even), love is 
talked of, and said to be our duty ; but all duty is necessita- 
tion, i.e.^ co-action, even where it is self-co-action, conformably 
to a law ; but whatsoever is done by constraint and co-action, 
that is not performed out of love. 

Acting beneficently to our fellows, according to our ability, 
is our duty, and that, too, whether we love them or nob ; and 
this duty loses nothing of its importance, even although we 
are forced to make the sad remark that our species is but 



Prerequisites of a Moral Nature. 219 

little amiable when we come to know tliem better. Mis- 
anthropy is, however, at all times hateful, even when, shun- 
ning hostile actions, it merely induces the man-hater to isolate 
and separate himself from commerce with his kind. Bene- 
ficence is at all times incumbent upon us as a duty even 
toward a misanthrope, whom we cannot assuredly love, but 
towards whom we can deal kindly. 

To hate the vices of other people is neither our duty nor 
the reverse, but simply the feeling of detestation for them ; a 
sentiment unrelated, and standing in no connection to the 
will, and mce versa. Beneficence is a duty : he who is often 
engaged in the discharge of this duty, and beholds the success 
of his beneficent designs, comes in the end to love him whom 
he has benefited. When, therefore, it is said. Thou shalt 
love thy neighbour as thyself, that is not to be understood, 
thou shalt first love thy neighbour, and then, by means of 
this love, act kindly towards him ; but, contrariwise, do good 
to thy fellow-men, and this beneficence will work in thee 
philanthropy, i. e., a habitude or inclination to be beneficent. 

Benevolent love is upon these accounts only indirectly a 
duty j but the love of complacency would be immediate and 
direct. To be constrained by duty to this is, however, a 
contradiction ; for the pleasure of complacency is imme- 
diately attached to the perception of the existence of the 
beloved object ; and to be obliged to be necessitated to this 
is absurd. 

D. Of eeveeence. In like manner, reverence is somewhat 
altogether subjective, an emotion of its own kind, — no judg- 
ment referring to any object which might make it incumbent 
on us to produce and establish this emotion ; for were this the 
case, such a duty could be represented only by the reverence 
felt towards it ; and to say that it is our duty to have this 
reverence, would be tantamount to saying, we were obliged 
to an obligation. So that when it is said man ought to 



2 20 Principles of the Metaphysic of Ethics. 

reverence himself, tliat is improperly said, and it should 
rather be thus couched. The law within him inevitably ex- 
torts reverence from him for his own being, and this peculiar 
and unique emotion, which is of its own kind, is the ground 
of certain duties, i. e., certain actions comporting with the 
duty owed by man to himself. But it is ill expressed to say, 
we have a duty of reverencing ourselves ; for mankind must 
first of all revere the law, before he can so much as cogitate 
anything as his duty. 

XIII. GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF THE METAPHYSIC OF ETHICS 

FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF A PURE MORAL PHILOSOPHY. 

1. First : A single duty can rise upon only one ground 
OF OBLIGATION ; and when two or several arguments are ad- 
duced to support it, that indicates for certain, either that as 
yet no V9,lid reason has been assigned, or else that they are 
seyeral and distinct duties, which, by mistake, have come to 
be regarded as one. 

For since e^ery ethic argumentation is philosophical, it is 
a rational knowledge arising out of notions, and not as the 
mathematics are, raised upon the construction of notions. 
These last admit of several different demonstrations, because, 
in an h ^priori intuition, there may be given several deter- 
minations, of the nature of an object, the whole of which 
carry the cogitation backwards to one and the same common 
ground! Put the case, that we wish to prove that veracity 
is a duty, and argue first from the detriment inflicted on 
others by the lie, and then support this argument by urging 
the internal vileness of the liar, and the violation of his own 
self-reverence, — and it is observable, that the first argument 
proves a duty of benevolence, not one of veracity, i. e., is no 
proof at all of the virtue desiderated. To flatter one's self, 
that by adducing several bad arguments in support of one 



Principles of the Metaphysic of Ethics, 221 

position, their number may make up what is wanting in their 
cogency, is a most unphilosophic stratagem, and betrays at 
once guile and dishonesty, — ^because a series of insufficient 
reasons, aggregated together, cannot eke out the certainty 
which each wants ; nay, they do not even beget a probability 
amongst them, — and yet this is the common artifice of the 
rhetorician. 

II. Secondly : The diffebence obtaining betwixt virtue 
AND vice cannot be stated to consist in the grade of adhering 
to given maxims and rules of life ; but must be sought for 
in their specific qualities, i. e., in their relation to the law: 
that is, in other words, the lauded principle of Aristotle is 
false : " Virtue is the mean betwixt extremes." For instance, 
let frugality be taken as a mean betwixt the two vices, 
prodigality and avarice, and it is clear that its origin as a 
virtue cannot be explained by gradually decreasing and 
abating the first of these vices ; neither can it by gradually 
enlarging the expenses of the miser, — these vices being in- 
capable of being so taken, as if they came from diametri- 
cally opposite directions, and met in the point of frugality ; 
but each vice has its own proper maxim, and these have 
qualities making them inconsistent with one another. Upon 
the same account, no vice can, generally speaking, be ex- 
plained by saying that it is a practice carried to excess; 
as when it is said, Prodigality is excess in the consumption of 
wealth: nor yet, that it is a defect, or falling short in prac- 
tice, Avarice is the failing to expend one^s wealth. For since 
the grade is here left undetermined, and yet everything is 
made to depend on this degree, whether conduct fall in with 
duty or otherwise, it is plain that such explanations can 
serve no purpose. 

III. Thirdly : Duties are to be judged of, not by the 
power man attributes to himself of being able to fulfil 
them ; but, contrariwise, his power is to be concluded upon 



222 Of Virtue in Genere. 

JFEOM THE LAW, WHICH COMMANDS CATEGORICALLY; that is, 

we go, not by the experimental acquaintance taught us of 
mankind by observation, but by the intellectual apprehen- 
sion we have of what we ought to be, as conformed to the 
idea of humanity. These three positions towards a scientific 
treatise on morals are pointed against these old apophthegms. 

I. There is one only virtue, and one only vice. 

II. Virtue is the keeping of the due mean betwixt ex- 
tremes. 

III. Yirtue must, like prudence, be taught us by experi- 
ence and observation. 

XIV. — OF VIRTUE m GENERE. 

Virtue signifies ethic strength of will ; but this does 
not exhaust the whole notion of it : for a like strength may 
belong to a holy (superhuman) being, in whom no instinct 
reacts against the law, and who, therefore, executes the 
whole law willingly. Virtue is therefore the ethic strength 
of man in the fulfilment of his duty, a strength which is an 
ethical co-action, by force of one's own legislative reason, so 
far forth as this last constitutes itself also at the same time 
the executive of the law. This ethico-active reason is not 
itself a duty, nor is it incumbent on us to procure it ; but it 
a,nnounces its behest, and makes this commandment .go hand 
in hand with an ethical co-action, possible according to laws 
of inward freedom; but because this co-action has to be 
irresistible, strength is indispensable, and the grade of this 
force can only be estimated by the magnitude of the obstacles 
springing from the person's own appetites and instincts, and 
to which reason has to rise superior. Vice, the ofispring of 
illicit passion, is the Hydra which man has to encounter and 
to overcome; upon which account this ethic strength, as 
talour (fortitudo moralis), constitutes the highest, and 



Of Virtue in Genere. 223 

indeed the only martial glory of tlie brave j and this it is 
wMcli has been rightly styled wisdom, because this wisdom 
makes her own the ends of man's existence here below, and 
by possessing this alone, is any one rendered 

Liber, pulcher, honoratus, Rex denique Begum, 

and enabled to stand invincible against all assaults of chance 
or fate ; because man cannot be shaken from his own self- 
possession, nor can the virtuous be stormed out of the inex- 
pugnable fortress of his own virtue. 

The encomiums passed upon the Ideal of Humanity in 
his ethical perfection are not in anywise invalidated by 
showing how contrary mankind are, have been, and very 
likely wiH be ; nor can anthropology, which gives but a 
tentative and experimental knowledge of man, at all affect 
or ingipair that anthroponomy which is reared upon our 
unconditionately legislative reason j and although virtue 
may from time to time be well-deserving of our fellow-men 
{never in respect of the law), and may merit a reward, yet it 
ought to be considered, as it is, its own end, so also to be in 
itself its own reward. 

Virtue represented in its entire perfection, is to be re- 
garded as if it held possession of man, and not as if he had 
appropriated or were the proprietor of it; in which last 
case, it would seem as if man had the option to accept or to 
decline her, and so would need an anterior virtue to induce 
him to make his election of the latter. To acknowledge 
several virtues, as we inevitably must, is merely to cogitate 
different moral objects, towards which the will is guided and 
led by the one and single principle of virtue ; and the same 
remark holds of the contrary vices. Expressions which 
impersonate the one or other of them are aesthetic engines, 
which typify a moral import. An esthetic of ethics is, by 
consequence, no part, but it is a subjective exposition, of the 



224 Of /^^^^^ Freedom, 

METAPHYSic OF ETHICS j and sucli a Critique of moral taste 
would make sensible in outward delineation those emotions 
effected by the co-active force of the law upon the sensory. 
Horror, disgust, etc., etc., depict in lively and vivid colours 
the ethical antagonism of the will, and would aid in counter- 
acting the false allurements of sensitive excitement. 



XV. OF THE PRINCIPLE DISTINGUISHUSTG BETWIXT 

MORALS AND LAW. 

This separation, obtaining betwixt the two main branches 
of Ethics, is grounded on this, that the idea Freedom, com- 
mon to both these, renders necessary a distinction of duties 
into the offices of outward and those of inward liberty, 
whereof the latter alone are moral. Whence it results that 
we must now state some preparatory remarks on inward 

FREEDOM AS THE CONDITION PRECEDENT OF ALL MORAL DUTY, 

exactly as we previously, in Ko. XII., held a preliminary 
discourse on conscience as the condition precedent of all 
obligement whatsoever. 

0/ Virtue according to the Principles of Inward 
Freedom. 

Keadiness or APTITUDE is a facility in acting in a par- 
ticular way, and is a subjective perfection of choice; but 
every readiness of this sort is not necessarily a free or liberal 
facility; for when it degenerates into habit, i. e., when the 
uniformity of custom slides into mechanical necessity, by the 
too frequent iteration of an act, such inveterate aptitude is 
no product of freedom, and is by consequence no ethical 
facility ; and this is the reason why virtue, as we have said, 
cannot be defined to be a readiness or facility in acting con- 
formably to the law ; although it might be so defined, were 
we to add that it was an aptitude of determining one's self 



Of Self-command and Apathy, 225 

so to act by the representation of the law, for tlien the 
habitude would cease to be a quality of choice, and would 
become one of will, which is a function of desire, announcing 
law universal, by the maxims of conduct it adopts ; and such 
a readiness alone can be deemed and taken for a part of a 
virtue. 

This inward freedom demands two things : the first, that 
mankind, in any unforeseen emergency, remain master of 
himself; and, second, that he suffer not the empii*e of his 
own reason to be usurped by his appetites and passions. 
The state and tone of soul is, by such inward freedom, noble 
and erect; by the contrary, abject, servile. 

XVI. — VIRTUE, so FAR AS IT IS BASED UPON A PRINCIPLE OP 
INWARD FREEDOM, DEMANDS, FIRST (POSITIVELY), MAN'S 
SELF-COMMAND. 

Emotions and passions differ essentially : the former are 
seated in the sensory ; and as these feelings are astir in the 
mind, prior to all thought and reflection, they hinder and 
obstruct the exercise of reason, or even render it for the time 
impossible. The emotions are often called transports or 
tempests of soul ; and reason promulgates to us, by the idea 
Yirtue, the law of self-command. However, imbecility in 
the exercise of reflection, coupled with the headlong im- 
petuosity of emotion, is merely non-virtue. It is silly and 
childish, and is not inconsistent with a good will, and has 
this advantage peculiar to such a frame of mind, that the 
storm soon blows over : a propensity to an emotion, e. g., to 
wrath, is therefore not merely so much allied to vice as a 
passion and affection is. These last denote permanent states 
of desire; e,g,, hatred, revenge, as contradistinguished from 
ANGER and wrath. The calm and composure wherewith 
mankind incline to those admit of reflection, forethought, 

Q 



226 Of Self-command and Apathy, 

and predetermination, and allow tlie mind to adopt maxims 
of conduct tending to the gratification of those affections; 
and so, by brooding over them, allow the hate to strike deep 
root ; by all which, evil is deliberately determined on, which, 
as aggravated wickedness, is a true crime. 

It results, therefore, that virtue, in so far as it depends 
upon man's inward freedom, addresses to mankind an affirma- 
tive commandment, ordaining him to bring all his feelings 
and passions under the dominion and government of his 
reason — i. e., obdains self-command ; and this it superadds 
to the prohibitive commandment the duty of apathy, 
whereby it ordains {negatively) man not to allow himself to 
have it lorded over him either by his appetites or instincts ; 
for when reason does not take into her own hands the ad- 
ministration of self-government, those revolting, subject her 
to their thraldom. 



XVII. — virtue, as based on a principle of inward freedom, 

DEMANDS, second (^. 6., NEGATIVELY), APATHY, CONSIDERED 
AS FORCE OF WILL. 

The term apathy, as if it meant bluntness or want of 
feeling, i. e., listlessness or indifference in regard of the 
objects of choice, has fallen into bad repute. People have 
mistaken it for a weakness ; a misunderstanding which may 
be obviated by denominating this dispassionateness, which 
has no common part with indifference, the ethic apathy, a 
freedom from passion, which takes place then only when the 
increasing reverence for the Law has so awed and ballasted 
the mind, that it ceases to tumble to and fro, and to 
be agitated by the storms and hurricane emotions which 
threaten to shipwreck its morality. It is but the seeming 
strength of one distempered, to allow one's interest, even in 
what is good, to degenerate into passion. An affection of 



Of Self-command and Apathy, 227 

this kind is called entliusiasm, and so gives occasion for that 
just medium which is recommended even in the practice of 
virtue. 

Insani Sapiens nomen ferat, asquus iniqui 

" TJltra quam satis est,'' virtutem si petat ipsam. — HoK. 

For it were ridiculous to fancy that any one could be too 
wise or too virtuous. An emotion is always of the sensory, 
by what object soever it may be excited. The true strength 
of virtue is the mind at tranquillity, established upon a well- 
pondered and steadfast determination to put the law into 
execution. This is the ^^healtli^^ of the ethic life. While, 
on the contrary, enthusiastic feelings, even when engendered 
by the representation of good, sparkle but with momentary 
lustre, and leave the mind chill and exhausted. He, again, 
might be called chimerically virtuous, who admits, in his 
system of morality, of no indifferent things, and who is beset 
^t every step with duties strewed along his path, like spring- 
guns j and deems it of moment whether he dine on fish or 
fowl, whether he drink beer or wine, although they all 
agree alike well with his constitution. But if the doctrine 
of virtue were to deal with such infinitesimal duties, her 
empire would be transmuted to a tyranny. 

YlRTUE IS CONSTANTLY PROGEESSIVE, AND YET IT HAS ALWAYS 
TO BEGIN AGAIN, OF NEW, FROM THE BEGINNING. The first 

part of this position results from this, that morality, con- 
sidered objectively, is an ideal, and unattainable, although it 
is our incumbent duty to press with advancing footstep un- 
remittingly toward it : the second, that virtue has always to 
^tart afresh, arises subjectively from its relation to the nature 
of man,— a nature ever lying so open to the perturbations 
of appetite and instinct, that virtue can, in its combat with 
them, never find a truce, but must infallibly, if she keep not 
herself in the van, and on the advance, be driven to the rear, 
a.nd forced to retrograde : ethical maxims not being, like the 



228 Of the Subdivision of Morals, 

technical, based on habit (wliich last refers to the physical 
part of voluntary determination) — so much so indeed, that 
were the'^ exercise of virtue to become habit, the agent would 
thereby undergo the loss of freedom ; which, however, is of 
the very essence of all actions performed out of duty. 

XVIII. PRELIMINAEY. OF THE SUBDIVISION OF MORALS. 

The principle of subdividing ought to comprehend — 

First, As to the formal of duty, all conditions serving to 
distinguish this part of general ethics from the science of law, 
a desideratum attained by the following : (1) That no mora] 
duty admits of any outward legislation ; (2) That while all 
duty, of whatever kind, must rest upon the law, yet, in 
morals, the commandment of duty ordains no given action^ 
but only maxims and rules of life tending to given ends ; (3) 
which follows from the second, That moral duty is of inde- 
terminate, and never of strict obligation. 

Second, As to its matter, Ethic has to be represented, not 
as a system of duties merely, but likewise as the system of 
the ends and scope of practical reason, — where man is shown 
as obliged to cogitate himself and all his fellow-men as his 
ends,^ which some moralists have talked of as duties of self- 
love, and of the love of our neighbour ; but such expression 
is inaccurate, there being no direct obligation to "Zove" of 
any sort, although there are to such actions as state one's 
self and others as their ends. 

Thirdly, As for the distinction betwixt the form and the 
matter of morals (^. e., betwixt an action's conformity to law 
and its conformity to its end), we have to remind the reader 

that NOT EVERY ETHICAL OBLIGATION IS A MORAL DUTY; in 

other words, that reverence for law begets of itself no end 
which can be represented as a duty, this last alone being a 
moral duty. There is the one only ethical obligement, but 



Of the Subdivision of Morals. 229 

several moral duties, there being many objects wliicli for us 
are ends tliat we are obliged to propose to ourselves. There 
can, however, be but one ethical intent, as the inward ground 
of a man's determination to fulfil his duty; an intention 
extending even to his juridical duties, though these last must 
not on this account be held or reputed moral duties. Every 

SUBDIVISION OF MORALS WILL THEREFORE HAVE RESPECT ONLY 

TO MORAL DUTIES. The knowledge of the ground whereon 
the law has its ethical virtue to oblige the will, is the 
SCIENCE OF ETHICS ITSELF, formally considered. 

Remark. — But why, it will be asked, have I divided 

MORALS INTO AN ELEMENTARY AND A METHODIC PART, Seeing 

this mode of division has been dispensed with in law % The 
reason is, because the former treats of duties of indeterminate 
obligation, the latter of those of strict ; whence it happens, 
that the latter is in its nature rigid and precise, and requires, no 
more than the mathematics, general directions (a method) for 
judging, but shows its method to be true, by real fact and event. 
Moral Philosophy, on the contrary, on account of the latitude 
admissible in its duties of indeterminate obligation, conducts 
inevitably to questions, calling upon the judgment to deter- 
mine what maxim ought to be applied in any given case ; 
and this maxim may come attended by its secondary or sub- 
ordinate maxim, of which last we equally demand a principle 
for applying it to different occurring cases. Thus morals 
falls into a sort of casuistry which law is quite ignorant of. 

Casuistry is, then, neither a science nor a part of any 
science ; for, were it scientific, it would be dogmatic : and 
it is not so much a method for finding truth, as a mere 
exercise of judgment in searching for it. Cases of casuistry 
are therefore interwoven, not systemaMcally^ hut/ragmentarily^ 
into morals, and come in, under the form of scholia, as 
addenda to the system. But when it is no exercise of the 
judgment that engages us, but the exercise of reason itself, 



230 Of the Subdivision of Morals, 

and that both in the theory and in the practice of her duty, 
then does this last belong appropriately to ethics, being the 
METHODOLOGY of puT 6 practical reason. Its methodic, in the 
first sort of exercise, viz., in the theory of its duty, is called 
DIDACTICS ; and this last is either akroamatic or erotematic. 
The erotetic method is the art of interrogating out of the 
pupil the notions of duty he already is possessed of; and 
these his notions may be extracted by the question, either 
out of his memory or out of his reason : from his memory, 
when he has been previously taught how to answer, where 
the method is catechetic : from his reason, when it is 
fancied that what is asked him, lies, although latent, in his 
mind, and needs only to be developed; and this is the 
dialogic or socratic method. 

To the didactics, as the method of theoretic exercise, 
corresponds, as antipart, the ascetic exercise, which is that 
part of the methodology, where it is taught not only how 
the notion Virtue, but likewise how man's active and moral 
powers, his will, may be gymnasticized by the ascetic exer- 
cise, and cultivated. 

Agreeably to these principles, we shall divide the whole 
system into two parts, — the Elementology and the Method- 
ology of Ethics. Each part will have its chapters and divi- 
sions. In the former part, the order of the chapters will be 
regulated upon the diversity of the persons toward whom 
obligations may be constituted; in the second, upon the 
different ends reason ordains man to have, and according to 
his capacity for these ends. 

XIX. The division established by practical reason toward 
an architectonic of the system of her ethical conceptions, may 
be regulated upon a twofold principle, either conjoined or 
separate : the one represents, materially, the subjective rela- 
tion obtaining betwixt the obliged and the obligors; the 



Of the Subdivision of Morals, 231 

other, formally, the objective relation obtaining betwixt ethic 
laws and the offices they enjoin. The first division proceeds 
upon that of the different living beings in relation to whom 
ethical obligement may be thought as subsisting; but the 
last would be the order of the conceptions of pure ethico- 
active reason, which conceptions correspond to each duty 
made imperative by reason, and belong to Ethics regarded 
barely as a science, and are therefore indispensable for the 
methodical contexture and arrangement of those propositions 
which the former division may throw into our hands. 

The former division of morals, agreeably to difference of tlie 

persons, contains 

Duties 



Of man to mankind. Of man towards beings of another kind. 



To himself. To others. Towards beings inferior Towards super- 

to man. human beings. 

The latter division of ethics, according to principles of a 
system of pure practical reason. . 

EtMcal. 

Elementology. Methodology. 



Dogmatics. Casuistics. Didactics. Ascetics. 

Which second division exhibits the form of the science, and 
must, as its ground-plan, go before the other. 



ELEMENTOLOGY OF ETHICS. 

OF THE DUTIES OWED BY MAN TO HIMSELF. 



INTEODUCTION. 

Sec. 1. — The Notion of a Duty owed hy Mankind to himself 
appears at first sight to involve a contradiction, 

WHEN" tlie obligating " / " is taken in exactly the same 
sense witli the "7" obliged, theli nndonbtedly duty 
owed to myself imports an absurdity : for the idea Duty 
brings along with it the notion of passive necessitation (I 
am obliged or beholden) ; whereas in a matter of debt owed 
to myself, I figure myself to be the obligor, that is, in a 
state of active necessitation (I, the very same person with 
the former, am the Obligor). And a position announcing a 
duty owed by mankind to himself (I ought to oblige my- 
self), would state an obligement to become obliged, ^. e., a 
passive obligation, which were, notwithstanding, at the same 
time and in the same terms, an active one; a statement 
repugnant to itself, and contradictory. The contradiction 
contained in such a proposition may be set under a yet 
clearer light, by showing that the author of the obligation 
could always grant a dispensation to the obliged from the 
obligement ; that is, by consequence, when the Author and 
the Subject of the obligation are the same, then, in such 
case, the obliger would not be at all beholden to any duty 



Of the Duty owed by Man to Himself. 233 

imposed bj liim upon himself; and this, again, is just the 
contradiction above insisted on. 

Bee. 2. — There are Duties owed hy Man to himself. 

For, put the case, that there were in effect no such self- 
incumbent duties, then would all other duties, even the out- 
ward ones, be abolished; for I only acknowledge myself 
beholden and obliged to others, so far forth as I at the same 
time, along with the other, put that obligation upon myself ; 
the law, by dint whereof alone I can recognise myself to be 
obliged, emanating in every instance from my own practical 
reason. By this reason I am necessitated, and so am at the 
same time my own necessitator.* 

Sec. 3. — Solution of this Apparent Antinomy, 

Man regards himself, when conscious of a duty to himself, 
in a twofold capacity : first, as a sensible being, i. e., as A 
MAN, where he ranks only as one among other sorts of 
animals ; but, second, he regards himself not only as an 
intelligent being, but as A very reason (for the theoretic 
function of reason may perhaps be a property of animated 
matter), resident in a region inscrutable to sense, and mani- 
festing itself only in morally practical relations, where that 
amazing quality of man's nature — freedom — is revealed by 
tlie influence reason exerts upon the determination of the 
wilLt 

Mankind, then, as an intelligent physical being (homo 
phenomenon), is susceptible of voluntary determination to 
actiVe conduct by the suggestions of his reason ; but in all 
this the idea of obligation does not enter. The very same 
being, however, considered in respect of his personality 
(homo noumenon), i.e.y cogitated as one invested with inward 

* Even in common speech we say, This is what I owe to myseK. 
t Ref. 4, from p. 40.— 0. 



234 Of the Dtity owed 

freedom, is a being capable of having obligation imjDOsed upon 
Mm, and, in particular, of becoming obligated and beholden 
to bimself, i.e,, to tlie liumanity subsisting in bis person; 
and, so considered in this twofold character, mankind can 
acknowledge the obligations he stands under to himself, 
without incurring any contradiction, the notion man being 
now understood to be taken in a twofold sense. 

Sec, 4. — On the Principle of subdividing the Duties owed hy 
Man to himself. 

This division can take place only according to the different 
objects incumbent on him, for there can be no room for it 
in respect of the self-obliging subject. The obligor and the 
obligated is always just one and the same person; and 
although we may theoretically distinguish betwixt man's 
soul and his body, as distinct qualities of his system and 
known nature, yet it is quite disallowed to regard them as 
different substances, founding distinct obligations in respect 
of them, and so we cannot be entitled to divide our duties 
into those owed to the body, and those due to the soul. 
Neither experience nor the deductions of reason afford us 
any gi-ound to hold that man has a soul (meaning by soul a 
spiritual substance dwelling in his material framework, 
distinct from the last, and independent of it) ; and we do 
not know whether life may or may not be a property of 
matter. However, even on the hjrpothesis that man had a 
soul, still a duty owed by man to his body (as the subject 
obliging) would be quite incogitable. 

First. There can obtain, therefore, only one objective 
division, extending at once to the form and to the matter of 
tjie duties owed by man to himself, — ^the first whereof, the 
formal duties, are limitary or negative duties ; the second, 
the material, are extensive and positive duties owed by man 
to himself. The former forbid mankind to act contrary to 



by Man to Himself, 235, 

tlie ends and purposes of Ms being, and so concerns simpljr 
Ms ethical self-preservation ; tlie latter ordain Mm to make 
a given object of choice his end, and command the perfecting 
of his own nature. Both these, as moral duties, are elements 
of virtue ; the one as duties of omission {sustine et ahstine), 
the other as duties of commission {virihus concessis utere). 
The first go to constitute man's ethic health (ad esse), and to 
the preservation of the entireness of his system, both as ob- 
jected to his exterior and to his interior senses (^. e., support 
his receptivity) ; the second constitute his ethic opulence (ad 
melius esse) — a wealth consisting in the possession of func- 
tions adapted for the realization of all ends, in so far as these 
powers and functions are matters of acquisition, and belong 
to self-culture as an active and attained perfection. The 
first principle of duty is couched in the adage, ^''Naturm con- 
venienter vive" i. e., " Maintain thyself in the original 
PERFECTION OF THY NATURE j " the second, in the position, 
^' Ferfice te ut Jinem, perfice te ut medium^^ — Study to per- 
fect and advance thy being. 

But second. There is, however, a subjective division of 
the duties owed by man to himself; that is, such a one, 
where mankind, the subject of the obligement, regards Mm- 
self as an animal, though also at the same time moral being, 
or as a moral being singly. 

Now, the instincts of man's animal nature are threefold, 
viz. (1), the instinctive love of life, whereby nature preserves 
the individual ; (2), that instinct whereby nature aims at the 
preservation of the kind ; and (3), and lastly, those appetites 
of hunger and thirst which are intended for enlivening the 
frame, — ^keeping it fitted for its ends, — and at the same time 
for securing an agreeable, though only animal enjoyment of 
existence. The vices which are here subversive of the duty 
owed by man to himself, are (1), self-murder ; (2), the un- 
natural use of the appetite for sex ; (3), that excess in meat 



236 Of the Duty owed 

or drink whicL. cliecks and lames tlie functions of tlie soul. 
As for tlie duty owed by man to himself as a moral being 
singly, it is formal, and consists in tbe coincidence of tbe 
maxims of bis will with the dignity of the humanity subsist- 
ing in his person ; by consequence, in the prohibition not 
to renounce the pre-eminence of his rank, which consists in 
his power of acting upon systematic principles and rules of 
life j that is, in the injunction not to despoil himself of his 
inward freedom, — that he become not thereby the toy and 
football of his own appetites and instincts, and so a mere 
thing. The vices subversive of this duty are lying, avarice, 
^nd spurious humility. These vices rest on maxims dia- 
metrically opposed, even already by their form, to the 
characters of mankind as a moral being ; that is, they are 
formally repugnant to and subversive of the inborn dignity 
of man's nature, his inward freedom, and make it, as it 
were, a man's maxim to have none, and so no character j 
that is, to slattern himself down to zero, and so to sink 
beneath contempt. The virtue opposed to all these vices is 
SELF-REVERENCE, and might be called the love of one's own 
INWARD honour ; a cast of thought having no common part 
with pride, which last is A love and ambition of outward 
honours, and may be, as it often is, abject and vile. This 
pride {superhia) is particularly treated of in the sequel, 
under this title, as a vice. 



by Man to Himself, 237 



PART I. 

OF THE DUTIES OF PERFECT AND DETERMINATE 
OBLIGATION. 

CHAPTER I. 

of the duty owed by mankind to himself in respect 
of his animal part. 

Sqg, 5. 

The first if not chiefest duty incumbent upon mankind, in 
respect of his brute nature, is his self-conservation in his 
animal estate. The antipart of this obligation is the de- 
liberate and forethought destruction of his animality; and 
this may be considered as either total or partial. The total 
we call SELF-MUBDER ; the partial, again, is either material or 
formal, — material, when a ^an bereaves himself of any 
integrant part or organ of his body, by demembration or 
MUTILATION ; formal, when by excess man suffers himself to 
be bereft, for a while or for ever, of the use of the physical 
functions of his system, and so likewise indirectly of his 
ethic rationality, self-obstupefaction. 

See, 6. — Of Self murder. 
The voluntary divestiture of man's animal parfc can be 
called SELF-MURDER, Only then when it is shown that such an 
act is criminal. A crime which may be perpetrated, either 
simply on our own person, or also at the same time and by 
consequence upon the person of another, e. g., as when one in 
pregnancy kills herself. 



238 Of the Dttty owed 

Self-destruction is a crime — murder. Suicide may no 
doubt be considered as the transgression of tbe duty owed 
by any one to bis fellow-men; as a violation of tbe conjugal 
obligations incumbent upon spouses ; as a disregard of tbe 
duty owed by a subject to bis government (tbe state) ; or, 
lastly, as a dereliction of one's duty to God, tbe person quit- 
ting, wifcbout His permission, tbe post entrusted to bim by 
God in tbe world. But none of tbese amount to tbe crime 
of murder j and tbe question at present to be considered is, 
wbetber or not deliberate self-destruction is a violation of 
man's duty toward bimself, even wben abstraction is made 
from all tbose otber considerations; tbat is, wbetber man 
ougbt to acknowledge bimself bebolden to tbe self-conserva- 
fcion of bis animal part (nay, most strictly and exactly be- 
bolden so to act,, and tbat too by force singly of bis person- 
ality). Tbat a man can injure bimself, appears absurd 
(volenti non fit injuria) ; and tbis was tbe reason wby tbe 
Stoics considered it to be a prerogative of tbe sage to walk 
witb undisturbed soul out of life as out of a smoky room, 
not urged by any present or apprebended evils, but simply 
because be could no longer sustain with effect bis part in 
life ; and yet tbis very courage, tbis strength of soul to 
advance undauntedly to deatb, arguing bis recognition of 
somewhat prized by him far higher than life, ought to have 
taught him not to despoil a being of existence possessing so 
mighty a mastery and control over the strongest forces in his 
physic system. 

Mankind, so long as duty is at stake, cannot renounce his 
personality; that is, by consequence,, never, — duty being 
always his incumbent debt ; and it is a contradiction to hold 
that any one were entitled to withdraw himself from his 
obligations, and to act free, in such sense as to need no 
ground of warrant for his conduct. To abolish, then, in his 
own person the subject of morality, is tantamount to ex- 



by Man to Himself. 239 

punging witli all his miglit the very being of morality from 
the world, which moraliby is, however, an end in itself. 
Whence we conclude, that to dispose of one's life for some 
fancied end, is to degrade the humanity subsisting in his 
person (homo noumenon), and entrusted to him (homo 
phenomenon) to the end that he might uphold and pre- 
serve it. 

For any one to deprive himself of an integral part of his 
frame, to dismember or mutilate his organs, — as when, for 
instance, any one sells or gifts a tooth to be transplanted 
into the jaw of another, or to submit to emasculation to gain 
an easier livelihood as a singer, and so on, — are acts of partial 
self-murder. The like observation, however, does not hold 
of the amputation of a decayed or mortified member, which 
it might be even dangerous to keep. Neither can we say 
that it is a violation of one's person to remove what is a part 
and pertinent, but still no organ of the body, e. ^., to cut one's 
hair j but were this done with a view to making gain by the 
sale of one's tresses, such an act could not be regarded as 
altogether devoid of blame. 

Casuistics. — Is it self-murder to devote one's self, like 
Curtius, to certain death for the liberation of his country ? 
Is martyrdom — the deliberate offering of one's self up for 
the benefit of mankind at large— capable of being regarded, 
like the former, as a trait of a heroic character % 

Is it allowed to anticipate an unjust sentence of death by 
suicide % Even were the sovereign to grant this permission, 
as !N"ero to Seneca % 

Can we regard it as a crime, on the part of our late great 
monarch,*^ that he always bore about with him a poison, pro- 
bably in order that if he should be taken in war, which he 
always carried on in person, he might not be compelled to 
accept conditions of ransom too burdensome to his country % 
* Frederick II. 



240 Of the Dtcty owed 

A motive we are entitled to ascribe to Mm, as it is not likely 
lie was impelled to it by mere arrogancy. 

A patient, feeling decided symptoms of hydropbobia, after 
the bite of a mad dog, declared that as tbi^ complaint was 
incurable, be would destroy bimself, lest, as be stated in bis 
testament, be sbonld, in a paroxysm of the disease, occasion 
some disaster to bis fellow-men. It is demanded if be did 
wrong % 

He wbo inoculates bimself for small-pox, bazards bis life 
on an uncertainty, even altbougb be does so witb a view to 
its more effectual preservation, and places bimself in a mucb 
more ambiguous relation to tbe law, tban the mariner, wbo 
does not excite tbe storm wbicb be encounters, wbereas tbis 
otber is bimself tbe cause of bis running tbe risk of deatb. 
Is sucb inoculation lawful % 

Sec. 7. — Of Self-defilement, 

As tbe love of life is bestowed upon us for tbe preserva- 
tion of our person, so tbe love of sex for tbe continuance of 
our kind. Eitber appetite is a last end purposed by nature; 
by end is to be understood tbat connection obtaining betwixt 
a cause and its effect, wbere tbe cause, altbougb unintelligent, 
is nevertbeless cogitated according to tbe analogy it bears to 
an understanding, tbat is, is spoken of and taken as if it 
intentionally and of design tended to tbe education of its 
own effect. In tbis way a question arises, if tbe power of 
propagating one's species stands under a restrictive law ; or 
if a person wbo exercises sucb a faculty may, witbout sub- 
verting any duty by doing so, overlook tbat end of nature, 
and employ bis intersexual organs as tbe mere engine of 
brute pleasure. 

In tbe elementary principles of law, we took occasion to 
sbow tbat mankind could not serve bimself of tbe person of 
anotber, in order to tbis enjoyment, except subject to tbe 



by Man to Himself. 241 

limitary conditions of a particular legal contract (marriage), 
in wMcLl event two persons become mutually obliged to one 
another. But the question ethics undertakes is this. Whether 
there be or not a duty owed by man to himself, in respect of 
this appetite, the violation whereof attaints (not merely 
•degrades), the humanity inhabiting his person. The appetite 
itself is called lust, and the vice it gives Lirtli to is called 
latPURiTY. The virtue, again, raised upon this instinct of 
the sensory is termed chastity ; and this chastity is now 
to be represented as a duty owed by man to himself. A lust 
is said to be unnatural, when a man is impelled to it, not by 
a real given matter objected to his sensory, but by the pro- 
ductive power of his imagination, depicting to him in fancy 
the object, contrary to the end aimed at by nature; for the 
power of appetition is then put into operation in such a man- 
ner as to evade or subvert the ends of nature ; and, in truth, 
an end yet more important than the end proposed by nature 
in the instinctive love of life, — this tending only to the con- 
servation of the individual, that to the upholding uninter- 
rupted the succession of the species. 

That this unnatural use (and so abuse) of one's sexual 
organs is a violation, in the highest degree, of the duty owed 
by any to himself, is manifest to everybody; and is a thought 
so revolting, that even the naming this vice by its own name 
is regarded as a kind of immorality, which is not the case, 
however, with self-murder, which no one hesitates to detail 
in all its horrors, and publish to the world in specie facti ; 
just as if mankind at large felt ashamed at knowing himself 
capable of an act sinking him so far beneath the brutes. 

And yet, to prove upon grounds of reason the inadmissi- 
bility of that unnatural excess, and even the disallowedness 
'of a mere irregular use of one's sexual part, so far forth as 
they are violations (and in regard of the former, even in the 
highest possible degree) of the duty owed by man to himself. 



242 Of the Dtity owed 

is a task of no sliglifc oi^ common difficulty. The ground of 
proving is to be sought, no donbt, in this, that man meanly 
abdicates his personality, when he attempts to employ him- 
self as a bare means to satisfy a brutal Inst. At the same 
time, the high and prodigious enormity of the violation j^er- 
petrated by man against the humanity subsisting in his per- 
son, by so unnatural and portentous a lust, which seems, as we 
have said, formally to transcend in magnitude the guilt of 
self-murder, remains unexplained upon this argument; unless, 
perhaps, it might be urged that the headlong obstinacy of 
the suicide, who casts away life as a burden, is no effeminate 
surrender to sensitive excitement, but shows valour, and so 
leaves ground for reverencing the humanity he represents ; 
while this other resigns himself an abandoned outcast to 
brutality, enjoying his own self-abuse — that is, he makes 
himself an object of abomination, and stands bereft of all 
reverence of any kind. 

Bee. 8. — Of Self-ohstupefaction hy Excessive Indulgence in 
Meats and Brinks. 

The vice existing in this species of intemperance is not 
estimated by the prejudice or bodily pains mankind may 
entail upon himself as the sequents of his excess ; for then we 
should regulate our judgment upon a principle of con- 
veniency (i. e., on a system of eudaimonism), which, how- 
ever, affords no ground of duty, but only of a dictate of 
expediency; at least such principle gives birth to no direct 
obligations. 

The inordinate gratification of our bodily wants is that 
abuse of aliments which blunts the operations of the intel- 
lect: drunkenness and gluttony are the two vices falling 
under this head. The drunkard renounces, for the seductive 
goblet, that rationality which alone proclaims the superiority 
of his rank ; and is, while in his state of intoxication^ to be 



by Man to Himself. 243 

dealt with as a brute only, not as a person. The glutton, 
gorged with viands, blunts his powers for a while, and is 
incapacitated for such exercises as demand suppleness of 
body, or the reflections of the understanding. That the 
putting one's self into such a situation is a grave violation of 
what a man owes to himself, is self-evident. The former 
state of degradation, abject even beneath the beasts, is com- 
monly brought about by the excessive use of fermented 
liquors, or of stupefying drugs, such as opium, and other pro- 
ducts of the vegetable kingdom \ the betraying power whereof 
lies in this, that for a while a dreamy happiness, and freedom 
from solicitude, or perhaps a fancied fortitude, is begotten, 
which, after all, concludes in despondency and sadness, and 
so unawares, and by insensible and unsuspected steps, intro- 
duces the need and want to repeat and to augment the stupe- 
fying dose. Gluttony must be reputed still lower in the scale 
of animal enjoyment; for it is purely passive, and does not 
waken to life the energies of fancy, — a faculty susceptible 
for a long time of an active play of its perceptions during the 
obstupefaction of the former, upon which account gluttony is 
the more beastly vice. 

Casuistics. — Can we, if not as the panegyrists, yet as the 
apologists of wine, accord to it a use bordering on intoxica- 
tion, so far forth as it animates conversation, and combines 
the society by the frankness it produces % Can we, in any 
event, say of wine what Seneca has said when talking of 
Cato : Virtus ejus incaluit mero? But who is he who will 
assign a measure to one who stands on the brink of passing 
into a state, where all eyesight fails him to measure anything, 
nay, whose disposition is in full march to go beyond it ? To 
employ opium or ardent spirits as instruments of one's animal 
gratification, is very much akin to meanness ; because these, 
by their soporific welfare, render the individual mute, re- 
served, and unsocial ; upon which accounts it is that these 



244 Of the Duty owed 

are allowed only in medicine. Maliometanism lias made but 
an injudicious selection, when it forbids wine, and allows the 
use of opium in its stead. 

A banquet (Lord Mayor's feast) is a formal invitation to a 
double intemperance in both kinds, although it has, over and 
above the stimulating of one's physical existence, a reference 
to a moral end, viz., the advancing of man's social intercourse 
with his species. Yet because, whenever the number of the 
guests exceeds, as Chesterfield says, the number of the muses, 
the very multitude obstructs the social exchange, and admits 
only the talking to one's immediate neighbours, — i. e., since a 
feast is an institution subverting its own end, — it remains to 
be regarded only as a seduction to excess, i. e., to immorality, 
and to a violation of the duty owed by man to himself. To 
what extent is mankind ethically entitled to give ear to such 
invitations 1 



CHAPTER II. 

OF THE DUTY OWED BY MAN TO HIMSELF, AS A MOKAL BEING 
SINGLY. 

THIS duty is opposed to the vices of lying, avarice, and 
false humility. 

Sec. 9. — Of Lying. 

The highest violation of the duty owed by man to himself, 
considered as a moral being singly (owed to the humanity 
subsisting in his person), is a departure from truth, or lying. 
That every deliberate untruth in uttering one's thoughts 
must bear this name in ethics, is of itself evident, although 
in law it was only styled fraud or falsehood when it violated 



by Man to Himself, 245 

the rights of others — ethics giving no title to vice on account 
of its harmlessness ; for the dishonour (i,e.^ to be an object 
of ethical disdain) it entails, accompanies the liar like his 
shadow. A lie may be either external or internal : by meaus 
of the former he falls under the contempt of others : but by 
means of the latter, falls, which is much worse, under his 
own, and violates the dignity of humanity in his own person. 
We ,say nothing here of the damage he may occasion to other 
people, the damage being no characteristic of the vice ; for 
it would then be turned into a violation of the duty owed to 
others : nor yet of the damage done by the liar to himself ; 
for then the lie, as a mere error in prudence, would contra- 
dict only the hypothetical, not the categorical imperative, 
and could not be held as violating duty at all. A lie is the 
abandonment, and, as it were, the annihilation, of the dignity 
of a man. He who does not himself believe what he states 
to another person (were it but an ideal person), has a still less 
value than if he were a mere thing ; for of the qualities of 
this last some use may be made, these being determinate and 
given ; but for any one to communicate thoughts to anothei- 
by words intended to convey the contrary of what the speaker 
really thinks, is an end subversive of the purpose and design 
for which nature endowed us with a faculty of interchang- 
ing thought, and is upon these accounts a renunciation of 
one's personality, after which the liar goes about, not as truly 
a man, but as the deceptive appearance of one only. Veracity 
in one's statements is called candour; if such statements 
contain promises, fidelity : both together make up what is 

called SINCERITY. 

A lie, in the ethical signification of the word, considered 
as intentional falsehood, need not be prejudicial to others in 
order to be reprobated, for then it would be a violation of 
the rights of others. Levity, nay, even good-nature, may be 
its cause, or some good end may be aimed at by it. How- 



246 Of the Dttty owed 

ever, the giving way to sucli a thing is by its bare form a 
crime perpetrated by man against his own person, and a 
meanness, making a man contemptible in his own eyes. 

The reality of many an inward lie, the guilt whereof man 
entails upon himself, is easily set forth ; but to explain the 
possibility of such a thing is not so easy ; and it looks like 
as if a second person were required, whom we intended to 
deceive, since deliberately to deceive one's self sounds like a 
contradiction. 

Man as a moral being (homo noumenon) cannot use him- 
self as a physical being (homo phenomenon), as a mere in- 
strument of speech, nowise connected with the internal end 
of communicating his thoughts ; but he is bound to the con- 
dition, under his second point of view, of making his declara- 
tion harmonize with his inward man, and so is obliged to 
veracity towards himself. Mankind thus perverts himself, 
when he bubbles himself into the belief in a future judge, 
although he find none such within himself, in the persuasion 
that it can do no harm, but may, on the contrary, be of 
service, inwardly to confess such faith before the Searcher of 
his Heart, in order, in any event, to insinuate himself into 
His favour. Or otherwise, supposing him to entertain no 
doubts on this point, still he may flatter himself that he is an 
inward reverer of His law, although he knows no other in- 
centive than the fear of hell. 

Insincerity is just want of conscientiousness, i. 6., of 
sincerity in a man's avowals to his inward judge, cogitated 
as a person different from himself. To take this matter 
quite rigidly, this would be insincerity, to hold a wish framed 
by self-love for the deed, because the end aimed at by it is 
good ; and the inward lie told by a man to himself, although 
a violation of his duty towards himself, commonly goes under 
the name of, and is taken for, a weakness, pretty much in 
the same way as the wish of a lover to find only good 



by Man to Himself. 247 

qualities in his adored, seals his eyes to her most glaring 
defects. However, this insincerity in the statements de- 
clared by man to himself, deserves the most serious repre- 
hension j for, from this rotten spot (which seems to taint the 
vitals of humanity), the evil of insincerity spreads into one's 
intercourse with one's fellow-men, the maxim of truth being 
once broken up. 

E/EMARK. — It is exceedingly remarkable that holy writ 
dates the original of evil, not from the fratricide of Cain 
(against which nature revolts), but from the first lie; and 
states the author of all evil under the denomination of the 
Liar from the beginning, and the Father of lies j although 
reason can give no account of this proneness of mankind to 
hypocrisy; which deflective tendency must, however, have 
preceded man's actual lapse, an act of freedom not admitting, 
as. physical effects do, a deduction and explanation from 
the law of cause and effect, this last law referring singly to 
phenomena. 

Casuistical Questions .—-Are falsehoods out of pure 
politeness (the most obedient servant at the end of a letter), 
lying? No one is deceived by them. An author asks, 
*' How do you like my new work ?" Now the answer might 
be given illusorily, by jesting upon the captiousness of such 
a question; but who has wit enough always ready? The 
smallest tarrying in replying must of itself mortify the author. 
Is it, then, allowed to pay him compliments ? 

If I lie, in matters of importance, in the actual business of 
life, must I bear all the consequences resulting from my 
falsehood ? One gives orders to his servant, if any call for 
him, to say he is not at home : the domestic does so, and be- 
comes in this way the cause of his master's finding oppor- 
tunity to commit a crime, which would otherwise have been 
prevented by the messenger-at-arms, who came to execute his 
warrant. On whom, according to ethic principles, does the 



248 Of the DtUy owed 

blame fall % Unquestionably, in part upon the servant, wlio 
violated by his lie a duty owed by him to himself, the con- 
sequences of which, also, will be imputed to him by his own 
conscience. 

Bee. 10. — Of Avarice. 

I understand in this chapter not rapacious avarice, the 
propensity to extend one's gains beyond one's needs, in order 
to sumptuous fare ; but the avarice of hoarding, which, when 
sordid, makes a man a miser, not so much because it dis- 
regards the obligations of charity, as because it narrows and 
contracts the proper enjoyment of the goods of life within 
the measure of one's real wants, and so is repugnant to the 
duty owed by man to himself. 

It is in the exposition of this vice that we can best display 
the inaccuracy of all those accounts of virtue and vice which 
make them differ in " clegree^^ and show clearly at the same 
time the applicability of Aristotle's famous principle, that 
virtue is the mean betwixt two extremes of vice. 

Thus, when for instance I regard frugality as the mean 
betwixt prodigality and avarice, and state this medium as one 
of degree, then the one vice could not pass into its opposite 
and contrary (which, however, is not unfrequent), except by 
passing through the intermediate virtue, and in this way 
virtue would come to be a diminishing vice, i. e., a vice at its 
vanishing quantity ; and the true inference from this would 
be, in the present instance, that the perfect point of moral 
duty would consist in making no use at all of the bounties 
of fortune. 

Neither the measure nor the quantum of acting upon a 
maxim, but that maxim's objective principle, is what con- 
stitutes the act a vice or a virtue. The maxim of the avari- 
cious and rapacious prodigal is to accumulate wealth, in order 
that he may eujoy it ; that of the sordidly avaricious, or 



by Man to Himself, 249 

MISER, is, on the contrary, to acquire and to keep accumu- 
lated his wealth, where he makes the bare possession of it 
his end, and dispenses with the enjoyment. 

The peculiar characteristic of the miser is this, that he 
adopts the principle of hoarding up the means conducive to 
many ends, with the inward reservation, never to apply such 
means to their destined uses, and so to bereave himself of all 
the amenities and sweets of life ; a maxim utterly subversive 
of the duty a man owes to himself. Profusion and hoarding, 
then, differ not in degree, but they are specifically distinct in 
respect of their contrary and inconsistent maxims.^ 

^ The position, one ought never to overdo or underdo ANYTmNG, 
says nothing, for it is tautological. What is it to overdo ? A ns. To 
do more than is right. What is it to underdo ? Ans. To do less than 
is right. What is meant hy one ought ? Ans. It is not right to do 
more or less than is right. If this be the wisdom to be pumped from 
Aristotle, we have made a bad choice in our fountain. 

There is betwixt truth and falsehood no mean, although there is be- 
twixt frankness and reserve : the reserved takes care that everything he 
says is true ; but he does not tell the whole truth, and a medium may 
be assigned. Now it is quite natural to ask the moralist to indicate this 
golden mean ; which, however, cannot be done, for both virtues admit 
of a certain latitude, and the bounds put to candour and reserve is u, 
matter for a man's judgment, and so is a question falling under the 
pragmatic rules of prudence, and not un der the imperative of morality ; 
that is to say, the solution affects a question of indeterminate obligation, 
and must not be handled as if it were strict and definite. He, therefore, 
who obeys the laws of duty, nay, if he do more than prudence would 
prescribe, in a given conjuncture, commits in so far a fault ,• but he 
commits none, in so far as he rigidly adheres to his moral maxims^ much 
less a vice in so doing ; and Horace's lines, 

Insani sapiens nomen ferat, sequus iniqui 
Ultra quam satis est, virt litem si petat ipsam, 
contain downright falsehood, if taken to the letter. Sapiens seems to 
mean a good, dog-trot, prudent man, who does not feed his imagination 
with any fantastic idea of perfection, which is to be aspired to, though 
not attained, which last exceeds man's power, and we would run up 
ethics into an absurdity. But to be too virtuous, i. e., too attached and 
devoted to duty, is as much as drawing a right line too straight, or a 
circle too round. 



250 Of the Dtity owed 

Casuistical Question. — Since we treat here only of duties 
owed to one's self, and rapacious avarice (insatiable cupidity 
of wealth), and the avarice of hoarding, rest on the common 
ground of self-love, and seem both objectionable, merely 
because they conclude in poverty, in the case of the former, 
issuing in unexpected, in that of the latter, in a voluntary 
indigence (by force of the determination to live in poverty) 
— since,*! say, all this is the case, the question might be 
raised, if they are either of them at all vices, and not rather 
mere imprudencies, and so not falling within the sphere of 
the duties owed by man to himself; but the sordid avarice 
is not a mere misunderstood economy, — it is an abject and 
servile enthralling of a man's self to the dominion of money, 
and is a submitting to cease to be its master, which is a vio- 
lation of the duty owed by man to himself : it is the opposite 
of that generous liberality of sentiment (not of munificent 
liberality, which is no more than a particular case of the 
former) which determines bo shake itself free from every 
consideration whatever, the law alone excepted, and is a 
defraudation comxmitted by man against himself. And yet, 
what kind of law is that, whereof the very inward legislator 
knows not the application *? Ought I to retrench the outlays 
of my table, or the expenses of my dress ? Should I in youth, 
or in my old age "? Or is there, generally speaking, any such 
virtue as that of thrift % 

Sec. 11. — Of False and Spurious Humility. 
Man, as a part of the physical system (homo phenomenon, 
animal rationale), is an animal of very little moment, and 
has but a common value with beasts, and the other products 
of the soil. Even that he is superior to those by force of 
his understanding, gives him only a higher external value in 
exchange, when brought to the market along with other 
cattle, and sold as wares. 



by Man to Himself, 251 

But man considered as a person, i, e., as the subject of 
ethico-active reason, is exalted beyond all price ; for as sucb 
(homo noumenon), he cannot be taken for a bare means, con- 
ducive either to his own or to other persons' ends, but must 
be esteemed an end in himself; that is to say, he is invested 
with an internal dignity (an absolute worth), in name of 
which he extorts reverence for his person from every other 
finite Intelligent throughout the universe, and is entitled 
to compare himself with all such, and to deem himself 
their equal. 

The humanity of our common nature is the object of that 
reverence exigible by each man from his fellow, which reve- 
rence, however, he must study not to forfeit. He may, and 
indeed he ought, to estimate himself by a measure at once 
great and small, according as he contemplates his physical 
existence as an animal, or his cogitable being, according to 
the ethical substratum of his nature. Again, since he has 
to consider himself not merely as a person, but also as a man, 
that is, as such a person as has imposed upon him duties put 
upon him by his own reason, his insignificance as an animal 
ought neither to impair nor affect his consciousness of his 
dignity as a rational, and he ought not to forget his ethical 
self-reverence springing from his latter nature; that is to 
say, he ought not to pursue those ends which are his duties 
servilely, or as if he sought for the favour of any other per- 
son : he ought not to renounce his dignity, but always to 
uphold, in its integrity, his consciousness of the loftiness of 
the ethical substratum of his nature ; and this self-reverence 
is a duty owed by man to himself. 

The consciousness and feeling of one's little worth, 
when compared with the law, is ethical humility : the 
over-persuasion that a man has a great deal of moral 
worth, owing only to his neglecting to quadrate himself with 
the law, is ethical arrogancy, and might be called self- 



252 Of the Duty owed 

RIGHTEOUSNESS. But to renoTincG all claim to any moral 
worth, in tlie hope of thereby acquiring a borrowed and 
another, is false ethical humility, and may be called spiritual 

HYPOCRISY. 

Humility, understood as a low opinion of one's self, when 
compared with other persons, is no duty (nor, generally 
speaking, in comparison with any finite being, although a 
seraph) : the active endeavour, in such comparison, to find 
one's self equal or superior to others, in the imagination of 
thereby augmenting his inward worth, is ambition, — a vice 
diametrically opposed to the duty we owe to others ; but the 
studied declinature of all one's proper ethic worth, considered 
as a mean for ingratiating one's self into the favour of an- 
other (be that other who he may), is false and counterfeit 
humility — (hypocrisy, flattery) — and a degradation of 
one's personality, subverting the duty he owes to himself. 

Upon an exact and sincere comparison of a man's self with 
the moral law (its holiness and rigour), true humility must 
infallibly result; but from the very circumstance that we can 
know ourselves capable of such an inward legislation, and 
that the physical man finds himself compelled to stand in awe 
of the ethical man in his own person, there results also at the 
same time a feeling of exaltation, and the highest possible 
self-estimation, as the consciousness of one's inward worth, 
by force of which he is raised far beyond all price, and sees 
himself invested with an inalienable dignity, inspiring him 
with reverence for himself. 

^ec, 12. 

This duty, in respect of the dignity of our humanity, can 
be rendered more sensible by such precepts as the following. 

Become not the slaves of other men. Sufier not thy rights 
to be trampled under foot by others with impunity. Make 
no debts thou mayest be unable to discharge. Receive no 



by Man to Himself, 253 

favours thou canst dispense with, and be neither parasites nor 
flatterers, nor — for tliey differ but in degree ^-beggars. Live, 
then, frugally, lest one day thou come to beggary. Howling 
and groaning, nay, a mere scream at a bodily pain, is beneath 
thy dignity as a man, more especially when conscious that 
thou hast thyself merited it. Hence the ennoblement of 
(averting of ignominy from) the death of a malefactor, by the 
constancy with which he meets his fate. To kneel or pros- 
trate thyself upon the earth, in order to depicture in a more 
lively image to thy fancy thy adoration of celestial objects, 
derogates from thy dignity as a man ; as does also the w^or- 
shipping of them by images : for then thou humblest thyself, 
not before an ideal, the handiwork of thy reason, but be- 
neath an IDOL, the workmanship of thy hands. 

Casuistics. — Is not the elation of mind in self-eeverence, 
considered as a consciousness of the lofty destiny of man, too 
much akin to arrogance, ^. e., to self-conceit, to make it ad- 
visable to summon up to it, not oiily in respect of the moral 
law, but even in respect of other men % or would not self- 
denial in this particular invite others to despise our person, 
and so be a violation of what is due by man to himself? Fawn- 
ing and scraping to another is in any event unworthy of a man. 

Are not the different styles of address, and the especial 
marks of respect, denoting, with such painful anxiety, differ- 
ence of rank in society, — all which differs widely from polite- 
ness, ,a thing indespensable for mutually reverencing one 
another, — ^the thou, he, they, your high wisdom, youk 
reverence, etc. etc., in which pedantry the Germans go 
beyond all nations on the earth, the Indian castes alone 
excepted, — are not, I say, these proofs of a widely-spread 
tendency among mankind to false and spurious humility? 
(hse nugse in seria ducunt.) — However, he who first makes 
himself a worm, dare not complain when he is trampled 
under foot. 



254 Of the Ditty owed by Man 

CHAPTEE III. 

OF THE DUTY OWED BY MAN TO HIMSELF AS HIS OWN JUDGE. 

Sec. 13. 

The idea Duty always involves and presents to the mind 
that of necessitation by law (law being an ethical imperative 
limiting our freedom), and belongs to our moral understand- 
ing which prescribes the rule. The inward imputation of an 
act, however, as of an event falling .under the law, belongs to 
the judgment, which being the subjective principle of the im- 
putation of an act, utters its verdict whether or not any 
given deed (i. e., act subsumible under law) has been done or 
not, after which reason pronounces sentence, i. 6., connects the 
act with its legal consequences, and so absolves or condemns; 
all which is carried on before a court of justice, as if in the 
presence of an ethical person sitting to give effect to the law. 
The consciousness of an internal tribunal in man, before 
which his thoughts accuse or excuse him, is what is called 
Conscience. 

Every man has Conscience, and finds himself inspected by 
an inward censor, by whom he is threatened and kept in awe 
(reverence mingled with dread) ; and this power watching 
over the law, is nothing arbitrarily (optionally) adopted by 
himself, but is interwoven with his substance. It follows 
him like his shadow, however he may try to flee from it. He 
may indeed deafen himself by pleasure or by business, or he 
may lull himself into a lethargy; but this is only for a while, 
and he must inevitably come now and then to himself : nor 
can he hinder himself from ever and anon awaking, where- 
upon he hears his dreadful and appalling voice. In the last 
stage of reprobation man may indeed have ceased to heed him, 
but not to hear^him, is impossible. 



to Himself as his own Judge, 255 

This originary intellectual and ethical (for it refers to duty) 
disposition of our nature, called conscience, has this peculiar- 
ity, that although this whole matter is an affair of man with 
himself, he notwithstanding finds his reason constrained to 
carry on the suit, as if it were at the instigation of another 
person ; for the procedure is the conduct of a cause before a 
court. Now, that he who is the accused by his conscience 
should be figured to be just the same person as his judge, is 
an absurd representation of a tribunal ; since in such event 
the accuser would always lose his suit. Conscience must 
therefore represent to itself always some one other than 
itself as judge, unless it is to arrive at a contradiction with 
itself. This other may be either a eeal — or an ideal 
PEKSON the product of reason.^' 

Such an ideal person, authorized to sit as judge in the 
court of conscience, must be a seakcher of the heart, for 
the tribunal is erected in the interior of man. Further, he 
must hold ALL-OBLIGATORY POWER, ^. 6., be such a person, or 

* The twofold personality in which the man who accuses and judges 
himself has to cogitate himself, this double self, forced on the one hand 
to appear trembling at the bar of a tribunal, where, on the other hand, 
he sits as judge, invested as his birthright with such authority, need* 
some explanation, lest reason seem to be involved in a contradiction 
with itself. I, at once accused and accuser, am numerically one and 
the same person, but, as the subject of the moral legislation, based on 
the idea Freedom iftomo noumenon), I must be considered, though only 
for a practical behoof, as diverse from the phenomenal man endowed 
with reason. For a practical behoof only, we say, because speculation 
gives no theory, of the relation obtaining betwixt the cogitable and 
the sensible system. And this specific difference betwixt the real and 
the phenomenal man is the difference of the superior and inferior facul- 
ties by which man is characterized. The former accuse, the latter 
appear in defence : after closing the record, the inward judge, as he^ 
who is invested with judiciary authority, utters the doom of bliss or 
woe, as ethical sequents of the deed ; but in this capacity (which is that 
of a sovereign governor) we are unable to investigate any further the 
sources of its power, but are constrained to stand in awe of the uncon- 
ditionate jubeo or veto of our reason. 



256 Of the Duty owed by Man 

at least be figured as if lie were a person, in respect of whom 
all duty may be represented as liis commandments, because 
conscience is jndge over all free actions. Lastly, lie must 
have all power (in heaven and in earth) to absolve and to 
condemn, these properties being of the very essence of the 
functions of a judge : apart from his being endowed where- 
with, he could give no effect to the law. But since he who 
searches the heart, and, having all-obligatory power, is able 
to absolve and condemn, is called God, it follows that con- 
science must be regarded as a subjective principle implanted 
in the reason of man, calling for an account of every action 
before God. ISTay, this notion of responsibility is at all 
times involved, however darkly, in every act of moral 
self-consciousness. 

This is not by any means to say that man is entitled, and 
still less that he is bound, to believe in, as real, any such 
Supreme Being, answering to the idea, to which conscience 
inevitably points ; for the idea is given him not objectively 
by speculative reason, but subjectively only, by practical 
reason obliging itself to act conformably to this representa- 
tion. And mankind is, by means of this idea, but merely 
from its analogy to that of a sovereign lawgiver of the 
universe, led to figure to himself conscientiousness (in the 
old language of the empire, religio), as a responsibility owed 
to A MOST HOLY BEING, different from ourselves, and yet most 
intimately present to our substance (moral legislative reason), 
and to submit ourselves to His will as if it were a law of 
righteousness. The notion of religion in genere is there- 
fore just this, that it is A principle of esteeming of all our 
duties as if they were divine commandments. 

1. In an affair of conscience, man figures to himself a pre- 
admonitory or warning conscience before he decides on act- 
ing; and here the minutest scruple, when it refers to an idea 
'of duty (somewhat in itself moral), and over which conscience 



to Himself as his own Judge. 257 

is tlie alone judge, is of weight, nor is it ever regarded as a 
trifle ; nor can what would be a real transgression be de- 
clared, according to the saying of minima non curat prcetor^ 
a BAGATELLE or PECCADILLO, and SO left for an arbitrary and 
random determination. Hence, having a large conscience is 
the same with having none. 

2. As soon as an act is determined on and completed, the 
accuser immediately presents himself in the court of con- 
science, and along with him there appears a defender, and 
the suit is never decided amicably, but according to the 
rigour of the law. After which follows — 

3. The sentence of conscience upon the man, either ab- 
solving or CONDEMNING, which concludes the cause. As to 
which final judgment, we remark that the former sentence 
never decrees a reward as the gaming of something which 
was not there before, but leaves room only for satisfaction at 
escaping condemnation. The bliss, therefore, announced by 
the consoling voice of conscience is not positive (as joy), but 
only NEGATIVE (tranquillization after previous apprehension); 
a blessedness capable of being ascribed to virtue only, as a 

^ warfare with the influences of the evil principle in man. 

Sec. 14. — The first commandment of all Duties owed by 
Man to himself. 

This is, KNOW THYSELF, not after thy physical perfection, 
but after thy ethical, in reference to thy duty. Search, try 
thy heart, whether it be good or evil, whether the springs of 
thy conduct be pure or impure ; and how much, either as 
originally belonging to thy substance or as acquired by thee, 
may be imputable to thy account, and may go to make up 
thy moral state. 

This self-examination, which seeks to fathom the scarcely 
penetrable abysses of the human heart, and the self-know- 
ledge springing from it, is the beginning of all human wis- 



258 Of the Duty owed by Man 

dom. Por this wisdom, which consists in the accordance of 
the will of an Intelligent with the last end of his existence, 
requires in man, first, that he disembarrass himself of an 
inward impediment (an evil will, nestled in his person) ; and 
second, the unremitted effort to develop his originary in- 
amissible substratum for a good one. Only the Avernan 
descent of self-knowledge paves a way to self-apotheosis. 

Sec. 15. 
This ethical self-knowledge guards, first, against the fana- 
tical DETESTATION" OF one's SELF as a man, and against a 
disdain of the whole human race in general. It is only by 
force of the glorious substratum for morality . within us — 
which substratum it is that renders man venerable — that we 
are enabled to find any man despicable, or to hand ourselves 
over to our own contempt, when seen to fall short of this 
august standard ; an ethical disregard attaching to this or 
that man singly, never to humanity in general. And then 
it guards, secondly, against the fond and fatal self-delusion 

OF TAKING A BARE WISH, HOWEVER ARDENT, FOR ANY INDEX OF 

A GOOD HEART; and obviates irregular self-estimation. Even 
PRAYER is no more than a wish, inwardly uttered in the 
presence of a Searcher of the Heart. Impartiality, in 
judging of ourselves, when compared with the law, and sin- 
cerity in a man's own self-confession of his own inward 
ethical worth or unworth, are the duties owed by man to 
himself, immediately founded on this first commandment of 
self-knowledge. 

EPISODE. 

8ec. 16. — Of an Amphiboly of the Reflex Moral Notions; 
whereby Mankind is led to regard what is only a Duty to- 
wards himself as if it were a Duty owed by him to others. 

To judge on grounds of naked reason, man has no duties 
imposed upon him, except those owed by him to humanity 



to Himself as his own Judge. 259 

in general (Mmself or others) ; for his obligement towards 
any person imports ethical necessitation by that person's will. 
The necessitating (obliging) subject must then, in every in- 
stance, be, FiEST, a person \ and must, second, be a person 
presented to our knowledge in experience and observation j 
for, since man has to work towards the end of that person's 
will, this is a relation possible only betwixt two given exist- 
ing beings, no imaginary or barely cogitable persons becom- 
ing the final cause and scope of any one's actions. But 
experience and observation teach a knowledge of no other 
being, except our fellow-men, capable of obligation, whether 
active or passive. Mankind can, therefore, have no duty 
toward any being other than his fellow-men, and when he 
figures to himself that there are such, this arises singly from 
an amphiboly of his reflex moral notions ; and this fancied 
duty owed by him to others is no more than a duty to him- 
self, he being misled to this misunderstanding by confound- 
ing what is duty to himself in regard of other beings, with a 
duty toward those others. 

This fancied duty may extend, either to impersonals, or 
if to PERSONAL, yet to INVISIBLE beings, not presented to our 
sensory. The former will be either the physical matter of 
the universe, or else its organized but impercipient products; 
or, lastly, that part of nature which we see endowed with 
choice, motion, and perception (1. minerals, 2. plants, 3. 
animals). The latter will have a reference to superhuman 
beings, cogitated as spiritual substances (God, angels). 
And we now ask, does there obtain, betwixt these different 
kinds of beings and man, any relation of duty % and if so, 
what is the nature and extent of this obligation ] 

Bee. 17. 
In regard of the beautiful but lifeless objects in nature, 
to indulge a propensity to destroy them, is subversive of the 



26o Of the Duty owed by Man 

duty owed by man to himself. For this spirit of destruction 
lays waste that feeling in man, which, though not itself 
ethical, is yet akin to it, and aids and supports, or even pre- 
pares a way for a determination of the sensory, not unfavour- 
able to morality, viz., the emotion of disinterested complacency 
in somewhat quite apart from any view of its utility, e. ^., as 
when we find delight in contemplating a fine crystallization, 
or the unutterable beauties of the vegetable kingdom. 

In regard of the animated but irrational part of the crea- 
tion, it is undoubted that a savage and cruel treatment of 
them is yet more inly repugnant to what man owes to him- 
self; for it blunts and obtunds our natural sympathy with 
their pangs, and so lays waste, gradually, the physical prin- 
ciple which isvof service to morality, and assists greatly the 
discharge of our duty towards other men. But to kill them, 
or to set them on work not beyond their strength (which 
labour man himself must undertake), is in nowise disallowed; 
although to torture them, with a view to recondite experi- 
ments subserving a mere speculation, which could be dis- 
pensed with, is detestable. Nay, gratitude for the services 
of an old horse or house-dog is indirectly a duty, namely, an 
indirect duty in regard of these animals ; for, directly^ it is 
no more than what a man owes to himself. 

^ec. 18. 
In regard OJB' a Being transcending all bounds of 
KNOWLEDGE, but whose existence is notwithstanding given to 
us in idea, viz., the Godhead, we have in like manner a duty 
called religion, which is the duty of recognising all our duties 
AS IF THEY WERE divino commandments. But this is not the 
consciousness of a duty toward God. For since this idea 
rises singly upon our own reason, and is made by ourselves 
for the behoof of explaining theoretically the symmetry and 
fitness of means to ends observed in the fabric of the universe. 



to Himself as his own Judge, 261 

or practically to give added force to the mainspring of action, 
it is manifest that we have nowhat given, toward whom an 
obligation could be constituted ; and his reality would first 
need to be established by experience (or revealed). And the 
duty we have here is to apply this indispensable idea of 
reason to the moral law within us, where it proves of the 
greatest ethical fertility. In this practical seiise it may be 
asserted, that to have religion is a duty owed by man to 
himself. 



PAET 11. 

OF THE INDETERMINATE MORAL DUTIES OWED BY MAN TO 
HIMSELF IN REGARD OF HIS END. 

Sec, 19. — Of the Duty owed hy him to himself of advancing 
his Physical Perfection, 

The culture of all the different resources of mind, soul, and 
body, as means conducive to many ends, is a duty owed by 
man to himself. Man owes it to himself as a reasonable 
being, not to allow to go to rust and lie dormant the latent 
energies and native elements of his system, whereof his reason 
might one day make use. And even were he to rest con- 
tented with the measure of talent nature had endowed him 
with as his birthright, still it ought to be upon grounds of 
reason, that he should instruct such a remaining satisfied 
without so moderate a share of capacity ; for, being a person 
capable of designing ends, or of proposing himself to others 
as an end, he ought to stand indebted for the development 
and amelioration of his powers, not to any physical instinct 
of his system, but to his own liberty, whereby he freely 



262 Of the Moral Duty 

decides liow far lie will carry tliem. This duty, then, is 
altogether independent on any advantages the culture of his 
faculfcies as means to ends may procure to him, — for perhaps 
the advantage, according to Bousseau^s views, might lie in 
the uncultivated roughness of a savage life, — ^but is founded 
on a commandment of ethico-active reason, and a duty 
imposed on man by himself to advance and ameliorate the 
condition of his humanity, according to the diversity of the 
ends assigned him, and to make himself, in a practical point 
of view, adapted to the final destinies of his being. 

Powers of mind we call those faculties whose exercise is 
possible by force of reason singly. They are creative, so 
far forth as their use is independent on experience and 
observation, and rests on principles a 'priori. Some of their 
products are, the mathematics, logic, and metaphysic of 
ethics, which two last fall under the head of philosophy, viz., 
the speculative philosophy, where this word is taken, not 
to signify wisdom, as it ought to do, but only science ; which 
last, however, may be subservient to advancing the ends of 
practical wisdom. 

Powers of soul, again, are those which stand at the com- 
mand of the understanding, and of the rule this last pre- 
scribes in order to attain the end it designs, and so depend to 
a certain extent on observation and experience. Instances 
of such powers are, memory, imagination, and the like, from 
which learning, taste, the graces of outward and inward 
accomplishments take their rise, and which can be employed 
as instrumental to a vast variety of ends. 

Lastly, the culture of our bodily powers (gymnastic pro- 
perly so called) is the caring for the stuff and materials of 
the man, apart from which instrument and engine his ends 
could not be exerted into acts ; consequently, the intentional 
and regular revivifying of man's animal part is a duty owed 
by mankind to himself* 



owed by Man to Himself, 263 

Sec, 20. 

, Which of these natural perfections may be the more 
eligible, and in what proportion, when compared with the 
remainder, it may be his duty to design them as his ends, 
must be left to the private reflection of each individual, who 
will decide according to his taste for this or that kind of life, 
and according to the estimate he may make of his ability, 
whether he should follow some handicraft, or a mercantile 
employment, or become a member of a learned profession. 
Because, over and above the necessity man stands in of pro- 
viding for his livelihood, a necessity which never can of itself 
beget any obligation, it is a duty owed by man to himself to 
make himself of use to the world; this belonging to the 
worth of the humanity he represents, and which, therefore, 
he ought not to degrade. 

But this duty owed by man to himself in regard of his 
physical perfection, is only of indeterminate obligation. Be- 
cause the law ordains only the maxims of the action, not the 
act itself ; and, in regard of this last, determines neither its 
kind nor its degree, but leaves a vast latitude for man's free 
choice to roam or settle in. 

Sec. 21. — Of the Duty owed hy Man to himself of advancing 
his Ethical Perfection. 

This consists, fiest of all, subjectively, in the purity of 
his moral sentiments, where, freed from all admixture of 
sensitive excitement, the law is itself alone the spring of 
conduct; and actions are not only conformable to what is 
duty, but are performed because it is so, — Be ye holy 
is here the commandment; and, second, objectively, consists 
in attaining his whole and entire moral end, i. e., the execu- 
tion of his whole duty, and the final reaching of the goal 
placed before him as his mark, — the commandment here is, 



2 64 Of the Moral Duty 

Be ye perfect. The endeavour after this end is, in the 
case of mankind, never more than an advancement from one 
grade of ethical perfection to another. If there he any virtue, 
if there he any praise, that study and pursue. 

Sec. 22. 

The duty towards one's self is, in its quality, determinate 
and strict ; but in degree it is of indeterminate obligation, 
and that on account of the frailty of human nature ; for 
that perfection which it is our constant and incumbent duty 
to pursue, but never (at least in this life) to attain, and the 
obeying which can by consequence consist only in urging 
after it with an unfaltering and progressive step, is no doubt, 
in regard of the object (the idea to realize which is end), de- 
terminate, strict, and given ; but in regard of the subject, is 
but a duty of indeterminate obligation owed by mankind to 
himself. 

The depths of the human heart are inscrutable. Who has 
such an exact self-knowledge as to be able to say, when he 
feels the impelling force of duty, that the mohile of his will is 
swayed singly by the naked idea of the law, and to declare 
that other sensitive excitements may not work alongside of 
it and pollute it, — such as by-views of advantage, or of 
avoiding harm^ — considerations which on occasion might 
serve the turn of vice. Again, as for that perfection which 
concerns the accomplishment of one's end, there can, it is 
true, be only one virtue objectively in idea, — the ethical 
strength of one's practical principles; but subjectively, in 
point of real fact and event, a vast number of virtues, of the 
most heterogeneous nature, amongst which it is not impossible 
some vice may lurk, although it escapes observation, and is 
not so called, on account of the virtues in whose company 
it appears. But a sum of virtues, the completeness or de- 
fects of which no self-knowledge can accurately detect, can 



owed by Man to Himself, 265 

beget only an indeterminate obligation to perfect our moral 
nature. 

Whence we conclude, that all the moral duties, in respect 
of the ends of the humanity subsisting in our person, are 
duties of indeterminate obligation only. 



^66 On the Offices 



OF THE MOEAL DUTIES OWED BY MAMIND 
TOWAKD HIS EELLOW-MEN. 



CHAPTEE I. 

OF THE DUTY OWED TO OTHERS, CONSIDERED 
SIMPLY AS MEN. 

PAET L 

OF THE OFFICES OF CHARITY. 

Bee, 23. 

THE principal division of these obligations may be made 
into SUCH DUTIES AS OBLIGE OUR FELLOW-MEN, wben WO 

discharge them; and second^ into those which, when ob- 
served, ENTAIL UPON THE OTHER NO OBLIGATION of any SOrt. 

To fulfil the former is, in respect of others, meritorious ; 
to fulfil the latter, of debt only. Love and reverence 
are the emotions which go hand in hand with our discharge 
of these two kinds of offices. These emotions may be con- 
sidered separately, and in practice they may subsist, each 
for itself and apart from the other. Love of our neighbour 
may take place even while he deserves but little reverence j 
as, on the contrary, reverence is due to every man, although 
deemed hardly worth our love. But, properly speaking, 
they are at bottom inseparably united by the law, in every 
duty owed by us, to our neighbour; but this in such a 
manner, that sometimes the one emotion is the leading 
principle of the duty of the person, along with which the 



of Charity, 267 

other follows as its accessory. Thus we regard ourselves 
obliged to benefit the poor ; but because this favour would 
imply his dependence for his welfare on my generosity, a 
case which would be humiliating for the other, it becomes 
my further duty so to behave to him who accepts my gift, 
as to represent this benefit either as a bare incumbent duty 
upon my part, or as a trifiing mark of friendship, and to 
spare the other such humiliation, and to uphold his self- 
reverence in its integrity. 

8eG. 24. 
When we speak, not of laws of nature, but of laws of 
duty as regulating the external relation of man to man, we 
then regard ourselves in a cogitable ethic world, where, by 
analogy to the physical system, the combination of Intelli- 
gents is figured to be efiected by the joint action and reaction 
of attractive and repellant forces. By the principle of 
mutual love, they are destined for ever to approach, and 
by that of reverence, to preserve their due elongation from 
one another ; and were either of these mighty moral prin- 
ciples to be suspended, the moral system could not be 
upheld, and, unable to sustain itself against its own fury, 
would retrovert to chaos. 

^ec. 25. 

But LOVE must not be here understood to mean an emotion 

of complacency in the perfection of other people, there being 

no obligation to entertain feelings ; but this love must be 

understood as the practical maxim of goodwill issuing in 

BENEFICENCE AS ITS RESULT. 

The same remark holds of the reverence to be demon- 
strated towards others, which cannot be understood simply 
to mean a feeling emerging from contrasting our own worth 
with that of another, — such as a child may feel for its 



268 On the Offices 

parents, a pupil for his ward, or an inferior for Ms superior 
in rank, — but must be taken to mean tlie practical maxim 

of CIRCUMSCIIIBING OUR OWN SELF-ESTEEM, BY THE REPRE- 
SENTATION OF THE DIGNITY OF THE HUMANITY RESIDENT IN 
THE PERSON OF ANOTHER ^that is, A PRACTICAL REVERENCE. 

This duty of the free reverence owed to other men is pro- 
perly negative only, viz., not to exalt ourselves above others. 
It is in this way analogous to the juridical duty '•'to do no 
wrong^"* and so might be taken for a strict and determinate 
obligation ; but, regarded as a moral duty, and a branch of 
the offices of charity, it is a duty of indeterminate obligation. 

The duty of loving my neighbour may be thus expressed, 
— that it is the duty of making my own the ends and 
interests of others, in so far as these ends are not immoral. 
The duty of reverencing my neighbour is expressed in the 
formula, to lower no man to be a bare means instrumental 
towards the attaining my own ends, ^. 6., not to expect from 
any man that he should abase himself to be the footstool of 
my views. 

By discharging the former duty, I at the same time 
oblige the other ; I make myself well-deserving of him. 
But by the observance of the latter, I oblige only myself, 
and keep myself within my own bounds, so as not to with- 
draw from the ,other any of that worth he is entitled a,s a 
man to put upon himself. 

8ec. 26. — Of Philanthropy in general. 
The love of our fellow-men must, because we understand 
by it practical benevolence, be understood, not as a love of 
complacency in our species, but as a maxim actively to 
BEFRIEND THEM. He who takes delight in the welfare of 
his fellows, considered merely as belonging to his own 
species, is a philanthropist, — a Friend of Mankind in 
general. He who alone finds delight in the misery and 



of Charity. 269 

woes of his neighbour, is a misanthrope. An egotist is he 
who beholds with indifference the good or the bad fortunes 
of his neighbour. While that person who shuns society 
because he is unable to regard his fellows with complacency, 
although he wishes them all well, would be an esthetic 
misanthrope; and his aversion from his kind might be 

called ANTHROPOPHOBY. 

Bee, 27. 
Whether mankind be found worthy of love or not, a 
practical principle of goodwill (active philanthropy) is a duty 
mutually owed by all men to one another, according to the 
ethical precept of perfection, Love thy neighbour as thyself ; 
for every ethical relation obtaining between man and man 
is a relation subsisting in the representation of pure reason, 
i, e,, is a relation of mankind's free actions, according to 
maxims potentially fit for law universal, which maxims can 
therefore, in no event, be founded on an emotion of selfish- 
ness. The constitution of my nature forces me to desire 
and will every other person's benevolence ; wherefore, con- 
versely, I am beholden to entertain goodwill towards others ; 
but, again, because all others, except myself, are not all 
mankind, a maxim expressing my active goodwill towards 
all others would want the absolute universality whereby 
alone the law has ethical virtue to oblige ; consequently the 
ethical law of benevolence must include my own person 
likewise with others, as the object of the commandment 
announced by practical reason ; — which is not to say, that I 
thereby become obliged to love myself, such self-love obtain- 
ing of its own accord, and inevitably, but states, that legis- 
lative reason, which embraces in its idea of humanity the 
whole race (i. e., me likewise), includes in its universal 
legislation myself likewise, under the duty of reciprocal 
benevolence; and so renders it allowed for me to wish 



270 On the Offices 

well to myself, under tlie condition that I cherish good- 
will towards every other person; my maxim being thus 
alone fitted for law universal, whereon is based every law 
of duty whatsoever. 

^ec, 28. 

The goodwill expressed in universal philanthropy i^' exten- 
sively the greatest possible, but intensively (in degree) the 
most contracted ; and to say of any one that he is interested 
in the welfare of his neighbour, as a general philanthropist, 
is to say that the interest he takes in him is just the smallest 
possible, — -he is merely not indifferent. 

But of my fellows, one stands nearer to me than another ; 
and, so far as goodwill is concerned, I am nearest to myself : 
how does this harmonise with the formula, " Love thy neigh- 
hour as thyself?'' If one is more my neighbour (nearer to 
me in the obligation of benevolence) than another, and I 
thus am bound to more benevolence toward one person than 
toward another, and am, moreover, nearer to myself than to 
any other person; then it would appear that it cannot 
without contradiction be asserted that I ought to love all 
others as myself, — ^this measure, self-love, admitting no dif- 
ference of degree. The smallest reflection, however, shows 
that the benevolence here intended is not a bare wish, which 
last is properly an acquiescence in the happiness of my 
neighbour, while I myself contribute nothing towards it, 
according to the adage, " Every one for himself God for us 
all;'' but that we have to understand an active practical 
beneficence, which makes the welfare of others its end : and 
so in wishes T may have an equal kind intent to all, while 
actively the degree may be carried to any extent or measure, 
according to the difference of the beloved persons, some of 
whom may stand nearer to me than others, and all this 
without violating the absolute universality of the maxim. 



of Charity. 271 



THE OFFICES OP CHARITY ARE : A. BEISTEPICENCE ; 
B. GRATITUDE j C. SYMPATHY. 

Bee, 29. 
A. Of the Duty of Beneficence, 

To enjoj tlie bounties of fortune, so far as may be needful 
to find life agreeable, and to take care of one's animal part, 
but short of effeminacy and luxury, is a duty incumbent on 
us to ourselves ; tbe contrary of which would be, sottishly 
to deprive one's self of the bounties of fortune, — either out 
of avarice, servilely, 6v out of an outrageous discipline of one's 
natural appetites, fanajtically, — things both of which are 
repugnant to the duty owed by mankind to himself. 

But how comes it that, over and above the benevolent 
wish, which costs me nothing, my fellows are entitled to 
expect that this wish should become practical, and be exerted 
into action, — that is, how can we evince that beneficence is 
due to the necessitous, from him who is possessed of means 
empowering him to become kind ? Benevolence or goodwill 
is the pleasure we take in the prosperity and happiness of 
our neighbour : beneficence, again, would be the maxim to 
make that happiness our end; and the duty to do so is 
necessitation by the subject's own reason, to adopt this 
maxim as his universal law. 

It is by no means evident that any such law is originated 
by reason ; on the contrary, it would seem that the maxim, 
^' Every one for himself God for us all^^ were far more 

natural. 

Bee. 30. 

To deal kindly toward our brethren of mankind who are 
in distress, without hoping for anything in return, and to 
aid them in extricating themselves out of it, is a mutual 
duty incumbent on us all. 



272 On the Offices 

For every one who himself is in difficulties, desires to be 
aided by other men; but if, on the contrary, he were to 
make the rule general, not to succour others when distressed, 
then would every one refuse, or at least be entitled, when 
such a law were announced as of catholic extent, to refuse to 
him all assistance ; that is, a selfish principle of this kind 
would, when elevated to the rank of law universal, be self- 
contradictory and self-destructive, that is, would be contrary 
to duty j whence, conversely, we hold the social principle of 
mutual and joint assistance to one another in case of need, 
a universal duty owed by man to man ; for, as fellow-beings, 
i, e., necessitous (by the finite constitution of their natures), 
they ought to consider themselves as stationed in this one 
dwelling to be fellow-workers to one another. 

Sec, 31. 
Beneficence, where a man is rich, i. e., enjoys the means of 
happiness to superfluity and beyond his own wants, is to be 
looked upon by the benefactor, not even as a meritorious 
duty, although his neighbour be obliged by it. The pleasure 
which he procures to himself, and which after all, costs him 
no sacrifice, is a kind of moral luxury. He must, likewise, 
studiously avoid all appearance of intending to oblige the 
other by this means, because, otherwise, it would not be truly 
a benefit done to, but an obligation thrust upon his neigh- 
bour, to come under which must needs make the latter stand 
a grade lower in his own eyes. He ought rather so to carry 
himself, as if he were the obliged and honoured by his 
neighbour's acceptance of his kindness ; that is, he ought so 
to figure to himself, and so to represent the favour, as if it 
were of mere debt, and rather, when possible, exercise his 
good deeds quite in private. This virtue might deserve a 
yet greater name, when the ability to give benefits is cur- 
tailed, and the soul of the benefactor is so strong as to take 



of Charity. 273 

upon himself, in silence, the evils which he spares the other 
from undergoing ; a case where he must be deemed ethically 
wealthy, 

Casuistics. — How far ought the outlay expended by any 
one in deeds of charity to be carried % Surely not till we 
ourselves came to stand in need of our friends' generosity % 
What may a benefit be worth, offered to us by a dead hand 
in his testaments Does he who uses the right conferred 
upon him by the law of the land, of robbing some one of 
his freedom, and then making the other happy, according 
to his own notions of enjoyment, — can, I say, such a man be 
regarded as a benefactor, in consequence of the parental care 
he may take of his slave's welfare % or is not the unrighteous- 
ness of bereaving any one of his freedom so grave a viola- 
tion of the rights of man, that all the advantages his master 
could bestow would cease to deserve the name of kindness % 
or can he become so well-deserving of his slave by kindness, 
as to counteract and redeem the violation committed by him 
against his slave's person ? It is impossible that I can act 
kindly toward any other (infants and madmen excepted) by 
force of my idea of his happiness, but only by studying his 
ideas of welfare, to whom I wish to exhibit my affection, no 
kindness being truly shown when I thrust upon him a pre- 
sent without his will. 

Bee. 32. 

B. Of the Duty of Gratitude, 

Gratitude is the venerating of another on account 
OF a benefit we have received from him : the sentiment 
or emotion which goes hand in hand with such a judgment 
is that of reverence toward the benefactor we are beholden 
to ; whereas this other stands toward the receiver in the rela- 
tionship of love. A mere' heartfelt, generous goodwill toward 
another, for a kindness shown us, even apart from any 

T 



2 74 On the Offices 

demonstrated regard, deserves the name of a moral duty; 
and this would indicate a distinction betwixt an affectionate 
gratitude and an active thankfulness for a favour. 

Gratitude is a duty, L 6., not a mere maxim of prudence, to 
engage my benefactor to yet greater degrees of kindness, by 
professing my obligation for what he has already done ; for 
that would be to use him as a means toward my by-ends ; 
but gratitude is immediately made necessary by the moral 
law, i: 6., it is a duty. 

But gratitude must be regarded still further as a sacred 
duty, i. e., as such a duty, which to violate, would be to ex- 
tinguish the moral principles of benevolence, even in their 
source ; for that ethical object is sacred and holy, in regard 
of whom the obligation can never be adequately acquitted 
and discharged (that is, where the person who is indebted 
must always stand under the obligation). All other is only 
ordinary and vulgar duty. But there is no retribution which 
can acquit a person of a conferred benefit, the benefactor 
having always the good desert of being first in the benevo- 
lence, an advantage which the receiver cannot take away. 
However, even without any active returns, a bare cordial 
goodwill toward the benefactor is of itself a kind of grati- 
tude j in this state of mind, we say that a person is grateful. 

Sec. 33. 
As for the extent of gratitude, it is not by any means con- 
fined to contemporaries, but goes back to our ancestors, even 
to those whom we cannot certainly name. And this is the 
reason why it is considered indecorous not to defend the 
ancients as much as possible against all attacks, invective, 
and slights — the ancients being here considered as our 
teachers ; although it were a ridiculous opinion to grant to 
them any superiority over the moderns, merely on account of 
their antiquity, either in their talents or in their kind in- 



of Charity. 275 

tentions toward humanity, and to disregard wliat is new, in 
comparison of what is old, as if the world were continually 
declining from its primitive perfection. 

Sec. 34. 
But as to the intensity of this duty, ^^ e., the degree in 
which we may be obliged to this virtue, that is to be esti- 
mated by the advantage we have derived from the benefit, 
and the disinterestedness which prompted the benefactor to 
bestow it on us, the least degree of gratitude would be, when 
our benefactor is alive, to repay to him the identic service 
performed for us, or, when he is no more, to show like ser- 
vices to others. In all which, we must take good heed not 
to regard the benefit as a burden we would willingly be rid 
of and discharge, but rather to hold and to accept of the 
occasion as an ethical advantage, L e., as an opportunity 
afforded us to exercise and practise this virtue of gratitude, 
which does, by combining the ardour of benevolence with its 
tenderness (perpetual unremitted attention to the minutest 
shades of this duty), invigorate the growth of philanthropy. 

C. Of the Duty of Sympathy, 

To have a fellow-feeling with the joys and sorrows of our 
friends, is no doubt a physical emotion only; and is an 
aesthetic susceptibility of pleasure or pain, on perceiving these 
states obtain in another. There arises, however, from this 
disposition of our nature, a particular, but only conditionate 
duty, called humanity, to cultivate and employ these physical 
springs as means of advancing an effective and rational bene- 
volence. The duty is called humanity, man being now re- 
garded, not as a reasonable being, but as an animal endowed 
with reason. This sympathy may be regarded either as 
seated in the will and the ability to communicate to one an- 
other what we feel, or as seated in that physical susceptibility. 



2'j6 On the Offices of Charity, 

which nature has implanted in us, for feeling in common the 
delights or misery of our neighbour. The former is free or 
liberal, and depends on practical reason; the second is nnfree 
and illiberal, as in pity, and may be called contagious, — ^like 
a susceptibility for heat or for distempers. The obligation 
extends to the former only. 

It was a lofty cogitation of the Stoic sages when they said, 
I would wish I had a friend, not to assist me in poverty, 
sickness, captivity, and so on, but whom I might be able to 
assist and rescue; and yet this very Sage again thu^ speaks, 
when the case of his friend is gone past remedy — ^What con- 
cern is it of minel i. e., he rejected pity. 

And, in truth, when another suffers, and I allow myself to 
be infected by his sorrow, which, however, I cannot mitigate 
nor avert, then two jpersons suffer, although naturally the 
evil affects one singly; and it is quite inconceivable that it 
can be any one's duty to augment the physical evils in the 
world; and consequently there can be no obligation to act 
kindly out of pity. There is likewise an offensive variety 
of this pity called mercy, by which is meant that kind of 
benevolence shown to the unworthy; but such an expression 
of benevolence ought never to take place betwixt man and 
man, no one being entitled to boast of his worthiness to be 
happy. 

Sec, 35. 

But although it is no direct duty to take a part in the joy 
or grief of others, yet to take an active part in their lot is; 
and so by consequence an indirect duty, to cultivate the 
sympathetic affections, and to make them serve as instruments 
enabling us to discharge the offices of a humane mind, upon 
ethical principles. Thus it is a duty not to avoid the recep- 
tacles of the poor, in order to save ourselves an unpleasant 
feeling, but rather to seek them out. Neither ought we to 
desert the chambers of the sick nor the cells of the debtor, 



Of the Vices contrary to Charity. 277 

in order to escape the painful sympathy we might be unable 
to repress, this emotion beiQg a spring implanted in us by 
nature, prompting to the discharge of duties, which the naked 
representations of reason might be unable to accomplish. 

Casuistical Question. — ^Would it not be better for the 
world if all morality and obligation were restricted to the 
forensic duties, and charity left among the adiaphokaI It is 
not easy to foresee what effect such a rule might have on 
HUMAN HAPPINESS. But, in this event, the world would want 
its highest ethical decoration — charity — which does by itself 
alone, even abstractedly from all its advantages, represent 
the world as one fair moral whole. 



OF THE VICES SPRINGING FROM THE HATRED OF OUR FELLOWS, 
AND WHICH ARE OPPOSED TO THE DUTIES OF PHILANTHROPY. 

iS^ec. 36. 

These vices form the detestable family of envy, ingrati- 
tude, and malice; but the hate is in these vices not open 
and violent, but veiled and secret; and so, to the forget- 
fulness of one's duty toward one's neighbour, superadds 
TneannesSj that is, a violation of what a man owes to him- 
self. 

A. Envy is the propensity to perceive the welfare of our 
neighbour with a grudge, even though our own happiness 
does not suffer by it; and, when it rises to the extreme of 
tempting any one actively to diminish his neighbour's hap- 
piness, is the highest and most aggravated kind of envy, 
although otherwise it is most commonly no more than 
jealousy, and is only indirectly a wicked sentiment, viz., an 
ill-will at finding our own happiness cast into the shade by 
the surpassing prosperity of our neighbour; and is a displea- 
sure arising from not knowing how to estimate our own 



278 Of the Vices 

adyantages by their own intrinsic worth, but singly by com- 
paring them with those enjoyed by others : from hence come 
the expressions, the enviable concord and happiness of a 
married pair, or of a family, just as if these were cases where 
it were quite allowed to envy. The movements of envy are 
implanted in the human heart, and it is only their utterance 
which can raise it to the shocking and disgraceful spectacle 
of a peevish, self-tormenting passion, which aims, in its in- 
ward wish, at the destruction and ruin of the good fortune 
of another, — a vice alike contrary to what is due from us to 
our neighbour and to ourselves* 

B. Ingratitude towards one's benefactor is, according to 
the common judgment of mankind, one of the most odious 
and hateful vices; and yet our species is so notorious for it, 
that every one holds it for likely that he may create himself 
enemies by his benefits. The ground of the possibility of 
such a vice lies in the misunderstood duty owed to one's 
self, not to come to need, or to summon up, others to assist 
us, which lays us under obligation to them; but rather to 
support alone the calamities of life, than to pester our friends 
with them, and so to stand in their debt, which places us 
to others in the relation of clients to a patron, a state sub- 
versive of a man's proper self-estimation. And this is the 
reason why gratitude to those who have been by necessity 
before us and our antecessors, is always generously expressed, 
— ^but scantily to our contemporaries; or why even sometimes 
we invert the latter relation, and show the contrary of grati- 
tude, to make insensible the unequal obligation. However, 
this is a vice at which humanity always revolts, not only on 
account of the prejudice which such an example must entail, 
by deterring mankind from benevolence (for this benevolence 
would, when the ethic sentiment is pure, be only so much 
the more worth, when disdaining even this hope of recom- 
pense), but because the duties of philanthropy are inverted, 



contrary to Charity. 2 79 

and the want of love is transmuted to a title to hate those 
by whom we have been first beloved. 

C. Malice is the exact counterpart of; sympathy, and de- 
notes joy at the sorrow of another; nor is it any stranger to 
our frame ; but it is only when it goes so far as to do ill, or 
to assist the miscreant in executing his nefarious designs, 
that it appears in all its horrors, and presents the finished 
form of MISANTHROPY, or the hatred of our species. It is 
quite inevifeble, by the laws of imagination, not to feel more 
vividly our own welfare or good deportment, when the 
miseries or the scandalous behaviour of others serve as a 
foil to set off the brighter hues of our own state ; but to find 
immediate joy in the existence of such portentous disasters 
as subvert the general welfare of our kind, or to wish that 
such enormities should happen, is an inward hate of mankind, 
and the veriest antipart of the offices of charity which are 
incumbent on us. The insolence of some upon uninterrupted 
prosperity, and their arrogancy upon their good deportment 
(properly upon their good fortune to have escaped seduction 
to any public vice), both which advantages the selfish imputes 
to himself as his deserts, are the causes productive of this 
miserable joy on their reverse of fortune, — a joy quite opposed 
to the sympathetic maxim of honest Chromes : ^^ I am a man, 
and I take an interest in all that relates to mankindJ* 

Of this joy in the misery of another, there is a sort which 
is at once the sweetest, and which seems even to rest on some 
title of justice, nay, where it would appear that we stood 
under an obligation to pursue the misery of another as our 
end, abstracting from all views of our own advantage ; and 
that is the case of the desire for vengeance. 

Every act violating the rights of man deserves punishment, 
by which the sufferer is not only indemnified, but where the 
crime itself is avenged upon the transgressor. Punishment, 
however, is no act emanating from the private authority of 



28o Of the Vices contrary to Charity. 

the injured, but from that of a tribunal different from him- 
self, which gives effect to the Laws of a Sovereign to whom 
all are subject ; so that when we consider mankind as in a 
society (as Ethic demands of us) combined, not by civil laws, 
but by ]aws of reason singly, it remains that no one can be 
entitled to decern a punishment, and to avenge the insults 
received from mankind, except He who is the Supreme moral 
Lawgiver ; and He alone, L e., God, can say, ^* Vengeance is 
mine; I will repay P Upon this account it is a moral duty, 
not only not to pursue with avenging hatred the aggressions 
of another, but even not to summon up the Judge of the 
World to Vengeance, — ^partly because man has himself so 
much guilt as to stand too much in need of pardon, and also 
partly and principally because no vengeance or punishment 
ought to be inflicted out of hatred. Placability is there- 
ore a duty owed by man to man, which, however, is not to 
le confounded with a soft tolerance of injuries. This last 
onsists in abstaining from employing rigorous means to 
bviate the continued provocations offered us by others ; and 
Tould be an abandonment of one's rights, and a violation of 
the duty owed by man to himself. 

Remark. — All those vices which make human nature hate- 
ful when they are practised upon system, are objectively 
INHUMAN j but, subjectively, experience teaches us that they 
belong to our species. So that though some people may, 
from their extreme horror of them, have called such vices 
DEVILISH, and the opposite virtues angelic, yet such notions 
express only a maximum, used as a standard in order to 
compare the particular grade of morality an action has, by 
assigning to man his place in heaven or in hell, without 
allowing a middle station betwixt either for him to occupy. 
Whether Haller has hifc it better, when he speaks of man 
being an ambiguous mongrel betwixt angel and brute, I shall 
here leave undecided j but to halve or strike averages when 



Of the Reverence owed by Man to Others. 281 

comparing heterogeneous things, gives birth to no definite 
conception ; and nothing can assist us in classifying beings 
according to the unknown differences of their ranks. The first 
division into angelic virtues and devilish vices is exaggerated, 
— the second is objectionable; for though mankind do, alas! 
sometimes fall into brutal vices, yet that is no ground for 
assigning to their vices a root peculiar to our species, as little 
as the stunting of some trees in the forest justifies us in taking 
them for a particular kind of shrub. 



PAET II 

OF THE DUTY OF REVERENCE OWED TO OTHERS. 

Moderation in one's pretensions, ^. 6., the voluntary circum- 
scription of a man's own self-love by the self-love of others, 
is MODESTY or DISCREETNESS. The want of this moderation 
in regard of the demands we make to be loved by others, 
is SELF-LOVE; but this indiscreetness in pretending to the 
consideration of others, is self-conceit. The reverence I 
entertain toward any one, or that observance which another 
may demand from me, is the recognition and acknowledgment 
of a dignity in the person of another ; ^. e., of a worth exalted 
beyond all price, and admitting no equivalent, in exchange 
for which the object of my estimation could be bartered. 
The judgment that somewhat is possessed of no worth at all, 
is contempt. 

Sec. 38. 

Every man may justly pretend to be reverenced by his 
fellows, and he ought in turn to accord to them his. Hu- 
manity IS itself a Dignity ; for no man can be employed. 



282 Of the Reverence owed 

neither by others nor by himself, as a mere instrument, but 
is always to be regarded as an end ; in which point, in fact, 
his Dignity, ^. e., his Personality, consists, and where he 
stands pre-eminent over all other creatures in the world, — 
not of his kind, and which yet may be used, and stand at his 
command. And as he cannot dispose of himself for any 
price (which would be subversive of his own self-reverence), 
neither is he at liberty to derogate from the equally necessary 
self-reverence of others as men, i, e., he is obliged peactically 

TO RECOGNISE THE DIGNITY OF EVERY OTHER MAN'S HuMANITY, 

and so stands under a duty based on that reverential observ- 
ance, which is necessarily to be demonstrated towards every 
other person. 

Sec. 39. 

To DESPISE others, i. e., to refuse them that reverence we 
owe to mankind at large, is, in any event, contrary to duty : 
to think but little of them, when compared with others, is 
sometimes inevitable; but externally to demonstrate such 
disregard, is at all times offensive. What thing soever is 
dangerous is no object of disregard, and consequently the 
vicious is not so ; and if my superiority to his attacks should 
authorize me to say I despise him, the only meaning such 
words can have is, that there is no danger to be apprehended 
from him, even though I take no precautions, because he 
shows himself in his full deformity. Nevertheless, I am not 
entitled to refuse, even to the vicious, all consideration in his 
capacity as a man, this last being inalienable, although the 
other make himself unworthy of it. Hence it comes that 
some punishments are to be reprobated, as dishonouring 
Humanity (such are drawing and quartering, to be devoured 
by wild beasts, demembration of the eyes and ears), which 
are often more grievous to the unhappy sufferer than the loss 
of goods and life, on account of the afllicting degradation they 



by Man to his Neighbour, 283 

import (and impending his pretending to the reverence of 
others, which indeed every man must do) ; and they also 
make the spectator blush, to know that he belongs to a race 
which some dare to treat in such a manner. 

Note. — Upon this is founded a duty of reverence for man, 
even in the logical use of reason ; viz., not to reprehend his 
blunders under the name of' absurdities, not to say that they 
are inept, but rather to suppose that there must be something 
true at bottom in them, and to endeavour to find out what 
this is ; to which would be attached the still further duty of 
exerting ourselves to discover the false appearance by which 
the other was misled (^. e., the subjective of the judgment, 
which by mistake was taken for objective), and thus, by ex- 
plaining to him the ground of his error, to uphold for him 
his reverence for his own understanding. And truly, when 
we deny all sense to an adversary, how can we expect to 
convince him that he is in the wrong % The same remark 
holds of the reproach of vice, which ought never to be allowed 
to rise to a complete contempt of the vicious, so as to refuse 
him all moral worth; this being a hypothesis according -to 
which he never could redintegrate his moral character, — a 
statement repugnant to the very idea of a man, who being, 
as such, a moral being, can never lose the ordinary sub- 
stratum for a good will. 

Sec, 40. 
Keverence for law, which subjectively was styled the moral 
sense, is identic with what is called the sense of duty ; and 
this is the reason why the demonstration of reverence toward 
mankind as a moral agent (highly venerating the Law) is a 
duty owed by others towards him, and, in his case, a right 
which he cannot abdicate. The standing upon this right is 
called the love of honour, and the expression of it, in one's 
external conduct, is decorum,- — the infraction : whereof is 



284 Of the Vices 

what is called ^^scandaly^ and is a disregard of this right, 
which may be followed as an example by others, whence it 
is highly reprehensible to give any such ; although, to take 
such scandal at what is merely paradoxical and a mere 
deviation from the common fashion, is a mere fantastic whim 
mistaking the uncommon for the disallowed, and an error 
highly prejudicial and perilous to virtue. For the reverence 
due to others, who display by their conduct an example, 
ought never to degenerate into a mere servile copying of 
their manners (which would be to raise a custom into the 
authority of a law), a tyranny of the popular use and wont, 
altogether subversive of the duty owed by man to himself. 

Sec, 41. 

To omit the offices of charity is merely non-virtue (a 
fault) ; but to neglect the duties founded on the incumbent 
reverence due to every man whatsoever, is a vice. When 
the first are disregarded, no one is offended; but by the 
breach of the latter, the just rights of mankind are affected : 
the one is merely negative of virtue ; but that which not only 
is no moral acquisition, but which abolishes that worth which 
ought otherwise to belong to the subject, is vice. Upon this 
account, the duties owed toward one's neighbour in respect 
of the reverence he is entitled to challenge, admit of a nega- 
tive enunciation only;^^. e., this moral duty is expressed 
indirectly, by forbidding its opposite. 

Sec. 42. — Of the Vice subversive of the Rever&nce owed by us 
to others. 

These Yices are : A. Pride ; B. Backbiting ; C. Sneering. 

Pride (superbia), i. e., the thirst to be always uppermost 
is a kind of ambition, where we impute to others that they 
will think meanly of themselves when contrasted with xis, 



contrary to Reverence. 285 

and is a vice subverting that reverence for wMcL. every man 
lias a legal claim.. 

Pride differs entirely from ^^fierte^'' considered as a love of 
honour, i.e., care to abate nothing of one's dignity as a man, 
when compared with others ; and which fierte is on that 
account often spoken of as nohle^ for the proud demands from 
others a reverence which he refuses to return them. But 
this fierte becomes faulty, and even insulting, when it pre- 
sumes that others will occupy themselves with its importance. 

That pride is unjust is manifest of itself; for it is a court- 
ing of followers by the ambitious, whom he deems himself 
entitled to handle contemptuously, and so is repugnant to 
the reverence due to humanity in general. It is also folly, 
since it uses means to attain somewhat as an end, which is 
nowise worth being followed as such. Nay, it is even 
stupidity, ^. e., an insult upon common sense, to use such 
means as must produce directly the contrary effect; since 
every man refuses his reverence to the proud, the more the 
haughty endeavours after it. But it is perhaps not quite so 
obvious that the proud is always, at the bottom of Ms soul, 
mean and abject; for he never could impute to others that 
they would think lightly of themselves in comparison with 
him, were he not inwardly conscious that, on a reverse of 
fortune, he would have no difficulty to sneak in his turn, and 
to renounce every pretension to be reverenced by others. 

Sec. 43. — B. Detraction. 

To SPEAK EVIL OF ONE's NEIGHBOUR, OR BACKBITING, — ^by 

which I do not mean calumny, a verbal injury which might 
be prosecuted before a court of justice, but by which I under- 
stand the appetite (apart from any particular purpose) to 
spread about reports to the disparagement of the reverence 
due to others, — is contrary to the reverence owed to mankind 
in general; because every scandal we give weakens this 



286 Of the Vices 

reverence, on wHcli emotion, however, depends the spring 
toward the moral good, and in fact tends to make people 
disbelieve in its existence. 

The studied and wilful propagation of anywhat impeach- 
ing the honour of another (not made judicially before a 
court), even allowing it were quite true, diminishes the 
reverence due to mankind at large, and goes to throw upon 
our species a shadow of worthlessness, and tends finally to 
make misanthropy or contempt the ruling cast of thinking, 
which mankind entertain for one another, and blunts away 
the moral sense, by habituating the person to the contempla- 
tion of scenes and anecdotes of his neighbour's vileness. It 
is, therefore, a duty, instead of a malignant joy, in exposing 
the faults of others, so as thereby to establish one's self in the 
opinion of being as good, at least not worse than others, to 
cast, on the contrary, a veil of charity over the faults of 
others, not merely by softening our judgments, but by alto- 
gether suppressing them; because examples of reverence 
bestowed on others may excite the endeavour to deserve it. 
Upon this selfsame account, the spying and prying into the 
customs and manners of others is an insulting pretext to a 
knowledge of the world and of mankind, against which every 
man may justly set himself, as violating the reverence due 
him. 

Sec. 44. — C. Scorn. 

The propensity to exhibit others as objects of ridicule, 
SNEERING (persiflage), i. e., the making the faults of others 

THE IMMEDIATE OBJECT OF ONE'S AMUSEMENT, IS WICKEDNESS, 

and quite different from jesting, where, amid familiar friends, 
certain peculiarities of one of their number are laughed at, 
hut not to scorn; but to exhibit, as the object of ridicule, 
one's real faults, or, still more, alleged faults, as were they 
real, with the intent of depriving any one of the reverence 
due to his person, and the propensity to do so by biting 



contrary to Reverence. 287 

sarcasm, is a sort of diabolic pleasure, and is so mucli the 
graver violation of tlie duty of reverence owed toward 
other people. 

Contradistinguished from this, is the jocose retortion, naj, 
even the sarcastic retortion, of the insolent attacks of an 
adversary, where the sneerer (or generally a malicious but 
impotent antagonist) is sneered down in return, and is a just 
defence of that reverence we are entitled to exact from the 
other. But when the topic is no object of wit, and one in 
which reason takes an ethical interest, then it is better, no 
matter how much soever the adversary may have sneered, 
and so have exposed many points for ridicule and sarcasm, 
and is also more conformable to the dignity of the matter, 
and to the reverence due toward humanity, either to make 
no defence at all against the attack, or otherwise to conduct 
it with dignity and seriousness. 

Note. — It will be observed that in the foregoing chapter 
it is not virtues that are insisted on, but rather the contrary 
vices which have been reprehended; and this arises from 
the very notion of reverence, which, as we are bound to 
demonstrate it towards others, is but a negative duty singly : 
I am not obliged to revere others (regarded simply as men), 
i. e., to pay them positive veneration. The whole reverence 
to which I am naturally beholden is toward the law ; to ob- 
serve which law and its reverence, in my intercourse with my 
fellow-men, is a universal and unconditionate duty, although 
it is not to entertain positive reverence toward other men in 
general, nor to bestow upon them any such; whereas the 
other, viz., the negative, is the originary reverence owed to 
and challengeable from whomsoever. The reverence to be 
demonstrated to others according to their different qualities 
and various accidental relations, such as age, sex, descent, 
strength, or fragility, and those things which mainly rest on 
arbitrary institutions, cannot be expounded at length, nor 



288 Of Friendship. 

classed in tlie metapliysic principles of ethics, since here we 
study singly the pure principles of reason. 



CHAPTEK 11. 

Seo. A:^,— Of the Ethical Duties owed hy Mankind toward one 
(mother in regard of their State and Condition. 

This chapter, consisting of a single paragraph, is omitted 
as immaterial. 



CONCLUSION OF THE ELEMENTOLOGY. 

OF FRIENDSHIP. 

Sec, 46. — Of the intimate Blending of Love with Reverence in 
Friendship. 

!Frienbship, regarded in its perfection, is the union 
of two persons by mutual equal love and reverence. 
It is then an ideal of sympathy and of fellow-feeling, in weal 
or woe, betwixt the reciprocally united by their ethical good- 
will j and if it do not effectuate the whole happiness of life, 
still the adopting such a double of goodwill into both their 
sentiments comprehends in it a worthiness to become so; 
whence it results, that to seek friendship is a duty. 

But although friendship, as a maximum of reciprocal kind 
intent, is no vulgar and common, but an honourable duty, 
proposed to us by reason, still it is easy to see that an entire 
friendship is a naked although a practically necessary idea, 
and unattainable in any given circumstances'. For how can 
any man exactly measure and adjust the due proportion 



Of Friendship. 289 

obtaining between the duty of Reverence and that of Love 
toward his friend % For, should the one party become more 
fervent in love, then he must dread lest he sink upon that 
very account in the reverence of the other. How can it, then, 
l3e reasonably expected that both the friends should bring 
into a due equipoise that love and esteem which are required 
to constitute this virtue % The one principle is attractive^ the 
other repellent ; so that the former ordains approximation, 
while the latter demands that a decorous distance be main- 
tained, a limitation of intimacy expressed in the well-known, 
rule, " that even the very best friends must not make them- 
selves too familiar ; " and which conveys a maxim, valid not 
only for the superior towards the inferior, but also vice versa; 
for the superior finds his dignity encroached on unadvisedly, 
^nd might perhaps willingly wish the reverence of his inferior 
suspended for the instant, but never abrogated, which, if 
once injured, is irrecoverably gone for ever, even though the 
old ceremonial be re-established on the former footing. 

Friendship, therefore, in its purity and entirety, figured to 
be attainable, as between Orestes and Pylades, Theseus and 
Pirithous, is the hobby of novel-writers ; whereas Aristotle 
bas said, " Alas ! my friends, there is no friendship." The 
following remarks may serve to point out the difficulties 
encumbering it. 

Viewed ethically, it is doubtless a duty that one friend 
make the other aware of his faults, for that is for his good, 
and so is one of the offices of charity; but his other half 
discovers in this a want of reverence, and fears that he has 
already sunk in this esteem, or at least is apprehensive, since 
he is scrutinized and censured, that this danger is close at 
hand ; nay, that he is watched and observed by his friend, 
appears to him already akin to insult. 

A friend in need, how desirable is he not % that is, when 
lie is an active friend, ready to help out of his own resources 

u 



290 Of Friendship. 

and exertion. It is, however, a grievous burden to be chained 
to the destiny of another, and to go laden with a foreign sor- 
row. Upon this account, friendship is not a union intended 
for mutual and reciprocal advantage; but this union must be 
purely moral; and the assistance either may coimt upon from 
the other in case of need, cannot be held the end and motive 
towards it, for then the one party would forfeit the reverence 
of the other : this help can only be understood to signify 
and denote the outward mark of their inward hearty good- 
will, without ever suffering it to be put to trial, which is 
dangerous, — each friend magnanimously endeavouring to 
spare his counterpart any burden, and not only to support it 
all alone himself, but, further, altogether to hide and conceal 
it from his view, while he at the same time can always flatter 
himself that in an exigency he could confidently call for aid 
on the other. But when the one accepts a benefit from the 
other, then he may count on an equality in their love, but 
not in their reverence ; for he plainly stands one grade lower, 
being indebted and unable to oblige in return. 

Friendship is, on account of the sweetness of the sensation 
arising from the mutual possession of one another, approach- 
ing indeed almost to a melting together, somewhat so exceed- 
ingly tender, that when it is hung upon feelings, it is not 
secure a single instant from interruption, but demands for its. 
guard that the mutual surrender and confidence be conducted 

upon PKINCIPLES OR FIRM RULES, CIRCUMSCRIBING LOVE BY 

DEMANDS OF REVERENCE. Such interruptions are frequent 
among the uneducated, which yet do not produce any rupture 
(for biting and scratching is common folks' wooing) ; they 
cannot let each other alone, and yet cannot bring themselves 
into harmony, the very rupture being wanted to sustain the 
intimacy, and give a relish to the sweetness of reconciliation. 
At all events, the love of friendship cannot be impassioned ; 
for this is blind, and in the sequel evaporates. 



Of Friendship. 2 9 1 

Bee, 47. 

Moral friendsMp, as contradistinguislied from the sestlieti- 
cal, is the entire coniidence of two people, who reciproeally 
impart to one another their private opinions and emotions, 
so far as such surrender can consist with the reverence due 
from one to the other. 

Man is destined for society, although in part unsocial; and 
in his progress through life he feels the mighty need to con- 
fide himself to others, and that without having any further 
end in view. On the other hand he is warned to fear the 
misuse others might make of this disclosure of his sentiments, 
and so sees himself compelled to lock up within himself a good 
deal of the judgments he forms, particularly with regard to 
other men. He would fain converse with others relative to 
their opinions of the government, religion, and what they 
think of the society he mixes in ; but he dare not hazard it, 
for others, by cautiously concealing their sentiments, might 
employ his to his disadvantage. He would willingly un- 
bosom to another his wants, defects, errors, and faults ; but 
he must dread that that other would conceal his, and that 
he might forfeit that other's reverence, were he to disclose 
his situation candidly. 

So that if he find a man who has good sentiments and 
understanding, and to whom he can open up his heart 
unreservedly, without apprehending that danger, and who 
generally falls in with his way of thinking, then he may give 
vent to his thoughts. He is no longer alone, imprisoned 
with his opinions, but goes forth to enjoy freedom, which he 
is precluded from, amidst the great mass of people. Every 
one has secrets, and dare not blindly entrust himself to 
others, partly owing to the ignoble cast of thiaking of the 
most, who would abuse the secret against his interest, and 
partly owing to the want of understanding of many, L e., 



292 Of Friendship. 

tbeir indiscretion, and being unable to discriminate betwixt 
what things are fit to be repeated, and wbat hot. Now, it is 
exceedingly seldom we find those quahties together in the 
same Subject, especially since "friendship demands that this 
intelligent and intimate friend deem himself obliged not to 
communicate the secret he has been entrusted with to any 
other, how trustworthy^ soever he may think him, at least 
without the consent of the other. 

Notwithstanding all this, the pure moral friendship is no 
ideal, but is to be found extant here and there, in its per- 
fection. But that intermeddling friendship which molests 
itself with the ends of other men, even though it does so out 
of love, can have neither the purity nor that entireness 
which is indispensable towards a defined maxim, and is only 
an ideal in wish, which, in cogitation, it is true, has no 
bounds, but must in observation and experience shrink 
within a very narrow compass. 

A FRIEND OF MAN is he who takes an sesthetic participation 
in the welfare of his race, and who never will disburb it but 
with inward regxet. This phrase, however, friend of man, is 
more limited than that of a philanthropist, for the friend 
cherishes the representation of the equality of his species, and 
has at least the idea of becoming indebted to them, even 
while he obliges them, where he figures to himself all man- 
kind as brethren under a common Father, who wills their 
joint and common happiness. For the relation of protector, 
as benefactor, relatively to the protected, is no doubt one of 
love, but not of friendship, the reverence due from each to 
other not being alike. The duty to cherish goodwill to man- 
kind as their friend (a necessary condescension), and the 
laying to heart of this duty, serves as a guard against pride, 
which is too apt to invade the prosperous, who possess the 
resources of good deeds. 



Of the Social Virtues, 293 

APPENDIX. 

Sec. 48. — Of the Social Virtues, 

It is a duty both, to one's self and to others to bring his 
ethical accomplishments into Society, and not to isolate him- 
self, — ^to make, no doubt, himself still the immoveable centre 
of his own principles, but then he ought to regard this circle 
which he has drawn around him as capable of expansion, till 
it swell to the size of the most cosmopolitical spirit, not in 
order immediately to advance the end of the whole world, 
but only to advance the means which indirectly tend thither- 
wards, viz., URBANITY OF MANNERS, SOCIABILITY, AFFABILITY, 

AND DECORUM, and so to accompany the Graces with the 
Virtues; to establish which companionship, is itself one of 
the offices of virtue. 

All these are, it is true, no more than mere by-work 
{pa/rerga), or accessory virtues, giving a fair virtuous appear- 
ance. These, h.owever, never deceive, as everybody knows 
for how much they are to pass current. They are valid only 
as small coin, and yet conduce to strengthen man's virtuous 
sentiments, were it even merely by awakening the endeavour 
to bring this outward form as near as possible to a reality, in 
rendering us accessible, conversible, polite, hospitable, and 
engaging in our daily intercourse; which things, although 
one and all of them no more than a mere manner of be- 
haviour, do, by being obligatory forms of sociability, at the 
same time oblige others, and promote the cause of virtue, by 
making it beloved. 

A question may, however, be raised, whether we may ven- 
ture to frequent the society of the wicked % But we cannot 
avoid meeting with them, unless by withdrawing from the 
world ; and besides, ovoc judgment as to their characters is 
incompetent. But whenever vice is a scandal, L is., is an 



:294 Of the Social Virtues, 

openly given example of tinblushing contempt for strict laws 
of duty, and does therefore entail the infamy of dishonour, 
then, all former intercourse must be broken up, or at least 
carried on as sparingly as possible, even sliould the law of 
the land annex no punishment to the crime ; for, to continue 
in society with such a person, is to throw a stain on honour, 
and to prostitute the virtues of sociability, to whomsoever is 
rich enough to bribe his parasites with the voluptuousnesses ' 
of luxury. 



METHODOLOGY OF ETHICS. 



PAET I. 

DIDACTIC OF ETHICS. 

Sec, 49. 

THAT VIRTUE MUST BE ACQUIRED, AND IS NOT INNATE, 
RESULTS FROM THE VERY NOTION OF IT, and doeS 

not need that we should recur to what observation and 
experience teach in Anthropology; for the ethic strength 
were not virtue, unless it were brought forth by the firmness 
of man's resolution when combating against such mighty 
withstanding appetites. It is the product of pure practical 
reason, so far forth as this last does, by the consciousness of 
her superiority in freedom, gain the mastery over those. 

That Ethics therefore can, and needs must, be taught, is 
corollary only from the position, that it is not born with us. 
It is accordingly a Science (a doctrine, i. e., a demonstrated 
theory); but since, by the mere knowledge how we ought 
to behave, no power is gained of exerting that knowledge 
into act, the old Stoics were of opinion that virtue could not 
be taught hortatively by the naked representation Duty, but 
behoved to be cultivated by the ascetic exercise of encounter- 
ing the inward enemy in man. For no man can straightway 
do anywhat he wills to do, unless he have first tried his 
powers, and practised them ; to which, however, the deter- 
mination must be taken all at once. And in the case of 



296 Didactic of Ethics, 

Tirtue, any intention to capitulate with vice, or parley as to 
tlie gradual evacuation of its territory, would be itself im- 
pure, and even vicious ; and the product of such a sentiment 
could not he virtue, this last depending on one only principle. 

Bee, 50. 
Now, as to virtuous scientific method, — and every scientific 
doctrine must he methodic if it is not to he tumultuary, — 
this METHOD cannot he fragmentary, hut must be systematic, 
if Ethics is to he represented as a science. But the treatment 
of it may he either acroamatic, or it may he erotematic. In 
the former case, those whom we address are auditors simply ; 
in the latter, we interrogate the pupil. This erotematic 
method, again, is subdivided into the dialogical, where the 
science is questioned out of the pupil's reason, and into the 
catechetic, where, out of his memory. When we intend to 
evolve anywhat out of the reason of another, it can he done 
only by the dialogue, the master and the disciple mutually 
interrogating and responding. The master conducts by his 
questions the pupil's train of thinking, by merely laying 
before him certain select instances, adapted for starting the 
substratum of given notions. The disciple is thus aroused to 
the consciousness of his own ability to think, and even does, 
by his reinterrogation (called forth by the obscurity or the 
doubtfulness of his master's tenets), teach the teacher how 
best to frame the dialogue : as the old proverb has it, docendo 
discimus. 

Sec. 51. 

The first and most necessary instrumental for conveying 
ethical information to the altogether untutored, would be an 
ethical catechism. It ought to go before the religious cate- 
chism, and to be taught separately, and quite independent of 
it, and not, as is too often done, taught along with it, and 



Didactic of Ethics, 297 

thrust into it, as it were, by parentheses ; for it is singly 

ON PUEE ethic principles THAT A TRANSIT CAN BE MADE 

FROM VIRTUE TO RELIGION ; and when the case is otherwise, 
the confessions are insincere. Upon this account it is that 
our most celebrated theological dignitaries have hesitated to 
compose a catechism for the statutable faith (creed), and 
thereby to stand, as it were, surety for it; whereas, one 
might have thought that so scanty a service was the very 
least we were entitled to expect from the vast stores of their 
learning. 

On the contrary, the composition of a pure moral cate- 
chism as a gTound-sketch of the moral duties, does not lie 
open to the like scruple or to the same difficulty ; the whole 
matter of it admitting of being evolved out of every person's 
common sense, and its form only requiring adaptation to the 
didactic rules of an elementary instruction. The formal 
principle, however, of this kind of instruction doe^ not admit 
of the dialogo-Socratic method, the pupil not yet knowing 
what he has to ask. The teacher, therefore, alone catechises ; 
and the answers, which are to be methodically elicited from 
the reason of the pupil, should be drawn up in definite, 
unchanging terms, and then entrusted for conversation to his 
Tnemory. In which latter point it is, that the catechetic 
method differs from the acroamatic, where the teacher alone 
speaks ; as also from the dialogic, where the interrogatories 
are mutual. 

Sec. 52. 

The EXPERIMENTAL MEAN, the technique of moral educa- 
tion, IS THE GOOD EXAMPLE OF THE TEACHER HIMSELF, his 

own conduct being exemplary, and the warning one of others; 
for copying is what first starts the causality of the will of 
the unlearned, and induces him to project those maxim>s 
which, in the sequel, he adopts. Habit is the establish- 



298 Didactic of Ethics, 

ment of a continnal and permanent appetite, apart from any 
maxim, and springs from abandonment to repeated gratifica- 
tion, and is merely a mechanism of tlxe sensory, and not any 
principle of cogitation; and to wean one's self from it, is 
usually more difficult than to bring it forth. But as to the 
power of examples (whether to good or to evil) offered to our 
propensity for copying, it is to be noted, that the conduct of 
no one can become the rule of ours, so as to found any 
maxims and principles of virtue; these consisting always 
just in the subjective autonomy of every man's own practical 
reason, where no external behaviour but only the law is the 
standard whereon we regulate the determinations of our will. 
The instructor will, for this reason, never say to an ill- 
thriving pupil, Take an example from that good, orderly, 
studious boy ; for the pupil can only take occasion to hate 
his model, from seeing himself placed by him in so disadvan- 
tageous a light. A good example ought not to be made a 
copy, but should be used to serve in showing the prac- 
ticability of our duty. It is not a comparison with any other 
man " as he is" but with the idea of humanity " as he ought 
to he" i. e., with the law, that must supply the preceptor with 
an infallible standard of education. 



OBSERVATIOK 

FRAGMENT OF SUCH A MORAL CATECHISM. 

The preceptor questions out of the reason of his scholar 
what he wishes to teach him ; and if, by hazard, this last 
cannot answer, then the other dexterously suggests to him 
the responses. 

Preceptor. "What is thy chief desire in life ^ 

Scholar remains silent. 

P. That everything should succeed and prosper with thee, 



Didactic of Ethics, 299 

according to thy whole heart and wish, — ^how is such a situa- 
tion called % 

S. is silent 

P. It is called happiness (welfare, comfort, entire felicity). 
"Now, suppose that thou hadst confided to thee all the happi- 
ness which is at all possible, — wouldst thou keep it to thyself, 
or wouldst thou impart some of it to others 1 

S. I would share it with my fellows, that they also might 
be happy and contented. 

P. Good : that says somewhat for thy heart. Let us now 
see how it stands with thy head. Wouldst thou give the 
sluggard cushions to while away his time in sloth ? wouldst 
thou allow the drunkard wine, and the occasions of excess ; 
or give the deceiver captivating form and manners, that he 
might entrap others? wouldst thou give the robber intre- 
pidity and strength ? These are some means, whereby each 
of the above hope to become happy after a manner. 

JS. Oh no ; not at all. 

F. So that if thou hadst at thy disposal all possible happi- 
ness, and hadst likewise the completely goodwill to bestow it, 
thou wouldst not unreflectingly confer it on the first comer, 
but wouldst previously inquire how far he might be worthy 
of such happiness as he aspired after ; but as for thyself, thou 
wouldst probably, without hesitation, provide for thee what- 
ever would conduce to thy welfare 1 

JS. Yes. 

F, But would not then the question occur to thee, to 
inquire if thou thyself wert altogether worthy of such 
happiness *? 

S, Yes, it would. 

F. That within thee which pants for happiness, is appetite; 
that, again, which limits and restricts this appetite for happi- 
ness to the prior condition of thy being worthy of it, is thy 
reason ; and that thou by force of thy reason canst contain 



300 Didactic of Ethics. 

and conquer thy appetites, that is the freedom of thy will."' 
And in order to- know what is to be done to partake of happi- 
ness, and at the same time not to become unworthy of it, 
the rule and the instruction lies all alone in thy reasoist; 
that is to say, it is not needful for thee to learn the rule of 
thy conduct from observation and experience, nor from others 
in education. Thy own" reason teaches and commands thee 
forthwith what thou hast to do : e. ^., suppose the case were 
put, that by a dexterous lie thou couldst extricate thyself or 
thy friend from some near embarrassment, and that without 
prejudice to any other, — ^what would thy reason say to such 
a matter % 

JS, Beason says that I ought not to lie, be the advantages 
of falsehood ever so great. Lying is mean, and makes man 
unworthy to be happy. Here is an unconditionate injunction 
of reason to be obeyed, in the face of which all appetite and 
inclination must be silent. 

P. How dost thou call this absolute necessity of acting 
conformably to a law of reason 1 

JS. Duty. 

F, The observance, then, of a man's duty is the only and 
the unchanging condition of his worthiness to be made 
happy ; and these two are identic and the same. But admit- 
ting that thou wert conscious of such a good and effective 
will, whereby thou mightest deem thyself worthy, at least 
not unworthy, of felicity, canst thou ground upon that any- 
certain hope of becoming one day happy 1 

/S, No, not upon that alone ; for it is neither in our own 
power to secure our welfare, nor is the course of nature so 
adjusted as to fall in with good desert ; and the chances of 
life depend on eventS' over which we have no control. Our 
happiness must remain a bare wish, and cannot even convert 
itself to hope, unless some foreign power undertake it for us. 
* Eef. 6, from p. 57.— C 



Didactic of Ethics, 301 

F. Has reason any grounds for believing in, as keal, any 
such supreme power, dealing out happiness and misery- 
according to desert and guilt, having sway over the whole 
physical system, and governing the world with the extremest 
wisdom j i. e., to hold that god is % 

S, Yes ; for we discover in those works of nature we can 
judge of, manifested, the traces of a wisdom so vast and pro- 
found, that we can account for it only by ascribing it to the 
unsearchable skill of a Creator,^^ from whom we deem our- 
selves entitled to expect a no less admirable adjustment of 
the world's moral order, which latter is indeed its highest 
harmony ; that is to say, we may one day hope to become 
partakers of happiness, if we do not, by our forgetfulness of 
duty, make ourselves unworthy of it.t 

Bee, 53. 

In this catechism, which ought to go in detail over all the 
virtues and vices, it is of the most vital moment that the be- 
hests of duty be not based on any advantages or inconveni- 
ences springing from their observance, to the man who stands 
obliged by them, no, not even on the good results accruing to 
others ; but that abstraction being made from all such, those 
behests be immediately grounded on the pure moral law it- 
self, the others may indeed be mentioned, but only by-the-by 
and as superfluities. It is the shame and not the damage 
that goes hand in hand with vice, that is at all points to be 
insisted on. For when the dignity of virtue in action is not 
extolled beyond everything, then is the very idea Duty 
thawed down and resolved into a mere dictate of expediency. 
That which ennobles and gives state to man fades out of his 
consciousness, and he, despoiled of the enchantment that 

* This does not contradict what was said at p. 140. There the question 
was of d priori knowledge. Here Kant only talks of belief. — (Te.) 
t Eef. 8, from p. 147.— C 



302 Didactic of Ethics, 

would have gnided him nnscathed through life, stands venal 
for any price his seductive appetites may bid for him. 

When these instructions have been exactly and wisely 
evolved, from the reason of the pupil, according to the dif- 
ferent stages of rank, age, or sex mankind may be presented 
in, then there remains yet somewhat which inly searches 
and shakes the soul to its foundation,- and places man in a 
position where he can only behold himself, struck with un- 
bounded admiration at the aspect of the originary substratum 
of his nature,^ — an impression no time can ever afterwards 
deface. When all his duties are briefly recapitulated to him 
in their order, and he is made observant at each one of them, 
that no evils, nor tribulations, nor ills of life, no, not even 
imminent death, which may be threatened, if he adhere 
faithful to his duty, are able to lessen, or to take away his 
^ consciousness of being independent on all such, and their 
master : then the question lies very near him. What is that 
within thee that dare trust itself to go forth to encounter and 
to brave every vicissitude in the physical system, within thee 
and without thee ; in the confident conviction that thou canst 
surmount the whole of them, if they come into collision with 
thy ethical resolves'? When this question, which presents 
itself of its own accord, but which far transcends all ability 
of speculative reason to investigate or explore, — ^when this 
question, I say, is once laid properly to heart, then must 
even the incomprehensible of the might retected in this 
part of self-knowledge, fire the soul to unsheath a yet keener 
energy of reason, and prompt her to the more inly hallowing 
of her law, the more temptation solicits to forsake it. 

In this ethic catechetical instruction, it would conduce not 
a little to facilitate the advancement of the pupil, to propose, 
at the analysis of each duty, a few questions in casuistry, and 
then let the whole scholars try their skill in disentangling 
themselves from the puzzle. Not alone because this manner 



The Ascetic of Ethics, 303 

of sharpening the judgment is the very best adapted to the 
capacity of beginners, but especially because it is man's 
nature to acquire a liking and relish for studies he is at 
length well versant in, and has urged to the grade of 
science ; and thus the pupil is unawares drawn over, by 
unsuspected steps, to the interests of morality. 

Eut it is of the very last moment, in all education, not 
to mix up and amalgamate the religious with the moral 
catechism ; and yet of higher, not to suffer that to precede 
this^ but always to endeavour, with the greatest diligence 
and detail, to bring the understanding to the clearest insight 
in ethical topics j for, when the case is otherwise, religion 
slides imperceptibly, and in the sequel, into HYPOcmsY ; and 
mankind is driven hy fear, to lie in the face of his own con- 
science, an acknowledgment of duties in which his heart 
takes no share. 



PART 11 

THE ASCETIC EXEECISE OF ETHICS. 

Sec, 54. 
The rules for the exercise of virtue are intended to bring 
about and establish these two moods or frames of mind^ 
viz., to make it (1) hardy and (2) cheerful in the dis- 
charge OF duty. Yirtue has to combat obstacles, for tho 
vanquishing of which she has to rally all her forces ; and is 
also sometimes summoned to quit and yield up the joys of 
life, the loss of which may well sadden the soul, and might » 
even make it dark and sulky. But he who does not do what 
he has to do with alacrity, but renders the servile services of 
bondage, finds no inward worth in the obeying of the law,, 
but dislikes it ; and will shun as much as possible all occa- 
sions of observing it. 



304 The Ascetic of Ethics, 

The culture of virtue, i. e.^ the ethical ascetics, has, in re- 
gard of its first element, i. e., for the valiant, dauntless, inde- 
fatigable practice of virtue, no other than the old watchword 
of the Stoa {an-)(p\) tloli a'7rz')(pv, bear and forbear). Bear, en- 
dure the evils of life vnthout comph^int; forbear, abstain from 
its superfluous enjoyments. This is a kind of dietetics, en- 
abling man to keep himself ethically in health. Health, how- 
ever, is, after all, only a negative satisfaction, and is not itself 
capable of being made sensible. Something must be super- 
added (viz., the second element) to make us taste the sweet 
amenity of life, and which must still be only moral. This is 
the having a serene, gay, and ever-joyous heart, according 
to the sentiment of the virtuous Epicurus. And who indeed 
can have more reason to be contented with himself, and gay 
— ^nay, who so able, even to regard it as a duty owed by him to 
himself, to transplant himself into a serene and joyous frame 
of mind and to make it habitual — as he who is aware of no 
wilful transgression, and knows himself secured against a 
lapse (hie murus aheneus esto) ? The antipart of all this, 
however, is the ascetic exercise of the monasteries,'^ which, 

* A reply made by Kant to Schiller may belong to this place. The 
-common objection in Germany to Kant's Ethics is, that it is too rigoris- 
tical; and the poet, in his paper on grace and decorum, affirms that 
Kant's ideas of duty and obligation are best fitted to produce monastic 
manners, being subversive of all physical grace, and proper only for 
slaves. Here is the answer of the philosopher. He distinguishes be- 
twixt the idea Duty and the beneficial effects of virtue. The first admits 
of no grace, on account of the awe and sense of the sublime, which follow 
on its representation — the sublime disdaining charms and embellishment 
a-s only proper to the beautiful ; but permanent effects of active virtue 
on him who has fulfilled his duty, may be, and often are, advantageous, 
and appear as graceful and decorous. 

"So that were the question put, Which, then, is the right determina- 
tion of the Sensory wherewith duty is to be obeyed ? i. e., what is the 
TEMPERAMENT OF VIRTUE ? — Yaliant, and by consequence joyous ? — Or 
Anxious and dejected ? — scarce any answer would be needed ; so slavish 
a state and tone of soul never can be where the law itself is not hated ; 



The Ascetic of Ethics. 305 

inspired by superstitious fear, and the hypocritical disesteem 
of a man's own self, sets to work with self-reproaches, whim- 
pering, compunction, and a torturing of the body, and is 
intended not to result in virtue, but to make expurgation for 
sins, where, by self-imposed punishment, the sinners expect 
to do penance, instead of ethically repenting of them (^. 6., 
merely forsaking them by the undecaying energy of the re- 
presentation of the law) ; but this custom of imposing and 
executing punishment upon a man's own self (which encloses 
a contradiction — punishment demanding the sentence of an- 
other) cannot beget that hilarity which goes hand in hand 
with virtue, and would rather tend to engender a covert 
hatred of the behests of duty. All ethical gymnastic consists, 
therefore, singly in the subjugating the instincts and appe- 
tites of our physical system, in order that we remain their 
master in any and all circumstances hazardous to morality ; 
a gymnastic exercise rendering the will hardy and robust, 
and which, by the consciousness of regained freedom, makes 
the heart glad. To feel compunction is inevitable on the 
REMEMBRANCE OF FORMER SINS, — it is even a duty not to 
suffer it to fade on such reminiscence ; but this compunction, 
and the infliction of a penance, such as fasting, are totally 
distinct and disparate ethical operations, the latter whereof, 
understood not in a dietetical but pious sense, is cheerless, 

and the glad and joyous heart, on the execution of duty (not com- 
placency in recognising it) betokens that the virtuous sentiments are 
genuine, — nay, is the test that piety is real, — piety consisting not in the 
self-re'proachings of a whining sinner (a state of mind I look upon as 
exceedingly equivocal, and which is, for the most part, the man's inward 
upbraidings at having erred against a dictate of prudential expediency), 
but in the steadfast, unfaltering determination to make the matter better 
in all time to come. And this purpose gaining in life and force by the 
constancy wherewith the ascetic knows he has adhered to it, must 
needs effectuate a joyful disposition. Apart from which, no one can be 
certain that he loves good, i. e., has adopted it into his maxims." — Kant's 
jion, p. 11.) — Tk. 

X 



3o6 Conclusion of the 

sad, and gloomy, makes virtue hateful, and scares away her 
supporters. The discipline exercised by man upon himself 
can only by its attendant hilarity and alacrity become wel- 
come and exemplary. 



CONCLUSION OF THE ETHICS. 

RELIGION, AS A DOCTRINE OP THE DUTIES OWED TO GOD, FALLS 
BEYOND THE BOUNDARY OF PURE MORAL PHILOSOPHY. 

Although the last result obtained in our inquiry into the 
reach and extent of the h priori operations of human under- 
standing was, that speculative reason declared the existence 
of God problematical ; yet the belief in God being here ad- 
mitted, and it being further admitted that the doctrine of 
religion is an integral part of the general system of the 
of&ces,'^ the question now raised respects the determining the 
BOUNDARY OF THE SCIENCE whereof it is part. Are we to 
regard it as belonging to morals (to law in no event, for the 
rights of man cannot comprehend it) % or is it to be considered 
as falling out of and beyond the domains of pure moral 
philosophy % 

The formal of religion, explained to be " the aggregate of 
OUT duties, as if they were divine commandments^^ belongs 
to the philosophy of morals; since it expresses singly the 
relation obtaining betwixt reason and that idea of God itself 
evolves, and the duty to have religion is not thereby made 
any duty owed by us toward God, as a being existing out of 
and beyond our own ideas j for we expressly abstract from 
such existence. "^ That all human duties must be cogitated 
agreeably to this form (by referring them to a divine a priori 
Will), rests on a ground subjectively logical only. We cannot 
* Ref. 8, from p. 147.— 0. 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 307 

easily depicture to ourselves in thought, obligation (ethical 
necessitation), except by figuring to ourselves another and 
His will — God, whose vicegerent is our universally legislative 
reason ;* but this duty in relation to the Divinity (strictly in 
relation to the idea we frame to ourselves of such a Being), is 
a duty owed by mankind to himself; ^. e., is not an objective 
duty to perform certain services to another, but a subjective 
obligation only, to strengthen the ethic springs of our own 
legislative reason. 

As for the matter of religion, as a whole of duties toward 
God, and of the worship to be rendered Him, such obligations 
would be particular, not emanating from universally legislative 
reason. They could not upon this account be cognisable h 
priori, but could be known by experience and observation 
singly, that is, they would be duties of revealed religion, 
rested on divine commandments in the proper sense of the 
words j and such duties would require to set forth, not the 
bare idea, of the Godhead for our practical behoof, but the 
existence of this Being as given mediately or immediately 
in observation and experience. A religion of this kind, how- 
ever, how well founded soever it may be, can never constitute 
a part of pure moral philosophy. 

Beligion, therefore, considered as the doctrine of the duties 
owed toward God, falls far beyond all limits of pure ethics ; 
and these remarks are subjoined here in justification of the 
present treatise, where the author has not, with a view to its 
completeness, inserted, as is usual, any religious duties. 

There may undoubtedly be a doctrine of " religion within 
the limits op pure reason," where it is not affirmed that 
the positions were originated at first by reason {for this might 
he too much 'presumption, p. 8, Yorrede Streit d. Facultdten, 
T.), but rest in part on historical documents and the tenets 
of a revelation, and where we treat only of the harmony of 
* Ref. 8, from p. 147.— C. 



3o8 Conchcsion of the 

this last with what is taught by pure practical reason. But 
neither is this kind of doctrine of religion pure, but is mixed 
and applied to the Critique of a given document; and for 
this, ethics, as pure practical philosophy, can afford no room. 

Kemakk. — All the ethical relations obtaining betwixt In- 
telligents, and involving a principle of the mutual harmony 
of their wills with one another, may be reduced and classed 
along with the emotions of love and reverence ; and where 
the principle is practical, the will's determination upon the 
former points to the end of the other person, but upon the 
latter to his right. If now there be such a Person as to have 
rights only, and no duties, toward others (God), and the 
others. Conversely, owe merely duties and have no rights, 
then is the principle of the ethic relation betwixt them 
TRANSCENDENT ; whereas that of man to man, whose wills 
reciprocally limit one another, is immanent. 

The end of the Godhead in creating, and His provi- 
dence of man, we can only depicture to ourselves as an end 
of love, i. e., that He wills their happiness ; but the principle 
of His will in regard of the reverence (awe) we owe Him, 
which limits the operations of the principle pointing to the 
end willed, i. 6., the principle of His divine rights, can be no 
more than that of justice ; we might, speaking as we must 
do after the fashion of men, lay down this position, that God 
created His intelligent universe that He might have some- 
what to love or be loved by in turn. But then, again, as 
extensive, nay more so (for the principle is restrictive, and 
conditions the end), is the demand, which, even our own 
reason tells us, divine justice, as punitive, may challenge. 
A REWARD cannot be expected, on the score of justice, from 
the Supreme Being, by Intelligents who have no rights, but 
only duties : they can only hope for it from His benignity 
AND Love; for wages there can be no claim; and a remune- 
rative justice is a contradiction in the relation of God to man 



Metaphysic of Ethics. 309 

There is, however, in the idea of the judiciary function 
OF A Being exalted beyond the possibility of any in- 
fraction OF His ends, somewhat hard to be reconciled with 
the relation of man to God, viz., the idea of a lesion com- 
mitted against the Sovereign Majesty of the Governor of the 
World, where the question is not of the violations of the 
rights of man, . perpetrated by mankind upon one another, 
and which God might as Judge avenge; but of a lesion which, 
it would seem, affected the rights of God himself; an idea 
altogether transcendent, L e., which goes quite beyond the 
range of any punitive justice we as men can instance, and 
presents surd and impossible principles not capable of being- 
brought to coincide with those employed in everyday life, 
and which, therefore, are for our reason blank and empty. 

This idea of divine punitive justice has been personified. 
It is not a particular being who dispenses it, for then it would 
be found contrary to the principles of justice ; but justice 
itself cogitated in substance (called eternal justice), which, 
like FATE in the old poets, is even above Jupiter, announces 
her law with an iron indeflectible necessity, the grounds of 
which we are unable to explore. — Of this, examples. Pun- 
ishment, according to Horace, never leaves out of her sight 
the culprit who stalks audaciously away before her, but limps 
unremittingly after him until she overtake him. — Innocent 
blood cries for vengeance. — Grime cannot remain unavenged; 
and if the transgressor suffer not, yet his iniquities are visited 
on his posterity ; or if vengeance is not in this life inflicted, 
it must in another, after death, which is expressly postulated 
and believed in, that the demand of eternal justice may be 
satisfied. — I will tolerate no blood-guiltiness to come over my 
land, said once a well-thinking prince, by granting pardon to 
a malignant assassinating duellist, for whom ye entreat my 
grace. — The debt of sins must be discharged, even though an 
innocent were required for a sacrifice (in which event his 



3IO Conchtsion of the Metaphysic of Ethics. 

sorrows could not be called punislinient, lie having transgressed 
no law) ; hence we see, that the justice to which we attribute 
such decrees, is not a person administering a judiciary func- 
tion (for he could not speak thus without violating the rights 
of others), but that bake justice as a transcendent principle, 
and cogitated to an invisible subject, defines the right of this 
personified Being. All which is in harmony, no doubt, with 
the formal of the principle of creation, but is contrary to its 
matter, the end, which must still be the happiness of man- 
kind ; for, on account of the vast multitude of criminals who 
allow their catalogue of sins to run on increasing, this prin- 
ciple of punitive justice would come to put the end of creation, 
not in the love of the Creator (as we cannot but think it), 
but in the rigid maintenance of his right (*. 6., would make 
his right itself the end of the creation, called^ — the glory of 
god); and yet, since this justice is only a negative principle 
limitary of the other (benevolence), to affirm this, is contrary 
to the principles of practical reason, or seems to be so ; for, 
in such event, practical reason would hold that there could 
have been no room for creation, leading to results so contrary 
to the design and intention of the Author, whose end we can 
only depicture to ourselves to have been that of love. 

Ethics then can, as pure practical philosophy, based on 
man's own inward legislation, treat singly of the relation 
obtaining betwixt man and man, and this is for us the alone 
comprehensible j but as for relations obtaining betwixt God 
and man, these far transcend all our powers of knowledge, 
and are absolutely incomprehensible : and this confirms what 
we advanced above, that Ethics could not extend itself be- 
yond the boundary of the duties owed by mankind to one 
another. 



INDEX. 



Absolute good, the only, 3, 4. 

Agreeable, the, in contrast with, the 
dutiful, 26, 129. 

Amenity of feeling which reason be- 
gets in carrying its law into execu- 
tion, 74. 

Amphiboly, an, of reflex moral no- 
tions, 258. 

Anthropology, moral, 165. 

Apathy, ethic, 226. 

Appetitive power, 158-160. 

Aristotle, his definition of virtue re^ 
futed, 221, 248. 

Ascetic exercises of ethics, 303, etc. 

Autonomy of the will, the supreme 
principle of morality, 65 ; explained 
by the idea of freedom, 57 ; the 
alone foundation of morality, 99 ; 
contrasted with every other mate- 
rial principle of morals, 106. 

Avarice, 248. 

Backbiting, 284. 
Beneficence, 219, 271. 
Benignity and justice, 104. 
Birthright of man, 185. 
Blameworthiness and punishment, 

the contrast of, with the Eudaimo- 

nistic system, 104. 

Canon, the, of ethical volition, 36. 

Casuistry, 229. 

Catechism, fragment of a moral, 298- 
301. 

Categorical imperative, the, 27, 29, 51; 
is single, 34; not valid for the 
Divine will, 26 ; how possible, 32- 
34 ; first formula of, 34 ; examples 
illustrative of this formula of, 34- 
36; shown a priori, 38-42; the 
second formula of, 42; second for- 
mula of, illustrated, 42-44; third 
formula of, 45 ; the three formulae 
of, stated together, 50 ; how pos- 
sible, more fuUy treated of, 65, etc. ; 



nature of the, more fully explained 

and distinguished, 170-173. 
Causality of the will, 70, 71, 135, etc. 
Charity, the offices of, 266, etc. ; vices 

opposed to, 277, etc. 
Chastity, 241. 
Choice, wish, and will, defined in 

their relation to each other, 160-1. 
Cogitable world or system, what, as 

contrasted with the sensible, 63, 71, 

76. 
Collision of duties, inconceivable, 172. 
Commandment, what, 25, 29. 
Concupiscence, 160. 
Conscience, 139, 217, 254-257. 
Contentment with his state, not the 

birthright of man, 89. 
Crime and fault, 172. 
Crime and punishment, 104. 

Deed, a, 171. 

Deflection from moral law belongs to 
human nature, 112. 

Desire, 158-160. 

Despising others, 282. 

Determinators of the will, various, 
contrasted, 106-8. 

Detraction, 285. 

Didactic of ethics, the, 295. 

Dignity and price, the difference be- 
tween, in the realm of ends, 48. 

Dignity of human nature, the, pre- 
cepts relating to, 252-3. 

Drunkenness, 242. 

Duties owed by man to himself, 
232-6 ; in regard to his animal part, 
237, etc. ; as a moral being, 244, etc. ; 
as his own judge, 254-7 ; the first 
commandment of all the, 257; as 
to the advancing his own physical 
perfection, 261; as to the advan- 
cing of his ethical perfection, 263. 

Duties, a collision of, inconceivable, 
172. 



312 



Index, 



Duties, a table of moral, 215. 

Duty, the notion of, analyzed, 7, etc. ; 
what gives an act of, its moral 
worth ? 11 ; what it really is, 11, 
171, 211-213 ; not a mere aposteriori 
notion, 18, 19; its law is of un- 
limited extent, 20 ; all the ideas of, 
have their seat in a priori reason, 
23; a determinate, 34, note; the 
unconditionate necessity of an act, 
38 ; known to every one, 103, 133, 
164 ; apostrophized, 127 ; what it 
demands, 120 ; distinguished from 
legality, 167; defined, 171. 

Emotion and passion, 225. 

End, an, defined, 195 ; exposition of 
the notion of, which is at the same 
time a duty, 197; the ground on 
which man represents to himself 
an, which is at the same time a 
duty, 200. 

Ends, what are they, the very essence 
whereof it is to be duties, 201, etc. 

Ends, the realm of, 47. 

Envy, 277. 

Epicurus, his theory of pleasure, 88 ; 
inculcation of a cheerful spirit, 304. 

Equity, 182. 

Ethical inquiry, the utmost verge of, 
68. 

Ethical legislation, and judicial, 166. 

Ethics, the necessity of a metaphysic 
of, 162; division of a system of, 
166 ; science of, defined, 162 ; pre- 
liminary ideas entering into a system 
of, 169, etc. ; the supreme principle 
of, 174; the fundamental division 
of the metaphysics of, 186 ; didac- 
tic of, 295; ascetic exercises of, 
303, etc. 

Eudaimonism, 84; the contrast of, 
with the idea of blame and punish- 
ment, 104. 

Example, the place of. in morals, 21 
298. 

Extreme verge of all practical phi- 
losophy, 68. 

Fanaticism, ethical, 124. 

Fault and crime, 172. 

Feeling defined, 158. 

Formulae of the categorical impera- 
tives, 34, 42, 45, 50. 

Formulae, judicial, 184. 

Freedom, the idea of, explains that 
of the autonomy of will, 57 ; must 



be postulated as a property of the 
will of every Intelligent whatso- 
ever, 58 ; and necessity, 68, 69, 141; 
of the will — the legal title of reason 
to, 70 ; of the will, the impossibility 
of explaining — a necessary hypo- 
thesis, 73; and imperative prac- 
tical law, reciprocally point to each 
other, 95 ; the original of, deduced 
from the moral law, 95 ; not to be 
explained by the help of observa- 
tion and experience, 134-141 ; con- 
sidered in relation to man's de- 
pendence on God, 142 ; negative 
and positive conception of, 161 ; the 
ideaof, aproduct of pure reason, 169. 

Freedom, juridical, the one birthright 
of every man, 185. 

Friend of man, a, 292. 

Friendship, 288. 

Gluttony, 242. 

God, his existence, 147, 301, 307 ; 
whence the idea of, as the supreme 
archetypal good, 21; his relation 
to morality, 98; the difficulty 
attending freedom, arising from 
man's relation to, 142-4 ; this diffi- 
culty solved, 144; pointed to by 
conscience, 255; man's duty to- 
wards, 260 ; his end in creating, 308. 

Good will, a, alone absolutely good, 
3,4. 

Gratitude, the duty of, 273-5. 

Habit, relation of to virtue, 224, 297. 

Happiness, man naturally prompted 
to seek his own, 10 ; the concep- 
tion of what constitutes, difficult 
to determine, 30-1 ; as a determina- 
tor of choice, 85-8 ; founds no laws 
of obligations, 88-91. 

Happiness of my neighbour, the, 203 ; 
as an end and duty, 209. 

Holiness and perfection, 263. 

Holiness of will, 98. 

Humanity, the virtue of, 275. 

Humility, false and sjiurious, 250-2. 

Hypocrisy, 252, 

Imperative, categorical. See Cate- 
gorical imperative. 

Imperatives, three sortsof, expounded, 
27-9 ; how these are possible, 29-33; 
nature and objective imj)ort of, 82; 
nature of, 171-3. 

Impurity, 240. 



Index. 



313 



Imputation, 175. 

Inclination, 160, note» 

Ingratitude, 278. 

Insincerity, 245. 

Instinct a surer guide to happiness 
than reason, 5. 

Intelligent, an, the supreme advan- 
tage of, 51 J the supreme dignity 
of, 52; the position of every, in a 
cogitable system, 64, etc. 

Intemperance, 242. ' 

Interest, the, connected with the idea 
of morality, 59 ; which mankind 
takes in the moral law, impossible 
to be investigated or explained, 73. 

Intuition, use of the term, 130. 

Judge, man's duty to himself as his 
own, 254 ; a, referred to by con- 
science, 255, etc. 

Juridical and ethical legislation, 158, 
166. 

Jurisprudence, 153 ; general divisions 
of, 184. 

Kant's defence of his own system, 

154-7. 
Knowledge of self, a duty owed by 

man to himself — its good fruits, 

2'57. 

Law, the representative of, is to de- 

" termine the will, if this is to be 
absolutely good, 13 ; of catholic 
extent, 20; universal, 26; a good 
will, and a defective, stand under 
objective laws, 26; the abstract 
form of, cogitable by the force of 
reason singly, 92; by its legislative 
force, as the determinator of choice, 
supposes a free will, 94 ; a free will 
supposes the legislative form of, 
94 ; reverence for, 113-9, etc. ; what 
so called, 161 ; proceeds from will, 
174 ; what is a, 175 ; the metaphy- 
sic of, 153 ; what the science of, is, 
177 ; the supreme principle of, 178; 
carries with it a title to co-action, 
179; the supreme principle of morals 
and of, 213. ^ 

Laws and maxims, the difference be- 
tween, 81-93, 174. 

Law and morals distinguished, 168. 

Legality and duty, 120, 167. 

Legislation, ethical aiid juridical, 
167-9. 

Liberty of choice, 174. 



Lie, a, 244. 

Lie, the first, 247. 

Life, the motives leading to the pre- 
servation of, 8. 

Limits, the utmost, of ethical inquiry, 
68 ; benefit of marking, 1^. 

Logic of Pure Practical Reason, 131. 

Love to God and our neighbour, the 
meaning of the commandment 
which enjoins, 122. 

Love of our neighbour, 218; and re- 
verence for the same, 267; as one's 
self, 269. 

Lust, 240. 

Lying, 244, etc. 

Malice, 279. 

Man, the possessor of a free will, — 
endowed with causality, 70 ; an end 
in himself, 128. 

Maxim, what form of, fit for law uni- 
versal, 92, 174. 

Maxims andlaws, 81-3; distinguished, 
174. 

Merit and demerit, 176, 206. 

Metaphysic of ethics, the necessity of 
a, 162 ; the division of a system of, 
166, etc. ; preliminary ideas enter- 
ing into the system of, 169, etc. ; 
fundamental division of, 186 ; gene- 
ral principles of, 220. 

Metaphysic of law, the, 153. 

Mind, the relation subsisting between 
the powers of, and the moral law, 
158-62. 

Misanthropy, 268. 

Miser, a, 248. 

Moral duties and judicial offices, 206; 
exposition of, as duties of indeter- 
minate obligation, 208, etc. ; what 
a moral duty is, 211; a table of, 
215. 

Moral Law, the, how the conscious- 
ness of, is arrived at, 96; extends 
even to the Supreme, 98, 121 ; ad- 
mits no exceptions, 103 ; to obey, 
possible at all times, 103; rever- 
ence for, 117, etc. ; the sum of, 
123 ; the a priori spring of the will 
— how it acts as such, 109-29 ; the 
relation subsisting between the 
powers of the human mind and, 
158-62 ; what is so called, 161 ; the 
true source of moral disciphne, 
165. 

Moral philosophy, value of, 17 ; pure, 
necessarily founded on reason, 23 ; 



SH 



Index, 



therefore a science, 295 ; tlie rela- 
tion of, to religion, 306. 

Moral sense not the foundation of 
etMc science, 105; proper use of 
the expression, 74, 88, 113, 119, 
202; the pure product of reason, 
114 ; belongs to the substratum of 
man's person, 216. 

Moral worth, essence of, 109. 

Morality, what, 54; the supreme prin- 
ciple of, 55 ; the interest connected 
with the idea of, 59, etc. ; au- 
tonomy of the will, the foundation 
of, 99 ; and utilitarianism, 133. 

Morals, contain no law for actions, 
but for the inward maxims, whence 
actions take their rise, 204; the 
supreme principle of, 213. 

Nature, inanimate and animate, man's 

duty towards, 259. 
Necessity, and freedom, 67, 130. 
Necessity, practical, 48 ; legal, 183. 
New Testament morality, value of, 

126. 

Objects, external,known only through 

the sensory as they affect us, 62. 
Obligation, 54, 99, 170. 
Obligation, how indeterminate, 206. 
Overdoing and underdoing, 249, note. 

Pains and penalties, true view of, 104. 

Passion and emotion, 225. 

Pathological, as applied to Will, 113. 

Perfection, 107 ; one's own, 201 ; my 
own, as an end and a duty, 208. 

Person, what constitutes a, an end to 
himself, 41 ; the truth on this point 
illustrated, 42 ; what is a, 172. 

Personality, 127. 

PersonaHty, the twofold, seemingly 
indicated by the operations of con- 

* science, 255, note. 

Phenomena and noumena, 62, 

Philanthropy, 268. 

Philosophy, but one true system of, 
155. 

Philosophy, the extreme verge of all 
practical, 68, etc. 

Pity, 276. 

Pleasure as a determinator of the 
will, 79-85 ; as connected with de- 
sire, 158 ; the duty of man to ad- 
vance his physical, 261; ethical, 
263. 



Popularity of style, when it is and 
when it is not attainable, 154. 

Powers of the human mind, the rela- 
tion subsisting between the, and 
the moral law, 158-62. 

Practical philosophy, the extreme 
verge of *all, 68. 

Practical principles, analytic of, 81 ; 
which presuppose an object which 
is a determinator of the will, 84 ; 
all material, the one point of agree- 
ment between, 85; of catholic 
extent, how cogitated by an Intelli- 
gent, 92. 

Practical reason, 161. 

Pride, 284. 

Principles, general, as to metaphysic 
of ethics, 220. 

Promise, a false, cannot consist with 
duty, 13 ; self-destructive, as a 
maxim, 35. 

Psychology and metaphysics, relation 
of, in moral philosophy, 22. 

Punishment and crime, 104. 

Punishments which are dishonouring 
to humanity, 282. 

Reason, its defectiveness as a judge, 
5; why conferred on mat), 6. 

Reason and the understanding, 63-4 ; 
when it oversteps its bounds, and 
when it does not, 72 ; its causality 
74 ; how it can be practical, impos 
sible to be explained, 75 ; the alon 
determinator of volition, 89; th 
fundamental law of, 97; spon 
taneously practical, 98 ; practica 
and speculative, contrasted, 130. 

Religion, 260 ; the relation of, to pure 
moral philosophy, 306. 

Responsibility to God, essential in 
morals, 255. 

Reverence, 11, 12, noU^ 219. 

Reverence for the moral law, 111-20. 

Reverence for men, 266-8 ; the duty 
of, 281-3; vices subversive of, 
284-8. 

Rewards and Punishments (Divine), 
300. 

Right and wrong, 172. 

Rights, legal division of, 185. 

Rules, practical, based on accidental 
circumstances, not fit laws for con- 
duct, 100. 

Scorn, 286. 



Index. 



315 



Scrupulosity in morals, 227. 
Self -approbation, 120, 
Self-conceit, 111, 125. 
Self-defilement, 240-2. 
Self-esteem, depends upon morality, 

111. 
Self-indulgence as a maxiih, 35. 
Selfislmess, as a maxim, opposed to 

reason, 36. 
Self-knowledge and its fruits, 257-8. 
Self-love, 18 ; gulf between, and 

morality, 103, 112. 
Self-love, the antipart of tlie true 

principle of morality — ^universal 

love, 102. 
Self-murder, 237 ; as a maxim, repug- 
nant to the supreme principle of 

duty, 34. 
Self-stupefaction, 242. 
Sensory, defined, 159, note. 
Sin, remembrance of, and how to deal 

with it, 305. 
Sneering, 286. 
Social virtues, 293. 
Solipsism, 111. 
Spinoza, 143. 

Spring of the will, the a priori, 109. 
Stoics, 176, 238, 276, 295. 
Strength of soul, defined, 199. 
Supersensible, the source 'of Duty, 

127. 
Sympathy, the duty of, 275. 

Thing, a, 172. 

Utilitarianism, 93, 101-4; and mo- 
rality, 133. 

Vanity, 111. 
Vengeance, 279. 

Verge, the utmost, of all ethical in- 
quiry, 68. 
Vice, defined, 206. 
Vices opposed to charity, 277, etc. 



Vices subversive of reverence for 
others, 284, etc. 

Virtue exhibited in her proper form, 
39, note^ 99; what gives its lofty 
claims, 50 ; exposition of the notion 
of, 193, etc. ; man's highest mo- 
rality, 198 ; what it is, 211 ; Aris- 
totle's erroneous definition of, 
refuted, 221, 248 ; in genere, 222, 
according to the principles of in- 
ward freedom, 255 ; as based on a 
principle of inward freedom, de- 
mands man's self-command, 226; 
demands apathy, considered as a 
force of will, 227. 

Virtues, social, 293. 

Will, choice, and wish, 161. 

"Will, the, and reason, their relation, 
25 ; relation of, to sense, and to the 
principles of reason, 26, note; a 
perfectly good, and a defective 
stand under objective laws, 26; 
and ends, 40 ; of every Intelligent, 
universally legislative, 45 ; the 
autonomy of, the supreme principle 
of morality, 55 ; the autonomy of, 
explained by the idea of freedom, 
57 ; freedom must be postulated of 
that of every Intelligent, 58, etc. ; 
the legal title on which reason 
claims her freedom of, 70 ; the 
causality of, 70; the legislative 
force of law, as a determinator of 
choice, supposes a free, 94 ; a free, 
supposes a legislative form of law, 
95 ; the autonomy of, the founda- 
tion of morality, 99 ; the a priori 
spring of, 109. 

Will, the, of the Most High, is holy, 
99. 

Wish, defined, 161. 

World, the cogitable and objective, 
63. 



LOBIMER AND GILLIES, PRINTERS, CLYDE STREET, EDINBURGH 



WORKS 

PUBLISHED BY 

T. & T. CLARK, EDINBURGH. 



Just published, in one large 8vo volume, price 12s., 

A History of the Christian Councils, from the 

Original Documents, to the close of the Council of Nicaea, a.d, 325. 
Translated from the German of Charles Joseph Heeele, D.D., 
Bishop of Eottenburg, formerly Professor of Theology in the 
University of Tiibingen. 

Just published, in two volumes, 8vo, price 2ls., 

History of Protestant Theology, particularly in 

Germany: Viewed according to its Fundamental Movement, and 
in connection with the Religious, Moral, and Intellectual Life. 
Translated from the German of Dr. J. A. Dorner, Oberconsisto- 
rialrath and Professor of Theology at Berlin. 

Ackermann (Dr. 0.)— The Christian Element in 

Plato, and the Platonic Philosophy. Translated from the German 
by Samuel Ralph Asbury, B. A. Demy Svo. Price 7s. 6d. 

Cousin's Lectures on the True, the Beautiful, and 

the Good. Translated from the last French Edition, under the 
sanction of the Author. Post Svo. 6s. 6d. 

In two volumes, crown Svo, price 10s. 6d., 

Manual of Modern Pantheism: Essay on Religious 

Philosophy, by M. Emile Saisset. Translated, with an Introduc- 
tory Essay, Marginal Analysis, and Notes. 

Chalybaeus' Historical Development of Speculative 

Philosophy, from Kant to Hegel. Svo. 6s. 

Cousin on the Destiny of Modern Philosophy, and 

Exposition of Eclectism. Two Parts. 2s. 



