Ae | GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 

| DAnoHZ0LOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA | 

ARCHAOLOGICAL | 
LIBRARY 


ACCESSION NO. 92 ; | ~ F 5 


i 


THE 
BOOK OF THE KINDRED SAYINGS | 
(SANYUTTA-NIKAYA) | 


OK GROUPED SUTTAS 


Me GTOR GENERAL 
. Ke > tip | 


Ves yo 
= Library Reg. No. 142 RS 
GS , “~~ 
Oe eee Pe en | 
| , aa 
4 


Palt Text Society 
TRANSLATION Sepies, No. 7 
(Extra SUpscrerrion) 


THE BOOK OF THE 


KINDRED SAYINGS] 


(SANYUTTA -NIKAYA) y 


OR GROUPED SUTTAS 


PART I. 
KINDRED SAYINGS WITH VERSES 
(SSAGATHA-VAGGA) 


THRASSLATED BY 


MRS. RHYS DAVIDS, M.A. 
rei ce Ceri y emai y OL. Bon, Lowi 
acre GF “SCDOT EST CHRULOGICAL ETCH,” “ODDIE! A aTUDY I THE Beret 


woe, “PALe OF THE EAD? Bes,” “OSs Perce,” Ete, 


ASSISTED BE 


SURIY AGODA SUMANGALA THERA 


| Aerie ors 'SaNVUTT-SIR AY ati ATEEAH ASEAS" EDITOR OF “TH DEP AD 1 (ars, WA, ee, 
F a21i 
“Say it, ache | alg in, singers | 
4 evant puamrdel & pil ie the words at tin aed rie 
Work on, wer aller age, othing ls te be lox 
wn Te w ay fs + to walt bong, but it will cevteinls “aren 


vie hat tae materials are all pre puted ancl ready, the 
architects alelh ageperur f 


| / B Pa Walt WiirTwan, 


London 
\ PUBLISHED FOR THE PALI TEXT SOCIETY 


HY 


THE OXFORD USIVERS SS Bor eek) WEN CORNER, E.C. 


NEW YORK, 


EeNTRAL ARCH AEOLOGIGAS 
on, No... FOU awe et 


a Dy ce enee 


ji "Sindee [0S 


PREFACE 


THe present translation, begun in October, 1115, and finished 
in the following July, was laid aside for many months when 
paper and printing rose to such war-inflated prices that a 
delay im issue seemed necessary for the Society's finances. 
In the teeth of such difficulties it is now being published, both 
to keep rolling the series of which it forms the seventh volume, 
and not to obstruct its auceessor, which follows closely behind. 

Tt had for years been my desire to present to the inquiring 
reader an English version of the psychological and philo- 
sophical Suttas of the Sanyutta-Nikiya. These are concise 
prose discourses contained for the most part in the volumes 
numbered I, IT, and IV of the Pali Text Society's edition 
prepared by the late Léon Feer. It has been more than once 
Suggested that a volume of selections would be of more instant 
service than would be afforded by the long drawn out appear- 
ance of the whole work in ita origina) order. There is much to 
recommend such an undertaking, but it would scarcely be in 
place in the methods of the Pali Text Society. Those methods 
seek to present a certam classic hterature as a whole, as a 
historical monument. [t will be for a later generation to 
exercise private judgment in compiling eclectic extracts. In 
the case of first editions this were too dangerous a game. 

And so my way to those prose Suttas was not to be had 
by any short cuts, but lay only through first accomplishing 
the translation of these eleven groups—the first volume in 
the Feer edition—called collectively the Sa-gatha Vagga or 
Section ‘ with verses.’ But [ trust that the reader may find 
a reward as rich as that which has been mine. The massa of 
these little Suttas, shght and concise sketches, with the verses 
which sum them up, or which they, the Suttas, explain—many 

‘ 


vi Preface 


af them very poor poetry as such—dealing with legends of 
fairies, gods and devils, with royal and priestly interviewers 
of the sublime teacher, may seem a tantalizing Jungle to the 
traveller bound for the hills of thought more austere. But 
let him enter not as hurried and ungesing, but leisurely, with 
open mind and sympathetic imagination awake. So will he 
wander not unrewarded. He will find himself for the most 
part in a woodland of faérie, opening out here on a settlement 
of religious brethren, there on scenes of life in rural commu- 
nities such as might well be met in the India of to-day, or 
indeed in other countries. Devas he will see: sons and 
daughters of * the gods,” one may call them, yet let him ever 
remember that, for the Indian, they are neither as the god 
nor the angel of Western cults. They (that is, certain of 
their antecedent individualities) have been men and women, 
with the memory of at least one such former life abiding. 

Vow, possessed of greater power over matter, and in some 
cases Only of improved wisdom, most of them are shown 
greatly concerned with the central fact of the book :—the 
wonderful period of incarnate wisdom and service that has 
broken over one favoured realm of earth, and the opportunity, 
within their reach, of benefiting by it. They are not here to 
consult our traveller, but they will enchant the eye of his 
imagination with a glory of colour, and while minor forest 
, devas will show concern in his spiritual welfare, those of this 
or that heaven will welcome him to celestial mansions. He 
will hear riddles and saws in doogerel metre, current in ancient 
Indian folk-philosophy, and pressed into a venerable canon 
that mothered efforts at thinking scriously, however rudi- 
mentary they might be. The prince of darkness—of life-lust 
and of recurring death—will startle him in odd and fearsome 
shapes and ways. Grave and noble Sisters will ahow him @ 
sefene peace, and a grasp of truth won at the cost of much 
that life holds dear. The incorrigible if amiable despot, and 
the priest, often no less incorrigible, will give themselves awny 
as they talk before him. Mysterious aboriginal creatures, in 
process of being merged into the stock ot folk-myth, will come 
forth from the abandoned shrines of dead deities to listen or 


Preface vii 


to menace, And the gods of to-day will contend before him 
with the gods of yesterday, become the Titans of to-day. 

And ever, as he wanders on, there will move before him, 

luminous and serene, the central figure of the great- eared 
Gotama, bringing him to the wood's end braced and en- 
lightened by the beneficent tension of listening to many wise 
sayings. In these he will hear the lesser gods instructed and 
the higher gods brought low, the devil swept aside and the 
demons fearlessly confronted; the king given simple, practical, 
secular advice, not too high or unworldly for his limited in- 
telhgence, and the priest's rites and dogmas tested by a new 
and higher Norm; the disciples’ talents evoked and appre- 
ciated, and the earnest lay inquirer made welcome. 
_ Mythical and folk-lore drapery are wrapped about many of 
the sayings here ascribed to the Buddha, And in nearly all 
of them, if any represent genuine prose utterances, they have 
become deflected in the prism of memorializing verse, and to 
that extent artificial. Nevertheless, the matter of them is 
of the stamp of the oldest doctrine Known to us, and from 
them a fairly complete synopsis of the ancient Dhamma 
might be compiled. And short and terse as are the presenta- 
tions of both saying and episode, they contribute not a little 
to body out our somewhat vague outline of India's greatest 
son, 80 that We receive successive impressions of his great 
good sense, his willingness to adapt his sayings to the indi- 
vidual inquirer, his keen intuition, his humour and smiling 
irony, his courage and dignity, his catholic and tender com- 
passion for all creatures. 

To the kindly = who would have preferred a translation 
entirely in prose, I would say that, with a lively sense of 
defects in workmanship detracting from such literary beauty 
as the text frequently possesses, I have judged that a faithful 
reproduction, so far 4s was practicable, of form as well as of 
matter was the first consideration. If Buddhista have bean 
content to preserve the nearest approach that could be got 
to some of their founder's original sayings in a metric form 
—a form in which they would agree that he never used in his 
discourse—who are we translators, that we should presume 


Vili Preface 


to scrape the gilt off the gold? Our task is not, directly, to 
reproduce the actual of the bygone ages. It is to reproduce 
portions of a literature treasured as canonical, as‘ holy scrip 
ture, and compiled, in this case, to a large extent in metre. 

Both the language and literary tradition of the translation 
render a literal reproduction of the metres impracticable. If 
an exception has been attempted in giving most of the tris- 
Hebh (Pali: teithubba) verses in corresponding English—e.y., 


the wpavayjira variety — 


| | pee 


Not sormal this, bralmin: for minds discerning. 
Yen, here's the field, if for reward thou lookest, 


here the translator pleads guilty with a double excuse:—the 
ease with which English lent itself to the metre, and the hope 
that coming to kuow the metre might prove wsthetically 
pleasant to the reader as well as to the reproducer. But, 
without imitating the details of form, that which in the text 
is verse should be reproduced as verse, even where the original 
is poor and wooden. In the Suttas this is often u necessity, 
for ideas which have just been enunciated in prose are forth- 
with restated, often with heightened effect, in verse. 

The Commentary on the Sanyutta-Nikiya entitled the 
Sdrattappakasini— the Kasence-exponent '—and ascribed to 
Buddhaghosa, has been my indispensable vade-mecum. It waa 
edited by the Thera Vimalabuddhi and brought out, nearly 
all of it, m seven printed fascicnli in Ceylon, of course in 
Singhalese script. It took thirteen years to produce these 
544 pages—from 1895 to 1907—and life being a brief matter 
for work turned out at that rate, the editor did not live to 
complete his task. The Pali Text Society has secured a 
complete transcript of the seven parts. Those conumenting 
on the Sagathavagga have been transcribed by the Rev. W. 
Dhammananda of Ambalangoda, and Miss May Smith and 


* Sampeseotay brdhime oe near dha 


Khettan hi toy puiiia-pekhaser holi 


Preface ix 


Miss Mary E. Lilley have shared in supplying me with a prior 
transcript of the Commentary on the first chapters, Mr. P. 
D. Ratnatunga of Tangalla, to whom we are indebted also 
for a transcript of the Commentary on the Anguttara-Nikiya, 
has transliterated the remainder of the printed edition of the 
Sarattappakasini. The Commentator's paraphrases of words 
should prove useful to students of Pali, and I have therefore 
grouped a selection in an Index to this volume. In this Way 
it has been possibl:, to some extent, to avoid trying the 
patience of the general reader by lexicographical footnotes, 
while yet bearing in mind the needs and difficulties of those— 
and they are increasing in number—who are studying the 
orginal. 

There remains the pleasant duty of acknowledging in detail 
the assistance rendered to this work by the Rev. Stiriyagoda 
Sumangala, Vice-Principal of the Parama Dhamma Cetiya 
Oriental School at Mount Lavinia, Ceylon. He was contem- 
plating a few years ago the publication of a translation of the 
gathas in the Sagithavagea in a Ceylon issue, but readily 
and graciously agreed to my proposal of a joint translation 
in the Pali Text Series of the entire work. His multifarious 
educational activities, however, as teacher, examiner, and 
delegate at distant centres, made it quite impossible for him 
to keep pace with me. Bad health also, temporarily affecting 
his eyesight, proved an additional check to good-will. I sug- 
gested, therefore, that we should allow the work to lapse into 
a one-sided affair by my sending him a copy of my translation 
and notes for his criticism. To this he consented and pro- 
nounced approval of nearly all my renderings, adding a few 
useful elucidations of obscure passages. He has subsequently 
sent me a manuscript translation in prose of the verses. 

T have further, as always, derived much help from the great 
collection of lexicographical references collected by my hus- 
hand for over forty years, He has also much aided me by 
reading the greater part of the work in proof. 


C, A. F. RHYS DAVIDS. 


Carpsreap, SURBET, 
June, 1917. 


BOOKS REFERRED TO 


A.—ENGLIEE. 
American Lectures on Buddiism. Rhys Davids. London, 


1806, 

Buddhism (Home University Library). London, 1912. 

Buddhist Birth Stories (Tritbner’s Oriental Series). Rhys 
Davids. London, 1880. 

Buddhist India (Stories of the Nations). Rhys Davids. 
London, [{:5. 

Buddhist Psychological Ethics, A translation of the Dham- 
masancani. London, LMM). j 

Childers's Pali Dictionary. London, 1875. 

Dialogues of the Buddha. A translation of the Dicha and 
Majjhima Nikavas (Sacred Books of the Buddhists). 
Rhys Davidse. London, 15, etc. 

Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics. Edmburgh, 1908, ete. 

JPTS: Journal of the Pali Text Society. London, 1882, etc, 

JRAS: Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, London. 

Mahavamea: The Great Chronicle of Ceylon. Translated by 
M. Geiger. PTS, 1912. 

Points of Controversy. A translation of the Kathivatthu. 
PTS, 1915. 

Psalms of the Brethren. A translation of the Theragatha, 
London, 1ES. 

Psalms of the Sisters. A translation of the Therigatha. 
London, 100%. 

The Jataka /translation). Cambridge, 1895,ete. (References 
are mostly to vol. and p. of the text. The text pages are 
indicated in the translation.) 

Vinaya Texts. A translation of the greater part of the 
Vinaya Pitaka (SBE). London, 1881, ete. 


Rt 


xii Books Referred to 


B.—P att. 

=Aneuttara-Nikaya, of the Sutta Pitaka, PTS, 1585, ete. 
6 vols. and index. 

B. refers always to Buddhachosa. 

Comy. —Sarattappakasini, Buddhaghosa’s Commentary on 
the present work. 

D.=Digha-Nikiya, of the Sutta Pttaka. PTS, 1889, ote. 
+ wols. 

Dhammapada, of the Sutta Pitaka. PTS, 1914. 

Dhammapads Commentary. PTS, 1906, ete. 4 vols. and 

Tti-vuttaka, of the Sutta Pitaku, PTS, 180. 

Jataka. Ed. V. Fausbéll. London, 1877, etc. 6 vols. and 
index, 

Khuddakapatha, of the Sutta Pitaka. PTS, 1410. 

M.—Majjhima-Nikaya, of the Sutta Pitaka. PTS, 1887, ete. 


3 vols. 
Milinds, Questions of King (Sacred Books of the East). 
2 vols. 


Netti-pakarana, a post-canonical work. PTS, 1902. 

Patisambhidiimagga, of the Sutta Pitaka. PTS, 1905-7. 
2 vols. 

P.P. = Poggala-Pafifiatti, of the Abhidhamma Pitaka. PTS, 
LESS. 

S.=Sanyutta-Nikdya, of the Sutta Pitaka. PTS, 1884, ete. 
% vols. and index vol. 

Sn.=Sutta Nipata, of the Sutta Pitaka. PTS, 1915. 

Sumangals-Vilisini, Comy. on Divhn-Nikava. PTS, 1886. 

Thera-theri-gathi, of the Sutta Pitaka. PTS, 1883. 

Udina, of the Sutta Pitaka, PTS, 1885. 

Vibhanga, of the Abhidhamma Pitaka. PTS, 1904. 


To 
MY BELOVED SON 


‘ Straight’ is the name that Road ts called, and * Free 
From Fear’ the Quarter whither thou art bound. 
Thy Chariot is the ‘ Silent Runner’ named, 
With Wheels of Righteous Effort fitted well. 
Conscience the Leaning-board ; the Drapery 
Is Heedfulnesa ; the Driver ts the Norm, 
I say, and Right Views, they that run before. 
And be it woman, be it man for whom 
Such chariot doth wait, by that same car 
Into Nibbina’s presence shall they come. 
IL, v, $6. 


CONTENTS 


i UH APT Ee Faudb 
} L THE DEVAS - - - - . 1 
\ jl, THE SONS OF THE DEVAS - - : - 65 
oe 1. KOSALA . - 7 . - 3 
. IV. MAEA 2 = F - as - 18 

| ¥. THE SISTERS . - - : - Lod 
: VL THE BRAHMAS - - . . - Lil 
VIL. THE EBRAHMINS - . - - «» 199 

VII, VANGISA - - - = - - 234 

Ix. THE FOREST - - - = - 250 

2 X. THE YAKRHAS - - = = - D252 

MI. SAKEA - : - = . - 279 

{NDEX OF NAMES AND SUBJECTS : ce 

INDEX OF PALI WORDS DISCUSSED - - - dali 


xT 


ERRATA 


Page 84, for Ghatikira read Ghatikara, 

Page 94, |, 2, better: Saftjaya of the Belatthia, 

Page 95, last verse: for good-will read good well, 

Pages 97, 99,101, 103: right headlines should read reapec- | 


tively: The King, Self-quarded, At the Seat of Judgment, 


Pages 67, 69, 71, 73: night headlines should read respec- 
tively: Magha, Kamada, Tayana, Suri ya, 
Pages 151, n. 5, delete line under Khandha. 


Page 156, after and said to him, add ‘0 recluse, we would he 
thy devoted slaves!’ 


s“~ 


THE BOOK 
OF THE KINDRED SAYINGS 
(SANYUTTA-NIKAYA) 


Honour to that Exalted One Arahant Buddha Supreme! 


PART I 
THE BOOK OF THE SAYINGS 
WITH STANZAS 


CHAPTER | 
THE DEVAS" 
1. Tue *“Reep* surras? 
E 1. Crossing the Flood. 
Tus have I heard :—The Exalted One was once staying near 
Sivatthi, at Jeta Grove, in Anithapindika’s Park. Now a 
certain deva, when the night was far spent, shedding radiance 
| with hia effulgent beauty over the whole Jeta Grove, came 


1 Devata. The term, literally ‘ deity,’ refers to o being differing 
only in details of physical constitution, and in habitat from so homuan 
being, and may mean either a der, devaputta, or o deradhita (danghter 
vol the gods, goddess; see below 1,4,99). This deva, says the commen. 

4 tradition, ia one who in past ages had beheld, since the last Buddha, 
Kazeapa, passed away, no other like him till this ocension. His- 
beauty (athitkantewenna) lay in the luminance emitted by his akin. 
As a Riipa-world (or higher heayen) deva, he had to assume a prosser 
muateriatization than o lower deva need do, or he could not have mover 
“in this atmosphere (cf. Dialogues of the Buddha, ii, 244), Devas usually 
risited Buddhas and their disciples just beforedawn. Comy. JetaGrove, 
presented by Andthapindika, the merchant millionaire, to the Buddha, 
-jmplies the vihiira built there. This haa been recently excavated. 

? So named after the simile in Sutta 10, p. 8: a tender reed,’ 
l 


2 The Devas [TEXTi, r 


into the presence of the Exalted One, and coming, saluted 


and stood at one side. So standing he spake thus to the 
Exalted One:-— 

* Tell me, dear sir,) how didst thou cross the flood #2 
[The Exalted One -—] 

* Unstayed, friend, and unstriving did I cross the flood."? 

‘ But how didst thon, dear sir, without atay, without 
striving, cross the Pr 

* When I, friend, kept myself stayed, then verily I sank; 
when I, friend, strove hard, then verily was [ whirled 
about.* And so, friend, unstayed, unstriving did I cross the 
flood.’ 


[The deva -—] 
Lo! now what length of time since I beheld‘ 
A perfect saint® [from evil] wholly free, 
One who, nor stayed nor striving in the flood, 
Hath safely crossed where all the world sticks fast.® 


' Warisa, 5B. assigns to this word the meaning niddwkkha, ‘ sorrow- 
leas one,” and culls it a kindly fashion (piyo-semuddcdre) of address 
tietoMmary among devas. 

* Le. the fourfold wave of craving for sensual joys, rebirth, erro- 
neols opinions, and ipnorance-begotten desires. Comy, 

* The Buddhas, says B., teach either by reproving or by encourag- 
ing. This deva is conceited, deeming he knows all about. the saint- 
ship of a Buddha, Hence he is reproved by an enigmatic reply, 
forcing him to put a further question. 

The key to the little riddle is, that a wrong support of footing, and 


mitlirested effort are as fatal ns drowning straight away. ‘Nor 


unstayed, nor without effort absolutely, but rightly stayed with right 
effort, did I cross.’... The Comy. names seven pairs of wrong 
supports and efforta. 

* Nibbuyhimi. 

* Some Singh, MSS. read paxssdma ‘we behold? His beholding 
includes spiritual discernment, says B. 

* Brikmana, with all kifesa's (passions) extinet. 

" B. here drops the false otymology of risa, * poison,’ in visaiiike 
Atthasdlini, 24), and calle craving (fankad) the cause of clearing 
daiia-visaiandad thi iitranehi; 4/ aaj). 


ee ee —_— . 


3 


1, I, § 2] The * Reed’ Suttas 3 


Thus spake that deva, and the Master approved. And the 
deva, noting that approval, made salutation ‘ by the right”? 
and vanished there and then. 


&§ 2. Delwerance. 


. +. hear Savatthi . . . a certain deva, when the nicht was 
far spent ... came into the presence of the Exalted One 
and spake thos:— 

thou, dear sir, know for them that live deliverance, 
freedom, detachment ?’* 

“Yea, 1 know, O friend, for them that live deliverance, 
freedom, detachment.’ 

‘As what, dear sir, dost thou know for them that live 
deliverance, freedom. detachment ? 


When life-lust,* when becoming is no more, 

When mind that marks and works by sense is dead, 
When feeling’s turmoil ceases, laid to rest:— 

I know, O friend, that thus, to them that live, 
Deliverance, freedom, and detachment come. 


§ 4. Led to its doom, 
.. “ go standing, the deva spoke this verse before the 
Exalted One:— 


' Keeping his right side toward the saluted one as he posses round 
ond away—a mark of reapect. 

3 Lit, * just there.” * There and then * is our equivalent idiom. 

4 These three terms: nimokkio, pamokkha, viveko—are eregelically 
identified by B. with the Path, Fruition, and Nibbana respectively, 
or oll three of them, with Nibbana alone. The deliverance is 
from Aifem’s—let us sav ‘ain '—the ‘detachment’ ia from misery, 
Saige 

* Nandi, ‘delight-m,' is the root, bhava, * becoming,’ is the kammne- 
theor, or aotivities, whence comes rebirth. E. sees in these, and in the 
next two lines, a# he is apt to do, a statement of the four * khandhaa’ 
making up our mental personality. 

* The text leaves us to aupply the introductory deseriptio 
ag 1, 2. 


2 The Devas [TEXTi, E 


into the presence of the Exalted One, and coming, saluted 
him and stood at one side. So standing he spake thus to the 
Exalted One:— 

"Tell me, dear air,t how didst thou cross the flood ? 2 
(The Exalted One :—] 


* Unstayed, friend, and unstriving did I cross the flood.’? 

‘But how didst thon, dear sir, without stay, without 
striving, cross the flood 2 

‘When I, friend, kept myself stayed, then verily I sank: 
when I, friend, strove hard, then verily was I whirled 
about.* And so, friend, unstayed, unstriving did I cross the 
flood.” 


[The deva :—} 
Lo! now what length of time since I beheld? 
A perfect saint® [from evil] wholly free, 
One who, nor stayed nor striving in the Hood, 
Hath safely crossed where all the world aticks fast,® 


| Marisa, Bi. assigns to this word the meaning niddubiha, ‘ sorrow- 
less one,” and calle it a kindly fashion (prypr-somwddcdra) of address 
customary among devas, 

* Fe. the fourfold wave of craving for sensual joys, rebirth, erro- 
neous opinions, and ignorance-begotten desires, Comy., 

* The Buddhas, says B., teach either by reproving or by encourag- 
ing. This deva is conceited, deeming he knows all about the saint- 
ship of a Buddha, Hence he is reproved by an enigmatic reply, 
forcing him to put a further question. 

The key to the little riddle is, that a wrong support of footing, and 
miscirecter! effort are as fatal as drowning straight away. * Nor 
unstayed, nor without effort absolutely, but rightly stayed with right, 
effort, did I cross.’ ... The Comy. names seven pairs of wrong 
supports and efforts, 

* Nibbuyhdmi, 

“Some Singh. MSS. read possima ‘we behold,” His beholding: 
includes spiritual disecmmment, says B. 

* Brahmana, with all Eifeaa's (passions) extinct, 

" B. here drops the false etymology of rises, * poison,’ in pisattika 
Atthasiiini, 204), and calls craving (fenha) the cause of clearing 
(satte-viealianadihi iranehi; 4/saj). 


= 


I, I, § 2] The ‘ Reed’ Suttas 3 


Thus spake that deva, and the Master approved. And the 
deva, noting that approval, made salutation ‘ by the right“ 
and vanished there and then. 


§ 2. Deliverance. 

- - hear Savatthi . . . a certain deva, when the night was 
far spent... came into the presence of the Exalted One 
and spake thus:— 

* Dost thou, dear sir, know for them that live deliverance, 
freedom, detachment ?’5 

‘Yea, I know, O friend, for them that live deliverance, 
freedom, detachment.’ 

‘As what, dear sir, dost thou know for them that live 
deliverance, freedom, detachment ?’ 


When life-lust,* when becoming is no more, 

When mind that marks and works by sense is dead, 
When feeling’s turmoil ceases, laid to rest:-— 

I know, O friend, that thus, to them that live, 
Deliverance, freedom, and detachment come. 


3 5. Led to ws doom. 


.. © so standing, the deva spoke this verse before the 
Exalted One:— 


——Saee Sq‘ S—= ———— 


' Keeping his right side toward the saluted one as he passes round 
and away—a mark of reepect. 

* Lat. * just there.’ * There and then‘ is our equivalent idiom. 

5 These three terms: nimokkia, pamotkha, viveka—are exegelicolly 
identified by B. with the Path, Fruition, and Nibbana respectively, 
or oll three of them, with Nibblina alone, The deliverance is 
from dilesa'e—let us say ‘sm '—the “detachment” is from MUBETY 
soTTOW. 

4 Nandi,‘ delight-in,’ is the root, bAaea, * becoming,’ is the bomemea- 
bhava, or activities, whenee comes rebirth. B. sees in these, and in the 
next two lines, as he is apt to do, «a statement of the four * khandhas’ 
making up our mental personality. 

* The text leaves us to supply the introductory description as in 
$5 1, 2. 


4 The Devas [TEXT i, 2 


Life to its doom is led? Our years are few.* 
Led to decay, for us no shelters stand, 
Whoso doth contemplate this fear of death, 
Let him so act that merit brings him bhas. 


[The Exalted One -—] 
Life to its doom is led. Our years are few. 
For ws, led to decay, no shelters stand. 
Whoso doth contemplate this fear of death, 
Let him reject the bait of all the worlds. 
Let him aspire after the final peace.* 


§ 4. Passing by. 
___ go standine the deva spoke this verse before the 
Exalted One :— 
The hours’ pass by. Nights drive us ever on. 
Stages of life in turn abandon us:— 
Whoso doth contemplate this fear of death, 
Let him so act that merit brings him blige. 


[The Exalted One :—] 
The hours pass by. Nights drive a ever on. 
Stages of life m turn abandon us. 

Whoso doth contemplate this fear of death, 
Let him reject the bait of all the worlds, 
Let him aspire after the final peace. 


‘The verb is in either the middle or passive Voice! m@pproacies 
death, as cattle are led by the cowherd. Comy. Cf. Dhammapada, 
135. ‘The verses recur below II, 2, §9; the former half ooour A. i, 
155; the firet quarter, Jataka iv, 398. 

+ A span of life is short as a whole and also in its component pro- 
cedure, for at every moment of consciousness 4 being ceases and is 
reborn: such is the gist of B.'s disoursus here. The deva, he thinks, 
considers his own heaven as a ° bait’ to stimulnte deeds of merit. 
The rejoinder sweeps aside all leavers. 

3 * The final peace (accanta-santi) termed Nibbina. Pekkho: wishing 
for, aspiring to.” Comy. 

4 Lit. times. * Nights’ corresponds in Indian postry to our ‘days. * 
Cf. the repetition af the first three lines, with varying conclusion im 
Jat. iv, 487. 


1, 1, $5) The * Reed’ Suttas 


$5. How many should he cut ? 


_.. 80 standing the deva apoke this verse before the 
Exalted One:-— 
How! many should he cut ? How many leave ! 
How many should he further cultivate ! 
How many ties transcending can he win 
The name of Brother ‘ Who-hath-crossed-the-Flood 


[The Exalted One :-—| 
Tis Five that he should cut, Five should he leave, 
And Five that he should further cultivate. 
Five ties transcending, his it is to win 
The name of Brother Who-hath-crossed-the- Flood.” 


g6. Vigil. 


_. 30 standing the deva spoke this verse before the 
Exalted One:— 
How? many sleep, when others are awake 1 
How many wake, when others are asleep | 
How many working, do we gather dust 
And through how many are we wholly cleansed ? 


(The Exalted One :—] 
"Tis five that sleep for five that are awake, 
And five that wake when other five do sleep. 
By work of five it is we gather dust, 
By five again are we made wholly clean. 


t Dhammeapada, $70; Theragitha, 15. The four Fivea are by 
B, explained as in the Commentaries on these works, vir: (1) the 
first * five fetters,” (2) the second do., do.: (3) the five spiritual powers; 
(4) the five ties (sanga). See Pee. of the Brethren, p. 20, 9.2. Cf. alao 
Rhys Davids’s American Lectures, 1896, pp. 142-50, 

2 ‘This riddle is held to refer to the Five Hindrances and the 
Five Spiritual Powers, which sleep amd wake respectively, and or 
cleanse, according to the spiritun! health of the individual, “ Dust” 
(raja) is always symbolical of worldly interests. Of. below, VI. 1,4 1 


6 The Devas [TEXT 1, 4 


€ 7. Not grasped. 


. 80 standing that deva spoke this verse before the 
Exalted One:— 


They who ne'er having pierced’ the truth of things* 
Are led astray errant “mong other creeds, 

Asleep they waken not. Now 1s the hour 

For them to wake !° 


They who well having pierced the truth of things 
Are nowise led astray ‘mong other creeds, 
Wholly awake are they, they fully know,* 

Walk through th’ uneven with an even stride.® 


& 8. Wholly Wurred. 


.. 80 standing the deya spoke this verse before the 
Exalted One:— 


In whom the truth of things is wholly blurred,* 
And they thus led astray “mong other creeds, 
Asleep they waken not. Now is the hour 

For them to wake! 


| Nanena patividdha. By an exegetical pun, B. indicates the in- 
tnitional nature of the cognitive act in pafiridifd. 

2° The doctrines (or matters) of the Four Truths.” Comy. 

3 fe. the great conjuncture of a Buddha's advent. Comy.. To 
waken and to be wise are both conveyed by the word pabujjhanti. 

4 The wholly awake, the rightly 4uddhd, eaye B., are the enlightened 
who are (1) omniscient, (2) paccheks (i.4. cannot save others), (3) 
masters of the four truths, (4) learmed. The lines refer to the firet 
three, 

5 Lit. * Walk evenly in the uneven.” ‘The uneven” may refer to 
one's environment, one's = of being, or to moral corruptions, 
Comy. Thus in A. i, 35; ii, 50, it is rough or insecessible places; 
ii, 74 f. astronomical irre; laritiea: i, 14, conduct. Cy. HH. i, 36; 
S.iv, LT. The Milinda frequently uses the term. 

® Su-semmuffid, a strong term from mwyh; ¢f. moha. _ 5. illustrates 
by a man who having ploughed two fields and sown one, sees only the 
other lying fallow and laments that no crop appears. 


i. 1, § 9] The * Reed’ Suttas 7 


In whom the truth of things is nowise blurred, 
And they not led astray "mong other creeds, 
Wholly awake are they, they fully know, 
Walk through th’ uneven with an even stride. 


& 9. Desire for delusion. 


... 80 standing the deva spoke this verse before the 
Exalted One:— 
Are vain conceits! wished for by him and weleomed, 
Ne’er wins he here taming [of mind and body}. 
Lone in the woods though he dwell, if he dally, 
Ne’er may he pass over the Death-realm confines. 


All vain conceits leaving, well concentrated, 
Lovely in heart? wholly emancipated, 

Lone in the woods dwelling at work and earnest, 
Well may he cross over the Death-realm confines. 


£ 10. In the forest. 


_. . 80 standing the deva addressed the Exalted One in a 
verse? — 

Who in the forest make their wonted haunt— 

The saintly livers of the holy life— 

Who by one daily meal do break their fast: 

Tell me how look they so serene of hue? 


1 Mana, often rendered pride, but always implying the illusions or 
conceits besctting pride. ‘Imagining « vain thing’ in Psalms 0, 
1, is mane. Error about the soul is often referred to it. 

9 Sueefaso: *A beautiful consciousness conjoined with imsight.’ 
Comy, 3B. has here « discursue making out that the first three phrases 
refer to the three-fold sikkha, or training in ethics, mental control, and 
insight (of. Huddhiem, Lond. 1912, p. 100 f,). 

3 ‘This devatd, unlike those of the preceding verges, says B., was just a 
forest-dwelling fairy, impressed by witnessing the simple life of brethren 
in the woods, 


8 The Devas [TexTi, 5 


[The Exalted One -—] 
They make no lamentation o'er the past, 
They vearn not after’ that which is not come, 
By what now is do they maintain themselves; 
Hence comes it that they look serene of hue* 
By vearning after that which is not come, 
By making lamentation o'er the past, 
Hence comes it that the foolish wither up 
E’en as a tender reed by sickle shorn. 


The Flood, Deliverance, That which must pass, 

And Passing by, How many should he Cut, 

The Watcher, Not grasped, Wholly blurred, In whom 
Concert sways inclination, and the tenth 

Called In the forest : thence the growp is named4 


2. Tue * Parapimsr’ Scurras 
& L. * Paradise. 

Thus have [ heard:—The Exalted One was once staying 
near Savatthi, at Jeta’s Grove, in Anathapindika’s Park. 
And the Exalted One addressed the brethren saying, * Bhik- 
khus!’ * Lord,’ they replied, And he said: 

In times gone by, bhikkhus, a certain deva of the Three- 


* Pajappant) = potthayanti. Comy, 
* After their meal, they retire to meditate, and attain to * one- 
pointed " consciousness, distractions to the attention being overcome; 
and thought becomes coherent and concentrated, Thence the mind 
grows serene, thereby the blood is soothed and physical results generally 
are cleansed, and the complexion is cleared and beautified—ao the 
Comy. 

77 sm not transluting these Uddine's or summarized titles, and 
mike an exception of the first only to show the canonical way of giving 
8° Table of Contents," 


as 


1, 2, § 2] The * Paradise’ Suttas oY 


and-Thirty vods, while wandering as he listed in Nandana 

Wood," attended by a troop of nymphs? and supplied and ~ 

provided with and surrounded by celestial sensuous enjoy- 

mente, uttered this verse:— 
They know no bliss who see not Nandana, N 
Abode of folk divine, splendid Thrice-Ten ! 

When he had so said, a certain deva rejoined with a verae:— 
Dost thou not know, O fool, how sainta* have said: 
Impermanent are all conditioned things; 

Their nature “t ia to rise and pass away. 
They come to pass, they cease . . . 
Happy the mastery of them and the peace !® 


§ 2. Gladness ariseth. 

++. 80 standing the deva spake this verse before the 
Kixalted One:-— 

Parent of sons in his sons is glad, and glad is the swain in his 
herds of kine: 

Gladness ariseth in man through sense," and gladdened is no 
tan where sense is not. 

1 Nandiind, corresponding in meaning to paradise: the grove in 
Sakka's or Taivatipsa heaven, lowest of the deva-worlds (alluded to 
both as of the Thirty-three, and the Thrice ten; cf. Dialogues ii, 241; 
Pas. of the Siastera, vera. 121, 181). We have no list of the 33; there 
were hosts of retinue-devas. According to tradition, devas were sent 
to the park by Sakka, when their decease wae imminent, there to 
dissolve like snow, or like a windblown lanp-flame, and be reborn. 

* Acchara: * daughters of devas." (Comy.) 

2 Arwhanta, 

4 SankAdrd: everything belonging to life or the universe, living 
activities, natural processes, All deva-worlds are included. These 
famous lines recur below, IX, 6, and in VI, 2, § 5, are put into the 
mouth of Sakka (ef. Dialogues ti, 176). 

8 Viipaaame oxpres both ‘mastery’ and ‘peace. A synonym 
for Nibbana, aays B. 

' Upedhihi; not usually rendered as above. Meaning * bases, or 
subetrate of rebirth,’ it refers to auch dispositions in character and 
conduct as form those bases, in other words, the common life of sense 


10 The Devas rrexTi, 6 


[The Exalted One -—} 

Parent of sons through his sons doth mourn, and mourneth 
the swain through his herds of kine. | 

Mourning arizeth in man throngh sense, and saddened is no 


Man where sense is not. 


§ 3. Ae we love the child. 

. .80 standing the deva thus addressed the Exalted One;— 
Naught love we as we love the child that’s ours;? 
No treasure rivals his who owneth kine; 
Radiance to match the sunlight is there none; 
The ocean among waters is supreme. 

[The Exalted One —} 
Naught love we as we love the inner self-* 
No treasure rivals his who owneth corn, 
Radiance with wisdom to compare there's none; 
The rain among all waters is supreme. 


§ 4. Of noble blood. 


Best* of all bipeds* he of noble blood, 

And best of things four-footed is the steer; 
Best among wives® the maiden nobly bred, 
‘ And he of sona who cometh first to birth. 

and desire, Thus the Cory. paraphrases it here by padacukimagund 
(ef. § 1: “sensuous enjoyment), but in IV, 1, §6, by the five Ehan- 
dhas (mind and body). The term became also applied to the kilea’s 
and the kdma's (cf, Childers’ Dicty. «.v. wpadAi). The verses recur in 
IV, 1, §8, where an alternative rendering is given. 

' The Master, writes B., seeing his false (or, rather, his one-sided) 
view, breaks into his speech with an opposite conclusion, as one may 
bring down a fruit by throwing another fruit at it. 

* Though it be ugly, we deem it beautiful, cherishing it in spite of 
oll its indecencics, Comy, 

2 Of. below, III, 1, § 8. 

* The text henceforth omits oven the fragment of introductory prose. 

* Dhanpaday, 

} ®* Among other wives” (sesa-) save B., whether in one household, 
or generally, is not clear, 


1, 2,85] The ° Paradise’* Suttas 11 


Best biped he of full enlightenment, 

And of four-footed things the finely trained,’ 
+ Best among wives she that best ministers, 

And he of sons who parents’ word obeys. 


§ 5, Forest sounds, 


"Tis the high hour of noon; the birds rest silently. 
Boometh the mighty forest ;* fearsome that sound to me. 


"Tis the high hour of noon; the birds rest silently. 
Boometh the mighty forest; enchanting that sound to me.* 


t Ajaniyo is literally ‘the knowing,’ ‘intelligent one.” ‘Who 
knows the reason why,’ says B., whether he be horse, elephant, or steer, 
Such wae King Kitakanna’s horse, who, when drawing the royal 
chariot to the Hill of Shrines, would not crogs the Kalamba river (see 
Geiger's Mohdveysa Translation, Map of Anuridhopura: Cetiyupab- 
bata, Kalambo-nadij), The driver assured the annoyed monarch 
that the beast was not mutinous, but ao well trained that he feared 
lest, by wetting his tail, he might spurt water over hia master. * Lift 
up his tail, sire!’ The King complied, and the horse entered the ford, 
(This king reigned over Ceylon a.p. 16-38.) 

? During siesta, creatures are weak (duibalyo-bilo), here symbo- 
lized by the perching birds, 

3 ‘Senate or sonamdno: sounds as though uttering o deep roar, 
the cause being the breezes among the trees, the stems of bamboos 
rubbing together, etc. Comy. Reoura below, IX, 12. We neod, of 
course, the useful Teutonic rawschen: 

‘the aough of the crests af the forest 
Swayed by the wined-gods," 
Pas, of the Sistera (372). 

4“ Because of the opportunity . . . of strenuous yet blissful prao- 
tice in concentrated thought. To a brother who has penetrated 
to some empty spot, pure in heart, endowed with right insight, bliss 
not of men arises.” Cf. Dhanunapadea 374, quoted by Comy., aleo;— 

Tf there be none in front, nor none behind 
Be found, is one alone and in the wooda, 
Exceeding pleasant doth his life become’ 
(Pas. of the Brethren, O47.) 


12 The Devas [TEXT 1, 7 


§ 6. Sloth, drowsiness. 


Sloth, drowsiness, the languid frame, distaste 
For noble effort, surfeit after meals:* 

By all such things to creatures here below 
The Ariyan Path is ne‘er made manifest. 


Sloth, drowsiness, the languid frame, distaste 
For noble effort, surfeit after meals:— 
Kxpelling these by noble energy, 

The Ariyan Path is cleansed and purified. 


§ 7. Hard to fulfil, or the Tortoise. 


Hard to fulfil, hard to endure for him 

Who lacketh wisdom is the holy life 

Many the difficulties, and ‘t is there 

The fool doth falter verily and fail.3 

How many are the days* when he ean live 
The holy life, if he cannot restrain 

His impulses ? Now in this thing, now that** 
He'd sink ® engrossed, slave to hia purposes. 


Hen‘ as the tortoise in its own shell’s shelter 
Withdraws its limbs, so may the brother holding, 


' These two lines occur Jat. vi, 57. Cf, also Vibhanga 352, cited 
by B., and 8. v, 64; 4.i,3. Metri causa, I invert the order of the: 
first two words. 

* Lit. recluseship (sdmadad), 

* Fisidali, wistdeyya, Cf. this word in Pes. of the Brethren, 1154:— 

ree ct 
And faint, asin a swamp an aged ox. 

* Katihay. "* Pade. 

* The Pali here changes in metre to the trighwhh, See 8, iv, 177 i. 
In this Tortoise Suttn, referred to by B., the jackal and Mara, the 
tempter, are represented aa getting no entrance, the former by the 
tortoize’s action. The verse occurs in Jain literature: Siyagadanya 
Sulfa 1, 8, 13; ef. JPTS. 1801, 40. Preeumably the Buddha ix the 
speaker, but B. is not explicit. 


I, 2, § 8] The * Paradise’ Suttas 13 


Composed, intent, thoughts in his mind arisen,* 
Leaning on naught,” injuring ne’er his neighbour, 
From evil freed wholly,® speak ill of no man. 


§ 8. Conscientiousness. 


Where will ye look throughout the world to find 
The man by conscientiousness restrained; 

He who at slightest hint forestalleth blame, 

As mettled horse at shadow of the whip 


The [chosen] few, by conscientiousness 
Restrained, constant in heedfulnesa their life, 
Have won the end of sorrow and of ill;* 

Walk through th’ uneven with an even stride.® 


$9. The Hut, 


Hast thou no little hut? Hast thou no nest f 
Hast thou no line stretched out? Art free from ties? 


[The Exalted One :—]| 
Nay,* never hut is mine, nor any nest. 
Nor line stretched out. Yea, I am free from ties. 


(The deva :—} 
What do [ mean who speak to thee of * hut,’ 
And ‘ nest.’ and ‘ line stretched out,’ and ‘ ties *! 


i Menomhi upponnariiakko, (omy. 

2 Neither on natural desires, nor wrong opinions. Comy. 

4 ‘The perinibbdna, or vomplete extinction, of passions (/ilead). 
Comet. 
4 —Dhoinmepada, 143. Cf. Childers’¢Dict, .7, appabodhati; 
and see below * Index. 

§ * Having attained Nibbana.” (omy. 

4 See 1,1,§ 7. Presumably the Buddha's reply. 

* Taggha. 

t “He thinks: this recluse answers my chigmas with Yea and Nay, 
though I had girded on the armour of my wits to put them, Does he 
follow my hidden meaning Y Cony. 


I4 The Devas [TExTi, 8 


|The Exalted —] 
; Mother thou meanest when thou sayest ‘ hut," 
And wife thou meanest when thou speak’st of * nest,’ 
And children, when thou sayest * line stretched out,"* 
And men's desires, when thou dost speak of ‘ ties,’ 
[The deva :-—| 
QO well is thee for whom no hut doth wait! 
O well is thee who hast no nest at niaht 


Thou hast no line stretched out—0O well is thee! 
And happy thou who from all ties art free ! 


§ 10. SaniddiaA 

1. Thus have | heard:—The Exalted One was once staying 
at Rajagaha in the Tapoda Park.® 

Now the venerable Samiddhi as the dawn drew near arose 
and went to the Hot Springs to bathe. And after his bath, 
le came out of the Hot Springs and stood clad in a single 
varment, drying his limbs. 

Then a certain deva, when the night was far spent, illu- 
minating all the Hot-Spring lake with her effulgent beauty, 
came up to the venerable Samiddhi and, floating in the air, 
uttered these verses:— 


* Cf. the * hut’ stanzas in Pass. of the Brethren, e.g. LVI, CCXXVIM, 
No mother waite ** 10 months" for an Arohant's rebirth. 

* Santinaka: a continuum. 

* * As birds ranging for food all day come homing to the neat at 
night.” Comy. 

‘The verses on the next page are verbatim those in the Samiddhida@taka 
(val. o, No, 167), The story is the same, the diction a little different. 
The derutd of the Nikéya is shown in the Jataka to be a deva-dhith 
or * goddess,’ and the Burmese MSS, so allude to her:—' anuppattd,’ 
‘yokkhi.’ The Singhalese MSS, ignore the Jitaka, and write anuppatio 
and pabiha. 

* A Vihiira built near the river Tupodi (hot waters), which ran 
bencath the Vebhéra or Vaibhira Hill near Rajagaha (Pas. of the 
firethren, pp. 45, n. 1; 364). Tt broadened into a pool whore was a 
hot spring due to its proximity to the Brazen Purgatory beneath. 


1, 2, § 10] The ‘ Paradise’ Suitas 16 


Neer having had thy fill thou seekest alms, 

O ulmsman; yea, nor taking now thy fill 

Thou seekest alms. O almsman, take thy fill 

Then seek thine alms. Let not the hour slip by !* 
| Sanvddiy :-—] 

Nanght of thine‘ hour® know I. Mine hour is hid, 

Not manifest. Therefore I seek mine alms 

Not taking first my fill, lest the hour pass me by. 


Now that fairy took her stand on the earth and spoke to 
Samiddhi thus: Thou art young, bhikkhu, to have left the 
world, and callow, black-haired and blessed with the luck of 
youth; thou hast not in thine early prime had the fun that 
belongs to natural desires, Take thy fill, bhikkhnu, of human 
pleasures. Give not up the things of the present to pursue 
that which involves time.* 

‘I, friend, have not given up the things of the present to 
pursue that which involves time. Nay, T have given up that 
which involves time to pursue the things of the present. 
Things involving time, friend, as the Exalted One hath said, 
are the pleasures of sense, full of ill, full of anxiety; that way 
lies abundant disaster, A thing of the present is this Norm, 
not involving time, inviting to come and see, leading onward, 
to be regarded by the wise as a personal experience. 


The little riddle turns on the ambiguity of Pawan, * having eaten,” 
: having enjoyed thyself in genoral,’—in other words ‘ sown your wilil 
oats.” The significance of the ‘hour,’ or ‘monient' recalls the 
* Pealma” (1, p. 12 f.; UO, vers. 231, 408, 653. 1005), alboit neither 
commentator on this story brings out that point. The hour that is 
hidden ts that of Samiddhi’s death. (Cy. below, IV. 3,91. Hence we 
have three points of time:—eeason of youth, opportunity for the 
Nibbina-aspirant,douth. €/. the riddle of the flag, Pas, of the Brethren, 
LXATV. 
* Kdlika, lit. * time-ish * (cf. the Greek chron-ios). Of the negative 
form—akdlike, often used in describing the Dhamma—R. saya ‘the 
Ditcmma of the Ariyan Path gives ite fruit (iruition-bliss) immediately 
after process" (or procedure to attain). In other words, the Path- 
graduate haa his heavens at hand, not aa postmortem eventa. cy 
Psa. of the Brethren, 314, n. 1. 


16 The Devas [TEXTi. 9 


‘In what way, bhikkhu, hath the Exalted One pronounced 
the pleasures of sense to involve time, to be full of il, full of 
anxiety, conducive to abundant disaster? In what way is 
this Norm a thing of the present, not involving time, inviting 
to come and see, leading onward, to be regarded by the wise 
as a personal experience [ 

‘1, friend, am a novice; I have but lately left the world, 
and am newly admitted. 1 am not able to explain the Norm 
and Rule in detail, But the Exalted One, who is Arahant, 
fully enlightened, he is staying at Rajagaha im the Tapoda 
Park. Go to that Exalted One and ask him of- this 
matter, Bear in mind that wherewith he shall answer 


i J 


Vou. 


‘ Not easy is it, bhikkhu, for us to approach the Exalted _ 


One, so is he surrounded by other and mighty devas. If thou, 
bhikkhu, wilt approach the Exalted One and ask im of ois 
matter, we too may come to hear the doctrine.’ 

‘Very well, friend, responded the venerable Samiddhi. 
And he went to the Exalted One, saluted him with obeisance, 
and sat down on one side. So seated, he spake to the Exalted 
One, telling him of the fairy’s interview after his bathe im 
the Tapoda, and of his reply, and of the fairy’s further 
questioning, and of her fear of not gaining access. * If, 
lord, that fairy spoke truly, she is just here, not far 
from us.’ 

And when he had so said, that fairy said to the venerable 
Samiddhi: ‘ Ask, bhikkhu! Ask, bhikkhu, for [ have won 
through !’ 

Then the Exalted One addressed the fairy in verses:— 

Men, ‘ware alone of what is told by names, 
Take up their stand on what is so expressed. 
If this they have not rightly understood, 
They go their ways under the yoke of death. 
He who hath understood what is expreseed, 
Concerning him-who-speaks no fancies builds, 


i B. pemes alternative terma for noviciate, medium mnk ate thera- 
ship, viz.: to 5, 10 years, and after, or to 10, 20 years, and after. 


—_ 


f+ 


1, 2, § 10] The * Paradise’ Suttas 17 


Nor do to such a man such things occur, 
As might be laid, os faults, to his account.? 


“Tf thou knowest [such a man], tell me, fairy.’2 

* Lord, I do not comprehend fully the matter of that which 
the Exalted One has stated in outline. Well for me if the 
Exalted One would himself declare in full the matter he has 
thus stated, that I may come to know it.’ 


[The Exalted One :-—] 
Whoso doth build fancies concerning values:— 
’ Equal [am I], better, or worse [than thou art] "— 
Hereby he may quarrels provoke. But whoso 
In all three ways holdeth his mind unshaken, 
* Equal [am I), or “ different” occurs not.” 


“Tf thou knowest [such a mun], tell me, fairy.’ 
* Netther of this, lord, which the Kixalted One has stated in 


outline, do I fully comprehend the meanmg. Well for me if 


1 The verses occur Jfi-vullaka, § 6. The lost two lines are quite 
different -— | 

Touched hath hia thought the goal of liberty, 
The station of incomparable peace. 


The Buddha rebukes the fairy for her suggestive ombiguities. 

The burden of the verses is doctrinally and philosophically of high 
importance, and the bewilderment of the frivolous fury, abruptly 
gonfronted with them, is ironically pathetic. ‘Told by names,’ lit., 
‘what may be expressed’ (abkheypini, from a-tha, to pro-claim):; 
ef. D. i, 4; Dhammapada, 275; A. ti, 17, ete. Mankind, aays B., 
have many notions (saitino—are ‘ware of) about the many compounds 
of the five aggregates (i.¢., of mind and matter), expressed in names, 
«yg. god, man, layman, recluse, person, individual, Tiasa, Phusaa, ete. 
He who understands sees in these compounds ae such no realities, nor 
& permanent entity in the declarer of them. Tho only reolities are the 
several components (the five khandhas), and these, though real, are 
ever changing. 

© Yokthi; cf. below, Chapter X. 

9 ‘These are the three forms of false opinion and strife springing 
from wdue. See above I, 1, § 0; 4. iii, 48; Bud, Psy. Eth, p. 208 /, 
Expanded also to nine: Vibhango, $89 (2 Comparisons invalid in the 


ever-changing collocations that make up individuals, 
2 


18 The Devas [TEXT i, 12 


the Exalted One would himself declare in full the matter he 
has thus stated that I may come to know it.’ 


[The Bralted One —} 

He hath renounced [bondage to] name and notion; * 
His mind is not set to imagine vain things* 
For life in this world hath he cut all craving. 
Him freed from bonds," happy, and void of longing? 
Him gods and men here on thia earth, or yonder? 
Or in the heavens, in every sphere of being 
Seeking, they seek vainly, they will not find him. 

“If thou knowest such an one, fairy, tell me.’ 


* OF this, lord, that the Exalted One has stated in outline, 
| have come to know the meaning fully thus:— 


Let him commit no evil whatsoever 

Throughout the world, in speech, or mind, or body. 
Dropping desires, mindful and understanding, 

Let him not work torment on self that is useless,”® 


" Sonkhd. The arahant has put away such notions as ‘Insting,” 
‘being angry,’ ‘confused.” Comy, 

* The Comy. treads na co mdnam agjhagd, and it is very likely, since 
this agrees with the context, that Foer read wi- erroneously if he con- 
sulted here only Singhalese MSS. Nevertheless B. allows the alter- 
native sense, in mdnan of an abode, i.¢., in rebirth, a matrix. as if 
he had a vd. =cimdney before him, 

* Cf, Sutta-Nipila 210, 

4 fhid, 400, 1060, etc.: a frequent half-line in SN, 

* Huran, i.e., other worlds. With * heavens’ added, «f. ibid, 224, 

* The fairy has rightly discerned, says B., the Middle Path between 
self-indulgence and seclf-torture. In fact she gives the whole Eightfold 
Path: —* in speech, ar body": Angas 3-5; ‘ mindful’: Angas 6-8; ‘under- 


standing *; Angus 1,2. * It was infact the oocasion of a mighty teaching,” 


I, 3, §1) The ‘Sword’ Suitas 19 


3. Toe ‘Sworn’ Swrras. 


- +. 80 standing the deva with this verse addressed the 
Exalted One:— 


§ 1. By tiepending sword. 


As one downsmitten by impending sword, 
As one whose hair and turban are aflame, 
So let the brother, mindful and alert, 

Go forth, all worldly passions left behind. 


[The Exalted One :—| 
As one downsmitten by impending sword, 
As one Whose hair and turban are aflame, 
So let the brother, mindful and alert, 
Go forth, leaving soul-fallacy behind. 


§ 2. The Touch. 


Who toucheth not, to him cometh no touch. 
But if he touch, thence to him touch may come. 
Hence if he touch, wreak injury upon 

The mnocent, cometh on him the touch.* 


—— 


1 In Pas. of the Brethren (vers. 30, 40, 1162, 1163) these verace are 
put in the mouth of Tissu (the Buddha's stepbrother), Vaddhamina 
and Wangiss. In that work for ‘fallacy of soul" we read ‘lust of 
living" (bhaverdga, not sakbdyaditthi). TB. ignores this, and makes 
the Master judge that the deva had poorly grasped the force of the 
metaphor. This is, that escape is only effectual when the real stumb- 
ling-block is surmounted—the soul-‘allacy. This happens when the 
Firat Path is entered, the only right way of escape. ‘Go forth,’ i.e,, 
‘leave the world." The verses recur telow, LI, 2, § 6, 

2 The little enigma bears on the double meaning of touch; active 
and passive—to make to feel, and to feel—the act (bamma) and its 
result-in-sentience (ripdke). On the latter, of. Per. of the Brethren, 
ver, 783—phasea-phuffha: “touched by the touch,” rendered ‘all feel 
the touch.” 


20 The Devas [TEXT i, 13 


Whoeo doth wrong the man that hath no guile-— 
The pure in heart and from all error free— 

On him, poor fool, his wicked act recoils, 

Like fine dust that is thrown against the wind. 


§ 3. The Tangle. 


Tangle within, without, lo! in the toils 

Entangled is the race of sentient things.* 
Hence would I ask thee, Gotama, of this: 
Who is’t can from this tangle disembroil ? 


[The Exalted One :-—| 


The man discreet, on virtue planted firm, 
In intellect and intuition trained:* 

The brother ardent and discrimimant: 
"Tis he may from this tangle disembroil. 


They that have lust and hate and nescience spurned, 
The Arahants immune from deadly Drugs,* : 
For them the tangle all unravelled hes. 

Where mind and body wholly cease to be. 

And earthly sense and sense celestial:— 

Here is the tangle riven utterly. 


1 These lines recur VII, 1, § 4, and occur 8.1. 662, Dap. 125. B. 
does not explicitly place them here in the mouth of the Teacher. The 
case of the innocent seems to be given « fortiori, to wit, from the 
more general statement. 

2 Desire or craving is likened to the interwoven foliage of ferna or 
bamboos, ‘within, without ° being referred to self and others, organs 
and objects of sense, Cony. 

3 Developing concentration and insight. Comy. 

4 The Acavne:—sensunlity, lust for renewed life, delusions, nesci- 
ence. The figure means a poisonous flux or ooze. 

' B. explains this line as (1) dimeabAaes, * life in the worlds of 
desire'—j.c., from purgatory to the five lowest deva-worlds; and (2) 
rupabhara, * life in the higher (mot highest) heavens.’ 


1,3, $4] The *‘ Sword’ Suttas pA | 


§ 4. Mind-cheching. 
since whencesoe'er the mind is held in check, 
It goeth not that way to misery, 
On every side mind should be held in check, 
Thus everywhence from woe is it set free. 


[The Exalted One :-—] 
Not on all sides should mind be held in check. 
Restrain it not if self-control be won.t 
But whence soever evil things do rise,” 
Thence should the mind be curbed and held in check. 


§ 5. The Arahant. 


He of the Brethren who is Arahant, 

Who hath accomplished all there was to do,* 

Who Drug-immune doth live the final life: 

He night ‘say anxiae “T" say’; ‘they say ‘t is 


“mine * 


[The Exalted One :—| 
He of the Brethren who is Arahant, 
Who hath accomplished all there was to do, 
Who a Soi doth live the final life: 


t The Dane. Treats menoyrlatian. Both this and the fcilowive 

pada fail in scansion. The SS. MSS. omit ca, and the Comy. aubsti- 
tules uppannan. 
Mi? The Teacher is made to think: ‘I will better this deva's mis- 
guided talk by distinguishing (rithajeted, cf. the name for his School:— 
Vibhajjavidin) where mind should be (1) checked, (2) developed, 
fostered, made to grow.’ Comy. 

* Kativi. 

7 This, anys B., was o forest fairy, who had listened to the talk of the 
forest-dwelling brethren and heard them say like any worldling: ‘T 
am eating... sitting... ‘my’ bowl, ‘my* robe .. .. when they 
hold that not ‘1, but a compound of khandhas isin activity, ‘Have 
they then,” is the further question, no mdna at all? See above, I, 
1,§9. This is reckoned as the cighth to go, of the Ten Fetters, before 
Arahantehip is won, On conventional usage and philosophic meaning, 
see above, 1,2, § 10; also Points of Controversy, p. 68, n. 2. 


99 The Devas [TEXT i, 14 


He might say thus: ‘17 say’; ‘ they say “t is * mine.” * 
So saying he, expert in usages 

Of men, "ware of the worth of common names, 

Would speak merely conforming to such use. 


[The deva :—] 
He of the Brethren who is Arahant, 
Who hath accomplished all there was to do, 
Who Drug-immune doth live the final life, 
If he said thus:—' * 1” say’; * they say *t is “ mine ~ '"— 
Would such a brother thereby show 
Pronenesa to notions of a self or soul ? 


[The Exalted One :—] 
For him who hath renounced them utterly, 
Chains of illusion as to self or soul 
Exist no more. Scattered are all such bonds. 
He rich in wisdom hath escaped beyond 
Conceits and deemings* of the errant mind. 
He might say thus: ‘“ 1” say’; * they say “tis “ mine. * 
So saying he, expert in usages 
Of men, “ware of the worth of common names, 
Would speak merely conforming to such use. 


§ 6. Light, 
How many things licht op the world, making it clear and 
plain | 
To ask this question, Sir, we've come. Thy word to learn 
we re fain. 
[The Exalted One :—] 
Four things give light unto the world; a fifth ye'll not 


By day the sun doth shine; by night the moon makes bright 
the sky. 


aa Pasatiy. 


13, $7] The * Sword’ Suttas 23 


And fire gives light by day and night, shining now here, now 
there. 
But, of all things that shine, as best, licht of a Buddha stands 
confessed,! 
Glory without compare. 


§ 7. The Tides. 


Whence ebb the flooding tides ? where whirls no mor 
The whirlpool { Where to utter ending comes 
This compound thing of body and of mind ! 


Where the four cloments that cleave, and stretch, 
And burn, and move no further footing find, 
Hence ebb the flooding tides; here whirls no more 
The whirlpool; here to utter ending come 

This compound thing of body and of mind.* 


§ 8. Goodly treasures 


Princes with goodly treasures, ample wealth, 
And broad domaine, ever in sense-desires 
Insatiate,* envy each other's goods. 


t ‘The light, namely, of insight, of enthusiasm (piti), of trust(pasida), 
and of his teaching. Comy. The verses recur I, 1, § 4. Line 2, 
along with other similes, occurs, Dip, 187. | 

2 With these lines cf. the more elaborate versions in JD. i, 225; 
(Dialogues i, 283), Uddna I, No, 10. B.'s comments here are brief. 
The streams -seqedra, the endlessly reborn life-flux of beings. The 
whirlpool (vaffa)—the same (ef. &. iii, 63 f.; iv, 180: dvaffa — the 
pleasures of the five senses), The four elements, in Buddhist doc- 
trine, mean, not simply * water, earth, fire, air,’ but the elemental 
forces of which these are concrete manifestations: the cohesive, ex- 
tending, oulorific, mobile elements in matter. This appears in the 
Nikiyas, if unformulated till later—eg, in M. 1, No, 62, the Buddha 
speaks of the internal ‘earth’ in each of us—i.¢., the stretched-out 
surface in the phenomenon of body. 

By ‘hence,’ ‘ here,’ Nibbiina is meant; not the Nibbana during life, 
known by the Arahant, but the absolute farewell to life, which can 
only be conceived or expressed as cessation of life. 


= 


24. The Devas [TEXT i, 15 


‘Mong these who thus in strain and ferment dwell,' 
Drifting adown the current of rebirth, 

Are any found who, having left behind 

Envy and greed, serene and restful dwell t* 


There are who have abandoned home and child, 
And herds, and all that heart of man holds dear, 
Yea, lust have they abandoned and ill-will 

And no more truck have they with ignorance. 
These are the Drug-destroyers, Arahants. 

They ‘mong all men serene and restful dwell. 


§ 0. The Four-wheeled, 


Lo! the four-wheeled, the nine-doored fulsome thing” 
Guided by greed, begotten from a bog-—* 


Great hero, say ! how shall there egress be t4* 


[The Exalted One :—] 
Let but the traces, let the thong be ent—* 
Let but the evil wish, the greed, yea, let 
Thy craving with its root be utterly 
Drawn out and banned*—then shall there egress be. 


' “Who have produced divers works to bring about things that had 
not come to pass, nnd have striven for power in that which had come: 
to pass.’ Comy. 

* Anusrulsi, 

* Je. the body, with its four types of deportment—=standing,. 
sitting, lying, going—and its nine orifices, (yf. Pass. of the Buddhiste 
IT, vera. 1150-52, I and I paasign, 

1 * Bog, morass” (prnka) ond ‘great hero’ are ossociated also in 
op. cif. 11, 1154, 

‘* Yatra. CY. below, I, 5, § 6. 

® This poda ocours Dhp. 308: Su, GH- both verses below, 
I, 3, $8. 

* Reading abbiuyha, os in 8. iii, 26, from abhi-ud-hran,. Cf. below, 


TV, 3,43, #. o. 


I, 3. § ro] The ‘Sword’ Suttas 25 


§ 10. The Antelope, 
Limbed like the antelope,! lean, vigorous, 
In diet sober, craving not t’ indulge, 
Like lion lonely faring, elephant, 
Indifferent to the calls of sense:-—lo! we 
Into Thy presence come that we may ask, 
How we from every ill may be set free ? 

[The Exalted One —] 

Five sensuous faculties are manifest 
‘Mong living beings, and the sixth is mind. 


On these do ye no longer set desire. 
Thus may ye be from every ill set free. 


4. Tue * Satvncapa-Grovup’ Surras. 
§ 1. With good men. 


1. Thus have I heard: The Exalted One waa once staying 
near Savatthi, at the Jeta Grove, in Andthapindika’s Park. 
2. And a great number of the Satullapa company of devas.* 


* This was one physical characteristic of the Superman: World-ruler 
or Budilha, (€f. Dialogues ii, 14. 

"EB. has a graphic and medimvally humorous story to account for 
the curious name of these visitors, who have, so far, been met with 
‘only inthis Vagga. Heinterprets the name as the ‘ Hundred-Shouters " 
(suf-ullapd). In their previous birth they were o ship's crew on a 
trading voyage. Their vessel was overwhelmed by stormy seas and 
sank, none escaping. During the storm the terrified crew noticed one 
only who, ‘seated like a yogi,’ was calm. He was thinking, not on 
his sins but on his good deeds. Of these he had enongh and to spare 


# 


26 The Devas [TEXT i, 16 


when the night was far spent, shedding radiance with thetr 
effulgent beauty over the entire Jeta Grove, came into the 
presence of the Exalted One, and coming, saluted him, and 
stood at one side, So standing, one of the devas spoke this 
verse before the Exalted One:— 


See that with good men only ye consort," 

With good men do ye practise intercourse. 
Knowledge of how the good do shape their life* 
Maketh the better man, and not the worse. 


Then five other devas each in turn spoke his verse before 
the Exalted One:-— 

The verses are all a repetition of the foregoing with a different 
last line (or pa da) thus:— 


.. . Knowledge of how the good do shape their life 


(i.) Wisdom bestoweth as naught else can do.” 

(ii.) Doth dry our tears in midst of those that weep. 
(iii,) Makes us of bright tenown among our kin.* 
(iv,) Doth make us find rebirth in happier worlds. 

(v.) Makes men persist in bliss perpetual. 


to ensure happy rebirth, and the passengers implored his charity. He 
divided them into five group# of a hundred each, and shouted to them 
through the tempest the Five Precepts, one to each group, assuring 
them that to take these maxime on themselves would see them to a 
happy doom. As the waters rose in the ship they recited them and 
after death were reborn in Sakka's heaven, each with # noble golden 
vimana (1, 2, § 10). Now they visit the Buddha to praise their good 

! Occurs in Jat, ¥, 493. ‘The whole Sutta recurs below, II, 3, § 1. 

? Lit. ‘knowledge of the good doctrine or Norm.’ The Comy. 
explains this, in this context, to mean the Five Precepts (against 
murder, etv.}—cf. ita introductory Iegend—hence a code of moral 
oonduct. 

4 * As oi! comes, not from sand, but from tila-seeds.” Corry. 

é Here B. launches into another legend: that of Adhimutta, nephew 
to Sankicva, referring to his adventure as told by Dhammapéila in the 
Comy. on Theragdthd (Pas. of the Brethren, 291), but with different 
details. 


14,82] The ‘ Satullapa-Group’ Suttas 27 


Then yet another deva said to the Exalted One:— By 
which of these, Exalted One, was it well spoken ( 
* As to matter," ye have all spoken well. But listen also 
fo me— 
See that with good men only ye consort; 
With good men do ye practise intercourse. 
Knowledge of how the good do shape their life 


From all and every ill may set us free. 


§ 2. Avurice. 

l. The Exalted One was once staying near Savatthi, at the 
Jeta Grove in Anathapindika’s Park. And a great number 
of the Satullapa company of devas . . . when night was far 
spent, came to the Exalted One . . . and so standing, fonr of 
them spoke each a verse before him, one after another:— 


(i.) From avarice and from frivolity," 
No charitable gift of alms doth come. 
By him who would have merit’s sure reward, 
By him who can discern, gifts should be given. 


(ii.) That which the miser dreads, and hence gives not, 
To him not giving just that danger ‘t 1s:-— 
Hunger and thirst—for this the thing he dreads— 
Just this the doom that doth befall the fool 
In this and also in some other world, 

Hence should he avarice suppress, and make 
Off'rings of charity, mastering the taint. 
Sure platform in some other future world 
Rewards of virtue on good beings watt* 

(iii) They are not perished ‘mong the dead* who, like 
Good comrades travelling on the jungle-roads,** 
Share scanty store. Lo! here’s an ancient rule.*7 


* Pariydyena. | 

1 * Some fear to lose their goods; some are thoughtless, some grudge 
the loss of amusement.’ Coy. 

? An oft-repeated verse: see 1, 5, § 4; UT, 1, § 4; 2,9 10, 4,9 2 

2 * And therefore unable to bestow their goods here and there.” omy. 

** Paniho. *+ Sonanlana, 


—— 


28 The Devas [TEXT i, 18 


Some from their scanty means bestow their mite; 
Some of their plenty have no wish to give. 

The offerings given from a scanty source 
Measured, with gifts of thousand pieces rank. 


(iv.) Hard is the giving unto those that give, 
And dificult the doing of such deeds. 
The wicked are unable to conform, 
For hard it is to follow* good men’s rule. 
Wherefore unlike the going hence must be 
That righteous and unrighteous folk befalls. 
To doom of purgatory these must go; 
The nghteous fare hereafter to the heavens.' 


Then yet another deva said to the Exalted One:— 

* Which of these, Exalted One, hath well spoken ? 

‘As to matter ve have all spoken well. But listen also 

to me;— 

Righteous his act who, though® he live by scraps 
Gleaned here and there,? though he maintain a wife, 
Yet from his scanty store finds gift to give. 
Of thousand donors hundred thousand [piftsP 
Are not In value equal to hia mite.® 

Then yet another deva addressed the Exalted One in a 
Why 1s their offering, abundant, lavish, 
Not equal to the poor man’s nghteous’ eift ? 


* Dieronnayo. 

' This githé is that of the Duddads (Hard-to-give) Jitaka (No. 180). 
All the verses ooour in the Hilarikosiya Jataka (No. 450). The Jiitaka 
Comy. on these githiis is more helpful than B. 

* The Jitaka version supplies pi after yo, and after appakasmiy, 

3° Eg. eure of corm from swept threshing floors.’ C'omy. 

4° Though it may be only herbs,” Cony. 

* B. is uncertain whether the * 100,000" refers to gifts or to * re- 
cipients.” Cf. Luke xxi, 1-4. 

* Kalay, lit. fraction, portion. 

* The Jaitaka Comy. explains samena by dhommena, and for agtay 
in the next line reads kathay (° how"), 


ie a —— = = a 


14.$3] The ‘ Satullapa-Group’ Suttas 29 


How is ‘t the thousand gifts of thousand donors 
Are not in value equal to his mite ? 

Then the Exalted One addressed that deva in a verse:— 
Some give with inconsistent ways of conduct, 
First smiting,* murdering, then comfort giving. 
Those offerings, [beamirched by] tears! and blows, 
Have not the value of the righteous gift. 
"Tis thus the thousand [coins] of thousand donors 
Are not in value equal to his mite. 


§ d. How blest! 

The same clase of devas, when night is far spent, visit the 
Exalted One at the same place, And atx of them before the 
- Exalted One breathed out the thought that inspired them* 
one after the other-— 

(i.) How blest** a thing, dear sir, is it to give! 
From avarice and from frivolity 
No charitable gift of alms doth come. 
By him who would have merit’s sure reward, 
By him who can discern, gifts should be given.® 


(ii.) How blest a thing, dear sir, 1s it to give! 
Yea, blest the aft though from a scanty atore. 
Some from their scanty means bestow their mite, 
Some of their plenty have no wish to give. 
The offerings given from a scanty source, 
Measured, with gifte of thousand pances rank.4 


* Thatvd. 
i Seal of one who has caused others to weep is callod a tear- 
faced gift.” Comy., The Jitake translator has missed this pathetic 


4 Udanay wdd@nesi, As o measure (? o sieve) cannot contain oil, 
whinh oozes through, or a net a flood of waters, so can the heart not 
contain within the uprush of rapturous speech which pours forth, 
Such an utterance ia the udina. Cony. 

* Sadhu. 

4 above, § 2. (1). 

4 See § 2. (iii), 


30 The Devas [TEXT i, 21 


(1i.) How blest a thing, dear sir, is it to give! 
Yea, blest the gift though from a scanty store. 
Of the believer! * too how blest the gift ! 
Giving and fighting are alike, “t is said; 
A handful of food men may down a host.* 
And 1f we give beheving m result," 
Good hap is ours from good to others done. 


liv.) How blest a thing, dear sir, is 1t to give! 
Yea, blest the oift though from a scanty store. 
Of the believer too how blest the sift ! 
And blest the wift from wealth that's intrly won. 
The man who gives from wealth that's fairly won, 
(iot by the honest effort he hath made,* * 
When dead and Death's dark river® he hath crossed 
To heavenly places doth he find his way. 


(¥. 


et 


How blest a thing, dear sir, is 1t to give! 

Yea, blest the gift though from « scanty store. 
Of the believer too how blest the gift ! 

And blest the gift from wealth that’s fairly won 
And blest the giving that’s discreetly made.* 
Wise giving by the Blessed One is praised. 


'* Saddhdya. J.e. who believes in karma and its fruit. Comy. The 
fresh matter in Githas ili-vi ocours in the Aditta-Jitaka (iii, 472. 

= He who would guard his life anvhow cannot be a good soldier; 
he who is timid as to his goods gives not. Comey. 

* BK. cites, aa illustrations, the stories in Dip. Comy (iii, 3; 219 /.) 
of the Une-Coat Brahmin and of Ankura, Whether this Comy. was 
his work, or not, is among scholars still undecided, butsee H.C. Norman, 
Dhommapada Commentary, |, xivi; S&S. Sumangala: The Dhammopada 
and its Commentary, Ceylon Nat. Rev., O14. 

4* Somena, The Jataka tranalation misses this point. The character 
of the donee comes on only in the next gatha. 

* Both Commentaries call this o mere deannad-eieeg or typical instance. 
The word Vetaraui (the infernal river) stands for the infernal regions. 
cy. Jat. v, 206. 

® Diseretion in the gift and choice of recipient, says B.—eg. not 
giving to schismatics, like the $5 Piaandas, but rather to the Sdiaana. 
Let us hope the deva was leas denominationally minded than B, 


4.§3] The ‘ Satullapa-Growp” Suttas 31 
Gifts offered them who in this world of life! 


Are worthy of our care bring great reward, 
As do [good] seeds when sown in fertile field. 


(vi.) How blest a thing, dear sir, is it to give ! 
Yea, blest the gift though from a scanty store. 
Of the believer too how blest the gift ! 
And blest the giving that’s discreetly made, 
And self-restraint with every living thing. 
Whoso "mong fellow-creatures harmless lives, 
From fear of neighbour's blame no evil works, 
Him timid they commend, but blame the bold. 


"T 18 fear of blame deters good men from wrong. 


Then yet another deva said to the Exalted One:— Which 
now of these, lord, has spoken well ?’ 
‘As to matter, ye have all spoken well, But listen also 
tO me}— 
Giving and gifta they that believe therein 
In divers ways and words praise and commend. 
Now there's a better thing than pious gift, 
Even the doctrines grouped within the Norm.* 
The good in days zone by, yea, in the days 
Yet further back,® with wisdom and insight 
They even to Nibbana won their way. 


& 4. They are wot. 
The same class of devas visit the Exalted One at the same 
place when night is far spent. And one of them uttered this 
verse before the Exalted One:— 


1 Jdhe fiveloke—aon unusual compound, 

* The line represents the one word dhammapaday. The ambiguity 
of the term is well known. See Childers’ Dict. a.c.; 5, Sumangala 
The Dhammapada and its Commentary. That Comy. (on Dip, 44, 45) 
defines it as the 37 ‘factors of enlightenment '=doctrines. Our Comy. 
paraphrases it here by Nibbiina, 

? Such os Kassapa Buddho and others; and Kopigamana Buddha, 
ete., or simply all the good in the past. Comy. 


BP The Devas [TEXT i, 22 


They are not permanent, these sense-desires. 

They are with us,’ these things we fain would have. 
The man who with them dallies, by them bound, 
From realms of death doth never come to that* 
Whereto there is no coming back again. 


Misery* born of desires, desire-born pain:— 
Suppress desires, then misery ‘s suppressed; 
From misery suppressed, suppressed is pain. 


The manifold of objects in the world— 
This in itself is not desires of sense. 
Lustful intention is man's sense-desire, 
That manifold of objects doth endure; 
The will thereto the wise exterminate.* 


Put wrath away, yea, and conceit abandon.* 

Have ye but got past all the bonds [of pris’nera], 
Not cleaving fast unto this mind and body,5 
Nowise [by lust, hatred, and dulness] hampered,* 
Sorrow and pain no more may overwhelm ye.? 

He* hath renounced [bondage to] name and notion; — 
His mind is not set to Imagine vain things; 

For life in this world hath he cut all craving. 

Him freed from bonds, happy and void of longing, 


1 Lit. “here.” Cf. Wordeworth's The world ia too much with wa. . . - 

* The Comy. renda andgantd, 

* Aghay. 

* This gatha, in A. in, 411, is ascribed to the Buddha, and is quoted 
in the Aathéd-vatiin (see Points of Controversy, p. 216, 0. 2). It is also: 
quoted in our Comy. with reference to the Pasiira Sutta in the Sutla- 
Nipdia. The Comy \to that work explains this reference in its narm- 
dive introducing the Sutta (p. 538 /,). 

“ Occurs in Dip. 221, and is repeated below, § 6. 

' cy. the explanation in Dip. C'omy. Hi, 298. 

‘Cf. ihidem. B.'s explanation coincides, 

* * One is in the inevitable misory-whirlpool of life, but one is not 
further overwhelmed.” Comy. 

* See above, I, 2, § 10. 


le 


44.95] The ‘ Satullapa-Group’ Suitas “33 


Him gods and men, here on this earth or yonder, 
Or in the heavens, in every sphere of being, 
Seeking, they seek vainly, they will not find him. 


If him they find not, thus emancipated 

(thus said the reverend Mogharajan), 
Nor gods nor men here on this earth or yonder— 
Him best of men working out man’s salvation— 
They that revere him, shall we praise them also ? 


Yea, they become praiseworthy also, almaman, 
Mogharajan ! (so the Exalted One) 

They that revere him thus emancipated. 

Yea, if, the Norm knowing, all doubt they conquer, 

They too become bond-liberated, almaman !! 


$5. The Captious-ininded. 


A great number of captious-minded devas* visited the 
Exalted One at the same place when the night was far apent, 
and hovered in the air. So hovering, one of them uttered this 
verse before the Exalted One-— 


* The form of these two verses is much affected in the Sutta-Nipata 
(eg., Sela Sutta and Pariiyansvagga, where see another query of Mo: 
ghardjan, ver. 1116 f.), but are quite exceptional in the Sagyutta- 
Nikige. The bhikkhu, probably the Thera Mogharijan (it was uo 
citeless oversight in the fs. of the Hrethren to suppose he might he 
the deva of the firat verse; he is called * reverend,’ dyramd), is said by 
B, to have formed the wish to catty on the listeners’ interest to learn 
what befell those who admired the saint, Lf they that praise do so 
with emulation, they also may hope to attain, 

* These, wrote B., formed no separate devu-world. They were just 
devatis who had heard the recluse Gotama praise his disciples for 
self-denying practices, while he himeclf wore raiment of silk, fine cloth, 
or linen, ate food worthy of a raja, dwelt in o * Fragrant Cell" like 
a deva-mansion, and used good medicines. Because of their captions 
remarks the Theras, when editing thease verses, gave them their name. 
The soubriquet is also given to a Thera in the DAp, Comy, (iii, 370) 
in connection with wer. 255, 

a 


34 The Devas [TEXT i, 24 


If any man profess he's otherwise 

Than what he really is, what he enjoys 

Is got by theft, as by the trickery of a cheat. 

Let him but talk of that which should be done. 

Let him not tall: of what should not be done. 

Of him who talketh ever, doing not, 

Wise men take stock and rate him [at his worth].’ 
[The Exalted One -—] 

Not if he merely talk or simply hear, 

Shall he avail to make advance herein.* 

A hard and strenuous course is this, whereby 

The strong in spirit liberation find 

In contemplative work from Mara’s toils. 

Not thus in sooth it is they do? who strong 

In spirit know the methods of the world,** 

And knowing, have attamed Nibbana here,*t 

Safe crossing o'er where all the world sticks fast.” 


Then those devas, standing on the earth, prostrated them- 
selves at the Exalted One's feet, and said to him:— 

“T is our transgression, lord, we have transgressed; even 
according to our folly, our stupidity, our wrongdoing have 
we fancied we could assail*t the Exalted One. Lord, may 
the Exalted One accept the confession of this our trans- 
uression as transeression, that in future there may be self- 
restraint." 

1 Lit, ‘understand him.’ These four lines are also assigned to 
Hikula, and the last two to Subbhiita | Pes, of the Brethren, vers, $22; 226), 

* Anunkkamituy. 

= Parsed as * We do not talk in this way.” Comy. 

** [| Loka|pariyidyay. 

*; Nibbuta. * See I, 1,§ 1. *+ Asddetabbay. 

‘ The uaual formula of confession aa given in the Vinaya and Suttaa, 
with, of course, a special application, See Vin. Tests ii, 261, where 
also the wonted response is given called ‘accepting.” It was the 
Master's inscrutable (and ironic 1) emile, in place of that which flustered 
the impulsive devas. B. judges that the smile was shown in order 
to provoke the questions which led to the fuller revelation of the 
iuddha’s high office. (Tava in the text should be fesam.) 


1 4§6) The *Satullapa-Group’ Suttas 35 


Then the Exalted One smiled. 
Then the devas, exceedingly irritated, rose up into the air. 
And one of them spoke this verse before the Exalted One:-— 


Whoso, when others do confess their fault, —" 

Doth not accept confession at their hands, 

Angry within, preferring enmity, 

Doth bind together wrath as in a knot. 

In whom is no fault found, no error proved ? 

Who never doth give way to thought confused ! 

Who strong and wise can heedful be alway ? 
[Pie Exalted One -—] 

In the Tathagata, the Buddha who 

For every creature doth compassion feel, 

In him no fault is found, no error proved, 

Never doth he give way to thought confused, 

Alway is he, the strong and wise, alert. 

* Whoso,” ye aay, ‘ when men confess their fault, 

Doth not accept confession at their hands, 

Angry within, preferring enmity, 

Doth bind together wrath as in a knot '-— 

Now I in wrath so held no pleasure take, 

And the confession of your fault accept, 


& 6. Faith. 
(1-3) A great number of the Satullapa (rroup of devas visited 
the Exalted One at the same place, when the night was far 
spent, ... And so standing, one of them uttered these 
verses before the Exalted One:— 
Faith is the * other I,’ the mate of man2# 
Thence, if he tarry not in disbelief, 
His shall be followers and fair renown, 

And when he quits this frame to heaven he goes, 


* So the Comy., gapthikay, Cf. Dhp. (omy. iii, 352 of, 

* The first two lines occur fti-vutiaka, § 29, 

* Aline repeated below, I,.6,§ 9. The‘ other 1? is literally * the 
second one’ (dufiyd), a term usually reserved for the more sinister 


36 The Devas [TEXT 1, 25 


Put wrath away, yea, and conceit abandon. 
Have ye but got past all the bonds [of pris ners], 
Not cleaving fast unto this mind and body, 
Nowise [by lust, hatred, and dulness] hampered, 
Sorrow and pain no more may overwhelm you.’ 


‘'T is a fool's part heedless to waste hus life:-— 
Such are the folk who will not understand. 
He who is wise doth foster earnestness 

As he were watching o'er his chiefest wealth. 
Give not yourselves to wastage in your lives, 
Nor be familiar with delights of sense. 

He who doth strenuously meditate, 

His shall it be to win the bliss supreme.* 


& 7. The Concourse? 


1. Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once dwelling 
among the Sakkas, at Kapilavatthn, m the Great Wood, to- 
gether with a great band of the brethren, about five hundred 
of them, all being Arahants. And devas from the ten thousand 
world-systems oft-times assembled there, that they might visit 
the Exalted One and the band of brethren. 


company of natural desire, or craving: 8. iv, 37; Pas, of the Brethren,wors. 
B41; 1091: Sn. 740. In rendering saddha by ‘faith,’ we would say 
that faith must be taken in its sense of assurance, confidence in the 
worth of « certain attitude and course of action. Thus a pupil must 
have siddhad: M. ii, 04. 

i Bee above, |, 4, § 4. 

2 ‘These verses are included in those assigned to Angulimila, Thera 
and ex-bandit, Pas. of the Brethren, ver, 335 fi=M. ii, 105, with 
one variant. *Chiefest wealth’ B. holds to be ‘pearls, and other 
jewels.” 

3 This Sutta is rerbetim the opening part of the Mahé Samaya or 
Great Concourse Suttanta of D. ii, 253 f. (Dialogues ii,282/.):  Sakka's, 
or Siikya’s, a noble clan of the highlands or Himalayan foothills of 
Kosala, the Boddha's own clan. 3B. launches fully into the story af 
the feud between the Sakka’s and Koliyans, told also in the intro- 
duction to the Kundla Jétaka (v, 412 f.). 


14.97) The ‘ Satullapa-Group’ Suttas 37 


2. Now to four gods of the hosts of the Pure Abodes’ this 
thought occurred:— That Exalted One is now dwelling among 
the Sakkas, at Kapilavatthu, in the Great Wood, together 
with a great band of the brethren, all being Arahants. And 
devas, from the ten thousand world-systems, oft-times are 
assembling there to see the Exalted One and his band of 
brethren. What if we, too, were to go into his presence, and 
before him were to recite each of us a poem ?’ 

3. Then those gods, as easily as a strong man might stretch 
out his arm, or draw it outstretched back again, vanished 
from the Pure Abodes, and appeared before the Exalted One. 
There they saluted him, and stood at one side. And 80 
standing, one after another, they recited to him these versea:— 


(i.) Great is the gathering in the glade; 
The hosts of heaven together met ! 
We to this holy congress here 
Are come, that we too may behold* 
The Brotherhood invincible, 


(u.) The brethren have made straight their hearts, 
Wrought up to concentration rapt. 
Wisely their faculties they guard, 
As driver keeping grip on rein. 


(m.) All bars and bolts are cut for them. 
The barriers down, all lusting gone, 
Spotless and pure their way they go, 
Seers, well-tamed young elephants, 


(iv.) Who in the Buddha refuge take, 
They shall not go to woeful doom. 
When they put off this human frame? 
They shall fill up the hosts of heaven. 


} The supreme heaven of the Rape-loka, the Brahma world bemg 
its lowest. Compendium, 138. 
* Dakkhitaye, a Vedio intinitive. Cf. E. Miller, Pali Grammar, p. 126. 
4 ‘The persistently animistic language of even these ‘higher’ gods is 
noteworthy. 6. ie garrulously imaginative—or the tradition he hands 
on is so—about their thoughts, words, and deeds on this great occasion. 


38 The Devas [TEXT i, 2 


§ 8. The Splinter. 


Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying at 
Rajagaha, in the Maddakucchi Deer Park. Now at that time 
the Exalted One's foot was pierced by a stone splinter. Sorely 
in sooth did the Exalted One feel it, grievous the pains he 
suffered in the body, keen and sharp, acute, distressing and 
unwelcome. Them in sooth he bore mindful and discerning, 
nor was he cast down. And making them spread his robe 
folded in four, he lay down on his right side lke « lion 
resting,* the left foot over the right, mindful and discerning. 

Now seven hundred devas of the Satullapa Group, when the 
night was far spent, shedding radiance with their effulgent 
beauty over all Maddakuechi, drew near, and coming to the 
Exalted One's presence, they saluted him, and standing at one 
side, seven of them, one after the other, gave vent to inspired 
utterance’:— 

(i.) Lo! what a wondrous creature* is the worshipful recluse 
Gotama! “Tis by this wondrous nature that he endures, 
mindful and discerning, the pains that have arisen in his body, 
keen and sharp, acute, distressing and unwelcome, and that 
he is not caat down. 

(ii.) Lo! what a lion is the worshipful recluse Gotama! 
“Tis by his hon’s nature that he endures: .. and is not 
east down. 

(.) Lo! what a thoroughly trained creature® is the worship- 
ful recluse Gotama. .. . 

(iv.) Lo! how unrivalled. 


! The Comy. narrates an absurd legend to explain the name, msso- 
ciated with Madda, mother of King Ajitasattu. (See Thwse Jatoba, 
No. 338). The park was a preserve in o very real sense: © where deer 
(or game) might dwell free from peril." The injury to the Buddha is 
that inflicted by bis cousm, the sachismatio Devadatta, narrated in 
Vinaya Texts, iii, 245; of. Jitaka, No. 503; Milinda i, 248 7. Cf. Dip. 
Comy. i, 1&4. 

2 The lion posture ia gone into by B. at some length. 

* See above, I, 4, § 3. 

4 Naga, Cf. Pas, of the Brethren, ver, 602 ff. BE. explams in o 
similar exegesis: balaeunteffheaa ng, 

® See above, 1, 2,54... . 


4,88) The ‘ Satullapa-Group’ Suttas 39 


(v.) What a patient burden-bearer. . .. 

(vi.) How tamed! is the worshipful recluse Gotama! “Tis 
by his self-mastery that he endures, mindful and discerning, 
the pains that have arisen, in his body, keen and sharp, acute, 
distressing and unwelcome, and that he is not cast down. 

(vii.) Behold how his mind is well practised in contempla- 
tive concentration and emancipated! Not strained forth, 
nor strained aside? nor having restrained [itself] by conscious 
deliberation, but as having the habit of seli-denial®. He 
who could transereas against such a wonder, such a lion, one 
60 thoroughly trained, such a matchless one, such a burden- 
bearer, a creature so selfcontrolled, could only so act from 
blindness; if not, then from what else ? 


Brahmins of five-fold Veda-lore* may ply 
Ascetic practices a century, 

Yet would their heart be never nahtly freed, 
Such is the low ideal at which they aim,° 
Not theirs it is to win to the beyond. 


1 All these six appellatives are terme connoting excellence borrowed 
from the animal kingdom, of metaphors of high mettle, breed, and 

1 Abhinatiy, aponatay. Morely exegetically explained by B. as 
riginugetay, doxinugatay respectively: *(not) gone after lust or ill- 
will.’ Nata is bent; the verb is applied (4) literally to the bending 
forth and, with second prefix ni, down, of a tortoise’s limba emerging 
from its shell, when danger ia past, 8, 1v, 178; (b) figuratively to con- 
structive work of mind (citfa) in Jhina, Dialogues i, 86 (§ 83) f. 

* | tried, in this difficult passage, to get light from B., who has 
vdritaviday. See *scsankhdre and *edritaecatay. 

‘J have followed the Comy. in this curious line, but am not con- 
vinced that the compilers of the Four Nikiiyas knew of more than the 
three older Vedas (to which they often allude), 2B. indeed specifies the 
Fifth os the Jtihise (-yurdva), but that is another matter. Satay 
suman he reads as—to the voseaesfay of the next verse, ond carey 
as=to ceranta. ‘500 Vedas’ is the more obvious hyperbole. 

§ A free, but, I think, not unfaithful rendering of the one compound 
Kinatia-ripa: having the quality or nature (Comy-+ sabiied) of 
‘Jowness.’ The whole effort to secure rebirth in Brahmi-world was 
jadged to be low or poor; ¢f. M. ii, 195: * that low Brahmé-world,’ 
ets, Cf. p. 37,0, 1. Sothe Teacher, Devas usually judged otherwize. 


40 The Devas [TEXT i, 29 


Suffused by craving, bound to mbe and mile, 
Penance severe a century they may ply, 
Yet would their heart be never rightly freed, 
Such is the low ideal at which they arm, 
Not theirs rt is to win to the bevoend. 


Are! vain conceits wished for by us and weleomed, 
Neer win we here taming [of mind and body], 
Lone in the woods though we dwell, if we dally, 
Ne'er may we pass over the Death-realm’s confines. 


All vain conceits leaving, wel-concentrated, 
Lovely in heart, wholly emancipated, 

Lone in the forest dwelling, earnest, strenuous, 
Well may he cross over the Dead-realm’s confines. 


$0. Payunna’s Daughter (1). 


Thus have | heard:—The Exalted One was once staying 

at Vesali, in the Great Wood at the Gabled Hall. Now 
‘Kokanada, daughter of Pajjunna,* when the night was far 
spent, shedding radiance with her effulgent beauty over the 
whole of Great Wood, came into the presence of the Exalted 
One, and standing at one side, spoke before him this verse:— 


The very Buddha, Crown of all that is? 
Residing at Vesali, in the Wood, 

Let me now worship—Cloud King’s daughter I, 
Even Pajjunna’s child, Kokanada. 


1 See above, I, 1, 9. 

* This amiable fairy has not been met with elsewhere in Pali litera- 
tur. B. is silent about her, and about Kokwnadaé-minor, of the next 
Suttu—whether they were sisters or not. The father’s name ooctrs 
not infrequently, ey., 2. ii, 205; Jd. i, d22; iv, 253; cf. Pas, of the 
Firethren, 5, 9.3, eto. BF. calla him * ijn’ of the rameloud devas, and 
the first named fairy cate-melvindjihd ; of the status of the Four Kings 
of the Firmament | Dialogues, il, 242). 

* Soifnssa 7 anilationsst, os in 2), i, 2) waldalbigps. 


1.4,§10] The ‘ Satullapa-Group” Suttas 41 


Till now had | bot heard about the Norm, 
Revealéd by the Man of Vision clear. 

To-day I know, eye-witness of the Sage, 

The Blessed One teaching [that Norm to men]. 


They who do go about, in wisdom poor, 

Casting aspersions on the Ariyvan Norm, 

Fall into Roruva’s dreadful abyas, 

Long, long therein to suffer misery. 

They who unto the Ariyan Truths draw nigh 
With heart consenting and with passions hushed, 
When they shall have put off their human frame, 
They shall fill up the heavenly hosts on high.* 


$10. Pajjunna’s Daughter (2). 


Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once at Vesali, 
in the Great Wood, at the teks Hall. And Kokanada the 
Less, daughter of Pajjunna : . ." came into the presence of 
the Exalted One . . . and spake before him this verse:— 


Come hither with the hue of lightning’s flame, 
Kokanada, Pajjunna’s daughter, she, 

Adoring both the Buddha and the Norm, 

Did speak these lines of sense beneficent: 
Though I by divers methods might expound 
The detailed parts of such a Norm as this, 
Yet in brief summary will I declare 

The contents, if so far my mind may reach:— 


L Of. Jét. v, 266. This partioular purgatory does not appear in the 
list of purgatories below, VI, 1, § 10. The seaport so named (see 
Buddhist India, p. 38) was not apparently connected with purgatorial 
legend. B, gives legendary details. (/f. below, 83, 0.3; 117. 

2 See above, |, 4, 37. 

3 Asin § 9. These verses form an interesting contrast to the pre- 
ceding. The terme used are of a less popular, more academical nature, 
as ifthe junior lady were more cultured, She uses the verb characteriz- 
ing the Vibhajjavadins and is primed in methodology. 


42 


Let him commit no evil whatsoever 

Throughout the world, in speech, or mind, or body. 
Dropping desires, mindful and understanding, 

Let him not work torment on self that's useless." 


5. Tre * Buesixa’ SuTrTas 


¢ 1. A-fire. 


Thus have | heard:—The Exalted One was once staying 


near Sivatthi, at the Jeta Grove, in Anithapindika’s Park. 
There a certain deva,? when the night was far spent, shedding 
radiance with his effulgent beauty over the entire Jeta Grove, 
came into the presence of the Exalted One, and coming, 
saluted him, and stood at one side. So standing, he spoke 
this verse before him:— 


1 See I, 2, § 10. 
? The Comy. has nothing specific to say about the speakers of this 


With house on fire *t is for the best to bring 

The goods outside, nor leave them to be burned. 

So in this world, a-blaze with age and death; 

Bring out by gifts; what's given is well brought. 

What's given bears fruit of bliss; naught given, no bliss. 
Robbers may bear away [the goods ye keep], 

Kings commandeer, and fire destroy the rest. 


The end arrives; the body must be left, 
And therewith all belongings:—let the wise 
Discerning this enjoy his goods and give. 
Hath he as he is able used and shared, 
Blamelesa he may to radiant realms attain. 


and the next four Suttas, On this of. Jat. iii, 471. 


® These ore said to serve as types for all the eleven ‘fires’ of the 


world: lust, hate, illusion; birth, decay or old age, death; grief, lamen- 
tation, suffering, sadnes:, despair: o late category. Cf. Childers 4,0, 
Aggi. 


1, 5,§2] The ‘ Burning’ Suttas 43 


§ 2. Giver of What? 


What doth he give who giveth strength ? 
Or he that giveth comeliness ? 
What doth he give who giveth sight ! | 
Or he that giveth happiness ! | 
Who all doth give, what giveth he ! 
Askéd art thou. Declare to me. 


He giveth strength who giveth food; 
Who giveth gear gives comeliness*; 
He giveth sight who giveth lamp; 
And he it is gives happiness 
Who giveth vehicles*; whoso 
Doth give a dwelling giveth all. 
Who in the Norm doth give instruction,‘ this 
Giveth Ambrosia [undying bliss}. 


§ 3. Food. 

“'T is food both gods and men chiefly desire. 
Who may that creature be, demon or sprite,” 
Who, unlike them, hankers not after food ? 


The food that’s given in faith, with heart made pure:— 
That finds him out in this world and the next. 

Hence" should he avarice suppress, and make 

Off rings of charity, mast’ring the taint. 

Sure planted in some other future life 

Rewards of virtue on all beings wait. 


. Lit. ‘what giver is strongth-giver, and so on. The auditory 
effect of the do, dddo jingle is not reproducible. 

* “Even a handsome person looks plain if ill-clad or unelad; even 
an tncomely person looks like a deva, when well dressed." Comy. 

2 ‘This includes all means to move or be moved about: elephants, etc., 
and such things as umbrellas, sandals, walking-sticks, palanquins . - . 
mending of ronda, making of stairways, causeways, ... ships. (omy. 

4 B, quotes Dip. oH. 

* Lit. “Now who may that yakbha be ? 

4 See above, |, 4, § 2. 


44 The Devas (TEXT i, 32 


§ 4. Which hath one root. 


That which hath but one root: which looks both ways: 
With triple stain; and with arenas five; 

An ocean; having dozen turns and twists; 

Quaking abyss! :— past all the seer hath crossed. 


§ 5. The Perfect One. 


By name the Peerless,* Seer of subtlest sense,” 
Giver of insight, looséd from the lair 

Of sense-desires, behold him, known of all, 

In wisdom rich, who wrought the mighty quest® 
For all wpon the Arivan Way embarked ! 


$ 6. Nynphe* 
By troops of nymphs made resonant—not ao! 
Haunted by troops of fends that paradise 
Doth seem. ‘ Delusion" were a fitter name. 
How shall there egress be ? 


1 Tanhé—natural, unregencrate desire, craving, thirst—ie the 
answer to the enigma. The roof is ignorance. Facing both waye are 
the opinions that there isa soul which (@) is immortal, (6) dies at each 
death. The stain is the triplet rdgu, dosa, moha (lust, hate, unintelli- 
gence or illusion), The arenas, the five sense-pleasures. Ocean ¢ 
insatiableness, Twelve turns and toists ; organs and objects of sense. 
Abyss. See Pes, of the Brethren, p. 418 f. 

2 Anoma-ndmay. Cf Rhys Davids, Buddhist Birthatories, p. 85. 
See also Sn, 153, 177; the latter verse o replica of this. Acoording to 
B. it means ‘absence of defect,’ perfection (pertpira), endowed with 
every good quality. 

* Nipunatihadasstin. 

* Tsually rendered ‘great seer, or rishi. Hut B, explains the 
context by evi, notim. See *Mahean. 

4 The quaint legend associated with these lines is that of a bhikkhu 
who, striving to emulate his Teacher's strenuous life, strove to excess 
and died suddenly as he leant against the terrace-post. His life-work 
unfinished, he is reborn in the heaven of the Thirty-Three Gods, lean- 
ing against o doorpost there. Accosted aa their lord by nymphs with 
song and music, he believed himself still n bhikkhu, till they brought 


1, 5:87] The * Burning’ Suttas 45 


[The Exalted One -—| 
‘Straight’ is the name that Road is called, and * Free 
From Fear’ the Quarter whither thou art bound. 
Thy Chariot? is the ‘ Silent Runner’ named,* 
With Wheels of Righteous Effort® fitted well. 
Conscience the Leaning-board*; the Drapery® 
Is Heedfulness: the Driver is the Norm, 
I say, and Right Views, they that run before.” 
And be it woman, be it man for whom 
Such chariot doth wait, by that same car 
Into Nibbina’s presence shall they come. 


§ 7. Plavters of groves. 


Say of what folk by day and night 
For ever doth the merit grow ?? 

In righteousness and virtuous might 
What folk from earth to heaven go! 


a choval-glass (lit. a ‘ whole-body-ish mirror’) and revealed the god- 
like figure. Bitterly disappointed at his earthly failure, he went, 
escorted by celestial attendants, to report himeelf to the Master, de- 
preciating celestial delights in his verse. The grove was Nondona, 
Cf. above, 1,2, § 1, He renames it Mohana, See also I, 3, § 9. 

1 Of. 5. iv, 201 f. 

© Lit. the ‘ uncreaking,’ unlike a chariot where axle fits badly into 
naves, or which squeaks when mounted. Comy. Road and Chariot 
are both interpreted by B. as the Eightfold Path. 

4 * Diemma *-cakba is eo interpreted by B. 

‘Cf, BR. Morris in JPT'S, 1886, 128. * That the warriors may not 
fall out.” Comy. Conselence=conecientioumess: I, 2, § 5. 

5 Such ue a lion's skin, ete. (omy. 

* To prepare the way. Comy. 

7 ‘The question of merit growing in the donor's karma (or karmic 
foree) in proportion to the utility of his gift is discussed in Kethdeutthv. 
VU, 5 (see Points af Controversy, 4), 250). The orthodox view is 
that merit grows less by utility of the gift, than by the benevolent 
thought and wish of the donor before, during, and after the giving. 
Tf he ‘ sends such « disposition after’ his gift, his merit grows. 


4G The Devas — (TEXT i, 33 


Planters of groves and fruitful trees, 
And they who build causeway and dam,* 
And wells construct and watering-sheds* 
And [to the homeless] shelter give:— 

Of such as these by day and might 

For ever doth the merit grow. 

In righteousness and virtue’s might 
Such folk from earth to heaven go. 


$5. Jela's Grove# 
This is the kindly Jeta Grove, resort 
Of the [august] fraternity of seers, 
Where sojourneth the Sovereign of the Norm, 
And whence ariseth rapture in my breast. 


foodwill,? and wisdom, mind by method trained,® 
The highest conduct on good morals based :— 
This maketh mortals pure, not rank nor wealth. 
Hence, his own good chscerning, let the wise 
Throughly examine how to train the mind.® 

Thus and therein shall he find purity. 

Even as Sariputta was supreme 

In insight, morals and self-mastery,® 


| * Flowering and fruit-bearing.” ‘They also who enclose groves of 
etch self-eown trees.” 

2 Lit. *-sefu-makers' expanded into « line. Sefu, from , to 
hind, includes both causeway, dam.and bridge, But B. meludes ships. 

* Papan, ete. 

2 According to the legend given below, IT, 2, § 10, the donor of the 
Grove, Anathapindika, reborn as a deva, revisits the familiar seen 

-a charming by-product of Indian eschatology. 

« Kamma, here defined aa the will (cetand) belonging to the Arivan 
Path. The motive behind the deed isin Buddhism of chief importance, 
See preceding § 7; M. i, 371 (Updlhi-sutta). 

§ B, explains dhammo here by doctrines belonging to samadhi, other- 
wise called adhicitia-nkbid, see Buddhiem, 1912, 10: * the second grade." 

§ Upasamena: * the calming, or suppressing, of the ileag's (lower 
nature, passions). Comy, Moggalliina’s verses (Pea. of the Brethren, 
1182) praise him in the same terms. The exegeses of Dhammapélis 
there, and of B. here differ. 


1 5,§9] The * Burning’ Suttas 47 


So may the Brother who hath won the goal 
Rank even with the highest of them all. 


$0. The Miser. 


They who ‘mong men as misera count, who grudge 
Their giving and who churlishly aceost,’ 

Who bar the way for gifts to others given : 

Here, and hereafter what is their reward ! 

To ask this of our lord we've hither come. 

To know how he will answer fain are we.* 


1 Frightening the bhikkhu at their gate with: “What have you 


They who ‘mong men as misers count, who grudge 
Their giving and who churlishly accost, 

Who bar the way for gifts to others given: 

In purgatory, or as animals, 

In Yama's kingdom come they buck to life. 


. Or if among mankind they live again, 


In some poor family they find rebirth, 

Where scarcely may they gain raiment, or food, 
Or sensuous pleasures, or the joys of play. 
Those things the fools do hope for by and by 
Remain e’en here ungotten: such reward 

Have they e’en now, hereafter woeful doom. 


Sooth hast thou said and we have understood. 
Another question ask we, GOTAMA. 

They who have won rebirth among mankind, 
Are affable and void of avarice, 

Fervent believers in Buddha and Norm, 
Holding the Order in deep reverence: 

Here and hereafter what is their reward ? 

To ask this of our lord we've hither come. 

To know how he will answer fain are we. 


ploughed or sown or reaped ? We don't get anything, whence should 
we give to yout Be off!’ 


1 Of. 1, 3, § 6. 


458 ; The Devas [TEXT 1,34 
[The Exalted One :—] 
They who have won rebirth among mankind, 
Are affable, and void of avarice, 
Fervent behevers in Buddha and Norm, 
Holding the Order in deep reverence: 
Brightly they shine in heaven when there reborn, 
Or if among mankind they hve agam, 
* In some rich family they find rebirth, 
Where without toil they get raiment and food, 
And sensuous pleasures and the joys of play. 
They bask in plenty like those devas who 
Joy in their own creationa!: such reward 
Have they een now, hereafter happy doom. 


& LO. Ghatikdra,* 
{The deva Ghafthara :-—] 
In the far heavens of Aviha* there came, 
Reborn,* seven Brethren winning Liberty. 
Lust and ill-will for them were perished quite. 
Safe had they crossed where all the world sticks fast.’ 


The Vasavatti gods, next to ‘the topmost devas in the lowret 
heavens included in the universe of Desire. See Compendium, 138. 

? The verses recur with introduction, UW, 3, § 4. B. comments on 
the present Sutta only, being curiously silent us to the legend of the 
deva and his seven friends. Of these we can identify only two: Upaka, 
husband of Capi; concerning him Dhammapala quotes these very 
lines (°s4. of the Sisters, p. 131, sec Commentary on Therigatha, ibid); and 
Pukkusiti (M. iii, 247; of. Buddhism, 1912, p. 67 f.; Pss. of the Brethren, 
p. $1). Of the others Bhaddiya can be neither of the Arahant Theras eo 
named. The other Bhaddiyas, Licchavi and Sakyan, were ot this time 
onearth The other four names are not elsewhere asaociated with the 
Aviha heavens. Perhaps the Pingiya is he of the Suva Nipata. Gha- 
tikfira and his friend Jotipila, who was the Bodhi=nt in « former life, 
are the subject of the Ghatikiira Sutta, W. ii, 45 f. The Buddha 
reminds the modest deva of this past friendship. We know of only 
three other such references to the Buddha's former births in the Four 
Nikiyas. See Buddhist India, 1M). Kassapa was the Buddha then. 
3 Twelfth of the 16 Brahma-worlds. * Immobile' in Compendium, 139, 
* Upapannasi. ‘cy. I, 1, § 1. 


I, 5, § 10] The * Burning* Suttas 49 


And who were they who crossed o'er the morass, 
The realm of dying, passing hard to cross, 

Who having !eft behind this mortal frame, 
Passed inte touch with things celestial !* 


‘Twas Upaka, and Phalaganda too, 

And Pukkusati making three, besides 
Bhaddiya, Khandadeva too, for five, 

And Bahuraggi, lastly Pingiva: 

They having left behind this mortal frame 
Passed into touch with things celestial. 


(The Exalted One -—] 
Fair things thou speakest of the Brethren seven 
Who have abandoned Mara‘s traps and snares. 
Whose was the doctrine that they learned, whereby 
They smote in twain the fetters of rebirth 


"Twas thine alone, Exalted One, thy Rule, 
Thy teaching only "t was they learned; thereby 
They smote in twain the fetters of rebirth. 
! Where mind and body wholly cease to be *:— 
That learned they here from thee; thereby 
They smote in twain the fetters of rebirth. 


{The Exalted One -—] 
Deep is the word thou speakest, hard to learn, 
And passing difficult to understand. 
Say then: whose doctrine is it thou hast learned, 
That thou canst utter such a word as this ! 


[@hatil dra -—] 
In former birth maker of jars was I, 
In Vehalinga as the Potter known. 
My mother and my father 1 maintained, 
Lay-follower of the holy Kassapo. 


* Dibiayogag. 
1 See above, I, 3,§ 3. This line occurs five times in this volume. 
4 


50 The Devas [TEXT 1, 35 
Eschewing carnal things, unworldly, chaste. 

I was of those men fellow-villager, 

I was their comrade in those bygone days. 

Wherefore I know these things, 1 know 

Of us seven Brethren winning Liberty, 

For whom lust and ill-will are perished quite, 

Who safe have crossed where all the world sticks fast- 


Yea, as thou say'st then wast thon, Bhaggava* 

In former birth maker of jara wast thou, 

In Vehalinga as * The Potter” known, 

Thy mother and thy father didst thou keep, 

Lay-follower of the holy Kassapa. 

Eschewing carnal things, unworldly, chaste. 

Of me wast thon the fellow-villager ; 

My comrade wast thou in those bygone days. 
[The Editors of the Canon*® —] 

Such was the meeting of these ancient friends, 

Both having faculties supremely travned, 

Both bearing bodies of their final life. 


6. Tae ‘ Decay’ Surras 
& 1. Old Age. 


Tell me what brings us luck® e’en till we're old ? 
What is't that’s fortunately* based and stayed ? 


t Name of the potter of Rijagaha in M. in, 327, Ohotikira means 
* jar-maker.' 


* So the Cheniaty. 

2 * Look,’ * good fortune,’ * blessed *“—*sddiu—eso the Cony. 

‘ Paurhifa means base or support, E. ecites Hatthafkn] the 
Alavakan and Citta the houcefather as instances. A. i, 26; 8. Ii, 
345; iv, 251 /.; ey. tr 


I, 6, § 2) The * Decay" Suttas 51 


What is the precious jewel of mankind ? 
And what is hard for thieves to bear away ? 


Good morals bring us luck e’en till we're old, 
A lucky base and stay hath confidence, 
Wisdom ‘s the precious jewel of mankind, 
And merit's hard for thieves to bear away. 


§ 2. By Absence of Decay. 


What by the absence of decay brings luck ? 
What base and stay’s of happy augury ? 

What is the precious jewel of mankind ? 

And what is it that thieves should bear away 72 


(sood morals bring us luck that ne'er decays, 
Faith well-established doth good fortune bring, 
Wisdom's the precious jewel of mankind, 


Merit it is that thieves should bear away.® 


§ 3. Friends 


What is a good friend to the wayfarer ! 

What ts the good friend dwelling in the home ? 
What is a good friend where has risen need ¢ 
What ts a good friend in the life to come ? 


Escort’s* a good friend to the wayfarer, 
‘ Mother's the good friend dwelling in the home,‘ 


' cy, Kip. viii, 9. * Merit means volition in meritorious acts, and 
that az an immaterial thing cannot be borne away.” Comy, 

* The sense, let alone the preceding Sutta, suggest here a possible 
misreading in the text, and the reading: coreA’ aha@riyay for corehi 
hdriyay. Comy. is silent. 

2 Mittay, lit, a kind thing. Miffdm, neut, plur,, occurs in D. iii, 
188 (Singaéloviida 4), 

© Sattha, 

4 "In time of trouble though she be dirty, yet is she reckoned 
fragrant as sandalwood." Clomy. 


9211 


52 The Devas [TEXT i, 37 


A comrade’s help where there has risen need, 
Is a good friend again and yet again, 

And meritorious deeds wrought by one's self:— 
That is a good friend in the life to come. 


§ 4. Basis and sitpport. 
What is the basis and support of men # 
What here below is comradeship supreme ¢ 
What are the spirits who sustain the life 
Of all such creatures as to earth are bound ¢ 


, Children are mankind's basis and support,* 
The wife is here below comrade supreme;* 
The spirits of the rain* sustain the life 
Of all such creatures as to earth are bound. 


§ 5. That which gives berth (1). 
What is it that doth cause a man to be? 
What is’t of him that runneth to and fro! 
What is it undergoes life’s endless round ! 
What is it brings him fear and mighty dread ! 


Craving it is that causeth man to be; 

His thought it ts that runneth to and fro: 
The ‘ person” undergoes life’s endless round; 
Suffering is his fear, his mighty dread. 


§ 6. (2). 
What is it that doth cause a man to be? 
What is't of him that runneth to and fro? 
What is it undergoes life's endless round ! 
What is there whence to him comes no release ? 


1 VFatthn, base, used bere as meaning also support. 

2 * They cherish in old age.” Cony. 

2 *Qne to whom one may tell a secret that can be told to no one 
eee.” Comy. ‘ 

4 Patthi-aid 


16,87] The ‘ Decay’ Suttas 53 


Craving it is that causeth man to be... 
~ 2 «+ {at above)... | 
. . « life’s endless round: 


. whence for him comes no release. 


= 


§ 7. (3). 
What it is that doth cause a man to be ? 
... asin 1)... endless round ? 
What is the prop and stay' [of his career] ? 


Craving it is that causeth man to he... (as em 1) 


tL] a + Li 


Action’s the prop and stay of his career- 


§ & The Wrong Road. 
Which is the road that’s said to lead astray ? 
What is't that perishes both might and day ™ 
What is it that doth stain celibacy ?* 
And what is bathing where no waters be? 


Lust is the road that’s said to lead astray, 
Life "tis that perishes both night and day,* 
"Tia woman that doth stain the hicher hfe, 
Steeped in that stain 1s all humanity. 
Ascetic ways, the life of chastity *;— 
These are as bathing where no waters be? 


A figure 


tf, Pes, of the Brethren, 402 “having o staif to lean upon 
for Karma's help to rebirth (wibetti-cetsenyo). 

* Kig wu rattindiva-bkhayo? may read as What ts destruction 
af both night and day, or, as we take it, What is night-and-da y- 
destruction? The night, says B., perishes by, or in the day [and rica 
werd). 

* Brahmeraniyay. 

2 Vayo is more literally age—i.e. life in terms of time. But the 
word our idiom would use here is * life.’ 

4*Not an outer sollure that may be washed off, but one of rot 
(futtho), that may not be cleansed.” Cony. 

* The Comy. is silent here. 


54 The Devas [Text i, 38 


$9. The Companion. 
What hath a man as second at his side 2 
And what is it that issues him commands ! 
What is that which if it be greatly loved, 
Will rid poor mortals of all misery ? 


Faith hath a min as second at his side, 
Wisdom it is that issues him commands, 
Nibbana, if they love it utterly, 

Will rid poor mortals of all misery. 


§ 10. The Bard. 
What i the Indden source whence verses tlow 7 
And what is it that issues from that source ¢* 
What are the pegs whereon verses are hung ?* 
And what's the abode wherein the verses dwell ¢ 


Metre’s the hidden source whence verses flow. 
Letters 1t is that issue from that source, 

"Tis names of things whereon verses are hung, 
The bard is the abode wherein they dwell. 


7. Tue ‘ Over-Unper* Scrras* 
$ I. Name. 


What is it that all things doth overnde ? 
Nought is in greater number found than this ? 


1 Boe above, |, 4, § 6, and also 6, § 1, § 2. 

® Letter: make the pada (half-line), and the pada makes the gathd, 
and the pdifid expresses the matter (atthag). Comy. 

* Expansion of the word sannissitd. * Hung, ¢.9., on such notions 
aa ocean, earth, &e." Comy, 

* The Comy, reads, not Addhavagga, but Anvavagga, and in § 1 
line 1, anvobhavi. Cf. aneagi in tine 2 of the text. (The confusion 


17, $2] The * Over-Under* Sutias 


a 


between addh and ant is easy in Singhaloae script.) N 
overrides (abhithavati), falls wpon (onvpatali) everything. There is 
no being or thing without 1 nome, whether this be attached primor- 
Even if a treo or mineral be of name on- 


dially or by convention. 
known, it will be called o no-namer (qndmeka). Cf, our of immomina- 


And what is it above all other things 
That bringeth everything beneath its sway * 


Name is it that all things doth override, 
Nought is in greater number found than name, 
And name it is above all other things 

That bringeth everything beneath its sway. 


¢ 2. The heart (mind),' 
Now what is that whereby the world ts led ! 
And what is that whereby it plagues itself ?* 
And what is that above all other things 
That bringeth everything beneath its sway ! 


lis thoughts are that whereby the world is led, 
And by its thoughts it ever plagues itself, 

And thought it is above all other things 

That bringeth everything beneath its sway. 


§ 3. Craving. 


As iw § 2, substituting craving for the heart. 


& 4. The Chawn. 
Now what is that whereby the world enchains ¢ 
What is it’s going over, going through !* 
And by abandoning of what is it 
That‘ Lo! Nibbana’ we [are wont to] say ! 


i 


jum : Pic Sanz-nom. 


? Pina. Generally used in the Nik&yas, especially in their poetry 
for mind as impulsive and emotional, A prose version of the stanza 


gocars in A. it, 177 (IV, 190). 
* Porikissatt. 


* Vicdranay, * The walking feet of the world, the singular expret- 


ging the plural.” Comy. 


amen, it saya, 


variant 


[TEXT i, 39 


Pleasure! is that whereby the world enchains 
By thinking doth the world go o'er, #0 through. 
And by abandoning of craving ist 

That ‘ Lo! Nibbana ’ we [are wont to] sav. 


§ 6. The Bond. 


Now what is that whereby the world doth bind? 
What is it’s going o'er and going through ! 

And by abandoning of whut is it 

That folk may sever that which holds them bound? 


Pleasure is that whereby the world doth bind. 

By thinkine doth the world go o'er, go through, 
And by abandoning of craving is't 

That folk may sever that which holds them bound. 


§ 6. Persecuted 


Tell me what doth so persecute the world / 
And whereby is it shrouded and beset ? 
What is the dart whereby it’s pierced alway, 
By itch of pestering desires assailed ? 


By Death the world is held enslaved; by age 
And all decay “t ia shrouded and beset; 

By dart of craving pierced evermore, 

By itch of pestering desires assailed. 


§ 7. Strung up. 


What ts't whereby the world is all strung up t* 
Whereby is 1t escorted, guarded sure ? 

What doth enclose the world and shut it im ? 
And wherein doth it stand planted and stayed ' 


i = 


1 Nandi. See above,'I, 1, § 2. 
Verses in Sirimanda’s gathi (Pas, of the Brethren, 445), with one 


(pori-EAito or -edrito). 


* Dddito. 7 See above, I, 6, § 1. 


I, Ti 4 8] 


The * Over-Under’ Suttas 57 


By cords of craving is the world strung up; 
By age is it escorted, by decay: 

Death doth enclose the world and shut if in. 
In suffering doth it stoud planted and stayed. 


§ &. Shut tm. 


Repeats the preceding lines in different order:—3, 4, 1, 2- 


& 9. Wishes. 
What is it holds the world a prisoner ‘ 
What subjugating gains it liberty ? 
And by abandoning of what is it 
That every bond is severed utterly ? 


By wishes! is the world held prisoner, 
Wishes suppressing gains it liberty, 
By wish [for this or that] abandoning. 
Lo! every bond is severed utterly. 


§ 10. The world. 


What being siven, comes the world to pass ?* 
What being given, holds it intereourse ? 

On what depending* doth it hold its way ! 
Because of what is it so sore oppressed ! 


‘Six’ being given,4 comes the world to pass. 
‘ Six” being given, holds it intercourse. 

On * Six’ depending doth it hold ita way. 
Because of ‘Six’ it is so sore oppressed. 


1 Lit. wish (want, desire), 

® Kiamiy (uppanne), writes B., seeing hore a locative absolute. 

* Upadaya. 

4 Namely, the six organs of sense, mind, as co-ordinating sensations, 
ranking as sixth. 


as The Devas [TEXT i, 47 


8. THe ‘Suavanter’ Surras! 


... 80 standing the deva addressed this verse to the 
Exalted One:— 
§ 1. What must we slay ? 


What must we slay if we would happy live? 
What must we slay, if we would weep no more ! 
What is't above all other things, whereof 

The slaughter thou approvest, GOTAMA ! 


(The Exalted One :—] 
Wrath must ye slay, if ye would happy live, 
Wrath must ye slay, if ye would weep no more. 
Of anger, deva, with ita poisoned source 
And fevered climax, murderously sweet? 
That is the slaughter by the Ariyans praised; 
That must ye slay in sooth, to weep no more. 


& 2. The Charvot. 


What signal doth a chariot announce ! 
What is the sign that warneth of a fire ? 
What is the symbol of a people's realm ! 
What is a woman's emblem and her sign % 


i The Coen. reads Juarvi, not Comrva, as do the Smh. MSS. and 
Feer. In his MS. of the Comy, be found Ghatva. T have retained 
*Jhatva (having destroyed), a3 agreeing better with eadhay (slaughter) 
in the context of the first githi, whence the Vagga derives its name. 
Spiritual ‘ cutting’ (cheted) ia prescribed for favAd and doubt, but 

never, I believe, for anger. 

* The original is severely simple. ‘The line expands the compound 
: canayawaes climax." Pleasure urises, writes B., in capping one angry 
rejoinder by another, in hitting back. The githi is repeated thrice 
in this volume: II, 1, § 3: vi, 1, § 1; xi,.3, $1. 

® Signal, sign, emblem: puiiitway; Comy. 'panfidyati eena, The 
banner in battle reveals the royal chariot, And ‘ even though she be 
an emperor's daughter, once married a woman i# known as so-and- 
eo’s wife.” There are, however, several cases where she is called so- 
and-so's mother (sce below, UL, 2,.§ 1; Psalms #. B. passim) ,or 
famed under her own name though married —-g, Visikha; 


— “= 


1,8, §3] The ‘ Slaughter? Suttas 59 


A benner doth the chariot announce; 

Smoke is the sign that warneth of a fire; 

A king’s the symbol of a people's realm; 
“A husbend is woman's emblem and sign. 


$4. Riches.! 
What here is the best wealth a man can have ¢ 
What well performed brings happiness alang ? 
What in good sooth is of all tastes most aweet ? 
How say they that our life can best be lived ! 


Faith here is the best wealth a man can have,® 
Right deeds* well done bring happiness along. 
Truth in good sooth* is of all tastes most sweet. 
Life lived by wisdom, it is said, is best. 


$ 4. Rain. 
Which of all things wpspringing is the best ? 
And which is chief among the things that fall ¢ 
Which of the creatures that perambulate 
Is chief, and which of those that predicate ? 


[Another deva :—] 
Seed® of the things upspringing is the best, 
And rain is chief among the things that fall. 


* Recurs helow, X, § 12, with one variant—eucina-ay, for -o, 

=“ By faith* (trust, confidence; eee above, 1, 4, $ 6) ‘a man wins 
wealth, social success, the lower and higher heavena, and finally 
Amata-mahd-nibbdne.’ Comy. 

7 Dhammo: ‘the tenfold path of good conduct’ named in 8. ii, 
168 (XIV, 27). 

* B. has in mind, under agceay have /, the form of adjuration by « 
statement of fnet (succa-diriyoy faroli) and ita magical resulta. 
He cites turning back rivers in spate, checking oconflagrations, ete. 
Cy. Jat. i, 214 passim. 

5B. draws « distinction between the wisdom of the layman and of 
the religiens, 

® Com being the best among the ‘seven kinds.’ (omy. 


G0 The Devas [rext i, 42 


_ Kine of the creatures that perambulate 
Are chief; a son, of those that predicate.' 


(The Exalted One :— 
Knowledge, of things upspringing is the best, 
And ienorance is chief ‘mong those that fall. 
The Order "mong perambulating things, 
The Buddha ‘mong the predicators ‘s chiel.* 


$ 5. Frightened. 


The Path hath been set forth in divers ways:— 
Why here are many folk ao sore afraid ? 

I ask thee, GoTAMA so amply wise 

How may a man so stand and so abide 

As not to fear life in another world ! 


[The Exalted One —] 
Let him but rightly set both speech and mind. 
And by the body work no evil things. 
Ti in a house well stored with goods he dwell, 
Let tim have faith, be gentle, share lis goods 
With others, and be affable of speech, 
In these four qualities if he persist, 
He need not fear life in another world. 


§ 6. Doth not decay. 


What doth decay and what doth not decay ? 
Which is the road that’s snid to lead astray ‘ 
What peril to cood doctrines bars the way ! 
What ts't that perisheth both night and day ? 


' The stilted terms are chosen to match the similar and unusual 
Pali verbs. A son (or child) is best of talkers * because he does not 
talk bharmfully about his parents.’ 

® The Comy. explaing this secoml reply by a sing a second devati, 
near the Presence, to rebuke her or his fellow for asking such questions 
and to have given the first reply. Wherenpon the former rebukes 
this impertinent brenking in, and again puta the questions to the 
Exalted One, who then gives his reply. 


4,8, §7] The ‘ Slaughter’ Suttas 61 


What is it that the celibate life doth stain ? 
And what is bathing where no waters be {* 
To ask this of our Jord we've hither come. 
To know how he will answer fain are we ?* 


Material shape of mortals doth decay, 

Their name, their family doth longer stay.* 

Lust is the road that's said to lead astray. 

Greed to sound doctrines bars th’ imperiled way, 
Life is't that perishes both night and day. 


~ Woman doth stain life of celibacy :— 


Steeped in that stain is all humanity. 
Ascetic ways, the life of chastity: 
These are as bathing where no waters be. 


Six holes there are within the world whereon no mind can 


stay 3 


From all these six, by every means see that ye turn away :— 
Sloth, slackness and inertia and want of self-control, 
Drowsiness, too, and laziness:—the fifth, and the sixth hole. 


i 
4 


§ 7. Lordship. 


What maketh lordship ‘mong the sons of men ! 
And what is the commodity supreme ! 

What is the rust and tarnish on the blade 74 
And who are they who make a hell on earth ? 
To whom conveying do men bar the way ¢ 
And whom, conveying, are they fain to sce? 
Who is it coming back again, again, 

Doth fill the wise man with complacency ? 


See, except for lines lst and trd, above I, 6, § 8, 


See above, I, 5, § 9. 
B. is careful to illustrate by such immortal names, ete., as those of 


the Buddhas. 
4 Of. Theragdthd, ver. 1005: ef. 1004, 5, also refers to * the blade 


of insight.’ 


f 


62 The Devas [TEXT i, 43 


Power of command* makes lordship amonz men. 
4 Woman is the commodity supreme;! 

Anger’s the rust and tarnish on the blade, 

Robbers are they who make a hell on earth.? 

To them conveying do men bar the way, 

The friar conveying® are they fain to see; 

The friar coming back again, again, 

Doth fill the wise man with complacency. 


$8. Seebiy, 


What should a man seeking his good not give ? 
Of what should mortals no surrender male ? 
What should as something gentle be discharged ? 
And what as rough be not discharged at all ? 


Himself should none seeking his own good give.* 
None of himself should a surrender make® 
Speech should as something gentle be discharged, 
As bad and rough discharged it should not be. 


§ 9. Provisions. 
What packeth up provisions for the way ? 
What is’t that draweth riches to itself ? 
What drags a man around and to and fro ? 
What's a hard thing to give up in this life ¢ 
Whereto is bound the great majority, 
Like to « bird imprisoned in u snare ? 
* Vaso. 
'* Because she is of indispensible utility, or because through her 
Bodhisate and world-rulers take birth.’ Cony, 
* Abjuda ; see below, VIL, 1, §§ 0, 10. 
+ * Namely, food-tickets: To give these confers merit on the luy 
donor,” Comy. p 
‘ That is, as walave. Comy, 
* That is," to lions, tigers, and the like.” Neither injunction applies 
to a Bodhisat. Comy. The Jitakas represent the Bodhisat as dis- 
regarding both. 


t, 8, § 10] The ‘ Slaughter* Suttas- 65 


Faith packeth up provisions for the way? 
The power of luck draws riches to itself. 
Desires* drat man around and to and fro, 
paires are hard to give up in this life. 
Thereto is bound the great majority, 
Like to a bird imprisoned in a snare. 


§ 10. Radiance. 


What giveth radiance to all the world ! 

Who in this world’s the watcher, fostering @ 

Who in their work is mate to sons of men {* 

The movements of that mate—what is their line ? 
What nourishes both slack and vigorous, 

Like as a mother nourisheth her child ? 

What are the spirits who sustain the life 

(} all such creatures as to earth are bound 74 


Wisdom gives radiance to all the world. 
Mindfulness is the watcher fostering. 

(xen in work are mates to sons of men. 
The furrow® of their movements ia the line, 
, The rain doth feed both slack and vigorous, 

- Like as a mother nourisheth her child. 
The spirits of the rain sustain the life 
Of all such creatures as to earth are bound. 


§ 11. Uwniefiled.** 


Who in this world below is undefiled ? 
Whose is the way of life that’s never wrecked 7 


\ Of. Dikp. Comy. iii, 355 (ver. 245), On’ faith * eee nhove, T, 4, 9 fh. 
* Or‘ wishes.” ('f. above, |, 7. $4. 

0+ Like the bralumin who fosters * (the sacred fire], Corny. 

* Sajied aay. 

‘ See above, G, § 4. 

- Read aif “aaa. 

** Arai. 

® That is, the Ariyan Path thot they have chosen. Comy. 


44 


The Devas [TEXT i. 44 


Who is it understand earthly desires ! 
Who is a freed man now and evermore ! 
Who, in his ways established, doth receive 
Homage from mother, father, brother too ¢ 
Whom, though he be of lowly birth, 


Do noble warriors reverently salute ¢ 


Recluses in this world are undefiled: 
Recluses’ way of life is never wrecked ; 
Recluses understand earthly desires; 
And theirs is freedom now and evermore. 


_ In virtue stablished the recluse receives 


ig. 


Homage from mother, father, brother too, 
Him, though he be of lowly birth, 
Do noble warriors reverently salute. 


CHAPTER II 
THE SONS OF THE DEVAS! 


I. 
§ 1. Aassapa (1). 
Tuus have T heard:—The Exalted One was once staying - 
near Savatthi, in the Jeta Grove, in Anathapindika’s Park. 
Now Kassapa, son of the gods, when the night was far spent, 
shedding radiance with his effulgent beauty over the entire 
Jeta Crrove, came into the presence of the Exalted One, and 
stood at one side. So standing, he spake thus to the Exalted 
One :— 
* The Exalted One hath revealed “the bhikkhu™ and 
hath given even to us the admonition for a bhikkhn.® 


[Tie Exalted One :—] 
* Well then, Kassapa, say what has occurred to thee.’ 


| Kussapa -—] 
See that in what hath been so finely said 
Ye train yourselves:—in the recluse’s task, 
In mysteries of the solitary seat, 
And in the mastering of the heart's unrest. 


? Devapulia. These were born to Seiwa gods from the hip (ante); 
females were called daughters of the gods (see I,1,§1,m....). Hf 
their mame was not known they were called derafd ; if known, they 
were called devapnitta. Comy. 

= B.'s legend is that Kassapu had listened to the Buddha's ex posi- 
tion of Abhidhamma in the * Thrice-Ten Devas’ City’ (see Points of 
ontroversy, 1) during one Lenten season of his long ministry on earth. 
A feature in the addreas was the ‘Jhine-vibhanga" (see Vibhunga, 
PTS, p. 224), containing a deseription of the calling and duties of a 
bhikkhu. He wishes to acknowledge the honour done to devas, and 
the profit to himself, 
65 5 


66 The Sons of the Devas [TEXT i, 46 


Thus said Kassapa,son of the devas,and the Master approved 
ofhie words. Then Kassapa thinking: * The Master approves 
of me!’ saluted the Exalted One with the right-hand obeisance 
and vanished from that spot. 


§ 2. Kassapa (2). 


1. In the same place and after the same manner Kassupa 
uttered these lines before the Exalted One:— 


The brother with his mind set wholly free 
Should zealously in Jhana meditate, 
Yearning to win his heart's inmost destre,! 
And knowing of all things the flux and ebb, 
Lovely in disposition, leaning not; 

By That rewarded and by That repaid. 


§ 3. Madgha. 


1. In the same place, and after the same manner, came 
Mazha, son of the devas, and addressed these lines to the 
Exalted One:— 


What must we slay if we would happy live ? 
What must we slay if we would weep no more ? 
What is’t above all other things whereof 

The slaughter thou approvest, GoTtama ? 


Wrath must ye slay, if ye would happy live, 
Wrath must ye slay, if ye would weep no more. 


' Je. Arahantship. Comy. On * heart’ (/edaya) in Buddhism, 
aoe Hud, Pay., 14, 34, 71. 

3 Seo above, 1, 1, § 9. 

* Expansion of the word fad-duiseyso (vix., archalldnisagso), 

* Micha is one of the names for Sakka, chief deva in the lowest, or 
Thrice-Thirty (or Three-and-Thirty) heaven, The Bodhisat hinsel! 
was once reborn as Sakka or Mighs. Vatru was an Asurw (titan or 
demon) conquered by Sakke, See Jat. i, 153; 100. The verses oocur 
above, I, 8, $l, and below, vii, 1, 4 1; xi,-3, #1, 


1, 1, § 4] Kassapa 67 


Of wrath, victor of Vatra, with its source 

Of poison and its climax murderous sweet:— 
That is the slaughter by the Ariyans praised, 
That must ye slay if ye would weep no more. 


$4. Magadha. 


Tn the sume place and after the same fashion Magadha, son’ 
of the gods, spoke these lines before the Exalted One:— 


How many things light up the world and make it bright and 
clear ! 

To ask this question, Sir, we've come. Thy word we fain 
would hear. 


Four things give light unto the world; a fifth ye'll not desery- 

By day the sun doth shine; by night the moon makes bright 
the sky; 

And fire gives light by day and night, shining? now here 
now there, 

But of all things that shine, as best: light of the Buddha 
stands confessed, 

Glory without compare. 


& 5, Damali. 


In the same place and in the same fashion Dimali, son of 
the devas, spoke these lines before the Exalted One-— 


Gireat effort hath the diligent Arahant® 
To make herein: that by the abandoning 
Of sense-desires he hope not for rebirth, 


1 These verses occur above, 1, 3, § 6, with the one variant, here, of 
pebdeati for pabhasati. It may be a misprint. 

* Brihmansa (ef. I, 1, § 1) o frequent equivalent in Buddhi«m for 
Arahant, and sometimes explicitly stated to be so, given of course the 
tight context, ag. 8. iv, 175; 4. ii, 5; of. Dialogues, i, 105, 13%. 
Dimali's mistake was to impute unfinished achievement to tho 


68 The Sons of the Devas (TEXT i, 47 


There is naught left to do, O Damali, 

For th’ Arahant,—-+o said the Exalted One— 
Accomplished is the work he had to do. 
While he no footing finds, with all his limbs 
A creature swept by river-current toils; 
Finding a footing high and dry he stands, 
He toileth not; passed over, sooth, 1s he. 

A parable this, Damali. E’en so 

The Arahant who hath destroyed the Drugs, 
Wise, given to Jhana, since he hath attained 
The end of death and coming back to birth, 
He toileth not; passed over, sooth, is he. 


§ 6. Adneada. 


In the same place and in the same fashion Kamada, son of 
the gods, spoke thus to the Exalted One:— 

‘Tie hard to do, Exalted One! “Tis very hard to do, 
Exalted One!" 


* And yet the “ hard to do” is done by them, 
O Kimada,’—so said the Exalted One— 

* Who in the learner's moral code* stand firm. 
For him who ventures on the homeless life, 
Serene content arises, bringing Joy.’ 


‘T's hard to win, O Exalted One, this serene content.’ 


‘And yet that which is hard to win they win, 

QO Kamada !'\—#o said the Exalted One— 

* Who love to achieve the mastery of the heart— 
The mind of whom, during both day and mht, 
Doth love to work and make that peace to be.’* 


t Kamada's legend is that, like the ex-bhikkhu of 1, 5, § 6, he failed 
on earth to attain, and comes to lament his disappointment. 

* Somahila. 

' So B. suggests, namely, as to the object of the constructive work 
(in contemplation, of course). The creative foree in the term bhd- 
rend (* work and make . .. to be’)—the causative form of bhavals, 
to become, is pointed out in Bud. Pay. (1914), 182 f. For all mystic 


a 


1, 1, § 7] Kassapa 69 
* Hard is it to compose, Exalted One, that heart.’ 


* Yet that which hard is to compose, een they 
Compose, Kamada —said the Exalted One— 
‘Who love the fret and fever of their parts 
And powers! to bring into tranquillity. 
Cutting in twain the net that Death doth lay 
They wall at large as Ariyans, Kamada.’ 
* The way is hard to go, Exalted One, and rough the Path !' 
‘And yet along the Path thou callest rough 
The Ariyans hold their course, O Kamada. 
In that * rough path "' non-Ariyans headlong fall ; 


To Anyans the way is even. They 
Walk in the uneven with an even stride.” 


§ 7. Paitedtacanda. 


In the same place, and after the same fashion, Paficila- 
canda, son of the devas, spoke these lines before the Exalted 


‘Lo! even amid crowding obstacles* 

He that is rich in wisdom findeth room, 

Even the sage, expert t’ eliminate, 

Th’ enlightened who doth Jhina understand.’* 


* Even ‘mid crowding obstacles they find, 
Paficalacanda,’ —said the Exalted One— 


work of mind ialocenpiaiion muns both elimination (pahdna) and 
hypernormal development or creation, 

t The indriys's, covering both nowns, are the organism viewed not 
a8 passively recipient, but as dynamically controlling paycho-physical 
life. 


1 Bee I, 1, $5 7, 5- 

2 Of the two classes of obstacle (aemdidhe)—the five hindrances 
(Dialogues i, 82 f.; Bud. Pay. Eth. 310 f.) and tho five kinds of sense- 
pleasures—the former is meant. Jhina is represented os * room,’ 
‘opportunity.’ (Comy.) But the deva (pron, Panchala-chanda) stops 
at Shine (as productive of rebirth in heaven), and has to be corrected. 

* Abuddhi. 


70 The Sons of the Devas [TEXT i, 48 


* The Norm whereby Nibbana may be won. 
They who have gotten hold* of mindfulness, 
They are perfected in self-mastery.’ 


§ &. Tayana. 


At the same place, after the same fashion, Tayana, son of 
the devas, formerly a dissentient teacher,) spoke these lines 
before the Exalted One:— 


Advance with vahant energy, recluse,“ 

Cut off the stream, scatter desires of sense? 
lf these be not renounced, nowise the sage 

Can conjure up the [mystic] unison.* 

If he would do that which he ought to do, 

He should go forth with desperate energy. 

He who hath left the world with purpose slack, 
Doth only sprinkle thicker cloud of dust.® 
Not done, for ws, 1s better than ill done; 

Ill done will burn us in the time to come.” 
That what is done be well done—this is best. 
On what's thus done burning doth follow not. 
Just as a blade of grasa, if badly grasped, 
Will only come to cut the clumsy hand. 

So the recluse’s calling. if misused, 

Doth drag him downward to the gates of hell. 


* Paccaladdhaye., 

1 Je. he taught some of the 6? views enumerated in the Brahma- 
jala-suttanta (Dialogues i, 1 f.), like Nanda, Vaccha, Kisa, Sankiooa, 
Piirana, ete: By dint of good deeds, believing in karma, he was 
reborn in the heavens. Discerning there that at length a really saving 
gospel and Order were founded, he came to incite disciples. Comy. 

* Brdhmava. Cy, above § 5. The admonition here is not fitted 
for an adept or Arahant, 

2 Dp, 383. 

* Hkatioy, 1.¢. in Jhiina. In Potisombhiddimagge a synonym for (a) 
concentration, (+) grasp of facts. J PI'S, 1008, 158. The next 12 
linee=, in a different order, Ap. 311-14. 

* A figure of moral corruption. Cf. L 1, § 6. 

“ Namely, with remorse, always thus figured. 


II, 1, § 9] Kassapa 71 
All flaccid action, all corrupted rites, 


On all such work follows no high reward.t 


Thus said Taéyana, son of the devas, and so saying he saluted 
the Exalted One with the right hand obeisance and vanished 
there and then. 

Now when the night was past the Exalted One addressed 
the bhikkhus and told them of Tayana's visit, repeating all 
the verses he had said. And he added: * Learn, bhikkhus, the 
Tayana-verses! Learn them by heart, for the verses of 
Tiyana bear upon your good and belong to the rudiments 
of the holy life.’ 


& 0. Candida. 
. the Exalted One was once staying at Savatthi. 
.. . Now at that time Candima, son of the devas, was 
seized by Rahu, lord of Asuras.* Then Candimi, calling the 
Exalted One to mind, invoked him by this verse:— 


) Buddha! Hero! glory be to thee ! 
Thou that are wholly set at liberty ! 
Lo! T am fallen into dire distress 5 
Be thou my refuge and my hiding-place ! 


Then the Exalted One addressed a verse to Rahu, lord of 
the Asuras, on behalf of Candima, : 


To the Tathagata, the Arahant 
Hath Candima for help and refuge gone. 


1 Ascribed, in Pas, of the Brethren, 277, to Sabhiya, aleo o zealous 
teacher ancl preacher. 

* Coudimad meana *‘moon” (e=ch). B., by « * portmanteau *- 
exegesis, calls himceand-av-imd-na-vasi: ‘the mandwelling in the mansion 
of the moon.’ The incident ia the Indian myth of the Innar eclipse, 
and the legend is annexed by the Suttanta-teaching to ahow the Bud- 
dha's power and pity. 

° Sore distress is the anniddAa, * congesting obstacle," of § 7 above: 
‘A fitting figure for the monster's jaws ! 


72 The Sons of the Devas [Text i, 50 


Rahn, set the moon at liberty ! 
The Buddhas take compassion on the world 


Then Rahu, lord of Asuras, let go Candima, son of the devas, 
and like a man afirighted, Rahu came into the presence of 
Vepacitti, lord of the Asuras, and stood at one side, trembling 
and with stiffened hair. And Vepacitti addressed him, stand- 
ing there, in these lines:— | 


Now why. as one o’erta’en by sudden fright, 
Didst thon, O Rahu, let the moon go free ? 
Here comest thou in agitated plight— 

Why standst thou there so terrified to see ? 


[Rahu :—] 
Now let my head in seven pieces rive, 
Ne'er let me happy be while yet | live 
Lf, had I not let Candimii go free, 
The Buddha's verse had not demolished me ! 


§ 10, Suriya.? 
Now at that time, Suriya, son of the devas, was seized by 
Rahu, lord of Asuras. Then Suriya calling the Exalted One 
to mind, invoked him by this verse :-— 
0 Buddha! Hero! Glory be to thee ! 
Thou that art wholly set at liberty ! 
Lo! 1 am fallen into sore distress. 
Be thou my refuge and my hiding-place ! 


Then the Exalted One addressed a verse to Rihu, lord of 
Asuras, on behalf of Suriya, son of the devas:— 


1 * Both on thee, Rahu, and on him compassionate. Comy. On 
Vepaotti, see below, XI, 1, § 5. 

* This is the corresponding myth and annexation of the solar eclipse. 
There is the additional personal touch, in the restraining adjuration, 
of the Buddha's family being descended from the sun. (/. below, VII, 
§§1,7. B. gives the measurements of the size of Riihu, the dragon 
(gendeba),and the panic he creates among the ‘mansions’ of the gods. ~ 


11, I, § 10] Kassapa 73 


To the Tathagata, the Arahant 

Hath Suriya for help and refuge gone. 

© Rahu, set the sun at liberty ! 

The Buddhas take compassion on the world. 
Nay, Rahu, thou that walkest in the sky, 
Him that thou chokest,! darkening the world, 
Swallow him not, the craftaman of the light, 
The shining being of the disc, the fiery heat, 
My kith and kin :?—Rahu, set: free the sun! 


Then Rabu, lord of Asuras, let zo Suriya, son of the devas, 
and Suriya as one swiftly crossing came into the presence of 
Vepacitti, lord of the Asuras... . And they held converse as 


2. Toe * Anituarinprka” Surras. 
]. Candimasa* 
..». &t Savatthi, at the same time and after the same 
fashion, Candimasa, son of the devas, spoke this verse before 
the Exalted One:— 


They that to contemplative rapture win, 
With single mind,"* insight, and thought alert, 
They surely shall in safety go their ways, 
As deer in marshy dell® mosquito-free. 

L Soo J PTS, 134, p. Gl. 

* Cf. Pas. of the Brethren, vor. 20, 158. B. takes the view that the 
Buddha ts speaking of Suriva as his disciple and spiritual son. 

* The Comy. dora not mention this deva by name, hence does not 
help us as to the quantity of the second a, short in the title, long 
{? meatri camad) in the summary (given in the text after each vagga). 
The name hae not been met with elbewhere, 

4 The J haina’s, 

 Bkodi, ie. concentrated on ite object 
' © Mountain or river marsh. Comy. 


74 The Sons of the Devas [text i, 52 


They that to contemplative rapture win, 
Quitting corruption with all earnestness, 
They to the further shore shall go their ways, 
As fish once captured that hath broke the net. 


§ 2. Vendu 


. + Vendu, son of the devas, also spoke this verse before 
the Exalted One:— 


Q fortunate, O happy are the folk 

Who, having waited on the Blessed One 
And entered ‘neath the Rule of Gorama, 
Pursue their training with all earnestness ! 


They that continue in deep thought to train 
Themselves, O Vendu—said the Exalted One— 
In all the doctrines [ have preached to them, 
They strenuous, earnest, in due time will go 
Maybe no more into the power of death. 


§ 3. Dighalatthi. 

Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying at 
Rajagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, at the Squirrels’ Feeding 
Ground. And Dighalatthi,? son of the gods ... after the 
same fashion, when night was far spent, came into his 
presence ... and spoke this verse before him:— 


The Brother with his mind set wholly free 
Should zealously in Jhana meditate, 
Yearning to win his heart's inmost desire, 
And knowing of all things the flux and ebb, 


* The Comy. has Venhu, the Pali form of Vishnu, but no comment 
on him. Vishnu is mentioned as attending, with his devas, the ‘ Great 
Concourse,’ Dialogues, ii, 200 (DB. ii, 250). Cf. p. 36, n. 4. 

* fe, Long-stick, His nickname while he lived on earth, because 
of his height. In the heavens they are all 3 ga@rufos in height. 
C'cmmy, 


,2,§4] ° The ‘ Anathapindika’ Suttas 75 


Lovely in disposition, leaning not, 
By that rewarded and by that repaid.t 


& 4. Nandana. 
. . Nandana, son of the devas, also addressed the Exalted 


One in verse :— 


Lask of thee, Gorama, of thy wisdom 

So wondrous wide, ask of th’ Exalted One's 
Al-piercing insight, irresistible knowledge: 
What kind of man is it that they call virtuous ? 
What kind of man, say they, possesses wisdom ¢ 
What kind of man liveth beyond all sorrow ™ 
What land of man is it that devas worship ? 


[The Kealted One :—| 
He that is wise, virtuous, cultivated 
In mind, intent, given to Jhina, mindful. 
All miseries driven away and banished:* 
Such is [the saint known as] the Drug-destroyer, 
Who here doth live, ultimate carcase bearing:— 
This kind of man is it that they alt virtuous; 
This kind of man, say they, possess 
This kind of man liveth beyond all SOTTOW ; 
This kind of man is it that devas worship. 


§ 5. Candana. 
. Candana also, son of the devas, addressed the Exalted 


One in verse :— 


=IT,1,§2. 
2 When ‘i Tathagata sends forth his ommiscience, no tree or 
mountain is able to obstruct it." Comy. 
= fe. having first got beyond it. Comy. 
4 [¢ should be noted how the Teacher rings the changes on the 
threefold 2itkha (training), in morals, mind-control, and insight. See 
above, I i $0, 2. 1; ¢f. again the reply to Candans (pron, Chan-). 


a a 


76 The Sons of the Devas [TEXT i, 53 


0 tell how may we pass actoss the Hood, 
Unfaltering in effort night and day ? 

Standing on naught, with naught on which to hang, 
What doth remain save in the deep to drown ? 


[The Exalted One:—] 
He that in virtuous habit never fails, 
Hath insight, can to mystic rapture win, 
Who stirs up effort, puts forth all his strength, * 
“hs he ean cross the flood so hard to pass. 


Whose for sense-experience is not fain, 

Whose hath got past each celestial chain,? 

In whom craving, rebirth® are smitten down:— 
‘Tis he that never in the deep will drown. 


§ 6. Sudatta, 


--. Sudatta also, son of the devas, spoke these verses 
before the Exalted One-— 


As one downsmitten by impending sword, 
As one whose hair and turban are aflame, 
So let the Brother, mindful and alert, 

Go forth, all worldly passions left behind. 


As one downsmitten by impending sword, 
As one whose hair and turban are aflame, 
So let the Brother, mindful and alert, 
(ro forth, leaving soul-fallacy behind.4 


' This pads recurs below, VIL, 1, 7; UX, § 2; ¢f. Pas. of the Brethren, 
ver. dod. 

* Pahitatto. 

* Lit. chain of rapa, Here B. judges that the reference is to the 
16 Ropa-heavens, from the Brahmé-world upwards. Sense-experionoe 
eovers all the lower universe, 

" The Comy, reads nandi-riga. But see above, J, 1, § 2. 

“ Verses as above, I, 3, 31, 


1,2,$7] The * Andthanindika’ Suttas 17 


$ 7. Subrahmed, 
... Subrahmé also, son of the devas, addressed the 
Exalted One in these verses :— 


Ever my heart is filled with sore dismay, 

Kver my mind with anguish is o’ereast, 

For things I looked for but which happened not, 
And for the things that happened in their stead. 
If there be riddance of my sore dismay, 

That tell me thou to whom I make appeal. 


[The Exalted One :—] 
Save by high wisdom’s modes, by ways austere," 
Save by restraint of powers and faculties 
Save by renouncing, by forsaking all, 
No safety can I see for living things. 


And the deva vanished there and then 


§ 8. Kakudha. 


Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One war cuce ataying at 
Saketa,4 in the Afijana Grove, in the Deer Preserve. And 
U Ahn Cisntmentagee’ 6 legencl to theae listresatis lines i is this: Subrah- 
ma was enjoving his deva-life in the lowest heaven, under the Pari- 
chattaka tree of that Paradise, surrounded by the deva-nympha, who, 
climbing the tree, pelt him with blossoms and sing to him. The force 
of their karma suddenly expiring, they decease, vanishing, and are 
reborn in purgatory. The deva, not feeling or hearing ‘what he 
looked for,’ rouses himeelf, anc with his dibha-caktAw (deva's vision) 
diseerns their fate, Bewailing the tragedy, he comes to the great 
Teacher. 

* Tapasd. This is not o characteristic term of the Buddha's doc- 
trine. Wemight render it * by ardour (fapat, to burn) in high wisdam’s 
seven modes.’ H., however, takes the compound as a deendva (nouns 
co-ordinate): bojjhanga-bvivenai ca tapo-guagi ca—and interprote 
inpo by the 13 Dhutangas, or more ascetic course optional for 
bhikkhus (ace Pas. of the Drethren, B44-56), 

2 See above, IT, 1, § 6, a. 4. 

4 See Rhys Davids, Buddhist [ndia, 40; Psa, ofthe Brethren, p. 43, 0. 1. 
This deva's legend is that he wos o son of the body-serrant of Mog- 


718 The Sons of the Devas =‘ [TEXT i, 54 


when the night was far spent, and after the same fashion, 
came Kakudha, son of the devas, and spoke thus to the 
Exalted One:— 
* Art thou pleased, recluse !’ 
* What, friend, have I received [that 1 should be pleased] ? 
* Art thou sad, recluse ?’ 
* What is worn out, friend ? 
* Wherefore, recluse, thou art neither pees nor sad 7 
* That is so, friend. 


[Kekudha :-—] 
How now, 0 Brother! thou art not depressed, 
And yet no pleasure doth arise in thee ? 
How now! art thou, seated so lonely there, 
Not overwhelmed im spirit by regret !! * 


[The Exalted One :—] 
Yea, I, O fairy,* am no wise depressed, 
And yet no pleasure doth arise in me; 
Nor yet, though I am seated lonely here, 
Am I oerwhelmed mm spirit by regret. 


[Kakudha —}] 
How comes it, Brother, thou art not depressed, 
Yet that no pleasure doth arise in thee ! 
How 1s't that thou, seated so lonely there, 
Art not o erwhelmed in spirit by regret ? 


{The Exalted One :—} 
Pleasure may come to one who's sad at heart: 
Sadness may follow where the heart is pleased. 
Whoso hath left the world—know this, O friend !— 
Neither feels pleasure, nor 1s sad at heart. 
gallina the Great. Attached a4 4 chill to the Thera's following, he 
died in Jhfina-trance, andl was reborn in Brohmé-heaven, 
1° Arofi nibhikirali. (CY, Pasa, of the Brethren, p. 207, a. 1, 
4 Yatkha. See below, Chapter 4. 


,2,$9] he * Andthapindika’ Suttas 79 


Long time it is, i faith, since I beheld, 

As now I see, a saint freed utterly ! 

This Brother who is neither pleased nor sad 

Hath safely crossed where all the world sticks fast,! 


& 9. Uttara. 
At Rajagaha, after the same fashion, Uttara, son of the 
devas, spoke these verses before the Exalted One:— 


Life to its doom is led. Our years are few. 
For us led to decay no shelters stand. 
Whoso doth contemplate this fear of death, 
Let him so act that merit brings him blisa. 


[The Exalted One :—] : 
Life to its doom is led. Our years are few. 
For us led to decay no shelters stand. 
Whoso doth contemplate this fear of death, 
Let him reject the bait of all the worlds, 
Let him aspire after the final Peace.? 


§ 10. Andthapindika.® 


ae Andthapindika also, son of the devas, spoke, these 
verses before the Exalted One:— 


This is the kindly Jeta Grove, resort 

Of the august fraternity of seers. 

Here sojourneth the Sovereign of the Norm, 
And hence ariseth rapture in my breast, 


' See above, I, 1, § 1. 

® See above, I, 1, § 3. 

* See above, 1,5, 5 8. The prose episode, with the Verses, occurs 
also in I, ii, 242, where it is told, that the last saint on earth seen 
by Anithapindikea on his deathbed was Sariputta, who came to con- 
firm him in ‘right views.’ The text, in making the usual condensation 
at the start, omits to state the place revisited, 


a0) The Sons of the Devas — [TExT i. 55 


Crood-will and learning, mind by method trained, 
The highest conduct on good morals based:— 
This maketh mortals pure, not rank nor wealth. 
Hence, his own good discerning, let the wise 
Throughly examine how to train the mind. 

Thus and therein shall he find purity. 

Even as Samnputta was supreme 

In insight, morals, and self-mastery, 

So may the Brother who hath won the goal 
Rank even with the highest of them all, 


Thus spake Anathapindika, son of the gods. And when he 
had ao said, he saluted the Exalted One, keeping him on his 
night hand as he went, ond vanished there and then. Then 
when the night was past, the Exalted One addressed the 
Brethren, and told them how a certain son of the devas had 
visited him in Jeta’s Grove, and repeated to them his verses. 

Then said the venerable Ananda to the Exalted One:* That 
son of the devas, lord, will have been Anithapindika! Ana- 
thapindika, lord, was greatly devoted to the venerable Siri- 
putta.” 

"TY is well, *t is well, Ananda; go far as anything can be ascer- 
tained by inference,’ thou hast ascertained it. The son of the 
devas, Ananda, was Anithapindika, 


3. THe *‘ Divens Srecraries’ Survas. 
S 1. Siva, 

Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying. 
near Savatthi, at the Jeta (crove, in Anathapindika’s Park. 
And there, when night was far spent, after the same fashion, 
came Siva, son of the devas, and® spoke these verses before the 
Exalted One:— 


| An interesting early instance of fakba (logic), used in thin sense. 
I. gives the later term for inference: anwindaa: ‘ deeming according 
to, or “following on.’ ‘He said: “o certain deva," to bring out 
Ananda’s power of inferential thinking (amemdna-bwddhiya).” 

2 BK. finds nothing of interest in this name, any more than he found 
in that of Venhu (1, 2, § 2).. Even he apparently lived too early to 


1,3,$2] The * Divers Sectaries’ Suttas 81 
See that with good men only ye consort, 
With good men do ye practise intercourse, 
Knowledge of how the good do shape their life 
Will make the better man and not the worse, 
See that with good men only ye consort, 
With good men do ye practise intercourse. 
Knowledge of how the good do shape their life 
Restoweth wisdom as naught else can do. 

(The verse is repeated with variants in each last line —) 

Doth dry our tears in midst of those that weep, 


Makes us of bright renown amongst our kin. 
Doth make us find rebirth in happier worlds. 


Makes men persist in bliss perpetual. 
Then the Exalted One made rejoinder to Siva'’s verses:— 


See that with good men only ye consort, 
With good men do ye practise intercourse. 
Knowledge of how the good do shape their life 
From all and every ill may set us free, 


& 2. Ahema. 


- - » Khema also, son of the devas, after the same fashion 
spoke these verses before the Exalted One:-— 


Th’ unwise and indiscreet,! with self as foe 
To self, live in the practice of ill deeds, 
That bear fruit bitter as black hellebore. 


witness the rise and florescence of those devas into powerful deities, 
The word see in the Canon means simply ‘luck’ and ‘lucky.’ The 
verses ascribed to him are, in I, 4, § 1, distributed among six deyna. 
* These 9 lines= Dip. 06-68, the Comy, on which defines Malad (here 
‘ nawise ") ae they that know neither their own good nor that of others. 
6 


by tom, f 
| 


aA The Sons of the Dev 


Not that’s a deed well done, that in its train 
Brings burning,’ the result whereof is reaped 
By doer weeping with « tearful face, 

But that’s a deed well done, that in its train 
No burning brings, result whereof is reaped 
By doer with cheerful mind and thrilling zest. 


[TEXT i. 57 


Let him afore® * that thing elect to do, 

Which he well knoweth is for his own good. 
Thinking no * carter’s thoughts, let him that’s firm 
In doctrine make a resolute advance. 

As carter who hath left the smooth hich road 

And turned to byways rough, his axle broke, 
Broods deep and long, ** so he who did forsake 
Right things and follow after what is wrong, 
Wretched and with a death’s head HOUntnance, 
Broods deep and long, his axle also broke, 


3. Seri. 
». . Ber also, son of the devas, addressed the Exalted One 
by verses*:— 
"Tis food both goda and men chiefly desire, 
Who may that creature be, demon or sprite, 
Who, unlike them, hankers not after food ? 


' Te. remorse. Indias liken it to burning, a+ we, to biting (-morse). 

* B. resumes his Commentary here, as if aware that the preceding 
verses had been discussed in another Comy. (Tt of his own. See above, 
p. 30, 4. 5). These lines are quoted in Milind, i, 102 f- 1 differ 
from Rhys Davide's translation of them only in omitting the simile 
within # simile, vix.of the gamester. Since akkha can mean ‘axle’ no 
lesa than ‘ die,” the ‘ gomester” seems redundant. 

* Patikaces, ** Avajhiyati, 

* See lL 5,8%  B. tells of Seri that he was king of two kingdome, 
Sindhu and Sodhika, his eity being Roruva jin /dt, iii, 470, the 
capital of Sovira), and that he had built gift-halls at each of ite four 
gates, and there had made daily doles of 100.000 feoimel, and « similar 
sum at the central judgment-hall, I have not met with him elep- 
where, 


1. 3.§3) The * Divers Sectaries? Suttas 83 
[The Exalted One -—) 


The food that’s given in faith, with heart made pure, 
Phat finds him out, in this world and the next. 

Hence should he avarice suppress, and make 

Off rings of charity, mast’ring the taint. 

Sure planted in some other future life 

Rewards of virtue on all beings wait. 


i 


"Tis wonderful, lord, * tts marvellous how well said that is by 
the Exalted One!" And Seri repeated the lines, and continued :-— 
_* In former times, lord, I was a rija named Seri, a giver by 
habit*, a generous benefactor,’ a commender of giving. In 
the four gates [of my capital] there was given, through me, 
charity to all who asked for it; brahmins and reeluses, pawpers 
and eripples, wayfarers and beggars. 

‘Now when I used to come to my ladies’ bower, they would 
say: His majesty has made an offering, but we have made 
none. Well for us if we also make offering through my lord, 
and win ment!’ And this, lord, occurred to me: T am a 
giver by habit, a generous benefactor, a commender of 
giving; now what ought I to say to them who gay: Let us 
make a gift?” So 1 gave the first, lord, of the four gates to 
the ladies’ bower, and there the vifts of the ladies were given, 
my own gifts coming back to me. And the nobles, my ad- 
herents, came and said the same thing . . - and I pave them 
the second gate, my own gifts coming back to me. And the 
army came and said the same thing .. . and | cave them the 
third gate, my own gifts coming back to me. And then the 
brahmins and burgesses came and said the same thing . . . 
and | gave them the fourth gate, my own sifts coming back 
to me. And then my men came and said: “ Now is there 
nowhere? anything siven by his majesty! So T told them, 


* Dédyoko. 

' B. repeats the classes of charitable givers given, ar. Dina p, in 
(hilders. This is diaapati, the * noble giver* who gives not lesa then, 
nor just equal to what ho uses himeelf, but fares worse than hia 


* Koci=fatthuci. Coins. 


84 The Sons of the Devas [text i, 89 


saying: ‘* Pass the word then that, of the revenue coming in 
from the outlving provinces, one half shall be sent into the 
palace, and one half shall be there and then given as gifts to 
those who ask:—brahmins, recluses, paupers and cripples, ° 
wayfarers, beggars.” ” 

And so, lord, | never made an end of works of ment wrought 
for many years, of good works wrought for many years, 
whether I was reckoning them as merit, or as reward of merit, 
or as a status in heaven. As I said: "T is wonderful, lord, "t is 
marvellous how well said were those lines by the Exalted 
One :— 


The food that’s given in faith, with heart made pure, 
That finds him out, in this world and the next. .. . 


§ 4. Ghatikara. 


.» + And Ghatikarayalso, son of the devas, spoke these 
lines before the Exalted One-— 


In the far heavens of Aviha there came 
Reborn, seven Brethren winning Liberty. . - . 
(As above, 1, 5, § 10.) 


& 5. Javtw, 


Thus have | heard:—There was once a great number of 
bhikkhus living among the Kosalese, on the slopes of Himé- 
laya, in a forest-lodye. Anil they were muddled in mind, 
putied up, vain, noisy, loose of speech, heedless, unintelligent, 
without concentration, unsteady in mind, uncontrolled in 
faculties.! * 

Now Jantu, son of the gods, on a fifteenth-day festival, 
came into the presence of those bhikkhue and addressed them 
in Verses — 


1" Uddhati, capold, mukhard, vikiawanied, Cf. JPTS, 1913-14 
(Pupgala-Poviriatty Comy.), 217, and Phusea’s verses: Theragitha, 058, 
noo, O71. 


ig)”: Ok a 


i, 3,§6] The ‘ Divers Seetaries’ Suttas 85 


Happy the bhiklhus as they lived of yore, 
Who true disciples were of Gorama. 
Unhankering they sought their frugal alms, 
Unhankering, their lodging and their couch. 
The impermanence of things they understood, 
And hence of misery they made an end. 


Now, making evil-doers of themselves, 

Like headmen of the village [taking toll],* 
Longing for what their neighbours’ house contains, 
They eat and eat until they sink to rest. 


The Order [as a whole} I humbly greet; 
To some of those here met I homage pay. 
Others, forlorn and leader-less are they, 
As cast out bodies of the dead are they. 


My message is for them who heedless live. 
To earnest diligent souls I say, All hail! 


o 6. HRolutasea.® 


.. . at Savatthi, after the same fashion, Rohitassa, son of 
the devas, spake thus to the Exalted One:— Now where, 
lord, dows one not get born, nor erow old, nor die, nor leaye 
one's aphere for another, nor get reborn? How is one able, 
lord, by walking,** to come to know the end of the world,’ or 
to see tt, or to get there 1 

* Where, frend, one does not get born, nor grow old, nor 
die, nor leave one sphere for another, nor get. reborn:—that 


* imoawikd, 
' B. omphasizes the occasion seized by the deva, when he could 


? There is no accounting for the shortened form Rohita given in 
the summary of the Vagga and placed as title hy Foer, save metrical 
reasons. The autta oowursalso, veriatim, aa this, in A. ii, 47 f. (iv, 45), 

** Gamanena, | 

* The *world’ is qualified by B. as the seffa-arnkidraiokn: the 
conditioned (phenomenal) world of sentient creatures, 


88 The Sons of the Devas —[rexr i, 63 


and fastidious is his wisdom ! Small in his desires, lord, and 
contented is the venerable Siriputta! Loving seclusion and 
detachment is he! Of rampant energy is the venerable 
Sanputta! A preacher [insistent],2 accepting advice," a eritic, 
a scourge of evil is the venerable Sariputta: nay, lord, but 
who that is not childish, or corrupt, or stupid, or of perverted 
mind would not approve of the vencrable Sariputta ? 

*'T is even so, Ananda, ‘t is even'so. All that you have said 
T repeat and confirm. .. , ’ 

Now Susima, son of the devas, attended hy a great company 
of sons of the gods, had come into the Exalted One's presence, 
while the praises of the venerable Sariputta were being recited. 
And he, saluting and standing at one side, spake thus to the 
Exalted One:—‘'T is even so, Exalted One! All that has 
been said I repeat and confirm. ... 1 too, lord, to which- 
Soever company of devas I go, I hear just these words on 
every hund: “ Wise is the venerable Siriputta! . .. who 
that is not childish . . . would not approve of him ?" 


* So far the culogy agrees with that ascribed to the Buddha in 
M. iii, 25 f. (Anupadn-Sutta; ef. A. i, 45 [I, xxi, 53]; 5. v, 376 Pah 
B. analyzes each term, here and in the other Commentaries. For the 
eontent of * wisdom" he refers to Mf. iii, 62 f. (Bahudhituka-Sutta): 
‘proficient knowledge of elements, of sense-processes, af cause and 
effect, and of possibles and impossibles’ in the cosmic order. The 
second pair of adjectives are associated in S. ¥, 376 f. See also *hésg- 
panifio, * joyous '—i.e, ‘ over the line of virtuous clean-minded condoct 
ind intellectnal concentration he is pursuing.’ * Swift *: “who quiekly 
eogmizes, understands.” On the double meaning of *}renna, see 
Compendium, 245 f. ‘Sharp’ implies swift elimination, intolerance 
of vicious consciousness, yoloanic attainment ‘at one sitting,” Here 
the Vedanipariggaha-Sutta (ac: M. i, No, 74) ia instanced, os. 
Psa. of the Brethren, pp, 342, 345, * Fastidious* involves the exegotioa! 
double use of witbedhika: ho is pierced by emotion and disgust at the 
world, and he pierces and shatters greed, hate, ivnorance. 

2 Paittd iz speaker, but the Comy. adds the invplieation of odimnaner, 
stirring, and of undelaying exhortation. Cy. Pasa, of the Brethren, 
v. DD4, 

* A pretty instance in giving from extro-canonical tradition ia quoted 
of Sariputtia who, when a little novice had told him that his elonk 
was in unseemly disarray, stepped aside to readjust itand then, satut- 
ing the child, said: * Teucher, it is folded now, 


1.3.$9) The * Diverse Sectaries’ Suttas 89 


Then the celestial retinue of Susima, son of the devas, while 
the praises of the venerable Siriputta were being uttered, 
through the pleasure, the gladness, the joy and rapture that 
they felt, waxed wondrous in divers colour-tones. Even as 
4 beantiful, illustrious beryl-stone of eight facets, well polished, 
when laid on an orange-coloured cloth! * shines and glows and 
blazes . . . and even as an ornament of fine gold excellently 
wrought in high relief** by a skilled goldsmith, when laid on 
an orange-coloured cloth, shines and glows and blazes . . 
and even as, when night fades into dawn, the morning-star 
shines and glows and blazes . . . and even as,in autumn, when 
the clouds are fled afar in the sky,? the sun breaking forth in 
high heaven, smiting all darkness in the firmament, shines and 
glows and blazes, even so did the celestial retinue of Susima, 
son of the devas . . . wax wondrous in divers colour-tones, 

Then Susima, son of the devas, spoke this verse before the 
Exalted One concerning Siriputta:— 


Wise is he! so we reckon, one and all: 

Our Sariputta gentle, meek and mild, 

Of few desires, self-mastered, and a seer 

Who hath the Master's praises rightly earned. 


Then the Exalted One spoke this verse in response to 
Susima, son of the gods, concerning Sariputta:— 


/ Wise is he! so we reckon one and all:-— 

Our Sariputta, gentle, meek and mild, 

Of few desires, self-mastered, and a seer 
Waiting the hour for wage that he hath earned? 


1* Powdu. The devas were believed to glow with hyper-vivid 
eolours: indigo, yellow, red, white—on such occasions, 

** Sampahatthay. 

* B. explains dera here by éhixa: space. 

2 There is a word-play in this line and the last of the preceding 
stanza Bb hat o (praise-borne) and bhatik-o (hearer, carrier, wage- 
eamer). The concluding line is amplified in Siriputta’s own verses 
(Pes. of the Brethren, 1002, 1003), quoted by B.:— 

“Not fainam f to die, wor wel fo live, 
«« . J await the hour. 
fake any Aireling who hath done hia task. 


The Sons epi Be 
Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying 


near Rajagaha, in the Baniboo Grove, at the Squirrels’ Feeding- 
ground. And a great many sons of the gods who had been 


disciples of different alien teacherst:—Asamu and Sahali and 
‘Ninka andjAkotaka and Vetambari and Mainaya-Gamiya,— 


whe the night was fur spent, shedding radiance with their 
beauty over the entire Bamboo Grove, came into 


the Exalted One's presence and saluting lim, stood at one 


side. So standing, Asama, son of the gods, spoke this verse 
before the Exalted One concerning Piirana-Kassapa:— 

Here if a man do mutilate or slay, 

Despoil or ruin others, Kassapa 


Sees in such acts no blame, nor otherwise 
Doth he find merit for the agent's self." 
He hath declared the basis for our faith. 
A master he, worthy to be revered. 


Then pee of the Seg A sees verse before the 


Py tis and by austere practices 
To perfect self-control hath he attained; 
He hath abandoned speech and wordy strife 
With any folk, abhorrent of offence 
And equable, speaker of truth, 
No evil such as that doth he commit.* 


1 ‘These were believers in karma; thus, by meritorious acta they 
attained celestial rebirth, and by common consent came down to praise 
their respective teachers on earth. 

* Seo the statement of this teacher's theory, Dialogues, i, 69. On 
the corrupt readings of the third pada (3rd line), B. only remarks: 
yi ON ae: MONEE A there is no result (in the agent's sentient: 
ponsciousness hereafter) of good or bad deeds.” CE below, ITI, 1, § 1. 
AO the ixteliem uf this nokable teacher whom the Baddha ranked 
as the most dangerous among his rivals (e.g. A. 1, 39; 286) see Dialogues 
1, 71 f.; Buddhiem, 1912, 85 f. 


1, 3§10] The * Divers Sectaries’? Suttas 91 


Then Ninka, son of the gods, spoke this verse before the 
Exalted One concerning the Nigantha, Nita's son-— 


Austerely scrupulous and subtly wise, 

An almsman, by the Four-fold Watch restrained,' 
Revealer of thinys seen and heard by him? 

Now sooth in him what fault is there to find ? 


Then Akotaka, son of the gods, spoke this verse before the 
Exalted One concerning different alien teachers:— 


The Pakudha Kiatiyina,” Nigantha, 

Yea, and with these Makkhali, Piirana also: 
Distinguished friars. cach of a school the leader, 
From saintly men these are in sooth not distant. 


Then Vetambari, son of the gods, made rejoinder to Akotaka, 
son of the gods, in a verse:— 


For all his howl vile is the jackal reckoned. 
The wretched beast ne'er is the lion's equal. 
Th’ ascetic nude, liar, and leader of pupils 
Suspecting® all, bears to the good no semblance. 


Then Mara, the Evil One, stealing up to Vetambari, spoke 
[for ae this verse before the Exalted One:— 


— 


estniotions in the wee of water, a specially Jainist aus- 


© fie. four 


terity, to avoid injuring the saita’s, or living souls there might be in 
at For these the Buddha substituted o Fourfold Watch of the four 


(Procepts aguinat taking life, stealing, inchastity and lying. DD. iii, 


48-f. 
* Cf. M. ii, 31, 
* Usually spelt Kacefyann. Cf. below, p. 04; Dialogues i, 74; 


(with the ¢ in the Thera’s name, Pas, of the Brethren, pp.40,215. The 


hams scans badly, as it stands. 
* B. reads sxhdravens, The lengthened a of cuha may be from 


@ravah, fo howl at. g and A in Singhalese are easily confused. 


The simile is perhaps an echo of the verse im J. iit, 25; and is com- 


‘parable to the fable of the ass in the lion's akin. 


* On sankossara, cf. Dhp. Comy. iii, 485, on ver, 312. ‘ Miachief- 
meking “in Pas, of the Brethren, ver. 277, is leas accurate, 
‘Took his shape, making the deva contradict himself," Comy. 


To rules austere and careful setuples given, 
With this and that self-torture! exercised, 

With things material Snaeoaied: their hearts 

Set on attaining where the devas dwell:— 

Mortals themselves, they for another world 

Do of a surety give the right advice to men. 

But the Exalted One, discerning that this was Mira the 

Evil One, made rejoinder to him by a verse:— 


Whatever shapes living in earth or heaven,? 
They that on high radiate shining beauty,’ 

Of all these thon, Namuci,4 sing'st the praises, 
As bait to fish, cast with a purpose deadly. 


Then Minava-Gamiya,® son of the gods, spoke this verse 
before the Exalted One concerning the Exalted One:— 


Of Rajgir's hills the chief is Vipula; 
Mount White® is chief of peaks in Himalay: 
The sun is chief of things that traverse space, 
The ocean of all waters is the chief, 
As is among the starry groups the moon, 
Of all the world and all the gods therein 
A Buddha is by all esteemed supreme, 


——— —— 


* Such as pulling owt hairs (ef. Pas. of the Sisters, p. 65), galiig tinkedl, 
eating like dogs from the ground, |ying on thorns. Cowiy, 

* Of. Sm. ver, 468 f.; 801; 224. Diseussed in JPTS, 1884, 108. 

* "Eg. the moon and sun, the lord of the Order (Songharija), the 
rainbow.’ Cony. 
' 4B. reads: sabb'er: fe te, and Namuci (Mins) in the vocative: | 
fe fayd (they by thee}, 

3A former body-servant of the Buddha. Comy. Not ineluded in 
the ist of these given by Dhammuapile (Pes. of the Brethren, p. 350), 
The name means simply * village youth.’ 

® Seta. Was this the snowy Kinchenjunga so familiar to us, as it. 
was to the founders of Buddhism # 


CHAPTER 
ROSALA 
L 
8 1. Young Creatures. 
Tuve have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying near 
Savatthi, at the Jeta Grove, in Anathapindika’s Park. Now 
the King, the Kosalan Pasenadi, eame into the presence of the 
Exalted One, and after exchanging greetings with him and 
compliments of friendship and courtesy,* sat down at one side, 
So seated he said to the Exalted One: 

‘Does master Gotama also make no claim to be perfectly 
and supremely enlightened ? 

" If there be anyone, sire, to whom such enlightenment might 
rightly be attributed, itis I. I verily, sire, am perfectly and 
supremely enlightened.” 

“But, master Gotama, there are recluses and brahmins 
who also (like yourself) have each their order of disciples, their 
attendant followers, who are teachers of disciples, well-known 
and reputed theorizers.* highly esteemed by the people—I 


* Such as mutial inquiries after health, ete. By all such « pleasant 
even current is set flowing, sa of blended hot and cold streams of water." 
Corny 

* The word pi means inclusion with the other six teachers. The 
iIneaning is: * thus you too do not (aa) claim? Comy,. 

* Titthatara, One of the secondary meanings of fittha (landing 
place, ford) is “unsound view, or the teacher of it. See JPT'S, 
19h-l4, p. 117, 9.5. B. paraphrases by Jaddhikord: opinion-, or 
uvpothesis-makers, On these six teachers see Dialogues i, 66 f.; and 
above, IT, 3,§ 10. The soubriquets of the second and sixth were, 
jaye B., from birthplace and habitual garment respectively, The 
third was leader of the (later so-called) Jains. B. gives the traditional 
account of the King’s interview with them alluded to. It seems to 
show that the idea of o Buddha's advent was "in the air’ at that time. 

ng 


supreme enlightenment. How can this be? For (as com- 
pared with them) master Gotama is young in years, and is a 
novice in the life of religion."# 


‘There are four young ereatures, sire, who are not to be 


disregarded or despised, because they are youthful. What are 
the four’ A noble prince, a snake, a fire, an almsman 
(bhikkhu), Yea, sire, these four young creatures are not to be 


| disregarded or despised because they are youthful.’ 


Thus spake the Exalted One. And the Blessed One so 
saying, the Master spake again on this wise:-— 
A princely youth, by birth with fortune blest, 
Offspring of well-born families, let none 
Disdain for being youthful nor despise. 
‘The time may come when he, as lord of men, 
Comes -to his | heritage, and in his wrath . 
May with a despot’s weapons seek revenge 
With heavy hand. Hence from such attitude 
Let everyone who guards his life refrain. 


Or if a man do walk within the woods 

And see a snake glide by, let him not say 
Disdainful:* "Tis a young one,” and despise. 
In divers shapes and with an ardent force? 


' Comy,: Pakudhassa gottasse. Feer elects to call him Kakudha; 
but in his index he gives Kakuddha, or Pakuddha. 

* This point in historically interesting, as illustrating the long loyal 
friendship of Pasenadi. In M. ii, $24, we see him Venerating the 
Buddha os one eighty years of age, like himself. On this king, whose 
personal name was probably Agnidatta, see Bud, India, 8-11, His 
sister, Princess Sumani, was present, and there resolved to leave the 


world (as if the Sisters’ Order was already started). See Pas. ‘of the 


Sisters, p. 18—a result searcely to have been expected from the 
discourse. 
* The Comy. takes wrago a4 a generic term for several spevies of reptiles, 


inean Pirapa-Kasapa, Maklhaliof the Cowstall, the Nigwnth 
- Nita’ 8 Son, Safijaya Belatthi’s son, Kacedyana of the Paku- 
dhas,' Ajita of the Hairblanket. Now they, when I have asked 
this same question of them, have not laid claim to perfect and- 


1m, 1, §2] Young Creatures 95 


‘Fareth the snake. Should he attacking strike, 
He bites the heedless, be it man or maid, 

No matter when. Hence from such attitude 
Let everyone who guards his life refrain. 


A fire ablaze with appetite immense 

And swarthy trail let none despise as young 
Since 1b was lit, nor hold of no account. 

If it but win to fuel, growing great, 

It may attack the heedless, man or maid, 

And burn no matter when. From this therefore 
Let everyone who guards his life refrain. 


The forest burnt by fire, the ewarthy-trailed, 

After the lapse of many nights and days, 

In shoots and seedlings* springs once more to life, 
But he whom almsman, strong in righteousness, 
Burneth with ardent flame,! may look in vain 

For child, or offspring ‘mong his stock. No wealth 
His hers may find; childless and without heirs, 
Like to a palm-tree stump such men become. 


Hence with these four—the serpent and the fire, 
The prince of high estate, the saintly friar— 
Let the wise man, his own good-will in sight, 
Conduct himself as seemly is and right. 


When these things had been said, Ring Pasenadi, tle 
Kosalan, spoke thus to the Exalted One:— 

* Most excellent, lord, most excellent! Just as if a man were 
It is not easy to tender justly the notion of fejasi, tejasd : lit, with 
heat, or flame. (€/f. the varied renderings of the term symbolically 
used in the Upanishads: (e.g, in Chaindogya TI, 1, 3), Max Miller: 
‘glory of countenance’; Deussen: * Kraft’; Bothlingk: ‘Glanz,’ Cf. 
ib. wil, 11, 1, 2; Brhad.“vi, 4, 6. 

* Parohd, 

' Comy.: silatejena. As in our,’ heaping eoals of fire on the head* 
of the wrong-doer, * such a bhikkhu is one who is incapable of retalia- 
tion, when injured, by anger or violence':—so the Comy., to exclude 
the interpretation that a rishi's curse ia hore meant, 


06 Kosala [TEXT i, 70 


to set up that which has been thrown down, or were to reveal 
that which is hidden away, or were to point out the rniht road 
to him who has gone astray, or were to bring a lamp into the 
darkness so that those who have eyes could see external 
forms—just even so, lord, has the truth been made known 
to me, in many a figure by the Exalted One. 1, even I, lord, 
hetake myself to the Exalted One as my refuge, to the Norm 
and to the Order. May the Exalted One aecept me as a 
follower, as one who from this day forth as long as life endures 
has taken his refuge therein. 


§ 3. A Mon. 


On another occasion," King Pasenadi, the Kosalan, visited 
the Exalted One, and asked him:’ How many kinds of in- 
ward experiences, your reverence, arising in a man anse for 
his bune, his suffering, his discomfort 7 

‘Three such expenences, sire; and which are the three? 
(Greed, hate, dulness, ‘These three inward experiences arising 
in a man arise for his bane, his suffering, his discomfort.’ 


As plants o’ the rush-tribe,* their own fruit become, 
Do suffer, so a man of evil heart 
Through greed and hate and dulness suffers seathe, 


For these none other than himself become. 


$5. The Ang. 

On another occasion the king asked the Exalted One:— 
‘ Isthere, your reverence, any born thing that can live without 
(ocay and death 

' As all the Suttas in this Chapter are associated with conversations 
at the Jete Grove (Vihira), it is needless to repeat the preliminaries, 
The text merely states the name of the town. 

2 Jie, the bamboo and the rush, both of the order‘ Juncus.’ The 
uenerig Pali word i tees-adre, husk-pith, ie. a plant having ita pith 
attached to the walls of its hollow stem. 

2 This descriptive formula occurs in Dialogues i, 175, 177, but with 
the term mah@eald omitted. 


M1, 1. $4] Young Creatures 7 


‘There is no life, sire, without decay and death. Even 
‘they who are eminent nobles, eminent brahmins, eminent 
burgesses, men of authority, OWnIng great treasure, great 
wealth, immense hoarda of vold and silver, immens® aids to 
enjoyment, immense supplies of goods and corn, even they, 
being born, cannot live without decay and death. Even those 
almsmen, sire, who are Arahants, for whom the intoxicants 
have perished, who have lived The Life, have done that which 
was to be done, for whom the burden is laid low, who have won 
their own highest good,* for whom the chain of becoming is 
utterly destroyed, who by nght insight are free\—even in 
them this composite frame is of a nature to dissolve and be 
Jnid naide.’ 

The king's own cars,® gay in their gold and silver, 
Wear out with age: so doth our hous also 

Fare to decay. Norm of the good decays net: 
The good, in sooth, one to another tell this. 


$4. The Dear One. 
... The king, the Kosalan Pasenadi, spake thus to the 
Exalted One:— 
‘These were the thoughts, lord, that arose in my heart, 
while | was privately meditating:—For whom, now, is the 
self a dear friend, and for whom is the self a hateful enemy ?4 


* Sadaitha. 

' ‘This sentence is one of the formulas of Ardhantehip that. run all 
through the four Nikfyas. HB. has a comment on cach of the beads in 
this * rosary.’ 

The * burden’ of the five aggregates (mind and body), of the bless 
or ten leading passions, of purposive worldly activities, of the pleasures 
af sense:—all these may be viewed as burdens by the Ariant. Comy, 

? Dip. 151. The sight of Pasenodi’s waiting chanots richly adorned 
suggested the simile, (Comy. 

1B. gives three interpretations of this line, 1 follow that of the 
Dhp. Comy. (iti, 123):—aabbhihi andilhiy . . . eony bothenti. 

* T assign no metaphysical import to this dramatization of conacions- 
ness into a dual subject. Cf my Buddiivet Paychology (1914) p. 28 sf. 
Cy. below 1, § 8: ‘self’ and ‘soul’ wre the same word: ang. It 

7 


98 Kosala [TEXT i, 71 


And I thought, lord, thus:—They whose conduct in deed, 
word, and thought is evil, for them the self is a hateful enemy. 
Even though they were to say: * Dear to us is the self,” never- 
theless the self is for them a hateful enemy. Why is this? 
Because that which an enemy would do to an enemy, even that 
are they themselves doing to the self. Therefore for them is 
the self a hateful enemy. 

‘And they whose conduct in deed, word, and thought is 
virtuous, for them is the self a dear friend. Even though they 
were to say: * Hateful to us is the self,’ nevertheless for them 
the self is a dear friend. Why is this? Because that which 
» friend would do to a friend, even that are they themselves 
doing to the self. Therefore for them is the seli a dear friend. 

‘ Even so, sire, even so. All that you have said I repeat 
and confirm.” 


He who would know the self as dear and kind, 
Let him not be with evil conduct yoked. 
Ti-won in sooth 1s evil-doer's weal. 
Laid low by * him-who-cometh-at-the-end, ?* 
And life among mankind abandoning, 
To such what thing's hisown? Whattakes he hence? 
What dogs his ateps, like shadow in pursuit ! 
Man's merita and the sins he here hath wrought:— 
That is the thing he owns, that takes he hence, 
That dogs his steps, like shadow in pursutt.* 
Hence let him make good store for life elaewhere. 
Sure platform in some other future world, 
Rewards of virtue on good beings wait.* 
should be noticed that in the verses the emphasis is shifted from the 
‘ self,” animistically understood, to a man's sote—his present sel{— 
and results of acts which make wp his future self. 
1 The Buddha repeats the King’s words in the text. ° They thus 
beoome a logion of the All-Knower, Cony. 
= Anitka: ‘ender,’ 2 name of death or Mira. CY. Pas. of the 
Siaters, 59, 62 (° Destroyer"), and below, TV, 1, § 1, ete. 
2 See Jip. 2, 
4 The last five lines recur below, Il, 2, § 10; the last three, [1, 3, 
§ 2: the last two, above, |, 4, 3 2; 5, § 3. 


It, 1, § 5) Young Creatures 99 


§ 5. Sef-guarded, 

On another occasion King Pasenadi, the Kosalan, apake 
thus to the Exalted One:— 

“These, lord, were the thoughts that arose in my heart 
while I was privately meditating:—“ Who are they by whom 
’ the self is guarded ? Who are they by whom the self is not 
euarded ! And I thought:—* They whose conduct in deed 
and word and thought is bad, by them the self is not guarded. 
Yea, though a squadron of elephants, or of cavalry, or of 
chants, or of infantry may keep guard for them, yet is the 
self by them not guarded. And why is this? Because this 
guard is external; because it is not an inner guard: therefore 
is the self by them not guarded. 

_°“ And they whose conductin deed and word and thought is 
food, by them the self is guarded. Yea, though no squadron 
of elephants, or of cavalry, or of chariots, or of infantry keep 
guard for them, yet is the self guarded by them. And why 
is this? Because theirs is an inner fuard, not an external 
ard; therefore ts the self guarded by them.” 

Even so, sire, even so, sire. All that you have said I 
9 tee and confirm." 


|  Blesséd is self-control in deed and word 
| And thought, yea, in all ways 't is blest. 
\ ‘Guarded’ we call the conscientious man* 
_ Who tn all ways doth practise self-control. 


§ 6. Few, 


On another occasion King Pasenadi, the Kosalan, spake 
thus to the Exalted One:— 

* These, lord, were the thoughts that arose in my heart, 
while I was privately meditating: “ Few are those persons in 
this world who, when they have gained great wealth and 
treasure, are not carried away and become intoxicated thereby, 
and indulge in greed of senae-desires, and misconduct them- 


* Lajji. 


102 Toads ‘[rext i, 75 


Then the king went down from the terrace and sought the 
Exalted One and told him of this talk. 

And the Exalted One understanding the matter uttered in 
that hour this yerse:— 


The whole wide world we traverse with our thought, 

And nothing find to man more dear than soul, 

Since aye so dear the soul to others is, , 
Let the soul-lover harm no other man. —— 


$ 9. Sacrifice. 

Now at that time a great sacrifice was arranged to be held 
for the king, the Kosalan Pasenadi. Five hundred bulls, 
five hundred bullocks and as many heifers, goats, and rams 
were led to the pillar to be sacrificed. And they that wer 
slaves and menials and craftsmen, hectored about by blows 
and by fear, made the preparations with tearful faces weeping. >» 

Now a number of almamen having risen early and dress “d 
and taken bowl and robe, entered Savatthi for alms. . 
And after their return they sought the presence of the Exalfed 
One and told him of the preparations for the sacrifice. 

Then the Exalted One, understanding the matter, utte 
in that hour these verses:— i 

The sacrifices called * the Horse,” the Man. / 
The Pes-thrown Site, the Drink of Victory, / 
The Bolts Withdrawn,' and all the mighty fnsg- 


is explained by his oherishing an illicit pussion and biol ane harm to 
the woman's husband. When the dream is explained by the Buddha, 
the King is described as hastily breaking off the preparations for the 
‘eacrifice. The ritual terms of the text are discussed at some length. 
Contrary to our modern theories, they ore declared to have been in 
primitive times, peaceful rites, bat to have been changed, in the days 
of Okkika the Sikyan, into bloody sacrifices: On the ‘ Drink of 
Victory ' see Questions of King Milinda,ji, 16,48. 3. The * Peg-thrown 


m1, t. § 10] Young Creatures | 103 


These are not rites that bring a rich result. 
Where divers goats and sheep and kine are slain, 
Never to such a rite as that repair 
The noble seers who walk the perfect way. 
But rites where is no bustle nor no fuss, 
Are offerings meet, bequests perpetual,? 
Where never goats and sheep and kine are slain. 
To such a sacrifice as this repair 
The noble seers who walk the perfect way. 
These are the rites entailing great results. 
These to the celebrant are blest, not cursect. 
Th’ oblation runneth o'er; the gods are pleased. 


§ 10. Bonds. 


Now at that time the king, the Kosalan Pasenadi, had had 
many of the people seized and bound with ropes, with chains, 
and in other ways taken prisoners. And almsmen returning 
from their alms-round in Savatthi, reported this to the 
Exalted One. 

And he, understanding the matter, uttered in that hour 
these verses:— 


Not such a mighty bond—the wise have told— 

Is forged of iron, wrought of wood or hemp, 

As binds all those who live infatuate 

With love of pelf*:—of precious stones and rings— 

* Whose thoughts are bent on children and on wives.* 
Site’ (sammdpasay) is explained os the binding or bnilding of am 
altar where a sama (wooden pin or peg) falls when thrown. The 
‘Rolts withdrawn’ are said to have referred to a festivity of mutual 
trust and unlocked doors, but since those days to mean merely sacri- 
ficial paraphernalia, 

t Anubilay sada : * perpetual meals, ete., established by persons in 
the past, given mgularly.” Comy. 

* Sdrotta-ratid. 

i Of. Theragathé, ver. 187. 

4 Of. Sutta-Nipita, ver, 38, and the translation in Jitaka, No. 201. 
‘Dr. Rouse is more fottered by his double rhymes. Here ys Hanh, 
I have been able to be more literally accurate. | 


104 Kosala [TEXT 1, 77 


Even this mighty bond—the wise have said— 
Down-dragging, subtle, and yet hard to loose, 
They who renounce the world sever in twain, 
Their hearts averted from all sensuous joys. 


} 


£1. He of the Matted Hatr. 


The Exalted One was once staying at Savatthi, in the 
Kastern Park, at the Terraced House of Migira’s mother." 
Now on that occasion the Exalted One at eventide had 
arisen from his meditationa and was seated in the loggia 
outside the eastern door And the king, the Kosalan 
Pasennadi, came to vistt the Exalted One, and having saluted 
him, took a seat at one side. 

Now just then there passed by, not far from the Exalted 
One, seven ascetics of those who wore the hair matted, seven 
of the Niganthas, seven naked ascetics, seven of the Single 
Vestment cluss? and seven Wanderers, all with hairy bodies 
and long nails, carrying friars’ kit. Then the king, rising 

1 'T'rachition assigns this royal raid to the sudden disappearance of 
the King’s turban-diadem. So our Comy. and the Mahisira Jatoka 
Introduction (No. 381). The verses, however, belong to the Ban- 
dhanfigdra Jitaka (No. 201), with which Dhammapada Comy, on ver, 
345, 746 agrees. 

2 Jie. Visikhi, the great Ioy-patroness of the young Order, 
B, gives ber story briefly. The Sutta, but with a differont stanza, 
occurs Vddna,vi,2. The Budilha'’s prose remarks are developed in a. 
sermon: A. ti, Sif, 

2 The Comy, directs that we read pisidedvdra-Lotfhaduseo boli, and 
that one of the gates in the wall that surrounded the Vilwira is not 
meant. Shaded at this cast door from the westering sun, the Master 
was surveying the eastern landscape; ond from where he sat the 
ascetics ‘passing along the road near by towards the town * could be 
aspen, 

4 It is said that the Niganthas, or Jains, wore only loin-cloths, the 
Eko-sitakas (One-robers) wearing & longer waist-cloth reaching to the 
knee or lower, 

& fie, fresticke, a waterpot, needles, wand, of course, the alma-bowl. 
See Dialogues i. 125 


a: >— : 


mt, 2, § 1] He of the Matted Hair 105 


- from his seat, and draping his robe over one shoulder, knelt 
down on his right knee, and holding forth clasped hands. 
thrice called out his name to those ascetics: “I aim the king, 
your reyerences, the Kosalan Pasenadi.? And when they 
were gone by, he came back to the Exalted One, and saluting 
him, sat down as before. So seated, he asked the Kxalted 
One:— 

* Are those persons, lord, either among this world’s Arahants, 
or among those who are in the Path of Arahantship & 

* Hard is it, sire, for you who are a layman, holding worldly 
possessions, dwelling amidst the encumbrances of children, 
accustomed to Benares sandalwood, arrayed in garlands and 
perfumed unguents, using gold and silver, to know whether 
those are Arahants, or are in the Path of Arahantship. 

‘Tt is by life in common with a person, sire, that we learn 
his moral character; and then only after a long interval if we 
pay good heed and are not heedless, if we have insight and 
are not unintelligent. It is by converse with another, sire, 
that we learn whether he is pure-minded ; and then only 
after a long interval if we pay good heed and are not: heedless, 
if we have insight and are not unintelligent. It is in time of 
trouble, sire, that we learn to know a man’s fortitude and 
then only after a long interval, if we pay good heed and 
are not heedless, if we have insight and are not unintelligent. 
It is by intercourse, site, that we learn to know a man’s 
wisdom, and then only after a long interval, if we pay good 
heed and are not heedless, if we have insight and are not unin- 
telligent.’ 

“Tt is wonderful, lend, it is marvellous how excellently 
the Exalted One has spoken as to a layman’s difficulties in 
learning to know anyone well and truly. There are men of 
mine, lord, who are spies, informants, and when they have in- 
vestigated u district they come to me. First they give m 


i 


t* Why did the king, seated near the greatest man in all the world, 
do aoY To concilinte them, ... in case he should ever leave the 
worldly life... also to learn the Exalted One's sentiments.” (ony. 
One of the Anthology Theras, Brahmadatta, is said to have been ‘a 
gon of the king of Kosala." See Pea. of the Brethren. p. 225, 


2 ) : * a aT 3 i 
; 7 | ms =. | — = - _ = =, :*. 
; ; 
fen a ee oe ron ‘ gw eS 
106 Kosala [rext i. 79 


their reports, and thereafter I form conclusions. They mean- 
while, when they have cleansed themselves of dust and dirt, 
are well bathed and anointed, trimmed as to hair and beard, 
and arrayed in white garments, will be waited upon and pro- 
vided and surrounded with every kind of enjoyment.” 

Thereupon the Exalted One, understanding the matter, 
uttered these verses:— 


Not by his outward guise is man well known. 
In fleeting glance let none place confidence. 
In garb of decent well-conducted folk 

The unrestrained live in the world at large. 
Aso clay earring made to counterfert, 

Or bronze half penny coated o'er with wold, 
Some fare at laree hidden beneath disguise, 
Without, comely and fair; within, impure.' 


§ 2. The five Rajas.* 

On one occasion when the Exalted One was at Savatthi, 
five rajas, the Pasenadi being the chief among them, were in- 
dulging in various forme of amusement, provided for and sur- 
rounding them; and they fell to discussing among themselves: 
‘Which of the pibasiires of sense is the highest ?" 

Then some said: ‘things seen,’ and some ‘things heard,’ 
some said * odowra,’ some ‘ tastes,’ and some ‘ shines felt.” 


* The story in Udéna VI, 2, is made to give point ain ati different 
stanza, In both versions the readings of ‘thieves’ give either card 
or cord, but in Majjhima i, 129, 186, Trenckner gives only cord, That 
the (well-organized) trade of the cor@ should be employed as part of 
the King’s * secret service" is quite intelligible. Ocardka is discussed 
in Vinaye iii, 52 (Sutta-vibhanga, Parajika IT), 

* Rdja is not necessarily a king in our sense of the word, ¢.g. the 
Siikya nobles were all of them alluded to os rajas. (Cf, Buddhist 
India, p. 12). Pusenadi may have been, as mahiraja, overlord, or 
fendal chief to the nobles in thie Sutta. 

3 The phrase: * pleasures of sense’ is in Pali kaamdniy. Kamas 
are not exactly objects of sense, but (1) the feeling connected with them 
in (2) one desiring them. See this ‘ambiguity discussed in Compen- 
dium, S1,n.2. Cf. above, I, 4,§ 4. 


- | Ss 


HI, 2, § 2] He of the Matted Hair 107 


And when* those rajas were unable to convince each other, 
the Pasenadi said: * Let us go, dear sirs, and visit the Exalted 
One, and refer the matter of our inquiry to him. And let us 
accept his decision, whatever that may be.” 

And the rajas assented, saying: ‘ So be it, dearair.’ So they 
repaired to the Exalted One and, saluting him, took seats at 
one side, Then the Pasenadi told him of their discussion, 
and asked him: ‘Which of the pleasures of sense is the 
highest 7 

* The highest sensuous pleasure, sire, is in my Judgment the 
limit-point in anyone's enjoyment. Objecta of sight are en- 
joyable for some, for others they are not so. And when any- 
ole is 80 gratified and so satisfied to all intents and purposes by 
any given objects of sight, that he does not wish for any other, 
any better thing to see than just those objects, then those 
objects are for him supreme, those objects are for him super- 
lative. The same, in my judgment, holds true, for the other 
four kinds of sense-objects,'! 

Now on that occasion a lay-adherent named Candananga- 
lika® was seated among the company. And he, rising from 
his seat and draping his robe over one shoulder, stretched 
forth his clasped hands toward the Exalted One saying: © An 
idea is revealed to me, Exalted One! An idea is revealed to 
me, Blessed One 

‘ Let it be revealed, Candanangalika !’ said the Exalted One. 

Then Candanangalika, before the Exalted One, uttered 
praise in suitable verse :-— 

Like the red lotus, sweet-scented, full-blown, 
At dawn of day, unspent its perfume’s treasure, 
Behold him! th’ Angirasa shedding radiance 

As shines the sun filling all heaven with glory. 


* Yato. 

‘ "This is a good instance of the Vibhajjavida method associated 
with Buddhism, of breaking up superficial generalizations by analysing 
the partioularity, or personal equation, in one or both terms. B. has 
some interesting comments, 

2 T have not met with him elsewhere in the canon, Pron. Chanda- 
nangalike: little plough of the moon. 


Rosle 


Peeenipon the five rijas wrapped their robes around 
Candanangalika. But Candanangalika wrapped those five 
robes around the Exalted One, 


§ 5. Heavy meal. 

When the Exalted One was once at Savatthi, the king, the 
Kosalan Pasenadi, dined off a large quantity of curried rice. 
Thereupon, replete and puffing, he came to see the Exalted 
One, saluted him, and took his seat at one side: 

Then the Exalted One, discerning the king's state of reple- 
tion and sterterous breathing, wttered in that hour this verse :-— 


To sons of men who ever mindful live, 
Measure observing in the food they take, 
All minishéd becomes the power of sense. 
Softly ald aye steals on, their days prolonged, 


Now just then prince Sudassana was standing behind the 
king. And the king bade him, saying: ‘Come you, dear 
Sudassana, learn this verse from the Exalted One, and recite 
it to me when you bring me my dinner, and I will arrange 
that a hundred pence! be instituted as a daily dole for you in 
perpetuity.’ 

“So be it, your majesty,’ responded Sudassana, and he 
forthwith carried out the king's bidding. 

Thereupon the king made it a rule to eat no more than 
one naiika. And on a later occasion it came to pass that the 
king, his body in good condition, stroked his healthy limbs 
and fervently exclaimed: * Ah! surely for my salvation®* both 
in this life and hereafter hath the Exalted One shown compas- 
sion unto me!’2 


* Kahdpage. On this coin see Bud. India, 100/, Lt is the monetary 
unit in Pali literature, Fractional coins are also mentioned. 

* Aittha, « word of many meanings: matter, meaning, uivantage, 
good, higher, or lower, ete. 

4 A fuller version than is hore given in text, or in the Comy., oours 
in Dhammapada Comy. iii, 264 6, on verse 204 (of, Mf. i, 508), and the 
verse an gross feeding in Theragithd, 17, 101, ig introduced, Sudassan 
is called the king's bhagineyyo (nephew), and the redaction in dint is 


mi, 2,§§4,5) Twa Sayings about War 109 


s6 4, 5. Two sayings about war. 


Now the king of Magadha, Ajitasattu, son of the Accom- 
plished Princess,}* mustering an army of cavalry and infantry* 
advanced into Kasi against the king, the Kosalan Pasenadi." 
And the Pasenadi, hearing of the expedition, mustered a 
dimilar army and went to meet him. So they two fought 
one with another, and Ajatasattu defeated the Pasenadi, who 
retreated to his own capital, Sivattht. 

And almsamen returning from their alms-round in Savatthi, 
éame and told the Exalted one of the battle and the retreat. 

* Almamen, the king of Magadha, Ajatasattu, son of the 
Accomplished Princess, is a friend to, an intimate of, mixed 
up with, whatever is evil! The king, the Kosalan Pasenaidi, 
is a friend to, an intimate of, mixed up with, whatever is 
good. But for the present the Pusenadi will pass this mght 
in misery, a defeated man. 


Conquest engenders hate; the conquered lives 
Tn misery, But whoso is at peace 


given as j, viz. from a dogs tou ndfika, the prescribed bhikkhu rations. 
(Of, Rhys Davids, Ancient Coina, ete.). Other factors contributing 
to the King's complacency are said to have been the treaty with 
Ajfitisatin, and the recovery of his turban-jewel (ITI, 1, § 10). 

‘* Vedehipuiia, VedeAi means, more obviously, “of Videha.’ Buil- 
dhaghoss resolves it also into veda-tha, wedena that, or intellectual 
effort, Here, he says, ‘there can be no question of WVideho; the second 
meaning is right." Ajitasattu’s mother was o sister of the King of 
Kosala (see Thuea and Tacchusikara Jatakas, Comy. ii, 121, iv, 342), 
not a Videhan. Elsewhere the alternative meaning is allowed, namely 
in Comy. on Digha i, 47, on Majjhima 1, 125 (Kakscipama 5.) and on 
Sayyuita ii, 215 (Kasaapa-Sapyutta 10), Buddhaghosa's ciymology 
is here, os often, not very plausible. But, assuming the Kosalan connec- 
tion is historical, can we more plausibly derive Vedehi? 

# Lit. an army of 4 prrts:—enumerated in 9 4. 

0 Why? sake B., and explains, much in the terms employed by 
Rh. Davida’ Rud. India, p. 3. 

4 He was, inter alia, w parricide, anil a supporter of Devadatta, the 
reat achiamatic. 

* Reading ajf eve for ajja tad oo, ‘The Commentary passes it over. 


110 Kosala [TEXT i, 83 


And passionless, happily doth he live; 
Conquest hath he abandoned and defeat. 


Now these two kings met again in battle, as is told in what 
is aforesaid But in that hattle the Kosalan Pasenadi 
defeated Ajitasattu, son of the Accomplished Princess, and 
captured him alive.* Then the Pasenadi thought: ‘ Although 
this king injures me who was not injuring him, yet is he my 
nephew. What if I were now to confiscate his entire army— 
elephants, horses, chariots and infantry—and leave him only 
his life # And he did so. 

And almsmen returning from their alms-tour in Savatthi. 
brought word of this to the Exalted One. Thereupon the 
Exalted One, understanding the matter in that hour. uttered 
these verses :— 


A man may spoil® another, just so far 

As it may serve his ends, but when he’s spoiled 
By others he, despoiled, spoils yet again. 

So long as evil’s fruit ia not matured, 

The fool doth fancy ‘ now's the hour, the chance t' 
But when the deed bears fruit, he fareth ill, 
The slayer geta a slayer in his turn: 

The conqueror gets one who conquers him; 
Th’ abuser wins abuse, th’ annoyer, fret. 

Thus by the evolution of the deed,’ 

A man who spoils is apoiléd in hia turn. 


$ 6. The Daughter, 
When the Exalted One was onee at Savatthi, and the king, 
the Kosalan Pasenadi, had come to visit him, one of the 


' The fourth campaign between these two. Comiy. 

* Jivagihay. 

* Thiet may be read rilwmpate “ea or rivmpetti) ec, Kither way 
the meaning is clear:—it moy seem. expedient prind facié to exact 
a great war indemnity from the fallen foe, but the latter will not Test 
till he can exact it in return. Hence it only breeds mor war, 

2 Kanma-vivastend, 


mt, 2, § 6] The Daughter 111 


king's men arrived and, approaching the king, announced 
to his private ear that Queen Mallika had given birth to a 
daughter, And the king was not pleased. 

Thereupon the Exalted One, discerning the matter, wttered 
on that occasion these verses:— 


A woman child, 0 lord of men, may prove 

Even a better! offspring than a male, 

For she may grow up wise and virtuous, 

Her husband's mother revy'renecing, true wife. 
The boy that she may bear may do great deeds, 
And rule great realms, yea, such a son 

Of noble wife becomes his country’s guide. 


§§ 7, 5. Diligence. 

On another visit the Exalted One was visited by the king, 
the Kosalan Pasenadi ... who said:— Is there now, lord, 
any one quality by which we may acquire and keep both 
kinds of welfare, welfare in this life and in life to come 7?" 

’ Yes, sire, there is such a quality.’ 

But what quality, lord, is that ?’ 

* Diligence, sire, is the one quality by which you can 
acquire and keep welfare both in this life and in life to come. 
As the elephant, of such creatures as can walk, combines all 
pedal characters tn its foot, and as the clephant’s foot‘ in 


! Reading seyyd, with the Comy., which, again, paraphrises por by 
posehi. It reads aubhaviyl for subhariya, 

2 We should say ‘temporal and eternal welfare.” The Buddhist 
never gave future life the monopoly of eternity, 

+ Appamdda is «a negative term, meaning not-lelay, not-dal- 
liance, non-infatuation, from the root, or roota, mad, mand, ‘to be 
exhilarated.” (See Whitney, Sanatri! Hoota, 118.) From thia source 
we get both the terms for such a state and those for its results and 
by-products:—intoxication, obsession, insanity, want of concentra- 
tion and earnestness, ete. Cf, below, VI, 2,95. B. qualifiea the term 
by the (unusual) word Msinipake-: diligence in making [others] do 
their work. 

* A favourite simile, applied also to insight. Soyy. V, 231, and 
to the Four Truths among doctrines, Majjhima, i, 194. 


At os 88 


an associate of that which is eh yaa dev Zine and expands 
the Ariyan eightfold path. And it is in just this way, Ananda, 
that thou must understand how the whole of this life “in 
‘religion is concerned with friendship, intimacy, association 
with whatsoever is lovely and righteous, 

‘Verily, Ananda, it is because* I am a friend of what is 
lovely and righteous that beings liable to rebirth are delivered 
from rebirth, that beings liable to grow old are delivered from 
old age, that beings liable to sickness are delivered from 
sickness, that beings liable to death are delivered from death, 
that beings liable to grief and mourning, sorrow and suffering, 
pe despair, are released from grief and mourning, sorrow and 
| ring, and despair. 

iti is in just this way, Ananda, that thon must understand 
how the whole of this life in religion is concerned with friend- 
slip, intimacy, association with whatsoever is lovely and 
nghteous.1 

* Wherefore it behoves you too, sire, to train yourself thus; 
“T will become a friend, an intimate. an associate of that 
which is righteous.’ To become this, you must take inte 
your life diligence i in good things. 
ne you, sire, lead a diligent life, your court ladies will say: 
The diligent king lives in habitual diligence. Come, then, 
let ua live likewise!" And your court nobles, a your 
subjects in town and country will say the same. And you, 
pre, living thus in habitual diligence, yourself will be guarded 
and preserved, the house of your women will be guarded and 
preserved, and your treasury and your storehouses also. 


As one who doth aspire to win good things, 

A noble store in never-failing flow, 

Wise men do praise his diligence in deeds 

Of merit. He that’s wise and diligent 
Twofold advantage wins —that which ix good 
In this life, and the good in life to come. 


* Agammu. 


' This interpolated Sutta on Ananda’s proposition is given detached, 


in &.¥,2. Itis scarcely in place hero, 


m1, 2, §9| Childless 115 


The strong in mind doth win the name of Wise 
Because he grasps wherein his Vuntage lies, 


§ 9. Childless (1). 

., . At Sivatthi, the king, the Kosalan Pasenadi, once 
visited the Exalted One, at noonday. .. 2* And the Exalted 
One said to him: * How now, sire, whence come you at this 
hour of the day ?” 

‘See here, lord: at Savatthi there has just died a burgess 
who was a wealthy man. He died intestate, and I come from 
secing that his moneyed property was conveyed to my palace 
—eight millions in gold, lord, to say nothing ofthe silver. And 
yet that burgess’s food consisted of sour husk-gruel left over 
from the day before? ** And his clothing—hempen garments 
in three lengths." And his carriage—he drove about in a 
rotten little chariot rigged up with a leaf-awning ! 

' Even so, sire, even so. A mean man*} who has aequired 
i great fortune cheers and pleases (therewith) neither himself 
vor his parents, nor his wife and children, nor his slaves, 
Craftsmen and servants, nor his friends and colleacues: nor 
(oes he institute for recluses and brahmins any offeri ng stimu- 
lating spiritual growth. productive of future bliss, fruitful in 
happiness, conducive to celestial attainment. Those riches 
of his, not being rightly utilized, are either confiscated by 
kings or by robbers,4 or are burnt by fire, or carried away 
by tlood, or are appropriated by heirs for whom he hath no 
affection. That being so, sire, riches that are not rightly 
utilized run to waste, not to enjoyment. 

“Tt is ike a lake, sire, of clear, cold, delicious, erystalline™ 

1” Pivadicasaa. See Jal, li, 1: Fin, Texts i, 241, 

"9 Kandjakay. Cf. Fin. Texts iti, 9: Jat, i, 208. 

7 Sewn together in two seams. Cony. 

*) Aseppurian, 

* There is irony in the same yorb being used for the act of king utd 
robber by one conversing with a king, a king who had just been con- 
veying away millions. (yf. 1, 5, $ 1, 

* Seiaka ; ‘the appearance of the water when broken by waves,” 
Conti. 


116 Kosala [TEXT i, go 


water, with good shores and most lovely, but lying in a savage 
region. None could come to draw or drink from it, bathe in 
it, or make any use of it whatever. Even so are the riches 
of a mean man... - 

‘But if a generous man have acquired @ great fortune, 
he cheers and pleases (therewith) not only himself but also 
his parents, his wife and children, his slaves, craftsmen and 
servants, his friends and colleagues. He institutes offerings 
for recluses and brahmins stimulating spiritual growth, pro- 
ductive of future bliss, fruitful in happiness, conducive to | 
celestial attainment.) His case may be compared with a 


* lovely lake, such as I spoke of, but which les near to village 


or township, where folk can draw and drink from it, 
bathe in it, and use it for any other purpose. Such riches 
go to enjoyment and not to waste. 

Like waters fresh lying in savage region® 

Where none can drink, running to waste, and barren, 

Such is the wealth gained by a man of base mind. 

On self he spends nothing, nor aught he giveth. 

The wise, the strong-minded, who hath won riches 

He useth them, thereby fulfils his duties. 

His troop of kin fostering, noble-hearted,* 

Blameless, at death faring to heav’nly mansion.* 


§ 10. Childless (2). 


In this Sutta, beginning verbatim as the foregoing, a dif- 
ferent reply is given by the Buddha to the king's story af the 
decexsed miser -— 


i "These three terms ocowr with o similar context, in D. i, 51; in, 66. 
B.'s comments in Sum, Vil. i, 157 f. and in this work are verbally 
different. E.g. in that work the second phrase is paraphrased: 
wayjgay arahatii, here: saggaasee hate laf’ appatts jonmnato, 

? ‘This line can only sean (in tristhubh metre) if we read, for rasitay 
ve wekerg. 

* Nisotha. CY. above, I, 4, 3 5. 

é See above, 1,5,§ 1. This and the following Sutta together form 
the Mayhaka Jataka (ii, 200), where a more graphic and detailed 
aecount is given. Some of the details are supplied in our Comy. 


Mt, 2, § 10] Childless 117 


“Even so, sire, even so, sire. This wealthy burgess in 
a former birth bestowed alms on a Silent Buddha named 
Tagarasikkhi.' Saying: ‘ Give ye alms to the recluse !' he rose 
up and went away. But afterwards he repented of his gift, 
saying: “It were better that the slaves and workmen hack 
eaten it.’ Moreover he slew the only son of his brother 
because of his fortune. i 

‘Now, sire, by the effect of his action in bestowing alms on 
the Silent Buddha, Tagarasikkhi, he was reborn seven times 
to a happy destiny’ in heavenly worlds, and by the residual 
result he has seven times caused this Sivatthi to make him 
eminently neh. 

‘ By the effect of his action in repenting afterwards of that 
gift, thinking “it were better that the slaves and workmen 
had eaten it,’ he inclined his heart to denying himself 
excellent food, clothes, carriages, and enjoyment of his sense- 
desires. 

‘By the effect of his action in slaying his brother's only son 
because of his fortune, he has [already] been punished many 
years, many hundred, many thousand, many handred thousand 
vearsin purgatory. And by the residual result he has caused 
this seventh intestate property to enter the royal treasury.* 

‘Of this wealthy burgess, sire, the ancient merit is used 
up, and fresh merit is not accumulated. To-day, sire, the 
burgess is suffering in the Great Roruva purgatory.” 

‘ Even so, lord, he is there reborn. 

* Even so, sire, he is there reborn.’ 


Grain-store and hoarded wealth, silver and gold, 
Or whatsoever property there be, 


| ‘This treatment of the * Poocheka-Boddha* is also the cocasion 
for an Udéna episode (v, 3; of. Dhp. Comy, ii, 36), By ‘silent’ I 
mean ‘with no mission to proclaim.” Pace{hjeks is lit. individualist, 
aa contrasted with the altruistic work of a Saviour Buddha. 

? The Jataka account mentions no seven rebirths with this Savatthi 
episode, but simply states that the treasures took seven days to be 
remove, Thos Pasenadi hed just seen the completion of the work 
when be called. 

a Cy. p. 41, m1. 


q P« 
» Tr al! ra 
cr Bo. ; 

-, “vs d 


Koma (ret 93, 


Or all whose living doth on him depend: 

_ His slaves, his craftsmen and hired menials— 
All this he hath to leave, naught can he take; 
All this is matter for sbandonment, 

But what he doth, by act or word or thought: 
That is the thing he owns; that takes he hence; 
That dogs his ateps like shadow in pursuit, 
Hence let him make good store for life elsewhere. 

‘Sure platform in some other future world, 
Rewards of virtue on good beings wait. 


3. 
§ 1. Persons. 


On another occasion, at Savatthi, when the king, the Kosalan 
Pasenndi, had come to visit the Exalted One, the latter said :-— 

‘There are these four [classes of] persons, sire, to be found 

in the world—which four (i) They that are joined? to 
diskscte and fare to darkness. (ii) They that are joined 
to darkness and fare to light. _{iii) They that are joined to 
light and fare to darkness, (iv) They that are joined to lizht 
and fare to light. page 

‘And who, sire, are they that are joined to darkness and fare 
to darkness ¢ This is the case of a man who is reborn in a 
family of low degree, be it of Chandalas, or of basket-weavers, 
or of trappers, or of leather-workers, or of flower-scavengers,4 
poor, ill-fed, in wretched circumstances, where victuals are 
hardly won, swarthy and ill-featured, a hunchback, diseased, or 
hei is purblind, or has misshapen hands, or is halt, ora penis 


| {Phe last five linea UT 1, §4. See also below, IT, &, § 2. 
 * This category is given, but without the fourfold figure, in 2. iii, 


2); A. ii, 85 (iv, 200) and P.P. iv, 19: rf. tta Comy. J PTS, 1014. 


This comments on the first class of persons in verbativh the sume terms 
as our Comy., but adds useful details on the third elnsa. 

2 So Comy.: famena yullo, 

‘CY. Dialogues i, 100, Both Commentaries render rathabira- 
(kula) by chariot-makers, ormmahara- by hide makers, and paraplitase 
pubkusa- by pupphachagdhale-. 


ea! 


7", 
i 


ad 


1m, 3, § 1] Childless 119 


one who recetves neither food, nor drink, nor raiment, nor 
conveyances, nor wreaths, perfumes and unguents, nor bed, 
dwelling, and light, He is an evil-doer in deed, word. and 
thought, the result whereof is that, when he dies, he is reborn 
after death in misery, to a woeful doom, to disaster. Just 
aa if a man, sire, were to go from blindness to blindness, from 
darkness to darkness, from one red! stain to another red stain: 
so do I illustrate this kind of person. Such, sire, are the 
persons that are joined to darkness and fare to darkness. 

‘And who, sire, are they that are joined to darkness and fare 
to light! This is the case of a man who, born to evil cireum- 
stances as I have just described, is a well-doer in deed, word. 

and thought, the result whereof is that, when he dies, he is 
reborn after death to a happy destiny in the bright worlds. 
Just as if a man, sire, were to mount a palanquin from the 
ground, or from @ palanquin were to mount a horse, or from 
horseback were to mount an elephant's crupper, or from the 
elephant were to mount a terrace: so do I illustrate this kind 
of person. Such, sire, are the persons that are joined to dark- 
ness and fare to hoht. 

‘And who, sire, are they that are joined to light and fare 
to darkness? This is the case where a. man is reborn into a 
family of high degree, be it of aneminent noble, or brahmin, 
or burgess, having authority, having great treasures, vreat 

wealth, ample hoards of gold ane silver, ample aids to enjoy- 
ment, ample stores of money and corn’: where also he is 
beautiful and fair to see, charming and endowed with an ex- 
quisite complexion*; where again he is the recipient of food, 
drink, raiment, means of transport, wreaths, perfumes and 
unguents, and residence. This man is an evil-doer, working 
evil by deed and word and thought; the result whereof is 
that, when he dies, he is reborn after death in misery, to a 
woeful doom, to disaster. Just as if a man, sire, were to 
descend from a terrace on to an elephant’s crupper, or from 
an elephant were to descend to a horse's back, or thence to a 


' Or * bloody." 3 Cf. above, LIT, 1, 3. 
+ *As opposed to s awarthy skin, i¢. the colour of « hurut stake.’ 
dry. 


; ; -  . Ua - = 
' = _ = a 
ss — 
= ice i i= 


d af “120 : Kosala ~ frextigs 


wlanquin, or thence to the ground, or thence were to descend 

into the durk'; so do T illustrate this kind of person. Such, 
sir, is the case of a person who is joined to light and fares to 
darlene: 

‘And who, sire, are the persons who are joined to light and 
fare to the light? This is the case where a man is reborn 
among any of the aforesaid fortunate circumstances and who 
is a well-doer, working good i in deed and word and thought, 
the result whereof is that, when he dies, he is reborn, after 
death, to a happy destiny in the bright worlds. Just, sire, 
as if a man were to pass from one palanquin to another, from 
one seat on horseback to another, from one seat: on elephant’s 
crupper to another, from one terrace to another; so do I 
illustrate this kind of person. Such, sire, is the case of a 
person who is joined to light and fares to the light. 

‘These, sire, are the four kinds of persons in the world. 


=" () 

A poor man, king, devoid of faith and mean, 
. Grudging of heart and planning evil aims, 

Holding wrong views and without courtesy, 

Who doth revile and scoff at the recluse, 

The brahmin, or at any seeking alms, 

Empty of hand? and seeking to annoy, 

Who hindereth gifts to them that ask for food: 

A man like this, O king, when cometh death, 

Fares to un awful! doom, O lord of folk, 

[In darkness born and for the darkness bound, 


(2) 
A poor man, king, of generous heart and faith, 
Who giveth, planning high and noble aims, 


! Andhakaray oroheyipa. Does this mean ‘tndorground " } 

* Natthibo: lit. a * there’s-not-fellow.” We find no parallel to the 
tern, thie parallel passages quoted above giving no verses after the 
prose, (Our Comy, is silent.) We infer it to mean one who refuses 
alis Natthi is equivalent to our * No,’ 


It, 3, § x) Childless 


—— = ——a = a = ee = —— 


A man of intellect intent and clear,* 

Who riseth to give greeting to recluse, 

Or bralimin, or to any seeking alms, 

Who trains himself in all the ways of peace, 
Not hindering gifts to them that ask for food: 
A man like this, O king, when cometh death, 
Fares to the home of gods, O Jord of follz, 

In darkness born, but bound for bourne of light. 


(3) 
A rich man, king, devoid of faith and mean, 
Grudging of heart and planning evil aims, 
Holding wrony views and without courtesy, 
Who doth revile and scoff at the recluse, 
The brahmin, or at any seeking alms, 
Empty of hand?! and seeking to annoy, 
Who hindereth gifts to them that ask for food: 
A man like this, O king, when cometh death, 
Fares to an awful doom, O lord of foll, 
Born in the ight, but for the darkness bound. 


(4) 


A rich man, king, of generous heart and faith, 
Who giveth, planning hich and noble aims. 

A man of intellect intent and clear, 

Who riseth to give greeting to recluse, 

Or brahmin, or to any seeking alms, 

Who trains himself in all the ways of peace, 
Not hindering gifts to them that ask for food: 

A man like this, O king, when cometh death, 
Fares to the home of soda, O lord of folk, 

Born in the light, and bound for bourne of light. 


* Appaqga-manaaa, 
' See note 2, p. 120 


21 


Kosala 


§ 2. Grandmother. 
On another occasion at Savatthi, when the king, the 


Kosalan Pasenadi, had called upon the Exalted One and | taken 


his seat, the Exalted One said: ‘ Well, sire, whence come you 
at this hour of the day ¥ 

“My grandmother, lord, is dead. She was aged and full of 
years; long her span of life, lone her life's Panes She has 
passed away in her 120th year. 

Now, my grandmother, lord, was dear to me and beloved. 
If [ had been offered the gift of a priceless elephant [or that 
her life might be preserved], I should have chosen that my 
grandmother had not died; nay, 1 would have given the ele- 
phant away to save her life. T would have done no less had 
I been offered, or did I possess a priceless horse, or the choice 
of a village, ora province,’ 

‘ All beings, sire, are mortal; they finish with death: they 
have death in. prospect.” 

“That is notably and impressively said, lord... ." * 

‘Even so, sire, even so.... Even all the veasels 
wrought by the potter, whether they are unbaked or baked— 
all are breakable. They finish broken, they have breakage 

All creatures have to die. Life is. but death. 
And they shall fare according to their deeds, 
Finding the fruit of merit and misdeeds :— 
Infernal realma because of evil works; 
Blissful rebirth for meritorious acts. . 


§ 3. The World. 
During another interview at Sivatthi, the king, the Kosalan 
Pasenadi, said: How masy kinds of sa van lord, that 


— — —_—  —— ee 


1 As in III, l, § 4. Lachadiner ea On Lom jy, She had been as oa 
mother to him. On hor legacy to the Order, see Vinaya Texts, iii, 200. 
The expressions Aatthi-rofana, ete,, may hint at the seven treasures 
of a Cakkavatti King. (f. Dialogues ii, 13; 204 f. For marapentam 
read muaretyctan oe Cy. Neti-palarena, p. 04, quoting and para- 


[rext i, 06 


HY, 3, § 4] Grandmother 125 
happen in the world, make for trouble, for suffering, for 
distress # 


* Three things, sire, happen of that nature. What are the 
three ? Greed, hate, and delusion:—these three make for 
trouble, for suffering, for distress. 

As plants o” the rush-tribe, their own fruit become, 
Do suffer, so a man of evil heart 

Through greed and hate and error suffers scathe, 
For these none other than himself become. 


§ 4. Bowmanship. 


During another interview at Savatthi, the king, the 
Kosalin Pasenadi, said?:— 

‘To whom, lord, should gifts be given 1 

There, sire, where the heart is pleased to give.’ 

But to whom given, lord, does a gift bear much fruit ?’ 

* This, sire, is a very different question from that which 


you first asked me. <A gift bears much frmitful result if 


given to a virtuous person, not to a vicious person, As to 
that, sire, I also will ask you a question. Answer it as you 
think fit. What think you, sire? Suppose that you were 
at war, and that the contending armies were being mustered. 
And there were to arrive a noble youth, untrained, unskilled, 
unpractised, undrilled, timid, trembling, affrighted, one who 
would run away—would you keep that man? Would such 


aman be any good to you ? 


“No, lord, 1 should hot keep that man, nor would such-a 
man be any good to me.’ 


‘And would you say the same, sire, if such a man were a 


brahmin, or a merchant's son, or the son of a labourer ?’ 


* See TIT, f, § 2. 

* The Comy. pictures this interview os a public one. Among the 
large audience are rival teachers, self-consciously ‘seratching the 
ground with their feet." They had suffered in popularity through 
Gotama's rising fame, and had represented him as exhorting the people 
to give to him and his followers only. The king summons the meeting 
to let him vindicate himecli. 


Kosala [TEXT i, 99 
* Yes, lord.’ 


* But what would be your opinion, sire, if the youth in 
question, to whichever social class he belonged, were trained, 
skilled, expert, practised, drilled, bold, of steady nerve, un- 
dismayed, incapable of running away? Would you keep 
that man? Would such a man be any good to you ? 

“I should keep that man, lord, he would be useful 
bo me. 

* Even so, sire, is the case of a man, no matter what his 
social class, who has left the world and exchanged the domestic 
for the homeless life, He has abolished five qualities, and is 
possessed of five qualities. Given to him, a gift bears much 
fruit. 

Which five qualities has he abolished ? Desire for sensuous 
pleasures, ill-will, sloth and torpor, distraction and worry, 
doubt Which tive qualities dors he possess ? The qualities 
of the adept—his morals, his proficiency in concentration, 
insight, emancipation, and the knowledge and vision belonging 
to the insight of the adept. It is in such a man, with those 
qualities abolished and these acquired, that « gift bears much 
fruit." 

Thus spake the Exalted One, and the Master added :— 


As prince engaged in war would keep that youth 

In whom he saw good bowmanship displayed 

And mobile energy," and would not choose 

Because of rank one eraven and uniit,* 

So would the wise do reverence to him 

Who, though of lowly birth, led noble life 

Of self-control and magnanimity. ® 

1 Usually termed the Five Hindrances (Nivarandni). The next 
five show that only gifts to Armhants (adepts, asekha) can become 
very fruitiul. 

* Balaviriyay. 

* He would not keep, or endure one who is a non-champion (ne 
aairay bhareyye). 

* B. calls khandi o synonym for Arahantship, and soracca, adhiv’- 
aane-Chanti; i.e, enduring graciously and pationtly the things that 
befall. But cf. his comments on 2. in, 213 (xiv), and A. i, 4. 


1,3,§5] The Parable of the Mountain 125 


Let givers pleasant hermitages make, 

Therein let them for scholars find a home; 

And make in arid jungle water-tanks,' 

And where ‘tis rough to go, clear passage: 

Let them with candid trusting heart Satna 
Victuals and water and dred meats and gear 
And lodging on the men of upnght mind. 

For as the storm-cloud thunders muttering, 

And wreathed with lightnings from its hundred erests.* 
Pours its full bosom on the drenched earth, 
Filling the uplands and the slanting vales, 

E’en so the cultured faithful, gathering stores,** 
Refreshes them that seek with food and drink. 
Yea, wise, he seatters gladly what he hath 

And bidding: Give ye | Give ye! doth he ery. 
As thus he thunders, raining like the god, 

His generous gifts upon the giver's self 

As rich and copious showers of merit fall. 


§ 5. The Parable of the Mountain. 


It was at Savatthi, and the king, the Kosalan Pasenadi, 
came to see the Exalted One. When he was seated, to him 
thus spake the Exalted One:— 

* Well, sire, whence come you / 

‘LT have been zealously busied, lord, with all such matters 
as occupy kings—kings who are of noble birth and anointed, 
who are drunk with the intoxication of authority, yield indul- 
gence to" their greed for sensuous pleasures, who have won 
security in their kingdoms and live os conquerors of a wide 
area of land! 

* As to that what think you, sire? Suppose a man were 
to come to you from the east, a man loyal and trustworthy, 


1 Reading of course papan ca vivane. VFivona ia called by the Comy. 
* waterless woodland.’ (ys. I, 5, § 7. 

* Sotakboku. 

** Abhisankhacca, 

2 Or are overmastered by (abhibhtiidnam, Comy.). 


oe (Sime 
ea ae ns 
A i it > 


and were to say: * May it please you to know, sire, that I have 
come from the eastern districts, and that I there saw a great 
mountain high as the sky moving along, ernshing every living 
thing' as it came, Whatever you can do, sire, do it.” And 
suppose other men came, from west, north, and south, all 
three loyal and trustworthy, and brought similar messages. 
And you, sire, seized with mighty dread, the destruction of 
human life so terrible, rebirth as man so hard to obtain, what 
is there that you could do ?’ 

“In such a mighty peril} lord, the destruction of human 
life so terrible, rebirth us man so hard to obtain, what else 
could I do save to live righteously and justly and work good 
and meritorious deeds t* 

“I tell you, sire, T make known to you, sire :—old age and 
death come rolling in upon you, sire! Since old age and 
death are rolling in upon you, sire, what is there that you can 
deo?’ 

‘Since old age and death, lord, are rolling in upon me, 
what else can I do save to live righteously and justly, and to 
work good and meritoridus deeds? Yeu, lord, such matters 

aa battles with elephant or horse cavalry, with chariots, 
with infantry—the business of kings of noble birth and 
anointed, who are drunk with the intoxication of authority, 
yield indulgence to their greed for sensuous pleasures, who 
have won security in their kingdoms and live as conquerors 
of a wide area of land—these cannot come to pass, there is no 
scope for these with old age and death rolling in upon me. 

‘There are mighty counsellors, lord, in my court, weavers 
of spells, able by their spells to arrest advancing foes? And 
there is, lord, at my court an immense gold supply, heaped 
in Vaults and upper floors, enough to enable us to frustrate an 
attack by financial strategy, These battles of spells and of 
finance cannot come to pass, there is no scope for them with 
old age and death rollingim upon me. With old age and death 


[TEXT i, 1or 


' Making them like pounded rape-sced. Comy. 

* dn the Tuccha-sikar Jaitaka (omy. the king is recommended to 
procure war-mactras from bhikkhus. What ho docs get ia a * tip,” 
full of common sense, 


1,3.§5] The Parable of the Mountain 127 


rolling in upon me, what is there that I can do save to live 
righteously and faatly and to work good and meritorious 
deeds 

‘Even 30, sire, even so. Whut else is there that you can 
do, save to live righteously and justly and to work good and 
meritorious deeds ?’ 


Thus spake the Exalted One, and the Master said:— 


As when huge mountain crags, piercing the sky, 
Advance in avalanches on all sides, 
Crushing the plains east, west, and north and south, 
So age and death come rolling over all. 
Noble and brahmin, commoner and serf, 
None can evade, or play the truant here. 
Th’ impending doom o'erwhelmeth one and all. 
Here is no place for strife with elephants, 
Or chariots of war, or infantry, 
Nay, nor for war of woven spell or curse, 
Nor may finance avail to win the day. 
Wherefore let him that hath intelligence 

And strength of mind, to his own good attent, 
In » Buddha, Norm, and Order place hia trust. 
Who doeth right in deed and word and thought 
Here winneth praise, and bliss in life to come.? 

! The Comy. relates, as the legend of this sutta, that bandits had 
lnid an ambuah for the king in the Andha Wood as he went, some- 
times with but a «mall escort, to pay his respects to the Teacher. He 
was warned in time, ancl had the wood surrounded, capturing and 
impaling or crucifying- the bandits on either side of the way leading 
through the wood, The Teacher judged that if the king, who came 
on red-handed to him, were taxed with the horrid deed, he would 
become sullen and not countermand anything. Henee the method 
adopted in this impressive dinlogue, 

lt does not fit well, however, and the king would scarcel y be refer. 
ring to the gens darme work he had been doing in the wood by such 
Bkpressions aa * battle” (Aatthi-juddhdni, ete.) and the rest, Nor 
dows the Comy. tell of any repentant action at the end. 


[TEXT i, 103 


CHAPTER IV 
THE MARA SUTT AS! 


| F 
$1. Penance ond Work. 

Tavs have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying at 
Uruvela, on the banks of the Nerafijara river, beneath the 
Goatherds’ Banyan, and he had just won full enlightenment. 
Now he was meditating in solitude, and there arose in his mind 
this train of thought: ‘Ah! iree am | indeed from that toil so 
hard to achieve! Ah! well freed am I indeed from that toil 
so hard to achieve, linked to naught that could bring me 
good! Steadfast, mindful, well have I arrived at enlichten- 
ment. 

Now Mara the evil one, conscious in his mind of the Exalted 
(One's thought, drew nigh and addressed him in this verae:— 


Those pentential tasks abandoning, 
Whereby the sons of men are purified, 

The impure fancieth that he is pure, 

When he hath strayed from path of purity. 


Then the Exalted One, discerning that this wax Mira the 
evil one, made rejoinder with Verses -— 


* This group of Suttas has been translated into German by Dr. 
Windisch in his Mdra und Buddha, Leipzig, 1805, a notable monograph 

* Other references to the Buddha's choice of the shade of this tree 
with its great ramifications oceur in Vinaya Texts i, 79 (see mw. 1); 4: 
fhalogues ti, 120; Majjhima i, 166; Uddne i, 4; and below, iv, 3, 
§4;VL1,§1. Cf. Rhve Davids's Buddiist Birthstories, 106. The 
Mejjhima includes a full account of the preceding five years of ex- 
treme asectic pructives undergone by the Buddha, 


Iv, 1, §2] Phe Wonder-Hlephant 120 


I understood full well haw any rites 

Austere, aimed at the overthrow of death, 

Belong to matters useless for our good. 

Yea, nothing good they bring along with them, 

Like oar and rudder in a slip on land? 

But morals, eonéentration and insight®:— 

The Path to Enlightenment—these were my task; 

That Path creating and developing 

Have L attained the purtty nines 

Thou thing of ¢nds,* confess thyself laid low ! 

Then Mira the evil one thoucht: The Exalted One knows 

me! The Blessed One knows me! and sad and sorrowful he 
vanished there and then, 


3 2. The Wonder-&lephant, 

At the same place and on the same occasion, the Exalted 
One was seated beneath the open sky in the darkness of the 
night, and the rain was falling drop by drop.* 

Now Mara the evil one, desirous of making the Exalted One 
feel dread and horror and creeping of the flesh, turned himself 
mito the likeness of a cing ecHnane3 and drew near. And 


. ee with the Comy. tinanty for aparay;— Self-tormenting 
exercises done to win immortality, the “ immortality-penance,” ' 

? BK. reads the locative dhammant and gives as equivalent a meaning 
not mot with elsewhore:—'in a forest'on dry land” (araive thale). 
#o placed, bo says, a veseel might be laden and manned, and the oar 
pulled and lifted, yet would the effort of the crew not avail to move 
the boat forward a finger’s length, Prpirition, * onr- rudder,” Path. 
inean collective machinery, or the sterm-oar which can be used both 
to propel and to steer, 

* These are the divisions adopted by B, for his Viewddhi- cpg, 

“Te. Arahantship. Comy. In A. v, 218, the Eightfold Path 
ia called the Arivan Purging and Cathorsia, 

® See UI, 1,§ 4. Lit. 'endl-er’; whose seductions lead to ever 
zo dying [and rebirth}. 

"Cf. the same idiom in Ud. 1,7; 8. iv, 250 7. Lit. the phrase is, 
hp mikes to touth one by one,” raining being usually alluded to as 
the [rain] god raining or dropping. Fbam-ebay, in Boethlingk ancl 
Roth's Dicty. is * continuously," 
0 


: : * ] a ; 
i: ie 
130 | The eae Suita 


his head was like a shepard block of steatite,’ his tusks. 
were “as polished silver, his trunk was like a huge plough- 
aha 


| frext i. 104 


‘ 


- ‘Phen the Exalted One, understanding that this was Mara 
the evil one, addressed him in a verses — 
Long, long hast thou been wandering to and fro® 
Taking on shapes comely or foul to see. 
Enough of these for thee, thou evil one! 
Thou thing of ends! confess thyself lnid low. 


Then Mara the evil one . . . vanished there and then. 


$3. Comely. 

At the same season, in the same place, the Exalted One was 
seated beneath the open sky, in the darkness of the night, and 
the rain wus falling drop by drop. 

Now Mira the evil one, desirous of making the Exalted One 
feel dread and horror and creeping of the flesh, drew near to 
the Exalted One and waxed wondrous in divers visible shapes, 
beautiful and ugly. 

Then the Exalted One, understanding that this was Mara 
the evil one, addressed him in a varse-— 

Long, long hast thou been wandering to and fro, 
Taking on shapes comely or foul to see; 
Enough of these for thee, thou evil one! 
Thou thing of ends, confess thyself laid low ! 
They that in deed, word, thought are well controlled, 
O Mara. they no subjects are of thine ! 

_O Mira, they no pupils* are of thee ! 

Then Mara the evil one . . . vanished there and then. 
co Sn ise Dau ARS ERS RA a 

1 On this term ef. Rhys Davids, JRAS, 1895, p. 893 f. and L. Feer'a 
response, #6. 1806, 109. Steatite is near enough to the vague kajako, 

* dark-ish’ of the Comy., to fit, that stone being greyish green, or brown. 
® Sapedray—seyserunio, 1B. gives alternative explanations of the 
interval: either from Mira’s own sphere to Uruvela, or during the six 
years of the Buddha's lonely struggles for light. 
* Paceagi. 


Iv, ay § 4] The Snare 131 


§ 4. The Snare (1). 


Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying 
near Benares, at§Isipatana in{the Deer Park. And he there 
addressed the Brethren, saying:* ‘ Bhildkchus‘! “Yes, lord,’ 
they responded. And he said: * It ts by systematic* thought, 
by systematic right effort,’ bhikkhus, that I have won 
supreme emancipation” that I have realized supreme emanei- 
pation. Do ye also, bhikkhus. by systematic thonght, by 
svyetematic right effort, win supreme einuncipation, realize 
supreme emancipation,’ 

Then Mara the evil one came into the presence of the Exalted 
One and spoke to him in a verse:— 

Bound art thou in the stiares by Mira laid: 
Snares [of delights} terrestrial or divine— 
In Mira’s bondage liest thou, recluse ! 
Thou hast not won to freedom yet from me. 
| Lhe Bralted One -—] 

Freed am I from the snares by Mara laid— 
Snares of delights terrestrial or divine, 
From Mira’s bondage have I freedom won. 
Thou thing of ends, confess thyself laid low. 

Then Mara the evil one . . . vanished there and then. 


$ 5. The Snare (2), 
Un another occasion at the same place, the Exalted One 
thus addressed the brethren®:-— ‘I am freed, bhikkhus, from 
allsnares both celestial and human. Ye also, bhikkhus, are 


" On this park surviving to-day, see Vin. T'ezts, i, 00, mn. 3. 

* This addreas ocvura in Fin. Terts, i, 116, 

* Yoniso, 

* The “fourfold right (ie. supreme or perfect: sommd) effort’ is 
the systematic prevention and suppression of evil thoughts, the con- 
juting up and development of good thoughts. Aud. Pay. Hth., p. 358 

* The fruition which is Arahantahip. Comy. 

* Kdmaguna-sankhdid, Comy. 

* See Fin, Texts, i, 112 f. 


al ae — 
- : 7 


The rf 1 Si WW tas — — [TEXT i, 105 


freed from all snares both celestial and human. Fare ye, 
bhikkhus, in a round! that may be for the good of the many, 
for the happiness of the many, for love? toward the world, 
for the advantage, the good, the happiness of gods and men. 
Let not two take the same courses Teach ye, bhikkhus, 
the Norm that is beneficent at the beginning, in the middle, 
at the end. Reveal ye the holy life, entirely perfected and 
purified both in its spirit and in its form. ‘There are beings 
whose eyes ate scarcely dinumed by dust of defilement. They 
perish because they hear not the Norm. They will become 
such os know! the Norm. I too, RE eae will go hence, 
even to Uruveli to the township of Sena 
Then Mara the evil one came into in presence of the 
Exalted One and spoke to him by a verse: 
Thou'rt bound by every snare that doth beset,— 
Snares of delihts terrestrial or divine. 
In mighty bondage art thou bound, recluse ! 
Thou hast not won to freedom vet from me. 


[Lhe Exalted One-—] 
Freed am 1 from all snares that do beset,— 
Snares of aenights terrestrial or divine, =~ : 


1 A tour of sywlematio progress, walking at mosh one y ojana a ciey. 
Com 
2 On the interesting upplications of this word: ‘anukcempati, lit, 
‘vibrating after or toward,’ and nauaally rendered * compassion, ser 
Encye. Religion and Ethics, art: *Lovn’ (Buddhist). 

3 hit ‘let not two by one.’ B, explains this elliptical phrase ae 
ekumuggena dee jand mai agamatthe, eng Ai gateru ckasinig dhawm- 
wiay desente, kona tughibhiitena thitabhay Aoli: ‘Let not two 
persons adopt the aime procedure, thus, in their goings, onw teaching 
while the other keeps silence is to be instituted "—reminding us of 
the first mission of SS. Paul and Barnabas, 

‘ef, Dia | 

® B. does not hold (ef. Vin. Texts, loc. cil.) that this place should 
read Seuini-nigama. He gives alternative explanations: either it wae 
pithoamakappibinag senviye nivitthokise palitthiiagime, or it was 
a township belonging to Seni, father of Sujitté (see Bud. Birth Stories, 
p: 1). There, however, a4 in the text of the Jétaka Conmy., the only 
reading given for the father’s name is Sendini. 


TV, T, § 6] The Cobra 133 


From mighty bondage have I freedom won. 
Thou thing of ends, confess thyself laid low. 


Then Mara the evil one . ... vanished there and then. 


§ 6. The Cobra. 

Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying at 
Kajagaha, in the Bamboo Grove at the Squirrels’ Feeding- 
ground. Now the Exalted One at that time was seated 
beneath the open sky, in the darkness of the night, and the 
rain was falling drop by drop.t| Then Mira the evil one, 
desirous of making him feel dread and horror and creeping 
of the flesh, assumed the mighty appearance of a king of the 
snakes and came into the presence of the Exalted One. His 
body was like a boat [hewn out] of one tree-truni; his hood 
was ike a distillers woven trav?; his eves became like brazen 
dishes of Kosala?; his tongue darted from his mouth like the 
forked lightnings’ dart when god is thundering; the sound of 
his breathing in and out was as the sound of the puffing of a 
smith’s bellows. 

But the Exalted One, understanding that this was Mara 
the evil one, addressed him in verses:— 


O well is him‘, the self-restrainéd sage, 

Whose haunts are homes of empty loneliness ! 
There let him fare who hath relinquished all. 
Men of his stamp such life in sooth beseems. 
Many the creatures roaming in the wild,* 
Many the things begctting fear and dread,‘ 


' Soe above, § 2, a. 1. 

** The moat for ¢preading meal (crushed grain) used by distillers. * 
Cony. Cf, M, i, 225. The meal (piffheay) would be malt or, for 
armok, rice, Shallow hasketa or trays similar in shape to the cobra's 
hood were still in wee in the 1th century in Ceylon. 

9 * Like the banqueting dishes used by the kings of Kosala.’ Comy, 
The phrase suggests rather a special Kosolan handicraft. 

* The Comy. paraphrases seyyo by seyyatthaya, 

2" Roving creatures such aa lions, tigers, etc.” Comy. 

" Intelligent sources of dread, as the foregoing, or unintelligent 
(inanimate) objects, such as tree-stumpes, or white ant-hoaps suggesting, 
in the dusk, goblins, or festouned, serpent-like creepers.” Commyy. 


134 The Mara Suttas [TExT i, 106 


Yea, many gadilies, many deadly snakes, 
Yet never there the calm and mighty sage, 
Resting in lodge of loneliness remote, 
Shall move a {musele, lift a] hair from dread. 
Yea, [winds] may crack the sky and shake the earth, 
Yea, all that lives may atrive to terrify, 
Yea, they may brandish dart against his breast— 
For springs of life! Buddhas no shelter make. 
Then Mara the evil one thought; The Exalted One knows 
me! ,.. and vanished there and then. 


5 7. He Sleeps. 

On another occasion, at the same place, when the Exalted 
One had walked about for a great part of the night, he washed 
his feet,* entered his cell, and took the lion's lying posture on 
his right side, placing one foot above the other,? considering, 
mindful and deliberate, the idea of rising up again. 

Then Mira the evil one approached and came into his 
presence, addressing him in this verse:— 


What ! dost thou sleep? Now wherefore sleepest thon ' 
What! would’st thou like a worthless hireling® sleep ? 
Deeming the house is empty dost thou sleep ? 
What! when the sun is risen would’st thou sleep ? 

[The Exalted One :—] eS 
When craving with her nets and venom-drugs 
No-whither can seduce,” when every base 


! Upadhi, here paraphrased by B, as the five khandhas (factora of 
the living person}. Cy. p. 0, ». 6, and below, § 8. 

?* The body of a Buddha needs no cleansing; dirt slips off it os 
water off a bird's feathers, Bot he did not neglect human dutirs. 

est it should be said he was not a man.” omy. 

2 oy. 1, 4, § 8: 4 Keamd au supposi? Comy, 

§ The Comy. reads dubbhago + * met with ill hap, os though dead or 
senseless.” We follow Windisch in reading dubblate, which is eo 
congruous with the context. 

& = Dhp. 180; cf. Pes, of the Brethren, 213, 0.3. Nelave.* 


Iv, 1,95] Gladness 135 


Of rebirth is abolished utterly, 
The man of intellect thus wakened! sleeps— 
With him, O Mira, what hast thou to do ?* 


§ 8, Gladness. 


Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying 
at Sivatthi, in the Jeta Grove, Anathapindika’s Park. 

Now Mara the evil one came into his presence and pro- 
nounced this verse before him:— 


Parent? of sons in his sons is glad, and glad is the awain in his 
herds of kine. 

(ladness ariseth through life renewed, and no man i3 
gladdened at life's decline. 


[The Exalted One -—| 

Parent of many sons doth mourn, and mourneth the swan 
through his herds of kine. 

Mourning ariseth through life renewed, and saddened 1s no 
man at life’s decline. | 


§ 9. Wan's Life (1). 


Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying 
at Rajagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, at the Squirrels’ Feeding- 
ground, And there he exhorted the brethren; ‘ Ghikkhus i 
‘Yea, lord,’ they responded, and the Exalted One said:— 

‘ Brief, bhikkhus, is the life of men—a matter of flitting 
hence, having its sequel elsewhere. To be wrought is the 
good; to be lived is the holy life. To him that is born there 
is no not-dying. He, bhikkhus, who lives long, lives but a 
hundred years or but: little longer.’> 

Then Mara the evil one drew nigh to the Exalted One and 
addressed him in verse:— 


t Buddho (i.e. onlightened, but lit. awakened). 

2 "Who att as unable to find fooling here as » little fly on hot 
gruel.’ (ony, 

3 First ocours in I, 2, 3 2. 

4 Cf, ibid, m. 6. a cy. 8. i, BH, 


136 The Mara Sullas [TEXT i, 108 


Long time have sons of men on earth to live. 
Let the good man herein no trouble take.t 
As babe with milk replete,* so let him act, 
There is no present coming on of death. 


[The Exalted One -—] 
Brief time have sons of men on earth to live. 
Let the good man herein much trouble take. 
Acting as were his turban all a-blaze.* 
There is no man to whom death cometh not.4 


§ LO. Afan’a Life (3). 

On another occasion, at the same place, when the Exalted 
One had addressed the brethren in the same words, Mira the 
evil one approached again and pronounced this verse before 
him :— 

The days, the nights pass on unceasingly; 

Nor doth our life break up und come to naught. 
Around us whirls our mortuls’ term of yeurs, 
As round the axle whirls the tyre of wheel. 


[The Exalted One -—] 
The days, the nights pass on until they cense. 
So doth our life break up and come to naught. 
Withers our mortals’ term of years and dries, 
As water of the rains in little rills. 


Then Mara the evil one thought: The Exalted One knows 
me! the Blessed One knows me! and sad and sorrowful 
he Vanished there and then. 


* Hilfe, -yya. Cf. JPTS, 1006-7, p, LOT; in popular idiom: ‘ not 
fash himself.’ ~ 

* Lit. “ns a milk-dronk one.” Comy.: ‘Just as a baby lying on 
its back, after drinking milk, in soft blankets, falls aslewp aa if sense- 
less, 80 let the good man not think whether life be short or long," 

O61 331 

* Lit. * There is no not coming on of death.” 


a 


IV, 2,51] The Rock 137 


ee 
& 1. The Rock. 


The Exulted One waa once staving at Rajagaha, on the 
hill of Vulture’s Peak, And on that occasion he was seated 
in the darkness of the night under the open sky, while god 
ralied drop by crop. 

Now Mara the evil one, desirous of making him feel dread 
and horror and creeping of the flesh, drew nigh to him, and 
there, not far from the Exalted One, he sent many huge rocks 
crashing down 

Then the Exalted One, understanding that this was Mara, 
addressed him in a verse :— 

Thou there ! could’st shake the whole of Vulture's Peak 
From top to base, no movement would there be 
In Buddhas whose is perfect liberty. 

Then Mara thought ... and vanished there and then. 


62: The Lion. 


The Exalted One was once staying at Savatthi, in the Jeta 
Grove, Andthapindika’s Park. And he was teaching the 
Norm surrounded by a great congregation. 

Then Mara the evil one thought: This recluse, Gotama, is 
teaching the Norm surrounded by a great congregation. 
What if I were now to draw near to darken their understand- 
ing 72 Then he drew near to the Exalted One and addressed 
him by a verse:— 


' Comy.:* Standing on the crest of the hill, he hurled. The rocks 
fell incessantly, crashing against each other.” The Burm. authority 
in the JPTS,-ed. (Bib. Nat, MS.) omits the doubled mahante—probably 
a genome old double, referring either to size or bo repetition. 

2 Lit. “for work of blinding.” Conmy.: ‘from desire to destroy the 
congregation's eye of insight, i.e among those who had attained any 
of the Paths of Froitions.” ('. Sek. mieakeu, * perplexed.’ 


158 The Mara Suttas [TEXT i, 110 


How now ! why like a lion dost thou roar,' 

So confident before thine audience ' 

Lo! here for thee a rival wrestler stands. 

Dost deem that thou hast overthrown us all ? 


The Exalted One :—] 
Nay then, great heroes take delight to fee! 
Just confidence before their audience. 
Tathigatas have won the [tenfold] power," 
And crossed the flood where all the world sticks tfast.* 
Then Mara .. . vanished there and then. 


§ 3. The Splinter. 

Thus have T heard:—The Exalted One was once staying at 
Rajagahn, in the Maddakuechi, at the Deerpreserve. Now 
at that time his foot was injured by asplinter.5 Sorely indeed 
did the Exalted One feel it, grievous the pains he suifered in 
the body, keen and sharp, acute, distressing and unwelcome. 
Them in sooth he bore, mindful and deliberate, nor was he 
cast down. 

Now Mara the evil one drew nigh to the Exalted One and 
addressed him im a verse:— 


What ? lest thou mentally dull and vacuous ! 

Or art thou mazed over thy coming discourse ?° 
Do not affairs divers and many await thee 17 
Biding aloof here in a resting-place lonely, 

With sleepy face why on this wise dost slumber ? 


' On this figure see Pes, (Sisters), pp. 136, 140, 

2 Of. Jdtaka, iti, M2 (mistranslated); Milinda, 21, 105. 

1 These ten are enumerated, M. i, 69 f.; Points of Controversy, 
140, §§ 3-12, and elsewhere, ¢.g., A. v, 33 f. 


‘cf. 11, 41. & See I. 4, 5 6. 
© Kaveyyo-matio, On this curious term see Pas, (Brethren), p. 406, 
n, 4. Comy.: ‘or thinking on that on which thou haat to disoourse, 


and mazed (dazed, drunken, crazy: matio oan be any of these) becanes 
of what thou hast to do? Thus we have the alternative of « mind 
inert and empty, and a mind congested with matter and exercise, 

7 Of. A. iii, 59, G2, 


TV, 2, § 4] Suitable 139 
[The Exalted One :-—| 

Here he I not mentally dull and vacuous, 

Nor am I mazed brooding on future discourse. 

My aim is won, nor have | any troubles. 

I lie at rest filléd with love for all things. 

E’en when, by dart piereed in the breast, men suffer 

Throbbing, throbbing heart-pulse, they wounded win sleep. 

Why should not I sleep whe am no more wounded ¢ 

In vigil care-free, without fear I slumber. 

Nor nights nor days stir up regrets within me. 

Nor harm I see in the whole world impending, 

Hence may I sleep filled with love for all things. 


Then Mara ... vanished there and then. 


§ 4. Sintable. 


The Exalted One was once staying among the Kosalese at. 
the brahmin village of Ekasala.1 And on that occasion he 
was teaching the Norm, surrounded by a great congregation 
‘of the laity. 

Now Mara the evil one thought: “That recluse, Gotama, 
is teaching the Norm surrounded by a great congregation 
of the laity. What if I were to draw near and act so as to 
darken their intelligence? So he drew nigh to the presence 

Not suitable for thee is this, that thou 

Should’st teach another. Have a care, lest thou 
In such a practice art not left to hang 

Strung “twixt supporters’ zeal, opposers’ ire.* 


(The Exalted One :-—| 
Love and compassion doth th’ enlightened feel 
Towards another when he teacheth him. 


= 


' A village not mentioned elsewhere. 

® Lit. ‘do not sink (Comy.: hang, laggi) down between supports 
and oppositions, i.e. between the passion and the antipathy of oppo- 
nents,’ adda 2B, 


140 The Mara Suttas [TEXT i, [Ir 


From zeal of partisan, opposera® ire 
Unloosed and freed is a Tathicata. 
Then Mara the evil one .. . sad and sorrowful vanished 
there and then. 
§ 5. Senve-erpertence| 
Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying 
near Savatthi,* in the Jeta Grove, A nithapindika’s Park. 
Then Mira the evil ene drew nigh to the Exalted One and 
addressed him in a verse:— 
The tule of sense-impressions is a anare 
That weaves its fetters to and fro in air. 
Here have I chains wherewith to fetter thee. 
Recluse, thou shalt not yet escape from me. 
[The Exalted One :-—] 
Sights, sounds and tastes, odours,” and things to touch, 
Gringing delights to mind of man—for such 
All wish, all will, for me, is past and gone. 
Thou thing of ends, confess thyself o’erthrown ! 


Then Mira. . . sad and sorrowful vanished there and then. 


§ 6. The Bowl. 
On one occasion, at Savatthi, the Exalted One was instruct- 
ing, enlightening, inciting and inspiring* the brethren by a 


+ Manasoy is not pleasure, as Windisch has it (die vat), but mind, 
ws the sixth, or co-ordinating ‘ sense,” sensus communis. Manaso, In 
the verse, is adjectival—C'omy.: ‘conjoined with mind ‘—qnalifving, 
paso, * snure’—Comy.: namely, of lust (réga), The first three lines 
are a free rendering of ‘the snare that wanders about in the air, this 
mind that wanders about: therewith will I bind thee.” 

? Presumably inadvertently omitted in PTS, ed. 

4 It is exceptional to find tastes put before odours in the strict pro- 
cedure of Buddhist psychology. The Burm, MS. correcta it hen, 
but not in IV. 2, § 7. 

‘In this recurrent group of verbs (eg. Dialogues, ii, 46, 105, eto.) 
the Comy. purallels the second by ganhdpeti, the third by samada- 
nomhy wasihay janeti, the fourth by patividdha-gupena voli peli, 


Ty, 2, § 6] The Bowl 141 


sermon on the five ageregates whereby we grasp at the things 
of life.’ And the brethren with their whole mind applied, 
attentive and intent, listened with rapt hearing to the 
Norm.* 

Thon it occurred to Mara the evil one; This recluse, Gotama, 
is instructing, enlightening, inciting and inspiring the brethren 
by a sermon on the five aggregates... . And they with 
their whole mind applied, attentive and intent, are listening 
with rapt hearing to the Norm. What if 1 were now to draw 
near and act so as to darken their intelhgence ? 

Now on that occasion a great many bowls had been placed 
in the open air [to dry]2 And Mara the evil one, assuming 
the ahape of a bullock, went towards these bowls. Then one 
brother called to another: ‘ Brother, brother, that bullock may 
break the bowla!" And when he had so said, the Exulted 
One said to him: ‘ That is no bullock, bhikkhu. It is Mara 
the evil one, who has come to try to darken your understand- 
ing.’ And the Exalted One, having understood that this was 
Mara, addressed the evil one in a verse:— 


The body's shape, all that we feel, perceive, 
And know by sense, and whatso will hath planned*:— 
This congeries—whoso doth know it well; 
‘That ‘tis not I, that 't is not Mine—he thus 
Breaks from ita charm. Him thus dispassionate, 
The self at peace,* all fetters lett behind, 
Him, thongh they hunting seek in every sphere 
Ot life, the hosts of Mara ne’er will find.* 
Then Mara .. . sad and sorrowful vanished there and then. 


ee 
jotipeti. ‘Thus B. does not connect the last, etymologieally or other- 

ise, with sumpraharsayati, to gladden, as Childers does (Dicty. «.1:.), 
but with purifying and illuminating. 

1 [pddidya, lit. having grasped: adit. . - dassento, Comey. 

2 Another Sutta-formula. C/. PD. ii, 204; 4. ii, 1G. 

3 So Vin, Texts, iii, $4 (Cv., v, 9, 4). 

‘* The fourth aggregate’ (sankiara). Comy. Thus it adds, the two 
lines give all the five factors of the * person.’ 

5 Khemibhitay atiahhdvay. Cory. 

: Of Mi, 140. Anvesay—pariyesamint. Cony. 


142 The Mara Sultas [TEXT i, 12 


§ 7. The Sphere of Sense. 


The Exalted One was once staying at Vesali, in the Great 
Grove, at the Gabled Hall. Now on that occasion he waa 
instructing, enlightening, inciting, and inspiring the brethren 
by a sermon on the six spheres of contact.1 And the brethren 
with their whole mind applied, attentive and intent, listened 
with rapt hearing to the Norm. 

Then it occurred to Mara the evil one: * This recluse Gotama 
is instructing, enlightening, inciting, and inspiring the brethren 
by a sermon. ... What if I were now to draw near and 
act so as to darken their intelligence ?” 

So Mira the evil one drew near, and when he was not far 
from the Exalted One, he made a mighty, fearful, terrible noise, 
so that men would think the very earth was splitting open.2 

Then one brother called to another: * Brother, brother, I 
do think the earth is splitting open beneath us!’ And when he 
had so said, the Exalted One said to him: * N uy, bhikkhu, 
this 1s not the earth splitting open. This is Mira the evil one 
come to act soas to darken your understanding,” And know- 
ing it was so, the Exalted One addressed Mara the evil one by 


fl Verse ;— 


Sights, sounds, and tastes® and smells and tangibles, 
Yea, all impressions and ideas* thereof:— 

These are the direful bait that draws the world- 
Herein the world infatuated lies. 

All this if he get past and leave behind, 

The Buddha's follower, with heedful mind, 

Passing beyond the range of Mira's might, 

Like the high sun, doth fill the world with light. 


Then Mara ... sad and sorrowful vanished there and 
then. 


' Namely, by way of sensations, 
* A phrase repeated below, [V, 3, § 2. 
4 Cf. above, IV, 2, § 5, mn. &. 
different sensations, cover this line's meaning, 


Iv, 2, $5] Alms 143 


§ 8. Alma. 

The Exalted One was once staying among the Magadhese 
at the brahmin village of Pafica-saali (Five Sil-trees'). Now 
on that occasion the young folks’ festival of sending gifts to 
each other was taking place, And the Exalted One dressing 
himself in the early morning and taking his robe and bowl went 
into Paficusala for alms. Then Mira the evil one entered 
into* the brahmin householders of Paticasala, inspiring them: 
‘Suffer not Gotama the recluse to receive alms,’ 

Then the Exalted One even as with washen bow! he entered 
Paficasala for alms, so with washen bowl came he back again. 
And Mara the evil one drew nigh and said to the Exalted 
One:— Hast thou too, recluse, gotten alms ?* 

* Hast thou, evil one, 30 done that I should get none V 

‘Wherefore let, lord, the Exalted One enter Paticasaéla 
villaze a second time, and [ will so do that he shall get alms." 


[The Exalted One :—] 
Mara hath generated evil force, 
In seeking the Tathagata to assail. 
What ! dost thou fancy, O-thou evil one, 
That evil wrought ‘guinst me beareth no fruit 7 


1 This village and episode, the latter more briefly told than m our 
Comy., ovour in Dap, Comy., ti, 257. The festival, to judge by both 
accounts, waa a kind of St. Valentine's Day. Clansmen's daughters, 
arrayed in their best, held a parade, the youths having also foregathered, 
and presenta, or ot loast flowers, were presented. Festival-cakes were 
aiso handed about, and Mira, foreseeing much offering of these to the 
Buddha, and much profit aceruing to the * 500 maidens" at the sports, 
should he discourse, thwarted this, The Buddha, adds B,, could have 
foreseen the froitlesaness of his quest, had it not been unbecoming for 
a Buddha to have considered beforehand the chances of his obtaining 
food on a given round, 

* Annavittha. 

? A ruse to inspire insult and injury on the top of negleot. The 
Buddha, knowing that he lied, and that he would suffer the penalty of a 
aplit hend (ef, Dialogues, i, 116, nm. 3), out of merey did not consent. Comy. 

41 The fruit was purgatory immediately ufter death. Points of 
Controversy, 340, 343, ‘ Evil force,’ lit. “demerit.' Mira was not im- 
mortal, though some one was always Mira. One is tempted to seo B. 


146 The Mara Suttas [TEXT i, 176 


conquering nor causing others to conquer, without sorrowing 
nor making others sorrow—rghteously ? 

Then Mara the evil one, discerning what was in the mind 
of the Exalted One, drew near to him, and said: * Let the 
Exalted One, lord, exercise governance, let the Blessed One 
rule without smiting nor letting others slay, without con- 
queting nor causing others to conquer, without sorrowing nor 
making others sorrow, and therewithal ruling righteously." 

“Now what, O evil one, hast thou in view, that thou 
speakest thus to me: ‘ Let the Exalted One exercise govern- 
ance! Let the Blessed One rule righteously ? 

‘ Lord, the four stages to potency have by the Exalted 
One been developed, repeatedly practised, made a vehicle, 
established, persevered in, persisted in, well applied. Thus 
if the Exalted One were to wish the Himalaya, king of the 
mountains, to be gold, he might determine it to be so, and 
the mountam would become a mass of gold.’ 


[The Bazalted One :—] 
And were the mountain all of shimmering vold, 
Not een twice reckoned would it be enough 
For one man's wants. This let us learn 
To know, and shape our lives accordingly. 
He that hath suffering seen, and whence its source— 
How should that man to sense-desires incline ? 
lf he but understand rebirth’s substrate® 
And know: here hangs the world bound fast alway,? 
He fain must work the bonds to eliminate, 


Then Mara the evil one thought: *The Exalted One knows 
me! the Blessed One knows me!’ and sad and sorrowful he 
vanished there ond then. 


' The Exalted One was thinking saceosonaaly of those suffering 
from the cruelty of rulers, Miira's plan was to make him absorbed in 
the fascination of exercising power, Comy. Cf. 8. Luke iv, 5-8, 

2 Soo I, 2, § 2, w. 6. 

* Lit. ‘this is the world’s bond’ (sango), Lagganan efay. Comy, 


IV, 3, § 1] The Supplementary Five 147 


3. THe SUPPLEMENTARY FIVE. 
§ 1. Very many. 


Thus have | heard:—The Exalted One was once staying 
among the Sikyans, at Silavati. Now on that occasion very 
many of the brethren were living near the Exalted One in 
zealous, ardent and strenuous study. 

Then Mira the evil one, assuming the shape of a brahmin, 
with a great matted topknot,* clad in a whole antelope- 
skin, aged and bent like the rafters of « roof, with wheezing? 
breath and holding a staif of udumbara-wood, drew near to 
those brethren and said to them: * Your reverences are 
young to have left the world, blackhaired lads that ye are, 
blessed with the luck of youth, without in your early prime 
having had the fon that belongs to natural desires. Enjoy, 
ventlemen, the pleasures of your kind. Do not, abandon- 
ing the things of this life, run after matters involving 
time {" 

‘Nay, brahmin, we have not abandoned the things of 
fuis life to run after matters involving time. It is matters 
of time, brahmin, that we have abandoned, who are running 
after things of this life. Yea, brahmi, matters of time are 
natural desires, hath the Exalted One said, full of sorrow and 
despair; that way lies abundant disaster. But this doctrine 
is concerned with things of this life, and is not a matter of 
time; it bids a man to come and behold, it guides him on 
and away, and should be known by the wise as a personal 
experience,” 

When they had thus spoken Mara the evil one departed, 


* Jafand nie, 

' Sa-thuray: ‘the hoofs left on. Comy. Cy. Windisch in joco; 
in, Texts, ii, 247, 

* Transluted ‘ snoring" in Jataka, i, 160; stertorous breathing. 

* Cf. the brahmin injunction, Laws of Mane, SRE., p. 198: * When 
& man sees himself wrinkled and white, . .. then let him resort to 
the forest. ... The dialogue verbafim occurs above, I, 2, § 10. In 
the text supply Lamd before vuttd. 


148 ‘The Mara Sutias [TEXT i, 118 


wagging his sunken head! his tongue lolling about,*? a three- 
branched frown standing out on his brow, and he leaning 
upon his staff. 

Then those brethren sought the Exalted One, and entering 
his presence, saluted, sat down at one side and told him what 
had happened and what had been said. 

‘Bhikkhus, that was no brahmin: that was Mara the evil 
one come to act so as to darken your understanding.’ 

Then the Exalted One, understanding the matter, in that 
hour uttered this verse?:— 


He that hath suffering seen and whence its source— 
How should that man to sense-desires incline { 

Lf he but understand rebirth’s substrate 

And know: here hangs the world bound fast always, 
He fain must work the bonds to eliminate. 


§ 2. Samiddhy, 

The Exalted One was once among the Sikyas at Silivati." 

Now on that occasion the venerable Samiddhi waa living 
near the Exalted One in zealous, ardent, and strenuous study, 
And as he was meditating in privacy, this thought arose in 
hia heart: ‘O what a gainis mine! O what a great gain is | 
mine in having for my Master an Arahant who is a Buddha | 
Supreme! © what a gain is mine, O what a great gain is! 
mine in having taken orders in a religious discipline that is 50” 
well prescribed | QO what a gain is mine, O what a greatl) 
gain is mine in having fellow-disciples who are virtuous an MN 
noble. 'b 


1 ee * knocking his chin on his chest.’ 
2 Comiy.: up and down and from side to side," 


‘ The disturbing of Samiddhi is also narrated in the Theragathi 
Comy. (Pes. of the Brethren, p. 51) on verse 46, But by 4 commentan ial 
confusion, the locality in that work is called the Tapodi Park, the 
scene of another disturbing of this young friar. See above, I, 2, § 10) 

5 The text should read kalyinadhammd. Sabredmacdriyo may 
an oversight for sabrohmacdérino—so the C'omy.: sabrahmacdring 
ea laddhoiia. But for anomalous forms of thie word see Ed. Milh 
Pali Grammar, tT. 81. 


tv. 3, § 3] The Supplementary Five 149 


Then Mara the evil one, discerning the thoughts that were 
in the mind of the venerable Samiddli, drew near, and when 
he was close to him made a tremendous noise, appalling and 
terrible, so that you would think the very earth were splitting 
open? 

And the venerable Samiddhi sought the Exalted One, and 
entering his presence saluted him and sat down at one side. 
And he told the Exalted One of what he had been thinking 
and what had befallen him, 

‘That was no splitting of earth,Samiddhi. That was Mara 
the evil one come to try to darken your understanding. Do 
you go, Samiddhi, to that same place and abide in zealous, 
ardent and strenuous study.’ 

‘Yea, lord!’ replied Samiddhi, and rising he saluted the 
Exalted One, passing round by the right, and departed. And 
in that same place he abode in zealous, ardent and strenuous 
study, and the same thoughts arose in him. And Mara, 
discerning his thoughts, came a second time and made a 
noise so that you would think the very earth was splitting 
open. But the venerable Samiddhi understanding that this 
was Mara the evil one, addressed him in a verse :— 

In trust and hope forth from my home I came 
Into the homeless life. And there have | 
Learnt? mindfulness and insight, and my mind 
Is tempered well. Make thou whatever shows 
Thou wilt, me canst thou never terrify. 


Then Mira the evil one thought, * He knows me, the brother 
Samiddhi!’ and sad and sorrowful he vanished there and then. 


& 3. Godhika. 


The Exalted One was once staying at Rajagaha, in the 
Bamboo Grove, at the Squirrels’ Feeding-ground. And on 
that occasion the venerable Godhika was staying at Black 


Cf. above, IV, 2, § 7. 

* The Therag&th& version reads wuddid, * grown,’ not fuddha, aa 
here. B. paraphrases the latter by sdta, ie, the French comms, comea- 
to-be-known, or learnt. 


150 The Mara Sutias [TEXT i, T20 


Rock, on the slopes of Seers’ Hill.1 And he, abiding in 
zealous, ardent and strenuous study, touched? temporary? 
emancipation of mind, and then fell away therefrom, And 
this befel him a second, and yet a third time, yea, even six 
times. 

Then he thought: ~ Up to six times have T fallen away from 
temporary emancipation of mind. What if I were now to 
use the knife 5?’ 

Now Mara the evil one, discerning in thought the thoughts 
of the venerable Godhika’s mind, sought out the Exalted One 
and in his presence addressed him in verse®:— 


0 mighty hero, O thou passing wise, 
Radiant in fame and mystic potency, 


' Tei-gili-passa, one of the group of hills above Rajagaha, whence 
the other crests could be seen: Vulture’s Peak, Webhira, Pandava, 
Vepulla (Mf, iii, 65 f.). A resort of the Order (Vin. Texts, iii, 7: 
below, VIII, 0, § 10; Dialogues, ii, 123), 

> Comy.: prapilabhi. 

* The text hos simiédhikay, the Comy, stmayikay, and defines it 
thus: [emancipation in which] one i+ emancipated from opposing things 
in one intense moment (appitappitakkhene), and is intent om (adhi- 
nexecati) the mental object, is o mundane accomplishment (Lodiaea- 
somdpatt), called simayikd cetovimutti, No other passage has been 
found nos yet, where sdméddhika occurs as unmistakably referring to 
somddhi, but in the Dap. Comy. account of the legend (i, 431), the 
form is somidhiha, ond thia term, in the Jdinka Comy., ii, 383, is 
analysed os samea-ndhibini. (yf. D. ii, 151; Jat. iv, $l; Watters: 
‘On Yuun Chwing,’ ii, 33. In the Katha-vatthy Comy., 35 (Points 
af Controversy, (4, n, 4), the Mandein Pitaka Press ed. reads, for admd- 
dhikdya, simeyibiya. The context there connects the word with the 
a-scmaya-rimutia of A. vy, 336, and P.P., p. LL. 

4 Comy.: * Why did he fall away six times 1 Because of an internal 
nilment affecting wind, bile, and phlegm. Hereby he was unable to 
attain the requisite conditions for sammddhi, and fell away after the 
momentary ecstasy.’ (In one Burmese M8. he attains seven times. | 

* The idiom for this form of suicide, Of. Psa. of the Brethren, p, 214, 
B. stutes that Godhika cut his * throat-tube," but so checked the final 
agony a8 to attain Arnhantship, and so, becoming samasisi (of. PP. 
Comiy., f PTS., 1913-14, 186), ended life. 

* He discerned that Godhika, careless aa to body and life, would 
awiftly become Arnhant. (omy, 


a 


tv. 3, $3] The Supplementary Five 151 


Who hast transcended all we hate and fear: 
Lo ! at thy feet, O seer, | worship thee. 
Behold, O mighty hero, how thy follower 

Is fain to die and thinketh upon death, 

0 thou that art the conqueror of death. 
Him do thou, seat of glory !! hold in check. 
For how, Exalted Lord, may one among 
Thy followers, devoted to the Rule, 

As undergraduate set term to life, 

With mind, O thou renowned® throughout the land, 
That hath not yet attained [the final goal]? 


But just then the venerable Godhika laid hands upon the 
lente. 

Then the Exalted One discerning that this was Mira the 
evil one who spoke, addressed him in a verse:— 


Ay, thus the strong in mind do go to work. 
No longing have they after living on, 
Craving and root of craving tearing out,” 
Hath Godhika passed utterly away. 


And the Exalted One addressed the brethren: © Let us go, 
bhikkhus, to Black Rock on the slope of Seers’ Hill, whore 
Godhika of the clanamen hath taken hia own life.’* ‘Yea, 
lord,’ said the brethren assenting. So they went thither. 
And the Exalted One saw the venerable Godhika afar lying 
[supine] on his couch with his shoulders twisted round.* 

' Puraphrased by anuhhiva-dhara. 

2 Sulia—piseula, Comiy. 

4 See T, 3, § 9; and Pas. of the Sisters, yer. 15, 18. Abbuyha= 
uppifelrd. Comisy. 

‘This Black-rock suicide legend has undergone bifurcation. In 
&. ii, 124 f,, Vakkali is the suicide, his act being directly due to in- 
curable disease, 

8 Windiech’s rendering of kAandAag, not by shoulder but by *aggre- 
gate,’ iz etrained. ‘The Commentaries do good service in revealing 
the simplicity of those older nurratives, ¢g. ‘though lying on his 
back to kill himself, he died with at least his head in the orthodox 
posture [for repose], 


152 The Mara Sutias [TEXT i, 122 


But just then a smokiness, a murkiness! was going toward 
the east, was going toward the west, was going toward the 
north, was going toward the south, was going aloft, was going 
downward, was going toward intervening points. 

Then the Exalted One admonished the brethren: ‘ Do ye 
not see, bhikkhus, that smokiness, that murkiness going enst, 
west, north, south, aloft, downward and in between ?° 

* Yea, lord.’ 

* That, bhikkhus, is Mara the evil one, who is seeking every- 
where for the consciousness? of Godhika of the clansmen.* 
“ Where,” he ia thinking, “ hath Godhika's consciousness been 
reinstated ?" But Godhika of the clansmen, bhikkhus, with 
4 consciousness not reinstated hath utterly ceased to live.’ 

Then Mara the evil one holding a vilya-wood lyre of golden 
colour drew nigh to the Exalted One and addressed him in 
Verses -— 

Aloft, below, and back and forth I seek 
The quarters four and in between in vain, 


I find not. Whither gone is Godhika ? 


[The Exalted One -—] 
He strong in purpose and in steadfastness, 
In contemplation rapt, to rapture given, 
Tn loving self-devotion day and night, 
Void of all hankering after life itself: 
Now hath he overthrown the hosts of death, 
Now cometh he no more again to birth: 
Craving and root of craving tearing out, 
Hath Godhika passed utterly away. 

* Comy.: ° There arose as it were amoky, murky clouds,’ 

* Comy.: “for the pafisendhi-citta, or consciousness [ae it emerges 
tifresh) at re-conveption or new birth, ‘The reason (firana) or condi- 
tions for its becoming reinstated in a new embryo were, in Godhika’s 
cave, absent.’ It is a subtle touch, in this delightful legend, that, to 
be able to discern « trinamission, from body to germ, of that which 
was not a substance, material or immaterial, but a resultant of forces, 
Mara, fertile in shape-transformation, should sublimate himself into 
vapour, Ts it possibly associated with dtmon (prenm?) myths t 

" Awlaputia, an unusval way of referring to a bhikkhu, 


IV, 3, $4] The Swpplementary Five 153 
* . & 
But he, grief-smitten, let the lyre slide down 
From hollow of his arm, and there and then 
The gloomy demon vanished quite away. 


§ 4. Seven Years. 

Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying 
at Uruvelé,t on the banks of the river Nerafijara, beneath the 
(roatherds’ Banyan. 

Now on that occasion Mara the evil one, who had been 
dogging the Exalted One for seven years* watching for access, 
but without obtaining it, drew near to him and addressed him 
In verse :— 

Is ‘t sunk in grief thou art, that in the wood 

Thou meditatest ? Art downcast at loss 

Of wealth,’ or art thou wishing it [were thine] ! 
Hast some misdeed within the village wrought ' 
Why makest thou no friends* among the folk ? 
Is there no one with whom thou canst be friends ? 


[The Exalted One :-—] 
Dug out** of me is every root of grief. 
Blameless I meditate, grieving at naught. 
All lust and longing for new life eut off, 
© thou that art to all the careless kin! 
So do I meditate, sane andimmune.* 


1 See above, IV, 1, $ tL. 

* Comy.: * six before the Enlightenment, and one after.” 

4 Most of the sources of the Feer edition here, and all of them helow 
(p. 157), where this passage recurs, have oiffay : thought, mind. The 
Comy,, with Feer, reada villay: property, money, and explains; priticy 
nu jinno (#0)? (jino wi batthaci) safay vd anhassay vd jifo si nu? Are 
you beaten [to the tune of] a hundred or a thousand feoins]? At the 
repetition there is no further comment, € and o in Singhalese lettera 
are almost the same. I have compromised; ‘ downcast ' implicates 
cittay ; but * wealth’ gives the cause of the mood imputed. 

* Sabkhi. ** Palikhaye, 

* Andsavo, rid of the delusions and vicious tendencies likened to 
poisonous liquide or drugs. The term is ever in use in Pea. of the 
Brethren, cf. ver. 47, ete. 


The Mara Suttas  —S[TExT i,123 


tings! about which men BLY: this, that is mine !— 
The folk who tell you: this or that is mine !— 
For those and these if thou ‘st a mind to care, 
Thou wilt not, O recluse, escape from me. 


[The Exalted One :—] 
Those things whereof they speak:—they re not for me. 
The folk who speak:—one of them am not I. 
Do thou learn this, 0 evil one, and know 
Thou wilt not see even the way I go. 
[Mara :—] ! 
Hast thou bethought thee of* a Path that’s safe, 
By which thou mayest reach th’ Ambrosial, 
Depart,’ go thou that way, but go alone. 
Why give thy guidance to another man ! 


[The Bvalted One -—] 


The people as they seek to cross beyond 

Ask for a land of immortality. 

And when they ask m¢, I declare to them 

The end of all, where ix no birth-substrate.® 
[Mara® =a 

* Tt is as if, lord, there were not far from a village or town- 
ship a lotus-pond, and « crab therein. And as if many boys: 
or girls? coming out from the arse or township were to 

1 =IV, 2, 3 th 

* Of. Jétaka iii, 387, on the meaning of “anubuddhay, 

4 Windisch is of opinion that, by peki, ‘die!’ is meant, and he 
draws ao parallel between these lines and the Mira episode in the 
Suttanta of the Great Decease, JMalogues, ii, 112. 

4 Amaccn-dheyyay, the negative form of the term rendered the 

* Dewthrealm,’ I, 1, § 9, ete. 

® Sabbantay nirupadhiy, B. is silent, 

© ‘This parable is told in M. i, 234, by one of the Licohavis at the 
defeat, in debate with the Buddha, of the Jain Sacoaka. 

TA rare instance in Buddhist literature of the male sex being placed 
lirst. 


Vv, 3,34] The Supplementary Five 155 


tiraw near to that pond, and lifting the crab from the water 
were to place it on dry land. And whenever the crab bent 
out a claw, those boys or girls were to be hacking and breaking 
and smashing it with sticks or potsherds, so that the crab 
with all his claws hacked and broken and smashed was not 
capable of descending again into the pool. As in what has 
been said, lord, so here, whatever disorders,! disagreements, * 
distortions® * there have been, they have all been hacked, 
broken, smashed by the Exalted One, and I now, lord, who 
seek ingress, am unable to draw nigh to him.’ — 

And Mira the evil one, in the presence of the Exalted One, 
Spoke these verses in his disappointment :— 


Round and about a stone that looked like fat 
Cireled a crow: * Shall we find something soft, 
Something that’s nice {’ But finding nothing nice 
He'd thence take his departure. As that crow 
Pecked at what proved to be a rock, so we 
Diagusted take our leave of Gotama.! 


Then Mara the evil one, when he had spoken these verses 
before the Exalted One, depated from that place, and seated 
himself cross-leeged upon the earth not far from the Exalted 
One, silent, discontented, with drooping shoulders, and 
countenance downcast, brooding and at a loss, scratching 
the earth with a stick? 


’ B. has visihiyibiniti Mar-*cisikini, We take this in the sense 
B. gives it in Atthosilini-and the Commentator in the Sudfa-Nipate 
omy. 

** Pisentani, Contradictory statements are instanced by B, 

7* Vipphandifani, Referring to Mira's transformations. Comy. 

4 Sn. vers. 447, 448, 

* This description ia a formula, or nearly so. Windisch distorts it, 
simplicity by making patiakkhawadhe refer to the philosophical notion 
of the five thandhes mental und bodily, AhAandia means here the 
upper part of the trunk or torao, (/, Vin. Testa, in, 15, with, above, 
IV, 3, § 3, alao 4. iii, 57, and Miliada i, 0. 

* The simplicity of this early narrative is in the Jdtaéa Comy. (Bud, 
Hirth Stories, p. 106) elaborated into Miira’s marking a tally of six- 
teen linea, one for each of his abortive attacks on the Buddha. 


156 The Mara Sutias [TEXT i, 124 


$5. The Daughters. 


Now Craving and Discontent and Passion, the dauchters of 
Mara, drew nich and addreased him in verse:-— 


Whereat, O dear one, art thou so depressed ? 
What man is it that thou dost grieve about ? 
We'll catch him by the snare of passion’s lust. 
As forest elephant,? and him we'll bring 
Hither and he shall vassal be to thee. 


[Ware —] 
Not easy is 't by passion’s lust to bring 
The Arahant, the Blessed of the earth, 
Transeending as he doth the realm that’s mine. 
Hence is it that [ grieve abundantly. 


Then Mara’s daughters, Craving, Discontent, and Passion, 
drew near to the Exalted One, and said to him:— 

But the Exalted One heeded them not, inasmuch as he 
Was emancipated in the uttermost destruction of the rebirth- 
substrate.4 

Then Mara’s daughters went aside and considered together 
thus: * Divers are the tastes of men. What if we were now 
each of us to assume the form of a hundred maidens?’ And 
they didso, and as such they again drew near to the Exalted 


' With this version ¢f. that in the Jdtake (omy. foe. cit, It is 
teferred to in A. y, 46, as ‘the Maidens’ Questions,’ and in Sn, 
ver. 835. In ibid., ver. 436 (Fausboll, 435), two of Mara’s * armies’ 
are called by the name of the first two daughters: Tanhi, Arati. 
The third daughter's name: Ragi or Rati (Dhp., Comy.. i, 
202 «.), ig tantamount more or less to that of Mira’a other ACOLy ¢ 
Kami. Windisch holds this Sutta is a later addition (ap, cif, 
202 f.). 

* The simile implies the decoying of a wild elephant by tame cow- 
elephants. Comy, 

* Opadhi: ie. of those feelings and desires, the resurgence of 
which indicates the presence of forces making for rebirth. 


1,385) The Supplementary Five 157 


One and said; ‘ O recluse, we would be thy devoted slaves."? 
But the Exalted One heeded them not, inasmuch as he was 
emancipated in the uttermost destruction of the rebirth- 
substrate. 

Then Mara’s daughters went aside and considered together 
thus: “ Men’s tastes differ. Let us each assume the shapes of 
a hundred young women who have borne a child once . . . 
and “Let us each assume the shapes of a hundred young 
women who have borne a child twice.’ . . and ‘ Let us each 
assume the shape of a hundred women of mature age’. . . 
and... ‘of a hundred senior women," but all with the same 
result. 

Then Mara’s daughter drew aside and said: * True it was 
what father said to us:— 

Not easy is "t by passion’s lust to bring 

The Arahant, the Blessed of the earth, 

Transcending as he doth the realm that's mine. 

Hence is it that I grieve abundantly. 
For if we had approached after this fashion any recluse or 
brahmin who had not extirpated lust, either his heart would 
have cleft asunder, or hot blood had flowed from his mouth, 
or he had become crazy, or have lost his mental balance. As 
a green reed that has been reaped dries up and wilts away 
and withers, even so would he dry up and wilt away and 
wither,’ 

So they drew mgh to the Exalted One and stood at one 
alte, and so standing Craving addressed him in verse *— 

Is't sunk in grief thou art, that in the wood 
Thou meditatest { Art downcast at loss 
Of wealth, or art thou wishing it were thine ? 


' Lit. we would cherish (or minister at) thy feet. A wife is called 
& * foot-minister’ in AbjidAdnappadipeba-sici, 

* Lit, great women (mah'itthiyo). It is not usual to express 
mivanced age by this term, and the ('omy, is silent. But even if the 
context did not point to this meaning, there is the Jdfaba Comy. (Bud. 
Birth Stores, 108), in which these last temptresses ore deseribed a4 
broken-toothed and grey-haired ! 

3 See IV. 3, § 4, 


r. ‘~ . 2, ya” . = = (4 AL ; 
= ne = oy ie oat _- e = @ ve =a i 
158 The M dra Suttas [TEXT i, t20- ‘ 


Hast some misdeed within the village wrought ? 
Why makest thou no friends among the folk ? 
Is there no one with whom thou canst be frienda ? 


[The Exalted One —) 
Now! that the host of sweet and pleasant shapes 
Hath been repulsed, fm seated here alone 
And meditate upon the good I've won, 
The peace of heart, the bliss experienced.2 
Therefore [ make no friendship ’ mong the folk; 
Friendship with anyone is not for me, 


Then Discontent, Mira's daughter, addressed the Exalted 


One in verse :— 


How must a brother mainly shape his life, 

Who having crossed five floods would cross the sixth {* 
How may impressions of the world of sense 

Be kept outaide of him and cateh him not 

Who mainly in rapt meditation bides ! 


[The Exalted One :-—] 
With body tranquillized and mind set free, 
Weaving no plans of deed or word or thought,* * 
Mindful and with no home where heart may cleave, 
Who's learnt to know the Norm, who meditates 
Rapt without restlessness of mind, he lets 
No anger rise, nor [perilous] memories, 
Yea, and no reeping torpor of the wits:— 


' (noted 4. v, 46. 
& sd aebitiony Sr anette: cf. p. 154, m. 2. 

= ee oe RMenatre: mnberseppamons: (6) tbh petile: by way: ot 
the tive senses and those of the ‘ mind-door*; (b) the five ‘ heater * 
and five “further fetters." See Rhys Davids: American Lecdures on 
Buididiem, BES 


| ; not devising worldly activities of the three kinds 
saint ‘I have #0 far not traced in Theravda Buddhism any Vo- 
ilanta theory of sankidrd as predispositio: | (wena), os adopted and 
applied by some Indologists. | 


Iv, 3.§ 5] The Supplementary Five 159 


Thus must a brother mainly shape his life, 

Who having crossed five floods would crosa the sixth. 
Thus may impressions of the worlds of sense 

Be kept outaide of him and catch him not 

Who mainly in rapt meditation bides. 


Then Passion too, Mara’s daughter, in the presence of the 
Exalted One, spoke these verses :— 


All craving having severed now he goes 

Attended by his bands* and companies. 

Yea, surely many souls will go. Ah me! 

This homeless man will cut owt multitudes 

From death king's clutches, leading them beyond. 


Yea, the great heroes, yea, Tathagatas 

Lead onward by the holy Norm. ‘“Gainst them 
Who by that Norm are led, who understand, 
What boots our jealous spleen? .... 


Then the three daughters sought out Mira the evil one. 
And Mara saw them coming from afar, and seeing them he 
addressed them in verses :— 

Ye fools ! ye seek to cleave a mountain crest 

With lily-stalks, to dig into a cliff 

With finger-nails, to chew iron with teeth.! 

Ye've knocked, as 't were, your heads against a rock, 
Ye seek to find a footing in the abyss, 

Ye ‘ve thrust as 't were your breast avainst a stake? 
Discusted, come ye hence from Gotama ! 


In’ glittering array they came : 
Craving and Discontent and Lust, 
Forthwith the Master swept them thence 
As down or leaf: by wind-god blown. 


1 — Jal. iv, 383. * Of. 8. iv, 207. 
4 Lit. * hit (*deajja) a atuke with your breast, 
4 ‘This verse, says H., wae added by the Recensionista, 


[TEXT i, 125 


CHAPTER V 
SUTTAS OF SISTERS: 
§ 1. The Alavite? 


Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying 
-at Savatthi, in the Jeta Grove, Anathapindika’s Park. Now 
the Alavite sister dressed herself early and, taking bow! and 
robe, entered Savatthi for alms. And when she had gone 
about Savatthi for it, and was returning after her meal, she 
entered Dark Wood seeking solitude.4 

Then Mara the evil one, desirous to arouse fear, wavering, 
and dread in her, desirous of making her desist from* being 


alone, went up to her, and addressed her in verse :— 


Ne'er shalt thou find eseape while in the world ! 
What profiteth thee then thy loneliness ! 

' This Chapter V. has already been translated into German by 
Windisch, op. cif., and into English in Padi of the Sisters ( Appendix). 
I repeat the latter translation bere to make some emendations, and to 
give o few commentarial clacidations. 

* Hor name waa Self, and as such she is numbered among the Theris, 
or senior sisters of the Anthology (Pas, p. 43, 8. 4). The Sagyutte 
pontaina the more adequate rejoinder to the tempter. 

1B. states that Dark Wood (Andha-Vana) was a grata, or 4 yojana 
south of Sivatthi (? about 1) miles), and was so called from having 
been the haunt of 500 bandits who gouged out the eyes of their victims 
fakkhibhedapaita), They had so treated Yasodhara the preacher, 
when he had collected monoys for repairing the Chetiya of Buddha 
Kassapa, Dark Wood should thus perhaps be better rendered Blind 
Worl, dAndhocwwe meaning either. The grove, adds B., was then 
guarded by royal custodians, and was often visited by a brother or 
sister in quest of solitude, 

Vivelo may mean spiritual detachment, but the Comy. hore speci- 
fies it as physical (biyavivek’ aithikini). 


* Lit, ‘fall from.’ 
1g 


v, § 2] The Alaviie 161 


Take thou thy fill of sense-desires and love. 
Be not 4 woman who repents too late, 


Then the Alavite thought: * Who now is this, human or non- 
human, that speaketh verse? Sure ‘t is Mara the evil one 
speaketh verse, desirous of arousing in me fear, wavering, and 
dread, desirous of making me desist from being alone? And 
the Sister, knowing it was Mara, replied with verses:— 

There is escape! while in the world, and well 
By insight? have I found and made it mine. 
Thou kin to all the careless,” evil one! 

Not thine is it to know the Way, the Goal.¢ 
lake spears and javelins are desires of sense, 
That pierce and rend the mortal frames of us, 
This that thou callest sense-desire and love: 
For me a thing detested hath become, 


Then Mara thought: ‘The Alavite Sister knows me!’ and 
sad and sorrowful he vanished there and then. 


§ 2. Soma, 

[On another occasion] at Savatthi, the Sister Soma . 
when she was returning from her alms-round, after her meal, 
entered Dark Wood for noonday-rest§ and plunging into its 
depths sat down under a certain tree. 

Then Mira the evil one, desirous of arousing fear, wavering, 
and dread in her, desirous of making her desist from concen- 
trated thought, went up to her and addressed her in verse :— 


That vantage-ground® the sages may attain 
Is hard to win. With her two-finger wit? 
That may no woman ever hope to achieve, 

} Nissorann ti nibbdneny. Coney, 

* Pornd, equated by pacearekkhana-adaay, 

2 Cf. IV, 3, § 4. * Way and goal—pudiy, 


another application of it: insignificant understanding, or because 
Il 


162 Sutias of Sisters [TEXT 1, 129 


Then Soma thought: ‘Who now is this ...? Sure 't is 
Mira’. . . and replied in verses :— 


What should the woman’s nature signify 

When consciousness is tense and firmly set, 
When knowledge rolleth ever on? when she 
By insight rightly comprehends the Norm ? 


To one for whom the question doth arise: 
Am I a woman [in these matters], ar 

Am I a man, or what not am I then ?# 
To such an one is Mara fit to talk. 


Then Mira the evil one thought: ‘ Sister Soma knows me" 
and sad and sorrowful he vanished there and then. 


§ 3. Gotami. 


[Un another occasion] at Sivatthi, the Sister Lean 
lotamis , , . ‘entered Dark Wood, and plunging into its 
depths, sat down at the root of a certain tree for noonday 
rest. Then Mara . . .4went upto her and addressed her in 
verse: 


How now? Dost sit alone with tearful face, 

As mother stricken by the loss of child ? 

Thou who hast plunged into the woods alone, 

Is tt & man that thou hast come to seek ? 
taking her cotton wool in two fingers abe outs the thread. For aptnesa 
we commend Dharmapila’s figare of testing the boiling rice. 

' "The knowledge (jidme) in the attainment of the fruitions pro- 
obeding, lit, rolling on. For ¢uifa-" in the text, read eatia’, 

* Questions, aye B., arising under the influence of natural desire, 
conodt, inles opinion. Comy., 

* ‘Lean through paucity of flesh and blood.” Comy. ‘The legend of 
Kisa-Gotami, of whom we know only the family name: ‘she of the 
Gotama’s, is the most widely known of almost all those that have 
survived concerning the earliest followers of the Buddha, thanks 
mainly to E, Arnold's Light of Asia. B, here repeats the story of the 
Mostard-seed, and gives a prior account of the Gotami, narrated more 
fully, not in the Therigidithd Comy., but in that on Dp. ii, F70-5. 

‘ Verbatim os in § 2. 


v, § 4] Vijaya 163 


Then Sister Lean Gotami thought: * Sure "tis Mara! .. 2 
and replied with verses :— 


Past are the days when | was she whose child 
Was lost! Men to that past belong—for me !! 
I do not grieve, I am not shedding tears. 

And as for thee, ood sir, I fear thee not. 

Lost on all sides is love of worldly joys. 

The gloom of ignorance is rent in twain. 
Defeating all the myrmidons of death, 

Here do | bide [to reat,] sane and immune. 


Then Mare the evil one . . . vanished there and then 


¢ 4. Vigaya* 
[On another occasion) of Savatthi, Sister Vijayd rose 
early . . , and sat down beneath a certain tree for noonday 


rest. Thon Mara the evil one... came up to her and 
addressed her in verse:— 


A maiden thou and beautiful—and I 

So young a lad! Now where to fivefold art 
Of sounds melocious* we may list, O come, 
Lady, and let us take our fill of joy! 


1 We give here a different ‘smendeniee from Windisch's, which in- 
Huenced that in ss. of the Sisters, The Comy. sees in accante simply 
totomatiay, an end or term thatis past, viz, of the days when marriage 
and matermuty filled her life. Shdvan apuysokay efay-— This ia a 
sexless state; that which was for me the end of child-dying, that was 
also for me the end of mon’ [oa males]. Men were ‘ that-endish,’ 
ending there (fad-antibd, not antifay, ‘near ot hand’), Cf. anta-ko, 
IV, 1, § 1, and antiyd, the Singh. oJ. here. 

* Of this Sister the Comy. tells nothing. Her name is equivalent to 
Vietrix, and her verses coincide with the opening verses of Queen 
Khemi's longer poem (Sisters, p. 53). Between theae two women, 
indeed, tradition has recorded a tie of companionship, if we muy 
assume that Vijaya Theri (op. cit., p. 01) is the bhikkhuni of the 

* The Comy. gives the usual list of instruments (sce op. cif,, p, 183, 
a. 4), 


164 Suttas of Sisters [TEXT i, 131 


Then Vijaya thought: ‘ Who now is this? ... Sure, ‘t 
ia Mara . ..’ and she rephed with verses:— 

Sights, sounds and tastes and smells" and things to touch, 

Wherein the mind delights, I leave them all 

To thee, Mara; nought of that ilk I seek. 

This body vile, this brittle, crumbling thing, 

Doth touch me only with distress and shame. 

Craving for joys of sense is rooted out, 

How beings are reborn in other worlds 

Material, how others dwell, again, 

Where matter is not, and th’ ecstatic states, 

Good [of their kind to bring men to those worlds]:* 

From all of these the darkness is dispelled. 


Then Mara the evil one . . . vanished there and then. 


§ 5. Uppalevanna* 

[On another occasion] at Savatthi, Sister Uppalavanna 
rose early . . . and stood at the foot of a sal-tree* in full 
blossom. Then Mira the evil one . . . came up to her and 
addressed her by a verae:— 

Thou that art come where over thee, crownéd with blossom 

| Waveth] the sal-tree, Sister, and standest there lonely, 

Beauty like thine none is there able to rival.® 

Fearest thou not, foolish girl, the wiles of seducers ? 


| See above, [V, 2, § 4. 

* | have modified the rendering given op. cet. p. 184. 8B. pronounces 
gawd samapaiti, ‘the good attainment,’ to mean only the eightfold 
“worldly attainment’ of Jhina practised for rebirth, ond not as an 
accessory in the quest for Arohantship. The former was * good" so 
far as it went. * Darkness,” 05 always, is a figure for ignorance. (7. 
with the last lines in $6. We have followed 5. 4. Anng’s views in 
discarding * form" in this connection, because of ita ambiguity, The 
belief was that, in the Ripa heavens there was auch sublimated matter 
ag served for vision and hearing, not to speak of locomotion, but in the 
formless, Aripa heavens life was of purely mental stuff. 

3 Nor concerning thia redoubtable lady has B. anght new to say. 

4 On this tree and its appearance see Pee. of the Brethren, p. 330.5 

5B. does not admit an alternative rendering for dutiyd, auch as 


v, § 6] Cala 165 


Then Sister Uppalavanna thought: Who now is this? . . - 
Sure ‘tis Mara...’ and replied with verses:— 


Were there an hundred thousand seducers es thou art, 
Ne‘er would I tremble affrichted nor turn a hair of me ! 
Mara, I fear not thee, lone tho’ I stand here. 

Lo! I can vanish, or enter into thy body. 

Yea, I stand 'twixt eyebrows; thou canst not see me. 


For consciousness is wholly self-controlled, 

The Paths to Potency are throughly learnt. 
Yea, I am free from all the bonds there be. 
In sooth, good sir, I have no fear of thee. 


Then Mira the evil one . . . vanished there and then. 


§ 6. Cala. 


[On another occasion] at Savatthi, Sister Cala rose 
early .. . and seated herself at the foot of a certain tree for 
noonday rest. Then Mara came up to her and said: * Wherein, 
Sister, dost thou find no pleasure ?* ~ In [reJbirth, fend,® 
I find no pleasure.” * Why findest thou no pleasure in [re} 


Windisch finds in the Therigdthé Comy. We do not find there such 
un alternative, unless, for ekikd ea, we read «kiki od. And we judge 
that, in ver, 230 of the Sisters’ Pas., ‘none to companion thee". . . 
should have been rendered ‘no one can rival thee.” ... This does 
more justice to the literary quality of the verse. It was redundant 
to add anything as to her want of a chaperone after the word ebd. 

We follow Windisch in finding that Mira’s fourth line in the text, abeent 
in Therigathd, is an intrusive errant from Uppalavanné’s reply, where 
alone it fita, forming the second line. So we omit it, Nevertheless 
the Comy. accepts the intrusion, with the exegesis: ‘Just aa thou, 
come hither, meetest with neither acquaintance nor love, ao they too 
(the sisters alluded to as less fair) would be even as thou art." This 
seems « little pointless. It should be ‘thou here alone, for all thy 
beauty, gettes! no more credit than a plainer woman.’ 

1 Qn C(hjalé and her sisters ond the discrepant scriptions in the 
Canon, ace Psa, of the Sisters, 186 f. 

2 (Or ‘ whereof dost thou not approve, (/. above, 01, 3, § 9. 

4 Avuso, used by the Order to all save spiritual superiors, or kings. 


166 Suttas of Sisters [TEXT i, 132 


birth ? Once born we enjoy the pleasures of the senses. 
Who hath put this into thy mind, Sister! :—“ find no pleasure 
in rebirth ?”’ 
[Cala -—] 

Once born we die. Once born we see life’s illk— 

The bonds, the torments and the life ent off. 

The Buddha hath revealed the Norm to us— 

How we may get beyond the power of birth, 

How we may put an end to every ill. 

He brought and stablished me upon the Truth® 

They that are born in worlds material, 

And they that dwell in immaterial heav'ns*:-— 

If they know not how they may end it all— 

Are goers, all of them, again to birth. 


Then Mira the evil one, ete. .. . 


5 |. Upacata. 

[On another occasion] at Sivatthi, Sister Upacdli, rising 
early . . . seated herself at the foot of a certain tree for noon- 
day rest. Then Mara . . . said to her: ° Where, Sister, dost 
thou wish to rise again ?"4 

‘ Nowhere, friend, do I wish to rise again." 


[Mara —] : 
Nay, are there not the Three and Thirty Gods, 
And gods who govern in the realms of shades 
They of the Blissful Heavens, they who rejoice 
In fresh creations, they who hold control 


''“ Some fool” is Mara’s suggestion, hence her emphasis on the 
teiching of the All-wise.” Comy. 

2 * Made me enter into, or settled me in the True (acecce nivesayi, 
a very unugual, but vivid phrase). J.e. the Third Truth or Fact of 
Nibbinat—the end of sorrow. Comy. 

3 Of. above, § 4. She seee in rebirth so great and fearful wo vista 
as compared with the tempter's limited opening. 

4 Uppajjati, arise, used for * be reborn.’ 

® The Yama or Plutonic gods. On‘ King Yamoa' see * Devadita- 
vagea,’ A. i, 198 f.; also MW. iii, 178 f. 


¥, $8) Sisupacala 167 


Over what others have created! ? Think, 
And here or there set thou thy heart’s desire. 
The bliss of each in turn may then be thine. 


[Upacala :-—] 
[Ay, think upon] the Three and Thirty Goda, 
And gods who govern in the realms of shades, 
They of the Blissful Heav'ns, they who rejoice 
In fresh creations, they who hold control 
Over what others have created:—{Think !] 
All they come evermore ‘neath Mara’s sway, 
For all are bound by bonds of sense-destre. 


On fire is all the world, and racked in flames.** 
Ablaze is all the world, the heav'ns do quake. 
But that which quaketh not, influctuate, 
Untrodden by the average worldling’s* feet, 
Where Mara cometh not, nor hath way-gate— 
There doth my heart abide in blest retreat. 


Then Mara the evil one, etre... . 


§ 8. Sisupacdla. 

[On another occasion] at Savatthi, Sister Sisupacala 
rising early . . . seated herself at the foot of a certain tree 
for noonday rest. Then Mara came up to her and said: 
“Of whose shibboleth,* Sister, dost thou approve ?” 

‘ Of no one’s shibboleth, friend, do [ approve.’ 

{Mara :-—] 
What ? In whose name, then, didst thou shave 
Thy head and like a nun art seen, if thou 


— — — — —— -_ = Se ————— 


1 On these curious features in Buddhist coamogony we can find ns 
yet no diseussion to add to Childers’ art: Nirndnarati, a definition 
given nleo in Therigdtha Clomy., 160. 

** Padhipiio. Cf. above, | 5, § 1. 

4 Puthujjana, lit. many-folk, the * masses” or * million,” hoi polloi. 

* Pdsanda is exegetioally derived from ‘the snares (pdt) of opinions 
thrown over the hearts of men." Comy. 


THs Suttas of Sisters [TEXT 1, 133 


No heretic and no shibboleth! dost approve ? 
What, futile and infatuate, is thy quest ? 


[ Sisupacald -—] 
"Tis they that are without, who cast the nets 
Of vain beliefs on which they pin their faith:— 
Theirs are the doctrines I do not approve. 
‘Tis they that lack conversance with the Norm. 


Lo! in the princely Sakya elan is born 

A Buddha peerless ‘mong the sons of men, 
Who all hath overcome,? before whose face 
Mara doth flee away, who everywhere 
Unconquered stands, he that is wholly freed 
And fetterless, the Seer who seeth all, 

For whom all karma is destroyed, who in 
The perishing of every germ that birth 
Onee more engenders, is at liberty! 

This is the Exalted One, my Master he, 
And his the system whereof I approve. 


Then Mara the evil one, ete, . . . 


§ 9. Seld, 


[On another occasion] at Sivatthi, Sister Sela, rising 
early . . . seated herself at the foot of a certain tree for noon- 
day rest. Then Mara, the evil one... went up to her 
and addressed her in verse:— 


Who was ‘t that made the human puppet[’s form | 2 
Where is the maker of the human doll #8 


——— —— —— 


' The Sovyyutia has the ainguler, the Theriithd, the plural. 

* 4, “all [the mystery of the] factors of life and all [the mystery 
of} rebirth.’ Comy. 

9 Himbay * applied to the individual organism ” (attabidea). Comey. 
Windisch renders by Leib, which does not include mind. The whole 
S-aggregate person ia meant. The same figure occurs in Ratthapala’s 
and Ananda’s verses: Pas, of the Brethren, ver. 760; 1020, where body 
and mind ore explicitly included. 


Whence, tell me, hath the puppet come to be ? 

Where will the puppet cease and pass away ? 
[Sela :—] 

Neither self-inade the puppet is, nor yet 

By other wrought is this ill-plighted thing.* 

By reason of a cause* it came to be, 

By rupture of a cause it dies away. 

Like to a certain seed sown in the field, 

Which, when it lighteth on the taste of earth 

And moisture likewise, by these twain doth grow, 

So the five aggregates, the elements, 

And the six spheres of sense—even all these— 

By reason of a cause they came to be; 

Gy rupture of a cause they die away. 


Then Mara the evil one thought: “Sister Sela knows me,’ 
and sad and sorrowful he vanished there and then. 


§ LO. Vajira. 


[On another occasion] at Savatthi, Sister Vajira, rising 
early . . . plunged into the depths of Dark Wood, and seated 
herself at the foot of a certain tree for noonday rest. Then 
Mira . . . came up to her and addressed her in a verse:— 


By whom was wrought this ‘ being’! Where is he 
Who makes him! Whence doth a being rise ? 
Where doth the being cease and pass away ? 


' Agha is os vague as our ‘ evil,” hence we have taken into account 
B's duttha-patifthdnaltd attabided, 

* Or condition (het); always, in Buddhist philosophy, understood 
14 impersonal, 

> We have slightly altered here to get closer following of the original. 

' Satta,” * being,” is used for living intelligent creatures in general, 
including devas, * All souls" would be perhaps o better rendering, 
the emphasis in the word being upon « permanent entity held to reaide 
in a pertghable frame, the worst of heresies for Buddhiam. ‘In the 
ultimate or highest sense," comments B,, ‘a “ being™ is not found 
(or known).’ So Aathdvutihu (Pontes of Controveray, p. 5, . 3). Milra 


170 Suttas of Sisters [TEXT i, 135 


Then Sister Vajira thought: ‘Who now is this? .. . 
Sure tis Mara’. . . and replied in verse :— 


‘Being! Why dost thou harp upon! that word ? 
‘Mong false opinions, Mara, hast thou strayed. 
Mere bundle of conditioned factors, this ! 

No * being’ can be here discerned to be. 

For just as, when the parts are rightly set, 

The word * chariot * ariseth [in our minds], 

So doth our usage covenant to say: 

A being’ when the agerevates are there. 


Nay, it is simply TIP that rises, Ill 

That doth persist, and Ill that wanes away. 
Nought beside Ill it is that comes to pass, 
Nought else but Ill it is doth cease to be* 


Then Mara the evil one thought: * Sister Vajira knows 
me, and sad and sorrowful he vanished there and then. 


Here endeth the Sisters’ Suttas. 


== ES ee — — 


Wie apparently pointing to himeelf or to Vajird in ‘harping on 
(paccess, cf. Dialogues, i, 252, n. 3; lit, * going back to"). In Thera- 
githa, ver. 0), Comy., the verb is paralleled by gavestnto, seeking. 

The suffering attending the life of the five aggregates. Comy. 
It 16 a8 1f Vajiré went on to say: * If you must have a unity, a unified 
notion that is perpetually present when the five aggregates are present, 
take Suffering rather than Satta. There is constancy of being for you, 
60 only you see in that too the threefold pulse of life:—genesia, oguili- 
brium, dying away. 

2 Tt is & curious accident that verses so famous and quoted in the 
Canon (Actia-vatthu) and other works, e.g. Mil, i, 45, and by B, 
himeeif, eg. Viewddhi-magge, ch. xviii, as these should (1) not be 
incorporated in the Therigithi, (2) receive so brief a notice in the 
Comy., (4) be accompanied by no legend about their author, 


CHAPTER VI 
THE BRAHMA SUTTAS 
CHAPTER I 
$1. The Entreaty. 


Thus have | heard: staying at 
Uruvela,) on the banka of the river Nerafijari, beneath the 
Goatherd’s Banyan, and he had just attained full enlighten- 
ment, Now as he was privately meditating,* the thought 
arose in him: ‘1 have penetrated" this Norm,4 deep, hard to 
perceive, hard to understand,’ peaceful* and sublime, no mere 
dialectic, subtle, intelligible only to the wise. But this is a 
race devoting itself to the things to which it clings,® devoted 
thereto, delighting therein, And for a race devoting itself 
to the things to which it clings, devoted thereto, delighting 
therein, this were a matter hard to perceive, to wit, that this 


1 See above, IV, 1,41. This Sutta occurs verbatim og the story of 
Brahmé&'s entreaty in Vin. T'exts, i, 4 f. It is also given nearly ver- 
hatim, in Dialogues, ii, 20 f., a8 an episode in the life of each of the 
seven Buddhas there recognized as the series of great world-savioura, 
but with two variants:— (1) the god proffers his request three times; 
(2) the four lines beginning ‘ In days of old’ . . . are omitted. 

? When! aska B. In the eighth week after his Enlightenment 
(huddha-bhvinss offhame aatighe), and he mentions the intervening 
incidente recorded also in the Jdfata Comy. (Sud. Birth Stories, 
p. 108 #f.). 

9 Adhigato ti patividdheo. Comy. 

«The Dhamma of the Four True Things.’ Comy, On this and 
the next paragraphs, the reader may consult notes in Pialoyues, ii, 
a6 /. This translation differs only in o aid detaila, 

5 Dur-conubodho, Cf, above, p. 14, a. 

= Santo. 

®* "To the fivefold pleasures of zense.’ Comy. 

171 


172 The Brahma Suittas [TEXT i, 136 


is conditioned by that—that all that happens is by way of 
cause. This, too, were a matter hard to discern, to wit, the 
tranquillization of all the activities of [worldly] life, the re- 
nunciation of all substrates of rebirth, the destruction of 
natural cravings, passionlesaness, cessation, Nibbana. And 
now I only might teach the Norm, and others might not 
acknowledge me: this would be wearisome to me, this would 
be hurtful to me. 

And then verily to the Exalted One were revealed these 
verses on the spur of the moment, unheard of before:— 


This that thro’ many toils "ve won, 
Enough ! Why should I make it known ? 
By folk with lust and hate consumed 

Not this a Norm that can be grasped. 
Against the stream [of common thought],2 
Deep, subtle, fine, and hard to see, 
Unseen "t will be by passion’s slaves, 
Cloaked in the murk [of ignorance].* 


In such wise, pondering over the matter, did the heart of 
the Exalted One incline to be averse from exertion and not 
towards preaching the Norm. 

Thereupon to Brahmé-Sahampati,# becoming aware in 
thought of the thoughts of the Exalted One, was this re- 
vealed:— Woe, woe! now will the world perish! Woe! now 
will the world utterly perish, in that the heart of the Tathi- 
gate, Arahant, Buddha Supreme inclines to be averse from 
exertion and not towards preaching the Norm! 


' ie. physically, if we may take kdya, when opposed to citta, in 
a Commentary, a8 riipa, “body.” (Sen Compendium, 96, n. 3). ‘In 
(eve) a Buddha can feel neither weariness not hurt.’ Comy. 

* £9. in its doctrines of impermanence, ill, non-soul-entity, non- 
beauty (in what superticially seems eo), it goes against the stream 
of belisia, Comy, 

1 Avijja rising ajjhotthata, Comy, 

' B. gives a tradition that this deva had been one Sahaka, « Thera 
in Buddha Kaseapa's dispensation, and by sustained First Jhina was 
reborn as a Brahma god. The Aiatory of the nume is unknown. &, 
represents him aa attended here by deva-hosts. 


VI, 1, § 1] The Entreaty 173 


Then did Brahma-Sahampati, even like a strong man 
atretching his bent arm out, or drawing together his arm out- 
stretched, vanish from the Brahma world and appear before 
the Exalted One. And Brahma Sahampati, draping his outer 
robe over one shoulder, and stooping his right knee to the 
round, raised his joined hands towards the Exalted One and 
‘Lord! let the Exalted One preach the Norm! Let the 
Blessed One preach the Norm! There are soula whose eyes 
are hardly dimmed by dust}; they are perishing from not 
hearing the Norm. They will come to be knowers of the Norm.’ 

Thus spake Brahmi Sahampati. And thereafter he said 
this also: 


There hath appeared in Magadha before thee 
A Norm impure by minds unclean contrived.* 
Unlock this door t’ Ambrosia! Let them hearken 
To Norm by Pure and Holy One revived. 


As on a crag on crest of mountain standing 
A man might watch the people far below, 
E’en so do thou, 0 Wisdom fair, ascending, 
© Seer of all, the terraced heights of truth, 
Look down, from grief released, upon the nations 
Sunken in grief, oppressed with birth and age. 
Arise, thou Hero! Conqueror in the battle ! 
Thou freed from debt! Lord of the Caravan ! 
Walk the world o'er, [sublime and blessed Teacher !) 
Teach us the Norm! There are, who'll understand. 


Then the Exalted One, understanding the entreaty of 
Brahma, because of his pitifulness toward all souls,® looked 
down with a Buddha’s Eye over the world. The Exalted One 


1 “The eye of insight, little affected by lust, hate, delusion.” Comy. 

* According to B., these are the six teachers named above, IL, 1. 
$ 1, whose doctrines were already published. 

® Comy.: The Ariyan Path to Nibbana. 

4 Thus far these six lines occur in the [h-cuttaka, § 38. 

4 Satta or beings, creatures. Not metaphysically taken. 


174 The Brahma Suttas [rext i, 138 


saw, with a Buddha's Eye, so looking, souls whose eyes were 
scarcely dimmed by dust, and souls whose eyes were sorely 
dimmed by dust, souls sharp of sense and souls blunted of 
sense, souls of good and soula of evil disposition, souls docile 
and souls indocile, some among them living with a perception 
of the danger of other worlds and of wrongdoing. As in 
a pool of blue or red or white lotus, some lotus plants born in 
the water, emerge not, but grow up and thrive sunken beneath 
the surface; and other lotus planta, born in the water and 
crowing tp in the water, rise to the surface; and other lotus 
plants, born in the water and growing up in the water, stand 
thrusting themselves above the water and unwetted by it, 
even 80 did the Exalted One, look down over the world with 
a Buddha's Kye, and see souls whose eyes were scarcely dimmed 
by dust, souls whose eyes were sorely dimmed by dust, 
souls sharp of sense and blunted of sense, souls of good and 
souls of evil disposition, souls dovile and souls indocile, some 
among them living with a perception of the danger of other 
worlds and of wronzdoing. 
Seeing Brahmi Sahampati he made response in verse:-— 

Open for them the doors stand to Ambrosia ! 

Let those that hear renounce the faith they hold.’ 

Foreseeing hurt I have not preachéd, Brahma, 


The Norm sublime and excellent for men. 


Then Brahma Sahampati thought: ‘ Now am I one by whom 
an opening has been given for the preaching of the Norm by 
the Exalted One !' 

And he bowed down before the Exalted One, and passing 
round him by the right, vanished there and then,  * 


§ 2. Holding in Reverence. 
Thus have | heard:—The Exalted One was once staying 
at Urnvela, on the banks of the river Nerafijara, beneath the 
Lroatherd’s Banyan, just after he had become fully enlightened. 


' Comy.: * Let them all give up (reasajjantu) their own faith (ad 
dean). 7 


VI, I, § 2] Holding wn Reverence 175 


And to the Exalted One, as he meditated in privacy, the 
thought a : to live paying no one 
the honour and obedience due to a superior. What recluse 
or bralimin is there under whom I could live paying him honour 
and respect ?* 

Then the Exalted One thought; * For the perfecting of the 
moral code’ [if] imperfectly carried out, I should live under 
another recluse or a brahmin, paying him honour and reapect. 
But [ see not anywhere in the worlds of godsa—Maras, Brah- 
mis—not among recluses and brahmins, not among the whole 
race, human or divine, any other recluse, or any brahmin more 
accomplished in moral conduct than myself, and under whom 
I might live, paying him honour and respect. 

So, too, for the perfecting of concentrative studies, for 
the perfecting of studies in insight, for the perfecting of 
study in emancipation, for the perfecting in contemplation of 
the knowledge of [my] emancipation, [if] imperfectly achieved, 
I should live under another recluse or a brahmin, paying him 
honour and respect. But I see not anywhere in the world 
of gods—Maras, Brahmas—nor among recluses and brahmins, 
not among the whole race, human or divine, any other recluse 
or brahmin more accomplished in any of these branches than 
myself, and under whom [for that reason] L should live, paying 
him honour and respect. 

This Norm then, wherein [ am supremely enlightened— 
what if I were to live under It, paying It honour and respect !# 


' “Namely, in the fifth week.” Comy. See above, p. ITI, a. 2 

? The Buddha was 'then about 35. In Manu, IU, 1, the term for 
being in statu pupilleri is stated to be from { to 36 years, for «a brah- 
min—t.e. till the Vedas are mastered. Bandhiyana gives till over 
48 years. 

1 On this and the four following branches of saintly studies, of. 
above, III, 3, § 4. 

‘Of, D. iii, TT: “live ye having the Norm as your iwland, as your 
refuge, and no other.” The Dhamma or Norm came at one time and 
in one branch of Buddhiam to be considered as a god (Hopkins, 
Religions of India, 249, 358; of. Manu, XU, 50, *the law’). It is just 
possible that this Sanyutta passage may have been considered os 
bestowing the sanction for this view. (Uiammo, as « masculine noun, 


176 The Brahmd Suttas [TEXT i, 139 


Thereupon Brahma Sahampati, becoming aware in thought 
of the thoughts of the Exalted One, even like a strong man 
stretching his bent arm ont, or drawing together his out- 
stretched arm, vanish fromthe Brahma world and appear before 
the Exalted One. And Brahma Sahampati, draping his outer 
robe over one shoulder, raised his joined hands towards the 
Exalted One and said: 

‘Even so, Exalted One! Even so, Blessed One! They, 
lord, who in time past were Arahants, Buddhas Supreme, 
those Exalted Ones did also live only under the Norm, honour- 
ing and respecting it. They also, lord, who in time to come 
will be Arahants, Buddhas Supreme, they will live only under 
the Norm, honouring and respecting it. Let the Exalted One 
also, lord, who now is Arahant Buddha Supreme live only 
ander the Norm, honouring and respecting it.’ 

Thus spake Brahmi Sahampati, and thereafter he spake 
thug :— 

They who were Buddhas in the days of yore, 
And they who will be Buddhas yet to come, 
And he who Buddha is in this our day, 
Slayer of griefs for many multitudes: 

All these have ever lived or! now do live 
Holding in reverence the holy Norm, 

Ay, in the days to come so will they live. 
Wherefore let whoso fain is for his good, 
Aspiring to be numbered ‘mong the great, 
Hold ever holy Norm in reverence, 
Remembering the Buddhas’ ordinance. 


§ 3. Brahimadeva. 


Thus have | heard:—the Exalted One was once staying at 
Savatthi, in the Jeta Grove, Anithapindika’s Park, 
would be referred to as * him,” and aid the growing myth, For the 
orthodox view cf. Vin, Texts, i, 91; M. i, 171, translated in Points 
of Controveray, p. 169, 

! The text has og, ‘and.’ B. guards the reader from seeing therein 
more than one living Buddha. 


VI, 1, § 3] Brahmadeva 177 


Now on that occasion Brahmadeva, son of a certain 
brahminee, left the world, going from home into the homeless 
in the Order of the Exalted One, And the venerable Brahma- 
deva, remaining alone and separate, earnest, ardent, and 
strenuous, attained ere long to that supreme goal of the higher 
life, for the sake of which the clansmen rightly go forth from 
home into the homeless; yea, that supreme goal did he by 
himself, even in this present life, come to understand and 
realize. He came to understand that birth was destroyed, 
that the holy life was being lived, that his task was done, 
that for life as we conceive it} there was no hereafter, And 
the venerable Brahmadeva thus became one of the Arahanta? 

Now the venerable Brahmadeva rose early one morming, 
und dressing himself, took robe and bow] and entered Savatthi 
for alms, And going about Savatthi, house by house, he 
«came to his own mother's dwelling. 

At that time his mother, the brahminee, was habitually 
making an oblation’ to Brahma, Then it occurred to Brahma 
Sahampati: * This mother of the venerable Brahmadeva, the 
brahminee, makes her perpetual oblation to Brahmi. What 
if 1 were now to approach and agitate her?’ So asa strong 
man might stretch forth his bent arm, or bend his arm 
Stretched forth, Brahma Sahanipati vanished from the 
Brahma world and appeared at the dwelling of the mother 
of the venerable Brahmadeva. And standing in the air he 
addressed her in verses:— 


Far hence, O braliminee, is Brahma’s world, 
To whom thou servest offerings alway. 
And Brahma feedeth not on food like that. 


' Lit. “for thusness" (itthattdya"), n word we need in serious diction. 

* We find no reference elsewhere to thia Arahant, Taking name 
and episode together, some Indologists might pronounce him to be 
a fiction to suit the occasion. The account of hie achievement ja 
here given in one of the eanonical formulas of arahantship. See 8, yi, 
p. vii (B.). 

7 Consisting, says G., of food. He gives o picture of how she 
decorated the house to set off her offering, 

12 


178 The Brahma Suttas [TEXT i, T4I 


What babblest thou*. unwitting of the way, 

QO brahminee, unto the Brahma world ? 

Lo here ! this Brahmadeva, son of thine, 

A man who ne'er will see another world,* 

A man who past the gods hath won his way; 

An almsman who doth nothing call his own, 
Nor other soul beside himself maintains:-— 

This man into thy house hath come for alms, 
Worthy of offerings, verséd in the Lore,’ 

With faculties developed and controlled, 

Meet for oblations from both gods and men, 
True brahmin— barring all things evil out —* 
By evil undefiled, grown calm and cool, 

He moveth on his quest for sustenance. 

There is no after, no before for him,® 

He is at peace, no fume of vice is his ;° 

He is untroubled, rid of hankering; 

All force renouncing toward both weak and strong.’ 
Let him enjoy the choice meats thou hast served. 


By all the hosts of evil unassailed,* 
His heart at utter peace, he goes about 


* Joppes. 

' Brahma-gods are maintained by Jhiina-raptore (sappittkaj- 
jhduena), and the way to attain their world is by the Four Jhainas of 
morit (Eusalajjhanand), Comy. CY. above, IV, 2, § 8, 

2 A free rendering of nirupadhike;: * without birth-substrate.’ 

% Fadi, Veda-goer, borrowed from bralimin terminology, Veda 
means also * feeling,’ hence Comy. : ‘gone to the end of sorrow by the 
Four Paths '—just an exegetical definition. 

4 ¢ The usual exegetical definition of bnikmeno : bdheted, * having put 
outside.’ See D. iii, 93, § 22. 

6 ‘No past, no future: deprived af desire and lust for mental and 
bodily aggregates such us they have been and will be.’ Comy. (Or 
ef. above, I, 1, § 10, 

@ Sy. ver, 1048 (tre. 1047), 

7 * Even if he nse a staff (dando, lit, staff, is used symbolically for 
force; cf. Tl, 1, § 1, *despot's weapons’), he has no will to injure 
with it.” Comy. Cf. Pas. of the Brethren, p. 323, 0. 1. 

* Sn. ver. 794 (tre. 793). Commentators of both works agree. 


Vi, I, § 4] Baka Brahma 79 


Like taméd elephant, with vices purged. 
Almsman most virtuous, and with heart well freed- 
Let him enjoy the choice meats thou hast served. 


On him so worthy of the gift do thou, 

In confidence unwavering, bestow thy gift. 
Work merit and thy future happiness, 
Now that thou seest here, O brahminee, 
A sage by whom the flood is overpaased.! 


On? lim so worthy of the gift did she, 

In confidence unwavering bestow her gift. 

Merit she wrought, her future happiness, 
, When [at her door] the brahminee beheld 

A sage by whom the flood was over passed. 


§ 4. Baka the Brahma god. 


Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying at 
Savatthi, in the Jeta Grove, Anathapindika’s Park. 

Now at that time there arose in the mind of Baka the 
Brahma god,? evil, erroneous notions, to wit: ‘ This [Brahma- 
life] is permanent and stable; this is eternal, this is absolute, _, 
this is influctuate in its nature; in this [life] there is no birth, 
nor decay, nor death; no falling from, nor rising up to; and 
beyond this there is no further salvation."4 

Then the Exalted Ont, discerning by thought the thoughts 
ol Bake the Brahma, like as a strong man might stretch forth 
his bent arm, or bend his arm stretched forth, vanished from 
Jeta’s Grove, and appeared in the Brahma world. 

Then Baka the Brahma saw tl: Exalted One coming afar 
- Hf, and he called to him: * Come, my lore ! weleome, my lord ! 

171, 1. § 1. 

* The concluding verses aro assigned by B, to the ‘ Counecil-com- 
pilers’ of thia Book of the Suttas. 

* On this god see M. i, 328. The episode and verses form the 
* Baka-brahma Jataka,” Jal. iii, 359 (trs. 219). 

4 Oy. 8. iii, 85. 


150 The Brahma Suttas [TEXT i, 142: 


lone is it, my lord, since thou madest occasion to come this 
way. [See], my lord, this [Brahma-life| ts permanent and 
stable; this is eternal, this is absolute, this is influctuate im tts 
nature; in this [life] there is no birth, nor decay, nor death; 
no falline from, nor rising up to; and beyond this there 1s no 
further salvation.’ | 

To him, so saying, the Exalted One spake thus: * Alaa, the 
good Brahma Baka is very ignorant! Alas, the good Brahma 
Baka is very ignorant! Inasmuch as he will be saying that 
something which is impermanent is permanent; that some- 
thing which is unstable is stable; that something which is 
temporal is eternal; that something which is telative 15 
absolute: that something from which one is bound to fall, 
admits not of decease. Where there is birth, decay, death, 
decease and rebirth, of such « life will he be speaking as he 
does :—-that no such things happen. And whereas there is 
another salvation beyond this, he will be saying that there 
is ne other auch ! 


[Baka :—] 
We seventy-two.) Gotama, from our good works 
Rule o’er the world, birth and old age transcending. 
This is our last Veda-won life as Brahmas; 

Many the folk off'ring us prayers and prhises.* 


[The Exalted One :—] 
Brief is this life; verily length pertaineth 
Not to this life, deemed by thee, Baka, so lengthy, 
‘Gainst the life waiting for thee? 0 Brahma, 
As I discern, lasting through countless ages. 


[Baka :-—] 
If thou be th’ Exalted One, birth and old age 
Transcending, then thine is the infinite vision. 
' Hee asa tycesnee Ais seyabantot tha wiitet (Maha) Brahms ? 
* Abhijappanti; ‘lifting joined hands toward us, glorifying us, 
aspiring to be aa we are.” Comy. 
1 Tova avasitthay ettakey dyun fi ahay jandmi, Comy. On the 
* countless ages * see computations in Jat, Comy, loc, cit, 


*/ 


Vit, § 4] Baka Brahma 181 


What help brought me rites and good works aforetime 
Do thou declare this so that I may learn it. 


[The Evalted One :-—] 
When many men, thirsty and heat-tormented, 
Thou in the past gaveat to drink [and saved them]: 
Lo! this was thy “ rites and good works aforetime-’ 
As one from sleep newly awaked I remember.* 


At Antelope Bank,” when the village was raided, 
Thou didst release folk bound and led off captive; 
Lo! this was thy ‘rites and good works aforetime.: 
As one from sleep newly awaked I remember. 


When mystic force wielding thou didst deliver 

In Ganga’s stream, vessel and crew assailed, 

By eruel snake fain to devour men victims: 

Lo! this was thy ‘ rites and good works aforetime.’ 
As one from sleep newly awaked ] remember. 


And I, by name Kappa, was once thy pupil, 
Intelligent, wise did his teacher deem him:* 


1 1 think this is more sccurately rendered than the Jiitaka trans- 
lation, and agreea better with the emphntic refrain in the Buddha's 
reply:—This was... ‘*Tf" and ‘thine is" are inserted from the 
Comy. Metrical exigencies, perhaps, have rendered the Pali stanza 
a little obacure, * You, being as you aay, so far-socing as to my life, 
tell me which of my past good deeds brought me here.’ According 
to B., ealasileratiay is juat siley, Fafa can séarcely mean the exple- 
tive rata J just hore, aa Feer acems to have thought. I prefer to let 
it stand os * rites * that were really fruitful, to wit, brave deeds. The 
8. and Jat, Commentariea elaborate the legends alluded to. In the 
firat three cases, Baka in a former birth as the hermit Kesava exerta 
magic power, bringing a stream past the parched, strayed caravan, 
making dacoits see a vision of royal police approaching, and scaring 
away the snake a5 4 Garuda-bird. The fourth instance is explained 
in the Keaoea Jilaka (iii, 141 f.; tes, 09 f.). 

2‘ Asifit were adraam.” dt. Comy. 

« Eni-kilasmig (Jat. xic):—our Comy.:—Gangi-tire ‘wa. Jat. 
Comy.t-—Eniyd adma nadiyd bale, 

' Again | suggest a better rendering than that of the Jittaka trans- 
lation, The point of the allusion is, not that Kappa thought Kesava 


182 The Brahma Suttas [TEXT i, T44 


Lo ! this was thy ‘rites and good works aforetime.’ 
As one from sleep newly awaked I remember. 


[ Baka -—] 
O this my life surely thou understandest ! 
Yea, thou dost know others, since thou art wakened.t 
Yea, hence prevails round us thy mighty glory, 
Radiance it sheds over the world of Brahmas. 


§ 5. Another false opinion. 


On another occasion, at Sivatthi, the evil and erroneous 
notion had occurred to a certain Brahma: ‘No recluse or 
brahmin can come here.’ 

Then the Exalted One, learning by thought the thoughts 
of that Brahmi, like as a strong man might stretch forth his 
bent arm, or draw in his arm stretched out, vanished from 
Jeta’s Grove, and appeared in the Brahma world. And the 
Exalted One seated himself cross-legged in the air above that 
Brahma, flames radiating from his body.* 

Now it occurred to the venerable Moggallina the Great: 
‘ Where is the Exalted One now abiding?" And with the 
heavenly eye, purified, passing the sight of men, he saw the 
Exalted One, seated above that Brahma, flames radiating 
from his body. Then, seeing him there, the venerable Mog- 
gallana, like as a strong man... vanished from Jeta’s 
Grove, and See in the Brahma world; and‘seated him- 


—e weak creature—wise, but that Kesava set sje: store on Kappa’s 
intelligence and character, and so reported to the King. The Jit. 
text reads amafiay, ‘I deemed." The Br. has amatiia, whieh is 
both Ist and 2nd person, If the verse is quoting Kesava’s report, 
the Ist person is right. 

| Buddho, 

2 Tejodhainy samapejjitra: ‘having attained to the sphere, or 
elemental condition, of heat." By this technical phrase it is implied 
that, making the self-hypnotizing preamble (parikamma) of fixing 
sensé and mind on fire, Jhina was induced and, with it, * the power 
at will to emit fire from the whole body* Comy. Cf. Pas. of the 
Sisera, p. 112, 


WI, T, $5] False Opinions 183 


self cross-legged in the air eastward of and lower than the 
Exalted One, flames radiating from his body. 

And Kassapa the Great, and Kappina the Ureat, and 
Anurnddha2 wondering, each to himself where the Exalted 
One might be abiding, discerned him after the same fashion, 
and each of them... appeared in the Brahma world and 
seated themselves cross-legged in the air above that Brahma, 
the first to the south, the second to the west, the third to the 
north of, and all of them lower than the Exalted One, flames 
radiating from their bodies. 

Then the vencrabla Moggallana addressed that Brahma in 


9. Veree — 


Dost hold even to-day, my friend, the views 
Which heretofore are views that thou hast held ! 
Dost thou behold, in this thy Brahmi-world, 
The dazzling sheen whereby 't is all excelled ! 


[The Brahma :—] 
My lord, no longer do I hold the views 
Which heretofore are views that I have held. 
I do behold, in this my Brahma world, 
The dazzling sheen whereby ‘t is all excelled. 
How were it possible for me to-day 
‘Tam eternal! I am permanent!’ to say ? 


Then the Exalted One, having agitated that Brahma, like 
a strong man might stretch out his bent arm . - ., vanished 
from the Brahmin world and appeared in Jeta’s Grove. 

Then the Brahma admonished one of his retinue, saying: 
‘Come, dear sir, do thou approach the venerable Moggallina 
the Great, and say unto him: “ Are there, my lord Moggal- 


\ These four great Brethren were by their leader declared foremost, 
reapectively, in magic power, ssesticiam, preaching to the Order and 
the ‘celestial eye.” A. i, 25. 

2 This context waa overlooked in Pss. of the Brethren, p. 392 f.; 
hence the verses are slightly inaccurate, the ‘ views’ in question being 
held up to the moment when the splendid visitors proved them false. 


184 The Brahma Suttas [TEXT i, 146 


lina, yet other disciples of that Exalted One as gifted and as 
mighty as the lords Moggallina, Kassapa, Kappina, and 
Anuruddha ?”" * 

‘Even eo, dear sir, did that attendant Brahma make 
response, And he fulfilled the behest. To him thus asking, 
the venerable Moggallina the Great addressed this verse — 


Disciples of the Buddha many they 

Who threefold lore have won and magic sway; 
Are skilled the thoughts of other minds to read, 
Are Arahants, in whom the Drugs are dead.* 


Then that Brahma, delighted and grateful that these words 
were spoken, repaired to the great Brahma and said: “ My 
lord, thus and thus did the venerable Moggallina the Great 
reply. And the great Brahmi was delighted at that which 
the attendant Brahma told him. 


§ 6. Infatuation. 


On another occasion, at Sivatthi, the Exalted One was 
meditating during the noonday heat. 

Now two* independent Brahmas, Subrahmé and Suddha- 
vasa, had come to see the Exalted One, and they waited one 
at each post of the door." And Subrahmi said to Suddha- 
visa: ‘ Dear sir, not yet ia it a fitting time to wait upon the 
Exalted One. He is meditating during the noonday heat. 


! Enumerating the six *super-knowledges’ (abhinna) But it is 
curious that the sixth ood last should be mentioned twiee, und the 
‘eclestial ear" (supernormil hearing) be left out. For B. confirms 
the fact (commenting ou A. i, 160-5), that * threefold lore *‘—a brah- 
minic idiom annexed by Bucdhises—moeant super-memory, celestial 
eye, and destruction of Asavas (* drugs"). Nevertheless he dovs not 
note the omission here, The detailed order followed in the Sayywtta- 
Widdiga (see ii, 121; 212) is ‘ magic power (iddht), the * ear, telepathy, 
uper-memory, the ‘eye, drug-iminuanity—the aims oa that followed 
in Dialogues, i, 88 f.; ef, 2. tii, 291. 

* Pacceka-lraimd. 1 have no traditional explanation to give of 
thie species, 

" Comy.: * like sentries," 


vi, I, $6] Infatuation 185 


There is such and such a Brahma-world, blissful and pros- 
perous, where dwells an infatuated Brahma.’ Come, dear sir, 
let us go to that world that we may agitate that Brahma. 
Suddhavisa consented and, like a strong man might stretch 
out his bent arm... they two vanished from before the 
fixalted One and appeared in that world. 

Now that Brahma saw those Brahmas coming from afar 
and called to them: “ How now, dear sira! whence come ye U 

‘We, dear sir, come from the neat presence of that Exalted 
One, Arahant Buddha Supreme, But thou, dear sir, shouldst 
go to wait upon that Exalted One, Arahant Buddha Supreme.’ 

Then the Brahma, not brooking such words, reproduced 
himself a thousand times? and said to Subrahmi: * Dost thou 
not see, dear sir, what the might of my magic power is like ? 

‘1 see, dear sir, what thy might and thy magic power are 
like.’ 

‘| then, dear sir, being so great in magic power, so greab 
in might, to what other, recluse or brahmin, should such as I 
co to present myself ?° 

Then Subrahma the independent Brahma reproduced him- 
self two thousandfold and said to the Brahma: * Dost thou 
not see, dear sir, what my magic power and majesty are 
like #7 | 

‘T see, dear sir, what thy magic power and majesty are 
like.” | 

* Now this Exalted One, dear sir, is greater in magic power 
and majesty than both thee and me. Thou shouldst go, dear 
sir, to present thyself to that Exalted One, Arahant Buddha 
Supreme.” 

Then that Brahma addressed a verse to Subrahma:— 


(In sculptured frieze reck'ning] the tiers by hniicined 
OF fairwing * birds? three, and four of famingoes, 


ee = 


a 


| Comy. + * self-satiefied with his own power and glory.’ 

* Qn this form of iddhi, of, Pas. of the Brethren, ver. 563, Jat. 1, 
114 (tira, 14). 

2 Supapnd, identified by Childers with the mythical Garuli, or 
Garuda, the mythical roc-like bird of India. 


186 The Brahma Suttas [rext i, 148 


And five of tigresses all fierily glowing, 
This heavenly fane shineth afar, O Brahma, 
Over the north firmament shedding a glory. 


[ Subrahima :—] 
Albert thy heavenly fane far shineth, 
Over the North firmament shedding a glory, 
He beauteous in wisdom,? discerning canker* 
In visible objects material, ever 
To fluctuate doomed, therein takes no pleasure. 


So Subrahmi and Suddhavasa, independent Brahmas, 
having agitated that Brahma, vanished there and then. And 
that Brahma on a later occasion came to present himself 
before the Exalted One, Arahant Buddha Supreme. 


§ 7. The Kokalikan. 


On another occasion, at Savatthi, the same two Brahmas, 
when the Exalted One had retired to meditate during the 
noonday heat, came to see him and waited one at each post 
of the door. 

And in the presence of the Exalted One, Subrahma spoke 
this verse concerning the Kokalikan brother? — 


Who can determine, who here understand, 
When meas ring him of whom measure there's none ? 
Clogged and confused the average man, methinks, 


Who to th’ illimitable limit lays. 


1'The Comy. reads cyagghiniyd paticesaliti pailea vyagghiniya- 
panti stdm . .. eyagghasediaa ekaece mia vyagghiniya nima. Why 
hot tigers % Or should we read ryagghin “teed (* tagress-deer")? For 
iss of, Jat. v, 427. The fives refer either to the number of statues 
(edpa’s), or to the rows of them. And Subr.'s reply is o play on the 
word ripa, which menns also material, and visible things in 


* Comy. : ° tha Master,” (/. above, VI, 1, § 1: ° 0 Wisdom F'air." 
* Rana 
3 On the Kokalikan’s libel sce below, 5 10. 


VI, I, $8] Tudu Brahma 187 


& 8, Tissaka, 
On another oceasion, at Savatthi, they came again .. . 
and Subrahma, in the presence of the Exalted One, spoke 
this verse concerning Katamoraka-Tissaka>— 


Who can determine, who can understand, 

When meas’ring him of whom measure there’s none ! 
Clogged and without wisdom® is he, methinks, 

Who to th’ illimitable limit lays. 


§ 9. Tudy Brahma. 


On another occasion, when the Exalted One was staying at 
Savatthi, the Kokalikan bhikkhu' was afflicted, suffering and 
very ill. 

Then Tudu, the independent Brahma,* when the night was 
far spent, shedding radiance with his effulgent beauty over 
the entire Jeta Grove, drew near to the Kokalikan blukkhu. 
And, standing in the air, he spoke thus to the Kokalikan: 
* Put thy heart's trust, Kokalika, in Siriputta and Moggal- 
lina! Lovely are Sariputta and Moggallina !' 

‘Who art thou, friend 7 

‘Tam Tudu, independent Brahma.’ 

‘ Wast thou not, friend, declared by the Exalted One to be 
a Never-Returner? Why then, what dost thou in that thou 
hast returned to this world? Behold what a mistake thou 


hast herein committed !’4 
' See § 10. 
* Akivaaray. 


* See above, § 6, 1. B. states that this deva had been the tutor 
of the ailing man, and that having won, as man, to the Third Fruition 
(that of never returning to earth), he was after death reborn in Brahmi 
world (to pass utterly awny in some * higher" heaven). 

1 Comy.: The Kokflikan thought: “he comes to chide me, not dis- 
cerning the boil on his own forehead.’ ‘Tudu perceives the wretol is 
too ill for admonixhing, and pronounces over him the sweeping Aaser 


é 


188 The Brahma Suttas [TEXT i, T49. 
[Tudic -—] 


In sooth to every man that’s born 
A hatchet grows within his mouth, 
Wherewith the fool, whene’er he speaks 
And speaks amiss, doth cut himself. 
He who the blameworthy doth praise, 
Or who the praiseworthy doth blame, 
Builds by his mouth his evil doom, 
And by that doom he finds no weal, 
Tritting the evil luck! of one 
Who by the dice doth lose his wealth. 
But greater far his evil luck, 
Taking his all and eke Inmeelf, 
Who ‘gainst the Blessed Sainta on earth 
Doth set his heart at enmity. 
For vaster epochs doth he go— 
A hundred thousand years and eke® 
Thirty and six, and yet five more— 
To life in purgatory, who, 
In thought and word on wrong intent, 
Utters abuse of Ariyans.* 


§ 10. The Kokalikan. 


On another occasion, at Savatthi, the Kokalikan bhikkhu,* 
coming into the presence of the Exalted One, saluted him 
and took hig seat at one side. And so seated said thus to 


F 

' Kali, rendered here also as * evil doom.” 

* On these epochs: piroiteda and abbuda—see § 10. I have no 
tlue to the curiously untidy precision of the periods stated. For 
paticn read ganied ee. 

7 The versea, repeated in § 10, oocur (1) in A. ¥, 171, where §§ 9 and 
10 form one sutta; (2) in Se. ver. 657-00; (9) in A. ii, 3, the first gatha- 
excepted. 

* This-popular story is also told in Sw. :—Kokdliya sutta, Maha- 
vagga, 1), in A. v, 170, and in Jat. ivy, No, 481, os the Takkiriya. 
Jitake, B. states that the Kokilikan bhikkhu was oa native of a 
kingdom and city called Rokali, and the son of o seifhi (leading citizen): 


VI, I, § 10) The Kokalikan 189 


the Exalted One: * Wicked, lord, in their desires are Saniputta 
and Moggallina! They are ruled by wicked desires ! 

Then said the Exalted One to the Kokalikan bhikkhu: 
‘Say not so,) Kokilikan, say not so! Put thy heart's trust* 
in Sariputta and Moggallina. Lovely® are Sariputta and 
Moggallina !’ 

But the Kokalikan bhikkhu spoke a second time thus to the 
Exalted One: * Even though, lord, the Exalted One be trust- 
worthy and his word teliable,* yet wicked, I say, in their 
desires are Sariputta and Moggallina, and ruled by wicked 
desires 1’ 

The Exalted One spoke a second time thus to the Koka- 
likan bhikkhu: ‘Say not so, Kokflikan, say notso! Put thy 
heart’s trust in Siriputta and Moguullina! Lovely are Sari- 
putta and Moggallina I’ 

But the Kokalikan bhikkhu spoke the same words yet once 
again, and the Exalted One answered him in the same words. 

Then ¢he Kokalikan bhikkhu, rising from his seat, saluted 
the Exalted One by the right and departed. 

And soon after, the Kokalikan’s entire frame was covered 
with pustules like mustard seed. From the size of mustard 
seed they increased to that of amall beans, to that of chick- 
peas, to that of kolatthi’s, to that of jujube-fruit, to that of 


also so-called! Also that he waa sof the pupil ot Devadatta (see 
Vin. Verte, ii, 251), but was known os Colla-Kokilika, to distinguish 
him from Maha-Kokilika, the former, who was of the brahmin clnas. 
He then gives 4 concise account of the Kokilikan’s grievance, more 
fully told in the Jdiaba Comy, 

1 Jie. ma dha evay, Comy. i mei eoay mbhawi, FausbOll (SBx, X, 
p- 118) evidently read: md hi evap. 

* + Charity,’ in the Jitaka translation is scarcely correct. The 
verb pa-sed ia constantly used to express ‘ faith, trust, confidence in.’ 

9 Pesold, not‘ amiable’ (Pausbdll, op. ci.), but ‘sweetly virtuous * 
(piya-sild), Comy. 

‘So our text and Comy, Tho Jidlaka Comy. has: ‘Thou, Lord, 
believest in thy chief disciples.’ 

3 ‘Why? Through the mighty power of Karma. When once 
Karma gets “ room," no one can thrust it off. It gave him no longer 
there to remain.” Comy. 


190 The Brahma Suttas [TEXT i, 150 


myrobalan, to that of unripe vilva fruit, to that of billa fruit. 
Whereupon they broke and discharged pus and blood. Then 
the Kokalikan bhikkhu died of that disease, and being dead 
he was reborn in the White Lotus Purgatory for that he had 
hardened his heart against Siriputta and Moggallina. 

Thereupon Brahmi Sahampati, when the night was far 
spent, shedding radiance with his effulgent beauty over the 
entire Jeta Grove, drew near to the Exalted One, and saluting, 
stood at one side and said: * The Kokalikan bhikkhn, lord, is 
dead, and bemg dead he is reborn in the White Lotus Purga- 
tory, for that he did harden his heart against Sariputta and 
Moggallana.’ 

And having so said, Brahma saluted, and passing round to 
left, vanished there and then. 

Then the Exalted One, when the night had passed, addressed 
the brethren, telling them of the visit of Brahma Sahampati 
and of what he had announced. And when he had thus 
spoken, @ certain brother asked the Exalted One: * How long, 
lord, is the measure of life in the White Lotus Purgatory ?’ 

"Long indeed, bhikkhu, is the measure of life im the White 
Lotus Purgatory. Not easy 1s it to reckon how many years, 
or centuries, or tens or thousands of centuries.’ 

‘Can we reckon it by means of a figure, lord ?” 

“We can, bhikkhu,’ said the Exalted One. * Suppose there 
were a load of twenty kharis' as we reckon them here in Kosala, 
of sesamum seed, And suppose at the end of every century 
fi were to take out one seed atatime. Sooner, bhikkhu, 
would that same load be used up and finished than [a term in] 
the Abbuda Purgatory.* Nov one term in the Nirabbuda 
_urgatory is equal to twenty in Abbuda Purgatory; one term 


' According to the Comy., the Kosalan menasuic , from a patiha 
upwards, were four times the bulk of those used in Magadho. ‘Twenty 
tharfa= | kAdrike, or cartload of tila-seeds of the small Magadhese 
variety. Of. Rhys Davids: Ancient Coins, efc., § 32. 

2 These names do not represent separate hells (pdfivetbo nirayo 
naithi), but only periods of time in Avichi (the general term for the 
informal regions; ¢f. Bud. Pay, Eth., p. 334) apportioned to each en- 
trant by the automatic working of Karma, Comy. 


a 


VI, 2, § 1] The Eternal Youth 191 


in Ababa Purgatory is equal to twenty in Nirabbuda Purga- 
tory; one term in Atata Purgatory is equal to twenty in Ababa 
Purgatory; one term in Ahaha Purgatory is equal to twenty in 
Atata Purgatory; one term in Water-lily Purgatory ts equal 
to twenty in Ahaha Purgatory; and so on for the Sogandhika, 
Blue Lotus, and White Lotus Purgatories. And one term in 
Red Lotus Purgatory is equal to twenty in White Lotus Pur- 
vatory. But it is in White Lotus Purgatory, bhikkhu, that 
the Kokalikan bhikkhu has been reborn, for that he hardened 
his heart against Sariputta and Moggallina.’ 

Thus spake the Exalted One. And thereupon the Blessed 
Master spake thus:— 


In sooth to every man that's bern 

A hatchet grows within his mouth, 
Wherewith the fool, whene’er he speaks 
And speaks amiss, doth cut himself. 

He who the blameworthy doth praise. 
_. « ete. (az an § 9, 1). 


9. THe QUINTUPLET. 


$1. The Eternal Youth. 


Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying at 
Rajagaha, on the banks of the Snake River.' 

Now Brahma Sanankumara,® when the night was far spent, 
shedding radiance by his efiulgent beauty over tl entire 


Sappeni, lit. she-snake. On thie littl (Comy.) river seo Vin. 
Terts, i, 24, n. 2. 

2 Lit, the ‘ever-boy’ or youth. On this god see Dialogues, 1, 121, 
w. 1. 3B. relutea that in the day of the youth Five-Crest (Pareastha- 
kuméara-kale), be from practice of Jhana was reborm in Brahmi-world, 
and retained the appearance of 4 boy, . And from retaining this per- 
petually le wos called ‘ Eternal-Boy.’ 


192 The Brahma Suttas [TEXT i, 153 


Snake River shore, came into the presence of the Exalted One, 
and saluting him, stood at one side and spake this verse 
before him :— 


As is the noble ranked the best among 
~The folk who pin their faith on breed and clan, 
So he who walks in lore and conduct versed 
Stands first in worlds of gods or world of man.* 


So spake he, and the Master approved. 

Then Brahmi Sanankumara noting: “ The Master approves 
of my words!" saluted by the right, and there and then 
vanished, 

§ 2. Devadatta. 


The Exalted One was once staying at Rajagaha, on Vul- 
ture’s Peak Hill, not long after Devadatta had left the Order? 
Now Brahma Sahampati, when the night was far spent, 
shedding radiance with his effulgent beauty over the whole 
of Vulture’s Peak Hill till nicht was far spent, came into the 
presence of the Exalted One, and saluting and standing at one 
side, spake this verse before the Exalted One concerning 
Devadatta :— 
As is the plantain, bamboo, and the rush 
Kach by the fruit it bears undone, 
So is the sinner by men’s homage slain, 
As by her embryo is the mule. 


‘0. Dialogues, i, 122; . iii, 03; Mi, 358; * Lore*=wvijja, a word 
referring usually, both for brahmin and Buddhist, to some articulate 
body of doctrine: Vedas, spells, runes, or, for the latter of the two, to 
practical doctrines, such as are act out, B. reminds us, in the Bhaya- 
bherava Sutta (M. i, 22 f.), or the Ambatthn-Sutta (Dialogues, i, 122; 
rijja—* wisdom"), or the cight wipja's (seo Childers’ Dict. s.e.), or the 
seven saddhammas (M. i, 354) and the four Thinas, 

? Jie. for the hill Gaya-sisa, taking 500 seceding bhikkhus with him. 
Vin, ‘Testa, iii, 258. 

7 These figures are more amply stated in prose in &. ii, 241; A, ii, 73, 
followed by the verm. The fourth figure is not so obvious as the 
others, Assateri is stated by B. to be the offspring of on oss and a 


VI, 2, § 3] Andhakavinda 193 . 


$3. Andhakevinda. 


The Exalted One was once staymg among the Magadhese, 
at Andhakavinda.? And on that occasion he was seated under 
the open sky in the darkness of might, while the god wag rain- 
ing drop by drop. | 

Then Brahma Sahampati, who by his effulzent beauty had 
been irradiating all Andhakavinda till night was far spent, 
came into the presence of the Exalted One, and saluting and 
standing at one side, spoke these verses before him:— 


Seek ye the lonely haunts remote from men. 
Practise the life of liberty from Bonds. 
Tf there ye come not by your heart's desire, 
Dwell with the Brethren mindful and controiled.* 
Seeking your alms ‘mong clansmen, house to house, 
Prudent and heedful, gaarded as to sense, 
Seek ye the lonely haunts remote from men, 
From fear released, in fearléssiess set free.* 
Where dreadful serpents [glide] and lightnings roam 
On high and god doth thunder in the night, 
The blinding blackness of the mght, there aits 
The brother rid of all Hesh-creeping fear. 
Yea, by my troth this have I seen, no hearsay this:? 
In one communion bound of holy life* 
A thousand [saints who had) abandoned death ;? 
Disciples too of these, five hundred, yea, 
And more, ten hundred, yea, and ten times that, 
Who all had reached the stream, the holy Way, 

1 Of. Fin, Texts, i, 254, 0. 2. 


® See IV, 1,32, 9. 1. 
4 = Psa, of the Brethren, ver. 143, ascribed to Cunda the Croat. 


(Cf. xxxix f.).° To sean, read aatinud. 


4 From fear and peril of atyeire, the round of rebirth, . . . freed in 
Nibbana (A-bhaya, the peril-less, or fearless), Comy. 
§ Je. ‘not by dinlectic, nor basket-achievement' (handing on aa 
tradition). Comy. 
" Kke-dhomma-desond, Comy. 
7 Comy, += mannyo-~paricedginay, 
13 


194 The Brahma Suttas (TEXT i, 154 


Nor could again as animals be born,t 

And for the rest, the sons of men endowed 
With merit due®:—my mind eufficeth not 
To count, fearful lest men should say T lie. 


§ 4. Arutiavaft. 


Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying 
at Savatthi... and on that occasion the Exalted One 
addressed the brethren: ‘ Bhikkhus!’ ‘Lord! they made 
reply. And the Exalted One said: 

‘In days gone by, bhikkhus, [ was a king named Arunavat. 
Now this king had o royal residence named Arunavati. And 
near it was staying Sikhin,? the Exalted One, Arahant Buddha 
Supreme. Now Sikhin had a pair of disciples, chief, elect, 
named Abhibhut and Sambhava. And Sikhin addressed 
Abhibhu, saying: ‘ Brahmin, let us go to one of the Brahma- 
worlds till the time comes for a meal.” ‘ Even ao, lord,’ 
replied Abhibhu, and like as a strong man would stretch forth 
his bent arm, or bend his arm stretched forth, so did they 
twain vanish from Arunavati, the king’s residence, and appear 
in that Brahmi-world. Then said Sikhin, the Exalted 
One ... to Abhibhu bhikkhu: ‘ Let there occur to thee, 
brahmin, # religious discourse for this Brahma and his company 
and his attendants.” ‘Even so, lord,’ replied Abmbhu 
bhikkhu. And he therewith instructed, enlightened, incited, 
aud inspired the Brahma, his company, and his attendants 
with a religious discourse. But forsooth the Brahma, his - 

i *Symbolical for rebirth in misery.” Comy. 

= Je. all who, without themselves entering the Path, at least acquire 
merit through intercourse with those that have entered, 

1 OY. Pes. of the Sisters, p. 31, and the form Aruna for Arunavat. 

4 Cf. Dialogues, ii, p. 7. Sikhin was the second of those seven Bud- 
dhas of whom the oldest books take cognizance. Abhibhu's versea ore 
ascribed, in the Theragdthd, to Abhibhiitu (sre Pas. of the Arethren,, 
170 f.). On Ananda’s query, how far his great powers bore relation to 
those of a Buddha, see A. i, 227 f. Our Comy. representa him «4 
choosing for his theme human setion and energy, because it would 
commend itself, as such, to all his hearers, gods and men. 


VI, 2, § 4] Arunavati 195 


company, and his attendants were thereupon offended, 
utmoyed, irritated, saying: “ O but this is a wondrous thing! 
O but this is a strange thing! How shall a disciple preach a 
religion in the presence of his Master © 

Then Sikhin told Abhibhu what they were feeling and think- 
ing, and added: “ Wherefore now, do thou, brahmin, agitate 
them exceedingly.’ 

* Even so, lord,’ replied Abhibhu, and continued to preach 
now with a visible, now with an invisible body, now with a 
body, the lower half only of which was visible, now with a 
body, the upper half only of which was visible. 

Then the hearts of the Brahma, his company, and his 
attendants, were filled with wonder and marvel: ‘ O but this 
is a wondrous thing! © but this is 4 marvellous thing:— 
the great magic power and might of the recluse !’ 

And Abhibhu bhikkhu said to Sikhin the Exalted One: 
‘| profess, lord, that using just such speech as if I were speak- 
ing in the midst of [a gathering of] our Order, I am able as I 
stand in the Brahma-world to make its thousand realms hear 
my voce." 

‘ This is the hour for it, brahmin, this is the hour in which 
standing in the Brahmii-world thou mayest make its thousand 
realms hear thy voice.’ 

* Even so, lord, rephed Abhibhu bhikkhu., And standing 
in the Brahma-world he uttered these verses:— 


Bestir yourselves, rise up, renounce and come, 
And yield your hearts unto the Buddha's rule. 
Shake off the armies of the king of death 

As doth the elephant a reed-thatched shed.! 
Whoso within this Norm and Diserpline, 

Shall ever strenuous and earnest live, 
Rebirth’s eternal round put far away, 

All pain and suffering he shall end for aye. 


Thereupon, bhikkhus, Sikhin the Exalted One, Arahant 
Buddha Supreme, and Abhibhu bhikkhu, having agitated the 


1 oy. Pas. of the Brethren, ver, 1147. 


196 The Brahma Suttas [TEXT i, 157 


Brahma, his company and his attendants, like as a strong man 
might stretch forth his bent arm... vanished from that 
Brahma-world and appeared at Arunavati. 

Then Sikhin the Exalted One addressed the brethren: 
“Thd ye hear, bhikkhus, the verses uttered by Abhibhu 
bhikkhu whiles he was standing in Brahma-world ? 

* We did hear, lord, the verses he so spoke.’ 

‘And what, bhikkhus, were the verses that ye heard him 
utter ? 


*™ Beatir yourselves, rise up, renownce and come 
And yield your hearts unto the Buddha's rule. 
Shake off .. . 

. he shall end for aye.” 


* These, lord, were the verses that we heard Abhibhu 
bhikkhu utter, whilea he was standing in Brahma-world.’ 

* Well done, bhikkhus, well done! Well did ye hear the 
verses uttered by Abhibhu bhikkhu whiles he was standing in 
Brahma-world,’ 

Thus spake the Exalted One. And the gladdened blikkhus 
were delighted by the sayings of the Exalted One. 


$5. The Utter Passing away. 

The Exalted One was once staying at Kusinara, in the Upa- 
vattana silatree grove, among the Mallas, between the Twin 
Sidlatrees, and it was the occasion of his passing utterly away. 

Then! the Exalted One addressed the brethren: ‘Lo now, 


' This account is cerbotim that given in the Mahi-Parinibbina- 
Suttanta (Jialogues, i, 174 f.), down to * passed utterly away,” with 
this one diserepancy, that the Seyyutta does not represent the dying 
Master a8 reaching, in his successive ‘sphere’ conseiousnesses, to that 
of trance, before proceeding to the reversed succession. Our narra- 
tive omits the allusion, after the passing, to an earthquake, and resumes 
its parallelism with the Suttanta ot the four solemn pronouncements 
by the two gods and the two Theras. In these there are, again, two 
discrepancies:—Ananda here speaks before Anuruddha; in the latter's 
verse, the fifth line here is substituted for 


So made the Sage an end of life. 


vt,2,85] The Utter Passing Away 197 
bhikkhus, I exhort you:—earnestly accomplish! Transient 
are all the things of life !’ 

This wos the tast sword of the Tathagata. 

Then the Exalted One attained First Jhaina, and thence the 
Second, Third, Fourth Jhinas; thence in succession to the four 
spheres:—infinity of space, infinity of consciousness, nothing- 
ness, neither consciousness nor unconsciousness; thence in 
reverse order back to First Jhana; thence once more in for- 
ward order to Fourth Jhina. And emerging from Fourth 
Jhina he at once passed utterly away. 


Now when the Exalted One was utterly passed away, 
Brahma Sahampati spake this verse:— 


All creatures in the world shall lay aside 
The aggregate [as which they lived] as now 
Even the Master, even such as he, 

Person without a rival in the world, 
Tathagata, who won and wielded powers,* 
Buddha Supreme, hath wholly passed away. 


Now when the Exalted One had utterly passed away, 
Sakka, ruler of the gods, spake this verse :— 


Alas! impermanent is everything in lite! 
Growth is its very nature, and decay. 
They spring to being and again they cease. 
Happy the mastery of them and the peace. 


Now when the Exalted One had passed away, the venerable 
Ananda spake this verse:— 


0 then was terror, then was mighty dread, 
Then stiffened hair and quivered creeping nerve, 
When he, endowed with every crowning grace, 
The All-Enliehtened Buddha passed away ! 


1B, assigns this sentence to the Recensioniste. 
2 Cf. iv, 3, 92 


198 The Brahma Suttas [TEXT i, 159 


Now when the Exalted One had utterly passed away, the 
venerable Anuruddha spake these verses:— 


No heaving breath left as he lay, 

The mind in Jhana’s steadfast stay. 
With thought from every craving free, 
Fixed on the Peace incessantly, 

So passed the Man-who-saw away.' 
With mind unshaken as they came, 
He suffered pangs of death in peace; 
Stole o’er his heart the last release: 
Nibbana of the unfed fame. 


' The phrase here, parinibbuis, is much more canonical and orthodox 
usage than the kilam abiri (or abisi) of the parallel sacoount. The 
latter phrase is not, as a rule, used for an Arahant. 


CHAPTER VII 
THE BRAHMIN SUTTAS 


$l. The Dhanatijdm brahmonee. 

Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying 
near Rajagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, at the Squirrels’ Feed- 
ina-ground [ Vihira]. 

Now at that time a Dhanafijini brahminee,! the wife of a 
certain brahmin of the Bhiradvaja family, was a fervent 
believer in the Buddha, the Norm, and the Order. And she, 
while serving the Bharadvaja with his dinner,* came before 


| Many (MS8.), says 5., read Dhananjani, According to our Comy., 
the Dhananjini brahmins were one of the most aristocratic families 
(ukkajthagotti), claiming to have sprung not from the mouth, but 
from the splitting open of the head, of Brahma. Ono of them, 
farmer, also of Rijagaha, holds with Sariputta the dialogue entitled 
‘Dhanafjini-sutta,’ M. ii, 184 f. The heroine of our Sutta ia pre- 
sumably she who, in the Apaddina (Therig. Comy., 140, 273; Psa. of 
the Sistera, p. 177) is anid to have been, with her friends, Khemi and 
Sumedha, a pious benefactress in Koniigamana-Buddha's days. 

2 8, gives a Jataka-like legend of how she frequently broke out in 
this way, her husband closing his ears. On the eve of his giving m 
great banquet to many fellow-brahmina, he begged her to do what 
ahe liked so only she did not offend his guesta by her wddna, She 
could make no such undertaking, He threatened to slice her like a 
plantain with hia dagger. She declared herself ready to suffer, so she 
retained freedom of speech, and proceeded to pour forth 500 versea 
con her theme, #o that he surrendered unconditionally. While serving 
, the guests the dominant impulse arises, Bow! and golden spoon are 
laid down, and in the midst she turns saluting towards the Bamboo 
Grove and utters the Doxology. The scandalined guests hurry away, 
spitting out the food defiled by the presence of a heretic, and the 
husband scolds her amid the ruins of his feast. 

10 


200 The Brahmin Suttas [Text i, 160 


him and gave vent to the triple inspired utterance: Glory to 
that Exalted One Arahant Buddha Supreme ! 

Glory to the Norm ! 

Glory to the Order 2 

And when she had so said the Bharadvaja brahmin ex- 
claimed: “ There now ! at any and every opportunity must the 
wretch be speaking the praises of that shaveling friar! Now, 
wretch, will I give that teacher of thine a piece of my mind! 

‘O brahmin, | know of no one throughout the world of 
gods, Maras or Brahmas, recluses. or brahmins, no one 
human or divine, who could so admonish that Exalted One, 
Arahant, Buddha Supreme. Nevertheless, co thou, brahmin, 
and then thou wilt know.’ 

Then the Bhairadvaja, vexed and displeased, went to find 
the Exalted One; and coming into his presence, exchanged 
with him greetings and compliments, friendly and courteous, 
and satdown atone side, So seated, he addressed the Exalted 
One in a verse 2:— 


What must we slay if we would happy live ? 
What must we slay if we could weep no more ? 
What is t above all other things, whereof 

The slaughter thou approvest, Gotama ? 


[Phe Exalted One :—] 
Wrath must ye slay, if ye would happy lite, 
Wrath must ye slay, if ye would weep no more. 
Of anger, brahmin, with its poisoned source 
And fevered climax, murderously aweet, 
That is the slaughter by the Ariyans praised: 
That must ye slay in sooth, to weep no more. 


' These two lines are indicnted only by... pe. 

* Verses occurring above, I, 8, § 1; U1, 1, § 3, and below! AIT, 3, § 1. 
His idea, writes B., was to catch the Master on the horns of a dilemma. 
If he confessed approval of some kind of destruction, why was he ‘ in’ 
religion Y If of none, then he would leave lust, hote, and ignorance 
undestroyed—why aguin was be, with such views, in religion ? 


Vit, T, § 2] Arahants 201 


When the Exalted One had thus spoken, the Bhiradvaja 
brahmin said to him: ‘ Most excellent, lord, most excellent ! 
Just as if a man were to set up that which had been thrown 
down, or were to reveal that which was hidden away, or were 
to point out the right road to him who had gone astray, or 
were to bring a lamp into the darkness so that those who 
had eyes could see external objects—tven 50, lord, has the 
lord Gotama shown me his doctrine in various ways. T even 
L lord, betake myself to the Exalted One as my refuge, to the 
Norm and tothe Order! 1 would leave the world under [the 
Rule of] Gotama; I would take orders.’ 

So the Bharadvija brahmin left the world under the Exalted 
One. and was ordained. And not long after his ordination 
the venerable Bhairadvaja, remaining alone and separate, 
earnest, ardent and strenuous, attained [ere long] to that 
supreme goal of the higher life, for the sake of which the clans- 
men rightly go forth from home into the homeless; yea, that 
supreme goal did he by himself, even in this present life, come 
to understand and realize. He came to understand that re- 
birth was destroyed, that the holy life was being lived, that 
his task was done, that for life as we conceive it there was 
no hereatter.* 

And that Bhiradvaja became one of the Arahants. 


8 2. Reviliny- 


The Exalted One waa once staying near Rajagaha, in the 
Bamboo Grove, near the Squirrels’ Feeding-ground, 

Now ‘ Reviler’? of the Bharadvija brahmins heard that 
the Bharadvaja* had ‘left the world to enter the Order of 


' Of. thus far LIT, 1, § 1. 

2 cy. VU 1,93. 

2 Asoording to B. this soubriquet was bestowed on him by thease 
who organized the Councils (sangitiiirehe) to distinguish him (there are 
several Bhiradvajos in the records of early Buddhism) as the author 
of o lampoon of 50) verses aimed against the Buddha, 

4 Apparently the head of the clan (and presumably the convert of 
the preeeding Sutta). ‘My eldest brother being induced to follow the 
Samana Gotama isa loss to us, breaking up our party (pakbho).' Comy- 


peut The Brahmin Sutias [TEXT i, 162 


Gotama the Recluse. Vexed and displeased, he sought the 
presence of the Exalted One, and there reviled and abused 
the Exalted One in rude and harsh speeches." 

When he had thus spoken, the Exalted One said: “As to 
that what thinkest thou, brahmin? Dost thou receive visits 
from friends and colleagues, from thy kin by blood or by 
marriage, from [other] guests 7’ 

‘ Yes, Master Gotama, sometimes I do.’ 

‘As to that what thinkest thou, brahmin? Dost thou 
make ready for them food both dry and juicy, and opportunity 
for rest 2 

* Yes, Master Gotama, sometimes I do.’ 

‘ But if they do not accept [thy hospitality], brahmin, whose 
do those things become ?’ 

‘Lf they do not accept, Master Gotama, those things are 
for us. 

‘Even so here, brahmin. That wherewith thou revilest 
us who revile not, wherewith thou scoldest us who scold not, 
abusest us who abuse not, that we accept not at thy hands. 
"T is for thee only, brahmin, ‘t is only for thee! He, brahmin, 
who revileth again at his reviler, who scoldeth back, who 
abuseth, in return, him who hath abused:—this, brahmin, 
ia as if thou and thy visitors dined together and made good* 
We neither dine together with thee nor make good. ‘T is for 
thee only, brahmin, ‘t is only for thee !’ 

‘The king and his court believe that Gotama the recluse 
is an Arahant. And yet Master Gotama can indulge in 
wrath !'5 


1 "Saying, thou thief! thou fool! . .. thou camel! ... thon ass! 
the ten bases of abuse." (omy. 

* So the Comy. explains these terms: etafo bhutijali; botasaa pafi- 
carey erat. 

7 Bimbisira was a patron of the S&kyan (Buddhist) Order. But 
Reviler, says B., misunderstanding the repetition ‘"Tis for thee only 

" imagines that the Buddha, like an insulted seer of the tradli- 

tional kind, was pronouncing a curse on him (and not merely showing 
that curses, such as the bralimin’s, * come home to roost"). 


VI, T, § 3] Arahants 203 


[The Exalted One :-—] 
Whence! should wrath rise for him who, void of wrath, 
Holds on the even tenour of his way, 
Self-tamed, serene, by highest insight free ¢ 


Worse of the two ia he who, when reviled, 
Reviles again. Who doth not, when reviled, 
Revile again, a two-fold victory wins. 

Both of the other and himself he seeks 

The good; for he the other's angry mood 
Doth understand and groweth calm and still. 


He who of both is a physician, since 
Himself he healeth and the other too.— 
folk deem him fool, they knowing not the Norm. 


When he had so said, Reviler of the Bhiradvajas spake 
thus: ‘Most excellent, Master Gotama, most excellent! 
It is as if that which was overturned,’ eto. . . . (the Sutta ends 
like the preceding) . . « 

And the venerable Bharadvaja became one of the Arahants. 


§ 3. Asurinda.* 

Again, while the Exalted One was at the Bamboo (rove, 
an Asurinds Bharadvaja brahmin also heard that the Bhaira- 
dvaja had entered the Order, and he, vexed and displeased, 
also went and reviled and abused the Exalted One with rude 
and harah words. 

When he had thus spoken, the Exalted One remained silent. 

Then said the Asurinda: ‘ Thou-art conquered, recluse, 
thou art conquered !’ 


l ‘These verses occur in Theragdtha (Pas. of the Brethren, 441-4), 
whore they ore ascribed to Brahmadatta, a son of Pasonadi. 

= “Tord of Asura(demon)s.’ This was the youngest of the brothers 
Bhairadvija. Comy. In the Sutta he is called by the adjectival 
form: Asurindaka, ‘demon-chiefer.' The nome is so ‘pagan’ for o 
brahmin, and the Buddha's reply so suggestive of Sakka’s (AL, |, 84), 
that a bifurcated or transferred Iogend here seems fairly plausible. 
Cf. Dialogues, ii, 73, also 297. 


204 The Brahmin Suttas [TEXT i, 163. | 
[The Exalied One :-—] 
The foo! forsooth doth deem the victory his 
In that he plays the bully with rude speech. 
To him who knoweth how he may forbear,! 


This in itself doth make him conqueror. 


Worse of the twos he who when reviled 
Reviles Auten cease 


The verses ond Sulla continue agin § 3. 


§ 4. The Congey-man.* 


Again, while the Exalted One was at the Bamboo Grove, 
the Bhiradvaja brahmin [known as] the Congey-man, also- 
heard that the Bharadvaja had entered the Order. And he, 
vexed and displeased, soucht the Exalted One's prasence, 
and when there sat at one side in silence.* 

Then the Exalted One, discerning by his mind the thoughts 
of that man’s mind, addressed him in verse:-— 


Whose doth wrong the man that’s innocent :— 
Him that is pure and from all errors free— 

His wicked act returns upon that fool 

Like fine dust that is thrown against the wind. 


When he had thus spoken, the Congey-man said: * Most 
excellent, Master Gotama ... (the Sutta ends like the pre- 
ceding Suitas) .. . 

And the venerable Bharadvija became one of the 
Arahants. 


1 Lit. “that which is forbearance.’ 

® This was another brother. He had won lange prolite, suys B,, by 
running 4 shop for different kinds of oxcellently prepared * congey * 
(Saja). The soubriquet of Bileng-ika (bilanga being another name 
for such preparations on « basia of rice-broth) was given him by the 
Recensioniste at the Third Council ( Patna). 

7 Comy.: He was so angry at the seduction of his three brothers 
that he could not speak. 

4 The verses are given to o Deva above, L, 3, § 2. 


Wil, T, § 5] | Arahants 205 


§ 5. Innocens.! 


When the Exalted One was once at Savatthi, Innocens 
(Ahinsaka) of the Bharadvaja brahmins came to [visit] the 
Exalted One and, exchanging with him the compliments of 
amity and courtesy, took his ‘seat ab one side. So seated, 
he said to the Exalted One: ‘ I am Innocens, Master Gotama, 
Tam Innocens.”* 


[The Exalted One :—] 
As is the name so should its bearer be. 
Wouldst thou be Innocens [as thou art named]? 
Whoso in deed, word, thought ne’er noxious is, 
Who on another worketh never harm: 
He verily is [well named] Innocena. 


When he had thus spoken, Innocens said: * Most excellent, 
Master Gotama, most excellent! .. . (as tm the four pre- 
ceding Sutias). 


t Comy.: ‘The Recensionista called him ao either because of his 
remark (called technically ‘question’: pafiia), or because he was 
actually so named. 

[t was us necessary to translate the name here os it was in the form 
aseribed to the converted bandit Angulimils, Pas. of the Brethren, 
ver. 879: | 
Ingocens ! euch the name | bear, 

While Noxious in the past waa I. 
To-day most truly am I named, 
For now [ hurt not any man, 


And since ‘innocent,’ meaning literally harmless, has the most 
dominant meaning now, of pure, guiltless or guileless, it was deemed 
here, too, better to retain the Latin form, where the dominant meaning 
ia ‘innocuous.’ (Cy. Cicero's: tnnocens is dicitur, non qui leviter nocel, 
sed qui nihil nocet. (Tuse, 5, 14, 41). So little, unfortunately, has 
*harmlessnees" been held wp as an ideal, in spite of its Christianity, 
by the aggressive and intolerant culture of Europe, that it is impossible 
to take that word as an equivalent of the term, so lofty in Baoddhist 
ethica, of ahipad. 

? This was apparently no protest, or professing, but the ancient 
Indian formula of respectful loyalty and devotion, Cf. above where 
King Pasenadi uses it, I, 2, § 1, and in M. ii, 120. 


206 The Brahmin Suttas [TEXT i, 165 


§ 6. Tangles. 


When the Exalted One was once at Savatthi, the Bhara- 
dvaja brahmin [known as} Tangles, went to visit the Exalted 
One and, exchanging with him the compliments of amity 
and courtesy, took his seat at one side, So seated, he ad- 
dressed the Exalted One in a verse:— 


Tangle within, without, lo! in the toils 
Entangled is the race of sentient things. 
Hence would I ask thee, Gotama, of this: 
Who is ‘t can from this tangle disembroil ? 


[The Exalted One :—] 
The man discreet, on virtue planted firm . . 
(verbatim as in I. 3, § 3). 


§ 7. Puritan? 

When the Exalted One was staying near Savatthi, at the 
Jeta Grove, the Bhiradvaja brahmin [known as] ‘ Puritan’ 
came to visit the Exalted One, and exchanging with him the 
greetings and compliments of amity and courtesy, took his 
seat at one side, So seated, he addressed the Exalted One 
in & Verse — 


Though he be virtuous and penance work, 

There is in all the world no brahmin found 
Thus rendered pure, 

"T is by the Veda-lore and by the course 

His class lays down that he is purified, 
Unique ‘mong men," 

1 Comy.: “He was so called by the Recensionists because of his 
question. With the rest we have dealt in the Depafi-Sapyutta.,’ 
See I, 3, § a. 

* B. aasigns o similar source to this soubriquet, 

2B. explains caraga a8 gotta-carane. 

‘ Freely rendered. Lit. ‘No other seoond race’ (of men), but the 
readings vary. The Comy. explains: ‘the Three-Veda brahmin is 
made pure, but this other-named race is not made pure.’ 


vil, 1, § 8] Arahants 207 


[The Exalted One -—] 
Nay, though he jabber multitudes of runes, 
Thus is no brahmin made regenerate,’ 
Garbage-defiled within, propped by deceits. 


But be he noble, brahmin, commoner, 
» Or labouring man, or of a pariah class, 
Who stirs up effort, puts forth all his strength,* 
Advances with an ever vigorous stride, 
He may attain the Purity Supreme. 
Brahmin, know this ! 


§ 8. The Fire-man.* 

The Exalted One was once staying near Rajagaha, in the 
Bamboo Grove, at the Squirrels’ Feeding-ground. Now on 
that occasion a preparation of rice with ghee had been con- 
cocted for the Bhiradvaja brahmin [known as] the Fire-man, 
for he thought: ‘I will offer the fire-sacrifice, | will tend the 
fire-oblation.” 

Then the Exalted One having dressed early, and taken 
howl and robe, went and entered Rajagaha for alms. And, 
going for alms from place to place,® he drew near to the 
dwelling of the Fire-man Bhiradvaja, and approaching stood 
ab one side. 

Now the brahmin beheld him coming for alms, and seeing 
him, addressed the Exalted One in a verse:— 

Proficient in the Vedas Three. a man 

Pure born and learnéd,® and acquainted well 
With all the lore and ritual [of our class]:— 
His let it be to enjoy this goodly rice! 


\ Na jaced hott, 

? See I, 9, § 5 and IX, § 2; =P ss. of the Brethren, vers. 156, 353. 

3 So called, because of his fostering » fire oblation, by the Reorn- 
sionista, Comy. 

4 Of. Pss. of the Sisters, ver. 143; Brethren, vers. 210, 341; p 223; 
and below, 5 9. 

& Sapadanay : of. Pas. of the Brethren, p. 262, n. 5, 

“*In many kinds of books (gandhe).” Comy. Cf. D. ii, M4. 


208 The Brahmin Suttas [TEXT i, 166 


[The Exalted One :—] 
Nay, though he jabber multitudes of rimes, 
Thus is no brahmin made regenerate, 
Garbage-defiled within, cloaked by deesits. 


Whose vision many former lives hath pierced, 
Who sees the heavens above, the saeclaed below? 
His is "t to win the doing down of birth: 

Master of supernormal lore, a Seer. 

In these Three Vedas if » brahmin be 

One whom we call * learned in the Triple Lore,’ 
Of him shouldst thou declare:— acquainted well 
‘With all the lore and ritual [of ourselves }— 

* His let it be to enjoy this goodly rice. 


(The brahmén : 
‘May it please the worshipful Master Giotama to eat? 
His worship is a brahmin.* 


{The Exalted One :—| 
Not® mine to enjoy [presents| for chanting verses. 
Not normal this, brahmin, for minds discerning. 
Buddhas reject wages for chanting verses. 
True to the Norm, this is their mode of conduct,.® 


1 Ser § 7. 1 = Jn, (47; Dhp. 428, 

4 Abhitiiirenton, The Buddha is aladwhane Le AM recasting 
the meaning of the brahmin term te-eigjo; * one-who-hns-the-Three 
Vedas. CY. above, VL 1, 5 5, a. 4. 

4 The brakmin apparently misunderstands the object of the fore- 
going verses, and offers him, as one of his class, « fee in kind in return 
for the chanted mantra. 

® These verses ooour again in § 9, and in 2, § 1, and also in Sn. 
vers, 81, 82 (trana. BO, 81); 480,481. The first is quoted in Milindn 
(trans,) i, $3. * You would not,” runs the exegesis, * while I stood sa 
long waiting give me one spoonful, and now you would pay me as if 
1 were & verse-reciting brahmin, when all the Buddha-virtue is mani- 
feat to you.’ 

® Lit, the Dhamma there or existing, this ia the way of living. 
B. parnphrases: dhammeay apebkhwted, dhamme patifthaya jivilay bap- 
pentanay esd vuéfi: ‘of those who maintain life with an eye to the 
Norm, established on the Norm, this is the conduct.’ 


VII, T, §9] Arahants 309 


On other grounds minster thou, 0 brahmin, 

With food and drink to a great Seer made perfect," 
To one from whom purged are the mental Poisons, 
In whom is calm, peace from all fret and worry. 
Yea, here's the field, if for reward*® thou lookest. 


When he had thus spoken, Fireman, the Bharadvaja, said: 
* Most excellent, Master Gotama, most excellent’ . . . (ele., 
as in the foregoing) . . . 

And the venerable Bharadvaja became one of the Arahants. 


§ 9. The Sundarikdyan. 


The Exalted One was once staying in Kosala on the banks 
of the river Sundariki, Now on that occasion the Bhira- 
dvaja brahmin [known as] the Sundarikayan,? was engaged 
in sacrificing to fire, in performing Fire-rites.* Then when 
he had sacrificed and performed the rites, he rose from 
his seat and looked around to the four quarters, thinking: 
‘Who now ought to partake of the remainder of this 
offering ?'5 

Then the Sundarikayan beheld the Exalted One seated at the 


' Kevalinay ; corresponds to ‘absolute,’ and is less used by Bud- 
dhiam than by Jainism and Sinkhyil. 

= Lit. merit. 

1 So called because of his sacrificing by that river. Comy. The 
Recensionists are this time not mentioned. The river ia named in 
the corresponding Sutta of the Sn. (LIT, 4), and in the Vatthipama- 
Sutta, M. i, 39, where o quite different account is given of the con- 
version of « Bharadvija brahmin called Sundarikn, He proposes to 
bathe, for religious purification, in the Bahuka river; to whom the 
Buddha, in eloquent verses contrasting such external rites with real 
purity, names several rivers. 

‘So obsolete apparently was Agni-worship become in Buddha- 
ehosa’s day, or even in that of his authorities, that he sees only the 
‘Great Brohméi' as the object of these rites, and those of 5 8. 

5 *T have laid my rice-concoction on the fire, partaken of by Great 
Brahma: if I give what is over to some bralmin, born of Brahmii's 
mouth, my father and | would be pleased, and the way to Brahmi- 
world made clear.” Comy. 

i4 


210 ' The Brahmin Suttas [TEXT i, 167 


root of a certain tree with his head covered,! and seeing him 
there, he took the remainder of his oblation in his left hand 
and his water-pitcher® in his nicht, and drew near to the Exalted 
One. 

Then the Exalted One, at the sound of the brahmin’s foot- 
steps, uncovered his head. 

Then the Sundarikayan thought: ‘This gentleman 1 
shaved, this gentleman is a shaveling!’ and felt inclined to 
tum back again. But he thought: ‘Nay, but some brahmins 
also are shaven. I might go and ask him now as to his birth. 

So he drew near to the Exalted One and said: © What art 
thou by birth, sir ?’ 


[The Exalted One :—] 
Ask not of birth, ask of the course of conduct. 
From any sticks verily fire doth take birth.5 
The steadfast® seer, though his descent be lowly, 
To intellect’s aristocrats’ is lifted, 
By noble shame all that is evil curbing, 


= a aS SS = 


1 The Commentaries on both this work and the Sn, assure us that 
we are to understand the Master sat with his body and head all wrapped 
up; and this less as a protection against the cold than os o stratagem 
to rouse the brahmin's curisity, and to prevent his being repelled 
from afar by the sight of the shor hair and tasarul. 

®* Kamandalu, the pitcher of o brahmin religieux, made with a 
lengthened spout to pour water into the mouth without contact 
between lips and spout. 

4 Qn this diversity in practice ef. Satepatha-Brahmena II, 6, 3, 
14-17, quoted in Hopkins's Keligions of India, 100; also the tithe of one 
Upanishad: Mundaka, * The Shaveling.’ 

4 The Sayyutta account now omita part of the dialogue given in the 
Sn. vors. 455-6] (trans, 44-60); and coincides with vers. 462, 463, 
when it diverges, coinciding again at ver. 450 for two stanzas only. 

5 The two Commentaries are here again at one: many woods serve 
for kindling, even os any class of society may yield o saint; the essen- 
tial matter is to evoke the combustion-virtues of the fire. 

" Divina, here paraphrased by viriyard, * energetic.’ 

? Ajdniyo, applied to a well-trained horse, elephant or ox, easily sug- 
gested by the favourite notion of donia, tamed, but hard to render in 
English, Cy, 1, 2, } 4, 0. 5. 


Vir, ,§ 9] Arahants 211 


Tamed by the truth, graduate in that taming, 

Of saving lore master,’ the good life living. 

Th’ oblation’s brought! Do thou invoke® him duly. 
Timely the rite; worthy is he thus worshipped. 


[The Sundarikiyan :—] 
QO well indeed offered is my oblation, 
Now that I've seen master like thee of wisdom ! 
Yea, in that | heretofore saw none like thee, 
Other the folk eating my altar’s leavings. 


"May it please the worshipfal Master Gotama to eat! 
‘His worship is a brahmin !’ 


[The Exalted One :—] 
Not mine to enjoy [presents] for chanting verses. 
Not normal this . . . (continue as in preceding Sutta). 


[The Sundanikiyan — | 

‘Then to whom, Master Gotama, do I give this residual 
oblation ? 

*T see no one, brahmin, in the whole world of devas, Brahmas, 
or Maras, nor in this whole race of devas and men, recluses or 
brahmins who, if he ate this food, could thoroughly digest it, 
save only a Tathagata or one of his chosen disciples.* Where- 


' Vedantagu : ‘One who has gone to the end of the Vedas:’ a brah- 
manic term that is not found prior to Buddhism. The two Commoenr- 
tariea call the Four Paths * Vedas,’ 

* Or entrat him, ef. Dialogues, ii, 289, The sacrificer was wont to 
eay: * We invoke the Supreme Brahma, or Indra, or Soma, or Varuna, 
or Isina, or Yama.’ Comy. 4N.B. Agni is not included, Cf, Dialogues, 
a, 310, 

2 To understand this curious reply, the reader should be aoquaintal 
with the facta relating to Indian sacrificial ritual: with the mystical, 
magic glamour belonging to the dish of oblation and to the * remnant" 
(ucchista) therein. See eg. Atharva Veda XI, 3, 7; Satapatha-Arah., 
Il, esp, Adh, 3; Maodonell, Vedic Mythology, 155. 5.’ interpretation 
is that the gods infused subtle essences from flowers, fruits and edible 
eoncoctiona into the oblation creating ojd, or nectar, digestible by their 
ethereal organs, but not to be assimilated by men’s grosger organs. 


212 The Brahmin Suttas [TEXT i, 169 


fore, brahmin, do thou either pour it out where no grass 18,2 
or launch [thy dish] in water wherein are no creatures.’ 

So the Sundarikayan launched® this offering in water 
wherein Were no creatures. 

Then that residual oblation, thus placed in water, seethed 
and hissed‘ and sent forth steam and smoke. Just as a red- 
hot ploughshare, if placed in water, will seethe and hiss and 
send forth steam and smoke, so waa it with that oblation. 

Then the Sundarikayan, alarmed and with stiffening hatr, 
came up to the Exalted One and stood af one side. And to 
him, so standing, the Exalted One addressed verses>— 


Nay, brahmin, deem not that by mere wood-laying 
Comes purity. Verily that is external. 
To him who thus purification seeketh, 
By things without none is made pure, the wise say" 


I lay no wood, brahmin, for fires on altars. 
Only within® burneth the fire I kindle. 
Ever my fire burns; ever tense and ardent,’ 
I, Arahant, work out the life that ‘s holy. 


As yoke of grain® surely is pride, O brahmin. 
Thine altar’s smoke, anger; thy false words ashes. 


On the other hand, the beef broth (ge-yaiac) and sesamum-seed infused 
by men made the oblation unpalatable to Such a mixture the 
Arohant ‘of dry vision" (not practising Jhiina) could not assimilate, 
but the Arahant of Eight Attainments (Jhina) might have power to 
do «o, as could a Buddha by the karma-born heat, or vim, of his natare. 

1 * Lest the grass rot.’ Comy. 

= Lest the creatures die.” Commy. 

1 *Opildpesi. ‘He immersed it with its golden dish.” Comy. 

‘ The Pali words are onomatopaic. Comy. : ‘it made a noise like 
that’: ciceifayati, eitici yah (c's pronounced ch), 

S Awaald, * expert.’ 

6 Comy.: ‘Subjectively in my own vital continuum I bam the 
agored fire of insight.’ 

7 ‘T have my mind ever rightly fixed.” Comy. 

\ Kharibharo: ‘os a yoke though borne aloft on the shoulders presses. 
on the earth st every step the bearer takes, eo do you with your pride 
of birth and class cause envy in others and weigh them down to woes 
after death. Comy. 


vir, t, §9] Arahants 213 


The tongue’s the priest's spoon, and the heart the altar, 
The fire thereon; this is man’s self well taméd. 


The Norm’s a lake, with virtue’s strand for bathing, 
Clear, undefiled,’ praised by the good to good men, 
Wherein in sooth masters of lore come bathing, 

So, clean of limb, to the Beyond cross over. 


The Norm is truth; discipline, life in orders,* 

Best vantage-ground, brahmin, the Path that’s Midway." 
Due honour pay thou to the upright-minded.* 

Whose doth this, him do | call ‘ Flux-rider.’® 


When he had thus spoken, the Sundarikiyan of the Bha- 
radvaja brahmins said; * Most excellent, Master Gotama... 
(as in preceding Suttas). So the venerable Bharadvaja became 
one of the Arahants. 


— = — —_—————e NN 


1 * You," comments B., ‘your rites over, go to cleanse your amoke- 
cinder-, and sweat-soiled body in your littl river, where when four 
or five bathe together the sands are churned up; but in my Eightfold 
Path-Norm-lake or sea, rahado, many hundrod thousand creatures may 
bathe in clear calm waters, and go to the shores of Nibbana.’ 

2+ Truth, he goes on, “ia truth of apesoh”; then, ag he is wont, lie 
divides the Eightfold Path between ‘ truth’ and ‘ discipline.’ 

t According to B, the Middle Path is here not the ethioal position 
set forth in the first sermon, between self-indulgence and asveticiam, 
but that between ‘ Eternalism’* and ‘ Annihilationiam" (Dialogues, i, 
27, 44). 

48. lays down that in the compound #2! - wjjabhiatern, the ¢ is 
euphonic, and the meaning is 2a tery (* thou’ emphatic) to the ap- 
right, ete. 

& Dhamnasari, of. dijfain, Sn. Oll. We have not met the term 
elaewhere, B. takes dhamma to mean, not the Norm, but dhammd : 
things orideas. And he gives an optional explanation: either protected 
from the flux or course of things, or making evil things to go by good 


things (sdreted). Hence o * thing-flux-er’ is one who is not swept 


along helplessly, There is no attempt to connest the word with the 
dhammanusirt of PP. 1, § 35. Cf. dhaminasiridhigame, 8. v, 402, 
Dhammsolay, on the other hand, in S. li, 43, 1s explained as the 
Path, 


214 The Brahmin Suttas [TEXT i, 170 


§ 10. Of many daughters? 


The Exalted One was once staying among the ree In 
wu certain forest. 

Now on that oceasion a certain brahmin of the Bharadvajas 
had Jost fourteen oxen. And he came seeking those oxen 
into the forest. And there he saw the Exalted One seated in 
the cross-legged position, his body set upright? and mindful- 
ness evoked before his face? 

Seeing the Exalted One, he drew near, and before him 
uttered these verses*:— 


For this good friar there sure are not six days to-day 
Since fourteen oxen have been loat to aight, 
Therefore the friar a happy man is he! 

For this good friar there sure are not grain crops gone bad, 
One leaf, two leaves a stalk of sesamum ! 
Therefore the friar a happy man is he! 

For this good friar there sure are not in empty barn 
Rats dancing rampantly® around, 

Therefore the friar a happy man 1s he! 


1 This quaint tithe, about which B, is alent, can be derived only 
from the fifth stanza, os if that dealt with the most impressive griev- 
nnoe of this farmer, so down in luck. DA in its crude forms in 
scan pomeels hecomes Ghiti, and dhttw (Ed. Miller, Pali Granunar, BA). 

* With the trunk erect so that the eighteen “ back-thorns” ( verte- 
bra) were end to end.” Comy. 

S* Fixing the “ confronting” mindfulness (or memory) of .Jhiina- 
exercise, or causing it to be near the face, as it ia said in the [.Jhins-] 
Pihhange ( VibA, 252): “ either at the tip of the nose, or in the image of 
the face (or mouth)."" Cf, Manual of a Mystic, 1. (PTS. 1916). 

4 The verses ore in slofa metre, anve that the first of each four 
padas has two redundant feet: 


Na Aa nitn-imasa serene, 


They give an interesting picture of a cultivator of ancient N. [ndia in 
straita, and are fairly racy of the soil. 

' Usothibiys, not met with elsewhere. FE. asya: * they spring up 
squenking and vigorous, their ears, tails, ete., erect... plaving in 
the unfilled granuries their outdoor games,’ | 


vi, 1, § 10] Arahants 215 
For this good friar there sure is not, seven months {un- 
watched j, 


A siesta-couch covered by vermin swarm,! 
Therefore the friar a happy man is he! 

For this good friar there sure are not seven dauchters all 
Widows with one child, maybe two [to cadge],* 
Therefore the friar a happy man is he! 

For this good friar there’s sure no tawny speckled one 
To wake the weary slumb'rer with her foot, 
Therefore the friar a happy man 1s he! 

for this good friar there surely never come at dawn 
Duns chiding him with debts: Come pay ! come pay ! 
Therefore the friar a happy man is he! 


(The Exalted One >—} 

For me, brahmin, there sure are not six days to-day 
Since fourteen oxen have been lost to view, 
Therefore a happy man, brahmin, am I! 

For me, brahmin, there sure are not grain crops gone bad, 
. +. nd goonto... 

For me, brahmin, there surely never come at dawn 
Duns chiding me with debts; Come pay ! come pay ! 
Therefore a happy man, brahmin, am I! 


1‘ "There ia no one to attend to the odtoh he has made of straw 
and leaves to rest on after his labours, so that vermin infest it and 
aseail him." 

* They send their children cadging to the grandfather, whose hand 
ig crowded out of his own food-dish by these hungry pensioners. 
Coma. 

2 Reading tilak’ dhatt.* B. embroidery to thé following effect: 
the brahmin, kept awake by rats and vermin, lies sleepless till dawn. 
Scarce have his eyelids closed when comes kick and summons: ~ What 
doest thou, brahmin tf’ and the day's coming burdens are enumerated. 

“ Presumably the wife is meant. 

‘ The Buddha's acquiescence in the harassed brahmin's imputation 
of a happiness free from cares makes this Sutta form an effective poo- 
dant to the Dhaniya Sutta (Sn, 1,2). There, the farmer glonting over 
his prosperity, the Buddha is no less complacent over his own freedom 
from all wealth. 


216 The Brahmin Suttas [TEXT i, 171 


When he had thus spoken, the Bharadvaja said: Most ex- 
cellent, Master Gotama, most excellent! ete. (The Sutta con- 
finues and ends like the preceding nine. See§ il)... 

And the venerable Bharadvija became one of the 


Arahanta, 


2, Toe Lay ADHERENTS. 
§ 1. The Ploughing." 


Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying 
on South Hill, at Ekanala, a brahmin village* 

Now on that occasion if was the time for sowing,? and 
Farmer Bhiradvaja, the brahmin, had harnessed five hundred 
ploughs.* 

Then the Exalted One dressed himself in the early morning 
and, taking bow] and robe, drew near to the ploughing opera- 
tions. 

Now at that time Farmer Bharadvajo’s distribution of food 


1 The Commentary on this charming Sutta seta out and prooeeds 
with such elaborate and graphic amplitude of detail that we may infer 
the episode possessed great popularity in Buddhaghosa’s day and 
eatlier, Nevertheless the corresponding exegesia on the Sutia-nipdta 
version, though often verbatim the same, is not exuberant in the came 
degree. To judge by both, the ploughing in question was a festival; 
house and fields, the farmer and hie wife, his men and cattle were 
decorated for the occasion. It waa the preliminary to the second or 
mud" sowing (payeu-vappa), Le. presumably the transplanting of 
the rice-seedlings to the furrows that were to be irrigated. 

2 A village near the hill (with ite Vihira) guarding the South of 
Rajagahs. Dokklina-giri is often mentioned in the Canon os a resi- 
dence for the Order. ‘ Brahmin villages* occur not seldom in the 
Jitaka. 5B. leaves it uncertain whether they were so called from t 
preponderance of brahmina, or of brahmin-property. 

1 Kasi, literally ploughing, but aymbolic of agriculture generally. 
B. says, he lived by kasi, but there is nothing to show that he onder-| 
took the communal ploughing. 

‘ B. nasigna § oxen to the leading team, 4 to each of the others, and 
a cart full of oe ang or seedlings) to follow each plough; also many 
relicf-oxen in readiness. 


vil, 2,§ 1] The Lay Adherents 217 


was going on.t And the Exalted One drew neat to the scene 
and stood at one side. Now Farmer Bharadvaja saw the 
Exalted One standing there for alms, and thereat he said: 
‘ Now I, recluse, plough and sow, and when I have ploughed 
and sown I eat. Do thou also, recluse, plough and sow, and 
when thou hast ploughed and sown, eat.’ 

‘But I too, brahmin, plough and sow, and when I have 
ploughed and sown, I eat.’ 

‘ But we see neither Master Gotama’s team, nor his plough, 
nor his ploughshare, nor his goad, nor his oxen. And yet 
Master Gotama says, ‘I too, brahmin, plough and sow, and 
when I have ploughed and sown, I eat!’ 

Then Farmer Bharadvaja addressed the Exalted One in 4 
verse :— 

A ploughman by thine own confession thou ! 
No ploughing can I aee! 

The ‘ ploughman’ queried, tell me how to know 
The ploughing done by thee. 

{The Exalted One :—] 

Vaith? is the seed, and rain the discipline. 

Insight for me is plough fitted with yoke, 

My pole is conscience’ and sense-mind the tie, 

And mindfulness my ploughshare and my goad. 

Guarded in action, guarded too in speech, 

And temperate a8 to my stomachs food, 

T weed with truth,‘ and my release from work* 

Is that fair thing of innermost desire.’ 

1 Superintended by the brahminee, the paydac, or rice-pudding, waa 
brought out in golden bowls on large carts, and administered to the 
500 ploughmen seated around. 

2 Je. trust, confidence, ‘its salient feature being complacency, 
satisfaction-in (aampasid), and ita essential property. élan, forward 
impulse (pakkhandana). (omy. 

3 Hiri, qonscientiousness, lit. shame (at doing wrong). 

+ fie. “insight into things-as-they-have-become.” (omy. 

* Nidddnay. 

This clause amplifies the concise and pregnant Pali 
sOraCCHIN ALE pAIROcEndy. 


218 The Brahmin Suttas [TEXT i, 173. 


Energy is my burden-bearing team, 

Drawing my plough toward the haven sure. 

Onward it goes nor ever turneth back; 

And where it goeth we shall weep no more,' 

Such is the ploughing that is ploughed by me. 

The fruit it bears is food ambrosial. 

Whoso this ploughing hath accomplished, he 

From suffering and from sorrow is set free. 
[The brahmin :—] 

“May it please Master Gotama to eat! A ploughman is 
Master Gotama, yea, it is for fruit ambrosial that Gotama 
ploughs his ploughing 
[The Exalted One :—] 

Not mine to enjoy [presents] for chanting verses.* 
Sot normal this, brahmin, for minds discerning, 
Buddhas reject [wages] for chanting verses. 

True to the Norm, such is their practice ever. 

On other grounds minister thou, O brahmin, 
With food and drink to a great Seer made perfect, 
To one from whom purged are all mental poisons, 
In whom is calm, peace from all fret and worry. 
Yea, here's the field, if for reward thou lookest. 


The latter suggeata * the taking off the yoke fora night, for a year.” 
(Cf. Rigveda, v, 53, T: vitnocanay, resting-place for horses.) ‘1,’ runs 
the exegesis, ‘took up my yoke ages ago, even in the day of Dipankara 
Buddha, nor did 1 lay it aside till, under the Bodhi-tree, | won the 
“fruition” of Arahantship. This fruition as something intensely love- 
able (#u-rofaiéa) is the foriner term do-raceoy, not meaning here abeence 
of licentiousness in act or speech, gentleness; since this has already 
been taken into socount.’ It should be noted that the Buddha is not 
standing up for his work os a missionary versus the farmer's work. 
He is out to ° save the soul’ of the brahmin and says: ‘ My work haa 
been to accomplish in myself the “one thing needful”; it is done; 
now I rest (1.2. eat), Hore you yet started 

' Cf. Pas. of the Brethren, ver. 194, 

* Here again the brahmin’s approval gives no assurance that the 
Dhamma preached has sunk into his heart. The subsequent confes- 
sign of faith shows that it hoa, See above, VII, 1, §§ 8, 9. 


= ame =| —_—_—_—— 


Vil, 2, § 2] The Lay Adherents 219 


When he had thus spoken, Farmer Bharadvaja said: 
‘Most excellent, Master Gotama, most excellent! As if one 
raised up that which had been overthrown, or revealed that 
which had been hidden, or declared the way to one who was 
bewildered, or carried an oil-lamp into the dark, so that they 
that had eyes could see, even 50 is the Norm, in many ways 
made manifest by Master Gotama. Lo! I go for refuge to 
Gotama the Exalted One, to the Norm, and to the Order. 
May Master Gotama suffer me as a lay-adherent, who from 
this day forth as long as life endures has taken in him refuge !’ 


§ 2. Udayu. 


While at Savatthi, the Exalted One, dressing himself early, 
and taking bowl and robe, came one day to the dwelling of 
Udaya! the brahmin, Then Udaya the brahmin filled the 
Exalted One's bowl with rice. 

Now the Exalted One repeated his visit the second day, and 
yet again the third, and each time Udaya the brahmin filled 
his bow! with rice. After he had done so the third time, Udaya 
the brahmin said: ‘ A pertinacious man* is the friar Gotama, 
that he comes again and again |’ 


[The Exalted One -—] 
Again, again is seed in furrow sown, 
Again, again the cloud-king sends down rain, 
Again, again the ploughmen plough the fields, 
Again, again comes corn” into the realm, 
Again, again do beggars* go their round, 
Again, again do generous donors give, 


| Not met with eaewhere. The brahmin’s eame recurs, Sa. V. L105 f. 
t Pakatthako is exegotically explained aa rasagiddho, ‘greedy for 
tastes"; the word is very rare in Pali. See the Sskr. kaya. * A 
desperate follow for dinner is the friar!" Corny. 

9 Reading dhaiiia. See op. cit. below. 

4 ‘Here he skilfully brings in himself.” Comy- Humorously, too, 
he hints at the self-sacrificing donor called danapati. Cf. above, I, 


220 The Brahmin Suttas [TEXT i, 174 


Again, again when many gifts are given, 
Again, again the donors find their heaven.' 
Again, again the dairy-folk draw milk, 
Again, again the calf tts mother seeks,* 
Again, again we tire and toil anew, 

Again, again the slow wits seek rebirth? 
Again, again comes birth and dying comes, 
Again, again men bear us to the grave. 


When once the man of broad insight that Path 
Which brings no new becoming doth attain, 
Then is he no more born again, again. 


When he had thus spoken, Udaya the brahmin said: Most 
excellent, Master Gotama, most excellent! .. . (continue as 
in § 1). 


§ 3. Devahita. 


On one occasion, at Sivatthi, the Exalted One fell ill with 
intestinal wind, And the venerable Upavana was attending 
on the Exalted One. 

Then the Exalted One appealed to him, saying: * Prithee, 
Upavana,* dost know how I can get hot water?’ ‘Surely, 
lord,” responded the venerable Upavana, and making ready 
he took bowl and robe, and sought the dwelling of the brahmin 
Devalita. When he got there he stood silently aside. 


— 


1 So far the verses form part of Sakulodiyin's poem, Pes. of the 
Brethren, vers. 531, 532, Is there any coincidence between this name 
and Udaya ? (Cf. above, VII, 1, § 3. 3B. speake of the whole list os 
16 things that have to be recurrently done in life, To get 16, we must 
toke 2 each in lines 11, 13. 

* Possibly meaning incurs rebirth. B. is silent. 

3 Theragdtha, 17, 101. 

*@ The Comy. grves the same acoount of the temporary attendants 
before Ananda as Dhammap&la gives, See Pas, of the Brethren, p. 350, 
differing only in the inclusion of one Bodhi. They were chosen 
aut of the 80 “Great Theras' of inner entourage of the Master, (yf. 
op. eit, xxxvi, 250; Dialogues, ii, 151, 


vit, 2, $3} The Lay Adherents 99] 


Now Devahita saw him standing thus in silence, and ad- 
dressed him in the verse:— 


His Worship standing there and speaking not, 
With shaven head and face, wrapped in his cloak, 
What doth he wish for, what may be his quest, 
What would he beg, that he is thither come ? 


[ Upavdna :-—] 
An Arahant, the Bleaséd of all men, 
A holy sage, he suffereth sore with wind. 
If there be any water heated here, 
0) give it to me, brahmin, for the sage. 
Revered by them to whom we reverence owe,” 
Cherished by them who claim our pious care, 
Honoured by them to whom honour is due, 
For him I do beseech it may be brought. 


Then Devahita the brahmin made a serving man take hot 
water on a carrying-pole® and a jar of molasses," and offered 
them tothe venerable Upavana. Then the venerable Upavana 
came to the Exalted One and administered them to him, 
fomenting with the hof water and mixing the molasses with 
hot water.® 

Then the illness of the Exalted One abated. 

And Devahita the brahmin came to visit the Exalted One, 
and exchanging with him the greetings of courtesy and amity, 
took his seat at one side. So seated, he addressed the Exalted 
Qne in the verse: 


Where should he give* who hath a gift to make ¢ 
Where given, will his offering bear much fruit ¢ 


Presumably it was not the conventional hour for the alma-call, 
hence the perplexity. ‘The verses of the petition agree with 185, 186 
of the The Les Mel. 

? Eg. ‘the 80 Great Theras." Comy. 

4 Kaja or pingo, the pole at right angles to the shoulders, 

‘Of. Vin. Tezta, ii, 42- 

5 * Aga sweating mixture.” Comy. 


‘ 
Ise 


The Brahmin Suttas [TEXT i, 175 


Yea, how to him who doth oblation bring— 
How shall his tribute work effectively ?* 


[The Exalted One :—} 
Whose! vision many former lives hath pierced, 
Who sees the heavens above, the depths below, 
Whose is “t to win the doing down of birth:— 
Master of supernormal lore, a seer:— 
There should he give who hath a gift to make, 
There given, will his offering bear much fruit, 
Yea, thus to him who doth oblation bring— 
Thus shall his tribute work effectively, 


When he had thus spoken, Devahita the brahmin said to the 
Exalted One: * Most excellent. lord!’ ete. (as in the feo pre- 
éeding Suttas), 


§ 4. The Millionaire? or The Shabby Cloak. 


On one occasion, at Savatthi, a certain brahmin millionaire. 
looking worn and in a coarse cloak, came to visit the Exalted 
One and, exchanging with him the greetings and compliments 
of courtesy, took his seat at one side. To him so seated the 
Exalted One said: ‘ Wherefore, brahmin, art thou looking 
worn** and art clad in a coarse cloak ? 


OS = a = 


* Tijheais. 

1 Oy. VIL, 1, § 8. 

* A mohieila is & magnate either brahmin or noble, but emphati- 
cally a wealthy person. This man's fortune amounted to 800,(4H) 
{? coins) stored in his house. The legend told is that he presented 
each gon on his marriage with an eighth. They fearing lest he, being 
a widower, would remarry, petted and coddled him, but told him 
* that to carry this on, they would need each the remaining four-eights, 
He gave all, retaining only bis clothing, and lived with his eldest son, 
Soon the daughter-in-law had him barred out; the others followed 
suit. He entered the brahmin order of Pandarangas and suffered 
great privations, till he throws himself on the reputed kindness and 
graciousness of the Samana Gotama, 

** Lakha. 


Vil, 2, § 4] The Lay Adherents 223 


‘Four sons have I, Master Gotama, in this place and they, 
yin concert with their wives,* have shown me the door.’ 
' Therefore, brahmin, thou shouldst jearn these verses and, 
When the folk are assembled in the Chapter Hall, and thy sons 
Seated there also, recite them:— 


They at whose birth my heart was glad, 
For whose becoming much I longed, 
They now in concert with their wives 
Aré as a dog that drives off swine. 
Impious and shameless sooth are these 
Who call me ‘ dear one,’ call me ‘ dad‘? 
Demons are they in guise of sons. 

Him that is come to years they leave 
Forsaken, a8 a worn-out horse 

Unfed is led away from crib. 

The sire, the senior of these boys 

Doth beg his bread at others’ doors. 


Better in sooth ‘ the stick " for me 

Than having disobedient sons, 

lt serves to keep off savage ox, 

It serves to keep off savage hound— 

Whereas I wandered in the dark 

I find a footing in the deep,* 
* Sampurcha, 

' The meeting of the brahmin synod, parallel to the santhdgire or 
Khattiya (nobles) mote hall. Cf. Dialogues, i, 113, 0.2. BB, amplifies 
the meagre account. Negleot of parents waa punishable by death. _ 

The sons fall at the father's feet, who withdraws his charge and 
bids them support him. 

* Tata, tata; the general familiar masculine appellative. We have 
nothing quite similar, 

1 Dange is here, I think, used in ita double sense of recluse's stuff, 
and legal punishment, The fact that he had arraigned his sons before 
the citizens in the hope of gaining redress gives point, lacking other- 
wise to these lines. ‘He goes on to show his bettered condition,’ is 
B.'s meagre comment. 

* The metaphors are so elliptically expressed that they seem mixed. 
‘1 was in the dark; the dawda guides me; I was in deep water: it 
steadies me, ete,” 


224 The Brahmin Suttas [TEXT i, 577 


And by the stick’s effective power 
I, though I stumbled, stand once more. 


Then that brahmin, when he had learned the verses taught: 
him by the Exalted One, recited them to all the folk assembled 
in the Chapter Hall, his sons being seated there also. There- 
after his sons led that brahmin to his house, and when they 
had bathed him, they each clothed him with a suit of raiment. 

Then that brahmin, taking one of the suits, went to visit 
the Exalted One and, exchanging with him the greetings and 
compliments of courtesy, took his seat at one side, and so 
seated, said: * We brahmins, Master Gotama, select a teacher's. 
fee for our teacher, May Master Gotama be pleased to accept 
my fee.’ 

The Exalted One, moved by compassion, accepted. 

Then that brahmin said: ‘ Most excellent,” efc.. efe. (as on 
§§ 1-3). 


§ 5. Pridestiff. 


Qn one occasion at Savatthi, there was a brahmin living 

there called Pridestifi1 He showed respect neither to his 

_ mother, nor to his father, nor to his teacher,* nor to his eldest 
brother. 

Now on that occasion the Exalted One, surrounded by a 
large congregation, was teaching the Norm. And if occurred 
to the brahmin, Pridestiff: ‘ This Samana Gotama, surrounded 
by a large congregation, is teaching the Norm. What if | 
were to go near? If he will talk to me, I will talk to him; 
if not, I will not speak to him.’ And he drew near and stood 
at one side, And the Exalted One did not speak to him. 


t Cf above, VIL1,§5. Evidently either a nickname: Mana-thaddha, 
ora mere nom d'occasion. CY. a similar character in Jenta (Psa, of the 
Brethren, CCX VII), the son of Pasenadi's chaplain, and with whom this 
Pridestiff should have been identified. Dhammapdla describes him 
as minathadde, and gives a similar narrative, 

® Unealuted an deariya (teacher) refused instruction, and, if the 
discourtesy proceeded from an ex-pupil, recognition. Comy, 


VII, 2, § 5] The Lay Adherents 225 


And Pridestaff thinking: * This Samana (rotama does not know 
anything,” was fain to turn back again. 

Then the Exalted One discerning intuitively the thoughts 
of the brahmin, addressed hin in the verse:— 


Not well is it to foster pride !* 
If there be any here, 

Brahmin, for sake of whom thou'rt come, 
Give him thy fostering care. 


Then Pridestiff thought: “The Samana Gotama knows my 
thoughts!" and there and then he fell on his face at the 
Exalted One's fect and kissed those feet and stroked them, 
telling his name: * Pridestiff am I, Master Gotama, Pridestiff 
am 1, Master Gotama !* 

Then the congregation was astonished, saying: ‘ O wonder- 
ful, sir! © astonishing, sir, is it! For this Pridestiff shows 
respect to neither mother, nor father, nor teacher, nor eldest 
- brother, and yet he utterly prostrates himself in this manner 
before the Samana Gotama.’ 

Then the Exalted One said to Pridestiff: ‘ Enough, brahmin, 
stand up and sit down in thine own place, whence belief in 
tne arose in thy heart. 

So Pridestiff sat down in his own place and addressed the 
Exalted One in the verse :— 

To whom should one show due humility,* 
Whom treat with reverence ? 

Whom should one offer honour and respect ? 
To worship whom is well ! 


TT OT 


' “In that he takes no notice of a high-bred person like me.” Com. 
The Burmese MS. of Dhammapala’s (omy, used in op et, reads: 
‘Na minabrihanag sadhu. Atthoy koriyoths, trdimana,” which is 

simpler than the reading in Feer's edition, and avoids the doubled 
iethmana, But it is otherwise awkward, and is leas courteous in 
tone, | 

1 Cf. Vil, U,$ 5, a. 2. 

‘ The Pali idiom is ‘(not) make pride.” Cf. Jat. iv, 388. 


Ll 


226 The Brahmin Suttas — [rext i, 178 


[The Exalted One -—] 
To mother and to father shouldst thou show 
* Humility, to eldest brother too, 
And fourthly to thy teacher: these shouldst thou 
With reverence treat, these honour and respect, 
These worshipfully to entreat 1s well. 


The Arahants, the Saintly Cool,t whose work 
Is perfected, and they sane and immune,* 
These peerless ones, docile,® thy pride subdued, 


In veneration hold. 


When he had thus spoken, Pridestiff, the brahmin, said: 
‘Most excellent,’ ete. » . . (continue as in the four preceding 
Suttas). 


$6, The Garneayer. 


On one occasion at Savatthi, a brahmin named The Gain- 
sayer! was living at Savatthi. And he thought: “ What if [ 
were to go to visit the Samana Gotama, and to whatever he 
says, | were to maintain the opposite f 

Now on that occasion the Exalted One was walking to and 
fro in the open air. And Gainsayer drew nigh and followed 
the Exalted One as he walked to and fro, and said: * Recite 
some doctrine, friar !’ 


[The Ezalted One —|] . 
Nay, not with thee, Gainsayer, with thine heart 
Corrupt and full of animosity, 

Sound thinking or sound speaking [shall I find). 


1 OY. Psa. of the Brethren, references in Index under ‘oool’ Bud- 
dhiam (1912), p. 175; and below, VI, $4. 

2 Cf. Pss. of the Brethren, references in Index under * sane.’ 

3 Lit. notestiff, supple-minded. The Br. MS. is here perhaps the 
corrupter reading: wihaecca mulnag althadedre, co we follow Feer, and 
let the pada refer to the brahmin. 

4 Lit, Happy-in-gainsnying, or opposing. If some one said: * it's 
all white? he would say: ‘it's all black,’ ete. Comy. 


vil, 2,.§ 7] The Lay Adherents 227 


Whoso can stnfe and discord of the mind! 
Suppress, and mve up enmity, ‘tis he 
In truth can apprehend whats soundly spoke. 


When he had thus spoken, Gainsayer the brahmin said: 
* Most excellent,’ efe. . . . (continue as tn §§ 1-5). 


& 7. New-Works. 

The Exalted One was once staying among the Kosalese in 
a certain forest. Now on that oceasion the Bharadvija 
brahmin “ New- Works “ was having [timber}work done in that 
forest. And he saw the Exalted One seated beneath a sala- 
tree cross-legged, his body in an upright posture and mind- 
fulness set up before his face® Seeing him, the thought 
occurred; “Tam enjoying the work that Tam having done in 
this forest. That Samana Gotama, what is he enjoying in the 
doing?” So New-Works drew nich to the Exalted One and 
addressed him in the verse:— - 


What enterprise of thine is being wrought, 

0 almsman, in the wood where sil-trees grow, 
That lonely in the forest though thou be. 
Enjoyment still is thine, O (rotama ? 


(The Kzalted One :—| 
No work in wood is left for me to do. 
Root-cut for me is wood and jungle all,5 


| Appasida, the opposite of that pleasure arising from satisfaction 
which is harmony. 

* Noon -tommite. On this expression B. confirma the interpreta- 
tion given in the Vin. Terta, ii, 350, wn. 2: cf. i, 189. This brahmin 
hud forest-trees cut and the timber framework ‘for gables, roof- 
terraces, ote., fitted, then carried to the town and sold, presumably 
for the vaddiaki, or worker in wood, to carry on withal. 

7 Cy, VIE, 1. § 10. : 

Ch ¥,§ 5, m. 2. 

5° B. doea not help us over the word wivabny (sic lege) or mawkbloy, 
Here it can handily mean * puppet-show, as in J. i, 6 (ef. Dialogues, 
i, 7, n. 2). The Sanskrit equivalent (rigeank) meana ety mologically 


998 The Brahmin Suttas [TEXT i, 180 


Thus I, all free from briars in the wool,! 
And with my heart unpierced,? alone may fine 
My joy, for whom regrets have ceased to be. 


When these words had been said, New-Works, the Bhara- 
dvaja brahmin, said: Most excellent,’ etc, , . . (ae #0 §) 1-6). 


§ 8. Wood-gathering. 


The Exalted One was once staying among the Kosalese 
‘1 a certain forest. Now on that occasion the numerous 
pupils of one of the Bharadvaja brahmins, lads gathering 
sticks, came into that forest. And so coming, they saw the 
Exalted One seated there cross-legged, the body fixed erect, 
and mindfulness set up before his facet And so seeing 
they sought out the Bharadvaja brahmin and said: “An 
it please you, sir, know that in the forest yonder a recluae 
is seated crogs-leaged, the body, fixed erect, and mindfulness 
set up before his face.’ Then the brahmin together with 
the lads repaired to the forest and beheld the Exalted 
One seated as they had told him. And seemg him, the 
brahmin drew near and addressed the Exalted One mm the 
verse*;— 


Thou who hast plunged in forest lone and void, 
In jungle depths, fearsome and perilous, 
With frame’ impassive, steadfast, beautiful, 


spreading in all directions; hence visiikay may be either (#) jungle or 

thicket, in apposition to cavay, or (b) an adverb to ‘eut*: ‘out oan all 
sicles,” 

' 4 Pane nibbanatho (for nir-ranatho) is again metaphorical, wood 

standing for lusts or passions (iesa-rana, Comy.) Cf. Pas. of the 
Sisters, LAT. 

2 Another favourite religious metaphor (op, eif. ver. 52 and Brethren : 
Index a0, ‘Dart.’). Ls there not bere another pun: A-slla=a-edlaF 
(As if we were to say: ‘and with my back wni-birehed.") 

3 Gy. VIE, 1, § 10. 

‘ These gathis are in Jagati metre, not used in this work till now, 
andl the diction, spoilt alas | in translation, is very beautiful. 

4 Bh, here supplics this word (kdya-visesnint). 


Vit, 2, § 8] The Lay Adherents 229 


© almsman, wondrous fair thine ecstasy." 
Not where they sing, nor even where is speech 
Thou bidest, but alone within the wood, 
A seer to whom the forest is a home. 
That thou thus dwellest lone and rapture-filled 
Reveals itself as wondrous strange to me. 
|For, sir, meseems if thou art fain to taste 
| Communion with the Lord of all the world,* 
In threefold? heavenly sphere most high reborn, 
Why then dost not, abandoning the woods, 
Untrod by man, work among us severe 
| Austerities that lift to Brahmi-world 1 


[The Exalted One :-—] 


AD longing or obsession of the heart, 

[n divers things deeply for aye engrossed, 

The promptings of desires® sprung from the root 
Of nesciénce:—together with their root, 

All these have I brought to an utter end. 

I [sit] unswayed, unhankering and aloof; 

With vision clarified all things I see. 

The coal supreme of blest enlightenment 

Is won, 0 brahmin, and | contemplate 

In secret places with a heart serene. 


When this was spoken, the Bhiradvija brahmin said: 
“ Most excellent !’ ete. . . . (ae in §§ 1-7). 


ar 


1 ‘The Comy. reads, with the Burmese, sundararapap, but ae-eiru? 
sans better, and gives the intensive su; ati-sundaray jhinay jhdyaa. 

2 Lolidhipati, ie. Great Brahmi. Comy. 

3 The Brahme-heaven is catalogued aa threefold with respect to 
inmates: retinue, ministers, great Brahmis, Cf. Vibhanga, 424. 

4 Kankha, and below a-kantho, usually meaning “doubt’ (ef. [Agha 
Nik. iii, 217), the prefix converting it into ‘desire,’ d-bankha, 
dropped probably for metrical reasons. But in Sanskrit bintha 
in only ‘ zi x." 

5 Pajappita. Jappa, lit. muttering, with tts prefixes, is a synonym 
of fobha or tanhd. See Bud. Pay. Eth, p. 279 fm. 6. B. echoes here 
the comment he makes there, (if. above p. 180, m, 2; 207, I 1, 


OTL 


230 The Brahmin Suttas [TEXT i, 185 


§ 9. The Mother-saintainer. 


On one occasion at Savatthi a brahmin who supported his 
mother! came to see the Exalted One, and, exchanging with 
him the greetings and compliments of courtesy, took his seat 
at one side. So seated, he said to the Exalted One: ‘Ola 
truth, Master Gotama, I seek my alms after the normal 
manner,? and so seeking them I maintain my parents. AmI 
not, sir, in so doine, doing what ought to be done f 

‘Yea, verily thou, brahmin, in so doing doest what ought 
to be done. Whoso, brahmin, seeks alms after the normal 
manner, and so seeking maintains his parents, engenders 
much merit.” 

In normal fashion whoso doth maintain 

His mother or his father, in this life 

Him for that cherishing the wise commend, 
And after death he wins the joys of heaven.” 


When this had been spoken the mother-maintaining 
brahmin said: * Most excellent! efe. . . . (as vm §§ 1-8). 


& 10. The Mendicant. 


On one oceasion at Sivatthi «a mendicant’ brahmin came 
to visit the Exalted One and, exchanging with him the greet- 
ings and compliments of courtesy, sat down at one side, nd. 
ssid to the Exalted One: © Both I, Master Gotama, am a 
mendicant and his reverence isa mendicant. What difference 
is there here between us ?’ 


[The Exalted One :—] 
No® man is rightly * mendicant ’ so far 
As he merely from others seeketh alms. 


1 Tt wos permissible, by the laws compiled in * Mann,’ for a brah 
to live by food given unasked or got by begging (IV, 4, 5), especially 
jn times of scarcity (X, 120), Hence neither this brahmi, nor the 
mendicant (§ 10), was necessarily a recluse. 

* Dhommend, us prescribed. I This Hole occurs in Ang. il, 69, 

‘ Bhikkhoko. See preceding Sutta, ® Occurs Dip, vers, 266, 267. 


vit, 2, § 11] The Lay Adherents 231 
And is he pledged unto a talnte norm,! 
Neither to that extent * almsman ‘ is he. 
Whoso, with us, hath in the higher life 
(Cast out both wickedness and [all the work 
Of piling] merit,* and by judgment sound* 
Fares through the world, * almsman * indeed is he. 


When this was spoken the mendicant brahmin said to the 
Exalted One: * Most excellent !" efe. . . . (as im $§ 1-9). 


§ LL. Sangarava. 


On one oceasion when the Exalted One was at Savatthi 
the brahmin Sangiravat was living there, and he was a Purity- 
by-Water man, believing* in purification by wate | evenin= 
and morning he made a religious practice of coin? dinwn inte 
the water.® 


t Taking vissay dhammay to moan * the whole law,’ Max Muller 
failed to grasp the point or the Pall. An ‘olmeman" is easenfially 
one who holds‘ right views’ wid shapes his life according to the sound 
judgments of the same. On viseoy, cf. Dis. § G25; At. 319: * putrid, 
‘rancid Both Commentaries on the verse refer to auch amella; ours 
also to ' bad norm’: that on Dip. to merely bodily act (aa the only 
rule of life). 

2 Max Miiller’s ‘good and bad,’ pace Nietzsche, is misleading for 
a European. (Fausbill’s too. See Sn. ver. 620.) Making merit and 
reaping its reward was mere lnyman’s ereed (ef, the preceding Sutitia), 
not that of a genuine bhikkhu, who by entering on the Path had 
renounced heavenly goals. 

2 Sunkhd, paraphrased in both Commentaries by fapa, and explained 
in Dhp. Comy. as the exercise of discernment cured philosophical 
judgment in regard to all things { Dip. Comy. iti, 393), 

4 Not the same, probably, as the brahmin youth of that name of 


Candalakappa in Kosula, Majjhima-Nik, ii, 200 f., with which of. above, 
VI, 1, § 1. 
* Pacceti. 


t Of. Pas. of the Sisters, LXV: dialogue between Pungé, or Punniké, 
and a brahmin of similar views, The practice especially when prac- 
tised three times daily, counted as o form of tapas, or self-mortification. 
Sep Dialoques, i, 232: Ang. i, 206; i, 206. 


; S 


232 The Brahmin Suttas [TEXT i, 182 


Now the venerable Ananda’ rising early and dressing 
himself, took bowl and robe and went into Savatthi for alms. 
Making his tour he dined, and on his return went to the 
Exalted One, saluted him, and took his seat at one side. So 
seated, he told the Exalted One of the views of Sangarava the 
brahmin, and said: * It would be well, lord, if the Exalted One 
would visit the dwelling of Sangirava the brahmin, ont of 
compassion for him.’ 

The Exalted One silently consented. And the next morn- 
ing early the Exalted One dreesed himself, and taking bowl 
and robe, set out for the dwelling of Sangirava the brahmin 
and, when there, seated himself on a seat that stood ready. 
Then Sangarava came up to the Exalted One, and exchanging 
with him the greetings and compliments of courtesy, sat down 
at one side, So seated, to him the Exalted One said: * Is it 
indeed true, brahmin, that thou art a water-purifier, and 
believest in purification by water; and dost thou make it a 
relivious practice to so down into the water both evening and 
morning {° 

* That is so, Master Gotama.’ 

‘Now what advantage, brahmin, art thou looking for, in 
that thou believeat and actest on this wise 

‘In this way, Master Gotama. The evil deeds that 1 do 
during the day, these by my bathing I cause to be borne away 
the same evening; the evil deeds that I do at night, these by 
my bathing 1 cause to be borne away the next morning. 
That is the advantage I look for, in that I believe and act on 
this wise.’ 


[The Exalted One :—] 
The Norm's a lake, virtue its strand for bathing. 
Clear, undefiled, praised by the good to good men, 


' According to B., Ananda and Sang&rava had, of laymen, boon 
friends, and the former was anxious to prevent * this wretch who, 
for all our friendahip, has contracted wrong views, from becoming o 
“ hell-filler: moreover, he has « large circle and hundreds may follow, 
if be is converted." 


VII, 2, § 12] The Lay Adherents ae 


Wherein in sooth masters of lore come bathing, 
So, clean of limb, to the Beyond cross over.* 


When this was spoken, Sangarava said to the Exalted One: 
“ Most excellent!’ efe. . . . (a# in §§ 1-10). 


§ 12. Khomadusea, 


Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying 
among the Sakyana ata Sakyan township named Khomadussa.® 

Now at an early hour the Exalted One dreased himself and, 
taking bowl and robe, entered the township of Khomadussa 
for alms. And just then the brahmin householders of the 
place were assembled in their place of council to transact some 
matters, and the god was raining drop by drop. 

Then the Exalted One came up to the hall, and they saw 
him coming from afar. And seeing him, they said: Who 
now are these shaveling friar-men ? And what can they know 
about council rules 1 

Then the Exalted One addressed the brahmin house-fathers 


of Khomadussa in the verse:— 


No ‘council’ that where are no pious gentlemen,* 
Nor gentle they whose speech observes no rule. 
They who have put far from them Inst and enmity 
And dulness, they become good gentlemen. 
When this was spoken, the Khomadussa brahmin house- 
fathers said to the Exalted One: * Most excellent! efe. . . 
{ax im §§ 1-11). 


1 Qoours VII, 1, § o. 

? Meaning ‘linen cloth’; ‘because of the preponderance (ussan- 
naif) of such,’ says B.; but whether as made there, or worn, oF both, 
docs not appear. I can find no other reference to the place. 

3 Lit. ‘hall-rule’ (eubAd-dAamma), According to B., there was 
side-antrance to wvaid disturbing those who wero comfortably seated, 
but the Buddha, aware that he would be creating or suffering dis- 
comfort, walked ‘straight’ in (ujukam eva jigacchati), angering the 
audience, He had previously ‘willed the rain to fall" The reason 
ia not given, unlesa it served! as an excuse for Laking shelter. 

‘ Santo: ‘ wise, good men.’ Comy. 


[TEXT i, 185 


CHAPTER VII 
THE VANGISA SUTTAS 


& 1. Gone from Home. 

Tuus have I heard:—The venerable Vangisu' was once 
staying near Alavi® at the chief temple* of that place, 
‘together with his tutor, the venerable Nigrodha-Kappa.* 
Now on that occasion the venerable Vangisn was a novice, 
not long ordained, who was left behind as custodian at the 
Vihara.> 

Then a number of women, gaily adorned, came into the 
pleasance to see the Vihirs. And seeing those women, dis- 
affection® in consequence arose in the venerable Vangisa, 
and lust harassed his heart, And then he thought: * Alas! 
the losgtome! Alas! nogaintome! Alas! how hard for me 
togain! Alas! no easy thing for me to gain! in whom disaifec- 
tion has angen, and lost harasses the heart. How were it 
possible here and now that another? should cause me to get 


- On the curious legend concerning his profession and conversion, 
seo Pua of the Brethren, p. 305 f. TB. gives it at the last of these Suttas. 

21s frequently mentioned in Poli literature. See JPTS.) 1558, 
p- Hl: of. Dhp, Comy. iii, 170; 261 f. 

2° Or shrine: refiyo, Comy. Probably erected by a pre-Buddhistio 
cult. See below, X, § 12. 

‘ See Pas, of the Brethren, p. 408 f.; Sn. ver, 342 f, 

0 Tt being bis firet year ond he unskilled in the bowl-and-robe 
usages, the Theras left him to guard sunshades, sandals, and staves, 
while they went for alms. Ciomy. 

* An-abhirati; ‘loyal love’ = ahhirati, a strong form of roti, CY, 
Mirn's daughter so-called, [V, 3, § 5: * Diseontent.’ 

T fe. in the absence of his * spiritual pastors and masters,’ as the 
Com y. Temarks, 

a e oie | 


Ys 2 Gone from Home 235 


rid of this disaffection and produce loyal love ' What if I 
Were now by myself to get rid of my disaffection and cause 
loyal love to arise’ And the venerable Vangisa by himself 
sot rid of his disaffection and caused loyal love to arise within 
him. In that hour he uttered these verses: 


Alas !! that now when I am gone from home 

Into the homeless life, these wanton thoughts 
Sprung from the Dark should flit about my mind! 
Were high-born warriors, mighty archers, trained 
In champion bow-craft, such a8 never Hee, 

A thousand, shooting arrows round about— 

/ But women! .. . well, far more than these may come, 
Yet shall they never wreck my peace of mind. 
Firmly established in the Norm* L stand. 

For even in his presence have I heard 

The Buddha of the sun's high lineage tell 

About the Path that to Nibbana goes, 

And there the love of all my heart is given.” 

Now that I alway in such mood abide, 

Dost think, vile one, thou canst draw nigh to me; 
Then shall I act in such wise, Death, that thou 
Wilt ne’er discover which the way | take.” 


t | give the rendering (with three alterations) as in the Pas. of the 
Brethren, 1209-13, and refer the reader to the notea there. B.'s com 
menta agree with those of Dhanmapéls (pointing to (2) 4 common 
source of materials, (b) dependence—see § 2, 1. 2), and ho, too, faile 
to make clear the syntax of achasaay apaldyinay, unless it be a genitive 
absolute. * Thousand,’ however, belongs to the bhowmen and not to 
their arrows, and has been corrected acoordingty. * The best archer,’ 
say the Commentators, © can only shoot one arrow at a time; women 
by appealing to the senses shoot five any moment i 

: Not dhommese, but dhamme su, or so, B, hoa Sdsanadhamme, 
‘rule, of Norm of the Teaching,’ or * Church," as we should say. 

3 ‘This in the ‘loyal’ love once more confessed and triumphant. 
Oy. the rato, ablirato of Pas. of the Brethren, ver. 742, and Sisters, 
vers, 350, 450, 

‘Of. Mara's baffled ignorance in IV. 3, § 3: of. also above, TV, 2. 
fi. 


236 The Vangisa Suttas rrexe f, 186 


§ 2. Disaffection. 


On another occasion, when the venerable Vangisa was stay- 
ing near Alavi, at the chief temple there, together with his 
tutor, the venerable Nigrodha-Kappa, the latter would enter 
his cell on returning from his alms-round and not leave it 
again till evening or the next day. 

Now on one such occasion disaffection arose in the venerable 
Vangisa, and lust harassed his heart. And blaming and com- 
posing himself by himself (as above), he in that hour uttered 
these verses: 


I? who had given up dislikes and dotings 

In all that stirs the lay imagination, 

May not make anywhere a haunt for lusting. 
He who from jungly vice* hath gained the open, 
From lusting free, ‘t 15 he 1s truly bhikkhu. 

All things material here on earth dwelling, 

Or in the upper air that’s based on land, 
Transient is all and all away 1s wearmg;— 
They thus discerning live who understand. 

To all that makes for life? the folk cleave ever, 


1 He waa vihdra-garuko (attached importance to keeping to the 
cell), Cony, 
2 See Pas, of the firethren, 1214-18. The metre in the text: 


— eee ir i 


le jc 


has not oceurred above, nor can | find a Pali name for it, The 
teadings differ here and there from thoge in the parallel passage; the 
discrepancies are indicated below. 

3 See above, VII, 2, § 7. The whole line amplifies the word nib- 

‘The Comy., reads oraio—tanhd-rahiio. The PTS. has a-nato, 
without inclination (nati), lit., aa with us, * unbent,’ a far better read- 
ing, and according well with the metaphor used: ‘ Unbending walks, 
“fishe...' 
8 Midtafa ; Theragithd muf[tjenta ; explained os ‘having wnder- 
stom.” 

®** The devices of the khandhas and kilesas,” Comy. 


vu, § 3] Disdaining the Kindly 237 


To things they touch, perceive! and see, and hear. 
Herein his will suppressing, unatiected, 

Adhering nowhere, him the wise call Seer. 

Of basis sixty-fold those wrongful notions* 

Fixed in the nature of the multitude, 

A bhikkhu he, who ne’er gives his adhesion 

‘To groups of these"; whose speech is never lewd.‘ 
Richly endowed, long since of self the master, 
Candid yet wise, and free from craving § power, 
The seer hath won the state of peace, and therefore? 
Perfect and cool awaits his final hour. 


§ 3. Disdaining the kindly. 

On another occasion, at the same place, the venerable 
Vangisa was despising amiable brethren because of his skill in 
improvisation.* Then blaming himself for such conduct, he 
of himself repented and in that hour utte red the verses? :— 


i See Psa. of the Brethren, 398, 7,9, Here Diammapdls quotes our 
Cony. by name, as taking pdtighe to mean ‘smelt and tasted,’ and 
mute to mean * touched "—a forcing the words to give the regulation 
list of the S senses, 1 have followed the more usual rendoring, with 
Dhammapale (altering the order for rhyme). 

* Another discrepancy. The PTS. ed. gives # line that doea not 
ecan, albeit tasita (trsita) is good, if rare and (7) late Pali (Dafiaonpsa,. 
[tl, 44). ‘The Comy. reads afha soatthi-nisnild aaamitukhi, the sa- being 
merely mel caus, and refers to six, not sixty, objects of sere. 

+ Kilesa-vaggate. Comy. 

‘ See Pea. 398, 0, 3. , 

& The curiously inserted paficen is referred by 8B. to the *atate of 
peace’: wibbanay paficcd. 

4 Papibhana, in popular usage, 45 here, that swift facility in adapt- 
ing knowledge and expressing it, which 18 590 marked by Vangisa's 
vhief talent, and for which he stood foremost (4.i, 24). Cf. this usage 
in the Jaymen's remarks: Dialogues, ii, 370; M. i, 378. Pafibhdina ia 
u department in the philosophy of patisnmbhida (ef. Pointa of Con- 
troveray, pp. 377 f.), and the Commentators as schoolmen naturally 
refer to it explicitly, or by exegesis, But they are here noneeessarily 
academic, B. pictures him seorning © theee old fellows’ * want of skill 
in text, commentary, or methods of * exposition.” 

7 Pes, of the Brethren, vere. 1219-22, and notes. The metre differs 
from that of § 2 only in Ist and 3rd padas. 


238 The Vangisa Suttas [TEXT i, 187 


Renounce conceit, thou Gotama’s disciple !! 
Wholly? from path of pride remove thy foot, 
Since with that path some time infatuated 
Long ere to-day thou truly didst repent.2 

By self-deceit: deceived this generation, 
Destroyed by vanity, is doomed to woe. 

For many an age in purgatory 

Will folk eaten by pride lament their doom. 


He weepeth not at any time, that brother, 
Path-victor, who the highest hath achieved. 
Both fame and happy conscience he enjoyeth. 
With truth they call him Seér of the Norm.‘ 
Hence in this life, strenuous, unimpeded, 
Dispelled all hindrances, and purified, 
Renouncing pride and vanity entirely, 

Calm and with knowledgze® doth he make an end. 


§ 4. Ananda. 


The venerable Ananda was once staying near Savatthi, 
at the Jeta Vana, in Anathapindika’s Park. And [one day], 
rising early, he took bowl and robe and went into Savatthi 
for alms, with the venerable Vangisa as his attendant 
recluse. 

Now on that occasion disaffection arose in the latter, and 
lust harassed his heart. Then to “Ananda he addressed the 
verse® :— 


1 FB. and Dh. agree. 

* Asesay (atbbag) belongs to the preceding pada. See Therageithil. 

3 Therog.: wppasdri Auied. B.—ahoai, 

‘ Therag.: Oldenberg selects dhamena-daso: Norm-seer, aa the 
Singhalese MSS. read. fafo is well in keeping with the foregoing 
Suttas, On fathatiay (an adverbial accusative?) ef. Sn. ver, 520: 
pavuccale tathata, 

® Di. paraphrases mjjdy" by vidhaya: of pride end-maker. Ft. has 
only vijfgya: by knowledge. 

© Pas. of the Brethren, vers, 1223-26. The incident may have taken 
place before Ananda became attached to the post he held so long, 


vitt, § 5] Well Spoken 239 


My sense with passion burns, my heart's aflame. 
Thou of the Gotamas,' compassion take ! 
“'T were well to tell how I may quench? [the fire]. 


[Ananda :—] 
Because perception is upset, perverse, 
Therefore they heart’s a-flame. Thou shouldst avoid 
[Looking at] lovely objects passion-linked. 
Look at thine acts as other than thyself," 
Tending to ill, and as devoid of soul, 
Eixtinguish this strong lust in fear lest thou 
Burn in the time to come again, again. 
And train thy mind, intent and well composed, 
To contemplate what is not fair to view. 
Let there be heedfulness concerning sense, 
And be thou filléd with a sane distaste. 
Study the absence of the Threefold Sign; 
Cast out the baneful bias of concert, 
Hath the mind mastered vain imaginings, 
Then mayst thou go thy ways calm and serene? 


§ 5. Well spoken. 


On one occasion, when he was at the Jeta Vana, the 
Exalted One addressed the brethren, saying: * Bhikkhus !’ 
‘Yea, lord,” they said responsive, And he spake: * Pos- 
sessed of four qualities, hhikkhus, is the speech that is well 
and not ill spoken, faultless and not blameable by the wise. 


1 Ananda was o Gotama, first cousin to the Buddha. 

* Nibidpanay: ‘a putting out’; eo below (extinguish). 

9 Porato. Cf. Pes. of the Brethren, p. 383, .n. 3. 5.'s exegeaim says: 
anitceato, ‘as transient’; in his usaal thirst for reference to categories, 
This pair of lines and the next pair are not in Theragithd. The first 
occurs in A, ti, 18, with matin? for poss. 

‘ Lit, study (or develop) the sign-less—a technical phrase of dov- 
trine, BL: ‘develop that insight due tothe destruction of the signs or 
appearances fof all things) suggesting permanence, happiness, and soul, 
which is called “the sign-less.”” 

© These eight lines occur in P4s. of the Siaters, 19, 20. 


240 The Vangisa Suttas [TEXT i, 188 


Of what four qualities ? Here, bhikkhus, if a brother speak 
well and not badly, speak righteously and not unrighteously, 
speak affectionately and not unkindly, speak truth and not 
falschood, his speech having these four qualities, is well 
spoken, faultless, and not blameable by the wise.’ 

Thus spake the Exalted One, and the Blessed One saying 
this, the Master spake thus further:— 


The good say: first let speech be micely said, 
And second, speak by good norm, not by bad, 
Next, ye shonld kindly, not unkindly speak, 
And fourthly, say ye what is true, not false. 


Then the venerable Vangisa, naing from his seat, and drap- 
ing his outer robe over one shoulder, atretched for his hands 
saluting, to the Exalted One, and said: ‘ It is revealed to me, 
Exalted One, it is revealed to me, Blessed One! 

The Exalted One said: * Be tt revealed to thee, Van- 
risa ! 

Then the venerable Vangisa extolled the Exalted One in 
his presence in suitable verses:— 


Whose ean speak a word whereby he works 

No torment to himself, nor causeth harm 

To fellow-men, that word is spoken well. 

Whoso can speak a kindly word, a word 

That's grateful to the ear, and lays not hold 

Of others’ faults, that word is kindly spoke. 
Truth is ambrosial speech’; of saints of old 

This was the ancient Norm*; on Troth and Good 
And Norm, ‘t is said, the saints do firmly stand. 


The Word which the Awakened speaketh, sure 
Safe guide to make Nibbana ours, to put 
An end to Iil:—that ts the Word Supreme. 


= a a — = 


1 * Resembling ambrosia by ita sweetness." Comy. The word is 
here used in ite nore primitive mythical meaning. 
* See above, I, 4,5 2; 8, § 3. 


Vit, § 6] Sdariputta 241 


§ 6. Sariputta, 


The venerable Sariputta was once staying near Savatthi, 
at the Jeta Vana, in Anathapindika’s Park. Now at that 
time the venerable Sariputta was instructing, enlightening, 
inciting, and inspiring the brethren by a sermon, delivered in 
courteous speech, without impediment, clearly enunciated, 
communicating the matter in hand. And those brethren 
with their whole mind applied, attentive and intent, listened 
with rapt hearing to the Norm. 

Then the ‘venerable Vangisa thought: ‘The venerable 
Sariputta and the brethren are thus engaged. What if 
T were to extol the venerable Sariputta in his presence with 
suitable verses ?* So he rose from his seat, and draping his 
outer robe over one shoulder, he bent his clasped hands salut- 
ing toward the venerable Sariputta, and said: * It is revealed 
to me, brother Sariputta ! it is revealed to me! 

* Be it revealed to thee, brother Vangisa.’ 

Then the venerable Vangisa extolled him to his face 
in suitable verses :— 


With insight [into mysteries | deep, 
And richly dowered with learned lore, 
Expert in methods true and false, 

The son of Sari.) greatly wise, 
Teacheth the brethren in the Norm. 
He teacheth both in brief outline, 
And eke expounds in full detail. 

And like the myna-bird’s* sweet song 
His exposition poureth forth. 

And while he teaches, they who hear 
His honeyed speech in tones they love 
Of voice enchanting, musical, 

With ravished ears, transported hearts 
Delighted, list his every word, 


i Hia mother was Ripssiri, his family name, Upatiasa, 
2 Salida, or rice-burd. Clough's Sift baler Dictionary calla it 
thrush: (urdus salicus. 


It 


242 The Vangisa Sutias [TEXT i, 190 


§ 7. Invitation. 
‘The Exalted One was once staying near Savatthi, in the 

East Park, at the Terraced House of Mizara’s Mother! And 
with him was a great company of bhikkhus, even five hundred, 
all of them Arahants. 

Now on that occasion the Exalted One, [presiding] on the 
fortnightly festival day nt the Pavyirana ceremony,* was 
seated in the open. And surveying the silent company of 
brethren, he addressed them: * Well then, bhikkhus, I invite 
you; have ye not aught wherein you blame me, in deed or 
word ? 7 

When he had thus said, the venerable Sariputta, rising from 
his seat, and draping his outer robe over one shoulder, bent 
his clasped hands saluting toward the Exalted One and said: 
‘Nay, lord, we blame the Exalted One in naught either in 
deed or in word. For the Exalted One doth cause a Way to 
atige where none had arisen, doth produce a Way that had 
not been brought about, doth declare a Way that had not 
been declared: he knoweth a Way, understandeth a Way, 
is expert in a Way, and now, lord, thy disciples following 
after thee, have made that Way their own.* I too, lord, 
invite the Exalted One: is there not aught wherefore he 
blames me, in deed or in word ? 

"Nay, Sariputta, naught is there for which I blame thee, 
iy deed orin word. Wise art thou, Siriputta, comprehensive 
and manifold is thy wisdom, joyous and swift is thy wisdom, 
sharp and fastidious is thy wisdom. Even as the eldest son of 
a king whose isthe Wh eel of Conquest rightly turns the Wheel 
as his father hath turned it, so, Siriputta, dost thou rightly 
turn the Wheel Supreme of the Norm, even as 1 have turned it."* 


1 See ITI, 2, § 1 

© of. Vin. Texts, i, 325 ff. A meeting held at the end of the rainy 
season, during which, members having dwelt cheek by jowl for three 
months, gievances might have mode themselves felt. g Mutual con- 
fession wus invited (pavdreti) on this valedictory occasion. 

2 ‘This is a formula of the Canon, Cf. &. i, 66;74f. mi, 8. 

4 CY. Pes, of the Brethren, vers, 826, 827;=8n. vera. 556, G57. 


“WIL, § 7] I nveiation. 243 


“Tf indeed, lord, the Exalted One have naught wherefore he 
blameth me, in deed or word, is there naught in these five 
hundred brethren wherefore the Exalted One blames them, 
in deed or word 2 

“There is naught, Siriputta, for which I blame these 
five hundred brethren, in deed or word. Of these brethren, 
sixty have threefold lore sixty have sixfold supernormal 
knowledge,* sixty are emancipated in both ways, and the others 
are emancipated by insight [alone],’4 

Then the venerable Vangisa, arising from his seat, and 
draping his outer robe over one shoulder, bent his clasped 
hands saluting toward the Exalted One, and said: ‘It is 
revealed to me, Exalted One! it is revealed to me, Blessed 
One !’ 

And the Exalted One said: * Be it revealed to thee, Vangisa.” 

Then the venerable Vangisa extolled the Exalted One in 
his presence with suitable verses :— 


To-day on feast-day, for full purity, 

Five hundted brethren are together come. 
Such as have cut their fetters, cut their bonds, 
Seers who are free from rebirth and from ill. 
And as a king who roleth all the world, 
Surrounded by his councillors of state, 
Toureth around his empire everywhere, 
Driving throughout this earth that ends in sea, 
So him, who is our victor in the war,® 

The peerless Master of our caravan,® 

We followers attend and wait upon, 

Who hold the triple lore, slayers of death. 


t* Bot not in thought’ (mane), remarks B., ‘the faults of mind are 
not apparent aa are those of word and deed *(orrather, are only apparent. 
as words or acts), 

* See above, p, Le. 

+ See above, VIL, 1, § 8, and VI, 1, § 5,9, 4. 

‘Cf, Dialogues, ii, 68, 70; Puggola-Paiiniatti, p. 14; J PTS, 1013-14. 
100, 

§ Agninst lust, hate, and ignorance. Cony, 

* * Borne ia he in the chariot of the Eightfold Path.’ Comy. 


244 The Vangisa Suttas [TEXT 1, 192 


All we are sons of the Exalted One; 

No sterile chaff! may amongst us be found. 

I worship him who strikes down craving § dart. 
I greet the offspring of the sun’s great line. 


¢ 8. A thousand and more. 


The Exalted One was once staying near Savatthi, at the 
Jeta Vana, in Anithapindika’s Park, with a great company 
of twelve hundred and fifty brethren Now on that occasion 
the Exalted One was instructing, enlightening, inciting, and 
inspiring the brethren by a sermon bearing on Nibbana. 
And those brethren, with their whole mind applied, attentive 
and intent, listened with rapt hearing to the Norm. 

Then the venerable Vangisa . . . [obtained permission from 
the Exalted One and] extolled him in appropriate verses >— 


A thousand brethren, yea, and more than these 
Attend around the Blessed One who here 

Doth teach the Norm, the passionless, the pure, 
Even Nibbana, where can come no fear* 

They hearken to the Norm immaculate, 

Taught by the Enlightened One Supreme. 

© wondrous fair the All-enlightened shines 
‘Mid all the Band of brethren as their chief. 
Mysterious spirit¢ thou, Exalted One, 

The seventh in the lineage of the Seers, 

Like a great storm-clond [in the summer sky] 
On thy disciples pouring plenteous rain. 


1 See Pas. of the Brethren, p. 403, #. 1. Palapo is, according to B., 
within empty and vicious. [1 also means prattle, chatter, but cannot 
well mean both, so I have withdrawn the double rendering. 

¢ The legendary number of the seventh Buddha's (Gotama’s) Ara- 
hants. See Dialogues, ui, 7. 

3 This striking compound a-kuto-bihayon, ‘the [having] no-whenece- 
fear, is applied cither to Nibbiina, #5 here, of. Pas. of the Sisters, vers. 
135, 333, or to the Buddha, v. 512; Brethren, vers, 289, 510, 831, 912. 
Cy. above, I, 5, § 6. 

4 Naga. Cf. above, 38, 1. 4. 


vin, § §] A Thousand and More 945 


And one of these from siesta-musing come, 
Full fain his [gracious] Master to behold, 
Thy true disciple, mighty Hero [see !], 

Low at thy feet Vangisa worships thee. 


‘Say now, Vangisa,! were these verses thought out hy thee 
beforehand, or have they been revealed to thee just on the 
spot.” 

‘Nay, lord, these verses were not thought out by me 
beforehand: they were revealed to me just on the spot. 

‘Wherefore, Vangisa, let yet more verses, not thought out 
beforehand, be revealed to thee just on the spot.’ 

‘So be it, lord,’ replied Vangisa, and in additional 
verses not thought out beforehand he extolled the Exalted 
One :— 

O'er Mara’s devious ways faring triumphant, 
Thou breakest up the fallows of our hearts. 
Behold him from all bondage our deliverer, 
Himself full fraucht* the harvest he imparts. 
Yea, thou hast shown a Way by many methods 
For crossing o'er the torrent safe to land ; 

And that Ambrosial thus manifested, 
Norm-seérs? inexpugnable we stand. 
Light-bringer, he hath pierced beyond. beholding 
Past all those stations [where we end our flight],* 
The topmost height knowing and realizing, 

He showeth us that vantage-point of sight. 


— — 


| Vangisa, thought the Master, does his work without hesitating, 
neither by developing « given statement, nor in reply to questioning, 
nor by pondering over it, He goes about tying gathiis together and 
making pada of aromatic powder, I must show the others how well 
he does it.” Comy. Vangisa, quickened in afilatus by the * encore,’ 
surpasses himself, 

* See Pas. of the Brethren, p. 404, n. 2. ° Full fraught’ (asap) fite 
better, I still think, than a-sitay (for a-nissifay) ; see Jdlaka il, p, 247 
(Comy.). 

1 See above, 238, a. 4. 

‘ Vitiiaya, or disfhi, Comy. Cf. Dialogues, ii, 66 f. 


246 The Vangisa Suttas [TEXT i, 193 


Lo! now in truth so well revealed, for trifling 
What pluce is there for those who learn his Lore ? 
Hence zealously within that Master's system 
Train ye alway, and while ye tram, adore. 


& 9. Kondafia. 

The Exalted One was once staying near Rajagaha, in the 
Bamboo Grove, at the Squirrels’ Feeding-ground, And the 
venerable Anfasi-Kondaniia,! after a very long interval, came 
to see the Exalted One, and coming, fell with face to earth at 
the feet of the Exalted One, and kissed and stroked them with 
his hands, uttering his name: “ I am Kondaiiia, Kxalted One! 
Tam Kondafifia, Blessed One !’ 

Then the venerable Vangisa ... (eholiding this, obtained 
leave and| . . . extolled Afifiasi-Kondafiia before the Exalted 
(ne in appropnate verses :— 

Who next to our great Wuked One was awoke,* 
Brother Kondania, strong in energy, 

The winner of a life of bhssful ease, 

Ever detached from every worldly tie. 

All that the Master's follower can win, 

If he the training in the Rule fulfil, 

All this Kondafifia step by step hath won. 
By study strenuous [of mind and wall]. 
Subhme in power and versed in triple lore, 
Expert the thoughts of others to desery, 
Kondanna of the Buddha rightful heir, 
Low at the Master's feet behold him lie, 


§ 10. Moggallana. 

The Exalted One was once staying near Rajagaha, on the 
slopes of Seer's Hill at the Black Rock.? And with him was 
a large company of brethren, even 500, all of them Arahante. 


! On his legend see Pes. of the Brethren, p. 284; Vin, Tents, i, 08. 
Forther, Bt. tells us, he had dwelt for 12 vears in the Six-Tusker Wood 
by the Mandikini lotus-pool a» haunt of Paccheka-Buddhas, be being 
much disinclined for touring about. 

2 So the (omy. * See above, [V, d, $a. 


vit, § 1] At Gaggara 247 


Now the venerable Moggallina the Great! intuitively dis- 
cerned the mind of these as being emancipated, void of the 
conditions of rebirth. 

Then the venerable Vangisa . . . [obtained leave und] ex- 
tolled the venerable Mogeallina the Great before the Exalted 
One in appropriate verses:— 

High on the hilly slopes diseiples wait, 
Holders of triple lore, slayers of death, 

Upon the presence of the seated Saint, 

Who hath transcended all the power of ill, 
And Mogegallina, great.in mystic power, 
Doth scrutinize in thought the hearts of all, 
And thus examining he finds them freed, 
And having naught wherefrom to be reborn 
So do they wait upon that Holy One— 

Who hath transcended all the power of il, 
And perfected on every hand his work, 
Himself with every virtue crownéd—GorTama. 


§ Ll. At Gaggara. 
The Exalted One was once staying at Champa, on the shore 
of the Lotus-pool, at Gaggara.? And with him was a great 
company of brethren, even five hundred, und seven hundred 
lay-adherents, and seven hundred lay women adherents, and 
some thousands of devas. Among them all of a truth the 
Exalted One shone exceedingly in beanty and in glory. 
Then the venerable Vangisa . . - [obtained leave and] extolled. 
the Exalted One in his presence with appropriate verses :>— 
As when the clouds have drifted from the sky, 
The moon shines as a sun immaculate, 
So thou, Angirasa,* great seer, yet more 
Dost gloriously the world illuminate. 


1 On Moggalliina’s powers see VI, I, 865, 0, 10. 

2 Expansion of nirupadhey. 

1 See Dialogues, i, 144; Ps. of the Brethren, p. 32, 1. 2. Champa 
was the capital of the Angas, now Bagalpur. 

‘ See Paa. of the Brethren, p. 251, . 1 


248 The Vangisa Suttas [TEXT i, 196 


§ 12. Vangisa. 


The Exalted One was once staying near Savatthi, at the 
Jeta Vana, Anathapindika’s Park. Now on that occ: shO0 
the venerable Vangisa had but a little while ago won Arahant- 
ship, and experiencing the bliss of emaneipation, in that hour 


he spake these verses :— 


Drunk? with divining art, of old we roamed 
From town and village on to town again. 
Then we beheld the All-Enlightened [fim 
Who hath transcended all that we can kuote]. 
He in the Norm instructed me [the Seer 

Who hath transcended all the power of wl, 
And when we heard that Norm our heart was glad), 
And faith and trust therein rose up in us. 
Hearing that Norm concerning body, mind, 
Sensations, objects of the same. and all 

The data of our knowledge—learning these 

I left the world to lead the homeless life. 


O surely for the weal of many folk . - - 

The Brethren and the Sisters, who have found 

And seen salvation’s system and its way,* 

The holy seer did win enlightenment .. . 

O welcome wast thou then to me who now, 

Have lived and studied at my Buddha's feet! . . - 


! B, here gives his legend, agreeing with that given by Dhanwna- 
pale, though not told in quite identical words, 

2 —Theragdtha (Pas, of the Brethren), vers. 1250-62, but omitting 
several padas and even whole lines. The portions omitted in the 8, 
are in italics, and below ore indicated by .. . 

1 On baveyya matio see above, [V, 2, § 3, and note in op. and foe, 
cif, just above. 

4 Niydmagataddasd, explained os having got to, and seeing the 
Nivadma—the * way,’ that is, of salvation, or “assurance” concerning 
it. Seo Points of Controversy, p, 177, 9. 1. 


[TEXT i, 197 


CHAPTER IX 
THE FORES! SUTTAS 


§ 1. Detachment.” 


Tavs have I heard:—A certain brother was once staying 
among the Kosalese, in a certain forest tract. Now on that 
occasion, while taking siesta, he indulged in wrong and evil 
thoughts connected with worldly matters® Then a deva 
who haunted that forest, moved with compassion for that 
brother, desiring his welfare, and wishing to agitate him, drew 
nigh to him and addressed him in the verses:— 

Into the wood fain for detachment come, 

Lo! how thy vagrant mind wanders without. 

As man for men, suppress all purposes®; 

Thereby shalt thou be happy, nid of lusts. 

Thrust out* thy disaffection ! heedful thou! 

Become** one of the good! that we approve.* 

For hard is it to (heat sic 2 the reek of hell.§ 


— —_— 


1 The echoolmen distinguish three forme of vireka : rr af the body, 
or physical solitude, (2) of the mind, (3) of NibtMina, or reverance from 
all aims connected with worldly, or any other form of life. 

® (eha-: lit. domestic life, and life in the world generally (geAa = house). 

. Chanda, desire-to-do. Unpartioularized, the term often implies 
irreligious, worldly desire or intention; and dhamma- is sometimes 
prefixed in the opposite connection, 

* Pajahasi. ** Bhavisi. 

4 A very obscure line. The C'omy. reads sadiéyamimase, and has: 
‘him who is mindful, wise, we too are pleased. Or the meaning is 
“the norm of the good, that we approve.”" The text has aqrdyama- 
mase— we bear in mind." 

5 On gatala see I, 5, § 4; 1V,3,§5. * Reek' and ' dust" are in the 
Pali rajo, on which see p.5,n.2. Uhavenot anywhere else met either the 

compound pdtdila-rajo, or dur-uifamay, here rendered * hard to outstrip.’ 
250 


1X, §2] Ministry 251 


Be not swept down with reek of sense-desires. 
Just as a bird sand-flecked, shaking itself 
Throws off the dust adhering [to its plumes], 
So the good brother, heedful, strenuous, 
Shaking himself, throws off the adhering dust. 


Then that brother agitated by the deva, was greatly moved. 


§ 2. Ministry 
A certain brother was once staying among the Kosalese 

in a certain forest tract. And during that time, while he took 
siesta, he would fall asleep. Then a deva who hamnted 
that forest tract, moved with compassion for that brother, 
desiring his welfare, and wishing to agitate him, drew near 
and addressed him in the verses:— 

Arise, good almaman, wherefore seek repose ? 

What benefit dost thou in slumber find ? 

Good for the sick is sleep, and for one pierced 

Ath wounda, for one that suffereth from shock.* 

The faith and trust that made thee leave the world 

And give up home to live the homeless life— 

That faith shouldst thou develop and expand. 

But come not thou under the sway of sleep. 


(The Brother:—f 


Transient and fleeting are desires of sense 
For which slow wits infatuated long. 


- : Upathandy. ‘The usual reference to the title does not occur in 
the Butta. ‘Ministry’ probably refera to the fairy’s well-meaning 
officiousness. The legend is that the bhikkhu who slept was an ara- 
hant, but that be had very far to go to procure himself any food and 
returned tired out. 

* Ruppato. On this term e¢f. B.'s analysis given in my Buddhist 
Paychology, L014, p. 43: ‘ disturbed, struck, hurt, broken,’ namely hy 
physical causes. 

2 B. confesses himeelf uncertain as to whether these lines belong to 
the brother, or the deva. ‘It is not apparent in the commentary * 
jayrn pan’ ettha anutidna-pddavanpana), But if to the deva, the 
refrain implies * why zhould he not plague himself, for he will [have 
to] do sof’ namely, if he yield to somnolent habits. 


Phe The Forest Sutias [TEXT i, 19% 


Whoso is freed and leaneth not on bonds, 
The world well lost'—why should you plague the man! 


Whose insicht is well cleansed and purified 

By the suppression of desire and lust, 

By the transcending of all ignorance, 

The world well lost—why should you plague the man ? 


Where saving lore hath broken nescténce, 
And poisons of the mind are wholly purged, 
A man who knows not sorrow or despair, 


The world well lost—why should you plague the man ¢ 


He that hath summoned effort, put forth strength, 
And ever maketh vigorous advance,’ 

Aspiring to Nibbina’s [blesséd peace], 

The world well lost—-why should you plague the man ? 


§ 3. Kassapa of the Kassapas (or The Trapper). 

The venerable Kassapa of the Kassapas® was once staying 
among the Kosalese in a certain forest-tract. Now at that 
time, while taking siesta, the venerable Kassapa admonished 
a certain trapper.* Then a deva who haunted that forest 
tract, moved with compassion for the Brother, desiring his 
welfare and wishing to agitate him, drew near and addressed 
the venerable Kassapa of the Kassapas in the verses:— 

Come stalking in the fastness of the hills, 
A silly trapper dull of intellect:— 


i Free rendering of pabhajita—the religieux, recluse, who has * gone 
forth ® from * the world.’ 

2 See above, VU, |, § 7. 

2 Kassupa-golla: possibly not the bhikkhu so named who lived at 
Vdiecbhogama, in Kasi: Fin. Tera, ti, 256; A. 1, S36. 

* Cheto, The trapper waa pursuing a ‘red deer, when Kassapa 
intervened, protesting against earning a living by such cruel means. 
So B.. describing in detail the very natural preoccupation of the 
hunter with his quarry and the domestic larder, Cf. Anguttara, ill, 
182, § 7. 


rx, § 4] Many of Them, or On Tour 953 


"Tig loss of time to admonish him. Methinks 
A brother doing so is slow of wit. 
He hears but does not understand; he looks 
But seeth not. ‘Thou mayst recite the Norm, 
Yet will the fool not waken to his good. 
Nay, if thou wert to bring of torches ten,* 
© Kassapa, yet would he never see 
The things he should; 't is eyesight he doth lack. 
Then the venerable Kassapa of the Kassapas, disturbed 
by that deva, was greatly moved. 


§ 4. Many of them, or On Tour. 

Many brethren were once staying among the Kosalese in a 
certain forest-tract. And at the close of the rains, when the 
three months [of Lent] were over, those brethren set out on 
tour. ‘Then the deva, indigenous to that forest, missed them, 
and lamenting, uttered in that hour the verse:— 

I see these many solitary seats, 

By learnéd men of varied discourse used.” 
To-day regret and discontent are mine— 
Where are those Gotama-disciples gone ! 

When this had been said, a certain deva addressed this 

verse to him:— 
They've gone to Magadha, to Kosala, 
And some into the Vajjian land have gone. 
As deer that roam untrapped at liberty, 
Owning no home the almsmen pass their time." 


! ‘The legend runs that to test his attention the bhikkhu held up 4 
luminous finger (¢f. Dabba of the Mallas: Vin. Texts, iii, 4-18: Pas. 
of the Brethren, 10), hence the context. 

2 These were not solitary students, but 4 school collectively and 
ayatemutically engaged, according to B., in teaching and learning by 
heart the doctrines, and asking and answering questions, marking the 
hours by a bell (gant). 

4 "The verses occur in Mahavastu, 3, 420, 15, which reada magahi for 
maga, Magi occurs above, I, 2, §. 1; ¢- M. i, 173 f.; 306. 


954 The Forest Suttas [TEXT i, 199: 


§ 5. Ananda, 

The venerable Ananda was once staying among the Kosalese 
in a certain forest tract. Now at that time the venerable 
Ananda was excessively busy imparting matters to the laity 
And a deva, Indigenous to that forest, moved with compassion, 
desiring his welfare, and wishing to agitate him, drew near and 
addressed him in the verse: 

Thou who hast plunged in leafy lair of trees, 
Suitering Nibbana in thy heart to sink, 
Study, thou Gotamid, and dally not! 

What will this babble-babble do for thee 

Then the venerable Ananda, agaitated by that deva, was 
ereatly moved. 

& 6. Anuwruddha, 

The venerable Anuruddha was once staying among the 
Kosalese in a certain forest-tract, And a certain goddess af 
the heaven of the Thirty-and-three, named Jalini,? consort 
in a former birth to- Anuruddha, came to visit him, and 

dressed him in the verses:— 


There set thy heart's desire where erst for thee 
Was life, with the celestial Thirty-three, 
Whose is the attainment of all sense-cesires, 
Where thou wast beauteous with thy retinue 
Of heavenly maids surrounding thee their lord! 


 Aooording to the legentl, this wie just after the Master's pearini- 
hana, shortly before Ananda beeame Arahant, People knowing 
af his close attendatiee on hie Master wore ever asking him for details 
about the * Great Decease,’ mourning, and being admonished by him, 
He took the Buddha's bowl and tobe about with him. Rebuke in 
the same verse is ascribed also toa Vajjian thera, Vajjiputta; Pes, 
of the Brethren, exix. 

7 B. makes biflufika reler dircetly to the * talkee-talkeo* noise of 
the laymen’s conversation, Cf. Dhammapdéla’s explanation op. cit, 
foc. cit. 

1 f. Pas, of the Brethren, 329. She is, in our Comy., said to 
uve been his ‘chief consort.” Anuruddha was first cousin to the 


ve , 
LO 


1x, §7] Nagadatta 255 


[Anuruddha :-—} 
Ul-fated are such maids celestial, 
In their own sphere of life established, 
[ll-plighted, too, the beings are whose lot 
Brings them possession of these heavenly maids. 


[J alint® -—]) 
They know no bliss who see not Nandana, 
Abode of men and gods, renowned Thrice-Ten ! 


[Anuruddha :-—| 
Dost thou not know, O fool, how saints have said: 
*Impermanent are all conditioned things, 
Their nature "t is to rise and pass away; 
When they have risen, then again they cease; 
Happy the mastery of them and the peace.’ 
Now 18 there no new dwelling-place for me 
In realms celestial, O Jalini!- 
The endless line of birth is snapt in twain. 
Now can I never more become again. 


§ 7. Ndgadatta, 


The venerable Nagadatta* was once staying among the 
Kosalese in o certain forest-tract. Now at that time the 
venerable Nagadatta went too early to the village and 
returned in the afternoon. Then a deva who haunted 


ee "I a —_ lh 


. The sense acenia to require this distribution, but the Comy. ia not 
explicit, und there is no Wi to the preceding lines, However this is 
twice omitted in this Chapter ($§ 12, 14). 

' Sokbiyaeniy patithid. Adyo (body) may be used for wihiya, 
group, society. One gathers that these celestial nymphs were destined 
to be reborn in the infernal regions. So B, both here and in I, 5, § 6. 
They were * fixed * herein for eight moral defects of character, he writes. 
_ 9 She now gives the verse occurring in [, 2, § 1, Anuruddha respond- 
ing with the corresponding retort, and adding the last four lines, 
which are given in his Gaithi, Psa, of the Brethren, ver. 908, I give a 
tendering different only in form. 

4 Woe have not met with him elsewhere. 


256 The Forest Suttas [TEXT i, 200 


that forest, moved by compassion, desiring his welfare, and 
wishing to agitate him, drew near and addressed him in the 
verses -— 

[Into the town] betimes, 0 Nagadatta, 

Thou hiest thee, erst after noon! returning, 

Too long a time with laymen thou consortest, 

[Spending thyself] in pleasure and in sorrow.’ 

And much I fear lest this same Nigadatta, 

So reckless, in society entangled, 

May fall into the clutches of the Death-king, 

The Ender [of so many hopes and chances]. 

Then the venerable Nagadatta, agitated by that deva, was 

greatly moved. 


§ 8. The Housewife, or Engrossed. 


A certain brother was once staying among the Kosalese in 

a certain forest-tract. Now at that time this brother was 
living exceedingly taken up* by a certain family. Anda deva 
who haunted that forest, moved by compassion, desiring his 
welfare, and wishing to agitate him, assumed the shape 
of the housewife’ of that family, and went to the brother, 
addressing him in the verse;— 

Along the rivers, resting by the gates,’ 

In mote-halls and along the chariot-roads 

The folk foregather and discussions mse :— 

Of me it is, and thee—now why is this ?¢ 


| Died. Comy. ; majjhantike. 

? B. gives no comment on this unfamuilisr compound, snicneew- 

3 Adhilajjh)-ogalhapatte. HB. does not paraphrase, but narrates 
‘n detail how the family, charmed by the brother, devoted themsolves 
to him and made him their pensioner. 

‘ Kula-gharani. B. does not comment on this uncommon term. 

 Santhane, described as ‘o resting-place (mseamdnaffhane) near 
the city-gate, when market-wares had been brought down.’ 

@ Kim antaran ii: * what's inside 2" See Childers, who would have 
found B.’s comment: Kiy kdraya? confirm the definition (= Aefu) of 
the Abhidhdnappadipikasuci. 


1X, § 9] The Vajjian (or Vesaliyan) 257 


[The Brother -—] 

: Ay, there is busy to-and-fro of words,* 
And a recluse must bear it patiently. 
Not thereby should he feel annoyed, for not 
Thereby can come defilement or disgrace. 
Whoso at sounds is flustered and dismayed, 
Like any antelope within the woods, 
Men call him widdy-pated, feather-brained* 
The practice he may plan he'll ne'er complete. 


§ . The Vajjian (or Vesdliyan). 


A certain brother of the Vajjian clan? was once staying near 
Vesali, in a certain forest-tract. 

Now an all-night festival took place at Vesali, and the 
brother, hearing the throb and thrum of the music* and the 
noise of Voices, lamented, uttering in that hour the verse:— 


Each by himself we in the forest dwell, 
Like a stripped log left lying’ in the woods. 
On such a night as this [of revelry] 

Who more ill-plizhted in their lot than we ? 


Then the deva who haunted that forest, moved with com- 
passion for that brother, desiring his welfare, and wishing 
to agitate him, drew near and addressed him in the verse:— 


* Paccnha, 

' * That arises only through evil deeda done by himself." Comy 

* Two renderings for fahu-citto, 

3 By birth « raja (or oligarch of the Vajjin republic), who * had 
tesigned the umbrella’ (noble rank), omy. The story not quite 
verbatim is given in Theragithd tomy. The Therag. verse is slightly 
different (see Pas, of the Brethren, LAT), the deva there repeating the 
“wo of the first line, and using ‘me’ for *thee’ below. 

4° The thrumming of musical iInstromenta such as tom-toms, ete., 
and the noise of utes, ete., and talking.’ Comy. 

6 * Deprived of garments, and adornments like timber Inid aside. . . . 


Conny. 


li 


958 The Forest Suttas [TEXT i, 202 


Thou by thyself dost in the forest dwell, 

Like a stripped log left lying im the woods. 
And many a one may envy thee thy lot, 

F’en as the hell-bound them that go to heaven. 


Then that brother, disturbed in mind by the deva, was 
greatly moved. 


§ 10, Diligence (or Doctrines). 


A certain brother was once staying among the Kosalese in & 
certain forest-tract. Nowatthat time this brother, whose life 
had bean one of exceeding and abundant diligence, lived 
subsequently at ease, given to silence, and resigned.’ Then 
the deva who haunted that forest-tract, moved with com- 
passion for the brother, desiring his welfare, and wishing 
to agitate him, drew near and addressed him in the 
verse :— 

O almsman t why dost thou not con and study” 
The doctrines all, while with the brethren biding. 
Who learns the Norm winneth heart's satisfaction, 
And in this life winneth men’s commendation. 


[The Brother :—] 
Ay, once was mine will to acquire those doctrines, 
Until | met with that Pure thing and Holy. 
Now since I met with that Pure thing and Holy, 
And understood worth of what sense can teach us, 
(One thing remained :—] laying all that on one side— 
So would the good speak of it [not as slackness |. 


L'These three terms (appossukko, tuphibhifo, sanknsdya) occur 
in conjunction three times in the Sayyulle Nikaya, and, I think, 
nowhere elae, 8. ii, 177, they are also applied to the misunderstood 
conduct of » young arahant; 3, iv, 178, they are applied to the snug 
security of a tortoise tucked up in ita armour. On the third term see 
JPT'S. 1900, p. 22. 

= Vinigenati ariyamaggena (the Ariyan Way to Salvation). Lit. 
with the passionleas, 


$11) Want of Method (or Fancies) 259 


§ Ll. Want of Method (or Fancies). 


A certain brother was once staying among the Kosalese in 
a certain forest-tract. And at that time that brother was 
occupied during his siesta with evil and wrongful thoughts, 
to wit, with sensual, malevolent, and cruel thoughts. Then 
the deva who haunted that forest-tract, moved with com- 
pussion for that brother, desiring his welfare, and wishing to 
agitate him, drew near and addressed him in the versae:— 


Thou hast no thorough method in thy thought! 
Good sir, and hence art thou inebriate? 

With thine ideas. Renounce these muddled ways. 
Marshall thy thoughts in ordered governance 
Anent the Master, Norm, and Brotherhood; 

From virtue’s code let there be no recoil. 

So shalt thou reach [the goal of] joy, of zest 

And bliss and full assurance." Thence in joy 
Abounding thou shalt make an end of Til. 


Then that brother, agitated by the deva, was greatly 
moved, 


§ 12. Noontide, or Resounding. 


A certain brother was once staying among the Kosalese in 
a certain forest-tract. And the deva who haunted that forest. 
tract, drew near and before him uttered the verse4:— 


‘Tt is never eaay to find fit rendering for the important idiom 
fa]yomiso manaabira. See p.131, and ef. my Buddhiat Psychology 
(1014), 123, 160, and ef. the attempt in Pas, of the Brethren, ver, 209, ete. 

Thereat arose in me the deeper thought:— 

Attention to the fact and to the cane. 
Yomi is matriz, source; yoriso is * from” or * qua” yoni (the ablative) 
The other word (in the Suttas) is just ‘work of mind.” B. often para- 
phrases "ayoniazp by an-upayo, with{out) method, plan, system. 
‘Muddled ways *—«a-yonip, 

® Majjasi. The indivative, os here, very rorely oocurs, 

* Lat, the negative form: * rid of doubt" (a-saysaqy). 

* Oceure I, 2,55. Sugita, in the title, here replaces Sanamitna, 


260 The Forest Suttas [TEXT i, 203 


— 


"T is the high hour of noon; the birds rest silently. 
Boometh the mighty forest; fearsome that sound to me. 


[The Brother :—] 
“T is the hich hour of noon; the birds rest silently. 
Boometh the mighty forest; enchanting that sound to me. 


§ 13. Uncontrolled (or, Very many brethren). 


A great number of brethren were once staying among the 
Kosalese in a certain forest-tract, And they were muddled in 
mind, puffed up, vain, noisy, loose of speech, heedless, unintelli- 
gent, without concentration, unsteady in mind, uncontrolled 
‘n faculties, ‘Then the deva who haunted that forest- 
tract . . . (continue as tn preceding Suttas lo the verses — 
these ave verbatim, those in I, 3, § 5. £m conclusion, * the 
brethren were greatly moved,’ as stated in preceding Suttas). 


§ 4. The Red Lotus-blossom, or White Lotus. 


A certain brother was once staying among the Kosalese in a 
eertain forest-tract. Now while there that brother, after he had 
returned from his alms-round and had broken his fast, plunged 
- sto the Jotus-pool and sniffed up! the perfume of a red lotus. 
Then the deva who haunted that forest-tract, moved with 
compassion for that brother, desiring his welfare, and wish- 
ing to agitate him, drew near and addressed him in the 
verse — 

That blossom, child of water* thing not given,” 
Thou standest sniffing up the scent of it. 

This is one class of things that may be stolen. 
And thee a smell-thief must I call, dear sir. 


\ (pasinghati: the compound form 1 have only found at Jat. ii, 339. 

: Varija, * water-born.’ 

1 Almost equivalent in Pali to ‘thing stolen.’ It was, of course, a 
device of the fairy's to gain his (or her) end by shooting beyond the 
mark with this exaggeruted figure. ‘So occupied, he. will get into 
sensuous ways, and cravings will arise,’ the monitor thinks, Comy. 


1x, §14] The Red Lotus, or White Lotus 261 


[The Brother -—] 
Nay, nought I bear away, I nothing break. 
Standing apart [ smell the waters child. 
Now for what reason am | smell-thief called ! 
One who doth dig up water-lilies, one 
Who feeds on lotuses, in motley tasks! 
Engaged :—why hast thou no such name for him f 


|The Deva :—] 
A? man of ruthless, wicked character, 
y Foul-flecked as is a handmaid’s dirty cloth:— 
With such the words I say have no concern. 
But this *t is meet that I should say [to thee] :— 
To him whose character is voul of vice, 
Who ever maketh quest for what is pure:— 
What to the wicked but a hair-tip seems, 
To him doth great as any cloud® appear. 


|The Brother :—] P 
In truth, O fairy, thou dost know me well, 
And kind compassion for me moved thy heart. 
[ prithee, fairy, speak to me again 
Whenever thou dost see me do the like. 


[The Deva :—] 
Neither? am [ dependent upon thee, 
Nor yet hath euilty deed by thee been done. 
But thou, O almsman, thou thyself shouldst know 
How thou to blissful destiny mayst. go. 


Then that hd agitated by the deva, was greatly moved. 

' Mecuas, lit. ‘seattered,’ * heaped,’ is by B.'s exegesis made to 
connote (a) impure, (4) hard, * ruthless" or fudda, os in line 7. 

? The distribution of these linea between the two parties is not easy. 
The Comy. makes no effort to distinguish, and only explaina that 
it is they in whom is the capacity for salvation in this life who ore 
meet to be admonished, not they who are * past praying for." 

* + Like the crest of a walahaba" (cloud). Comy. 

‘ ‘The sceptical fairy judges that he will loan on his mindful moniter 
and live a elacker,and so‘ I will not consent," Comy, 


Fi 


[TEXT I, 206 


CHAPTER X 
THE YAKKHA SUTTAS 


£1. The Yakkha of Indra’s Peak. 

Tue Exalted One was once staying near Rajagaha, on the 
hill Indra’s Peak, at the haunt of an Indra’s Peak yakkha.t 
Now that yakkha drew near to the Exalted One and addressed 
him in t 

* Material form is not the hving soul ?:— 

So say th’ Enlightened Ones, Then how? doth soul 

Possess this body ? Whence to soul doth come 

Our bunch of bones and bowels 7* How doth soul 

Within the mother-cave suspended bide ? 


1* Pook and yakkhe each derived ita name from the other,’ is B.'s 
only ond quaint comment. An ‘ Indako yakkho’ finds mention in 
Petavotthu, U1, 9, 65 7. The myth of the yakkha, and ita evolution 


“gtill, I believe, await investigation. The English equivalent does not 


exist. ‘Geni’ (djinn) is perhaps nearest (cf. Pas. of the Sisters, p. 30)- 
In the early records, yakkha as an appellative is, like niga, anything 
but depresiative. Not only is Sakka so called (M. i, 262), but the 
Buddha himeelf is sq referred to, in poetic diction (Mf. i, 356), We 
have seen Kakudha, son of the gods, so addressed (TT, 2, § 8); and in 
D. ii, 170 (Dialogues, ii, 200), the city of the gods, Alakamandii, is de- 
seribed as ‘crowded with Yokkhas’ (*goda"). They have o deva's 
supernormal powers, and are capablo. of putting very pertinen® pro- 
blema in metaphysic and ethics. But they were decadent divinities, 
degraded in the later ora, when the stories to the Jalaba verses were 
set down, to the status of red-eyed cannibal ogres. C/. the older and 
newer view together in Pas. of the Brethren, p. 245. 

* Jivay, the vital principle constituting the entity or person proper, 
B.: actin, puggala. 

9 Neayey nu ayy. 

« Yakoi-na), liver, weed spabolisane for all the soft parte. fi. 


specifies 00 feahy units. 
282 


x, § 2] Sakka 263 


[The Exalted One"—] 
At first the kalala takes birth, and thence 
The abbuda. Therefrom the pest grows, 
Developing as ghana in ifa turn, 
Now in the ghana doth appear the hair, 
The down, the nails. And whatsoever food 
And drink the mother of him takes, thereby 

y The man in mother's womb doth live and grow. 


& 2. Sakka. 


The Exalted One was once staying near RAjagaha, on the 
Vulture’s Peak Hill.* Then a fairy named Sakka® drew near 
to the Exalted One and addressed him in the verse:— 


Tt is not well, not fit that thou, who art 

A friar, who hast all ties of every sort 
Renouneed, and dost emancipated live, 
Shouldst [spend thy life] exhorting other men.* 

‘ ‘The point in the reply is that the embryo evolves into the shape 
we know by laws of physical growth, and not by the instantaneous 
materialization wrought by a soul's jit, Cy. the argument as applied 
«1 the Aathdvatthu (xiv, 2; Fouts of Controversy, p. 284), and the 
interesting pendant supplied by Lucretiva in his maintaining cosmic 
law:— 

Nam fieren! juvenes subita ex wafantibu’ partia, efc. De Rerun, I, 
150 ff. 

The yakkha, says B., i# clearly an Animist (Puggalaradin), The 
Comy. gives interesting details in contemporaneous ombryology 
quoting githas from an untraced source on the subject. 

2 See Psalms of tie Sisters, pp. 25, G0. 

4 ‘There is no tradition, revealed in the Comy., that Sakka, roler of 
the Thirty-three Gods, is meant; this isonly ‘ eho yakkho Mirapakkhiko * | 
{one yakkga of Miira’s faction); cf. the same acousation brought by 
Mira (IV, 2, § 4). But that this deity was originally meant is no 


‘ Anusdsati, to give continuous, OF consecutive, systematic instruc 
tion, not merely “to teach" (deseti). He is free, yet he makes to 
himself ties, Few finer logia than the answer here given are to be 
found ascribed to any teacher, 


264 The Yakkha Suttas [TEXT i, 200 


[The Exalted One :—} 
Whate'er the apparent cause,* Sakka, whereby 
Men come to dwell together! none doth fit 
The Wise Man’s* case. Compassion moves his mind. 
And if, with mind thus satistied, he spend 
His life instructing other men, yet he 
Thereby is nowise bound as by a yoke. 
Compassion moveth him and sympathy. 


& 3. Suctloma, 


The Exalted One was once waiting near Gaya, on the Stones 
(ouch, at the haunt of the yakkha Suciloma.* 

Now at that time Khara the yakkha and erties the 
vakkha were passing by, not far from the Exalted One. And 
Khara said to Suciloma: ‘ That’s a friar.’ ‘No [rephed the 
other], that’s not a friar, that’s a mere shaveling,* at least 
until I know that he ’s the one and not the other.’ 

Then Suciloma came up to the Exalted One and bent lia 
body up against him. And the Exalted One bent his body | 
away. Then Suciloma said: * Dost fear me, fnar ?’ 

‘Nay, friend, [ fear thee not, albeit) contact with thee is 
an evil thing.® 

* Vanaq, 

' Sayedao (' living together"); Comy, ; “living os one, friendliness, 
amity." 

? Sappnine hi wtppaiia auabuddha, 

3 An expreasive statue of the yakkha Sucilome is among the has- 
teliefs of the Bharhit Stipa (Cunningham, p. 156). Tt and those 
of other yakkhas compare favourably with presentations of devas. 
The Stone Conch is, in the Sutia Nipita Comy. (i, 301), described as a 
long slab of rock resting on four upright rocks, Gaya comprised both 
a town and a landing-stage, and the Couch waa at the latter, but not 
far from the town-gete. Here the Master sat, awaiting his two 
converte-to-be. 

‘Soman, somapain, the affix ‘of appurtenunce” here haa, os bs 
often the case, a diminutive and contemptuous value. 

® Fousboll’s * sinful’ is misleading. 5. says: ‘shameful or unplea- 
gant, to be avoided like dirt, fire, or a black snake, not to be acquieaced 
in liv that golden-hued body,’ so he “bent away slightly o5 when one 


wal 


X, § 3) Sucilomea 265 


* Friar, [ will ask thee a question. If thou answerest me 
not, I will cither derange thy mind,! or split thy heart, or 
I will take thee by the feet and throw thee over the 
Ganges.’ | 

‘T see no one, friend, in the whole world, be he Mira or 
Brahma, nor among gods or men with all the recluses and the 
brahmins, who is able to do to me any one of these. things; 
nevertheless, friend, ask according to thy desire’ 


[The Yakkha :—] 
Say,? whence are caused passions of greed and hatred # 
Repulsion, love, terror:—whence have they being ? 
And whence spring thoughts into our minds down sinking, 
Like [tethered] crow pulled by boy-captors earthward ? 


[The Exalted One -—|] 
"T is hence are caused passions of greed and hatred. 
Repulsion, love, terror:—hence* have they being. 

And hence spring thoughts into the mind down sinking, 
Like tethered crow pulled by boy-eaptors earthward. 
Born of our likes and longings,* of the self 
The outcome. like the banyan’s trunk-born runners, 

They cleave in divers ways to things of sense, 
Like creeper intertwined in the forest. 


bends back the golden envelope of a piece of jewelry. Now’ the 
yakkho had hairs (foma) over the body like tapestry neniles (aiei); 
these he erected, assuming o horrid shape with wide-opened mouth." 
Khare ia described os having sooles like a crocodile’s back. Both 
cases were results of thefts from ‘the Order’ in « former birth.’ Comy,. 

1 Bither by making an appalling sight of himself before the Buddha, 
or by uttering fearful sounds, ete. Couny. 

* The verses are in fristhudh motre, interrupted by two lobes. 

® The simile is explained by B. as I give it: Boys pass a string round 
a crow's leg and their finger, and pull it down in its flight; so our evil 
thoughts springing from ourselves are polled back again into con- 
scien, 

4 Tonhd-snehalo pila. Conny. 

S Tio otfabhavate jaid, Comey. 


/ 


266 The Yakkha Suttas [TExT i, 208 


And they who know self and wherefrom it riseth, 
They crush it down—listen to me, O yakkha— 
They cross this flood, difficult, by them ne'er cross’d, 
So they may ne'er come back again to rebirth ! 


& 4. Manibhadda. 


The Exalted One was once staying among the Magadhese, 
at the Manimala Temple, in the haunt of the yakkha Man- 
bhadda’ Then that yakkha drew near to the Exalted One, 
and before him uttered the verse:— 


To one of mind alert luck ever comes; 
He prospers with 1 increasing happiness. 
For him to-morrow is a better day. 

And wholly from all hate is he released.? 


[The Ezalted One -—] 


. (repeating the first three lines) -. . 
Nat wholly from all hate is he released. 
For him whose mind ever by night und day 
In harmlessness, in kindness" takes delicht, 
Bearing his share in love for all that lives, 
In him no hate is found toward anyone.* 


§ 5. Sane. 


The Exalted One was once staying near Sivatthi, at the 
Jeta Grove, in Anathapindika'’s Park. 


1 These nomes have not been met with alacwhere. 

© Feer found the first stanza in his Burmese MS. only, and printa 
it in brackets. They are possibly interpolated to let the Exalted 
One make the usual response, for Buddhaghosa takes no notice of the 
corrected view, but comments only on the * Not wholly,’ eto. 

2 1 have inserted this term as representing the positive meaning 
of the negative term (a-Aipad). 

4 The last two lines occur in the Cakkavdka Jdtaka (iv, 71). B. 
gives mefiay «o and metiayso a8 alternative interpretations. The 
Ja. Comy. gives only the one I have adopted (meffd - apso, 
E ofthdso). ' 


x, §5] Sanu 267 


Now on that occasion Sinu,! the child of a certam lay 
adherent, was possessed by a yakkha. And the mother, 
making lamentation in that hour, uttered the verses :— 


ip To me? one of the holy men was he— 
So, have I heard, the holy men do say"— 
Yet lo! the sight that meets mine eyes to-day: 
With Sinu demons make their [cruel] sport. 
On fourteenth day and on the fifteenth day, 
And on the eighth of either half the month 
I ‘ve kept the feast, firm in the precepts eight, 
The extra-fasts,* learnt from the holy men. 
Yet lo! the sight that meets my eyes to-day :— 
With Sanu demons make their cruel sport. 


[The Demon (in possession of Sanu) :—] 
On fourteenth day and on the fifteenth day, 
And on the eighth of either half the month 


t ‘The story in this little drama-sutta is given briefly in the Comy. 
on Sanu's gatha (Pas, of the Brethren, XLIV.), and more fully im the 
Dhp. Comy. on ver. 326 (iv, 18 f.) and in our Comy. Sinu, whose 
pious mother had placed him in the Order os o child, leads o model 
‘career till he suffcra a normal relapso and recrudescence of worldly 
longing. In distmse and dishevelment he visite his mother and con- 
fesses hia dietracted condition. She prepares food to comfort him, 
but his previous mother, who had been a Yakkha, was now danghter 
of the gods and honoured exceedingly by them because of her late 
aon's piety. Anxious not to lows credit and to ‘save his soul,’ she 
intervenes and ‘possesses’ him, so that he falls in on epileptic fit- 
‘he mother takes him on her knees, with embraces and lamentation, 
The ex-mother ‘in’ the son warns her of her son's parlous state; the 
eon revives and wonders; the mother admonishea. 

Ie this so chu ¥ ‘The four lines are in Burmese MSS. only, and B, 
takes mo notion. 

3 The arahant was just a holy man to the average layman. (OF. 
Pas. of the Sisters, 130.) The line seems to resemble a ballad refrain, 
not always very pertinent. 

‘ These 24 lines occur in Pas. of the Sisters, p. 31. She now refers 
+o her own piety as meeting, no less than her son's, with unfair reward. 

¢ Qn this power ascribed to Yakkhas, Pisiichas, ote., of. Washburn 
Hopkine’s Religions of India, p. 415:— Asaociated with Skenda (the 


268 The Yakkha Suttas [TEXT i, 209 


Who keep the feast, firm in the precepts eight, 

The extra-fasts; who lead the higher life, 

With such the demons make no eruel sport. 

Our wise and clever Sinn thou shouldst tell:— 

This is the word that Yakkhas [venerate}]-— 

Do nought of evil open or concealed: 

If evil thou now doest or wilt do, 

Thou'lt not escape from pain and misery, 

Though thou spring up* and run in headlong flight.! 


[Sanu (coming to himself) -—] 

Mother, they weep for the dead, or the living they may not, 

But for him, O mother, who lives, who is here, w hy mournest 
thou me? 


[Phe Mother :-—] 
They mourn for son who lieth dead, or him 
Who is alive, but whom they no more see, 
And him they mourn, who though he did renounce 
The world, my son, doth hither come again, 
For though he live again, yet is he dead.* 
Drawn forth from burning embers? 0 my dear, 
Dost thou on embers wish to fall again ? 
Cast up from hellish regions, O my dear, 
Dost thou desire to fall into the abyss ? 
Run thou thy course; my blessing take with thee. 


Saivite battle-god) are the spirits, or * mothers,’ who afflict people. . . . 
Asin other lands, people are * possessed’ by evil spirits called graha’a: 
ecizers (Our Pali has gadifo, seized)... . The mothers are witches and 
live in cross-roads, cemeteries, and mountains, They may be of 
Dravidian origin...’ He refers to several passages in the Anugifa 
(Mahabharata). 

* I ppaced. 

' See Uddna, VI, 4; Pas, of the Sisters, vers, 247, 248. 

* Diammapdala quotes 8. ii, 271;—* This is death that one should 
reject the training and turn away to lower things.’ 

7 Of, Pointa of Controveray, p, 127, on the Gokulika theory of life. 


x, §6] Piyankara 269 


To whom give we occasion for offence ! 
The goods from burning house brought safely forth, 
Dost thou desire that they should burn again ? 


§ 6. Piyankara. 

The venerable Anuruddha was once staying near Sivatthi, 
at the Jeta Vana, in Anathapindika’s Park. 

Now on that occasion the venerable Anuruddha, rising as 
the night lifted, recited sentences of the doctrine* And the 
yakkha, known as Piyankara’s mother, hushed her little boy,* 
saying — 

Hush ! make no noise, Piyankara, 

The friar is speaking holy words. 
If we can hear and learn those holy words 
And practise them, it may be good for us. 
Lf we can keep our hands off* living things, 
If we can knowingly utter no lies, 
And train ourselves to do the things we ought, 
We may from goblin-sphere obtain release. 


§ 7. Punabbasu. 


The Exalted One was once staying near Savatthi, at the 
Jeta Vana, in Anathapindika’s Park. And on that occasion 
he was instructing, enlightening, inciting, and inspinng the 
brethren by a sermon bearing on Nibbana. And the brethren, 
with their whole mind applied, attentive and intent, were 
listening with rapt esti to the Norm.” 


1 ARE Very naturally B, specifies these as verses af the 
Diammapad«, namely, Nos, 21-32:—the Appamdda-vagga, He had 
formed « committee of 21 to consider interpretations of the text (fants); 
arpa after the Buddha's passing away. (CY. above, VI, 2, § 5. 

‘Starting from the western portion of the Grove, she . . . with 
her boy on her hip came unexpectedly on the settlement, and heard 
the aweet voice in the ciddra. Cut to the heart, and smitten to the 
marrow, she stood like « post’ while the child whimpered for food. 

* Say anise. 

2*'The hour,’ according to the Comy., “was toward sunset time; 
the Master after hia dinner had preached to « general assembly, had 


270 The Yakkha Suitas [TEXT j, 2t0 


_ Thena yakkha, known as Punabbasu’s mother, hushed her 
” little children thus:-— 


O silence, little Uttara! Be still, 

Punabbasu, that I may hear the Norm 

Taught by the Master, by the Wisest Man. 

‘ Nibbana,’ the Exalted One did say, 

‘Is the Deliverance from every tie’? 

And for that truth my love is passing great. 
Dear unto us is our own child, and dear 

Our husband; dearer still than these to me 

Is ‘t of this Doctrine to explore the Path. 

For neither child nor husband, though they be 
So dear to us, can save us from all ill, 

As can the hearing of the blessed Norm 

From pain and sorrow set a creature free. 

And in the sequent sorrows of this life, 

Linked as they are with age, decay, and death. 
That Norm in which He found enlightenment 
How there might be release from age and death — 


then gone to the bath-rooms, and thereafter had rested on the * Bud- 
dha-seat in the cell of the Fragrant Gable, surveying the eaktern view.’ 
Then certain ascetio brethren, in ragged attire, almamen, who had 
been touring singly, in pairs, or other numbers, came out from their 
quarters and, saluting, disposed themaelves round the Teacher like 
the red swathing (round a jewel). He, disnerning their wish, diseoursed 
to them. i 
* Nothing of special interest is recorded about this earnest-minded 
mother. * With daughter on hipand the boy's hand in hers, she comes 
round by the back fence or wall (padre) of the Grove to the entrance 
opposite the aisle (vithi) leading to the Buddha's seat, and fecing the 
hushed rapt audience fancies some market transaction is being pro 
posed, whence she may get serapa.’ Comy. 
* Buddha-sefthasea, lit. of the best of Buddhas (enlightenod per- 
SOms). ! 
4 fti-vuttaka, § 102 (ef. § 122; A, ii, 24), 
Not by the slothful wndiscerming mean, 
Phe fool, may the Nibbana be atinined 
That ia Deliverance from every tie, 


The last of verses concluding a short discourse on Nibbana, 


H x, § 5] Sudatta 211 


That is the doctrine I am fain to hear, 
Wherefore, Punabbasu, my son, be still. 


[ Punabbasu:—] 
Mother, I will not speak a word, and see, 
Still too is Uttara. So hearken thou, 
For sweet: it is to listen to the Norm. 
Because we haven't known the blessed Norm, 
Mother, we go on suffering here and now. 
To gods and men all in a muddled maze 
This is the giver of the licght:—that He, 
The Buddha to his final body born, 
The Man who Sees doth teach the Norm to men? 


[The Mother :-—] 
0) blessed words ! and wise the son I bore 
And cradled at my breast, for now this son 
Loves the pure Norm taught by the Wisest Man. 
 mayst thou happy be, Punabbasu ! 
For now am I uprisen from the round 
Of life renewed. The Ariyan Truths we see. 
Thou too, my Uttara! listen to me. 


§ 8. Sudatta. 


The Exalted One was once staying near Rajagaha, in Cool 
Wood. 

Now on that occasion the citizen Anadthapindika had 
arrived at Rajagaha to transact some business.? And he 
heard it said that a Buddha had arisen in the world, and he 


' Read cobkiwend ti. 

® Merchant's business. The story is given in Vin. Texts, i, 179. 
The high importance attached by tradition to this first meeting of 
the great lay-supporter of early Buddhism with its Founder may be 
the reason for the repetition of efforts made by the excited merchant. 
There is an eene atmosphere about the simple story that is Bunyanic. 
The Comy, amplifies the weird details and difficulties in the momen- 
tows quest of a millionaire breaking out of his groove, 


272 The Yakkha Suttas [TEXT i, 2IT 


hecame desirous of going to see the Exalted One. Then he 
thought: * Thereis no suitable hour for going to see the Exalted | 
One to-day; to-morrow then at the proper time [ will go to see 
him.’ And thus, dwelling in thought upon the Buddha, he | 
fell asleep, Thrice during the night he awoke, faneying it | 
was daylight,! and he went forth to the gate intothe Cemetery,” — 
and creatures not-human opened the gate. 

Then it seemed to Anathapindika, as he came out of the 
city, that the light vanished, and all was dark. Fear and 
trembling and creeping of the Hesh arose, and he became 
desirous of turning back. 

Then Sivaka the yakkha, himself invisible, caused a sound 
to be heard?:— 

A londred elephants and horses too, 

Ay, and a hundred chariots drawn by mules, 
A hundred thousand maidens, in their ears 
Bejewelled rings:—all are not worth 

The sixteenth fraction of a single stride. 
Advance, O citizen, go forward thou! 
Advance for thee is better than retreat. 


Then to Anathapindika the darkness vanished, and it 
became light, and the fear and trembling and ereeping of the 
flesh that had come over him were abated. | 

Now all this happened a second time, and yet a third time. 
And then Anithapindika came to (ool Wood where was the 
Exalted One. 


1 Waking, says B., after the first, and after the second watch, his 
rapture at the prospect of seeing a Buddha became 4 sensation of 
light. Going on to the open roof, he saw the moon, and returned to 
hed. The third time it was indeed daylight, and he went down to the 
‘geven-storied door’ intothestreet. Inthe acquel of what was probably 
the traditional narrative, B. gives the population of Rajagnha,—ot 
city, fuori fe mure and the suburbs—as amounting to sbout 

2B. eupports this Singhalese reading by swadnamagye, where the 
dead lay exposed and jackals howled. 

S Like blows struck on a golden bell, says B., who does not make 
the omission of referring the verse to the speaker. 


_ &, §9) Sukka 273 


Now just then the Exalted One had arisen as the day dawned, 
and was walking up and down in the open air. And the 
Exalted One saw citizen Anathapindika coming while yet 
afar. And seeing him, he came down from the terrace and 
seated himself on a seat made ready, So seated, the Exalted 
One said to Anathapindika: * Come, Sudatta !"! 

Then Anathapindika thought: * The Exalted One addresses 
me by my own name!’ and he fell at the feet of the Exalted 
One, and said: ‘ Lord, has the Blessed One rested happily (2 


[The"Exaited One :-—] 
Surely at all times happily doth rest 
The Arahant in whom all fire’s extinet 
Who cleaveth not to sensuous desires, 
Cool all his being, rid of all the germs 
That bring new life,‘ all cumbrances cut out, 
Subdued the pain and pining of the heart, 
Calm and serene he resteth happily 
For in his mind he hath attained to peace, 


9 9. Sukka (1)5 
The Exalted One was once staying near Rajagaha, in the 
Bamboo Grove, at the Squirrels’ Feeding-ground. 
Now on that oceasion Sukka, the Bhikkhuni, was teaching 


* Sudatta was so exclusively known by the title * given him by the 
people,’ says B,, of ‘Feeder of the Forlom,’ that he judged none 
{even in Réjagaha: his home was at Siivatthi) knew his personal 
name, and he had thought to test the Buddha's intuition by asking 
if he knew it. On the force in the weloome: EH (oome !), resembling 
Christ's ‘Follow me,’ see ss of the Sisters, p. G7: Brethren, Index 4.0. 

* A delightful touch is given by the naturalness of the nervous, 
wrought-up seeker faltering out this commonplace courtesy after all 
his prepared questions, broken night, and sensational walk, No lesa 
delightful is the way in which the gracious Teacher, by the same sirnapalis 
instrument, lifta him up at once to the lofty thoughts he wished to hear. 

* Brdhimayo parinibbuta, See above, I, 1, § 1. 

* Nirupadhi. Seo above, I, 1, § 2. 

" Cf. Pas, of the Sisters, XXXIV; American Lectures, p. Litt 


274 The Yakkha Suttas [Text i, 273 


the Norm, surrounded by a great congregation. And a 
yakkha,! enthusiastic about her, went into Rajagaha, going 
from chariot-road to chariot-road, from crossways to cross- 
ways,* and in that hour uttered these verses: 


What have ye, men of Rajagaha, done," 

That here ye lie** as though bemused with wine, 
Nor wait upon Sukka while she doth teach 

The doctriné of the Bourne Ambrosial— 

That source from whence there is no turning back,” 
That elixir that no infusion needs." | 
The wise methinks were fain to quaff [that cup], 
As waytarer [the droppings of] the cloud. 


§ 10. Sukka (2). 


The Exalted One was once staying near Rajagaha, in the 
Bamboo Grove, at the Squirrels’ Feeding-ground. 
Now on that occasion a certain lay-follower gave food to 
Sukki the Bhikkhuni. And a yakkha, enthusiastic about 
Sukka, went into Rajagaha, going from ch ariot-road to chariot- 
road, from crossways to crossways, and in that hour uttered 
this verse:— 


(0 surely plenteous merit hath he wrought, 
That layman wise who Sukka’s wants supplied— 
Sukka, who from all bonds is wholly free! 


i So called alao in the Aped@na account, but referred to in the 
Therigdtha Comy. as a devatd of the tree, the tree being at the end of 
the Theri’s * walking-ground,’ or open cloisters, As the Pali is yabho, 
evidently o male fairy 1s meant. 

* Singhdtaba. 

? Kim oa katd. "The me seems to be the dative of personal refer- 
ence, now obsolete in English; B., however, sees in it “me for ime 
(these). 

** Acchare. 

1 Because of satiety, when we turn away from that of which we have 
been drinking. C'omy. 

‘ Creates its own essential spirit or juice, needing no external in- 
gredienta, Cori. 


x, $1] Vira (or Cira) 275 


$ 11. Vira (or Cina). 

Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying 
near Rajagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, at the Squirrels’ Feed- 
ing-ground. 

Now on that occasion a certain lay-follower gave food to 

f Vira the Bhikkhuni. Anda yakkha, enthusiastic about Vira, 
did as the aforesaid yakkha, uttering the same verse. 


§ 12. At Alavi. 


Thus have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying at 
Alavi [and had entered] the haunt of a yakkha of Alavi. 

Then that yakkha said to the Exalted One: ‘Get out, 
friar |"? . 

"Very good, friend," said the Exalted One, and came out. 

‘ Come in, friar !’ 

‘Very good, friend,’ said the Exalted One, and came in, 

Thus did the yakkha order the Exalted One a second, and 
yet a third time, and the Exalted One complied each time, 


' Vird as the feminine form of Vira (cf. Pas. of the Brethren, VU) 
would seem to be the more likely of the two. © and ¢ in Singhaless 
ate almost identical Istters, Neither of them is found elsewhare. 
EB. is silent, 

* The story of this little opisode is given with great amplitude and 
in many identical words by both our Comy, and that on the Sutta 
Nipate, where the Sutta also occurs (fT, 10). Three salient features 
‘at least link it to the large Eroup of stories grouped ao ably by Dr. 
Watanabe under the name of Kalmasapida stories (JPTS,, 1900.10, 
p. 240 f.):—(1) The mat-cating yakkha, (2) the captured King saving 
himeelf by a promise, and the aanetity of that promise, (3) The oon- 
version of the man-enter. When the Sutta begins, the yakkha is 
represented as returning home and finding the Teacher seated in his 
dwelling and exhorting a respectful group of his women folk ‘as if 
he were master of the house.’ The Buddha has sought permission 


of amity, he judges the best way is to soften the yakkha by com- 
pliance. The yakkha, sxpecting a night's wrestling with the su per- 
normal powers of w Rishi, is dazed, and tries that compliance, thinking 


276 The Yakkha Suttas «(TEXT i, 214. 


And yet a fourth time the Alavan yakkha said to the Exalted 

One: ‘ Come out !’ 
‘ Nay, friend, I will not come out, Do what thou hast to 
do.’ 
‘| will ask thee, friar, a question, If thou wilt not answer, 
J will either derange thy mind, or split thy heart, or take thee 
by the feet and throw thee over the Ganges. 

*T see no one, friend, in the whole world, be he Mara or 
Brahma, be he god or man, be he brahmin or recluse, who 15 
able to do any one of these things to me. Nevertheless ask 
thou according to thy desire.’ 


[The Yakkha* :—] 
What here is the best wealth a man can have? 
What well performed brings happiness along ! 
What in cood sooth is of all tastes most sweet ! 
How do they say our life can best be lived 7 


[The Exalted One :—]| 
Faith here is the best wealth a man can have. 
Right deeds well done bring happiness along. 
Truth in good sooth is of all tastes most sweet. 
Life lived by wisdom, they do say, 1s best. 


[The Yakkha -—] 
0 say, how may we pass over the flood ? 
How may we pass over the watery waste ! 
How may we get past ill and auifering ¢ 
How may we win to utter purity ¢ 


[The Exalted One :—] 
By faith, surely, ye pass over the flood ; 
By zeal ye pass over the watery waste; 
By energy ye get past ill and woe; 
By wisdom utter purity ye win. 


t That the questions and aiswers had been handed down by the 
yakkha's parenta (who had them from Kassapa Buddha), written on 
a gold leaf (pofte) in ced ink, are o quaint feature in the legend. 


X, § 12] At Alavi 277 


[The Yakkha :-—] 
Say, how may wisdom be acquired ? 
Say, how may wealth be found ? 
How may we win fame and renown ? 
And how may friends! be bound ! 
In this world and where life shall be, 
How may we lose all misery ? 


[The Exalted One -—] 
Whoso believeth in the Norm 
Of Arahants, where lies the way 
To win Nibbana, fain to learn 
He should get wisdom, must display 
An earnest zeal, discerning wit.* 


Who doth what seemly is and fit, 
And on his back the burden bears 
With vigour, he may riches find; 
Speaking the truth he wins renown ; 
And fmends by giving he will bind. 
In this world and where life shall be 
Thus will he lose all misery. 


Whoso the layman's life doth seek 

In pious faith and hath these four:— 
Veracity and self-control, 
Steadfastness, generosity— 

When passed away, he'll weep no more. 
Yea, verily, I'd have thee ask 
Recluses, brahmins one and all, 

If any other like these four:— 
Veracity and self-control, 

A generous will and fortitude—* 


. Mittani, the neuter plural. Perhaps ‘kind acts’ are meant, 
See I, a, 3 a. 

* Vicakkhans, 

* Khanéi replaces dhiti. Tho preceding term, cdga, is in Pali un- 


278 The Yakkha Suttas [TEXT i, 215 


Are so effective found, that he, 
In‘this world and where life shall be, 
When passed away will weep no more. 


[The Yakkha -—] 

Now wherefore should I question these, 
Recluses, brahmins, one and all 
Who fully understand to-day, 
The causes of the after-life.1 

 O surely for my growth and good 
The Buddha came to Alavi. 
To-day I fully understand 
Where what is given rich fruit may bear. 
Lo! I will now a-travelling go, 
Village to village, town to town, 
To magnify th’ Enlightened One, 
The seemly Order of the Norm.* 


1 Aho sampardyile, * Growth and good’ just below is also atfha. 
EB. gives six meanings of *attho, and explains * causes,” and * growth and 
good” thus:—'causes": kdranass' efay odhivaconay: * growth and 
good": fildys vuddhiyd ca. 

* Dicmmassa sudhunmatd, lit. the fine normality af the Norm: 
‘So well proclaimed by the Buddha" is all that the Commentaries 
see in this striking phrase, often occurring in the Pes, of the Brethren, 


CHAPTER XI 
THE SAKKA SUTTAS 
i 
§ 1. Suvira. 
Tavs have I heard:—The Exalted One was once staying near 
Sdvatthi, at the Jeta Vana, in Anathapindika’s Park. And 
there the Exalted One discoursed to the brethren, saying: 
* Bhikkhus!’ ‘Lord!’ they responded, The Exalted One 
said: ‘In days gone by the Asuras marched out against’ the 
gods, Then Sakka, ruler of the gods, called to Suvira, son 
of the gods*: ‘ These Asuras, my dear Suvira, are come out 
against us. Go thou out to meet them.’ ‘So be it, lord,’ 


1B. seems to be ignorant of the bygone lustre of the word Asura 
—as=to Ahura [mazda], and » nome or title of Varuna. He gives his 
traditional version of the immediate antecedents of Sakka, as 4 
virtuous, public-cpirited citizen of 4 Magadho village, and of his 
rebirth in the lowest deva-world (on Mt. Sineru, or Meru) as ita King. 
Other versions are given in the Kuldraba Jiitaka (No. 31) and in the 
Mahdli-paitha story of the Comy. on Dhp. ver. 30 (i, 263 f,). Merely 
tonching on the good works of Sakka as the brahmin Magha, and on 
his seven Rules of Conduct (see 2, § 1 below), he names 33, not 30, 
co-operating fellow-citizens who were also reborn, a& they died, in the 
same heaven, ae if wishing it to be inferred that these became the 
* 33 gods" immediately beneath Sakka (see below, § 3). We may pre- 
sume that, for Buddhists, the thrones and powers of the 33 wero 
relutive pernman 4. like the Subketta (Sakka-hood) of Sakka, 
Gocupied dunoadaively by long-lived devas. B.'s version of the Asura 
ware is, that certain devas tried to get the vigorous and virtuous new 
rulers into their power by doping them with gandapans. Sak kon 
watned his comrades to abstain; the plotters alone got dead drunk 
and were thrown down Sineru, They formed a kingdom below, and 
lived a-sura, without atrong drink, trying from time to time to regain 
the lost Paradise. 
+ We do not meet elaewhere with Suvira, 
279 


250) The Sakka Suttas [TEXT i, 216 


responded Suvira, son of the gods, but he played the slacker. 
Yea, twice and even thrice did Sakka summon him; and twice 
and even thrice with no better result. 
Then Sakka, ruler of the gods, addressed Suvira, son of the 

roils, in the verses:— 

Where happiness is found at journey’s end 

By him who ne'er bestirs himself nor tries;— 

Go thou, Suvira, get thee to that goal, 

And make me-also thither find the way. 


[Suvira -—] 
For sluggard who bestirreth not himself 
Nought that he undertaketh ean he do. 
For one whose every wish hath reaped success 
What is the goal supreme,” O Sakka, say |? 


[Sakka —] 
Where sluggard who bestirreth ne'er himself 
Doth win his way to final happiness :-— 
Go thou, Suvira, get thee to that goal, 
And make me also thither find the way. 


[ Suvira -—] 
But may one without action, chief of gods, 
Such happiness discover and possess 
As sorrow and despair may never dim ? 
What is the goal supreme, 0 Sakka, say ? 


[Sakka :—] 
[fit may be that where no deed is done* 
No man comes anywhere again to birth, 
Nibbana is the way to compass that. 
Go thou, Suvira, get thee to that goal 
And make: me alo thither find the way. 


* Farad fi arnar, 1 *Say* is supplied by the Comy. 
? 4-bommena. B. is singularly wanting over these interesting 
verses, combining as they do (1) the doctrine of the non-accumulation 
of Karma (cf. p. 301, 7. 2), good or bad, with (2) the primary im- 
portance of strenuous persevering activity of 4 right sort: training 
in the Paths for no earthly or celestial reward. 


XI, 1, § 2] Susima 28! 


Verily, bhikkhus, Sakka, ruler of gods, subsisting on the 
fruit of his own well-doing, ruling over and governing the 
Thirty-three Gods, will be one who commends exertion and 
energy. Now in this Rule, bhikkhus, ye do enhance his 
words when ye, who have gone forth under a Norm and Disci- 
pline so well proclaimed, do exert yourselves, and strive and 
endeavour to attain to the unattained, to arrive where ye 
had not arrived, to realize that which ye had not realized. 


§ 2. Susima.! 
And with Susima, son of the gods, Sakka discoursed in the 


same words. 
§ 3. The Top of the Banner.* 


The Exalted One once, while at the Jeta Vana. addressed 
the brethren on this wise:— 

* Long ago, bhikkhus, a battle was raging between the gods 
und the Asuras. Then Sakka, ruler of the gods, addressed 
the Thirty-three Gods, saying: “ If in you, dear sirs, when ye 
are gone into the battle, fear and panie and creeping of the 
flesh should arise, look up at the crest of my banner. If ye do 
so, any fear and pani¢ and creeping of the flesh* that will have 
arisen will be overcome. If ye look not up to the crest of my 
banner, look up at that of Pajapati, king of the gods, . . . or 
at that of Varuna,‘ king of the gods, . . . or at that of sana, 


' He is called Sakka’s son; presumably the Susima, eon of the devas, 
of IT, 3, § 9. 


* This Sutta was trnuslated by the late E. R. Gooneratne m the 
Ceylon National Reriew, 1906. No graphic device is described by 
B. as forming the agga, or crest of the banner of these vast devas— 
Sakke's was 250 yojance in length, himself and his chariot of propor 
tional size—but from it the wind elicited music. Hence it served 
both as a bagpipes and as a visible rallying point. 

+ This triplet of terms ocvura in the Mara and Bhikkhuni Suttas, 
but not in the other Nikdyas, 

4 This interesting trio are repreaented os invoked in the Tevijja 
Sutta, Dialogues, i, 310. On the first three, see Macdonell’s Vedic 
“if ythology. Isinu is an older name for Rudra, called euphemistioally 


289 The Sakka Sutias [TEXT i, 219 


king of the gods, and any fear and panic and creeping of the 
flesh that will have arisen will be overcome. 

Now, bhikkhus, in them that look up to the erest of one 
or other of these four banners, any fear and panic and creep- 
ing of the flesh that has arisen may be overcome, or again it 
may not. And why is this? Because Sakka, ruler of the 
sods, is not purged of passions, hate, or ignorance, is timid, 
given to panic, to fright, to running away,’ 

But I say thus unto you, bhikkhus: If in you when ye 
have gone into forests, to the roots of trees, to empty places, 
fear and panic and creeping of the flesh should arise, do ye 
in that hour only call me to mind and think: ‘ This, that 1s 
the Exalted One, Arahant, supremely enlightened, profi- 
cient in knowledge and in conduct, the Blessed One, who 
understands the world, peerless tamer and driver of the hearts 
of men, the Master, the Buddha for gods and men, Exalted 
One. Forif ye so call me to mind, bhikkhus, any fear, panic, 
creeping of the flesh that will have arisen will be overcome. 

And if ye cannot call me to mind, call to mind the Norm, 
and think: ‘ Well proclaimed by the Exalted One is the Norm, 
relating to the present, immediate in its results, inviting all, 
giving guidance, appealing to each, to be understood by them 
that can understand. For if ye so call the Norm to mind 
your fear .. . will be overcome. 

And if ye cannot call the Norm to mind, then eall to mind 
the Order, and think: ‘ Well practised is the Exalted One's 
Order of Disciples, practised in integrity, in intellectual 
methods, in right lines of action—to wit the four pairs, the 
eight groups af persons?;—this is the Exalted One's Order of 
Disciples worthy of offerings, oblations, gifts, salutations, the 
world’s peerless field for merit, Forif ye so call the Order to 
mind, your fear, panic, creeping of the flesh will be overcome. 


Siva (Bothlingk and Roth). So distorted had their mytha become 
for B., that he assigns them places immediately below Sakka, and 
henee presumably among the 33 | 

! See this sequence of terma, IIT, 4, § 4. 

* Those dissiples reckoned to have attained one or other of the 
Four Paths or Four Fruita. 


XI, I, § 4] Vepacitti, or Forbearance 283 


And why is this? Because the Tathigata, bhikkhus, Arahant 
Supremely Enlightened, is purged of passion, hate, ignorance, 
is without timidity or panic or fright, and fleeth not.’ 

Thus said the Exalted One, and the Blessed One so saying, 
the Masten spel yet further:— 


Whene’er in forest or in leafy shade 

Or lonely empty places ye abide, 

Call to your mind, bhikkhus, th’ Enlightened One; 
No fear, no sense of peril will ye know. 


Or if-ye cannot on the Buddha think— 
The chief, the senior of the world, the Bull of men—1 
Then call the Norm to mind, the well-tanght guide. 


Or if ye cannot think upon the Norm— 

The well-tanght doctrine wherein guidance lies— 
Then turn your thoughts to the Fraternity, 
Unrivalled field where men may sow good deeds, 


It ye in Buddha, Order, Norm thus refuge take, 
Fear, panic, creeping of the flesh will never rise. 


§ 4. Vepacitti,* or Forbearance. 

Again, at the same place, the Exalted One addressed the 
brethren :— 

Long time ago, bhikkhus, gods and Asuras were mingled 
in battle. And Vepacitti, ruler of the Asuras, addressed the 
Asuras, saying:— If, dear sirs, in the battle now raging 
between gods and Asuras, the Asuras-are victorious, the gods 
defeated, when ye have bound Sakka, ruler of the gods, hand 
and foot and neck,? bring him before me into the City of the 
Astras.’ 


! Norgastha, for sara-usnbha. Cf. Dhp. ver. 422, and Comy. 
iv, 231): * by his undauntedness.’ 2 Pronounce “chiti, 

?* Both hands and both feet, the neck muking the fifth,” and B. 
adds the curious comment: ‘ these five fetbers appear to the eye like 
4 web of rushes, or a spider's web, and obstruct movement. By thought 
‘only was he bound by them, by thought (cillena) only was he loosed. 


284 The Sakka Suttas [TEXT 1, 221 


Sakka also, bhikkhus, ruler of the gods, addressed the 
Thirty-three Gods, saying: — H, dear sirs, in the battle now 
raging between gods and Asuras, the gods are victorious, 
the Asuras defeated, when ye have bound Vepacittt, ruler of 
the Asuras, hand and foot and neck, bring him before me into 
the hall Sudhamma.’ ° 

Now in that battle, bhikkhus, the gods were victorious, the 
Asuras were defeated. And the Thirty-three Gods bound 
Vepacitti hand and foot and neck, and brought him before 
Sakka into the hall Sudhamma. And Vepacitti, thus bound, 
railed at and reviled Sakka as he entered and when he left 
the hall, with coarse and scurrilous words. 

Then, bhikkhus, Matali, the chanoteer, addressed Sakka, 
ruler of the gods, with the verse:-— 

Now is it, Sakka, that thou art afraid, 

Or because thou art weak that thou forbear st, 
When thou dost hear these speeches scurrilous 
By Vepacitti cast into thy teeth ? 


[Sakka :—] 
Nay, not from fear nor weakness do I bear 
With Vepacitti. How should any man 
Who lacks not understanding, such as I, 
Engage himself to bandy with* a fool 


[ Mfatali :—] 
But fools may only wax ever more wroth 
If there be none to put a stop to them. 
Wherefore by heavy chastisement and sharp 
Let the strong-minded man restrain the fool. 


. [Sakka -—] 
But in my judgment this alone avails 
To stop [the railing of] a foolish man:— 


t B."s list of scurrilous epithets is not without interest: * Thou art 
a thief, w fool, a bungler (mijho), a camel, a bullock, a donkey, a bell- 
man, & beast; there's neither heaven nor hell to be expected by such 
ns thou.’ 

* Pafieayyuje. 


x1, 1, § 4] Vepacitti, or Forbearance 285 


When he who has a mind alert, and sees 
Another filled with rage, growa calm and still. 


[ Matali —] 
In this, that thou dost patiently forbear, 
A grievous error, Vasava,' I see. 
For when the fool doth fancy: * 't 1s from fear 
He bears with me," the dolt will press you hard, 
Like cow [that charges] more when you do flee.” 


ee —| 
0 let him fancy as he will—or won't :— 
That I do bear with him because I fear. 
‘Mong highest matters of our spirit’s growth® 
Nought ranks above* forbearing patiently. 
Yea, surely he that hath the upper hand 
And beareth patiently with him that’s down;— 
Ever to tolerate the weaker side:— 
This the supreme forbearance hath been called. 
Whoso doth think the strength of fools is strength, 
Will say of the strong man: A weakling he! 
For the strong man whom righteousness doth guard, 
To bundy words comes not into his thought. 
Worse’ of the two is he who, when reviled, 
Reviles again. Who doth not, when reviled, 
Revile again, a twofold victory wins. 


1 See below, p. 205, 

? The metaphors are a little mixed. Loge (=ajfhattharati) 

‘ oreas you hard,” is to climb on to and over you,’ ‘ apread over,’ and 
is teed for ¢.g. parasitic plants. Jai, iii, 300. In the second figure: 
the herd watching two bulls fighting, will join in pursuit quickly 
enough when one af the two yields and runs away, Comy, 

3 Here is another instance of the use of the pregnant term affha in 
two shades of meaning. The Pali pada is sadattha-paraomd atthd. 
(Cf. above, X, § 12.) I take sad-attha- (sakattha-, Comy,) in the 
sense of ruddhi, * [spiritual] growth,’ and affhd in the sense of fa- 
rond, “ matters,’ * grounds,’ * causes.’ 


4 These verses occurred in VIL, 1, $ 2,-4. 


286 The Sakka Suttas [Text i, 222 


Both of the other and himself he seeks 

The good: for he the other's angry mood 

Doth understand and groweth calm and still. 

He who of both is a physician, since 

Himself he healeth and the other too, 

Folk deem him fool, they knowing not the Norm. 


Verily this Sakka, bhikkhus, ruler of the gods, subsisting on 
the fruit of his own good works, and ruling over and govern- 
ing the Thirty-three Gods, will be of those who commend 
forbearance and gentleness. Now in this Rule, bhikkhus, ye 
do enhance his virtue when ye who have gone forth under a 
Norm and Discipline so well proclaimed become forbearing 
and gentle.’ 


& 5. Vietory by speeches, 

Another discourse at Savatthi:— 

‘Long time ago, bhikkhus, a battle: was raging between 
the gods and the Asuras, And Vepacitti, ruler of the Asuras, 
said to Sakka, ruler of the gods: “ Let the victory, ruler of 
the gods, be according to excellence in speech !’”’ 

‘So be the victory, ruler of the Asuraa !’ 

Then bhikkhus, the gods and Asuras, arrayed their 
audiences, saying: ‘ These will judge what is well-spoken and 
what is ill-spoken.’ 

Then Vepacitti said to Sakka: * Recite thou a verse, ruler 
of the gods!’ And Sakka replied: * Thou, Vepacitti, art here 

4 the older god; speak thou a verse.’ 
Then Vepacitti, bhikkhus, spoke this verse:— 


They that are foolish ever wax more wroth 
If there be none to put a stop to them. 
Wherefore by heavy chastisement and sharp 
Let the strong-minded man restrain the foal. 
Now the Asuras, bhikkhus, applauded the verse spoken by 
Vepacitti; the gods remained silent. 


) There is a pleasant humour in putting into Vepacitti’s mouth the 
verses In which Mitali arraigned him (eee § 4), but this is lost on B. 


xt, 1,95] Victory by Speeches 287 
Thereupon Sakka spoke this verse:— 
But in my judgment this alone avails 
To stop [the railing of] a foolish man:— 
When he who has a mind alert, and sees: 
Another filled with rage, grows calm and still. 


Now the gods, bhikkhus, applauded the verse spoken by 
Salkka; the Asuras remained silent. 

Then Sakka said to Vepacitti: ‘ Recite thou a verse, Vepa- 
cititi 1’ 


{ Vepacittt -—] 
In this that thou dost patiently forbear, 
A erievous error, Vasava, I see. 
For when the fool doth fancy: *"T is from fear 
He bears with me,’ the dolt will press you hard 
Like cow [that charzes] more the more you flee. 


Now the Asuras applauded; the gods remained silent. 
Then Vepacitti said to Sakka: * Recite a verse, ruler of the 
gods,’ And Sakka spake these verses:— 
O let him fancy as he will—or won't :— 
That one doth bear with him because of fear . 
The whole of the verses following these lines tn § 4 follow here. 


Then the gods applauded the verses spoken by Sakka, the 
Asuras remained silent. ‘Thereupon the audiences of gods and 
Asuras spoke thus:— 

‘The verses spoken by Vepacitti, ruler of Asuras, belong to 
the sphere of force and violence, of quarrelling, strife, and 
contention. The verses spoken by Sakka, ruler of gods, belong 
to the sphere of persuasion and mildness, of concord, amity, 
and harmony.t To Sakka, ruler of the gods, the victory by 
excellence of speech !’ 

And thus, bhikkhus, did Sakka win the victory by excellence 
of speech. 


1 | take the positive forms; none of the negatives given in the Pali: 
non-force, ete.—would appeal to us who prefer positive forma of ex- 


258 The Sakka Suttas [TEXT i, 224 


$6. Nests. 

Another discourse at Savatthi:— 

Long time ago, bhikkhus, a battle was raging between the 
gods and the Asuras, And in that ficht! the Asuras con- 
quered, the gods were defeated. And the defeated gods 
retreated towards the north, the Asuras pursuing them. 

Now Sakka, ruler of the gods, addressed Matali, his chario- 
teer, in the verse :— 

See that the chariot pole, O Matali, 

Keeps clear of nests ‘mong the silk-cotton trees,* 
Let us choose rather to give up our lives 

To Asuras than nestless make these birds. 

“So be it, lord! said Matali, and in obedience to Sakka he 
turned back the chariot with its team of a thousand thoroughly 
trained horses. 

Then, bhikkhus, the Asuras thought: ” The chariot of Sakka 
+. now turned back, the devas will engage the Asuras in a 
second battle. And terrified, they retreated into the City of 
the Asuras. 

Thus, bhikkhus, was Sakka victor by righteousness. 


§ 7. Not treacherously. 


Another discourse at Savatthi;— 

‘Long time ago, bhikkhus, to Sakka, ruler of the gods, 
meditating in private, this idea arose m his mind: “ Whoever 
may be my enemy, even him I may not betray.” ° 

Then Vepacitti, ruler of the Asuras, discerning in mind the 
mind of Sakka, came upto him. And Sakka saw him coming 


1 Here the Comy. gives, in its own words, another portion of the 
Kulavaka Jdfaka (see above, p. £70, w. 1). 

2 ‘The Simbali Vana, Silk-ootton-tree Wood (Bombax Heptaplyllum, 
according to the Wilsonian botanical lore incorporated by Childers 
in his Dictionary) stood on the slope of Mt. Sineru, and waa the abode 
of Garuda or roc-birda (ef. V1, 1, § 6). ‘These were great creatures, 
henee their nesta torn by the enormous chariot-pole of the deva's 
chariot is not s fancy so out of proportion as it might at first seam. 


XI, I, § 7] Not Treacherously 289 


from afar, and seeing him, called out: * Stop, Vepacitti, thou 
art my prisoner !’ 

“That which was just now in thy mind, dear sir, ranounce 
it not !' 

‘Thou mayest swear, Vepacitti, that I will use no 
treachery." 


[Vevaovs —) 
The evil fruit that from false speaking comes, 
The evil fruit from blasphemy of sainta,? 
The evil fruit from perfidy to friends," 
The evil fruit borne by ingratitude “— 
That evil fruit, O consort of Suja, 
He reaps who showeth treachery to thee. 


§ 8. Verocana, lord of Asuras, or Aims. 


Another discourse at Savatthi:— 

- Now on that oceasion the Exalted One had gone at noon 
to take siesta, and was meditating. 

Then Sakka, ruler of gods, and Verocana®, lord of Asuras, 
came to visit the Exalted One, und waited, leaning one against 
each doorpost.° 

Then Verocana spoke this verse before the Exalted 
One:— 

A man should only strive until 
His purpose? is accomplishéd. 

t Sapasen. Comy.: ‘1 being without perfidy, make thou an oath 
fon it)" 

2 * Like that of the Xotalitan' (gee VI, 1,5 10). Comey. 

0 * Ag in the Great Ape Jitaks,” Comy. The Mahd-kap Jdinka, 
No. 407, iii, p. 225 /., is meant, 

4B. instances Devadutta’s vaae. 

6 Presumably o name of Fepacith, meaning the Shining One or sun. 
B. passes him over. In the text-summary he is Virocano, 

» * Cf. above, VI, 1, $5 7, 8. 

7 Once more the elusive *attha. B. here paraphrases it by bicea: 

function, task, duty, something to be done, a meaning he did not 
W 


200 The Sakka Suttas [TEXT i, 225 


Verocana doth wtter this. 


| Sakka :-—] 
A man should only strive until 
His purpose is accomplished, 
A purpose shines when perfected. 
Nothing forbearance doth excel. 


[ Verocena —] 
All beings have some task in view 
Now here now there as they are ht, 
Food that is excellently blent 
Will every creature satisty." 
Our tasks when finished look their best:— 
Verocana doth speak this word. 
[Sakka :—] 
All beings have some aim in view, 
Now here now there as they are fit. 
Food that is excellently blent 
Will every creature satisfy. 
Nothing forbearance doth excel. 


& 9, Forest Seers, or Perfume. 
Another discourse at Savatthi;— | 
Long time ago, bhikkhus, many seers, virtuous and lovely 
in character, dwelt together in leaf-huts in a wild forest.’ 


include in the six given above (X, § 12). Atthajata ti biceajata. 
* From dogs and jackals upward, there is no being who ta a-kicenjate. 
(Is this ' born without « task,’ or * for whom no function has ansen * 7). 
His definition comes nearest to that meaning whioh be ells‘ wicakthapes 
and meane * discerned need": atfhi me altho . ‘T need. . 

t The figure is o little obsoure; the achiaved task is likened to a 
skilfully compounded, well-cooked rice-pudding, not fit to be eaten 
till ready. 

2B. places this in the Him@layas in charming spot fitted with 
day and night * cloisters’ ete. These two persons, father- and son-in- 
low (jana jamaliba-sovurd), he goes on, were sometimes at war, some- 
times in concord (ekato carenéi); just then they were the latter.’ 


XI, 1, § 9] Forest Seers, or Perfume 291 


And Sakka, ruler of the gods, and Vepacitti, lord of Asuras, 
came to visit them. Then Vepacitti, having put on his 
buskined shoes.) his sword hanging at his side, with his canopy 
of state borne over his head, entered the hermitage by the 
principal gate; whereby, having insulted? those seers, virtuous 
and lovely in character, he transgressed. But Sakka, having 
put off his buskined shoes, given his sword to others, and 
caused his canopy of state to be folded, entered the hermitage 
by a cate,* and took his stand to leeward of those seers, 
virtuous and lovely in character, rendering them homaye 
with clasped hands. 

Then, bhikkhus, those seers, virtuous and lovely in 
character, addressed this verse to Sakka, ruler of the 
works — 


The scent of seers long vowed to holy things, 
Fall'n from their bodies by the breeze is borne, 
And wafted hence to thee, O thousand-eyed !* 
The scent of seers is foul, O king of goda!’ 


[Sakka :—] 
The scent of seers long vowed to holy things, 
Fall’n from their bodies may the breezes waft, 
Like wreath of varied blossoms on the head. 
This is the scent; we look for, reverend sirs, 
Nought is there here to bring the gods disgust.® 


t B. explains afaliyo ne ganenguwapdhend. Cf. Vin, Texts ii, 14, 
uv. l:— with many linings’ (? soles). My guess is that they were 
buskins, state-footwear, or war ditto. The word occurs in the Ags- 
liyona-Sutta (Jf, ii, 155), where B. has the same comment, 

2 Apabydmato § koritvad, See Points of Controversy, p. 270, 
Me: 2 
7 We should have expected ‘side-door.’ See above, p, 20g. n. 3, 

‘ Suhassenella, iw variant of Sahasaokltha, See list of his names 
below, 295, 

& The perfume of virtue is described in Dhp, ver. 34. The smell 
of mankind, washed or unwashed, ix suid to ‘offend the gods « 
hindred leagues wway.’ Dialogues, ii, 355. Cf. below, p. He, 


292 The Sakka Suttas [TEXT i, 227 


§ 10. Seers of the seaxide, or Sambara. 


Another discourse at Sivatthi:— 

Long time ago, bhikkhus, many seers, virtuous and lovely 
in character, were living together in leaf-huts on the senshore,* 

Now at that time, bhikkhus, a battle was raging between the 
gods and the Asuras. And in those seers the thought arose:— 
‘The gods are righteous, the Asuras are unrighteous. There 
may be danger even for us° from the Asura. Whatif we were 
now to go to Sambara,” lord of Asuras, and ask for a pledge 
of safety 7 Then those Rishis, as quickly a8 a strong man 
might stretch out his bent arm, or bend in his arm stretched 
out, vanished from their leafhuts on the seashore and 
appeared before Sambaru. Then, bhikkhus, those Rishis, 
virtuous and lovely of character, addressed Sambara, lord of 
Asuras, in a Verse: 


We Rishis, come to Sambara, 
Entreat of him a safety-pledge. 
Do as thou listest. Give that we 
In peril or in safety dwell. 


[Sambara :—] 
Safety is not for such as ye! 
Who Sakka serve choose ill their time. 
To you entreating safety-pledge, 
Terror is all that I do give. 


1 A mythical spot by * the great geo of the Cakkavila, on sands 
glistening like sheets (patta) of gold. Comy. 

* B., reading no, explaina: siya ps amity). 

2 Jie, Vepacilli. See below, XI, 4, § 4. 

‘ Je. o ‘non-fear-gift.’ Bhaya has-the double sense of * fear’ and 
‘thing feared’ or ‘peril.’ The gift spparently consisted simply in 
the king's promise to give orders for their being unmolested, when the 
fighting came their way. Sakka, B. says, hod already conferred 
(manteted) with the Rishi«, and the Asuras, wrathiul lest this meant 
an enlisting of Rishia’ magic powers, had on one occasion smashed up 
their bermitage. 


x1,2,8t] The Gods, or The Rules 293 


And dost thou only peril give 

To us who ask for safety-pledge ! 
Lo! then accepting this from thee, 
May never-dying fear be thine ! 
According to the seed that’s sown 
So is the fruit ye reap therefrom. 
Doer of good [will gather] good, 
Doer of evil evil [reaps]. 

Sown is the seed and planted well. 
Thou shalt enjoy the fruit thereof. 


Then, bhikkhus, those Rishis, virtuous and lovely of char- 
acter, having laid a curse on Sambara, ruler of the Asuras 
strong man might stretch out his bent arm . - ., Van 18 
the presence of Sambara and reappeared in their leaf-huts on 
the seashore. But Sambara, on whom those Rishia had laid 
« curse, that very night woke up thrice seized with terror.’ 


If. 
§ 1. The Gods, or The Rules, 


Another discourse at Savatthi;— 

In the days, bhikkhus, when Sakka, ruler of the gods, was 
a man, he undertook and carried out seven rules of conduct, 
whereby he attained his celestial sovereignty. What were the 
seven ! 


t And this, writes B. graphically amplifying the slender narrative 
of Sambara’s nightmares, is how, his mind gotting deranged (wipati- 
cilfo), he came to be called Vepacitti (crazy-nerve). Cy. below, 3, § 4. 
That Rizhis, armed with their weapon of pflective cursing, should seek 
protection seems incongruoun, but it is « common trait in the Euro- 
pean fairy-story for the witch, ote., to erave a boon. 

t Seo Kulivaka Jataka and XI, 1, § 1 above. Cy. Milinda’s similar 
§ rulee, also called mfapadind (p. 90; tre, i, 138). 


204. The Sakka Suttas —_—([rexr i, 228 


/ 1, As long as I live, may IT maintain my parents. 
4. As long as I live, may I revere the head of the famuly- 
S. As long as I live, may I use gentle language. 
. As long as I live, may I utter no slander. 
. As long as [ live, with a mind rid of stain and selfishness, 
may I conduct myself in the home with generosity, with clean 
hands,' delighting in renunciation, amenable to petitions,* 
6. As long as I live, may I speak the truth. 
7. As long as I live, may I not give way to anger; if anger 
should rise, may [ awiftly repress it. 
By undertaking and carrying out these rules when he was # 
human being, Sakka attamed his celestial position. 


ae 


Whoso his mother and his father keeps, 

The senior in his family reveres, 

Converseth gently and with soft-toned speech, 
And all that makes for slander pute aside, 

Who sets himeelf all meanness to suppress, 

A man of truth, his temper ‘neath control:— 
On such an one the Three and Thirty Gods 
Do verily confer the name: Good Man.* 


§ 2. The Gods (2). 
Another discourse at Sivatthi :-— 
When Sakka, ruler of the gods, was formerly a human 
being, bhikkhus, he was a son of brahmins named Magha, and 
hence one of his names is ‘of the Maghas.”* As such, he 


' B. takes this literally, * hands always washen in order to givo gifts. 

2" Worthy of being solicited (by others), or devoted to the practice 
af soliciting.” Comy. Sakka, or Magha, being rich, this can only 
mean “devoted to raising subscriptions.’ 

3 Quoted in Diammapada Comy. i, 265. 

‘Seo Auldvala Jdiaka, and Dhammapada Comy., i, 263 f., where 
the Buddhs is made to address Mohali (see next Sutta). For a more 
scholarly comment on these titles see Rhys Davids in Pinlogues, ii, 
27, introduction to Subkka-Pofiia-Swia, The titles omitied above 
are Aoviya ond Sahasonetic (ace above, p. 21). 


4, 2, $3] The Gods 995 


bestowed gifts from town to town, hence one of his names is 
Purindada: ‘townlord-giver.. As such he gave munificently, 
hence one of his names is Sakka—' thorough’ (sakkaceay). 
As such he gave dwelling-places, hence one of his names 15 
Vasava: * house-owner.’ 

Sakka can in a moment think of a thousand matters, 
hence one of his names is Thottsand-eyed (Sahass'akkha). 

Sakka became consort to the Asura maiden named Sua, 
hence one of his names is Consort of Suji (Sujampati). 

Saka rules over and governs the Thirty-three Gods, hence 
one of his names is Ruler’ of the Gods. 

(The Sutta continues by repeating the whole of Sutta 3 1.) 


& 3. The rods (3). 

Thus have 1 heard:—The Exalted One was ohte staying 
near Vesali, in the Great Wood at the Gabled Hall. And 
Mahali the Licchavite? went to see the Exalted One and, 
saluting him, sat down at one side. So ‘seated, he said: 
‘Hath the Exalted One seen Sakka, ruler of the gods? 

‘1 have seen him, Mahali.’ 

‘Was that perhaps someone, your reverence, who looked 
like Sakka, for Sakka is surely hard to see ? 

‘1 know Sakka, Mahali, and those Norms that Sakka set 
himself, by the undertaking and carrying out of which he 
attained to his celestial position—I know them also." (Here 
follow Sakka's names, as im § 2, and Seven Rules, ax in § 1.) 


§ 4. The Poor Man. 

The Exalted One was once staying near Rajagaha, in the 

Bamboo Grove, at the Squirrels’ Feeding-ground. And there 
he stipe the breebten as as follows:— 
1 Peiinam-inda, On Inda and Indra, see op. ef foc, ev. 

1 Of. J aka, iv, 148 f., and Dp, Comy., toferences in Index (vol. v.), 

9 * Giving these aa a sample * of his great knowledge." Comy, B. refors 
to n fuller account of this little episode given in his Comy. on the Digha 
Nikaya (Sumangala- Vildsini). The dialogue occurs almost terbafim in 
the Sutta in Dhammepada Comy., i, 263 f. (on ver. 0), 


206 The Sakka Suttas [TEXT i, 232 


‘Long time ago, bhikkhus, a certain man dwelt in this 
Rajagaha, and he was poor, destitute? and of no account. 
He embraced the faith of the Norm and Discipline set forth 
by the Tathivatas, and the morals and the learning and the 
charity and the wisdom thereof. And because he did so, 
he was reborn, after death and the dissolution of the body, 
in the world of bliss and light, into the communion of the 
Three and Thirty Gods, where he outshone the other gods in 
beauty and in glory, Thereupon, bhikkhus, the Thirty- 
three Gods were verily vexed and fretted and were consumed 
with indignation at this strange and unheard-of event, that 
i poor pauper of no account, reborn from the world of men, 
should so outshine them. But Sakka spoke to them saying: 
* Be not vexed, dear sirs, at this son of the goda, for he, while 
yet a human being, embraced the faith of the Norm and 
Discipline set forth by Tathagatas, likewise the moral code, 
the learning, charity, and wisdom. Hence it is that he doth 
outshine you all.” 

And in appeasing the Thirty-three, Sakka, ruler of the gods, 
on that occasion spoke these verses :— 

Whose faith in the Tathagata 
Is firm and well-established, 

Whose moral code is pure and good, 
To Arivyans dear and by them praised, 
Who for the Brotherhood is filled 

With loyalty, whose vision’s straight :— 
* Not poor that man,’ they rightly say, 
Nor sterile is the life he lives. 
Wherefore the wise should cultivate, 
Teaching of Buddhas borne in mind, 
Faith, virtue, loyal piety, 

And clear discernment of the Truths. 7 


+B. Alte this term (kapane) aa * one th has ‘attained to > pity 
OF. the triplet in Suppabuddhn’s story, (dana, V, 3. 

= All these lines are in Ang. ii, 37, B.'s Comy. on them there (Mano- 
rathepirant) explains *loval piety" (peedda) as faith in the Buddha, 
Norm, Order, and dhowmaddssaneay os translated bere (the Four 
Truths). 


4 


~. 


XI, 2, § 5] Enjoyable 297 


& 5. Enjoyable. 

At the Jeta Vana, Sakka, ruler of the gods, once came to 
visit the Exalted One, and, saluting him, stood at one side. 
So standing, he said; ‘ What, lord, is by its situation enjoy- 
able 7 


[The Exalted One. :—] 
The varied beauties! of the park, the grove, 
Or lakes of lotuses and lovely line 
For man’s enjoyment are of little worth. 
In village or the wild, in vale, on hill, 
Where’er the ‘ men of worth —the Arahants— 
Their dwelling make, that is the spot 
By situation most enjoyable,” 


§ 6. For them that sacrifice. 


The Exalted One was once staying near Rajagaha, on Vul- 
ture’s Peak Hill. And Sakka, ruler of the gods, came to 
visit him, and, saluting him, stood at one side. So standing, 
he addressed the Exalted One in the verse: 

For mankind offering sacrifice, 

For creatures fain to earn reward, 

Who work good deeds for life renewed ; 
Where do the gifts they offer here 
Entail hereafter ample fruit ? 


[The Exalted One :—| 
The four who travel on the Paths, 
The four who in Fruition stand,* 
This Brotherhood whose way lies straight, 
In virtue and in insight trained:— 


! Cetya ‘in the sense of variegated, of many colours.’ (omy. 

In the Dip, Comy. (ii, 195) on ver, 06, these four lines are ascribed 
to the Buddha, but in the Theragatha (Pas. of the Brethren, vers. 901, 
992), to Siriputta, But in both works they are spoken concerning 
his younger brother Revata, and his love for wild or desolate places. 

4 Seo above, p. 282, a. 2. 


298 The Sakka Sutias [TEXT i, 233 


For mankind offering sacrifice, 

For creatures fain to earn reward, 
Who work good deeds for life renewed ; 
Whate'er they to that Order give 
Entails hereafter ample fruit. 


§ 7. Worshep. 


On one occasion, when at the Jeta Vana, the Exalted One 
had retired at noon to take siesta, meditating. Then Sakka, 
ruler of the gods, and Brahma Sahampati? came to see the 
Exalted One, and stood leaning each against a doorpost.? 
And Sakka, ruler of the gods, uttered this verse in the presence 
of the Exalted One:— 


Arise, O Hero, Vietor in the fight, 

Whose burden heth low,* who hast no debta® 
Walk o'er the world! 

Wholly emancipated is thy heart, 

Like moon at large on night of fifteenth day. 


[Brahma Sahamypati :-—] 
‘Nay, ruler of the gods, not so is the Tathagata to be wor- 
shipped, but on this wise:— 
Arise, 0 Hero, Victor in the fight, 
Who hast no debts, Lord of the Caravan, 


' Cf. above, pp. 103, 123 f. 

2 Of. above, VI, 1, § 1 f. and compare the verses in that Sutta. It 
was ‘up’ to B, to discuss the correction of Sakka'’s version by the 
‘higher oriticism* of the Brahma, but he passes it by. The latter 
insists on the missionary emphasis in the classic and orthodox version, 
He had interceded with the new Buddha to bring about his great 
muasion. 

acy. above other august door-keepere, VI, 1, 99 7, 8; AL 1, § 8. 

4 An epithet applied to the Arahant. (jy. smh such, Ponts 
of Controversy, p. 113, 

* Another euch epithet, bot confined to the Phera-theri-pitha 
(Brethren, vers. 780, 882; Pas. of the Sistera, vers. 2,110). * Debtless 
bliss" ia applied also to a layman in Ang., ti, 69, 


x1, 2, §§] Sakka’s Worshipping 


Walk o'er the world, 
And teach the Norm, 
Exalted One! there are who'll understand. 


§ 8. Sakka'a worshipping (1). 


Another address at the Jeta Vana:— 

Long time ago, bhikkhus, Sakka, ruler of the gods, sum- 
moned his charioteer Matali, saying: “ Harness, good Matah, 
the thousand thoroughbreds’ to our chariot, and let us go 
to the Gardens that we may see their beauty.’ ‘So be if, 
lord,’ responded Miatali, and obeyed. When the chariot was 
ready, he sent word to Sakka, saying: ‘ Harnessed, dear 
sir, are the thousand thoroughbreds to the chariot and await 
thy pleasure.’ 

Then Sakka, ruler of the gods, descending from the Veja- 
yanta palace, with clasped hands did obeisance toward the 
different quarters. 

And Matali the charioteer addressed to him the verses:— 


They of the Triple Lore do honour thee, 

And all the nobly born that dwell on earth, 

The Four Great Kings* and the renowned Thrice Ten.* 
But who may he, this yakkha,* be to whom 

Thou, Sakka, dost such aiznal honour pay ! 


[Sakka :-—] 
They of the Triple Lore do honour me, 
And all the nobly born that dwell on earth, 


1 Lit, the * thousind-yoked thoroughbred-chariot.’ On ‘ thousand * 
nasociated with Sakka, «f. two of his names above (2, § 2). Possibly 
» term of solar-myth origin. ‘ Bred’ is here to be understood in the 
sense of being thoroughly trained, of ‘good breeding,’ rather than 

‘good peiligree.’ Possibly it needed a horse of good strain to achieve 
that rotional development claimed by B. (and the Pali term) for o 
highly trained horse. See above, pp. 11, 4. 1; and 38 (i). 

§ Lower deities of the four quarters. See Dialogues, fi. 242. 

+ See above, ps. 1, n |. 4 See above, p. 262, mn. 1, 


300 The Sakka Suttas [rex i, 234 


he Four Great Kings and the renowned Thrice Ten. 
But I my homage render unte them 

Who, in all virtuous habit graduates, 

Long-time experts in mastery of mind, 

Leaving the world, by highest motives led,* 

Find in the higher life support and goal. 


And householders besides, who ment work, 
Laymen of virtue and of picty, 

Who with integrity maintain their wife,” 4 
To them I pay my homage, Matall. 


| Matas | 
Yea, [ have heard, the best in all the world 
Are these whom thou, Sakka, thus honourest. 
[ too do render homage unto them 
Whom thou thus honourest, O Vasava! 
Thus spake he of the Maghas, thus the king 
Of gods, Sujampati, and having paid 
To all the divers quarters reverence, 
Mounted his chariot and led the way.’ 


& 9. Sakka's worshipping (2). 

Another address at the Jeta Vana:— 

Long time ago, bhikkhus, Sakka, ruler of the gods, sum- 
moned his charioteer Matali, saying: “ Harness, good Matalhi, 
the thousand thoroughbreds to our chariot, and let us go to 
the Gardens that we may see their beauty.’ ‘So be it, lord, 
responded Matali, and obeyed. When the chariot was ready, 
he sent word to Sakka, saying: ‘ Harnessed, dear sir, are 
the thousand thoroughbreds to the chariot and await thy 
pleasure.’ Then Sakka, ruler of the gods, descending from 


! Sammé, who have ‘rightly,’ or * perfeotly” left, ie. from anddha, - 


* confidence’ in their object and course, not from lower motives. 
* Representing ‘the family.” Comy. 
9 * At the head of his deva-retinue.” Comy. 


BI, 2, $9) Sakka’s Worshipping 301 


the Vejayanta palace, with clasped hands did obeisance to 
the Exalted One. 
And Matali the charioteer addressed to him the verse: 


Thee, Vasava, both gods and men revere. 
But who may he, this yakkha, be to whom 
Thou, Sakka, dost such signal honour pay 4 


[Sakka -—] | 
The perfectly Enlightened, in this world 
With all its gods, illustrious Master, him 
L honour and revere, O Matali. 


They who have given up passion, enmity, 
And ignorance, the Ar hants poison-purged 
T honour and revere, 0 Matall. 


And they who by suppressing lust and hate 
And out of ignorance emerging follow on, 

As learners finding joy in pulling down,” 

And training with all zeal and strenuousness --— 
I honour and revere them, Matali. 


{ Matali —] 
Yea, I have heard, the best in all the world 
Are these whom thou, Sakka, thus honourest. 
I too do render homage unto them 
Whom thou thus honourest, O Vasava ! 


Thus spake he of the Maghas, thus the king 
Of gods, Sujampati, and having paid 

To the Exalted One due reverence, 
Mounted his chariot and led the way. 


1 ‘Those in the three lower Patha are being desuribed (gee Compen- 
dium, p. 217, § 19; Bud. Paych. Ethica, p. 95 J-). The Arahant was 
a-sekha; ‘ non-learner,’ or adept. 

8 See above, p- 250, 0. 1. Bud. Payoh. Ethics, p. g2, n. 2 


302 The Sakka Suttas (TEXT i, 235 


§ 10. Sakka's worshipping (3). 

.. . as in §§ 8, 9 to thy pleasure. Then Sakka, ruler of the 
gods, descending from the Vejayanta palace, with clasped 
hands did obeisance to the Order of Brethren. 

And Matali the charioteer addressed him in the verse:-— 


Surely ‘t is they should thee revere, 
These men who live in bodies foul, 

In carrion sunk, who hunger, thirst. 
What in these homeless houseless folk 
Canst see to envy, Vasava ? 

Declare to us how Rishis live; 

Thus will *t be ours to hear thy voice.* 


[Sakka :—] 
This in these homeless, houseless folk 
I see to envy, Matali— 
When from the village they depart, 
They go their way free from all care. 
In granary they nothing hoard, 
Nor storehouse-jar nor crate [is theirs]. 
Others make ready what they seek. 
Hence they maintain their goodly ways, 
With eloquent words in steadfastness. 
Or silent in serenity. 


1 ‘These terms, writes B., may refer to the material matrix, or to 
their own bodies, The gods were animistic, as was shown In the First 
Chapter, and would speak natu rully of the man, soul, aelf, as ‘immersed 
in” the body. 

? Sakka's voice was very sweet, like the sound of a golden bell 
proceeding from the exquisite screen of his teeth. Comy. 

4 These verses resemble Rohini's apologia for recluses (Shastera, 
LXV). Three of the lines: ‘In granary, otc.’ are included in her 
verses. But Piachel’s edition (PTS.) of the Therigathd gives parinif- 
fhitay ‘completed,’ where the Sagyutta has parawifthitay, ‘ made reacly 
by another.’ Their alms, explains B., are ” cooked * in * other’ folk's 
houses, made ready by ‘others'—an earthly, but safer substitute 


lb 


x1, 3, $1) What must We Slay? 305 


The gods contend with Asuras, 

And men fight alway, Matali. 
Non-combatant mid combatants, 

At peace where others go seli-armedd. 

Not laying hold "mong them that grip:— 
These do I reverence, Matali. 


[ Matali :—] 
Yea, I have heard, the best in all the world 
Are these whom thou, Sakka, thus honourest. 
1 too do render homage unto them 
Whom thou thus honourest, O Vasava ! 
Thus spake he of the Maghas, thus the king 
Of gods, Sujampati, and having paid 
T's Order of the Brethren reverence due, 
Mounted his chariot and led the way. 


Il. 
(The Sakka-Quintuplet. 
$1. What must we slay? 
At the Jeta Vana, Sakka, ruler of the gods, once came to 


visit the Exalted One, and saluting him, stood at one side 
and addressed him in the verse— 


What must we slay if we would happy live ? ete. 


for the loftier (and grammatically forced) guess of my earlier trans- 
lation. 

Again, the Therigatha has osenti for open!i=pahkkhipants: ' deposit" 
(* hoard *). 

1 ‘The second appended group of Five in these collections of Suttas, 
See Mira Suttas, p. 147. 

4 The Sutta appears for the fourth time (I, 8, § 1; 0, 1,5 3; VU, 
1, §.1). 


304 The Sakka Suttas [TEXT i, 237 


[To whom the Exalted One :—] 
Wrath must ye slay if ye would happy live. 
Wrath must ye slay if ye would weep no more. 
Of anger, Vasava, with poisoned source, elo, 


§ 2. Latlle Ugly. 

Another address at the Jeta Vana:— 

Long time ago, bhikkhus, a certain yakkha, ill-favoured, a 
pot-bellied dwarf came to be seated on the throne of Sakka, 
ruler of the gods. Thereat the Thirty-three Gods were 
annoyed, vexed and consumed with indignation at this strange 
and unheard-of procedure. Now in proportion as they be- 
came annoyed, vexed indignant, that yakkha grew ever 


handsomer and more presentable and more attractive. Then 


they went and told Sakka what had happened. And they 
asked: ‘ Will this, then, dear sir, be a yakkha who feeds on 
anger f° i 
Then Sakka came up to that anger-nourished yakkha, and 
draping his robe over one shoulder, and kneeling on his right 
knee, bent forth his clasped hands towards him, calling his 
own name thrice: ‘ I, dear sir, am Sakka, ruler of the gods t= 
Now in proportion, as Sakka did this, that yakkha became 
more and more ill-favoured and dwarfed and pot-bellied, tall 
he vanished there and then. Thereupon Sakka, taking ls 
seat on his throne, appeasing the Thirty-three Gods in that 
hour, addressed them in these verses :— 
Nay, not so easily put out am I, 
Nor in the whirl of passion lightly drawn.* 
Long time ye know‘ it is sinoe | was wroth ; 
In me wrath findeth no abiding place. 


1 Okotimako, explained us both lakunieke and mahodaro, in fact, 
quite a Punoch-silhouctte. 'Thia Sutta is translated in Warren's Bud- 
dhian in Translations, 426, The Master 19 in a humorous vein. 

2 Seo IL, 2, § 1. 

3 Kodhdvultena, so Comy., not -ratiend, 

‘ Fo, dative of reference, obsolete with us. I give the nearcat 
substitute. 


= 


oe 


XI, 3. § 3] Mage Art 305 


To harsh and auery words I give no breath, 
Nor to my creed may | inconstant prove. 
But 1 restrain and hold myself in check, 
Heedful of my own spiritual growth. 


$ 3. Magic urt. 

Another discourse at Siivatthi:— 

Long time ago, bhikkhus, Vepacitti, lord of the Asuras, 
wis il* and suffering, and much afflicted. And Sala, role, 
of the gods, went to Vepacitti to inquire after his health. 

Vepacitti saw him coming afar off, and said: ° Heal me, 0 


~ ruler of the gods !’ 


‘Then do thou, Vepacitti, tell me Sambara’s magic art.” 

‘Wait, dear air, till | have held consultation.’ 

Then Vepacitti consulted the Asuras, saying: ” May [, 
dear sirs, tell Saka, ruler of the gods, Sumbara’s magic art ? 

‘Nay, dear air, do not tell him ! 

Then, bhikkhus, Vepacitti, lord of Asuras, addressed this 


verse to Sakka, ruler of the gods:— 


Thou of the Maghas, Sakka, king of gods, 
Sujampati. the conjuror's magic art 
Leads to the dread abvas where Sambara 
The Asura hath been a century.’ 


© 8 ia xilent over this not very obvious clause. But I think Feer 
is right and Warren wrong: ° And ne'er proclaim my virtue’s fame’ 
(diammdnt). This neater plural is not unknown, but the proclaiming 
is precisely what the dear good god was doing! | read dhamend as 
equivalent to the instrumental dhammens. And sibittaye, *1 may 
not be false, or inconsistent to,” is good Sanskrit, though not vet 
found in Pali, Sakka's dharma (norm or creed) was eapocially 
Forbearance. 

t See above, 1,§ 10. *° Through the Rishis’ course.” (omy. 

5 Sambari(ya) mayd. Juggling, or ? white magic is all that sviqd 
ever means in carly Buddhist literature or in ‘Theravada literature. 
Anira-vidyd is used in the Srauta Siitras as u synonym for may, 
See Vedic Index, Macdonell and Koith, «2. 

4 Here is apparently a curious anomaly in B.'s commenta, (1) He 
has told us that Vepacitti’s real name was Soinbars, Ina. or roler of 

20 


306 — The Sakka Suttas [TEXT i, 239 


§ 4. Genileness at offence. 


Cn one oceasion, at the Jeta Vana, two of the brethren had 
a dispute, in which one of them gave offence. Aware of this, 
he confessed his offence to the other as such, but the latter 
would not accept his apology. 

Now many of the brethren went and reported this to the 
Exalted One, who said: ‘ Bhikkhus, there are two fools: he 
who does not see his offence as such and he who does not 
accept the other's right ruling. A wise pair were two of 
whom this one saw the offence as such, and that one ac- 
cepted the other's right ruling. 

Long time ago, bhikkhus, Sakka, ruler of the gods, when 
calming the Thirty-three Gods in the Sudhamma Hall, spoke 
in that hour this verae:— 


Let unger come beneath your sway. 
Be there in friendship no decay. 
Blame not where censure is not due. 
And be no slander apread by you. 
By wrath bad folk are overthrown 
As if an avalanche came down. 


the Asuras (1, § 10). (2) He calle the magician or conjurer whose art 
is known to Vepacitti, or is Vepacitti's, and who practised it, with 
direful results, Sambaro Asurindo, (3) He explains the last line os 
‘Sambara ruler of Asuras, a juggler, who, having practised maya (mayaet 
mayay payojeted) i “roasting since a century ago in purgatory: — 
and all without making any distinction between any fio Sambearns. 
The only inference is that there was 4 post of Sambaratta (Sambara- 
hood) as there was of Sakkntta (Sakka-hood), and that the * late * 
ruler of the Asuras had an art which was cither an heirloom tanght to, 
or an innate talent possessed by each succeeding Sambara. But what 
an opportunity for our good B. to hnve miseed ! 

The Asuras naturally fear to put more power into Sakka’a hands:— 
‘he will torment us, destroy us! Vepacitti advises him and his, as 
honest men (tumhe dhammika va), to keep clear of it (alay vo ma 
mdydye). The legend adda that Sakka’s other offer of healing wae 
to take Vepacitti to beg pardon of the Rishis, But to the champion 
of ‘frightfulness ' this was too much, 


XI, 3. § 3] Mildness (and Kindness) 307 


§ 0. JWdness (and kindness). 


Thus have I heard-—The Exalted One was once staying 
near Savatthi, at the Jeta Vana, in Andthapindika’s Park, 
There he addressed the brethren:— 

Lone time'ago, bhikkhus, Sakka. ruler of the gods, when 
calming the Thirty-three Gods in the Sudhamma Hall, spoke 
in that hour this verse:— 


Let anger not o'ermaster you, 

And rage ye not ‘gainst them that rage. 

For love and kindness [felt and shown]! 

Ever ‘mong Ariyans find a home. 

Bad folk by wrath are overthrown 

As when an avalanche comes down, 

'“Non-anger is love (or amity) at its inception (pubfabhdae)- 

non-oruelty 1s compassion in its inception ond after.” Comy, 


INDEX 


I—NAMES AND SUBJECTS. 


Annmird, Ii /. 

Abyes, 44, 205 

Action, deeds (famuna— karma), 
Ba, S81, 168, 280; «pecified 
effects of, ant right (diame | 
quinn), 27 

ante (a- ited [24 

See Decay, Life 
Aggivgate (thandha’, M41, 160 


Ajitanattn, ae of AMagatihn, 
38, m I; 
A ita SC cackambale, tH 
taka, iy ee oO ff. 
Au wi, 234 f., 27 
Alavite, the, bhikkehuwnt, 162 /. 
Alms, 145 f. 
Almaman (bhdhbhar), 15, 65, 84 f,, 
179, 231, 253 
Ambrosin-l, 14, 175 f.. 218, 246, 


274 

Ananda thera, his inference, 50; 
eulogy of Sariputta, 87 f.; 
corrected by the B., 119; 
mourns, 17; brings the B. to 
Sangarava, 232; admonishes 
Vangisa, 238 f. 

Anathapindika, 271 f.; his Park, 
1, 2h, 42, 46. n. 3, 50, 09, 1h, 
137, 140, 10, 176, 235, 241, 
O44, 248, 206, 269; Suttas ev- 
called, 73 f+ (reborn as deva), 


he ices, 103 
oe on, 


S04. See 


Angirasa, 107, 247 

Animal! kingdom, 47, [4 
Aiijana Grove, 77 

Antelope, 24, 257; Bank, 151 
Anurn ha, thera, ISS, 108, 254, | 


wt 


| Average man, 186 


| Bamboo Grove. 


| 


Arahant, 20, 2), 24, 36, 67, 106, 
is4, 220, 207, 301; destin 
unpredictable, od, [46; wor 

done, 67 f., 220; description of, 
178, 273 (brahmins), 201 /. 


See aise Saint. 
Ar avbuarits bi, formulas of, 07, 104, 


IT, : 
| Ariyan, 271. dee Path 
Ariyana, 58, 69, 188, 200), Zit 


Army, i), 110, 128 


Arunavat, 14 

Arunavati, [4 

Asani, devaputta, ih 

Asavas (* Drugs,’ * Poisons,’ * Pai- 


nip ey 20, n, 4, 21, 68, 
76, 200, 2; drug-immune or 
purged ‘Chiaanvay 21, 301 

Ascetic, austere, asceticism, aus- 
terities, ao f., 2, iat a oot 
(condemned), 18, 42, G1, 128; 
(eommencded), 77 

Assurance, 25th 

Asurinda, brahmin, 203 

Atmun, 56 f., 152, n. 2 

Avarice, 27, 29, 43, 47 


Baihuragpi, 40 
Bait (carnal things), 4, 
(reburths), 02 


L422; 


See Hiijagaha 

Banner, 50, 24] 

Bard, ot 

Base, support, 32 

Bathing, 214, 242 

eauty of complexion, ete.,. 1 f., 
ld4; of devas, 1 /.. 80; of nature, 
207; of heart. See Lovely 

Becoming, rebirth (bhava), 3, 40; 
current of, 214 

Ka 


r Cd he 


C{hjampa 


Index 


Being. See Porson 

Beliefs, 168, 170, 179, 182 /. 

Bhaddiva, 49 

Bharadvaja, brahmin elan, 199 /. 

Bhoja, $6 

Black Rock, 140 f.. 246 | 

Blessed, blest, 20 7, 90 (adiellm): 
(sing), 22) 

Body (haya), 24, 158, Id: and 
mind, 23, 32, 40, 148; and soul, 
262; (earira), 42, 71; (group), 
255, 0. 2; final, 371. See alaa 
Cinease 

Bonds, Lies, ld fi; 1s, 2. 24, ag, 
$7, 66, 105, (as, 10%, 243, 252, 
pla bt) 


Bowls, 141 

Bowmanship, 86, 124 f., 244 

Brahma, a ripe god, IT2-08, 
180 f.; Sahampati, 172 /., 190, | 
12 ‘, 107, 208; Baka, 170 f.; 
Sunankumira, 191; Tudu, 187; 


B.-world, 14 
Brahmadeva, arahant, [77 
Brahmins, * barring out. ITS; 
‘of the Three Veclas," 209; low | 
ideal, 30; Mira os 6., 147; brah- 
minces, 177, 109 f. 


Brotherhood. See Order 

Buddha, Gotama the, his world. 
oon , 35; his moral per- 
fection, 35; injury, 38, 138; 
illness, 220; preacher, 60; peer- 
lesa, rite fearless, 137, 204; 
careless of aafety, 134; posecs 

106-8 ; 


Butldhas, 137, 176; former, Knasn- 
pa, 1, m, 1; $1, 4. 3, 48, 40; 
Konagamann, 199, n. L; Sikh. 


+ 


in, | 
cracily ox, 141, 144, 214 


Cala, bhikkhunt, 145 f. 

247 

Candana, devaputta, 75 
Gandanangalika, uplisuka, 17 /. 
Candim&, devaputta, 71 f. 
Candimasa, devaputta, Ta 
Carcase (deha), 75; (kafebara), St 


Careless, heediess. See Diligence 
Cause, 160 

Celibacy, 563, G1 

i =. ff 


aolar ‘lineage, | 
| Courtesy, G0, 62, 93; ‘diac, 47 


300 
Cometory. Hijagaho, 272 
Ceasstion, 169, 172, See also 
End 
Chaff, 244 


Change. See Impermanent, Flax 

Character, knowledge of, 105 

Chariot, car, carrie, 68, 7, 
288; -road, 274; of the Norm, 45 

Chatter, 234, 256 

Cheat, d4 

Child, love of, 10,260; and mother, 
Lé2 f.; children, 14 


Coins, 108 
Compamsion, “tte love, do, 72 fi, 
139, 173, 250 //., 261, 204 


Competition, 286. 
Composed, intent (aamodahay), 


1d, 69 

Coneeit-s, 7, 22, $2, 38, 40; 
fancies, 16 f,: vain imaginings, 
18, 42 


| Concentrated (samdAi(atlja), 7, 


oi, 70, 162 ? 
Concentration (samddiv), 124, 16] 
Concourse, congress, 36 f. 
Conditioned, caused, 9, fe us 
conditions of rebirth, 9 . e. & 
Conduct, 40, 08; rules of, 203 /f. 
Ree sat 4, aie 
edt Pa See net 
Conscientious, -ness, 15,45,09, 217 
Consciousness, 152, 165 
Cool, 226, 273 
Connoil of brahmins, 223, 239 
Council-compilers, verses by, 50, 
179, 107; names by, 201, n. 4 


Crab, 154 
Craving, : Seng (fanhd), 14, 18, 


44,0. 1, 66f., OE 151, 10 fF, 
Lait; (mandi), 76; | leja}, D8; 
sufiuced by, 40; cause af life, 
nz 

Cropa, 214 


Dimali, devaputta, 67 

aay Lil, 214 f. 

Dear, 07 f. 

Death, ai, 122, 126; -king, 256; 
-realm, 7, 32, 40, 49; end of, 
6s, 270; fear of, see Fear; 
power of, 74; river of, 30; 
yoke of, 16; universality of, 
Hf f.; death's hend, 82 


310 


Tebta, 215, 295 _ 

Decay, 00 /., 56, G0 7., 96 f., 126 f 

De =. See Yakkho, ecapecially 
207 

Deva (of Kaéma-heayens), 48, 
166 /.; (of Riipa-heavens), 1 /., 
37; (of earth), 7, a. 3, 250 Ff; 
gone of, 65 f.; captiona, a3 f-; 
throng round the Buddha, 16; 
colour-expression of, &0; hard 
to see, 205 

Devadatta, 38, n. 1, 100, 192 

Dhamma, the Doctrine, Norm, 
Cosmic Law. See Norm 

Dhamma, See Doctrines, Things, | 
‘Truths 

Deliveranoe (nemolhha}), 3; (pamo- 
cond), 270 

Deliveror, 245 

Delusion, ge pies 44: desire for, 7 

Desires, 50, See Sense 

oe pemean 3, Tin, 160 f., 


Devahita, brahmin, 220 

Dhammapadsa, 269, n. | 

Dice, 185 

Dighalatthi, devaputta, 74 

Diligence, earnestness, strenuous- 
nese, 26, 40, 65, 1 f., 258, 276; 
want of earnestness, careless, 
hbeoedlees, dallinnes, ete., 16l, 
84 /., 240 

opens a discontent, 236, 250, 


Discipline (Vinaya), 195 
Disdain, 237 

Divining, 245 

Doom, 4; (miraya), 120 
Doo B+, si 28t, 208 
Drugs. See | 

Dronk, 248, a5 

Dust, dirt, reek, 5, 70, 250 f. 


Earth, se Ld4, 142, 140, 160 
, 220; states of, 1h 
Eevee (ward, conveying}, 
44 


Ekanila, brahmin village, 216 
Ehastié, beahmin village, 130 


Elements, the four, 23; sense 
data, 
Elephant, (naga), 25, 37, 170; 
‘}, LU, UD, 126, (29; 
lbwitjara), 156, 195 
Elixir, 274 


D4, 


Index 


mated (wu{ geen praltet), 7 
serra -p Jf. 158, 108 
Emancipation; liberty, 45, 124, 


131, 137, 248 


! bers, 268 
teeth thd 
Bind ending, 120) 
gee 23; cometh at the 
ganas 8: thing of ends, 120 /.; 
ciider: 25 
Energy, effort (viriya), igs Kis 


218, 252, 276; (padhann), 13 
Enlightened. See Wakened 
| Enlightenment (sambodha), <M, 
rel 270; (bodhi), 248; (bodhao}, 


Bamity, 227, 233 
capo (wigsorana), 16. 
ration 


See also 
ark 
Escort, 4] 


Fairy (yakicha, i), 17, 78 

Faith, confidence, belief {aaddhd), 
40, 35, 51, 54, 69, 63, 120 f, 
217, 276; giving in, 43, 120 f.; 
(vimtroda), 138 

Family, 104, 246 

Father, ™) 

Fathom, 56 

Fear, 60, 160 f., 164 f., 252, 200; 
of death, 4; of suffering, 52; 
of blame, 31; free from, with- 
ont, 45, LOS 

Feather-brained, 257 

Feeling, 3 

Festival, 143, 243, 257, 267 

Fetters, 49, 243 

Pield (of merit), 2ho 

Finger, two-wit, 161 

Fire, 95: on fire, 19, 42, 58, 167, 
20: eleven fires, 42. nw. dy 
fire-man, 207; sucriftoe, 207 f., 
209 f.; magic, 182 f.; inner, 
212 f. ;' 

Fives, the, 5, 124 

Flood, or floods, 2. 
158, 170, 266, 276 

Flux of things, 66, 74 

Food, 43, 82: digestion of, BL; 
rhtions, 108 

Fool, the, 784, 306; a waster, 36; 

unintelligent, 36, see 

| ortekenies: 84 f.2 2 

Forest. See Woods 


i 
| 
| 
* Fairwing’ birds (zupanna), 185 


5. Th, 138, 


amen || 


Free, 183. Set Emancipated 
Freedman, (4 | 


113, 53 , 158, 277, 306 
Frivolity (pamdda), 27. See also 
Di 


Fruit, result, Sl, ee hi 25t, 
27 - four * Fruits,’ 297 


Gaggara, 247 


neayer, 226 
Ganga (Ganges), 181, 205, 276 
Gaya, 204 


Generosity, 277 | 


Gentlemen (éanifo), 20) 

Gentlenens, 2386 

taggevie, AS J. SA 

2 f., 47, 83, 120 Of: 
(fruitful) ‘133 t., 221 

Gladness, 7, 195 

Goal (vari dist), 250) 

‘Goatherds’ Banyan, 
174 

Goblins, aN | 

Godhika, * ula putta,’ Lat f. 

Gods, of Sakks a heaven (‘Tivat- 
ines), i, 44.0.4; 65, 0. 1, 166 /., | 
254, 296, See lao "Devas. 
daughters of the gods, 1, n. 1; 
Oa. 3: 14: aod men, 

Good (aftha), 20, 248; ones 
own, 46, 09, 95, 07, 255, 278, 
Hh; the, 26. f. 81, 97, 250; 
. man, 2th; rale of the 
(lhcemance), m7 present anc | 
future, 113, [14 

Gotama, so addremed by devas, 
ap, 38, 47, 58, 00, ou, 74, Th, 
85; by a king (at first), ai 
by brahmins, 200, 206; by 
dhaviple, 247; G. for G.'s ‘din- 
iple, 238; disciples of, 253 | 

Gotami, Kisa-, bhikkhuni, P62; | 


15d, 71, 


is | 
Grccducaber, Pasenadi'’s, 122 | 
Greed. See Lust 

Grief, 153, 162 f., 179 

Growth. See Good 

Guard, +ed (0 


Hair-tip, 261 
Hankering, 12, estat | 


oll 
Happiness, 50, 246, 266, S80 
Happ * 18, ao 
See Innocent, 


Kindness 
Hate, 32, 48, 96, 123, 172, 265 


Health, 108, ene 

Heart (cita), 53 1 Va : (Aadaya), 
65 /., 74 

Heaven, 26, 28, 37, 48, 112, 230, 
r= heavens. 104, 160: of the 

- Pure Abodes," 37; Aviha, 45. 

See alan Brahmi, Gods 

Heretic, 168 

Hero, 24, Tl f., 150, 173 

| Himdlayo, 4, 2, 146 

Holy men, 267 

Home-, house-less, 149, 158, 235, 
253, 302 

Hopkins, E. Washburn, 267, *. 4 

Horse, 11, 13, 25; -saerifice, 102 

Housn-witr, 25th 

Human, not A., 272 

Hut, 13; leaf: hut, 145, 290, 202 


1, mine, 21, 141, 145, LH 

Ignorance (arijja), 252, 301; (ai- 
fina), 229; nescience, duiness, 
lusion (mohn), ; 32, 123,233 

TU (dubthe), 25, 57, 146, 170, 263, 
276; end of, 13, 166: free from, 
7, Sl, 318, 249; ills, 32; ilbwill. 
Ave Hate 

Immortality, [5+ 

Tmpermanen-t, -ce, 
Moye 197, 236, 255 

Ab whakbenlr gs 245 

4 oka, 26 

arco sing I84. See also Dili- 
eno 

Inference, BO 


1, 85, 150, 


Influctuste, 167 
| Innocent (harmless), 205; (blanre- 


loge), 10 f., 204 

Insight, intuition, wiadom, wit 
(panda), 10, 20, 26, 46, hl, 54, 
59, 75, 81, 124, 149, 161, 217, 
241, 276: (tana), 252; giver oi, 
44; ‘ol Siriputta, 87, 

Intestate, 115, 117 

Tatra ( pavdrana), 241 

lafina, 2 

Tsigill (Seers Hill), 150 


| Jaina, G1, 03 f. 


Jalini, devath, 254 f. 


312 


Janta, devaputta, S4 


Jeta Grove (Vibfira), 152, 206 | 


passim. Soe diac Aniithapin- 
dika; hie park | 
Jhana, 66, 68 fe. ‘Tihy a4 yay Lay 
doy, 2) 
al tue nt-hball, lim 
Jupgle, 238 


Kacciyana, Kitiyéina, #1, 4 
Kakudha, devaputte, 77 
Kamada, devaputta, 68 f. 
Kapilavatthu, 16 
Kappa, 181. See Nigrodha- 
Kappina the Great, 153 

Asi, 100 f. 
Kumapa Buddha, See Buddhas 


Kassapa, devaputta, 65 
Kaseapa the Great, 15 


Kassapn-gotta, 252 
Katamoraka-Tisenka, 157 
Khandadeva, 49 

Khare, yakkha, 204 
Khoma, devaputta, 31 
Khomadussa, 235 


Kine, oxen, 0, 80, 05, 15 

King, 50; confiscating, 42, lla; 
touring, 243; example, Ld; 
self-complacent, 125; the Four, 
200 

Knowledge, intuition, ratiocina- 
tive (nana), 7h, 124, 162; 
(super-), 184, n. 1. 208, 243 

Kokflikan, the, 186 f. 

Kokanadi, sister goddessus, 40 f. 

Kondanfia, Afidai, 24h 

Kosala, 36, 0. ii, 03f., 133, 200, 253 

Kosalese, $4, 1, 145, 250 f, 

Kasinéra, 196 


Loy adherent, 95 f., 210 f.. 300; | 


lay mind, 236 
Liberty, See Emancipation 
ife, 53, 49; brevity of this, 4, 61, 
135 f., 180; L to come, 51, 278; 
| - endless series of, 
2; cause; of, 52; 


life in the prese resent, 33; holy 
(sdimaiiia), 12; (brahmacariya), 
vps 2 


lust (nondi), 3, 4 

Light, 22, 67; figurative, 118 f.; 
I.-hringer, 245, 271 

Lion, 25; reproving, 33, [4 


| Lordship, 61 
| Lore (dha 


| Migitrna’s 


Index 


Lone, -ly, solitary, 133, L607., ih 
227 f., 282 | 

Longing (asa), 18, 32; (kawhid), 
220; (aneha), 205 


mms), 246: (wigjd), 252; 
triple, 185, 243, 240, 240. See 
also Knowledge (fuper) 
Lotus, 2 i — 
Love, 10); (rati), 161, 226; (piya- 
yond), 270; (meffa), 266, S6e 
alao Comipission 
Lovely (character), 7, 159 
Luck (sédhw), 50 fi: (iri), 64; 
(kali), 188; (bhaddoy), 260 
ust, greed, passion (raged, oF 
lobia, 20, 32, 53, 61, 77, 96, 
123, 156 f,, 172, 233, 236, 239, 
215. See alao Life 


Magadha, 100 f., 173, 203 
Maégadha, devaputta, 67 
Magudheae, 144, 15 
Maghavat, J00 


| Mighs, devaputta (Sakka), 04 


Magic, $05 

Mahali, 205 

Mokkhali Gosaln, 0, M4. 

Malas, 106 

Mallika, 101 
Manava-Ganuya, devaputta, 90), 


92 

Manibhadda, yakkha, 264 

Manimaéla, 206 

Mira, bondage to, 34, Il; 
anures of, 3, 40, U91, 140; 
personates others, 1, 153; 
tempts, OP Posts, disturbs (a) 
the Buddha, 128-34, 137 f., 
143, 144, 153; (6) the Brethren, 
187 f., 144, 147 f.;.(¢) Sisters, 
160 f.; daughters of, 160. f.: 
hosts of, 14], 162, 163, 195; 
way of, 245 

Matali, 284, 288, 200 f. 


“Matter, material, 164 


Maze, 271 

Mazed, 158 

Meditation, 07 f., 128, 145, P71, 
220 

Menchicant, 251 

Merit, 4, 20, 44 (,, 51 J, 98, [22, 
125, 194, 231; demerit, 145 

mother’s ‘Terraced 

House, Sivatihi, 1H, 241 


Nandan beer W, 265 


Index 313 


Millionaire, pa | elaimed, 112; profound, 171 f-; 
Mind, 3. 65, 77, 86, 217, 245; and | truth, 215; pure, ete., 244; 

sense, 164: restless, 62: checked, N.-seer, 245 

21; tempered, 140; mastery of, | Nympha (acchard), 0, 44: (lever 

400; alert, 206, 286; single, 74; Lanna), 25-4 f- 

emancipated, Jt f.; strong in, Nun (srmant). by 

vt 1 151: derange, 265, 276. — 

See aleo Body ela [ * te te 
Mindfulness, 63, 70, 149, 217, 227 eee $ 
Sete Hs Hi | | _.. | Pajjunnu, 4i) 

acTry, saclinss (ugha), $2, 733 Pakudhaka, al ts 

(soba), 75; (dukkia), 85, 108 | parcalacanda, deveputta, 69 
Mission, 132 Pancasala : 143 : 
Moggullduo, the Great, 182 Je} | © piradian! Sf. 44 

nai 187; thought-reader, | pooenadi of Kosala, interested in 

| religion, 1 if Lit f., Lil Tes 


Mogharéjan, a brother, $3 | 197 fer in ethics, 97 f, 101 f,, 
soc eee | 488s im psychology, 100 f.3 
orals, morality, See Virtue, superstitions, 102 f.; tyran- 


Rule ey ee 5 4 = 2 
Mothor, 14, 50, 51, 63; and child, | ple ts an hier Rive 
. 162, shai }; maintainer of, 200) on a miser's habits, 115; filial, 
Mountain, falling, 126; of gold, 122 


146 

ced oe aa Passing away, utter, 196 f. 

Musir, 13, 207 7 : , : 

ip: | Sali amiaaa neal ness, 119, 172; dispassionate, 
141 

Nagadatta, bhikkhu, 255 Path, or Way, 154, 242, 244, 270; 

Name, 54; names, 16, 22, 32 Middle, 18, #. 6, 214 

Naimuci (Mara), 92 - Path, Ariyan, 12, 45, 60, 69, 113; 

Nanda, devaputta, 8: the Four, 297, 301; to & 


ps egal 108: to Nibbana, 


Nandans, devaputta, 75 / 5: revealed by the Buddha, 

Nandivisila, devaputta, 87 | . 242 

Nerafijuri, 128, 153, 171, 174 | Patience, 285 

Nests, 285 Peace (soni), 4, 198, 2d; (up- 

Nibbana (Nirvana), 31, 45, 55 f., | asanta) at peace, 109, 178, 200; 
70, 144, 172, 198, 240, 200 f., | (klematta), 141; waye of (og 


| maceriyd), 121; peaceful, 171; 


977, 280; (aa peace), 4, (: a3 ! | : 
(upasama), 197; (parinidbuto), 


self-mnasterv, {; 08 attained 
during life ((pari-jnibbwta), 1, ryy 

13, 34, 79, 237; a8 end of ‘ill,’ Peerless, illustrious, 44, 301 

13. w. 5, 54; path to, 2395; Perfect, -ion, 44 

aspiring to, 252, 24 Person, being (puggala), 116 f.; 


Nigantha Nataputta, 91, ‘4 | (sada), 52, 169 f- 
Nigrodha-Kappa, 234 Phalaganda, 49 

Ninka, devaputta, 90 f- Physician, 203, 286 
Noble (birth), 10, 12, ert Piyankara, yakkho, 20!) 
Noon, 11, 260; after-, 2 Planters of treea, 45 


Norm (dhamma), 31, 41, 43, 70, | Pleasure, 15, 56, 78 
97. 159, 162, 295, 248, 282; | Plough, 144, 216; -share, 140 
beneficent, 132; of Aruhants, | Ploughing, 216 J. 
277; Sovereign of the, 46, 79; | Ploughman, 144, 216 
us chief, 176; to whom pro- | Poetry, 04 


314 

P See 
Reseeepit ll 
“Senie ot), i 


Sunebbarn: yakkha, 260 J. 
Punishment 24, 236 
uppet, 
Pirann er att, 40) 
Purgatory, hell (temporary), 28, 
47, 117, 188, 1o), 248 
Puritan, 206 
Purity, 46, 120, 207, 212, 243, 
252, 276; by water, 231 f. 
Purpose («ntther), 280 f. 


Quest, d4, 168 
Quictude, 255 


a 71 : 
Rain, 59, 125, cibeges 137. 193, 
217, D244; 
Trains, 253 
Raja, 106 
vik 2 me 14, 38, 74, 79, 90, 133; 
uro'a Penk, ‘197, 192. 203, 


207; Bamboo Grove, M0, 133 f., 
HO, 199, 201, 207, 273, 205; 
Maddakucchi, 35, 138; Snake 
River, 191; Cool Wood, 271 
Rank, and efficiency, 123 f.; and 
religion, 207; and conduct, 
ire (pati), L44, 229; SS alg 


Rap 
3, 162; (avecmidAite), 7 

Rats, 14 

Rebirth, 47, 76, 165 f.; bases, 
causes of (a: i), 9, m. 6, 134, 
146, [4, 158, 172, 238, 273; 
end of, 85 f., 255, 266; free 
from, 243 

Recluse, friar (admit), G2, 64, 
65, 78; (bnthmana), 70 

Reck. See Dust 

Religion, life in (#imaritia, frak- 
macariya), 113. See Life (holy) 

— oo (supernormal), 181, | 

engi repentance, * burning,” 


Renunciation, 24, 77 


210 


Index 


Result (vipdka}, 47, 103 

Reverence, [74 f., 22 

Reviling, 201 f., 204, 285 

Reward. See Reault 

Righteous-nosa, 45, 146, 288 

Rishi (ia. See Sect}, rat 

Rite, 103, 129, 181 

River, 256 

Rood (patha), 33; (vestige oh. 
Seo aleo Poth, Ariya 

Robbers, thieves, 42, 51, G2, 15; 

‘ amell-thief," 260 
| Rohitusss, devaputta, 85 
Roruva, city, 52, 1. 3; a purga- 


| tory, LIT 
lec cigs the (esau, wi- 
naya), 49, 74, 151, 194, 246, 


249° norm (dhamma), 27; Tite- 
nind-rule (vata-vila), 40 


Sucritice, ritual, 102 
Safety-pledge, 202 


Sage (muna), 41, OO fF, 133 ff, 
170, 221; (isi), 16] 

Sahali, devaputta, ” 

Samt (brdimeana), 2, 70; (ara- 


Aon), 9; (sugata), 188 
| Sakka, mourns, 197; at war, 279, 
235 


Sakka, a wakkha (Mdrapakkit- 
ka), 203; weak, 282; gentle, 
Su8, 304, 306 f.; just, 296; 
honourable, 288: sentry, 289, 
208; respectial, 203, 200 
his good deeda, 203 f.; 
titles, 205 

Sakkas, Skkyas, 36, 113, 147 f. 
165, 233-86 

Sal tree, Tit, 196, 227 — 

Salutation, * by the right’ (pa- 
datthimay), or * right hand,” 3, 

49; announcing name, 105 

Salvation (attha), 33, 108; (#ot- 

the), 77; (niaearona), 160 

Sumbara, 292; his magic art, 305 


= 
=f 
LI 


Sambhava, f4 
Sam dhi, a brother, 14, 148 
Sane andl immune, 253, 163, 226 
| ‘Sangiirava, brahmin, 231 
| Safijaya Belatthiputtia, 94 
| Sanu, 266 f. 


Siriputta, his fine tialities, 46, 


241 


~ 87 std Re reviled, 18; preach- 
Pt fliepa -abnge sy 20 f. 


Index 


Bavatthi, 1, 25, 42, pussim; Dark 
Wood, 127, 0. 1, [60 f.; East 
asta a 242 See also Ani- 
thapindika (park) 

Boont of seers, 211 

Seashore, 202 

Seed, Af) 

Seer (Gai), 103, 200, 2-3; (cak- 
khumd), 168, 195, 271; (-daso), 
238; (cakkhu), 173; muni, 208, 
210, 237 

Sela, bhikkhuni, 168 

Self, 205; foe to, 81; at peaor, 141; 
tamed, 215 


Self-eontrol (yabaiia), 21; (aany- 
tufctia), 0; (soqrare), 4; 
(diemo), 277 

Self-danial (cirvarala), 30 


Seli-mastery (ipasmme), 46, 66, 
68. See Composed, Uoncen- 
trated 

Belf-restriint (snyyome), 31, 61, 
Ti; (etta-acgyata), 133 

seni, 12 

Bense, 15, 20, 25; senses, 57, 144, 
li, 169, 245; «.- impressions, 
140, 142; s.-desires, 32, 44, 67, 
70, LOO, L46, 161, 167, 251, 254, 
265; pleasures of, Ld f. 

Serenity, 65, 87, 220; revealed in 
the face, 7 /f, 

Ser devaputta, 82 

Serpent, snake, 4 f, lsd s., 193 

Shaveling, 200, 210), 233, 204 


Bilavati, 147 J. 

Similes. Fighting the current, 2; 
deep and vigil, 6; dust, 5; and 
wind, 20; the uneven, 6 f., 13; 
the out reed, 8, LOT; the tor- 
toise, 12; horse and whip, I; 
the current, 24; the hut, 13; 
the nest, 15; the impending 
eword, 10, 77; burning, 19, 77; 
whirlpool, 23; fi 
comrades, 27; driver, 37, 45; 
ehariot, 45; bog, morass, 
swamp, 24, 49; waterless bath- 
ing, 53, 61; tarnished blade, 
61 f.; bird ensnared, 63; saved 
from drowning, 68; sharp grass- 


—— 


tidea, 23: good | 


$15 


blade, 70; deer in dell, 73: fish 
and net, 74; black hellebore, 81; 
carters broken nxle, 82; head- 
man, 84; wages, 80; jackal and 
lion, 9; rush-plante, 00, 124; 
shadow, #8, 118; [unjtrapped 
deer, 100, 253; trapped fieh, LOL; 
counterfeited riches, 106; lotus 
perfume, 107; elephants foot, 
111; luke. 115 f.; light, dark- 
ness, 118 f.; storm-showers, 125, 
244; avalanche, 125 f.. 306 f-; 
bake replete, 136; wheel, 146; 


rills, 146; lion's: roar, 108; 
wrestler, 138; sunlight, 142; 


ship on land, 129; orah-baiting, 
154 f.; crow and fat, 155; crow 
und boys, 265; six equivalents 
of ‘kick against pricks,’ 159; 
spears, jovelina, 161; gloom, 
darkness, 163 f., 172; snares, 
neta, 167 f.; seed, 160; charuot, 
170; crag-wateher, 173; lotuses, 
174; hatchet in mouth, [8s; 
plant ending in fruit, 192; 
mule and embryo, 192; fuel, 
#10; king nnd retinue, “43; 
caravan-leader, 248; moon and 
clouds, 247; bird and duat, 
251; torches, 253; antelope af- 
frighted, 257; loz in woods, 
#57; dirty cloth, 261; banyan, 
365; creeper, 266; waylarer 
ani rain, 274; bull of men, 283; 
cow pursuing, 285; food, well 
blonded, 20; wreath, 291 


Sivaka, yakkha, 272 

Sixes, the four, 67; aix holes, 61 
Slanghter, 65, 66, 200, 303 

Sleep, L34, 138 f., 2651 


Smoke, 59, 152 

Society, 256 

Solitude. See Lonely 

Som bhikkhuni, 161 7. 

Son, 10, 00, 225, 7. 

Sorrow, 252, 270. See also Ill 
Soul, fallacy of, 19, 77; illusion 


of, 22; character, honour, 101, 
a. 2; and body, 202; creature, 
173 f. See alao I, Self 


_ South Hill, 216 


316 . Index 
Speco, 2at Treachery, 250 
Spies, 105 /. ‘Truth, 6,59, 166, 213,-271, 276; 
Squirrels’ Feeding Ground, 74, tamed by, 211; speaker af, 0; 
90, 133 weeding by, 217; untruth, lies, 
Stuadfastness, 277 100; ambrowial, primeval, 240) 
Stick,” the, 229 Todt ‘Heahmi, 187 
Stream (Arivan Way), 11K Turban, 10, 136 ‘ 
Stina vekicha 364 f. Undetiled, 63, 213, 257 
Sudaasana, 108 Uneven, the, 6,7, 13, 69 


Sudatta, See Andthapindika | | Unison, 70 Sep 
Sudatta devaputts, 70 (ack Upacala, bhikkhuni, 166 


Suddhavdss, packs « braiima, Upalca, 48, n. 2, 40 
- Whevatte rage 
Suffering. See Il Peeve DE 
Suja, Sujampati, 280, 295, 200 Uppalavannd, bhikkhunt, 164 /f- 
Sukka, bhikkhunt, 273 | Uravela, 128, 132, 163, 171, Vid 


2f | Uttara, devaputta, 70 
Sun, sane al, 72:f.; fiona of, Uttara, yakkha pirl, 270 


Sundarikk 200 rts ‘one 
LB i ir Lt i j f. 
Sundariktyan, 200 f- os gdh soak! 
Buriys, Gevapubtn, 72 ; Vajjinn 957 
Surrender (vossaqgga). See Re- Vangisa thera, 234 f 
unciation Vantage-point, 161, 345 


+ 


Susimna, devaputtia, 87 f 


Susima, devaputia, 28] vane ies ag5 
Suvite, devepatie, 270 Vatra, Asura, 06, 2. 4, 67 
Sympathy, 258 Vodas (three), 206 f., 249, 299; 
# five (7), 99 . 

Tagarasikkhi, ent, of indi- | Vehualinga, 49 

Vidualiast Buddha, 117 Vehicles, 43 
Tangled, 20, 206 Vojayanta, 2), 301 
Tapoda Park. 14 Vendu, Venhu, devaputta, T4 
Tathfiigata, or races 7, LS, | Vepacitti, Asura, one f., 283-90: 

140, 143,159, 2 | foul-mouthed nt, 21; 


Tayana, acta 70; Tayana- aocurst, 202 f.; ill, S05 

verses, 71 | Verocann (? Vepacitti), 280 
Teachers, 0) f., 03 f.: fee, 224 Vorses, 34, 245 
Teaching, 130, 263 f. Vesali, 257; Great Wood, 40, 148, 


Tense, See Concentrated 205; Gabled Hall, 40, 142 
Thief. See Robber Vetambari, deyaputta, 00 f. 
Thought, systematio (voniso), 151, | Vibhajjaviidin, 41, 9, 3, LOT, w. 1 

259; thoughts, 250, 265 Views, right, 45, 113; opinions, 
* Thusnesa,” 177, a. 1 | Jes See also Beliefs 


Tigress, or tigress-deer, 186 Vigil, 5, 130 
Time, 4, 1; involving, 15 f., 147; | Vi ira, 24 


irregular hours, 2a5 f, Vijaya, 163 
Titans. Ses Asuras Villaee, -ar, 60 
Touch, the, 10 Vira, bhikkhuni, 275 
Trades, * low,’ 118 f. Virtue, morals (#ile), 20, 45, 46, 
Trained, 11 fl, 68, 250 
Training, 46,65 Vision, of the sear, 41, 124, 208; 
Tranqguillization, 172 straight, 2h} 
Trapper, 252 Voice, beauty of, 241 


Pn mir _. 


Index 317 


Bly for mantras, 208 | (wijfa), 40, 60; (-medhaj, 173, 
Wake, wakened (buddha), 60,!  iné 


135, 240, 248; supremely en- | Wise  (jensdita, patiiard), 112, 
lightened (—wakened), 93, 182. | IG; (kwaalea), 212 
244, S01 Wish, -cs, 56 7, 63, 140 

Waking, 6 Woman, a ‘stain,’ 53, 58 f., Gl: 
far, 100 f., 124; arresting by | ~—s nature, 162; supreme com- 


apells, money, 126 | modity, G1 fi: as daughter, 111: 
Warriors, 64, $35 ns Wife, 10, 215: as mother, | 11; 
Watanabe, Dr., 275, 0. 2 seductive, 235 


Water (sea, ocean, luke, ox- Woods, forests, solitude in, 7, Lt, 
panse), 44, 115 f-: -shed, 46: 40, 162, 227 f. 
child of, 250 | Works, 297 

Way, See Path | World, 55; lord of, 229: on fire, 
Wayfarer, 51 167; out of, 259; end of, 85 /.; 
Wealth, riches, 50, 00. 115 S217; worlds. See Heaven 
-poitore of, 126; loss of, 153 f.,157 | Worldling, 167 

stping, 29 Wrath, anger, 12, 35, 655, 60, 
giire (atthe), 111 ff. See wlan | 158, 200, 203, 304, 306 f. 


Yukkhas, 262, n, 1, 269-78, Pi: 
Od 


Theat cf ca ip unger-eating, 3 | 
Mindech. Oe Keict iss, wt yamuvs Kingdom (Yamuloka), 47 
140, 0. 1, 14 passim to 16 Young, 15, 04 f. 


Wisdom (pafiad). See Insight: | Zest, 250 


1T.—PALI WORDS. 
Paraphrases from the Commen tary. 


Akissivan ti hippifiay (WI, 1, eto = alata, a puriethta 
& St) (as a, 5) 

Aghan. Here aghay—duk. Anulkum ituy :—okkamitus) paati- 
thap and chan d &=tan- | pajjituy (I, 4.5 5) Of. I, ii, 
ha Comp. (I, 4, § 4) | BS; ii, 101. CA with this Ft. 

Acvhare: sayate (X, § 9) | Morris's supposition APT's, 

Ajjhariihatiti ajjhottharati (NJ, | tas, 1] 

4 Anubuddhay. — Jae, Ccanay, iti, 
O87 f.: ndnubujgphati — awn ae. 
rate 

Aw-nseulba —qeipatd (I, a. & a) 

‘Avtaka: antakena : eneeETiLALE WNT HT j- 
jhotthatassa (IIL, 1, § 4) 

Anvavittha: anupavittha (TV, A 

na] | 


Attha: (1) siitthay savyafjanan 
ti(D.i, 62) . . . —pathe; (2) at 
tho me... hirafifiasuvanne- 
na (D. ii, 176) —ricatkhane, 
(= payojans); (3) hoti silavata 
attho (7. a, 144). . son md- 
dhimAd (4) bahujane Libis jactes at- | . 
hihetu (cf. dn, 75)... dhe: Aprpebodhiuti kasag apaharaute 
(5) ubbinnwin atthe caruti bujjhati patedscchiyay disya 
(8. i 162)... .=hite; (6) at- aap Vijjanto vivu kaeiya attanin 
the jite ca panditay (icchanti: | (#i¢) Mipiitay na deti, evameva so 
/. i, 387)... karcne vattati bhikkhu bhitassn okkosayat! 
lef. Sn, Comy. i, 248); (7) hirer, thuno attani nipitay addanto 
259, nm. 7 nindan appabodhati apohoran- 


a 


318° 


to = bujjhati_ He a3 $b os: 
Dhkp. Comy. ti, $ 

Abuddhi. 1] take it aa the Aorist 
of bujjhati, usunlly abujj a 
The t are discrepant, | 
B. is silent (D1, |. $7) 

Abhisankhacea: riisikntwi (ITT, 
3, 9 4) 

Pind Fi nikkiles& (1, 8, § 11) 

Arati nébhikiratiti ikkanthite | 
nabhibhavati (I, 2, 4 8) 

Avajhdyati. So B, explains; va 
jhavati (without doubling the 
3) = balavacintarar embetiz 
‘does a big think,’ ao to apenk, 
Cf. Dhp. Comy. in, 132: jogma- 
kofich ... avajjhiyanti: age 
(or starving) herons br 
over the drought-dried ones, 
Here the Comy. does write ah 
(Il, 4, i 2) 

Avy nao, Comy.: obbyag- 
ga: ekaggucitto (101, 3, § 1) 
Asankharino (sic) ti tayo kam- 
mibhisankhare anabhisankha- 

ronto (TV, 4, § 5) 

Asappurieo ti iemakopurisn; in 
the verses: kiipuriso (111, 2, § 1) 
Asidetabban: ghattayitabbay ... | 
kiiyenn vaclvé (I, 4, 3 5). Of. 
Psa of the Brethren, p. 387, | 

no 


Agamma: drabbha, sandhiya, pa- | 


tioon (Taare kalyanamittay | 
figamma (IIT, 2 2, § 8) 
Arambho: kieon, karaniva, attha 
(Ti, 1, § 9) 
Asnjja: paharitva (TV, 3, § 5) 
Ahaté: kfla-setidi vannehi tilo- 
kehi fhotagatta (VII, I, § LO) 


Ijjhatiti samnij) hs abi Fit spa] 
boti (Vit, 2 int aby 


Ttthattayiti itthabhivato; imas- 
mi evan-pakird idini vatta- 
mind-khandha-santind aparan 
Soares natthi (VI. | 

_ 4, § 4) | 

Iseatian ti LHEUZippan 


dito tanhiya ullanghito; enak- | 


hug hi tanha rajjuna aiyuni- 
tva (1, 7, $7) 


Index 


Udinay. See p. 2, mn. 2 

 Uddhata — uddhacea “ 
hutvi; ond also having 
verted notions as to ¢ 
(1, 3, § 9) 

Unnali uggatanala, 
tuechaméind (sc) 

Pol ec cancer gf aa Maceo 
upagaté (1, 35, 9 10 

Upidiya igamma, matics a pukwant- 
tati (1, 7. § 10). The verb in 
the veret ia omitted preavmahly 
mek. cans. 


ate uppatitwal pi anky 9 


uae 
ash: 


richil hintin- 


Uppacea 
vLyVts | 
Usaukkay Leena 


| Ekodi—ckaggacitté (I, 2, if 


Ocarak&i (avacuraki) seem ; 
Vin. ti, 62, to mean spies, 4f- 
Pes. of the Brethren, 189, 0. a. 
Ocurilvd (text, ocarifa) is pata- 
phrased by B.: vimagsitva, tay 
tan pavattin fatva 

Opilipesiti suvannapitiys sad- 
er yeva nimujjapes (VI, 

i) 


Kativi=catihi ai kata- 
kioon (1, 3, § 5) 

Kati-han--kati abini (I, 2 2,57) 

Kajebaro ti pitabharo. 1t ia pro- 
bably a word of non-Arvan ori- 
gin (II, 3, § 6) 

| Katupaeano ti kutessrakkhepo 
(II, 3, § 6) 5B. tguores the 
preceding katayoguo. (See PTS. 
ed, p. 62, n. 1) 

Kanfjakan ti eokundakabhatian, 
bal utivan ti kufjikabhat- 
tary (ITT, 2, § 4) 

Kayirithn = i (1. 1. § 3, 4) 


Khipsan:=kuminan (IIT, 1, § 7). 
See Pes, of the Brethren, p. ‘83, 


ti, at 


(rae va sanghe ca caratiti eatthi 
gana singha-cfiri niumoe (IV, 4, 


. Pe i padsgamancno (UH, 
Gimaniki: pimoakité& . . .janay 
piletvi. . .. A fuller descrip 


ha 


Tad 


on af = viniecha- 
VamMacto a Sr nbiad oF the peace,’ 
whe fakes bribes to pervert jus- 


fice, elr., oocura in the Comy. on | 


gimakitako: 8. n, 248 (U1, 3, 
§ fi) 


Capald ti patta-civace-mandani- 
linéi (11, 3, § 5) 


Cheto: migaloddake (1X. 3) 
Jatipluvejatsoumbataka (IV, 
1. § 1) 

Jappasi, ppainpes. (WI, 1, 3 3) 
Javani-pafino : aabbay ripay . 


vinffiinan aniccato anattate 
dukkhato khippan javati 


Jivagihan nan aggahesi: *eap- | 


tured him (ea) a living co plore" 
(THT, 2, § 5) 


dhatvé ti vadhitva. Cy, Jd, A. 
iv, O7: jhatva ti kilametva: and 


above, I, 4. § 2 (pp. 20): jhatva | 


ti poghetrl (1. 8, § 1) 
Tagghiti ekansavacane 
(I, = 3 UD] 


Dajje ti dadeyya (VIL, 2, 4%) 
Dayako ti dinasilo (LI, 4, $ 3) 
Dibbavogan tupaceagun (1, a, 
5 10). See Childers, a.r,, gogo 
Diviidivassati divaamssa divi, 
majjhantikasamarve ti’ atthe 
Durannayo=duranugamano, dup- 
pans (IL, ne § 2) Salita 
pika-kuran ti ‘Ly et 
kuran-donasaa tondulinay pak- 
kabhattan tad-upivai ca sipa- 
bysiijannay bhuijatiti atthe 
(Donnpiaka autlin iti buku) 
Prides for dvipadinan (1, 2, 
4 4) 


Niddinan een lunanay up- 
fanny .. . aham pi ajjhatti- | 
E kosin kotva. knsalasasnacdii- 


fikinay Vvisanvidana - Romany | 


saccena nidd&inay karom 

Nipunatthadassin = etuekin 
re chandhar tarbdnvo atthe 
passati (I, 5, § 5) 


Ti pity | 


319 


| Nibbuta, kilesaparinibbinens (1, 
4,95) 

Pvt WO navahi purivaiieli 
yajitabbassa saddhin bhimiya 
ca purisehi ca assamedhe yut- 
tavibhava-dakkhinases sabbam 
eva pariydyanimassa medha- 
Vikappase ev etan adhivyaca- 

nan (LTT, 1, § 9) 

Netare, Vedic infin. of no me 

Comy.: katthaci netuy (1Y, 

$7) 


| ~~ ith The Comy. 

ie bette ebatel pasha. - 

ri : tabahev ark. aise, mnbe vi 

fika na honti. Windisch refers 

parthegs Tana la a Sane- 
=7a 


ag Se.5 | 
ae 


pati(ajladdhansu 

tilabhinat | (11, 1, § 7) 

Becca el re patilomn-saddis 
(TX, § 8) 

Paceetiti iechati, psttheti + * im 
clines fo, will Awe W that.” To- 
chati, inthe Aathdvatthu Comy., 

| ie the usual tern for belief im 
anne heresy, Cf. Points af 
Controveray, VIL, 2, § 11 

Pajahisiti pajaha, Cf, ihe form 


| Via. 1, 3 
Patikace’ eVati pe nad yore 
Thay, A. om wer. 


(IL, oe sige 
7 (Pas. af é pitcher p. 256, 
i. 2 sede eval puretaray 
sith pase Surth. edt, af the 
Comy. spella if also patigace’. 
But Trenckner'a note (Mil. 421, 
48") derives the term from pati- 
karoti “to provide againat future 
ecenla, aa wn Jat A. iv, 1b 
Patisanyuje li patisanrujevya, pa- 
tiphareyya (XT. 1, § 4) 
| Pandukambale:  ratta -kambale 
(11, 3, § 9) 
Pade pade The irammaye aram- 
mane (I, 2, § 7) 
Padhiipite ti pal OE (¥,§7) 
Pantho ... kantiramaggan (I, 
4, § 2) 
Papan ele: paniya-datia-.8la 
Parikissati, i.¢., parikilissati (1, 7, 
¢ 2). See Fausboll, SBE, A, 
xi, on fhe term oni Sn. S20 


320 Index 


Pariyantan: nipphattikag, koti- 
kan, something perfect, a climax 
Pariviyena=—kiranena (1, 4. 1). 
Cf, Sum. V, p- $6: pariviya 
mena vita (turn, course, order), 


desind (presentation, method [of 


feaching|), kiirona for attha] 
(case, matter, ef. art; Attha 
above). Cf. also lokaparivAyay: 
sankhirulokusss udayabbayan 
(Ll. 4, § 5) eplained aa kia- 
fan ales in Sum, VL on J). iii, 
271,44 

Pariyutthita: oabhibhati, y. 
Ponts of Coulroveray, 288 

Palikhiya, khanitya (IV, 3, § 4) 

Pahitatio (podhj=pesitatte (11, 
2, 9.5) 

Pikatindriya: sigjvanibhayenn 
gihikile viya vivata-indriya 
(Pas. of the Brethren, v, 10D) 

Parohi. ti... tipn-rukkhidayo 
daddhatthines miilamatte pi 
avaaitthe piel nto rohanti jiyanti 
vaddhanti... rohanatthens vi 

roha, (jf, Jit. v, 472; vi, 15. 
with fron a plan! of which 


only tie slirmp is eff, Comy. i 


A polei-iree cannot grow again 


in thin way, ond hence affords 


a favourite simile for one who 
will wot ie reborn (111, 1, § 1) 


Balaviriyan; cttha balan nima 
viyodhitu. Bala ia the phiyai- 
col element of mobility (vdyo- 
dhaiu); viriyan iv energy, phys- 

‘cal and mental (111, 3, § 4) 

Brahmacariyayn methunan virati 
(I, 6, § 8) 


Bhavisiti bhava. (€/f. another 
form; bhavihi, 8. ii, 235 /. 

Bhivetiti vadidlheti, attane citta- 
Santen punappunag janeti, 
abhinibbatteti ite 2, § §) 

Bhiyyo a vijjati: uttaritaro afifio 
na vijjati (X11, 1, § 4). Cy. 1, 


Fy | 


Mano ti savajjanikay bhnavan.- 
ittan; dhurend ti arammana- 

i; manwampiaas ti 
sivajjanemi bhavangena «ag. 
payutta phasso; vilifinaynata- 


fan ti javanscittan tod-iram- 
manam pi vattati (IV, 2, § 9) 

| Mahesin: mahantdnay silakkhan- 
dhidinan esitinay pariyesi- 
tainan ti (I, 5, § 5) 

| Mifirisa, Seep. 2, n, I 

Mukhara ti mukha-kharaé khara- 

vacand (IT, 3, § 5) 


Yato ti yad& (111, 2, § 2) 
Yamatap. The Comy. haa waail- 
fianan, although the metre re- 
quires a short first syllable. Un- 
ees [he word is for yan-matay, 
I ctnnet explain uv. Or ia ft a 
ranant to gantha (ynma-thl) t 
: (I, d, 5 5) 
Vitra . . . niggamanap . - . 
mutt, parimutt, samatikkamo 
(I, 3, § 9) 
| Yoniso manasikirl ti upiya- 
minasikirenn, The second 
word in the Sullas has net yet 
become specialized, and iw tan: 
lamount to “work of «mind ' 
“s intellect generally (IV, 1, 
+) 


| Kanan: ripambi jiti-jari-bhanga- 
Katikhatin doa (V1, lee 6) 

Ruppate ti ghattanatthena (EX, 
5 2) | 


| 


Lajjt: one who has hiri and with 
# ottappa (Bid. Pay, Meh, 
p. 20, m1). (TM, 1, § 5) 

Likha: jinna (VIT, 2, § 4) 


anno—kiranan (X, § 2) 
Varaf, disan: ut 4a 
Vaso ti anapavattanan (1, 8, § 7) 
Viiritavatan:  kilesinan peice 
chinnatté vatan phalasama- 
dhin& samihitan (I, 4, § 8) 
| Me ge aaanyata-" (11, 3, 7 
§ 5) 
Viceakkhano subhasita-dubbhasi- 


taffiutiya (X, 12). Cf. Ab- 
Midhinappadimbdaict : = puvo- 


jano 
Vi Sper . «+ tambhi tambi 

kilo  hatthirajavanna - sappa- 

vannididassanani (IV, 3, § 4) 


utiomay thingy - . 


Vibbhanta-citté (sie 1): anavat- 
 thita-*, 

andisa 
Viveko ti vivitattia; vivittata ci- 
| tad- anga-viveko, vikkham- 


ter ti panes 
‘vidho (ITT, 2, § 8) 
isikini: vinivij jhanatthena vi- 
omanatthens (1V, 3, 4) 
ae viritita eavitkal 
ehi etous ti vedehiti popdliti 
hivatanam etan, pandititthi- 
3 putto ti atthe. Elsewhere 
comenents aa follows: (a) 
“Sum, Von D. i, 47: Vedehiput- 
ty ti aya y Kosalarainio dhitiya 
i » jo, na Videharafio, Vede- 
i penta itddhivacanam 
stan, ath! aha: * Vedehiki 
gala 
| nite | tatrayan vaca- 
nattho: vedena ithati ghatati 
viyamatiti vedeh. Vedohiyk 
iain ti Vedehipuito” (6) Pa- 
‘ -Sidant on Mf. i, 125: 
edehika& ti Videharatthava- 
= kulassa dhiti, Atho 
wi o ti palfié vuvcati, ve- 
ihati, i ape ra 
ti, (c) Sdratthappaba- 
int on 8. i, 216: vedehamunino 
- panditamunino andite hi 
“fi Snasankhitena vedenis Thata 


cen 


Bie nibbanapak- 
dan Tinind sakalena va- 


tanena ¥ . arinui~ 
afi Ati, . . . On pari- 


Seni. ts Vipen. ace Mil, 292 


arte ti) 


Sek 


Index 


Sankhi, as 
panthirajhavalamigu- 


hana - samuocheds - patipassa | 


Sattho: saddhi 


ayyo Anando | 


amamase tisanyamima, sag-— 
ti Nes iran wif be | 


321 


ar pate) chester: 
i may (without prejiz) =reckon- 
ing (ganani), @ portion (kot- 
thasa}, a ferm-cand-concepd (pan- 
fiatti). The last ia its meaning 
here, Comy. Thue il soma u 
the fire gatha aa the next 

gums up the second (I, 2, 3 10) 


Sajivainay: kammens saha jivan- 


tina . karmmnsa hit yi 
amma-dutiyaks pima homti 
(I, 8, § 10) 


Sotakkakiti: sata-sikharo aneka- 


kfite ti (IIT, 3, § 4) 
in-caro janghazat- 
thé vi sakatasattho v& (1,6, § 3) 
Saddhiya—<eaddahitva (I, 4, § 3) 
Sanantano porinako Pee es 
oie a pot 
mic | 
Santa i nib se panite ti atap- 
peko: idan aoaear lokuttarcm 
ovasandhiva vuttay (WLhiel) 
Sadatthd: sako atthe (IIT, 1, § 3) 
Samibhiti, affered fo gekha “ala faa 
here only the meaning of samu- 
BOL, Milindapatton 352.” 
c Dei sobs ; 
ea a sampohansetL See 
LV, 2, § 6, p. 140, a 4. 
Samna—dhammena (I, 4, § 4). 
So 8. aud Jat, Comiea, 


Sampahatthon. Ukkamukhe pa- 
citvil simpahattha (i, 3, fo) 
Sampucchma . “auddhin min 
tiyitva (V IL, 2, £4) 
Sazankhfirena =sappayogena (I, 
4 § 6). of. 6 Psy. Ethies, 
p. d4, m. 1 


Sadhu, or eihu (ao Comy,)— lat- 
thakan, bhaddiakan (1, 4, § 3) 
Saratta-ratta tisutthn ratte-ratia, 

Birattienn vi ratta, Aran idan 
timaifiaminiya rattd, A rare, 
emphatic compound (ITL1, § 10) 
Singhitakan ti catukkay (X, § 0) 


fidsa (pavino): aynonyma: veda- 
0 ie Ea ulo 


—— = = 


————_—_=_=[=[=[=__ EE 
BILLINY AND S00, LTD. PRUSTERA, OUILOFORD, BSiLanD 


Ti 


— 
a. 


ae 


eS 


Central Archaeological Library, 


NEW DED 


Call No. A/4 5 Am 


J 


