TO THE MEMOBY OF 

T. W. EHYS DAVIDS 

1843-1922 
FOUNDER OF 

THE PALI TEXT SOCIETY 
1881 



Pali ^ext S'Ofietg 

Translation Series, No. 13 
(Extra Subscription) 


THE BOOK OF THE 

KINDRED SAYINGS 

(SAlNjYUTTA-NIKAYA) 

OR GROUPED SUTTAS 

PART III. 

TBANSI.ATBD BY 

F. L. WOODWARD, M.A. 

TRANSLATOR OP 

“manual of a mystic,'’ “the BUDDHA’S PATH OF VIRTUE,” ETC. 

EDITED BY 

MRS. RHYS DAVIDS, D.Litt., M.A. 


“ Say on, sayers I sing on, singers ! 

Delve 1 mould 1 pile the words of the earth ! 

Work on, age after age, nothing is to be lost, 

It may have to wait long, but it will certainly come 
in use; 

When the materials are all prepared and ready, the 
architects shall appear ! *’ 

Walt Whitman. 


XonOon 

PUBLISHEIVPOR THE PALI TEXT SOCIETY 

BY 

THE OXFORD UNIVERSUfY PRESS, AMEN CORNER, E.C. 

* ”*’^AND AT 

NCIY YORK, TORONTO, MELBOURNE, AND BOMBAY 



PEii^TED IN Great Britain 



EDITORIAL NOTE 


Editor’s word scarcely seems necessary here, where the present 
translator has so generously come to aid in continuing this 
series, and has so ably carried on the work. But he writes 
urgently that such a word should be forthcoming, so here it is. 
There are so many points of interest, yet it is better to be brief. 
Let there be just a word of apology, a word of appreciation, 
a word of historical suggestion. 

In the first place, it is a woeful editor who recommended 
that the two important words Tathagata and Asava be left 
untranslated in a translation. Only the conviction, after long 
years, that no English word would adequately serve, brought 
Tis both to this decision. As to the first of the two — after all 
we do not translate ‘Messiah.’ The Commentaries centuries 
later still offSred half a dozen alternate meanings of Tathagata. 
And for asava many words have been tried. Critics have 
criticized these, but have offered nothing better. In asava 
we have three, more usually four, wrong or dangerous states 
of character, likened because of their pervasive power over 
conduct to spreading ferments: sensuality, the lust of life {i,e. 
of rebirth), the obsession of opinion, the mark of ignorance. 
The pious (early) Buddhist when he used the word was probably 
aware both of that sinister meaning and of its contents. The 
English reader would not be aware of those meanings if ‘ fer- 
ments ’ or other such word were used. Warren used ‘de- 
pravities,’ and some follow him. But depravity means moral 
turpitude ; asava does not As a choice of evils, it is better that 
a word be left untranslated, suggesting too little, than that it 
suggest what was never there. The reader should be able 
easily, as here, tojook up the contents of the term. But it 
is a favour the tohslator should ask of him very, very seldom. 

In the next place, W'oodward pronounces this volume 
valuable ‘for a study oi the doctrine of personality.’ This 
is so^ and could hardly be otherwise. Of these thirteen groups 



VI 


Editorial Note 


of Kindred Sayings, the first, wMcli is on the question of the 
Khandhas, the factors of personality — self, body, mental 
factors — occupies two-thirds of the volume. 

But among other features of interest there is one which is 
to me of greater value than the churches’ teaching on the 
Khandhas bodily and mental. I refer to two little episodes 
which are placed in the Khandha Suttas, and which had, never- 
theless, in my belief, nothing to do originally with that doc- 
trine. The episodes are those entitled ' Nakula’s father ’ (p. 1 ) 
and ' Tissa ’ (p. 90). In these we seem to be meeting with the 
living word of a live man. And so hard is it, amid the mass 
of these Suttas, whether legendary or of church catechisms, 
to find a personality and a message that could draw the world 
after the speaker, as Gotama drew his world, that it were 
worth while issuing this volume if it were only to show the two 
episodes and the contrast they offer to the rest of the book — or 
most of it. • 

Let the reader compare the former of them with the Sutta of 
^ the untaught ’ (the titles are glosses) in Part , p. 65, of^ 
Kindred Sayings. There where We might, judging by this 
third part, have expected to find the Khandhas intruded, we 
read only of ' what we caU heart or mind or awareness con- 
trasted with just kayo or body, the teaching being that body 
changes more slowly than mind. 

Here, again, he does not plague the sick old man with how 
many names we can call the incorporeal part of us. He just 
bids him keep his mind (or heart) healthy, lest the diseased 
body infect and age it. This was surely the real word of a 
wise healer, a real helper and saviour of men The comforted 
man is waylaid by the disciple as he departs, and the Khandha 
doctrine is fully trotted out. It is typical of a church’s more- 
wording, in the sense of embroidering the founder’s word. 
It is as a way-sign, hinting at how the Suttas came to be com- 
piled as they are. And this was certainly compiled centuries 
later than Sariputta, the man who taught liS^Jiis Master — 

^hat^wheel 

Both Sariputta after m^&car^ple turn — 

} Iti pi cittam iti pi mano Hi pi vinndnam* 



Editorial Note 


It was compiled by after-men who presumed to improve upon 
that pregnant advice by an academic category and formulas. 
So much has been fathered upon Sariputta ! 

In the other episode, Tissa, the depressed and weary disciple, 
a high-born man unused to the simple life and democratic 
fellowship^ of the Order, is heartened and toned up and 
mothered by his kinsman and teacher. 

Is it likely that Gotama, knowing, as none but an inspired 
helper knows, the hearts of men, would submit this poor, 
possibly bilious, certainly sick-hearted brother to a catechism 
about the frailties of factors one, two, three, four, five ? Go- 
tama was not a marvellous disease-healer like Jesus; he was a 
will-healer. We seem to see him taking Tissa’s hands, and 
sending into him the magnetic current of his own force of will; 
we hear him telling the parable of the lorn wayfarer and his 
guide, bidding him to go on, to go on, this way and that way 
nntil the perils w'ere past and the end of the journey was in 
view. And then the healing is driven in with words like so 
^many elec-^ic shocks: ^Courage, Tissa! Cheer up, Tissa I 
I am here to guide you ! I will keep you I I will make you 
strong I’ or words to that effect. Would we had all he reaUy 
may have said ! 

Earely have the Suttas saved from the devouring past so 
vivid an etching in bare outline as this. A fragment, and 
with interpolation, it still lives. And in it Gotama lives, 
the teacher men so loved that they bequeathed their love of 
him and his love of them to the faith and the devotion of the 
centuries to come. 

These live counsels of how to keep well, of how to walk in 
the Way to ' the Well,’ of how to help the brother so to walk — 
this is the real brahmachariya the teaching originally meant; 
this it is that the first missioners were sent to carry out; this 
it is that was to lead to the ending of sorrow. And this it 
was — according to the canonical legend, the Great Apadana — 
which first suggested to Gotama the ideal that lay in the 
'going forth,’ i5he fahhajja, from the world to end sorrow: — 

1 0/. Part n, p. 19r/.; a very ‘live’ Sutta, except the verse 
(probably just a memorizing device). 



Editorial Note 


viii 

‘ Tte excellence, namely, of righteous and peaceful conduct, 
of good and worthy action, of harming none, of compassion 
to creatures/^ 

Taking the present volume as a whole, the emphasis of its 
contents is by no means on this way of ending sorrow. The 
way to do that would seem to be the entirely monastic one. 
Namely, mind, resolved into four much overlapping divisions, 
literally heaps {hhandM)^ and body are to be resolutely held 
up for inspection, and for the creating of disgust. Thereby 
the man is liberated from interest in what body does or mind 
does. So liberated, the seed of rebirth in him withers and he 
^ knows,’ that for him renewed life in body and mind comes no 
more. This is the burden of Sutta after Sutta. 

Who and what is the nature of this scrutinizer of his body 
and mind is nowhere positively said. But who and what he 
was not is affirmed with much earnestness. And ever there 
comes into the denials the formula probably annexed from^ 
such current opinion as opposed the Brahmin or Vedantist 
affirmation of what man is. This affirmed : — ai^ Atman or 
World-Self; He is I; 'thou art That.’ The formula said the 
contrary. Man was not the Self, i e. not God (Atman or Self 
is Brahman). If he were, he could not be subject to suffering, 
to change, to shortcomings in body and mind; he could will 
his body and mind, that is, his instruments, to be as he 
would have them be. 

In time this original quarrel with the Atmanist position 
diverged. In Buddhism it became an irrational denial of the 
man as man ; he was reduced to his instruments, body and mind. 
The scrutinizer of these became what he scrutinized. ' The baby 
was emptied out with the bath. ' With the rej ection of divinity 
in the self, the self himself, the man, the person, the spirit using 
mind and body was also rejected. (In Sankhya agnosticism 
the negation came to be of the holding of the ' I ’ as distinct 
from the soul or self : — ' I ’ am not, (it is) not mine; not I.^ 

Now when did that later, that total rejection of spirit or 
self, come to pass in the Buddhist church ? We see that the 

1 Dialogues of the Buddha li, p. ^^Dlfka ii, 28, 29). 

2 SdnJchya-Mrikd, Sutra 64: ndsmi na mama ndhay. 



Editorial Note 


ix 

editors of the Suttas show the elders much exercised about the 
doctrine. Not only does it seem to some to bring to fiought 
any teaching of future retribution (and thereby of future 
growth) there is also animated discussion among themselves 
on the ' I ’ and the ' self,’ notably in the Yamaha, Channa, 
Ananda and Khema(ka) Suttas. The last-named has indeed 
quite a Humian touch about it: see that with respect to 

body and mind ' I am ’ comes to me, but I do not discern 
this ^ I am.’ ” 

And we know, by the long opening series of arguments in 
the Katha-vatthu of a later date, and again in the Qmstions of 
King Milinda of a still later date, what a deal of trouble the 
Thera vada church had to get triumphantly orthodox on the 
question, and how long it took them to settle down to the 
belief, not that man’s body and mind were not Divine Spirit, 
not that man’s self was not body or mind, but that man was 
^just body and mind, and, nothing else. 

But where exactly, with respect to these three stages of 
^ dogmatic gjrowth, were they who committed the Suttas to 
writing ? I incline to think they were in sight of the last 
stage, but they had to set down a memorized wording belonging 
to the earlier stages. There is, in these Suttas, a curious absence 
of the arguments used in the ' Puggala-katha ’ of the Katha- 
vatthu. There is no lighting upon the vivid similes of the 
Milinda which Buddhaghosa found very useful. Always there 
is a falling back on the archaic argument involving the divine 
attributes without which a ' self ’ or soul was unthinkable. 

I say 'archaic’ because, except when elders discuss the 
subj ect , the rej ection of Atman or Atta is given so mechanically, 
as if long ago the wording had been as it were graven on stone 
and was no longer alive. In one Sutta, and one only, the subj ect 
seems to retain life. And perhaps it seemed on that account 
to coniSact with the later teaching and only a half -suppressed 
argument survives. The parable in the ' Not Yours ’ Sutta, 
p. 32 , can surely only mean that body and mind is to ' -ws ’ 
as the removable kindling is to the whole wood. J etavana is 
we^ Jetavana is the sSlf, the man. 

1 Below, p. ^B^Maj^hima iii, 19/. 



X 


Editorial Note 


But notMng will convince me that we have, in that stereo- 
typed -argument about Atta, the very way in which Gotama 
fed his questioners over and over again. That is indeed 
unthinkable. He may conceivably in his long ministry have 
sanctioned his disciples’ drawing up a fixed wording here and 
there. But as a man of originality, of power, of winning 
charm, he would be simply unable to repeat himself. It is 
the way of such elect souls to react with fine sensitiveness 
to every fresh conjuncture calling for speech. It is the way 
of such elect souls to be welling up and overflowing in creative 
will now thus and now thus Not his the formula of the Suttas 
any more than was his the terse cryptic gnome of the Sutras. 

We are not seldom reminded by the learned, that the Suttas 
are teachings of a popular kind, even when addressed to the 
Order. Now ' popular’ teaching is not given in formulas. 
It is largely by parable and story, or by the next stage to these 
in argument — ^the argument by analogy. And so in this 
our day, when folk on Sabbath full-moon evenings m Ceylon* 
sit far into the night listening to the ' Teaching,’ it is not to 
formulas about soul and the like, but more often lhan not to • 
Jataka stories. 

Lastly, when historians of early Buddhism come to write 
from a really adequate acquaintance with the contents of the 
Suttas, what will they infer from this: — that, of the Suttas 
in this volume, numbering roughly 313, about 285 are said to 
have been delivered at Savatthi, and only 28 at other places ? 

With these we may compare those in Vol. II. Here we get 
the same disproportion. About 191 Suttas located at Savat- 
thi, 30 elsewhere Eoughly, then, Savatthi claims seven- 
eighths of all these discourses and conversations. 

This inquiry might be extended to other books in the Sutta 
Pitaka, but here there is space and occasion only for a pro- 
visional suggestion. 

Savatthi was the capital, I gather, of Gotama’s native 
country, the kingdom of Kosala His interviews with the 
King of Kosala, who lived about as long as he did,^ are recorded- 

^ Above, Part I, Cb. 3. In Majjhima ii, 118, the Corny, states he was 
in flight, a dethroned king. 



Editorial Note 


XI 


as taking place there; or else no specified place is given. It 
is true that Gotama’s last tour did not tak^in Savatthi, but 
appears to have been made in Magadha and in the Vajjian 
confederated states, that is to the south and east of Kosala. 
He passed away as a true Wandering Friar, on tour, without 
home. Yet the Kindred Sayings would seem to lead us to infer 
that he spent most of his years of teaching at one and the same 
place. Rajagaha where his church was really started comes 
second, but is a very bad second. The few Benares Suttas 
are discourses by disciples, very likely after his death. 

There is another inference that may be suggested. Most 
of the Savatthi Suttas have a very condensed opening formula. 
There is only ' was staying at Savatthi,’. . . or . . . ^ park.’ 
In Part IV it is often only Savatthi niddnarj. Once the phrase 
is added : — ‘ Thus it is to be amplified.’ 

Now it is possible that the Savatthi monastery or monas- 
•teries became, at least till the rise of the Asokan empire, the 
centre where a collecting of Suttas was carried on. This work 
^ of collecting oral records is referred to in the Vinaya. Rhys 
Davids has reminded us, in his luminous chapters on ' writing ’ 
in Buddhist India^ that in order to collect a ' Suttanta ’ from 
the laity before it was forgotten, the rule forbidding travel 
in the rains might be suspended. It is also possible that a 
slight outline, or sermon-text, of each Sutta was committed 
to writing. Many Suttas reveal a structure of this kind: — 

" argument ’ followed by developed exposition, notably in the 
latter Majjhima Suttas. It was also possible that no record 
was made at the time of the place whence the Sutta was col- 
lected, or where it was originally uttered, or later generations 
of recorders may have forgotten. It may have been collected 
from the descendant of the pious layman who remembered it, 
and he may have been on a journey when he heard it. Any- 
way, the place was not for him a vital fact. 

In this way there would come to be, in the thesaurus at 
Savatthi, quite a number of ' Suttas ’ or ' Suttantas ’ lacking the 
stock beginning of an ear- witness S,t first hand. They would 
not begin with the Thus have I heard. The Exalted One 
was once staying,’ etc. And if they are just headed Savatthi ’ 



Editorial Note 


xii 

or Sdvatthl mdanarj, this may not mean that the Buddha’s 
sojourn at Savatthi is to be ' taken as read.’ It may only 
mean: ' Sutta from the Savatthi collection ’ (or series niddna, 

? or depository, nidJidnarj). The drdme or viharati may be a 
late interpolation. 

And among these are some that are pure formulas or sche- 
mata; such are those in the Jhana Sagyutta, for instance, in 
this volume. Here the heading Savatthi may merely mean 
that they were tables, lists drawn up in the monastery schools, 
void of all missionary interest. 

If we now omit all these Suttas headed Savatthi only, we 
find that of those associated with Savatthi in the regular 
Sutta opening ' Thus have I heard, etc. amount only to eighteen 
in Part II, and to four in Part III (and to seven in Part IV). 
This result brings Savatthi into line with other places given. 
In fact, it places Eajagaha, the mother church, slightly ahead.^ 

With the growth of the Asokan hegemony, there would be* 
very possibly a transference of archives, written or human, 
to Patna; and it may well be that, in preparing Ihe existing . 
materials, however they were preserved, for the important 
Council there, the classing of the unlocated Suttas under the 
name of the place where they had been stored up was effected. 
And when, centuries later, the Suttas, possibly for the first 
time anywhere, were fully written out in Ceylon, it was a 
natural thing to assume that 'Savatthi,’ with or without 
niddnarj^ meant more than it originally meant. 

C. A. F. RHYS DAVIDS. 

1 Cf. the similar preponderance of the Jatakas told at Savatthi, in 
L. Peer’s Table (No. VI. in Rhys Davids’s Buddhist Birth-Stones ^ 
new ed., Broadway Translation Series, 1925). 


Note. — AUd, in the archaic formula (discussed above, p. viii/), is 
once or twice rendered by Self, not self. I had suggested this way. 
The formula reflects, I repeat, not the later noij-ego of the Sasana so 
much as the old opposition to Brahminist theism. Indeed, had 
Upanishad translators rendered Atman by God or Brahman, not by 
Self, they might have produced a truer impiKj^sion. The translator 
preferred self, but in the text a few of the capitals, like lonely pillars, 

survive. Thus the rAJl./lAT* en.n OTAt 1+. irroTTCi Xl.- T-_xx 



TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE 


Those who study Buddha-dhamma and have read the first 
two volumes of this series will have appreciated the valuable 
introductions from the pen of Mrs. Ehys Davids. Certainly 
I know of no other Pali scholar who combines so well a wide 
knowledge of Dhamma with the fruits of a literary and philo- 
sophical training — qualities which enable her at once to put 
her finger on points which are to be weighed and considered 
in reading a collection of doctrinal sayings such as this. Thus, 
in undertaking a translation of this third volume of Kindred 

* Sayings^ I stipulated that she should write another introduc- 
tion (which, at the time of writing this, I have not seen), and 

• I live in hdj)es that the next volume also, now in preparation, 
may have a similar advantage. 

Separated by time and space from the printers, I am glad to 
take advantage of her offer to see the book through the press. 
It goes without saying that accuracy is better insured by this 
course. Closeness to the original text and an improved ren- 
dering of terms have, I hope, been attained. I have in several 
cases deferred to Mrs. Ehys Davids’s better judgment in 
recasting certain phrases. There are stiU some words which 
defy an adequate rendering in English, viz. : dsavd^ tathdgata^ 
deva^ etc. For sahhdya^ word almost equally untranslatable, 
we discussed various terms, and a various rendering has been 
given, none satisfying us. It has been thought best to leave 
the first three here mentioned in the original, as they are 
sufficiently familiar to the reader. 

In preparing this translation, I have had the additional 
advantage of simultaneously preparing a critical edition of 
Buddhaghosa’s Coi^mentary on Sayyutta Nikdya^ namely 
SdraUha-pakdsinl (‘The pronouncement of the essential 
meaning ’), and I have quoted freely from it here, when it 



xiv Translator's Preface 

seemed to telp an imderstanding of onr text. Though it is 
not seldom impossible to accept Buddhaghosa’s etymology — 
often astoimding — or his philosophical view, yet it is to be 
remembered that he represents, as we may suppose, the estab- 
lished view of Doctrine at the time at which he wrote. That 
was, approximately, the ninth century after the Buddha’s 
First Sermon. His views are, admittedly, to a very large extent 
drawn from the more ancient Commentaries, which he freely 
quotes as Purdnas^ and which have perished long ago. 

Though this Khandhd Booh does not contain the rich variety 
of the Dlgha and Majjhima Nikdyas^ or the interesting folk- 
lore of the first volume, yet it is valuable for a study of the 
doctrine of personality, and has several sections which do not 
occur elsewhere in the Canon. 

F. L. WOODWAED. 

Adtae, Madeas, 

1924. 



CONTENTS 
THE KHAm)Hl BOOK 
{Khandhd-vagga) 


CHAPTER PAGE 

XXII. THE KINDRED SAYINGS ON ELEMENTS: 

I. THE EIRST FIFTY SUTTAS: 

1. Tbe Nakulapitar Section - - - 1 

2. Tlie Second on Impermanence - - 20 

3. On the Burden - - - - 24 

4. On Not Yours - - - - 31 

6. On being an Island to Self - - - 37 

m 

II. THE MIDDLE FIFTY: 

1. On Attachment - - - -*45 

2. OntheArahant - « - - 64 

3. On What must be Devoured - - 68 

4. The Elders - - - - - 89 

5. On Flowers ----- 116 

TTT - the last fifty: 

1. On Separates - . - . 134 

2. On Pious Converse - - . 138 

3. On Ignorance - . - - 146 

4. Glowing Embers - - - - 149 

5. On View ----- 150 

XXIII. KINDRED SAYINGS ABOUT RADHA*. 

I. - 155 

n. 160 

in. request/ - - - - - 161 

- 163 

s:v 


IV. CONFIDENTIAL 



XVI 


GmAmis 


CHAPTER PAGE 

XXIV. XINDEED SAYINGS ON VIEWS: 

I. ON STEEAM-WIHNING - - - - 164 

n. FIRST REPETITION (OF THE EIGHTEEN IN- 
STRUCTIONS) ----- 173 

in. SECOND REPETITION - - - - 174 

IV. THIRD REPETITION - - - - 175 

V. FOURTH REPETITION - - - - 175 

XXV. KINDRED SAYINGS ON ENTERING - - 177 

XXVI. KINDRED SAYINGS ON GENESIS - - - 180 

xxvn. KINDRED SAYINGS ON THE CORRUPTIONS - 183 

XXVni. KINDRED SAYINGS ON SARIPUTTA - - 186 

XXIX. KINDRED SAYINGS ON NAGAS - . - 192 

XXX. KINDRED SAYINGS ON HARPIES - - - 195 

XXXI. KINDRED SAYINGS ON THE GANDHARVAS - 197 

xxxn. KINDRED SAYINGS ON CLOUD-SPIRITS -• - 200. 

XXXHI. KINDRED SAYINGS ON VACCHAGOTTA - - 202 

xxxrv. KINDRED SAYINGS ON JHANA (OR SAMADHi) - 205 

INDEXES: 

I. GENERAL - - . . _ 211 

n. PALI WORDS DISCUSSED HERE OR IN FOOT- 
NOTES - - - - - 216 

in. TITLES OF THE SAYINGS ... 219 



THE BOOK 

OF THE KINDRED SAYINGS 

{SAl^YUTTA-mKlYA) 


PART III 

THE BOOK CALLED THE KHANDHA-VAGGA 
CONTAINING KINDRED SAYINGS ON THE ELEMENTS 
OF SENSORY EXISTENCE AND OTHER SUBJECTS 


CHAPTER XXII 

KINDRED SAYINGS ON ELEMENTS (KHANDHA) 

I. ' The First Fifty ’ Suttas 
§ 1 (1). NaJculapitar, 

Thus have I heard: — The Exalted One was once staying 
among the Bhaggi, at Crocodile-Haunt^ in Bhesakala^ Grove 
in the Deer-Park. Then the housefather Nakulapitar came 
to the Exalted One, saluted him and sat down at one side. 

As he sat there, the housefather Nakulapitar addressed the 
Exalted One, saying: — 'Master, I am a broken-down old 
man, aged, far-gone in years, ^ I have reached life’s end, I am 
sick and always ailing. Moreover, Master, I am one to whom 
rarely comes the sight of the Exalted One and the worshipful 
brethren.^ Let the Exalted One cheer and comfort me, so 
that it be a profit and a blessing unto me for many a long day.’ 

^ A town, so called, Says Corny., because when it was a-building 
‘ a crocodile made a noise.’ 

2 Named after a yakkhini. Gf. K.S. i, 262, n., on these beings; 

Pali Diet., s.v. ^ 

3 addha-gato. Corny. ‘ Come to the third and last stage of life.’ 

^ ‘ Owing to his sickness.’ Corny, 



2 


The Khandha Booh 


[text iii, 2 


' True it is, true it is, housefather, that your body is weak^ 
and cumbered.^ For one carrying this body about, house- 
father, to claim but a moment’s health would be sheer foolish- 
ness. Wherefore, housefather, thus you should train yourself ; 
— Though my body is sick, my mind shall not be sick.” 
Thus, housefather, must you train yourself.’ 

Then Nakulapitar, the housefather, welcomed and gladly 
heard the words of the Exalted One, and rising from his seat 
he saluted the Exalted One by the right, and departed. And 
he came to the venerable Sariputta, saluted him and sat down 
at one side. 

As he sat there, the venerable Sariputta said to the house- 
father Nakulapitar : — ' Calmed are your senses, housefather : 
clear and pure is your complexion.^ Surely to-day you have 
had pious converse face to face with the Exalted One ?’ 

' How could it be otherwise, Master ? I have just now 
been sprinkled with the nectar^ of pious converse by the 
Exalted One.’ ^ 

‘ And in what way, housefather, were you sprinkled with 
the nectar of pious converse by the Exalted One V 

^ Well, Master, I went to the Exalted One, saluted him, 
and sat down at one side. As I sat thus. Master, I said to the 
ExaUed One: — “ Master, I am a broken-down old man, aged, 
far gone in years, I have reached my life's end, I am sick and 
always ailing. Moreover, Master, I am one to whom rarely 
comes the sight of the Exalted One and the worshipful 
brethren. Let the Exalted One cheer and comfort me, so 
that it be a profit and a blessing unto me for many a long 
day.” 

True it is, true it is, housefather, that your body is weak 
and cumbered. For one carrying this body about, house- 
father, to claim but a moment’s health were sheer foolishness. 

^ Andabhuto (egg-born), for text addhabhuto. Gomy. explains ‘ as 
weak as if just hatched from the egg.’ 

^ Pari{y)onaddho. Cf. M. i, 25. Pap. 141, equivalent to sanchanna, 

‘ enveloped with overgrowth ’ like a tree in a^ungle, or as C., ‘ covered 
with a fine film.’ 

3 Gf, K,8, i, 186. 


* AmcUena abUsitto. 



3 


XXII, I, § i] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

Wherefore, housefather, thus you should train yourself: — 
^ Though my body is sick, my mind shall not be sick/ Thus, 
housefather, must you train yourself.” ’ 

‘ But did not it occur to you, housefather, to question the 
Exalted One further? Thus: ^‘Pray, how far, Master, is 
body sick and mind sick ? And how far is body sick and 
mind not sick ?” ’ 

" I would travel far indeed. Master, to learn from the lips 
of the venerable Sariputta the meaning of this saying. Well 
for me if the venerable Sariputta should think fit to expound 
to me the meaning of this saying.’ 

‘ Then listen, housefather ; apply your mind and give heed 
to what I shall tell you.’ 

‘ Even so, Master,’ said housefather Nakulapitar, and 
listened to the venerable Sariputta. 

• The venerable Sariputta thus spake: — ^ And how is body 
sick, housefather, and mind sick too ? 

^ Herein,^ housefather, the untaught many-folk, who 
discern not those who are Ariyans,^ who are unskilled in the 
Ariyan doctrine, who are untrained in the Ariyan doctrine, 
who discern not those who are worthy ones, who are unskilled 
in the worthy doctrine, untrained in the worthy doctrine — 
these regard body as the self,® they regard the self as having 
body, body as being in the self, the self as being in the body, 

1 am the body,” say they, body is mine,” and are pos- 
sessed by this idea; and so, possessed by this idea, when body 
alters and changes, owing to the unstable and changeful 
nature of body, then sorrow and grief, woe, lamentation, and 
despair arise in them. 

They regard feeling as the self, they regard the self as 
having feeling, feeling as being the self, the self as being in 
feeling. I am feeling,” they say, feeling is mine,” and are 
possessed by this idea; and so possessed by this idea, when 
feeling alters and changes owing to the unstable and changeful 

^ See Warren, Buddhisrrtin Translations, p. 143 This view includes 
the annihilationist {uccJieda) and eternalist {sassata) heresies. Corny, 

2 Bud, Psy, Ethics, § 1003, n, on Ariydnay adassdvl 

2 Attd, Vedic dtmdn. 



4 The Khandha Booh [text iii, 4 

nature of feeling, then sorrow and grief, woe, lamentation, 
and despair arise in them. 

They regard perception as the self, they regard the self 
as having perception, perception as being in the self, the 
self as being in perceptioh. “1 am perception,” they say, 

perception is mine,” and are possessed by this idea; and so 
possessed by this idea, when perception alters and changes 
owing to the unstable and changeful nature of perception, 
then sorrow and grief, woe, lamentation, and despair arise 
in them. 

They regard the activities as the self, they regard the self 
as having activities, activities as being in the self, the self as 
being in the activities, and are possessed by this idea ; and so 
possessed by this idea, when the activities alter and change 
owing to the unstable and changeful nature of the activities, 
then sorrow and grief, woe, lamentation, and despair arisejn 
them. 

They regard consciousness as the self, they i^egard the self 
as having consciousness, consciousness as being in the seif, 
the self as being in consciousness. I am consciousness,” 
they say; consciousness is mine,” and are possessed by this 
idea; and so possessed by this idea, when consciousness alters 
and changes owing to the unstable and changeful nature of 
consciousness, then sorrow and grief, woe, lamentation, and 
despair arise in them. That, housefather, is how body is 
sick and mind is sick too. 

And how is body sick, but mind not sick ? 

^Herein, housefather, the well-taught Ariyan disciple, 
who discerns those that are Ariyans, who is skilled in the 
Ariyan doctrine, well trained in the Ariyan doctrine, skilled 
in the worthy doctrine, well trained in the worthy doctrine, 
regards not body as the self, regards not the self as having 
body, nor body as being in the self,, nor self as being in 
body. He says not I am body,” he says not body is 
mine,” nor is possessed by this idea. As he is not so pos- 
sessed, when body alters and changes^ owing to the unstable 


^ See Warren, p. 422. 



XXII, I, § i] Kindred Sayings on Elements 6 

and changeful nature of body, then sorrow and grief, -woe, 
lamentation, and despair do not arise in him. 

He regards not feeling as the self, regards not the self as 
having feeling, nor feeling as being in the self, nor the self 
as being in feeling. He says not I am feeling, feeling is 
mine,’’ nor is he possessed by this idea. As he is not so 
possessed, when feeling alters and changes owing to the un- 
stable and changeful nature of feeling, then sorrow and grief, 
woe, lamentation, and despair arise not in him. 

He regards not perception as the self, regards not the self 
as having perception, nor perception as being in the self, nor 
the self as being in perception. He says not I am percep- 
tion, perception is mine,” nor is he possessed by this idea. 
As he is not so possessed, when perception alters and changes 
owing to the unstable and changeful nature of perception, 
sorrow and grief, woe, lamentation, and despair do not arise 
in him. 

He regards not the activities as the self, regards not the 
self as having activities, nor the activities as being in the self, 
nor the self as being in the activities. He says not I am 
the activities, the activities are mine,” nor is he possessed by 
this idea. As he is not so possessed, when the activities alter 
and change owing to the unstable and changeful nature of the 
activities, sorrow and grief, woe, lamentation and despair do 
not arise in him. 

He regards not consciousness as the self, regards not the 
self as having consciousness, nor consciousness as being in the 
self, nor the self as being in consciousness. He says not I 
am consciousness, consciousness is mine,” nor is he possessed 
by this idea. As he is not so possessed, when consciousness 
alters and changes owing to the unstable and changeful nature 
of consciousness, sorrow and grief, woe, lamentation and 
despair do not arise in him. Thus, housefather, body is sick, 
but mind is not sick.^ 

Thus spake the venerable Sariputta, and the housefather 
Hakulapitar was pleaf^ed and welcomed what was said by the 
venerable Sariputta. 



6 


The Kkandha Booh 


[text iii, 6 


§ 2 (2). Devadaha} 

Thus have I heard: Once the Exalted One was staying 
among the Sakkas^ at Devadaha,^ a township of the Sakkas. 

Now on that occasion a number of westward-faring brethren 
came to the Exalted One, saluted him and sat down at one 
side. 

As they sat there they addressed the Exalted One thus: 
' Master, we wish to go to the western province, and in the 
western province to take up residence.’^ 

And have ye got leave, brethren, from the venerable 
Sariputta V 

"No, Master, we have not got leave from the venerable 
Sariputta.’ ^ 

" Then, brethren, do ye get leave from the venerable Sari- 
putta, A wise man is Sariputta. He is the patron® of those 
brethren who live the righteous life along with him.’ 

" Even so. Master,’ replied those brethren to the Exalted One. 

Now on that occasion, the venerable SariputtS, was seated 
not far from the Exalted One, under a cassia tree.'^ 

Then those brethren, having welcomed and approved the 

1 Of, S. IV, 124. 

2 Of. K.S. 1 , 36, n, ‘ The Sakkas or Sakyas, a noble clan of the high- 
lands or Himalayan foothills of Kosala, the Buddha’s own clan.’ Infra 
text, p. 91. 

® Devadaha, see Jdt. 52. The native place of the Buddha’s mother, 
j ourneying to which she gave birth to her son at Lumbini Grove. Gomy- 
says ‘ Royal Pool,’ so called because kings are called devas, or because 
the pool was of natural formation and so divine (not man-made). 

^ G., ‘ for the rainy season.’ 

® His death is described at S, v, 161, and this epithet of ‘patron of 
co-religionists ’ is there applied to him, and he is called ‘ The radiance, 
the treasure, the patron of the Norm.’ Here he is held up to the breth- 
ren as a pattern of propriety in the etiquette of the Order. Corny. 
says he used to visit the sick ward and wait on the brethren there, and 
was a great stickler for the neatness of the Residence, ‘ lest heretics ’ 
should cast a slur on the followers of the Master. Cf. Pss, of the 
Brethreni p. 46. 

® anuggdJialco, ‘ uplifter, companion,’ 

dagald-gumha. G. ‘said to be a tree that grows by steady-flowing 
water.’ 



7 


XXII, § 2] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

words of tte Exalted One, saluted kim and departed by tke 
right and came to the venerable Sariputta. Thereupon they 
greeted him with friendly words, and, exchanging the com- 
pliments of courtesy, sat down on one side. 

So seated those brethren thus addressed the venerable 
Sariputta : ' Friend Sariputta, we desire to go to the western 
province and in the western province to take up residence. 
The Master has permitted us.’ 

‘Friends, there are those who will be questioners^ of a 
brother who roams the various provinces. Wise men of the 
nobles,^ of the brahmins,® among householders^ and wan- 
derers^ — there are wise men, friends, of an inquiring mind 
(who will ask) “ What does the Teacher of your reverences 
declare, what does he announce ?” Now it may be, friends, 
that your doctrines are well learned, well grasped, well thought 
over and well understood: so that, in answering, you might be 
a*ble to repeat the views of the Exalted One and not misrepre- 
sent the Exalted One by uttering an untruth, but rightly state 
your doctriife in agreement with his doctrine, so that one 
who is of his way of thinking* may not give grounds for 
reproach in stating it.’® 

‘ We would come from far, friend, to hear from the lips of 
the venerable Sariputta the meaning of this saying. Well for 
us if it would please the venerable Sariputta to state its 
meaning.’ 

‘ Very well, friends. Do ye listen carefully. G-ive heed and 
I will speak.’ 

‘ Even so, friend,’ replied those brethren to the venerable 
Sariputta. 

1 Pucchitdro. Of, Sn 140 for a similar case. 

2 Corny, gives as example ‘ Bimbisara the Kosalan ruler.’ 

^ Corny , ‘ Like Gankin and Taruldsha, etc.’ These names occur 
among those of other learned brahmins Sn 115. 

4 Comy.^ ‘Like Citta and Sudatta (Anathapi^dika),’ chief supporters 
of the Buddha. See the list at A, i, 24-6. 

s Corny , ‘ Like Sabhiya, after whom a Sutta is named.’ Cf. Sn, 
90-102 and S. ii, 153; S.^y, 401. 

* vdddnuvado. Corny, reads vdddnufdto, and explains as 

‘ following the teacher’s path.’ 

6 Cf, K.S, ii, 28 (S. ii, 33) for a similar passage. 



8 


The Khandha Booh 


[text ili, 7 


Thus spake the venerable Sariputta : ^ Friends, there are 
those who will ask a question of a brother who roams the 
various provinces — wise men of the nobles, and so forth — 
there are wise men, friends, of an inquiring mind (who will 
ask) What does the teacher of your reverences declare, what 
does he announce V Thus asked, friends, thus should ye 
reply: Friends, our teacher is one who tells of the restraining 
of desire and lust.” 

Upon this reply, friends, there might be those who would 
put a further question — wise men of the nobles and so forth 
— ^there are wise men, friends, of an inquiring mind (who will 
ask) But in what way does your reverences’ teacher tell of 
the restraining of desire and lust 

Thus questioned, friends, thus should ye reply: '' In body 
surely, friends, our teacher tells of the restraining of desire 
and lust; in feeling, in perception, in the activities, in con- 
sciousness does our teacher tell of the restraining of desire 
and lust.” 

ft 

Upon this reply, friends, there might be those who would 
put a further question — wise men of the nobles, and so forth — 
there are wise men, friends, of inquirmg mind (who might 
ask): ‘‘But seeing what danger therein, friends, does your 
reverences’ teacher tell of the restraining of desire and lust in 
the body, likewise in feeling, perception, the activities and 
consciousness ?” 

Thus questioned, friends, thus should ye make reply: — 
“ In body, friends, he who is not rid of desire, who is not rid 
of lust, who is not rid of affection, nor yet of thirst and fever 
and craving, — owing to the unstable and changeful nature of 
body, sorrow and grief, woe, lamentation and despair arise in 
him. In feeling, perception, the activities, he who is not rid 
of desire . . . and the rest . . . who is not rid of craving, 
owing to the unstable and changeful nature of the activities, 
sorrow and grief, woe, lamentation and despair arise in him. 
In consciousness, he who is not rid of desire, who is not rid 
of lust, who is not rid of affection, nor yot of thirst and fever 
and craving— owing to the unstable and changeful nature of 
consciousness, sorrow and grief, woe, lamentation and despair 



9 


XXII, § 2] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

arise in him. That, friends, is the danger, seeing whiQh in 
body, our teacher tells of the restraining of desire and lust in 
body: so also in feeling, perception, the activities . . . seeing 
it in consciousness also he tells of the restraining of desire and 
lust.’’ 

Upon this reply, friends, there might be those who would 
put a further question . . . wise men of the nobles, of the 
brahmin caste, or among householders and wanderers. There 
are wise men, friends, of an inquiring mind (who might ask) : 

But seeing what profit therein does your reverences’ teacher 
tell of the restraining of desire and lust in the body, in feeling, 
in perception, in the activities, likewise in consciousness ?” 

Thus questioned, friends, thus should ye make reply: '' In 
body, friends, he who is rid of desire, who is rid of lust, who is 
rid of afiection, of thirst and fever and craving, owing to the 
unstable and changeful nature of body, sorrow and grief, woe, 
lamentation and despair do not arise in him; so also with 
feeling, perception, the activities and consciousness. This, 
friends, is the profit, seeing which our teacher tells of the 
restraining of desire and lust in body, in feeling, in perception, 
in the activities and in consciousness.” 

And, friends, that in fostering evil states and dwelling 
therein, in this very life he would live pleasantly, unharassed 
and free from life’s fret and fever, and, when body dissolves, 
after death he may look for the abode of bliss — this is not 
the putting away of evil states that the Exalted One would 
approve. 

But, friends, inasmuch as having fostered evil states and 
dwelling therein, in this very life one would live painfully, 
harassed, unfreed from life’s fret and fever, and, when body 
dissolves, after death one may look for the woeful state — 
therefore does the Exalted One approve of the putting away 
of evil states. And, friends, that in fostering righteous states 
and dwelling therein, in this very life one would live painfully, 
harassed, unfreed from life’s fret and fever, and, when body 
dissolves, after deaths one may look for the woeful state — 
this is not the way of fostering righteous states that the 
Exalted One would approve. 



10 


The Khandha Booh 


[text lii, 9 


But, friends, inasmuch as having fostered righteous* 
states and dwelling therein, in this very life one would live 
pleasantly, unharassed, free from life’s fret and fever, and, 
when body dissolves, after death one may look for the abode 
of bliss, therefore does the Exalted One approve of the 
accomplishing of righteous states.’ 

Thus spake the venerable Sariputta, and those brethren 
were delighted and welcomed the words of the venerable 
Sariputta. 

^ 3 (^)* II(il'idd%lcci'yh'bt 

Thus have I heard: Once the venerable Kaccana^ the Great 
was dwelling among the folk of Avanti at Ospreys’ Haunt 
on a sheer mountain crag.^ 

Then the housefather Haliddikani came to the venerable 
Kaccana the Great and saluting him sat down at one side. 

So seated the housefather Haliddikani thus addressed th^e 
venerable Kaccana the Great: — 

‘ Master, it was said by the Exalted One the eighth 
chapter in the Questions of Mdgandiya — ^ 

Home he abandons: homeless wandering 
The sage with village-folk not making ties. 

Empty of lusts, showing no preference,^ 

With no man wageth wordy warfare more. 

Pray, Master, how should one regard the full meaning of this 
concisely spoken saying of the Exalted One V 

' The material element, housefather, is the home of con- 
sciousness.^ Kow consciousness, being lust-tied to the material 

* Text wrongly reads ahisale here. 

^ Pronounce Kach-chana. 

^ Of, S. iy, 115, 288, and Uddna vi, 1, where Corny, so translates, 
reading palpate pabbate. Here Corny, reads papdte pavatte for text 
pavatie pabbate. 

® The name of a section of Sutta Nipdta, where (v, 844) the quotation 
occurs. See Corny, on it (Param. Jot. ii, 647), and M ii, 510. 

^ Apurehhardno (text wrongly apurahhhardno). Corny, at Sn. 
says, ‘ not giving rise to any future personaHty,’ The word means 
‘ showing no preference.’ 

^ Gf. Dhp. 34; Thag. 36. 



11 


XXII, § 3] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

element, is called home-liaunter.” Then again, house- 
father, the feeling-element is the home of consciousness. 
Thus being lust-tied to the feeling- element, consciousness 
is called home-haunter.’’ Now the perception- element, 
housefather, is the home of consciousness; thus being lust- 
tied to the perception- element, consciousness is called home- 
haunter.” Now the activities- element, housefather, is the 
home of consciousness : thus being lust-tied to the activities- 
element, consciousness is called '^home-haunter.”^ That, 
housefather, is the meaning of the word " home-haunter.” 

And how, housefather, is one a " home-abandoner ”? 

Now as to the material element, housefather, that desire, 
that lust, that lure, that craving, those system-graspings, 
that mental standpoint, that dogmatic bias which is inherent 
therein^ — ^all these for a Tathagata are struck off, cut down 
at the root, made like a palm-tree stump, made things that 
have ceased to be, so that they cannot grow up again in the 
future.^ 

• So it is atso, housefather, with the feeling-element, the 
perception-element, the activities-element, the consciousness- 
element — that desire, that lust, that lure, cannot grow up 
again in the future. Therefore, housefather, a Tathagata is 
called " home-abandoner.” That is the meaning of the word. 

And how is one an " adherent 

One who is in bondage to the impressions® of things seen, 
housefather, is called " adherent.” Likewise with regard to 
sounds, smells, savours, tangibles and mental objects — ^he 
who is in bondage to these impressions is called " adherent.” 

And how is one " non-adherent,” housefather ? 

Such bondage to impressions® of things seen is, for a Tatha- 
gata, struck off, cut down at the root, made like a palm-tree 


^ Corny, asks, ‘ Why does he omit the fifth factor, consciousness - 
element ? and says sammoha-vighaf atthay, ‘to obviate any confusion. 

2 Gf. S. ii, 17; K.S. ii, 13. 

3 S. ii, 88; K.8. 44. 

^ Niheta-sdn. Niket(^ connected with hetu, ‘ sign or banner,’ thus 
‘ follower of a token,’ an adherent. 

^ Nimitta. 



12 


The Khandha Boole 


[text iii, II 


stunxp, made things that have ceased to be, so that they 
cannot grow up again in the future. Therefore, housefather, 
a Tathagata is called '' non-adherent.’' So also with regard 
to sounds, smells, savours, tangibles and mental objects — 
such bondage is not found in a Tathagata: therefore is he 
called '' non-adherent.’' That, housefather, is the meaning 
of the word. 

And how is one a former of ties in the village ” 

Herein, housefather, a certain one lives intimate with 
householders. He shares their joys and sorrows; among the 
happy he is happy, among the unhappy he is unhappy : when 
affairs of business arise, he involves himself in these. That, 
housefather, is how one is ^^a former of ties in the village." 

And how is one no former of ties in the village 

Herein, housefather, a brother^ dwells not associating with 
householders: he shares not their joys and sorrows, is not 
happy amid the happy, unhappy amid the unhappy. When 
affairs of business arise, he does not involve himself in them. 
Thus, housefather, one forms no ties in the village. 

And how is one ‘‘ not empty ” 

Herein, housefather, a certain one has not abandoned lust, 
has not abandoned desire, nor affection, nor thirst, nor fever 
and craving. Thus, housefather, he is not empty." 

And how is one empty 

Herein, housefather, a certain one has abandoned lust, has 
abandoned desire, likewise affection and thirst, fever and 
craving. Thus, housefather, is one empty." 

And how does one show no preference " P 

Herein, housefather, one thinks thus : “May I have such and 
such a body in future time: may I feel thus and thus: may I 
perceive thus and thus: may my activities be such and such: 
may my consciousness be such and such in future time.’' 
Thus, housefather, does one show preference. 


^ Gf. 63; ii, 202, for the duties of the hhihlchu. 

^ The ‘ freeman ’ is here regarded as the hhikhhu or mendicant, for 
he alone is not bound by such ties. ^ s Eitto. 

Gomy.t vattar) purato hurumdno, purehkhardno, see above, ‘ showing 
preference for such and such a future state.’ Gomy. to Sn. 844. 



13 


XXII, § 3] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

And how does one show no preference 

Herein, housefather, one does not think thus: May I have 
such and such a body in future time : may I feel, may I perceive 
thus and thus: may my activities be such and such: may my 
consciousness be such and such in future time/' Thus, house- 
father, does one show no preference. 

And how is one a wager of wordy warfare with people 

Herein, housefather, a certain one makes talk like this: — 
‘ ^ You know not about this norm-discipline.^ I do know about 
this norm-discipline. How could you know about it ? You 
have fallen on wrong views.^ I have come by right views. 
You speak last what should come first, and first what should 
come last. I am speaking to the point : you are not.® What 
you have thought out so long is quite upset. ^ Your view 
is confuted. Go, explain yourself. You are shown up. 
Clear yourself if you can P' That, housefather, is how one is 
a ‘‘ wager of wordy warfare with people.” 

And how^ one no wager of wordy warfare with people ”? 

Herein, housefather, a brother makes not talk like this: 

You know not about this norm-discipline," and so forth. 
That is how one is ‘‘no wager of wordy warfare with people.” 

And this, housefather, is the meaning of what was said by 
the Exalted One in the eighth chapter of Magandiya’s 
Questions^ to wit : 

Home he abandons: homeless wanderiug 
The sage with folk no longer maketh ties. 

Empty of lusts, showing no preference, 

With no man wageth wordy warfare more. 

Thus, housefather, should be understood in full what was 
concisely stated by the Exalted One.’ 


^ Dliamma-v%naya, the original name for the Buddha’s method. 
See the Introduction to Oldenberg’s Vinaya Pitaha, 

2 Dial, i, 14 (D. i, 8); D, in, 117. 160j iv, 323; 8, v, 419, etc. 

2 Sahitay, Corny, ^ ‘(jpherent,’ silitthay, Sahitarj me, ‘the combine 
is mine.’ 

^ Corny,, adhicinnay te vipardvattay, 8 , v, 419 reads dcinnay, ‘your 
system or performance.’ 



14 


The Khandha Booh 


[text 111, 13 


§ 4 (4). Hdhddikdni (2). 

Thus have I heard : Once the venerable Kaccana the Great 
was staying among the folk of Avanti at Ospreys’ Haunt on 
a sheer mountain crag. 

Then the housefather, Haliddikani came to the venerable 
Kaccana the Great. 

As he sat beside him, the housefather Haliddikani said to 
the venerable Kaccana the Great: ^ Thus was it said. Master, 
by the Exalted One, in the Questions of Sakha Those 
recluses and brahmins who are freed by the utter destruction 
of craving, they only are fully proficient, they only have fully 
reached the infinite safety, they only fully live the righteous 
life, have fully reached the goal — best of devas and men are 
they.”^ Pray, Master, how should one regard the full mean- 
ing of this concise saying of the Exalted One V 

* As to the material element, housefather, that desire, tha^i 
lust, that lure, that craving, those system-graspings, that 
mental standpoint, that dogmatic bias which is inJierenlr 
therein — it is by the destruction, by the not lusting for, by 
the cessation, the giving up, the utter surrender of those things 
that the heart is called fully freed/’ Likewise as regards 
the feeling-element, the perception-element, the activities- 
element, and the consciousness-element, I repeat ... it is 
by the destruction of these, the not lusting for these, it is by 
the cessation, the giving up, the utter surrender of these 
things that the heart is called fully freed.” 

Thus, housefather, what was said by the Exalted One in 
the Questions of Sakha, to wit: ‘‘ Those recluses and brahmins 
who are freed by the utter destruction of craving, they only 
are fully proficient, they only have fully reached the infinite 
safety, fully practise the righteous life, have fully reached 
the goal — best of devas and men are they ” — that is how one 
should regard the full meamng of this c'oncise saying of the 
Exalted One.’ 


^ Dialog, ii, 316 (D. li, 282); cf. A, v, 326. Tor these ‘ riddles of 
Sakka ’ see Buddhist India (T. W. Rhys Davids), p. 180. 

2 This last phrase occurs in A. but not in D. 



XXII, § 5] Kindred Sayings on Elements 


15 


§ 5 (6). Concentration. 

Thus have I heard: — The Exalted One was staying at 
Savatthi. 

Then thus spake the Exalted One : ‘ Concentration, brethren, 
practise^ concentration. A brother who is concentrated, 
brethren, knows a thing as it really is. And what does he 
know as it really is ? The arising of body and the passing 
away thereof; the arising of feeling and the passing away 
of feeling, of perception and the activities; the arising of 
consciousness and the passing away thereof. 

And what, brethren, is the arising of body, of feeling, of 
perception, of the activities, of consciousness ? 

Herein, brethren, one is enamoured, one welcomes;^ having 
clung one persists. To what ? 

He is enamoured of body , . . clings to body ... so 
clinging there comes a lure upon him. That lure which is in 
body is grasping. Conditioned by that grasping is beconung. 
Conditioned t)y becoming is birth, conditioned by birth old 
age and decay, sorrow and grief, woe, lamentation and 
despair together come into being. Thus is the arising of this 
whole mass of 111. 

He is enamoured of feeling ... of perception ... of the 
activities , . . of consciousness; he welcomes it, having clung 
he persists — and lure comes upon him and grasping . . . even 
to sorrow ... to despair. Thus is the arising of this whole 
mass of 111.^ 

Such, brethren, is the arising of body, of feeling, perception, 
the activities, of consciousness. 

And what, brethren, is the passing away of body, of feeling, 
of perception, of the activities, of consciousness ? 

^ Cf. S. V, fl4, quoted at V M. i, 371; Bxpos. i, 216. The whole 
chapter is found at intervals mK S ii Buddhaghosa, commenting on 
this passage at V M. 523; likens the process to that of four men pulling 
up a creeper; the two men who hold on to the middle of it go o^ with 
their bit when it is cut; but the man who cuts the root is the one who 
knows the truth of the wnole matter. 

2 abhivadati. Corny., ‘ Ones out in raptures over it.’ 

^ The full formula is repeated for each group. 



16 


The Khandhd Booh 


[text ili, 14 


In this case, brethren, he is not enamoured, he does not 
welcome, not having clung does not persist. With respect to 
what ? To body. ... In him, not being enamoured of body, 
not welcoming it, not having clung, not persisting with respect 
to body, there arises not the lure which is in body. The 
passing away of that lure is the passing away of grasping. 
The passing away of grasping is the passing away of becoming 
. . . and so forth. Thus is the passing away of this whole 
mass of 111. 

So also as regards feeling, perception, the activities and 
consciousness. This, brethren, is the passing away of body, 
of feeling, of perception, the activities and of consciousness.' 

§ 6 (6). Solitude, 

At Savatthi. . . . Then [the Exalted One] thus addressed 
the brethren: 'Apply yourselves, brethren, to solitude.^ 
A brother who is given to solitude knows a thing as it really is. 

And what, brethren, does he know as it really is ? Tl\e 
arising of body and the passing away thereof, the arising of 
feeling and the passing away thereof, the arising of percep- 
tion . . . of the activities . . . and the passing away thereof.’ 

(As in the first section^ so should this he expanded.)^ 

§ 7 ( 7 ). Grasping and worry? 

At Savatthi. . . . [The Exalted One] thus addressed the 
brethren: ^I will show you grasping and worry, brethren; 
likewise not grasping and not worrying. Listen to it, apply 
your minds to it thoroughly and I will speak.’ 

‘ Even so, lord,’ replied those brethren to the Exalted One. 

Thus spake the Exalted One: ' And how, brethren, is there 
grasping and worry ? Herein, brethren, the untaught many- 


^ Patisalldna. Pati’$a7j4l, ‘stickmg-on- again,’ is applied to solitude 
chosen in order to meditate. 

2 So the Burmese recensions. The Sinh. MSS. expand, 

U pdddna-'paritassana (so Corny.), Cf. Dialog, i, 53 and n. Pari* 
tassana, ‘fidgetiness or worry,’ Of, M, i, 136; MiL Pan, 253, 400; 
and M. i, 36, na asati paritassati, ‘ is not worried at the non-existent.’ 



17 


xxii, § 7] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

folk, wko discern not those who are Ariyans, who are unskilled 
in the Ariyan doctrine, untrained in the Ariyan doctrine, who 
discern not those who are worthy, who are unskilled in the 
worthy doctrine, untrained in the worthy doctrine — ^these 
regard body as the self, the self as having body, body as being 
in the self, the self as being in the body. Of such an one the 
body alters and becomes otherwise. Owing to the altering 
and otherwiseness of the body, his consciousness is busied^ 
with the altering body. From this being busied with the 
altering body, worried thoughts arise and persist, laying hold 
of the heart.^ From this laying hold of the heart he becomes 
troubled, and owing to vexation and clinging he is worried. 
He regards feeling as the self, the self as having feeling, feeling 
as being the self, the self as being in feeling. Of such an one 
feeling alters and becomes otherwise . . . with the same 
result. So also with perception . . . the activities . . . and 
consciousness. Thus, brethren, comes grasping and worry. 

And how, brethren, is there no grasping and worry ? 

• Herein the well-taught Ariyan disciple, who discerns those 
that are Ariyans, who is skilled in the Ariyan doctrine, well 
trained in the Ariyan doctrine, skilled in the worthy doctrine, 
well trained in the worthy doctrine . . . such an one regards 
not body as the self, regards not the self as having body, 
nor body as being in the self, nor the self as being in body. 
His body alters and becomes otherwise; but in spite of the 
altering and otherwiseness of body, his consciousness is not 
busied with the altering body: worried thoughts do not arise 
and persist, laying hold of his heart from his being busied 
with the altering body. As his heart is not so possessed, he 
is not troubled, and through absence of vexation and clinging 
he is not worried. 

So also with regard to feeling, perception, the activities 
and consciousness. Thus, brethren, is there no grasping and 
worry,’ 

^ Anuparivatti, mind is occupied with, the petty concerns of body 
Cf. J.P.T.8., 1913, p. 125, etc. ‘ Of the name as term and concept.’ 

2 Cf. 8. ii, 235, pariydddya titthanfi; ‘make an impression on,’ is not 
forceful enough. ‘ Having altogether laid hold of (him) they persist.’ 
tn 2 



18 


The Khandhd Booh 


[text iii, 19 


§ 8 (8). Grasping and worry (2). 

At SavattKi. . . . 

‘ I will show you, brethren, grasping and worry, likewise 
not grasping and not worrying. Do ye listen. . . . 

And how, brethren, is there grasping and worry ? 

Herein, brethren, the untaught many- folk have this view: 

This body is mine: I am this: this is my self.’' Of such an 
one the body alters and becomes otherwise. Owing to the 
altering and otherwiseness of body, sorrow and grief, woe, 
lamentation and despair arise in him. 

So also with regard to feeling, perception, the activities. 
Again, ‘'This consciousness is mine,” they think. “I am 
this : this is my self.” Of such an one the consciousness alters 
and changes. Owing to the unstable and changeful nature 
of consciousness, sorrow and grief, woe, lamentation and 
despair arise in him. Thus, brethren, is there grasping and 
worry. 

And how, brethren, is there no grasping and no worry ? - 

Herein, brethren, the well-taught Ariyan disciple has this 
view: “ This body is not mine: I am not this: this is not my 
self.” Of such an one the body alters and becomes other- 
wise. But in spite of the altering and otherwiseness of body, 
sorrow and grief, woe, lamentation and despair arise not in 
him. So also with regard to feeling, perception, the activities. 
Again, “ Consciousness is not mine,” he thinks, “ I am not 
this: this is not my self.” His consciousness alters and be- 
comes otherwise. Yet in spite of the altering and otherwise- 
ness of consciousness, sorrow and grief, woe, lamentation and 
despair arise not in him. 

Thus, brethren, is there no grasping and no worry.’ 

§ 9 (9) Past, future and present (1). 

At Savatthi. . . . The Exalted One thus addressed the 
brethren: — 

‘ Body, brethren, is impermanent, both in the past and in 
the future, not to speak of the present. So seeing, brethren, 
the well-taught Axiyan disciple cares not for a body that is 



19 


XXII, § lo] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

past, is not in love with a body to be, and for the present 
body seeks to be repelled by it, seeks dispassion for it, seeks 
the ceasing of it. So also with feeling, and perception. 

The activities are impermanent, both in the past and in 
the future, not to speak of the present. So seeing, brethren, 
the well-taught Ariyan disciple cares not for activities that 
are past, is not in love with activities to be, and for present 
activities, seeks to be repelled by them, seeks dispassion for 
them, seeks the ceasing of them. 

Consciousness is impermanent, both in the past and in the 
future, not to speak of the present. So seeing, brethren, the 
well-taught Ariyan disciple cares not for consciousness that is 
past, is not in love with consciousness to be, and for present 
consciousness seeks to be repelled by it, seeks dispassion for it, 
seeks the ceasing of it.’ 

« 

§ 10 (10), Past, future and present (2). 

•At Savatthf. . . . Then the Exalted One thus addressed 
the brethren: — 

' Body, brethren, is an ill, both in the past and in the 
future, not to speak of the present. So seeing, brethren, the 
well-taught Ariyan disciple cares not for a body that is past, 
is not in love with a body to be, and for the present body 
seeks to be repelled by it, seeks dispassion for it, seeks the 
ceasing of it. So also with regard to feeling, perception, and 
activities. . . . Again, consciousness is an ill, both in the past 
and in the future, not to speak of the present. So seeing, 
brethren, the well-taught Ariyan disciple cares not for con- 
sciousness that is past, is not in love with consciousness to be, 
and for present consciousness seeks to be repelled by it, seeks 
dispassion for it, seeks the ceasing of it.' 

§ 11 (11). Past, future and present (2). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: ‘Body, 
brethren, is without the self both in the past and in the future, 
not to speak of the present. So seeing, brethren, the well- 
taught Ariyan disciple cares not for a body that is past, 



20 The Khandha Booh [text iii, 20 

is not in love witli a body to be, and for the present body 
seeks to be repelled by it, seeks dispassion for it, seeks the 
ceasing of it. 

So also with regard to feeling, perception, the activities. . . . 
Consciousness is without the self, both in the past and in 
the future, not to speak of the present. ... So seeing, the 
welhtaught Aiiyan disciple . . . seeks the ceasing of con- 
sciousness.' 


2. The Second on Impermanence 
§ 12 (1). Impermanence, 

Thus have I heard: — (Once the Exalted One was staying) 
near Savatthi. 

Then the Exalted One said: ‘ Body, brethren, is imperma- 
nent. Feeling, perception, the activities . . ? consciousness 
is impermanent. 

So seeing, brethren, the well-taught Ariyan disciple is 
repelled by body, is repelled by feeling, by perception, by the 
activities. He is repelled by consciousness. Being repelled 
by it he lusts ^ not for it: not lusting he is set free: in this 
freedom comes insight that it is a being free. Thus he 
realizes: ‘‘Eebirth is destroyed, lived is the righteous life, 
done is my task, for life in these conditions there is no here- 
after.’"* 

§ 13 (2). Ill, 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

‘Body, brethren, is an ill. Feeling is an ill: perception, 
the activities and consciousness are an ill. 


^ Virajjati, virago^ translated just above ‘ dispassion ’ 

* Napara^g itthattdyd h pajdndti Of, K S. ii, 17; n. S. ii, 20, etc. 
Buddhaghosa, explaining the phrase at 1^. 226 y says: iddni vatta- 
mdna-hkkandha-santdnd aparag khandha-santdnay mayhap rC atthi, 
‘ After the present life-continuum of the fivefold mass has run its course, 
there is no further life-continuum of the fivefold mass for me.’ 



21 


XXII, § 15 ] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

Thus seeing (tte well-taught Axiyan disciple is repelled. . . . 
and realizes), ... ‘‘for life in these conditions there is no 
hereafter.” ' 

§ 14 (3). Withovi the Self. 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

‘ Body, brethren, is without the self. Feeling is without the 
self; perception, the activities . . . consciousness is without 
the self. 

Thus seeing (the well-taught Ariyan disciple is repelled . . . 
and realizes) . . . “ for life in these conditions there is no 
hereafter.” ’ 

§ 15 (4). What is impermanent (1). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

‘ Body, brethren, is impermanent. What is impermanent 
that is suffering.* What is suffering, that is void of the self. 
What is void of the self, that is not mine, I am not it, it is 
not my self. That is how it is to be regarded by perfect 
insight of whsjt it really is. 

Feeling is impermanent . . . likewise perception . . . 
the activities. . . . 

Consciousness is impermanent. What is impermanent is 
suffering. What is suffering, that is void of the seif. What 
is void of the self, that is not mine, I am not it, it is not my 
self. That is how it is to be regarded by perfect insight of 
what it really is. 

Thus seeing (the well-taught Ariyan disciple is repelled and 
realizes) . . . “ for hfe in these conditions there is no here- 
after.” ’ 


The force of duhhhay may in many places be better brought out 
by translating ‘ ill-fare,’ as opposed to su-lchay, wel-fare.’ See Pali 
Diet. s.v. which suggests ‘ ease ’ and ‘ dis-ease,* ‘ wealth and ilth,’ 
‘ well-being ’ and ‘ ill-being.’ But all these words have now various 
significances. ‘ Ui-fare ’ • is used in Elizabethan literature. Bud- 
dhaghosa defines the word at V.M. 461, and at p. 494 attempts its 
derivation (not very successfully) in du, ‘ mean, inferior ’ ; Jehay^ ‘ empty. 
But the underlying id^a seems to be ‘ill-put-together, temporary, 
unreal, unsatisfactory.’ Of. Expositor i, 53, 54, and note on next page; 
Mrs. Bhys Davids, Bud. Psychology, 1924, p. 83 /. 



22 


The Khandha Booh 


[text hi, 22 


§ 16 (5). What is impermanent (2). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

‘ Body, brethren, is ill-faring. What is suffering, that is 
void of the self. What is void of the self, that is not mine, 
I am not it, it is not my self. That is how it is to be regarded 
by perfect insight of what it really is. . . . So also with 
regard to the other factors. ..." 

§ 17 (6). What is impermanent (3). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

' Body, brethren, is void of the self. What is void of the 
self, that is not mine: I am not it: it is not my self.’ [And 
so on as before.] 

§ 18 (7). Cause (1). 

At Savatthi. . , . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

‘Body, brethren, is impermanent. That which is the 
cause, that which is the condition of the arising of body, that 
also is impermanent. How, brethren, can a feody which i^s 
compounded of the impermanent come to be permanent ? 
Feeling is impermanent. That which is the cause, that 
which is the condition of the uprising of feeling, that also is 
impermanent. How, brethren, can feeling which is com- 
pounded of the impermanent come to be permanent ? 

Perception is impermanent . . . the activities are im- 
permanent. . . . 

Consciousness is impermanent. That which is the cause, 
that which is the condition of the arising of consciousness, 
that also is impermanent. How, brethren, can consciousness, 
which is compounded of the impermanent, come to be per- 
manent ? 

Thus seeing, the well-taught Axiyan disciple is repelled . . . 
and realizes ’ [as before], 

§ 19 (8). Cause (2). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exaltegl One) said; — 

‘ Body, brethren, is an ill. That which is the cause, that 
which is the condition of the arismg of body, that also is im- 



XXII, § 2 i] Kindred Sayings on Elements 23 

permaneat. How, brethren, can body, which is compounded 
of ill,* come to be ease ? 

Feeling is sufiering . . . perception , . . the activities are 
sufiermg. . . . 

Consciousness is suffering. That which is the cause, that 
which is the condition of the arising of consciousness, that 
also is suffering. How, brethren, can consciousness, which 
is compounded of suffering, come to be ease ? 

Thus seeing, the well-taught Ariyan disciple is repelled . . . 
and realizes . . ' [as heforel, 

§ 20 (9). Cause (3). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

‘ Body, brethren, is void of the self. That which is the 
cause, that which is the condition of the arising of body, 
that also is impermanent. How, brethren, can body, which 
is'compounded of the impermanent, come to be the self ? 

Feeling . . . perception . . . the activities . . . conscious- 
ness is void or the self. That which is . . . that also is void 
of the self. How can that . . . come to be the self ? 

Thus seeing ... [as before], 

§ 21 (10). Ananda. 

At Savatthi ... in the Park: — 

Then the venerable Ananda came to the Exalted One, 
saluted him and sat down at one side. 

As he thus sat, the venerable Ananda thus addressed the 
Exalted One: — 

' Lord, we hear the phrase Ceasing ! Ceasing By the 
ceasing of what natural states is there said to be ceasing ’ 

^ Body, Ananda, is impermanent, conditioned, arisen 

* Here especially the translation of dulchha-sambhutayf ‘ill>put 
together/ will better bring out the idea of a compost. The universe 
would seem to be ‘ bungled ’ by its causes, as ‘ Nature trying her 
’prentice hand,’ or ‘ created by some lesser god,’ as Tennyson puts it 
in The Idylls of the K%n^ It is an experiment. This significanoe of 
‘ill-state’ IS suggested to me by Mr. J. van Manen. The phrase 
suhhay ‘ lives at ease,’ means ‘ the mind-feeling-body-com- 

pound,’ works perfectly, like a well-made and well-oiled machine. 



24 The Khandha Booh [text iii, 25 

because of (sometbing). It is a vanisbing thing, a decaying 
thing, a fading-out thing, a ceasing thing. By such ceasing 
is there said to be ceasing/’ 

Feeling, Inanda, is impermanent, conditioned (and all this 
may be said of) perception, the activities . . . conscious- 
ness. , . . 

By the ceasing of these there is said to be '' ceasing.” ’ 


3. Ok the Buhden 
§ 22 (1). The Burden/^ 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

^ I will teach you the burden, brethren, the taking hold of 
the burden, the lifting of it up and the laying of it down. 
Do ye listen. ... 


* Cf. Warren 159, who, however, wrongly translates hharaharo as 
‘ bearer of the burden/ 

At V.M. 512, Buddhaghosa says the burden is the fact of sorrow; 
the taking of it up is the rise of sorrow; the throwing of it down is the 
ceasing of sorrow; the manner of doing so is the Path. 

Professor Keith, Buddhist Philosophy (pub 1923), p 82, says: ''‘the 
author of the sutra did not entertain the view that the person is nothing 
save the five aggregates, as these authorities (Buddhaghosa, Vasu- 
bandhu, Candrakirti, Yasomitra) insist, and all those who maintain 
that the sutra accepts a person are justified. ... To say that the 
aggregates are the bearer is to contradict the text.’ To this, however, 
we may add that, in Buddhist fashion, no bearer of the burden is men- 
tioned at all, but a bearing, Haro is ‘ a taking.’ The puggala is 
the taking hdd of the fivefold mass, Nevertheless, in the second stanza, 
we cannot avoid the use of the word ‘ bearer.’ 

[We need not be misled by the little parable of the ‘burden-bearer.’ 
BamyuUa [hi], xxii, 22, 1. There the ‘ bearer,’ lit. the ‘bringer,’ is any 
person; the ‘ burden ’ is the mental and bodily complex of his living 
organism. The ‘ taking up,’ the ‘ la 3 ring down,’ of it are the one the 
exercise, the other the extinction, of craving. The simile is not so 
told as to convey what one would expect, namely, the laying down 
at death, the taking up at rebirth. But critics have written as if it 
did convey this: mind as well as body laid dowifat death, and a ‘ person ’ 
or ego left burdenless, or with a new burden. This is to garble the text. 
Mrs. Bhys Davids, Bud, Pay,, 1923 , p. 259 .— Id.] 



25 


xxii, § 22] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

What, brethren, is the burden ? 

It is the mass of the five factors of grasping, should 
be the reply. What five ? The mass of the body factors 
of grasping, of the feeling factors, the perception, activities 
and consciousness factors of grasping. This, brethren is 
called the burden.’’ 

And what, brethren, is the ‘‘ laying hold of the burden ”? 

It is the person ” should be the reply: that venerable one 
of such and such a name, of such and such a family. This, 
brethren, is called the laying hold of the burden.” 

And what, brethren, is the taking up of the burden ”? 

It is that craving that leads downwards to rebirth,^ along 
with the lure and the lust that lingers longingly now here, 
now there: namely, the craving for sensation, the craving for 
rebirth, the craving to have done with rebirth.^ That, 
brethren, is called the taking up of the burden.” 

‘And what, brethren, is ‘‘ the laying down of the burden ”? 

It is the utter passionless ceasing of craving, the giving up 
of craving, the renouncing of, the release from, the absence of 
longing for this craving. That, brethren, is called the laying 
down of the burden.” ’ 

So spake the Exalted One. The Well-Farer having thus 
spoken, the Master said this yet further: 

The burden is indeed the fivefold mass: 

The seizer of the burden, man: 

Taking it up is sorrow in this world: 

The laying of it down is bliss. 

If a man lay this heavy burden dov^n, 

And take not any other burden up : 

If he draw out that craving, root and all. 

No more an-hungered,® he is free.^ 

1 Ponohhavika. 

2 Vibhava-tanha. Corny,, uccheda-diUht (the anmiiilationist heresy). 
Owing to a later use of vihliava to mean expanded (vi-) becoming, or 
prosperity, this term usea to be wrongly rendered in English. 

® Nicchdto, ‘ with hunger stilled,’ being nittanho. 

^ Parimhbuto : he has completed the round of existence. 



26 


The Khandha Booh 


[text lii, 26 


§ 23 (2). Understanding} 

At SavattM. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

^ Brethren, I will show you things that are to be understood, 
likewise understanding. Do ye listen to it. 

And what, brethren, are the things to be understood ? Body ^ 
brethren, is a thing to be understood: feeling is a thing to be 
understood: perception, the activities and consciousness also. 
These, brethren, are the things that are to be understood.’’ 

And what, brethren, is understanding 

The destruction of lust, the destruction of hatred, the 
destruction of illusion: that, brethren, is called ^'under- 
standing.” ’ 

§ 24 (3). Understanding, or Thorough knowledge} 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

' Brethren, by not thoroughly knowing, by not understand- 
ing, by not being detached from, by not renouncing^ body, 
one is unfit for the destruction of suffering. 

By not thoroughly knowing feeling . . . perception . . . 
the activities . . . consciousness, one is unfit for the destruc- 
tion of suffering. 

But, brethren, by thoroughly knowing, by understanding, 
by being detached from, by renouncing body, one is fit for the 
destruction of suffering. 

So also, by thoroughly knowmg . . . feelmg . . . perception 
. . . the activities . . . consciousness . . . one is fit for the 
destruction of suffering.’ 

§ 25 (4). Desire and lust. 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

' That desire and lust, brethren, which is in body, do ye 
renounce them. So will that body become rejected, cut down 

^ VM. 606. B. treats of the three worldly {lolciya)'pannnas or 
knowledges, viz. : Ndta-tlra'm-'pahdna, or to have come to know things, 
investigation and rejection of things. 

2 Parijanaij, abhijanar). 

® At Expos, ii, 489 this passage is wrongly referred to; also where it 
reads; ‘ not to be eliminated,’ not should be omitted. 



27 


xxu, § 26] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

at the root, made like the stump of a palm-tree, made some- 
thing that has ceased to be,^ so that it cannot grow up again 
in the future. 

That desire and lust, brethren, which are in feeling, do ye 
renounce them. So will that feeling become rejected. . . . 

That desire and lust, brethren, which are in perception . . • 
in the activities ... in consciousness, do ye renounce them. 
So will that consciousness become rejected, cut down at the 
root, made like the stump of a palm-tree, made something 
that has ceased to be, so that it cannot grow up again in the 
future.’ 

§ 26 (5). Satisfaction (1). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

^ Formerly, brethren, before I was enlightened with the 
supreme enlightenment, when I was yet a Bodhisat, I thought 
thus: ‘‘Now what is the satisfaction,^ what is the misery 
of,* what is the way of escape from body ? . . . Likewise 
from feeling .^. . perception, the activities. . . . What is 
the satisfaction, the misery, the way of escape from con- 
sciousness 

Then, brethren, to me there came this thought 

“ That ease, that pleasure which arises owing to body: 
that is the satisfaction of body. That impermanence, that 
suffering, that instability which is body, that is the misery of 
body. That restraint of desire and lust, that renouncing of 
desire and lust which are in body, — ^that is the way of escape 
from body. 

Likewise also that ease, that pleasure which arises from 
feeling . . . from perception . . . from the activities . . . 
from consciousness . . . that is the satisfaction of conscious- 
ness. That impermanence, that suffering, that instability 
which is consciousness, — ^that is the misery of consciousness. 
That restraint of desire and lust, that renouncing of desire 
and lust which are in consciousness, — that is the way of escape 
from consciousness.” 


1 Wrongly referred to at Nidd, 1 , 53, where phasso is being discussed. 

2 Cf S. ii, 171. 



28 The Khandhd Book [text iii, 28 

So long, brethren, as I did not thoroughly understand, as 
they really are, the satisfaction of these five factors of 
grasping as such, the misery of it as such, the way of escape 
from it as such, — so long, brethren, was I doubtful whether I 
was enlightened with that supreme enlightenment, unsur- 
passed in the world with its devas, its Maras, its Brahmas, 
among the host of recluses and brahmins and of devas and 
men. 

But as soon, brethren, as I thoroughly understood, as 
they really are, the satisfaction of these five factors of 
grasping as such, the misery of it as such, the way of escape 
from it as such, — ^then, brethren, I knew for certain that I 
was enlightened with that supreme enlightenment unsur- 
passed in the world, with its devas, its Maras, its Brahmas, 
among the host of recluses and brahmins, and of devas and 
men. 

Then, indeed, the knowledge arose in me and insight ar(5se 
in me: — ‘‘ Sure is my release. This is my last birth. There 
is no more rebirth for me now.’' ^ 

§ 27 (6). Satisfaction (2). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

‘Brethren, I practised the search after the satisfaction 
which is in body, and to this conclusion I came: In so far as 
there is satisfaction of body, that by insight have I rightly 
seen.” 

Brethren, I practised the search after the misery which is 
in body, and to this conclusion I came: “ In so far as there is 
misery of body, that by insight have I rightly seen.” 

Brethren, I practised the search after the way of escape 
from body, and to this conclusion I came; “ In so far as there 
is a way of escape from body, that by insight have I rightly 
seen.” 

Brethren, I practised the search after the satisfaction, the 
misery of, the way of escape from feeling . . . perception . . . 


* See The First Sermon, Vin, i, 10; S, v, 420. Buddhist Suttas 
(R.D.), 162-3. Also KM, ii, 114. 



29 


XXII, § 28] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

tlie activities in like manner, and to tMs conclusion I came 
, . . a way of escape from consciousness by insight have 
I rightly seen/’ 

So long, brethren, as I did not thoroughly understand, as 
they really are, the satisfaction of these five factors of 
grasping as such, the misery of them as such, a way of 
escape from them as such, — so long, brethren, was I doubtful 
(as I have just said) . . . but when I thoroughly understood 
. . . then the knowledge arose in me, the insight arose in 
me : Sure is my release. This is my last birth. There is no 
more rebirth for me now.” ’ 

§ 28 (7). Satisfaction (3). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

^ Brethren, if there were not this satisfaction* which comes 
from body, beings woxdd not lust after body. But inasmuch 
as there is satisfaction in it, beings lust after it. 

If misery, brethren, belonged not to body, beings would not 
be repelled by body. But inasmuch as there is misery in it, 
beings are repelled by it. 

If there were no way of escape, brethren, from body, beings 
could not escape from body. But inasmuch as there is a way 
of escape from it, beings do escape. 

So likewise with regard to the satisfaction, the misery, the 
way of escape from feeling, perception, the activities ... if 
there were no way of escape, brethren, from consciousness, 
beings could not escape from consciousness. But inasmuch 
as there is a way of escape from consciousness, beings do 
escape. 

So long, brethren, as beings have not thoroughly under- 
stood, as they really are, the satisfaction as such, the misery 
as such, the way of escape as such in these five factors based 
on grasping, — so long, brethren, beings have not remained 
aloof, detached, separated, with the barriers to the mind 
done away with, no? the world and its gods, its Maras, its 



[text iii, 31 


30 The Khandha Booh 

Braliinas, nor the host of recluses and brahmins, devas and 
men. 

But so soon, brethren, as beings thoroughly understand, 
even as they really are, the satisfaction as such, the misery 
as such, the way of escape as such in these five factors based 
on grasping, — ^then, brethren, beings and the world with its 
devas, its Maras, its Brahmas, the host of recluses and brah- 
mins, devas and men do remain aloof, detached, separated, 
with the barriers of mind done away with. 

§ 29 (8). Taking delight in. 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said : — 

‘ He who takes delight, brethren, in body, he takes delight 
in suffering. He who takes delight in suffering, I declare that 
he is not released from suffering. He who takes delight in 
feeling, in perception, in the activities ... he who tak*es 
delight in consciousness, he takes delight in suffering. He 
who takes delight in suffering, I declare that he is not released 
from suffering. But he who takes not delight in body, in 
feeling, in perception, in the activities, in consciousness, he 
takes not delight in suffering. He who takes not delight in 
suffering, I declare that he is released from suffering.’ 

§ 30 (9). Uprising. 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

‘ That, brethren, which is the uprising, the persisting, the 
rebirth, the manifestation of body, — ^that is the uprising of 
suffering, the persisting of diseases, the manifestation of 
decay and death. 

So also with regard to feeling, perception, the activities. . . . 

That, brethren, which is the uprising, the persisting, the 
rebirth, the manifestation of consciousness, — ^that is the 
uprising of suffering, the persisting of diseases, the manifesta- 
tion of decay and death. 

But that which is the ceasing, the qtrelling, the going out 
of consciousness, — ^that is the ceasing, the quelling, the going 
out of suffering.’ 



31 


XXII, § 33 Kindred Sayings on Elements 

§ 31 (10). The Boot of Pain."^ 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

^ I will teach you, brethren, pain and the root of pain. Do 
ye listen to it. 

And what, brethren, is pain ? 

Body, brethren, is pain: feeling is pain: perception, the 
activities, consciousness is pain. That, brethren, is the 
meaning of pain. 

And what, brethren, is the root of pain ? 

It is this craving that leads downward to rebirth, along with 
the lure and the lust, that lingers longingly now here, now 
there: namely, the craving for sense, the craving for rebirth, 
the craving to have done with rebirth.’ 

§ 32 (11). The corruptible} 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

win teach you, brethren, the corruptible and the in- 
corruptible. ]Jo ye listen to it. 

And what, brethren, is the corruptible, and what the 
incorruptible ? 

Body, brethren, is corruptible. The ceasing, the sinking of 
it to rest,^ the coming to an end of it, that is the incorruptible. 

Feeling is corruptible, likewise perception, the activities. . . . 
Consciousness is corruptible. The ceasing of it, the sinking of 
it to rest, the coming to an end of it, — ^that is the incorruptible.’ 


4. Ox Not Yours 
§ 33 (1). Not yours^ (1). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

^ What is not of you, brethren, put it away. Patting it 
away will be for your profit and welfare. 

* Agha. Corny , duhhliarj Of K.S ii, 116, n 
^ Pabhangu, or brittle. Of. S v, 92, where the word is used of gold. 
Corny , 'pabhij'jana sahhd'd^y, ‘ of the nature to crumble away.’ 

2 Cf. B.S li, 44 and n. Expos li, 489; M i, 140; Nidd ii, 438; 
Pap. 234, aU of which passages add dlgha-rattay. Corny. , ‘ by putting 
away desire and lust.’ ® Upasamo. Not literally ‘ rest ’ 



32 


The Khandhd Booh 


[text iii, 34 


And what, brethien, is not of you 1 Body, brethren, is not 
of you. Put it away. Putting it away will be for your profit 
and welfare. 

Feeling is not of you, perception, the activities, conscious- 
ness is not of you. Put it away. Putting it away will be for 
your profit and welfare. 

Just as if, brethren, a man should gather, burn, or do what 
he please with all the grass, all the sticks, branches and stalks 
in this Jeta Grove, — ^pray would ye say this man is gathering, 
burning us, doing what he please with us ’ 

‘ Surely not, lord.’ 

^ Why so V 

‘ Because, lord, this is not our self, nor of the nature of 
self.’ 

‘Even so, brethren, body is not of you. Put it away. 
Putting it away will be for your profit and welfare. FeeHng 
is not of you, perception, the activities are not of you, nor 
consciousness. Put it away. Putting it a\^y will be for 
your profit and welfare.’^ 

§ 34 (2). Not yours (2). 

\The same as the above, leaving out the comparisonJ] 

§ 35 (3). The Mendicant,^ 

At Savatthi. ... In the Park. 

I 

Then a certain brother came to the Exalted One, saluted 
him and sat down at one side. So seated, that brother thus 
addressed the Exalted One: — 

‘ Well for me,® lord, if the Exalted One would teach me a 
doctrine in a few words, so that hearing the teaching of the 
Exalted One I might dwell solitary, secluded, zealous, ardent 


^ On the inference that there is here implied a self who is not body or 
mind, see Mrs. Rhys Davids, Bud. Psy., 2nd*ed , p. 284. 

2 Trans. Warren, p. 161. 0/. 8. ii, 244; K.8. li, 165. 

3 Sddhu. Dor this sense of the word see 8uUa-Nipdta Corny, i, 176. 



33 


XXII, § 35] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

and aspiring/ (Tlie Exalted One said) ; ^ That for whioh a 
brother has a bias, by that he is reckoned.^ That for which 
he does not have a bias, by that he is not reckoned/ 

^ I understand, 0 Exalted One ! I understand, 0 Well- 
farer V 

^ But how far, brother, do you understand in full the 
meaning of what I have thus concisely stated V 

‘ If one cleave to body, lord, by that he gets a name. If 
he cleave to feeling, by that he gets a name. So likewise with 
perception, the activities and consciousness, he gets a name 
from it. And if, lord, he cleave not to body, he gets no name 
thereby. So with feeling, perception, the activities, and con- 
sciousness. That is how, lord, I understand in full the mean- 
ing of what was concisely stated by the Exalted One.’ 

' Well said ! Well said, brother ! Well do you understand 
in full the meaning of what I concisely stated. If one cleave 
to tody, by that he gets a name, and so forth. And if he do 
not so cleave tojiody, to feeling, to perception, to the activities, 
to consciousness, he gets no name thereby. That is how to 
understand in full the meaning of what I concisely stated.’ 

Then that brother welcomed the saying of the Exalted One, 
and was pleased thereat, and he rose from his seat, saluted the 
Exalted One by the right and departed. 

II 

Thereupon that brother, living solitary, secluded, zealous, 
ardent and aspiring, in no long time attained that goal for 
which the clansmen rightly leave home for the homeless life? 
even that unrivalled goal of righteous living; attained it even 
in that very life : and knowing it for himself, realizing it for 
himseK, abode therein, so that he came to know: ‘De- 

^ Sanhhay gacchati, ‘ goes to a reckoning, comes to be called ’ Corny. 
paraphrases pannattiy gacchah, ‘ is characterised,’ ‘ is reckoned some- 
body/ Warren, ‘comes to be’ (see below, § 36) Mrs Rhys Davids 
writes: I think the teaching is this: if your bias, bent, leaning, pre- 
occupation IS towards the life of the body, or the thmgs of the worldly 
mind, you come to be reckoned accordingly; your measure is taken 
thereby — i.e., you are materialistic, a pleasure-lover, or you are clever, 
wordy, astute, etc. The true way is to turn aside from both, 
m 3 



The Khandha Booh 


34 


[text iii, 36 


stsoyed is rebirth, lived is the righteous life, done is my task, 
for life in these conditions there is no hereafter !’ ^ 

And that brother was now one of the saints. 


§ 36 (4). The Mendicant (2). 

{Exactly the same as the 'previous section, except that the 
phrase ' that for which one has a bias ’ {yay anuseti) is fol- 
lowed hy ' that he takes as measure ’ ^ {tay anumiyati). 
Thus the paragraph will read, ‘ That for which one has a bias, 
one takes as measure. That which one takes as measure, by 
that he is reckoned,’ and vice versa,) 

§ 37 (5). Ananda (1). 

At Savatthi. ... In the Park. . . . 

Then the venerable Ananda (came to the Exalted One). . . . 

As he sat at one side, the Exalted One thus addressed*the 
venerable Ananda : — 

' If they were to ask you, Ananda, Frien® Ananda, what 
are the things in which is discerned uprising, in which is dis- 
cerned passing away, in which is discerned otherwiseness 
while they last — what would you reply to such a question ? ’ 

‘'If they asked me, lord: ^‘Friend Ananda, what are the 
things (as the Exalted One hath said) . . . thus, lord, should 
I make answer: — 

"^It is of body, friends, that uprising is discerned, that 
passing away is discerned, that otherwiseness while it lasts 


^ Supra ii, § 12. 

2 Corny , ‘ That body which one cleaves to . . . perishes when the 
cleaving dies away. When the object dissolves, the objective states 
no longer hold together.’ So we read {K,S. ii, 45), ‘if are occupied 
about something, this becomes an object for the persistence of con- 
sciousness, whence bnrfch takes place.’ 

® To illustrate the terms ‘ uprising ’ {uppqdo), ‘ passing away ’ (vayo)^ 
‘iuBtability’ {annathattarj), and ‘fixity’ (Mi), Corny, quotes a Porana 
or ancient saymg which may be thus translated: — 

‘ Birth is said to be th’ uprising: passingraway is called the term: 

Ageing, instabihty; fixity, life’s maintenance.’ 

Cf. A, ii. 152. 



35 


XXII, § 38] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

is discerned. It is of feeling, of perception, of the activities, 
of consciousness that uprising is discerned, passing away is 
discerned, otherwiseness while they last is discerned. These 
are the things, friends, in which uprising and so on is dis- 
cerned.’' Thus questioned, lord, thus should I make answer.’ 

‘ WeU said ! Well said, Ananda ! It is indeed of body, 
Ananda, that uprising is discerned, and of feeling, of percep- 
tion, of the activities, of consciousness. These indeed, 
Ananda, are the things in which uprising is discerned, passing 
away is discerned, otherwiseness while they last is discerned. 
Thus questioned, Ananda, thus should you make answer.’ 

§ 38 (6). Ananda (2). 

At Savatthi. ... In the Park. . . . 

Then the venerable Ananda (came to the Exalted One and 
sat down at one side). As he thus sat, the Exalted One said 
to the venerable Ananda : — 

‘ If they wer§ to ask you thus, Ananda: Friend Ananda, 
what are the things in which uprising has been discerned, in 
which passing away has been discerned, in which otherwise- 
ness while they last has been discerned ? What are the 
things in which uprising will be discerned, in which passing 
away, in which otherwiseness while they last will be discerned? 
What are the things in which they are even now discerned ?” 
Thus questioned, Ananda, what would you reply ?’ 

‘ If I were thus questioned, lord, thus should I reply: — 
The body, friends, which is past, perished, altered, of 
which uprising, passing away, otherwiseness while it lasts, has 
been discerned, feeling . . , perception . . . activities . . . 
consciousness, of which uprising, passing away, otherwiseness 
while it lasts, has been discerned, — ^these, friends, are the 
things concerning which these three have been discerned. 
Then again, friends, of that body which is unborn, not yet 
manifested, uprising will be discerned, passing away, other- 
wiseness while it lasts, wiU be discerned, — ^these, friends, are 
the things concerning which these three will be discerned. 
Then again, friends, of that body which has been born and 
manifested ... of that feeling , . . that perception . . . those 



36 


The Khandha Booh 


[text iii, 39 


activities . . . that consciousness . . . uprising, passing 
away, otherwiseness while they last, are now discerned, — ^these 
are the things concerning which these three are discerned.’’ 
Thus questioned, lord, thus should I reply.’ 

' Well said, Ananda ! Well said, Ananda ! It is indeed of 
that body which is past, perished and altered ... of that 
feeling, that perception . . . those activities, of that con- 
sciousness that is past, perished and altered, — it is of these 
that uprising and so forth has been discerned. Likewise of 
that body and of the other factors yet unborn, unmanifested, 
uprising, passing away, otherwiseness while they last will be 
discerned. . . . Likewise it is of that body . . . that feeling 
, . . that perception . . . those activities . . . that conscious- 
ness that is now born and manifested, of which uprising, 
passing away, otherwiseness while they last are now dis- 
cerned. Thus questioned, Ananda, thus should you make 
answer.’ 


§ 39 (7). Conforming to the Norm (1). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said : — 

' Of that brother, brethren, who is versed in conformity 
to the Norm,^ this is the accordant practice. He should 
abide in the utter disgust for body, for feeling, for perception, 
for the activities, for consciousness. 

So abidmg in utter disgust for these, he fully discerns body, 
feeling, perception, the activities and consciousness. 

Eully understanding these he is released from body, from 
feeling, from perception, from the activities, from conscious- 
ness: likewise from rebirth, from old age and decay, sorrow 
and grief, from woe, lamentation and despair. I declare him 
to be released from suffering,’ 


§40 ( 8 ). 
§41 (9). 
§ 42 (10). 


I Conforming to the Norm (2), (3), and (4). 


^ Anudhammo. Corny., Anuloma-dhammo, ‘m accordance or in due 
order.’ Gf. 8. ii, 18; K.8. n, 14. 



37 


XXII, § 43] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

{The same as the above, hut treated in respect of seeing 
(a) the impermanence, (b) the suffering, (c) the lack of 
a self in all these.) 


5. On Being an Island to Self 
§ 43 (1). An island to self.^ 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

' Do ye abide, brethren, islands unto yourselves, refuges unto 
yourselves : taking refuge in none other ; islanded by the Norm, 
taking refuge in the Norm, seeking refuge in none other. 

By them who are islands unto themselves, brethren, who 
are a refuge unto themselves, who take refuge in none other, 
who are islanded by the' Norm, take refuge in the* Norm, seek 
refuge in none other — by them the very source of things^ 
is to be searched for: thus — What is the source of sorrow 
and grief, of wop, lamentation and despair ? What is their 
origin 

What then, brethren, is the source, the origin of these ? 

Herein, brethren, the untaught many-folk, who discern not 
those that are Ariyans, who are unskilled in the Ariyan 
doctrine, untrained in the Ariyan doctrine, who discern not 
those who are worthy ones, who are unskilled in the worthy 
doctrine, untrained in the worthy doctrine,— these regard the 
body as the self . . . (as at § 7 above). But [the well-taught 
Ariyan disciple]*^ beholding, brethren, the impermanence of 
body, its instability, its coming to an end, its ceasing, says : 

Formerly also, as well as now, all bodies were impermanent 
and suffering, unstable in nature.’’ Thus seeing it as it really 
is, by perfect insight, he puts away from him all sorrow and 
grief, woe, lamentation and despair; nor is he troubled at 

^ Lit., ‘ self -islanded ’ ; usually rendered ‘lamps {dlpa) unto your- 
selves’ Corny., Attadipa^tdnay, lenay, gaU, pardyanarj—AUa-sayana 
— i.e,, ‘ shelter, cave of refuge, resort, goal, refuge. Cf Dialog ii, 108. 

2 Yoni yeva upaparihhlyktahho Yoni{s(^ is ah ongine {cf Yoniso 
manasihdro), so ‘ methodical attention.’ Corny , ‘ Jcdraymy ti; updyena 
manasrhdro. K S. i, p. 131. 

* The text omits ‘ the well-taught Ariyan disciple.’ 



38 


The Khandha Booh 


[text iii, 43 


their putting away, but untroubled lives at ease, and so living 
at ease that brother is called '' one who is rid of all that/''*' 

Beholding, brethren, the impermanence of feeling, its 
instability, its coming to an end, its ceasing, he says: Form- 
erly also, as well as now, all feeling was impermanent and 
suffering, unstable in its nature.” Thus seeing it as it really 
is, by perfect insight, he puts away from him all sorrow and 
grief, woe, lamentation and despair: nor is he troubled at 
their putting away, but untroubled lives at ease, and so living 
at ease this brother is called: One who is rid of all that.” 

So also with regard to perception, the activities and con- 
sciousness.' 

§ 44 (2). The Way to. 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

‘ I will teach you, brethren, both the way going to the 
arising of bodyhood,f and the way going to the ceasing of 
bodyhood. Do ye listen to it. 

And which, brethren, is the way going t(f the arising of 
bodyhood ? 

Herein, brethren, the untaught many-folk (as above) view 
body as the self . . . view feeling, perception, the activities 
consciousness as the self; the self as possessed of consciousness, 
consciousness as being in the self, the self as being in con- 
sciousness. 

This, brethren, is called the way going to the arising of 
bodyhood.” So the meaning here is just this; — it is called, 
brethren, the view going to the arising of suffering.” 

And which, brethren, is the way going to the ceasing of 
bodyhood ? 

Herein, brethren, the well-taught Ariyan disciple (as above) 
regards not body as the self, regards not feeling as the self, nor 
the activities ... he regards not consciousness as the self, 
nor the self as possessed of consciousness, nor consciousness 
as being in the self, nor the self as being in consciousness. 


* Tad-anga-mhbuto = tad^ anga-vimutto — i.e., ' cooled down,’ freed 
as to these [attributes] accordingly or respectively. — Cf> Pss, of the 
Sisters, Ail Sa'klcdya>,'^t. ‘one’s own group.' 



39 


XXII, § 46] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

TMs, brethren, is called “ the way going to the ceasing of 
bodyhood/' So verily the meaning here is just this:— 
it is called, brethren, the view going to the ceasing of body- 
hood.’’ ’ 

§ 45 (3). Impermanence (1), 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

‘ Body, brethren, is impermanent. What is impermanent, 
that is snfiering. What is suffering, that is without the self. 
What is without the self, that is not mine, I am not that, not 
of me is this self. Thus should one view it by perfect insight 
as it really is. For the one who thus sees it as it really is by 
perfect insight, his heart turns away, is released^ from it 
by not grasping at the Asavas.^ 

Feeling is impermanent . . . likewise perception, the 
activities . . . consciousness is impermanent ... (so seeing) 
his heart turns away, is released from it by not grasping at 
the asavas. 

But if, bretjiren, a brother’s heart turns away from the 
material element, and is released from it by not grasping at 
the asavas: if his heart turns away from feeling . . . from 
perception, from the activities, from consciousness, and is 
released from it by not grasping at the asavas . . . then by 
its release^ it is steadfast; by its steadfastness it is happy; by 
its happiness it is not troubled; not being troubled, of its own 
self it is utterly well; so that he knows: ‘‘ destroyed is rebirth, 
lived is the righteous life, done is the task, for life in these 
conditions there is no hereafter.” ’ 

§ 46 (4). Impermanence (2). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

{This section repeats the above down to ^ by perfect 
insight.’) 

" For him who thus sees this as it really is, by perfect 

1 Cf. S. ii, 48; K,S. ii, 37. 

Corny, explains, ‘ he turns away at the moment of realizing the Path, 
and IS released at the moment of realizing the Fruits of the Path. 

2 Corny., anuppada-nirodhena niruddJieM dsavehi agahetvd. 

^ Reading for vimiiUatd, vimuitattd. 



40 


The Khandhd Booh 


[text Hi, 46 


insight, there is no more guessing at the far-off past.^ As 
there is no more guessing at the far-off past, there is no 
more guessing at the far-off future As there is no more 
guessing at the far-off future, there is no stubborn^ perversity. 
As there is no more stubborn perversity in him, his heart 
turns away from body, from feeling, perception, the activities 
and consciousness, and is released by not grasping at the 
asavas. By its release it is steadfast ; by its steadfastness it 
is happy ; by its happiness it is not troubled ; being untroubled, 
of its own self it is utterly well, so that he knows : destroyed 
is rebirth, lived is the righteous life, done is the task, for life 
in these conditions there is no hereafter.” ’ 

§ 47 (5). View. 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said : — 

^ Those recluses and brahmins, brethren, who regard the 
self in divers ways,*^ regard it as the body-mass of five factors 
based on grasping,^ or as some one of these. What five ? 

Herein, brethren, the untaught many-folk who discern not 
those that are Ariyans . . . regard body as the seH, self as 
possessed of body, body as being in the self, self as being in 
body ... so also as to feeling, perception, and the other 
factors. . . . Thus this is the view: — it has come to him 
(to think) “ I am.” How when it has come to anyone to 
think I am,” there comes to pass a descent of the five feeling- 
faculties^ of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting and touching.® 


^ Cf. D. 1, 12; Dialog, i, 26 

2 Infra 110. Text reads thdrmso (gen of thamo) fardmdso But 
Corny, reads thamdmaso pardmaso (ditthiyo) as below, § 85. M. i, 257 
has tKdmasd pardmasm ahhinimssa voliarah, 

^ Anehavihtayy adv. If it is past part., trans., * as bestowed in divers 
Ways ’ 

^ Of. Buddhism (1912) p. 58. Buddh. Psych (1924) 102. 

5 Pancannay indriydnap avahhanti hoti. 

Corny., ‘ There is a rebirth {mhbatti) of the five feeling-faculties 
causally resulting from the existence of that net of sensuality.’ 

Avahhanti {ohhant\)=::pdtuhJidvo, ‘manifestation ’ 

® Kdyindnya, ‘ body-faculty,’ the skm enveloping body (sense of 
touch) being the faculty. 



41 


XXII, § 48] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

Mind is the result, mind-states^ are the result, the ignorance- 
element is the result.^ Touched by the feeling born of contact 
with ignorance, there comes to the untaught many-folk (the 
view), I am there comes (the view), this same I am 
there comes (the view), '"things will be’’; there co^es the 
view, " things will not be there comes the view, "things 
will have body”; the view, "things will be bodyless”; 
there comes the view, " things will be conscious ” . the view, 
"things will be unconscious”; the view, "things will be 
neither conscious nor unconscious.” 

It is just therein, brethren, that the five feeling-faculties 
persist. But herein for the well-taught Ariyan disciple 
ignorance is put away and knowledge arises.*^ Along with 
the fading away of ignorance and the arising of knowledge 
there comes to him no view that " I am,” that " this same I 
am,” that " things will be, things will not be : things will have 
body, will not have body: things will be conscious, will be 
unconscious, 'v^ll be neither conscious nor unconscious.” ’ 

§ 48 (6). The Factors, 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said : — 

' I will teach you, brethren, the five factors and the five 
factors that have to do with grasping. Do ye listen to it. 

And what, brethren, are the five factors ? 

All body, brethren, be it past, future or present, inward 
or outward, gross or subtle, low or lofty, far or near, — that is 
called "the body-factor.”® Every feeling, every perception, 
all the activities . . . every consciousness, be it past, future 
or present, inward or outward, etc. . . . that is called the 
" consciousness-factor.” 

These five, brethren, are called the five factors. 


^ Dhamma (says Corny,) dr amimmay, ‘ base for thought ’ 

2 Mano, dhammd avijjddhdtti Here text reads vijjd, but Burm 
and Corny , avijjd is preferable. 

® Corny,, ‘ The eternalist and annihilationist views.’ 

4 Corny , ‘ Of the Arahant’s Path.’ 

^ Cf. Compendium, p. 185; Pts. ofContr, 95; M. iii, 16 ff. 



42 


The Khandha Booh 


[text iii, 48 


And what, brethren, are the five factors that have to do 
with grasping Every body, brethren, be it past, future or 
present . . . be it far or near, is a co-asava, and has to do with 
grasping. That is called the five factors that have to do with 
graspir^. 

Every feeling, brethren . . . that is called the factor of 
feeling that has to do with grasping. . . . 

Every perception . , . that is called the perception factor, 
that has to do with grasping. 

All the activities. , . . Whatsoever consciousness, be it 
past, future or present ... be it far or near, is a co-asava, and 
has to do with grasping. These are called the fivefold mass 
of factors that have to do with grasping.’ 

§ 49 (7). Sma^ (1). 

Thus have I heard: Once the Exalted One was staying 
near Eajagaha in the Bamboo Grove at the Squirrels’ Feeding- 
Ground. 

Then Sona, the housefather’s son, came to the Exalted One 
(and sat down): As he thus sat, the Exalted One thus ad- 
dressed Sona, the housefather’s son: 

‘ Whatsoever recluses and brahmins, Sona, hold views 
about the impermanent body, the sorrow-fraught, the unstable, 
such as better am I,” ‘‘ equal am I,” or worse am I ” (than 
thou), what else are they but non-seers of what really is 


^ Updddmyay. Corny., ‘ winch comes to be as a condition of the 
bases ’ ; it is equivalent to upadatabbarj. 

^ Sona (to be distinguished from Sona). This may have been one 
of the three bhikkhus of the name mentioned in Theragdthd : one of 
whom gives a name to a section in Uddna. 

2 The three forms of mdno (conceit). See Dialog, iii, 209 n.; also 
S. i. 12; K.8. i, 17. I quote the verse: 

* Whoso doth build fancies concerning values : — 

“ Equal am I, better, or worse (than thou art) — 

Hereby he may quarrels provoke. But whoso 
In all three ways holdeth his mind-unshaken, 

“ Equal (am I), or “ different ” occurs not.’ 

Cf. S. ii, 253. 



43 


XXII, § 49] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

Likewise, whatsoever recluses and brahmins, Sona, 'hold 
views of this sort about impermanent feeling, the sorrow- 
fraught, the unstable . . . perception . . . activities . . . 
consciousness . . . what else are they but non-seers o^/vhat 
really is ? 

But, Sona, whatsoever recluses and brahmins hold not views 
of this sort about the impermanent body, the sorrow-fraught, 
the unstable . , . perception . . . activities . . . consciousness 
. . . such as better am I,” equal am I,” or worse am I 
(than thou) . . . what else are they but seers of what really is ? 

Now what think you, Sona ? Is body permanent or im- 
permanent V 

' Impermanent, lord.’ 

^ And what is impermanent, is that woe or weal V 

‘ Woe, lord.’ 

^‘And is it fitting to hold such views as ‘‘this is mine,” 
“ this am I,” or “ this is the self of me,” about that which is 
impermanent >^nd unstable ?’ 

‘ Surely not, lord.’ 

‘ Is feeling . . . perception . . . the activities ... is con- 
sciousness permanent or impermanent ? (as before). . . 

‘ Surely not, lord.’ 

‘ Wherefore, Sona, whatsoever body there be, whether past, 
future or present, inward or outward, gross or subtle, low or 
lofty, far or near . . . every body should thus be regarded as 
it really is by right insight. Thus “ this is not mine,” “ this 
am not I,” “ this of me is not the self.” 

And so also with regard to feeling, perception, the activities 
and consciousness (so should they be regarded). 

Thus seeing, Sona, the well-taught Ariyan disciple feels 
disgust at body, feels disgust at feeling, at perception, the 
activities and consciousness. Peeling disgust he is repelled 
thereby. Being repelled he is released. In being released 
there is knowledge thereof, so that he knows “ destroyed is 
rebirth, lived is the righteous life, done is my task, for life in 
these conditions there is no hereafter.” ’ 





The Khandha Book 


[text iii, 50 


§ 50 (8). Sona (2). 

Thus have I heard: Once the Exalted One was staying near 
Eajagaha in the Bamboo Grove at the Squirrels’ Feeding- 
Ground.*:^ 

Then Sona, the housefather’s son, came to the Exalted One 
(and sat down). As he thus sat, the Exalted One thus ad- 
dressed Sona, the housefather’s son: 

‘ Whatsoever recluses and brahmins, Sona, know not body, 
know not its uprising, know not its ceasing, know not the way 
going to its ceasing . , . and know not feeling and its uprising, 
its ceasing; know not the way going to its ceasing . . . know 
not perception nor the activities nor consciousness . . . those 
recluses or brahmins, Sona, are approved neither among 
recluses as such, nor among brahmins as such: nor have those 
venerable ones in this very life understood of themselves, nor 
have they realized the good of being recluses, the good of 
being brahmins, nor do they live m the attainment thereof. 

And whatsoever recluses and brahmins, Sona, do know 
body, do know the arising of body, do know its ceasing and 
the way going to its ceasing: do know feeling, its arising, its 
ceasing and the way going to its ceasing : do know perception 
. . . the activities and consciousness in this way . . . those 
recluses or those brahmins, Sona, are approved among recluses 
as such, and among brahmins as such. And those venerable 
ones have in this very life understood of themselves and have 
realized the good of being recluses and the good of being 
brahmins, and they do live in the attainment thereof.’^ 

§ 51 (9). The Destruction of the Lure (1). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

‘ Brethren, when a brother sees that body is impermanent, 
he, rightly perceiving this is the right view,” feels disgust 
thereat. By the destruction of the lure of lust comes the 
destruction of lust. By destruction of^lust comes the de- 

^ Cf, S, ii, 14; K.S. ii, 11, where the same words are used of ‘ decay 
and death.’ 



45 


XXII, § 53] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

struction of tlie lure, and by this destruction of the lure the 
heart is set free, and it is called well freed.” And so for the 
other four factors.’ 

§ 52 (10). The Destruction of the Lure (2). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

' Do ye apply your minds thoroughly, ^brethren, to body and 
regard it in its true nature as impermanent. He who so 
applies his mind thoroughly to body, and so regards it, feels 
disgust at body. By the destruction of the lure of it comes 
destruction of lust. By the destruction of lust comes the 
destruction of the lure, and by the destruction of the lure the 
heart is set free, and it is called well freed,” and so for the 
other four factors. 


II.* THE MIDDLE FIFTY ” 

1. Ok Attaohmekt 
§ 53 (1). Attachment? 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted Dne) said: — 

‘Attachment, brethren, is bondage; aloofness is freedom. 

By attachment to body, brethren, consciousness, if it get 
a standing, may persist. With body for its object, with body 
for its platform, seeking means of enjoyment, it may come 
by growth, increase, abundance.® With the activities for 
its object, with the activities for its platform, seeking a means 
of enjoyment, it may come by growth, increase, abundance. 

Were a man, brethren, to declare thus: “ Apart from body, 
apart from feeling, apart from perception, apart from the 


^ Yomso. 

2 Cf Warren, p 162. Upayo (text reads upciyo). Corny., ‘ by way 
of craving, views, conceit, it is subject to the five factors.’ 

3 Cf. D%alog. iii, 2207 and n. for a somewhat similar paragraph. 
Corny., ‘ activity-consciousness, arousing action, by its ability to induce 
rebirth, would experience growth, etc.’ 



46 


The Khandhd Booh 


[text iii, 54 


activities, I will show forth the coining or the going or the 
decease or the rebirth of consciousness, or the growth or the 
increase or the abundance of consciousness ” — ^to do that were 
impossible. 

If lu'&t for body, brethren, is abandoned by a brother, by 
that abandonment of lust its foothold is cut ofi.^ Thereby 
there is no platform for consciousness. 

Likewise as regards feeling, perception, the activities. . . . 
So also, brethren, if lust for the consciousness-element be 
abandoned by a brother, by that abandonment of lust its foot- 
hold is cut ofi. Thereby there is no platform for consciousness. 

Without that platform consciousness has no growth, it 
generates no action^ and is freed: by freedom it is steady:® 
by its steadiness it is happy: owing to happiness it is not 
troubled. Being untroubled, of itself it becomes utterly well, 
so that it knows : ‘‘ Destroyed is rebirth, lived is the righteous 
life, done is the task, for life in these conditions there is no 
hereafter.’’ ’ 

§ 64 (2). Seed.^ 

At SavatthL . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

' There are five sorts of seed, brethren. What five ? Eoot- 
seed, trunk-seed, seed from shoots, seed from joints, grain- 
seed, making five in all. Suppose, brethren, that these five 
sorts of seed are unbroken, not rotten, unspoiled by wind and 
heat, capable of sprouting,^ and happily planted, but that 

^ VoccUjjaf arammanay Corny., ‘By absence of the ability to 
induce rebirth its support is severed.’ 

2 Of. B. 11 , 82 (sanhhdray ahhisanhharoti). Corny, reading anabhisan- 
hhacca, ‘ generates (no conception).’ 

^ Cf. 8. ii, 65. In this connexion thito is not ‘ fixed on an object ’ 
but ‘ calmed ’ or ‘ steadfast.’ (Or « he,’ or < one’ is steady.) 

^ V^n, V, 132. In detail at Vzn. iv, 35 Cf. M.P. 52-3. Explained 
by Corny, with examples of each sort, such as turmeric, ginger, etc.; 
wild-fig; knot-grass and bamboo; samlrana j(a creeper with berries); 
grain, such as rice, barley, and beans. 

s Cf. D. li, 353-4; Dialog ii, 371 Text edraddni (autumnal; year-old, 
so fertile). Corny., sdrdddyini, and explaiij^ ‘ contaimng the sap, 
pith, or essence.’ Professor R. D. translates ‘ selected seed,’ M,P. 255. 
Cf. Questions of King Milinda, ii, p. 79 n. ‘ Bdraday hljay, “ Seed which 
will give sdral^ It has nothing to do with sdraday, “ autumu.’’ ’ 



47 


XXII, § 54] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

there is no soil and no water. Think ye, brethren, that 
these five sorts of seed would come to growth, increase, 
abundance V 

‘ Surely not, lord.’ 

‘Suppose, brethren, that these five sorts of seed^are un- 
broken, not rotten, unspoiled by wind and heat, capable of 
sprouting, but not happily planted, and that there were soil 
and water. Now would these five sorts of seed come to growth, 
increase, abundance V 

‘ Surely not, lord.’ 

‘ Again, brethren, suppose that these five sorts of seed are 
unbroken, not rotten, unspoiled by wind and heat, capable 
of sprouting, and happily planted, but that there is both soil 
and water. Now would these five sorts of seed come to 
growth, increase, abundance V 

‘ Surely, lord.’ 

‘ As the earth-element, brethren, so should the four stations 
of consciousness be considered. As the water-element, 
brethren, so should the lure of lust be considered. As the 
five sorts of seed, brethren, so should consciousness and its 
cause be considered. 

By attachment to body, brethren, consciousness, if it got a 
standing, would stand. With body for its object, with body 
for its platform, seeking a means of enjoyment, it would come 
by growth, increase, abundance. By cleaving to feeling, 
brethren, to perception, to the activities . . . these would 
come by growth, increase, abundance. 

Were a man, brethren, to declare thus: “ Apart from body, 
apart from feeling, apart from perception, apart from the 
activities, I will show forth the coming or the going, or the 
decease or the rebirth of consciousness, or the growth, the 
increase, the abundance of consciousness . . — to do that 
were impossible. 

If lust for the body, brethren, be abandoned by a 
brother . . .’ 

{The rest is the earners in the previous section to the end,) 



48 


The Khandha Book 


[text lii, 56 


§ 56 (3). Inspired words} 

^^At SavatthL . . . Then the Exalted One uttered these 
insjtdred words: 

^ Were I not then,* it would not now be mine. 

It shall not be, and mine it shall not be. 

If a brother were thus resolved, he could burst the bonds that 
bind to the lower world. 

At these words, a certain brother thus addressed the 
Exalted One: ‘ But wherein, lord, could a brother, making his 
resolve in these words : 

Were I not then, it would not now be mine. 

It shall not be, and mine it shall not be . . . 

burst the bonds that bind to the lower world V 
‘ As to that, brother, the untaught many-folk who discern 

not those that are Arijans . . . regard body as the self, or the 



^ Uddna'Q Lit , ‘ up-breathing ’ Corny., ‘ breathed out an utter- 
ance originated by a strong emotion of joy, on this occasion owing to the 
efficacy of the teaching,’ which he illustrates by two stories. Also at 
D.A. 141 he says, ‘ as pent-up waters burst forth in a flood, so, when the 
heart cannot hold a joyous utterance, the excess cannot be contained, 
but rushes out’ In this connexion cf the riddling Uddnay at Ud* 
vi, 3 (last line at Thag. 180): 

ahu fiibhe, tadd ?^’ dhu • dhu puhhe, tadd ahu : 
na c’ dJhu, na ca hhavissaU, na c’ etamlii vi'j'jati. 

* Text has no c’ assa, but on p. 99, 183, no 0 ’ assay. I read with 
Corny . ' — 

no c’ assay no ca me s%yd 
na bhavissah na me hhavissah. 

Corny, says, if it were not for my past karma, my present body-person 
would not exist.’ The aspirant who is in earnest here makes up his 
mind that he shall no more come to be (The Pali future inflexion, 
bhavissati, is one and the same, not our ‘ shall be, will be.’ It is not 
easy to say whether a meaning of resolve, ' shall be,’ could be conveyed 
by it — Ed.) 

^ Oramhhdgiydm sayyo^andm. Cf. D i, 92, etc. The first five 
fetters that bmd to the world of lust, by breaking which one is reborn 
in the brahma world (as non-returner), thence to pass to Nibbana, to 
come back no more. 



49 


xxn, § 55] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

self as possessed of body, or body as in tbe self, or tbe self as 
in body. ... So also with, feeling, perception, tbe activities 
and consciousness. 

Of tbe impermanent body they do not understand, as it 
really is, ''body is impermanent.” Of tbe imperrnanent 
feeling, the impermanent perception, of the activities ... of 
tbe impermanent consciousness they do not understand, as it 
really is, " these are impermanent.” 

Of the pain-fraught body they do not understand, as it 
really is, " body is pain-fraught. . . .” Likewise of the pain- 
fraught feeling, of perception, of the activities, of conscious- 
ness they do not understand, as it really is, " these are pain- 
fraught.” 

Of the selfless body they do not understand, as it really is, 
" body is selfless.” Nor yet of the other factors do they so 
understand. 

Of the conditioned body they do not understand, as it really 
is, " body is cor^tioned,” nor do they so understand of feeling, 
and of the other factors. 

That " body will come to cease ” they do not understand, 
as it really is. 

That feeling, perception, the activities, and consciousness 
will come to cease they do not understand. 

But, brethren, the well-taught Ariyan disciple, who discerns 
those that are Ariyans. ... Of this impermanent body he 
understands, as it really is, " body is impermanent likewise 
of the other factors he so understands. 

He understands " body is pain-fraught,” " body is selfless,” 
" body is conditioned,” " body will come to cease ”; and he so 
understands of the other factors. 

Owing to the ceasing^ of body, the ceasing of feeling, of 
perception, of the activities and consciousness, a brother 
making his resolve in these words: 

Were I not then, it would not now be mine. 

It shall not be, and mine it shall not be, 

could burst the bonds that bind to the lower world.’ 


^ Vtbhava, ‘ the absence of becoming.’ Dialog, ii, 340 n. 



60 


The Khandha Booh 


[text iii, 58 


^'Even so resolving, lord, a brother could burst the bonds * 
that bind to the lower world. But how knowing, lord, how 
seeing, are the asavas straightway^ destroyed in him 
Xs to that, brother, the untaught many-folk are troubled 
where there is no ground for trouble. It is by this thought, 
brother, that they are troubled: '‘were I not then,” and so 
forth. 

But the well-taught Ariyan disciple is not troubled where 
there is no ground for trouble. He is not troubled, brother, 
by this thought: " were I not then,” and so forth. 


By attachment to body, brother, consciousness, if it got 
a standing, would stand. With body for its object. . . , 
{here Sutta 53 is repeated). 

Thus knowing, brother, thus seeing, the asavas are straight- 
way destroyed in him.’ 

r> 

§ 56 (4). Grasping {applied to) the Series,^ 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

' There are these five groups, brethren, that arise from 
grasping. What five ? They are — ^the grasping body-group, 
the grasping feeling-group, the grasping perception-group, 
the grasping activities-group, the grasping consciousness- 
group. 

So long, brethren, as I understood not fully, as they really 
are, these five grasping-groups, and the fourfold series, — just 
so long, brethren, was I not assured that about this world with 
its devas, its Maras, its Brahmas, in the realm of recluses 
and brahmins, of devas and men, I was fully enlightened with 
the supreme enlightenment. 

But as soon, brethren, as I fully understood, as they really 

^ Anantara, ‘ without interval ’ Corny. ^ ‘ There are two proximates, 
the near and the further. Insight of the Path is the close proximate/ 

* Parivattarji below catu~parivaita7) — ^viz.^ the series of the Four 
Truths This is the alternative title of a sutta in the Majjhima (No- 115) ; 
see ihid.f p. 67, where the ‘ four ’ are the ways in which a brother may 
be approved as wise and thoughtful. 



51 


XXII, § 56] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

are, these five grasping-groups, and the fourfold series^ — 
then, brethren, was I assured that about this world, witJi 
its devas, its Maras, its Brahmas, in the host of recluses ‘did 
brahmins, of devas and men, I was one fully enlightened 
with the supreme enlightenment. 

And how in a fourfold series ? 

I fully understood body, I fully understood the arising of 
body, I fully understood the ceasing of body, I fully under- 
stood the way going to the ceasing of body. 

In like manner I fully understood feeling, its arising, its 
ceasing and the way going to the ceasing of feeling. 

1 fully understood this in regard to perception, the activities 
and consciousness. 

And what, brethren, is body ? 

It is the four great elements,^ and that form which is 
ba^ed on the four great elements. That, brethren, is called 
body. 

From the arising of food^ is the arising of body: from the 
ceasing of food is the ceasing of body. And the way going to 
the ceasing of body is this Ariyan Eightfold Path, to wit : right 
views . . . {and the rest, and) right concentration. 

Whatsoever recluses or brahmins, brethren, fully under- 
stand body in this way, they by fully understanding thus the 
arising of body, the ceasing of body and the way going to the 
ceasing of body, are thereby apt for the disgust at body, for 
the fading out, for the utter ceasing of body. These are truly 
apt, and they who are truly apt are firm-grounded^ in this 
Norm and Discipline. 

And whatsoever recluses or brahmins, brethren, by thus 
fully understanding body, its arising, its ceasing and the way 
going to its ceasing, through disgust at body, through the 
fading out and utter ceasing of body, are thereby liberated 
without grasping,'^ they are well liberated, they who are well 

^ Or ‘ phenoirLena ’ ; mahdhhutd* Cf K S i, 23 n. Dhammasan- 
gani, § 584, and n.; V.Mm6dO; Expos. 404. 

2 Or ‘ sustenance,’ or ‘ a condition ’ or ‘ cause.’ 

3 Gadhanti. 

^ Anupddd for anupdddya. Cf. S. ii, 253; E S ii, 168 n. 



62 The Khandha Booh [text iii, 6o 

liberated are perfected:^ they wbo are perfected, for them 
t^iere is no more tbe whirling round for tbem.^ 

"^nd what, brethren, is feeling ^ 

It is these six seats of feeling, brethren: feeling that is born 
of contact with eye, feeling that is born of contact with ear, 
born of contact with nose, with tongue, with body [i.e,, skin), 
and with mind. That, brethren, is called feeling. Owing 
to the arising of contact there is the arising of feeling; owing 
to the ceasing of contact, there is ceasing of feeling. This is 
that Eightfold Ariyan Path going to the ceasing of feeling, to 
wit: right views ... {and the rest). 

Moreover, brethren, whatsoever recluses or brahmins, by 
fully understanding feeling in this way, by fully understanding 
in this way the arising of feeling, the ceasing of feeling and 
the way going to the ceasing of feeling, are thereby apt for the 
disgust at feeling, for the fading out, for the utter ceasing, of 
feeling, — these are truly apt. They who are truly apt are 
firmly grounded in this Norm and Discipline. 

And whatsoever recluses or brahmins, brethren, by fully 
understanding feeling in this way . . . and the way going to 
the ceasing of feeling ... of these can one say, no more 
is there the whirling round.” 

And what, brethren, is perception ? It is these six seats of 
perception, brethren: perception of sights, perception of 
sounds, of smells, tastes, touches, and mental images. This 
is called perception. From the arising of contact is the 
arising of perception, by the ceasing of contact is the ceasing 
of perception: this is that Ariyan Eightfold Path going to 
the ceasing of perception, to wit: right views . . . {and the rest). 

Kevalino. Corny., ^ sahcdino Tcata-sabha-ldccd,^ ‘have perfected 
all their tasks.’ It is interesting to compare this use of the term for 
the recluse’s ideal of saintship with the more metaphysical emphasis 
in the Sankhya use of it. 

2 There is here a word-play on {pari-)vatta. Vamy tesay rCaWhi 
fannd'pandya. Cf. the phrase used above, ndparay itthattdyd and 
na sanhhay gacchati. Corny, takes vatto/y {aX as ‘ the whirling on the 
wheel or in the whirlpool of existence; (h) as hdranay, cause. For them 
nothing is left to point to as existence or as cause. Cf. S. i, 15, ettha 
lyzttay na vatlati, ‘ no more whirls the round.’ 



53 


XXII, § 56] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

Moreover, bretliren, hy fully understanding in tliis way 
perception, its arising, its ceasing and the way going to ’its 
ceasing ... of such as these can one say no more is tl^^re 
the whirling round. 

And what, brethren, are the activities ? ^ 

They are these six seats of will the will for sights, the will 
for sounds, for smells, for tastes, for touches, and for mental 
images. These, brethren, are the activities. 

From the arising of contact comes the arising of the activ- 
ities: from the ceasing of contact comes the ceasing of the 
activities, and this is that Ariyan Eightfold Path going to the 
ceasing of the activities, to wit: right views ... {and the rest). 

And whatsoever recluses or brahmins, brethren, by thus 
fully understanding the activities, by thus fully understanding 
the arising of the activities, their ceasing and the way going 
to^ their ceasing, are thereby apt for disgust at the activities, 
for the fading out, for the utter ceasing of them they are truly 
apt. They who are truly apt are firm grounded in this Norm 
and Discipline. 

Moreover, brethren, whatsoever recluses or brahmins, by 
fully understanding the activities, their arising, their ceasing 
and the way going to their ceasing, through disgust at the 
activities, through the fading out, through the utter ceasing 
of the activities, are thereby liberated without grasping, they 
are truly liberated. They who are truly liberated, they are 
perfected: they who are perfected, of such as these can one 
say '' there is no more the whirling round.” 

And what, brethren, is consciousness ? 

It is these six seats of consciousness, eye-consciousness, 
ear-consciousness, nose-, tongue-, skin-, mind-consciousness. 
This, brethren, is called consciousness. 

From the arising of mind and body comes the arising of 
consciousness: from the ceasing of mind and body comes the 
ceasing of consciousness, and this Ariyan Eightfold Path is 
the way going to the ceasing of consciousness, to wit: right 
views . . . {and the rest). 


^ Sancetand. Cf. li, 39, 40, etc. 



64 


The Khandha Booh 


[text iii, 6i 


Now whatsoever recluses or brahmins, brethren, by thus 
fully understanding consciousness, by thus fully understanding 
itSv^arising, its ceasing and the going thereto, are apt for 
disgust at consciousness, for the fading out, for the ceasing 
of consciousness, — they are truly apt They who are truly 
apt are firm-grounded in this Norm and Discipline. 

Moreover, brethren, whatsoever recluses or brahmins, by 
thus fully understanding consciousness, its arising, its ceasing 
and the way going to its ceasing, by the disgust at, by the 
fading out of, by the utter ceasing of consciousness are 
liberated without grasping, — they are truly liberated. They 
who are truly liberated are perfected. Of them who are 
perfected it may be said there is no more the whirhng 
round.’’ ’ 


§ 57 (5). The Seven Points. 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

^ A brother who is skilled in the seven points,^ brethren, 
who is an investigator of the three ways,^ he is called accom- 
plished'® in this Norm and Discipline, one who has reached 
mastership,^ superman.”^ 

And how, brethren, is a brother skilled in the seven points ? 

Herein, brethren, a brother fully knows body, the arising 
of body, the ceasing of body and the way going to the ceasing 
of body. He fuUy knows the satisfaction there is in body, 
the misery that is in body, the escape from body. 

He fully knows feeling in like manner, and perception, the 
activities. . . . 


^ Satta-uMnd. Corny , ohdsd. Corny, calls this sutta ‘ excellent, 
pre-eminent, allurmg.’ 

2 These were apparently not an obvious category. The Corny, gives 
two alternatives — viz., according to the view of elements, of domain, 
and of causal arising; or of things in themselves, their sphere of action, 
and the manner of their action. 

^ Kevall. Cf. above, p. 52. 

4 Vusitavd. Cf. M. i, 4. Pa'panc. Sud,4:2;^‘ garu-sayvdse pi ariya- 
magge pi ariyavdsesu pi vasi, parivasi, vuttJho, parivuttho : so vutthavdso 
armacarano ti : synonyms of ‘ abiding in.’ 

s Uttamapuriso. Cf. Dialog, lii, 132-6; Dhp. 97; D. iii, 142. 




55 


XXII, § 57] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

He fully knows consciousness, lie fully knows the arising 
of consciousness, the ceasing of consciousness and the way 
going thereto. He fully knows the satisfaction that is in 
consciousness, the misery that is in consciousness, and the 
escape from consciousness. 

And what, brethren, is body ? It is the four grea-j^ements, 
and that form which is derived from the four great elements. 
That, brethren, is called body. From the arising of food comes 
the arising of body : from the ceasing of food is the ceasing of 
body : and the way going to the ceasing of body is this Ariyan 
Eightfold Path, to wit: right views . . . {and the rest). 

That ease, that pleasure which arises because of body, that 
is the satisfaction that is in body. In so far as body is im- 
permanent, is fraught with suSering and unstable, that is 
the misery that is in body. That restraint of desire and lust, 
that putting away of desire and lust that are in body, that is 
the escape from body. 

Whatsoever ^recluses or brahmins, brethren, by thus fully 
understanding body, its arising, its ceasing and the way 
going to its ceasing, by thus fully understanding the satis- 
faction, the misery of body, and the way of escape from body, 
are apt at disgust, apt at the fading out of, the ceasing of 
body, — they are truly apt. They that are truly apt are firm 
grounded in this Norm and Discipline. 

Moreover, brethren, whatsoever recluses or brahmins, by 
thus fully understanding body, its arising, its ceasing and the 
way going to its ceasing ... by thus fully understanding the 
satisfaction, the misery and the escape from body, they who 
are apt at disgust for body, apt at the fading out, the ceasing of 
body, are liberated without grasping, — they are truly liberated 
• . . for them it may be said “ there is no more the whirling 
round.” 

And what, brethren, is feeling ? 

These six seats of feeling, to wit: feeling that is born of 
contact with eye and the other organs . . . from contact with 
mind . . . this, brethicen, is called feeling. From the arising 
of contact comes the arising of feeling; from the ceasing of 
contact is the ceasing of feeling; and the way going to the 



66 


The Khandha Booh 


[text hi, 63 


ceasing of feeling is tHs Ariyan Eigthfold Path, to wit: right 
views . . . {and the rest), 

^^hat ease, that pleasure which arises because of feeling, — 
that is the satisfaction that is in feeling. In so far as feeling 
is impermanent, fraught with suffering and unstable, this is 
the misei^^ that is in feelmg. That restraint of desire and 
lust, that putting away of desire and lust which are in feeling 
. . , that is the escape from feeling. 

Now whatsoever recluses or brahmins, brethren, by thus 
fully understanding feeling, its arising, its ceasing, and the 
way going thereto; by thus fully understanding the satisfac- 
tion, the misery that is m feeling, and the escape from feeling, 
are apt for disgust at feeling, apt for the fading out, for the 
utter ceasing of feelmg, — they are truly apt. They that are 
truly apt are firm grounded in this Norm* and Discipline. 

Moreover, brethren, whatsoever recluses or brahmins, by 
fully understanding these things . . . are truly liberated . . . 
for them it may be said '' there is no more the wjtiirling round.’’ 

And what, brethren, is perception ? 

These six seats of perceiving: perception of body, perception 
of sound, of smell, taste, tangibles and mental images . . . 
that, brethren, is called perception, and for those who fully 
understand it ... (as I have told you) there is “no more 
the whirling round.” 

And what, brethren, are the activities ? 

These six seats of will:^ the will that is in body ... in 
mental images. These, brethren, are called the activities. 
Prom the arising of contact comes the arising of the activities. 
Prom the ceasing of contact is the ceasing of the activities : 
and the way gomg to the ceasing of the activities is this Ariyan 
Eightfold Path, to wit: right views . . . {and the rest). 

That ease, that pleasure which arises because of the activi- 
ties, that is the satisfaction that is in the activities. In so far 
as the activities are impermanent, fraught with suffering and 
unstable, — that is the misery of the activities. That restraint 
of the desire and lust that are in the activities, that putting 


* Text omits dhamma. 


^ Cetand, Lit.: thinking. 



XXII, § 58 ] Kindred Sayings on Elements 67 

' away of the desire and lust that are in the activities, — that is 
the escape from the activities. 

Whatsoever recluse or brahmins, brethren, fully understand 
these things, as I have told you, for them it may be said 
“ there is no more the whirling round.’’ 

And what, brethren, is consciousness ? 

These six seats of consciousness: sight-conscioifsness, hear- 
ing-, smelling-, tasting-, touching-, and mind-consciousness. 
This, brethren, is called consciousness. Erom the arising of 
name and shape ^ (comes) the arising of consciousness; from 
their ceasing its ceasing. The way going to its ceasing is just 
that Ariyan Eightfold Path, namely, etc. Continue as for the 
other four ‘ groups J 

In this way, brethren, a brother is skilled in the seven 
points. 

how, brethren, is a brother an investigator of the three 

ways ? 

As to that, Itf^ethren, a brother investigates things by way 
of the elements,* by way of the sense-spheres, by way of 
causal happening. 

That is how he is an investigator of the three ways. 

A brother who is skilled in the seven points, brethren, who 
is an investigator of the three ways, — ^he is called accom- 
plished in this Norm and Discipline, one who has reached 
mastership, superman.’ 

§ 58 (6). Fully enlightened. 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

‘ The Tathagata, brethren, who being arahant,^ is a fuUy 
enlightened one, because of disgust at body, of the fading 
out of body, of the ceasing of body, is called freed without 
grasping,” ‘‘fully enlightened.” 


^ Ndmarufa. 

* Dhdtuso. Corny., ^dhdtu sahhdvena passati, ‘ sees the elements in 
their real nature.’ 

2 Arahay, the crude form, or present participle, not arahd, the 
nominative* 



58 


The Khandhd Booh 


[text iii, 66 


That brother who is freed by insight, because of disgust at ^ 
body, of the fading out, the ceasing of body, is called “ freed 
without grasping,” '' freed by insight.” 

The Tathagata, brethren, who being arahant, is a fully 
enlightened one, because of disgust at feeling, of the fading 
out, the casing of feeling, is called ^‘free without grasping,” 

fully enlightened.” 

So also with perception, the activities and consciousness . . . 
such an one is called freed without grasping,” ‘‘ fully en- 
lightened.” 

Now herein, brethren, what is the distinction, what is the 
specific feature,^ what is the difference between the Tathagata 
who, being arahant, is a fully enlightened one, from the 
brother who is freed by insight V 

^ For us, lord, things are rooted in the Exalted One, have 
the Exalted One for their guide and their resort. Well for 
us, lord, if the Exalted One should reveal unto us the meaning 
of this saying. Hearing the Exalted One, the brethren will 
bear it in mind.’ 

‘ Then listen, brethren, and apply your minds closely. I 
will speak.’ 

^ Even so, lord,’ replied those brethren to the Exalted 
One. 

‘ The Tathagata, brethren, who, being arahant, is fully 
enhghtened, he it is who doth cause a way to arise^ which had 
not arisen before; who doth bring about a way not brought 
about before ; who doth proclaim a way not proclaimed before ; 
who is the knower of a way, who understandeth a way, who is 
skilled in a way. And now, brethren, his disciples are way- 
farers who follow after him.® That, brethren, is the distinc- 
tion, the specific feature which distinguishes the Tathagata 
who, being arahant, is fully enlightened, from the brother who 
is freed by insight.’ 

^ Adhifpdyoso, 

2 Cf. 8. li, 104-5; 8. li, 74. Corny, retos to the passage. 

^ Cf. 8, i, 190; K.8. i, 242; M. in, 8. 



XXII, § 59] Kindred Sayings on Elements 


69 


§ 59 (7), The Five, 

At Benares, in the Deer Park was the occasion^ (for this 
discourse). 

At that time the Exalted One thus addresser! hanrl of 
five brethren: 

‘ Body, brethren, is not the Self. If body, br^hren, were 
the Self, then body would not be involved in sickness, and one 
could say of body : “ Thus let my body be. Thus let my body 
not be.” But, brethren, inasmuch as body is not the Self, 
that is why body is involved in sickness, and one cannot 
say of body: ''thus let my body be; thus let my body 
not be.” 

Feeling is not the SeM. If feeling, brethren, were the 
Self, then feeling would not be involved in sickness, and one 
cou]d say of feelmg: "thus let my feeling be; thus let my 
feeling not be.” 

Likewise per<»eption, the activities and consciousness are 
not the Self. If consciousness, brethren, were the Self, then 
consciousness would not be involved in sickness, and one 
could say of consciousness: "thus let my consciousness be; 
thus let my consciousness not be ;” but inasmuch as conscious- 
ness is not the Self, that is why consciousness is involved in 
sickness: that is why one cannot say of consciousness: " thus 
let my consciousness be; thus let my consciousness not be.” 

Now what think ye, brethren. Is body permanent or im- 
permanent V 

' Impermanent, lord.’ 

' And what is impermanent, is that weal or woe V 

' Woe, lord.’ 


^ NidanaT). Yin, i, 12. This is the famous logion out of which 
the compilers have elaborated with formulas the so-called Anattalak- 
khaua-Sutta. ‘ The five ’ were Annata-Kondanna, Vappa, Bhaddiya, 
Mahanama and Assa3i, the early supporters of the Master. The dis- 
course followed that which is called Dhamma-cahha-ppavattaim-suttaf 
or ‘ the Foundation of the Realm of Righteousness.’ There is a tradi- 
tion that it took place on the full-moon day of Asalhd (July). Of, 
Warren, p. 146. 



60 


The Khandhd Booh 


[text iii, 68 


‘ Then what is impermanent, woeful, unstable by nature, ' 
is it fitting to regard it thus: this is mine; I am this; this is 
t^ie Self of me ’ 

' Surely not, lord.’ 

^ So ajso is it with feeling, perception, the activities and con- 
sciousnes^^^ Therefore, brethren, every body whatever, be it 
past, future or present, be it inward or outward, gross or 
subtle, low or high, far or near, — every body should be thus 
regarded, as it really is, by right insight, — this is not mine; 
this am not I ; this is not the Self of me.” 

Every feeling whatever, every perception whatever, all 
activities whatsoever (must be so regarded). 

Every consciousness whatever, be it past, future or present, 
be it inward or outward, gross or subtle, low or high, far or 
near, — every consciousness, I say, must be thus regarded, as 
it really is, by right insight : this is not mine; this am not I ; 
this is not the Self of me.” 

So seeing, brethren, the well-taught Ariy^n disciple feels 
disgust for body, feels disgust for feeling, for perception, for 
the activities, feels disgust for consciousness. So feeling 
disgust he is repelled; being repelled, he is freed; knowledge 
arises that in the freed is the freed thing; so that he knows: 

destroyed is rebirth; lived is the righteous life; done is my 
task; for life in these conditions there is no hereafter.” ’ 

Thus spake the Exalted One, and the band of five brethren 
were pleased thereat, and welcomed what was said by the 
Exalted One. Moreover, by this teaching thus uttered the 
hearts of those five brethren were freed from the asavas 
without grasping. 


§ 60 (8). Mahdli. 

Thus have I heard: Once the Exalted One was staying near 
Vesali, in Great Wood, at the Hall of the Peaked Gable. 

Then Mahali, the Licchavi,^ came to the Exalted One (and 
sat down at one side). So seated, Mahali, the Licchavi, thus 
addressed the Exalted One: — 


Of, S. i, 230; K.S, i, 295. 



61 


XXII, § 6o] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

^ Lord, Purana Kassapa^ tlius spoke: There are no condi- 
tions, there is no cause ^ for the impurity of beings. Without 
conditions, without cause do beings become impure. There 
are no conditions, there is no cause for the purity of beings. 
Without conditions, without cause do beings become pure.^’ 
As to this, what saith the Exalted One V 

^ I say there are conditions, there is cause for the4mpurity of 
beings, Mahali. By conditions, by a cause do beings become 
impure. There are conditions, there is cause, Mahali, for the 
purity of beings. By conditions, by a cause are beings purified.’ 

^ But what are the conditions, lord, what is the cause for 
the impurity of beings ? How do they become impure by 
conditions, by cause V 

^ If the body, Mahali, were thus entirely painful, fallen 
upon® pain, beset with pain, untouched by pleasure,^ beings 
would not thus delight in the body. But whereas the body, 
Mahali, is pleasant, fallen upon pleasure, untouched by pain, 
therefore beings^take delight in the body. Linked by passion 
to it, because of that union they become impure. These, 
Mahali, are the conditions, this is the cause for the impurity 
of beings, and thus beings become impure by conditions, by a 
cause. 

If feeling, Mahali, if perception ... if the activities, if 
consciousness were thus entirely painful, fallen upon pain, 
untouched by pleasure, beings would not thus take delight in 
these, in consciousness. But, Mahali, whereas consciousness 
is pleasant, fallen upon pleasure, untouched by pain, therefore 
beings take delight in consciousness. They are linked to it 
by passion, and because of that union they become impure. 

^ The head of one of the six independent sects which opposed Bud- 
dhism. Gf, S. i, 65; K S. i, 90; Buddhism (Mrs Rhys Davids), p 85/ 
By a quite curious carelessness the editors of the Kindred Sayings 
have imputed to Purana Kassapa the teaching imputed in the Digha 
(i, 53) to Makkhali Gosaia He denied hetu~paccayo, condition and 
cause; the efficacy of karma. He is ahetu-vddo^ non-causatiomst. 

2 Compendium 280-1. Hetu-paccayo, ‘something which affects a 
cause in the production (if the effects of that cause. So “ condition ” 
is nearest.* 

3 For avakhati. See Buddh. Psychol , 22. 

^ At Expos, i, 53, suhhai^ is defined in different ways. 



62 


The Khandha Booh 


[text iii, 70 


These, Mahali, are the conditions, this is the cause for the- 
ilnpurity of beings, and thus beings become impure by con- 
ditions, by a cause/ 

‘ But what, lord, are the conditions, what is the cause for 
the purity of beings ? How do beings by conditions, by a 
cause, S^me pure V 

' If the body, Mahali, were thus entirely pleasant, fallen 
upon pleasure, untouched by pain, beings would thus delight 
in the body. But whereas, Mahali, the body is painful, fallen 
upon pain, untouched by pleasure, therefore beings feel disgust 
at the body; by that disgust they are repelled, by that 
repulsion they are made pure. 

And these, Mahali, are the conditions, this is the cause for 
the purity of beings. Even so they are made pure by con- 
ditions, by a cause. 

The same may be said of feeling, of perception, of ^the 
activities, of consciousness. Even so, Mahali, are beings made 
pure by conditions, by a cause.’ • 

§ 61 ( 9 ). On fire} 

At Savatthi. . , . Then (the Exalted One) said : — 

‘ Body is on fire, brethren: feeling is on fire: perception, the 
activities and consciousness are on fire. 

So seeing, brethren, the well-taught Ariyan disciple feels 
disgust for body, for feeling, for perception, for the activities, 
for consciousness. Feeling disgust he is repelled ; by repulsion 
he is freed; knowledge arises that in the freed man is the freed 
thing, so he knows: destroyed is rebirth, lived is the 
righteous life, done is the task, for life in these conditions there 
is no hereafter.” ’ 


§ 62 (10). Mode of rechoning. 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

These three modes of reckoning, brethren, of terming, of 
naming,^ both now and formerly held distinct, will not be con- 

^ 

^ More, fuUy in the famous logion of the third or ‘fire-sermon/ 
preached on Gaya Head, Yin. i, 21. Of. Pts. of Controv. 128. 

2 Nirutti-adhivacana-pannafti-patha. Cf. Pts. of Cont. 96, 100, 378. 



xxn, § 62] Kindred Sayings on Elements 63 

fused by recluses and brabmins wbo are wise. Wbicli 
three ? 

Whatsoever of matter,^ brethren, is past, ceased, changed, — 
that is reckoned, termed and named as has been.” It is 
not reckoned as is,” nor is it reckoned as will be.” 

Whatsoever feeling, brethren, is past, ceased, changed, — 
that is reckoned, termed and named as has beeiv’’ It is not 
reckoned as "" is,” nor is it reckoned as “ will be.” 

So likewise whatsoever perception, whatsoever activities, 
whatsoever consciousness is past, ceased, changed, — ^that is 
reckoned, termed and named as has been.” It is not 
reckoned as is,” nor is it reckoned as “ will be.” 

Wdiatsoever matter, brethren, is unborn, unmanifested, — 
that is reckoned, termed and named as will be.” It is not 
reckoned as is.” It is not reckoned as has been.” 

So likewise as regards feeling, perception, the activities, 
and consciousness. Whatsoever matter, brethren, is born, 
manifested, — ^t!^at is reckoned, termed and named as ‘^has 
been,” nor is it reckoned as will be.” 

So likewise as regards feeling, perception, the activities and 
consciousness. Thus, whatsoever consciousness is born, 
manifested, — that is reckoned, termed and named as is.” It 
is not reckoned as has been,” nor is it reckoned as will be.” 

These, brethren, are the three modes of reckoning, terming 
and naming, which both now and formerly held distinct are 
not confused, will not be confused and obscured by recluses 
and brahmins who are wise. 

Moreover, the folk of Ukkali,^ preachers in the retreat,® 


^ Or body (rupar)). 

2 Cf Kafhdvatthu, 141 [P^5. of Contr 95 n.]. A ii, 31. 

3 During vassa (Sinhalese was) or the rainy season, when wanderers 
were in residence, these ‘dwellers of the Ukkali district’ {Corny,) 
taught, as in the last sutra, that there is no condition and no cause; 
that ill befalls not the doer of the deed; that charity is fruitless; that 
nothing exists. Even these extremists upheld the distinctions of the 
three times. At M. iii,»78 we have Ye pi te ahesuy OhJcald (VT^ald) 
. . , te pi dhamma-panydyaT) . . . manneyny, for the same alleged 
reasons. 



64 


The Khandha Booh 


[text iii, 73 


deniers of tlie cause, deniers of the deed, deniers of reality, — . 
even they used to judge that these three modes of reckoning 
were not to be blamed, not to be scorned. And why was that ? 
Because they feared blame, attack, reproach. 


2. On the Aeahant 
§ 63 (1). Clinging} 

At Savatthi. ... In the Park. 

Then a certain brother came to the Exalted One, saluted 
him and sat down at one side. So seated that brother thus 
addressed the Exalted One: — 

‘ Well for me, lord, if the Exalted One would teach me a 
doctrine, so that hearing the doctrine of the Exalted One I 
might dwell solitary, secluded, zealous, ardent and aspiring.’ 

‘ Brother, if one cling,^ he is Mara’s bondsman. If he cling 
not, he is released from the evil one.’ 

^ I understand, Exalted One ! I understand, Well-farer !’ 

‘ But in what way, brother, do you understand in full the 
meaning of what I spoke concisely V 

‘ Thus, lord: — Clinging to body, one is Mara’s bondsman. 
Not clinging, he is released from the evil one. Clinging to 
feeling, he is Mara’s bondsman. Not clinging, he is released 
from the evil one. Clinging to perception, to the activities, 
to consciousness, he is Mara’s bondsman. Not clinging, he 
is released from the evil one. That, lord, is how I understand 
in full what was concisely spoken by the Exalted One.’ 

‘ Well said, brother ! Well said, brother ! Well have you 
understood in full the meaning of what I spoke concisely. It 
is indeed by clinging to body, brother, by clinging to feeling^ 
to perception, to the activities, to consciousness that one is 
bondsman to Mara. By not clinging gne is released from the 
evil one. And so should be understood in full what I said 
concisely.’ 

r - — 0^ 

^ Upddiyamdno (upa+a-f diy, /rom da; giving on up to = taking, 
grasping). ‘ To craving, pride, views.’ Corny. 



65 


XXII, § 66] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

Thereupon that brother gladly heard the words of the 
Exalted One and welcomed them, and he rose from his se^t, 
saluted the Exalted One and departed. Thereafter that 
brother, dwelling solitary, secluded, zealous, ardent and 
aspiring, in no long time attained that goal supreme of the 
righteous life, to win which the clansmen rightly go forth from 
home to the homeless, so that in that very life af himself he 
fully understood it, realized it and abode therein, and knew: 

destroyed is rebirth, lived is the righteous life, done is the 
task, for life in these conditions there is no hereafter.” 

So that brother was yet another of the Arahants. 

§ 64 (2). Imagining, 

{This is the same as the previous section^ substituting ‘ imagin- 
ing ’ {manhamdno) for ‘ clinging.’) 

§ 65 (3). Enamoured, 

{The same, substituting ^ enamoured ’ {ahhinandamdno) for 
' clinging.’) 

§ 66 (4). Impermanent, 

At Savatthi. (A certain brother came to the Exalted One, 
saluted him and sat down at one side.) 

So seated, that brother thus addressed the Exalted One : 

‘ Well for me, lord, if the Exalted One would teach me a 
doctrine, hearing which ... I might dwell solitary, secluded, 
ardent and aspiring.’ 

‘ For that which is impermanent, brother, you must put 
away desire.’ 

' I understand, Exalted One ! I understand, Well-farer 
But how, brother, do you understand m full that which I 
said concisely V 

^ Body, lord, is impermanent. I must put away desire for 
that. Feeling, perception, the activities . . . consciousness 
is impermanent. I i^^iust put away desire for that. TBat is 
how I understand in full what was concisely spoken by the 
Exalted One.’ 


Ill 


5 



66 


The Khandhd Booh 


[text lii, 77 


' Well said ! Well said, brother ! Well indeed do you ^ 
understand in full the meaning of what I said concisely. Body, 
brother, is indeed impermanent. You must put away desire 
for body. Feeling, perception, the activities . . . conscious- 
ness is impermanent. You must put away desire for that. 
That is how, brother, the meaning of what I said concisely is 
to be understood in full.’ 

Thereupon that brother ... (as before) . . . ^ there is no 
hereafter.’ 

Thus that brother was yet another of the Arahants. 

§ 67 (6). Suffering, 

{The same as the above, substituting ' suffering ’ {duhTchay) 
for ^ impermanent.’) 

§ 68 (6). No self 

(As before, with ' no self ’ {anattd)for ' impermanent.’) * 

§ 69 (7). Not belonging to the Self, 

(As before, with ‘ not belonging to the Self ’ (anattaniyaY for 
‘ impermanent.’) 

§ 70 (8). Lustful, 

(As before, with ^ inherent in what is lustful ’ (rajaniya^ 
santhitay) for ' impermanent.’) 

§ 71 (9). Radha,^ 

AtSavatthi. . . . In the Park. 

Now the venerable Eadha came to the Exalted One, and 
saluting him, sat down at one side. 

So seated the venerable Eadha thus addressed the Exalted 
One: 

^ How in him who knows, how in him who sees, lord, are 
there in this body, together with its consciousness, and like- 


^ Corny., " na attano santahay * attano panhkhdra-bhdvena sunnatay,^ 
‘not one’s own property; emptiness of beiii^ one’s own equipment.’ 
The meaning here is that ‘ the non-essential ’ is to be put away. 

2 Gf Thag. 133, Brethren, 115; infra 188, iv, 48. 



XXII, § 72 ] Kindred Sayings on Elements 67 

wise in all external objects, no (more) ideas of I ’’.and 
“ mine,” no more leanings to conceit 

‘ Whatsoever material object, Radha, be it past, future or 
present, inward or outward, gross or subtle, low or high, far 
or near, one regards thus: This is not mine; this am not I; 
this is not the Self of me ” — ^that is seeing things as they 
really are, by right insight. 

WTiatsoever feeling, whatsoever perception, whatsoever 
activities, whatsoever consciousness one regards thus: This 
is not mine ; this am not I ; this is not the Self of me ” — ^that is 
seeing things as they really are, by right insight. 

Thus, Eadha, in him who knows, thus in him who sees, in 
this body, together with its consciousness, and likewise in all 
external objects, are there no more ideas of ‘‘ I ” and mine,” 
no more leanings to conceit.’ 

And the venerable Radha was yet another of the Arahants. 


§ 72 (10). Surddha? 

At 'Savatthi. . . . In the Park. 

Now the venerable Suradha (came to the Exalted One, and 
saluting him sat down at one side. So seated the venerable 
Suradha) said to the Exalted One: 

‘ How in him who knows, how in him who sees, lord, in 
this body with its consciousness, and likewise in all external 
objects, has mind gone away from all ideas of I ” and 

mine,” and has passed beyond the ways of conceit® and is 
utterly liberated V 

^ WTiatsoever material object, Suradha, be it past, future or 
present ... far or near, one regards thus: This is not mine; 
this am not I ; this is not the Self of me ” — so seeing things as 


^ For this and the next section c/. S ii, 252-3; K.S. ii, 167-8, and n., 
where the same words are put m the mouth of Rahula. Cf. infra 
135-6. 

^ In Thag, Corny. {Pss. of the Brethren, p 116) a thera Sui^dha is 
the younger brother of ^ thera Radha. 

3 Vidhd-samatikkantay. The three forms of false opinion arising 
from mdno have been referred to above, 1 49 (Sop-a-)* 



68 The Khandha Booh [text iii, 8i 

they really are, by right insight, one is liberated without 
grasping. 

Whatsoever sense, perception, activities, whatsoever con- 
sciousness . . . one regards thus . . . one is liberated without 
grasping. 

In him, Suradha, who thus knows, in him who thus sees, in 
this body, tegether with its consciousness and likewise in all 
external objects, mind has gone away from all ideas of I ” 
and mine,” passing beyond the ways of conceit and is utterly 
liberated.’ 

. . . And the venerable Suradha became yet another of the 
Arahants. 


3. On what Must be Devoured 

§ 73 (1). Satisfaction, 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One)^aid: — 

^ Brethren, the untaught many-folk understand not as they 
really are the satisfaction of body, the misery of it, the escape 
from it. 

They understand not the satisfaction of feeling, the misery 
of it, the escape from it, from perception, from the activities, 
from consciousness. . . . 

But the well-taught Ariyan disciple does understand these 
things.’ 

§ 74: (2). Arising (1). 

{The same, with ' arising ’ {samudayo) and ‘ going out ’ 
{atthagamay) for ' satisfaction,’ etc.) 

§ 76 (3). Arising (2). 

{The same, with ' well-taught ’ (sutavd)for ^ untaught.’) 

§ 76 (4). Arahants (1). 

ifTSavatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

‘ Body, brethren, is impermanent. What is impermanent^ 
that is suffering. What is suffering, that is not the Self. 



69 


XXII, § 76] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

Wliat is not the Self, that is not mine, that am not I, that 
is not the Self of me.” This is the way one should regard 
things as they really are, by right insight. 

So likewise with regard to feeling, perception, the activities, 
consciousness. 

So seeing, brethren, the well-taught Ariyan disciple feels 
disgust at body, at feeling, perception, the activities and 
consciousness. 

Feeling disgust he is repelled: by repulsion he is released ; by 
that release set free, knowledge arises: in the freed man is 
the free thing,” and he knows: destroyed is rebirth; lived is 
the righteous life ; done is the task ; for life in these conditions 
there is no hereafter.” 

Throughout the seven abodes, brethren, up to the highest 
becoming, these are the topmost, these are the best in all the 
world, — ^these Arahants.’ 

Thus spake the Exalted One. The Well-farer having so 
said, the Teacb3r said this further: — 

^ Ah, happy saints, the Arahants ! In them no craving’s seen. 
The ‘ I ’ conceit is rooted up : delusion’s net is burst. 

Lust-free they have attained; translucent is the heart of them. 
These god-like beings, drug-immune, unspotted in the world, 
Ejiowing the fivefold mass, they roam the seven domains of 
good.^ 

Worthy of praise and worthy they — sons of the Wake true- 
born. 

The wearers of the sevenfold gem,^ i’ the threefold training® 
trained — 

These mighty heroes follow on, exempt from fear and dread : 
Lords of the tenfold potency,'^ great sages tranquillized: 

Best beings they in all the world; in them no craving’s seen. 


^ Corny , saddhd, hin-ottappay, saccay, {draddha-)viTiyat sah, panfid, 

^ Corny., SaUa-hoj'jhangd, the seven factors of enlightenmenUf 

® The three siJchhd : adhi-slla, -citta, -pannd, ‘ the higher morals, 
mind and wisdom. 

^ Dasa-holdni. Cf, M. i, 6Q. 



[text iii, 84 


70 The Khandha Book 

ThejVe won the knowledge of adepts. This compound is " 
their last. 

That essence of the holy life^ that have they made their own.^ 
Unshaken by the triple modesf set free from birth to come, 

The plane of self-control they’ve won, victorious in the world. 
Upward or crossways or below'^ — no lure is found in them. 

They sound Sloud their lion’s roar Supreme are they that 
wake.” ’ 

§ 77 (5). Arahants (2). 

{The same as the above, omitting the verses.) 

§ 78 (6). The Lion^ (1). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted Onel said : — 

" The lion, brethren, king of beasts, at eventide comes forth 
from his lair. Having come forth from his lair he stretches® 
himself. Having done so he surveys the four quarters. Sur- 
veying the four quarters he utters thrice his lion^ roar. Thrice 
having uttered his lion’s roar he sallies forth on his round. 

Whatsoever brute creatures,'^ brethren, hear the sound of 
the roar of the lion, king of beasts, for the most part are 
afraid, fall a-quaking and a-trembling. 

Those that dwell in holes seek them ; water-dwellers make 
for the water; forest-dwellers enter the forest; birds mount 
into the air. 

Then, brethren, whatsoever royal elephants at royal seats, 
in villages, in towns are tethered with stout leathern bonds,® 

^ Corny , sdro— arahatta-phalay 
2 A-para-paccayd, not through dependence on others 
® Cf. § 72, tividhd. This couplet is quoted at Nidd. i, 243. 

^ Corny., UddhaTj, ‘ from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head,’ 
or ‘ past time,’ or ‘ heaven.' 

ApdcinaT) (sic), ‘ the ground ’ or ‘ the future ’ or ‘ the hells.’ (7/- 
Ehys Davids-Stede Dicty. s.v at A. ii. 15: It-, p. 120 apdcinay. 

Tiriyay, ‘ the middle ’ or ‘ the present ’ or * the world of men ’ 
fi Cf A. ii. 33, Z.^.ii,23,41. 

® owwy describes in detail how a lion stretches himself. 

’ Tiracchdnagatd pdnd : explained elsewhere as * gomg horizontally, 
as opposed to the erect gait of humans.’ 

® Reading varattehi with Corny. 



XXII, § 78 ] Kindred Sayings on Elements 71 

burst and rend those bonds asunder, voiding excrements and 
run to and fro for very fear.^ 

Thus potent, brethren, is the lion, king of beasts, over brute 
creatures; of such might, of such power is he. 

Even so, brethren, when a Tathagata ariseth in the world,^ 
an Arahant, fully awakened, perfect in lore and conduct, 
well-farer, world-knower, unsurpassed charioteer of men to 
be tamed, teacher of devas and mankind, a Buddha, an 
Exalted One, — ^thus he teacheth the Norm: '' Such and such is 
body, its arising and its ceasing. Such and such is feeling, 
its arising and its ceasing. Such and such is perception, such 
the activities, such is consciousness, its arising and its ceasing.’’ 

Then, brethren, whatsoever devas there be, long-living, 
beautiful and blissful, long established in lofty palaces, when 
they hear the Norm-teaching of the Tathagata, for the most 
part® they become fearful, fall a-trembling and a-quaking, 
(and they say) It seems, friends, that impermanent are we, 
and permanent we deemed ourselves. Unstable are we, it 
seems, and stable we deemed ourselves. Not to last, 
friends, it seems are we, and lasting we deemed ourselves. 
Verily, friends, are we impermanent, unstable, not to last, 
prisoned in a person.” 

Thus potent, brethren, is the Tathagata over devas and 
their world; of such might, of such power is he.’ 

So spake the Exalted One, and when the Well-farer had thus 
spoken, the Teacher added this further : — 

^ Corny , ‘ Few are they that fear not. Who are they ? Lions of 
like nature, elephants, and steeds and bulls and men of noble breed. 
Lions fear not because they say, ‘ we be of one blood, you and we ’ 
Elephants, because they trust in self and mighty power But holy 
saints fear not because they have put away belief in self.’ 

2 Corny seizes the opportunity to describe in detail the Buddha’s 
enlightenment and first sermon and gives in brief the eight orthodox 
derivations of the 'wovd^Tathagato (cf Chalmers sv s,iid Papanc. 45; 
Vrs M. 203; D iii, 134; and Uddn. Corny. (S. 84), and refers us to Vis. 
Jf. (203) and Niddesa {Oulla N 156). It is a little curious that 
the Corny, refers to the very slender notice in the Vtsm aiJ^'"i* tO' 
D. iii, 135, or to the full analysis mSum Vzldsinlf p. 59. 

2 Corny., ‘ except those devas in this world who are Ariyan disciples ’ 
(an interesting point). Mrs.Rhys-Davids suggests ‘who were so on earth.’ 



72 The Khandha Booh [text iii, 86 

" WJien tlie Vaked by mighty wisdom sets the Norm- wheel , 
rolling on, — 

Teacher he without a rival of the devas and the world — 
Teacher that the person^ ceases and the person^ comes to be. 
And the Noble Eightfold Path that leads to calming of all 
woe, — 

Devas, they who live for ages, beauteous, of great renown, 

Like the beasts before the lion, fall a-trembling, are afraid:^ 
Per they have not conquered selfhood. “ Transient, friends,” 
say they are we,” 

When they hear the Arhanth words, of him who hath won 
liberty.’ 

§ 79 (7). The Prey? 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said : — 

^ Whatsoever recluses or brahmins, brethren, remember 
their divers former lives, in so doing all of them remember 
the five factors of grasping, or one or other of these 
factors, thus: — Of such and such a body f/as I in time 
past,” says one; and so remembering, it is body, brethren, 
that he thus remembers. ‘‘I felt thus and thus,” says he; 
and in so remembering it is feeling that he thus remembers. 

Thus and thus I perceived,” says he ; and in so remembering, 
it is perception that he thus remembers. Thus and thus 
in activity was I,” says he; and in thus remembering it is the 
activities-compound^ that he thus remembers. Thus and 
thus conscious was I,” says he; and in so remembering it is 
consciousness that he remembers. 

And why, brethren, do ye say body ? One is affected, 
brethren. That is why the word body ” is used. Affected 
by what ? Affected by touch of cold and heat, of hunger and 

Sakkaya. Of above, p. 38 

2 Reading santasar} dpMuy for text santd samdpdduy. 

® Text seems to have a wrong title (‘ the lion ’) to this sntta. In the 
Udddna, or table of contents at the end of the chapter, it is called 
KJia'j'jani, The whole chapter is called Khaj^amya (to be eaten). 
JpjiM-frrotion body is likened to a devourer^ and at § 85 to a murderer, 

^ Of. Mrs. C. A. Rhys Davids’s analysis of the section in Buddh, 
Psych. t p. 43. The medieval tradition of Burma conceives sanhhdrd 
not as compound but as conditioned, caused. 



XXII, § 79] Kindred Sayings on Elements 73 

4iliirst, of gnats, mosquitoes, wind and sun and snakes. Qne 
is affected, bretliren. That is why ye say body.”^ 

And why, brethren, do ye say feeling 

One feels, brethren. That is why the word feeling ” is 
used. Teels what ? Teels pleasure and pain; feels neutral 
feelings. One feels, brethren. That is why the word feel- 
ing is used. 

And why, brethren, do ye say '' perception ” ? 

One perceives, brethren. That is why the word percep- 
tion ” is used. Perceives what ? Perceives blue-green, per- 
ceives yellow, or red, or white. One perceives, brethren. 
That is why the word perception ’’ is used. 

And why, brethren, do ye say '' the activities-compound ” ? 

Because they compose a compound. That is why, brethren, 
the word activities-compound ” is used. And what com- 
pound do they compose ? 

It is body that they compose into a compound of body.^ 
It is feeling tha1% they compose into a feeling-compound. It 
is perception that they compose into a perception-compound; 
the activities into an activities-compound; consciousness into 
a consciousness-compound. They compose a compound, 
brethren. Therefore the word (activities)-compound is used. 

^ Eupar) ruppatz We cannot keep up the play of words here. 
Form IS m-formed, shape is shaped; body is embodied; it lives by these 
stimuli, without which there is no consciousness of body. Corny. 
paraphrases ruppati by words meaning ‘ is troubled, struck, oppressed, 
broken up ’ Mrs. Khys Davids suggests ‘ affected’ as a compromise. 

‘ Afflicted ’ seems to sum up Buddhaghosa’s terms. Corny, points out 
that these are merely remimscences of something past and perished, 
not now existing; and so with all the five factors; they all have the 
characteristics of ‘ emptiness ’ He misconstrues these various contacts 
not as referring to this life, but as ‘ informing ’ creatures m other 
spheres — e.g , the cold hell, the hungry-ghost world, etc. He regards 
‘ wind ’ as referring to flatulence I Etymologically rupa;) is not con- 
nected with ruppati. This is from rup (lup) to damage ; that is pro- 
bably from vazp, shape. &e Stede, in Pah Diet. 

^ Text vedzyanti, probably an error for sing, vediyati or vedayati. 
Corny, has both forms and comments on them, but mentions no 
He says ‘ no entity feels, bTit there is just feeling,’ omitting the recorder 

^ Heading with Corny.) rupa-lvedanlatthdya, etc., for text’s rilpat 
tdya-vedanattdya. 



74 


The Khandha Booh 


[text iii, 87 


And why, brethren, do ye say consciousness ? ^ 

One is conscious, brethren.^ Therefore the word con- 
sciousness ’’ is used. Conscious of what ? Of (flavours) sour 
or bitter; acrid or sweet; alkaline or non-alkaline ; saline or 
non-saline. One is conscious, brethren. That is why the 
word “ consciousness ” is used. 

Then, brerthren, the well-taught Ariyan disciple thus reflects : 

I am the prey of body now.^ In the past likewise I was 
the prey of body. Just as now I am the prey of this present 
body. Moreover, if in future time I should be enamoured of 
body, in future time also even thus should I be the prey of 
body, just as I am now the prey of this present body.’’ 

Thus reflecting, he is freed from desire for a past body; he 
is not enamoured of a future body; he is apt for disgust at the 
present body, for the turning away from it, for the ceasing of it. 

(He thus reflects): I am the prey of feeling now. In the 
past likewise I was the prey of feeling, just as now I am the 
prey of this present feeling. Moreover, if m future time I 
should be enamoured of feeling, in future time also even thus 
should I be the prey of feeling, just as I am now the prey of 
this present feeling.”^ 

Thus reflecting, he is freed from desire for feeling of the past ; 
he is not enamoured of future feeling ; he is apt for disgust at 
present feeling, for turning away from it, for the ceasing 
from it. 

So also with perception, the activities and consciousness . . . 
he is apt for disgust at present consciousness, for turning 
away from it, for the ceasing from it. 

What think ye, brethren ? Is body permanent or im- 
permanent V 

^ Corny., sanjdndti, vijdnati, pajdndti : three stages of consciousness, 
to be distinguished as ‘ awareness, discrimination, decision.’ 

^ Corny., hhajjdmi, ‘ body does not rend and eat up the flesh like 
a worm, but, just as one clothed in a filthy garment suffers discomfort 
as a consequence of that and says, “ the garment eats me up,” even so 
^^......J^^Ji^mfort to be regarded as consuming him.’ Cf. 114, vadhahay 

rupay, ‘ body is a murderer.’ So inf. 143, ’badhafco, eso ahhhdto At 
8. iv, 172-5 in the parable, the panca-hhhandhd are the ‘ five murderers.’ 

^ Corny, illustrates by a story of a hMhJchu who had a thorn in his 



75 


XXII, § 79] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

‘ Impermanent, lord.’ 

‘ And what is impermanent, is that woe or weal V 

^ Woe, lord.’ 

‘ Then what is impermanent, woeful, unstable in nature, — 
is it fitting to regard that as: this is mine; this am I; this is 
the Self of me ?” ’ 

‘ Surely not, lord.’ 

{The same is said for the other factors.) 

^ Therefore, brethren, every body, be it past, future or 
present, be it inward or outward, gross or subtle, low or high, 
far or near — I say, every body should be thus regarded as 
it really is, by right insight : this is not mine; this am not I ; 
this is not the Self of me.” 

He, brethren, is reckoned an Axiyan disciple who reduces, 
heaps not up; who abandons, grasps not; who scatters, binds 
not ; who quenches, kindles not. 

And what does he reduce^ and not heap up ? He spreads 
abroad body, he^s it not up. He reduces feeling, perception, 
the activities, consciousness, heaps them not up. 

And what does he abandon, not grasp ? He abandons 
body, and grasps it not. He abandons feeling, perception, 
the activities, consciousness, and grasps them not. 

And what does he scatter and not gather ^ . . . He scatters 
body and gathers it not. He scatters feeling, perception, the 
activities, consciousness, and gathers them not. 

And what does he quench and not kindle ^ . . . He 
quenches body, and kindles it not. He quenches feeling, per- 
ception, the activities, consciousness, and does not kindle them. 

So seeing, brethren, the well-taught Ariyan disciple con- 
ceives disgust at body, at feeling, at perception, at the activi- 
ties, at consciousness. Being disgusted he is repelled by them ; 
by that repulsion he is released ; by that release he is set free ; 
knowledge arises: in the freed man is the freed thing, and 
he knows: destroyed is rebirth; lived is the righteous life; 
done is the task; for life in these conditions there is n o^ere- 
after.” ^ """ 

He, brethren, is reckoned a brother^ who neither heaps up 


^ BJiiTchhu, here in its proper sense of ‘ almsman,’ ‘ owning nothing.’ 



76 


The Khandha Booh 


[text iii, 90 


nor reduces. Having reduced, he stands neither abandoning 
nor grasping. Saving abandoned, he stands neither scattering 
nor gathering. Having scattered, he stands neither quenching 
nor kindling. 

Having quenched, what is it that he neither heaps up nor 
reduces ? Having reduced, it is body that he stands neither 
heaping up nor reducing. Having reduced, it is feeling, 
perception, the activities and consciousness that he stands 
neither heaping up nor reducing.' 

Having reduced, what is it that he stands neither abandon- 
ing nor grasping ? Having abandoned, it is body that he 
stands neither abandoning nor grasping: it is feeling, per- 
ception, the activities, consciousness that he stands neither 
abandoning nor grasping. 

Having abandoned, what is it that he stands neither scatter- 
ing nor gathering ? Having scattered, it is body that he stands 
neither scattering nor gathering: it is feeling, perception, the 
activities, consciousness that he stands neitlfer scattering nor 
gathering. 

Having scattered, what is it that he stands neither quench- 
ing nor kindling ? Having quenched, it is body that he 
stands neither quenching nor kindling: it is feeling, percep- 
tion, the activities, consciousness that he stands neither 
quenching nor kindling. 

Having quenched, he stands: — brethren, it is even such a 
brother whose heart is set free, whom the devas, with their 
governor, and the Brahmas and their consorts even from afar 
do reverence. 

We worship thee, 0 thorough-bred of men ! 

We worship thee, 0 highest among men ! 

We do not grasp what thou dost ponder on.’^ 

^ CJ. Thag. 1084; Brethren, p 367; D, iii, 197-8; Thag. 1179, where 
the first line of these gathas occurs in conne^^ion with the praises of the 
Superman. ‘ Such a Jchmdsava/ says Corny,, * the devas honour, even 
as they honoured NUatthera (v 1. Nlta- and CiUa-Uhera), who, having 
pwii ii^ p his mind to end all there and then, while pondering on his 
resolve, at the moment of having his head shaved on taking the robes, 
attained Arahantship.’ The verse refers to the brother’s resolve, on 
which he pondered. 



XXII, § 8o] Kindred Sayings on Elements 


77 


§ 80 (8). Almsman} 

Once the Exalted One was staying among the Sakkas, near 
Kapilavatthu in the Banyan Park. 

Then the Exalted One, after rebuking the Order of brethren 
in a certain matter,^ robed himself at early dawn, took bowl 
and robe and entered Kapilavatthu for alms. 

When he had gone his rounds for alms in Kapilavatthu and 
had finished his early meal, he went to G-reat Grove for noon- 
day rest, and plunging into Great Grove, sat down for noonday 
rest at the foot of a young vilva^ tree. 

Then, as he meditated in seclusion, this train of thought 
arose in him: have now well established the Order of 

brethren. There are here new brethren, who have not long 
left the world, late-comers into this Norm and Discipline. If 
they behold me not, maybe they will falter and fall away,^ 
even as a tender caH that beholds not his dam falters and 
falls away. ^ 

Verily, verily, there are here new brethren, who have not 
long left the world, late-comers into this Norm and Discipline. 
If they behold me not, maybe they will falter and fall away, 
even as tender seedlings falter and fall away for lack of water. 

Verily, verily, there are here new brethren, who have not 
long left the world, late-comers into this Norm and Discipline. 
If they behold me not, maybe they will falter and fall away. 
How now if I confer a boon upon the Order of brethren, even 
as I did aforetime V 

Thereupon, Brahma-Sahampati,^ being aware in thought 
of the thought of the Exalted One, just as a strong man 


^ P'lndolyay Cf Brethren, p 110 w , 415. Corny., ‘ One who goes 
after (nce-balls) ’ 

2 Corny says xt was owing to their noisy behaviour in the hall, de- 
scribed at TJddna 25, on which occasion the Master likened the brethren 
to quarrelsome fishermen, and sent Ananda to rebuke them. 

^ Readmg with Corny., heluva-latthitdya for text vein- (bamboo) 

^ The words ahhatthay viparindmo, lit. ‘ a changing, becomin oLoth^ 
wise,’ used in these three Examples, I have paraphrased to suit the con- 
text (as does Corny.). 

5 GJ. K.S. 1 , 172 n. 



78 


The Khandha Booh 


[text ili, 91 

miglit stretch out his bent arm, or bend his outstretched arm, 
vanished even so from the Brahma world and appeared before 
the Exalted One. 

Then Brahma-Sahampati, drawing his outer robe over one 
shoulder, raised his joined hands to the Exalted One and thus 
spake unto him: ‘ Even so it is, 0 Exalted One ! Even so it 
is, 0 Well-:(arer ! ^ Well established by the Exalted One is the 
Order of brethren. Verily, verily, there are here new brethren, 
who have not long left the world, late-comers into this Norm 
and Discipline . . . and if they behold not the Exalted One, 
maybe they will falter and fall away. 

Let my lord, the Exalted One, delight the Order of brethren. 
Let my lord the Exalted One admonish the Order of brethren ! 
Even as aforetime the Order of brethren was favoured by the 
Exalted One, so may he now confer a boon upon them.’ 

The Exalted One consented by his silence. 

Thereupon Brahma-Sahampati, beholding the consent of the 
Exalted One, saluted him by the right and v^ished there and 
then. 

Then the Exalted One, rising at eventide from his solitude, 
went to the Banyan Park, and coming thither sat down on a 
seat prepared. As he sat there the Exalted One performed a 
mystic wonder in such wise that the brethren should come 
unto him singly and in pairs with timid mien.^ 

So those brethren came to the Exalted One singly and in 
pairs® with timid mien; and when they had come there they 
saluted him and sat down at one side. 

So seated the Exalted One thus spake unto those brethren: 

' This, brethren, is the meanest^ of callings — ^this of an 
almsman. A term of abuse is this in the world to-day, to 
say: “You scrap-gatherer! With bowl in hand you roam 

^ Brahma acquiesces (says (7.), ‘ even as a skilful cook suits his sauces 
to the taste of his royal master.’ 

2 Corny, says, ‘ if he had summoned them in a body to chide them, 
they would not have been impressed or have felt personal shame for 
bh eir jai isconduct. numbers giving confidence to the guilty.’ 

^ Beading with Corny,, eka-dvihi-kdya for text ekavihakdya. 

^ Antay, as we say ‘the limit but Corny,, Idmahay, These two 
sections are m Itivuttaka, p. 89. 



79 


XXII, § 8o] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

about.” ’Tis this calling that is entered on by those clansmen 
who are bent on [their] good because of goodf not led thereto 
by fear of kings, by fear of robbers, not because of debt, not 
from fear, not because they have no livelihood:^ but with the 
thought: Here am I, fallen upon birth, decay, death, sorrow 
and grief, woe, lamentation and despair, fallen upon woe, 
foredone with woe. Maybe some means of ending all this 
mass of woe may be found.” 

Thus, brethren, a clansman leaves the world, and covetous 
is he in his desires, fierce in his longing, malevolent of heart, 
of mind corrupt, careless and unrestrained, not quieted, but 
scatter-brained, and thoughtless. Just as, brethren, a torch 
from a funeral pyre, lit at both ends, and in the middle smeared 
with dung, kindleth no fuel either in village or in forest — 
using such a figure do I describe unto you this man, for he has 
lost his home and wealth, nor yet does he fulfil the duties of 
a recluse. 

There are thege three evil ways of thought, brethren: — 
thoughts of lust, thoughts of ill-will, thoughts of hurting. 
And these three evil ways of thought cease utterly without 
remainder in him whose heart abides established in the four 
stations of mindfulness,^ or who practises concentration that 
is withdrawn from objects. 

Good indeed, brethren, is this practice of concentration 
that is withdrawn from objects. This sort of concentration, 
brethren, if practised and dwelt upon is of great fruit, of great 
profit. 

There are these two views, brethren: the view of coming-to- 
be and the view of not coming-to-be. Herein, brethren, the 
well-taught Ariyan disciple asks himself: Is there, I wonder, 
aught in all the world which I can cling to without sin ^ 

Then he knows for certain: '' No ! There is naught in all the 
world that I can cling to without sin. Suppose I were to 
grasp and cling to body, to feeling, to perception, to the 
activities, to consciousness. Conditioned by that grasping of 


^ Corny, i hhayattd na dpvihd fahatd. 

2 Corny. i sahpatthdnesu. ^ JS^a vajjavd. 



80 The Khandha Booh [text iii, 94 

mine would be coming-to-be ; conditioned by that coming-to- 
be would birth be shaped; conditioned by birth would decay 
and death, sorrow, woe, grief, lamentation and despair be 
shaped. Thus would come about the arising of this whole 
mass of woe.’’ 

What think ye, brethren ? Is body permanent or im- 
permanent V 

' Impermanent, lord.’ 

‘ And that which is impermanent, is it weal or woe V 

^ Woe, lord.’ 

‘ And that which is woe, unstable in nature, is it fit to regard 
that thus: This is mine; this am I; this is the SeK of me 

' Surely not, lord.’ 

‘Is it right to regard feeling, perception, the activities, 
consciousness so V 

‘ Surely not, lord.’ 

‘ Wherefore, brethren, he who thus sees . . . knows . 

“ for life in these conditions there is no here^ter.” ’ ^ 

§ 81 (9). Pdrileyya,^ 

Once the Exalted One was staying near Kosambi in Ghosita 
Park. 

Then the Exalted One, robing himself at early dawn and 
taking bowl and robe, entered Kosambi for alms. When he 
had been his rounds for alms in Kosambi, on his return from 
begging he ate his meal, and setting his own bed in order, he 
took bowl and robe, and without calling his attendants or 
giving notice to the Order of brethren, alone and unattended, 
went forth a-wandering. 

Now a certain brother, not long after the Exalted One had 
gone out, came to the venerable Ananda and addressed him 


^ As above, p. 60. 

2 Corny briefly tells the story which is" told in full at Dhp Corny. 
i, 57-63 (cf. M. i, 320; iii, 152), of the Master’s leaving the residence 
in di^ust at the turbulent brethren He retired to the jungle and was 
waited on by the devoted elephant Parileyya, Then the brethren, 
after some time, came to Ananda and begged him to intercede with the 
Master and get them admittance to his presence. 



81 


XXII, § 8i] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

thus: ^Friend Ananda, the Exalted One has set his own 
bed in order, taken bowl and robe, and without calling his 
attendants or giving notice to the Order of brethren, alone 
and unattended, has gone forth a-wandering.* 

‘ Friend, when the Exalted One . . . does that . . , and 
thus alone and unattended goes forth a-wandering, at such a 
time the Exalted One wishes to dwell alone. At ^uch a time 
the Exalted One is not to be followed by anyone.’ 

So it came to pass that the Exalted One went wandering 
on and came to Parileyya[ka], and there at Parileyya[ka] 
the Exalted One dwelt at the foot of a lucky sal-tree.^ 

Then a number of brethren came to the venerable Ananda 
and held friendly converse with him, exchanged the courtesies 
of friendly talk and sat down at one side. 

So seated, those brethren thus addressed the venerable 
Ananda : — 

‘ ’Tis a long time, friend Ananda, since we had pious talk^ 
face to face with4;he Exalted One. We desire, friend Ananda, 
to hear a pious talk face to face with the Exalted One.’ 

Thereupon the venerable Ananda went along with those 
brethren to Parileyya to the lucky sahtree where the Exalted 
One was dwelling, saluted him and sat down at one side. 

As they thus sat, the Exalted One instructed, calmed, 
aroused and composed those brethren with pious talk. 

Now on that occasion this tram of thought arose in a certain 
brother : ' How knowing, how seeing, I wonder, can one with- 
out delay destroy the asavas V 

Then the Exalted One, with his own thought reading the 
thought of that brother’s mind, thus spake unto the 
brethren: — 

' Brethren, I have defined^ and taught you the Norm. I 
have defined and taught you the four stations of mindfulness, 
likewise the right efforts, the four bases of magic power, 
the five controlling powers, the five strengths, the seven limbs 
of wisdom. I have defined and taught you the Ariyan Eight- 

^ Bliadda-sala. ^ Dhamml-lcathd. 

® Yicayaso., ‘ discussed in detail.’ Corny,, ‘ V%cinanta-sarnatthena- 
ndn^na 'paricchinditvdJ 
III 



82 The Khandhd Booh [text iii, 96 

fold Path. Thus, brethren, have I defined and taught you 
the Norm. ^ 

And yet, brethren, in spite of this, in the mind of a certain 
brother here there has arisen this train of thought: How 
knowing, how seeing, I wonder, can one without delay destroy 
the asavas 

And how^ indeed, brethren, can one do so without delay ? 

Herein, brethren, the untaught many-folk, who discern not 
those that are Ariyans, who are unskilled in the Auciyan Norm, 
untrained in the Ariyan Norm, who discern not the worthy 
ones, who are unskilled in the worthy doctrine, — such regard 
body as the Self. This regarding is an activity,^ and this 
activity — how does it result, how does it arise, how is it born 
and how produced ? In the untaught many-folk, brethren, 
nourished by feeling that is born of contact with ignorance, 
there arises craving: thence is born that activity. Thus, 
brethren, that activity is impermanent, willed,^ arisen from 
a cause. That craving is impermanent, willed, arisen from 
a cause. That feeling is impermanent, willed, arisen from a 
cause. That contact, that ignorance is impermanent, willed, 
arisen from a cause. Thus knowing, brethren, thus seeing, 
one can without delay destroy the asavas. 

Maybe he regards not body as the Self, yet he regards the 
Self as possessing body: and this view also is an activity. 
This activity, how does it result, how does it arise, how is it 
born and how produced ? In the untaught many-folk, 
brethren, nourished by feeling that is born of contact with 
ignorance, there arises craving. Thence is born that activity. 
But that activity is impermanent, willed, arisen from a cause. 
Thus. . . . 

Maybe he regards not body as the Self, regards not the Self 
as possessing a body, yet he regards body as being in the Self. 
And this view also is an activity. But that activity also is 
impermanent. ... 

Maybe he regards not body as the Self, regards" not the Self 

possessing body, regards not body^s being in the Self, — 


^ Sankharoso, 


2 Or designed, planned: sanhhato. 



83 


XXII, § 8i] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

yet lie regards the Self as being in the body. And this view, 
brethren, is an activity. Thus that activity* is impermanent, 
willed, arisen from a cause. So likewise is that craving, that 
contact, that ignorance. Thus knowing, brethren, one can 
without delay destroy the asavas. 

Maybe, brethren, he regards not body as the Self, nor the 
Self as possessing body, nor body as being in t^e Self, nor 
the Self as being in the body. Yet nevertheless he regards 
feeling as the Self . . . regards perception, the activities, 
regards consciousness as the Self. . . . 

Maybe, however, brethren, he (holds none of these views, 
but yet) has this belief: That is the Self; that is the world; 
that hereafter shall I become, permanent, lasting, eternal, not 
subject to change. . . .’’ 

But this eternalist belief also, brethren, is an activity . . . 
[and so forth]. Maybe, however, he holds none of these views, 
but yet has this belief: 

‘‘ Were I^ot then, it would not now be mine. 

I shall not be, to me it shall not be.’^* 

But, brethren, this annihilationist belief is an activity. . . . 

And that activity — ^how does it result, how does it arise, 
how is it born and how produced ? In the untaught many- 
folk, brethren, nourished by feeling that is born of contact 
with ignorance, there arises craving: thence is born that 
activity. Thus, brethren, that activity is impermanent, 
willed, arisen from a cause. ... So knowing, so seeing, 
brethren, one can without delay destroy the asavas. 

Maybe he regards not body as the Self, regards not feeling, 
perception, the activities, consciousness as the Self . . . 
regards not the Self as being in consciousness. 

Maybe he has not this view: “ That is the Self, that is the 
world, that hereafter shall I become permanent, lasting, 
eternal, not subject to cJhange.” 

* Of. § 55. Here the verses are slightly altered to suit the apiihila- 
tionist view. The readiiig here is : — ^ 

No d‘ assay no ca me siya 
Na hhavissdmi na me hhavissati. 



84 


The Khandhd Booh 


[text iii, 99 


Maybe be has not this view: 

Were I not then, it would not now be mine, 

I shall not be, to me it shall not be.’’ 

Yet in spite of this, maybe he is doubting, wavering, not 
firmly established in the true Norm. But this very doubting, 
this wavering, this not being established in the true Norm, — 
this is an activity, , . . and this activity, how does it result, 
how does it arise, how is it born and how produced ? In the 
untaught many-folk . . . there arises craving, there is born 
that activity. Thus, etc. {as above). 

Seeing that it is impermanent, as I have shown you ... so 
knowing and so seeing, brethren, one can without delay destroy 
the asavas.’ 

§ 82 (10). Full-Moon. 

Once the Exalted One was staying near Savatthi in East 
Park at the storeyed house of Migara’s mother^ with a great 
gathering of the Order of brethren. On that occasion, — it 
was the sabbath, the fifteenth day of the moon, on full-moon 
night, — the Exalted One was seated in the open air surrounded 
by the Order of brethren. 

Then a certain brother, rising from his seat, and drawing 
his outer robe over one shoulder, bowed before the Exalted 
One with folded hands and thus addressed the Exalted One: 
' Lord, I would fain question the Exalted One on a certain 
point, if the Exalted One grants permission and would give 
an answer to my question V 

‘ Then sit down where you are, brother, and ask what you 

will.’ 2 

^ Cf. 8. i, 77; /S v, 216, 270. She was Vosakha. Of. K.S. i, 104 n. 

2 Corny, asks, ‘ Why was he told to sit down in his place ? It was 
because this hhihhhu was the teacher of five hundred disciples who were 
present (?). If he stood up and asked a question, while they sat still, 
it would show respect for the Master, but their sitting would be dis- 
respectful to their own teacher Whereas if they stood up too, it 
would be disrespectful to their own teacher, but not Master, 

.^njllorerver, their attention would be distracted from what he said, 
if they kept standing.’ Corny, adds that, orcourse, the bhihkhu knew 
the answer to these questions. He merely asked for the sake of his 
disciples, who might thus get an answer esc cathedrd. 



85 


XXII, § 82] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

^ ^ Even so, lord,’ replied that brother to tjie Exalted One, 
and sat down where he was, and thus addressed the Exalted 
One: 'Are these the five grasping-groups, lord, to wit: the 
grasping body-group, the grasping feeling-group, the grasping 
perception-group, the grasping activities and grasping con- 
sciousness-groups V 

‘ That is so, brother. Those are the five grasping-groups, 
as you say,’ 

^ It is well, lord,’ said that brother, welcoming and gladly 
hearing the word of the Exalted One, and put another ques- 
tion: ' But these five grasping-groups, lord, in what are they 
rooted V 

^ These five grasping-groups, brother, have their root in 
desire.’^ 

(Then that brother asked again): ' Now this same grasping, 
lord, — is it those five grasping-groups, or is grasping something 
apart from those five groups ?’ 

‘ No indeed, brother, this same grasping is not those five 
grasping-groups, nor yet is it something apart from those five 
groups. But where there is desire and lust, there also is 
grasping.’ 

‘ It is well, lord,’ replied that brother, and put another 
question: — 

^ May it be, lord, that in the five grasping-groups there is a 
variety of desire and lust V 

^ It may be so, brother,’ replied the Exalted One. ^ Herein, 
brother, one thinks thus; May I be of such a body in future 
time: may I have such feeling, such perception, such activities, 
such consciousness in future time.” In this way, brother, in 
the five grasping-groups there may be a variety of desire and 
lust.’ 

‘ It is well, lord,’ replied that brother, and put another ques- 
tion: ‘ Pray, lord, how ‘far is there a group-definition^ of the 
groups V 

^ Every body, brother, be it past, future or present, mward 
or outward, subtle or 'gross, low or high, far or near, is called 


^ Chanda. 


2 Khandhddivacana. 



86 


The Khdndha Booh [text iii, loi 


a/^ body-group.’’^ Every feeling, every perception, all of tbe- 
activities, every consciousness is called a consciousness- 
group.” Thus far, brother, is there a group-definition of the 
groups.’ 

'It is well, lord,’ replied that brother, and put another 
question: ' What, lord, is the condition, what is the cause in 
the designation of the body-group ? ^ What is the condition, 
what is the cause in the designation of the feeling-group, the 
perception-group, the activities-group, the consciousness- 
group V 

' The four great essentials,^ brother, are the condition, the 
four great essentials are the cause in the designation of the 
body-group. Contact is the condition, contact is the cause 
in the designation of the feeling-group. Contact is the con- 
dition, contact is the cause in the designation of the percep- 
tion group ... of the activities-group. Mind and body are 
the condition, mind and body are the cause in the designation 
of the consciousness-group.’ 

' It is well, lord,’ replied that brother, and asked again: — 

' Pray, lord, what is the individual-group view 

' Herein, brother, the untaught many-folk . . . regards 
body as the Self, regards the Self as having body, regards the 
body as being in the Self, or the Self as being in the body . . . 
and so with feeling, perception, the activities and conscious- 
ness ... he regards consciousness as being the Self, or the 
Self as having consciousness, or consciousness as being in the 
Self, or the Self as being in consciousness. That, brother, is 
how the individual-group-view exists.’ 


1 Cf, Exfos. ii, 399. 2 Or elements. Cattaro mahabhuta. 

2 Sahhdya-ditthi (=the first ‘fetter’). Kendered above, p. 38, 
* bodyhood,’ p. 72, ‘ person.’ [A difficult term to translate. Lit., view 
[as to] group plus ‘ sa ’ ; and sa is either for ‘ sat,' ‘ being,’ or ‘ given,’ 
in the sense of datum or postulate, or for sayay' ‘ sahay,' one’s self. 
So the Corny, on the Dhammasangam, § 1002 (p. S':^i^^In other 
words, ‘ sahhdya ’ means either ‘ given the group reokoneo^as five- 
fold (o?body and mind),’ or ‘ one’s self, so-ayg.y, this one (being given), 

the view as to that group.’ Kdya may mean ‘ body ’ as opposed to 
mind, ‘ citta,' but in this formula rupa is used for body. It is best to 
reserve ‘ self ’ for 'Attd. — Ex> ] 



xxn, § 82 ] Kindred Sayings on Elements 87 

^ ‘ It is well, lord,’ replied that brother, and asked 
again: — 

^ And how, lord, is there no individual group-view V 

^ Herein, brother, the well-taught Ariyan disciple , . . does 
not so regard body, feeling, perception, the activities, con- 
sciousness. Thus there is no individual group-view/ 

' It is well, lord,’ replied that brother, and asked again: — 

‘ Pray, lord, what is the satisfaction, what is the misery of 
body ? wherein is there escape from body ? What is the satis- 
faction in, the misery of, the way of escape from feeling, per- 
ception, the activities and consciousness V 

‘ That ease, that pleasure which arises owing to body, — ^that 
is the satisfaction in body. That impermanence, that suffer- 
ing, that instability, that is in body, — that is the misery of 
body. That restraint of desire and lust, that putting away 
of desire and lust which are in body, that is the way of escape 
from body. Likewise also that ease, that pleasure that arise 
from feeling . .*. from perception . . . from the activities 
• . . from consciousness . . . that is the way of escape from 
consciousness.’ 

" It is well, lord,’ replied that brother, welcoming and gladly 
hearing the words of the Exalted One, and put a further 
question; — 

^ How, lord, should one know, how should one see, so that 
in this body, together with its consciousness, and likewise in 
all outward objects, there be no idea of I ” or mine,” no 
leanings to conceit therein 

‘ Whatsoever body, be it past, future or present ... of 
every body he knows: — “ this is not mine; this am not I: this 
is not the Self of me.” Thus with right insight he beholds 
things as they really are. 

Whatsoever feeling, whatsoever perception, activities, con- 
sciousness there be . . , of that he knows; this is not mine: 
this am not T * this is not the Self of me.” 

Thii<l6rother, should one know, thus should one see, so 
that in this body, together with its inner consciousness, and 


♦ Cf. 8.11,263. 



88 The Khandhd Booh [text iii, 104 

likewise in all outward objects, there be no idea of or 
‘'^^mine,’’ no leanings to conceit therein/ 

At that moment there arose in a certain brother this train 
of thought: — * 

‘ So then you say that body is not the Self; feeling is not the 
Self: likewise perception, the activities and consciousness. 
Then what, self can those acts affect which are not self- 
wrought V 

Thereupon the Exalted One, with his thought reading the 
thoughts of that brother’s mind, said to the brethren: — 

‘ It is possible, brethren, that some senseless fellow, sunk in 
ignorance and led astray by craving, may think to go beyond 
the Master’s teaching thus : So then you say that body is not 
the Self: that feeling is not the Self; that perception, the 
activities . . . consciousness is not the Self. Then what self 
can those acts affect which are not self- wrought ?” 

That question, brethren, I have already answered thus and 
thus in those teachings that I have given youc — 

Now what think ye, brethren ? Is body permanent or 
impermanent V 

‘ Impermanent, lord/ 

^ And feeling, perception, the activities, consciousness, — are 
they permanent or impermanent ?’ 

^ Impermanent, lord.' 

‘ That which is impermanent, is it weal or woe 

^ Woe, lord.’ 

^ But that which is impermanent, woeful, unstable in nature, 
is it right to regard it thus : “ this is mine : this am I : this is the 
Self of me ?” ’ 

* Surely not, lord.’ 

‘Wherefore, thus seeing one knows . . . “there is no 
hereafter.” 


^ 

* iii, 19/. ^ 

^ This, which was a stock formula in the Suttas, ends as above, 
p. 20 n , with the realization formula of arahantship. 



XXII, § 83] Kindred Sayings on Elements 


89 


4. The Elders 
§ 83 (1). Ananda. 

Thus Have I heard: Once the venerable Ananda was staying 
near Savatthi in Jeta Grove, at Anathapindika’s Park. 

Then the venerable Ananda addressed the brethren thus: 

^ Brethren ! Eriends !’ 

^ Yes, brother !’ they replied to the venerable Ananda. 

The venerable Ananda thus spoke: ‘ Pnnna,^ friends, the 
venerable son of Mantani was very helpful to us when we 
were novices. With this instruction he instructed us: 

Owing to a cause ^ comes the conceit ‘ I am,’ friend Ananda, 
and not without a cause. And how comes the conceit ^ I 
am ’ by a cause and not without a cause ? Owing to body it 
comes, not otherwise. Owing to feeling, owing to perception, 
the activities, owing to consciousness it comes, not other- 
wise. 

Suppose, friend Ananda, that a woman or a man or a young 
lad fond of self-adornment, should gaze at the image of his 
face in a mirror that is clean and spotless, or in a bowl of clear 
water, — he would behold it owing to a cause and not other- 
wise. Even so, friend Ananda, through the cause ^body' 
comes the conceit ‘ I am,’ not otherwise. So also as to 
feeling, perception, the activities and consciousness, — owing 
to a cause comes the conceit ' I am,’ not otherwise. 

What think you, friend Ananda ? Is body permanent or 
impermanent?” , . . (As in the last section). . . . Where- 
fore, thus seeing, one knows ..." there is no hereafter.’ ” 

Punna, friends, the venerable son of Mantani, was very 
helpful to us when we were novices. And this was the instruc- 
tion with which he instructed us. When I heard the Norm- 
teaching of the venerable Punna, Mantani’s son, I fully under- 
stood the Norm.’® 


^ Proclaimed chief preacher of the Norm by the Master Gf. 
M» i, 146/.; Brethren^ pjfj. 8-9; A. i, 23; /S', ii, 156. 

2 Corny., Updddya^::^ dgamma, drahhha, saTidhaya, 'paticca.^ 

3 ‘ So as to become a Stream-winner.’ G. 



90 


The Khandha Book [text iii, io6 


§ 84 (2). Tissa} 

AtSavatthi. . . . In the Park. 

Now at that time the venerable Tissa, nephew to the Exalted 
One’s father, thus spoke to a number of brethren: 

‘ Truly, friends, my body has become as if drugged f the four 
quarters are become dim to my eyes, and the teachings^ are 
no longer clear to me. Sloth and torpor possess my heart: 
joyless to me is the righteous life, and I waver in the teachings.’ 

Thereupon a number of brethren went to the Exalted One? 
saluted him and sat down at one side. 

So seated, those brethren said to the Exalted One: ‘ Lord, 
the venerable Tissa, nephew to the Exalted One’s father, 
speaks thus to a number of brethren: '' Truly, friends, my 
body is become as if drugged. The four quarters are dim 
to my eyes, and the teachings^ are no longer clear to me. 
Sloth and torpor possess my heart: joyless to me is the 
righteous life, and I waver in the teachings.”^’ 

At that, the Exalted One called to a certain brother: — 
‘ Come thou, brother, and in my name bid hither brother 
Tissa, saying: Friend Tissa, the Master would speak to 
you.” ’ 

‘ Even so, lord,’ said that brother in reply to the Exalted 


^ For Tissa see 8. ii, 282; Brethren, p. 43. 

2 This picturesque sentence, as a stock expression of dejection, occurs 
elsewhere — e g , D. i, 99; 8. v, 153; A iii, 69, but api-api ca generally 
has a concessive sense, which it has not here. Cf. Brethren, p. 356 : — 

‘ The firmament on every hand 
Grows dim; yea, all confused stand 
The truths I seemed to understand.’ 

madhuraha-jato, rendered m other translations ‘weak as a creeper.’ 
Cy. says: ‘heavy and lumpish,’ sanjdta garu-hhdvo viya ahammanno. 
Apparently the idea to be conveyed is that of mtoxication {madhura. 
Skt. madhula, liquor). See Pali Diet, ad vh. At Uddna iv, 4, where 
Sariputta is hit on the head by a yakkha^ he says afi ca me slsay 
thohay dukhhay, ‘ I did feel a bit dizzy,’ Corny x^mav^ii^fyamattaTcay 
madhuraka-jatay viya me slaay dulchhan t%. The word alicHlt^"^ ‘ the 
jivika f!ant.’ (7/. i>. ii 99 ; Dialogues, ii. 107. 

3 Dhammd. At D. i, 99, translated ‘faculties,’ I think wrongly. 
Here Corny, explams it as fariyattr-dhammd, ‘ the Norm committed to 
memory.’ 



XXII, § 84 ] Kindred Sayings on Elements 91 

Qne, and went to the venerable Tissa and said to him: ' Friepd 
Tissa, the Master would speak to you/ 

^ Even so, brother,’ said the venerable Tissa in reply to that 
brother, and came to the Exalted One, saluted him and sat 
down at one side. 

As he thus sat the Exalted One thus spake unto the vener- 
able Tissa: ' Is it true, as they say, Tissa, that you^saidthis to 
a number of brethren: Truly, friends, my body is become as 
if drugged . . , and so on . . . and I waver in the teachings 

' True, lord.’ 

‘ Now as to that, what think you, Tissa ? In a body that 
is not rid of lust, rid of desire, of love, of thirst, of fever, and 
craving, — in such a body do there arise states of change 
and instability ? Do sorrow and grief, woe, lamentation 
and despair arise V 

‘ Yes, lord.’ 

‘ Well said ! Well said, Tissa ! And is it so likewise with 
feeling . . . with perception, with the activities and with 
consciousness V 

‘ Yes, lord.’ 

‘ Well said ! Well said, Tissa ! So it is likewise with con- 
sciousness that is not rid of lust, of desire, of love, thirst, 
craving and fever : in such consciousness there do arise sorrow 
and grief, woe, lamentation and despair. Now what think 
you, Tissa ? In a body that is rid of all these, in such a 
body do there arise sorrow and grief, woe, lamentation and 
despair V 

' Surely not, lord.’ 

‘ Well said ! Well said, Tissa ! And as with body, so also 
with feeling, perception, the activities, and consciousness, do 
they arise V 

' Surely not, lord.’ 

" Well said ! Well said, Tissa ! So it is with consciousness 
that is nd ^ rf^iust. Now what think you, Tissa ? Is body 
permaSent or impermanent ?’ 

^ Impermanent, losd.’ 

‘ Is feeling, is perception, the activities, — is consciousness 
permanent or impermanent V 



92 The Khandhd Booh [text hi, io8 

‘Impermanent, lord/ 

' ‘ Wherefore, lie who seeth this^ ... he knows: ... “for 
life in these conditions there is no hereafter.” 

Suppose now, Tissa, there be two men, one unskilled and the 
other skilled in wayfaring. And the one who is unskilled asks 
the way of the other who is skilled in that way. And that 
other replies: “ Yes. This is the way, good man. Go on for 
a while and you will see the road divide into two. Leave the 
path to the left and take the right-hand path. Go on for a 
little, and you will see a thick forest. Go on for a little and 
you will see a great marshy swamp. Go on for a little and 
you will see a steep precipice. Go on for a little and you will 
see a delightful stretch of level ground.” 

Such is my parable, Tissa, to show my meaning: and this is 
the meaning thereof. By “ the man who is unskilled in the 
way ” IS meant the many-folk. By “ the man who is skilled 
m the way ” is meant a Tathagata, an Arahant, a Fully 
Enlightened One. By “the divided way,”‘^Tissa, is meant 
“ the state of wavering.” The left-hand path is a name for 
this false eightfold path, to wit: — ^the path of wrong views, 
wrong intention, and so forth. The “ right-hand path,” 
Tissa, is a name for this Ariyan Eightfold Path, to wit: right 
views, and so forth. The “ thick forest,” Tissa, is a name for 
ignorance. The “ great marshy swamp,” Tissa, is a name for 
the feeling-desires. The “ steep precipice,” Tissa, is a name 
for vexation and despair. “ The delightful stretch of level 
ground,” Tissa, is a name for Nibbana. 

Be of good cheer, Tissa ! Be of good cheer, Tissa ! I to 
coimsel (you) ! I to uphold ! I to teach.’ ^ 


^ The text abbreviates here as usual. The sentence has been given 
in full several tim^s — e,g , pp. 20, 39. 

2 Here text has anusdsaniya. Corny, reads dmisa-dJiammanugga- 
hena, explained as ‘ material and spiritual blessing.’ CGhe instrumental 
case here expresses purpose Cf. Uddna, 23-4, ‘ .* 

ahay te ^dphhogo 'paUldhhdya’ 

[Lit ‘ I by {or with) counsel ! I with, etc.’ St is a rare and precious 
glimpse surviving of the story radiant magnetic personality imparting 
will to the weaker brother. — En.] 



93 


XXII, § 85 ] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

Tiius spake the Exalted One, and the venerable Tissa was 
comforted and welcomed the words of the Exalted One. ’ , 

§ 85 (3). Yamaha} 

Once the venerable Saripntta was staying near Savatthi at 
Jeta Grove, in Anathapindika’s Park. 

At that time there had arisen in the mind of a certain 
brother named Yamaka such an evil heresy as this: ‘ Thus do 
I understand the doctrine taught by the Exalted One: — in 
so far as a brother has destroyed the asavas,^ he is broken up 
and perishes when the body breaks up, he becomes not after 
death.’^ 

Now a number of brethren heard of this evil heresy that had 
arisen in the mind of the brother Yamaka, ‘ thus do I under- 
stand the doctrine taught by the Exalted One — in so far as a 
brother who has destroyed the asavas, he is broken up and 
perishes when the body is broken up, he becomes not after 
death.’ 

Then those brethren came to the venerable Yamaka, greeted 
him and exchanged with him the courtesy of civil words and 
sat down at one side. 

So seated those brethren thus addressed the venerable 
Yamaka : — 

' Is it true, as they say, friend Yamaka, that such an 
evil heresy as this has arisen in your mind: “thus and 
thus do I understand the doctrine taught by the Exalted 
One 

' Even so, friends, do I understand it.’ 

' Say not so, friend Yamaka ! Overstate not thus the 
Exalted One’s word. It were ill-done to overstate the 
Exalted One’s word. Surely he would not say : “ A 


^ Trans. Warren, op. cit , 138-45. Of. Be la Valine Poussin, Bond- 
dh%smei p. 172.^ 

2 ^ e., qud Arahant, he is broken up, etc. 

^ Crniy. says, ‘ if his view were this: ‘‘ the aggregates rise cease; 
^ere is a ceasing of the» round of existence ” — it would be no heresy, 
but expert knowledge of the teaching But in so far as he thought: 
‘‘ a being is broken up and perishes,” herein arises a heretical view.’ 



94 


The Khandhd Booh [text iii, no 

brother who has destroyed the asavas is broken up and 
perishes when the body breaks up: he becomes not after 
death/’ ’ 

But the brother Yamaka, though thus rebuked by those 
brethren, still remained steadfast in his stubborn perversity,^ 
maintaining: ‘As I understand the doctrine taught by the 
Exalted One: “ in so far as a brother has destroyed the asavas, 
he is broken up and perishes when the body breaks up, he 
becomes not after death/’ ’ 

So, as those brethren could not move the venerable Yamaka 
from this evil heresy, they rose up and went to the venerable 
Sariputta, and said to him: 

‘ Friend Sariputta, there has arisen in the mind of the 
venerable Yamaka this evil heresy. ... It were well if the 
venerable Sariputta went to the venerable Yamaka, out of 
compassion for him.’ 

So the venerable Sariputta consented by his silence. 

Then at eventide the venerable Sariputta ^ose up from his 
solitude and went to the brother Yamaka, and greeting him 
with courtesy sat down at one side. 

So seated the venerable Sariputta said to the venerable 
Yamaka: ‘ Is it true, friend Yamaka, as they say, that you 
hold this evil heresy V 

‘ It is true, friend, that thus do I understand the doctrine 
taught by the Exalted One: “ that in so far as a brother has 
destroyed the asavas, he is broken up and perishes when the 
body breaks up, he becomes not after death.” 

* How, as to this, friend Yamaka, what think you ? Is body 
permanent or impermanent ?’ 

^ Impermanent, friend.’ 

‘ And feeling, perception, the activities, consciousness, — 
are they permanent or impermanent V 

‘ Impermanent, friend.’ 

‘ Wherefore . . . one who thus sees' . . . hej^ows, for life 
in these conditions there is no hereafter. 


^ Thamasd pardmdsasd Corny, ^ ‘ diUhi4lidmena c’ eva ditthi-pard- 
mdsena ca,^ Cf, sup. 46. 



95 


XXII, § 85 ] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

Now terein, friend Yamaka, do you regard a Tathagata^ 
as body V 

^ Surely not, friend.’ 

^ Do you regard a Tatkagata as either feeling, or as percep- 
tion, or as the activities, or as consciousness V 
^ Surely not, friend.’ 

‘ Now what think you as to this, friend ? Is a Tathagata 
in the body V 

‘ Surely not, friend.’ 

^ Do you regard a Tathagata as distinct from body V 
' Surely not, friend.’ 

^ Do you regard him as in feeling, or as distinct from 
feeling ? In perception, or as distinct from perception % In 
the activities, or as distinct from the activities ? Do you 
regard a Tathagata as in consciousness or as distinct from 
consciousness V 

‘ As none of these, friend.’ 

Now as to tl»s, friend, do you regard a Tathagata as body, 
feeling, perception, the activities, consciousness V 
^ Surely not, friend.’ 

* Now as to this, friend Yamaka, do you regard a Tathagata 
as this one who has not a body, not feeling, not perception, 
not activities, not consciousness V 
^ Surely not, friend.’ 

" Then, friend Yamaka, since in this very life^ a Tathagata 
is not to be regarded as existing in truth, in reality,^ is it 

^ Tathdgato ti Corny here says it means ‘ Satto ’ (a being), ‘ massing 
together the five groups ’ ; an entity. The word is translated by Warren 
as ‘ the saint ’ ; by De la Vallee Poussin {loc, citJ), ‘ the Buddha, the real 
living Buddha ’ (following Oldenberg) It is possible to translate here 
as ‘ an entity ’ (satto), but the context perhaps demands the meaning 
uttama-puriso, arahant, superman, ‘ he who has done with rebirth 
and death ’ Cf. R. Chalmers, ‘ Tathagata,’ J.R A S,, 1898, p. 103 /. 
It IS worthy of notice that Satto is deflUed as ‘ that which clings, is 
diffused, hangs, cumbers ’• (see Nidd i, 24 At Papanca 113 (Bodhi- 
satta), ‘ TatMjtSo hodhiyarj satto, laggo’ And infra 190 (text) the word 
isd^ftg&d). 

^ eva dhamme. # 

3 It is interesting to find the Kathavatthu (i, 1) here verbally antici- 
)ated. 



96 


The Khandhd Book [text iii, 112 

proper for you to assert: “As I understand tlie doctrine 
taught by the Exalted One, in so far as a brother has destroyed 
the asavas, he is broken up and perishes when body is broken 
up, he becomes not after death 

' It was in my folly, friend Sariputta, that I came to hold 
this evil heresy, but now that I have heard the explanation of 
the venerable Sariputta, this evil heresy is put away, and I am 
established* in the Norm.’^ 

‘ Now, friend Yamaka, if they were to ask you: “ As to that 
brother, friend, who has destroyed the asavas; when the body 
is broken up, does he become after death Thus questioned, 
friend, what would you assert V 
' If, friend, they were thus to question me, thus should I 
assert: “Body, friends, is impermanent. What is imper- 
manent, that IS woe. What is woe, has ceased, been de- 
stroyed. So with feeling, perception, the activities. Con- 
sciousness IS impermanent. What is impermanent, that is 
woe. What is woe has ceased, been destiioyed.” That is 
what I should assert, friend, if I were questioned.’ 

* Well said ! Well said, friend Yamaka ! Now I will show 
you a parable to show my meaning. Suppose, friend Yamaka, 
a housefather, or his son, a rich man, exceeding rich and pros- 
perous, with a strong body-guard. Then suppose some fellow 
desirous of his loss and harm, desirous of troubling his serenity, 
longing to slay him, should say to himself : “ Here is this house- 
father [or housefather’s son], a rich man, exceeding rich and 
prosperous; but, as he has a strong body-guard, it would not 
be easy to slay him by force. What if I were to work my way 
in and so slay him ?” Thereupon he approaches that house- 
father, or housefather’s son, and says: “ I would enter your 
service, master.” So that housefather, or housefather’s son, 
admits him to his service. And the other, by rising up early 
and so late taking rest, becomes a willing servant^ to him, 
eager to please and well-spoken. Then that jjgi ^father, or 

^ Su'j^a, § 83, where Corny, says the phrase inphes stream- 
or conversion. 

2 Kii^hdra, which Corny, explains as ‘one who is always asking, 
“ What shall I do, master ’ 



XXII, § 85] Kindred Sayings on Elements 97 

housefather’s son, comes to trust him^ as a friend and con- 
fidant, and thus makes a companion of him.^* 

Now when this fellow is assured: This housefather, or 
housefather’s son as it may be, is my boon companion,” then, 
catching him in a lonely place, he slays him with a sharp 
sword. 

Now as to this, friend Yamaha, what think you ? When 
that fellow went to such and such a housefather, or house- 
father’s son, and said to him: “ I would enter your service, 
master,” — was he not even then a murderer ? But, though 
he was a murderer, was not his master unaware of this fact, 

I have a murderer So also, when he entered his service, 
rose up early and late took rest, was a willing servant to him, 
eager to please and speaking affectionately, was he not even 
then a murderer, though his master knew it not V 

‘ He was, friend.’ 

‘ Even so, friend, the untaught Ariyan disciple, who discerns 
not those who a?e Ariyans, who is unskilled in the Ariyan 
Norm, untrained in the Ariyan Norm; who discerns not the 
worthy ones, who is unskilled in the worthy Norm, untrained 
in the worthy Norm, — such an one regards body as the Self, 
or the Self as having a body, or body as being in the Self, or 
the SeK as being in the body. Likewise with regard to feeling, 
perception, the activities and consciousness ... he under- 
stands not the impermanent body as it really is, that it is 
impermanent. Of the impermanent feeling he understands 
not, as it really is, that it is impermanent. Of the impermanent 
perception, of the impermanent activities ... of the imper- 
manent consciousness, he understands not, as it really is, that 
it is impermanent. 

Of the woeful body he understands not . . . that it is 
woeful. And so also of the other factors. 

Of the Selfless body he understands not, as it really is, that 
it is Selfless .^^^^^^and so of the other factors. 

leads saddaheyya. 

‘ takes his meais with him ’ 

Gf. § 79, ricpena khaj^dmi, and below, rupay vadhahay, etc. For 
.his and other terms for body, see Via. Magg. 479. 


ui 



98 


The Khandha Booh 


[text ill, 114 


Of tLe compounded body be understands not, as it really is, 
'tbat it is a confpound . . . and so of the other factors. 

Of the murderous body be understands not, as it really is, 
that it is murderous . . . and so of tbe other factors. 

He approaches a body, lays hold of it, and is assured: 

It is the Self of me.” He approaches feeling, approaches 
perception, the activities, consciousness, lays hold of it and 
is assured: It is the Self of me.” Thus the five grasping- 
groups are approached and laid hold of by him, and they turn 
to his loss and sufiermg for many a long day. 

But the well-taught Ariyan disciple who discerns those that 
are Ariyans . . . who is well trained in the worthy Norm 
. . . regards not the body as the Self, nor the SeK as having 
body, nor body as being in the Self, nor the Self as being in 
the body. He regards not feeling, perception, the activities 
and consciousness in this way. 

He regards the impermanent body, as it really is, as imper- 
manent; and so does he regard the other ftictors ... as im- 
permanent. 

He regards the woeful body, the woeful feeling, perception, 
the activities, and consciousness, as woeful, as they really are. 

He regards the Selfless body as it really is, as Selfless. So 
also of feeling, perception, the activities and consciousness. 

He regards the compounded body as it really is, as a com- 
pound. So also of the other factors. 

He regards the murderous body as it really is, as murderous. 
So also does he regard the other factors, as murderous. 

He approaches not a body, lays not hold of a body, is not 
assured, '' I have the Self.” He approaches not feeling, per- 
ception and the other factors, lays not hold of them, is not 
assured I have the Self.” 


Thus the five groups based on grasping are not approached, 
not laid hold of by him, and so they turn to his bliss and 
pleasure for many a long day.’ 

^ Even so, happy, friend Sariputta, are those venerf^^^ones 
who have such co-mates as thee in the righteous life, 
passionate, so anxious for their welfare, such teachers, 
expounders ! And now that I have heard this Norm-teaching 



XXII, § 86] Kindred Sayings on Elements 99 

from the venerable Sariputta, my heart is released from tjie 
asavas without any grasping.’ 

So spake the venerable Sariputta, and the venerable Yamaha 
rejoiced thereat and welcomed the words of the venerable 
Sariputta. 

§ 86 (4). AnurddhaJ^ 

Thus have I heard: Once the Exalted One was staying near 
Vesali, in Great Grove, at the Hall of the Gabled House. 

At that time the venerable Anuradha was staying not far 
from the Exalted One in a forest hut. 

Then a number of wandering heretics came to the venerable 
Anuradha, greeted him and exchanged the courtesies of civil 
words and sat down at one side. So seated, those heretic 
Wanderers said to the venerable Anuradha : 

‘ Eriend Anuradha, a Tathagata, a superman, one of the 
best of men, a winner of the highest gain, is proclaimed in 
[one of] these fpur ways: ''A Tathagata comes to be after 
death ; or he does not come to be after death ; or he both comes 
to be and does not come to be after death; or he neither comes 
to be nor comes not to be after death.” ’ 

Upon this the venerable Anuradha said to those heretic 
Wanderers : — 

‘ Friends, a Tathagata, a superman, one of the best of men, 
a winner of the highest gain, is spoken of in other than those 
four ways, to wit, '' He comes to be after death; or he comes 
not to be after death , or he both comes to be and comes not to 
be after death; or he neither comes to be nor comes not to be 
after death.” ^ 

Upon this those heretic Wanderers said of the venerable 
Anui'adha: ' This brother must be a novice, not long ordained. 
Or, if he is an elder, he is an ignorant fool’ 

So those heretic Wanderers, having thus abused the 
venerable Anuradha, by calling him ' novice ’ and ' fool,’ 
rose up and went away. 

^"'"hereupon the venerable Anuradha, not long afte» those 


^ Tliis sutta is repeated and expanded at S. iv, 380-6. The name is 
famous as that of the capital city of ancient Ceylon, Anuradha-pura. 



100 


The Khandha Booh [text lii, 117 


heretic Wanderers were gone, thought thus: ^If these heretic 
Wanderers were to put me a further question, how, in answer- 
ing, should I tell them the views of the Exalted One, without 
misrepresenting the Exalted One by stating an untruth? 
How should I answer in accordance with his teaching, so that 
no one who agrees with his teaching and follows his views 
might incur reproach V Thereupon the venerable Anuradha 
went to the Exalted One and sat down. Seated at one side 
the venerable Anuradha thus addressed the Exalted One: — 

‘ I am staying here, lord, in a forest hut not far from the 
Exalted One. Now a number of heretic Wanderers came to 
me . . . and said this; Eriend Anuradha, a Tathagata, a 
superman, one of the best of men, a winner of the highest gain, 
is proclaimed in [one of] these four ways: 'A Tathagata 
comes to be after death: or he comes not to be after death: 
or he both comes to be and comes not to be after death: or 
he neither comes to be nor comes not to be after death.” 
Whereupon, lord, I said to those heretic Wanfierers: Friends, 
a Tathagata is spoken of in other than these four ways.” 

Whereupon, lord, those heretic Wanderers said of me: 
'' This brother must be a novice, not long ordained. Or, if he 
be an elder, he is an ignorant fool.” Thereupon, lord, those 
heretic Wanderers, after abusing me by calling me a novice 
and an ignorant fool, rose up and went away. Not long after 
they had gone, lord, the thought occurred to me: "'If these 
heretic Wanderers were to put me another question, how, in 
answering, should I tell them the views of the Exalted One, 
without misrepresenting the Exalted One by stating an 
untruth ? How should I answer in accordance with his 
teaching, so that no one who agrees with his teaching and 
follows his views might incur reproach ’ 

' Now what think you, Anuradha ? Is body permanent 
or impermanent V 
' Impermanent, lord.’ 

‘ Wherefore one who thus sees, he knows . . .for in 
these conditions there is no hereafter.” 

Now as to this, Anuradha, what think you ? Po you regard 
a Tathagata’s body as the Tathagata V 



101 


XXII, § Sy] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

' Surely not, lord.’ 

* ‘ Do you regard him as [his] feeling, [his] tperception, [his] 
activities or apart from them ? As consciousness or as apart 
from it V 

' Surely not, lord.’ 

‘ Now what think you, Anuradha ? Do you regard him as 
having no body, no feeling, no perception, no activities, no 
consciousness 1’ 

‘ Surely not, lord.’ 

‘ Then, Anuradha, since in this very life a Tathagata is not 
to be regarded as existing in truth, in reality, is it proper for 
you to pronounce this of him: Friends, he who is a Tatha- 
gata, a superman, one of the best of beings, a winner of the 
highest gain, is proclaimed in other than these four ways: 
‘ The Tathagata comes to be after death; he comes not to be 
after death; he both comes to be and comes not to be after 
death; he neither comes to be nor comes not to be after 
death’”?’ 

" Surely not, lord.’ 

‘ Well said ! Well said, Anuradha ! Both formerly and now 
also, Anuradha, it is just sorrow and the ceasing of sorrow 
that I proclaim.’ ^ 

§ 87 (5). VaJchali? 

Thus have I heard: Once the Exalted One was staying near 
Eajagaha in Great Grove, at the Squirrels’ Feeding-Ground. 

On that occasion the venerable Vakkali was staying in the 
Potter’s shed,® being sick, afflicted, stricken with a sore disease.^ 

Now the venerable Vakkali called to his attendants, saying: 
' Come hither, friends ! Go ye to the Exalted One, and, in pay 
name worshipping at the feet of the Exalted One, say unto 

^ = if 1 , 140. The matter is left a mystery, as not tending to edifica- 
tion or release. At S. iv, 385 it is said to be avyakatay, ‘ not declared.’ 

2 See Thag. 350-4; Brethren 197-200; DJif, A, iv, 117 (which omits 
the episode abo-^Mara); V%s. M. 129. 

‘ 3 <7f. Af. lii, 237. 

says, after keeping the rainy season, he had come t*see the 
Master, was taken ill on^he way and removed in a litter to the Potter’s 
shed or workshop. According to Thag. Qcmy. he suffered from cramps 
owing to insufficient food. 



102 


The Khandhd Book [textiu, 119 

Mm: ''Lord, the brother Vakkali is sick, afBicted, stricken 
with a sore disease. He worships at the feet of the Exalted 
One.” And thus do ye say : '' Well were it, lord, if the Exalted 
One would visit brother Vakkali, out of compassion for him.” ’ 

‘ Even so, friend,’ replied those brethren to the venerable 
Vakkali, and went to the Exalted One, saluted him and sat 
down at one side. So seated those brethren said to the 
Exalted One: 'Lord, the brother Vakkali is sick . . . well 
were it if the Exalted One would visit brother Vakkali out of 
compassion for him.’ 

The Exalted One consented by his silence. Thereupon the 
Exalted One robed himself, and taking bowl and robe, went 
to visit the venerable Vakkali. 

Now the venerable Vakkali saw the Exalted One coming, 
while yet he was afar oS, and on seeing him he stirred upon his 
bed.^ 

Then said the Exalted One to the venerable Vakkali: 
‘ Enough, Vakkali ! Stir not on your bed I t There are these 
seats made ready. I will sit there.’ And he sat down on a 
seat made ready. 

So the Exalted One sat down and said to the venerable 
Vakkali: 

' Well, Vakkali, I hope you are bearing up. I hope you are 
enduring.^ Do your pains abate and not increase ? Are 
there signs of their abating and not increasing V 

'No, lord, I am not bearing up. I am not enduring. 
Strong pains come upon me. They do not abate. There is no 
sign of their abating,^ but of their increasing.’ 


'^^Samadhosi (from dhunati), elsewhere samancopi. Some say he 
shook the bed owing to the violence of his fever, but C. says, ‘ out of 
reverence ’ he tried to rise to salute the Master; and adds that, in the 


Buddha’s time, a hhihhhu always had a seat ready in case the Master 
paid a visit. 

2 Uddna {Sonathera-vagga, 17, 46, 59). Corny, e ^^ ains the phrase 
hacci hhamaniya^ Jcacci yapantyay (sometimes mistranslated * have 
you foo^ enough V) in this way. 

2 PaphhxrrC osdnay panndyaii, Comy,^ however, interprets {pap^ 
Icamo) sdnay as etdsay {vedandnay); lit.: * is the end of their coming on 
in sight ?’ 



103 


XXII, § 87] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

' Have you any doubt, Vakkali ? Have you any remorse V 
Indeed, lord, I have no little doubt. J have no little 
remorse.’ 

' Have you not anything, Vakkali, wherein to reproach 
yourself^ as to morals V 

' Nay, lord, there is nothing wherein I reproach myself as 
to morals.’ 

^ Then, Vakkali, if that is so, you must have sbme worry, 
you must have something you regret.’ 

' For a long time, lord, I have been longing to set eyes on 
the Exalted One, but I had not strength enough in this body 
to come to see the Exalted One.’ 

* Hush, Vakkali ! What is there in seeing this vile body of 
mine ? He who seeth the Norm, Vakkali, he seeth me : he who 
seeth me, Vakkali, he seeth the Norm. Verily, seeing the 
Norm, Vakkali, one sees me: seeing me, one sees the Norm.^ 

As to this what think you, Vakkali ? Is body permanent 
or impermanent- ?’ 

* Impermanent, lord.’ 

‘ Is feeling . . . perception, the activities, is consciousness 
permanent, or impermanent V 

' Impermanent, lord.’ 

^ WTierefore, Vakkali, he who thus seeth ... he knows 
. for life in these conditions there is no hereafter.” ’ 

Then the Exalted One, having thus taught the venerable 
Vakkali this lesson, rose up and went away to Vulture’s Peak. 

Now not long after the departure of the Exalted One, the 
venerable Vakkali called to his attendants: ' Come ye hither, 
friends. Lift up my bed and go to Black Rock® on the slope 
of Seers’ Hill. How should one of my sort think to make an 
end within a house ?’ ^ 

^ <7/. Buddh. Psych, 28 Here attd is the equivalent of our 
‘ conscience.’ 

^ Gf. Expos. ^^3; Buddli. Psych. 258-9 n. 

® A hill -top near Rajagaha. See E.B. i, 150 n. 

, ^Compare the suicide of Godhika, S. i, 119; K.S. i, 150. As often 
happens in the TipitaJca, the same story is told of different persons, 
either in ignorance or to preserve the traditional framework free from 
too many details. Thus the introductoiy part of this story is a stock 



104 


The Khandhd Booh 


[text iii, 12 j 


' Even so, friend,’ replied those brethren to the venerable 
Vakkali, lifted up the bed and carried him to Black Eock oh 
the slope of Seers’ Hill. 

Now the Exalted One spent the rest of that day and the 
night on Vulture Peak. Then when the night was waning 
two devas of exceeding beauty caused the whole of Vulture’s 
Peak to be lit up, and came to the Exalted One and stood there 
at one side/* 

So standing one of those devas thus addressed the Exalted 
One: ‘ Lord, the brother Vakkali is bent on release.’ 

And the other deva said to the Exalted One: ' Surely, lord, 
he will win the utter release.’ 

Thus spake those devas. So saying they saluted the 
Exalted One by the right and vanished there and then. 

Now the Exalted One, when that night was spent, called to 
the brethren: — 

‘ Come hither, brethren. Go ye to brother Vakkali, and 
say to him: Friend Vakkali, listen to the words of the 
Exalted One and of two devas. This night, friend, when 
night was waning, two devas of exceeding beauty caused the 
whole of Vulture’s Peak to be lit up, and came to the Exalted 
One and stood at one side. So standing those devas thus 
spake to the Exalted One: ^ Lord, the brother Vakkali is bent 
on release.’ And the other deva said to the Exalted One: 
‘ Surely, lord, he will win the utter release.’ And as to that, 
friend Vakkali, the Exalted One says this: ' Fear not, Vakkali. 
Fear not, Vakkali.^ Your dying will not be evil. Your 
ending will not be evil.’ ” ’ 

^ Even so, lord,’ replied those brethren to the Exalted One, 
and went to the venerable Vakkali and thus said to him: 
‘ Listen, friend Vakkali, to the word of the Exalted One and 
of two devas.’ 

passage for describing the sick and their visiting. Ii^he Thag. Corny. 
and Dhp. A, versions, Vakkali does not ‘ use the kime,’ but rises up 
into the air at the call of the Master and attains arahantship on ths^^y 
by an effort of self-control ^ 

^ It IS noteworthy that devas are never described as sitting down. 

^ Possibly a characteristic genuine logion. Cf. 8. v, 369, 371. 



106 


XXII, § 87 ] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

Then the venerable Vakkali called to his attendants saying: 

Come hither, friends. Lift; me off from the bed. How should 
one of my sort think fit to hear the message of the Exalted 
One while sitting on a high seat 

‘ Even so, friend,’ replied those brethren, and lifted him oS 
from the bed. (Then they gave him the message of the 
Exalted One.) 

^ Wherefore, friends, do ye in my name worship at the feet 
of the Exalted One and say: Lord, brother Vakkali is 
sick, afflicted, stricken with a sore disease. He worships at 
the feet of the Exalted One and thus speaks : ‘ Body is 
impermanent, lord. I doubt it not. Whatsoever, lord, 
is impermanent, that is woe; I doubt it not. What is 
impermanent and woeful and of the nature to fade away, — 
for that I have no desire, no lust, no love. I doubt it not. 
Feeling, lord, perception, the activities, consciousness is im- 
permanent ... for that I have no desire, no lust, no love. 
I have no doubVof that.’ ” ’ 

‘ Even so, friend,’ replied those brethren to the venerable 
Vakkali and went away. 

Then the venerable Vakkali, not long after the departure 
of those brethren, drew a knife (and slew himself).^ 

Now those brethren went to the Exalted One (and repeated 
the words of the message). 

Then the Exalted One said to the brethren: ‘Let us go 
hence, brethren, to Black Rock, on the slope of Seers’ Hill, 
since the clansman Vakkali hath slam himself.’ 

‘ Even so, lord,’ replied those brethren to the Exalted One. 
Then the Exalted One went with a number of the brethren to 


^ One of the rules of Vinaya discipline. 

2 Aoommon practice of the Japanese Samurai (clansmen) to this day. 
The ethics of the deed are not discussed by Corny,, who says the elder 
was conceited and blmd to his remaining faults; thought he was 
hhlndsavo and mj^ht rid himself of the bodily pain. However, the 
paiiTof the knife was such that, m the very moment of dying, realizmg 
his sstCTce of puthu^jano as imperfect, he made a great effort attain 
and did so before actual lieath. Corny, adds, ‘ he died lymg on his right 
side, as arahants generally do (the traditional posture of the Buddha, 
“ on his right side, like a lion lying ”), and m a decent posture.’ 



106 The Khandha Booh [text hi, 124 

Black Eock on the slope of Seers’ Hill. And from afar the 
Exalted One saw*fche venerable Vakkali lying on the bed witK 
his shoulder twisted round.^ 

Now at that time a smoky cloud, a mass of darkness was 
moving to the east,^ was moving to the west, to the north, 
to the south, and up and down and to the points between. 

Then the^ Exalted One said to the brethren: 'Do ye see, 
brethren, yonder smoky cloud, yonder mass of darkness 
moving east and west, to north and south, and up and down 
and to the points between V 

' Yes, lord.’ 

' Brethren, that is Mara, the evil one. He is searching for 
the consciousness of Vakkali, the clansman, saying: " Where 
is the consciousness of Vakkali, the clansman, stationed 
anew?” But, brethren, with consciousness not stationed 
anew anywhere, Vakkali the clansman is utterly well,’® 


§ 88 (6). Assaji. 

Once the Exalted One was staying near Eajagaha in Great 
Grove, at the Squirrels’ Eeeding-Ground. 

On that occasion the venerable Assaji was staying in Kas- 
sapa’s Park, being sick, aflOlicted, stricken with a sore disease. 

{Exactly the same as the previous sutta, except for the name 
Assaji, down to ' you must have some worry, you must have 
some regret ’). 

. . . ' Eormerly, lord, I kept trying to calm down my 
sickness, but I am still much troubled'^ by my breathing. I 


^ Vivatta^khkandhaT) semdnay, 

2 Cf. K.SAf 151 n. At Dhf. A. the story is amplified Cf. Warren, 
p. 381. 

® Parinilbuto. 

* Kaya-sankhdre, Here ‘the necessary conditio^ of bodydife’ (as 
vdci-'Sankhdro and mano-sankhdro are those of percept and concept). 
Explained by Corny, as assdsa^passdse, ‘in- and out-breathingi{^ By 
restrai n i n g these he would induce the fourth*.? /lana, involving loss of 
body-consciousness, but this cannot be done easily when attention has 
to be paid to body or pain. 



107 


XXII, § 88] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

cannot win balance of mind. But though I cannot win 
Balance of mind, I say to myself: — “ Yet I dcf not fall away.’’.’^ 

^ Those recluses and brahmins, Assaji, who deem balance 
of mind as all in all, they who reverence balance of mind, — 
when they cannot win that balance of mind, say to themselves : 

May we not fall away !” 

Now as to this, what think you, Assaji ? Is body permanent 
or impermanent V * 

‘ Impermanent, lord.’ 

' So it is with the other factors, and consciousness. . . . 
Wherefore he who sees this . . . knows: . for life in 

these conditions there is no hereafter.” 

If one feels a pleasant feeling, he knows it as impermanent, 
he knows it as not clung to, he knows it has no lure for him. 
If he feels a painful feeling, he knows it is impermanent, he 
knows it as not clung to, he knows it has no lure for him. If he 
feels a mental feeling, he knows it is impermanent, he knows 
it as not clung to, he knows it has no lure for him. 

If he feels a pleasant feeling, he feels it as one who is un- 
attached. If he feels a painful feeling, he feels it unattached. 
If he feels a neutral feeling, he feels it unattached. If he 
feels a feeling that his bodily powers have reached their end, 
he knows that he so feels. If he feels a feeling that life has 
reached its end, he knows that he so feels. He knows that 
when body breaks up, henceforth, when life has run its course, 
all that he has felt, all that had a lure for him will grow cold.’^ 

§ 89 (7). Khema, 

Once a number of brethren were staying near Kosambi^in 
Ghosita Park. 

Now at that time the venerable Khemaka was staying in 
Jujube Tree Park,® being sick, afflicted, stricken with a' sore 
disease. 


^ Corny., sdsanato, ‘ from the teachings.’ • 

^ Cf the same passage at S. li, 126, which ends with ‘ bodies will be 
left aside.’ 

® Corny., ‘ a matter of three miles [gdvuta-mattarj; a league] distant.’ 



108 


The Khandha Booh 


[text iii, 127 


Then the elder brethren, rising at eventide from their 
solitude, called to the venerable Dasaka:^ 'Come hither, 
friend Dasaka ! Go you to brother Khemaka and say to 
him: " Friend, the elder brethren say thus: ' We hope you are 
bearing up, friend. We hope you are enduring. Do your 
pains abate and not increase ? Are there signs of their 
abatmg and not increasing ’ 

' Even so, friends,’ said the venerable Dasaka in reply to 
those brethren, and gave the message, to which the venerable 
Khemaka replied: 

' No, friends, I am not bearing up. I am not enduring. 
There is no sign of my pains abating and not increasing.’ 

Thereupon the venerable Dasaka reported his words to the 
brethren. Then said they again: ' Come hither, friend 
Dasaka. Go you again to the venerable Khemaka and say: 
" Friend, the elders say thus: ' Friend, in this fivefold grasp- 
ing-group, so called by the Exalted One, to wit : the grasping- 
group body, that of feeling, of perception, the activities, con- 
sciousness ... in these five groups does the venerable Khe- 
maka discern the Self or anything pertaining to the Self ’ 
‘ Even so, friends,’ replied the venerable Dasaka to those 
brethren, and he took the message. 

' In these five grasping-groups, friend,’ replied the venerable 
Khemaka, ' I discern no Self nor aught pertaining to the Self.’ ^ 
Then the venerable Dasaka went back to the brethren with 
that message (and they said) : ' Go you again, friend Dasaka, 
and say : “ If then in the fivefold grasping-group the venerable 
Khemaka discerns no Self nor aught pertaining to the Self, 
the venerable Khemaka must be arahant, one in whom the 
asavas are destroyed.” ’ 

' Even so, friends,’ replied the venerable Dasaka to those 
brethren, and took the message. ' Though, friends, I discern 

in the fivefold grasping-group no SeH nor aught pertaining 

— — 

^ If this is the Dasaka of Thag, 17, who, like Channa in the follow- 
ing section, was son of a slave, the walking exercise thus put upon him 
by the brethren may have been done with a pierpose, for he was fat and 
lazy, ‘ sleeping much after meals.’ 

^ The reply is here condensed. 



109 


XXII, § Sg] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

to tlie Self, yet am I not arahant, nor one in whom the asavas 
are destroyed. Though, friend, I see that ITiave got the idoa 
of “ I am ” in the fivefold grasping-group, yet do I not discern 
that I am this “ I am.” ' 

Then the venerable Dasaka returned to the brethren with 
that message and reported the words of the venerable Eie- 
maka (and those brethren sent this further message): ^As 
to this I am,” friend Eiemaka, of which you speak, what 
do you mean by this lam”? Do you speak of “ I am ” as 
body, or as distinct from body ? As feeling, or as distinct 
from feeling ? As perception ... as the activities ... as 
consciousness, or as distinct from consciousness ? As to 
this I am,” what do you mean by it (So the venerable 
Dasaka went again and took the message in these words.) 

^ Enough, friend Dasaka. What boots this running to and 
fro ! Fetch my stafi. I will go myself to these brethren.’ ^ 

So the venerable Kiemaka, leaning on his stafi,^ came to 
those brethren. When he got there, he greeted them, and 
exchanging the courtesies of civil words, sat down at one side. 
As he thus sat, the elders thus spoke to the venerable Klie- 
maka : — 

^ As to this ‘‘ I am,” friend Khemaka, of which you speak, 
what do you mean by it ? Do you speak of it as body or as 
distinct from body ... as consciousness or as distinct from 
consciousness ?’ 

^ No, friends, I do not say “ I am body ” or feeling, or per- 
ception or the activities or consciousness, or as distmct from 
these and from consciousness. Though, friends, I see that 
I have got the idea of '' I am ” in the five grasping-groups, ][et 
I do not discern that I am this I am.” Just as, friends, in 


^ Corny, says, ‘ why did they send Dasaka to and fro four times that 
day, so that he covered some twenty -five miles ? Because they were 
anxious to hear iJm doctrine from an expert. Why did they not go 
themselves ? Because his forest hut could not hold some sixty breth- 
ren Why did they not ask him to come ? Because of his ^ckness 
But they knew that, ii»they kept questioning him he would at last 
come in person. And the elder went, knowing their secret wish ’ 

2 a/. J.P.T,S, 1887, 156. OluMor or oluhbha. 



no 


The Khandha Booh [text ui, 130 

the case of the scent of a blue lotus or a white lotus, — if one 
should say: 'the* scent belongs to the petals or the colour or 
the fibres of it,’’ would he be rightly describing the scent ?’ 

' Surely not, friend.’ 

' Then how would he be right in describing it V 

' Surely, friend, by speaking of the scent of the flower.’ 

' Even so, friends, I do not speak of the “ I am ” as a body, 
or as feeling and so forth. Nevertheless I see that in these 
five grasping-groups I have got the idea of " I am yet I do 
not discern that I am this " I am.” Though, friends, an 
Ariyan disciple has put away the five lower fetters, yet there 
remains in him a subtle remnant^ from among the five grasp- 
ing-groups, a subtle remnant of the I-conceit, of the I am- 
desire, of the lurking tendency to think "I am,”^ still not 
removed from him. Later on he lives contemplating the rise 
and fall of the five grasping-groups, seeing thus: " Such is 
body, such is the arising of body, such is the ceasing of it. 
Such is feeling . . . perception . . . the activities . . . such 
is consciousness, the arising of it and the ceasing of it.” 

In this way, as he lives in the contemplation of the five 
grasping-groups, that subtle remnant of the I am-conceit, of 
the I am-desire, that lurking tendency to think " I am,” 
which was still not removed from him, — that is now removed. 

Suppose, friends, there is a dirty soiled cloth, and the 
owners give it to a washerman, and he rubs it smooth with 
salt-earth, or lye or cowdung, and rinses it in pure clean water. 
Now, though that cloth be clean, utterly cleansed, yet there 
hangs about it, still unremoved, the smell of the salt-earth or 
lye or cowdung. The washerman returns it to the owners, 
and they lay it up in a sweet-scented coffer.® Thus that smell 
of salt-earth or lye or cowdung, that hung about it and was 
not removed, is now utterly removed. Even so, friends. 

though an Ariyan disciple has put away the five lower fetters, 

^ __ ^ ^ 

^ Anusahagato Corny , ‘ suhhumo " The passage is quoted at 
Asl. 244^ Bsc'pos. ii, 326. 

^ For anusayo see K,8. ii, 167 n 

® Corny, says, ‘ the sweet-scented cofier ’ is the knowledge of the 
Arahant’s Path, which removes the taints. 



Ill 


XXII, § 90] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

yet there remains in him from among the five grasping- 
groups a subtle remnant of the I am-conceit, of the 
I am-desire, of the liu’king tendency to think I am/’ still not 
removed from him. Later on he lives contemplating the 
rise and fall of the five grasping-groups, seeing thus: “ Such 
is body, such is the arising of body, such is the ceasing of 
body. Such is feeling . . . such is perception . . . such are 
the activities, such is consciousness, such is the arising of con- 
sciousness, such is the ceasing of consciousness.” In this way 
as he lives in the contemplation of the five grasping-groups, 
that subtle remnant of the I am-conceit, of the I am- 
desire, of the lurking tendency to think “ I am,” which was 
not removed from him, is now utterly removed.’ 

Upon this the elders said to the venerable Khemaka: 

‘ Indeed we did not put these questions to the venerable 
Khemaka from a wish to trouble him. It was because we 
thought: The venerable Khemaka is able to expound in full 
the teaching of the Exalted One, able to teach it, to make it 
known, to set it forth, to make it clear, to open it up, to 
analyze it, to make it plain.” 

And so the venerable Khemaka has expounded in full the 
teachmg of the Exalted One. He has taught it, made it 
known, set it forth and made it clear, he has opened it up, 
analyzed it, made it plain.’ 

Thus spake the venerable Khemaka. The elders were 
pleased at the words of the venerable lOiemaka and welcomed 
them. 

Now when this teachmg was thus expounded the hearts of 
as many as sixty brethren were utterly set free from the 
asavas, and so was it also with the heart of the veneralble 
Khemaka. 

§ 90 (8). Channa} 

Once a number of brethren were staying near Benares at 
Isipatana in tM Deer Park. 

Then the venerable Channa, rising at eventide from his 
^ # 

^ Channa may be of Thag, b9; Brethren^ p- 70. But according 
to the Corny, he is the very Channa of the ‘ renunciation ’ legend of 
the Buddha. The son of a slave, he was born on the same day as 



112 The Khandha Book [text hi, 132 

solitude, took his doorkey and went from lodging to lodging, 
S9.ying to the brethren: — 

‘ May the venerable elders teach me. May the venerable 
elders grant me pious converse so that I may see the Norm.’ 

Whereupon those elder brethren said to the venerable 
Channa : ‘ Body is impermanent, friend Channa. Feeling is 
impermanent : perception, the activities . . . consciousness is 
impermanait. Body is not the Self: feeling, perception, the 
activities, consciousness is not the Self. All compounded 
things are impermanent. All conditions^ are not the Self.’ 

Then the venerable Channa thought thus: ‘ Yes, I too see 
this. Impermanent is body, feeling, perception, the activities 
and consciousness. Body is not the Self, and feeling, percep- 
tion, the activities, and consciousness is not the Self. Im- 
permanent are all compounded things. All conditions are 
not the Self. 

Nevertheless, for the calming of all activities, for the giving 
up of all the bases of birth, for the destruction of craving, for 
passionlessness, for cessation, for Nibbana, my heart springs 
not up within me. It is not calmed, it is not released from 
trembling. But grasping arises, and my mind shrinks back 
again (at the thought), ‘‘Who forsooth is the Self ?” This 
way^ I cannot see the Norm. Who is there to teach me the 
Norm, so that I may see the Norm ?” ’ 

Then this thought came to the venerable Channa : ‘ Here 
is this venerable Ananda staying at Kosambi in Ghosita Park, 
one praised by the Master and honoured by intelligent co- 


Gotama and ‘ went forth ’ with him. Apparently of small intelligence, 
he used to talk of ‘ our Buddha,’ ‘ our Dhamma,’ was secretive and 
jealous, and disagreeable to his fellows owing to his sharp tongue. 
Accordmg to Corny, the events of this siitta happened after the death of 
the Master, who on his deathbed ordered the brethren to ‘ put Channa 
into Coventry.’ Cf. D ii, 154 (braJima-danda). Owing to this he could 
get no speech with them Hence his wandering away to Benares 
At S. IV, 55’60 he kills himself owing to an incurabl^isease. 

^ Corny, asks, ‘ why did they speak only of two of the truths and not 
the usuakthree f Because, they said, ‘ If we say ‘ ‘ all thmgs are sorrow- 
ful,” he will conclude that the Path and its Plants are also sorrowful, 
and abstain from striving after them ’ 

2 Corny, reads e^vay for text etay. 



113 


XXII, § 90] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

mates of the righteous life. The venerable Inanda is the man 
to*show me the Norm so that I may see the N!>rm. I put full 
trust in the venerable Ananda for this. What if I were to go 
to the venerable Ananda V So the venerable Channa put 
his lodging in order, and taking bowl and robe, set out for 
Kosambi and Ghosita Park, where the venerable Ananda was 
staying. When he got there he greeted him and sat down at 
one side. So seated the venerable Channa said to the vener- 
able Ananda : — 

^ Of late, friend Ananda, I have been staying near Benares, 
at Isipatana, in the Deer Park. Then at eventide, arising 
from my solitude, I took my doorkey and went from lodging 
to lodging, saying to the elder brethren: May the venerable 
elders instruct me with pious converse, so that I may see the 
Norm.” Thereupon, friend, the elder brethren said to me: 

Friend Channa, body is impermanent,” and so forth (and he 
told him of his treatment and his thoughts and his decision 
to go to Ananda, and said) : — 

^ May the venerable Ananda teach and instruct me. May 
the venerable Ananda grant me pious converse so that I may 
see the Norm.’ 

* Thus far, indeed, I am pleased with the venerable Channa. 
For now the venerable Channa has made things plain and has 
broken up the fallow ground.^ Lend an ear, friend Channa. 
You are fit to understand the Norm !’ 

And there sprang up there and then in the venerable Channa 
a wondrous eagerness and joy at the thought: ‘ he says I am 
fit to understand the Norm.’ {Then said the venerable 
Ananda ) : — 

‘ From the very lips of the Exalted One, friend Channa, 
from his very lips as he taught brother Kacchanagotta,*^ I 
heard this: — 

' On two things, Kaccana, does this world generally base 


^ Avi-ahdsi, hhilay 'pahhindi^ the latter phrase occurs at S. i, 193. 
Khila is unploughed land and here signifies mental callousnes*. C/. 
Bn. 973. 

2 At ii, 17; ^ 8. ii, 12, where text reads Kaccdyana. Corny, here 
and elsewhere reads Kaccana. 


Ill 


8 



114 


The Khandha Booh [text iii, 135 

its view, — on existence and on non-existence. Now he who 
with right insight sees the arising of the world as it really is, does 
not believe in the non-existence of the world. But, Kac- 
cana, he who with right insight sees the ceasing of the world 
as it really is, does not believe in the existence of the world. 

Grasping after systems, imprisoned by dogmas is this 
world, Kaccana, for the most part. And he who does not go 
after, does not grasp at, does not take his stand on this system- 
grasping, this dogma, this mental bias, — such an one does not 
say it is my soul.’’^ He who thinks, that which arises is 
but ill: that which ceases, it is ill,”^ such an one has no doubts, 
no perplexity. In this matter, knowledge not borrowed from 
others comes to him. Thus far, Kaccana, goes right view. 

All exists,’’ Kaccana, — that is one extreme. Nought 
exists,” Kaccana, — that is the other extreme. Not approach- 
ing either extreme, Kaccana, the Tathagata teaches you a 
doctrine by the middle way: ‘‘ Conditioned by ignorance come 
the activities : conditioned by the activities comes conscious- 
ness, and so forth. Thus is the arising of this whole mass of 
ill. By the utter fading away and ceasing of ignorance comes 
the ceasing of the activities, and so forth. Thus is the ceasing 
of this entire mass of ill.”^ 

* This, friend Ananda, is what comes to those venerable ones 
who have such co-mates in the righteous life, compassionate, 
desiring our good, admonishers, instructors. Hearing this 
Norm-teaching from the venerable Ananda I am firmly 
established in the Norm.’ 

^ § 91 (9). Rahula^ (1). 

At Savatthi. ... In the Park. 

Then the venerable Eahula came to the Exalted One and 


^ Or my self: attd me ti. Cf. below, § 91. 

2 S. i, 135; E.S, i, p. 179. 

^ Ofr. Pts of Contr , p. 60 ti Thus the world-process is ' a cosmos 
of conditions becoming.’ .rs 

^ This and the next sutta are reproduced from ii, 252-3; K.S. ii, 
167 and n. Cf. Expos, ii, 302 n., and sup. 71 (Radha). 



XXII, § 92 ] Kindred Sayings on Elements 115 

sat down at one side. So seated, the venerable Rahnla said 
to the Exalted One: — 

^ How, lord, should one know, how should one see, so that 
in this body, together with its consciousness, and likewise in 
all external objects, he has no more idea of I ” and mine,” 
no more leanings to conceit V 

‘ Whatsoever material object, Rahula, be it past, future or 
present, inward or outward, subtle or gross, low or high, far 
or near, one regards thus : — this is not mine; this am not I ; 
this is not the Self of me,” — ^that is seeing things by right 
insight as they really are. 

Whatsoever feeling, perception, activities, consciousness, 
one regards thus: “ this is not mine, this am not I; this is not 
the Self of me,” — ^that is seeing things by right insight as 
they really are. 

Thus knowing, Rahula, thus seeing, in this body, 
together with its consciousness, and likewise in all external 
objects, one has no idea of and '‘mine,” no more 
leanings to conceit.’ 

§ 92 (10). RahuU (2). 

At Savatthi. ... In the Park. 

Seated at one side, the venerable Rahula said to the Exalted 
One: — 

' How, lord, does one know, how does one see, so that in this 
material body, together with its consciousness, and likewise 
in all external objects, his mind has gone away from all 
notions of an “ I ” and of " mine,” and from conceit, passing 
beyond all ways of conceit, and is peaceful and utterly 
released V 

' Whatsoever material quality, Rahula, be it far or near 
. . . one beholds thus: " this is not mine; this am not I; this 
is not the Self of-me ” — by so seeing it, even as it is by right 
insight, one is released from grasping. 

And so also with feeling, perception, the activities. ? . . 

Whatsoever consciousness, be it past, future or present . . . 
by so seeing, one is released without grasping. 



116 The Khandha Booh [text iii, 137 

.Even so knowing, Kahula, so seeing, in this material 
body . . . one’s* mind has gone away from all notions of 
an ‘‘ I ” and of mine,” and from conceit, passing beyond 
all the ways of conceit,*^ and is peaceful and utterly 
released/ 

5 Ox Elowees 
§ 93 (1). The River, 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

^Suppose a stream, brethren, a mountain- torrent, down- 
drawing, rising from afar, swift-flowing, and on both its banks 
are growing grasses which overhang the stream, kusa-grass 
there might be that overhangs, reeds and creepers and over- 
hanging shrubs; and a man is swept away by that stream and 
clutches at the grasses, but they might break away,^ and owing 
to that he might come by his destruction. He might clutch 
at the kusa grass, at the reeds, at the creepers; he might 
clutch at the shrubs, but they might break away, and owing 
to that he might come by his destruction. 

Even so, brethren, the untaught manyfolk . . . regard the 
body as the self, or the self as having body, or the body 
as being in the self, or the self as being in the body. Then 
body breaks away, and owing to that they come by their 
destruction. 

And so with feeling, perception, the activities . . . and they 
regard consciousness as the self, or the self as having con- 
sciousnesB, or consciousness as in the self, or the self as 
in consciousness, and, these breaking away, owing to that 
they come by their destruction. 

Now as to that, what think ye, brethren ? Is body per- 
manent or impermament V 

^ Impermanent, lord.’ 

‘Soalsofeeling, perception, the actmties, aonsciousness . . . 
are they permanent or impermanent V 

' Impermanent, lord.’ 


* Gf.K.B.UlIn, 


^ Palujeyyuy, 



xxir, § 94] Kindred Sayings on Elements 117 

, ^ Wherefore, bretliren, he who sees thus . . . knows . « . 
for life in these conditions there is no hereafter/ 

§ 94 ( 2 ). The Flower (or Growth), 

At Savatthi. . . . Then (the Exalted One) said: — 

' I quarrel not with the world/ brethren. It is the world 
that quarrels with me. No preacher of the Norm, brethren, 
quarrels with anyone in the world. 

That which is not upheld, brethren, in the world of sages/ 
of that I declare It is not.” What, brethren, is upheld in 
the world of the sages, of that I declare “ It is so.” 

And what, brethren, is not upheld in the world of the sages, 
of which I declare it is not ?” That body is permanent, 
stable, eternal, not sub 3 ect to decay. That is not upheld in the 
world of the sages, and of that I declare'' it is not.” "Feeling, 
perception, the activities, consciousness is permanent, stable, 
eternal, not subject to decay.” That is not upheld in the 
world of the sages, and of that I declare " it is not.” 

But what, brethren, is upheld in the world of the sages ? 
Of what do I declare that it is so ? 

" Body is impermanent, woeftil and sub j ect to decay. ’ ’ That, 
brethren, is upheld in the world of the sages, and of that do 
I declare " it is so.” Likewise with regard to feeling, percep- 
tion, the activities and consciousness. 

This, brethren, is upheld in the world of the sages, and of 
this do I declare " it is so.” 

There is, brethren, in the world^ a world -condition^ 
which the Tathagata has thoroughly penetrated and realized. 
Having thoroughly penetrated and realized it, he declares, 
teaches and defines it, opens it up and analyzes it. 

^ [Satta-llohei ‘ the world of beings.* Corny, assigns three meanings 
to lohe in this section, of which this is the first. 

^ Le La Vallee [Journal Asiatique, 1902, p. 257) compares 

the passage in Ma^hyamahavrUi, 111 [Gandrahrti), and says the Pali 
version ‘ inserts ’ the word pandit dnay here. 

^ lohe^sayhhdralohe. Corny. 

^ Lohadhammo, Corny. ‘ the five groups.’ So called from lujjana, 
breaking, crumbling, a derivation discussed at Expos. 63. At V.M, 
683 eight loha-dhammd are described. 



118 


The Khandhd Booh 


[text iii, 139 

,An(i what, brethren, is that world-condition in the world 
which the Tathagata has thoroughly penetrated and realized, 
and, having thoroughly penetrated and realized it, what docs 
he declare, teach, define, open up and analyze ? 

Body, brethren, is that world-condition in the world 
which the Tathagata . . . analyzes. And whosoever, brethren, 
understands not and sees not when the Tathagata declares, 
teaches, defines, opens up and analyzes, him, brethren, do I 
set at naught^ as a foolish worldling, blind, without vision, 
unknowing, unseeing. 

Feeling, brethren, is a world-condition in the world, 
and perception, the activities, consciousness is a world- 
condition in the world which the Tathagata . . . analyzes. 
And he, brethren, who understands not when the Tathagata 
declares, teaches, defines, opens up and analyzes conscious- 
ness, him, brethren, do I set at naught as a foolish worldling, 
blind, without vision, unknowing, unseeing. 

Just as, brethren, a dark blue lotus or a white lotus, born 
in the water, come to full growth in the water, rises to the 
surface and stands unspotted by the water, even so, brethren, 
the Tathagata [having been born in the world] having come 
to full growth in the world,^ passing beyond the world, abides 
unspotted by the world.’ 

§ 95 (3). Foam. 

On a certain occasion the Exalted One was staying at 
Ayojjhaya,^ on the bank of the river Ganges. 

Then tSe Exalted One thus addressed the brethren: — 

^ ‘ Just as if, brethren, this river Ganges should carry down 
a huge lump of foam, and a keen-sighted man should see it, 
observe it and look close into its nature.^ So seeing it, ob- 


^ {Kint% Karomi. ‘Can anything be done with such a man ? No.’ 
Br. Stede suggested the selected rendering. — En.) m 
2 ohdsa-loke. Corny. Lohe jdto is omitted here in the text, but it is 
found ^ K.V. xviii, 1 {Pts. of Gontrov., p. 324), where we find lohe 
samhuddho for our lohe sayvaddho. 

® Corny, says the townsfolk built a residence for him here. 

^ Yoniso upaparihhheyya. (7om2/. ‘ causally investigate.’ 



m 


XXII, § 95] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

serving it and looking close into its nature, ke would find it 
empty, lie would find it unsubstantial, he would find it with- 
out essence.^ What essence, brethren, could there be in a 
lump of foam ? ^ 

Even so, brethren, whatsoever body, be it past, future or 
present . . . far or near . . . which a brother sees, observes 
and looks close into its nature, he so seeing, observing and 
looking into the nature of it, would find it empty* he would 
find it unsubstantial, he would find it without essence. What 
essence, brethren, could there be in a body ? 

Suppose, brethren, in autumn time when the sky-god 
rains down big drops, a bubble rises on the water and straight- 
way bursts, and a keen-sighted man should see it, observe 
it, look close into its nature. So seeing it, observing it and 
looking close into its nature, he would find it empty, he would 
find it unsubstantial, he would find it without essence What 
essence, brethren, could there be in a bubble on the water ? 

Even so, brethren, whatsoever feeling, be it past, future or 
present,beitfar or near, a brother sees . . . he finds it without 
essence What essence, brethren, could there be in feeling ? 

Just as if, brethren, in the last month of the dry season at 
high noontide there should be a mirage, and a keen-sighted 
man should see it, observe it and look close into the nature 
of it, so observing it he would filnd it to be without essence. 
What essence, brethren, could there be in a mirage ? 

So it is likewise with any perception. . . . 

Again, brethren, suppose a man should roam about in need 
of heart of wood,® searching for heart of wood, looking for 
heart of wood, and taking a sharp axe should enter a forest. 
There he sees a mighty plantain-trunk/ straight up, new 
grown, of towering height.^ He cuts it down at the root. 

^ jSdro : see next page, n 2. 

2 Sdro. Gf. Sisters, p. 167, ‘ froth, without a soul.’ 

3 0/ Jf. i. Ill : 2^33 (trans. Silacara, li, 43), S. iv, 94. 

4 A plantam- trunk is not more than about ten feet high. The 

exaggeration is probably intentional. (Or is hadali not a p],|intain ? 
-~Ed.) ^ 

s Text ahuhhajdtay Read ahlcuhuhd, with Pali Diet, and S. iv, 
167. 



120 


The Ehandha Booh [text iii, 141 

Having cut it down at the root he chops it off at the top. 
Having done so, he peels off the outer skin ^ When he peels 
off the outer skin, he finds no pith^ inside, much less does 'he 
find heart of wood. 

Then suppose a keen-sighted man sees it, observes it, looks 
into the nature of it. So seeing and observing it he would 
find it to be without essence. What essence, brethren, could 
there be in a plantain- trunk ? 

Even so, brethren, whatsoever activities, be they past, 
future or present ... far or near ... a brother sees, he finds 
them without essence. What essence, brethren, could there 
be in the activities ? 

Again, brethren, suppose a juggler or a juggler’s apprentice 
should spread a glamour^ on the high road, and a keen-sighted 
man should see it, observe it, look close into the nature of it. 
So seeing, he would find it empty, he would find it unsub- 
stantial, he would find it without essence. What essence, 
brethren, could there be in a glamour ? 

Even so, brethren, whatsoever consciousness, be it past, 
future or present ... far or near, a brother sees, observes, 
looks close into the nature of ... so seeing, he would find it 
empty, he would find it unsubstantial, he would find it without 
essence. What essence, brethren, could there be in con- 
sciousness ? 

So seeing, brethren, the well-taught Ariyan disciple feels 
disgust at body, at feeling, at perception, at the activities, 
at consciousness. Peeling disgust he is repelled. By re- 
pulsion he is set free. By that release set free the knowledge 
pomes to him: . . . ‘^Por hfe in these conditions there is 
no hereafter.” ’ 

Thus spake the Exalted One. When the Well-Parer had 
thus spoken, the Teacher added this further : — 

^Like to a ball of foam this body isr 
Like to a bubble blown the feelings are: 


1 Pattavatti. 

2 Pheggup soft outer wood. Sdro, lieart of wood. 
^ Mayag vidlmyseyya. 



121 


XXII, § 95] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

Like to a mirage imsubstantial 
Perception: pithless as a plantain- trtmk 
The activities : a phantom, consciousness. 

Thus hath declared the Kinsman of the Sun.^’ 

However one doth contemplate (this mass) 

And thoroughly investigate its form, — 

To him, so seeing, empty, void it is. 

Beginning with this body first of all: — 

By his rich subtle wisdom^ it is shown. 

’Reft of three things, hfe, heat and consciousness, 
Behold it thrown aside. When ’tis cast off, 
Discarded there it lies, a senseless thing, ^ 

Mere food for others. Such its lineage.^ 

A babbling fantasy, a murderer:^ 

Such is its name. No essence here is seen. 

Thus should a brother, with an eager will, 
Regard this mass. Mindful and self-possessed 
By day, yea, day and night, let him cast off 
All fetters, make a refuge of himself. 

And act as if his head were all ablaze,® 

Aspiring for the state that changeth not.’^ 


1 Tracing his lineage back to the Solar Race. Gf. 8. i, 186, 192. 

2 Bhuripannena. Corny. ^ Sanha^vipula-cittata pannena, ‘Subtle 
and many-sided.’ Cf. 8. iv, 205; B, Psy. Ethics, § 16. 

2 Cf. Dhammapada, 41, ‘ like a senseless log.’ 

^ Santdno. Perhaps the only occurrence in the Pi takas of this term 
much used in later Buddhism. ^ 

6 Vadhaho. See supra, § 79 IKhajjanlya] and p. 113. Also 8 iv, 
172-5. Corny, says the fivefold mass of aggregates mutually destroy 
each other, e.g , the break-up of body causes the destruction of the 
other skandhas and vice versa. 

6 Aditta-slso. Cf. Thag> 39: Brethren, p. 44. ‘As one whose hair 
and turban are aflame ’ — i.e. , instant action is required. Cf. Thig. 493 : 
8isters, p. 172,' v, 7. 

’ Accutay paday : lit. ‘ un-deceasing state.’ 



122 The Khandha Booh [text iii, 143 

§ 96 (4). Oowdung, 

At Savatthi. . . . Then a certain brother came to the 
Exalted^ One and sat down at one side. 

So seated, that brother thus addressed the Exalted One : — 

‘ Pray, lord, is there any body that is permanent, stable, by 
nature lasting, unchanging, like unto the eternal, so that thus 
it will stand fast ? 

Pray, lord, is there any feeling, any perception, any activi- 
ties, — is there any consciousness of such a nature V 

^ No, brother, there is no material form that is permanent, 
stable, eternal, by nature unchanging, like unto the eternal, 
so that thus it will stand fast. Nor is there any feeling, per- 
ception, there are no activities, there is no consciousness of 
such a nature, so that thus it will stand fast.’ 

Then the Exalted One took up a little pellet of cowdung 
in his hand, and said to that brother: — 

' Even the getting of a selfhood^ so small as this, brother, 
is not permanent, stable, eternal, by nature unchanging, 
like unto the eternal, so that thus it will stand fast. 

If the getting of a selfhood so small as this, brother, were 
permanent, stable, eternal, by nature unchanging, then the 
living of the holy hfe for the best destruction of suffering 
would not be set fortL 

But inasmuch, brother, as there is no getting of a selfhood 
even so small as this is unchanging . , . therefore the living of 
the holy life for the best destruction of suffering is set forth. 

Formerly, brother, I was a ruler, a noble crowned,^ and 
(as such) I had eighty thousand townships, chief of which 


1 AUabMvo : the personality in any one span of life. 

2 Muddhavasitto, ‘ whose head is anointed,’ His nanae was Maha* 
Sudassana, ‘The great king of glory.’ Of. MaJid-sudassana-Suttat 
D. li, 169 j^.: Dialog, ii, 220, Introduction: ‘‘What we really have is a 
wonderful fairy tale, a gorgeous poem, in which an attempt is made 
to describe in set terms the greatest possible glory and majesty of the 
greatest possible king, in order to show that ail is vanity, save only 
righteousness — ^just such a poem as a Jewish"^prophet might have 
written of Solomon in all his glory.’ At D. ii, 187 the descriptive part 
will be found with variations. 



123 


XXII, § 96] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

was the royal town, Kusavatl. When I was such, brother, I 
had eighty thousand palaces, chief of which was the Palace of 
Righteousness. 

And I had eighty thousand halls, chief of which -^^as the 
Great Assembly Hall. 

And I had eighty thousand couches of solid ivory, of solid 
wood, of solid gold and silver, furmshed with woollen draperies, 
with white draperies, with flower-worked coverlets *and spread 
with choicest skins of antelopes, with canopies above and 
scarlet cushions at each end. 

And when I was such, brethren, I had four and eighty 
thousand elephants with trappings of gold and gilded harness, 
covered with nets of gold thread, chief of which was the royal 
elephant called Sabbath.^ 

And I had four and eighty thousand steeds, with trappings 
of gold and gilded banners, covered with nets of gold thread, 
chief of which was the royal steed Thundercloud ^ 

And I had four and eighty thousand chariots, with trappings 
of gold and gilded banners, covered with nets of gold thread, 
chief which was the royal chariot The Conqueror.® 

And I had four and eighty thousand jewels, chief of which 
was the Gem. 

And I had four and eighty thousand women, chief of whom 
was Queen of Good Fortune.'^ 

And I had four and eighty thousand vassals,® chief of whom 
was the Crown Prince. 

And I had four and eighty thousand cows, with tethers of 
fine jute and silver milk-pails.® 

And I had four and eighty myriads of garments woven of 
finest flax, of finest silk, of finest wool, of finest cotton. 

^ Ufosathai or sabbath day. ^ Valahaha-assa. 

3 The name of Sakka’s palace and car. R. D. trans.: ‘flag of 
victory.’ , ^ Suhhcbdda. 

5 Reading annym^tani with text 0/. A. v, 22, where, as here, there 
is a V, 1., anuyuttdni, ‘ devoted (attendants).’ Corny, does not notice 
it. D. ii. 188 reads anuyuttdni, which R. D. trans. ‘ yeomei^’ 

® Kays^ ufadhdranSni. Corny. rajatamaya-doJia-hhajandni, ‘with 
silver milk-pails.’ At jDmZo^. ii, 221, R. D. trans. ‘ with horns tipped 
with bronze.’ See Pali Diet., s.v. 



124 The Khandha Booh [text iii, 146 

. And I liad four and eighty myriad vessels, in which both 
morning and evening rice food was served. 

Of those four and eighty thousand towns, brother, ^tids 
town Ku^avati was my royal residence in those days. 

And of those four and eighty thousand palaces, brother, 
the Palace of Eighteousness was where I dwelt in those 
days. 

And of l3hose four and eighty thousand halls, the Great 
Hall of Assembly was where I dwelt in those days. 

And of those four and eighty thousand couches, the couch 
of solid ivory, of solid wood, of solid gold or silver was the one 
which I enjoyed. 

And of the four and eighty thousand elephants, the royal 
elephant called Sabbath was the one I mounted in those 
days. 

And of those four and eighty thousand steeds, my royal 
steed called Thundercloud was the one I mounted in those 
days. 

And of those four and eighty thousand chariots, the chariot 
Conqueror was the one I mounted in those days. 

And of those four and eighty thousand women, Khattiyani 
or Yelamika was the one who waited on me in those days. 

And of those four and eighty myriads of garments, one suit 
there was I donned in those days, made of finest flax, of finest 
silk, of finest wool, or of finest cotton. 

And of those four and eighty myriad vessels there was one 
from which I ate a measure of choicest rice and drank broth 
for seasoning thereto. 

Thus all those things of the world,^ brother, are past and 
gone and perished utterly. Thus impermanent, brother, 
are things of the world. Thus mutable, brother, are they. 
Thus doomed to perish, brother, are they; insomuch that 
there is enough for disgust at all things of the world, enough 
to be averse from them, enough to be freed "from them.’ 


^ Sanhhdrd, 



XXII, § 97] Kindred Sayings on Elements 


125 


§ 97 (5). Tip of the Nail? 

At Savatthi. . . . Then a certain brother came to the 
Exaited One, sainted him and sat down at one side. • 

So seated that brother thus addressed the Exalted 
One : — [as in the previous section down to ‘ thus it will stand 
fast.’) 

Then the Exalted One took up a pinch of dust* on the tip 
of his nail and said to that brother: — 

' Even thus much material form, brother, is not permanent, 
stable, eternal, by nature unchanging, like to the eternal, 
so that it will stand fast. 

If even thus much material form, brother, were permanent 
. . , unchanging, then the living of the holy life for the utter 
destruction of suffering would not be set forth. But inas- 
much as even thus much material form, brother, is not 
permanent, stable, eternal, by nature unchanging, therefore 
the living of the holy life for the utter destruction of 
suffering is set forth. 

Even thus much feeling, brother, thus much perception, 
activities and consciousness is not permanent . . . rmchanging. 
If it were not so, brother, the living of the holy life for the 
utter destruction of suffering would not be set forth. But 
inasmuch, brother, as even thus much consciousness is not 
permanent . . . therefore the living of the holy life for the 
utter destruction of suffering is set forth. 

Now as to this, what think you, brother ? Is body per- 
manent or impermanent ?’ 

‘ Impermanent, lord.’ 

' Is feeling, perception, are the activities, is consciousness 
permanent or impermanent V 

' Impermanent, lord.’ 

' Therefore, brother, so seeing, a brother knows: '' For life 
in these conditions there is no hereafter.” ’ 


^ Nakhasihha<^ (for text naichdsiJcai)). Cf. S. ii, 133, 2S53. 



126 


The Khandha Booh [text iii, 149 


§ ^98 (6). Puritan (or Oceanic)} 

‘ {The same as in the previous section down to ' so that thus it 
will st%nd fast.’) 

§ 99 (7). The Leash (or The Thong) (i).^ 

At Savatthi. . . . Then the Exalted One said : — 

' Incalculable,® brethren, is the beginning of this round of 
rebirth.^ No beginning is made known of beings wrapt in 
ignorance, fettered by craving, who run on, who fare on the 
round of rebirth. 

There comes a time, brethren, when the mighty ocean dries 
up, is utterly drained, comes no more to be. But of beings 
hindered by ignorance, fettered by craving, who run on, who 
fare on the round of rebirth, I declare no end-making. 

There comes a time, brethren, when Sineru, monarch of 
mountains, is consumed,® is destroyed, comes no more to be. 
But of beings hindered by ignorance, fettered by craving, who 
run for ever the round of rebirth, I declare no end-making. 

There comes a time, brethren, when the mighty earth is 
consumed, is destroyed, comes no more to be. But of beings 
hindered by ignorance ... I declare no end-making. 

Just as, brethren, a dog tied up by a leash® to a strong 
stake or pillar, keeps running round and revolving round and 
round that stake or pillar, even so, brethren, the untaught 
manyfolk, who discern not them that are Ariyans . , . who 


^ Suddhiharf or Samuddakay. The name of a section at S. i, 165, 
so called after a fastidious brahmin, Suddhiko. But the subject of 
purity IS not referred to here, and it is not clear why such a title is 
aarsigned There is some confusion in the text between suddhiha'Q and 
suddhakay. So at Bk. viii. infra we should read the former. 

2 Bead haddhula for text bhaddnla. 

3 Ana-mata-'gga. See n. to K,S, li, p. 118. J.P.T.S. 1906-7, p. 84. 
Thig. 499 and Pah Diet., s.v , ‘ of which the beginning is inconceivable.’ 

4 Sandhdvatay saysaratay (gen plur.). df. 153: Aneka jdti- 
saysdray, sandhdvissay amhbisay. 

6 UddayTiati for text dayhati 

® Gor^y. says the dog is the fool: the leash view or opinion: the 
pillar is the self- body : and like a dog the many folk are tied by opinion 
and craving to the self-body or personality. 



127 


XXII, § 100 ] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

are untrained in the worthy doctrine, regard body as the Self, 
regard feeling, perception, the activities, regard consciousness 
as having a Self, regard consciousness as being in the Self or 
the Self as being in consciousness . . . run and revolve round 
and round from body to body, from feeling to feeling, from 
perception to perception, from activities to activities, from 
consciousness to consciousness . . . they are not released 
therefrom, they are not released from rebirth, fr#m old age 
and decay, from sorrow and grief, from woe, lamentation 
and despair . . . they are not released from suffering, I 
declare. 

But the well taught Ariyan disciple, brethren, who discerns 
them that are Ariyans . . . who is well trained in the worthy 
doctrine, regards not body as the Self, regards not the Self 
as being in consciousness. He runs not, revolves not round 
and round from body to body . . . from consciousness to con- 
sciousness, but is released therefrom. He is released from 
birth, old age and decay, from sorrow and grief, woe, lamenta- 
tion and despair. I declare he is released from suffering.’ 

§ 100 (8). The Leash (ii). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then the Exalted One said : — 

‘Incalculable, brethren, is this round of rebirth. No 
beginning is made known of beings wrapt in ignorance, fettered 
by craving, who run on, who fare on the round of rebirth. 

Just like a dog, brethren, tied up by a leash to a strong 
stake or pillar — ^if he goes, he goes up to that stake or pillar; 
if he stands still, he stands close to that stake or pillar; if he 
squats down, he squats close to that stake or pillar; if he lies 
down, he lies close to that stake or pillar. 

Even so, brethren, the untaught manyfolk regard body 
(thus) : “ This is mine; this am I ; this is the self of me ” They 
regard feeling, perception, the activities and consciousness 
thus: “ This is n^ine; this am I; this is the self of me.” 

If they go, it is towards this fivefold grasping-group that 
they go. If they stand still, it is close to this fivefold gjasping- 
group that they stSnd still. If they sit, it is close to that 
they sit. If they lie down, it is close to that they lie down. 



128 


The Khandha Booh [text iii, 151 


Whereforej brethren, again and again must one regard 
one’s own mind flins: ‘‘For a long, long time this mind ha*s 
been tainted by lust, by hatred, by illusion.” By a tainted 
mind, brethren, beings are tainted. By purity of mind 
beings are made pure. 

Brethren, have ye ever seen a picture which they call a 
show-piece ^ 

‘Yes, lord.’ 

‘ Well, brethren, this so-called show-piece is thought out 
by mind. Wherefore, brethren, mind is even more diverse 
than that show-piece.^ 

Wherefore, brethren, again and again must one regard one’s 
own mind thus: “Fora long time this mind has been tainted 
by lust, by hatred, by illusion.” By a tainted mind, brethren, 
beings are tainted. By purity of mind beings are made pure. 

Brethren, I see not any single group^ so diverse as the 
creatures of the animal world Those creatures of the animal 
world, brethren, are thought out by mind."^ Wherefore, 
brethren, mind is even more diverse than those creatures of 
the animal world. 

Wherefore, brethren, a brother must again and again thus 
regard his own mind: “ For a long long time this mind has 
been tainted by lust, by hatred, by illusion.” By a tainted 

^ Garanarj ndma cittay Of. Expos. 85 ‘ A master-piece.’ Corny. ^ 

^ v%carana-ciUa 7 },’‘ and adds that the artists went about (vicaranti) 
exhibiting their work, which, it seems, was like Hogarth’s ‘The 
Hake’s Progress,’ etc. Also, p, 185, ‘consciousness (citta) is so called 
because of its variegated {oiUa~) nature.’ ‘Dazzling’ or ‘showy’ or 
* brilliant,’ German ‘bunt’ would better express the meaning of citta 

{Citra = jXVpLOTpOTTOQ). 

Expos. 86, ‘Even more artistic than art itself.’ Cf. Brethren, 
378, 419. 

3 Eha-mhdya, Expos. 32, 88. 

^ Corny , ‘ Thought out by work-of-mind. But we are not to suppose 
that that work-of-mind energizes thus (in the case, say, of quails and 
partridges) “we will become thus and thus vari-'gated.” But it is 
action that leads to a birth- womb. Their varied nature has its origin 
in the womb.’ Does this phrase of the Buddha point to a belief in a 
creative universal mind (cf. Mano-puhbangam^ dhammd. Dhp. 1) ? 
(It should be remembered that mind is a mode of action, i.e , karma. 
— Ed.) 



129 


XXII, § 10 1] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

mind, brethren, beings are tainted. By purity of mind beings 
are made pure.^ 

• Just as if, brethren, a dyer or a painter, if he have dye or 
lac or turmeric, indigo or madder, and a well-plane<? board 
or Wall or strip of cloth, can fashion the likeness of a Woman 
or of a man complete in all its parts,* even so, brethren, the 
untaught manyfolk creates and re-creates its body, its feelings, 
its perception, its activities, its consciousness. 

As to that, what think ye, brethren ? Is body permanent 
or impermanent V 

' Impermanent, lord.’ 

‘ And so it is with feelings, perception, the activities, con- 
sciousness 

Wherefore, brethren, so seeing ... a brother knows: 

For life in these conditions there is no hereafter.” ’ 

§ 101 (9). Adze-handle^ (or The Ship), 

At Savatthi. . . . Then the Exalted One said: — 

' By knowing, brethren, by seeing is, I declare, the destruc- 
tion of the Asavas, not by not knowing, by not seeing. 

And by knowing what^ brethren, by seeing what, is there 
destruction of the Asavas ? Thus: Such is body, such is 
the arising of body, such is the ceasing of body. 

Such is feeling, perception, the activities, such is conscious- 
ness, such is the arising of consciousness, such is the ceasing 
of consciousness.” 

By thus knowing, brethren, by thus seeing is there destruc- 
tion of the Asavas. 

Suppose, brethren, in a brother who lives neglectful of self- 
training there should arise this wish: 0 that my heart were 
freed without grasping from the Asavas.” Yet for all that 
his heart is not freed from the Asavas. What is the cause of 
that 1 

■ • _______ — 

Quoted Papanca, i, 232. where it is added that the purification 
must be done by the practice of the saUpatthana-tnaggo. 

* Of.SAUlOl;E.S.j^, 71. 

^ Vdsijata^. Of. Y%n. iv, 168. The whole section occurs at A. iv, 
126-7. 


ni 


9 



130 


The Khandha Booh [text iii, 153 

It must be said that it is Ms neglect of self- training.^ 
Self-training in wbat ? In tbe Pour Earnest Contempla- 
tions, in the Four Best Efforts, in the Four Ways of Will* 
Power, In the Five Controlling Faculties, in the Five Powers, 
in the Seven Limbs of Wisdom, in the Axiyan Eightfold 
Path. 

Just as if, brethren, some eight or ten or dozen hen’s eggs 
are not fuIiy sat upon, not fully warmed, not fully brooded 
over^ by the hen. Then suppose that in that hen there 
arise such a wish as this : '' 0 that my chicks with foot and 
claw or mouth and beak might break through the eggshells 
and so be safely hatched.” Yet for all that those chicks are 
not made fit to break up the eggshells with foot and claw or 
mouth and beak, and so be safely hatched. What is the 
cause of that ? It is because those eight or ten or dozen hen’s 
eggs, brethren, have not been fully sat upon, fully warmed, 
fully brooded over by the hen. 

Even so, brethren, if in a brother who lives neglectful of 
self-traimng there should arise this wish: '' 0 that my heart 
were freed from the Asavas without grasping:” yet is his 
heart not freed thereby from them What is the cause of 
that'? It must be said: “It is his lack of self- training.” 
Training in what ? In the Four Earnest Contemplations . . . 
in the Ariyan Eightfold Path. 

Just as if, brethren, when some eight or ten or dozen hen’s 
eggs are fully sat upon, fully warmed, fully brodded over by 
the hen, such a wish as tMs would not arise in her: “ O that 
^my cMcks with foot and claw, with mouth and beak might 
break through the eggshells and so be safely hatched”: and 
those cMcks would yet be fit with foot and claw or mouth 
and beak so to do. 

What is the cause of that ? It is because, brethren, those 
eight or ten or dozen hen’s eggs have been fully sat upon, 
fuUy warmed, fully brooded over by the hen. 

Even so, brethren, in the brother who dwells attentive 

^ Bhdvand. ^ 

2 Paribhdvitdn% ^ covered by the wings of the hen.’ Cf. M. i, 104, 
and Dialog, i, 86, n. 



131 


XXII, § loi] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

to self- training there would not arise such a wish as this: 

0 that my heart were freed from the Asavas without grasp, 
ing ” : and yet his heart is freed from them. What is the 
cause of that ? ' 

It must be said it is his attention to self-training. Train- 
ing in what ? In the Pour Earnest Contemplations : in the 
Four Best Efforts, in the Four Ways of Will-power: in the 
Five Controlling Faculties: in the Five Powers, m the Seven 
Limbs of Wisdom : in the Ariyan Eightfold Path. 

Just as if, brethren, when a carpenter^ or carpenter’s 
apprentice looks upon his adze-handle and sees thereon his 
thumb-mark and his finger-marks he does not thereby know ; 

Thus and thus much of my adze-handle has been worn away 
to-day, thus much yesterday, thus much at other times.” 
But he knows the wearing away of it just by its wearing 
away. 

Even so, brethren, the brother who dwells attentive to self- 
training has not this knowledge: Thus and thus much of 
the Asavas has been worn away to-day, thus much yesterday, 
and thus much at other times ” : but he knows the wearing 
away of them just by their wearing away. 

Just as, brethren, in a sea-faring vessel, rigged with masts 
and stays ^ and stranded on the bank for six months owing to 
the failure of water ^ in the dry season, its rigging is spoiled 
by wind and sun: then, overstrung by a shower^ in the rainy 
season, it is easily weakened and rots away. 

Even so, brethren, in a brother who dwells attentive to self- 
training the fetters are easily weakened and rot away. 


^ Corny. y reading palagavdo for text phalagando, says ‘ carpenter’ or 
‘ knofc-planer.’ At A. iv, 167 the text also reads palagando. 

2 Repeated at v, 51. 

^ Text, udake panydddya. S. v, 51 reads panyendya (? for pari- 
ydyena, vicissim). 

^ Text has han&handni pavussakena meghena ah}i%ppavattdm; but 
8. V, 21 and A. iv, 127, read vutthdm, followed by Pah Diet., wrongly 
I think; for this would mean ■* the rigging had rained ’ I t%ke abhip- 
pavattdm to mean ‘ p?^uch twisted round, warped,’ which would be the 
result of a wetting. 



132 


The Khandha Booh [text iii, 155 


§ 102 (10). Impermanence (or Perception). 

At SavattH. . . . Then the Exalted One said: — 

'The perceiving of impermanence, brethren, if practised 
and enlarged, wears out^ all sensual lust, all lust of rebirths 
all ignorance wears out, tears out all conceit of " I am.” 

Just as, brethren, in the autumn season a ploughman plough- 
ing with a great ploughshare, cuts through the spreading 
roots as he ploughs; even so, brethren, the perceiving of imper- 
manence, if practised and enlarged, wears out all sensual lust, 
wears out all lust for body, all lust for rebirth, wears out all 
ignorance, wears out, tears out all conceit of " I am.” 

Just as, brethren, a reed-cutter cuts down a reed, and 
grasping it by the end shakes it up and down and to and fro 
and tosses it aside f even so, brethren, the perceiving of 
impermanence . . . wears out all sensual lust, all . . . wears 
out, tears out all conceit of " I am.” 

Just as, brethren, when a bunch of mangoes is cut from the 
stalk, all the mangoes that are joined to the stalk go along 
with it, even so, brethren, the perceiving of impermanence, 
if practised and enlarged, wears out all . . . tears out all con- 
ceit of " I am.” 

Just as, brethren, in a peaked house® all rafters whatsoever 
go together to the peak, slope to the peak, join in the peak, 
and of them all the peak holds chief place; even so, brethren, 
the perceiving of impermanence, if practised and enlarged, 
wears out all sensual lust . . . wears out, tears out all 
conceit of " I am.” 

* Just as, brethren, of all scented woods the dark sandal- 
wood is reckoned chief, even so is it with the perceiving of 
impermanence. . . . 

Just as, brethren, of all scented heart- woods the red sandal- 
wood is reckoned chief, even so is it with the perceiving of 
impermanence. . . . 

^ Fany^diyati Cf. K S. u, 95: ‘ wholly finished ’ ; Vin, Texts i, 20: 

‘ conquers.’ 

2 Nicchodeti. Of. J F.T.S. 1 91 7, 53. 

2 Kutaninnd. CJ. do. 47 and S. r, 43. 



133 


XXII, § 102] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

Just as, brethren, of all scented flowers the jasmine is 
reckoned chief, even so is it with the perceiving of imper- 
manence. . . . 

Just as, brethren, all petty princes whatsoever arb subject 
to^ a universal monarch; just as the universal monarch is 
reckoned chief of them, so is it with the perceiving of imper- 
manence. . . . 

Just as, brethren, of all starry bodies whS,tsoever the 
radiance does not equal one-sixteenth part of the moon’s 
radiance, just as the moon is reckoned chief of them, even so 
is it with the perceiving of impermanence . . . 

Just as, brethren, in the autumn season, when the sky^ 
is opened up and cleared of clouds, the sun, leaping up into 
the firmament,^ drives away all darkness from the heavens, 
and shines and burns and flashes forth; even so, brethren, the 
perceiving of impermanence, if practised and enlarged, wears 
out all sensual lust, wears out all lust for body, all desire for 
rebirth, all ignorance, wears out, tears out all conceit of I 
am.” 

And in what way, brethren, does it so wear them out ? 

It is by seeing: Such is body: such is the arising of body : 
such is the ceasing of body. Such is feeling, perception, 
the activities, such is consciousness, its arising and its 
ceasing.” 

Even thus practised and enlarged, brethren, does the 
perceiving of impermanence wear out all sensual lust, all lust 
for body, all desire for rebirth, all ignorance, wears out, 
tears out all conceit of I am.” 


1 Anuyantd, ^ following after ’ At S. v, 43, the reading is anuynttd 
‘ subject to.’ We find the same interchange of readings at § 96 supra 
{text, 145). 

2 Devo,’~B. ^ dhdsa,^ the (sky) god. Cf. S. i, 65: K.8. i, 89. At 
Itiv. 20 the reading is na^ke for deve, 

3 Text has abhlyussuhhamdno (‘ energizing ’), but Itiv, 20 and Pali 
Diet read ahhhussahamdno, ‘ springing up into the sky.’ 



134 


The Khandha Booh [TExxiii, 158 


III. THE LAST FIFTY 

I. On Separates 
§ 103 (1). The Separates} 

At Savattlii. . . . Then the Exalted One said: — 

' There are these four separates^ brethren. What four ? 
The person-pack,^ the arising of the person-pack, the ceasing 
of the person-pack, the way to the ceasing of the person-pack. 

And what, brethren, is the separate (called the) person- 
pack ? It is the five groups based on grasping. What five ? 
The group based on body-grasping, that based on feeling- 
grasping, on perception-grasping, on the activities-grasping, 
on consciousness-grasping. This, brethren, is called the 
separate of the person-pack. 

And what, brethren, is the arising of the separate (called 
the) person-pack ? Just that craving which, accompanied 
by lure and lust, leads down to rebirth, to wit : — the craving 
for feeling, the craving for rebirth, the craving for no rebirth. 
TJiis, brethren, is called the arising of the separate (called) 
person-pack. 

And what, brethren, is the ceasing of the separate called 
the person-pack ? 

It is the utter passionless ceasing, the giving up, the aban- 
donment of, the release from, the freedom from attachment 
to, that craving. This, brethren, is called the ceasing of the 
separate (called) person-pack. 

*And what, brethren, is the way going to the ceasing of 
the person-pack ? It is this Ariyan Eightfold Path, to wit : 


^ Antd. Corny. t ‘ hotthdsdf’ divisions: not * extremes ’ here, as in 
the dveantd of K.S. ii, p. 13. Cf. Sum. Vilas, 103. Childers, 
s Sahhdyo suggests ‘ goals of doctrine.’ The Sangiti S. {Dialogues iii, 
210) has three ‘ limits,’ omitting the fourth. 

2 Sah-hdya, i.e., the pack or group or clust<u; {hdya : derivation 
probably from d, to heap up. Pah Diet.) of one’s self. Gf. nihdya, 
and other renderings supra, p. 86, etc. — E d. 



136 


xxii, § 105] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

Eight view , . . right concentration.^ This, brethren, is 
called the way going to the ceasing of the* separate (called) 
person-pack. 

These, brethren are the Four Separates. 

§ 104 (2). Suffering, 

At Savatthi. . . . Then the Exalted One said: — 

^ Brethren, I will teach you suffering, the arising of suffer- 
ing, the ceasing of suffering, the way leading to the ceasing 
of suffering. Do ye listen to it. 

And what, brethren, is suffering ? It is to be called the 
five grasping groups What five ? The body-grasping-group 
. . . the consciousness-grasping-group. This, brethren, is 
called suffering. 

And what, brethren, is the arising of suffering ? 

It is that craving . . . that leads downward to rebirth . . . 
the craving for feeling, for rebirth, for no rebirth. This, 
brethren, is called the arising of suffering. 

And what, brethren, is the ceasing of suffering ? 

It is the utter passionless ceasing, the giving up, the aban- 
donment of, the release from, the freedom from attachment 
to, that craving- . . . 

This, brethren, is called the ceasing of suffering. 

And what, brethren, is the way going to the ceasing of 
suffering ? 

It is this Ariyan Eightfold Path, to wit: Right views . . . 
right concentration. This, brethren, is the way going to 
the ceasing of suffering. 

§ 105 (3). The Person-pack. 

At Savatthi. . . . Then the Exalted One said: — 

' I will teach you, brethren, the person-pack, its arising, its 
ceasing, and thg way" leading to its ceasing. Do ye listen 
to it. 

{The same as in § 103). 

— ■ — — 

1 The excision is m the text. For the eight factors, see pp. 51, 81. 



136 


The Khandha Booh [text iii, 159 


§ 10 ^ (4). Things to be understood} 

'At Savatthi. . . . Then the Exalted One said: — 

' Brethren, I will tell you of the things to be understood, 
of understanding, and of the person who has understood. 

And what, brethren, are the things^ to be understood ? 

Body, brethren, is a thing to be understood : feeling, percep- 
tion, the aativities, consciousness is a thing to be understood. 
These, brethren, are the things to be understood. 

And what, brethren, is understanding 1 

It is the destruction of lust, of hatred, of illusion. This, 
brethren, is called understanding. 

And who, brethren, is the person who has understood ? 

Such and such a venerable one, of such a name, of such a 
clan. This one, brethren, is the person who has understood. 


§ 107 (5). Recluses (1). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then the Exalted One said : — 

‘ Brethren, there are these five grasping-groups. What 
five ? The body-grasping group . . . the consciousness- 
grasping-group. Whatsoever recluses or brahmins, brethren, 
understand not as they really are the satisfaction in, the 
misery of, the escape from the five grasping-groups® (live 
not in the attainment of the fruit of being recluses or 
brahmins) . . . but those recluses or brahmins who do under- 
stand . . . those venerable ones have come, even in this life, 
fully to know of themselves, to realize, to live in the attain- 
inent of the fruit of being recluses or brahmins. 

§ 108 (6). Recluses (2). 

{The same as the previous section.) 


^ Supra § 23, text p. 26. 

2 DhaT^md. Of. Mrs. Eh. E. on Prof. Th. Stcherbatzky’s Vasa- 
band/hu. BulUUn of the School of Oriental Studies ^^24:. 

^ Of. S. li, § 37 (8): K.S. li, 117; above, pp, 108, 127. 



xxn, § III] Kindred Sayings on Elements 


137 


§ 109 (7). Stream-winner, 

At Savatthi. . . . Then the Exalted One said . — 

‘ There are these five grasping-groups, brethren. , What 
five ? The body-grasping-group . . . the consciousness- 
grasping-group. 

And when, brethren, the Ariyan disciple understands as 
they really are both the arising and the ending, and the 
satisfaction in, the misery of, and the escape from the five 
grasping-groups, this one, brethren, is called an Ariyan 
disciple who is a stream- winner, saved from disaster, assured, 
bound for enlightenment. 

§ 110 (8). The Arahant. 

At Savatthi. . . . Then the Exalted One said: — 

‘ There are these five grasping-groups, brethren. What 
five? The body-grasping-group . , . the consciousness- 
grasping-group. 

And when, brethren, a brother, having seen as they really 
are both the arising and the ending of, the satisfaction in, 
the misery of, and the escape from the five grasping-groups, 
is released without grasping, — ^this one, brethren, is called 
a brother who is an arahant, in whom the Asavas are de- 
troyed, who has hved the life, done the task, lifted the burden, 
won his own welfare,^ worn out the fetters of rebirth, and is 
released by perfect insight.” ’ 

§ 111 (9). Desirous-lustfur^ (1). 

At Savatthi. . . • 

' Whatsoever desire, brethren, whatsoever lust, whatsoever 
lure, whatsoever craving there be concerning body, do ye 
abandon that.' Thus will that body be abandoned, cut 
down at the root, made like the stump of a palm tree, made 
something that has ceased to be, so that it cannot grow up 
again in the future. 

— — — ^ 

^ A7b€ppaUd-sa(Tattho. 

^ Trans. Warren, p. 163. Gf, § 25. 



138 The Khandha Booh [text iii, i6i 

Whatsoever desire . . . there be concerning feeling, percep- 
tion, the activities, consciousness ... do ye abandon them. 
Thus will . . . that consciousness be abandoned, cut down 
atthe 2 S)ot ... so that it cannot grow up again in the future.’ 

§ 112 (10). Desirous-lustful (2). 

At Savatthi. . . . 

‘ Whatsoever desire, brethren, whatsoever lust, whatsoever 
lure, whatsoever craving, whatsoever grasping after systems, 
addiction to dogma and mental bias there be concerning body, 
do ye abandon them. Thus will that body be abandoned, 
cut down at the root ... so that it cannot grow up again in 
the future. 

Whatsoever desire . . . there be concerning feeling, percep- 
tion, the activities, consciousness ... do ye abandon them. 
Thus will . . . that consciousness be abandoned, cut down at 
the root ... so that it cannot grow up again in the future.’ 


II. Ox Pious Converse. 

§ 113 (1) Ignorance (or The Brother) (1). 

At Savatthi ... In the Park. 

Then a certain brother came to the Exalted One (and sat 
down at one side). 

So seated that brother thus addressed the Exalted One: — 

^ ''Ignorance, ignorance,’’ ’tis said, lord. Pray, lord, what 
is ignorance, and how far is one ignorant V 
• ‘ Herein, brother, the untaught manyfolk know not body, 
know not the arising of body, know not the ceasing of 
body, know not the way going to the ceasing of body. 

They know not feeling, perception, the activities, they 
know not consciousness, nor the arising#»of consciousness, 
nor the ceasing of consciousness, nor the way going to the 
ceasing of consciousness. 

This, brother, is called ignorance, and- thus far is one 
ignorant.’ 



XXII, § 1 15] Kindred Sayings on Elements 


139 


§ 114 (2). Wisdomi}- (or The Brother) (2). 

At Savatthi. . . Then a certain brother came to the 
Exalted One, . . . 

Seated at one side that brother thus addressed the Exalted 
One : — 

‘‘‘Wisdom, wisdom,” ’tis said, lord. Pray, lord, what is 
wisdom, and how far has one wisdom V « 

‘ Herein, brother, the well-tanght Ariyan disciple under- 
stands body, its arising, its ceasing, and the way leading to 
its ceasing. 

He understands feeling, perception, the activities, con- 
sciousness . . . the way leading to the ceasing of conscious- 
ness. 

This, brother, is called wisdom, and thus far has one 
wisdom.' 


§ 115 (3). The Teacher^ (1). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then a certain brother came to the 
Exalted One. . . . 

So seated at one side that brother thus addressed the 
Exalted One: — 

‘“Norm-teacher, Norm-teacher,” is the saying, lord. 
How far, lord, is one a Norm-teacher 

‘ If a brother teaches a doctrine of revulsion from body, 
of its fading away, its ceasing, well may he be called “ Norm- 
teacher,” brother. 

If a brother be apt for revulsion from body, for its fading 
away, its ceasing, well may he be called “ one apt in teaching 
what conforms with the Norm.”® If a brother, by revulsion' 
from body be released from grasping by making it to fade 
away, by making it to cease, well may he be called “ a brother 
who in this very life hath won Nibbana.” 

If a brother thu« teach, be thus apt, be thus released from 
grasping in respect of feeling, perception, the activities, and 

^ Vijjd 

^Of. S. ii, 18: K.S. ii, 14. 

® Dkammdriudhamma-patipanno, 



140 


The Khandha Booh [text iii, 163 

ponsciousness . . . well may he be called Norm-teacher,’^ 
?apt in teaching what conforms with the Norm,” and '' a 
brother who in this very life hath won Nibbana.’”^ 

§ 116 (4:). The Preacher (2). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then a certain brother came to the 
Exalted One. . . . 

Seated lit one side that brother thus addressed the Exalted 
One : — 

' Norm-teacher, Norm- teacher,” is the saying, lord. How 
far, lord, is one a Norm-teacher ? How far is one a teacher 
of what conforms with the Norm ? How far has a brother 
won Nibbana V 

{The rest is the same as in the 'previous section.) 

§ 117 (5). Bonds. 

At Savatthi. . . . 

‘Herein, brethren, the untaught manyfolk, who discern 
not those that are Ariyans . . . who are untrained in the 
worthy doctrines, regard the body as the self, or the self as 
possessing body, or the body as being in the self, or the self 
as being in body. Such an one is called one of the untaught 
manyfolk, one fettered by the bonds of body, one bound to 
the inner and the outer, one who has not sighted the (further) 
shore, ^ one who has not sighted the beyond,® one who is born 
bound, who dies bound, one who from this world goes to the 
world beyond. 

He regards feeling as the self . . ■ . regards the self as being 
in feeling. Such an one, brethren,, is called (one of) the 
untaught manyfolk, fettered by the bonds of feeling, one 
bound to the inner and the outer, one who has not sighted the 
(further) shore, one who has not sighted the beyond; born 
bound he dies bound; from this world -he goes to the world 
beyond. So with perception, the activities, and conscious- 
ness. . . . 

^ Comi/L ssbya the first is a preacher, the second {sehha) one on the 
Paths, the third (asekha) is Arahant. 

^ A4lra~dassl. Gf. A. iii, 368. 


® A-pdra-dussl. 



141 


XXII, § iig] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

But, bretkren, tlie well-taught Ariyau disciple, who dis- 
cerns those that are Ariyans . . who is traineS in the worthy 
doctrines, regards not the body as the self, nor the self as 
possessing body, nor the body as being in the self, nor th»e self 
as being in the body. This one, brethren, is called a well- 
taught Ariyan disciple, not fettered by the bonds of body, 
not bound to the inner and the outer, one who has sighted 
the (further) shore, one who has sighted the beyond. Re- 
leased is he, I declare, from suffering. 

He regards not feeling as the self, he regards not perception, 
the activities, he regards not consciousness as the self. This 
one, brethren, is called a well-taught Ariyan disciple, one not 
fettered by the bonds of consciousness, not bound to the inner 
and the outer, one who has sighted the (further) shore, one 
who has sighted the beyond. Released is he, I declare, from 
suffering.’ 

§ 118 (6). Infatuated'^ (1). 

At Savatthi. . . . 

^ As to this, what think ye, brethren ? Do ye regard body 
as This is mine; this am I; this is the self of me ” V 

^ Surely not, lord.’ 

^ Well said, brethren ! Thus to regard body: This is not 
mine ; this am not I ; this is not the self of me ” — that is 
how it should be seen with perfect insight Do ye regard 
feeling, perception, the activities, consciousness in like 
manner: '' This is mine; this am I; this is the self of me” V 

" Surely not, lord.’ 

'Well said, brethren! To regard consciousness thus: 
" This is not mine; this am not I; this is not the self of me,” 
it should be seen by perfect insight. 

So seeing, brethren, one knows: . . . "For life in these 
conditions there is no hereafter.” ’ 

1 119 *(7). Infatuated (2). 

At Savatthi. . . . 

' As^tp this what think je, brethren? Do ye regard bodjr thus : 
" This is not mine;^^his am not I; this is not the self of me ” ?’ 


1 Parimucchita, in this sense at Uddna, 75. 



142 


The Khandhd Book 


[text iii, i66 


‘ Even soj lord.’ 

‘Well said, b^rethren ! That is how it should be seen by 
perfect insight. Do ye regard feeling, perception, the activi- 
ties, do ye regard consciousness thus also V 

‘ Even so, lord.’ 

‘ Well said, brethren I So to regard consciousness is how 
it should be seen by perfect insight. 

So seeing . . . one knows: “For life in these conditions 
there is no hereafter.” 

§ 120 (8). The Fetter. 

AtSavatthi. . * . 

‘ I will show you, brethren, the things that make for bond- 
age^ and the fetter. Do ye listen to it. 

And what, brethren, are the things that make for bondage, 
and what is the fetter ? 

Body, brethren, is a thing that makes for bondage. The 
desire and lust of body are the fetter of body. 

Likewise with feeling, perception, the activities, conscious- 
ness. . . . 

Consciousness is a thing that makes for bondage. The 
desire and lust of consciousness are the fetter of consciousness. 

These, brethren, are called “the things that make for bond- 
age ” and this is the fetter.’ 

§ 121 (9). Grasping. 

At Savatthi. . . . 

‘ I wiU show you, brethren, the things that make for grasp- 
ing,^ and grasping. Do ye listen to it. 

And what, brethren, are the things that make for grasping, 
and what is grasping ? 

Body, brethren, is a thing that makes for grasping. The 
desire and lust therein are grasping. 

Feeling, perception, the activities, consciousness is a thing 


^ Sannojamya-dhammd. Cf. SC* 
2 Upaddniya dhammd. 



XXII, § 122 ] Kindred Sayings on Elements 143 

that makes for grasping. The desire and lust therein are 
grasping. * 

• These, brethren, are the things that make for grasping. 
This is grasping.’ 


§ 122 (10). Virtue. 

Once the venerable Sariputta and the venerable Maha- 
Kotthita^ were staying at Benares, in Isipatana, imtiie Deer- 
Park. 

Then the venerable Maha-Kotthita, rising at eventide from 
his solitude, came to the venerable Sariputta . . . and thus 
addressed him: — 

‘ Friend Sariputta, what are the conditions that should be 
pondered with method^ by a virtuous brother V 

‘ The five grasping-groups, friend Kotthita, are the condi- 
tions which should be pondered with method by a virtuous 
brother, as being impermanent, sufienng, sick, as an im- 
posthume,^ as a dart,^ as pain, as lU-health, as alien, as tran- 
sitory,® empty and soulless. 

What five groups ? The group of body-grasping . . . the 
group of consciousness-grasping. By a virtuous brother, 
firiend Kotthita, these five groups of grasping should be 
pondered with method. 

Indeed,® friend, it is possible for a virtuous brother so 
pondering with method these five groups of grasping to 
realize the fruits of stream-winning.’ 

' But, friend Sariputta, what are the things that should 
be pondered with method by a brother who is a stream- 
winner V 


1 Of SAi, 112-5. 

2 Yoniso manasikattabhd. Cf. K S. li, 6, n. 

3 Oandato, def at 8. iv, 83, as at Dialog i, 87, ‘ the four-element 
built, of parents sprung, ,by rice and gruel supported, by nature im- 
permanent, liable t# be broken up, crushed, shattered, to crumble 
away.’ Ccrniy: anto-dos" aUhena (? as an inward sore) 

^ SaUato, a synonym for Mma, S. li, 230: A. iv, 289 

5 Palokato. Cf. S. iv, 53 {paluj^aria-dhammay, ‘ crumbhng^). 

6 Thft tft-x-t flimos^us^s^ests that a further Question, nut here, has been 



144 


The Khandhd Booh [text iii, i68 

' By a brother who is a stream-winner, friend Kotthita, it 
is these same five groups of grasping that should be so pon- 
dered. 

Indeed, friend, it is possible for a brother who is a stream- 
winner ... by so pondering these five groups ... to realize 
the fruits of once-returning ’ 

‘ But, friend Sariputta, what are the things that should 
be pondered with method by a brother who is a once- 
returner V 

' By one who is a once-returner, brother, it is these same 
five groups that should be pondered with method. 

Indeed it is possible, friend, for one who is a once-returner 
by so pondering to realize the fruits of never-returning.” 

‘ But, friend Sariputta, what are the things that should 
be pondered with method by one who is a never-returner V 

^ By such an one, friend Kotthita, it is these five groups 
of grasping that should so be pondered. It is possible, friend, 
for a non-returner by so pondering to realize the fruits of 
arahantship.’ 

‘ But what, friend Sariputta, are the things that should be 
pondered with method by one who is arahant V 

^ By an arahant, friend Kotthita, these five groups should 
be pondered with method as being impermanent, suffering, 
sick, as an imposthume, as a dart, as ill-health, as alien, tran- 
sitory, void and soulless. 

For the arahant, friend, there is nothing further to be done, 
nor is there return to upheaping of what is done.^ Nevertheless, 
these things, if practised and enlarged, conduce to a happy 
existence and to self-possession even in this present life.’ 

§ 123 (11). The wdl-taught. 

{The same^ substituting sutavd (well-taught) for silavd (vir- 
tuous). 


^ N' atthi paUcayo The phrase is used at Ud. 35, where Corny says 
pahlnd- Mies dnay puna pahdne na Jctccay atthi, ^ there is nothing to be 
done in striking- off for one who has put off the tanS^s.’ 



XXII, § 125] Kindred Sayings on Elements 


145 


§ 124 (12). Kappa^ (1). 

, At Savatthi ... In the Park. 

Then the venerable Kappa came to the Exalted and 
sat down at one side. So seated the venerable Kappa thus 
addressed the Exalted One: — 

‘ Pray, lord, how should one know, how should one see, so 
that in this body,^ with its consciousness as welj, as in all 
external objects, he has no more thought of '' I ” and mine,’’ 
no leanings to conceit V 

' Whatsoever bodily form, Kappa, be it past, future or 
present, inward or outward, gross or subtle, low or high, far 
or near, whatsoever bodily form you see as it really is by 
perfect insight thus: This is not mine; this am not I; this 
is not the self of me ” . . . and whatsoever feeling, perception, 
activities . . . whatsoever consciousness you so behold, — to 
you so knowing, so seeing. Kappa, in this body and in all 
external objects there is no thought of I ” and mine,” 
no leaning to conceit.’ 

§ 125 (13). Kappa (2). 

At Savatthi. . . . 

So seated the venerable Kappa thus addressed the Exalted 
One: — 

^ Pray, lord, how should one know, how should one see, so 
that in this body,^ together with its consciousness and in all 
external objects, the mind has gone away from all thought 
of I ” and mine,” gone from conceit, has passed beyond 
the ways of conceit, is calmed, and utterly released V 

‘ Whatsoever bodily form, Kappa, be it past, future or 
present . . . you behold thus: ‘‘This is not mine; this am not 


1 Of. Thag. 567: Brethren, p. 259. A dissolute young prince who 
renounced the world^a^fter hearing a discourse from the Master on the 
asuhhdni (foul things) and became arahant, even while his head was 
being shaved for ordination. These two sections are the same as at 
S. ii, 253. For mdn^ dnusayo see K.8. 167, n., and Bdhula-sutta [su'p. 
§ 71, 92). 

2 Kayo, lit.: this group or ‘ pack.* 
ni 


10 



146 The Khandhd Booh [text iii, 170 

I; this is not the self of me/’ so seeing things as they really 
are by perfect insight, one is released without grasping. 

So also with regard to feeling, perception, the activities., 
conscic^Usness. 

To you, thus knowing. Kappa, thus seeing . . . the mind 
has gone away from all thought of I ” and “ mine,” is gone 
from conceit, is passed beyond the ways of conceit, is calmed 
and utterly released.’ 


III. On Ignorance. 

§ 126. Of a coming4o-pass- nature (1). 

At Savatthi. ... In the Park. 

Then a certain brother came to the Exalted One and sat 
down at one side. So seated that brother thus addressed 
the Exalted One: — 

" Ignorance, ignorance !” is the saying, lord. Pray, 
lord, what is ignorance, and to what extent is one ignorant V 
‘ Herein, brother, the untaught manyfolk know not as it 
really is that the nature of body is to come to pass ! The 
nature of body is to come to pass !” 

They know not as it really is that the nature of body is 
to pass away ! The nature of body is to pass away 
So with feeling, perception, the activities, and conscious- 
ness — ^they know not as it really is that the nature of 
consciousness is to come to pass and to pass away ! The 
nature of consciousness is to come to pass and to pass away !” 

This, brother is called ignorance, and thus far is one 
ignorant.’ 

Whereupon that brother thus addressed the Exalted One: — 

‘ ''Wisdom ! Wisdom is the saying, (^ord. Pray, lord, 
what is wisdom, and how far has one wisdom V 
'Herein, brother, the well-taught Ariyan disciple knows 


^ (7/. Dialogues ii, 26 /. 


’SS 

Cf. supra, p 139. 



147 


XXII, § 129] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

as it really is that "" The nature of body is^to come to pass ! 
The nature of body is to come to pass !” He knows as it 
really is that It is the nature of body to pass away ! It is 
the nature of body to pass away !” He knows as it*really is 
that “ It is the nature of body to come to pass and to pass 
away ! It is the nature of body to come to pass and to pass 
away !” 

So with feeling, perception, the activities, and conscious- 
ness ... he knows as it really is that It is the nature of 
consciousness to come to pass and to pass away ! It is the 
nature of consciousness to come to pass and to pass away !” 

This, brother, is called wisdom, and thus far has one 
wisdom.’ 


§ 127 (2). Of a coming-to-fass-nature (2). 

Once the venerable Sariputta and the venerable Maha- 
Kotthita were staying near Benares, at Isipatana, in the 
Deer Park. 

Then the venerable Maha-Kotthita, rising at eventide 
from his solitude, (went to the venerable Sariputta and sat 
down at one side). 

So seated at one side the venerable Maha-Kotthita thus 
addressed the venerable Sariputta : — '' Ignorance ! Ignorance !” 
is the saying, friend Sariputta . . . {the rest is the same as in 
the ^previous section), 

§ 128 (3). Of a coming-to-pass-natare (3). 

{The same as the second, part of Section 126 ) 

§ 129 (4). Satisfaction (1). 

Near Benares .... At Isipatana ... in the Deer Park. 

Seated at onie side the venerable Maha-Kotthita thus 
addressed the venerable Sariputta : ‘ '' Ignorance ! Ignor- 
ance !” is the saying, friend Sariputta. Pray, friend? what is 
ignorance, and^hbw far is one ignorant V 

‘ Herein, friend, the untaught manyfolk know not as it 



148 


The Khandha Book [text lii, 173 

really is the satisfaction in, the misery of, the escape from^ 
body. So with feeling, perception, the activities . , . they 
know not the satisfaction in, the misery of, the escape from 
consciousness. 

This, friend, is ignorance, and thus far is one ignorant.’ 

§ 130 (5). Satisfaction (2). 

« 

Near Benares ... At Isipatana ... in the Deer Park. 

' Wisdom ! Wisdom !” is the sapng, friend Sariputta. 
What IS wisdom, and how far has one wisdom V 

'Herein, friend, the well-taught Ariyan disciple knows 
as it really is "the satisfaction in, the misery of, the escape 
from body.” So with feeling, perception, the activities . . . 
and consciousness. 

This, friend, is wisdom, and thus far has one wisdom.’ 

§ 131 ( 6 ). Ooming-to-pass (1). 

{The same, with ' the coming-to-pass and the passing away 
of the five groups.) 

§ 132 (7). Ooming-to-pass (2). 

{The same as § 130 with ' the coming-to-pass, the passing 
away, the escape from the groups.^) 

§ 133 (8). Kotthita ( 1 ). 

{The same as § 129, 4.) 

§ 134 (9). Kotthita ( 2 ). 

{The same as § 133, prefixing ' the coming-to-pass and the 
passing away ” to the other features of the five groups.) 

§ 135 ( 10 ). Kotthita (-3). 

{The same, with ' knows not the coming-to-pass and the 
passing ajjyay of body and the way going to the passing away 
of body ’ and the other factors.) 



XXII, § 143 - 45 ] Kindred Sayings on Elements 149 


IV. Glowing Embers.* 

§ 136 (1). Glowing Embers. 

At SavatthL . . . Then the Exalted One said : — 

‘ Body, brethren, is (a mass of) glowing embers. Feeling 
is a mass of glowing embers: hkewise perception, the activi- 
ties and consciousness. 

So seeing, brethren, the well-taught Ariyan disciple feels 
aversion from body, from feehng, perception, the activities; 
he feels aversion from consciousness. Being averse from 
them he is disgusted with them ... so that he knows, “ For 
life in these conditions there is no hereafter.” ’ 

§ 137 (2). By the impermanent (1). 

At Savatthi. • . • 

‘ For that which is impermanent, brethren, there desire 
should be put away by you. And what, brethren, is imper- 
manent ? . . . Body, brethren, is impermanent. ... Ye 
should put away desire there. 

Feeling, perception, the activities, consciousness is imper- 
manent. Ye should put away desire there. 

Whatsoever, brethren, is impermanent, there ye should put 
away desire. 

§ 138. By the impermanent (2). 

{The same as the above, with ‘ lust ’ {rdgo) for ^ desire ’ 
{chanio),) 

§ 139 (4). By the impermanent (3). 

{The same with ‘ desire and lust ^ together,) 

§§ 140-142 (5-7). By suffering (1-3). 

{The same directidns for ‘ sufiering.’) 

§§ 148-145 (8-10). By without a self {1-d), 

{The same with ‘ lust and desire-and-lust for that which is 
without a self should be put away.’) 


1 Kuhhula. Of. K.JS. i, 268, n.: K.V. ii, 8: Pts. of Contr. 127. 



160 


The Khandhd Booh [text iii, 179 


§ 146 {11)^ By the clansman from suffering (1). 

At SavatthL . . . 

‘ For 11 clansman, brethren, who has gone forth in faith this 
is the proper way,* — ^let him live much in aversion from body. 

Let him hve much in aversion from feeling, from perception, 
from the activities and from consciousness. So living he fully 
imderstand^ these things. 

Fully understanding them he is released from body, from 
feeling, from perception, from the activities, from conscious- 
ness; he is fully released from birth, from old age and death, 
grief, lamentation, suffering, woe and despair. 

He is fully released, I declare, from suffering.’ 

§ 147 ( 12 ). By the clansman from suffering ( 2 ) 

(The same, with ‘ seeing impermanence ’ (aniccdnufassi) 
for ‘ aversion.’) 

§ 148 (13). By the clansman from suffering (3). 

(The same, with ‘ seeing no soul in ’ (anattdnupassi) for 
‘ impermanence.’) 


V. On View.^ 

§ 149 ( 1 ), Personal^ (inward). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then the Exalted One said: — 

' There being what, brethren, clinging to what,® does one’s 
0 '^ weal-and-woe arise V 

' For us, lord, things have the Exalted One as their root^ 
(their guide, their resort. Well indeed if the meaning of 
these words should show itself in the Exalted One).’ 

‘ There being a body, brethren, by clinging to body, one’s 

* An^dhamma, ‘ conformity to rule.’ ^ Ditthi. 

2 AjjhathJcay, as opposed to haUray, ‘ external.’ 

^ Kismiy n% sati, him updddya, ^ 

* Bhagavd-mmulahd no dhamma. Cf. K.8. ii, 18, w. 



151 


XXII, § i5i] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

oym weal-and-woe arises. Tliere being feeling, perception, 
tbe activities, tliere being consciousness, by clinging to con- 
sciousness one’s own weal-and-woe arises. 

As to that, wbat tbink ye, brethren ? Is body perlnanent 
or impermanent V 

^ Impermanent, lord.’ 

^ That which is impermanent, is it weal or woe V 

‘ Woe, lord.’ ' 

' Then as to that which is impermanent, woeful, by nature 
changeable — could one’s own weal-and-woe arise without 
a clinging to that V 

^ Surely not, lord.’ 

‘ And so with feeling, perception, the activities and con- 
sciousness. . . . Seeing that, one knows: ‘'For life in these 
conditions there is no hereafter.” ’ 

§ 160 (2). This is mim> 

At SavatthL . . . 

‘ There being what, brethren, by clinging to what, adhering^ 
to what does one hold the view: “This is mine; this am I; 
this is the self of me ” 

‘ For us, lord, things have the Exalted One as their root. . . . 

‘ There being a body, brethren, clinging to body, depending 
upon body , . . feeling, perception, the activities, conscious- 
ness . . . one holds this view. 

As to that, brethren, what think ye ? Is body permanent 
or impermanent V {The rest is as before.) 

§ 151 (3). This is the self of •me?' 

At Savatthi. . . . 

‘ There being what, brethren, by clinging to what, depend 
ing upon what, does this view arise: “ That is the self, that is 
the world, that hereafter^ shall I become, permanent, lasting, 
eternal, by nature unchangeable ” ?’ 


^ Ahhinivi8sa=^abhinivisrtvd : 'paccayan katvd. Coifiy. 
2 Title text omits the ‘ me ’ of the refram. 

® Pecca (gerund), sup. § 81, ‘after death.’ 



152 The Khandhd Book [text iii, 182 

‘ For Tis, lord, things have the Exalted One as their root. . . ’ 
» ' There being a’^body, brethren, by clinging to body, depend- 
ing upon body, does this view arise: That is the self ” . . . 
and so^orth. There being feeling, by perception, by the activ- 
ities, by consciousness it arises. 

‘ As to that what think ye, brethren ? Is body permanent 
or impermanent V 

‘ Imperilianent, lord.’ 

^ Then what is impermanent, woeful, by nature changeable 
, . . can such a view as That is the self and so forth ” arise 
without a clinging to that V 

' Surely not, lord.’ 

^ Then so seeing . . . one knows: For life in these condi- 
tions there is no hereafter.” ’ 

§ 152 (4). And if it be not mine} 

At Savatthi. . . . 

‘ There being what, brethren, by clinging to what, depend- 
ing upon what, does this view arise:' — 

Were I not then, and if it be not mine, 

I shall not be, and mine it shall not be ” V 

' For us, lord, things have the Exalted One as their root. . 

‘ There being a body, brethren, by clinging to body, depend- 
ing upon body, such a view arises. There being feeling, 
perception, the activities, consciousness; by clinging to con- 
sciousness, depending upon consciousness, such a view arises: — 
Were I not then, and if it be not mine, 

I shall not be, and mine it shall not be ” . . . {as before)* 

As to that what think ye, brethren ? Is consciousness 
permanent or impermanent ? 

‘ Impermanent, lord.’ 

‘ Then without a chnging to what is impermanent, woeful, 
by nature changeable, could such a view as this arise: ''Were 
I not then ”... and so forth?’ 

^ No ca me siyd. Of. sup. §§ 55, 81, where this view is praised as 
being the determination of a person to end the ronnd of rebirth. But 
here I am not sure whether the words should b^ translated in the 
same way. 



153 


XXII, § 155 ] Kindred Sayings on Elements 

' Surely not, lord.’ 

^ Tiien so seeing . . . one knows . . . there is no here- 
after.” ’ 

§ 153 (5). Wrong. 

At Savatthi. . . . 

' There being what, brethren, by clinging to what, depend- 
ing upon what does wrong view arise ?’ 

^ For us, lord, things have the Exalted One for thei3;root. . , 

' There being a body, brethren, by clinging to body, de- 
pending upon body, wrong view arises. There being feeling, 
by perception, by the activities, by consciousness, by clinging 
to consciousness, depending upon consciousness, wrong view 
arises. 

As to that, brethren, what think ye ? Is body permanent 
or impermanent V 

‘ Impermanent, lord.’ 

^ Could wrong view arise without a clinging to what is imper- 
manent V 

* Surely not, lord.’ 

‘ So also with feeling, perception . . . consciousness. Is 
consciousness permanent or impermanent V 

^ Impermanent, lord.’ 

‘ And what is impermanent, is that weal or woe V 

' Woe, lord.’ 

^ But what IS impermanent, woeful and by nature change- 
able, — can wrong view arise without a clinging to that ?’ 

‘ Surely not, lord.’ 

'Then so seeing . . . one knows: "For life in these condi- 
tions there is no hereafter.” ’ 

§ 154 (6). The 'person-'pack. 

{The same as the above with ' the person-pack view ’ {sahkdya- 
ditthi)for ' wrong view.’) 

*§ 155 (7). About the self. 

{The same, with 'speculation about the self’ {attdnuditthi*) 
for ' wrong view ’.) 

— 


* Of. 8. iv, 148. 



154 


The Khandha Booh [text iii, i86 


^ § 156 (8). Defendenoe (1). 

(The same, with ' bondage of, dependence upon the fetters ’ 
(ahhinivesa) for ^ wrong view.’) 

§ 157 (9). Dependence (2). 

{The same, with ^ attachment to the bondage of dependence 
upon the fetters 'for ' wrong view.’) 

§ 158 (10). By Ananda. 

At Savatthi. ... In the Deer Park. 

Then the venerable Ananda came to the Exalted One. 
Approaching the Exalted One he said : — 

‘ Well for me, lord, if the Exalted One were to teach me a 
doctrine, hearing which from the Exalted One, I might dwell 
remote, strenuous, ardent and intent.’ 

^ As to this, what think you, Ananda ? Is body permanent 
or impermanent V 

^ Impermanent, lord.’ 

^ And that which is impermanent, is it weal or woe ?’ 

^ Woe, lord.’ 

^ Then is it proper for one thus to regard what is imper- 
manent, woeful, by nature changeable: — This is mine; 
this am I ; this is the self of me ”? ’ 

^ Surely not, lord.’ 

' So also with feeling, perception, the activities and con- 
sciousness. . . . Wherefore, Ananda, whatsoever material 
form, be it past, future or present . . . one so regards, he 
knows: For life in these conditions there is no hereafter.” ' 



BOOK II 


CHAPTER XXIII 

KINDRED SAYINGS ABOUT RADHA 

I 

§ 1 (1). Mara, 

At Savatthi. ... In the Deer Park. 

Then the venerable Radha^ came to the Exalted One. 
Having done so, he saluted the Exalted One and sat down at 
one side. 

So seated the venerable Radha thus addressed the Exalted 
One: — 

‘ They say, Mara ! Mara !” lord. Pray, lord, how far 
is there Mara ?’ 

^ Where a body is, Radha, there would be Mara or things 
of the nature of Mara,^ or at any rate what is perishing. 
Wherefore, Radha, regard the body as Mara ; regard it as of 
the nature of Mara ; regard it as perishing, as an imposthume, 
as a dart, as pain, as a source of pain.^ They who regard it 
thus rightly regard it. 

And the same is to be said of feeling, perception, the activi- 
ties and consciousness.’ 

' But rightly regarding, lord, — ^for what purpose V 

' Rightly regarding, Radha, for the sake of disgust.’ 

‘ But disgust, lord, — for what purpose is it ?’ 

‘ Disgust, Radha, is to bring about dispassion.’ 

' But dispassion, lord; — for what purpose is it ?’ 

' Dispassion, Radha, is to get release.’ 


^ Of. § 71 and Brethren, 115. 

2 Mara^dQdJik^Mareta, ‘killer Corny. Infra^^.160. 
2 Su'p. § 122 . 


155 



156 


The Khandha Booh [xEXTiii, i88 

' But release, lord,— what is it for V 

‘ Release, Eatlha, means Nibbana.’ 

' But Nibbana, lord, — ^what is the aim of that V 

' This, Radha, is a question that goes too far> You can 
grasp no limit to this question. Rooted^ in Nibbana, Radha, 
the holy life is lived. Nibbana is its goal, Nibbana is its 
end.’ 

§ 2 (2). A being? 

At Savatthi. (Then the venerable Radha came to the 
Exalted One.) Seated at one side the venerable Radha thus 
addressed the Exalted One: — 

' A being ! A being !” they say, lord. Pray, lord, how 
far is one called a being V 

‘ That desire, Radha, that lust, that lure, that craving 
which is concerned with body, — entangled thereby, fast 
entangled thereby, therefore is one called a being. 

That desire, that lust, that craving, that lure which is con- 
cerned with feeling, with perception, the activities, conscious- 
ness, — entangled thereby, fast entangled thereby, therefore 
is one called a being. 

Just as when, Radha, boys or girls play with little sand- 
castles.^ So long as they are not rid of lust, not rid of desire, 
not rid of affection, thirst, feverish longing and craving for 
those little sand- castles, just so long do they delight in them, 
are amused by them, set store by them,^ are jealous of them. 

But, Radha, as soon as those boys or girls are rid of lust, 


^ Text has assa only. Corny, reads accasavdyo and says atihkanto 
ti. The phrase occurs ia similar questions and answers at S. v, 218, 
. where text reads a'jjha-'param, brdhfmma, 'panharjt na sahhM, ... Cf. 
M. i, 304‘ 

^ Ogadhay. Corny, ^ Ntbhdne patittJiitayJ 

3 For Satto see 8, i, 135 : K,8 i, 169, n. At Nidd, i, 2-i (satto guhdyay)- 
satto, visatto, asatto, laggo^ lagg%to, pahhuddho ; all synonyms of ‘ some- 
thing caught, entangled, hindered.’ Corny, lagg^-pucchd. For BodM^ 
satto see Papanca, 113 {bodMyay satto, laggo). [Commentators were not 
philologists, and confused the root sat, existent with saj, to clmg. — End 

^ PtysvdgdraJcehi. 

s Text reads manayanti, I read dhandyanti vriMio^omy,, which para- 
phrases dhanay viya mannanti. 



157 


xxni, § 4 ] Kindred about Rddha 

of desire and affection, are rid of thirst, feverish longing and 
craving for those little sand-castles, straightl^ray with hand 
and foot they scatter them, break them up, knock them down, 
cease to play with them. • 

Even so, Eadha, do you scatter body, break it up, knock it 
down, cease to play with it, apply yourself to destroy craving 
for it. 

So also with feeling, perception, the activities*. . . do 
you scatter consciousness, Eadha, break it up, knock it down, 
cease to play with it, apply yourself to destroy craving for it. 
Verily, Eadha, the destruction of craving is Nibbana.’ 

§ 3 (3). Leading to becoming} 

At Savatthi. . . . 

Seated at one side the venerable Eadha thus addressed the 
Exalted One: — 

' The cord of rebirth ! The cord of rebirth !” is the saying, 
lord. Pray, lord, what is the cord of rebirth and what is the 
ceasing of it ?’ 

‘ That desire, Eadha, that lust, that lure, that craving, 
those graspings after systems, that mental standpoint, that 
dogmatic bias which is concerned with body,^ — that is called 
the cord of rebirth.” The ceasing of these is called the 
ceasing of the cord of rebirth.” ’ 

So with feeling, perception, the activities. . . . 

That desire, that lust, that lure, that craving, those grasp- 
ings after systems, that mental standpoint, that dogmatic 
bias which is concerned with consciousness — that is called 
'' the cord of rebirth.” The ceasing of these is called the 
ceasing of the cord of rebirth.” ’ 

§ 4 (4). To he understood} 

At Savatthi . . • 

As he thus sat at*one side the Exalted One thus addressed 
the venerable Eadha : — 

^ Bhava-Tietti Gomy vajju (the cord). Buddh. Psych. Eth. ^9, n. 
2nd ed. 256, n. 10.^^ 

2 Gf. S. ii, 17: K.S. ii, 13. 


3 Supra, § 106. 



168 The Khandha Booh [text iii, 191 

' I will show you the things to he understood, and the under- 
standing, and tlTe person who has understood. Do you listen 
to it.’ 

Th^ Exalted One thus spake: “ And what, Radha, are the 
things to he understood ? Body, Radha, is a thing to he 
understood : so is feeling, perception, the activities. Con- 
sciousness is a thing to he understood. These, Radha, are 
the things to he understood. 

And what, Radha, is understanding ? 

The destruction of lust, the destruction of hatred, the de- 
struction of illusion, — this, Radha, is called ‘"understanding.” 

And who, Radha, is the person who has understood ? 

“ Worthy ” should he he called, that venerable one of such 
and such a name, of such and such a clan, — that, Radha, is 
the meaning of “ the person who has understood.” ’ 

§ 5 ( 5 ). Recluses (1). 

At Savatthi . . • 

As he sat at one side the Exalted One thus addressed the 
venerable Radha : — 

‘ There are these five groups of grasping, Radha. What 
five? The group of body-grasping . . . the group of con- 
sciousness-grasping. 

Whatsoever recluses or brahmins, Radha, understand not 
in their true nature the satisfaction in, the misery of, the 
escape from these five groups of grasping, — ^those recluses or 
brahmins are approved neither among recluses as recluses 
nor among brahmins as brahmins : nor have those venerable 
ones understood of themselves, nor have they realized in this 
. present life the use of recluseship or of brahminhood, nor do 
they live in the attainment thereof. 

But those recluses or brahmins, Radha, who do understand 
these things, they are approved both among recluses and 

brahmins as such: and those venerable ones have understood 

# 

of themselves, and in this present life have realized the use 
of recluseship and of brahminhood, and they do live in the 
attainment thereof.’^ 


1 C/. li, 11, etc.; supra, p. 28 - 9 . 



159 


XXIII, § 9] Kindred Sayings about Rddha 

§ 6 (6). Recluses (2). 

[The same, with ^coming to pass ^ a passing away/ 
for ‘ the satisfaction,’ etc. 

§ 7 (7). Stream-winner, 

At Savatthi. . ■ . 

As he sat at one side the Exalted One thus addressed the 
venerable Radha : — • 

' There are these five groups of grasping, Radha. What 
five ? They are the group of body-grasping . . . that of 
consciousness-grasping. 

Now Radha, when the Ariyan disciple understands in their 
true nature the coming to pass, and the passing away, the 
satisfaction in, the misery of, the escape from these five 
groups of grasping, this Ariyan disciple, Radha, is called 
'' stream- winner,” saved from disaster,” assured,’' 
‘‘ bound for enlightenment.” ’ 

§ 8 (8). The Arahant. 

At Savatthi ,,, {as before). . . . 

‘ But when, Radha, a brother sees in their true nature the 
coming to pass and the passing away, th^ satisfaction in, the 
misery of, the escape from these five groups of grasping, that 
brother is called arahant, one in whom the Asavas are de- 
stroyed, one who has lived the life, who has done his task, 
who has shifted the burden, won his own welfare, worn out 
the fetters of becoming, and by perfect insight is released.’ 

§ 9 (9). Desire-and-lust (1). 

At Savatthi . . . 

As he sat at one side the Exalted One thus addressed the 
venerable Radha : — 

' That desire, Radha, that lust, that lure, that craving 
which is concerned with body, put it away. Thus put away, 
this body will became cut down at the root, made something 
that has ceased to be, so that it cannot grow up again in the 
future. • 

So is it withieeling, perception, the activities and conscious- 
ness.’ 



160 The Khandha Book [text lii, 194 

§ 10 (10). Desire-and-lust (2). 

{The same, aading 'those graspings after systems, that 
mental standpoint, that mental bias ’ after ' craving.’) 


II. 

§ 11 (1). Mara, 

At Savatthi. . . . 

As he sat at one side the venerable Eadha thus addressed 
the Exalted One : — 

“'Mara! Mara 1”^ they say, lord. Pray, lord, what is 
Mara ?’ 

' Body, Eadha, is Mara. Feeling, Eadha, is Mara. Per- 
ception, the activities, consciousness, Eadha, is Mara. 

So seeing, Eadha, the weU-taught Ariyan disciple feels 
aversion from body, from feeling, perception, the activities, 
from consciousness; so that he knows: "... for life in 
these conditions there is no hereafter.” 

§ 12 (2). Of the nature of Mdra,'^ 

[The same, with ' of the nature of Mara ’ for ' Mara.’) 

§ 13 (3). Impermanent (1). 

' “ Impermanent 1 Impermanent !” they say, lord. Pray, 
lord, what is impermanent V 

' Body, Eadha, is impermanent. Feeling, Eadha, is im- 
permanent. So is perception, the activities . . . conscious- 
ness is impermanent. 

He who so sees knows: "... for life in these conditions 
there is no hereafter.” ’ 

§ 14 (4). Impermanent (21. 

{The same, with ' by nature impermanent ’ {anieca-dhammo) 
for anhca,) 


^ Cf, supra, p. 155. 


* Mdradhammo, i.eTTperishable* 



161 


XXIII, § 23] Kindred Sayings ahovt Uddha 

§§ 15, 16 (5, 6). Suffering (1, 2). 

^ {The same, with ‘ suffering ’ and ‘of the nature of suffering* 
for ‘ impermanent ^ and ^ by nature impermanent ’ res'pectfvely.) 

§§ 17, 18 (7, 8). Without a self (1, 2). 

{The same, with ‘ without a self ’ and ‘ by nature without 
a self.’ for ‘ impermanent ’ and ‘ by nature imperma^ient.’) 

§ 19 (9). Perishing, 

{The same, with ‘ perishable ’ {khaya^dhammo) for ‘ by 
nature impermanent.’) 

§ 20 (10). Life* 

{The same, with ‘ transitory ’ {vaya-dhammo,) 

§ 21 (11). Coming to pass, 

{The same, with ‘ of a nature to come to pass ’ {samudaya- 
dhammo.) 

§ 22 (12). Ceasing. 

{The same, with ‘ doomed to cease ’ {nirodha-dhammo),) 


III. Bequests. 

At Savatthi. . . . 

Seated at one side the venerable Radha thus addressed 
the Exalted One : — 

‘ Well for me, lord, if the Exalted One were to teach me a 
doctrine in brief, (hearing which from the Exalted One I * 
might dwell remote, strenuous, ardent and intent).’^ 

§,23 (1). Mara, 

‘ That which is Mara, Radha, desire for that must be put 

away by you. And What, Radha, is Mara ? Body, Radha, is 

— — — ^ — « 

, ^ Vayo, life or age: vaya-dhammo, ‘ ageing.’ 

^ Gf,'7upra, pp. 32, 155. 

m 11 



162 The Khandhd Booh [text iii, 198 

Mara. Desire for that must be put away. F eeling, Kadta, is 
Mara. So is perception, the activities. . . . Consciousness 
is Mara. Desire for that must be put away. ’ 

§ 24 ( 2 ). Of the nature of Mara, 

' That which is of the nature of Mara, Radha, — desire for 
that must be put away by you. Lust must be put away, 
desire and lust must be put away.’ 

§§ 25 , 26 ( 3 , 4 ). Im'permanent ( 1 , 2 ). 

‘ That which is impermanent and of the nature of imper- 
manence must be put away.’ 

§§ 27 , 28 ( 5 , 6 ). Suffering ( 1 , 2 ). 

‘ That which is sufiering and of the nature of suffering ’ . . . 

§§ 29 , 30 ( 7 , 8 ). Without a self ( 1 , 2 ). 

‘ That which is without a self and naturally without a self 
must be put away.’ 

§§ 31 , 32 ( 9 , 10 ). Destruction — transience. 

' That which is perishing and transient by nature must be 
put away.’ 

§ 33 ( 11 ). Coming to pass. 

' That, Radha, which is of a nature to come to pass — desire 
for that must be put away. You must put away lust for 
' that, desire-and-lust for that you must put away. 

§ 34 ( 12 ). Of a nature to cease. 

At Savatthi. . . . 

Seated at one side the venerable Radha thus addressed 
the Exalted One: — 

‘ Well for me, lord, if the Exalted One would teach me a 
doctrine in brief, hearing which from the Exalted One I might 
dwell remote, strenuous, ardent and intent.’ 

' Tteat, Radha, which is of a nature to cease, — desire for that 
you must put away, lust for that, desire-and 4 pst for that you 
must put away. 



163 


XXIII, § 46] Kindred Sayings about Rddha 

And what, Eadha, is of a nature to cease ? Body, feeling- 
perception, the activities, consciousness is olf nature to cease; 
Hesire for that you must put away. 

Whatsoever, Eadha, is of a nature to cease, desire for that, 
lust for that, desire-and-lust for that must be put away.’ 


IV. Confidential.* 

§§ 35, 36 (1). Mdraandof the nature of Mara (1, 2). 

(The same as §§ 23, 24.) 

§§ 37, 38 (3, 4). Impermanent (1, 2), 

(The same as §§ 25, 26.) 

§§ 39, 40 (5, 6). Suffering (1, 2). 

(The same as §§ 27, 28.) 

§§ 41, 42 (7, 8). Without a self (1, 2). 

(The same as §§ 29, 30.) 

§§ 43, 45 (9-11). Destruction — Transience — Coming to pass, 
(The same as §§ 31, 33.) 

§ 46 (12). Of a nature to cease, 

(The same as § 34.) 

* Tlie chapter is called Upanisinna, ‘ seated near/ implying a special 
teaching, with perhaps an implication of an upamsa, ‘ secret doctrine ’ 
of the brahminical method. Corny, says, ‘ The first two chapters are 
about questions; the third is about requests (for teaching). The 
fourth is a “ seated near ’’ talk. The whole section is to be understood 
as a teaching with th.^ object of ripening his emancipation ’ It is thus 
seen that the teachmg might be called 'special or intimate,’ not for 
the general, but for the individual, which is the meaning o^ secret 
doctrine Of. Upamsad. 



BOOK III 


CHAPTER XXIV 
KINDRED SAYINGS ON VIEWS 

L On Stream-winning 
§ 1 (I). Wind, 

At Savatthi. . . . 

* There being what, brethren, by clinging to what, by de- 
pending upon what does such a view as this arise : Winds do 
not blow, rivers do not flow, pregnant women do not bring 
forth, moon and sun neither rise nor set, but (all) are stable 
as a pillar ” V 

‘ Eor us, lord, things have the Exalted One for their root. . 

‘ There being a body, brethren, by clinging to body, depend- 
ing upon body, arises such a view as this. There being feeling, 
perception, the activities . . . there being consciousness, by 
clinging to consciousness, depending upon consciousness 
arises such a view as this: Winds do not blow, rivers do not 
flow, pregnant women bring not forth, moon and sun neither 
rise nor set, but (all) are stable as a pillar.” 

As to that, what think ye, brethren ? Is body permanent 
or impermanent V 

‘ Impermanent, lord.’ 

‘ And what is impermanent, is that weal or woe ?’ 

^ ‘Woe, lord.’ 

‘ Impermanent, woeful, by nature changeable, — ^without 
clinging to that can such a view as this arise ?’ 

‘ Surely not, lord.’ 

‘ Is feeling, is perception, are the activities, is consciousness 
permanent or impermanent ?’ 

‘ Impermanent, lord.’ 

‘ And what is impermanent, is that weal or woe V 

• Woe, lord.’ 


164 



XXIV, § 2] Kindred Sayings on Views 165 

* Woeful, by nature changeable, — ^without clinging to that 
co'uld such a view arise ?’ 

• ‘ Surely not, lord.’ 

* Now what is seen, heard, sensed, known, attained, nought 
after, thought out by mind, — ^is that permanent or imper- 
manent V 

‘ Impermanent, lord.’ 

* And that which is impermanent, is that weal or iwoe V 

' Woe, lord.’ 

' Impermanent, woeful, by nature changeable, — ^without 
clinging to that could such a view as this arise: Winds do 
not blow, rivers do not flow, pregnant women bring not forth, 
moon and sun neither rise nor set, but (all) are stable as a 
piUar ” 

^ Surely not, lord.’ 

^ But when in an Ariyan disciple doubt as to these six 
points^ is put away when for him doubt as to sufiering is put 
away, doubt as to the arising of sufiering, as to the ceasing 
of suffering, as to the way going to the ceasing of suffering is 
put away, — ^then this Ariyan disciple is called stream- winner, 
saved from disaster, assured, bound for enlightenment.” ’ 

§ 2 (2). This is mine. 

At Savatthi. . . . 

' There being what, brethren, by clinging to what, depend- 
ing upon what does such a view as this arise: '' This is mine; 
this am I; this is the self of me ” V 

' For us, lord, things have the Exalted One for their root. . . ’ 

[The rest is the same as above, with ‘ this is mine,’ etc., for 
* winds do not blow,’ etc.) 

* Corny, says ‘it is not winds that blow, but a wind-atom, they say ’ 
{mta-leso). In reality the wind is fixed like a mountain peak. Nor 
does the water carry down sticks and straws, but a water-atom. The 
water is really immovable as a post or pillar. Perhaps a glimpse of the 
fact that, in a wave, not the water of itself moves. (It is reasonable 
to assume that a stock saying of some current theory is here quoted, 
not more irrational when philosophically explained than, say, Berkeley’s 
view of matter, or Zeno’s tortoise Cf e.g. infra, p. 170. — ^En?) 

^ Chasu thanem. It is not clear how six are made out. Bm. ed. 
reads ca. 



166 


The Khandhd Booh [text iii, 205 


§ 3 (3). That is the self. 

At SavattM. f. * 

‘ There being what, brethren, by clinging to what, depend- 
ing upon what does such a view as this arise : “ That self, 
that world, that hereafter I shall become, permanent, stable, 
eternal, by nature unchangeable ” V 

'For us, lord . . . [the same, with 'that is the self,’ etc. /or 
‘ winds,’ etc.)’ 


§ 4 (4). It may not he mine?- 
At Savatthh . . • 

‘ There being what, brethren . . . does such a view as this 
arise : " I may not be, and mine it may not be. I shall not be, 
and mine it shall not be ” ?’ 

(The same, with this phrase for ' winds do not blow,’ etc ) 

§ 5 (5). There is not? 

At Savatthi. . . . 

' There being what, brethren, by clinging to what, depend- 
ing upon what does the view arise: " There is no alms-giving, 
no sacrifice, no offering. There is no fruit, no result of good 
or evil deeds. This world is not, the world beyond is not. 
There is no mother or father, no beings of spontaneous birth.® 
In the world are no recluses and brahmins who have won the 
su mm it, who have won perfection, who of themselves have 
won and realized both this world and the world beyond and 
proclaim it ” ? 

Of the Four Great Elements is a man composed.^ When 
he makes an end, his body, earth to earth, returneth, to earth 
goes back.^ His body, water to water, returneth, to water 
goes back. His body, fire to fire, returneth, to fire goes back. 

^ Cf. 152 supra. 

2 The annihilationist doctrine of Ajita, of the hair-shirt. Cf. D. i, 
55, § 23; AT. i, 515; Dialog, i, 73, where the passage comes; and again 
at 8. iv, 348. 

3 Opcfpdtilca, unprocreated. 

^ Gatu-mmahabhiitiko ayarj punso. 

s Text has anupagacchah. Corny, reads anuvigacchati. 



167 


XXIV, § 5] Kindred Sayings on Views 

His body, air to air, returneth, to air goes back. His faculties 
rejoin tbe element of space. Then bearers four, with bim 
upon the bier as fifth, ^ take up the dead, and on the way to 
the burning-ground men sound his praises forth ^ H^sS bones 
9 rre bleached and the funeral ofierings turn to ashes.^ 

Instituted by fools^ is this alms-giving: it is empty idle 
talk to say there is profit therein: for fools and wise alike, 
when body breaks up, are cut down and perish. 4^ter death 
they are not.’ 

(How, think ye, brethren, does this view arise ?) 

^Forus, lord, things have the Exalted One for their root. . . 

' There being a body, brethren, by clinging to body, depend- 
ing upon body does such a view arise: There is no alms- 
giving, no sacrifice,'' and so forth. . . . 

Conditioned by feeling, by perception, by the activities, 
conditioned by consciousness, clinging to consciousness, 
adhering to consciousness does such a view as this arise: 

There is no alms-giving,” and so forth. . . . 

As to that what think ye, brethren ? Is body permanent 
or impermanent V 

^ Impermanent, lord.’ 

^ And could such a view as this arise without a clinging to 
that V 

' Surely not, lord.’ 

^Is feeling, perception, are the activities, is consciousness 
permanent or impermanent V 

^ Impermanent, lord ’ 

^ Woeful and by nature changeable — ^without a clinging to 
that could such a view as this arise V 

‘ Surely not, lord.’ 

‘ Again, what is seen, heard, sensed, known, reached, sought 

Text has ayanti ; 'pancama purisa. Corny, asandi pancamd. So 
also 10, 1, 55, 

2 Ydva dldhand paddni (stanzas) panndpenti. Corny, gundguna 
paddni, ‘ verses about his virtues or vices.’ 

3 Bhasmantdlintiyo. Corny. ‘ and have no further results ’ 

* 0/. Fausb, Jdt. 116, daUa-panmttay. Corny. ‘Ft)ols give; 
wise men take.’ 



168 The Khandha Booh [text iii, 208 

after, thought out by mind, — that permanent or imper- 
manent V 

* 

'‘Impermanent, lord.’ 

‘ Then if it were not for clinging to what is impermanent, 
woeful, by nature changeable, could such a view as this arise V 

‘ Surely not, lord.’ 

‘ But, brethren, when in an Ariyan disciple doubt as to these 
six points^ is put away, when for him doubt as to suffering, 
doubt as to the arising of suffering, as to the ceasing of suffer- 
ing, as to the way going to the ceasing of suffering is put 
away, — ^then this Ariyan disciple is called ‘‘ stream- winner, 
saved from disaster, assured, bound for enlightenment.” ’ 

§ 6 (6). For him who acts? 

At Savatthi. . . . 

‘ There being what, brethren, by clinging to what, depend- 
ing upon what does such a view as this arise: ‘‘ For him who 
acts or makes others act: for him who mutilates or makes 
others mutilate, who torments or makes others torment,® 
who causes grief of himself or through others, who enfeebles 
or make others enfeeble,^ who binds or makes others bind,® 
who causes life to be taken, who causes robbery, who breaks 
into houses, plunders on the highway, who plunders houses, 
waylays travellers, commits adultery and tells lies, — ^by one 
so acting no evil is done.® 

Even though with a razor- edged tool he should make all 
living beings on earth one mash*^ of flesh, one heap of flesh, 
no evil would result from that, no coming by any evil.® 
Though he should go along the right bank of the Ganges, 


^ The six here are also not clearly made out. Corny, is silent. 

2 The heresy of Purana Kassapa, from B i, 52; Dialog i, 52. 

® Reading with Corny 'paccato pacapayato (for text vadhato vadhd- 
payato) ti — parehi pllapenta^sa. 

^ Corny. ‘ by starvation or imprisonment.’ 

5 Corny , handhato for text pliandJiato. 

® Jcarato na harlyaie pdpay. Or * for him ’ or ‘ to him.’ No de- 
merit accr'ues to him. 

^ Mar)sahhalay, lit. ‘ a flesh-paste.’ 


® rAgamo. 



169 


XXIV, § 7] Kindred Sayings on Views 

slaying and striking, mutilating and causing mutilation, 
tormenting and causing torment, — ^yet tli:^refrom results no. 
^evil, no coming by any evil. Tbough be should go along the 
left bank of the Ganges,^ making burnt offerings and causing 
them to be made, sacrificing and causing sacrifice, — ^yet 
therefrom results no merit, no coming by any merit. In 
charity, in self-restraint, in control of feeling, in truthfulness 
there is no merit, no coming by any merit 

(How think ye, brethren, could such a view arise V) 

' For us, lord, things have their root in the Exalted 
One. . 

‘ There being a body, by clinging to body, depending upon 
body such a view arises.’ 

{The rest is the same as in the 'previous section.) 

§ 7 (7). Condition^ 

At Savatthi. . . . 

‘ There being what, brethren, by clinging to what, depend- 
ing upon what does such a view as this arise: There is no 
condition, there is no cause for the impurity of beings. With- 
out condition, without cause do beings become impure There 
is no condition, there is no cause for the purity of beings. 
Without condition, without cause do beings become pure. 
There is no strength,® no energy, no human effort, no human 
vigour. All beings,^ all living creatures, all beasts, all lives, 
are without power, without strength, without energy. They 
are determined by destiny, by coincidence, by nature,^ and 

^ Corny, says that on the north bank men are religious devotees of 
the Buddha-Dhamma-Sangha. On the south bank they are scoundrels 

2 This section also is at D. i, 53; Dialog, i, 71, and is the accidentalist 
heresy of Makkhali of the Cow-pen. Of. above, § 60; Mrs. Rh. D., 
Buddhism, p. 85 j7* Corny., paccayo—hetu. 

3 Some copies of Corny have (wrongly) phalay (fruit of action) for 
balay. Ror ‘ vigour ’ we may also read ‘ progress.’ 

* Sattd, pand, hJiUtd, jlvd. Corny, distinguishes these as ‘animals 
(such as elephants, cattle, asses, etc.), creatures with one or more 
senses, egg-born creatures, and grain that grows (the vegetabl^g world),’ 
which seems a fanciful elaboration of the old, simple group of synonyms. 

s Niyati-san^ati-bhdva-panruitd. 



The Khandha Booh 


170 


[text lii, 210 


they experience weal or woe by birth in one of the six 
^classes 

‘(How think ye, brethren, does such a view arise ?’) 

‘ For^is, lord, things have the Exalted One for their root. . 
[The rest is the same as in § 5 ) 


§ 8 (8). By the [Great) Heresy. 

At Savatthi. . . . 

* There being what, brethren, by clinging to what, depending 
upon what does such a view as this arise: These seven things 
are neither made nor caused to be made, neither created nor 
caused to be created, barren (of results). Stable as a moun- 
tain-peak, stable as a pillar, they move not nor change: they 
clash not together, incapable of causing each other weal, or 
woe, or weal and woe alike. 

What seven ? The elementary substances of earth, water, 
fire, air : weal and woe and life These seven things are neither 
made nor caused to be made . . . incapable of causing each 
other weal, or woe, or weal and woe alike 

He who with a sharp sword cuts off a head thereby robs 
none of life. It is just the sword entering in between the 
seven elementary substances.^ 

There are (these) fourteen hundred thousand chief sorts 
of birth: sixty hundred, and again six hundred. There are 
five hundred karmas, five karmas, and three karmas.^ There 
is a whole karma and a half karma ^ There are sixty- two 
ways of conduct, sixty-two periods (in the kalpa), six classes 


Ghasu eva abhijatasu (in next section chalabhijatiyo). According 
to this Hindu system, beings are of six species, each with a colour. Cf. 
A. iii, 383. The classification is that of Purana Kassapa, viz. : black, 
blue, red, yellow, white, and radiant. 

2 The view of Pakudha Kaccayana. D. i, 56; Dialog, i, 74. The 
view following is ascribed to Makkhali of the Cow-pen. D. i, 54; 
Dialog, i, 72. 

2 Gomy. takes these divisions to be according to the five senses, and 
again according to thought, word, and deed. 

^ Gomy. says word and deed are to be reckoned as one, and thought 
as a half. 



171 


XXIV, § 8] Kindred Sayings on Views 

of mankind.^ Tiiere are eiglit stages (in the life) of a man.^ 
There are forty-nine hundred ways of life,^^ forty-nine hundred 
sorts of wanderers, forty-nine hundred names of nagas. There 
are twenty hundred sense-faculties, thirty hundred purga- 
tories, six and thirty dust-heaps:^ seven womhs of conscious 
and seven of unconscious birth,® seven ways of birth from the 
knot ® There are seven sorts of devas,*^ seven sorts of men 
and seven of goblins * There are seven lakes, seven knots, 
seven great precipices, seven hundred precipices. There 
are seven great dreams, seven hundred dreams. 

There are eighty-four hundred thousand great periods, 
wherein both fools and wise, when they have run, have 
fared on, will make an end of suffering. Herein it is 
useless for one to say : ' By this virtue, by this practice, by 
this penance, or holy living I shall bring to ripeness the karma 
that is yet unripe:’ useless to say: ^ this karma that is ripe, 
meeting^ it again and again, I shall work out to an end.’ 
Useless to say: ^ The Weal and woe of rebirth allotted® to me 
have an end. There is no waxing or waning of it, no growing 
more or less.’ Just as when one throws down a ball of thread, 
it rolls^® as far as it unwinds — even so both fools and wise 
alike wander on so far as their weal or woe unwinds ” ? 

^ Gomy., as in the previous section, says. Under the colour hlach are 
included hunters, fishermen, robbers, etc Under line, bhikkhus and 
wanderers Under red, ascetics of one cloth. Under yellow, naked 
ascetics. Under white, djlvaha ascetics. As the view is that of Mak- 
khali, radiant is reserved for the practisers of his own precepts. 

2 Corny , ‘ Tender (baby) stage, playtime, stage of investigation, 
standing erect, learning, reclusehood, victory, attainment.’ 

® Text has apvaha'SB,te, but Gomy. djiva-. 

^ ? Realms where cosmic dust gathers. Gomy merely says ‘ dust 
from hand or foot ’ 

5 Gomy., ‘ of animals and vegetables and grains, by grafting.’ 

6 Text pavudhd (growth period). So Gomy., who says ^ganthihd^ 
(knots). Digha text reads patuvd, where R. D. has pacuta. Both are 
unintelligible. It may refer to the seven- knotted bamboo staff of the 
ascetics, said to represent the seven centres or plexuses of the spinal 
column, awakened in yoga. 

7 Dihbd. * Gomy ‘whereas they are^ountless.’ 

8 Lit. touching. Gf. Pss. Brethren, ver. 783. ® Donamite, ‘ ladled out.’ 

Reading paleti with text and Corny. Digha reads phaleti. 



172 


The Khandha Booh [text iii, 212 

(How tMiik ye, brethren, does such a view as this arise 
For us, lord, things have the Exalted One for their root. . 

‘ There being a body, brethren, by clinging to body, depend- 
ing upoiJ body does such a view arise.’ . . . 

(The rest is the same as section 1.) 

§ 9 (9) The world is eternal. 

At Savatthi . . . 

‘ There being what . . . does such a view as this arise : 
“ The world is eternal ” V 

^ For us, lord, things have the Exalted One for their root. 

(The rest, with §§ 10-18, is the same as in § 1.) 

§ 10 (10). The world is not eternal. 

§ 11 (11). Limited (is the world). 

§ 12 (12). Unlimited (is the world). 

§ 13 (13) What the life is, that is the hody.^ 

§ 14 (14). The life is one thing, the hody is another. 

§ 15 (15). The Tathdgata exists. 

§ 16 (16). The Tathdgata exists not. 

§ 17 (17). The Tathdgata both exists and exists not.^ 

^ § 18 (18). The Tathdgata neither exists nor exists not. 

At Savatthi . . . 

‘ There being what, brethren, . . . does such a view as this 
arise: ‘'The Tathagata neither exists nor exists not after 
death ?” ’ 


^ Text Tar} jlvar}, tay sarlray. Jlva is the animating principle, 
‘ animal-sci?il.’ 

2 These eight are all treated like the following and last^ Dialogues, 
i, 44 /. Ma'j'jhima, ii, 229 



XXIV, § 36 ] Kindred Sayings on Views 173 

"For ns, lord, things have the Exalted One for their 
root. . 

" There being a body, brethren, by clinging to body, depend- 
ing upon body, such a view arises. Now as to that, brethren, 
what think ye ? Is body permanent or impermanent V 

" Impermanent, lord.’ 

" Woeful and by nature changeable — ^without a clinging to 
that could such a view as this arise: "" The Tathagata neither 
exists nor exists not after death ’’ V 

" Surely not, lord.’ 

" Likewise with regard to feeling, perception, the activities, 
consciousness. That which is seen, heard, sensed, known, 
attained, sought after, thought out by mind, — is that per- 
manent, or impermanent V 

" Impermanent, lord.’ 

" Now what is impermanent, — ^is that weal or woe V 

" Woe, lord.’ 

" Impermanent, woeful, by nature changeable, — ^without a 
clinging to that could such a view arise (as this) : "" The Tath- 
agata neither exists nor exists not after death ” V 

" Surely not, lord.’ 

" But when in the Ariyan disciple doubt as to these six 
points is put away, when for him doubt as to suSering is put 
away, doubt as to the arising of suffering, as to the ceasing 
of suffering, as to the way leading to the ceasing of suffering 
is put away, — this Ariyan disciple is called "" stream- winner, 
saved from disaster, assured, bound for enlightenment.” ’ 


II. First Eepetition (of the Eighteen Instructions) 


§ 19 (19). Winds. 

{These followiiig sections, §§ 19-36, are exactly the same as at 
Book III. (supra) Ditthi-sayyumy). 


36 (18). Neither exists nor exists not. 



174 


The Khandhd Booh [text lii, 219 


III. Second Repetition (of the Eighteen Insteijctions). ' 
§ 37 (19). The self has form. 

At SavattliL . . . 

' There being what, brethren, . . . does this view arise: 
'' The self Jias form,^ it is without sickness, after death ” 

{This and the following sections to § 44 are statements of 
various heretical views under the same formulae. ) 

§ 38 (20). The self is formless. 

"... It is formless, without sickness, after death.’ 

§ 39 (21). It both has form and is formless. 

‘ . . . The self both has form and is formless after death.’ 

§ 40 (22). It neither has form nor is formless. 

"... The self neither has form nor is formless, is without 
sickness, after death.’ 

§ 41 (23). Sheer bliss. 

"... The self is sheer bliss, without sickness, after death.’ 

§ 42 (24). It is sheer suffering. 

\ . . The self is sheer suffering, without sickness, after 
death.’ 

§ 43 (25). It is bliss and suffering. 

. . . The self is both bliss and suffering, without sickness, 
after death.’ 

§ 44 (26). It is without bliss or suffering. 

# 

The self is without bliss or suffering, wi-ftout sickness, 
after de^th.’ 


^ Or has a body {rupi). Cf. i, 44. 



XXIV, § yi] Kindred Sayings on Views 


175 


IV. Third Repetition 
§ 45 ( 1 ). 

{The same as in Chapter I, § 1 of this Ditthi-sa^yutta,) 

§§ 46-69 (2-25). 

{The same as §§ 20-43.) 

§ 70 (26). It is without bliss or suffering, 

{The same as § 44.) 


V. Fourth Repetition 
§ 71 ( 1 ). 

{The same as §§ 45-95.) 

§§ 72-96 (26). It is without bliss or suffering. 

At Savatthi. ... 

^ There being what, brethren, by clinging to what, depending 
upon what does such a view arise: '' The self is without bliss 
or suSering, it is without sickness, after death ” V 

' For us, lord, things have the Exalted One for their root. . 

‘ There being a body, brethren, by clinging to body, depend- 
ing upon body such a view arises. There being feeling, per- 
ception, the activities, by consciousness, by clinging to con- 
sciousness, depending upon consciousness such a view arises: 

The self is without bliss or suffering, it is without sickness, 
after death.” 

As to that what think ye, brethren ? Is body permanent 
or impermanent V 

^ Impermanent, lord.’ 

' What is woeful, impermanent, by nature changeable . . . 
is it proper to regard that thus: “ This is mine; this am I; 
this is the’self of me ” 



176 


The Ehandha Booh 


[text iii, 223 


/ Surely not, lord.’ 

/Sowithfeeling, perception, the activities, consciousness . . ! 
is it proper thus to regard it : ‘‘ This is mine ; this am I ; this is ' 
the self^of me ” V 

' Surely not, lord.’ 

‘ Wherefore, brethren, whatsoever body, be it past, future, 
or present, inward or outward, gross or subtle, low or high, 
far or near? — ^whatsoever body there be, thus must it be re- 
garded in its real nature by perfect insight : This is not mine; 
this am not I; this is not the self of me.” 

So also with feeling, perception, the activities, conscious- 
ness. . . . 

So seeing, the well- taught Ariyan disciple has aversion from 
body, from feeling, from perception, from the activities, from 
consciousness. Being averse from them he is disgusted; 
by disgust he is set free; by freedom he is released and the 
knowledge comes to him: ‘‘ Destroyed is rebirth, lived is the 
righteous life, done is my task, for life in these conditions 
there is no hereafter.” ’ 



BOOK IV 

CHAPTEE XXV 

THE KINDEED SAYINGS ON ENTERING ' 

§ 1. The Eye. 

At SavattLi. . . . Thea the Exalted One said: — 

‘ The eye, brethren, is impermanent, changeable, becoming 
otherwise.^ The ear, brethren, is impermanent, changeable. 
So is the nose, the tongue, the body,^ and the mind. It is 
impermanent, changeable, becoming otherwise. 

He who has faith and confidence, brethren, in these doctrines, 
such an one is called walker in faith, one w‘ho enters on 
assurance of perfection,^ one who enters on the state of the 
worthy, one who has escaped the state of the manyfolk; one 
incapable of doing a deed by which he would be reborn in 
purgatory or in the womb of an animal, or in the realm of 
Petas; one incapable of dying without realizing the fruits of 
stream- winning . ’ ’ 

He, brethren, by whom these doctrines by his insight are 
moderately approved,® is called ' Valker in faith, one who enters 
on assurance of perfection, one who enters on the state of the 
worthy, one who has escaped the state of the manyfolk : one 
incapable of doing a deed by which he would be reborn in 
purgatory or in the womb of an animal, or in the realm of 
Petas, one who cannot die without realizing the fruits ofe 
str earn- winning. ” 


^ See 8, ii, 244= ; K.S^ ii, 165 for these sections. 

2 Annathd-hh^vi. Cf. 8. iv, 67/. 

3 Kayo, here the organ of touch sensation, the whole bodily surface. 
^ Ohhanto sammatta-niyarmT). Cf. Pts. of Gontrov. 177, C. 185. 

Vis. Magg. 177. Samrmtta is the abstract noun from samma (Lat. 
summa, highest, best). • 

^ MaUaso nijjhdmy hMmanti. Cf. 8. v, 377; A. iv, 241.; P.T.S., 
1913-14, p. 
in 


177 


12 



178 


The Khandha Booh [text ni, 225 

He, brethren, who thus knows, thus sees these doctrines, 
^is called “ Streanji- winner, saved from destruction, ' assured, 
bound for enlightenment.” ’ 


§ 2. Body} 

At Savatthi. . . . 

‘ The material body, brethren, is impermanent, changeable, 
becoming otherwise. Sounds likewise and scents, tastes and 
tangibles, states of mind are impermanent, changeable, be- 
coming otherwise. 

He, brethren, who has faith and confidence in these doc- 
trines is called '' walker in faith. ... {as above ). ’ 

§ 3. Consciousness.^ 

At Savatthi. . . . 

‘ Eye-consciousness, brethren, is impermanent, changeable, 
becoming otherwise. Likewise ear-consciousness, nose-, 
tongue-, body-consciousness, . . . mind-consciousness is im- 
permanent.’ . . . {the rest as above) 

§ 4. Contact. 

At Savatthi. . . . 

‘ Eye-contact, brethren, is impermanent, changeable, be- 
coming otherwise. Likewise ear-, nose-, tongue-, body-, 
mind-contact is impermanent.' . . . {the rest as above). 

§ 5. Feeling. 

At Savatthi. . • . 

‘Feelings, brethren, that arise from eye-contact are im- 
jpermanent. . . . Likewise feelings that arise from ear-, 
nose-, tongue-, body- and mind-contact are impermanent.' . . . 
{the rest as above). 

§ 6. Perception. 

At Savatthi. ... 

‘ Perception of body, brethren, is impermanent. . . . 
Likewise of sound, scent, savour; perception of tangibles and 
phenorrena is impermanent.’ . . . 


^ Here rupap not hayo. 


2 JS. ii, 140,* K:S. ii, 101. 



XXV, § lo] Kindred Sayings on Entering 


179 


§ 7. Volition} 

At SavattM. . . . 

‘ Volitional acts occasioned by body, brethren, are imper- 
manent. . . . Likewise those occasioned by sound, by^scent, 
by taste, by touching, by ideas . . . are impermanent.’ . . . 

§ 8 Craving, 

At Savattin. . . . 

' Craving for body, brethren, is impermanent. . . . "^Likewise 
craving for sounds, scents, savours, tangibles, ideas ... is 
impermanent.' . . . 

§ 9. Element} 

' The element of earth, brethren, is impermanent, likewise 
the element of water, of heat, of air, the element of space and 
consciousness is impermanent.' . . . 

§ 10. By the (Fivefold) Group, 

At Savatthi. . . . 

^ Body, brethren, is impermanent, changeable, becoming 
otherwise. Feeling likewise and perception, [the activities^ 
and] consciousness are impermanent. . . . 

He, brethren, who has faith and confidence in these doc- 
trines, is called: walker in faith, one who enters on assurance 
of perfection, one who enters on the state of the worthy, one 
who has escaped the state of the manyfolk; one incapable 
of doing a deed by which he would be reborn in the womb of 
an animal or in purgatory or in the realm of Betas; one in- 
capable of dying without realizing the fruits of stream- 
winning.” 

He, brethren, by whom these doctrines by his insight 
are moderately approved, is called walker in faith. ...” 
He who thus knows, thus sees these doctrines, is called 

Stream- winner, saved from destruction, assured, bound for 
enlightenment,” ’ 

^ Gf. Pts, of Contr. 225. 

2 Of earth, water, fire, air and space (ahdsa). Text omits vinndna- 
dhdtu, but it occurs in the formula at D. iii, 247, at M, iii, 31^62, 240, 
and infra, § 9 of Bk. V. and V.M, 486. 

® Text omit.3 sanhhdrd here. 



BOOK V 


CHAPTER XXVI 

THE KINDRED SAYINGS ON GENESIS ^ 

§ 1 . 

At SavattM. . . . 

‘ Brethren, the arising, the establishing, the rebirth, the 
appearing of eye, — this is the arising of suffering, the estab- 
lishing of diseases, the appearing of decay-and-death. So 
also the arising ... of ear, of nose, of tongue, of body. . . . 
The arising, the establishing, the rebirth, the appearing of 
mind, — this is the arising of suffering, the establishing of 
diseases, the appearing of decay-and-death. 

Moreover, brethren, the ceasing, the calming, the coming to 
an end of eye, — that is the ceasing of suffering, the calming 
of disease, the coming to an end of decay-and-death. So also 
the ceasing of ear, of nose, of tongue, of body. . . the ceasing, 
the calming, the coming to an end of mind, — that is the 
ceasing of suffering, the calming of diseases, the coming to an 
end of decay-and-death.’ 

§ 2. Material form. 

At Savatthi. . . . 

‘ Brethren, the arising, the establishing, the rebirth, the 
appearing of material forms, — ^that is the arising of suffering, 
the establishment of diseases, the appearing of decay-and- 
death. 

So also the arising of sounds, scents, savours, tangibles, 
phenomena. . . . Moreover, brethren, the ceasing, the calm- 
ing, tlj^e coming to an end of material forms, — this is the 


^ Uppada. 
180 



XXVI, §6] Kindred Sayings on Genesis 181 

ceasing of suffering, tlie calming of diseases, tke coming to an 
efid of decay-and-death. 

So also is tke ceasing of sounds, smells, tastes, tangibles, 
of tkings.’ 

§ 3. Consciousness. 

At Savattki. . . . 

^ Bretkren, tke arising of eye-consciousness and of tke otker 
factors, . . . tkis is tke appearing of decay-and-deafk. 

Moreover, bretkren, tke ceasing ... of eye-consciousness 
and of tke otker factors, — tkis is tke coming to an end of 
decay-and-deatk. ’ 


§ 4. Contact. 

At Savattki. . . . 

‘ Bretkren, tke arising of contact by tke eye . . . and of 
contactby tke mind, . . . tkis is tke arising, tke establiskment, 
tke appearing of decay-and-deatk. 

Moreover, bretkren, tke ceasing of contact by tke eye . . . 
and of contact by tke mind, — ^tkis is tke coming to an end of 
decay-and-deatk.’ 

§ 5. jBy Feeling. 

At Savattki. . . . 

‘ Bretkren, tke feeling born of contact by tke eye . . . and 
of contact by tke mind, — ^tkis is tke appearing of decay-and- 
deatk. 

Moreover, bretkren, tke ceasing of that feeling born of 
contact by tke eye and of tkat born of contact by mind, — tkis 
is tke coming to an end of decay-and-deatk.’ 


§ 6. By Perception. 

At Savattki. . . . 

' Bretkren, tke arising of consciousness of body . . . and of 
consciousness of pkenomena, — ^tkis is tke appearing of decay- 
and-deatk. 

But tke ceasing of consciousness of body and of cojiscious- 
ness of tkings, — tkis is tke coming to an end of decay-and- 
deatk.’ "" 



182 


The Khandhd Booh [text iii, 230 


§ 7. Volition. 

At Savatthi. . r . 

‘ Brethren, the arising of volitional acts through body and 
through things, — this is the appearing of decay-and-death. 

But the ceasing of these is the coming to an end of decay- 
and-death.’ 

§ 8. Craving. 

At Sav^tthi. . . . 

‘ Brethren, the arising of craving for body and for things, — 
this is the appearing of decay-and-death. But the ceasing of 
these, — this is the coming to an end of decay-and-death.’ 

§ 9 , Element. 

At Savatthi. . . . 

‘ Brethren, the arising of the element of earth, of water, 
of heat, of air, of space, of consciousness, — this is the appearing 
of decay-and-death. But the ceasing of these, — this is the 
coming to an end of decay-and-death,’ 

§ 10 . The Fivefold mass. 

At Savattlu. . . . 

‘Brethren, the arising of body, the establishing of body, 
the rebirth, the appearing of body, — ^this is the arising of 
suffering, the establishing of diseases, the appearing of decay- 
and-death. So also of feeling, perception, the activities of 
consciousness. . . . 

But the ceasing, the calming, the coming to an end of body 
(and of the other factors), of consciousness, — this is the 
ceasing of suffering, the calming of diseases, the coming to an 
end of decay-and-death.’ 



BOOK VI 


CHAPTER XXVII 

KINDRED SAYINGS ON THE CORRUPTIONS! 

§ L The eye. 

At SavatthL . . . Then the Exalted One said: — 

^ Brethren, the desire-and-lust that is in the eye is a 
corruption of the heart. The desire-and-lust that is in the ear, 
the nose, the tongue, the body, the mind, — that is a corruption 
of the heart. 

But, brethren, when in a brother the heart’s corruption 
in these six points is put away, and his heart is bent on re- 
nunciation, then, compassed about ^ with renunciation, his 
heart is seen to be pliable® for penetrating those things that 
are to be realized,’^ 


§ 2. Material form. 

At Savatthi. . . . 

^ That desire-and-lust, brethren, that is in material form is 
a corruption of the heart: likewise that desire-and-lust that is 


^ Ten hilesa^s are given in Abhidhamma {Bud. Fsy. Eth., § 1229/.); 
greed, hate, dullness, conceit, speculative opinion, perplexity, stolidity, 
distraction, unconscientiousness, indiscretion. 

2 Panhhdvitay. Cf. supra, xxii, § 101. 

^ At 8 . V, 92-3 the corruptions or flaws of the different metals are 
enumerated, which make them incapable of perfect workmanship. 
Then the five corruptions or faults of the heart are given: failure to be 
soft, pliable, shining, delicate and capable of perfect moulding. So 
we read in cases where the Master is turning an enquirer to salvation, 
he questions, exhorts, chides, calms, fires and arouses him. Then, 
seeing that his heart is pliable, he opens up the deeper matters of the 
Norm. 

^ Abhinnd sacchiJcararilyesu dhammesu. 

183 



184 The Khandhd Booh [text iii, 232 

in sounds, scents, savours, tangibles and things is a corruption 
of heart, 

** ' But, brethren, wKen in a brother the heart’s corruption in 
these sp: points is put away. (as before). 

§ 3. Consciousness. 

At Savatthi. . . . 

‘ That desire-and-lust, brethren, that is in eye-conscious- 
ness is a corruption of heart. Likewise that which is in con- 
sciousness that comes by ear, nose, tongue, body and mind. 

But, brethren, when in a brother the heart’s corruption in 
these six points is put away. . . .’ 

§ 4. Contact. 

^ . that desire-and-lust that is in eye-contact and by 
contact with the other sense-organs and mind, — this is a 
corruption of the heart. . . 

§ 5. By feeling. 

* . . . that desire-and-lust that is in feeling born of eye- 
contact, bom of contact with the other sense-organs and with 
mind, — ^this is a corruption of the heart. , , .’ 

§ 6. By perception. 

‘ . that desire-and-lust that is in consciousness of visible 
shape, sound, scent, savour, tangibles and things, — ^this is a 
corruption of the heart. . . J 

§ 7. Volition. 

‘ , that desire-and-lust that is in will concerning visible 
shape, soimd, scent, savour, tangibles and things, — ^this is a 
corruption of the heart. , . 

§ 8. Craving. 

‘ , that desire-and-lust for visible shape, sound, scent, 
savour, tangibles and things,— -this is a corruption of the 
heart. . . 



xxvn, § lo] Kindred Sayings on the Corruptions 185 


§ 9. Element, 

, , . that desire-and-lust for the element of earth, water,* 
heat, air, space and consciousness, — this is a corruption of 
the heart. . . 


§ 10. The (fivefold) mass. 

At Savatthi. . . . 

‘ That desire-and-lust, brethren, for visible shape, — that is 
a corruption of the heart. That desire-and-lust the other 
factors of feeling and in consciousness, — that is a corruption 
of the heart. 

But when, brethren, in a brother the heart’s corruption in 
these six points is put away, and his heart is bent on renuncia- 
tion, then, compassed about with renunciation, his heart is 
seen to be pliable for the penetrating of those things that are 
to be realized.’ 



BOOK VII 

CHAPTER XXVIII 
KINDRED SAYINGS ON SARIPUTTA 
§ 1. Solitide, 

Once the venerable Sariputta was staying near Savatthi, 
at Jeta Grove, in Anathapindika’s Park. 

Then the venerable Sariputta, rising at early dawn, robed 
himself, took bowl and robe and entered Savatthi to beg for 
alms. After going his beggmg-roxmds in Savatthi and re- 
turning from begging he ate his meal and drew near Dark 
Grove for noonday rest. Plunging into Dark Grove, he sat 
down at the foot of a tree for noonday rest. 

Then the venerable Sariputta, rising at eventide from his 
solitude, went to Jeta Grove, to Anathapindika’s Park. 

Now the venerable Ananda saw the venerable Sariputta 
coming, while yet he was far off, and beholding the venerable 
Sariputta he thus spake to him: — 

‘ Calm are your senses, friend Sariputta, clear and trans- 
lucent the colour of your face. In what mood has the 
venerable Sariputta been spending this day V 

‘ Eriend, I have been dwelling aloof from passions, aloof 
from things evil, with my thought applied and sustained in 
&st Jhana, which is born of solitude and full of zest and 
happiness.^ To me thus, friend, the thought never came: 

It is I who am attaining JGLrst Jhana,’’ or It is I who have 
attained first Jhana.” or It is I who have emerged from first 
Jhana.” ’ 

' Surely for a long time have leanings to I-making,^ to mine- 
making and to vanity been well rooted out from the vener- 

^ See Mrs, Rh. D., Buddh. Psychol., pp. 99, 107-19; Buddhism, p. 215. 

^ Cf. 8. ii, 275. On the term ahayhdra cf. Gar];;^, 8dnhhyd 
Philoscyphie, p. 68. 


186 



187 


xxviii, § 3] Kindred Sayings on Sdriputta 

able Sariputta. That is why it occurs not to the venerable 
'Sariputta: '‘It is I who am attaining first Jhana,” or "It is 
I who have attained first Jhana,” or " It is I who have emerged 
from fixst Jhana/’ ’ 

§ 2. Without applied thought?- 

At SavatthL . . . {continued,) 

Now the venerable Ananda beheld the venerably Sariputta 
approaching, while yet he was far off, and on seeing the vener- 
able Sariputta he thus spake to him: " Calm are your senses, 
friend Sariputta, clear and translucent the colour of your face. 
In what mood has the venerable Sariputta been spending the 
day?’ 

' Friend, owing to the calming down of thought applied and 
sustained, I have attained and been dwelling in second Jhana, 
that inward calming, that single-mindedness,^ of will, apart 
from thought applied and sustained, born of mental balance, 
full of zest and happiness. To me thus, friend, the thought 
never came: "It is I who am attaining second Jhana,” or 
" It is I who have attained second Jhana,” or " It is I who 
have emerged from second Jhana,” ’ 

' Surely for a long time have leanings to I-making, to mine- 
making, to vanity been well rooted out from the venerable 
Sariputta. That is why it occurs not to the venerable Sari- 
putta, " It is I who am attaining to second Jhana,” or "It 
is I who have attained second Jhana,” or " It is I who have 
emerged from second Jhana.” ’ 

§ 3. Zest. 

At Savatthi. . . . Now the venerable Ananda saw the 
venerable Sariputta approaching. . , and said to him: — 
"Calm are your senses, friend SMputta. . , . In what mood 
has the venerable Sariputta been spending the day V 

1 Of, 8. ii, 211; K,8. ii, 142, etc. The Second Jhana. 

2 Bhodibhavo, trans. by Silaoara (in Maj')Mma) as ‘ mind emerging 
sole,’ by Mrs. Rh. D., ‘ self- contained and uplifting’ {Bud, ^sy., 110); 

‘ the mind grows calm and sure, dwelling on high,’ B, Psy, Etk,, § 161 . 
Of Mxpositer;^ p. 226. It is one-pointedness. 



188 


The KhandM Book [text id, 237 

Friend, from the fading away of zest, I have attained and 
l^ave been dwelling in third Jhana, disinterested,^ mindful 
and self-possessed, well aware in the body of that happiness 
of which the Ariyans declare: “Disinterested and alert he 
dwelleth happily.” ’ {The rest as above,) 

§ 4 . Equanimity, 

At Savatthl. . . . Then the venerable Ananda said to the 
venerable Saripntta: — ‘Calm are your senses, friend Sari- 
pntta, clear and translucent the colour of your face. In what 
mood has the venerable Sariputta been spending this day V 

‘ Friend, by putting aside weal and woe, by the ending of 
both joy and sorrow felt before, I have attained and have been 
dwelling in fourth Jhana, a state wherein is neither pleasure 
nor pain, an equanimity of utter purity. To me thus, friend, 
the thought never came. . • (As above), 

§ 6. Space,^ 

At SavatthL . . . Then the venerable Ananda saw the 
venerable Sariputta (who replied ) : — ‘ Friend, passing utterly 
beyond the consciousness of shape and form, by the ending 
of the consciousness of resistance,® by not attending to the 
consciousness of diversity, I have attained and have been 
dwelling in the sphere of the infinity of space, realizing: 
“ Infinite is space.” ’ 

At Savatthi. . . . Then the venerable Ananda saw the 
venerable Sariputta approaching (who replied): — ‘Friend, 
passing utterly beyond the sphere of unbounded space, I have 
attained and have been dwelling in the sphere of infinite 
consciousness, realizing: “Infinite is consciousness.” To 
me thus, friend, the thought never came, . . .' 

^ UpehkhaJco. 

2 The full title is dJcasdnancdyatanaTjf ‘the sphere of unbounded 
space.’ Cf, Mrs. Rh. D., B, Pay. Ill f,; Buddh. Psych, Ethics, §§ 265-8, 
nn, for this and following sections. 

^ Pafigh^r-sahnd, ‘ awareness of opposition ’ (generally used of ethical 
opposition or dislike, but) here, perhaps, the subtle resistance of a 
separative force by which individuality is experienced. 



189 


xxvni, § lo] Kindred Sayings on Sdrifutta 

§ 7 Nothingness} 

At Savatthi. . . . Then the venerable Ananda saw th« 
venerable Sariputta approaching {who replied) : — ‘ Eriend, 
passing utterly beyond the sphere of infinity of conscibusness, 
I have attained and have been dwelling in the sphere of noth- 
ingness, realizing: There is nothing.” To me thus. . . 

§ 8. Having neither perception nor non-perception} 

At Savatthi. . . . Then the venerable Ananda saw the 
venerable Sariputta approaching {who replied) : — ‘ Friend, 
passing utterly beyond the sphere of nothingness, I have 
attained and have been dwelling in the sphere of neither 
perception nor non-perception. To me thus. . . 

§ 9. Cessation? 

At Savatthi. . . . Then the venerable Ananda saw the 
venerable Sariputta approaching {who replied) : — ‘ Friend, 
passing utterly beyond the feeling of neither perception nor 
non-perception, I have attained and have been dwelling in 
the state of cessation of perception and feeling. To me thus, 
friend, the thought never came: It is I who am attaining 
the cessation of perception and feeling,” or “ It is I who have 
attained the cessation of perception and feeling,” or ‘'It is 
I who have emerged from the cessation of perception and 
feeling.” ’ 

‘ Surely for a long time have leanings to I-making, to mine- 
making, and to vanity been well rooted out from the venerable 
Sariputta. That is why such thoughts occur not to the 
venerable Sariputta.’ 


§ 10 Pure-Face? 

Once the venerable Sariputta was staying at Eajagaha, in 
Bamboo Grove, at the Squirrels’ Feeding-ground. 

Then the venerable Sariputta, rising up at early dawn, 


^ Akincanndyatanay, ' the sphere of nothingness.’ ^ 

^ Neva-sannd-ndsanndyataTKirjo Text reads simply sanni. 
3 Sdnndvedayita’nirodho. ^ Suci-muJchh 



190 


The Ehandha Book [text iii, 259 

robed himself, and taking bowl and robe entered Rajagaha to 
^eg for alms. After begging straight on from house to house^* 
inEajagahahe was eating his meal, leaning against a certain 
wall. • 

Then the wandering sister Pure-Face came up to the vener- 
able Sariputta and addressed him thus: — ^0 recluse, why do 
you eat looking downwards V 

‘ I do not eat looking downwards, sister.’ 

' Then, recluse, you are eating looking upwards.’ 

* I do not eat looking upwards, sister.’ 

' Then, recluse, you are eating looking to the four quarters.’ 

‘ I do not eat looking to the four quarters, sister.’ 

^ Then, recluse, you are eating looking to the points between 
the four quarters.’ 

‘I do not eat, sister, looking to the points between the 
four quarters.’ 

‘ Then how, forsooth, how are you eating, recluse ? For 
when I question you thus and thus you deny it every time.’ 

‘ Whatsoever recluses and brahmins, sister, get their living 
in a wrong way by the practice of divination and of such low 
arts, — ^these, sister, are called ‘‘recluses and brahmins who eat 
looking downwards.” 

Whatsoever recluses and brahmins, sister, get their living 
in a wrong way by the practice of star-gazing and such low 
arts,^ — such as these, sister, are called “ recluses and brahmins 
who eat looking upward.” 

Whatsoever recluses and brahmins, sister, get their living 
in a wrong way by the practice of sending messages and going 
errands,® — such as these, sister, are called “ recluses and 
brahmins who eat looking to the four quarters.” 

^ Sa'paddna'Q. See Words in Pah Dictionary. The derivation is 
uncertain. 

2 VattTin and tiracchdna-vi'}jd. Corny, says ‘ such as, by the mean 
occupation of divination of the best plots for growing gourds, pump- 
kins and radishes.’ Cf. Vin ii, 139; D. i, 9. The practice of such 
arts was forbidden to the Order. 

® Gf Dialog, i, 15; there is a certain word-play in hhuii'janti (eat). 
It means both enjoying food, and enjoying generally; thus ‘are 
maintained by.’ Gf. E.8. i, 15 w. 1. • 



191 


XXVIII, § lo] Kindred Sayings on Sdriputta 

WiatBoever recluses and brahmins, sister, get their living 
in a wrong way by the practice of palmistry and such loW 
arts, — these, sister, are called ‘^recluses and brahmins who eat'’ 
looking to the points between the four quarters.” ^ 

But I, sister, am one who gets his living in no one of these 
ways. Eightly do I seek my food, and rightly do I eat my 
food when I have sought it.’ 

Thereupon the wanderer Pure-Face roamed from street to 
street and from crossways to crossways in Eajagaha and thus 
proclaimed: ^Eightly do the recluses who are sons of the 
Sakyan win their food. Blamelessly do the recluses who are 
sons of the Sakyan win their food. Do ye give alms to the 
recluses who are sons of the Sakyan.’ 



BOOK VIII 

CHAPTEE XXIX 
KINDEED SAYINGS ON NAGAS 

§ 1 (I). According to scheme?- 

At Savatthi. , . . Then the Exalted One said: — 

‘ There are these four sorts of birth, brethren, as nagas. 
What four ? The egg-born, the womb-born^ the sweat- 
born,^ those born without parents. 

These, brethren, are the four sorts of birth as nagas.’ 

§ 2 (2). Pre-eminent 

At Savatthi. . . • 

' (There are these four sorts of birth, brethren, as nagas). 
Herein, brethren, the womb-born, the sweat-born and those 
born without parents are better than^ the egg-born. The two 
latter sorts are better than the two former, and the last three 
are better than the egg-born. Such, brethren, are the four 
sorts of births as nagas.’ 


§ 3 (3). Sabbath, 

Once the Exalted One was staying near Savatthi in the 
Deer Park. 

Then a certain brother came to the Exalted One, and salut- 

1 SuddMJcay, On this term see B Psy Bth., 2nd ed. only, § 505, 
n.l. In the next section the text reads suddhakay. Asking why the 
Master chose such a subject as naga- births (t.e., among the gnomes and 
elves) for his discourse, Corny, says it was to explain the desire {uhhan- 
thaf atthay) for such births. 

2 Jalahujd, ‘water-born.’ Corny, says vatthihoie jdtd. 

® Sanseda-jd. They are exuded from the pores; the last class, 
opapdfikg, ‘ just come to be.’ Cf, Corny, on B, iii, 107, in Dialogues, 
iii, 103, w. 2; and Corny, on Puggala-PannatU, J.P.T.S. 1913, p. 197. 

^ Pamtatara. 


192 



XXIX, § 7 ] Kindred Sayings on Ndgas 193 

ing him sat down at one side. So seated that brother thus 
addressed the Exalted One: — 

^ What is the reason, lord, what is the cause why some 
egg-born nagas keep the Sabbath and divest themselves of 
their naga-forms ?’* 

‘Herein, brother, certain egg-born nagas think thus: 
“ Formerly we were double-dealing in speech, double-dealing 
in act, double-dealing in thought. Thus in three ways being 
double-dealers, when body breaks up after death we shall be 
reborn in the company of egg-born nagas. 

Now if we were to practise virtuous deeds, virtuous words 
and virtuous thoughts, when body breaks up after death we 
might be reborn in the happy state, in the heaven world. 
Come now, let us practise virtuous deeds, virtuous words and 
virtuous thoughts.’’ 

This, brethren, is the reason, this is the cause why certain 
egg-born nagas keep the Sabbath and divest themselves of 
their naga-forms.’ 


§ 4 (4). Sabbath (2). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then a certain brother came to the 
Exalted One, saluted him and sat down at one side. 

So seated that brother addressed the Exalted One: — 

‘ What is the reason, lord, what is the cause why certain 
womb-born nagas keep the Sabbath and divest themselves 
of their naga-forms V {The rest as before.) 

§ 5 (5). Sabbath (3). 

{The same question is ashed of ‘ sweat-born ’ ndgas ) 

§ 6 (6). Sabbath (4). 

{The same question is ashed of ndgas ‘ born without parents.’) 
' § 7 (7). Hearsay (1). 

At Savatthi. . , . Then a certain brother . . . thus 
addressed the Exalted One: — 

^ {V)ossaUha-hdyd hhavanU. Cf. Jdtaha iv, 460 {Camfeyya-jdtalca). 
in 13 


194 


The Khandhd Booh 


[text ill, 243 


• ‘ What is the reason, lord, what is the cause why a certain 
•one, when body brtaks up after death is reborn in the company 
of the egg-born nagas V 

‘ Herein, brother, a certain one is a double-dealer in act, 
a double-dealer in word and in thought. He hears it said: 

The egg-born nagas are long-lived, fair to see and have much 
happiness.” 

Then he thinks: 0 that when body breaks up after death 
I might be born m the company of the egg-born nagas !” 

When body breaks up after death such an one is so reborn. 

This is the reason, brother, this is the cause for such a re- 
birth.’ 

§§ 8 , 9, 10 ( 1 - 10 ) Hearsay (2-4). 

{The same is said of the ‘ womb-born ’ nagas and of the 
other two classes.) 

§§ 11-20 (11). Supporters by gifts'^ ( 1 ). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then a certain brother . • . thus 
addressed the Exalted One: — 

‘ What is the reason , . . {the same reply is given with 
this addition : 

‘ Such an one gives an ofiering of food, gives drink, clothing, 
carriage, flowers, scents, ointment, a seat, a lodging, lamps 
and oil. When body breaks up after death he is reborn in 
the company of the egg-born nagas. 

This, brother, is the reason, this is the cause for such a re- 
birth.’ 

§§ 21-50 (12-14). Supporters by gifts (2-4). 

{The same question is ashed of the other three classes of nagas 
and the same reply given in each case.) 


1 Ddn^ ufakdrd.. 



BOOK IX 


CHAPTEE XXX 

KINDRED SAYINGS ON HARPIES ^ 

§ 1 (I). According to scheme?' 

At Savatthi. . . . Then the Exalted One said : — 

^ There are these four sorts of rebirth as harpies, brethren* 
What four ? The egg-born, the womb-born, the sweat-born, 
those born without parents. 

These, brethren, are the four sorts of births as harpies.’ 

§ 2 (2). They carry off. 

At Savatthi. . . . 

‘ Then, brethren, the egg-born harpies carry off the egg-born 
nagas, but not the womb-born nagas, the sweat-born nagas 
nor the nagas born without parents. 

Then, brethren, the womb-born harpies carry off the egg- 
born and the womb-born nagas, but not the sweat-born nagas 
nor the nagas born without parents. 

Then, brethren, the sweat-born harpies carry off the egg- 
born, the womb-born and the sweat-born nagas, but not 
those nagas born without parents. 

These, brethren, are the four sorts of birth as harpies.’ 


^ Supannd, ‘ fairwing,’ a mythical bird, Garula, or Garuda, the roc 
or harpy, which makes war on snakes or nagas. Of. S. i, 148 : K.S 
i, 185. Of. D. 11 ,' 259: Dialog, ii, 289: 

‘ They who, twice-born, winged and keen 
Of sight, the heavenly harpies, who 
With violence prey on Naga chiefs: 

“ Gaudy ” and “ Well- winged ” are their names.’ 

2 For title see supra, Bk, vm, 1 . 

195 



196 


The Khandha Booh [text hi, 247 


§ 3 (3). DcnAle-dealer^ (1). 

At Savatthi. ... In tlie Park. 

Theif a certain brotlier came to tlie Exalted One, sainted him 
and sat down at one side. 

So seated that brother thus addressed the Eixalted One: — 

‘ What is the reason, lord, what is the cause why a certain 
one, when-body breaks up after death is reborn in the company 
of the egg-born harpies V 

‘ Herein, brother, a certain one is a double-dealer in act, 
word and thought. He hears it said: The egg-born harpies 
are long-lived, beauteous, and have much happiness.’’ Then 
he thinks thus: “ 0 that when body breaks up after death 
I might be reborn in the company of the egg-born harpies !” 

That one when body breaks up after death is so reborn. 
That, brethren, is the reason, that is the cause why a certain 
one when body breaks up after death is reborn in the company 
of the egg-born harpies.’ 

§§ 4-6 (4-6). Double-dealer (2-4). 

{The same question is ashed of the other three classes,) 

§§ 7-16 (7). Supporters by gifts ( 1 ). 

{The same question is ashed of the egg-born and the same 
answer given with this addition : — 

'He makes an ofiering of food, drink, clothing, carriage, 
flowers, scents, unguents, seats, lodging, lamps and oil: and 
when body breaks up after death that one is reborn in the 
company of the egg-born harpies.’ 

§§ 17-46 ( 8 - 10 ). Supporters by gifts (2-4). 

{The same with respect to the other classes of harpies.) 


1 Dvaya-kdrl. Corny., ^ Kuealdkusala-kdrl^ It is noticeable that 
‘ double-dealers ’ aspire to be reborn as nagas and harpies; but further 
on they afe omitted. Only the honest can aspire to rebirth among the 
Gandharva devas. 



BOOK X 


CHAPTER XXXI 

KINDRED SAYINGS ON THE GANDHARVAS^ 

§ 1 (1). According to scheme. 

At Savatthi. . , . Then the Exalted One said: — 

* I will teach yon, brethren, of the devas belonging to the 
Gandharva group. Do ye listen to it. 

* And which, brethren, are the devas belonging to the Gan- 
dharva group 1 They are those devas, brethren, that dwell 
in the fragrance of root-wood, those that dwell in the fragrance 
of heart-wood, in the fragrance of pith, in the fragrance of 
bark, in the fragrance of sap, in that of leaves, in that of 
flowers, on that of savours, in that of scents. 

These, brethren, are called ‘‘the devas belonging to the 
Gandharva group,’’ ’ 


§ 2 (2). Good Conduct, 

At Savatthi. ... In the Park. Then a certain brother 
came to the Exalted One. 

Seated at one side that brother thus addressed the Exalted 
One: — 

‘ What is the reason, lord, what is the cause why a certain 
one, when body breaks up after death is reborn in the com- 
pany of the devas belonging to the Gandharva group V 


^ For the sub-title see supra, xxix, § 1. Gandhabbakaya and 
Gandhabbakayika deva. These sayings, like the two preceding 
sections, are curio’^s instances of the annexing by Buddhism of Vedic 
folk-lore. These devas were by it reckoned lowest of all devas. See 
Dialogues li, 246. [Presence of a Gandharva was essential to concep- 
tion, M. i, 265 ; MP, 123. Cj. Edmunds, Buddhist anUt Christian 
Gospels, i, 167-8, n.J * SucaritaTj. 


197 



198 The Khandha Booh [text lii, 250 

^ Herein, brother, a certain one practises good conduct in 
deed, in word and thought. 

'"Then he hears it ''said: The devas belonging to the Gan 
dharva^roup are long-lived, beauteous, and have much happi- 
ness.” 

Then he thinks thus: 0 that when body breaks up after 
death I might be reborn in the company of the devas belong- 
ing to the Gandharva group !” After death he is so 
reborn. 

That, brother, is the reason, that is the cause why a certain 
one IS reborn in the company of the devas belonging to the 
Gandharva group.' 


§ 3 (3). Givers (1). 

At Savatthi. . . . Then a certain brother came to the 
Exalted One. 

Seated at one side that brother thus addressed the Exalted 
One : — 

‘ What is the reason, lord, what is the cause why a certain 
one when body breaks up after death is reborn in th^ company 
of the devas who dwell in root-fragrance V 

‘ Herein, brother, a certain one practises good conduct in 
deed, in word and thought. Then he hears it said: “The 
devas that dwell in root-fragrance are long-lived, beauteous, 
and have much happiness.” 

Then he thinks thus: “ 0 that when body breaks up after 
death I might be reborn in the company of the devas that 
dwell in root-fragrance !” 

Then he becomes a giver of offerings of root-fragrance, and 
alter death he is so reborn. 

This, brother, is the reason, this is the cause why a certain 
one is so reborn.’ 


§§ 4-12 (4-12). Givers (2-10;. 

{The same for ‘ one who makes offerings of heart-wood,’ 
ani so onfor all the other varieties,) 



XXXI, §§ 23 - 112 ] Kindred Sayings on the GandJiarvas 199 

§§ 13-22 (13). Supporters by offerings (1). 

{The same aspiration is made and the following is added : — 

^ Then he offers food, drink, clothing^ carriage, flowers,’ 
scent, unguents, seat, lodging, lamps and oil, and, whep. body 
breaks up after death he is reborn in the company of those 
devas that dwell in root-fragrance. . . . 

This, brother, is the reason, this is the cause why a certain 
one is thus reborn.’ 

§§ 23-112 (14-23). Supporters by offerings (2-10). 

{The same aspirations for each of the other varieties, with 
offerings,) 



BOOK XI 


CHAPTEE XXXII 

KINDKED SAYINGS ON GLOUD-SPIEITS 
§ 1 (1). Exposition, 

At Savatthi. * . . Then, the Exalted One said: — 

‘ I will teach you, brethren, about devas that belong to 
cloud-groups.^ Do ye listen to it. And what, brethren, 
are these devas ? 

They are devas (embodied) in cool clouds, hot clouds, 
thunder clouds,^ wind clouds and rain clouds. 

Thus, brethren, are called those devas that belong to cloud- 
groups.’ 

§ 2 (2). Honesty, 

{The same as in the previous sections, the aspirant wishing 
to he reborn among the cloud-group devas instead of the ndgas, 
harpies or devas belonging to the Gandharvas,) 

§§ 3-22 (3). Supporters by offerings (1). 

(Here the aspirant desires rebirth as a cool-bodied deva,) 

§§ 23-52 (4-7). Supporters by offerings (2-5). 

^ (Here the other aspirants are enumerated,) 

§ 53 (8). Gool, 

At Savatthi. . . . Then a certain brother came to the 
Exalted One. , . . Seated at one side that brother thus 
addressed the Exalted One: — 


^ Vtddhaha-hdyihd, 

2 Ahhha-valahaha, generally in the sense of a cumulug,. 
200 



xxxn, § 57 ] Kindred Sayings on Clovd-'Spirifs 201 

‘ What is the reason, lord, what is the cause why at one time 
it is cool?’ 

‘There are devas, brother, who are caHed “cool-clouds/*’ 
When those devas think: “ What if we were to revel^in the 
delight of bodies ! ” ^ Then to them according to their heart’s 
desire it becomes cool. 

This, brother, is the reason, this is the cause why at one 
time it' is cool.’ 

§ 54 (9). Hot 

{The same with regard to the ‘ hot-cloud ’ devas, heat result- 
ing.) 

§ 55 (10). Thunder-cloud. 

{In this case a thunder-cloud results.) 

§ 56 (11). Winds. 

{Wind results.) 

§ 57 (12). Rain. 

At Savatthi. . . . (Then a certain brother came to the 
Exalted Oi^e.) 

Seated at one side that brother thus addressed the Exalted 
One; — 

‘ What is the reason, lord, what is the cause why at one 
time the (sky) god rains ?’ 

‘ There are devas, brother, called “ rain-cloudy.” When 
those devas think: “ What if we were to revel in the delight 
of bodies ?” Then to them according to their heart’s desire 
the sky-god rains. 

That, brother, is the reason, that is the cause why at one 
time the (sky) god rains.’ 

1 SaMya-ratiyd rameyydma, lit. ‘ revel (either) in our own company, 
(or) our own body ’ (or) in embodied delight.” 



BOOK XII 


CHAPTER XXXIII 

KINDRED SAYINGS ON VACCHAGOTTA 

§ 1 (1). Through ignorance. 

At Savatthi. . . . Tiien the wanderer of the Vaccha clan 
came to the Exalted One, exchanged friendly greetings with 
him and courteous compliments, and sat down at one side. 

Seated at one side the wanderer Vacchagotta thus addressed 
the Exalted One: — 

‘ Pray, Master Gotama, what is the reason, what is the cause 
why these divers opinions arise in the world? Such as: 
‘‘The world is eternal,” or “the world is not eternal”; 
“ the world is finite ” or “ the world is infinite ”; “ what is 
the life,* that is the body ”; or “life is one thing, body is 
another”: “the Tathagata exists after death” or “the 
Tathagata exists not after death,” or “ he does and does not 
exist after death,” or “he neither exists nor not exists after 
death ” ? ’ 

‘ Through ignorance of body, Vaccha, through ignorance 
of the arising of body, of the ceasing of body, of the way lead- 
ing to the ceasing of body. That is how those divers opinions 
arise in" the world, such as “the world is eternal ” and so 
^orth.’ 

§ 2 Through ignorance (2). 

[The same, hut with ‘ through ignorance of feeling.*) 

§ 3. Through ignorance (3)i 

(The same, hut with ‘ through ignorance of perception.*) 


* Gf, xxiv, §§ 13, 14. 
202 



XXXIII, §§ 46-50] Kindred Sayings on Vacchagotta 203 
§ 4. Through ignorance (4). 

{The same, but with ^ through ignorance pf the activities.’), 

§ 5. Through ignorance (5). ^ 

{The same, hut with 'through ignorance of consciousness.’) 

, §§ 6-10 (2). By not seeing (1-5). 

{The same, but with ' by not seeing.’) 

' §§ 11-15 (3). By not comprehending'^ (1-6). 

{The same, but with ' by not comprehending ’ each of the five 
factors,) 

§§ 16-20 (4). By not understanding.^ 

{The same, hut with ' by not understanding ’ each of the 
five factors and the Four Truths.) 

§§ 21-25 (5). By not penetrating (1-5). 

{The same, but with ' by not penetrating.’) 

§§ 26-30 (6). By not discerning^ (1-5). 

{The same, but with ' by not discerning.’) 

§§ 31-35 (7). By not discriminating (1-5). 

{The same, but with ' by not discriminating.’) 

§§ 36-40 (8). By not differentiating (1-5). 

{The same, but with ' by not differentiating.’) 

§§ 41-45 (9). By not considering (1-5). 

{The same, hut with ' by not considering.’) 

§§ 46-50 (10). By not loohing into (1-5). 

{The same, but with ' by not looking into.’) 


^ For ahhisamaya see Si ii, 133: Pts. ofGontr., p. 381. 

^ Ananuhodhd. ^ 

® AsallahJchand. Gf. Buddh Psych. Eth., p. 17> n. ‘By non-dis- 
cernment of sense-objects and the Three Marks (impermanence, suffer- 
ing, lack of reality).’ For the following terms see this page and § 292 

of the same work. 

0 



204 


The Khandha Book [text iii, 262 


§ 51 ( 11 ). Not making clear ( 1 ). 

{The same, but with ^ by not making clear body/ etc.) 

§§ (52-54). Not making clear (2-4). 

{The same, hut with ^ by not making clear feeling, percep- 
tion, tbe activities.') 

§ 55, Not making clear. (5). 

At SavattM. . . . 

' Through not making clear consciousness, Vaccha, through 
not making clear the arising of consciousness, through not 
making clear the ceasing of consciousness, through not making 
clear the way to the ceasing of consciousness, — that is how 
these divers opinions arise in the world, such as: The world 
is eternal ” or the world is not eternal ” : what is life, that 
is body,'' or ''life is one thing, body another "the Tatha- 
gata exists after death," or " the Tathagata exists not after 
death": "the Tathagata both exists and exists not after 
death," or " the Tathagata neither exists nor exists not after 
death." That is the reason, Vaccha, that is the cause why 
such divers opinions arise in the world. . . .' 



BOOK XIII 

CHAPTEE XXXIV 

KIXDEED SAYINGS ON JHANA (OE SAMADHI) 

§ 1 (I). Attainment in concentration} 

At Savattlu. . . . Then the Exalted One said: — 

^ There are these four, brethren, who practise the jhanas. 
What four ? 

Herein, brethren, a certain one who practises meditation 
is skilled in concentration, but is not skilled in the attain- 
ment thereof. 

Again, brethren, a certain one who practises meditation is 
skilled in the attainments of concentration, but is not skUled 
in concentration (itself). 

Again, brethren, a certain one who practises meditation is 
neither skilled in concentration nor skilled in the attainments 
thereof. 

Again, brethren, a certain one who practises meditation 
is both skilled in concentration and skilled in the fruits 
thereof. 

Of the four, brethren, who practise meditation, he who is 
both skilled in concentration and skilled in the attainments 
thereof, — ^he, is the topmost, he is the best, pre-eminent, 
supreme, most excellent. 

Just as,^ brethren, from the cow comes milk, from milk 
cream, from cream butter, from butter ghee, from ghee come 
the skimmings of ghee, and that is reckoned the best, — even 
so, brethren, of these four who practise meditation he who is 

^ SamadJvi-samapatU. See Buddh. PaycJi, Eth., § 1329*^’., n 4. 
Corny, i ‘ the hrst jhdna has five stages, the second three. Thus he is 
skilled in ei^t in all.’ ^ C/. ii, 95. 


205 



206 


The Khandkd Book 


[text ill 265 


both skilled in concentration and skilled in the attainments 
thereof, — ^he is the topmost, he is the best, pre-eminent, 
supreme and most excellent.’ 

§ 2. Steadfastness} 

At Savattln. . . . 

' There are these four, brethren, who practise meditation. 
What four ? 

Herein' brethren, a certain one who practises meditation 
is skilled in concentration, but not skilled in steadfastness 
therein. 

Herein, brethren, a certain one who practises meditation 
is skilled in steadfastness in concentration, but not skilled in 
concentration (itself). 

Herein, brethren, a certain one who practises meditation 
is neither skilled in concentration nor in steadfastness in 
concentration. 

Herein, brethren, a certain one who practises meditation 
is both skilled in concentration and skilled in steadfastness 
therein. 

Of these four, brethren, who practise meditation, he who is 
both skilled in concentration and skilled in steadfastness 
therein, — ^he is the topmost, best, pre-eminent, supreme, most 
excellent. 

Just as from a cow comes milk . . . and ghee, and the 
skimmings of ghee are reckoned the best, even so is such an 
one reckoned most excellent in meditation.’ 

§ 3 Emerging} 

{In the same way as the above, with ' skill in emerging ’ for 
'' steadfastness.’) 

§ 4. Thorough} 

{The same, with ‘ fully expert ^ for ' steadfastness.’) 

^ TMti. See Dhs,, § 11 {Buddh Psych. Mh,^ 11. Cittassa thiti 
iantMh avatfhih, or ‘stability, solidity, absorbed steadfastness of 
bbougbt.’ 

^ {V)'uMhdna, ‘ability in rising up or emerging from the jhdna or 
breaking it up at will.’ Cf. M. i,' 302; A. 111 , 311. Dhs. loc. cit supra. 

^ Kallavd {holla is soundness or fitness in an 3 rt’liing). * 



XXXIV, § 14] Kindred Sayings on Jhdna 


207 


§ 5. Object? 

(The same, with ^ skilled in the object ^ fbr ^ steadfastness/)^ 
§ 6. Range? 

(The same, with ‘ skilled in the range ’/or ‘ steadfastness.’) 

« 

§ 7. Resolve? 

(The ^ame, with ‘ skilled in resolve ’/or ‘ steadfastness,’) 

§ 8. Zeal? 

(The same, with ‘ skilled in zeal ’/or ‘ steadfastness.’) 

§ 9. Persevering? 

(The same, with ‘ skilled in perseverance.’) 

§ 10. Profit? 

(The same, with ‘ skilled in fitness.’) 

* § 11. Steadfastness in attainment. 

(The same, with ‘ skilled in steadfastness in attainment.’) 

§ 12 Emerging from attainment. 

(The same, tvith ‘ skilled in emerging from attainment.’) 

§ 13. Ease in attainment? 

(The same, with ' skilled in ease of attainment.’) 

§ 14. Object of attainment. 

(The same, with ^ skilled in the object of attainment.’) 

^ Arammana, the object of concentration, e.g., the kasina or device. 

2 Gocaro, the spjjere or field of his exercise. Cf. Compendt'um, 206, 
n. 1. Corny., hamniatphdna-gocara 
^ Ahhinlhara ^ Sahkacca. 

^ Sdtaccakdrl, one who makes continuous or keeps the concentration 
going. 

6 Sa'ppaya'^. 


' Samdpath-kallita 



208 


The Khandha Booh [text iii, 270 


§ 16. Range of attainment, 

{The same, with ^skilled in the range of attainment.’) 

§ 16. Resolve for attainment, 

{The same, with ' skilled in resolve for attainment.’) 

§ 17. Zeal for attainment. 

{The same, with ' skilled in zeal for attainment.’) 

§ 18. Perseverance in attainment. 

{The same, with ' skilled in perseverance in attainment.’) 

§ 19. Profiting by attainment} 

Skilled in attainment in concentration, but not profiting 
by concentration.’) 

§ 20. Emerging from steadfastness^ 

(‘ Skilled in steadfastness in concentration, but not in 
emerging from concentration.’) 

§§ 21-27. Steadfastness in the Object, 

{With {a) ‘ skilled in steadfastness in concentration, but 
not skilled in ease in concentration,’ (5) ^ skilled in steadfast- 
ness in concentration, but not skilled in profiting by concen- 
tration.’) 

§ 28. Base in emerging. 

{With {a) ‘ skilled in emergmg from concentration, but not 
skilled in- ease in concentrating,’ (b) ^ skilled in ease in con- 
centration, but not in emerging.’) 

§§ 29-34. Emerging, 

{With ^ skilled in emerging, but not skilled in {a) tbe 
object of concentration, (6) in tbe range, (c) resolve, {d) 
zeal, (e) perseverance, (/) profit. Thenfollolbs : — ) 

' Herein, brethren, a certain one who practises meditation 

y . 

rs* 

^ Sappaija-kdn, Gomy.> ^samMMssa sappdye upaMraha-dhamm^ 
puretUT).'^ 



XXXIV, § 47-49] Kindred Sayings on Jhdna 209 

makes profit by concentration, but is not skilled in emerging 
•from it. 

. He is neitlier skilled in emerging from* it nor in profiting 
by it. 

He is both, skilled in emerging from it and m profiting 
by it. 

Of tkese, brethren, he who is both skilled in emerging 
from concentration and makes profit thereby, he is the best.’ 

§ 35. Ease and Object 

He is skilled in ease in concentration, but not in the object 
of concentration, or vice versa, or in neither, or in both. 

§§ 36-40. Ease, 

He is skilled in ease in concentration, but (a) not in the 
range of it, (b) nor in resolve, (c) nor in zeal, (d) nor in per- 
severance, (e) nor in profit. 

§ 41. Object 

He is skilled in the object of concentration but not (a) in 
the range of it. 

He is skilled in the range . . . but not in the object. 

He is skilled in neither ... or in both. 

Again, he is skilled in the object of concentration, but not 
in [a) resolve, (6) zeal, (c) perseverance, {d) profit. 

§ 46. Range and Resolve, 

He is skilled in the range of concentration, but not in re- 
solve in it. . . resolve in ... , but not in range. . . . 

He is skilled in neither. He is skilled in both, and such an 
one is reckoned best. 

r- 

§§ 47-49. Range, 

He is skilled in the range of concentration, but n#t {a) in 
zeal for it, (6) or perseverance, (c) or profit, etc. 

Ill 


14 



210 


The Khandha Booh 


[text 111, 277 


§ 50. Resolve. 

o, He IS skilled in rfjsolve for concentration, but profits not by 
it. He profits by concentration, but is not skilled in resolve 
for it.'" He is neither. He is both. Such an one is reckoned 
the best. 

§§ 51-52. Resolve and Perseverance. 

He is skilled in resolve for concentration, but (a) does not 
persevere; and (6) does not profit by it. 

§ 53. Zeal and Perseverance. 

He is zealous, but does not persevere. He perseveres, but 
is not zealous. He is neither persevering nor zealous. He is 
both. Such an one is best. 

§ 54. Persevering and Profiting. 

(The four classes are: — ^He who perseveres in concentra- 
tion, but does not profit thereby. He who profits thereby, 
but does not persevere in it. He who does neither. He who 
does both.) 

‘ Herein, brethren, of the four who practise meditation, he 
who perseveres in concentration and profits thereby, — ^he is 
the topmost, best, pre-eminent, supreme, most excellent. 

Just as, brethren, from the cow comes milk, from the milk 
cream, from cream butter, from butter ghee, from ghee the 
skimmings of ghee and this is reckoned best, even so, of these 
four who practise meditation, he who perseveres in concentra- 
tion and profits thereby is reckoned the best.’ 

Thus ^spake the Exalted One, and those brethren were 
delighted with his words and took pleasure therein. 

Thus are the fifty-five abbreviated sayings to be unfolded. 

Thus ends the book of the Kindred Sayings on the groups. 
Its contents are these : — 

The Groups, together with Rddha, V^e^v, Entrance, Origin, 
Corruptions, Sdriputta, Ndgas, Harpies, Gandharvas, Clouds, 
Vaccha'^nd Meditation. These thirteen are in the Chapter on 
the Groups. 



INDEX 


I.— GENEEAL. 


Abandoning, 75 
Abodes,^ the seven, 69 
Accordant {anuloma), 36 
Action, 54 n , 168 
Activities, 73, 82-4, (group-) 86, 
87, 95 

Adepts (arahant’s knowledge), 70 
Adherent, 11 
Adze, 131 
Age, 1 

Aggregates, 93 n. 

Ajita, 166 n 

Almsman (pindolya) 75 w., 77 
Ananda, asks about ‘ ceasing,’ 23; 
introduces the brethren, 80-1; 
gives Punna’s teaching on the 
conceit ‘I am,’ 89; teaches 
Channa, 113; taught imper- 
manence ^by the Buddha, 154; 
questions Sanputta, 187-9 
Anathapindika, his Park, 89, 93, 
186 

Animal-group, 128 
Annihilationist (heresy), 3 n., 25 n , 
41 ?i.,64, 83 

Anuradha, bhikkhu, abused by 
heretics, 99-101 

Arahant (Tathagata), 57 n * the 
five, 59; a brother becomes, 64; 
formula of, 88 n ; has no more 
to do, 144; has destroyed the 
asavas, 159 

Arising, 51, 54 tz-., 55, 68 
Ariyans, 3, 37, 173, etc. 

Arts, low, 190-1 
AsaUia (festival), 59 n 
Asavas, the, 39, 50, 81-4, 94, 96, 
99, 129-30, 137 
Ascertainments, 136. 157-8 
Ascetics, classes of, 171 
Assaji, brother, 106-7 
Attainment, in samddM, 205 
Attendants, 81 
Avanti, 10 14 


Bamboo-grove, 44 
Banyan-park, 77 
Becoming, 49 n 
Benares, 111, 147 
Bhaggi, 1 
Bhesakala-gi’ove, 1 
Bias, mental, 33 n., 34, 138 
Bimbisara, 7 n 
Black Rock, 103 

Bodhisat, before enlightenment, 27 
Body, 1-5, 48-9, 51, 55; not the 
self, 49, 59, 67, 83; group, 86 , 

93, 95, 97 n., 115, 121; created 
by man, 129; person, 134; as 
dart, etc , 143-4; nature of, 143 
n,; pack, 145 n. , constituents 
of, 166-7, 180, 183 
Brahma-Sahampati, 77-8 
Brahmas, 28-30, etc 
Breathing, 106 
Brethren, the five, 50 
Burden, the, 24-5 w 
Butter, 210 

Cassia tree, 56 
Cankip, brahmin, 7 n. 

Causal sequence, 114 
Cause, 22, 23, 51, 52 n , 57, 61 n.y 
83,89 

Ceasing (nirodha), 23, 54, 51, 55, 
189, etc. 

Channa, brother, accosts the breth- 
ren, 111-3 nn. 

Characterization (pannaUi), 33 n. 
Chickens in shell, ISO 
Clinging, 64 
Cloud-spirits, 200-1 
Colours, 73, of caste, 170-1 
Coming-to-be, 80, 147, 148 
Compounds (activities), 73, 82, etc. 
Conceit (of self), 42 67, 87, 89, 

145 

Concentration, 15, 205 ff , ; device 
(Jcasma), 207 n 


211 



212 


Index 


Condition (faccayo : ahara), 51, 

'161 7 ^. 

Conduct, good {sucantsi), 196-8 
Conforming, 36 
Conqueror, the (chariot), 123 
Consciousness, 4, 5, 11-3, 27, 45, 
57, 73-5; stages of, 74 n , 83; 
group, 86, 87; rebirth, 106, 
128 n., 181 

Contact {fhassa), 52, 55, 82, 86, 
181, etc. 

Contempla^ons, the four earnest, 
130 

Cord of rebirth, 157 
Corruptions {dosa), 183 w., 184-5 
Craving {tanka), as leading to 
rebirth, 25, 64 n., 82, 157; 
impermanence of, 179 
Crocodile-haunt, 1 
Crown-Prince, the, 123 

Dasaka, brother, 108-9 
Death, after, 94-6 
Deer-park, 1, 23, 59, 111-3, 147, 
154 

Delight, 30 
Dependence, 154 

Desire {ckanda), 26, 65, 149; and 
lust {rag a), 159; as dosa, 185 
Devadaha, 6 

Devas, 71 n., 104, 196-9, 200-1 
Disciple, Ariyans, 141, 146-7, 173, 
etc. 

Disease, 21 n. 

Disgust, 57, 62 
Dispassion, 20 n. 

Divmation, 190 
Doctrine, 7-9 
Dogmas, 114 

Domains of good, seven, 69 
Double-dealers, 196 
Drug-immune {andsava), 69 
Dust, pinch of, 125 
Dyer, 129 

Ease {suJcka), 21 n., 87 
East-park, 84 

Efforts, the four best, 130-1 ; effort 
{viriya), 169 
Egg-born, 2 n., 192-6 
Eightfold Path, the, 51, 81, 135 
Elders, 89 

Elements,^essentials {makabkutd ) , 
51,55, 57, 86 166, 182 

Elephants, 71 n. 

Empty {rifta), 12 


Enamoured {ahhinandah), 65 
Energy, 169 

Enlightenment, ‘ before my,’ 27, 
28, 57 

Entering {oTchanti), 177 fj. 

Entity {satta), 95 n. 

Equanimity, 188 
Escape from body, 29, 87 
Eternalist (theory), 3 n., 41 n , 
166 

Exalted One, the {Bhagavci)*, 151-2 
169, etc 

Existence (non-), 114 
Extremes {antd), 114 
Eye, 177, 183 

Factors, of rebirth . . . the five 
{updddnd-hJcharidhd),2B-Z0,4.0- 
2, 45, etc ; of 'jhdna, 205 ff. 
Faculties, the five controlling 
{Kdyindiiydm), 40 ?^ , 130-1 
Faith, 179 

Features, specific, 58 

Feeling, 3-6, 52-7, 73, 82, 181; 

{vedand) groups, 86, 87, 107, 181 
Fetters {sayyojandm), 48 w., 131-7, 
142, etc. 

Fever, 8-10 
Fire, 62 
Fitness, 206 n. 

Five, brethren, 59 n., powers of, 
81 ; strengths of, 81 
Fivefold mass, the (body), 20 n., 
25, 182, 185 
Fixity {tkiti), 34 n. 

Flavours {rasa), 74 

Flowers, 116 

Food (sustenance), 51 

Form. See Body 

Four bases, the (stations), 81 

Freed from ties, 12 n. 

Freeman, 12 and n. 

Full-moon, 84 

Gabled House, the, 99 
Gandharva (see devas), 197-9 
Ganges, 169 
Gaya Head, 62 n 
Gem, the royal, 123 ; the sevenfold, 
69 

Genesis, causal, 180-5 
Ghosita Park, 80, 107, 112-3 
Gifts, 193-6, 199 
Goal, the, 65 
Godhika, suicide of, lOo 



Index 


213 


Grasping (updddna), 16-8, 42, 
50 ff,, 114, 142; groups, 85; 
108 ff , 127, 136-7, 143, 158 
Great Grove, 77, 99, 106 
Gross, 85 

Groups (khandhd), definition, 85, 
86 n., 94 n. 

Haliddikani, 10-4 
Harpies, 195-6 
Heaping up, 75 
Hereafter, 20 n., 88, 92 
Heresy, 3 n., 94; the great, 170, 
164-;76, 202-4 
Heretics, 99 
Home, 11 

Housefather, 1, 98-7 
Hunger, 25 n. 

‘I’ conceit, 3, 4, 18, 48, 87, 110-1, 
115, 186-9 

Ignorance, 82, 138, 146 
111 (duhkha)> 19, 114; illfare, 21 n , 
23 

Images, mental, 52 
Imagming, 65 

Impermanence (amcca)^ 20, 39, 
49, 65, 75, 82, 87, 88, 94-6, 97, 
107, 112, 116, 122, 124-5, 129, 
132, 146, 153; seeing it {amccd- 
nupassirfjf 150 
Imposthume, 155 
Impressions, 11, 17 n. 

Impurity, 169 
Individual-group, 86-7 
Infinity (of space), 188 
Insight {ndna), 28, 58; released 
by, 159 

Instability, 34 n., 87 
Investigator {upapanhJchi), 57 
Investigation, causal (yomso-ma- 
7iasikdra), 37, 45, 118, 143 
Inward (a'j'jhathka), 85, 150 n, 
Isipatana, 111, 113, 147 
Island of refuge {dlpa), Z1 n. 

Jeta Grove, 32, 89, 93, 186 
Jhana, 186-8 
Jujube- tree Park, 107 

Kacchana, the g^sat, brother, 
10-4; "gotta, 113 and n. 
Kapilavatthu, 77 
Kappa, brother, 145-6 
Karma, 61 w., 171 
iOiattiyam, 124 


Khemaka, 107-11 
Kindling, 75 

King of glory, the, 122 ff, 
Kmsman of the Sun {adicc(P- 
handhu), 121 

Knowledge, 139, 146-8; (okkinM), 
183 

Kosala, 6 n 

Kosambi, 80, 107, 112-3 
Kotthita, the great, 143, 147 
Kusavati, 123 


Leash, the (or thong), 126-7 

Liberated, 68 

Licchavi, the, 60 

Life, the homeless, 33, etc. 

Life-continuum {santdna)^ 20 n. 

Limbs, the seven, 81 

Lion, 70-1 

Low arts, 190-1 

Lure, 31,45, 107, 157 

Lust (mgra), 26, 31, 45, 157, 163 


Magandiya, 10 
Mahali, 60-2 

Makkhali (ghosala), 61 n., 170 n, 
Mantani, 89 

Manyfolk, 37, 68, 82, 86, 146 
Mara, 28, 30, 64, 106, 155, 160-1 
Marks, the three, 203 
Material element, 10; object, 115 
Measure, 34 
Meditation, 205-7 
Mendicant, 32 

Mental, balance, 107; bias, 114, 
138 

Middle Way, 114. See Path 
Migara, 84 

Mind, work of, 128 and n. 
Mindfulness, 81 

‘Mine,’ 43, 87, 116, 151, 165, 186-9 
Misery, 87 
Modesty Qiin), 69 
Morals, 69 ri. 

Murderer, 96-7, 121 


Nagas, 192-6 
Nakulapitar, 1-5 
Never-returner iandgamin), 144 
Nibbana, 92, 139, 156 
Norm {dhamma), 36, 71, 81-2; the 
Master of, 103, 112-^ teacher 
of, 139, 140 

KotWgness, sphere of, 180 







Objects, external {bahiddha), 67 
Ojice-returner (sahaddgdmin), 144 
One-pointed, 187 and n. 

Osprey’s Haunt, 10, 14 
Otherness (annatha-hhdva), 177 
Ownership? 67 

Pain, 31, 61, 73 
Palace of Righteousness, 123 
Palm tree, 11, 27, 137 
Parables, See Similes 
Parileyya, 80-1 
Park, Anatliapmdika’s, 89 
Path, the Eightfold, fruits of, 
39 n., 72, 81-2; the twofold, 92; 
Ariyan, 130-5 
Peaked Gable Hall, 60 
Perception (sannd), 5, 8 § , 15, 
36, 40, 43, 52, 73-4; group, 86-7, 
181, 189, etc. 

Permanent (mcca)^ 88 
Perseverance, 210 
Person-pack {sahhdya), 134; view 
of, 153 

Personal {ajjhatkJca, inward), 150 
Perversity, 94 
Petas, 179 
Phenomena, 61 n. 

Picture, 128 

Pious talk (dhamml-hathd), 2 
Pleasure, 61, 73, 87 
Plough, 132 
Points, the seven, 54 
Potter’s Shed, 101 
Powers, the five, 130-1 
Prey, 72-4 
Property, 66 n. 

Punna, 89 
Purana Kassapa, 61 
Pure-Eace, 189-90 
Purgatory, 179 

Quarrels, ll7 

.Quarters, the four [disd), 190-1 
Queen, 123 
Quenching, 75 

Radha, 15, 66, 155, 163 
Rahula, 67 n , 114-5 
Rajagaha, 44, 101, 106, 190 
Realizing, 15, 16, 20, 23, 28, 39 
Rebirth, 25, 28, 46 n , 159; lust 
of, 132, 134; states of, 177-9 
Reckoning (sanJchd), 33 n., 62-4 
Recluses and brahmins, 44, 158, 
190-1 


Reed-cutter, 132 
Release, 28-9, 145 
Restraint, 8, 10 
Right regard, 155 
Root of Pain, 31 
Round {vatta), 52 n 

Sabbath (elephant), 123, day 
(uposatha), 84, 192 
SabMya, 7 n. 

Sakka, 14 n. 

Salikas, 6, 77 
Sakyas, 6, 191 
Sahkhya, 52 

Sariputta, teaches Nakiilapiiar, 
2-8; reproves Yamaka, 94-9; 
teaches Kqtfhita, 143-4, 147; 
talks with Ananda, 185-91 
Satisfaction (assddo), 27-9, 87, 148 
Savatthi, the scene of most of the 
suttas, passim 
Scattering, 75 
Seats, 55-6 

Secret doctrine, 163 n. 

Seed, 46 n. 

Seers’ Hill, 103 

Self (soul), 3-6, 18, 32 59, 66, 

69, 82-4, 86 n , 108, 114, 115, 
140-1, 151 ; attahhdvo. 122, seeing 
lack of {anattdmipasszn), 122; 
speculation on {aUdmiditthi), 
153, 175-6 

Separates, the 134 fj. 

Senes {panvafiay), 50-4 n 
Sevens, the, l7l 
Ship, 131 

Sickness, 1-5, 59, 100-8 
Similes: — stump of a palm tree, 
11, 27, 137, 159; the burden, 
24-5; sticks and grass, 32; 
seeds, 47, 77 ; the calf, 77 ; whirl- 
ing round, 57; fire, 62; the 
bondsman, 64; the lion and the 
beasts, 71; the prey, 72; the 
strong man, 77; the funeral 
torch, 79; bowl of water as a 
mirror, 89; the wayfarers, 92; 
the forest, swamp, precipice, 
level ground, 92; housefather 
and murderer, 96-7; scent of 
flowers, 116; washerman and 
dirty cloth, 110; the stream and 
drowning man, 116; lotus in 
water, 118; Ganges and foam, 
118-9; bubbles on water, 119; 
the mirage, 119; heart- wood. 



Index 


215 


119; the plantain and wood- 
cutter, 119; 3 uggler and glamour, 
119; the head ablaze, 121; 
cowdung, 122; leash or thong, 
and dog, 126-7; the show- 
piece, 128; the dyer or painter, 
129; chicks in the shell, 130; 
carpenter and adze, 131; 
stranded vessel, 131 ; the plough- 
man, 132; the reed-cutter, 132; 
scented woods, 132; the bunch 
of mangoes, 132, the jasmine, 
133; the peaked house, 132, the 
sun, 133; children and sand- 
castles, 156-7; the plunderer 
and murderer, 168-9; the ball 
of thread, 171; cow’s milk, 205, 
210; princes and monarch, 133; 
stars and moon, 133; glowing 
embers, 149 

Skandha^s, the five, 3-5, etc. 
Solitude, 16 n 
Sona, 42-4 

Squirrels’ feeding ground, 44, 101. 
106 

Star-gazing, 190-1 
States {dJiamma), 9 
Stations, the four, 81 
Stream- winner {sotd'panna) 89 n , 
96 n., 144, 159 
Subtle, 85^ 

Sudatta, 7 n 

Suffering, woe, 66, 135, etc 
Suicide, 101-6 
Sun, 121 

Superman, 76 lOl 
Suradha, 67 

Sustenance {ahdra), 51 n 
Tarukkha, 7 n. 

Tathagata, as home-abandoner, 
11-3; as arahant is free, 57-9; 
has powers, 71; views about, 
94-5 n.; after death, 99; as 
superman, 100-1; has realized 
the world, 117-8; exists or not 
after death, 172-3, 204 
Teachings {dhammd), 90 and n 
See Norm 
Tenfold Powers, 69 
Thirst, 8-10 ^ 

Thought, 35, 45, ll8, 143; reading, 
81, 88; applied, 187 


Thundercloud (horse), 123 
Times, 18, 19, 63, 67 
Tissa, 90 
Torpor, 90-1 
Training, threefold, 69 

Udana (defined), 48-50 
Ukkali, 63 71 

Understandmg {panilM), 26; 

{abhisamaya), 203 
Unstable, 88 
Uprising, 30, 34 n., 35., 

Vacchagotta, 202-4 
Vakkah, 101-6 
Velamika, 124 
Vesali, 60 

View {dittln), 40; {sahJcciya-), 80-7, 
150-1 See Heresy 
Virtuous (sUavd), 144 
Volition {ceta7id), 53; seats of, 56 
Vultures’ Peak, 103 

Wake, the, 69 
Wanderers, 99 
Was (Sinhalese), 63 ti 
W avering, 84 
Way, the, 38 

Ways, the three, 54, 70; the four, 
130-1 

Weal and woe (sukha-dukklia), 59, 
75, 80, 88, 164-5, 171, etc 
Wellfarer {sugata)^ 65, 78 
Well-taught (disciple) sutavat, 144 
Whirling, 52 and n. 57 
Will, 56 ; power, 130-1. See 
Volition 

Wind and water, 165 
Wisdom, 81, limbs of, 130-1 
Words, 13 

World (hka), 117; condition, 117; 

periods, 171 
Worry, 16 7^., 16-8 
Worthy {amTiai}), 82, etc. 

Wrong, 153; view {ahlumvesa% 
154 

YakkhinT, 1 n: 

Yamaka, 93-9 

Yours (not), 31-2. See ‘Self’ and 
‘ I ’ conceit 



216 


Index 


IT. PALI WORDS IN NOTES. 


Akkukuka, 119 
Accutai) padar), 121 
Ajivaka, 171 
AjjkattijLar), 150 
Afinathattap, 34, 77 
Annatkabhavi, 177 
Andabbuto, 2 
Atta, 11, 14 
Attabhavo, 122 
Attadipa (=tanar|, etc.), 37 
Addbagato,*! 

Adbicbmari, 13 
Adbippayoso, 58 
Ananubodba, 203 
Anantara, 50 
Anamatagga, 126 
Anuggabako, 6 
Anudbammo, 36, 150 
Anuparivattati, 17 
Anupada, 51 
Anupada-mrodbo, 29 
Anuppatta-sadattbo, 137 
Anuyanta, 123, 133 
Anuloma, 36 
Anusayo, 110, 145 
Anusabagato, 110 
Aneka-vilutap, 40 
Auto, 78 
Apacinap, 70 
Apurekkbarano, 10, 12 
Abbbussukkamano, 133 
Abbijato, 170 
AbbMa, 183 
Abbinandamano, 65 
Abhinivissa, 151 
Abbipavattani, 131 
Abhivadati, 15 
AbMsankaroti, 46 
Abbisamaya, 203 
Amatena abbisitto, 2 
Arabap, 57 * 

Ariyanaij adassavi, 3 
Avakkati, 40, 61 
Avyakatag, lOi 
*AsaUakkbana, 203 
Asnbbard, 145 
Asekba, 140 
Assasa-passasa, 106 
.^etu-vado, 61 
Akasa, 133 
13 

Ajivo, 79 e 
Aditta-slso, 121 


^ammana, 207 
Asalha, 59 
Asava, 39, 93 

Uccbeda, 3 
Uddayhati, 126 
Uttama-puriso, 54, 05 
Udana, 70 
Uddbap, 70 
Upamssinna, 163 
Upaparikkbeyya, 118 
Upayo, 45 
Upasama, 31 
UpMamya, 42, 142 
Upadaya, 89, 150 
Upadiyamana, 64 
IJpekkbaka, 188 
Uposatha, 123 
Uppado, 34 

Eka-nikaya, 128 
Ekodibbava, 187 
Elagala-gnmba, 6 

Okasa-loka, 118 
Okkala, 63 
Ogadhap, 156 
Opapatika, 166 
Orambbagiyani, 48 
Olumbba, 109 
Ossattba, 193 

Kapsupadbaranani, 123 
Kaya, 86, 177 
Karanap, 52 
Kifikara, 96 
Kukkula, 149 
Kulaniima, 132 
Kevalin, 52, 54 
Kottbasa, 134 
Kbajjaniya, 72, 74, 97 n, 
Kbandba-santanap, 20 
Kbandba, 85 
Kbamanlyap, 102 
Kbiia, 113 

Kbinasava, 76, 93, 105 

Gadbati, 51 
Gantbika, 171 
Ganda, 143 
Garuta, 107 
Goeara, 207 



Index 


217 


Caranari, 128 
Citta (citra), 128 
'Cetana, 56 
Chanda, 85 

Jalabuja, 192 
Jiva, 169 
Jhana, 106 

x> 

Nata-tirana-pahana, 26 

Tliiti, 34, 206 
Thita, 46 

Thamaso paramaso, 46, 94 
Tathagata, 71, 94 
Tadanga nibbuto, 38 
Tiracchana, 70 
Tiriyar), 70 
Tividha, 70 

Datta-panhatta, 167 
Dasa-balani, 69 
Dittha-dhamma, 95 
Dipa, 37 
Diikkha, 21, 23 
Deva, 104 
Donamita, 171 
Dvaya-karin, 196 
Dhamma, 136 
Dhamma-cakka, 69 
Dhamma- viaaya, 13 
Dhamma-arammana, 41 
Dhammanudhamma, 139 
Dhammi-katha, 81 
Dhatuso, 57 

Nakhasikha, 125 
Naparap itthattaya, 20 
Nama-rupa, 57 
Niketa-sarin, 11 
Nicchata, 25 
Nicchodeti, 132 
Nidana, 59 
Nibbatti, 40 
Nirutti-adhivacana, 62 

Pahca-kkhandha, 74 
Pahca-vaggiya, 59 
Pahhatti, 33 
Pahha, 69 
Patigha-sanha, 188 
Paticcaya, 144 
Patisallana, 16 
Paccaya, 70 
Pajanati, 74 
Patikkama sanap, 102 


Padani, 167 
Pattavatti, 120 
Papata pabbata, 10 
Pabhangn, 3^ 
Parikkhara, 61 
Parihha, 26 
Paritassana, 16 
Parinibbuta, 25, 106 
Paribhavitani, 130, 183 
Parimncchita, 141 
Pariyatti-dhamma, 90 
Pariyadaya, 17, 131 
Pariyadiyati, 132 
Pariyonaddha, 2 
Parivatta, 50, 52 
Palagarida, 130 
Palujeyyup, 116 
Palokato, 143 
Pana, 169 
Patibhoga, 92 
Patubhava, 40 
Pindoliya, 77 
Puggala, 24 
Pncchitaro, 7 
Puthujjana, 105 
Pecca, 151 
Ponobhavika, 25 
Pheggu, 120 

Baddhula, 126 
Bahirarj, 150 
Brahma-danda, 112 
Brahma-ioka, 48 
Bharahara, 24 
Bhava-netti, 157 
Bhajanani, 123 
Bhavana, 130 
Bhikkhn, 12, 75, 84 
Bhimjati, 190 
Bhuta, 169 
Bhuripanna, 121 

Mannaman?, 65 
Mapsakhalap, 168 
Mattaso, 177 
Madhuraka-jato, 90 
Mano, 128 
Maha-bhhta, 51, 86 
Mahasudassana, 122 
Mana, 42, 67 
Mara, 155 
Maradhamma, 160 
Muddhavasitta, 122 
Mtilaka, 150 

Yapanlya, 102 
Yoniso, 37,45,118, 14 



218 


Index 


Rati, 201 
Ruppati, 73 
Ilupa, 63, 73, 97 n. 
JRupa-vedanatthaya, ^3 

Lujjan^, 117 
Lesa, 165 
Loka, 117 
Lokadhamma, 117 

Vatta, 52 
Vadhaka, 121 
Vaya, 34,161 
Vassa, 63 
Vadanupata, 7 
Vadanuvada, 7 
Vasijata, 129 
Vicaya*so, 81 
Vijanati, 74 
Vidhapsati, 120 
Vidha-samatikkantap, 67 
Viparinama, 77 
Vipula-citta, 121 
Vibhava, 49 
Vibbava-tanlia, 25 
Virajjati, 20 
Viriya, 69 

Vivatta-kkhandba, 106 
Vuttha, 54 
Vusitava, 54 
Vediyati, 73 
Vociujjatarammana, 46 

Sakkacca, 207 
Sakkaya-ditthi, 86, 95, 134 
Sankhap gaiscbati, 32 
Sancbarma, 2 
Sancetana, 53 
Sanjanati, 74 
Safikbata, 82 
Sankkara, 72, 82, 106 


Sapyojanani, 48 
Sapyojaniya, 142 
Sapvaddba, 118 
Sapsedaja, 192 
Saccag, 69 
Satta-bojjhanga, 69 
Sati, 69 

Satipatthana, 79, 129 
Satta-tthana, 54 
Satta-ioka, 117 
Satta (-lagga), 95, 156, 16Q 
Santaka, 66 
Santana, 121 
Sandbavatap, 126 
Sabbava, 57 
Sapadanap, 190 
Sappayap, 207-8 
Samirana, 46 
Samadbi, 205 
Samodbasi, 102 
Sammatta, 177 
Sammoha, 11 
Salla, 143 
Sassata, 3 
I Sabita, 13 
Sataccakari, 207 
Sadbu, 32 
Sara, 69, 119, 120 
Stodani, 46 
Sala, 81 
Sasana, 107 
Sikkba, 69 
Silittba, 13 
Sukba, 21, 23 
Sukbuma, 110 
Suddbika, 126, 192 
Supanna, 195 
Sekba, 140 

Hiri-ottappa, 69 
Hetu, paccaya, 61 



Index 


219 


in.— TITLES OF THE SAY|NGS. 


About the self, 153 
According to the scheme, 192-7 
Adze-handle (or the Ship), 129 
Almsman (1,2), 77 
Ananda, 23, 34, 35, 89, 154 
And if it^be not mine, 152 
Anuradha, 99 
Arahant, 137, 159 
Arahants, 68 
Arising (1, 2), 68, 162 
Assaji, 106 
Attachment, 45 

Attainment in concentration, 205 

Being, a, 156 

Being an island to self, 37 

Body, 178 

Bonds, 140 

Burden, 24 

By not seeing, comprehending, 
understanding, penetrating, dis- 
cerning, discriminating, dif- 
ferentiating, considering, not 
looking into, not making clear 
(3), 203-4 

-% 

Cause (1, 2), 22 
Ceasing, 161, 189 
Channa, 111 

Clansman from suffering (1-3), 
150 

Clinging, 64 

Coming to pass, 161, 163 
Coming to pass nature (1-3), 146, 
148 

Concentration, 15 
Condition, 169 

Conforming to the Norm (1-4), 
36 

Consciousness, 178, 181, 184 
Contact, 178, 181, 184 
Cool, 201 
Corruptible, 31 
Cowdung, 122 
Craving, 179, 182, 184 

o 

Dependence (1, 2), 154 
Desire and lust, 26 
Desirous-lustful (1, 2), 137, 159-60 
Destruction 162-3 


Destruction of the lure (1, 2), 44 
Devadaha, 6 
Double-dealer (1, 2), 196 

Ease, 209 

Ease and object, 209 
Ease in attainment, 207 
Ease in energy, 208 
Element, 179, 182, 184 
Emerging, 206 

Emerging from attainment, 207-8 
Emerging from steadfastness, 208 
Enamoured, 188 
Equanimity, 188 
Exposition, 200 
Eye, 177, 180, 183 

Factors, 41 
Feeling, 178, 181, 184 
Fetter, 142 
Five, 59 

Fivefold Mass, 182, 184 
Flower (or growth), 117 
Foam, 118 

For him who acts, 168 
Full moon, 84 
Fully enlightened, 57 

Givers (1, 2), 198 
Glowing embers, 149 
Good conduct, 197 
Grasping, 142 

Grasping and worry (1,2), 16 
Grasping the series, 50 
Group, 179 

Haliddikani (1, 2), 10 
Having neither perception nor 
non-perception, 189 
Hearsay, 193-4 
Heresy, 170 
Honesty, 200 
Hot, 201 

Ignorance (or the Brother), 138 

111, 20 

Imagining, 65 
Impermanence, 20, 39, 132 
Impermanent, 65, 149, 161-3 



220 


Index 


Infatuated (1, 2), 141 
^Inspired words, 48 
'It may not be mine, 166 

Kappa (1, 2), 145 
KLema, 107 
Kotthita (1-3), 148 

Leading to becoming, 157 
Leash, or thong (1, 2), 126 
Life, 161 

Life is ome thing, body another, 
172 

Lion, 70 
Lustful, 66 

Mahali, 60 
Mara, 155, 160-3 
Material form, 180, 183 
Mendicant, 32 
Mode of reckoning, 62 

Kakulapitar, 1 
Ko self, 66 

Jlot belonging to the Self (1, 2), 
66 

Kot yours, 31 
Nothingness, 189 

Object, 207 

Object of attainment, 207 
Of Nature to cease, 162-3 
Of the nature of Mara, 160, 162-3 
On Fire, 62 


Parileyya, 80 

Past, future and present (1-3), 18 
Perception, 178, 181 
Perishing, 161 
Persevering, 207 
Persevermg and profiting, 209 
-Persevering in attainment, 208 
Person-pack, 135, 153 
Pre-eminent, 207 
Prey, 72 
Profit, 207 

Profit by attainment, 208 
Pure-Face, 189 
Puritan (or Oceanic), 126 


Padha, 6^ 
Pahula (1, 2), 114 
Pain, 201 


Pange, 207 

Range and resolve, 209 
ange of attainment, 208 
Recluses (1,2), 136, 158-9 
Requests, 161 
Resolve, 207, 209 
Resolve and perseverance, 209 
Resolve for attainment, 208 
River, 116 
Root of pain, 31 


Sabbath (1-4), 192-3 
Satisfaction (1-3), 27, 68, 147 
Seed, 46 

Self has form, 174 
Separates, 134 
Seven Points, 54 

Sheer bliss, sheer suffering, both 
. . . neither, 174-5 
Solitude, 16, 186 
Sona (1, 2), 42 
Space, 188 
Steadfastness, 206 
Steadfastness in attainment, 207 
Steadfastness in object, 208 
Stream- winner, 137, 159 
Suffering, 66, 135, 149, 161-3 
Supporters by gifts (or oflerings), 
194, 196, 199-200 
Suradha, 67 


Taking delight in, 30 
Tathagata exists, exists not, both 
. . . neither, 172 
Teacher (1, 2), 139-140 
There is not, 166 
They carry off, 195 
Things to be understood, 136 
157-8 

This is mine, 151, 165 

This is the Self of me, 151, 166 

Thorough, 206 

Through ignorance, 202-3 

Thundercloud, 201 

Tip of the nail, 125 

Tissa, 90 

Transience, 163 


Uprising, 30 


Vakkali, 101 
View, 40 
Virtue, 143 



Index 


221 


Volition, 179, 182, 184 


'Way to, 38 
Well taught, 144 
What is impermanent, 21 
What is life, that is body, 172 
Wind, 164, 173, 201 
Wisdom (or The Brother), 139 
Without applied thought, 187 
Without* bliss or suffering, 175 


Without the Self, 21, 149, 161-3 
World is eternal . . is not . . 

is limited . . . unlimited, 172 
Wrong, 153 

Yamaha, 93 

Zeal, 207 

Zeal and perseverance, 209 
Zeal for attainment, 208 
Zest, 187 


ERRATUM, PART II. 

Page 192, in footnote * For maccha read makkha 



